11161 99838294 2668
THE LADIES TRIALL. ACTED By both their Majesties Servants at the private house in DRVRY LANE. FIDE HONOR LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Shephard, and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery-lane at the signe of the Bible, between Sarjants Inne and Fleet-street, neare the Kings-head Taverne. 1639.
To my Deservingly-honoured, IOHN WYRLEY Esquire, and to the vertuous and right worthy Gentle-woman, Mrs MARY WYRLEY his wife, This service. THE inequalitie of retribution turnes to a pitty, when there is not ability sufficient for acknowledge∣ment. Your equall respects may yet admit the readinesse of Ende∣vour, though the very hazard in it, betray my Defect. I have enjoyed freely ac∣quaintance, with the sweetnesse of your dis∣positions; and can justly account, from the Noblenesse of them, an evident distinction be∣twixt Friendship and Friends. The latter (ac∣cording to the practice of complement) are usu∣ally met with; and often without Search: The other, many have searcht for, I have found. For which, though I partake a benefite of the for∣tune;
yet to you (most equall Paire) must remain the Honour of that Bounty. In presenting this Issue of some lesse serious houres to your tuition, I appeale from the severitic of censure, to the mercy of your Iudgements: and shall rate It at a higher value, than when It was mine own, if you onely allow It the favour of Adoption. Thus, as your happines in the fruition of each others love, proceeds to a constancie: so the truth of mine, shal appeare lesse un-shaken, as you shall please to con∣tinue in your good opinions. IOHN FORD.
THE SCENE, Genoa. The Speakers. Auria A noble Genoese. Adurni A young Lord. Aurelio Friend to Auria. Malfato A discontented Lover. Trelcatio Citizen of Genoa. Martino Citizen of Genoa. Piero Dependant on Adurni Futelli Dependant on Adurni Guzman A Bragadotio Spaniard. Fulgoso An upstart Gallant. Benatzi Husband to Levidolhe. Spinella Wife to Auria. Castanna Her sister. Amoretta A fantastick Mayd. Levidolche A Wanton.
PROLOGVE. LAnguage and matter, with a fit of mirth, That sharply savours more of aire than earth, Like Midwives, bring a Play to timely birth. But wheres now such a one? in which these three, Are hansonely contriv'd? or if they bee, Are understood by all who heare to see. Wit, wit's the word in fashion, that alone Cryes up the Poet, which though neatly showne, Is rather censur'd often-times than knowne. He who will venture on a jest, that can Raile on anothers paine, or idlely scan Affaires of state, oh hee's the onely man. A goodly approbation, which must bring Fame with contempt, by such a deadly sting, The Muses chatter, who were wont to sing. Your savours in what we present to day, Our fearlesse Author boldly bids me say, He tenders you no Satyr, but a play. In which, if so he have not hit all right, For wit, words, mirth, and matter as he might, A' wishes yet a' had for your delight. Mr. Bird.
THE LADIES TRIALL. ACTVS PRIMVS. Enter PIERO and FUTELLI at severall doores. PIERO. ACcomplished man of fashion. FVT. The times wonder. Gallant of gallants Genoas Piero. PIE. Italies darling, Europes joy, and so forth, The newest newes, un-vampt, FVT. I am no foot-poast, No pedlar of Aviso's, no monopolist Of forged Corantos, monger of Gazets. PIE. Monger of courtezans, fine Futelli, In certaine kinde a merchant of the staple For wares of use and trade, a taker up, Rather indeede a knocker downe, the word
Will carry either sence but in pure earnest, How trowles the common noysc? FVT. Auria who lately Wedded and bedded to the same Spinella, Tyred with the enjoyments of delights, is hasting to  the Tur∣kish pirats, in the service of the great Duke of Florence. PIE. Does not carry His pretty thing along. FVT. Leaves her to buffet Land pirats here at home. PIE. Thats thou and I, Futelli (sirrah) and Piero—blockhead To runne from such an arme full of pleasures For gaining, what? a bloudy nose of honour, Most sottish and abominable. FVT. wicked Shamefull and cowardlie I will maintaine. PIE. Is all my signiors hospitality Huge banquetings deepe revells costly trapings Shrunke to a cbbin, and a single welcome To beverage and bisket, FVT. Hold thy peace man. It makes for us—he comes, lets part demurely. Enter Adurni, and Auria. AD. Wee wish thee (honourd Auria) life and safety, Returne crownd with a victory, whose wreath, Of triumph may advance thy countries glory, Worthy your name and Ancestors. AVR. My Lord, I shall not live to thrive in any action, Deserving memory when I forget Adurnis love and tavour. PIE. I present ye My service for a farewell. FVT. Let few words Excuse all arts of complement.
FVL. For my owne part, Kill or be kill'd, for theres the short and long on't. Call me your shadowes hinch-boy. AVR. Gentlemen, My businesse urging on a present hast, Eforceth short replie. AD. Wee dare not hinder Your resolution wingd with thoughts so constant. All happinesse. PIE. PHVT. Contents. AVR. So leave the wintred people of the North, The minutes of their summer, when the Sunne Departing leaves them in Cold roabes of Ice, Enter Trelca∣tio, Spinella, & Castanna. As I leave Genoa,—now appeares the object Of my apprentic'd hart, thou bringst Spinella A welcome in a farewell, soules and bodies Are severd for a time, a span of time; To joyne againe without all separation, In a confirmed unitie for ever. Such will our next embraces be for life; And then to take the wracke of our divisions, Will sweeten the remembrance of past dangers, Will fallen love in perpetuity, Will force our slepes to steale upon our stories▪ These daies must come, and shal without a cloud Or ight of feare, or envie: to your charge, (Trelcatio our good unkle) and the comfort Of my Spinella's sister, faire Castanna, I doe intrust this treasure. TREL. I dare promise, My husbanding that trust with truth and care. CAST. My siser shall to me stand an example, Of powring free devotions for your safety. AVRI. Gentle Castanna, thou art a branch of goodnesse, Growne on the selfe same stocke with my Spinella. But why my deere, hast thou lockd up thy speech in so much silent sadnesse, oh at parting!
Belike one private whisper must bee sighd, Vncle the best of peace enrich your familie, I take my leave. TREL. Blessings and health preserve yee. Exit. AUR. Nay nay Castanna, you may hear our counsels. A while, you are desigad your sisters husband, Give me thy hand Spinella, you did promise, To send me from you with more cheerefull lookes, Without a grudge or teare, deed love you did. SPI. What friend have I left in your absence? AUR. Many thy vertues are such friends, they cannot faile thee, Faith, purity of thoughts and such a meekenesse, As would force scandall to a blush. SPI. Admit Sir, The patent of your life should be calld in, How am I left then to account with griefes; Mor slav'd to pity then a broken heart? Auria! soule of my comforts, I let fall No eye on breach of fortu, I contemne No entertainment to divided hopes; I urge no pressures by the scorne of change; And yet my Auria, when I but conceave How easie tis (without impossibilitie) Never to see thee more, forgive me then, If I conclude I may be miserable, Most miserable. CON. And such conclusion sister Argues effects of a distrust more voluntarie then cause by likely hood. AUR. T is truth Castanna. SPI. I grant it truth, yet Auria I am a woman; And therefore apt to feare, to shew my dutie And not take heart from you, Ile walke from yee, At your command, and not as much as trouble Your thought with one poore looking backe. AUR. I thanke thee, My worthy wife! before we kisse, receave
This caution from thine Auria, first Castanna Let us bid farewell. SPI. Speake (good) speake▪ AUR. the steps Young Ladies tread left to their own discretion, How ever wisely printed are observed And construed as the lookers on presume, Point out thy waies then in such even pather, As thine owne iealousies from others tongues May not intrude a guilt, tho undeserved. Admit of visits as of Physicke forc'd Not to procure health, but for safe prevention Against a growing sickenesse in thy use Of time and of discourse be found so thristy, As no remembrance may impeach thy rest, Appeare not in a fashion that can prompt The gazers eye, or holla to report; Some widdowed neglect of hand, some value In recreations be both wise, and free, Live still at home, home to thy selfe how-ere Enricht with noble company, remember A womans vertue in her lifetime, writes The Epitaph all covet on their tombes, In short I know thou never wilt forget Whose wife thou art, nor how upon thy lippes, Thy husband at his parting stald this kisse. No more. SPI. Deere heaven I goe sister, goe. Exit. AURI. Done bravely, Enter Aure∣lio. And like the choice of glory to know mine, One of earths best I have forgone,—see, see, Yet in another I am rich; a friend, A perfect one, Aurelio. AUREL. Had I been, No stranger to your bosome Sir, erenow You might have sorted me in your resolves, Companion of your fortunes.
AUR. So the wrongs I should have ventur'd on against thy fate Must have deny'd all pardon, not to hold Dispute with reputations, why before This present instant I conceald the stealth Of my adventures from the Counsels, know My wants doe drive me hence. AUREL. Wants, so you sayd, And 'twas not friendly spoken, AURI. Heare me further. AUREL. Auria take heed, the covert of a folly Willing to range; be not without excuse Discoverd in the coynage of untruths. I use no harder language, thou art neare Already on a ship-wrack in forsaking The holy land of friendship in forsaking To talke your wants. Fie. AURI. By that sacred thing Last issu'd from the Temple where it dwelt, I mean our friendship, I am sunke so low In my estate, that bids me live in Genoa But six moneths longer, I survive the remnant Of all my store. AUREL Vmh. AURI. In my Countrey, friend Where I have sided my superiour friend Swayd opposition, friend, friend here to fall Subject to scorne, or rarely found compasion, Wre more than man that hath a soule could beare, A soule not stoop'd to servitude. AUREL. Your shew, Nor certaintie, nor weake assurance yet Of reparation in this course: in case Command be proffered. AURI. He who cannot merit Preferment by employments, let him bare His throat unto the Turkish cruelty,
Or dye or live a slave without redemption. AUREL▪ For that so, but you have a wife, a young, A faire wife; she, though free could never claime Right in prosperitie, was never tempted By triall of extreames, to youth and beauty, Bayts for dishonour, and a perisht fame. AURI. Shew me the man that lives, and so my face Dares speake, scarce thinke, such tyranny against Spinellas constancie, except Aurelio He is my friend. AUREL. There lives not then a friend Dares love you like Aurelio, that Aurelio, Who  and early; often sayd and truly, Your marriage with Spinella would entangle As much th'opinion due to your discretion, As your estate, it hath done so to both. AURI. I finde it hath. AUREL. He who prescribes no law, No limits of condition to the objects Of his affection; but will meerly wed A face because tis round, or limb'd by nature In purest red and white, or at the best, For that his mistresse owes an excellence Of qualities, knowes when and how to speake, Where to keepe silence, with fit reasons why, Whose vertues are her onely dowre, else In either kinde, ought of himselfe to master Such fortunes as as adde fuell to their loves For otherwise:—but herein I am idle, Have foold to little purpose. AURI. She's my wife. AUREL. And being so, it is not manly done To leave her to the triall of her wits, Her modestie, her innocence, her vowes. This is the way that poynts her out an art Of wanton life. AURI. Sir, sayd yee?
AUREL. You forme reasons, Iust ones, for your abandoning the stormes Which threaten your owne ruine; but propose No shelter for her honour; what my tongue Hath utterd, Auria, is but honest doubt, And you are wise enough in the construction. AURI. Necessitie must arme my confidence, Which if I live to triumph over friend, And ere come back in plentie, I pronounce Aurelio heire of what I can bequeath. Some fit deduction for a worthy widow, Allowd with caution, she be like to prove so. AUREL. Who? I your heire? your wife being yet so young, In every probability so forward To make you a father? leave such thoughts. AURI. Believe it, Without replies Aurelio: keepe this note, A warrant for receiving from Two hundred Ducats; as you finde occasion Dispose them in my absence to Spinella. I would not trust her uncle▪ hee good man, Is at an ebbe himselfe, another hundred I left with her, a fourth I carry with me, Am I not poore, Aurelio, now? exchange Of more debates between us, would undoe My resolution: Walke a little prithee, Friends we are, and will embrace: but let's not speake Another word. AUREL. Ile follow you to your horse. Exit. Enter Adurni and Futelli. A letter. ADUR. With her owne hand. FUT. She never us'd my Lord, A second meanes, but kist the letter first, Orelookt the superscription: then let fall Some amorous drops, kist it againe, talkt to it Twentie times over, set it to her mouth,
Then gave it me, then snatch'd it backe againe, Then cryd, oh my poore heart, and in an instant Commend my truth and secresie, such medly Of passion yet, I never saw in woman. AD. In woman? th'art deceav'd; but that we both Had mothers, I could say how women are, In their owne natures, modells of meere change: Of change of what is naught, to what is worse, She fed ye liberally. FUT. Twenty ducates She forcd on me, vowd by the pretious love She bore the best of men, (I use my lord) Her very words the miracle of men, Malfato, (then she sigh'd) this mite of gold Was only entrance to a farther bounty, Tis meant (my lord) be like presse mony. AD. Divell! how durst she tempt thee, Futelli, knowing Thy love to me? FUT. There lies (my lord) her cunning, Rather her craft: first she began what pitty It was, that men should differ in estates, Without proportion some so strangely rich, Others so miserable poore; and yet, Quoth she, since tis very deed unfit All should be equalls; so I must confesse It were good justice that the properest men Should be prefer'd to fortune, such as nature Had mark't with faire abilities of which Genoa, for ought I know, hath wondrous few Not two to boast of. AD. Here began her itch. FUT. I answerd, she was happy then, whose choice In you, my lord, was singular. AD. Well urgd. FUT. She smil'd, and said, it might be so, and yet There stopt: then I cloz'd with her, and concluded The title of a lord was not enough,
For absolute perfection, I had seene Persons of meaner quality, much more Exact in faire indowments; but your Lordship Will pardon me, I hope. AD. And love thee for it. FUT. Phew: let that passe (quoth she) and now wee prattle Of handsome gentlemen, in my opinion, Malfato is a very prety fellow, Is he not, pray Sir, I had then the truth Of what I rov'd and with more then praise, Approv'd her judgement in so high a straine, Without comparison (my honourd Lord) That soone we both concluded of the man, The match and businesse. AD. For delivering A letter to Malfato. FUT. Whereto I No sooner had consented, with protests, (I did protest my Lord) of secresie, And service, but she kist me (as I live) Of her owne free accord—(I trust your lordship Conceaves not me amisse) pray rip the seale (My lord) youle finde sweet stuffe, I dare believe, AD. Adurni reades. Present to the most accomplisht Of men, Malfato with this Love a service. Kind Superscription, prithee finde him out, Deliver it with complement, observe How ceremoniously he does receive it. FUT. will not your lordship peruse the contents? AD. enough I know too much be just, and cunning A wanton Mistresse is a common sewer Much never project labors in my braine— Yur friend heres now the Gemini of wit What od conceit is next on foot, some cast Enter Piero. Of neate invention, ha sire. PIE. Very fine,
I doe protest my lord. FUT. Your lordships eare shall share ith' plot. AD. As how? PIE. You know my lord Young Amoretta, old Trelcatio's daughter An honest man, but poore. FUT. And my good lord, He that is honest, must be poore, my lord, It is a common rule. AD. Well Amoretta, Pray one at once my knowledge is not much, Of her instruct me. PIE. Speake Futelli. FUT. Spare me. Piero has the tongue more pregnant. PIE. Fie play on your creature. FUT. Shall be yours. PIE. Nay good. AD. Well keep your mirth, my dainty honies agree Some two daies hence, till when— PIE. By any meanes, Partake the sport, my lord, this thing of youth. FUT. Hansome enough, good face, quicke eye, well bred. PIE. Is yet possest so strangely. FUT. With an humor of thinking, she deserves— PIE. A Duke, a Count. At least a Viscount, for her husband that— FUT. She scornes all mention of a match beneath One of the foresaid nobles; will not ride In a caroach without eight horses. PIE. Six, she may be drawn to fower— FUT. Are for the power▪ But for two horses in a coach— PIE. She saies, Th'are not for creatures of heavens making fitter— FUT▪ Fitter for litters to convey hounds in, Then people christian yet herselfe—
PIE. Herselfe walkes evermore a foot, and knowes not whether A Coach dothtrot or amble. FUT. But by heare-say. AD. Stop gentlemen, you run a gallopboth▪ Are out of breath sure, tis a kinde of complement Scarce entred to the times, but certainly You coyne a humour, let me understand Deliberately your fancie. PIE. In plaine troath, My Lord, the she whom we describe is such, And lives here, here in Genoa, this Citie, This very citie, now, the very now. AD. Trelcatios daughter. FUT. Has refused suiters Of worthy ranke, substantiall and free parts▪ Onely for that they are not Dukes, or Counts, Yet she herselfe, wi h all her fathers store, Can hardly weigh above foure hundred Ducates▪ AD. Now your designe for sport. PIE. Without prevention, Guzman the Spaniard late casheerd, most gravely Observes the full punctilios of his nation, And him have we beleagred to accost This shee-peece, under a pretence of being Grandee of Spain, and cousin to twelve Princes. FUT. For rivall unto whom we have enrag'd Fulgoso, the rich cox-combe lately started A gentleman out of a Sulers hut, In the late Flemish warres, we have resolvd him He is descended from Pantagruel, Of famous memory by the fathers side, And by the mother from Dame Fusti-Bunga, Who troubled long time with a strangury, Vented at last salt-water so abundantly, As drownd the land twixt Sirixia and Vre, Where steeples tops are onely seene▪ hee casts Beyond the Moone, and will be greater yet
In spight of Don. AD. You must abuse the maid Beyond amends. FUT. But countenance the course My Lord, and it may chance beside the mirth, To worke a reformation on the mayden, Her fathers leave is granted, and thankes promis'd, Our ends are harmlesse trials. AD. I betray me secrets of such use. AMBO. Your Lordships humblest. Exit. Enter Aurelio and Malfato. AU. A Melancholy grounded, and resolv'd, Receiv'd into a habit, argues love, Or deepe impression of strong discontents, In cases of these raritles a friend Upon whose faith, and confidence, we may Vent with security, our griefe becomes Oft times the best Physition, for admit Wee finde no remedy, we cannot misse Advise in sted of comfort, and beleeve It is an ease, Malfato, to disburthen Our soules of secret clogges, where they may finde A rest in pitty, tho not in redresse. MAL. Let all this sence be yielded to AU. Perhaps you measure what I say, the common nature Of an officious couriosity MAL. Not I Sir. AU. Or that other privat ends Sift your retirements— MAL. Neither. Enter Futelli. FUT. Under favour Signior Malfato, I am sent to crave Your leisure, for a word or two in private. MAL. To me! your minde FUT. This letter will informe ye. MAL. Letter? howes this? whats here?
FUT. Speake yee to me sir? MAL. Brave riddle: ▪Ile endevour to unfold it. AU. How fares the Lord Adurni? FUT. Sure in health sir. AUR. He is a noble Gentle-man; withall Happy in his endevours: the generall voyce Sounds him for courtesie, behaviour, language, And every faire demeanor, an example: Titles of honour adde not to his worth, Who is himselfe an honour to his titles. MAL. You know from whence this comes. FUT. I doe. MAL. D'ee laugh! But that I must consider such as Spaniels, To those who feed and cloath them, I would print Thy pandarisme upon thy fore-head: there Beare backe that paper to the hell from whence It gave thee thy directions, tell this Lord, He ventur'd on a foolish policie, In aiming at the scandall of my bloud, The tricke is childish, base, say base. FUT. You wrong him. AU. Be wise Malfato. MAL. Say, I know this whore. She who sent this temptation, was wife To his abused servant, and divorc'd From poore Benatzi, sencelesse of the wrongs That Madam Levidolche and Adurni Might revell in their sports without controule, Secure, uncheckt. AUR. You range too wildly now, Are too much inconsiderate. MAL. I am A gentleman free borne, I never wore The ragges of any great mans lokes, nor fed Upon their after-meales; I never croucht Unto the offall of an Office promis'd
Reward for long attendance, and then mist. I read no difference between this huge, This monstrous big word Lord, and Gentleman, More than the Title sounds; for ought I learne, The latter is as noble as the first, I'me sure more ancient. AU. Let me tell you then, You are too bitter, talk you know not what, Make all men equalls, and confound all course Of order, and of Nature: this is madnesse. MAL. Tis so; and I have reason to be mad: Reason Aurelio, by my truth and hopes. This wit Futelli brings a suit of love From Lenidolche, one however maskt In colourable privacie, is fam'd The Lord Adurnies pensioner, at least. Am I a husband pickt out for a strumpet, For a cast suit of bawdrie? Aurelio, You are as I am, you could ill digest The triall of a patience so unfit. Be gone Futelli, doe not mince one syllable Of what you hare: another fetch like this May tempt a pece o rage: so say, be gone. FUT. I shall report your answer. Exit. MAL. What have I Deserv'd to bee so us'd? in colder blood I doe confesse nobilite requires Dutie and love, it is a badge of vertue, By action  equir'd, and next in ranke Vnto anoynted royal ie wherein Have I neglected distance, or forgot Observance to superiours? sure my name Was in the oe mistooke. AU. We will consider the meaning of this mystery. MAL Not so, Let them feare bondage who are slves to feare, The sweetest freedome is an honest heart. Exeunt.
Actus Secundus. Enter Futelli and Guzman. FVTELLI. DExteritie and sufferance, brave Don, Are Engines the pure politicke must work with. GUZ. We understand. FUT. In subtilties of warre, (I talke t'ee now in your owne occupation, Your trade, or what you please) unto a Souldier, Surprizall of an enemy by stratagem, Or down-right cutting throats is all one thing. GUZ. Most certaine: on, proceed. FUT. By way of parallell, You drill or exercise your company, (No matter which for termes) before you draw Into the field, so in the feats of Courtship▪ First choyce is made of thoughts, behaviour, words, The set of lookes, the posture of the beard, Besol as manus, cringes of the knee, The very hums and ha's, thumps, and ay mees. GUZ We understand all these: advance. FUT. Then next, Your enemy in face, your mistresse (marke it) Now you consult either to skirmish slightly, Thats carelesse amors, or to enter battaile, Then fall to open treatie, or to worke By secre spies or gold: here you corrupt The Chamber-mayd▪ a fatall engine, or Place there an Ambusesdo, thats contract With some of her neere friends, for halfe her portion, Or offer truce, and in the interim, Run upon slaughter, tis a noble treachery, Thats sweare and lye, steale her away: and to her
Cast caps, and cry Victoria, the field's Thine owne (my Don) shee's thine. GUZ. We doe vouchsafe her. FUT. Hold her then fast. GUZ. As fast as can the armes Of strong imagination hold her. FUT. No, sh'as skipt your hold, my imaginations eyes Perceives she not endures the touch or sent Of your war-over-worne habiliments, Which I forgot in my instructions To warne you of, therefore my warlicke Don, Apparrell speedily your imagination With a more courtly out-side. GUZ. Tis soone done. FUT. As soone as sayd, in all the cloathes thou hast, More than that walking wardrobe on thy back. GUZ. Imagine first our rich Mockado doublet, VVith our cut cloath of gold sleeves, and our quellio, Our Diamond buttond Callamancho hose, Our plume of Ostrich, with the embroydred scarfe The Dutchesse Infantasgo rowld our arme in. FUT. I this is brave indeed. GUZ. Our Cloake whose cape is Larded with pearles, which the Indian lacquies Presented to our countrey-man De Cortez, For ransome of his life, rated in value At thirteene thousand pistolets, the guerdon Of our atchievement, when wee reseued The Infanta from the Bore in single duell, Neere to the Austrian forrest with this rapier, This onely, very, naked, single rapier. FUT. Top and top-gallant brave, GUZ. VVe will appeare Before our Amoretta like the issue Of our progenitors. FUT. Imagine so, And that this rich sute of imagination,
Is on already now (which is most probable As that apparell) here stands your Amoretta, Make your approach and court her. GUZ. Lustre of beauty, Not to affright your tender soule with horrour, We may discend to tales of peace and love, Soft whispers fitting Ladies clossers, for Thunder of cannon, roaring smoake and fire, As if hells maw had vomited confusion, The clash of steele, the neighs of barbed Steeds, Wounds spouting blood, townes capering in the ayre, Castles push downe, and Cities plowd with swords, Become great Guzmans Oratory best, Who tho victorious, and during life Must be: yet now grants parley to thy smilts. FUT. S'foot, Don, you talke too big, you make her tremble, Doe you not see't imaginarily? I doe as plainely as you saw the death Of the Austrian Bore, she rather heares Of feasting then of fighting, take her that way. GUZ. Yes we will feast my queene, my empresse saint, Shal't tast no delicates but what are drest Wth costlier spices then the Arabian bird Sweetens her funerall bed with, we will riot With every change of meates; which may renue Our bloud unto a spring, so pure, so high, That from our pleasures shall proceede a race Of scepter-braing princes, who at once Mst raigne in every quarter of the globe. FUT. Can more be said by one that feeds on herring And garlicke constantlie? GUZ. Yes we will feast. FUT. Enough, shes taken, and will love you now, As well in buffe, as your imagin'd bravery, Your dainty ten times dreft buffe, with this language (Bould man of armes) shall win upon her, doubt not Beyond all silken puppetry, thinke no more
Of your mockadoes, calaminchaes, quellios, Pearle larded capes and diamond buttond breeches, Leave such poore out-side helpes to puling lovers, Such as Fulgoso your weake rivall is, That starveling braind-companion appeare you At first (at least) in your owne warlike fashion: I pray be rul'd, and change not a thred about you. GUZ. The humour takes (for I sir, am a man Affects not shifts) I will adventure thus. FUT. Why so you carry her from all the world, Ime proud my starres designed me out an instrument In such an hie imploiment. GUZ. gravely spoken, You may be prowd ont— Enter Fulgoso, and Piero. FUL. What is lost is lost, Money is trash, and Ladies are et caetera's, Play's play; luck's lucke, fortunes an I know what, You see the worst of me, and whats all this now? PIE. A very sparke (I vow) you will be stil'd, Fulgoso the invincible, but did The faire Spinella loose an equall part How much in all d'ee say? FUL. Bare threescore duckets, Thirty a peece, we neede not care who know it She plaid, I went her halfe walkd by and whistled After my usuall manner thus—unmoved Whistles. As no such thing had ever beene as it were, Altho I saw the winners share my money His lordship, and an honest gentleman Purs'd it, but not so merrily as I Whistled it off—whistles PIE. A noble confidence. FUT. Dee note your rivall. GUZ. With contempt I doe. FUL. I can forgoe things neerer then my gold,
Allyd to my affections, and my bloud; Yea honour, as it were, with the same kinde. Of carelesse confidence, and come off fairely Too as it were. PIE. But not your love, Fulgoso. FUL. No, shees inherent, and mine owne past loosing. PIE. It tickles me to thinke with how much state▪ You, as it were, did runne at tilt in love Before your Amoretta. FUL. Broke my lance. PIE. Of wit, of wit. FUL. I meane so as it were And laid flat on her backe, both horse and woman. PIE. Right as it were. FUL. What else man, as it were. GUZ. Did you doe this to her, dare you to vant Fulgoso whi∣stles the spanish Pavin. Your triumph we being present? um, ha, um. FUT. What thinke you Don, of this brave man? GUZ. A ma? It is some trusse of reeds, or empty caske, In which the winde with whistling spores it selfe FUT. Beate up Sir, hees your rivall, budge not from him An inch, your grounds are honor. PIE. Stoutly ventured, Don, hold him too't. FUL. protelt a fine conceit, A very fine conceite, and thus I tould her, That for mine owne part, if shee lik'd me, so, If not, not; for my ducke or do said I, It is no fault of mine, that I am noble, Grant it; another may be noble too, And then wee'r both one noble better stil Habs-nabs good wincke and choose, if one must have her, The other goes without her, best of all, My spirit is too high, to fight for woman, I am too full of mercy to be angrie, A foolish generous quality, from which No might of man can beat I'me, ime resolvd.
GUZ. Hast thou a spirit then ha? speakes thy weapon Toledo language, Bilbo, or dull Pisa? If an Italian blade, or spanish mettall, Be briefe, we challenge answer. FUT. Famous Don. FUL. What does he talke? my weapon speakes no language, Tis a dutch iron trunchion. GUZ. Dutch? FUL. And it need be, Twill maule one's hide, in spight of who saies nay GUZ. Dutch to a Spaniard, hold me. FUL. Hold mee too Sirrah if th'art my frind, for I love no fighting, Yet hold me least in pitty I flie off, It I must fight, I must; in a scutvie quarrell I de fie hees and shees, twit me with dutch? Hang dutch and french, hang spanish and Italians, Christians and Turkes pew-waw; all's one to me, I know whats what, I know on which side My bread is butterd. GUZ. Butterd? dutch againe? You come not with intention to affront us. FUL. Front mee no fronts, if thou beestangrie squable Heeres my defence, and thy destruction—whistles a charge If friends shake hands, and goe with me to dinner. GUZ. We will embrace the motion, it doth relish, The Cavaleiro treates on termes of honor, Peace is not to be baulkd on faire conditions. FUT. Still Don is Don the great. PIE. He shewes the greatnesse Of his vast stomach in the quicke embracement Of thothers dinner. FUT. Twas the ready meanes to catch his friendship. PIE. Yare a paire of worthies, That make the nine no wonder. FUT. Now since fate Ordaines that one of two must be the man,
The man of men which must enjoy alone Loves darling Amoretta, both take liberty To shew himselfe before her, without crosse Of interruption, one of tother: he Whose sacred mystery of earthly blessings Crownes the pursuit; be happy. PIE. And till then, live brothers in societie. GUZ. We are fast. FUL. I vow a match: Ile feast the Don to day And fast with him to morrow. GUZ. Faire conditions. Enter Adurni, Spinella, Amoretta, Castanna. AD. Futelli and Piero, follow speedily. PIE. My Lord we wait yee. FUT. We shall soone returne. Exeunt. FUL. Whats that? I saw a sound. GUZ. A voyce for certaine. FUL. It nam'd a Lord. GUZ. Here are Lords too, we take it, We carry blood about us, rich and haughty, As any the twelve Caesars. FuL. Gulls or Mogulls, Tag, rag, or other, Hoger-Mogen vanden Skip-Iacks, or Chouses. Whoo! the brace are flincht, The paire of shavers are sneakt from us, Don. Why? what are we? GUZ. The valiant will stand too't. FUL. So say I, we will eate and drink, and squander, Till all doe split againe. GUZ. Match on with greedinesse. Exeunt. Enter Martino and Levidolche. MAR. You cannot answer what a generall tongue Objects against your folly, I may curse
The interest you lay claime to in my blood, Your mother my decre neece did die, I thought Toosoon, but she is happy, had she liv'd▪ Till now, and knowne the vanities of your life Hath dealt in, she had wisht herselfe a grave Before a timely houre. LEV. Sir, consider, My sex, were I mankinde, my sword should quit A wounded honour, and repreave a name From injury, by printing on their bosomes Some deadly Character, whose drunken surfets Vomit such base aspersions, as I am Scorne and contempt is vertue: my desert Stands far above their malice. MAR.. Levidolche, hypocrisie puts on a holy robe, Yet never changeth nature: call to minde, How in your girles dayes you fell forsooth In love, and married, married (harke ye) whom▪ A trencher-waiter, shrewd preferment: but Your childhood then excus'd that fault: for so Footmen have run away with lusty heires, And stable-grooms reacht to some fair ones chambers. LE. Pray let not me be bandied sir, and basfaild By your intelligence. MAR. So toucht to the quicke, Fine mistresse, I will then rip up at length The progresse of your infancie, in colour Of disagreement you must be divorc'd, Were so, and I must countenance the reasons On better hopes I did, nay tooke you home, Provided you my care, nay justified Your alteration, joyd to entertaine Such visitants of worth and ranke, as tendred Civill respects; but then, even then— LEV. What then? Sweet unkle doe not spare me. MAR. I more shame
To feare my hospitality was bawd And (name it so) to your unchaste desires, Then you to heare and know it. LEV. Whose whore am I? For thats your plainest meaning. MAR. Were you modest, The word you utterd last would force a blush. Adurni is a bounteous Lord, tis sayd, He parts with gold and jewels like a free And liberall purchaser, a' wriggles in To Ladies pleasures by a right of pension; But you know none of this: You are growne a Taverne talke, Matter for Fidlers songs, I toyle to build The credit of my family, and you To pluck up the foundation, even this morning Before the common Councell, young Malfato Convented for some lands he held; suppos'd Belong'd to certaine Orphans, as I question'd His tenure in particulars, he answerd, My worship needed not to flaw his right: For if the humour held him, he could make A joynture to my over-living Neece, Without oppression, bad me tell her too, She was a kinde young soule, and might in time Be sued to by a loving man, no doubt. Here was a jolly breakfast. LEV▪ Uncles are priviledged More than our parents, some wise man in state Hath rectified, no doubt, your knowledge sir, Whiles all the policie for publicke businesse, Was spent—for want of matter, I by chance Fell into grave discourse; but by your leave, I from a strangers table rather wish To earne my bread, than from a friends by gift, Be daily subjct to unfit reproofes. MAR. Come, come, to the poynt.
LEV. All the curses Due to a ravisher of sober truth, Dambe up their gracelesse mouthes. MAR. Now you turne rampant, Iust in the wenches trimme and garbe, these prayers Speake your devotions purely. LEV. Sir, alas, What would you have me do? I haue no Orators, More than my teares, to plead my innocence, Since you forsake me, and are pleas'd to lend An open eare against my honest fame. Would all their spight could harry my contents Unto a desperate ruine; Oh deare goodnesse, There is a right for wrongs. MAR. There is, but first Si in commission on your owne defects, Accufe your selfe: be your owne Iury, Iudge, And executioner, I make no sport Of my vexation. LEV. All the short remaines Of undesired life, shall onely speake Th▪extremitie of penance: your opinion Enjoynesit too. MAR. Enough; thy teares prevaile Against credulity. Enter Trel∣catio. A let∣ter. LEV. My miseries, As in a glasse, present me the rent face Of an unguided youth. MAR. No more—Trelcatic, Some businesse speeds you hither. TREL. Happy newes, Signior Martino, pray your care; my nephew Auria hath done brave service: and I heare (Lets be exceeding private) is returnd High in the Duke of Florences respects, Tis sayd, but make no words that a' has firke And mumbl'd the roguie-Turkes.
MAR. Why would you know His merits so unknowne? TREL. I am not yet Confirmd at full, withdraw, and you shall read All what this paper talkes. MAR. So; Levidolche, you know our minde, Be cheerefull, come Trelcatio, Causes of joy or griefe, do seldome happen Without companions, necre thy resolutions Have given an other birth to my contents▪ Exit. LE. Even so, wise uncle, much good doe ye—discoverd! I could flie out, mix vengeance with my love, Unworthy man Malfato, my good Lord My hot in bloud, rare Lord, growes could too, well Rise dotage into rage, and sleep no longer; Affection turned to hatred, threatens mischiefe. Exit. Enter Piero, Amoretta, Futilli, and Castana. PIE. In the next gallory you may behold Such living pictures Lady, such rich pieces, Of Kings, and Queens, and Princes, that you'd think They breath, and smile upon yee. AMO. Ha, they crownthes, Great crownthes oth gold upon their headthes. PIE. Pure gold, Drawne all in state. AMO. How many horthes pray Are ith their Chariots? PIE. Sxteene, some twenty. CAST. My sister wherefore left we her alone? Where staies she gentlemen? FUT. Viewing the roomes, Tis like youle meet her in the gallery. This house is full of curiosities, Most fit for Ladies sights. AMO. Yeth, yeth, the thight
Of printhethes ith a fine thight. CAST. Good, let us finde her. PIE. Sweet Ladies this way; see the doores sure. FUT. Doubt not. Exit▪ SONG. Enter Adurni, and Spinella. PLeasures, Beauty, Youth attend yee. Whiles the spring of nature lasteth, Love and melting thoughts attend yee Ʋse the time, ere winter hasteth. Active blood, and free delight, Place and privacie invite. Doe doe! be kind as faire, Loose not opportunity for ayre. She is cruell that denies it, Bountie best appeares in granting, Stealth of sport as soone supplies it, Whiles the dues of love are wonting. Here's the sweet exchange of blisse, When each whisper proves a kisse. In the game are felt no paines, For in all the looser gaines. AD. Plead not faire creature without sence of pity So incompassionatly gainst a service, In nothing faulty more then pure obedience, My honours and my fortunes are led captives In triumph by your all-commanding beauty, And if you ever felt the power of love, The rigor of an uncontrouled passion, The tyrannie of thoughts consider mine▪ In some proportion, by the strength of yours, Thus may you yield and conquer. SPI. Doe not study (My Lord) to apparrell folly in the steed Of costly colours, henceforth cast off farre
Far from your noblest nature, the contempt Of goodnesse, and be gentler to your fame, By purchase of a life to grace your story. AD. Deare, how sweetly Reproofe droopes from that baulmy spring your breath, Now could I read a lecture of my griefes Un-earth a mine of Jewells at your foote, Command a golden shower to raine downe, Impoverish every Kingdome of the east, Which trafficks richest cloathes, and filkes; would you Vouchsafe one, unspleend chiding to my riot, Else such a sacrifice can but beget Suspition of returnes, to my devotion, In mercenary blessings, for that saint To whom I vow my selfe, must never want Fit offerings to her altar. SPI. Auria, Auria, Fight not for name abroad, but come my husband, Fight for thy wife at home. AD. Oh never canke (Deare crulty) one that is swone your creature, Amongst your countries enemies, I use. No force, but humble words, delivered from A tongue thats secretarie to my heart. SPI. How poorely some, tame to their wild desires, Fawne on abuse of vertue, pray my Lord, Make not your house my prison. A noise within. AD. Grant a freedome, To him who is the bondman to your beauty. Enter Aurelio, Castanna, Amoretta, Futilli, and Piero. AURE. Keepe backe yee close contrivers of false pleasures, Or I shall force ye backe—can it be possible Lockd up and singly too, chast hospitality A baquet in a bed-chamber; Adurni! Dishonourable man.
AD. What sees this rudenesse, That can broach scandall here. AURE. For you hereafter, Oh woman, lost to every brave report, Thy wronged Auria is come home with glory, Prepare a welcome to uncrowne the greatnesse Of his prevailing fates, SPI. Whiles you belike, Are furnisd with some newes for entertainement Which must become your friendship to be knit More fast betwixt your soules, by my removall, Both from his heart and memory. AD. Rich conquest, To triumph on a Ladies injur'd fame, Without a proofe or warrant. FUT. Have I life Sir, Faith, Christianity? PII. Put me on the rack, The wheele, or the gallies, if— AURE. Peace factors, In merchandise of scorne, your sounds are deadly, Castanna, I could pity your consent To such ignoble practice, but I finde. Course fortunes easily seduc'd, and herein All clayme to goodnesse ceases. CAST. Use your tyranny. SPI. What rests behind for mee, out with it. AURE. Horror, Becomming such a forfeit of obedience, Hope not that any falsity in friendship Can palliate a broken faith, it dares not Leave in thy prayers (fair vow-breaking want on) To dresse thy soule new, whose purer whitenesse Is sullyd by thy change, from truth to folly. A fearefull storme is hovering, it will fall, No shelter can avoydit, let the guilty Sink under their owne ruine. Exit.
SPIN. How unmanly His anger threatens mischiefe! AMO. Whom, I prethee, Doth the man speake to? AD. Lady, be not mov'd, I will stand Champion for your honour, hazard All what is deerest to me. SPIN. Mercie heaven! Champion for me, and Auria living? Auria? He lives, and for my guard my innocence As free as are my husbands clearest thoughts, Shall keep off vaine constructions, I must beg Your charities; sweet sister, yours to leave me, I need no fellowes now: let me appeare, Or mine owne lawyer, or in open court (Like some forsaken client) in my suit Be cast for want of honest plea—oh misery. Exit. AD. Her resolution's violent, quickly follow, CAST. By no means (sir) y'aue followed her already▪ I feare with too much ill successe in triall, Of unbecomming courtesies; your welcome Ends in so sad a farewell. AD. I will stand The roughnes of th'encounter, like a gentleman, And wait yee to your homes, what are besal me. exeunt. Actus tertius. Enter Fulgoso and Guzman. FULGOSO. I Say, Don, brother mine, win her and weare her. And so will I; if't be my lucke to loose her, I loose a prety wench, and theres the worst on't. GUZ. Wench said yee, most mechanically? faugh!
VVench is your trull, your blowe, your dowdie, but (Sir brother) he who names my Queene of love Without his bonnet vaild, or saying grace, As at Some paranymphall feast, is rude, Nor verst in literature, Dame Amoretta, Lo, I am sworne thy Champion. FUL. So am I too. Can as occasion serves, if she turne scurvie, Vnsweare my selfe again, and nere change colours. Pish man, the best, though call em, ladies, madames, Faires, fines, and honies, are but flesh and bloud, And now and then too, when the fis come on 'em, Will prove themselves but flirts, and tirliry pufkins. GUZ. Our choler must advance. FUL. Dost long for a beating? Shalls try a slash, heres that shall do't: Ile tap A gallon of thy braines, and fill thy hogshead With two of wine for't. GUZ. Not in friendship brother, FUl. Or whistle thee into an ague; hang't, Be sociable: drinke till we rore and scratch; Then drinke our selves asleepe agen. The fashion! Thou dost not know the fashion. GUZ. Her faire eyes, Like to a paire of pointed beames drawne from The Sunnes most glorious Orbe, does dazle sight, Audacious to gaze there; then over those A severall bow of jet securely twines In semicircles under them two bankes Of roses red and white, divided by An arch of polishe Ivotle, surveying A temple from whence Oracles proceed, More gracious than Apollos, more desir'd Than amorous songs of Poets, softly tun'd. FUL. Hey day, what's this? GUZ. Oh, but those other parts, all— FUL. All: Hold there, I barre play under boord,
My part yet lies therein; you never saw The things you wier-draw thus. GUZ. I have dream't Of every part about her, can lay open Her severall inches, as exactly (marke it) As if I had tooke measure with a compasse, A rule, or yard, from head to foot. FUL. Oh rare, And all this in a dreame. Enter Benat∣zi as an out∣law. Levi∣dolche above GUZ. A very dreame. FUL. My waking brother Souldier is tumd Into a sleeping Carpenter or Taylor, Which goes for halfe a man—whats he? beare up? BEN. Death of reputation, the wheele, strappado, gallies, Racke, are ridiculous fopperies; goblins to Fright babies: poore lean-sould rogues, they Will swowne at the scarre of a pinne: one teare Dropt from their harlots eyes, breeds earth-quakes In their bones. FUL. Blesse us, a monster patcht of dagger bumbast, His eyes like Copper-basons, a' has chang'd Haire with a shagge dogge. GUZ. Let us then avoyd him, Or stand upon our guard; the foe approches. BEN. Cut-throats by the score abroad, come home, and rot in fripperies, brave man at armes. Goe turne pandor doe, stalke for a messe of warme broath: damnable, honourable cuts are but badges for a fool to vaunt, the raw rib'd Apothecarie poysons cum privile∣gio, and is payd. Oh the common-wealth of beasts is most politick∣ly ordered. GUZ. Brother, wee'l keep aloofe, there is no valour In tugging with a man fiend FUL. I d. fie him. It gabbles like I know not what, believe it, The fellowes a shrewd fellow at a pink. BEN. Looke else; the Lion roares, and the spaniell fawnes. Downe Curre, the Badger bribes the Unicorue,
That a Iury may not passe upon his pillage: here the Beare fees the Wolfe, for he will not howle gratis, beasts call pleading howling. So then, there the Horse complaines of the Apes rank-riding: the Jockie makes mouthes, but is fin'd for it: the Stagge is not jeer'd by the Monkie for his hornes: the Asse by the hare for his burthen: The Oxe by the Leopard for his yoke, nor the Goat by the Ram, for his beard, onely the Fox wrappes himselfe warme in Bever, bids the Cat mouze, the Elephant toyle, the Boare gather akorns, whiles he grinnes, feeds fat, tells tales, laughes at all, and sleepes safe at the Lions feet.—Save ye people. FUL. Why save thee too, if thou beest of heavens making: What art?—Feare nothing Don, we have our blades, Are mettall men our selves, try us who dare. GUZ. Our brother speakes our minde, thinke what you please on't. BEN. A match: observe well this switch; with this only switch have I pasht out the braines of thirteene Turkes to the dozen for a breakfast. FUL. What man? tirteen? is't possible thoulyest not? BEN. I was once a Scholler, then I beg'd without pitty: from thence I practiz'd law, there a scruple of conscience popt me over the barre: a Souldier I turnd a while, but could not procure the letter of preferment. Merchant I would bee, and a glut of land∣rats gnawd me to the bones; would have bought an office, but the places with reversions were catch up: offered to passe into the Court, and wanted trust for cloathes; was lastly, for my good parts prest into the Gallies, tooke prisoner, redeemd amongst other slaves by your gay great man, they call him AURIA: and am now I know not who, where, or what. How d▪ee like me? say. FUL. A shaver of all trades; what course o f life Doest meane to follow next? ha? speake thy minde. GUZ. Nor be thou daunted fellow: we our selves Have felt the frownes of fortune in our dayes. BEN. I want extreamly, exceedingly, hideously. LE. Take that, enjoy it freely, wisely use it. Throwes a purse Th'advantage of thy fate, and know the giver. Exit.
FUL. Hoy d, a purse in troath wh o dropt, stay, stay, Vmh; have we gipsies here? oh mine is safe Ist your purse, brother Don? GUZ. Not mine, I seldome Weare such unfashionable trash about me. FUL. Hast any money in it, honest blade? A bots on empty purses. GUZ. Wee defie them. BEN. Stand from about me, as you are mortall, you are dull clod-pated lumpes of mire and garbish. This is the land of Fairies, Emperiall Queene of Elves, I do croutch to thee, vow my services, my blood, my sinewes to thee, sweete soveraigne of largesse, and liberality—a French Taylor neate; Persian Cooke; dainty! Greeke Wines; rich Flanders Mares; stately Spanish Sallads, poy∣nant, Venetian, wanton, ravishing, English Bawd unmatchable sirs I am fitted. FUL. All these thy followers, miserable pigmies Prate sence and don't be mad, I like thy humour, Tis pretty odde, and so as one might say, I care not greatly if I entertaine thee, Dost want a master? if thou dost I am for thee Else choose, and sneake up; pish I scorne to flinch man. GUZ. Forsake not faire advancement, money certes Will fleet and drop off, like a cozening friend, Who holds it, holds a slippery Eele byth' tayle, Unlesse he gripe it fast, be ruld by counsell. BEN. Excellent, what place shall I be admitted to? Chamber, wardrobe, cellar, or stable. FUT. Why one and all, th'art welcome, lets shake hands on't, Thy name? BEN. Parado Sir FUL. The great affaires I shall employ thee most in wilbe newes, And telling whats a clocke, for ought I know yet. BEN. It is sir to speake punctually some hour and halfe Eight three thirds of two seconds of one minute over at most, Sir FUL. I doe not aske thee now, or if I did
We are not much the wiser, and for newes— BEN. Auria, the fortunate is this day to bee receavd with great solemnity at the city counsel house, the stretes are already throngd with lookers on. FUL. Thats well remembred, brother Don let's trudge, Or we shall come too late. GUZ. By no meanes, brother. FUL. Waite close my ragged new-come. BEN. As your shaddowes. Exit. Enter Auria, Adurni, Martino, Trelcatio, Aurelio, Piero, and Futilli. AURI. Your favours with these honours, speake your bounties And tho the low deserts of my successe Appeare in your constructions faire and goodly, Yet I attribute to a noble cause, Not my abilities, the thankes due to them, The Duke of Florence hath too highly prizd My duty in my service, by example, Rather to cherish and encourage vertue, In spirits of action, then to crowne the issue Of feeble undertakings. whiles my life Can stand in use I shal no longer rate it In value then it stirres to pay that debt, I owe my countrie for my birth and fortunes. MART. Which to make good, our state of Genoa Not willing that a native of her owne, So able for her safety, should take pension From any other Prince; hath cast upon you The government of Corsica. TREL. Addes thereto Besides th'allowance yearly due, for ever To you and to your heires, the full revenew Belonging to Savona; with the office Of Admirall of Genoa. ADUR. Presenting
By my hands, from their publique treasury, A thousand Ducates. MAR. But they limit only One moueth of stay, for your dispatch, no more. FUT. In all your great attempts, may you grow thrifty, Secure, and prosperous. PIE. If you please to ranke, Amongst the humblest one that shall attend Instructions under your command, I am Ready to waite the charge. AURI. Oh still the state Engageth me her creature with the burthen Unequall for my weakenesse, to you gentlemen I will prove friendly honest, of all mindefull. AD. In memory (my Lord, such is your stile now) Of your late fortunate exployts, the counsell Amongst their generall acts, have registred The great Dukes letters, witnesse of your merit To stand in characters upon record. AURI. Load upon load let not my want of modesty Trespasse against good manners, I must study Retirement to compose this weighty businesse And moderately disgest so large a plenty. For feare it swel unto a surfeit. AD. May I be bould to presse a visit? AURI. At your pleasure, Good time of day, and peace, Os: health to your Lordship. AD. What of Spinella yet? FUT. Quite lost no prints, Or any tongue of racing her, how ever Matters are huddled up: I doubt my Lord Her husband carries little peace about him. AD. fall danger what fall can, she is a goodnesse Above temptation, more to be ador'd Then sifted; I'me too blame sure.
FUT. Levidolche. For her part too▪ laughd at Malfatos frenzie (Just so she termd it) but for you (my Lord) She said shee thankd your charity, which lent Her crooked soule, before it left her body, Some respit, wherein it might learne againe The means of growing streight. AD. Shee has found mercy, Which I will seeke, and sue for. FUT. You are happy. Exit▪ Enter Auria, and Aurelio. AURI. Count of Savona, Genoas Admirall, Lord governor of Corsica, enrould A Worthy of my country, sought and su'd to Prais'd, courted, flatterd; sure this bulke of mine, Tayles in the size a timpany of greatnesse Puffes up too monstrously my narrow chest, How surely dost thou malice, these extremes, Vncomfortable man? when I was needy, Cast naked on the flats of barren pitty, Abated to an ebbe so low, that boyes A Cocke-horse friskd about me, without plunge You could chat gravely then, in formall tones, Reason most paradoxically; now Contempt and wilful grudge at my uprising becalmes your learned noyse. AURE. Such florish Auria, Flies with so swift a gale, as it will wast Thy suddaine joyes into a faithlesse harbor. AURI. Canst mutter mischiefe, I observd your dulnesse Whiles the whole ging crowd to me harke my triumphs Are eccho'd under every roofe, the ayre Is streightend with the sound, there is not roome Enough to brace them in, but not a thought Doth pierce into the griefe that cabins heare,
Here through a creeke a little in-let crawles, A flake no bigger than a sisters threed, Which sets the region of my heart a fire. I had a kingdome once, but am depos▪d From all that royaltie of blest content, by a confederacle twixt love and frailtie. AURE glories in publik view, but adde to miserie, Which travailes in unrest at home. AURI. At home? That home Aurelio speakes of, I have lost, And which is worse, when I have rowld about, Toild like a pilgrime, round this globe of earth, Wearied with care, and over-worne with age, Lodg'd in the grave, I am not yet at home, There rots but halfe of me, the other part Sleeps, heaven knowes where, would she and I my wife, I meane, but what alas talke I of wife, The woman, would we had together fed On any out-cast parings, course and mouldy, Not liv'd divided thus, I could have beg'd For both, for't had been pitty she should ever Have felt so much extremitie. AURE. This is not Patience requir'd in wrongs of such vile nature, You pittie her, thinke rather on revenge. AURI. Revenge! for what? (uncharitable friend) On whom? lets speake a little pray with reason, You found Spinella in Adurnies house, Tis like a' gave her welcome very likely, Her sister and another with her, so Invited, nobly done; but he with her Privatly chamberd, he deserves no wife Of worthy qualitie, who dares not trust Her vertue in the proofes of any danger. AURE. But I broke ope the doores upon em. AURI. Marry, it was a slovenly presumption, And punishable by a sharpe rebuke.
I tell you sir, I in my younger growth, Have by the stealth of privacie enjoyd A Ladies closet, where to have prophan'd That shrine of chastitie and innocence, With one unhallowed word, would have exild The freedome of such favour into scorne. Had any he alive then ventur'd there, With foule construction, I had stampt the justice Of my unguiltie truth upon his heart. AURE. Adurni might have done the like, but that The conscience of his fault in coward blood, blusht at the quick surprisall. AURI. O fie, fie. How ill some argue in their sowre reproofe, Against a partie liable to law: For had that Lord offended with that creature, Her presence would have doubled every strength Of man in him, and justified the forfeit Of noble shame, else twas enough in both With a smile onely to correct your rudenesse. AURE. Tis well you make such use of neighbours courtesie, Some kinde of beasts are tame, and hug their injuries: Such way leads to a fame too. AURI. Not uncivilly, though violently, friend. AURE. Wherefore thn, thinke yee, Can she absent her selfe, if she be blamelesse? You grant of course, your triumphs are proclaim'd, And I in person told her your returne. Where lies she hid the while? AURI. That rests for answer In you, now I come t'ee, vve have exchang'd bosomes, Aurelio, from our yeares of childhood, Let me acknovvledge vvith vvhat pride I ovvne A man so faithfull, honest, fast, my friend: He vvhom if I speake fully, never faild by teaching trust to me, to learne of mine, I vvisht my selfe thine equall; if l aymd
A wrong, twas in an envie of thy goodnesse, So dearly witnesse with me my integritie, I layd thee up to heart, that from my love, My wife was but distinguisht in her sex, Give back that holy signature of friendship, Canceld▪ defac'd, pluckt off, or I shall urge, Accounts scor'd on the tally of my vengeance, Without all former complements. AURE. D'ee imagine I fawne upon your fortunes, or intrude Upon the hope of bettering my estate, That you cashiere me at a minutes warning? No, Auria, I dare vie with your respects, Put both into the ballance, and the poyse Shall make a setled stand, perhaps the proffer, So frankly vowd at your departure first Of setling me a partner in your purchase, Leads you into opinion of some ends Of mercenary falshood, yet such wrong Lest suites a noble soule. AURI. By all my sorrowes, The mention is too course. AURE. Since then th'occasion Presents our discontinuance, use your libertie: For my part I am resolute to die The same my life profest me. AURI. Pish, your faith Was never in suspicion; but consider, Neither the Lord nor Lady, nor the bawd, Which shuffled them together, opportunitie Have fastned staine on my unquestion'd name, My friends rash indiscretion was the bellowes Which blew the cole now kindled to a flame, Will light his slander to all wandring eyes. Some men in giddie zeale ore-doe that office They catch at, of whose number is Aurelio: For I am certaine, certaine it had beene
Impossible, had you stood wisely silent, but my Spinella, trembling on her knee, Would have accusd her breach of truth, have bg'd A speedy execution on her trespasse, Then with a justice lawfull as the magistrates, Might I have drawne my sword against Adurni, Which now is sheathed and rusted in the scabberd; Good thankes to yonr cheape providence, once more I make demand—my wife—you—si. AURE. Roare lowder The noyse affrights not me, threaten your enemies, And prove a valiant tongue man—now must follow, by way of method, the exact condition Of rage which runnes to mutinie in friendship. Auria come on, this weapon lookes not pale At fight of that againe heare and believe it, What I have done, was well done and well meant; Twenty times over, were it new to doe. I de doo't and doo't, and boast the paines religious; Yet since you shake me off, I slightly value Other sevrity. AURI. Honor and duty Stand my compurgators, never did passion Purpose ungentle usage of my sword, Against Aurelio, let me rather want My hands, nay friend, a heart then ever suffer Such dotage enter here, if I must loose Spinella, let me not proceed to misery, by loosing my Aurelio, we through madnesse, Frame strange conceits, in our discoursing braines, And prate of things as we pretend they were, Joyne helpe to mine (good man) and let us listen After this straying soule, and till we finde her, beare our discomfort quietly. AURE. So doubtlesse, She may be soone discoverd. AURI. Thats spoke chearefully.
Why theres a friend now,—Auria and Aurelio At oddes oh't cannot be, must not, and shanot— Enter Castanna. But looke Castannas here,—welcome faire figure Of a choice Jewel, lockd up in a cabinet, More pretious then the publique view should sully. CAST. Sir how you are informd, or on what termes Of prejudice against my course, or custome▪ Opinion swaies your confidence, I know not Much anger, if my feares perswade not falsely, Sits on this gentlemans sterne brow, yet sir, If an unhappy maids word may finde credit, As I wish harme to no body on earth, So would all good folkes may wish none to me. AURI. None does sweete sister. CAST. If they doe, deare heaven Forgive them is my prayer, but perhaps, You might conceave (and yet methinkes you shold not) How I am faulty in my sisters absence, Indeed tis nothing so, nor was I knowing Of any private speech my Lord intended, Save civill entertainement, pray what hurt Can fall out in discourse, if it be modest? Sure noble men will shew that they are such With those of their owne ranke, and that was all My sister can be charg'd with. AURI. Ist not friend, an excellent maide? AURE. Deserves the best of fortunes; I ever spoke her vertuous. CAST▪ With your leave, You us'd most cruell language to my sister, Enough to fright her wits, not very kinde To me my selfe, she sighd when you were gone, Desird no creature else should follow her; And in good truth, I was so full of weeping, I markd not well which way shee went. AURI. Staid she not Within the house then?
CAST. Passe not she—Aurelio Was passing rough. AURI. Strange! no where to be found out▪ CAST. Not yet, but on my life, ere many howers, I shall heare from her. AURI. Shalt thou? worthy maide, Thast brought to my sicke heart a cordiall—friend Good newes—most sweete Castanna. AURE. May it prove so. Exeunt. Enter Benatzi as before. BEN. The paper in the purse for my directions appoynted this the place, the time now, here dance I attendance—shee is come already. Enter Levidolche. LE. Parado, so I over heard you nam'd. BEN. A mushrome sprung up in a minute, by the sun-shine of your benevolent grace, liberality and hospitable compassion (most magnificent beauty) have long since lyen bed-rid in the ashes of the old world till now, your illustrious charity hath rak'd up the dead embers by giving life to a worm inevitably devoted yours as you shall please to new shape mee. LE. A gratefull man (it seemes) where gratitude Has harbor; other furniture becomming Accomplish'd qualities must needs inhabit, What country claimes your birth? BEN. None, I was borne at sea, as my mother was in passage from cape Ludugory to cape Clagliaty toward Affrick in Sardinia, was bred up in Aquilastro, and at yeares put my selfe in service un∣der the Spanish Viceroy: till I was taken prisoner by the Turkes. I have tasted in my daies hansome store of good and bad, and am thankefull for both. LE. You seeme the issue then of honest parents. BEN. Reputed no lesse: many children oftentimes inherit their lands who peradventure never begot them: my mothers husband was a very old man at my birth, but no man is too old to father his wives childe, your servant I am sure I will ever prove my selfe entirely.
LE. Dare you be secret? BEN. Yes. LE. And suddaine. BEN. Yes. LEV. But withall, sure of hand, and spirit. BEN. Yes, yes, yes. LE. I use not many words, the time prevents 'em, A man of quality has rob'd mine honour. BEN. Name him. LE. Adurni. BEN. A' shall bleed. LE. Malfato contemn'd my proffered love. BEN. Yoake 'em in death—whats my reward? LE. Propose it, and enjoy it. BEN. You for my wife. LE. Ha! BEN. Nothing else, deny mee. And ile betray your counsells to your ruine; Else doe the feate couragiously—consider. LE. I doe dispatch the taske I have enjoyn'd, Then claime my promise. BEN. No such matter, pretty one, Weele marry first—or—farewell. LE. Stay, examine From my confession what a plague thou draw'st Into thy bosome, tho I blush to say it, Know I have without sence of shame, or honour, Forsooke a lawfull marriage bed, to dally Betweene Adurnis armes. BEN. This Lords. LE. The same; more not content with him I courted, A newer pleasure, but was there refus'd by him I nam'd so late. BEN. Malfato. LE. Right, am henceforth resolutely bent to print My foll es on their hearts, then change my life For some rare pennance, canst thou love me now? BEN. Better I doe believe tis possible you may mend,
All this breakes off no bargain. LE. Accept my hand, with this a faith as constant As vowes can urge, nor shall my haste prevent This contract, which death only must divorce. BEN. Settle the time. LE. Meete here to morrow night, We wil determine further, as behoves us. BEN. How is my new love call'd? LE. Levidolche, be confident, I bring a worthy portion; But you'l slie off. BEN. Not I, by all thats noble, A kisse—farewell—deare fate. Exit. LE. Love is sharpe sighted And can pierce through the cunning of disguises, False pleasures I casheere ye, faire truth welcome. Exit. Actus Quartus. Enter Malfato, and Spinella. MALFATO. HEre you are safe, (sad cosen) if you please May over-say the circumstance of what You late discourst, mine eares are gladly oper, For I my selfe am in such hearty league With solitary thoughts, that pensive language Charmes my attention. SPI. But my husbands honours, By how much more in him they sparkle cleerly by so much more they tempt beliefe to credit The wrack and ruine of my injur'd name. MAL. Why cosen should the earth cleave to the rootes, The seas and heavens be mingled in disorder, Your purity with unaffrighted eyes Might waite the uproare, tis the guilty trembles
At horrors, not the innocent, you are cruell In censuring a libertle allowd. Speake freely, gentle cousin, was Adurni Importunately wanton? SPI. In excesse Of entertainment, else not. MAL. Not the boldnesse Of an uncivill courtship. SPI. What that meaht, I never understood, I have at once Set barres between my best of earthly joyes, And best of men, so excellent a man As lives without comparison, his love To me was matchlesse. MAL. Yet put case, sweet cousin, That I could name a creature, whose affection Followd your Auria in the height: affection To you; even to Spinella▪ true and setled, As ever Auria's was▪ can, is, or will be. You may not chide the storie. SPI. Fortunes minions Are flattered, not the miserable. MAL. Listen to a strange tale, which thus the authour sigh'd, A kinsman of Spinella (so it runnes) Her fathers sisters soune, some time before Auria the fortunate possest her beauties, Became inamor'd of such rare perfections, As she was stor'd with, fed his idle hopes With possibilities of lawfull conquest, Propos'd each difficultie in pursuit Of what his vaine supposall stil'd his owne, Found in the argument one onely flaw Of conscience, by the nearnesse of their blouds, Unhappy scruple, easily dispenc'd with, Had any friends advice resolv'd the doubt▪ Still on a' lov'd, and lov'd, and wisht, and wisht, Eft-soone began to speake, yet soone broke off,
And still the fondling durst not, cause a' durst not. SPI. Twas wonderfull, MAL. Exceeding wonderfull, Beyond all wonder, yet tis knowne for truth, After her marriage, when remaind not ought Of expectation to such fruitlesse dotage. His reason then, now, then could not reduce The violence of passion, tho a'vowd Never to unlock that secret, scarce to her Herselfe, Spinella, and withall resolv'd, Not to come neare her presence, but to avoyd All opportunities how ever proffered. SPI. An understanding duld by th'infelicitie Of constant sorrow, is not apprehensive In pregnant noveltie, my eares receive The words you utter, cousin, but my thoughts Are fastned on another subject. MAL. Can you embrace, so like a darling, your owne woes, And play the tyrant with a partner in them? Then I am thankfull for advantage, urg'd By fatall and enjoynd necessitie, To stand up in defence of injur'd vertue, Will against any, I except no qualitie, Maintaine all supposition misapplied, Unhonest, false, and villanous. SPI. Deare cousin, as y'are a gentleman, MAL. Ile blesse that hand, Whose honourable pittie seales the pasport For my incessant turmoyles, to their rest. If I prevaile, (which heaven forbid) these ages VVhich shall inherit ours, may tell postericie Spinella and Malfato for a kinsman, By noble love made jealons of her fame. SPI. No  I dare not heare it. MAL. All is sayd: Henceforth shall never syllable proceed, Enter Ca∣stanna. From my unpleasant voyce, of amorous folly—
CAST. Your summons warn'd me hither, I am come Sister, my sister twas an unkinde part, Not to take me along w'ee. MAL. Chide her for it, Castanna, this house is as freely yours, As ever was your fathers. CAST. we conceave so, Tho your late strangenesse hath bred mervalle in us, But wherefore, sister, keepes your silence distance? Am I not welcome t'ee? SPI. Lives Auria safe? Oh prithee doe not heare me call him husband, before thou canst resolve what kinde of wife His fury termes the runne away, speake quickely, Yet doe not stay Castanna, I am lost, His friend hath set before him a bad woman, And hee, good man, believes it. CAST. Now in truth— SPI. Hold, my heart trembles, I perceive thy tongue Is great with ills and hastes to be delivered, I should not use Castanna so, first tell me, Shortly and truely tell me▪ how he does. CAST. In perfect health. SPI. For that my thankes to heaven. MAL. The world hath not another wife like this, Cosen you will not heare your sister speake, So much your passion rules. SPI. Even what she pleases: goe on Castanna. CAST. Your most noble husband Is deafe to all reports, and only grieves At his soules love, Spinellas causelesse absence. MAL. Why looke ye cosen now? SPI. Indeede. CAST. Will value no counsel, takes no pleasure in his greatnesse, Neither admits of likelyhood at all, That you are living: if you were hee's certaine It were impossible you could conceale
Your welcomes to him, being all one with him, But as for jealousie of your dishonor, Hee both laughes at and scornes it. SPI. Does a'. MAL. Therein he shewes himselfe desertfull of his happinesse, CAST. Methinks the newes should cause some motion sister. You are not well. MAL▪ Not well. SPI. I am unworthy▪ MAL. Of whom? what? why? SPI. Goe cosen, come Castanna. Exeunt. Enter Trelcatio, Piero, and Futilli. TREL. The state in counsel is already set, My comming will be 'late; now therfore gentlemen, This house is free as your intents are sober, Your paines shall be accepted. FUT. Mirth sometimes falls into earnest signior. PIE. Wee for our parts aime at the best. TREL. You wrong your selvs & meelse, good successe t'ee▪ Exit. PIE. Futilli tis our wisest course to follow Our pastime with d scretion, by which meanes Wee may ingratiate as our businesse hits, Our undertakings to great Aurias favour. FUT. I grow quite weary of this lazie custome Attending on the fruitlesse hopes of service, For meate and ragges, a wit, a shrewd preferment Study some scurrill jests, grow old and beg No let em be admit'd that love foule linnen. Ile runne a new course. PIE. Get the coyne we spend, And knocke 'em ore the pate who jeers our earnings— FUT. Husht man, one suiter comes. Musicke. PIE. The tother followes. Enter Amoretta. FUT. Be not so lowd—here comes Madona sweete lips.
Mithtreth, inthooth for thooth, will lithpe it to uth. AMO. Dentlemen then ye ith thith muthicke yourth, or can ye tell what great manths fidleth, made it tith vedee petty noyth, but who thold thend it. PIE. does not your selfe know Lady. AMO. I doe not uth To thpend lip labour upon quethtionths, That I my thelfe can anthwer. FUT. No sweet madam, Your lips are destind to a better use, Or else the proverbe failes of lisping maids. AMO. Kithing you mean pey come behind with your mockths then, My lipthes will therve the one to kith the other — How now whath neckt? SONG. VVHat hoe we come to be merry, Open the doores a Joviall crew, Lusty boyes and free, and very, Very, very lusty boys are wee, We can drinke till all looke blew, Dance sing and roare, Never give ore. As long as we have nere an eye to see Pithee, pithee▪ leths come in▪ Oue thall all oua favous win, Dently, dently, we thall passe, None kitheth like the lithping lasse. PIE. What call yee this a song? AMO. Yeth a delithious thing, and wondroth prety; FUT. A very country catch—doubtlesse some prince Belikehath sent it to congratulate Your nights repose. AMO. Thinke ye tho thignior,
It muth be then thome unknowne obthcure printh That thuns the light. PIE. Perhaps the prince of darkenesse. AMO. Of darkeneth what ith he? FUT. A courtier matchlesse A'woes, and wins, more beauties to his love Then all the kings on earth. Enter Fulgoso. AMO. Whea thandeth hith court pey— FUT. This gentleman approaching I presume, Has more relation to his court then I, And comes in time t'informe ye. AMO. Thinck ye tho time thure you know him, PIE. Lady youl perceave it▪ FUL. She seemes in my first entrance to admire me, Protest she eyes me round; Fulg▪ shees is thine owne. PIE. Noble Fulgoso. FUL. Did you heare the musique? Twas I that brought it, was't not tickling? ah ha AMO. Pay what pinth thent it. FUL. Prince, no Prince but we, We set the ditty and composd the song, Theresnos a note or foote in't, but our owne, And the pure trodden morter of this braine, We can doe things and things. AMO. Doo'd thing't youa thelfe then. FUL. Nay, nay, I could never sing More then a gib cat, or a very howler, But you shall heareme whistle it. AMO. Thith thingth thome jethter, Thure he belongth unto the printh of darkneth. PIE. Yes, and ile tell you what his office is, His Prince delights himselfe exceedingly In birds of divers kindes, this gentleman Is keeper and instructer of his black-birds, he tooke his skill first from his fathers carter. AMO. Tith wonderfull to thee by what thrange meanes Thome men are raisd to plathes.
FUL. I doe heare you, And thanke ye heartily for your good wills, In setting forth my parts, but what I live on, Is simple trade of money from my lands. Hang sharkes, I am no shifter. AMO. Ith pothible— Enter Guzman. Bleth uth whoth thith? FUT. Oh it is the man of might. GUZ. May my addresse to beauty lay no scandall Upon my martiall honour, since even Mars Whom as in war, in love I imitate, Could not resist the shafts of Cupid, therefore As with the god of Warre, I deigne to stoop▪ Lady vouchsafe loves goddesse like to yield Your fairer hand unto these lips, the portalle Of valiant breath, that hath ore-turnd an army. AMO. Fay'a weather, keepe me, what a thorme ith thith? FUT. Oh Don keepe off at further distance yet A little farther, doe you not observe How your strong breath hath terrifyd the Lady? GUZ. Ile stop the breath of war and breath as gently As a perfum'd paire of sucking bellowes In some sweete Ladies chamber, for I can Speake Lyon-like, or sheepe like, when I please. FUT. Stand by then, without noise a while brave Don And let her only view your parts, they'le take her. GUZ. publish them in silence. PIE. Stand you there Fulgoso the magnificent. FUL. Heare? PIE. Just there, Let her survey you both; youle be her choyce Nere doubt it, man. FUT. I cannot doubt it, man. PIE. But speake not till I bid you. FUL. I may whistle. PIE. A little to your selfe, to spend the time.
AMO. Both foolth you thay. FUT. But heare them for your sport. PIE. Don shal begin,—begin Don, she has surveyd Your outwards and your inwards through the rents, And wounds of your apparell. GUZ. She is politicke, My out-side Lady shrowds a prince obscurd; AMO. I thanke ye for your muthicke printh. GUZ. My words Are musique to her. AMO. The muthicke and the thong You thent me by thith whithling thing, your man? GUZ. She tooke him for my man, love thou wert just. FUL. I wonot hould, his man, tis time to speake Before my time, oh scurvy, I his man? That has no meanes for meat or ragges, and seame-rents. GUZ. Have I with this one rapier. PIE. He has no other. GUZ. Past through a field of pikes, whose heads I lopt As easily as the bloody minded youth Lopt off the poppy heads. FUL. The puppit heads. GUZ. Have I—have I—have I? FUL. Thou lyest thou hast not, And ile mayn't. GUZ. Have I—but let that passe, For tho my famous acts were damb'd to silence, Yet my discent shall crowne me thy superior. AMO. That I would lithen to. GUZ. List and wonder, My great, great Grandsir was an ancient Duke, Stild Dis? vir di Gonzado. FUT. Thats in Spanish An incorrigible rogue, without a fellow, An unmatchd rogue, he thinkes we understand not. GUZ. So was my grandfather height Argozile. FUL. An arrant, arrant theefe leader, pray mocke it.
GUZ. My grandsire by the mothers side a Condee, Condee Scrivano. FUT. A crop-eard Scrivener. GUZ. Whose son, my mothers father was a Marquis, Hio di puto. PIE. Thats the sonne of a whore. And my renowned sire Don Piccace. FUT. In proper sence a rascall—O brave Don. GUZ. Huio di una pravado— PIE. A'goes on, Son of a branded bitch—high spirited Don, GUZ. Had honors both by sea and land, to wit. FUT. The Gallies and Bride-well. FUL. Ile not endure it, To heare a canting mungrell—Heare me lady, GUZ. Tis no faire play. FUL. I care not faire or foule, I from a King derive my pedigree, King Oberon by name, from whom my father The mightie and couragious Mounti-banco, Was lineally descended, and my mother (In right of whose blood I must ever honor The lower Germany) was a Harlekine. FUT. He blow up The Spaniard presently by his mother side. FUL. Her father was Grave Hansvan Herne, the son Of Hogen Mogen, dat de droates did sneighen Of veirteen hundred Spaniards in one neict. GUZ. Oh Diabolo. FUL. Ten thousand Divels, nor Diabolos Shall fright me from my pedigree, my uncle Yacob van Flagon drought, with Abraham Snorten fert And yongster Brogen foh with fourscore hargubush, Manag'd by well-lin'd Butter-boxes, tooke A thousand Spanish Iobber-nowles by surprise, And beat a sconce about their eares. GUZ. My furie
Is now but justice on thy forfeit life. Drawes. AMO. Lath they thall not fight. FUT. Feare not, sweet Lady. PIE. Be advis▪d great spirits. FUL. My fortunes bid me to be wise in duels, Else hang't, who cares? GUZ. Mine honour is my tutour, Already try'd and knowne. FUT. Why there's the poynt, Mine honour is my tutour too, Noble men Fight in their persons, scorn't, tis out of fashion, Theres none but hare-brain'd youths of metall use it. PIE. Yet put not up your swords, it is the pleasure Of the faire Lady, that you quit the field, With brandisht blades in hand. FUT. And more to shew your suffering valour, as her equall favours, you both should take a competence of kickes. AMO. How? FUT. PIE. Thus and thus, away you brace of stinkards, FUL. Pheugh, is it were. GUZ. Why since it is her pleasure, I dare and will endure it. FUL. Pheugh. PIE. A way, but stay below. FUT. Budge not, I charge yee, Till you have further leave. GUZ. Mine honour claimes The last foot in the field. FUL. Ile lead the van then. Exit. Enter Trelcatio. FUT. yet more, be gone, are not these pretious suiters— TREL. What tumults fright the house? FUT. A brace of Castrels, That flattered sir, about this lovely game your daughter, but they durst not give the souze And so tooke hedge. PIE. Mee Haggards, Buzzards, Kites. AMO. Ith korne, thuch trumpe and will thape my luffe,
Henth forth ath thall my father betht direct me. TREL. Why now thou singst in tune, my Amoretta▪ And my good friends, you have likewise Physicians, Prescrib'd a healthfull dyet, I shall thinke on A bounty for your paines, and will present yee To noble Auria: such as your descents Commend, but for the present we must quit This roome to privacie: they come— AMO. Nay predee, Leave me not Dentlemen. FUT. We are your servants. exeunt. Enter Auria, Adurni, and Aurelio, AURI. Y'are welcome, be assur'd you are, for proofe, Retrive the boldnesse (as you please to terme it) Of visit to commands, if this mans presence Be not of use, dismisse him. ADUR. Tis (with favour) Of consequence my Lord, your friend may witnesse How farre my reputation stands ingag'd To noble reconcilement. AURI. I observe No partie here amongst us, who can challenge A motion of such honour. ADUR. Could your lookes Borrow more cleare severitie and calmnesse, Than can the peace of a composed soule; Yet I presume, report of my attempt (Train'd by a curiosity io youth) For scattering clouds before 'em, hath rais'd tempests Which will at last break out. AURI. Hid now (most likely) I'th darknesse of your speech. AURE. you may be plainer. ADUR. I shall my Lord, that I intended wrong, AURI. Ha? wrong? to whom? ADUR. To Auria, and as farre
As language could prevaile, did— AURI. Take advice, (Young Lord) before thy tongue betray a secret Conceald yet from the world; heare and consider In all my flight of vanitie and giddinesse, VVhen scarce the wings of my excesse were fledg'd, VVhen a distemperature of youthfull heat, Might have excus'd disorder and ambition, Even then, and so from thence till now the down Of softnesse is exchang'd for plumes of age▪ Confirm'd and hardned, never durft I pitch On any howsoever likely rest, VVhere the presumption might be consterd wrong, The word is hatefull, and the sence wants pardon: For as I durst not wrong the meanest, so He who but onely aimd by any boldnesse, A wrong to me, should finde I must not beare it, The one is as unmanly as the other. Now without interruption. ADUR. Stand Aurelio, And justifie thine accusation boldly, Spare me the needlesse use of my confession, And having told no more, then what thy jealousie Possest thee with againe before my face, Vrge to thy friend the breach of hospitalitie Adurni trespast in, and thou conceavst Against Spinella; why proofes grow faint, If barely not suppos'd, Ile answere guilty. AURE. You come not here to brave us. ADUR. No Aurelio. But to reply upon that brittle evidence, To which thy cunning never shall rejoyne. I make my Iudge my Iurie, be accountant VVhither withall the eagernesse of spleene Of a suspitious rage can plead, thou hast Enforc'd the likelihood of scandall. AURE. Doubt not
But that I have deliverd honest truth, As much as I believe, and justly witnesse. ADUR. Loose grounds to raise a bulwarke of reproach on, And thus for that; my errand hither is not In whining trewant-like submission, To cry I have offended, pray forgive me, I will doe so no more: but to proclaime The power of vertue, whose commanding soveraignty, Sets bounds to rebell-bloods, and checke restraines, Custome of folly by example teaches A rule to reformation; by rewards, Crownes worthy actions, and invites to honour▪ AURE. Honour and worthy actions, best beseeme Their lips who practice both, and not discourse 'em. AURI. Peace, peace, man, I am silent. ADUR. Some there are, And they not few in number, who resolve No beauty can be chaste, lesse unattempted; And for because the liberty of courtship Flies from the wanton, on the her comes next., Meeting oft times, too many soon seduced, Conclude, all may be won by gifts, by service, Or complements of vowes; and with this file I stood in ranke, conquest securd my confidence, Spinella (storme not Auria) was an object Of study for fruition; here I angled Not doubting the deceipt could finde resistance. AURE. After confession followes— AURI. Noyse observe him. ADUR. Oh strange: by all the comforts of my hopes I found a woman good; a woman good, Yet as I wish beliefe, or doe desire A memorable mention, so much majesty Of humblenesse, and scorne, appeard at once In faire, in chast, in wise Spinellas eyes, That I grew dull in utterance, and one frowne From her, could every flame of sensuall appetite.
AURI. On sir and doe not stop. ADUR. Without protests, I pleaded meerely love, usd not a sillable, But what a virgin might without a blush, Have listned to, and not well arm'd have pittied, But she neglecting, cry'd come Auria, come Fight for hy wife at home, then in rushd you sir Talkd in much fury, parted, when as soone The Lady vanishd, after her the rest. AURI. What followd? ADUR. My commission on mine errour, In execution whereof I have prov'd So punctually severe, that I renounce All memory, not to this one fault alone But to my other greater, and more irksome, Now he who ever ownes a name, that consters This repetition, the report of feare. Of falshood, or imposture, let him tell me I give my selfe the lye, and I will cleare The injury, and man to man, or if Such justice may prove doubtfull, two to two, Or three to three, or any way reprieve Th' opinion of my forfeit, without blemish. AURI. Who can you thinke I am? did you expect So great a tamenesse as you finde, Adurni, That you cast lowd defiance? say— ADUR. I have rob'd you Of rigor (Auria) by my strict self-penance, For the presumption. AURI. Sure Italians hardly Admit dispute in questions of this nature, The tricke is new. ADUR. I finde my absolution, By vowes of change from all ignoble practice. AURI. Why looke ye frind, I tould you this before You would not be perswaded,—let me thinke. AURE. You doe not yet deny that you solicited
The Lady to ill purpose. ADUR. I have answerd, But it returnd much quiet to my minde, Perplext with rare commotions. AURI. Thats the way It smoothes all rubs. AURE. My Lord. AURI. Foh I am thinking You may talke forward, if it take tis cleare And then and then, and so and so. ADUR. You labour with curious engins sure▪ AURI. Fine ones, I take ye To be a man of credit—else, ADUR. Suspition is needlesse, know me better. AURI. Yet you must not part from me sir. ADUR▪ For that your pleasure. AUR. Come fight for thy wife at home my Auria—yes We can fight my Spinella, when thine honor Relies upon a Champion—now. Enter Trelcatio. TREL. My Lord Castanna with her sister, and Malfato Are newly enterd. AURI. Be not lowd▪ convey them Into the gallery—Aurelio, friend Adurni Lord, we three will sit in counsell And peece a hearty league, or scuffle shrewdly. Exit. Actus Quintus. Enter Martino, Benatzi, and Levidolche. MARTINO. RUffan out of my doores, thou comst to rob me, An officer, what ho! my house is haunted By a lewd packe of theeves, of harlots, murtherers,
Rogues, vagabonds, I foster a decoy here, And she trowles on her ragged customer, To cut my throat for pillage. Lev. Good sir heare me, BEN. Heare or not heare▪ let him rave his lungs out, Whiles this woman hath abode under this roofe, I will justifie my selfe her bedfellow in despight Of deniall, in despight, those are my words. MAR. Monstrous! why sirrah, do I keepe a bawdy-house, An hospitall for panders? Oh'; thou monster, Thou she-confusion! are you growne so rampant, That from a privat wanton thou proclaimst thy selfe A baggage for all gamesters, Lords or Gentlemen, Strangers, or home-spun yeomen, foot-posts, pages, Rorers or hangmen, hey day, set up shop, And then cry a market open, toot, and welcome. LEV. This is my husband. MAR. Husband! BEN. Husband naturall, I have married her, And whats your verdict on the match signior? MAR. Husband, and married her! LEV. Indeed tis truth. MAR. A proper joyning, give ye joy great mistresse Your fortunes are advanc'd, marry are they, What joynture is assur'd pray? some three thousand A yeare in oathes and vermine? faire preferment. Was ever such a tatterd ragge of mans flesh, Patch'd up for Copesmate to my Neeces daughter. LE. Sir, for my mothers name forbeare this anger, If I have yoak'd my selfe beneath your wishes, Yet is my choyce a lawfull one, and I Will live as truly chaste unto his bosome, As ere my faith hath bound me. MAR. A sweet couple. BEN. We are so, for mine owne part, however my out-side Appeare ungay, I have wrastled with death, Signior Martino, to preserve your sleepes, and such
As you are untroubled, a souldier is in peace A mockery, a very towne-bull for laughter, unthrifts, And landed babies, are prey-curmudgeons, Lay their baits for, let the warres rattle about Your eares once, and the securitie of a souldier is Right honourable amongst yee then, that day May shine againe: so to my businesse. MAR. A souldier! thou a souldier, I doe believe Th'art lowfre; that's a pretty signe I grant: A villanous poore Bandetti rather, one Can man a queane, and cant, and pick a pocket▪ Pad for a cloake, or hat, and in the darke Pistoll a stragler for a quarter Ducae. A souldier! yes, a lookes as if a had not The spirit of a herring, or a tumbler. BEN. Let age and dotage rage together, Levidolche thou art mine, on what conditions the world shall soone witnesse: yet since our hands joyn'd, I have not interessed my possession of thy bed, nor till I have accounted to thy injunction, doe I meane: kisse mee quick and resolute. So adieu Signior. LEV. Deare, for loves sake, stay. BEN. Forbeare intreaties. Exit. MAR. Ah thou: but what? I know not how to call thee, Faine would I smother griefe, and out it must▪ My heart is broke, thou hast for many a day Been at a losse, and now art lost for ever: Lost, lost, without recovery. LEV. With pardon, Let me retaine your sorrowes. MAR. Tis impossible, Despaire of rising up to honest fame, Turnes all the courses wilde, and this last action Will roare thy infamie, then you are certainly Married forsooth, unto this new-come. LEV. Yes, and herein every hope is brought to life, Which long hath laine in deadnesse▪ I have once more Wedded Benatzi my divorced husband,
MAR. Benatzi, this the man? LEV. No odde disguise Could guard him from discoverie; tis he, The choyce of my ambition, heaven preserve me Thankfull for such a bounty; yet he dreames not Of this deceit, but let me die in speaking, If I repute not my successe more happy Then any earthly blessing; oh sweet uncle, Rejoyce with me, I am a faithfull convert, And will redeeme the stains of a foule name, By love and true obedience. MAR. Force of passion Shewes me a childe againe, doe Levidolche, Performe thy resolutions, those perform'd, I have been onely steward for your welfare, You shall have all between yee. LEV. Joyne with me sir, Our plot requires much speed▪ we must be earnest, Ile tell yee what conditions threaten danger, Unlesse you intermediate; let us hasten, For feare we come too late. MAR. As thou intendest A vertuous honestie, I am thy second To any office, Levidolche wittie, My Neece, my wittie Neece. LEV. Let's slack no time sir. Exeunt. Enter Trelcatio, Malfato, Spinella and Castanna TREL. Kinsman and Ladies, have a little patience▪ All will be as you wish, Ile be your warrant, Feare nothing, Augia is a nobe fellow, I leave yee; but be sure I am in hearing: Take courage. Exit. MAL. Courage, they who have no hearts, Finde none to lose; ours is as great as his, Who defie danger most▪ sure state and ceremonie
In habit here like strangers we shall wait Formalitie of entertainment, Cousen, Let us returne, 'tis paultry. SPI. Gentle sir, Enter Auria, and Aurelio. Contine your passion, my attendance onely Commends a dutie. Now for heavens sake sister— A' comes, your husband comes, take comfort sister AURI. Malfato. MAL. Auria. AURI. Cosen, would mine armes In their embraces might at once deliver Affectionately what interest your merit Holds in my estimation, I may chide The coynesse of this intercourse betwixt us, Which a retir'd privacle on your part Hath pleas'd to shew; if ought of my endevours Can purchase kinde opinion, I shall honour The meanes and practice. MAL. Tis your charitie. AURE. VVorthy Malfato. MAL. Provident Aurelio. AURI. Castanna, vertuous mayd, CAS. Your servant, brother. AURI. But who's that other, such a face mine eyes Have been acquainted with, the fight resembles Something which is not quite lost to remembrance; VVhy do's the Lady kneele? to whom? pray rise; I shall forget civilitie of manners, Imagining you tender, a false tribute, Or him to whom you tender  counterfeit. MAL. My Lord, you use a borrowd bravery, Not suiting faire constructions, may your fort unes Mount higher than can apprehension reach 'em, Yet this waste kinde of antique soveraign Unto a wife who equals every best Of your deserts, archievements, or posteritie,
Bewrayes a barrennesse of noble nature, Let upstarts exercise uncomely roughnesse, Cleare spirits to the humble will be humble: You know your wife no doubt. AURI. Cry ye mercie Gentleman, Belike you come to tutour a good carriage, Are expert in the nicke ont, we shall study Instructions quiently, wife you sayd, agreed. Keepe faire, and stand the triall. SPI. Those words raise A lively soule in her, who almost yeelded To faintnesse and stupiditie, I thanke yee, Tho prove what judge you will, till I can purge Objections which require beliefe and conscience, I have no kindred sister, husband, friend, Or pittie for my plea. MAL. Call ye this welcom? we are mistook Castanna. CAS. Oh my Lord, other respects were promised. AURI. Said yee Lady, No kindred, sister, husband, friend. SPI. Nor name, With this addition, I disclaime all benefit Of mercie from a charitable thought, If one or all the subtilties of malice, If any enginiere of faithlesse discord, If supposition for pretence in folly, Can poynt out, without injurie to goodnesse, A likelihood of guilt in my behaviour, Which may declare neglect in every dutie, Requir'd fit, or exacted. AURI. High and peremptory, The confidence is masculine. MAL. Why not, an honourable cause gives life to truth, Without controll. SPI. I can proceed, that tongue, Whose venome by traducing spotlesse honour, Hath spread, th'infection is not more mine enemie,
Then theirs, or his weake and besotted braines are, On whom the poyson of its cankred falshood Hath wrought for credit to so foule a mischiefe. Speake sir, the churlish voyce of this combustion, Aurelio speake, nor (gentle sir) forbeare Ought what you know, but roundly use your eloquence Against a meane defendant. MAL. Hee's put too't, It seemes the challenge gravels him▪ AURE. My intelligence, Was issue of my doubts, not of my knowledge. A selfe confession may crave assistance, Let the Ladies justice impose the penance. So in the rules of friendship, as of love, Suspition is not seldome an improper Advantage for the knitting faster joynts Of faithfullest affection by the fevers Of casualtie unloosd, where lastly errour Hath run into the toyle. SPI. Wofull satis faction for a divorce of hearts. AURI. So resolute, I shall touch nearer home, behold these haires, (Great Misters of a spirit) yet they are not By winter of old age quite hid in snow, Some messengers of time I must acknowledge Amongst them tooke up lodging, when we first Exchang'd our faiths in wedlock, I was proud, I did prevaile with one whose youth and beauty Deserv'd a choyce more sutable in both. Advancement to a fortune could not court, Ambition either on my side, or hers: Love drove the bargaine, and the truth of love Confirm'd it, I conceiv'd, but disproportion In yeares, amongst the married, is a reason For change of pleasures, whereto I reply Our union was not forc'd, 'twas by consent; So then the breach in such a case appeares
Unpardonable; say your thoughts. SPI. My thoughts in that respect are as resolute as yours, The same, yet herein evidence of frailtie Deserv'd not more a separation, Then doth charge of disloyaltie objected Without or ground or witnesse, womans faults Subject to punishments, and mens applauded, Prescribe no lawes in force. AURE. Are ye so nimble. MAL. A soul sublim'd from drosse by competition, Such is mighty Aurias fam'd; descends From its owne Spheare, when injuries profound ones Yeeld to the combat of a scoulding masterie. Skirmish of words hath with your wife lewdly rang'd Adulterating the honour of your bed. Hold dispute, but execute your vengeance, With unresisted rage we shall looke on, Allow the fact, and spurne her from our blouds, Else not detected, you have wrong'd her innocence Unworthily, and childishly, for which I challenge satisfaction. CAS. Tis a tyranny Over an humble and obedient sweetnesse, Ungently to insult— Enter Adurni. ADUR. That I make good, And must without exception finde admittance Fitting the party who hath herin interest, Put case I was in fault, that fault stretch'd meerely To a misguided thought, and who in presence Except the paire of sisters faire and matchlesse, Can quit an imputation of like folly? Here I aske pardon (excellent Spinella Of only you) that granted he amongst you, VVho calles an even reckoning, shall meet An even accountant. AURI. Baited by consederacie,
I must have right. SPI. And I, my Lord, my Lord, What stirre and coyle is here? you can suspect, So reconciliation then is needlesse, Conclude the difference by revenge, or part, And never more see one another: sister, Lend me thine arme, I have assum'd a courage Above my force, and can hold out no longer, Auria unkinde, unkinde. CAS. She faints. AURI. Spinella, regent of my affections, thou hast conquerd, I finde thy vertues as I left them, perfect, Pure, and unflaw'd, for instance let me claime Castannas promise. CAS. Mine? AURI. Yours, to whose faith I am a guardian, not by imposition, But by you chosen, looke yee, I have fitted A husband for you, noble and deserving, No shrinking backe, Adurni I present her A wife of worth. MAL. Howes that? ADVR. So great a blessing Crownes all desires of life, the motion, Lady, To me, I can assure you, is not sudden, But welcom'd & forethought, would you could please To say the like. AURI. Castanna doe—Speake deerest, It rectifies all crookes, vaine surmises, I prethee speake. SPI. The courtship's somewhat quick, The match it seemes agreed on, doe not sister Reject the use of fate. CAS. I dare not question The will of heaven. MAL. Vnthought of and unlookt for. SPI. My ever honored Lord.
AURE. This marriage frees Each circumstance of jealousie. AURI. Make no scruple (Castanna) of the choyce, tis firme and reall, Why else have I so long with tamenesse nourisht Report of wrongs, but that I fixt on issue Of my desires, Italians use not dalliance But execution; herein I degenerated From custome of our nation: for the vertues Of my Spinella rooted in my soule, Yet common forme of matrimoniall complements, Short liv'd, as are their pleasures, yet in sooth, My dearest, I might blame your causelesse absence, To whom my love and nature were no strangers, But being in your kinsmans house, I honour His hospitable friendship, and must thank it. Now lasting truce on all hands. AURE. You will pardon A rash and over-busie curiositie. SPI. It was too blame, but the successe remits it. AD. Sir, what presumptions formerly have grounded Opinion of unfitting carriage to you, On my part I shall faithfully acquite At easie summons. MAL. You prevent the nicetie, Use your owne pleasure— Enter Benatzi his sword drawn, Levi∣dolche and Martino fol∣lowing. AURE. Whats the matter? AURI. Matter? BEN. Adurni and Malfato found together! Now for a glorious vengeance. LEV. Hold, oh hold him. AURE. This is no place for murder, yeeld thy sword. AURE. Yeeld it, or force it; set you up your shambles Of slaughter in my presence. ADUR. Let him come. MAL. VVhat can the Russian meane? BEN. I am prevented.
The temple or the chamber of the Duke, Had else not prov'd a sanctuarie Lord, Thou hast dishonourably wrong'd my wife. ADUR. Thy wife! I know not her, nor thee. AURI. Feare nothing. LE. Yes, me you know, heaven has a gentle mercle For penitent offenders: blessed Ladies, Repute me not a cast-away, though once I fell into some lapses, which our sex Are oft inntangled by; yet what I have been, Concernes me now no more, who am resolv'd On a new life. This Gentleman Benatzi, Disguised as you see, I have re-married, I knew you at first sight, and tender constantly Submission for all errours. MAR. Nay, tis true sir. BEN. I joy in the discovery, am thankfull Vnto the change. AURI. Let wonder hence forth cease, For I am partner with Benatzis counsls; And in them was director, I have seene The man doe service in the warres late past, VVorthy an ample mention; but of that At large hereafter, repetitions now Of good or bad, would streighten time presented For other use. MAR. VVelcome, and welcome ever. LE. Mine eyes sir, never shall without a blush Receive a looke from yours; please to forget All passages of rashnesse, such attempt VVas mine, and onely mine. MAL. You have found a way To happinesse, I honour the conversion, ADUR. Then I am freed. MAL. may stile your friend your servant, MAR. Now all thats mine, is theirs, ADUR. But let me adde
An offering to the altar of this peace. AURI. How likes Spinella this? our holy day Deserves the Kalender. SPI. This Gentlewoman Reform'd must in my thoughts live faire and worthy, Indeed you shal. CAS. And mine, the noveltie Requires a friendly love. LEV. You are kinde and bountifull. Enter Trelcatio, Futelli, Amoretta, Piero, driving in Fulgosa, and Guzman. TREL. By your leaves Lords and Ladies, to your jollities, I bring increase with mine too, here's a yongster Whom I cll sonne-in-law, for so my daughter Will have it. AMO. Yeth in sooth thee will. TREL. Futelli hath wean'd her from this paine. PIE. Stand forth stout lovers. TREL. Top & Top-gallant paire, and for his pains, She will have him, or none, hee's not the richest I'th parish; but a wit, I say Amen, Because I cannot helpe it. AMO. Tith no matter. AURI. Wee'l remedy the penury of Fortune, They shall with us to Corsica, our cousin Must not despaire of means, since tis believ'd Futelli can deserve a place of trust. FUT. You are in all unfellowed, AMO. Withly thpoken. PIE. Thinke on Piero sir. AURI. Piero, yes, But what of these two pretty ones? FUL. Ile follow. The Ladies, play at cards, make sport and whistle, My purse shall beare me out, a lazie life,
Is scirvy, and deboshd; fight you abroad, And weele be game whiles you fight at home, Runne high, runne low, here is a braine can doo, But for my martiall brother Don, prithee make him A what dee callt, a setting dog, a centinell Ile mend his weekely pay. GUZ. Hee shall deserve it. Vouchsafe employment honourable FUL. Marry. The Dons a generous Don. AURI. Unfit to loose him, Command doth limit us short time for revells, Wee must be thrifty in them, none I trust, Repines at these delights, they are free and harmelesse, After distresse at sea, the dangers ore, Safety and welcomes better taste a shore. EPILOGVE. THe Court's on rising; tis too late To wish the Lady in her fate Of try all now more fortunate. A verdict in the Iuries brest, Will be given up anon at least, Till then tis fit we hope the best. Else if there can be any stay, Next sitting without more delay, We will expect a gentle day.
