11840.5 23063224 26165
❧ A FRVIT∣ful Sermon, prea∣ched at Occham, in the Coun∣ty of Rutland, the Second of Nouem∣ber. 1583. By Thomas Gybson. PROVERB. 29.8. ¶ VVhere there is no Vision, the people decay. GOD IS MY DEFENDER GOD IS MY DEFENDER AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue dwelling without Temple-Barre. 1584.
¶ TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE Lorde, FRAƲNCES, Earle of BEDFORD, and one of her Maie∣sties most honourable priuy Counsell Knight of the Noble order of the Garter: VVith the Right Honoura∣rable, Syr VVALTER MILDEMAY Knight, Chan∣celour of the Queenes Maiesties Court of Exchequer, and one of her Highnes most honourable priuy Coun∣sell, Grace, Mercy, and peace be multiplied from God our Heauenly Father, & from our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christe. THE blessed & holy Euange∣list Saint Luke, (Right Hono∣rable) penning and publishing the Heauenlye story and bles∣sed Gospell of Iesus Christ, doth also dedicate the same to one Theophilus, a Noble and famous man, of singular credit and authority. The reason and
cause that mooued him thereto, is because in those times, the purenesse of the Gospell was hindred, and per∣secuted, whereby many erroures be∣gan to be spreade and allowed: and therefore in great Wisdom it pleased the holy Ghost, not onely to write a faithfull, sure, and perfect story: but also to offer and present the custodie and defence of the same, to one of Religion and Povver. The verye same cause, partly hath mooued me at this time, to bee so bolde as to offer and Dedicate this poore and simple testimony of my trauaile to your Honoures. For although I doe confesse, vvee liue vnder a Gracious Prince (whome the Lorde long con∣tinue to his glory, to the shame and confusion of his enemies, and to the dayly profit of his Church) although (I say) we liue in so peaceable, happy, and gracious a time, vnder the flow∣rishing state of the Gospell; yet true∣ly the dearest Children of God, and the sincerity of Religion, is subiect to bitter Persecution. These wordes at
the first may seeme verye greeuous, hard and haynous, and yet they are most certaine and true. The holy Apo∣stle S. Paul, writing to the Galatians, 4.29. speaketh on this maner: As he that was borne after the Flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirite; euen so is it nowe: hee speaketh of Ismael and Isaac, and yet we do not reade in the scripture of any persecution be∣tweene them, neither did Ismael per∣secute his Brother Isaac, with hande or sworde, but that which is worse, proudly & arrogantly, he raised him selfe against him, mocking him, and as it were, treading vnder feete the promise of God. And this dealing by the apostle is cálled a persecution, & in deede there is not any persecution more greeuous to the Children of God then this. Nowe who doth not dayly see, that the best Christians, and the purenes of Religion are greatly persecuted, by Papists, Atheists, and Hipocrites, as Isaac was by his Bro∣ther Ismael, And of all matters of re∣ligion, I thinke there is scarse any in
these dayes more generally hated of such kind of men, then that, which is most altogether, & almost only hand led in this simple Sermō. For these & such like men, many of them can bee content with a common ordinarye profession, to heare Mattins and Euensong, and sometimes a Sermon, by such men as they like of, but that there should be any continuall course of the pure preaching of the worde of God, they can in no case allowe or like of. This I say, is hated, reiected and persecuted so farre as may be, of the greater sorte, and therefore not without cause haue I attēpted to de∣dicate this my labor, to your honors as special Patrons, & defendors of the Lords cause, & tried Friends and Fa∣uorers of God & his trueth. But yet this attempt may seem very raish and needles: For who am I, that I should take vppon mee to set foorth and to publish any thing. The vnworthiest I confesse of many hundreths, and the vnablest of manye thousands, and yet seeing many things more simple, lesse
needefull and profitable, are not only suffered, but alowed to come abroad: I am not altogether discouraged, nei∣ther hath any mā iust cause to accuse mee in this my simple enterprise. I know these be daies of knowledge & learning, there bee greate store of fa∣mous and learned diuines in our land (whom I beseech the Lorde to blesse, that they may assist their weake bre∣thren, in the defence of this, and such good causes,) and yet the two mites of the pore widow cast into the trea∣sury, amongest the great giftes of the wealthy, are not to be refused. I know your Honours be daily hearers of fa∣mous and learned men, both in your houses and abroad, you are acquain∣ted with the sermons of profound & deepe diuines, and such as are mighty in the scriptures: notwithstanding ha∣uing in my self sufficient trial & expe¦rience of your honors most curteous humble, & fauorable dealing towards me, and also of some liking of my simple & my poore trauelles in prea∣ching heretofore. I am not ashamed
or afrayd after such triall and proofe, to offer this so small and simple a thing vnto your Honours. The great necessity of the matter I deale with∣all, the care of Gods glory, the zeal of his house, the benefit that his church may haue by it, hath especially moo∣ued me that it should be published & come abroad. Let not therefore hy∣pocrites bee too rash in iudging, the Lorde the searcher of the hearts and reynes knoweth my purpose and af∣fection, in preaching and publishing this matter. The cause that hath mo∣ued me to present it to your Honors, rather then to other, is the lōg proof and acquayntance of your honoura∣ble courtesies, and friendlye good will towards me, which for my part, I am neuer able to requite, for the which I thinke my selfe as long as breath is in me, moste bound and in∣debted to your Honours. And here I offer this poore fruite of my trauaile, as some Testimony of good will and thankfulnes. And whereas wee are wont commonly to offer and present
to our dearest Friendes, some giftes, as tokens of good will, or else of spe∣cial duety. Amongst many great and precious presentes, vvhich are no doubt giuen and presented to your honours; I also offer this simple mite, and yet I hope more pleasant and ac∣ceptable to the receiuers, then thou∣sands of gold or siluer, or any earthly thing whatsoeuer. And in deede, can there be any matter more sweete and pleasaunt, to the cheefe Patrons and Defenders of the Godly Preachers, and the word of God, then to heare of the necessity, profite, and excel∣lency of preaching: which things, are set foorth plainly & largely in this lit∣tle Sermon. For howsoeuer many mē hate and abhorre this matter, and can in no case disgest it: yet your honours zeale, courage, liking, goodwill and countenaunce, to this and other good causes is cōmonly known and spreade abroad. A further reason why I pub∣lishe this Sermon, is because there is some matter in it, for the which I haue beene in the country where I dwell, o∣openly
slaundered and euill spoken off, and therefore to cleare my selfe from such false reports, to satisfie my friends which are readie to answer in my cause, to let the enemies knowe, I haue spoken nothing whereof I am a∣shamed, but dare put it to the witnes∣sing and testimonie of the Christian reader: and also to resolue more ful∣ly, the weaker sort, in such things as at the first seeme strange and absurd: for these and such like causes, I say, I am content and willing that this my trauell come to light: although the whole or most part of this Sermon is vnsauory & vnpleasaunt to the grea∣ter sort, and specially to the ignorant people, to the hypocrit, to the idol or dumb minister: yet this is that, which chiefly misliketh and grieueth them; because, both in the place where I pre¦ched this Sermon, and also elsewhere, I sayd and affirmed, that the minister which preacheth not, and hath not those gyftes which the Lorde requi∣reth in his Ministers, that such a one is no Minister, approoued of GOD,
neyther hath anye right and autho∣ritie from the Lorde, to mynister his Sacramentes; which matter, howe straunge and absurde soeuer it seeme to ignoraunt and carnall men: yet I hope it is heere sufficiently confir∣med by authoritye and examples of the holy Scripture. I coulde alleadge further, the allowaunce and iudge∣ment of most famous and pure Di∣uines, and such as are gennerally re∣ceyued and allowed of all true Chri∣stians. Master IOHN CALVIN, about the latter ende of his Cate∣chisme, which is allowed by her Ma∣iesties authoritie, sayth in playne wordes, that the ministration of the Sacraments belongeth to them, who haue the charge to preache openly in the Church. For the preaching of Gods worde, and the ministration of the Sacraments, be things ioyntly belonging to one kind of office: these be his very words which are as plaine as may be. M: Rodolphus Gualter in his 118. Homely vpon Mark, speaking of the institution of the Lordes supper,
and of the right order in ministring that sacrament, amongst other things sayth on this manner. Peccant qui coe∣nam abs{que} verbi predicatione peragunt, a∣deó{que} illam huic praeferunt, quasi vel ad dei cultum, vel ad salutem plus conferat, quam verbum, cum tamen huius maiorem quam sacramentorum rationem habuerunt Chri∣stus & Apostoli. They sinne against the institution of Christe, which doe mi∣nister the supper without preaching of the word, and so preferre the Sa∣crament before preaching: as though that auayled more to saluation and seruice of God, then the worde prea∣ched; whereas notwithstanding, both Christe and the Apostles esteemed more the preaching of the Worde, then the Sacrament: these are his wordes. I might alleadge many other testimonies for this cause, not onely from the most worthy, Godly, and learned diuines, both old and new of other Nations: But also from famous Martyrs and Byshops in this oure Lande, in their sermons and writings, published and priuileged by autho∣rity.
I hope then ther is no cause why this doctrin shold not receiue a fauo∣rable intertainment & allowance, as of your honors, so of al faithful Chri∣stians, hauing such warrant from so pure and learned men, and from the testimony of the holy word. VVhat soeuer I spake in deliuering and vt∣tering this sermon, I haue here set it down (so nere as I could remember) both in forme and matter. To con∣clude, I moste heartily desire in the Lord, the Christiā reader, & especially your honors, to accept this my pore trauell. I am bold to ioyn you both in one, not only because the Lord hath ioined you together in the bonde of friendship, & in a care of my good estate: but also that which is greatest of all, in a zeale of Gods glory & fur∣therance of his religion. Now the ve∣ry God of peace, sanctify you through out: and I pray God that your whol spirits and souls, and bodyes, may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen. Your Honours in the Lord; THOMAS GYBSON.
Hearken with feare and reuerence to the worde of the Lorde, written by the holy Apostle Saint Paule, in his first epistle to the Corinthians. Chap. 9. verse 16. Woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospell. OVR Lord and Saui∣our Iesus Christ, in the 17. chapter of the bles∣sed Euangelist Luke, amongst manye other excellent things, vtte∣reth and propoundeth this parable, Who is it of you, that hauing a seruaunt plowing or feeding cattell,Luk. 17.7.8.. would say vnto him by and by when he were come from the field. Goe and sit downe at table, &c. And afterwardes in the tenth verse appli∣eth it on this maner. So like wise ye, when ye haue done all those thinges which are commaunded you, say, we are vnprofi∣table seruauants: we haue done that which
was our duetie to doe. The holy Apostle and seruant of Christ in this place, a∣uoucheth and confesseth in him selfe, the saying of his Master to be moste true. For although amongst many good workes, there is not a more ex∣cellent or better work, then the prea∣ching of the word of God (which was done most purely, effectually, and di∣ligently by the Apostle) yet he is so farre from accounting it meritori∣ous, that he sayth, a necessitie is layd vpon him, that duety bindeth him to do it. In the former verses from the beginning of this Chapter. S. Paule sheweth, and that with diligence and large copie of wordes, that beeing a∣mongst the Corrinthians, he was con¦tent to giue place to his owne right, to forbeare that which he might law∣fully doe, to take no maintenaunce at all from them, least he should giue oc∣casion of cauilling to the false Apo∣stles: as though he vnder the pre∣tence of the calling of an Apostle, should seeme to seeke his owne gaine and lucre. Amongst other thinges he
hath sayde, and that in the former verse: It were better for me to dye then that any man should make my reioycing in vaine. The which wordes may seeme to proceed and flow from an ambiti∣ous and vaineglorious spirite. And therefore it might be sayde, What now Paule? What needes all this? Thou art wont to glory in Christ a∣lone, and dost thou now glory in thine owne doinges? To such a question or obiection the Apostle aunsweareth qualifiyng his former speach, as if he should say: Although it be an excel∣lent worke to preach the Gospel, and that freely, yet take not my wordes o, as though I repose any merite of saluation in this worke, for I am cal∣led to it, and bound to it, by duety and commaundement from my master Christ. And if I doe it not I prouoke and procure the anger of God, and the sentence of his curse and condem∣nation on me. Woe bee to me if I preach not the Gos∣pell: Of these words, being but a part of the verse, I haue taken vpon me to
speake at this time. From whence I meane by Gods grace to speake of these three pointes. First I will ga∣ther some description of preaching, that you may know what it is. Se∣condly, I meane to prooue the necessi∣tie of preaching, and that euery Mi∣nister is bound to preach. Thirdly, I will shewe what they ought to preach. The first point as in many other places, so here it is na∣med, but not fully set downe what it is, but in other places we may easily gather what it is. The second is here named and prooued. For Saint Paule being a Minister, and saying, ƲƲoe bee vnto mee, if I preach not the gospell, doth plainely affirme as much. The third is here set downe most plainly, the matter that we must preach of, namely the Gospell. As touching the first, let vs see how the scripture speaketh of it, as it is particularly and specially applyed to the publique office of the Minister, o∣therwise I knowe this worde prea∣ching to haue a further and more ge∣neral
signification: But I speake of it, as Christ and the Apostles doe, ap∣plying it to the Ministers. Saint Paul sayth,1. Cor. 14.3. He that prophecieth speaketh vnto men to edifiyng,2. Tim. 4.2. to exhortation, and to com∣fort. The same Apostle charging Ti∣mothie & in him euery minister, to preach the word, addeth immediatly,Ioh. 21.15. Improoue, rebuke, exhort with all long suffe∣ring and doctrine.1. Pet. 5.2. The blessed Apostle Peter, as he receiued of his Master a charge to feed his flocke, so he exhorteth al other to do the same. The holy Euangelist Luke sayth that Christ taught or preached in Na∣zareth. He first reade,Luk. 4.16. then shut the booke, afterwarde he expounded that scripture which he read, and so apply∣ed it to the hearers. By these and such like places we may gather, that prea∣ching properly as we speake of it, is an exposition and application of the scriptures, by the liuely voyce of the minister, to the edifiyng of the people: whereby it may easily appeare that reading is not preaching, nor yet suf∣ficient in a minister approued of God.
Saint Paul wil haue him apt to teach. 1. Tim. 3.2.The Prophet Malachy affirmeth, that the Priestes lips must preserue knowledge.Mal. 2.7. Christ after reading shut the booke and expounded, and yet some are not ashamed to count simple rea∣ding sufficient, saying, it will serue the turne, and there may be as much good done by it, as by preaching. As for reading, wee speake not againste it wee disalowe it not, but account it a holye, lawfull, necessarye, and profitable meane, whereby greate good and benefite is wrought to the Church of God: but yet, it doth not follow yt it is sufficient in a minister, yt it will serue simply of it self in the publique congregation. The Lorde hath set downe another order, and re∣quireth greater things at the handes of his speciall seruaunts. But this matter shal appear more plain in the words following. For my purpose in this part is, only to shew you by some circumstances and discriptions what preaching is, and that reading is not preaching, or at least that kinde of
preaching, which the Lord requireth in his ministers, as may appeare by comparing them together, and by v∣sing some apt similitudes for the ex∣planation of this matter. The smell or sight of meat doth good to the hun∣gry man, but it will not feede him, except he taste of it: so by reading men may haue some smell of Religi∣on, but they shall neuer throughly taste of it, without preaching,Eph. 4.11. and therefore it is called a feeding, as we hearde before and Preachers are counted Pastors and feeders. Again, meate that is rawe and fat, maye bee called good, but it is not to bee eaten before it bee made readye and dressed: so are the Scriptures reade good, holy and pure, but not sufficient foode for the people, without preach∣ing. Againe, bare reading is as thogh one should cast a whole loafe, before them which want strength to cut it,2. Tim. 2.15. Preaching is a cutting and diuiding of the breade of life, that euery one may haue his seueral portion. Again, bare reading without preaching is
euen as the husbandman should cast whole strikes and bushels of Corne, on his Land together on heapes, not scattering of it.Mat. 13. Preaching is a sprea∣ding and a sowing of the seed. Again. bare reading is as though the Fisher should shuffle his nets on heapes, not opening them: Preaching is a wise opening, laying and handling of the Net. Bare reading is as one should of∣fer good treasures, and yet suche as were hid, shut vp & fast locked, & could not becōe by: preching is an opening of the Treasures, to the ioy of Gods Children. Reading is like to fire co∣uered with Ashes, which doth smally profite them that stand by it. Preach∣ing is an opening and discouering of the fire. Let vs consider one example amongst many, for the further expla∣ning of this matter.Act. 8.27. The Chamber∣laine that Noble Treasurer of Aethi∣opia, going to Hierusalem, to worship God as he went, reade the scriptures, if reading wold haue serued his turn, Philip needed not to haue come to
him, but he vnderstoode not before be had a guide, hee was not conuerted, neyther had he sayth sufficient to sal∣uation, before hee hearde the prea∣ching of the Worde, which in deede is that especiall, effectuall, bles∣sed and excellent ordinarye meane of fayth, as it appeareth more plain∣ly and fully in the next part of our text. Which beeing rightly waighed, confirmeth the greate necessitye of preaching, and prooueth that euery Minister ought to preach. Woe bee to me, if I preach not the Gospell. And why so? because I am called to it, because I am a Minister, because the Lorde requireth it of me. Although Saint Paule and the other Apostles had pri∣uiledges and prerogatiues, which we haue not, although we haue not fullye so large a commission, as hee and they had: Although they did ma∣ny thinges, which we neither may, nor can doe: yet as touching the office of preaching, it appertaineth as well to vs as to them. And for the further
proofe of this matter I will rehearse some argumentes, which before I haue vsed in this place, adding di∣uers others to them. 1 It is the commandemēt of Christ and the holy Apostles, therefore ne∣cessary. Christ sayd to his Apostles, Goe preach the Gospell.Mar. 16.15. The which cō∣mandement, in this behalfe belong∣eth to all the ministers of God. Saint Paule straightly chargeth the mini∣sters of Ephesus. Take heed vnto your selues, and to all the flocke, whereof the ho∣ly Ghost hath made you ouerseers, to feede the Church of God, which he hath purcha∣sed with his own bloud. And most weigh¦tily of al, he requireth it in the place already alleadged, he leaueth it not as a thing indifferent, that may be done, or vndone, but speaketh with a wonderful and mighty protestation, he ioyneth the Scripture and prea∣ching togeather. For hauing before in the former Chapiter, set foorth the great profit of the scriptures, straight waye hee necessarilye addeth this forecible exhortation.2. Tim. 4.1. I charge thee
therefore before God, and before the Lord Iesus Christ, which shall iudge the quicke and the deade at his appearing, and in his kingdome, preach the worde, be instant, in season and out of season, improoue, rebuke, exhort. 2 It is an argument & token of the loue the Minister oweth vnto Christ and to the people, as it appea∣reth Ioh. 21.15. where Iesus Christ sayth to Peter after his resurrection.Iohn. 21.15.16.17. Simon sonne of Iona, louest thou me more then these? He sayde vnto him, yea Lorde, thou knowest that I loue thee: he sayde to him, feed my Lambes. He said vnto him the second time. Simon the sonne of Io∣na, louest thou me? He sayde vnto him, yea Lorde, thou knowest that I loue thee: he sayd vnto him feed my sheepe. Christ said to him the third time. Simon the sonne of Iona, louest thou me? Peter was sory be∣cause he sayd to him the third time, louest thou me, & said vnto him, Lord thou kno∣west all thinges: thou knowest that I loue thee. Iesus sayd vnto him: feed my sheepe. Whereby it is euident, that those which feed not, loue not Christ: Sée∣ing
then that feeding or preaching is so plaine a token of the loue that the minister oweth to Christ, it is moste necessarily required if any do preach and yet not vpon this loue, they haue their condemnation. 3 The Church of God is begunne and grounded, by the preaching of the word:Rom. 10.17. and therfore necessary. Paule sayth, Faith commeth by the worde prea∣ched. 1. Cor. 3.6.Againe, he counteth his preaching amongst the Corrinthians, a planting of them in faith and religion. S. Peter sayth,1. Pet. 1.23. We are borne a new, not of mortall seede, but of immortall, by the word of God, who liueth and indureth for euer. And presētly addeth. This is the word which is preached among you, 1. Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5 12. & 6.1.4 By preaching, the church of God is not onely begun, but also amplifi∣ed, buildes and enlarged. It wil not onely make vs babes in Christe, but strong and spirituall men. It hath not onely milke for the weake, but strong meate for them, that are of age. By it we are brought not one∣ly
to the beginning of Christe, and firste rudimentes of Christian reli∣gion, but also we are ledde forwarde vnto perfection. The holy Apostle affyrmeth this, when as hee sayth, that Iesus gaue some to be Apostles, and Prophetes, and some Euangelistes, and some Pastoures and Teachers, for the ga∣thering of Sayntes, for the worke of the Ministery, and for the edification of the bodye of Christe vnto a perfect man, and vnto the measure of the age of the ful∣nesse of Christe. 5 The Church of God begun and brought to that perfection which can be in earth, is also stayed, strengthe∣ned, vpholden and preserued, by the preaching of the worde, against sinne and errour. And therefore for these causes also, the preaching of the word is most necessary, yea and that day∣lye and continually, because some are weake and haue need of daily streng∣thening, some fall into errours, and some into greeuous Sinnes, from the which they are to bee drawen
out by the effectuall preaching of the worde. This doth the holy Apostle confirme, whereas he sayth, that The whole Scripture is profitable to teach,2. Tim. 3.16. to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, beeing made perfect vnto all good workes. 6 Againe, to the pure preaching of the word, the Lorde hath promised a blessing, the minister shal be blessed, the people also blessed through it. They that be wise sayth Daniell,Dani. 12.3. shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament: And they that tourne many vnto righte∣ousnesse shall shine as the starres for euer and euer.Mat. 24.45.46.47. The wise and faithfull Steward, that giueth meate to the housholde in due season, when his maister commeth he shall be blessed, and made partaker of exceeding ioy and glory.1. Tim. 4.16. Take heed sayth the Apostle to thy selfe, and to learning: continue ther∣in, for in doing this, thou shalt both saue thy selfe and them that heare thee. God so blessed the preaching of his Ser∣uaunt Ionas,Ionas. 3.4. that through it the Ni∣niuites beléeued God, humbled them
selues, and forsooke their former wic∣ked wayes.Act. 2.41. At one preaching of Pe∣ter there were wonne to the Lorde about thre thousande soules. Thus doth the Lorde blesse his owne or∣der, the minister by pure and faith∣full preaching, dischargeth his owne soule, obtayneth peace in conscience, and so is blessed in this life, but shall be farre more blessed in the life to come, when hee hath finished his course, he shall receiue an incorrup∣tible crown of glory. The people also by this means are many ways bles∣sed, they receiue knowledge, faith,Act. 2.18. & saluation: their eies are opened, they are turned frō darknes to light, & frō ye power of satan vnto God All these great and notable blessings, doe en∣sue the preaching of the worde, and therefore required most necessarilie in euery minister. 7 On the other side, without this, both the minister and the people are accursed, the bloud of the people shal be required at his handes, because he hath not as a faithfull watchman,Ezec. 3.17
forewarned them of daunger, and yet they shall die in their owne sinnes. The Lord complaineth by his Pro∣phet Hosea saying,Hosea. 4.6. My people are de∣stroyed for lacke of knowledge, because thou haste refused knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shalt be no Priest to me.Mat. 5.13. To this agreeth our Sauiour Christ, If the salt haue lost his saltnes, it is good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be troden vnder foot of men. And if these Ministers which sometimes haue had Salte in them, zeale, and knowledge to season the people, and by negligence and carelesnes, de∣cay and loose it If these I saye be worthy to be cast out, howe miserable and cursed are they which neuer had nor yet haue any Salt in them. It muste needes be fulfilled of them which our Sa∣uiour speaketh in an other place, They be blinde leaders of the blinde, and if the blinde lead the blind,Mat. 15.14. both shall fall in∣to the ditch, (that is) both the igno∣raunt Minister and the ignoraunt
people shall perishe. And in another place it is sayde,Mat. 25.30. Cast that vnprofita∣ble Seruaunt into vtter darkenesse, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And here it is sayde, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospell. Seeing then that euery way there hangeth so manye greeuous curses, both vppon the minister and people, where the worde is not preached, it is most requysite and necessarie, that euery minister looke to this, euen as hee will escape the fearefull and heauie cursse of God. 8 Moreouer the chiefe ende and vse why the scriptures were writ∣ten, doth requyre preaching.Rom. 15.4. 1. Cor. 14. They are lefte for our comforte, instructi∣on, and edifying. But we are most comforted, instructed, and edifyed, if they bee opened and applyed to vs, and therefore moste necessarie that they be so vsed. 9 Also the Corruption and dul∣nesse of our nature requyreth the same, we are dull, ignoraunt, and carelesse. We please our selues in
our owne sinnes, the Deuill goeth about continually to deuour vs, and therefore we haue need to haue con∣tinuall preaching of the word.1. Cor. 2, 14. The naturall man perceiueth not the thinges that are of Gods spirit. Da∣uid,2. Sam. 12. after he had sinned, continued in his sinne, vntill the Prophet reproo∣ued him for it, yea and woulde not take it to him selfe, although Nathan spake a very plaine parable, till it was particularly applyed to him. Seeing then there is in our nature such corruption, such blindnesse, such slouthfulnesse, and also forgetfulnes: what can be more necessary for the curing of these so great diseases, then the continuall and dayly preaching of the word: Besides all this, it hath beene an v∣suall order in the church of God vn∣der the lawe, by Christ and the Apo∣stles, not onely to reade, but also to expound and apply the Scriptures, and therefore the same order is to be obserued of vs.Nehe. 8.8. It is sayd of the Le∣uites that they red in the booke of the
law of God distinctly and gaue the sence, and caused them to vnderstande the rea∣ding. Christ as we haue heard already cō∣tinually preached and commaunded the same to his Apostles, who as they obeyed in them selues their Maisters commaun∣dement, so they required it as a continu∣all and vsuall rule to be obserued for euer of al the Ministers of God in his church. And most specially the Apostle in those Epistles which he wrote vnto Timothie and Titus very largely & effectually vr∣geth this matter. I referre you also vnto the 14. Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians: wherein so highly he com∣mendeth the gift of Prophesieing,1. Cor. 1 Inter∣pretation or preaching, that he preferreth it before all other giftes, and accounteth it so necessarie, that he would haue it con∣tinually obserued in the Church of God. Againe Christ commaundeth vs, and wee doe daylie praie for the enlarging of his Kingdome, whereas he hath taught vs to say thy kingdome come: Now, the singuler and excellēt meanes to establish the kingdome of Iesus Christ is, by the pure and effectual preaching of the word,
and therefore he saieth in an other place, Pray to the Lorde of the Haruest,Math. 9.38. to send forth Labourers into the Haruest. And how cā they pray with any safe cōscience, for the enlarging and establishing of the kingdome of Christ, which by their igno∣rance and carelesnesse, do altogether hin∣der it. Furthermore, all and euery one of the names whiche are giuen by the holie Ghost to the ministers, in ye word of God, doe necessarily require at their handes Preaching: They are called the light of the worlde, the salt of the earth. They are called Pastors and Sheepheards. They are called Husbandmen, Guides, Ste∣wards and Messengers, besides many o∣ther excellent titles giuen to them. Now how can they bee called Lightes, whiche haue no light in them, which either are in ignoraunce and darknesse themselues, or els hide their cādle vnder a Bushel? How can they bee called the Salt of the earth, which cannot or will not season the vnfa∣uorie and sinfull people, with the heauen∣ly & wholesome doctrine of eternall life: How can they be called Pastors and tea∣chers, which do not feed or haue no foode
at all to giue to the flocke? How can they be called the Lords Husbandmen, which haue no skill at all in tilling his ground, and sowing his seede? How can they bee called Guides vnto other, whiche either know not the way themselues, or els will not vouchsafe to open and declare it to o∣ther: How can they be called Stewards, which haue no care of the houshold, which either cannot or will not feede them? And how can they bee called the Lordes Mes∣sengers, whiche are not able to doe their message, or haue no care at all to doe it. If the Minister bee a light to the peo∣ple, of necessitie he must needes goe and shine before them in knowledge and doc∣trine. If he bee the Salt, he must needes season. If he be a Pastor or Sheepheard, he must needes feed. If he be a Husband∣man, he must needes haue a care of the Lordes Husbandrie. If he be a Guide, he must needes shewe the waye. If he bee a Stewarde, he must prouide for the hous∣holde. If he bee a Messenger, he must bee willing and able to do his message: Naie I saie more, it standes for the Lordes glo∣rie and credite to haue suche Pastors, and
such Husbandmen, such Stewardes and Messengers, as haue wisedome & know∣ledge. The poore people of the Countrie will not hire him to be a Sheepheard to their Sheepe, whom they know to be ig∣norant and carelesse, and shall the Lorde choose such to gouerne & guide his flock? The Gentleman and the Yeman wil not hire any to be ouerseers of their Husban∣drie, except they knowe them to haue suf∣ficient discretion and experience: and wil he thinke ye bee content with simple, foo∣lish, and recklesse ouerseers of his so dere and precious a Husbandrie? The Noble man for his honors sake, wil seeke to haue such a one to be the Steward of his house, as is trustie, wise, & of sufficient to guide and gouerne a whole housholde, and shall the Lorde be lesse carefull of his honour? shall he bee content with vnwise and vn∣faithfull Stewardes? The Prince will haue a speciall care to sende such to be his messengers and Ambassadors, as be most wise and faithfull, and are able discreetly and cunningly to doe their message, and shall the Lordes messengers bee without knowledge? What can be more to the di∣scredite
and dishonour of his holy name? This argument I amplifie the more, be∣cause it is very plaine & effectuall. Mark I beseech you wel, all these and other na∣mes giuen to vs in the holie Scripture, doe require of euery minister of God that he preach the worde, as we haue a rare to aunswere to our names, and a care of the glorie and credite of our God: euen so let vs be carefull in doing this so necessarie a duetie. What shall I saie more, the end and purpose of our calling and Ministrie requireth at our handes Preaching. The Lorde hath ordained Pastors and Tea∣chers for the gathering together of his Saincts, and to the edification of the bo∣die of Christ: Seeing then we are called to this ende, seing we are ordained to this purpose, there is no remedie, we that are the Ministers of God, must needes of ne∣cessitie preach his worde. For a further proofe and conclusion of this matter, I call you to recorde, I appeale to your owne consciences, which are now wonne to the Lord, which haue some measure of knowledge, which are called out of dark∣nesse to light, from ignoraunce to know∣ledge:
ye that sometime haue been con∣tent with reading Ministers, and quarter Sermons, but now hunger and thirst for the worde preached. I call you I saie, as witnesses in this cause, what comfort you feele, what profite, what power in the ef∣fectuall preaching of ye word? How care∣lesse, how prophane, how ignorant, how leaude you were before, notwithstanding the daylie and the ordinarie Readinges whiche diligently you had? What hath wrought in you that measure of faith, that heauenly knowledge whiche you now haue? What is it, that hath wrought in you suche a sorrowe of your former life, suche a griefe and hatred of sinne and su∣perstition, both in your selues and others, suche an earnest zeale of the worde, such a conscience and a care to reforme your sel∣ues and your housholdes. What (I saie) hath wrought these thinges in you? How came you by them? What is it that hath so altered your mindes, deedes and affec∣tions: Let your conscience be witnesse to me in this matter: I am sure you wil ap∣proue that which I haue spoken, and ac∣knowledge the profite, the power and ne∣cessitie
of the worde preached. All and euery one of these arguments doe proue and confirme as I thinke, that euery Minister necessarilye ought to preach, and otherwise, that he is no Mini∣ster approued of God. All and euery one of these, or most of them doe quite ouer∣throw and condemne, all dumbe, idle and carelesse Ministers whatsoeuer. One day they shall knowe what accounte he ma∣keth of the soules of his people, for seeyng the worde of the Lord, in so many places, requireth in a Minister preachyng, yea, diligent and carefull preaching, in what a miserable and damnable state doe these men stand? The Apostle saieth woe be to me if I preach not the Gospell. Well, it maie bee whatsoeuer I haue yet spoken will be graunted. It is necessarie that e∣uery Minister preache: but what shall all those be condemned which haue not such full measure of knowledge as other haue, whiche be not accounted and allowed for publique Prachers, God forbid? I know these difference in giftes, there was so a∣mongst the Apostles, but they all sufici∣ently preached. Amongst vs and suche o∣thers
as vse this place, and such like pla∣ces, there is differēce, euery one of vs haue not the like measure, but for my parte I speake as I thinke, our measure is small inough, yet the Lorde be thanked for that we haue, and giue vs grace to vse it to his glorie and the benefite of his Church, in my self I professe and graunt very small and weake measure, insufficiencie and lacke of gifts, and the Lord the searcher of the harts knoweth, that the consideration of this hath and doeth make me to feare and trimble often tymes, to sigh and la∣ment that so great a charge, and so waigh∣tie a burthen is layed vpon me, so simple and weake a wretch. To you that haue any measure of those gifts which the Lord requireth in his Mi∣nisters, to you (I say) quenche not the spi∣rite, vse the meanes to increase your mea∣sure, if you be painefull, carefull, watch∣full, and faithfull in your ministrie with a holy and pure affection, the Lorde will blesse you.Act. 18.26. To him that hath shall be giuen, we cannot at the first come to perfection. Appollos a learned Docter, feruente in the spirite, and mightie in the scriptures,
yet was he ignorant in some things, and receiued instructions from Aquila and Priscilla. Some haue more then others,Math. 25.14. some haue tenne talentes, some fiue, and some but one, yet alwaies remember, and let it neuer slippe out of your minds, that the slothfull and vnprofitable seruaunt shalbe cast into vtter darkenes, there shall bee weepying and gnashyng of teeth. A∣gainst suche I speake whiche in deede ne∣uer had any one talente, or any giftes of Ministers, or hauyng any do either abuse them, or at least doe not put them forth to any profitable vse. Consider a little the state of our ministrie. There bee some a∣mongst vs sacrificeing and masing Prie∣stes full of manifest superstition and hy∣pocrisie, and in truth enemies to Christs religion. Others there be altogether ig∣norant, vnlearned, very idoles, they can doe what? Euen iust nothyng. Others there be which may haue some ground of learnyng, but in deede they vtter very lit∣tle, neither is the people better by them. Some are idle, some carelesse, some alto∣gether leude and profaine, some ioyne li∣uing to liuing, and take more vpon them,
then they can discharge although it may be they speake in one place, yet are they due in an other. All these and such like are worthte of blame, to be openly spoken against because they open offence. All these stand dayly in a miserable and dam∣nable state without repentance. But my cheif drifte at this tyme in this parte of my text, is to proue as you haue hard, that euery Minister approued of God must preache, that is, he must teede the people, he must cut the worde of God, he must im∣proue, rebuke, exhort, he must not simply or barely reade, or heare the people saie some Catachisme, but he is to be able in some sufficiēt measure to open and inter∣pret the holy Scripture, and applie them, and I hope that this is alreadie proued: onely I exhort you to accompt the Lord wisest to rest in his holy decrees, and al∣lowe his owne order as best. Let vs not take vppon vs to appointe him what he should do. Seing he hath set downe prea∣ching, as the most excellent, and ordinary meanes to saluation, let not vs say that reading will serue the turne: seing that he requireth that his Ministers bee apt to
teach, let vs not coumpt them his Mini∣sters which neuer taught, nor euer had a∣ny aptnesse in them. If he maie bee coun∣ted a lawfull Minister and Teacher that onely readeth the ordinarie Seruice, and sometime heareth a fewe children to saie a Catechisme without booke, as it is set downe before him, then maie the Clarke also of the Towne be coumpted a Mini∣ster, and teacher: then may euery Hus∣bandman, Seruing man, nay euery boye or childe that can doe asmuch, be so coun∣ted. Let not some saie for defence of igno∣rant Ministers, that if they do that, which they can doe, it will serue the turne: for in the building of an house, as there be some Maister builders which bring timber and stone, so other there be, which bring mor∣ter and fillinges, and serue to necessarie vse, but let vs remember that euery Mi∣nister in his charge, is or ought to bee a builder, yea a Maister builder, and if the chief builder bring nothing but fillinges, how shal the Lords building in that place goe forwarde? The Apostle in that place whiche hath been already twise alledged,Ephe. 4. saieth That the Lorde hath ordained the
Minister for the gathering together of his Saincts, and for the edification of the bodie of Christ, till wee all meete together in the vnitie of faith and knowledge of the Sonne of GOD, vnto a perfect man, and vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ. Oh these be no small things, these are no trifles, this is no vile, simple, and drudge∣rie woorke, no small measure, but very great, weightie, high, and most excellent. The holy Ghost in an other place saieth, Leauing the doctrine of the beginning of Christ,eb. 6.. let vs be led forwarde vnto perfec∣tion, not laying againe the foundation of repentance from dead workes, and of faith toward GOD, of the doctrine of Baptisme and laying on of handes, and of the resur∣rectiō from the dead, and of eternal iudge∣ment. Marke I beseech you these words. There be many people, yea & Ministers also that are ignoraunt of the first rudi∣mentes of Christ, that of repentaunce, of Baptisme, of the resurrection, of eternall iudgement, are able to saie nothing to a∣ny purpose: but yet let it bee so that some can doe this, they can teach as they saie in some measure: their an Catechise, and ay
the groundes of Religion, yet this will not serue the turne, there must bee buil∣ding after the foundation, there must be a leading forward to perfection. The Lord in building the material Tabernacle, did choose men of singuler wisedome, and vn∣derstanding, and will he be content, with euery drudge and bungler in the building and erecting of his spirituall Taberna∣cle: But herein chiefly haue some gathe∣red offence and grief, because I haue said in this place before, and also other where, that suche Ministers haue no right to ad∣minister the Sacramentes. This seemeth a straunge and hard doc∣trine, yea, some are not ashamed to count it erronious and hereticall, if I would stande vpō the authoritie of men, I could alledge for the confirmation of the very wordes whiche I haue spoken, the iudge∣ment of those which by common consent of all true Christians are receiued and al∣lowed, as the best, most learned and most pure Diuines that euer were since the time of the Apostles, but this I hope shal not neede: for if of necessitie euery Mini∣ster ought to preache, or if all the former
argumentes wil serue to proue this, then also that other doctrine, how straunge and obsurde soeuer some count it, I must I saie needes necessarily and consequent∣ly followe, none ought of right to deale with the Lordes Sacramentes but his Ministers. Christ requireth of him that Baptiseth, that he teach: saiing, Go teach and Baptise:Math. 28.19. No Teacher, no Baptiser, that which God hath ioyned together, let no man put asunder.. Cor. 11.26. Sainct Paule spea∣king of the Lordes Supper: As often saieth he, as ye shall eate this breade, and drinke this cupp, ye shew the Lordes death till he come. If the people at the receiuing of the Sacrament, ought to haue an ef∣fectuall and thankfull remembraunce of the death of Christ, it must needes follow that the Minister is bound, sufficiently to instruct them in the same. If any will say that this done by the dumbe Minister in reading the wordes of the institution, he preacheth, he sheweth and publisheth Ie∣sus Christ crucified, so may I say that he or any other doth the same, and that more effectually, if they doe but saie their be∣leefe openly before the Congregation,
but we speake of a singular, of an effectu∣all, of an excellent and liuely shewing of his death, which is by preaching. The A∣postle speaking to the Galatians saieth,Gala. 3.. That Iesus Christ was described in their sight, and among them crucified. His mea∣ning is that Christe was so liuely prea∣ched to them, as his liuely Image was set before their eyes, or els had been cru∣cified amongst them. This is the power of preaching, this is the duetie of the Mi∣nister, plainly and effectually to discribe and set forth the merite of Christ his Pas∣sion, so that it maie bee seen as it were be∣fore the eyes. The first Minister of Baptisme Iohn the Baptist was a Preacher,Math. . he ioyned Preaching and Baptisme together, and in no dout the Lorde would leaue to his Churche an example and patterne, and a forme of the right ministration of the Sacramentes.Mark. 1.. Christ although there were sundrie causes why he would not Baptise, yet he ministred the Supper to his Apostles,Math. 16.. but Christ was a Prea∣cher, yea he preached then of his death be∣fore
that first ministration and institution of that Sacrament, leauing vs an exam∣ple to doe the like. Act. 2.38. Act. 8.12.38. Act. 10.34. Act. 20.7.The Apostles ministred the Sacra∣mentes but they all preached, yea, the E∣uangelist Luke in the storie of the Actes, setteth Preaching alwaies before the mi∣nistration of the Sacramentes. Iohn the Baptist, Christ, the Apostles and Prima∣tiue Church are the best examples that I knowe, and best worthie to bee followed. Consider further I beseeche you, the greate inconueniences which followe in these places where the worde is not prea∣ched, the people are still in ignorance and blindnesse, and kept still in their olde and Popishe errors, receiued from their fore∣fathers, they know not the vse of the Sa∣cramentes, or to what ende they serue, they holde still their Papisticall transub∣stantiation: some saie, they receiue their maker: other saie, they neuer heard what a Sacrament meant: some saie they doe it in a good intent, and yet they knowe not their owne intent: other say thei hope that they receiue it as others doe: fewe make any conscience with knowledge,
feare and reuerence to prepare themsel∣ues. The greatest cause of this, is lack of Preaching, and in deede how can their greate ignoraunce be taken awaie, how can their olde supersticious errors bee ef∣fectually confuted, but by the continuall and pure preaching of the worde? And is it not then most fitt and conuenient, when the Sacrament is to be ministred: but we are so farre from hauing any vsuall prea∣ching before the Sacrament, that be ma∣ny thousandes whiche neuer heard any preaching at al of the Sacramentes in al their life, they haue liued these 25. yeares in a Christian land vnder the Gospel, and yet they haue profited no further: and if they should liue still dubble and triple the same yeares, they should bee neuer a whit the better, except they had better Mini∣sters, Woe be to me if I preach not the Go∣spell. Learne one thing further before I goe to the next parte of my Text, if there depende a woe ouer the Minister if he preache not the same, woe is also against the people if they heare not, and obey not the worde preached: Woe Chorazin:Math. 11.2. woe
Bethsaida, woe Capernaum, wo to these Countries, Citties, Townes and Peo∣ple, which neglect and contemne the word preached, it shall be easier for the lande of Sodome and Gomorrha in the daie of Iudgement, then for suche a people. The same God, the same worde whiche requi∣reth preaching of the Minister, requireth also hearing and obedience of the people. He that is of God heareth Gods word,Ihon 8.4. and therefore doe ye not heare it because ye are not of GOD.Ihon. 10.27. My Sheepe (saieth Christ) heare my voyce. And to the true Minister it is said,Luke. 10.16. He that heareth you heareth me, and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and he that dispiseth me dispiseth him that sent me.Ihon. 13.20. And againe, Verely verely I saie vnto you, if I send any, he that receiueth him re∣ceiueth me.Heb. 2. Wherefore we ought diligently to giue heede to the things which we haue heard, least at any time we should let them slippe. For if the worde spoken by Angels was stedfast, and euery transgression and disobedience receiued a iust recompence of rewarde, how shall we escape, if we neglect so greate saation, which at the first began
to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed vnto vs by them that heard him, GOD bearing witnesse thereto, both with signes and wonders, and with diuers miracles, and giftes of the holy Ghost, ac∣cording to his owne will? Woe then vnto all Papistes, Infidells, Atheistes, Hypo∣crites, ignorant and carnall men, for none of these in truth doe make account of the Gospell. And now let vs come to the third parte of our Text,The third parte. wherein is sett downe what euery Minister ought to preache, name∣ly the Gospell. They are not bounde to deliuer the Counselles of men, the Tra∣ditions of the Fathers, the Statutes of earthly Princes, or the authoritie of mor∣tll men: but as they are the seruauntes of Iesus Christ, Prince of all Princes,Ierem. 1. so are they bounde onely to preache his Go∣spell.Ezec. 3. The true Prophetes neuer speake of them selues to the people, but as they receiued warning from the Lorde. They had no authoritie to speake their owne words, nor the words of any mortal man. The Apostles might not teach their own
doctrine,Math. 28.20. but onely that whiche they had receiued from their Maister, who enioy∣neth them to teache all thinges what soe∣uer he had commaunded them: Goe (saieth he) and preache the Gospell.Marc 16. The holy A∣postle writing to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 11.23. auou∣cheth that he receiued of the Lorde, that which he deliuered to them,1. Cor. 15.3. whereby wee maie see all these Teachers confuted, which stande vpon the authoritie of men, whiche adde or diminishe any thing from the Scriptures, whiche ioyne their owne fantasies and the traditions of men, with the holy pure and perfect worde of God: Woe be to those sonnes of vanities for in deede they preache not the Gospell, they preache not Christ but themselues. They deface and weaken the authoritie of the holy Scriptures:Psalm. 19. The lawe of GOD is a perfect lawe conuerting soules.. Tim. 3. The Scrip∣ture is able to make the man of God abso∣lute and perfect to all good workes. The Lord saith by his Prophet: He that hath a dreame,Ierem. 23.28. let him tell a dreame, and he that hath my word, let him speake my word faithfully: and what is the chaffe to the
wheate, saith the Lorde? Is not my worde euen like a fire, saieth the Lorde, and like a hammer that breaketh the stone? Our Sauiour in the Gospel speaketh against such teachers: saying,Math 15.. In vaine they wor∣shippe me, teaching the doctrine and pre∣ceptes of men. Let vs remēber that which is spoken in the last Chapter of the Reue∣lation.Reue. 22.18. I protest vnto euery man that hea∣reth the prophesie of this booke, if any man add vnto these thinges, God shall add vnto him the plagues, that are written in this booke. And if any man shall diminishe of the wordes of this prophesie, God shall take awaie his parte out of the booke of life, and out of the holy Cittie, and from these thin∣ges which are written in this booke. Woe be to them which preache and yet preach not the Gospell. But that we may know the better howe the Gospell should bee preached, let vs consider a little what it is, and what it containeth. The Euan∣gelistes call it the Gospell of the King∣dome.Rom. 13.16. Sainct Paule accoumpteth it that whiche was promised before by the Prophetes in the holie Scriptures con∣cerning
Iesus Christe our Lorde: And in the same Chapter he saieth,2. Cor. 5.18. It is the power of GOD vnto saluation to euery one that beleeueth. And in an other place he calleth it the worde and ministrie of Re∣conciliation.Reue. 1.2. Sainct Iohn calleth it the testimonie of Iesus Christ. From these and suche like places maie bee easily ga∣thered a full definition of the Gospell, whiche I leaue to your godly considera∣tion: Onely this I adde, that vnder the voyce of the Gospell, is comprehended the whole historie of Iesus Christ in the flshe, and also the fruite and vse of the same Historie.Luke. 24.46. As touchyng the first, namely the historie of Christe, it is som∣marily comprehended vnder his Passion and Resurrection: the vse and ende of all is, that wee should haue repentaunce and remission of sinnes in his name, and this doeth Christe himselfe witnesse, when as he laied to his Apostles after his Resur∣rection: Thus it is written and thus it be∣hooued Christ to suffer, and to rise againe from the dead the third daie, and that re∣pentance and remission of sinnes should bee
preached in his name among all Nations. To this agreeth the holy Apostle Saint Peter,Act. 5.30. when as he saieth with other the Apostles, to the Counsel and chief Prie∣stes. The God of our Fathers hath raised vp Iesus, whom ye slue, and hanged on a tree. Him hath God lift vp with his right hande, to bee a Prince and a Sauiour, to giue repentaunce vnto Israell, and forgiue∣nesse of sinnes. By this wee maie see how the Gospell must bee preached, the peo∣ple must bee taught what Christe hath done for them. The whole Storie of his Incarnation, Conception, Birth, Suf∣feringes, Resurrection and Assention, these thinges I saie must bee often ty∣mes and effectually preached to the peo∣ple, as they are set downe by the holy E∣uangelistes and Apostles: But yet this is not enough to shewe what Christ hath done, to rehearse the Storie of his In∣carnation, but also the Minister must bee carefull to preache the vse, the ende and fruite of the same Storie: whiche is, that the people maie repent, bee tourned vn∣fainedly vnto God, and so by faith made
pertakers of remission of sinnes through Iesus Christe. Repentaunce is a true tournyng to GOD, a chaungyng of the outwarde and inwarde man, a dying to sinne, a liuing to righteousnesse, and a mendement of the whole life: which this doctrine wee must beginne, this we must first of all and chiefly vrge: This is that doctrine chiefly and most of all preached by the holy Prophetes:Ierem. 4.1. Ezec. 18.1. This is the com∣mon and vsuall voyce, O Israell returne to the Lorde.Hose. 14 1. Math 3.2. Math. 4.17. Iohn the Baptist the Mes∣senger, and also Iesus Christe his Mai∣ster, they crye both of them: Repent for the kingdome of Heauen is at hande. The A∣postles also euery where exhorte men to repentaunce to amendement of life,Rom. 3.2. to mortification and regeneration. This is an vsuall doctrine in all their Epistles. Now,Rom. 7.7. they can neuer truly repent which knowe not the greatnesse of their sinnes and the punishment due to them. And how shall they knowe this, except their sinnes bee reproued and laied open by preaching the lawe of GOD, for by the lawe commeth the knowledge of sinne:
so that the doctrine of the lawe must not bee seperated from the preaching of the Gospell, for it is a Schoolemaister to bring vs to Christ. This then is necessa∣rily required of euery Minister, freely and boldly to reprooue sinne in all states and degrees whatsoeuer. This is it that the Lorde saieth to his Prophete.Isai. 58.. Crye a∣loude, spare not, lift vp thy voyce like a Trumpet, and shew my people their trans∣gressions, and to the house of Iacob their sinnes. Our Sauiour Christ accounteth it as an office & duetie of the holy Ghost,Ihon. 16.8. to reproue the worlde of sinne. And in deede there is no doctrine more necessa∣rie for this age, wherein wee liue, al∣though fewe can away it, but crie out a∣gainst such as preache it. And as in other places, so in this place heretofore I haue had proofe in this matter. For vpon iust occasion noting the certaintie of Gods iugements and condemnation of the wicked, I finde then that the impenitent and suche as continue in their sinnes could not bee saued, God could not for∣giue them, here vpon some haue sayd and
doe say still of mee, that I preached, that God could not forgiue sinnes. I sayde, and I say agayne, the Lorde is as true in his iustice, as in his mercie. Christ saieth, except ye amend, ye shall all perish: and againe, he that beleeueth not is damned. Saint Paul sayth, no whoremonger, nor adulterer, no vnrighteous or vncleane persone shall inherite the kingdome of Heauen. This is asmuche as I saied, and in effect all that I saide, woe bee to me if I preache not the Gospell. Now Repentaunce is a parte of the Gospell, and that wee maie repent, it is needfull to knowe our sinnes, and as the sinnes of all men must bee reproued, and the iudgementes of GOD threatened against them, so especially the sinnes of publique persones as Magistrates and Ministers: And if this in no case will bee borne, but he that doth it, is straight way blamed, alas, what shall wee doe? If wee speake against the people, they are gree∣ued, they saie we deale hardly with them, but looke not to our selues or to the higher powers. If wee deale against
Gentlemen and greate men, wee are ha∣ted, euill spoken of and abused: If wee speake against the ignoraunt and care∣lesse Ministers, they are also offended, and saye wee lacke discretion, charitie and modestie. Thus daungerous a thing it is to preache the Gospell, yea euen a∣mongst them that glorie in the Gospell, so that as our state standeth it mate bee saied cleane contrarie to the saying of the Apostle in this place: Woe to them that preache the Gospell: and happie are they which preache not the Gospell, and they are coumpted wisest whiche either holde their peace, or els meddle not with this parte of the Gospell. But the faith∣full Minister how soeuer he seeme to be discouraged by suche wicked and vn∣thankfull dealinges of the worlde, yet he is to comforte himself in the Lorde, and to feare GOD more then men: It is farre better to discharge our dueties faithfully with a good conscience, al∣though wee procure displeasure of men, then by leauing our duetie vndone, or by doyng the Lordes worke negligently
and vnfaithfully to procure the displea∣sure and heauie curse of God. The holie Apostle hath spoken it, woe bee to me it I preache not the Gospell: And to aunswere them somewhat which blame vs for dealing so hardly and open∣ly against the sinnes of the Ministers. Is it not a parte of discretion to reproue their sinnes whiche doe most hurte, and are the causes of many other sinnes: this is that discretion whiche was vsed by the holy Prophetes euery where: They crie out against the negligence of the Prie∣stes, against their ignoraunce, careles∣nesse, and leude conuersation. Amongst many and infinite places, I referre you that one place in the Prophet Malachie, who dealeth so hardly and particularly with the Priests, as though all sinne had been in them. No doubt there were ma∣ny sinnes amongst the people, and yet in all his Prophesie, he seemeth to deale specially almost onely against the Prie∣stes, being in deede the causes and the au∣thors of the sinnes of the people: yea, and these were suche Priestes, as were ordei∣ned
of GOD, as were the successors of Aaron, and the tipes of Iesus Christe, and yet are so sharply and publiquely re∣proued by the Prophet. This discretion was vsed by Christ himself.Math. 28.3. How often times together doeth he pronounce woe against the Scribes and Pharises, cal∣ling them Hypocrites, fooles, blind gui∣des, Serpentes, and generation of Uy∣pers: yea, how often times doeth he most sharply and openly rebuke his owne A∣postles.Marc. .7. Perceiue ye not yet (saieth he) nei∣ther vnderstand, haue you your hartes yet hardened? haue you eyes and see not, haue ye eares and heare not, and doe ye not re∣member? Are not these my bretheren ve∣ry hard wordes, and suche wordes as are vsed in the Scriptures against the very reprobate, and yet the Lorde Iesus vseth them against his owne Apostles.Marc. 16.14. In an other place he reproueth them for their vnbeleefe and hardnesse of harte. How sharply doeth the Apostle deale in all his Epistles against false Apostles: Naye, did he not repoue openly to his face,Gala. 2.. Pe∣ter the Apostle, and his fellowe minister,
because he went not the right waie to the truthe of the Gospell? So that it is not onely lawfull, but also necessarie, that the sinnes of all states, and specially of the greatest, and of the Ministers bee sharply and openly reprooued. The ho∣ly Apostle saieth, Them that sinne open∣ly, rebuke openly, that the rest also maie feare. But are not the sinnes of our Mi∣nisters open? Is not their ignoraunce apparant? Is not their idlenesse and care∣lesnesse knowne? Doeth not the com∣mon sorte of people see it? And are not some of them faine to seeke for instruc∣tion in other places? Dooe not many complaine of the liues of the Ministers? Dooe they not saye commonly of them, they speake well and dooe euill? They bee as couetous as others, they haue ne∣uer enough, doe not the people see this and a greate deale more? Are not these open offenders? Doeth not duetie, dis∣cretion and charitie binde the Preacher, if he will faithfully preache the Gospell, to reproue them seuerally whiche giue cause of suche offences? The Apostle v∣seth
this modestie against himself, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospell: which woe signifieth no light, small or easie matter, but greeuous curse of GOD in this life, and that fearefull condemna∣tion in the life to come. Can they bee too sharpely reprooued, or can any spee∣ches bee too harde for them, whiche are ignoraunt and carelesse in so greate a light of the Gospell, after so long pro∣fession, whiche shoulde bee guides to o∣thers, whiche haue so many excellent meanes, so greate helpes of knowledge, offered to them by the Lorde, in these da∣yes whiche we liue in? Can they bee too muche or to often spoken against, which are ignoraunt, and will bee ignoraunt, whiche mistike those that reprooue them, whiche hate all that are not like themsel∣ues, whiche seeke to deface the painefull Minister, yea, & stande in defence of their owne wickednesse? Is not this to binde sinne together with Cart-ropes? Sinne not twise, saieth the wise man, for one sinne shall not be vnpunished, & therefore
take heede in tyme and amende, or els you perish: Say what you will thinke what you will, the Lorde is my witnesse I speake the truthe. I knowe I might bee better thought of to passe euer suche matters, but woe bee to mee if I preache not the Gospell. But it may bee yet that some will saye although this bee true that you haue spoken, yet all truthe is not to bee spoken at all times, in all pla∣ces, and to all persones. The Mini∣ster must cut the word of GOD aright: like a wise Steward, he must giue meate in due season. To these men I aunswer, that no necessarie truthe is to bee hidden from the Churche of GOD. And to speake more fully and directly to the purpose, as touchyng this matter of the necessitie of preachyng, of the misera∣ble estate of them that be with out it, and of suche Ministers as preathe not, this matter I say in my conscience, with wis∣dome and discretion may be spoken pri∣uately or openly, where soeuer, when so euer, and before whom soeuer, there is no
place, but it hath need of this doctrin, no time but it requireth it, no persons that it is not meet for. It is most fit and conuenient, most profitable and necessarye for all states and degrees of men, high and low, rich and poore, strong and weake, learned and vn∣learned, Princes, Nobles, Bishops, Preachers, dumbe Ministers and people, all haue need of this doctrine. They which haue knowledge, haue need of it, that they may know what they haue beene, that they maye see what they are, &c be thankfull to God. The ignorant sort haue need of this doctrine, that they may feel their mi∣serable estate, and so seek for help and remedy. Princes, Nobles and gentle∣men, haue neede of this doctrine, and it is fit and necessary to be preached before them, that knowing the neces∣sity and worthines of preaching, they may be more carefull and liberall to maintaine it, and with better consci∣ence bestow their liuinges. The lear∣ned Bishops haue neede of this doc∣trine, it is chiefly to be vrged before
them, and they are continually to re∣member it, least they lay hands rash∣ly on any man, and so be partakers of other mens sins. The wise and God∣ly Preachers haue neede of this doc∣trine, that they may be comforted and stirred vp to greater zeal and trauail: ignorant ministers haue need of this doctrine, that they may see the dam∣nable state they stande in, and so ei∣ther amende if it will be, or els giue thēselues to some other calling, more fit and profitable for them. Let this doctrine be stayed: Let men be per∣swaded, as they are of them selues that they are in good state without the word preached, that bare reading wil serue the tourne, the people waxe carelesse, and make no account of preaching. For they thinke they are wel inough, and best of al without it, the people of God shal lack their strēg¦thening, their growing in faith and knowledge, Princes and Gentlemen wil make no account (as they do but little alreadie) how, or on whom they bestow their liuinges. The preachers
shal be nothing set by, the Idol mini∣sters encouraged: ye famous vniuersi∣ties decated & ouerthrown: & in a word yt concealing, hindring, & withstāding this doctrine, is the next way to cast down al religion & learning: to bring princes, nobles, rich & poore, ministers & people, to hipocrisie and Atheisme. The lord therfore open ye mouthes of his faithful ministers, to ye dayly vr∣ging of this so necessary a doctrine, yt the prince may be strengthened, the Nobles stirred vp, all good ministers encouraged, the poore people instruc∣ted, ignoraunce & idolatry defaced, re∣ligion and knowledge of God, may flowe thorow the whol land, that at ye length, al ignorāt & careles ministers may be ashamed, & euery congregatiō may haue a faithful, seuerall, & a resi∣dent Pastor. Thus we haue seene at large, yt whosoeuer wil preach yt Gos∣pel faithfully and profitably, he must first of all, & chiefly, vrge the doctrine of repentaunce, which men can neuer haue, before they know their sins by the law of God, and therefore the sins
of all men muste be throughly and sharply reprooued, and chiefly the sins of them which do most hurt, and giue greatest occasion of offence: as the sin of the magistrate and the minister. Now indeed to repentance, ther must be ioyned also the doctrine of remissi∣on of sinnes through Christ. But this belongeth onely to them that repent, that are humbled and cast down, that feele in their conscience the torment of sinne and condemnation, to such belongeth remission of sinnes, to such it is to be offered and preached, but it doth not appertaine to ignorant and sencelesse men, to hipocrites, infidels, Atheistes, Iusticiaries, prophane and carnall men, these haue nothing to do with the doctrine of remission of sins. And because this age is altogether secure and carelesse, ful of iniquitie, of ignorance, disobedience, vnthankful∣nesse, and contempt of the worde, it is vnworthie of the doctrine of mercie, and remission of sinnes, so much the more vnworthy, as the benefites of God in so great measure, and so long
a time haue beene receiued without any profit at all, so that in many ther is nothing stil, but ignorance and I∣dolatry, in others lesse zeal and reli∣gion, lesse godlinesse of life then was in them many yeares agoe: and are these men worthy of mercy? Is re∣mission of sins to be preached and of∣fered to them, nay the former doctrin of repentaunce, of the lawe of reproo∣uing sinne, of denouncing the iudge∣ments of God against all states and degrees. This part of the Gospell, I say is most fit and needful for such an age. And woe be to vs, if we preach not the Gospell. Consider also, I besech you here be∣fore we goe to an ende, the excellency and worthinesse of the preaching of the gospel. It is smal accounted of in the worlde, it is thought a vile and a simple office, it is contemned and dis∣pised of the most part: But if these mē knew the sweet and excellent things contained and offered in the Gospell, which is the matter of preaching, they woulde also know the worthinesse of
this so high a calling, & that the excel∣lēcy therof may more clearly appeare, let vs adde some further proofe of this matter. And first remember, that this calling of the ministery & preaching of ye word, is no deuise of any mortall man, but the ordinance of the liuing God.2. Peter. 1. It was he ye ordayned Moses & the prophetes. The prophesy came not in the old time by the will of man, but ho∣ly men of God spake as they were mooued by the holy Ghoste.Mark. 3.13. The Lorde Iesus himself, called, appointed, & sent foorth into ye world his Apostles to preach ye gospell:Acts 20. It is the holy ghost, which or∣daineth faythfull ouerseers to feede the Church of God.Ephe. 4. It is Christe also at this day, which appointeth pastors and teachers, for the gathering toge∣ther of his saints. It must needes be a worthy and an honourable calling, which hath so worthy authors, euen God him self, his sonne Christ Iesus, & the holy ghost: yea, and not only so, but as worthy haue exercised & practi∣sed this calling. The first preacher yt euer was in the world was God him
selfe, he preached to Adam in paradise that comfortable Gospel, the seed of ye woman, shall destroy the Serpentes head. After that he stirred vp Noe, & Lot, Moses and the prophetes, men of singular credite and authoritie. Nay what shal I speake of Dauid and Solo∣mon, of the which, the one was a most victorious prince, and the other most wealthy, & yet they haue gotten more glory and credits, by their doctrines and instructions, then by all their ri∣ches and triumphes. These are gone and they are gone, but their good coū∣sel, their prouerbes, their Psalmes, & Preachings, remaine and abide for e∣uer for their euerlasting memory, to the glory of God, and dayly profite of his church. The first minister & prea∣cher of the new Testament, was Iohn the Baptist, of whom Christ our Sa∣uiour saith,Mark. 2. there was not a greater Prophet amongst womens children. Nay Christ himselfe was also a prea∣cher of the gospel, & witnesseth that he came into the world euen to that pur∣pose. After him ye Apostles also were
sent into the world, euen to this end. Seing then that God him selfe, & his sonne Christe Iesus, haue vouchsafed to preach the word, seeing so famous men as the Prophetes and Apostles were ordayned to this purpose, it must needes followe that the office of preaching is moste famous, worthy and excellent. The worthinesse also of our calling most euidently appea∣reth in the worthinesse and price of the things committed vnto vs, which is the people of God, the Churche of Christ, his dear spouse, the very price of his bloude: It so great thinges bee committed to vs. If the Lorde put vs in trust with so deare and precious thinges, our calling must néedes bee worthy and notable. Remember the notable effect and fruite of this cal∣ling, the winning of soules, the con∣uersion and saluation of the faithful.1. Cor. 1. It pleased God by the foolishnesse of preaching to saue them that beleeue. And further, the worthy matter of preaching, is both here and other where set downe, namely the gospell,
the word of reconciliation, the worde of grace, the good newes and glad ti∣dinges of saluation, the testimony of Iesus Christ, repentance and remis∣sion of sinnes. O that al men woulde consider this, that the glory of Gods ministery might appeare. If Princes noble men, and Patrons, would re∣member this, they would haue more care & conscience in bestowing their liuinges, and in defending the good minister. Pharaoh,Gen. 47.23. king of Egipt in the time of famine, had such a care to pro¦uide for his idolatrous priests, yt hee would not suffer thē to sel their land, but gaue thē a sufficient ordinary to liue vpō. This example of an idolater in prouiding for idolatrous priestes shal condemn many christian gentle∣mē, which haue a great deal lesse care for true & Christian ministers, which are so farre from adding any thing of their owne to their maintainaunce, yt rather daily by deceite or violence, they take that from the Minister, which long agoe was giuen by o∣thers. Let the papist, the Atheist and
hipocrite remember and consider the worthy calling of the minister, that laying aside all contempt, skoffing, disdaine and railing, they mighte in heart, reuerence and honor the Lords ordinance, & let al people remember this that they may chearfully yeelde honor obedience, reuerence and main¦tainance to the faithful minister, re∣member that his calling is of the Lorde, that he hath to deal with your soules, that his purpose is to win you to the Lord, that he preacheth no lesse a thing then the holy gospell of Iesus Christ. Now these things righty con∣sidered, is he not worthy to be obeied and maintained.Rom. 10. Howe beautifull are the feete of them, that bring the glad tidinges of peace: And reade al which is gone before in the chapter, that you may know that hee which preacheth the gospel, by right and equity ought to liue of the Gospel. Let al good Ministers remember this for their comfort, and instruction, that how∣soeuer the world thinke of them, they haue a worthye and highe calling,
and let thē not faint, but make their ministery fully known, and end their course with ioy: and let al ignoraunt and carelesse ministers, especiallye remember this doctrine, that so they may either amend, or else come to shame & confusion. If the Lord be the authour of the ministery, the soules of the people are committed to vs: If the effect of our calling be to saue the soules of the people: if wee haue to deal with the gospell of Christe: If so famous & notable men haue alwayes beene in this calling, what a man ought ye minister to be? what care? what conscience? what knowledge? what zeale & holy conuersation is re∣quired at his handes? You may see & witnesse with me, I speake nothing to the defacing and discredite of the minister of God, but rather to his great credite and glory: his calling is most worthy and honourable, hee is worthy of double honour, he is to bee obeied & sufficiently maintained, hee is the steward of the Lords house, and the messenger of the Lorde of hostes.
But as the faythfull minister is to haue his credit and commendation, so the ignorant and carelesse sort, as we haue sufficiently already prooued, are to be cast down & defaced, because by their ignoraunce, idlenes and lewde conuersation, they greatly dishonour the Lord, and deface his glory, I con∣clude and end with the holy Apostle: I beseech you brethren, that you know them which labor among you, & are ouer you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you haue them in singular loue for their worke sake. By the which place, we see that such as labor not, admonish not, and work not (such I say) are not worthy of any loue or honor, but rather to be thrust out and bannished, as vnprofitable mēbers out of ye Church of God. The which ye Lord of the haruest, graunt for his tender mercies, in Iesus Christe. A∣men. FINIS.
