12927 99853636 19029
A WATCH-WORD TO ALL religious, and true hear∣ted English-men. By Sir Francis Hastings, Knight. Deuter. 31. vers. 6. Plucke vp your hearts therefore, and be strong: Dread not, nor bee afraide of them: for the Lord thy God himselfe doth goe with thee; he will not faile nor forsake thee. AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Ralph Iackson. 1598.
To the Christian Reader. THE raging hearts of Rome and Spaine be∣ing set on fire, with all force and furie to set vpon England; I hold it the part and dutie of euery true English-man, to be prepared inwardly with loyaltie and courage, and outward∣ly with all necessarie prouision and furniture, as his bounden dutie is in the one, and his abilitie & purse will reach in the other. And to this end J haue been caried in the true loyaltie of my heart to set my thoughts on worke, not onely how to prepare my particular selfe in all readines, to doe all seruices enioy∣ned
and commanded to me, and to adde anything of my selfe, that the strength of one poore man can affoord: but also how I might in∣cite and prouoke others to carrie the same minde. To my selfe I haue set downe this law, that shall neuer be repealed, that for the libertie of my conscience, the safetie of my deare Soueraigne, and the peace∣able prosperitie of my countrie, if my wealth were millions, if I could bring thousands of fighting hands to the field, and if my life were ten thousand liues; wealth, strength, life and all shall goe, to be spent, ha∣zarded, and ended for my God, my Queene, and my Countrie, against that Antichrist of Rome, the am∣bitious tyrant of Spayne, and all forren forces, and home-borne traytors whatsoeuer; else should I
thinke my selfe vnworthie to liue. To stirre vp others, I haue presu∣med to giue an attempt in these few leaues following: wherein if I haue erred in any part of the matter, let my want of experience excuse me: if I haue erred in the forme, let my ignorance excuse me: and if I haue erred both in matter and forme, yet let my faults in all be excused; because my zeale to religion, my loyaltie to my deare Soueraigne, and my loue to my natiue Countrie, hath enforced me to make this ad∣uenture, rather choosing to bewray my simplicitie & wants, than that I would defraude my countrymen from being put in minde of matter so needfull for them (in my con∣ceit) not onely to thinke of, but to be throughly resolued in; that with confidence, boldnes, & assurance of
the goodnes of our cause, we might with heart and hand be prest and readie to take our places, and to march on to the field, when our Soueraignes authoritie commaun∣deth, and there to set forward with a swift foote against these enemies of God, our Queene Elizabeth, and our Countrie, whensoeuer they shall dare to shew their faces against vs. F. H.
A VVatch-word to all re∣ligious, and true hearted English-men. IF I should take vp∣on me to enter in∣to the enumeratiō of all the benefits and blessings, that from the almigh∣tie haue been powred vpon this little Island of England, by, and vnder the gouernment of our most gratious soueraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth; I might both forget∣fully lessen the number too farre, and ignorantly passe ouer many things notable, and worthie to be obserued, and remembred. And if I should aduenture to aime at the
particular iniuries her Highnesse hath receiued from forraine ma∣lice, and home disloyaltie; and the particular daungers that haue fol∣lowed her thereby, to the hazard of her safetie in person, and the good estate of her whole king∣dome; I might gesse at very ma∣ny, and come short of the num∣ber; & I might point at very great wrongs and dangers, and yet misse those that bee farre greater. And therefore for the benefits we haue receiued by her most happie en∣trance to sit in this regall seate, as the annoynted of God, to bee the soueraigne cōmander vnder him, ouer vs his people of England, I wil onely tye my selfe to one, as the fountaine and well-spring whence all the rest (being an infinite num∣ber) doe issue and flow. And for
the iniuries and daungers depen∣ding thereupon, to her person and kingdome, I will tye my selfe to no number, but aime at them as I can; and they shall be such all, as from which also doe spring what∣soeuer hath been offered, or inten∣ded against her sacred person, and this peaceable, and flourishing Common-wealth. It is not vnknowne to many yet liuing, neither can it be altogether hidden from the yonger sort that liue with them, what a darke mi∣stie clowde of ignorance (which brought in Popish idolatrie, and al maner of superstition) did ouer-shadow the whole land; where∣unto was added, and wherewith was mixed all bloodie and sauage crueltie against those that desired knowledge, and were any way in∣lightened
(by Gods grace) with a glimmering, or small insight into true religion. For though it were but only a desire to reade vpon the holy booke of God, either the old, or new Testament; then Heretike was his title, heresie was his fault; and for this was he called before the Romish Cleargie, to receiue their censure: and such neuer de∣parted from their clutches, till they had branded them to the slaugh∣ter. But because the Romish sy∣nagogue persecuting Christ in his members, may maske vnder the Iewish vaile persecuting Christ himselfe, who thirsting after Christs blood, yet would seeme to spill no blood, crying, It is not lawfull for vs to put any man to death: therefore the ciuill Magi∣strate must be their butcher to ex∣ecute
their bloodie decree, and to the stake they must goe to be con∣sumed with fire. Of this their blood-thirstie humour how many hundreds haue tasted, stories doe record, and many yet liuing can in parte remember. In these dark and clowdy daies, least the Sunne-shine of know∣ledge should disperse the mists of ignorance, and giue light to the dimme of sight, whereby they might be able to discouer the iug∣ling and falshood, which in that time of darknes they vsed; this po∣sition was set down for their Maxi∣me, or rule infallible, that Igno∣rance is the mother of deuotion: And that sacred worde of God, which was giuen from God to be a lanterne to all our feete, and a light vnto all our steps, was forbid∣den
to the lay sort (for so they cal∣led them) as matter vnfit for them to looke into. By which meanes they kept them blind-fold, admit∣ting them none other guides but themselues, being as starke blinde as beetles in all Christian and true religion: and when the blind doe leade the blind, both are in hazard to fall into the ditch. When they thus had setled this blinde course to keepe the people from knowledge, and had deui∣sed to fill their eyes with dumme showes to gaze vpon, and their cares with bare sounds of wordes, farre from their capacitie to reach vnto, or profitably vnderstande: (much like to Caligula, who bid∣ding many guests, caused to be set before them golden dishes, and golden cups, and bad them eate.)
Then they offer another posi∣tion, that it was not for lay men to meddle with matters of religion, that belonged wholly and only (as a priuiledge) to the Priests; there∣by making them secure and care∣les of God, and all godlines. Only if he came diligently and deuout∣ly to heare Masse, and once a yere to confesse his sinnes to his ghost∣ly father (how slenderly so euer his sayde Confessor were furnished with gifts of the holie Ghost in himselfe to instruct him) all was safe: and he that so did, was recko∣ned as religious a man (secundum vsum Sacrū) as could be wished. And though he were tainted, and to bee taxed with the grossest sins, Rome, by the authoritie from their Vicar generall, had a tricke to hale thē into the rabble of their saints,
and so to canonize him; as wee haue example of Thomas Becket in Henry the thirds time, whose treasons to his Prince were appa∣rant and manifest: and yet after his death was he canonized a saint by the Pope, and an holy day was commanded for him. These two irreligious and pro∣phane grounds being layd, they proceed to a third, and set it down for a popish ground, that it was a dangerous and deadly sinne for a∣ny man to disobey the Pope, and his Cleargie, in any of their orders enioyned and commaunded. In such reuerence and regarde must he and all his Cleargy be had, that the meanest Masse-priest (com∣ming with authoritie from him) must bee obeyed, vnder paine of damnation; though he command
that which is blasphemous before God in Christians, or disloyall to men in subiects. And hauing thus made an o∣pen passage (without stop) to the marke and matter he aymed at, and so hemmed them in, as they could not see which way to es∣cape danger, but by them that had layd the snare for them; they pro∣pound vnto them a meanes of de∣liuerie from all daungers, (euen when they sinned immediatly a∣gainst God) which is, A pardon from his holines, and absolution from his holy priests. But if the de∣crees and ordinances of their Ro∣mish synagogues were transgres∣sed, hardly any mercie was to bee had. Thus haue you the blind course they sought to breede vs in, by de∣barring
vs the cleere light of the holy written word of God, and the carelesnes they sought to settle in vs of all religion, by making it a thing impertinent to vs, as though wee had no soules to care for; or the narrow way that leadeth to saluation were so easily found out, as we neede no light to guide vs, or no furniture to arme vs with de∣fence against the dangers of our passing. And yet, Search the scrip∣tures, is a watch-word to all that desire to bee the seruants of God: and, Put on the whole armour of God, is a direction to all the true children of God here vpon earth: the seuerall parts of which furni∣ture, and to what vse all of it must serue vs, you shall easily finde, if you will take paines to looke into and reade the place. And further
you fee the terrour and feare they cast vpon vs, if we offend the Pope and his Massing priests: and then the end is, our absolution and par∣don must come from themselues, which mony must purchase: and so the best purse (by their rule) did speed best in their religion. Yet our Sauiour Christ telleth vs, that It is as easie for a Camell to goe through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heauen. But the fattest purses are fitter for the Popish synagogue than the poore in spirit. And yet, Blessed are the poore in spirit (sayth the holie Ghost by the Euangelist) for they shall see God. And, Godli∣nes is great riches (sayth the A∣postle) if a man bee content with that he hath. But as it is beyond my reach to decipher and disclose
all the grosse corruptions of the Romish religion: so it is no part of my meaning to search curiouslie into thē; they are already (through Gods fauour and goodnes) by ma∣ny learned, more sufficiētly hand∣led, discouered and confuted, than I can, and to their learned workes I referre you; I onely touch those few, that by these you may see the blacke darknes and grosse igno∣rance wee were brought into, by such as sought more their owne pompe & enriching, than to set vs in the right way to sauing health and saluation, of which they sought to bereaue vs. And hauing giuen you this taste of those miserable times, and dan∣gerous estate we were brought in∣to by them, I hasten to put you in minde of our most blessed, and
happie deliuerance out of this spi∣rituall pit, and thraldome of Pope∣rie and superstition, whereinto we were deeply plunged: for which wee owe all dutifull and heartie thankes to our God, as the author; and all reuerence, loue, and loyalty to our most gracious Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth, as the instrument: whose perill and dan∣ger, before she came to that abili∣tie to performe this holie worke a∣mongst vs, I may not passe ouer. For by Gods goodnes onely and wholly she was preserued, her life being malitiously, and with great cunning shot at by the Romish Cleargie, then in place of credit. For Gardiner, that most proude and bloodie monster, left no cor∣ner of his wit vnsought (being wise enough to worke mischiefe)
but set all his skill and cunning on worke to shorten her dayes, and to preuent her (by bloodie slaughter of her sacred person) from euer be∣ing our Queene. And no reach of man can yeeld me a reason of her deliuerance, but the mightie God in power, and most rich God in mercie, did (beyond all expecta∣tion of popish malice) deliuer her from many dangers, and preserue her, to free vs from al the most bit∣ter thraldome of this Romish Pha∣raoh, & to bring vs into the sweete and sincere libertie of Christs true religion and Gospell: euen as hee did miraculously preserue Moses (being destined to destruction) to deliuer his people of Israell from the miserable taxes and torments they sustayned vnder the Egyptia∣call Pharaoh.
Thus you see that these their bloodie practises would take no place: but that the God of Israell (who neuer fayleth his) hath brought this his religious hand∣mayden, our deare Soueraigne, to the royall throne of this flourish∣ing kingdome: and, by her happie entrance into this seate of gouern∣ment, hath banished the Popish ordinances and decrees, which held vs in slauerie of conscience: and in stead of this, hath brought home vnto vs the cleere Sunne-shining light of his glorious Gos∣pell, and restored vs into the liber∣tie of conscience long wished for, and often prayed for by all his Saints and children. He hath also established a course of teaching by learned ministers and pastors, by whom the glad tydings of sal∣uation
is pronounced and publi∣shed to his people, her subiects, whereby they may be trayned vp in all true knowledge and vnder∣standing. And surely the most simple now may learne to poynt out the vanitie of that superstitious religion, which was sent, and brought to vs from Rome; and may see and feele how sweet the Lord Iesus is in the voyce of his Gospell: which is a blessing that many haue longed for, and haue not yet attained vnto. For this and all the rest we owe our continuall thankes vnto God, and are bound (euery mothers sonne of vs) to pray to him for our Soueraignes life and raigne long to continue; and with all heartie willingnes to shew the loyall loue of our hearts to her Maiestie, by yeelding our
lands, goods, and liues, to be sold, spent, and hazarded for her de∣fence. For of how much more pre∣cious account the soule is than the body, of so much greater price and estimation ought wee to reckon this spirituall deliuerance out of this spirituall bondage, brought vpon vs by poperie and supersti∣tion, which we haue obtayned by her Maiesties most happy entrāce, and enioying this seate of gouern∣ment; in which I pray God she may long sit, to his glorie, the quiet & profit of her people, both in spirituall and earthly things, and the euerlasting comfort to her owne soule and conscience. But when this our deare Soue∣raigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth was fullie possessed of this her princely place, and had receiued
the royall Diademe and Crowne, with the applause and liking of al true hearted Englishmen, both Nobles, Cleargie and Commons; (as a due by right belonging vnto her) then began Sathan to rage, and his ministers to fret and chafe; in so much as euen in the first Par∣liament holden after her most hap∣pie coronation, Doctor Story, that blood-sucker, who had bathed his hands in the blood of sundrie Gods saints, doubted not, without blushing, openly in that most ho∣norable Senate and Councell, to bewaile that his counsell was not followed; and that they had omit∣ted the right course of stopping vs from seeing, and beholding these Halcyon and blessed daies; which he sayd to bee, the not striking at the roote when time serued; mea∣ning,
the not bereauing of our deare Soueraigne of her life. A bloodie speech of a bloodie tray∣tor, who would not conteine to vtter out the poysonfull conceiued malice of his heart to her Maiestie, though it were when his malice could not reach (praised be God) to doe her the least harme. In this arch-traytor there is offe∣red a most notable obseruation of Gods iustice and iudgement. For euen this Story passing ouer the seas after this, without touch, and there exercising his lewd wit to inuent all slaunders against her Maiestie, and the whole state; and (boyling in the bloodie malice of his heart) did burst out into all practises that he could, whereby to disturbe our peace, and to indan∣ger her person; it pleased our God
to assigne the time when he shuld enter into an English ship, deuoid of all feare to bee intrapped, and without all hope in the owner of the ship that he shuld carrie home such a guest. Yet finding (by cer∣taine intelligence) whom he pos∣sessed, and the winde (by Gods prouidence) being prosperous to take way for England, hee hoysed vp his sayles, and tarrieth for no better fraught, arriueth with good speede in England, and presenteth this his merchandise to the hono∣rable Lords, by whom hee was committed to the place most fit for him, and shortly after being indicted, arreigned, found guiltie, and condemned, hee receiued his iudgement at the seate of iustice, and was executed accordingly, as he had well deserued, at Tyburne:
and so may they al speed that wish to Queene Elizabeth, as he did. After this then commeth out the thundring Bull of excommu∣nication against her Maiestie, and her whole land, from that impious Pope Pius Quintus, wherein her Maiestie is not allowed the title of lawfull and rightfull Queene, but is termed The pretended Queene of England; and all her subiects are absolued from the oth of obe∣dience which they had taken, and by right is due from them vnto her. And from this Bull bellowing out these monstrous sounds, as out of another Troian horse, by which all Troy was betrayed) all the troubles, rebellions, and trea∣sons plotted against her Maiestie haue proceeded. Hence the Nor∣therne
Rebels did take their war∣rants and grounds, though it were before the setting of it vp by Fel∣ton, at the Bishop of Londons gate by Paules Church, as shall appeare plainly. For by this Bull these Re∣bels thought themselues to haue a strong immunitie and freedome from all daunger, when such a plackard was published frō Rome: and therefore doubted not to be∣come traytors to their Prince, be∣trayers of their Countrie, and to offer it for a spoyle to forrenners and strangers. As though it were in the power of any one mortall childe of man to dispose of king∣domes, to depose Princes, or to dispence with subiects for not only disobeying, but rebelling against their lawfull Soueraignes. In deed that worthie Doctor Saunders, the
Popes Legate, to comfort the Re∣bels of Ireland, doubteth not to defend this Bull of excommuni∣cation to be iust and lawfull, in his book intituled, Of the visible Mo∣narchie. And to prooue that this Bull was ye encourager of our two infortunate Earles, Northumber∣land and Westmerland, to take armes against their lawfull Soue∣raigne and liege Lady. This Saun∣ders affirmeth that Doctor Mor∣ton was sent to sollicite such Eng∣lish Noble men as he could, that Elizabeth, who then was in pos∣session of the Crowne, was an He∣retike, and for that cause to haue fallen from al dominion & power, and that she may be had, or repu∣ted of them as an Ethnicke, and they are not to be cōpelled to obey her lawes and commandements.
A noble embasey and message to be sent from a Pope, very fitting for his fatherhood; and this olde doting Masse-priest was a very fit ambassadour for his turne, who doted so much vpon his Masse and Mattens, vpon his Dirges & Tren∣tals, and such other trash (where∣unto his corrupt heart was incli∣ned) as he did forget how farre it was against the law of God, Na∣ture, and Nations, to stir subiects to rebell against their rightfull So∣ueraigne: and he was so besotted with his holy Dad, sitting as Pe∣ters successour in his pontisicalibus at Rome, as neither law of God, Nature, nor Nations, could with∣hold him frō satisfying the Popes holines, in this his vnholy and most diuellish direction and errand; far contrary to our Sauiour Christs
direction to Peter, whom he com∣manded to put vp his sword into his sheath. And if it were reckoned a fault in Peter to strike off the high Priests seruants care; how shall it not be a fault in Peters successor to strike at the head, not of a seruant, but of an annoynted Prince, onely because she wil not forsake Christ and obey Antichrist. If Doctor Morton had neuer read so farre in Gods booke; or had liued so long as to forget that he had read; the Lord from hea∣uen commanding this to all men on earth, that euery soule should be subiect to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God; and euery power is ordeined of God: yet hee could not but remember himselfe to bee an English man
borne, and that Queene Elizabeth was the rightfull owner, and pos∣sesser of the Crowne of England, by right of birth, by right of inhe∣ritance, and by right of succession: and therefore by the law of Na∣ture, and Nations, there was obe∣dience and loyaltie due vnto her from him. But he was so bewitched with the Popes primacie, and su∣preme authoritie ouer kings and kingdoms, as he thought the Pope might depose when hee would, and dispose Crownes and king∣domes vpon whom he would; as if he had quite forgotten himselfe to be an English man. Whence this priuiledge ouer kings and kingdoms should come vnto this proude Priest of Rome, I cannot finde, vnlesse he fetcheth it from that spirit, that brought our
Sauiour Christ vnto the top of an high mountaine, shewing him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glorie of them, and sayd, All these will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worship mee: ha∣uing as much authoritie to dispose of them, as Popes haue to depose Princes. But you see what was commit∣ted and commaunded to this do∣ting Doctor Morton by the Pope; and how faithfully Morton per∣formed his faithles errand, to the preiudice of his Prince, and danger of his Countrie. I wish with all my heart the two Earles had been more wise, than to be misled by so wicked a messenger; and more loyall, than to bee miscarried into rebellion by so treasonable a mes∣sage. Notwithstanding they so
embraced the messenger, and so farre followed the direction of the message, that they fell into flat re∣bellion, and marched vnder the ensigne of trayterous subiects: for which the one receiued his con∣digne punishment, and the other escaped by flying, remaining a fu∣gitiue from his Queene and coun∣trie, and not daring to shew his face in his owne natiue soyle, for that hee had disloyally rebelled a∣gainst the one, and vnnaturally sought the destruction of the o∣ther. I finde some blushing in some of this popish crew. For a Romish discourser, in a booke published, and printed against the execution of Justice in England for mainte∣nance of publike peace; seemeth to wish that Saunders and Bristow
(which both do defend, and main∣tain ye Popes Bull against Queene Elizabeth to bee lawfull and iust) had spared to speake so much in defence thereof. And yet he doub∣teth not to affirme that these two learned men, of great zeale and excellencie, had their speciall rea∣sons to doe so; which he will nei∣ther defend nor reproue. He further laboureth to smooth ouer this fault of theirs, by a kinde of retractation in both: the one leauing this out of his booke in his second edition; and the other by suppressing to his liues end, A ve∣ry learned booke made in defence of Pius Quintus his sentence a∣gainst her Maiestie. Marke the E∣pitheton he giueth to it. For he cal∣leth it a very learned booke: so as neither his reproofe, nor their re∣tracting
doth condemne the mat∣ter (which is the maine poynt) but some other reasons did mooue a moderation in them, and all the rest of our nation (to vse his owne wordes) which was neither their condemning the seditious Bull, nor their approuing of her Maie∣sties right to the royall seate she sate in, which the Bull sought to impeach both amongst forrainers and home subiects. The ground and cause of the moderation spoken of by this Po∣pish politike discourser, appeareth by the suite made by Campion and Parsons, vnto Gregory the 13. then Pope; wherein they desired that this Bull of excommunication might not reach to touch the Ca∣tholikes for performing obediēce to her Maiestie, which was graun∣ted
to them; and the very wordes of the dispensatiō are these. Where in the Bull of Pius Quintus all her subiects are commaunded not to o∣bey her; and she being excommu∣nicated, and deposed, all that doe o∣bey her, are likewise innodate and accursed: (which point is perilous to the Catholikes: For if they obey her, they are thē in the Popes curse; and if they disobey, they are in the Queenes daunger:) therefore the present Pope, to relieue them, hath altered that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey, and serue her, without perill of excom∣munication: which dispensation is to endure, but till that it please the Pope otherwise to determine. And these good fathers (so called by this popish discourser) are iusti∣fied & commended, and thought
worthie of great thankes, both of the Queene, and countrie: and yet you see that euen in this dispensa∣tion, as well as in the Bull, our So∣ueraigne is cōtinued by this Pope excommunicated, and cursed, as farre as the hand of such a cursed creature can reach; and so are all her true hearted subiects. But by this they doe discouer their grosse cunning. This discourser would faine per∣swade that this was done for the Queenes good, both for the safetie of her person, and quiet of her countrie. Notwithstanding reue∣rend father Saunders could, after this, bee the Popes Legate, to in∣cite, and comfort Irish subiects to rebell against her Maiestie: where, if the mightie God had not giuen a couragious heart, and a strong
hand to that most vertuous and valiant gentleman, the noble Lord Arthur Gray, then her Highnes Deputie in that place, Saunders perswasion had made a strong partie; and Spaniards had setled too strong a footing for vs to re∣couer in haste. Further to discouer the treache∣rous hearts of all these confede∣rates, the conspiracie of Babing∣ton, Barnewell, Titchborne, and the rest iumping together in one minde, and combining together to performe one bloodie action, which was, to lay violent hands vpon Gods annoynted: whence came it, but from Rome, and Rhemes, following the impious rules of Pius Quintus in his cursed Bull? Besides this, who set Parry on worke to come hither with an
impudent and shameles face, and here to court it; to bee one of the high Court of parliament; and to intrude himselfe into the houses, and to the tables of her Maiesties chiefest Counsellors; yea very of∣ten to her Maiesties owne pre∣sence, and too often, & too neere, with allowance and liking; ha∣uing with her Highnes large dis∣courses, and long conferences, but that fisher of Rome? who fisheth not for mens soules, as Peter did, to winne them to God; but after kingdomes, and segniories, that they may be tributarie to him, and that hee may haue authoritie to dispose of them at his pleasure. For from this, Parry came reconciled, and, forsaking his obedience to his rightfull Soueraigne, became subiect to him; and frō those parts
he came ouer with this bloodie purpose to kill our dread Queene, To assure this, he gaue his word to sundrie to vndertake it; he recei∣ued the Sacrament to doe it; and he confirmed his bloodie promise with his hand, in a letter sent to Rome, desiring therein his holines allowance for the doing of this vn∣holy act, and crauing full remis∣sion for all his sinnes: which was performed to him by this holie Vicars commandement, in a let∣ter sent to him from a Cardinall in Rome, wherein his purpose was sayd to be honorable, the fact me∣ritorious before God; and kinde requitals are promised to him for vndertaking the matter, and for his care had in the busines. Therefore notwithstanding the fine smoothing of this discourser,
who would beare the worlde in hand, that after this Bul published, the peaceable gouernment of our gracious Queene was not by any disturbed; you shall finde it most false and vntrue. For if I should stand to reckon vp all the stirres, that troublesome, and trayterous spirits (as the vipers brood) would haue raised in the bowels of their natiue countrie, I should ouer∣loade you with too many odious and loathsome examples. For what mooued Frauncis Throckmorton to enter into a new practise? What was the cause of Charles Pagets going out of England? of the two vnhappie Earles commitment? the one be∣ing arraigned, and tried by his Peeres, and (being condemned) spared to liue by the wonderfull
mercie of her most milde Maie∣stie: the other preuenting his trial, by laying violent & bloody hands vpon his owne person: was not all this, and much more than this, to depose, or (some way or other) to dispatch our most gracious and lawfull Queene? And yet, after the publishing of this Bull of Pius Quintus (sayth our discourser) our Catholikes (committing nothing against her Maiestie, or her lawes) remained quiet, and did all acts of homage and honor vnto her. But, to proue this his owne cleering of them not to be so cleere, he sayth presently after, that the most part of all sorts of Catholikes, both in England and Ireland, haue done this; onely a very few Nobles of both countries taking armes for their defence: so as to an excuse of
all he addeth an accusatiō of some; and, if the matter of this excuse were liked of by himselfe, and al∣lowed; he must needes condemne these some, that were so rash hea∣ded to take armes against their Queene, and country; and if he al∣lowed these same in thus dooing; then his great paines taken to ex∣cuse all Catholikes to be free from stirring disloyallie, was but a Po∣pish florish of dissimulation. He proceedeth to excuse all the preests, and students beyond the seas, and all such as came ouer, and faith, that al of them since that cen∣sure of his holines (to vse his owne words) did vse all reuerence, and respect to her Maiestie, vttering in no preaching, speech, or booke, no not at the houre of their death, and martyrdome (as he calleth it,
though hee shall neuer proue a traytor to be a martyr) nor euer be∣fore in any their confessions to the Magistrate, any disloyall word a∣gainst her Maiestie. But for many proofes against this, take one for all, to disproue him; and this one proofe being from such a one; as the whole packe of them did high∣ly reuerence, and regarde, being a Cardinall; and Cardinall Allen it was. This English traytor, though he were a Cardinal at Rome, hath sent vs from thence many slaunderous, and seditious pamphlets. Amongst the rest he vndertaketh the defen∣ding of that false faithles Gentle∣man, Syr William Stanley, in his treasonable parte played against her Maiestie, in deliuering vp the towne of Deuenter, contrarie to
the trust reposed in him; and in that booke he blusheth not to set downe these words, that, since her excommunication, and deposition by the Pope, she hath no iust title, or interest to her crowne, and king∣dome; and that no act done by her authoritie since the publishing of that excommunication, and deposi∣tion, hath been, or can be lawfull by the law of God, or man. And there∣fore that no man may lawfully serue her in any action, be it other∣wise neuer so iust. From which he rusheth into an earnest perswa∣sion to reuolte, to withdraw her subiects from her seruice; and to exhort them to the seruice of the Romish catholike party, and her e∣nemies. Now let Master Discourser tell me, whether this be to vtter in no
preaching, speech, or booke, any disloyall word against her Maie∣stie? And if he will be silent, be∣cause he dare not speake the truth, to contrary, and controule his for∣mer lye; yet let all true hearted English-men tell me whether this iugling companion (the discour∣ser I meane) bee not an impu∣dent, and shameles dissembling lyar, in perswading vs by a prin∣ted pamphlet, that all Catholikes were sory that Saunders, and Bri∣stow did write in allowance, and defence of the Bull, and wished that such an offensiue matter had neuer been touched, (they are his owne words) and that all Catholikes, both Preests, students, and others, did conteyne themselues from all disloyall speeches, or actions; when as Cardinall Allen, their Arch∣prelate,
(on whose iudgement all the English Papists liuing did rely as resolutely, as the Heathen could possibly vpō the Oracles sent from their Gods) durst, like an Arch∣traytor, thus villanously stuffe his booke with blasphemous slanders, diuelish perswasions, and impu∣dent lyes against her Maiestie. There is no ende of this humor in them; their practises are pesti∣lent, their perswasions perilous, and their platformes trayterous; and to serue their turne, they want not cunning to execute all: so vio∣lent they are in their villanies, and treasons; and so shameles they are in their falsehood, & dissimulation. I haue dwelt long in this vnsa∣uery, and vnpleasant argument of treacheries and treasons, and in the enumeration of our godlesse,
and vnnaturall traytors: wherein I haue touched many matters, and poynted out many persons: yet could I very easilie adde many more: but I holde it needelesse, because the purpose of my labour is onely to giue a taste to my deare countrymen in this stirring world, wherein Rome, and Spaine, and Hell it selfe; are set on fire against our rightfull Queene, and her kingdome; that by this taste they might see the brutish villanies of our bastard countreymen, and might vnderstand what iust cause there is for them to detest both the traytors, and treasons. And surely the traytors themselues (if God iustly had not blinded them) by many stories, and examples might knowe, that proditio placet, non proditor, though it light vpon
forreyners against a nation. We reade of Mahomet, who intending to besiege Constanti∣nople, a rich, but seditious Citizen, goeth to him, and promiseth to procure the gates to bee set open for him, if hee would promise to giue him his daughter in mariage with a rich dowry. Mahomet a∣greeing, the other performed his deuised treason. And comming after to demaund his wages; It is but thy due, saith Mahomet; and so commaunded a great masse of treasure to bee layed before him: But because thou requirest my daughter (saith hee) thou being a Christian, thou must put off thy olde skinne, that thou maist be fit to company with a wife of a new, and strange religion to thee; and withall commaunded him to bee
flayed, and hot imbers, and salte to be cast vpon the raw flesh, and so to be layed in a bed, till a new skin might growe; where he ended his miserable life, with a iust and righ∣teous punishment for his treason. At home, and amongst our selues, Earle Edrick, to settle this kingdome in the handes of the Danes, setteth on his sonne by some trayterous plot, or other, to dispatch king Edmunde, surna∣med Iron syde, out of the waye. Which hee indeede shortly perfor∣med, murthering the king, as hee for necessities sake was sitting in a secret place. The father, with good hope, but ill speede, hasteth to en∣forme Canutus the Dane, of this exploite performed for him. But as was his worke; such was his wa∣ges. Trayterous was his acte; and a
shamefull death was his end; euen by Canutus appoyntment, abhor∣ring the traytor, though he got the kingdome by his treason. Much more ought we to be incēsed with a detestation of our traytors; the treason being against England; & the traytors being borne English. For in such a case what true harted Englishman can brooke either? I will now hasten to those, to whom the treason was, & is pleasant; and that is, the ambitious Spaniard; whose minde is neuer quiet from aspiring, nor neuer will be satisfi∣ed with lesse than the possessing of an whole worlde of kingdomes; whose ambitiō hath touched vpon many dominions, & territories; & where they preuaile, and can once set a cōquering foote, they gouerne not in the mildenes of a rightfull
king, but rule with the crueltie of a bloodie tyrant. Examples hereof there are many; & sundry printed bookes amongst vs doe publish, and discouer particulars of it. This proud Spaniard was bac∣ked with all the ayde that possiblie Rome and all the Romanists could affoord him, and encouraged to go on with great hope of successe; and offereth an inuasion vpon this little Island of England; and strengtheneth himselfe to this pur∣pose with as great choice of ship∣ping and mē, as possibly he could; the shippes being huge, great, and strong; the men, both souldiers and marriners, well chosen; the guides, both for land and sea, of great skill; the furniture strong, and good; the munition for pow∣der and shot plentifull; the victu∣all
sufficient, and seasonable, and all the prouision fit and necessarie for such an exployte vndertaken. And in this Nauie such trust was reposed by Rome, by Spayne, and by our home-borne traytors, that it was called The inuincible nauie. Yet they found that it had been good counsell, that Ahab gaue to Benhadad, Let not him that gir∣deth himselfe with his armour, boast, as he that putteth it off. For when flesh and blood will bragge of his greatnes, glory in his strēgth, and vaunt of his victories before hand; there is a God in heauen that watcheth ouer his chosen; and, whē the wicked meane most mis∣chiefe against his annoynted, can disappoynt their purposes, and o∣uerthrow them in their own turne. So fell it out to this ambitious
Spaniard, who promising to him∣selfe a victorious conquest ouer England, was conquered himself, without any blow, or not many blowes striken; the Lord of hosts setting the boysterous windes, and surging seas to fight against him; by which many of them were dis∣persed and drowned: not vnlike vnto the victory of Theodosius vp∣on the Alpes, for whom the storie sayth, that the great windes were sent from God to sight, and he had a great victorie; whereupon Clau∣deanus writeth these verses: O nimium dilecte Deo, cui mili∣tat aether, Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti. And so may we say to our Queene in her victory against this boasting proud Spaniard.
O blest of God, for whom the skie it selfe doth fight, And boysterous winds against thy foes do band to shew their might. He is taught hereby what it is to fight against God, though he thinke neuer so basely of Englands strength, or respect neuer so little of the abilitie thereof to encounter and resist him. For was not this his ouerthrowe almost matchable with that, that young Agesilaus gaue to the Arcadians? For they made warre against the Spartans, when Archidamus was aged, and not able to goe into the field, and he did send his sonne Agesilaus a∣gainst them, who ouerthrew the Arcadians with smal losse, or none at al; and it was called The teare∣les battaile. And, with praise to God be it spoken, he had cause (to
his sorrow and shame) to thinke that our milde & mayden Queene wanted not ships, mariners, and souldiers to encounter him; nor yet noble, and valiant conductors; to stop his attempt, and resist his furie; and (I trust) she shall euer be able to man out shipping to ma∣ster his malice, and to abate his pride; and I rest assured of it, be∣cause his, and the Popes malice to her, is not because she is daughter to King Henrie the 8. and sister to Queene Mary; but because she hath banished the Pope, that An∣tichrist of Rome, and hath yeel∣ded her selfe to the obedience of Christ Iesus, in the voyce of his Gospell. Hence it is, that the Pope ra∣geth, and bestirreth himselfe with his curses, and sendeth his pupills a∣broade
amongst vs, to draw chri∣stians from Gods truth, to his false religion; and to withdraw subiects from obedience to their lawful So∣ueraigne; a worke well beseeming Antichrist, and all his adherents. Against whom the heathen shall rise in iudgement, and shall con∣demne them; who thought it vn∣honest, and vnhonorable, not one∣ly to plot, and deuise treasons, but euen so much as to hearken to any treason offered them, though ne∣uer so much for their benefit. For in the warre betweene Fabricius the Romaine, and Pyrrhus; the phisition of Pyrrhus did offer for a summe of mony to poison Pyr∣rhus, that so Fabricius might get the victorie: but Fabricius was so farre from accepting the offer, as he sent backe the traitour to Pyrrhus,
and bad him take heede how hee entertayned such traytors so neere him. But the king of Spayne deale not so with the Queene our mi∣stres, when her poysonfull Portin∣gall phisition Lopus would haue poysoned her. For, from such hopes hee taketh hearte, and hath al∣readie offered to inuade vs; and hath been, and is still busied with vs in Ireland, and did carry a full purpose this last spring, to trye the vttermost of his strength to get footing heere, had not her Maie∣stie most prouidently foreseene in her princely wisdome how fit it was to speake with him at his own home, thereby to diuert his forces from his intended inuasion vpon vs, to defend him selfe; and to that end shee sent out a royall nauye vn∣der the conduct and commaunde
of two honorable Generalls; who diuiding themselues the one to keep the seas, and the other to set foot vpon the spaniards sayle. He that desired to land, left his hono∣rable companion with the greatest parte of the fleet, and himselfe ha∣steth with the companies agreed vpon, to the shore, and with the extraordinarie forwardnes of a Generall, he stayed not the en∣trance of many before him into the towne, but to the encouragement of all, both before him and behind him, he shewed little to respect the safety of his own person; and more regarding the honour of his Soue∣raigne, his countrey, and himselfe, then his owne life, hee entred the towne with a small number at the first, and would not be daunted or driuen backe by the fiery furie of
Spanish shot, setled in euery house to annoy him: but continued his course, till he possessed the Market place, where he proceeded in his most valorous and victorious at∣tēpt, to the winning of the towne: which done, he ioyned himselfe to his most honorable companion a∣gaine, who no doubt was prest and readie to performe what belonged vnto his place, if occasion had been offered. And all England hath iust cause to praise God, for this blow of dishonour giuen to Spayne, and for the safe returne of both the ho∣norable Generals againe: who so speedily by their diligence, so pro∣uidently by their gouernment, and so forcibly by their courage arri∣ued vpon his coast, approached an attempt, and followed it with such magnanimitie, as (by the goodnes
of ye Almighty) they had most pros∣perous successe, without any great losse of men, or shipping; & retur∣ned safe home, by the assistance of ye same God, being as ready to de∣fend vs from inuasion, as they haue shewed themselues forward to of∣fend him at his owne dore. And no doubt this biting blow, lately giuē him by these two noble Generals, hath no whit abated his anger, but incēsed him more: so as we are not to doubt, but that he wil no longer stay frō offering a reuenge vpō vs, than he can furnish himselfe strōg∣ly to his liking. And herein shall he not want the helpe of al his popish confederates, both forreine, and at home. For I doe not heare that the Popes holines is so purged frō am∣bition, or so recōciled to religion, as he meaneth not to continue his
claime for the Supremacie: or wil cease to settle the dregs of his poy∣son, and superstitious doctrine a∣mongst vs. I cannot conceiue that the thirst of Parsons, and his pew-fellowes is yet quenched, from seeking the blood of our deare So∣ueraigne, and (in her) the destruc∣tion of vs all; the cause remayning stil, for which heretofore they haue sought it; neither can I be perswa∣ded ye Spaynes malice to England is yet abated, but that the Queene our mistris, & her kingdome, is ac∣counted with him a pray worth the enioying. Therefore I doubt nothing of ye Popes malicious for∣wardnes to incite it, and to adde all the strength he can to it; nor of our English traytors harty disposition to further it; nor of the Spaniards ambitious desire to take it in hand, and his willingnes to do the worst
he can. And his worst let him doe. For the God of heauen is with vs, who is a iust defender of all those that haue a iust cause: and as it was sayd of Constantius: Et causa{que} valet, causam{que} tuen∣tibus armis: So may we say of our Queene: Her cause is better that she takes in hand; Her force more strong, Spaynes malice to withstand. For whether we respect ye Pope, the fugitiue, and home-traytors, or the King of Spayne; our cause is most iust. With the Pope we stand for Gods sacred and sincere truth, against his superstitious and Ido∣latrous falshood. With the fugitiue and home-traytor, wee stand for our Soueraigne, and countrie, a∣gainst barbarous, vnnaturall, and
most monstrous bloodie harted treasons. With the ambitious King of Spayne wee stand for our rightfull Queene, against an vsur∣ping tyrant. And therefore there is no Christian heart so senceles, that wil not stand for God, against the Diuell; for Christ, against An∣tichrist; for trueth, against false∣hood: neither is there any true English heart so voyd of loyaltie to his Soueraigne, and loue to his countrie, but that hee will stand for both, against practises & plot∣formes of fugitiues, against the fu∣rie, and madnes of home-traytors; and against the inuading humour of a bloodie tyrant. Now, deare countrymen, you haue a taste of the black darknes, that this our natiue, and naturall country was in, when the Popish
cleargie carryed the sway amongst vs; and what a blessed change did befall vs, when the mightie God from heauen allotted our moste deare, and rightfull liege Lady, to be his soueraigne substitute, to go∣uerne ouer vs, his children, and her naturally borne subiects of Eng∣land; by whose happy entrance in∣to this seate of gouernment those darke and cloudie dayes, daunger∣ous both to soule and bodie, were turned into a cleare sun-shyne of comfort, to all, that had any taste, and sauour of the wofull blinde∣nes they were held in; or had any fence, or feeling of their countryes miserie. And lastly you haue heard of the manifolde daungers, that this our deare soueraigne, and su∣preame gouernour (vnder God) was in; both in the time of her
sister, Queene Marie; the bloody purposes, and practises against her by the Romish cleargie; as also after she was possessed of the royall au∣thoritie, due to her in this flou∣rishing kingdome, by forreine ma∣lice, and home treason; by which the peace of our land hath bene disturbed, her precious lyfe mis∣chieuously, and many wayes short at; and our whole countrey sought to be runiated, and ouer-runne by inuasion from the ambitious ty∣rant of Spayne. And all these deui∣ses against her, and vs, were plotted at Rome; from whence that man of sinne (the Pope I meane) hath inci∣ted and encouraged home-borne subiects to become rebells, in ray∣sing men, and carrying armes a∣gainst their rightfull Queene; and to become bloudy traytors in con∣spiring
the death of her, whose life is moste precious vnto vs, and should haue been most deare vn∣to them. But our neuer fayling God hath cutt the throate of all those platformes, and practises, by disappointing the purposes of all these rebells, and traytors; and pre∣seruing the life of our gratious So∣ueraigne Lady, beyond the reach of all policie, and wit of man: for which we can neuer be sufficiently thankfull to this our good God, for that in the contynewing of her life, (which the Lorde still long conty∣nue) true religion, the liues of vs all, and our countries libertie, and tranquillitie is preserued, and pro∣longed. This bloudye monster of Rome doth not stay here, but hauing al∣readie stirred vp Spaine to set vp∣on
vs both in Ireland, and in En∣gland, doth still whet them on, by his vnholy prouocations, to in∣uade; and Spaine beeing enraged at his former ill successe when he was here, and the sharp blowe now giuen him, will not disobey his holy father at Rome; nor refuse to giue a newe attempt vpon vs, to trye whether he can speede better. For Romish malice is not easilie a∣bated; and the thirst of a kingdome will hardly be quenched. To meete with this proud po∣pish champion, our carefull Soue∣raigne, and her prouident Councel consult daylie, and commaund daylie. They consult of the best meanes to resist him, and defend vs; and they commaund all thinges necessarie to be prouided by vs, that wee may stand strongly for
God, for Queene, for countrie, euē for the life, and liberties of our selues, and all belonging to vs. It behoueth vs therefore to bee care∣full in our places also, that as her Maiestie, & her honorable Coun∣cell consult, and command for the best; so we should obey, and pro∣uide for the best. It is sayd of a learned man, that the felicitie of a Common-wealth consisteth in well commaunding, and well obeying. For if the com∣maunders doe their parts, if obe∣dience faile, their commanding is vaine: but if well commanding be answered with dutifull obeying, then is religion safe, the Queene is safe, the Common-wealth is safe, and we are all safe. For Xenophon in his time sayth, that, Quae hoc tempore habemus bona, ob nul∣lam
aliam causam adepti sumus, quàm ob praestitam obedientiam principi. So sacred and holy a thing is obedience to Princes, before God himselfe, who commandeth vs to obey: nay whom in this point none can disobey, being a true Christian; and so reuerend a thing was obedience to such as knewe not God, who were drawne there∣to by the light of nature, and by experience of their owne feeling the sweete thereof. Now herein we haue an aduauntage aboue them: for wee haue both knowledge of God, who commandeth vs to o∣bey, and him we may not disobey; and we haue no lesse cause to feele the benefit of godly and Christian obedience to our Christian prince, than euer had, or hath any nation of the worlde: and to shewe our
selues senceles of this, were to re∣sist Gods ordinance, to be ingrate∣full to our deare Queene, and to shake off all care to continue the peace and prosperitie of our coun∣trie; and consequently to neglect our owne priuate good. I hold it a sound ground, & not to bee controlled, that euery Chri∣stian ought to striue to keep these three things soūd within his breast; his conscience before God, his loi∣altie to his Prince, and his loue to his countrie. All which three for my part I account so neerely con∣ioyned each to other, as they can∣not iustly be seuered. For in vaine do wee speake of conscience to God, if we be short in loyaltie, and obedience to her Maiestie: in vaine doe we brag of loyaltie to her Ma∣iestie, if we carrie not a loue to our
countrie: and in vaine do we pro∣test loue to our country, if we per∣forme not all loue, loyaltie, and o∣bedience to our Soueraigne, & la∣bour not in some measure to satis∣fie the dutie of a good conscience to our good God. Our conscience cannot but tell vs, that all obedience is due to the soueraigne Magistrate. For we are taught it out of the booke of con∣science, the holy Scriptures; which teach vs that wee must submit our selues to all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the su∣periour, &c. Our loyalty should tel vs, & teach vs, that the safetie of her Maiestie consisteth in loyall, and true obedience frō her subiects: for obedience proceedeth of loue; and Amor ciuiū est regi inexpugnabile
munimentum, sayth Seneca. And our loue should tell vs, that the Common-wealth is most happie, where obedience is most heartilie performed. For, as one saith verie notably, Nihil est, quod regnum a∣liquod reddat potentius, firmins, se∣renius, aut durabilius, quàm obe∣dientia subditorum. Whosoeuer therefore hath any conscience be∣fore God, any sparke of a loyall heart to her Maiestie, or the least sound loue in his bosome to his countrie; he cannot but embrace this obedience, euery way in him∣selfe seeke to expresse it, and with others earnestlie labour to per∣swade it. Notwithstāding we haue some, and too great a summe of those a∣mongst vs, that shake off this obe∣dience, and are so vehemently ca∣ried
with a preposterous blinde zeale to popish Idolatrie, that the Romish Antichrist challenging to bee Christes Vicar vppon earth, (though it bee plaine that in stead of Christ his simple and naked truth, he setteth vp his vnchristian, and carnal forgeries, and vntruths) is had in more reuerence and re∣gard, by those recusant English-borne subiects, than is our most Christian, and most rightfull Queene Elizabeth. For although the commandemēt be giuen from God, that wee should obey her: yet dare they couer and cloake their disobedience vnder the co∣lourable name of conscience: whereas it is nothing els, but a vaine, and superstitious conceit, wrought in them from Rome, be∣sotting them with a blinde loue
of their dregges, and making them (like to the foolish Israelties) to preferre the leekes and onyons of Egypt, before the sweete Manna, wherwith the Lord fed them from heauen. So that in them the olde verse is fully verified: Quisquis amat ranam, ranam pu∣tat esse Dianam. The foole that to a frog his fācy ties, As faire Diana thinks it in his eies. Now conscience must be groun∣ded vpon knowledge; and know∣ledge to guide the consciēce must bee fetched out of the sacred and holie worde of GOD; the triall whereof they can no more abide, then can the owle the light. I note three things in this kinde of people, worthie to bee knowne and obserued. First, the hurt they continually do: secondly, the hurt
they would doe: and thirdly, their deepe dissimulation. For the first, it would aske a large discourse to discouer all the hurts done by thē, they are so many and manifold; I will onely touch some. My owne experience telleth me, that where the gentleman, and man of wealth refuseth to come to the Church, and is in any sort borne withall; there the meaner sort receiue in∣fection, and draw back from obe∣dience. For, A boue maiori discit arare minor. Of elder oxe the yonger steere doth learne. If the men come to Church, and their wiues refuse (which is a cun∣ning tricke much practised of late yeres) thē is yt houshold, both chil∣dren & seruants, in daunger whol∣ly to bee corrupted. And sure it is,
that the wiues of the meaner sort are infected greatly by them; and the night crowes perswasion pre∣uaileth much; and in mint owne knowledge, within these three yeares, many of the meaner sort are fallen away, and doe fall away daily: Impunitatis spes, magna peccan∣di illecebra. Touching the hurt they would do, who doubteth but they would gladly haue vp their Masse againe, and banish the sincere worship of God? Their whole catholike go∣uernment and religion, I am sure, they long for. And yet, to pro∣nounce these men to carrie hol∣low hearts to Queene Elizabeth, is thought to bee an vncharitable sentence. But I pray you tell me, Can God and Mammon; Christ
and Boliall; the table of the Lord, and the table of diuels agree toge∣ther? Scripture sayth they cannot; and it becommeth vs to beleeue it, no more can the Popes autho∣ritie, and Queene Elizabeths stād together: and yet must I beleeue that these men carrie loyall hearts to our Soueraigne, though they o∣bey the Pope, and disobey her. For my part I see no reason at all to beleeue them; and I wish all my countrimen to beware of them, for they are a dangerous breede; and the more dangerous, because many of thē shew to haue a good outward ciuill carriage in ciuill matters. But let not that possesse you with too great a regarde of them: and to deliuer you from the danger of such deceitfull baytes, I must assure you that this is a true
position, that, without the true feare of God there can bee no true religion; and vnles the religion be sound, the face, and shew of ci∣uill honestie (seeme it neuer so glorious in the eyes of flesh and blood) is but a deceitfull visour vp∣on a crabtree face, couering the most vile, and cankered partes of a most deceitfull heart; and so I come to their dissimulation. These ciuill honest men, that vnder pretence of conscience rebel against God in religion, and refuse to yeeld a loyall obedience to their liege Lady, and Soueraigne (as in religion, and policie they ought, in her moste iust, and christian lawes and commaundements) seeme to carry a moste lamentable resoluti∣on lurking in their bosomes, a∣gainst Queene, Country, & vs all,
when, they will seeke the life of their, and our Queene, the thral∣dome of their, and our countrie, and the ruine of vs all, that professe the gospell, to haue their popish priesthood, and massing sacrifice vp againe; and if this be consci∣ence, I know not what conscience meaneth. And yet this conscience they fetch from Rome; and, by the plaine profession of them that are fledde the realme, and haue, (be∣cause they thought them selues out of reache) shewed them selues in their colours, wee may iustly doubt the affection of those, that remayne with vs; how demurely so euer they will shewe to behaue them selues. For they are of the horseleach kinde; and seeme to ex∣pect when they may glut them∣selues with the blood of Gods saints: without which they cannot
haue their Dagon vp againe. The Recusants of our age can∣not professe, nor make greater shewe of loyaltie, and loue to our dread Soueraigne: neither can serue her outwardly with greater apparance of faithfulnes; nor can protest more deepely by wordes and oathes, their true and good meaning to her, than did Gardi∣ner, Boner, and Tonstall, to her no∣ble father, and brother; which they did confirme by printed bookes. For Gardiner he wrote his booke De vera obedientia, and Boner added his epistle before it; And Tonstall published a flat treatise against the Pope. But when these two noble Princes were called to their last, and euerlasting home, and kingdome in heauen, and Queene Marie possessed the go∣uernement of this kingdome vp∣on
earth; then Gardiner did teare off his glorious visour, and shewed him selfe in his right colours, and shape. For he, and his complices neuea rested, till they had brought in the Spaniard, and had matched him in marriage with the Queene; by which they betrayed God, her, and the whole realme. This bloudie intention by this linck thus strengthened, then com∣meth Gardiner out publikely in pulpit with this sentence, Hora est iam nos ê somno surgere: peruerting the sacred scripture most profane∣ly, and blasphemously to his bloo∣die purpose; and what hauock he, and Boner, and the rest made of Gods saintes, and our deare bre∣thren, and countrymean, stories make mention. Yea further, as be∣fore I haue set downe, this bloodie monster Gardiner did put hard at
the life of our deare Soueraigne, and mistres, by whom (next, and immediatly vnder God) wee all liue in peace, and safetie, both of soule, and body; praysed be the al∣mightie for her deliuerance, and long may shee liue, to rule and raigne ouer vs, to the wasting of poperie to the least dramme of that religion (or rather superstiti∣on) amongst vs; and to the rooting out, and vtter ruinating of all trea∣sons, and traytors; and let all, that truly feare God, cary loyall hartes to our deare Queene, & loue their countrey vnfeignedly, as faithfull christians, loyall subiects, and true harted English-men, say Amen. As for the rest, such of them, as are to be conuerted, I wish them true, and speedie conuersion, with all my heart; otherwise, rather than Gods true religion shoulde bee
darkened, her Maiesties least fin∣gerake by treacherie, and treason; or my countrey sustaine the least harme by their vnnaturall practi∣ses, I wish their speedie confusion, and ouerthrow. For we may well say of them, as Tullie saide of Ca∣tiline the conspiratour, in one of his orations, In all, or most of these happie yeres of her Maiesties most prosperous, & peaceable gouerne∣ment, there hath been no trayte∣rous practise against her person, or our countrey, but it came alwayes from them, and by them; whome neither shame of their villanies, nor feare of punishment, nor any sound reason out of Gods booke, or the rule of true christian policie could withholde from pursuing their traiterous purposes, and prac∣tises. And to see, or heare, that the royall person of our Soueraigne
Ladie was in danger, was pleasing to them; as contrariwise, the news of her happie escape, was yrksome; so that, where there is onely the bare sence of a true English heart, these Popish Recusants cannot bewitch, or deceaue with their hy∣pocriticall holines, or ciuill hone∣stie: and so I leaue them. Now my deare countrymen, to you, whome God hath seasoned with a better spirite of knowledge, and whose hearts he hath taught to honor, and loue your rightfull So∣ueraigne, and Queene; and whom nature it selfe hath instructed to holde your natiue soyle and coun∣trey deare vnto you; and to haue a sensible feeling of many miseries threatned against yourselues, your wiues, & children; plucke vp your spirits, and bee couragious in the Lordes quarell, in the Queenes
quarell, in your countries quarell, and in your owne quarell; know, and acknowledge this common quarell of GOD, Queene, and Countrey, to be your owne quarel in deede. For in this busie bending of diuelish wits together to con∣spire; and this ioynt-banding of huge, and strong forces to execute; your soules are hunted after, that they may bee imprisoned in the darke dungeon of Popish Idolatrie (which is the ready way to pre∣pare them for the cheines of dark∣nes for euer:) your bodies are hun∣ted after, to be exposed to their sa∣uage, and intolerable torments; and here with your wiues to be de∣flowred, your daughters to be ra∣uished, your sonnes to bee made slaues, and all of you to be tyed to a lingring tormenting life, or a bloody cruell death; your landes
and goods are hunted after; not for ransomes to bee accepted for your deliuerance out of their ciuell hands, but for prayes, and rewards to the tormenting Souldier, and proude tyrannicall Spaniard. Let vs therefore labour to bee instructed daylie more and more in the knowledge of Gods trueth, that our consciences being groun∣ded vppon true knowledge, wee may be armed against all the sub∣till sleights of Sathan, and his Ro∣mish instruments; and with cou∣rage, and with boldenes stand to Gods infallible, and eternall truth to our liues ende; that when the time of our dissolution commeth, we may enioy the crowne of eter∣nall glorie; propounded to, and prepared for all those that make a blessed entrance into the professi∣on and practise of true religion;
continew therein with a christian proceeding; and holde on with perseuerance to the end. Let vs with all willingnes straine our selues to our vttermost habili∣ties, to fight for God, for Queene, for Countrey, and for our owne selues. For, what benefite shall we receiue of our wealth, if the raue∣ning Spaniard catch holde on vs? And what cōfort shall our wealth yeelde vs, though we possesse it, if our bodies be in bondage? And what pleasure can we take of our liues, if wee see our wiues, and daughters rauished, and deflou∣red, and our sonnes tyed to perpe∣tuall slauerie. For although the ground (in shewe) of the Spaniards comming to inuade vs, is his care to obay the Popes commaundement, to re∣duce this land to his obedience, in
taking holde of, and receauing his Romish religion, and gouern∣ment; and our simple Recusants rae so sottish, and so bewitched with the inchauntments of Popish superstition, as they beleeue this to be true; and the rather, because one of our Arch-runnagate traytors, sworn to the Popes pantable, pub∣lished a seditious pamphlet, be∣fore the last inuasion, to perswade it; yet if you will giue me leaue to call to your rememberance the maner, and meaning of his com∣ming into England, when hee came, not as an inuader, to con∣quer; but as a freind, to fasten a strong league of amitie by a mar∣riage, I doubt not to discouer the treacherous crueltie of his hearte. For this marriage was sought for, and intended also in shewe onely to strengthen the hand of the
Queene of England, to bring in the Romish religion, and gouerne∣ment into this land; and to esta∣blish it with continuance, with purpose, and meaning to adde strength to all the corners of chri∣stendome, to continue poperie where it was; and to bring it in, where it was not; that so the Arch∣prelate of Rome might holde the scepters, and power of all princes, and potentates of christendome in his hand, to dispose at his pleasure. But the plots, and practises, layed, and pursued by the Spanish King, had made a wofull proofe to Eng∣land of a further marke shotte at (which was discouered in a letter to some of our nobles from a true harted Englishman in Spaine) had not God almightie, in his riche mercie, preuented their purposes, and defeated them in their deter∣minations;
as it shall appeare hereafter, if I first remember to you that it is recorded of the Spaniard, that in diffimulation he surpasseth all nations, till he haue attained to his purpose; and when he can once preuaile, he goeth beyonde them all in oppression, and tyrannie; al∣so that he disdayneth all other na∣tions; and that in pride, and carnall voluptuousnes no nation com∣meth neere him, and these bee his qualities. Now to proceede to laye open the right marke, that in deede hee shotte at, though when hee made waye to ioyne in marriage with Queene Marie, hee made sem∣blance of greate conscience to Ca∣tholike religion, and greate care to bring the whole land into the obe∣dience thereof; and seemed to glo∣rie much, when it was brought to
passe; as his letter to his holy father at Rome written out of England doth make shewe: wherein he ex∣presseth what a worthie worke he had done, when he had drawen the nobles, and commons of the lande to submitte them selues to his ho∣lynes, as their cheefe (those are the very wordes) yet little did the no∣bles, and commons knowe what was intended towardes them by this Catholike child of Rome. For vnder this colourable name of Ca∣tholike religion, was hidden the ambitious humor of a most proud vsurping tyrant; whose resolution was, vppon mature deliberation, and consultation with his Machi∣auellian counsellers, to seeke, by all the possible kind meanes he could, to winne the principall of our no∣bles to affect him, and in their af∣fection to possesse him of the
crowne, and so to establish him in an absolute power ouer poore England; & to bring this to passe, hee decreed to spare neither cost, nor kindnesse. If once hee had obtained the crowne, and regall power into his clutches, then (as in yt letter of dis∣couerie is layed open,)  The Coun∣cell table must bee filled with his counsellers;  The hauen townes must be possessed with gouernours of his appointing;  Fortifications must be made by his direction;  & Souldiers of his owne must bee placed in garrison, at places most apt for strength to himselfe, and annoyance to this poore nation;  Then must the common law of this land bee altered, by which Iu∣stice is truely taught to al sorts; the Prince to gouerne, the people to o∣bay; the nobles to liue of their
owne, with out wronging the in∣feriours; the inferiours to liue vnder the nobles, with al loue, reuerence, and dutie, the riche to dwell a∣mongst ye poore without oppres∣sion; the poore to dwell with the rich without disorder; the offen∣ders to bee punished without par∣tialitie; and the well disposed to be defended, without respect of per∣sons. This the law of the land doth offer vnto vs, to our comfort; and from this he purposed to make an exchange to his Spanish lawes; which beeing no better than his Spanish Inquisition (as in deede they are not) we could not (out of question) receiue great comforte by the exchange. For the Inqui∣sition conuenteth without know∣en cause; compelleth to accuse without reason; condemneth without proofe; committeth to the
torture without colour; and final∣ly neuer ceasseth till harte bloud bee sucked out of such, as make their wofull appearance. Which vnholy Inquisition he did most sa∣uagely settle in most partes of his dominions; and this bloudie In∣quisition would he not haue failed to bring into our land, with all o∣ther his lawes, and ordinances su∣table to the same. Their intole∣rable taxes also we must haue been pestered with; being such (as my author reporteth, who knew them well) as England (thankes bee to God) was neuer yet acquainted with, neither, I trust, euer shalbe. A tast whereof I will giue you, as, that for euerie chimnie, and other places to make fyre in, as ouens, fornaces, smithes forges, and such others, a french crowne was yere∣ly payed to him. Hee had also
powling pence for all manner of corne, bread, beefe, mutton, capon, pigges, goose, hennes, ducke, chic∣kin, butter, cheese, egges, apples, peares, nuttes, beere, wine, and all other thinges whatsoeuer the peo∣ple feedeth vpon. Yea no farmer, yeoman, or husbandman durst eat a capon in his house, if his friende came to him. For if he did, it must cost him sixe shillings eight pence though the capon was not worth twelue pence and so ioties quoties. These bee the benefites, and bles∣singes, that this Catholike kinge sought to bring in hither by this absolute authoritie sought for. My author doth further vnfolde his treacherous purpose towardes this land,  by discouering vpon his own knowledge, and hearing, this kings intention to be, by little and little to roote out the nobilitie:
to keepe the commons in begge∣rie,  and not to suffer one to liue heere, that was borne in twentie yeares before; but either to destroy them, or to make them slaues a∣mongst the Moores. The colour whereof was, because they were borne out of the faith of the Ca∣tholike church of Rome: where∣in he shewed a very conscionable regarde of their soules health, and saluation, by killing them, before he sought to conuert them; or by sending them where no instructi∣on was to be had for them. And, to make vp the full mea∣sure of al impietie, the faster to set∣tle his crowne vpon his head from remouing (if he had gotten it) hee layed his plotte to destroye out deare soueraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth: hauing decreed with himselfe, that neither shee nor any
of that cursed nation (so hee tear∣med it, and yet the Popes holynes had absolued it) should gouerne England any more. But blessed be God, who hath blessed vs with the life, and raigne of our blessed Queene; who, (I trust) shall liue to giue him such a deadly blowe, as neither his cursed selfe, nor any of his cursed nation, (iustly so to bee called, because the Pope, that cur∣sed man of sinne, hath blessed them) shall euer see the day to rule in England. Whiles this plot was layde, and the practise was in hand, to set the crowne vpon the Spaniards head, the Spaniards them selues did, in my authors hearing (as he reporteth) often curse the time, that euer their kinge maryed Queene Marie, vnlesse they might get the crowne; but if that might bee
brought to passe (which was ment by making of the marriage) they should then do well enough. Thus you see yt vnder the colour of this marriage, saluation of soules see∣med to be sought for; but in deede destruction both of our bodies and soules was pursued: Loue to the nobles, and our whole nation, was manifested in shewe, but in sub∣stance, the ruine both of nobles, and nation was intended: Strength was saide to be added by this match to our kingdome; but it is apparant they sought to strength∣en them selues, by weakening vs, and our kingdome. For without regarde of sexe, age, or degree, all were destined to slauerie, and bon∣dage at the least; howsoeuer they escaped with life. To knitt vp this; If marriage (the strongest bonde of amitie to a true religious christian
heart) could not drawe the least sparke of true loue from him to this noble Queene, who so louingly made choice of him to be her hus∣band; nor the honorable accepta∣tion of him by the nobles, could worke any sound loue in him to∣wardes them; nor his comming in tearmes of loue to our countrie, coulde yeeld better fruites, but to seeke the ruine, and destruction thereof; what shall our deare soue∣raigne Queene Elizabeth, her no∣bles, and all her people looke for now at his handes, cōming in open hostilitie, with banner displayed, shippes manned, swordes drawne, ordinance charged, myndes fully bent to roote out Queene, nobles, and people; and to make this flou∣rishing kingdome a praie to his ambitious bloudie desire? I looke for little soundnes from
those, that are fugitiues of our na∣tion; but I could wish all English home dwellers should be so farre from all sencelesse feeling of their countries miserie (wherein their owne share is, of what profession so euer they be) as to be not onely free from treacherous combining with the enemye; but also forward to stretch forth their handes to resist his force. I would haue none of Metius Suffetius his mynde a∣mongst vs; who beeing required by Tullus Hostilius, to ayde him in his warre against his enemies, he promised to come (because he durst not deny him) but he stood a loofe off, and beheld the fight, for∣bearing to ioyne to either partie, till he might see what waye the victorie would go. But Hostilius perceiuing his cunning, and false∣hood, caused him to be drawne in
peeces with wylde horses. You maie reade also in the booke of Iudges, that Meroz was cursed for not helping in the warre against Sisera; and Jael, for her forwardnes therein was blessed. And surely the curse of the Almightie must needs light vpon al such English-men, as will either by falsehood betraye their Queene, & countrie, for loue to Rome and Spayne; or bee colde in prayer to God, or faint in cou∣rage against the enemie, or pinch∣ing in purse, to make all requisite prouision for the defence of their Soueraigne, and countrie, against Rome, and Spayne. Neutralitie, in matters concerning christianitie; or loyaltie, sauoureth neither of a true hearted christian, nor subiect. And Solon made a lawe, that in a∣ny stirre, or tumult, all the Citizens should stand on one side, or o∣ther;
he would haue no neuters a∣mongst them. Our Soueraigne, and Countrey hath been assaulted many wayes; and they both (through Gods great goodnes) haue escaped many dan∣gers; And surely it behoueth vs to know, and vnderstand, that a dan∣ger past requireth hearty, and con∣tinuall thankes to be giuen to the author thereof; and a perill depen∣ding, exacteth both prayer, and prouidence. It is true, that wee all, euery mothers childe of vs, are very slacke both in prayer, and thankes∣giuing. Yet we are more ready to beg of God those things we want, than to giue him thankes for that we haue already receaued. Not∣withstanding, as Augustine saith, Non est dignus dandis, qui non est gratus de datis. Wee are easilie intreated in sicknes to praye for
health; in danger to pray for deli∣uerance; and in any aduersitie to cry for helpe; but how soone sick∣nes is forgotten, when health is re∣stored; How easily dangers fall out of memorie, when deliuerance is obtained; How little aduersitie is thought of, when helpe is once graunted; many examples doe proue. It is recorded for our lear∣ning, and warning, that tenne Le∣pars were clensed by our Sauiour Christ; but onely one came backe, to giue thankes. Againe wee reade that the Israelites were in misera∣ble bondage vnder cruel Pharaoh; and whilest the crosse was vpon them, they cryed hard for help, and deliuerance; but being released of their miserie, and deliuered from the intolerable burdens of Egypt; they are so farre from being thank∣full to God, that they fall to mur∣mur
against God; and in steede of seruing him, that had saued them, they fall to Idolatrie, and false worship. Let this warne vs to beware we be not slacke in thankfulnes to our God, who hath bestowed so many blessings and benefits vpon vs, and hath freed vs from many perils, by so many strange deliuerances. For thankefulnes for a benefite recei∣ued, draweth on a new blessing. And if euer this thankfulnes were needfull to appeare in vs, it is now, when, beyond the policie and wit of man, the life of our gracious Queene hath been sundrie times preserued; and in her Gods true religion, our owne liues, and our countries liberty both in soule and bodie prolonged. Let vs know for truth, that our God hath not boūd himselfe to continue a God of fa∣uour,
and defence to vs, vnles wee continue thankfull to him. There∣fore with the holy Prophet Dauid let vs say, Benedictus Dominus, qui non dedit nos in captionem denti∣bus eorum. But is this enough? sure∣ly no. For if our thankfulnes come from a feeling heart, as it ought, it will not onely sound in words, but will also shew it self in action; and that in our continuall care, and en∣deuour, both by practise & paines to seeke the glorie of God, and the good of his Church. The prosperi∣tie and welfare thereof ought to be more deare vnto vs, than our own liues. For no Common-wealth hath promise from God of peace, and tranquilitie, but in the flouri∣shing of religion, and true beautie of the Church: and in deede here∣vpon the saluation of our soules, and the safetie of our Queene doth
depende: and it is most certaine, that if the Queene bee in daunger, we cannot looke to sit safe. I finde amongst the learned, that sinceritie of religion, and loue of the people, are two especiall props and pillers of the state of a Prince. For sincere religion teacheth to loue soundly; and sound loue quencheth all sparkes of disloyal∣tie. Therfore I hold it for certaine, that religion, and the Queenes sa∣fetie cannot bee seuered. For if re∣ligion flourish, the Queene must needes be safe: and, if the Queene bee safe, religion must needs flou∣rish: and, as I thinke them to deale vnsoundly, that seeke to settle her safetie, without care of religion; so must I deeme them to deale hypo∣critically, that speake much of re∣ligion, without care of her safetie. For he that shall carrie a right and
sound care for Queene Elizabeths safetie, must first loue religion, and feare GOD: according to that, which Constantius the Emperour sayd, who (grieuing at his peoples reuolt from true religion, vpon triall that he made of them) plain∣ly protested, They that will not be true to God, can neuer bee true to man. And therefore such of them as had any office, he putteth them out; such of them as were neere about him, he displaced, and freed himselfe from the daunger of such hollow-hearted subiects, and ser∣uants. Religion then is the true guide to euery mans conscience, and hol∣deth euery mans conscience with∣in the compasse of true obedience; and this obedience containeth e∣uery good subiect within the li∣mits of true loue and feare: and
where these two meete together, they make a sweete harmonie in the heart of euery true subiect. For loue nourisheth all care to please, and obey; and such feare expelleth all disposition to offend; and both ioyne together with a feeling con∣sent, to yeeld continuall thanks to the almightie, for deliuering our Soueraigne from daunger, and to pray daily and hourely to his ma∣iestie, that hee will in mercie pro∣tect vs still. This perill depending, it beho∣ueth vs to bee prouident. For as warre is denounced, and threat∣ned from forraine parts; so conspi∣racies lye and lurk closely at home in our owne bosomes. Foris they prepare; intus they conspire, and all to giue a deadly blowe to the state we liue in; and to the person, whom (next vnder God) wee liue
by. For I say it againe, and I can∣not say it too often, these preparers abroade, and these conspirers at home, shoote al at one marke: our religion they would alter, & there∣by bring our consciences into thraldome: our gouernment they would change, and thereby bring our bodies into slauerie: and, to effect these the more easily, the life of our sacred Soueraigne they would shorten, and thereby bring all miserie and mischiefe vpon vs. These bee high poynts, and of great cōsequence. For who would not rather dye, than lose the liber∣tie of his conscience? Who would not depart with any thing that hee hath, to preuent the bondage of his bodie? and who would spare the best blood in his bodie (much lesse his purse) to redeeme all dan∣ger from his religious, louing, and
lawfull Soueraigne? I doubt not (deare countrimen) but that you are men of wisedome, and can ea∣sily conceiue what daunger wee stand in, by that hath bin set down before. You are men of iudgemēt, and therefore can easily consider, what furniture is fit for the streng∣thening of vs, to preuent such a danger (knowing treasure to bee the finewes of warre) and you are men religious, louing, and loyall; and therefore will not refuse to straine your purses farre, rather than the religion of our God, the libertie of our Countrie, and the person of our Soueraigne shall be exposed to the desire of Popish I∣dolaters, Spanish tyrannies, and bloody traytors. It is no time for vs now to plead pouertie; the cause requireth libe∣ralitie; and we must bee liberall;
the life of religion, of Queene, and countrie, is at the stake. He that is sicke of a dangerous disease, loo∣keth not into his abilitie what hee can spare; but looketh into the ne∣cessitie of his case, what hee must spare, to worke himselfe recouery. And in this case hee that would spare any cost, al men would hold him a very sauage, and vnnaturall miser. I hope therfore being faith∣full Christians, loyall subiects, and true hearted Englishmen; the re∣ligion, and trueth of God, the li∣bertie of our countrie, and the sa∣fetie of our Soueraigne is of grea∣ter price with vs, than ten thou∣sande liues; and none of vs will make dainty to spend the last drop of blood in our bodies, to ransome any of these; much lesse therefore will he spare to ransacke the bot∣tome of our purses, to adde strēgth
to preuent the danger. Peny thirst in this case may bring pound pe∣rill: and (to speake plainly) with what cōfort can a religious Eng∣lishman liue; I saye, a religious man: for I speake not of the su∣perstitious Papist, the godlesse A∣theist, nor the schismatical Brow∣nist) when he shall lose the liber∣tie of his conscience? with what ioy shall a man enioy his sub∣stance, when he is brought into bondage and slauerie? and what safetie can there bee to a right Englishman, when Queene Eliza∣beth is in danger? Seeing then they seeke to bring their Popish Idolatrie to vs againe from Rome, wee must seeke to en∣tertaine, and holde fast the religion of Christ Iesus sent to vs from hea∣uen; and seeing they seeke to tye vs againe in the chaines of super∣stitious
Romish bondage, we must seeke to holde fast, and increase the libertie we enioy, in the since∣ritie of Christ his gospell; seeing Rome, and Romanists seeke enui∣ously, and trayterously the ruine, and ouerthrow of our Queene, and countrey; wee must seeke religi∣ously by obedience, and assistance, to vpholde, & maintaine the right, quiet, and prosperitie of both. It is not in vs, or our power, to effect this; but it becommeth vs to shew our forwardnes, and willing∣nes to effect it; our lands, goods, and liuings must not be respected, in regarde of this; all prayer, all prouidence, and all endeuour that can be, is little enough to follow, and finish so holy, and heauenly a worke; and this is our speciall comfort, the Lorde himselfe is on our side, for it is his owne cause,
who is of power sufficiently able to defend vs; who in his mercy is forward, and willing to defend vs: and if wee can call vpon him in faith, and will walke before him in feare, and trembling, he will neuer fayle vs. For The Lord is nigh vn∣to all those, that call vpon him in faith, and veritie. 2. Chro. 15.The same, that Azariah saide vnto Asah, and al Iudah, the same may be saide vnto our Soueraigne, and vnto all England; that the Lord is with her, and with vs, whi∣lest wee bee with him; and if wee seeke him, he will be found of vs; and if we forsake him, he will for∣sake vs. Which being vttered by this Prophet to them, they make speede to turne from their euill waies; they haste hartely to call vp∣on the Lord; both king and people turne; both king and people pray;
and they all ioyne in offering the sa∣crifices allowed, and looked for in those times, and make a couenant to seeke the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soule; and a law is set, that whosoe∣uer will not seeke the Lord of Israel, shal be slaine, whether he were small or great, man or woman; and they take a solemne oth to performe this to the Lord with a lowd voyce, with showting, with trumpets, and with cornets: and it is sayd in the text fol∣lowing, that all Iudah reioyced at the oth. For they had sworne to the Lord with all their heart, and sought him with a whole desire. The blessing also that followed this harkening to the Prophet, (bringing foorth so reli∣gious an obedience to his words) is set downe. For it is sayd, The Lorde was found of them, and gaue them rest round about. Here is a blessed watch-word
word from the Prophet; a blessed o∣bedience both from king & people; a blessed comfort sent from God; & this happie issue followed; name∣ly, the ouerthrow giuen by Asah to the Ethiopians, who was set vpon by Zerah of Ethiopia with an hoast of ten hundred thousand, & three hun∣dred chariots (as it is recorded in the former chapter) and it is there said, that Asah did goe out before him, and set his battaile; and Asah lift vp his voyce vnto the Lord his God, and sayd,1. Chro. 14.11. O Lord, it is nothing with thee to helpe with many, or with no power: helpe vs, ô Lord our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name are we come against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not man preuaile a∣gainst thee. And the text sayth, that The Lord smote the Egyptians be∣fore Asah, and before Iudah, and the Ethiopians fled.
Here is a liuely paterne of our state and cause. Asah destroyeth Idola∣trie, and banisheth false worship: he is maligned by the Idolatrous Ethi∣opians, who send out forces against him; he prepareth, and setteth out against them; he putteth his whole and onely trust in the Lord; he pray∣eth vnto him; the Lord heareth him; the Lord scattereth his enemies, and giueth him the victorie. Is not this the very cause of our liege and So∣ueraigne? who hath banished Po∣pish Idolatrie, and hath established the true, and sincere worship of God; and for this is maligned by the Anti-christian Pope, by the ambitious King of Spayne, and by al the popish confederates of Christendome. And did not Spayne man out a huge Na∣uie by sea vpon England, as the Ethi∣opian did send out an armie by land, to set vpon Iudah? They prayed, and
we prayed; the Lord heard them, and the Lord heard vs: the Ethio∣pian armie the Lord of hoasts dis∣comforted, and the Spanish Nauie the Lord of hoasts did disperse and ouerthrow. Vpon this victorie the Prophet Azariah warned Asah, and all Judah; and both king and people hearkened and obeyed: and since our victorie, the Prophets and prea∣chers of our time haue often warned vs; and it becommeth vs to hearken and obey: which if we do, then must we make the like couenant with our God that they did; ioyne in the like oth that they did, and ioy when wee haue done it, as they did. Then shall the same blessing bee promised and performed vnto vs, that was vnto them; The Lord will be found of vs, and will giue vs rest round about vs. And if the Lord for his owne glorie, and our triall, giue a way to Rome
and Spayne, to set vpon vs againe (as they bragge, and threaten that they will) let vs beleeue with Asah, that the Lord is of power sufficient to o∣uerthrowe great and huge armies with a smal number; and let vs pray to him with Asah, that he will stand with vs, and for vs, in the day of bat∣taile; and then, no doubt, neither Spayne, Pope, nor Diuell shall haue power to preuaile against vs. I finde it recorded, that King Hen∣rie the 8. her Maiesties most noble father, in the 19. yeare of his raigne, (before the Lorde had touched the eyes of his heart, and pulled away the scales that darkened his spirituall sight) shewed such zeale to that su∣perstitious religion of Rome, which in the time of his blindnes he profes∣sed, that vpon warre threatned, and pursued by the Emperour against Rome, for the sacking thereof, he suf∣fered
the Cardinall to inioyne his whole land and kingdome, that so∣lemne Processions, and fasts should bee solemnelie helde (after their blind maner) for the deliuerance of Rome from his ruine intended to∣wards it; in so much as this one Ar∣ticle specially is added to their Le∣tanie, Sancta Maria, &c. ora pro Clemente Papa. Verily I could wish that not onely commandements, and examples Canonicall out of the book of God, (whereof we haue plentie) should of conscience moue vs to such holy ex∣ercises in these times, because our sins haue prouoked the iudgement of God; but also that this zeale with∣out knowledge in a false religion, should euen for shame incite, and stir vs vp with seruent zeale to seeke the glorie of our God; and by such godly religious necessarie exercises
to humble our selues before ye throne of his maiestie, to beg either release of these troubles threatned against vs, and hastening vpon vs; or his arme of assistance to defend vs from the furie, and deliuer vs from the danger. For if they could be drawne in a superstitious blinde zeale, to fall to their superstitious praiers for a priest; I see not how, with a good consci∣ence, we can be slacke to fall to reli∣gious and harty prayers to our God, for our Christian religious Prince. If they could be so forward in England to fall to prayers for an Italian stran∣ger; much more ought wee in Eng∣land for our naturally borne Soue∣raigne. If they were so readie to pray to God for him, to whom they could not subiect themselues, and conti∣nue in a true, and holie obedience to their God; much more should wee
haste to runne to powre forth our prayers to the Almightie for her, to whom wee ought to performe all o∣bedience; vnlesse we will shew our selues to rebell, and wage warre a∣gainst God himselfe. I will enlarge this no further, but leaue it to ye religious care of such as carrie the chief place in our Church, who (I doubt not) will play Azarias part in warning our Asah; and I as∣sure my selfe, our Asah will hearken to it, and her whole people will fol∣low with willing and most ioyfull hearts: which God grant, that so this extraordinarie attempt threatned, may haue such extraordinarie exer∣cises of fasting and prayer, as were (with the fruite of a blessed successe) vsed in the yeare 1588. when the Spanyards last attempted inuasion; and those not formall, but zealous; euen such as may instruct the con∣science,
to humble the heart, to ac∣knowledge the sinnes committed, to meete the Lord by repentance; and then no doubt the Lorde will heare vs, and our victorie will fol∣low. God giue vs repentant hearts for our sinnes, carefull and sincere hearts to our Soueraigne, louing hearts to our country, and charitable harts one towardes an other. No doubt then, out religion shal flourish, our Soue∣raigne shall liue long, and our coun∣trie shall euer prosper, maugre the malice, and practises of all Tyrants and Traytors. For this ought wee all to pray; and for this all, that truly feare the Lorde, and sincerely affect his truth, and gospell, will daylie, and hartely pray. But for this the super∣stitious papist hath no will to pray; and the scorning Atheist knoweth not how to pray. From the malice,
and madnes of both these, God al∣mightie deliuer her Maiestie, and this flourishing kingdome; that God, and his truth may be wholly, and only reuerenced, and regarded; and such, as oppose them selues against him, either by corrupting his religi∣on, or flatly denying him, and al reli∣gion, may either by seueritie of lawe be corrected, and reformed, or else by christian iustice be remoued from amōgst Gods people; that our Eng∣lish soyle may not be stayned with blasphemous Papists, or prophane Atheists. Thus hauing aduentured to make this rude collection of a matter most necessarie to be vnderstoode, and thought of, by al true christian harted English-men; I will knit it vp with this earnest request to al my countri∣men, that my endeuour may be ac∣cepted, beause I haue vndertaken it of
loue; that my defects may be borne withall, because my heart carrieth a good meaning; and that the truth of the matters herein cōteyned may re∣ceaue no discredit through my par∣ticular rudenes in the collecting; nor the cause it selfe (requiring a speciall, and great regarde) stand subiect to any disgrace by want of good me∣thode in mee to dispose it. This ob∣tayned, I desire no more, but wish the growing of Gods truth, and religion amongst vs, by mightie increases; the prolonging of our deare Soueraignes dayes with bodily health; and home quiet, and the preseruation of this little Iland of England from Popish ignorance, forraine inuasion, and home treason. God onely can worke this; and to God onely I pray for this; and vnto God alone I commend his owne cause, which is, religion, the safetie of
his annoynted (by whome, as the meane, Religion standeah with vs) and the defence of our Countrie, which, without religion, and her Maiesties safetie, cannot long pro∣sper. August. in Serm. 210. de tempore. Non quisquam tibi potest nocere, si damnato scelere diuinus in te ger∣minauerit cultus. FINIS.
