12929 99853328 18705
The crie of the poore for the death of the Right Honourable Earle of Huntington. To the tune of the Earle of Bedford. O God of thy mercie remember the poore, And grant vs thy blessings thy plenty & store: For dead is Lord Hastinges, the more is our griefe, And now vp to heauen we cry for reliefe. Then waile we, then weepe we, then mourne we ech one. The good Earle of Huntington from vs is gone. To poore and to néedie, to high and to low, Lord Hastinges was friendly, all people doth know: His gates were still open the straunger to féede, And comfort the succourles alwaies in néede. Then waile we, &c. The husbandles Widdow he euer did cherrish, And Fatherles Infants he likewise would nourish: To weake and to sicke▪ to lame and to blinde, Our good Earle of Huntington euer was kinde. Then waile we, &c. The naked he clothed with garments from cold, And frankely bestowed his siluer and gold: His purse was still open in giuing the poore, That alwaies came flocking to Huntingtons doore. Then waile we, &c. His tennants that daylie repairde to his house, Was fed with his bacon, his beefe and his souse: Their rents were not raised, their fines were but small And manie poore Tennants paide nothing at all. Then waile we, &c. Such Landlordes in England we seldome shall finde, That to their poore Tennants wil beare the like minde, Lord Hastinges therefore is ioyfully crownde, With Angels in heauen where peace doth abound. Then waile we, &c. His wisedome so pleased the Quéene of this land, The sword of true Iustice, she put in his hand: Of Yorke he was President, made by her Grace, Her lawes to maintaine and rule in her place. Then waile we, &c. Such mercifull pittie remainde in his brest, That all men had Iustice, and none were oprest: His Office in vertue, so Godly he spent, That Prince and his countrie, his losse may lament. Then waile we, &c. And likewise Lord Hastings S. Georges true Knight, Did weare the goold garter of England so bright: The gift of a Prince, King Edward first gaue, A Gem for a Souldier and Counceller graue. Then waile we, &c. His coyne was not whorded, to flourish in pride, His Kings and his Iewels, and Chaines to prouide: But gaue it to Souldiers, wounded in warres, That pike and the bullet, hath lamed with fearres. Then waile we, &c. He built vp no Pallace, nor purchaste no Towne, But gaue it to Schollers to get him renowne: As Oxford and Cambridge can rightly declare, How many poore Schollers maintained are there. Then waile we, &c. No groues he inclosed, nor felled no woodes. No pastures he paled to doe himselfe good: To Commons and Countrie, he liude a good friend, And gaue to the néedie what God did him send. Then waile we, &c. He likewise prouided in time of great néede: If England were forced with warres to procéede: Both men and munition, with horses of warre, The proude foes of England, at all times to scarre. Then waile we, &c. Our Quéene and our Countrie, hath cause to complaine, That death in his furie this Noble hath staine: Yet England reioyce we, reioyce without feare, Lord Hastinges hath left a most Noble heire. Then waile we, &c. A thousand poore Widdowes for Huntingtons sake, As manie poore children, their praiers will make: That God may long prosper his heire left behinde, And graunt him old Huntingtons true noble minde. Then waile we, &c. Then pray we for Countrie, for Prince and for Peares, That God may indew them with most happie yeares: Lord blesse vs with vertue, with plentie and peace, And manie more subiects like him to increase. Then waile we, then weepe we, then mourne we ech one, Our good Earle of Huntington from vs is gone. FINIS. Printed at London for VVilliam Blackvvall, and are to be sold at his shoppe nere Guild-Hall gate. 1596.
