13109 99853142 18510
A Declaration and Protestation, published by the King of Nauarre, the L. Prince of Conde, and the L. Duke of Montmorency, concerning the peace concluded with the house of Lorrayn, the Captaines and chiefe aucthors of the league, to the preiudice of the house of Fraunce. Also two Letters written by the sayd King of Nauarre. The one to the Parliament, the other to the Maisters of Sorbonne. More an Epistle written by Philipp de Morney to the French King: Hereunto, for the playner declaration of the innocencie of the sayd Princes, are inserted the Articles agreed vpon betweene the King and the Lordes of Guyze. All faithfully translated out of French, Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas.
The Declaration and Protestation. IT is not vnknowne to all men, and they may soone call to minde in what estate the affaires of this Realme stoode, and of what minde the King was, when the house of Lorrayn vnder the title of a Holy league began to raise Wars against his Ma∣iestie & to trouble the quiet estate of this Realme. For through Gods grace Peace began to take roote in the depth of mens hearts, and thence to expell all hartbur∣ning and mistrust: Iustice vnder the wings thereof gathered strength by the exercie of lawes: Religion on both parts crept into credite in mens consciences, whence the licencious libertie of warres had almost expelled it: Nobilitie grewe into familia∣ritie & gaue ouer partialities and factiōs: The Cōmons after so many mischiefes and calamities, began to enioye the fruites of
their labours, and through such good or∣der as the King had taken, were in possi∣bilitie speedely to bee freed from the pil∣lage and insolencie of the Souldier. To be brief, the miseries and calamities incident to warres grewe into obliuion, and were almost buried vnder the commodities of peace, which was mightily prosecuted and daylie cherished through the Kings wise∣dome, to whom nothing was in such re∣commendation as the continuaunce and establishing of the same. For if on either side there remained any scarre of the aun∣cient miseries, which the peace (that yet had not beene of so long continuaunce or force as the warre) could not cleerely de∣face, the King, who had both noted the mischiefe and founde out the remedie, through that dayly care that he tooke for the affayres of his Realme, was surely en∣tred such a path as would not onely haue ended the calamities of this Realme, but also in short tyme haue restored her to her auncient dignitie, prosperitie, and brightnesse. But this necessarie path that should haue led al things to wealth, quiet, and ease, is now broken vp and disturbed
by the house of Lorrayn, who are vtterly vnpatient and not able to abide the tran∣quilitie and peace of this Realme, as fin∣ding the same repugnant to their purpo∣ses, which they knowe them selues vtterly vnable to compasse by the prosperitie, but rather through the confusion, ruine and subertion of this estate. It is needlesse here to rehearse such their purposes as by the effects are sufficiently discouered: For it may be euidently kno∣wen to all men what the pretences and practises of those of that house haue bene as also what meanes they haue from time to time vsed, especially since the raigne of Francis the second, for the contriuing of their deuises: which, to be brief, do tēd to the extinguishing of the house of Fraunce, and intruding of thē selues into the place thereof. And for the easier atteyning to such their drifts and enterprises, how they haue sought to set deuision in the Realm, to nourish troubles, to weaken the power of the Nobilitie by the losse and shedding of their bloud, to abase vnder sundry pre∣tēces the credite & auctoritie of the Prin∣ces. In the meane time themselues to take
weapon in hand, to gayne partakers, to o∣uerthrowe all that stand in their way, and finally so farre as in them lieth, to encroch the strength and power of this Realm in∣to their own hands. This course haue they euer since the raigne of Frances the secōd taken, still gathering ground by little and litle and employing euery occasion. They layd to the Princes of the bloud that they had practized against the person of the young Prince, and vnder pretence thereof procured the apprehēding and detaining of the chiefe Princes of the bloud, seque∣string the rest from about his Maiestie, & bringing into mislike the most auncient and faithfull officers of the Crowne, yea euen then, had not God preuented them, they had set foote vpon the very throte of this estate. This being most manifest, can not be attributed other then to their am∣bicious practizes: For at that time no Prince in Fraunce openly did professe any other then the Catholicke Romish Relig∣ion, neither was there any such question of controuersie in Religion, which as yet was not much spoken of in this Realme▪ No, the quarrell which the house of Lor∣rayne
then had and yet hath against the house of Fraunce, tended vnder shadow of the King to raigne, vntill fitter oportuni∣tie, the whiles, vnder his auctoritie and by his power to rid their hands of the chiefe Princes of the bloud, who were any stum∣bling blockes in their way, and of the of∣ficers of the Crowne, as those that could not brooke their vsurped auctoritie. Vpon these and such like beginnings we are to iudge of their actions ensuing: ac∣cording to these originalles must we con∣sider of the effectes, that since they haue endeuoured to disguize to the ende di∣uersly to procure them fauour, as soone after they did, & stil they endeuour to do: but the nature of water is neuer better knowne then at the Spring while it is yet pure and vnmingled, as likewise all hu∣maine actions are naturally discerned at their first beginnings, before the inconue∣niences that wee finde haue gathered any sleights, and learned to vse any cloked dis∣simulation. This also was the reason that moued thē, immediatly vpon the decease of King Francis, vnder whose name they ruled, because he had married the Scottish
Queene their niece, finding themselues thereby excluded from all meanes of go∣uernement, to alter their former pretēce: For when they perceyued that the gene∣rall estates lawfully summoned and assem∣bled did call them to accoumpt for their administrations and dealings, they began to cloke their ambition with the vayle of earnest zeale to the Catholick Romish re∣ligion. They, who but fower daies before had put the Germain Princes in such hope of ioyning with them in the confession of Ausbourg, beginning with the murder of many persons of all sortes, ages and kinds at Vassy, did violate the lawes and infringe the peace and publicke tranquilitie of the Realme, for the continuaunce whereof, the said general estates had found it expe∣dient to graunt the exercize of both Reli∣gions, and to the same end had published a solemne edict verefied in all the Courtes of Parliament: which could not bee attri∣buted to force, feare, or other vnlawfull pursuite, but onely to the sole considera∣tion of the benefite & tranquilitie of this estate: With armes during the Kings mi∣noritie they seazed vpon his person toge∣ther
with the Queene his mother, who in wisedome had consented to the sayed edict, and through iust feare of their forces, was compelled (not without manifold reclay∣ming the aide of the Princes of the bloud against their tyrannie) to yeeld and in the ende to auctorize them for her patrons. All this they did to the ende to entangle the Princes youth in mallice, hatred and warres against his owne bloud, therby to weaken the Realme, and to lay it open to their inuasions, & to drawe to themselues both the auctoritie and force, (which in∣deede they brought to passe) so liuing and raigning in and among armes, which, as opportunitie should serue, they might a∣buse to their owne pretences. This foun∣dation did they lay so firme, that for the space of these 25. yeres this Realme hath flowed with ciuill warres, vnder the sup∣port whereof they haue exercized their mallice, satisfied their reuenging affectiōs, and laboured their ambition with the price of the King and his estate, yea, euen with the price (through their accursed & execrable counsayles) of the honour of the French nation, vnto whom are imputed
al the mischiefes and calamities that tho∣rowe the counsayle of this fatall house of Lorrayne hath beene contriued, vntill the King now raigning by his wisedome foūd out that the zeale of Religion by thē pub∣lished as a shield, was but a pretence: that the true spirite of Religion, whereof him selfe hath more apprehension and feeling then they, doth not perswade or counsaile the violation of publick lawes, the breach of oath, or the tainting of a whole estate with bloud and murder: so that he percei∣ued that vndoubtedly it was but a prac∣tise to climbe higher: for the preuenting whereof it was requisite to ende the trou∣bles of his Realme by an equal and indif∣ferent peace conuenient for the present time, referring to God (who only raigneth in the consciences) all operation in the hearts of his subiects, for the reuniting & bringing them all to one Religion. Howbeit this peace being made, not by force, but of the Kings meere motion and free consent, which also in respect thereof he would haue called his peace: this famely could not brooke it, as men that could neuer finde any peace in peace, and ther∣fore
did continually crosse it by al meanes and subtilties possible, yea, they procured their partakers by all kinde of iniuries, violences and wrōgfull attempts to driue the professors of the Religiō into dispaire and impatiencie, & to force them to take armes, whereby the King might iustly lea∣uie warre against them. Againe, on the o∣ther side they sollicited the sayd profes∣sors of Religion to ioyne with them, al∣leadging the benefite of the Common∣wealth, and promising them libertie of re∣ligion vnder whatsoeuer cautions or assu∣rances that they could desire, leauing no deuice or pollicie vnpractised, that might returne this estate into trouble, as kno∣wing that the quiet and peace of the land fighteth against & ouerthroweth all their deuises and purposes. Finally, finding the King more and more resolued to main∣taine peace, and the professors of the Re∣ligion crauing nothing more hartely thē quietnes vnder the benefite of the edicts. Especially my Lord the Duke of Anieowe deceased, and the King without issue, whō by an imagination, which cannot spring but out of desire, they assure themselues
to out lie, and vnto whome, as all men knowe, they haue prescribed and limited but a short time, they resolued to rise in armes and to seaze vpon their Maiesties persons (had they not beene discouered) togither with the most part of the Realm, so to bee the better prouided against the time of their imagined alteration: Also for the drawing of the greater number of partakers to this conspiracie, they haue published sundrie titles and pretences, as true the one as the other, therby to acco∣modate them selues to the diuers mindes and seuerall affections of men, stil cloking their poyson and venome vnder a gorge∣ous title of a counter poyson, the rather to abuse and confirme their adherents. The pretences and titles published are these. The Common wealth: The discharge of the third estate: The reintegration of the Nobilitie in their pristinate dignitie: The ree∣stablishing of the Church in her liberties and priuiledges: The suppression of certaine persons Whom the King hath exalied: The restitution of such as they pretend to haue beene euill en∣ and hardly dealt with: The nominatiō of a Catholick Romish successor to the Crowne,
for the defence of the Romish Church: The ex∣tirpation of heresie and rooting out of those whō they pretend to be heretickes. All these things haue they promised to bring to passe before they cease, and yet how they haue accomplished it, I leaue to all mens consideration. The true cause yet remaineth vnspoken of, & is the same that only hath already produced some effects. Viz. To be armed to the end to prescribe lawes to the King vnder colour of rooting out of He∣retikes: and to make away the chiefe Princes of the blood, and such as are their principall stum∣blingblockes: that is, those that professe the re∣ligion wherein they were borne and bread vp, so the easelier to attaine to the rest, and this hath the King very well marked, euen from the beginning of their broyles hetherto: For in sundry his Letters to the King of Na∣uarre he hath confessed, that he knoweth well enough that this their zeale of Reli∣gion is but a pretence: & that their drifts do tend against his own person, his house, and estate. And in the meane time, because vnder this pretence they had abused many of his subiects, he requireth the said king of Na∣uarre
to haue pacience, vntil he might eui∣dently discipher the colors from the cau∣ses, and the pretences from the purposes, assuring him that hee findeth the enter∣prise directly against him selfe, and so the offence to appertaine properly vnto him. Moreouer, vpon the same iudgement and foresight his Maiestie hath by his expresse Letters, commaunded al gouernours and Lieutenants generall, in their Prouinces and perticuler chardges, to assaile their troopes, and hath proclaimed and decla∣red them Rebels, Traytors, perturbers of cōmon peace, and enemies to the Estate: Vpon the verfication of these his Maie∣sties commaundements in all the Courts of Parliament, there haue ensued many decrees, yea some haue bene executed, be∣sides that the like messages haue bin sent to all Princes allied and confederat to the Crowne, with expresse commaundement to his Maiesties Embassadours, to direct their speeches conformably thereunto, Viz. That his Maiestie findeth by the ef∣fectes as well past as present, and vnder∣standeth by the demeanurs and testimo∣nies aforesayde, that the insurrection of
those of this house, notwithstāding what∣soeuer their pretences, is one of the fruits of their first attempts, that is, of their con∣spiracie to roote out the house of France, whereof none neede to plead ignoraunce that list but to looke backe vnto, and call to minde their behauiours these 25. yeres and more, and at once to consider well of the same. At the same time also that his Maiestie proclaymed them Rebels, he reuiued the publication of his Edict of pacification throughout all partes of his Realme, as a testimony to al, but chiefly to those of the Religion, that hee in no wise ment to en∣cline to the demaunds of these men, but did rather condemne them, for that they sought to abolish the sayde Religion by force of armes, his Maiestie knowing that to be no meet or lawfull meane, as also by sundry letters he assured the King of Na∣uarre that he would do nothing preiudici∣all either to the sayed Edict or him, whose cause he acknowledged to be his owne. All the premisses notwithstanding, it so fell out, that vpon a sudden a peace was concluded with those of this famely and
league, wherof proceeded an Edict, wher∣by the former Edict of pacification, so de∣liberatly confirmed, & so solemnly sworne vnto by their Maiesties: the Princes of his blood: all the Courtes of Parliament: and the chiefe Lords & officers of the crowne, which also had bene so freshly reiterated and again confirmed, was now vtterly re∣uoked, all exercise of religion vnder paine of death prohibited: all professors there∣of condemned within the tearme of sixe months to depart the realme: the townes for assurance, which likewise of his owne accord, and for diuers considerations con¦cerning the welth and quiet of his estate, he had proroged to those of the said reli∣gion, they should now speedely habādon, to the ende to buy peace at the hands of the sayed Rebels & traitors, so proclaymed and acknowledged by his Maiestie, with the hinderance of his neerest kinsemen: and, which is worse, the weapons commit∣ted to the hands of those men, to the end to put the same in execution, a matter vt∣terly repugnant to all lawes, which doe meerly forbid the execution of any de∣cree to be committed to the aduerse par∣tie,
nay more, that he shal not assist there∣at, notwithstanding it were to maintaine the execution of Iustice. Hereupon therefore doth the King of Nauarre desire all good Frenche men in France to consider what cause he hath, to to lament. In their publike protestations, the conspirators opposed themselues di∣rectly against him, and yet he▪ to the ende to satisfie the Kings minde, and to auoyde all occasion of the peoples oppression, re∣mained peaceable, and neuer would arme himselfe, although he see them in armes round about him. He see the Kings mind enclined to peace, and that euil and ruine which they openly procured him, might haue mooued him by all meanes to crosse them▪ & yet for the benefite of the realme he offered to the king some entrie to qui∣etnesse by the declaration which expresse∣ly he published, yea such as he trusteth all Christiandome will allowe of, and the ve∣riest barbarous nation would haue ac∣eapted of. They spake of the rooting out of here∣sie, and the Christian authors fought a∣gainst it with generall Counsels: he sub∣mitted
himselfe to a counsayle, and decla∣red himselfe to be ready to be enstructed therby and to yeeld thereto. They craued reformation and alteration in some mat∣ters of estate: such controuersies and dif∣ferents are by the auncient statutes of the land to bee determined by the generall e∣states, to the assembly whereof, whensoe∣uer it should please the King to summon them, hee offered to referre, and submit himselfe. They requested that the King of Nauarre and the professors of the Reli∣gion should immediatly habandon and depart the Townes of assurance, notwith∣standing the Kings prorogation of the tenour of the same to them graunted: for the eschuing of al mistrust he offered with∣out delay to yeeld thē, yea, which is more, to dispossesse himselfe and to render into the Kings handes, both he and the Lorde Prince of Conde, al gouernments that they holde within this Realme, conditionally, that the others might doe the like, not∣withstanding such inequalitie as all men may easely perceiue: for it is not meete to make straungers equall with the houshold children. Moreouer, if there were any fur∣ther
controuersie, the decision whereof might touch or any way concerne him, for the exempting of the King (whose person would be too deare a price to this Realm) from all daunger and care therof, the sayd King of Nauarre besought his Maiestie not to mislike the determining of any such quarrell, either by his power against theirs, either els, for the preuenting of publicke calamitie, by his person against the Duke of Guyze, or by more to more, as he should think good, within the realm or without, in whatsoeuer place of free accesse: adding moreouer that if his Ma∣iestie could conceiue any more conueniēt remedie for the pacifying of the estate of the Realme, the sayed King of Nauarre woulde gladly yeelde thereto and not to spare his life therein, most humbly withal beseeching his Maiestie so farre to honor him as to let him vnderstande the same. Howbeit, nothing respecting all these his so reasonable offers, thei haue in the mean time proceeded to a treaty of peace, to the great preiudice of the estate and house of Fraunce, yea, of the King himselfe. A peace, to speake indifferently, vnwoorthy
any such title, as beeing to bee rather ac∣compted a summons of warre, yea, & vn∣lesse God of his great mercie doe preuent it, such a warre as will be an entry into the ruine and subuertion of the whole estate. A peace made with straūgers for the roo∣ting out of the home borne childrē: with Traytors for the spoyle of the obedient Subiects: with conspirators, to the end to commit to their hands the sworde against himselfe, to abuse at their pleasures. A peace that hath not so much as the tast of any thing appertayning to peace; A black peace▪ A wofull and funerall peace, and of an vnfortunate aspect: A peace which the King signed not but with a quaking and shiuering hand: A peace whereto the Prin∣ces of his bloud and Peers of this Realm, yea, the most Catholicke, haue refused to sweare, as being the decree of their deaths and the small ouerthrowe of the estate, which moreouer procureth no comforte either to the Countrey or Townes, but hath filled all the good Frenchmen of this Realme with horror, and reioyced onely those that nourish them selues and feede vpō their deaths. A peace to say the troth,
which the sayd Lord King of Nauarre ac∣knowledgeth not to be imputed vnto the King, a courteous and iust Prince, from whose nature the same is too odious, nei∣ther to the Queene his mother, who in al her indeuours haue sought no other but the tranquilitie of the Realme: but partly to the dastardlinesse of some of the Kings Counsayle, and partly to the trecherie of other some, who are either seruants or of kindred and alliaunce with those of this league, who also, as it is sufficiently kno∣wen, in the beginning lessened and demi∣nished the mischiefe, propounding it vnto him to be easely appeased, least he should haue prouided remedies necessary there against. But afterward euen at once when they see the power of the league waxe great, did so enlarge it to his view that he was easely perswaded that himselfe might soone be by them oppressed if speedily he satisfied not their mindes: and for such persons it is well knowne that a number of them which vnder colour of her seruice accompanied the Queene, did aduertise those of the league of her chiefe secretes: some hld their conuenticles so soone as
they came foorth of his Chamber, what counsayle they shoulde giue him: other some to the end to astonish him, disciphe∣red vnto him such armies to the succours of the league, as neuer appeared, nor had any other substance then ayre. These were the counsailes whereby the King was tur∣ned from vsing his neerest kindred, who would not haue spared the shedding of their bloud for his quiet, and who had both will and oportunitie, and now for recompence are sold to the straunger, and so farre as may be, payment is made with their bloud and liues. Vpon these coun∣sayles hath hee refused the offers of his princely Neighbours, the loyall confede∣rates of the Crowne, while by meanes of the league the Spanish coyne trotted tho∣rowe out Fraunce, and found entrie into the Townes, into the Counsayle, yea, into the priuiest parte thereof. Finally, and all men knowe it, the King was deluded by those to whom be had as great occasion to commit himselfe, if benefites receiued might amend mens mindes. And the sayd Lorde King of Nauarre fully assureth him selfe that though by their  and
violence they haue bene able to arme his armes against him, yet at the least his sobbes, sighes, desires and vowes shal fight in his quarrell, which he hath well founde & cannot possibly forget to be his owne. The said Lord King of Nauarre hopeth that the most parte of men of iudgement in this Realm, especially such as haue had neerest familiaritie with their actions or beene intangled therein, haue beene able to enter into consideration of the depth of the entents of those of the league, and therefore he wil so farre assure himselfe of thē, that they will not so blemish their ho∣nors as to beare armes against the house of Fraunce, vnder the shadow of this edict, as also they should proceede too farre a∣gainst their own knowledge if they should but thinke to haue taken them vnder the said pretences, yea, were it for the assurāce of their Religion. Those of this league alleadged diuers pretences, as they dealt in one so it is like they doe and will doe in the rest. Of this Common wealth whereof they made so great boast and which had pro∣uoked sundry, euen of the Nobilitie, such
as were farthest from ambition, and least partakers of the corruptiō of these times, in this edict there is no worde of it, euen the first day thereof they gaue it ouer. Concerning the discharge of the third estate which they promised, in this treatie there is no mention thereof, but contra∣riwise by this peace it hath begun to bee surcharged and more and more brought into ruyne. For, where in their declara∣tions they promised that their Souldiers should liue in order and pay all men, it is well knowne that during all the troubles of this Realme there haue beene none more vnruly or disordered in all sortes, as likewise that which they protested that they would not attempt against the kings Townes, or therein place any Garrison without the consent or liking of the In∣habitants, hath beene no whit better ob∣serued by such as haue seazed vpon the same. For in some by force, in others that voluntarily receiued them, vnder colour of good meaning they haue built Cita∣delles and brought in Garrisons. The Nobilitie haue had no better a∣mends: for in this treaty whom haue they
prouided for but themselues, or those of their house? either whom haue they resto∣red to the dignities wherof they preten∣ded them to be vnworthely depriued? To bee briefe, all their doings haue stretched only to the parting & deuiding of France to those of their famely according to their platforme layd for the atchieuing thereof in time to come, causing by this peace the gouernement of sundry Townes of im∣portaunce and Prouinces both vpon the frontiers and in the hart of the Realme to bee committed to them, wherevpon the Nobilitie of this Realme is to consider what aduauncement they maye expect at their hands when 24. Princes of Lorrayne must be contented and satisfied before a∣ny of them may by their meanes attaine to any dignitie. As for the due promotions vnto Eccle∣siastical functions and dignities, they haue in this Edict had no more respect (wit∣nesse the Bishoprick of Authum, wherun∣to the D. of Mayne hath by force pro∣moted his Sonne in Law) then to the pre∣rogatiues, franchizes and liberties therof, notwithstanding, that seeking to take a
pretence for Religion, the same shoulde haue bene a principall article and of grea∣test recommendation. But contrariwise, entring into information of their liues, it will bee found that they haue ransomed the Priests & clergie, prophaned the Mo∣nasteries, embeseled the Chalices & Cros∣ses, with all other the Churche goods, all haue bene to them Wars, euen in making their peace. To the ende to be paide their expences, folowing the steppes of the late Cardinal of Lorrayn their vnkle, they haue propounded and extorted a promesse to alienate Rentes to the value of 100000. Crownes, and to procure the Popes con∣sent thereto. Prouided alwayes, that the said coyne may be employed in the reem∣bursing of them: Besides it is euidēt to all mē that in any matter touching the three Estates, without instance or pursuit they discharged themselues at the beginning of the Parley of this peace. Touching the great fauour about the King, whereof they complaine of some gentlemen whome they tearme in their Declaration (The bloodsuckers of the people) whom also they say they wil abase and re∣duce
into order, it is most manifest that they haue most vildly in all sortes sought their amitie, that they haue gone about to buy the same by remitting into their hands the townes of their gouernments, which by Warres they had seased vpon & takē away: but to their great shame those men haue taught them the path to Gene∣rositie and courage, by giuing them to vn∣derstand that they regarded not their a∣mitie further then the commodity of this Realme did require. With the Cardinall of Bourbon, whome they had brought into the field vpon pro∣messe of procuring him that right which they perswaded him he might pretend to the Crowne, they haue played the same partes according to their vsuall maner, which is to drawe euery mans interest into their owne particular profite: For hauyng hym once entangled among them, they made so smale accompt of his imagined right, that comming to parley with the Queene, they were euen ashamed to open their mouthes therein: But in cace there were any greeuous question, or any difficult or thorny point, they vsed
him as an instrument. It was my Lord the Cordinall that motioned it, and so reserued them selues stil to mollefie matters, to ap∣pease parties, and to wrest all the thanks and profit of the treatie vnto themselues. In the meane time one principal point, whereupon they layde the foundation of the Catholique Romish Religion, was to prouide that the King should name a suc∣cessor that professed the same, and vnder that pretence (as also vnder the former cōcerning the comon wealth) they drew to their faction many of the Nobilitie, which thought they had bene in earnest, but their pretence was onely to atchieue that point which by this peace they haue obtayned, which was the same onely that they were so earnest for, viz. to sease vpon the Frontiers and Kayes of the Realme, which had bene kept, euen from the late Monsier, also vnder shadowe of Religion to haue weapon in hand, so to become ar∣bitrators of the counsayles▪ to prescribe Lawes to the king during his life: to make away the Princes of his blood, and loyall seruants of the house of France, and after his decease, which they imagine to bee at
hand, violētly to vsurpe this poore estate. To thinke they either can, or doe sup∣pose them selues able to compasse the rooting out of Religion, the proofe that for these 25. yeeres or more they haue made is quite repugnaunt thereto. Our Kings haue not spared them selues either by pollicies of peace or rigors of Warres. The authors of this league haue employ∣ed both force and craft. The name League hath nothing encreased their meanes: hath not bred vp any new souldiers in the Realme, neither hath made them greater Captaines then afore they were, still it is Fraunce part whereof, yea the best part wil not helpe to spoyle and destroy Fraunce. It is euen the house of Fraunce which the house of Lorrayn doth assayle, for their pretences are sufficiently reuealed to all men. This it is that will strengthē the K. of Nauarre with the auncient officers of the Crowne, with the Princes of the blood. with the wishes of the King, with ye sighes and sobbes of all good Frenchmen with∣out respect of Religion, and so much di∣minish & weaken the enemy. Besides that it is no longer to any purpose herein, as
against the ould Albigeois, to imagine the publication of a croysade, for there is not one Towne of France that consenteth to this partie. There is no member, no part of the body, no there is not scarce any one synew but complaineth hereof. Nei∣ther is it Fraunce onely that hath prose∣cuted this reformation in Religion, but it hath bene a cōmon motion in all Estates and nations of our Europe: Hole king∣domes haue sequestred them selues from the Pope. Empires haue bene more then halfe touched, scarce is there any estate, but haue stirred herein (as all men know and doe graunt) and feeling it can plainly find out and eschue their owne ruine by that of their neighbours. On the other side, there is no Prince in Europe of whatsoeuer Religion, but thin∣keth it straunge to pretend the excluding of a Prince without audience or teaching, no other trespasse against the lawes of the Countrey committed, from an estate or succession vnto him due. But in Histories it is euident, what the effects of an ambi∣cious or enuious passion can compasse, e∣uen vpon the least occasion to the vrging
of an heresie, as for example. Philipp the fayre was denounced an heretick for that he would not hold this Realm in homage of the Pope, and so was cut off from the Church: but such Popes both before and since as haue pretended more modestie, and were not led by the like passion haue held an other opinion and otherwise de∣cided it. A counsayle must order all, and who so eschueth a counsaile, eschueth the light, and refuseth reason, as shewing him∣selfe to seeke darknesse, and to vse the title of Religion in vaine. In the meane time, such is the mischief, the King our Soueraigne, partly through the violence and conspiracie of his ene∣mies, and partly by the mallice and collu∣sion of some of his Counsailors hath bene forced and brought to conclude a peace, whereof vndoubtedly, without speedy re∣medie, will ensue his owne ouerthrowe, the destruction of the house of Fraunce and the subuertion of this estate. Where∣fore the King of Nauarre, as first Prince of the bloud & chiefe Peere of this Realme, the Lorde Prince of Conde his Cousine a Prince and Peere of Fraunce, and the Lord
Duke of Montmorency a Peere of Fraunce and the chiefe Officer of the Crowne, to∣gether with the Lordes, Knights, Gentle∣men, Prouinces, Townes and Communal∣ties as well of the one as of the other Re∣ligion, vnited for the preseruation of this estate, doe protest and declare as ensueth. First that their entent neither is, neither euer was other then to see the King well serued and duetifully obeyed of all men, euery one in his place according to his calling and estate, and themselues to be∣come an example to all, which was to bee seene in these late dealings. Namely, that their desire tēdeth only to see the Realme peaceable and quiet, as it was in a good forwardnesse at the beginning of these broyles, and to the same end haue withall their heartes endeuoured them selues a∣gainst such as sought to molest the pro∣speritie of the King and Estate, and to the like entent will willingly employ whatso∣euer they are able in life or goods. Also because heretofore there haue bin sundry meanes propounded vnto the King, whether for deciding the contro∣uersies in Religion, or of the Estate, which
his enemies vsed for a pretence, either for ending such quarrelles as particulerly they pretended against the Princes of Fraunce, among whome the King of Na∣uarre hath the peeminence: the sayd King of Nauarre, doth most humbly desire his Maiestie to call to minde the aforesaid of∣fers conteyned in his declaration, bearing date the 10. of Iune 1585. which he sent to his Maiestie, writtē and signed with his owne hand. Also if himselfe haue concei∣ued, or there be to him any other motion made for the contentation of his Maiestie and the wealth of the Realme, the sayde Lord King of Nauarre would craue to vn∣derstand thereof and accompteth himself happy, in cace it bee such as before God and man hee may accommodate himselfe vnto. But perticulerly, because these of the league, to the ende to finde opportunitie presently to assault him, haue for their ar∣gument thought good to require the de∣liuerie of the Townes of assuraunce, and vpon refusall thereof, with open force to set vpon him, hee doth most humbly be∣seech his Maiestie to remember that in
December last, Anno 1584. it peased him during the full peace voluntarily to graūt the prorogation therūof at the humble pe∣titions to him made in the behalfe of his subiects: that then he so thought it most conuenient for the peace of the Realme▪ that since by meere force of armes and v∣pon lesse occasiō he hath graūted greater and more Townes to those of the league, who rise against his person, against his house and against his estate, as being con∣tent not onely to leaue to them such as they haue seazed vpō, but also hath giuen them others, yea more then in two yeeres Wars with prosperous successe they could haue gotten: wherevpon the sayde Lorde King of Nauarre, as also al other the good subiects and seruaunts of this estate haue occasion to desire the King to graunt thē new assurāces against those of the league, and that the rather because those men haue in their hands the chiefe frontiers as well on the Sea coasts as on the lād, wher∣by to draw the straunger into the Realm. All which notwithstanding, the sayd Lord King of Nauarre once againe offereth to dispossesse himselfe of the sayd Townes of
assuraunce vnto him by his Maiesties free consent proroged, conditionally that the sayd house of Lorrayne and other their ad∣herents of the league doe likewise effectu∣ally departe from those that they holde: That all weapons may be layd aside: That the straungers bee returned, and themsel∣ues withdrawne into their owne houses. That if notwithstanding so reasonable offers any forces do march against the K. of Nauarre, the Lord Prince of Conde, and the Lord Duke of Montmorency, or any of them or their adherents, they do most hūbly require his Maiestie not to mislike that they follow the counsaile both of na∣ture and necessitie, which do teach to re∣pell force by force, either that they em∣ploy whatsoeuer their frends or meanes therein, and the rather because now they are not to fight in Guyen for Guyen, in Languedock for Languedock, in Daulphine, Prouince and other places for the estate of the sayd Lo. K. of Nauarre, the Lo▪ Prince, or the Lord Duke of Montmorency, but vndoubtedly for the Estate and libertie of the King hymselfe, with the Queene his Mother: for the preseruatiō of the lawes,
and for the defence of the Estate, as also they are assured (which encreaseth their courage) that though the enemy hath proceeded so farre as to seaze vppon his Maiesties Weapons, yet he hath kept and reserued his harte for them. They pray the Queene the Kings Mo∣ther, to call againe to mynd how those of that famely entreated her, when vnder K. Frances the second her Sonne, they ruled all, as also what from time to time she no∣ted in them, touching the driftes of their ambition. Euen she, who was the first that to the Kings her children displayed them for such as they are. But chiefly that shee, who hath wonne to her selfe the name of Mother of the Realme, would not now leaue an opinion in the hearts of the posteritie of the leading of the same to ruine, by de∣liuering it into the handes of straungers, by enfringing the publicke peace for the contēting of the particuler desires of the publicke enemie, and forcing her nearest and most obediēt subiects to encurre the paine due to the Rebelles and perturbers of the estate: Whereas at the least there might be some generall peace concluded
vpon, if in her wisedome she iudgeth it ex∣pedient for the peace of this estate to a∣bolish and pardon their offences. The said Lo. K. of Nauarre, Lord Prince of Conde, and Lord Duke of Montmorency, do adiure the Lords Princes of the blood, earnestly to cōsider that the same impor∣teth their house and blood: The Peeres & principall officers of this Realme, that it cōcerneth the oth and duetie which they haue taken and owe to the Crowne: All Parliaments, that it toucheth the founda∣mental lawes of this estate whereof them selues are the preseruers and guardians. Generally, all estates and degrees of this Realme that it tendeth to the subuertion and confusion of their famelies: For who can euer assure himselfe of a particuler quiet in a publicke vprore, of a calme in a tempestious Sea, of a certaine estate in an alteration of all estates, or of a priuate as∣suraunce in an vniuersall spoyle. Also all Princes and estates our neighbours being likewise in league and alliaunce with this estate to assist them in their vndertaken defence, and not to suffer such a conspira∣cie to take effect, in respect of the conse∣quence
wherinto it might draw all estates Christian. They do declare before God who seeth their hearts and before men whom they chose Iudges of their actions, that they doe bewaile the Kings estate, who abroad is besieged and at home entangled by and in the practises of his enemies: that their weapons are vowed onely to his libertie and seruice, and would to GOD he had, vouchsafed to haue employed their affec∣tions, for so could they soone haue deliue∣red him out of all these perplexities. Concerning Religion, the sayd Lordes King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, doe from their hearts and on their faith and honor declare that they entende not any way to molest the Catholicks or preiudice their Religion which they doe professe, as being alwaies of opinion that the consci∣ence ought to be free, and as concerning their owne that they are readie to submit themselues to a Counsayle. That they doe accept of all good and true Frenchmen, both temporall and spirituall, and of al without acception or exeption of Religion: equally taking into their pro∣tection
and safegarde, them, their consci∣ences, honors and dignities, their goods, liues and famelies, to the ende, so farre as in them shall lye, to warrant and defende them against all oppression and violence. They doe exhort each one particulerly according to his habilitie and calling, in token what they are, to draw to them, to succour and assist thē against those of this league, whom the King hath opēly decla∣red attēpters against his person, Crowne and estate. To the ende also to take from them all doubt and mistrust, the Lorde Duke of Montmorency, whose Religion was neuer mistrusted, & whose wisedome as sufficiently knowne to bee such as can well finde the entents of the sayd Lordes King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, shall bee their loadesman and serue them as a guyde. Hee being a Peere of Fraunce and chief officer of the Crowne, to whom be∣longeth the first place in leading of the armies. Besides, that through Gods grace they haue already the assistance and com∣panie of a good number of Catholicke Lordes, Knights, Captaines and Gentle∣men, such as haue found out and percei∣ued
their good right, together with the necessitie of their defence. As for the Captaines of the league and those who to the same entent shall sticke vnto them, the sayd Lordes King of Na∣uarre, Prince of Conde, and Duke of Mont∣morency, do declare & acknowledge them to bee enemies to the King, the house of Fraunce, and the weale of this estate, euen such as the King hath alreadie declared them, and as his Courtes of Parliament in the verification of his letters haue aduou∣ched them. Also according to the tenour and contents of the sayd letters, together with the Kings commaundements there∣in conteyned, they will with their whole power prosecute warre against thē and by all meanes procure the rooting of them out. Howbeit, for asmuch as diuers there are that by the pretences of the league maye haue been deceiued and abused, so many of them as shall within the space of this present yere departe therefro and with∣drawe them selues to them, or into their owne, they will admit & receiue into their protection and safegarde as before, mea∣ning
that conformably to his Maiesties former ordenances they shal in no wise be molested or called into question for ha∣uing beene seduced by the perswasions of those of the league aforesayd. The sayd Lords King of Nauarre, Prince of Conde, and Duke of Montmorency, doe desire al those that shoote not at the same mark with the leaguers which thei should sufficiently know, and yet doe remaine in their holdes, armies or troopes, to with∣drawe and get thence so soone as conue∣niently they may, least to their great grief they should not be able to discerne them from the rest, for that they intend not to make such partakers of the like payne as are not comprehended in the same crime. Further, in asmuch as the sayde Lorde King of Nauarre, Lord Prince of Conde, & Lord Duke of Montmorency, do sufficient∣ly acknowledge all Warre to bee one of Gods scourges, but especially domesticall Warre, wherein the poore innocent peo∣ple are in greatest daunger, whose calami∣ties and miseries they doe euen alreadie bewayle, they doe withall their hearts be∣seech the almightie to open his mercifull
prouidence ouer the miserable estate of this Realme and people, to the ende the mischiefes may by some meanes bee tur∣ned awaye, either els preuented through some good peace: that it may also please him to touch the harts and open the eyes of the King and of the Queene his mo∣ther, that they may conceiue the necessa∣rie meanes for the same: also to mollefie the hardnesse & obstinatie & to suppresse the ambition of those of this league, ma∣king them capable of better counsayle, & such as may bee more conuenient to the quiet of this estate. If otherwise, and that their prayers can not auayle or obtaine this successe▪ yet doe they hartely desire e∣uery oue to iudge whether there were e∣uer defence more naturall, more necessa∣rie, or more iust. Also to lay the blame and cast the curse vpon such as haue brought them into this extremitie, and left them no other choyce but either the rooting out of the house of Fraunce together with the subuertion of the estate, or els a law∣full and necessary defence. Consequently, they assure themselues that God wil blesse the right, and bring vpon the authors of
this league, the very ringleaders of our ca∣lamities, that destruction which they pur∣pose against the King, his famelie and e∣state. Giuen at S. Paule of , the 10. of August 1585. Signed Henry. Henry of Bourbon. Montmorency.
A Letter written by the King of NAVARRE to the pre∣sidents and Members of the Court of Parliament for the French King at Paris. MY Masters, of all things paed sence the last broyles, I craue no other iudges then your selues: For you may haue seene howe many wayes the mies of this Estate and myne haue tempted my pacience: neither can you bee ignorant what sway the respect of the King and weale of this Estate haue borne in mee, whereby I haue bene detained in my iust griefe. In the meane time it hath so fallen out (and I am assured your selues do all know what wrong I doe herein susteine) that the ene∣mies of the King and Realme are auctho∣rized and and armed against mee. Where∣on it must necessarily ensue that my pati∣ence and obedience must beare the pen∣nance of their rebellion, and the stranger be rewarded with the goods of the house∣hold seruant, the seruant with those of the home borne child. It is in trueth a matter vnto me very hard, but I haue God for my protector, Fraunce for my iudge, your
selues for my witnesses and my Lorde the King (for I can not doubt thereof) for the allower of my sinceritie. I bewaile the mis∣hap of this estate: But God knoweth in whom the fault is, and can there lay the punishmēt. I moane the calamities of the people: but it is euidēt who, euen of plea∣sure, brake the peace, and how necesarily I am forced to take heed to my selfe. It is in vaine to report to you what conditions I haue propounded, you haue seene them and can tell whether they deserue to bee looked vpon. I haue therefore no more to say, but to require you, euen by the oath that you owe vnto Fraunce, with your au∣thoritie to withstand the cōspiracie which you see doth tend to the subuersion ther∣of, or at the least assist not with your au∣thoritie so pernitious a practise: euen with your vowes fauour those that purpose to employ their liues for the preuenting of such misery and ouerthrow of this Estate. I desire and craue no more of you, but the iudgement of your owne consciences. If my cause bee iust, I desire you to allowe thereof, if wrongfull, determine my ma∣ers what you shal think in duetie for the
weale of this estate. God I take to witnesse that I am and haue beene faithfull to the King: that I loue Fraunce: that I honour such verteous persons as doe defend it, & that I bewayle the miserie and calamitie which I see ready to take hould of all E∣states. I beseech him to assist you with his grace, you whome alwayes I haue accom∣pted the Pillars of this Realme, to the end that in these broyles you may (as many tymes heretofore) reape the commenda∣tion of the susteyning and vnderpropping of the body of this estate: and I trust that he will giue me grace so to serue the King my Lord, also to bee so well serued of all good French men, louers of his Crowne, that shortly I may present to his view the end of his enemies and quiet of his Sub∣iectes, for the compassing whereof I will not spare either my bloud or life Where∣vpon my masters I ende, praying God to haue you in his holy grace & protection. From Mont de Marsan this 11. of October. 1585. Your most affectionate and assured frend. Henry.
A Letter from the King of Nauarre to the Masters of the Facultie of Deuinitie in the Colledge of Sorbonne. MY Maisters, vnto you I haue re∣course for matters now in questiō, as vnto those whose particuler pro¦fession tēdeth to prouide that the Church encurre or suffer no detriment. You haue considered these late broyles of those of the house of Guyze founded vpon many and very diuers pretences, but finally re∣duced and al formed into one: namely, to restore the Catholick Church to her per∣fection, and to that ende, to roote out me and all other whom they pretende to bee heretickes: To which purpose, such hath beene their force and violence, there haue ensued an edict almost to their mindes. Now I will not doubt but through your wisedomes you doe knowe that they pur∣pose an other matter then they speake of. That is, vnder the shadowe of Religion to haue weapon in hande wherewith to op∣presse the chiefe of the house of Fraunce▪ and so to prepare the way to the vsurping
of this estate. But I pray you euen in these matters of Religion iudge whether they or I haue opened the better waye to reu∣nite the Church and to take awaye the scisme which so long haue troubled vs. I haue bene brought vp in a Religion which I think holy and true, neither need there any testimonie whether in hart I do professe the same. For otherwise I could haue eschued so many mischiefes as I haue beene forced to suffer, wherein naturally man can cōceiue no great delight I could otherwise also haue purchased the Kings fauour, and loue of his people, which next after Gods fauour I accompt most profi∣table and requisite for me. The case being such, it is ouer hard and so I suppose your selues will thinke, to desire that without any other forme or order I should forsake my Religion & force both my conscience and soule: yea, if I should bee so wretched as in such sort to offend, your selues might iustly mistrust me in all other matters. Me that shoulde sayle in that which in the iudgement of my owne soule I thinke to be my duetie to God, a matter that reaso∣nably none can require at my hands. This
is it that as I thinke I haue voluntarily of∣fered and which daylie I doe still offer: Namely, to bee instructed in a free & law∣full Counsell, wherein the controuersies of religion may be thorowly dobated and decided, & so to yeeld to whatsoeuer shall be determined. A way, as your selues are not ignorant, at all times practised in the Church in like cases, and that by the wi∣sest Kings and Emperours in the world: A way, whereunto you my Maisters haue often counsayled the Kings predecessors, and whereby you haue alwaies bene able to maintaine the priuiledges and rightes of the French Church against many vsur∣pations: To bee briefe, such a waye as the Church in her greatest force neuer refu∣sed for reducing into her bosome euen meane persons, yea, sometimes one man onely. And therfore much lesse ought she now to reiect or flee from the same, now I say, when it standeth vpon millions of sou∣les, vpon whole Tounes and large Prouin∣ces, vpon an infinite number of qualified persons, euen of the chiefe Princes of the blood & neerest to the Crowne, who can not easely bee forced, neither rooted out
without subuertion of the estate, and yet being by reason perswaded to chaunge, may be a cause of firme peace in this land, of a stedfast revniō of ye Catholick church, with the foreiudgement of their persons and of a more happy worlde, not to this Realme only, which were an inestimable gayne, but also to all Christendome and Europe, which necessarily must haue some feeling of the miseries and calamities of so puissant an estate. This my Maisters, is the offer that I haue made to the King my Lord, which now I doe repeate vnto you, and whereof I call you to witnesse among all to whom it may appertaine, to the end it may be manifest both to those that now liue and to the posteritie, that I was not the cause of disquiet in this estate, either any hinderance that the Church was not reduced into her former vnion, peace and tranquilitie. Where as it is obiected against me that I am an hereticke, you are to shewe vnto the world & of you haue I learned it, that there is great difference betwixt heresie and error. That al that hold an heresie are not neuerthelesse heretickes. That here∣tickes
are they who doe proceede either vpon ambition or obstinacie, wherof nei∣ther can haue place in me whom no man euer went about to teach, and whom con∣trariwise they haue by all meanes ende∣uoured to cast of, alleadging no other rea∣son then a strong ambition. Besides that I haue renounced the large path to that greatnesse that by the Catholicke Romish Religion lay open vnto me, and haue ta∣ken the contrary way, viz. the way of per∣secution and contempt, constantly perse∣uering in that which vsually is called and I doe accompt reformed. But admit it were so. It is against error and heresie that the Church calleth Cō∣sailes, and consultations are houlden to cure the diseased, the Surgeon vseth nei∣ther Iron nor fire, but where his plaisters are to weake. It it an euident argument of passion, when they begin conuersion with subuersion, and instruction with de∣struction: With rooting out and Warre, when they should begin with brotherly admonition and gentlenesse. Neither is is enough to alledge the hol∣ding of the Counsaile of Trent, wherein
was condemned the religion which I pro∣fesse, and they tearme Heresie: you all my my Masters doe knowe what maner of Counsaile that was, neither did you euer allowe thereof, yea, there against haue the whole Estate, Cleargie and Parliaments of this Realme often protested. You knowe also that in case it had beene lawfully cal∣led and holden, yet had that bene no pre∣iudice to the summoning of an other. E∣specially sith it concerneth the saluation and reestablishment of such persons and so great an estate. Cōtrariwise, I am giuen to vnderstand that in the generall Coun∣saile holden at Basill, it was ordeined that from ten yere to ten yere there should be a Counsaile holden, to the ende to cut off such errors as might spring in the church. Much more needfull then were it for the rooting out such as alreadie are growne vp. Iudge now therfore my Maisters which of vs is in the right, whether of vs in this case is most to bee respected, either who propoūdeth the meetest remedie for this estate. The straūger craueth that the home borne childe bee cast out vnder colour of
heresie. Euen the straūger who long haue practised to haue his roome. Mee, truely notwithstāding farre vnequall with them, vpon whose behauiours they can take no hold. I neither haue nor doe desire but to haue my cause heard: by a Counsaile to be taught the best way: to doe better if I be better instructed. Which then will you iudge most right, either what neede the whole Realme to bee kindled herewith? For who doubteth whether you will soo∣ner choose, either ciuill Warre or a Coun∣saile? either the subuertion of the one half of this estate by the other, or rather the reunion of both partes of this Realme in∣to one, which vndoubtedly wil be of great consequence to all Christiandome. Now therfore, I doe finally declare vn∣to you that I craue and am ready to yeeld to a Counsaile: that I am readie to hearkē to the Church therein. And therefore can you not accompt me either an Ethnicke or Publicane. I doe moreouer giue you to , that in default of a generall Coun∣salle for the pacifying of matters I do not refuse a nationall, which often hath bene practised in this Realme, yea, and that by
your owne counsaile and consent. But if notwithstanding any these my offers and request, they doe contrary to all order of the Church proceed by banishmēts, mur∣ders, and other rigorous barbarousnesse, I am resolued to oppose my selfe in my iust defence against such horrible banish∣ments and violences. And the curse be v∣pon those that doe trouble this estate vn∣der the false pretence of the Church. You therefore doe I call to witnesse of the rea∣sonable conditions whereto I submit my selfe. Also God for my defender, who is a∣ble to debate my right against my aduer∣sries, and I beseech him my Maisters, to haue you in his holy protection. From Mont de Marsan this 11. of October. 1585. Your affectionate and assured frend. Henry.
An Epistle to the King. SIr, great Captaines, Kings, and Em∣perours in olde time sought to take their surnames of those Countries, that they cōquered. And so came the sur∣names of African, Asian. &c. Your prede∣cessors, who wanted no conquestes wher∣by to bee famous among the posteritie, chose for them selues and you, and left as an inheritance the surname Most Chri∣stian, therein seeking to declare to al men, that the true honour of man consisteth in being truely Christian, and the very triūph of Princes whom God hath established o∣uer man resteth in the defence and ad∣uancement of Christian religion. Where∣vpon I agree with those that say that your Maiesties scope should tend to revnite the Church, a worke meet for you, a labour incident to your Diademe, yea such a la∣bour as you ought to haue in no lesse ie∣lousie then your estate. But it may be that in the meanes we may somewhat differ, wherein your Maiesties iudgement ouer∣ruling
both you are to choose the most expedient. They propound the restoring of the Church to her perfection by armes: but who can better iudge of the vnprofitable∣nesse of armes in matter of Religion then your Maiestie, who hauing so fortunatly vsed thē against those whom by al meanes they endeuour to ouerthrowe, could ne∣uerthelesse in the end reape no other pro∣fit thereby, then to learne that the happi∣est successe auaileth not against the con∣science. Also that weapons haue no more force ouer the soule, then the Surgeans Raser ouer the mans vnderstanding and affections that guideth it. The remedies ought to haue an▪ Analo∣gie and proportion correspondent to the mischiefes and diseases. Feare naturally o∣uercommeth the body, sound mastereth the eare, and reason ruleth the soule, bnt to vse force against the soule, it worketh as smale effect as reason ouer the eare, or sound ouer the masse of a mans body. Armes therfore are a meanes not to re∣vnite the Church, but to subuert the state of the Realme, not to instruct or conuert,
but to subuert & destroy, and as nothing in this world can breede mischief, but it must also feele part thereof, so the destruc∣tion of the one side will cost the ouer∣throw of the other. The ruine and rooting out of those of the religion (howe easy so euer it be accompted) wil proue to be the confusion and desolation of the whole E∣state. These great Catholickes that haue en∣deuoured to compell you to force your subiects: who with open force haue requi∣red your Maiestie by force to reduce your subiects into the Romish Church, I would fayne learne what they hope for, whether more power, of better successe then your Maiestie? They commaunded ouer your armies, armed with your will, depending vpon your aucthoritie, guyded with your good hap, and fauoured with your owne presence, and your presence I accompt a great parte of the strength of a mightie armie. If your will bee not present, as vn∣doubtedly it can not bee, who seeth not those willes that depend therof very cold and quailing? But especially sith your per∣son can not bee safe among their armies,
who doth not euidently see that the gre body of this armie, how grose or strong soeuer, will shortly shrincke asunder by peecemeale, in that it is not holden toge∣ther with any respect of your Maiestie, or kept in awe with your presence. The child naturally beareth at the fathers handes, and how good soeuer his cause be, is ne∣uerthelesse content to shunne the stripes, to hold his hand before him, or to get out of the way vntill the choller bee ouer. In the seruaunt or straunger, he shall finde as much stomacke and force as may coun∣teruaile all reuerence, yea, sometime in∣dignation wil double: and that is it which naturally is to be expected of a Prince, the first of your blood, whom seruaunts and straungers doe endeuour to exclude out of your famelie with a million of your na∣turall Subiectes, brought vp vnder your wing and vnder the clemencie of your commaundements, whom I say the straū∣gers would make you roote out and driue to seeke forraine Countries. Whereof to be brief, such a dispaire may spring as may teach great indignities and indignations, and so consequently the most extreame
Counsailes that dispayre can conceiue or bring forth. In olde time the lawes condemned in great fines such Carpenters as, to drawe a man to enterprize a building, deceiptful∣ly perswaded him that the charges would be but small, and yet that tended to buil∣ding, the greatest commoditie whereof redounded to the benefite of the Maister of the house, and to the ornament of the Common wealth. What paine then may be sufficient for those who to the ende to stirre vp your Maiestie to the destruction of your Realme, are not ashamed to auow the enterprize to be very easie. An enter∣prize whereof the losse will redounde to you, the miserie to vs, and the benefite to themselues. Let vs therefore here speake of reuni∣ting, not of subuerting. The mischiefes now in question are auncient, and our el∣ders knewe the remedies for the same: which remedies are the safest, so as we shal not neede these practitioners corosiues, that haue replenished all Fraunce with murders, mournings, funeralles and la∣mentations, and yet the disease they crye
out of, and the deuision that they com∣plaine of, is now in worse case then eue before. Dissentions in Religion molested the Primitiue Church, sundry heresies were fostered among the people: yea, euen Em∣perours the defenders the Church were infected with them. The histories of such are plentifull. The Fathers found that he∣resie was an opinion, that al opinion con∣sisted in the head, and that it was a false I∣mage of reason which could not be defa∣sed or rased out but with the presence of reason it selfe. They did therefore gather Counsayles, they called a sufficient num∣ber of people out of all places, euery one quietly propounded his opinion, in the ende opinion gaue place to knowledge, likelihoode to trueth, and Sophistrie to reason. Let vs not thinke Christian Religion so darck, but that trueth may be found out, where a Counsaile hath her assured prin∣ciples, stedfast maximees, inuiolable con∣sequences reason her self which if it be sufficiēnt to decide the difficulties in lawes, can well determine those in deuini∣tie,
and that the better, because it is the lawe of one GOD which admitteth no contrarieties, neither can beare any An∣tinomy, but mans lawes doe often suffer ei∣ther the inequalitie of the Lawmakers a∣mong themselues, or of one onely. To be briefe, it is a manifest iniurie to this law which is called the true light, to beleue that it can not light or leade men, yea which is worse, to perswade that with∣out fire it can not shine, that such as they pretend to be darkenesse, must be burned rather then produced into the daylight, either to take this light from vnder the Tubbe. Some will shewe you that there shall neede no Counsaile, that we must followe the Church, and she can neuer erre. Bookes are sufficiently furnished with replications therevpon: the olde and new Testament are full of the great errors of Gods people: It was the Chuch and the Counsaile of Hierusalem that condemned Iesus Christ and his Apostles: It was there∣fore the Church that condemned her sal∣uation. And S. Paule telleth vs that Ante∣christ shall sit in the very Church of God.
What is there thē but perdition worship∣ped in ye Church? These are but subtelties whereby to eschewe a Counsaile. Man is darke, & the Church an assembly of men, the Church therefore is a misty and darck body, and hath no light in it but frō God, and is no farther, then it gathereth light at Gods worde, thence therefore take it. The Church may at euery straine stumble, and therfore we see our forefathers from worlde to worlde grone after reforma∣tion, and therefore also did the coun∣saile of Basill decree, that from 10. yeres to 10. yeres a Counsaile should be called, to the ende to cut of such errors as might spring vp in the Church. But some will reply and say, they haue already holden one Counsaile against the doctrine now in question. Admit it be so, yet were it to soone to giue ouer well do∣ing. The auncient fathers were not so sone weary against those of their time, against the Arrians, who were heard in their dis∣putations with all libertie, yet being con∣demned in three counsailes they were not debarred the forth. But if we may be wea∣ry of reiterating the selfe same remedies,
how much rather of retourning to warre which so often hath bene practised in vaine: to warre, whose best successe is more daungerous and hurtfull then euen the worst of any Counsayle: or how much more expedient were it to call an other Counsaile, rather then to hazard a battel: to lose a conference to some purpose, or to shed so much blood in vaine. The truth is, that vpon the very diffe∣rents nowe in question, there haue bene two Counsailes holden. The first through the diligence of the Emperour Sigismund at Constance, where contrarie to publike faith the disputers of the one parte, Iohn Hus and Hierom of Prague were burned quick, and then followed a decree, that there was no faith to be kept with Here∣tikes, a monstrous decree, and the cause of all disorder and excesse since fallen out in Christendome. The other at Trent in the chiefe heate of the French troubles, where by the iudge∣ment of the former decree coulde bee no safe appearance. Where also your Em∣bassadors might not bee heard in their Christian propositions for the quietnesse
of the Church. And where they protested nullitie against the actes of the Counsaile which since all your Courts of Parliament haue confirmed and reiected the said acts, yea euen Sorbonne it self, notwithstanding whatsoeuer instance the Pope hath from time to time made. Thinke therefore sir, whether they haue cause to alleadge the fore iudgements of these Counsailes: and iudge whether these two Counsailes may debarys of al hope of goodnesse or fruite that might spring out of one free & law∣full Counsaile, called vnder your auctori∣tie. The difficultie resteth onely vpon one poinct, and that is that the Pope of late daies hath encroched to himselfe the au∣thoritie of calling of Counsailes, which before belonged to the Emperours: for by al histories it appeareth that thei haue summoned the most famous. And now because he feareth the reformation of the abuses of the Popes Court, and especially the question so often harped at. viz. Whe∣ther the Pope be aboue or vnder the Counsaile, whereof there are contrarie decrees, it is manifest that he will so fair as in him lieth auoyde the calling of any, but principally
at the suite and request of the French Church, which alwaies haue auowed him to b vnder the Counsaile. And for exam∣ple, for the assembling of the Counsile of Constance the Emperour, Sigsund was to traualle frō state to state, to sol∣li all Princes, because the Popes stri∣uing among themselues, would not stoop to a Counsaile, and there it was decreed that the Pope should bee subiect to the Counsaile. Since againe for the calling of the Counsaile of Trent, it is well knowne what protections were faine to be made, what practises the Pope wrought among all Christian Princes, wherby to shift it of. What adoe there was to keepe them to∣gether after they were assembled, & what the Popes vsed to the ende to yeeld it vnprofitable to the Church, but commodious to them selues▪ where also, contrary to the former, they caused it to bee determined that the Pope was aboue the Counsaile. Hereby they your Maiestie haue a barre the Pope & shut vp his mouth whereby he dare no more presume to sol∣licite you to the overthrowe of the estate,
euen he that shall haue refused the lawfull meanes to reunite & restore the Church. Besides, in such a necessitie of your estate and during such the Popes default, the Kings your predecessors by the counsaile of your Cleargie, yea, of your Colledge of Sorbonne, haue long since trode you a faire path: namely, by your owne auctoritie, for want of a generall, to summon a national Counsaile within this Realme. A course taken by the most Christian Kings, yea, e∣uen the deuoutest among the most Chri∣stian, to the great benefite of the Church and estate. For naionall Counsailes being well ordered, and proceeding of the Prin∣ces zeale haue often done more good thē the generall, bribed and laboured by the Church of Rome, as histories doe testifie. For if you tarrie vntill the Pope prouide, paraduēture it wil be so late, & your estate alreadie being in combustion, that it were requisite to make more speede. If any man alleadge that this assembly will bee in vaine, also that in such conten∣tions, were it but for honour, neither side will giue place to reason, euery one defen∣ding his part to the ende: also that it will
bee hard to agree vpon Iudges and such like, wherein vndoubtedly I can see no great difficultie, I aunswere, that God will blesse your Maiesties holy zeale and ear∣nest affection to the peace of so many consciences: also that hee will heare the sobbes and cryes of so much people who of such a conuocation doe attende their weale & the quiet of their soules, besides that God by his Prophet said not in vaine that the raine neuer falleth from heauen without fruit, either his holy worde vpon earth without some notable effect: But admit matters should growe to that passe, yet dare I assure my self to motion to your Maiestie a meane that shall satisfie & agree both parties, yea such a one, as any reaso∣nable man that willingly would not bee deceiued, may thereby easely discerne the trueth from falshoode and false doctrine from true. And therefore, if the eye of your Maiesties reason bee free from blemish, there is no doubt but your selfe shal both finde and knowe the trueth: for trueth wil shine forth and lighten you and naturally is cleare enough to spread it selfe abroad. Onely God giue vs grace to leaue all our
passions at the threshold of the doore and to enter in in a ful desire to see & finde the trueth, as being freed from all particuler▪ interest except of our soules. Consider Sir what contentation your self in your life time shal reape, & what ho∣nor with the posteritie you shall atchieue▪ if in your daies and through your wisdom and exaple, you maye determine a Scisme of so many yeres continuaunce, and pro∣cure throughout all Christendom the sin∣ging of that song of the Angles, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace. When in this duetie you haue preuēted the Popes▪ Emperours, and Catholick Kings, yea e∣uen exeded your most Christian forerun∣ners, therein shewing your selfe in deede most Christian for your self, Christian for France & Christian for the whole church. God I take to witnesse, that from my harte I doe write vnto you al that I seeke▪ which is, to see in our time the Church pourged, and the Temple swept, to the end we may be conuersant togither. All men doe agree and long haue, that there are abuses among vs. Let them be taken away and cleansed, and let vs not set our
selues against our selues, neither let vs search starting holes to our losse, or shewe our selues skilfull contrary to our saluati∣on Waying for this benefite at your Ma∣iesties hand, let vs one beare with another in modestie & gentlenesse, suffering your Edicts of Peace to rule, and mens consci∣ences to be in rest, and as for those which in the meane tyme doe counsaile to sur∣cease or forbid the exercise of the soule, they shewe them selues to haue no great feeling of their owne, sith thei suppose the soules can liue without their action or foode: yea, those that thinke it so easie a matter for others to neglect the seruing of GOD according to their consciences, doe by that lawe which they prescribe to others, sufficiently shew what them selues are. viz. of themselues cōtemners of God, deuoyde of Religion and Conscience. Sir, your Maiestie are to excuse my bold∣nesse. In great inconueniences great men haue not despised the meanest voices. The barking of one Dog hath preserued many a house from spoyle, and the gagling of one Goose was sufficient to keep the Ca∣pitoll. Duetie and daunger must iustefie
my presumption Duetie, for it were an of∣fence in daunger to hold my peace. Daun∣ger also, for it is plaine deceipt in seeing to seeme not to see. I beseech sir, the Crea∣tor with his holy spirite to assist your Ma∣iestie, to giue you the same for counsayle and conduct, and after so many trauayles to see his Realme florish in yours, to pro∣sper vnder his, to his glorie, your praise, and the peace of your people. So be it. Your most humble and most obedient seruaunt and subiect. P. D. M.
A Declaration of the Ar∣ticles agreed vpon betwene the King and the house of Guyze and their adherents: commonly called. The holy League. THE Princes, Officers of the Crowne, Lordes, Gentlemen, townes, comminalties, & other the Catholikes of this Realme vnited, being the King most humble sub∣iectes and seruants, vnderstandihg by the Queene, that his Maiesties entent is to embrace the cause of Religion, as being holy and iust, and to roote out all heresies out of this Realme, praysing God for in∣spiring him with so good & holy a mynd, do most humbly beseech him to assist thē, and the Queene to continue her wonted affection to whatsoeuer concerneth the benefite and preseruation of the state, to the ende to prouide for the same. They doe therefore desire his Maiestie to set forth an Edict which may be perpe∣tuall and irreuocable, wherby all exercize of the newe Religion may bee abolished, and the Ministers expelled the Realme.
Also, in asmuch as libertie of conscience tollerated among subiectes maye breede much contempt and  against the seruice of God: It may be enioyned to all his subiectes of whatsoeuer calling or condition to professe the Catholick Apo∣stolike and Romish Religion within after the publishing thereof, otherwise to departe the Realme, and no way to sell or dispose of their goodes, the same to remaine to their Catholicke heires in direct line, if they haue any, p∣ing the iust valewe and estimate of the o∣werth part of the sayd goodes: But if their heires be other then in  collaterall▪ the to pay the estimate of the third parte, ac∣cording to the valewation that shall be made by the Commissioners thereunto appointed: and the money hereof arising to be committed into the handes of cer∣taine persons thereto deputed to bee em∣ployed vpon the execution of this enter∣prize. That all Heretickes of whatsoeuer state or condition may be declared, according to the Canonicall Sanctions, perpetually incapable of all publicke charges, offices,
estates and dignities, and those that now haue any to be forced to forgoe & resigne the same vnto Catholicke persons such as are capable, and not to keepe them, not∣withstanding they would abiure their er∣ror, except for the space of three yeres af∣ter the sayd abiuration they continewe in Catholicke life, so as there may be no fur∣ther doubt of fayned repentaunce or dis∣simulation. That his Maiestie declare▪ al whatsoeuer haue bene done by the Catholick Princes and Lordes and all other as well particu∣ler persons, as Tounes and Communalties that haue taken their partes, and sucou∣red and fauoured them, either in the sea∣zing vpon Townes, fetching of Coyne out of his receiptes, taking vp of victualles and Munition, or leauying of Souldiers either within the Realme or without, and generally all whatsoeuer haue bene done, wrought or delt in vntill this present tou∣ching the effect and execution of the pre∣mises, notwithstanding the same bee not particulerly specified or expressed, to haue beene done for his seruice, with the assu∣raunce of Religion, to the preseruation
whereof he acknowledgeth himself to b bound, both as a most Christian King, and also by that solemne oath that hee tooke at his annoynting. To the ende the Catholiques may not quaile or reenter into any feare, iudging the sequel hereof by others that are alrea∣dy past, that is, that this enterprize should be but couldly prosecuted, and finally de∣termined by some other Edict contrary to this, by meanes whereof there were no other fruict to be hoped for thē the com∣mon mischiefe and domages ensuing of Warre. They do most humbly beseech his Maiestie to ordeyne that this sayde Edict may presently bee published without any restriction or qualification vppon the se∣crete recordes or otherwise. It may also please his Maiestie with the Peeres and other officers of the Crowne to assist the publication therof in the Par∣liament of Paris, and the same being read, to declare that as a most Christian King, being bound aswell by the othe that hee toooke at his Coronation, as also by that zeale which alwayes hee hath borne to the seruice of GOD, togither with the
request and supplication to him made by the generall estates of his Realme assem∣bled at Bloys, he hath consideratly & with great deliberation by the aduice of the Queene his mother, the Princes of his blood and other Peeres, Princes of France, Officers of the Crowne, and many other notable persons of his Counsayle made the sayd Edict. That he sweareth and pro∣testeth inuiolably to obserue and cause to be kept the same, and neuer to permit it to be infringed, promising hereafter in a∣ny wise not to make any other repugnant or derogatory hereunto in whole or in part, also that if any such should be made, his entent and meaning to be, that no re∣gard be had therof, as being directly con∣trary to the seruice of God, wherto he ac∣knowledgeth him selfe and his subiects to owe the chiefe duety, and to be principal∣ly and especially bounden. That he shall likewise cause all Princes, Peeres of Fraunce, officers of the Crowne, Knightes of the holy Ghost, Counsaylers of Estate, Gouernors, and Lieutenants ge∣nerall of his Prouinces, Presidentes and Counsailers of his soueraigne Courtes, all
Bayliffes, Sensehals, and other his Offi∣cers, all Maiors and Sherifes, also all bo∣dies & comminalties of townes, to sweare to the same. And all the sayde othes and cautions aforesayd to be set in order, and committed to the registers of the Roules of the Courtes of Parliament, to the end to haue recourse thereto as neede shall re∣quire. Further, to the ende to shewe foorth a more euident testimonie that hee enten∣deth to keepe his sayd Edict, and accor∣ding to the tenour thereof to procure the moring out of heresies out of this Realm: It may please him, if it be not very contra∣rie and preiudicial to his estate, to giue o∣uer the protection of the Towne of , that to the great griefe of his Catho∣lickes hee hath taken vpon him, because that out of that spring do slowe al heresie throughout Christendome, and therfore so long as the sayd protection remaineth in force, his sayd subiects cannot but feare that this enfectious disease will neuer bee cured. Also because the sayd Edict will bee to no purpose if in euery point▪ without re∣mission
it be not put in execution, which cannot be brought to passe without force, because those of the newe Religion doe shew no token that they purpose to yeeld their doe obedience, it may please his Ma∣iestie to employe that power which they haue made of people to him most affectio∣nate, and his faithfull subiects▪ such as will hazard themselues in the execution of his cōmaundements, and therevpon do most humbly desire him to declare his entent. As for the meanes to compasse the said expedition, the aduersaries being weake and withdrawne into one corner of the Realme, all the rest remayning very due∣tifull and zealous to the Catholicke Reli∣gion, they presume that his Maiestie is re∣solued to put too his last helping hand & not to returne to the former counsayles, which haue▪ but nourished and encreased the mischiefes: that al his good Catholick subiects will assist and ayde him to their a∣bilities. That to the same effect (prouided that the money bee not otherwise emplo∣yed) the Cleargie can finde in their hearts voluntarily to graunt the sale of their tē∣poralties to a reasonable valewe, conside∣ring
what great charges aforetime they haue bene at. Also that our holy Father the Pope will not sticke to permit and auctorize the same. Moreouer▪ they know that his Maiestie is not without other good and able mea∣nes, but it is not for them more particu∣lerly to enter into the search thereof, be∣sides that they haue beene so smally em∣ployed in matters of his treasurie, not∣withstanding some of them bee honored with the chiefe places and principall char∣ges of this Realme, who are thereto mere winterlings. For their owne partes, together with their liues which they will venture in so holy and necessary an enterprize, they do also offer whatsouer their meanes or ha∣bilities and vpon their credits to aduance the pay and enterteynment of and to be content to take it vp againe in the space of one whole yere▪ conditionally that it may please his Maiestie to giue thē assurance thereof, also to giue his word to to the Captaines of the straungers that shall receiue it vpon their caution, that so they may bee assured and haue good and
sufficient assignation of the said paiment, and satisfaction within the time limitted, as also of that which alreadie they haue aduaunced towarde the chardges of this warre which is leuyed for his seruice, for it is for the preseruation of the Catholick Religion, whereto his Maiestie as a most Christian King hath alwayes shewed him∣selfe most affectionate. Moreouer, as he hath testified his zeale and pietie to the honour and seruice of of God in this enterprise, so it may please him, shewing hym selfe a good father to his subiectes, to ease them. And although the effect of this good will can not bee so ready by reason of those expenses where∣into through this war he shal be forced to enter, yet in ye meane time that he would discharge them of the leauy of the coun∣try vpon the sault of the newe encrease and imposition of Wine, also of the impo∣sition of Cloth, which his sayde Maiestie had already purposed vpon the petitions vnto hym diuers times made by his sub∣iectes, to abolish and take away. More-o∣uer it may please hym to cause the verball Proces of the Cōmissioners by him late∣ly
deputed throughout the Prouinces, which doe conteine the complaintes of e∣uery one togither with the remedied for the preuēting & ceasing of the mischiefs, to be perused and considered vpon, so shal his subiectes pray to God for his prospe∣ritie and greatnesse, and them selues per∣ticulely shall not tend to any other, but with heart and affection to yeelde to him that most humble seruice which they doe owe. They doe also most humbly beseech his Maiestie, in consideration of those perils whereof vntill the execution of this Edict they shall dayly bee in danger by reason of former enmities which those of the new religion do beare them, and are now greatly increased through this their reso∣lution vnder his Maiesties authoritie to ayde and assist the Catholike Religion in this Realme, wherevpon their lines doe depend, and themselues are as it were mi∣serably thereto conioyned, to graunt vn∣to them the meanes of assurance hereaf∣ter ensuing, wherby they may liue in safe∣ty and out of daunger, yeelding to him all obedience as his most humble subiects.
First, that it may be lawful for them, in eace the execution of this Edict should be giuen ouer, or those of the newe Religion should work any enterprise against them, to call to their ayde the Catholicke Suit∣zers, to whome it may be lawfull to doe that seruice whereto they shall be requi∣red, touching the obseruation of the E∣dict onely, and to no other purpose: so as by their so doing, they shall not enfringe their alliances with the Crowne, this E∣dict beeing made for the safegard and greatnesse of the estate thereof. That all Gouernors & Lieutenants ge∣neral of the Prouinces, also al other parti∣culer gouernors & Captaines of Townes, Holdes and Fortresses that haue followed this partie may be maintined and defen∣ded in their gouernments, charges and e∣states, also in those Holdes that presently they haue and possesse and not to be put from the same. That such Townes as haue taken their partes may remaine in libertie as before the warres without any Garrisons placed in them. Because also the Lord Cardinal of Bour∣bon
hath no place of assurance and safetie, and that he ought ordinarely to bee resi∣dent at Roome, that the sayd Towne and Castle be left him, with auctoritie to put in Captaines that may bee thereof proui∣ded, as also in the Towne and Castle of Diepe depending of the demaynes of his Archbishopricke. To the Lorde Duke of Mercure in his gouernment of Brittain two places, such as he shall nominate to his Maiestie, with the Admiraltie ouer all Seafaring places within the sayd gouernment, according to such instructions as heretofore haue vnto him bene made. In asmuch also as throughout all the Townes within the gouernment of Cham∣pagne, there is neuer a Castle sufficient for the assuraunce and safegarde of the Lorde Duke of Guyze, who is gouernor thereof, it may please his Maiestie to graunt vnto him the Towne and Citadell of Metz. To the Lorde Duke of Mayne gouer∣nor of Bourgondy, together with the Castle of Digeon which already he houldeth, the Castle of Beaeune or the Citadel of Chaalon. To the Lorde Cardinall of Guyze the
Towne of Rheimes, together with some reasonable extent which may bee to that ende taken out of the gouernement of Champagne. To the Lord Duke of Aumale aucto∣ritie to commaund in the Holdes and go∣uernement of Picardie, being of the fame partie. To the Lorde Marquise of Elboeuf the gouernement of Anieow. To the Lord of Antragues the gouerne∣ment of Orleans in chiefe together with whatsoeuer therevpon depended at the time that the late King prouided him of the Lieutenancy generall of the sayd go∣uernment. To the Lord of O. the gouernement of the Bayliwickes of Caen and Constance ac∣cording as heretofore hee hath enioyed them. To the Lord of Brissac the Lieutenancy generall of the gouernment of Acow, al∣so the state of Coronell generall of Pied∣mont to enioy as others haue done before him and in time past it was accustomed. To the Lord Coūtie of Saux the Lieute∣nancy generall of the gouernment of Pro∣uince
during the absence of the Lord great Pryor of Fraunce. To the Lorde of Mandelot as Gouer∣nor of Lyons the Citadell thereof. To the Lord of Chastre, his gouernmēt of Bourges with his companie maintained vpon the first leauy of the receipt of Bour∣ges. To the Lord of Vaillac the Capteynship of Castle Trompet in Bourdeaux. Also vpon the vacation of any the sayd Gouernments, Lieutenancies, or Capten∣ships, if any happen before the full execu∣tion of the sayde Edict, it maye please his Maiestie vpon the humble supplication which vnto him shall be made on the be∣halfe of the Princes and principals of the said partie, to prouide for the same accor∣dingly. That all Garrisons necessary for the de∣fence and keeping of the sayd places in his Maiesties assurance and to the preser∣uation of those of the sayde partie, maye monthly be payd with the appointments by order of the Gouernors and Officers out of the treasurie of the generall re∣ceipts of euery the sayd gouernments, by
whose order the same shall bee deducted out of the receipt at the beginning of the yeere. That the compagnies of men of armes in the Prouinces, gouernments and gene∣rall Lieutenancies of the Prouinces, may in euery of their gouernments haue their paye out of the leauye of the fines or a∣mercements in their generall receipts e∣stablished which shall expressely be there∣to reserued and not to be conuerted to a∣ny other vse. Also the dueties and pen∣sions of the sayde Prouinces, Gouernors and Lieutenants, to be raised vpon other the coyne of the sayde receipts, whereof quarterly there shall a certeyne be left for that vse. The sayd Holds & Castles of the which, the parties to whoe his Maiestie shall leaue them for their safegarde, were not prouided of before, they shall holde vnder his aucthoritie, and for his seruice, and of the same shall be to him accomptable. They shal also promise ioyntly together and each one seuerally for himselfe, also the principall Captaines of the sayd party in the name of all to restore the same into
his Maiesties handes so soone as the sayd Edict which it shall please his Maiestie to make, be put in execution and obserued. And this shall they sweare vpon perrill of their liues and honors faithfully to per∣forme. FINIS.
depiction of dragon and crown
