14570.3 s3135 33143049 28194
CERTAINE DEVOVT AND GODLY PETITIONS. called the IESVS PSALTER. IHS There is no other Name vnder Heauen giuen vnto men, in which we must be saued. Act. 4. Vers. 12. With Priuiledge 1624
ADVERTISMENT. BEGINNE your Psalter with deuout kneeling, or at least∣wise with bowing to Iesus, and say thus as followeth: In the name of IESVS let euerie knee bowe, of the celestialls, terrestrials, and infernals: and euerie tongue con¦fesse, that our Lord Iesus Christ, is in the glory of God the Father. And at the end, either of the first Fiue, Ten, or last Fifteene, say: Our Lord Iesus Christ humbled himselfe, being made obedient vnto death: euen the death of the Crosse. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE FIRST PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Haue mercy on me. IESV haue mercy vpon me, and forgiue me the great of∣fences which I haue done in the sight of thee. Grant me grace Iesu, for the
loue of thee, to despise sinne, and all worldly vanity. Haue mercy on all sinners, Ie∣su I beseech thee: turne their vices into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion, I beseech thee, and for thy giorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE SECOND PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Helpe m. IESV helpe me to ouercome all temptations to sinne: and the malice of my ghostly enemy. To spend my time in vertue and labour acceptable to thee: to
represse the motions of my flesh, in slouth, gluttony, & carnality. To haue my hart enumoured of vertue, and the glorious pre∣sence of thee: to haue good name and fame, Iesu, to thy honour, & to the comfort of me. Haue mercy on all sinners, Ie∣su I beseech thee: turne their vi∣ces into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lo∣urs of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glorie. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinitie, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE THIRD PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Strength∣en me. IESV strengthen me in soule & body, to execute the workes of vertue to the pleasure of thee: wherby I may come to thy euer∣lasting ioy, and felicity.
Grant me firme purpose, most mercifull Iesu, to amend my life, & to recompence for those years which I haue misspent to the dis∣pleasure of thee, in euil thoughts, delectatiōs, consentings, wordes, workes, and euill customes. Also in breaking thy Cōman∣dements, wherby I haue deserued damnation, and thine emnity. Make mine hart obedient to fulfill thy will, and ready to doe for thy loue the workes of pitty. Grant me the seauen giftes of the holy Ghost: the eight Beati∣tudes: the foure Cardinall vertues: and in receauing of the Sacra∣ments, deuoutly to dispose me. Haue mercy on all sinners, Iesu I beseech thee: turne their vices into vertues, & make them true obseruers of thy law, and
louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE FOVRTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Comfort me. IESV comfort me, and giue me grace to haue my greatest ioy and pleasure in thee. Send me heauenly medita∣tions, ghostly sweetnes, and fer∣uour
of thy glory. Rauish my soule with bur∣ning desire of thy heauenly ioy, where I shal euerlastingly dwell with thee. Grant me, sweet Sauiour Iesu, contempt of all wicked plea∣sures, full of sinne and misery. Grant me remembrance of my saluation, with feare of damna∣tion. Also remembrance of thy goodnesse, thy gifts, and great kindnesse shewed to me. Reduce into my mynd, my sinnes and wickednes, wherby I haue offended thee. Grant me the spirit of perfect penance, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, to obtaine thy grace, and from filthy sinne to purge me.
Haue mercy on all sinners, Iesu I beseech thee: turne their vices into vertues, & make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glorie. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE FIFTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me constant and stable. IESV make me constant and stable in faith, hope, and cha∣rity: with continuance in vertue, and desire not to offend thee. Make me oftē to remember thy
passion, and bitter paines, which thou sufferedst for me. Send me perfect patience, in all tribulation and aduersitie. Preserue me from Pride, Ire, Enuie, Couetousnesse, and from all other offences contrary to thy holy Law. The Catholique Obseruances of the Church, make me to keep truly▪ Make my Soule obedient to holie Doctrine, and to thinges pertayning to my ghostly weale, for the loue of thee. Suffer no false delight of this deceaueable life, by fleshly tem∣ptations, & fraud of the Enemy to blind me. Till the houre of my death, my fiue Senses, Iesu keep I beseech thee.
From excesse in Speaking, in Feeding, and Working euill, preserue my frailty. Haue mercie on all sinners, Iesu I beseech thee: turne their vi∣ces into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glorie. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Our Lord Iesus Christ humbled himself, being made obedient vnto death: eun the death of the Crosse. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE SIXT PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Enlighten me. IESV enlightē me with ghostly wisedome to know thy good∣nesse, and those thinges which are most acceptable to thee. Graunt me grace to giue good
example, profitable to soules, that none be hurt by me: and to help those with good counsell, who haue offended thee. Make me proceede from ver∣tue to vertue, vntill such time, that I shall clearely see thy Ma∣iesty. Let me not returne to those sin∣nes, which I haue sorrowed for, and by confession haue accused my selfe off. The horrible sentence, of end∣lesse death, the errble iudgement of damnation, thy wrath, ire, and indignation mercifull Lord, let neuer fall vpon me. Thy Mercy and thy Merits. O my Sauiour, be euer betweene them and me. Haue mercy on al sinners Iesu I beseech thee: turne their vices
into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glorie. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE SEAVENTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace  dread thee. IESV grant me grace inwardly to dread thee, and to eschew all those thinges, wherby I may offend thee. Thy Blessed Mother be me∣diatresse
for me: and purchase me a contrite hart for that wherin I haue offended thee. Remoue my sinfull disposi∣tions, which dull my hart, and like vnto lead do oppresse me. All thy Saints pray for me, that I be not separated from thee, and from their Blessed fellow∣ship in thy heauenly Citty. Let me not forget good Lord, the riches of thy goodnes, of thy patie, of thy long sufferance and benignity. Let the theatning of paine & and torment, which shall fall vpō sinners, the losse of thy loue, and of thy heauenlie inheritance euer terrify me to offend thee. Suffer me not to lye in sinne, but call me soone to penance: and when I shal haue displeased thee,
haue mercy on me. Haue mercy on all sinners, Iesu I beseech thee: turne their vices into vertues; & make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glorie. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE EIGHT PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to loue thee. IESV grant me grace truly to loue thee, for thy endlesse goodnesse; and for those giftes which I haue receaued, and trust to receaue of thee.
Lord when I offend, strike me not with suddaine death, I be∣seech thee. Let the remembrance of thy Gentlenes and Patience, con∣quer all Malice and wretched Desires in me. Drawe me Lord to thee, by perfect Loue and Charity. By breaking of thy Comman∣dements I haue despised thee: grant me good Lord, in keeping of them, as greatly to honour thee. From lesser sinnes, that I fall not into the greater, Lord pre∣serue me. Doe with me according to thy mercy, & not according to my mi∣sery: withdraw thy sword of ven∣geance, for thy great mercy and pitty.
Grant me Lord to be the child of saluation, in body and soule to haue glorification, cleere sight, and fruition of thy Diuinity, and euer presently to see the glorious Trinity. Haue mercy on all sinners, Ie∣su I beseech thee: turne their vi∣ces into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lo∣uers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glorie. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster, Aue Maria.
THE NINTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to remem∣ber my death. IESV grant me grace to re∣member perfectly the danger of my death, and the great ac∣count which I must then giue to thee: and so dispose me, that my
soule be acceptable to thee, and to thy glorious Mother, the B. Virgin Mary. Then with the assistance of the glorious Angel S. Michael, deliuer me from the daunger of my ghostly enemie. And thou my good Angell, I beseech thee then to helpe me. Then good Lord, remember thy mercy: and for mine offences turne not thy louely face frō me. O my Lord, be a mercifull, kind and meeke Iudge vnto me, at that dreadfull houre. That I may not heare the ri∣gour of thy righteousnes, there∣fore I appeale to thy mercy. Thy mercy exceedeth thy iud∣gement: and to vs sinners it is sal∣uation, when we cry hartily to thee.
At that dreadfull houre, help vs most mercifull Lord, who for the time now call for mercy. Haue mercy on all sinners, Ie∣su I beseech thee: turne their vi∣ces into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lo∣uers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinitie, One True God, haue mercy on me. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE TENTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Send me here my Purgato∣ry. IESV send me heere my Pur∣gatory: and preserue me from those torments of fire, which euer shall punish sinne and iniquity. Let full hope of thine helpe
alwayes abide in me, that I neuer fall in desperation of thy endlesse mercy. O Mother of God, Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Euangelists, Martyrs, Cōfessors, Virgins, Wid∣dowes, Matrons, and Innocents. I offer my selfe to your merits, and beseech you to pray for me, and at my passing, helpe to pro∣tect me. With thy Sacraments O Lord thon recomfort me: and bring me to the Kingdome of endlesse felicity. My Lord Iesu crucified for me, by the merits of thy glorious passion, I beseech thee, graunt  these Petitions which I  asked of thee. Haue mercy on all sinn Iesu I beseech thee: turne th ∣ces
into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory. Haue mercy also on the soules in Purgatory, for thy bitter pas∣sion I beseech thee, and for thy glorious Name, Iesu. O holy Trinity, One True God, haue mercy on me. Our Lord Iesus Christ hath humbled himself, being made obedient vnto deah: eun the death of the Crosse. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE ELEAVENTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to flie euill company. IESV grant me gace to flie euill company, and when I come among them, for thy glo∣rious passion I beseech thee, pre∣serue me, that no occasion of
mortall sinne ouercome me: and send me ghostly comfort, by such as be true louers of thee. Keepe my mouth, good Lord, from slaūderous speaches, lying, false witnesse-bearing, cursing, swearing, vncharitable chiding, dissolute laughing, and wordes of vanitie. Make me, Blessed Lord, with dread to remember, that thou presently hearest me, & who of all my wordes shalt iudge me. Suffer not my hart to be light of credit, in hearing detraction, obloquy, rancor, and ire. Iesu represse in me al inordinate affection of carnality: & where I haue by euil fellowshippe of∣fended, meekely I aske mercy of thee: and I beseech thee to help all that crie to thee for mercy.
Thy power protect me, thy wisdome direct me, thy Fatherly pitty correct me. Send me a gratious life, and a Blessed ending: and thy passion preserue me from euerlasting damnation, and terrour of mine Enemy. Haue mercy on all sinners, Iesu I beseech thee: turne their vices into vertues, & make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory &c. as before. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE TWELFTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue me grace to call for helpe to thee. IESV grant me grace, spe∣cially in the time of tempta∣tion, to cal for helpe to thee: and then with faithfull mind to re∣member thy passion, which thou
sufferedst for me. Then, most mercifull Lord, keep my soule frō all consent to sinne: & for the very true loue of thee, then let sinne appeare stin∣king and abhominable to me. Let the remembrance of the paines of hell and damnation, so horrible, & terrible, and full of thine anger, with the merites of thy meeke patience, through charity and chastity, mitigate the pronesse to sinne & fraylty in me. In my temptations, Lord I beseech thee, helpe me: for the tender loue that thou didest shew to thy Mother, and she to thee. Repell the power of my ghost∣lie aduersaries, which intend the damnation of me. Inhabit my soule, O Sauiour,
which with al humble subie∣ction, desireth the Blessed pre∣sence of thee. Make me pure in spirit, meeke in speaking, patient in suffering, hungrie of righteous working, & merciful to all those that be in misery. Make me peaceable in conuer∣sation, cleane in hart with holy meditation, and ioyfully to suf∣fer Persecution for the cause of thee. Let al my powers, and desires be ruled according to the will of thee: and all my petitions orde∣red to thy wisedome, and to the euerlasting profit of me. Haue mercy on all sinners, &c. as before. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE THIRTENTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Make me to perse∣uere in Vertue. IESV make me perseuerant in the Blessed seruice of thee: in holy custome and vertuous oc∣cupation, Lord keep my soule and my body.
Make me to flie sinful delecta∣tions: & patiēly to suffer iniuries and rebukes, in recompence of my disobedient hart to thee. Prouide good Lord, that life for me, which thou knowest to be most to thy honour, and to my eternall felicity. Fill my hart with contrition, and mine eyes with teares, that I neuer be forsaken of thee. Awake my dull soule from sleep of sinne, and send me help from heauē, my Blessed Sauiour, to ouercome the old serpent with all his crafte, by exercise of ver∣tue, and speciall grace of thee. The Angels of light, deliuer mee from the Angels of darke∣nesse, & from their great cruelty. Let thy obedience, Lord, re∣compence for my obstinacie; thy
abstinence, for my superfluity, thy meekenesse and thy patience, for my pride, ireful hate and emnity. Thy charity for my malice, thy deuotion for my dulnesse, thy lo∣uing hart for my vnkindnesse, thy holy death for my wretched life, and for all my misery. Haue mercy on all sinners, Ie∣su I beseech thee: turne their vi∣ces into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lo∣uers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory &c. as before. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE FOVRTENTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Grant me grace to fixe my mind on thee. IESV grant me grace, espe∣cially in the time of prayer, to fixe my mind on thee, and then to remember my wretchednes, & faithfully to cal for help to thee.
And at that time to remēber the perils of body and soule which I haue escaped, and the benefits that I haue receaued through thy great charity: and with all my hart, Lord, then to giue praise to thee. In this prayer, I thanke thee for all the creatures which thou hast made to help man, and that thou haste made him to thine Image: & finally in thy glory to honour thee. The motions of my running mind, the desires of my vnstable hart, in the time of prayer to stop, and stay I beseech thee. Represse the power of my ghostly Enemies, when they shall drawe my mind from ghostly weale, to any imaginations of vanity.
With the hand of thy seruent loue, then I beseech thee to take me, and strengthen me in thy power: and with thy goodnesse to glad me. Keepe me so exercised in good workes, that my prayers may be acceptable to thee. Heare now, sweete Sauiour Iesu, heare the voyce of a sinner, which would faine loue thee, and with my hart as greatly please thee, as euer it hath offended thee: and if it please thy grace, more largely to recompence it, I be∣seech thee. Iesu saue mine enemies from thy enmitie, and forgiue them that wherin they haue offended me: like as I would be forgiuen in those thinges, wherein I haue offended thee.
Lord helpe all those which haue holpen mee, or prayed for me, or shewed to me any deed of pitty. Thy Grace, O Lord, & the me∣rits of thy pretious bloud, defend me from the striking Angel, and the spirit of pestilence, and cause him to ouer passe me. Haue mercy on all sinners, Ie∣su I beseech thee: turne their vices into vertues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and louers of thee: bring them to blisse in euerlasting glory &c. as before. Pater noster. Aue Maria.
THE FIFTEENTH PETITION. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, Giue mee grace to order my life to thee. IESV giue me grace to order my life, and the workes of my body and soule, with actuall in∣tention to serue thee, for the re∣ward of thy infinite ioy and eter∣nall felicity.
The water and bloud which ranne from thy Blessed harte, wash my soule from sinne and iniquiy: and purchase to me aboundance of grace, faithfully to serue thee. O my Lord, my life, my might, and my light, leade me, feed me, and speed me, in the pilgrimage of this mortality. Grant me Lord, by the merits of thy passion, and vertue of thy most excellent and glorious di∣uinity, whatsoeuer thy wisdom knoweth most expedient for me, which my miserable life is not worthy to obtaine of thee. At the houre of my Death, when I shall be accused before thee for the death that thou suf∣feredst for sinners, haue mercy on me.
Breake my froward hart and make it obedient to thee: & from suddaine and vnprouided death, Lord preserue me. Grant me grace to depart with contempt of this world: & with ioyfull hart to come to thee. Let the remembrance of thy passion, make mee ioyfully to beare temptation, & tribulation for the loue of thee. Make mee most to loue that ioyful life, that immortall glory, most excellēt blisse & endlesse fe∣licitie, which is ordained in thy heauēnly Kingdome for the ser∣uants of thee. By the vertue of thy Incarna∣tion, Natiuity, Passion, and Re∣surrection, grant me these suppli∣cations, which I haue made to thee, in this Inuocation and Psal∣ter
of thee. And by the intercession of thy most entirely beloued Mother, purchase to me, a gratious life, & Blessed ending, free from debt, and deadly sinne, I beseech thee: and after my bodylie death, euer∣lasting life, with endlesse blisse & felicity. Haue mercy on al sinners, &c. as before Our Lord Iesus Christ hath hum∣bled himself, being made obedient vnto death: euen the death of the Crosse. Pater noster. Aue Maria. FINIS.
ISVS,  ee be of the C∣ Terrestria  and let  esse that our  is in the glo  Father. The End of the IESVS Psalter.
