16033.5 99843629 8374
The Dirige. BLessed is he that con¦sidereth the pore, the Lorde shall delyuer hym in the tyme of trouble. Thou shalt preserue hym and kepe him aliue, he shal make him to prosper vpon erth, & shal not deliuer him to the wyl of his enemyes. The Lord shal refeesh him when he lyeth sycke vpon his bedde, yea, thou makest his bed in all his sickenes. I sayed Lorde be merci∣full vnto my soule, for I haue synned agaynst the. Myne enemies speake euil
vpon me: whē shal he die, & when shal his name perish. Thoughe he came into se, yet mened he falshed in his hert apyng myschife vp¦p hym selfe. l thei that hate me, rūne in together agaynste me, & ymagined euil agaynst me. Thei haue geuē a wycked sentence vpō me, whē he ly¦eth, he shal rise vp nomore. Yea, enē myne owne famy¦lier frendes whō I trusted which did eat my bd hath lift vp his hele against me. But be thou merciful vnto
me (O Lord) raise thou me vp, and I shal reward thē. By this I knowe thou fa¦uorest me, that mine enemy shal not triumph ouer me. hou hast holden me, be∣cause of myne innocencie, and set me before thy face for euer. O blessed be the Lord God of Israel from henseforth & euermore, so be it, so be it  Heale my soule Lord, for I haue synned a¦gaynst the.
Quemadmodum desi. Lyke as the hart desy¦reth ye waterbrokes, so longeth my soule after the o God. My soule is thrustye for God, euen for ye liuing foū¦tayn, whē shal I come and behold the face of God. My teares are my meate day and nyght whyle it is daily saied vnto me, where is no we thy God. Now when I thinke ther¦pon I poure out my hart  selfe, for  ld
immortalitee. But when this corrupti¦ble shal put on incorrupciō and this mortall shall put on immortalitee, then shal that worde bee fulfylled whiche is wrytten. Deathe is swalowed vp in victory Answere We shall all be brought before the iudge∣ment seate of Chryst wher euery one of vs shall geue accomptes for him felf vn¦to God. Versicle. And he shal rewarde euery man ac∣cordynge to his dedes. ion. Where euery
man shall geue accompte. ¶ I Wolde not brethren that ye shulde be igno¦raunt concernynge theim that are fallen a sleye, that ye sorowe not as other do whiche haue no hope, for yf we beleue yt Iesus dyed and rose againe. Euen so they also whiche slepe by Iesus shal God brynge wt him, for this we saye vn∣to you in the worde of th
Lorde, that we which lyue and are remayninge in the cōminge of the Lorde, shal not come yer they whiche slepe, for the Lorde shall come downe from heauen with a shoute and voice of the Archaungell and with the trompe of GOD, and the deade in Chryst hall arise fyrste, then shall we whiche lyue and remayne, be caught vp with theim also in the es to mete the Lorde in the ae, and so shal we euer be with the orde. Wherfore cōforte
your selues one another with these wordes. . Nowe is Christ risen from the dead and is become the fyrst fru¦tes of thē that slepe, for by one man cōmeth deathe, & by one man the resurreci∣on of the dead, for as they all die in Adā, so shall they al be made a lyue in Christ but euery one in his order Versicle. The firste is Christ, then they that be∣longe vnto Christ when he cōmeth. Repetition. Eue¦ry one in his order.
Nowe Christ Ie∣s, we most hūbly beseche & thou which art come to re∣deme wretches frō synne & thraldome, wilt thē cast a∣way thē whō yu hast so dere¦ly redemed. O Lorde deliuer me frō euer∣lasting death at ye dredfull day whē heauē & earth shal be altered, whiles yu shalte come to iudge the worlde. The a My brused. ¶ . Miserere mei de{us}. Anth. My brused bones Lorde
shalbe refreshed. Heare my prayer. ¶ Te decet hymnus. THou (O God) arte praysed in Siō, & to the is ye vowe perfourmed Thou hearest the prayer, therfore commeth al fleshe vnto the. Our misdedes preuayle a¦gainst vs, oh be thou mer∣ciful vnto our sinnes. lessed is the man whō yu chosest & receiuest vnto ye, that he maye dwell in thy court: he shalbe satisfied wt the
his webbe. While I was yet takinge my rest he hewed me of, & made an ende of me in one daye. thought, I wolde haue lyued vnto ye morowe, but he brused my bones lyke a Lyon, and made an ende of me in one day. Then chattered I lyke a swalowe, and like a crane and mourned as  doue. I lift vp mine e into ye hight O Lord (s I) vi∣olence is done vno me, be thou sutie for me.
What shal I speke or say that he may do this that I may lyue out all my yeres, yea, in the bitternes of my lyfe. Verely (Lorde) men must liue in bitternes, and al my lyfe must I passe ouer thē, for thou raysest, me and wakenest me, but I wil be well content with this byt¦ternes. Neuerthelesse my conuer∣sacion hath so pleased the that yu wouldest not make an ende of my life, so that thou hast cast my sinnes be¦hinde
thy backe. or hell prayseth not the death doth not magnifie ye hey that go downe into the graue prayse not thy truth, but the lyuinge:yea, the lyuing acknowledge y• lyke as I dooe this day, ye father telleth his chyldren of thy faythfulnes. Deliuer vs (O Lord) and we wyl sing prayses in thi house all the daies of oure life. . Frō ye gates of hell, Lorde deliuer them. . Let euery spirits geue prayse vnto the Lord
Ps Laudate dnm de celis. Ver. Frō the gates of hel. Answer. Lord deliuer their soules. An. I am the resurreccion & life, he yt be∣leueth in me, yea although he were deade, yet shall he liue, and whosoeuer liueth and beleueth in me, shall not se euerlastynge death. Psalme  Benedictus dns. Lorde haue mercy on vs. Christ haue mercy on vs. Lde haue mercy on vs. Our father. And leade vs not. But deliuer vs. ¶ The  Psalme Exaltabo
cōmynge of thy sonne our Lorde Chryst, we with all other faythful people may be graciously brought vn∣to ioyes euerlastinge, whi∣che shalt come to iudge both the quicke and deade. By Christ our Lorde. Amen. FINIS.
¶ Imprynted in London by Ry∣charde  dwel¦lynge within the cir∣cuite of the late  prynter to the Prynces grace▪ (✚) Cum priuilegio ad imprimendū solum
