1649 S115503 99850722 15947
TWO GODLY AND FRVITFVLL TREATISES: The one, Vpon the Lords Prayer: The other, Vpon the sixe Principles. Both penned by that learned man, Paul Baine, sometimes Preacher of Gods word at S. Andrewes in Cambridge. LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his shop at the great South-doore of Paules. 1619.
To the honorable SIR THOMAS SMITH Knight, late Embassadour from his Maiesty to the Emperour of Russia, Go∣uernour of the famous So∣cieties trading to the East Indies, Muscouia, &c. all blessings of this life and the next. HOnorable Sir, that Axiome in morall Phi∣losophie so often vsed, that Bonum est sui diffusiuum, Good is of a spreading nature,
hath preuailed with me to go on in further pub∣lishing a parcell of the writings of that worthie Diuine and faithfull ser∣uant of God, Maister PAVL BAINE. The former tractates that are abroad, I heare to be thankfully entertained in the Church of God. And therefore the Printers still importune me to set forth that which remaineth vnpublished; almost chal∣lenging me as one that inuert to my priuate good, such things as should be communicated for gene∣rall benefit. Which asper∣sion
that I may wipe off from my selfe, I haue gi∣uen way to the printing of the two ensuing vse∣full Treatises. To the which that I haue pre∣fixed your honourable name, let it not (I beseech you) seeme any presumpti∣on. For there being many ends of dedicating bookes, yet the two most frequent∣ly vsed, are to procure countenance to the bookes so dedicated, and to testifie the thankfulnesse of the Dedicators. Both which ends I confesse my selfe to haue aimed at in this de∣dication: howbeit the lat∣ter
beareth with me the greater sway. For hauing my selfe, honoured Sir, tasted the fruites of your loue, yet my desire is, not onely to be thankfull to you for my selfe, but much more for the many, and great kindnesses, a long time continued to my deare Parents. To whom what is it you could well do, and haue not largely performed? The particu∣lars I need not proclaime, what personall loue you haue vouchsafed them∣selues; what bountie (ma∣ny times) by my louing mothers hand, you haue
sent to releeue the necessi∣ties of diuerse poore peo∣ple, who haue blessed God for you in that behalfe. Go on thus still, worthie Knight, to do well; and as you haue had the honour of religious profession heretofore, so prouide that your last dayes may a∣bound with such fruites, as are found with them that flourish in the Courts of our God, (as the Psal∣mist saith) who still bring forth fruite in old age,Psal. 92.13.14. be∣ing fat, and flourishing. To the helping forward of which things, if this good & godly Manuel may con∣duce,
(as vpon diligent reading I trust it will) I shall praise the Lord, whom I beseech heartily to blesse your selfe, and your vertuous Ladie, with the young Knight your onely issue liuing. Lime-streete the 11. of December. 1618. Readie at your honou∣rable commande∣ment to his power, E. C.
A Treatise vpon the LORDS Prayer. THis prayer hath three parts, the first is the Preface; in which is de∣clared whom we must pray vnto, in these words: O our Father which art in heauen. The second part is the prayer it selfe, standing on sixe petitions. The last is the Conclusion, which ren∣dreth a reason why we pray to God alone; be∣cause
the kingdome, which is all authority to grant our requests, be∣longeth to him: the po∣wer, that is, all abilitie to execute our desires, is with him: the glory, that is, all this honour of be∣ing acknowledged a fountain of good things, belongeth to him a Fa∣ther of lights, from whō euery good gift descen∣deth; who in this regard is onely to be inuocated and praised. From the Preface in generall ob∣serue; No Angels or Saints departed, but God our Father onely must be
inuocated of vs. In no∣thing be carefull,Phil. 4.6. but let your requests be known to God with thanksgi∣uing: Whatsoeuer you aske my Father in my name, you shall receiue it. What an vnseemely thing were it, that chil∣dren should seeke to ser∣uants in the house for supplie of what they want, not to their natu∣rall parents? so here. A∣gaine, we cannot call vpon any religiously, on whom we may not be∣leeue. Rom. 10. Now to deriue faith from any creature is a thing ac∣cursed.
Ier. 17. Cursed is he that maketh flesh his arme, and is with∣drawne from the Lord. Thirdly, to pray faithful∣ly, (that is, so as we are perswadéd that we shall receiue that we aske) re∣quireth knowledge of three things: First, that the partie we pray to or call on, doth heare vs to know our desires: Se∣condly, that he is willing to helpe vs: Thirdly, that he hath ability to accō∣plish what he willeth. Now for mentall praiers the Angels often can∣not know them; God
who only searcheth the hearts and reines, vnder∣standeth such prayers as are mentall and vocall: the Saints in heauen haue no meanes how to vnderstand them, for a∣ny thing the Scripture teacheth. I know mans presumption voucheth many reasons why An∣gels should heare vocall prayers; which are as easily reiected as reci∣ted. Had they know∣ledge, yet the other things are doubtfull; for they can do nothing which they will not, and they will not do any
thing to which God cal∣leth them not; they are so perfectly conformed to his pleasure, and at∣tend his beckoning in all things. Fourthly, it is his will to be called on, and so to performe that he knoweth we want; and he is both willing and able to supply it vnto vs. We may argue from this prayer thus: That which is a perfect plat∣forme of prayer, teach∣eth as perfectly who must be called on, as it teacheth what is to be asked: But this is a per∣fect
forme of praier, tea∣ching fully what things soeuer may be asked; Therefore it teacheth vs fully what kind of per∣sons may be called on. Ob. The Sonne and the Spirit are not here ex∣pressed? An. The Father excludeth all other per∣sons that are pure crea∣tures, not persons which haue the same singular essence with him. Se∣condly, these are not named, because such is the diuine dispensation, that though whē one is inuocated all are inuo∣cated; yet the Father is
fitly alone named, be∣cause the Sonne hath the part of a Mediator, through whom we go to the Father; and the Spirit the office of a schoolemaster, teaching what to pray, and as we ought. Whence the Councell decreed, yt not Christ, nor the Spirit should be named in di∣recting publike prayers to God; a plaine argu∣ment that the naming of Saints was not dreamed of by those times. Let vs then make ye name of the Lord our strong Tower, to which we flie seeking
saluation. Parents loue not when their children are strange towards thē and stand aloofe, being in the meane while affa∣ble enough to others. No, let vs not with God ioyne others. Men loue not to be sorted in any businesse but with their peeres and equals; so neither shall the liuing God like to be matched with his creatures. Now in particular. First, that he setteth downe not a single forme, but a forme of speech of ma∣ny conioyned, it doth teach, that We must not,
because we pray alone, be carelesse of ioyning with others in prayer. He tea∣cheth his disciples ioynt∣ly to pray, Our Father, &c.Mat. 18.20. and, Where two or three are gathered toge∣ther, I am in the midst of them. Looke as if a sin∣gle prisoner should aske vs ought, it hath his force; but when all in the house lift vp their voices at once, it is much more piercing; so in this mat∣ter: which letteth vs see how wide such are, who will make light of pray∣ing with other, they hope they may pray for
themselues, and like the old saying, Euery man for himselfe & God for vs all. Secondly, hence we note that in our prayers we must be mindfull of others as wel as our selues. For as he teacheth them to pray, and to say, Our Father, because they were more then one ioyntly before him; so in this regard that he might make them mind∣full of all their brethren, called, or vncalled, that belong to the election of God:Ephes. 6.18. Watch vnto prayer for all Saints; not
that we may not make a prayer wherein we must not mention others, but because wee must not faile at cōuenient times in the exercise of praier, to mention others as wel as our selues, seeking their peace with God. We are members of one body: and therfore must helpe one another; and such as haue learned loue and mercy, cannot but seeke at God the prosperity of their bre∣thren, whose conflicting state they know by good experience in thēselues; wherfore we must stirre
our selues vp to the faithfull performance of this dutie. He were a gracelesse childe that would neuer pray for his mother; & we would thinke he would do lit∣tle for vs, that would not lend vs a good word here or there: so when we remember not the Church, and will not open our mouthes one for another to God, what loue is there? Se∣condly, let vs therefore frequent this dutie, not in word or shew, but in deed and truth. From the practise of this dutie
it cometh to passe that a Christian man is like a rich merchant, who hath his factors in diuers countries: so a Christian man hath in all places of the world some that deale for him with God (that neuer saw his face) who are petitioners for him vnto God. Thirdly, hence that he teacheth vs to pray, Our Father, we learne, that We must in prayer to God come with loue to the brethren. If thou art about to offer thy sacrifice at the altar,Mat. 5.23.24. and remembrest thou hast any thing against
thy brethren, go, recon∣cile thy selfe first, then do thy duty after; other∣wise the Lord will turne away from our prayer. If one should giue the King a petition, and car∣rie in his hand, or about him, some stinking sa∣uour which the sence of any abhorred, could he thinke but the King would turne from him? So he that cometh peti∣tioning to God with wrath and malice, which stinketh odiously in Gods nostrils, must look that God will turne his countenance from him.
Hence Saint Peter saith,1. Pet. 3.7. that by wrath prayers are troubled; wherefore let vs labor to be of bro∣therly affection one to∣wards another. Should our parents know that we are fallen forth with our brethren, durst we come in their sight? would we looke for o∣ther then to be checked from them? euen so the Lord will turne his back to our prayers, while our affections are turned a∣gainst our brethren. Further, obserue hence both a ground of reue∣rence and hope, when
we come to deale with God: If I be a Father,Mal. 1.6. where is my reuerence? We come with reue∣rence before our earthly Princes, and in all our gestures expresse it: how much more must this be in vs, when we haue to deale with the liuing God? for this Father is impartiall in iustice, that we haue need to con∣uerse before him in feare. Againe, it is a ground of hope; earthly parents will not deny their children good things: much lesse shall God deny vs his Spirit,
and what euer thing is good for vs. This there∣fore doth rebuke the rudenesse of some that care not how vnprepa∣red they fall vpon pray∣ers, how rude gesture they vse in it, how vn∣mannerly they breake away after it, vsing their Father as if he were a cypher, or a father of clouts, rather thē a God that will without respect of persons iudge euery one. Our doubting minds must hence be re∣proued, and strengthe∣ned. How confidently do children come to
their parents? If we haue a suite to a friend which is reasonable, we will presume it; how much more may wee be of good hope in all our re∣quests which we make to God? Which art in heauen, &c. By manifesting the effect of glory; other∣wise he filleth heauen & earth, yea all the crea∣ture is with him as a moate within the light of the Sunne; but looke as a King who by his au∣thority & power ruleth ouer all his kingdome, is at the Court more espe∣cially
displaying there the glory of his maiesty: so God whose essence and presence of powers is euery where, in the heauens as in the Court of his Maiesty, doth ma∣nifest his glory more ex∣cellently. Obserue then; that In coming to God we must set before vs his heauenly Maiesty. For this stirreth vp reuerence, moueth deuotion, making vs to be heauenly minded, strengthening our faith. The glister of the pomp of earthly Princes doth moue the subiect to all
humble regard of them, to al seemly submisnesse in their behauiours to∣wards them: and doubt∣lesse, the not being stri∣ken with any considera∣tion this way, doth make vs so loose and heedlesse when we approach to God. Againe, this doth admonish vs to be hea∣uenly minded, if we will haue any coniunction with God: for as he that would speak to the King at Court, must bodily moue himselfe thither where the King bideth; so we that would speake with God, who dwelleth
in heauenly glory (a∣boue all this visible frame of the creature) we must in spirit by faith moue our hearts thither, where he is. Besides, where our Father is, there our country is: Vbi pater ibi patria: & there∣fore as pilgrimes and strangers do long after their natiue soiles, so must we after that glo∣rious inheritance, which our father in the heauēs reserueth for vs. Third∣ly, it confirmeth vs in our faith: being in hea∣uen, he both seeth our wants, and is of all
strength and power to effect our desires. Our God is in heauen, and doth whatsoeuer he will. Parents earthly who haue large hearts, haue short hands, though they wish vs well, yet they haue no power to effect what they would; Were it thus with our Father, faith were sha∣ken: but whē he wanteth not will as a father, nor power as a heauenly gouernour, our faith is firmly vnderpropped. How then are we to ac∣cuse our selues, who know not how suffici∣ently
to admire and a∣dore an earthly maiesty, a mortall man, and yet are so respectlesse of the high excellency of God? How slow of heart are we, that we are not rai∣sed vp higher then these earthly things, when we are to deale with our God glorious in the heauens? Why do wee dread and trust in the power of mā, not awing nor hauing confidence in this power, when the power of euery creature higher then the earth is vnresistable by it? as what power of flesh can
resist the least cloud frō dropping his raine, the least starre from sending forth his light and influ∣ence? What a power is this of the Creator of al these things, who dwel∣leth in glorie aboue them? Let vs therefore considering this hea∣uenly, glory our Father hath, grow vp to more reuerence, deuotion, and affiance towards him. Now follow the petiti∣ons, in which I will ob∣serue this order: First, to open the phrase of them where it is needfull. Se∣condly, to shew the con∣tents
of euery petition. Thirdly, considerations how we may feelingly come to make our seue∣uerall requests to God. Fourthly, the cōclusions which may be drawne from them. Hallowed be thy Name. Name is put here for God, by name, or any other wayes notified, that is, made knowne to vs: Name put for the person named, as Acts 1.15, by a Metonymie of the adiunct, and so named, one kind of ma∣nifesting a person, for all other, by a Synecdoche.
Hallowed here signifieth to be manifested, and acknowledged holy; as wisdome is iustified of her children: so declared to be, and approoued of those that embrace her. The summe is, that God wold so worke, that him∣selfe howsoeuer made knowne by titles, word or works, may be discer∣ned of vs as holy, and so confessed, and accor∣dingly respected of vs; that God would effect this that himselfe may be more and more ho∣nored of vs, who are his chosen, and in all others
that are the children of destruction. First then, here we aske that God would worke all such things as may be matter of his praise, whether they be good things towards his children, or iudgements vpon the wicked. For thus God doth honour himselfe, when he doth such things before vs, vpon which we take oc∣casion to honour him. Hence it is that he will win honor to his Name in deliuering his chil∣dren; and when he in∣flicted that iudgement
on Aarons sonnes, he said, he would be glori∣fied in such as come neare him: if he might not haue it from them, he wold haue it in them, by sending such iudg∣ments on them, as might be matter of his glorie. Secondly, we aske of  God to refraine the bringing of such things vpon vs, which might make wicked ones take occasion to prophane his Name. For when God saith, he will not pollute his Name a∣mong the heathen, by
the vtter extinguishing of his people, he doth teach vs that the giuing occasion to wicked ones to crow against his peo∣ple, and himselfe their God, is a dishonor of his Maiestie; and there∣fore here we pray it may be preuented. Yet if it so fall out that the state of Gods people is incor∣rigible, and they will not be reclaimed from pro∣phaning Gods Name, it is better that the open enemy should blas∣pheme them, then that he should receiue such intollerable indignity
from his owne people. Thirdly, we aske yt God would make vs grow vp to acknowledge him, in all meanes, and wayes of his, wherein he manife∣steth his glory. For as the Sun shining bright∣ly, should be glorious in it selfe, but if eyes were not opened to behold it, it should not be had in accompt as glorious with man; so the Lord, glorious in all his wayes, hath not that glorie in his creature, till, the eye of the mind opened, this be discerned of them.
Fourthly, we aske that he would enable vs in spirit, word, and worke, to giue him glory from our selues, and seeke that others may do the same, moued by our words & works; that as we dis∣cerne him to be holy & glorious euery way, so we may accordingly glorifie him. For these may be distinguished; yea seuered, Rom. 1.21. that we might be zealous of his glory. Fiftly, for others as yet vncalled, they are two-fold, belonging to the election of grace, or
otherwise. Now for the former we intreate that God would daily bring them home to glorifie him with vs, yea that he would giue them godly sorrow for such things as before their visitation they heedlesly negle∣cted, Psal. 67. For other we pray, that God wold restraine them from their high prophanation of his Name, and that he would turne their rage (and so by proportion all their other sinnes) to the praise of his Name, Psal. 18. Now to say this petition feelingly, wee
must cōsider. First, how necessary a thing it is that God should haue his glory: for to this end all things were made, we liue, moue, and haue be∣ing from him to no o∣ther  purpose. Secondly, though this is so neces∣sary, yet how little God is honoured by vs who are his, he passing by vs in many parts of his pro∣uidence we not seeing him, nor taking any heed to him in the things we do see; not affected with feare, ioy, thankfulnesse as they require, little thinking on him, not
speaking of him to his praise, not ordering all our works in such sort as they might be to the glorie of him our hea∣uenly Father. How ma∣ny wayes do we take his Name in vaine? Thirdly,  we must consider how our hearts are so poyso∣ned with loue of our owne names, estima∣tion, & that glory which is from man, that we are altogether carelesse of Gods glory. Hence it is that if we circumstanti∣ally so faile, that it cra∣seth our reputation in any kind with men, it
doth sting vs; but when we fault towards God, we passe it ouer well enough. Hence it is that if one put the least con∣temptuous behauiour vpon vs, vsing a terme of any disgrace, it doth kin∣dle cooles presently; but we can heare Gods Name dishonored, and not be affected, and mo∣ued with it. We had need therefore to pray vnto God, that he would heale this matter.  Fourthly, to marke how fearefully with wicked ones not yet called, Gods Name is propha∣ned:
Doth it not pittie vs when we heare that our friends haue such seruants as do twentie dishonest parts, which will redound to their discredit? Did we see their giuing no regard to their maister, rioting his goods otherwise then he commandeth, drinking themselues drunke in his cellers, would it not grieue vs? Thus that Lord of vs all, that Maister in heauen is vsed by those that should be seruants vnto him; which if we will weigh, we cannot
but crie to him for helpe that those deluges of his dishonour might be stopped and diminished.  Fiftly, Gods promises to such as seeke his glory, and threatning to such as do otherwise; he will honour such as honour him, and such as despise him shall be despised. These things pondered, wil ingender some more feeling when we preferre this petition. The things to be collected are these. First, that the chiefe thing that we are to de∣sire, is that God may more & more be hono∣red;
this is to be dearer to vs then our owne soules, which made Paul and Moses so affected, that they could with the hazard of their soules haue promoted it. Rom. 10. We see it hath the first place; this is more worthy then all the crea∣ture besides. The end is more worthie, then that which serueth to the end; as meate and drink which serue to maintain the bodily life, are not so good as the body. So when all the creature & all the actions of vs, are to tend hither, that God
may be glorified, it is sure that Gods glorie is farre more excellent; which must make vs seeke that he be more & more sanctified of vs. We see that seruants of honourable personages they are all for their Lords honour; they will runne into bookes, and out of good inheritan∣ces sometimes, to main∣taine a kind of gallancy, which graceth, as they thinke, the personage they serue; shall not we to our great good ho∣nour our God? O let vs seeke it. Who will keepe
a seruant no way to his credit? no more wil God let vs retaine vnto him alwayes, if we be so care∣lesse to him this way. Secondly, when we seeke this at God, we confesse it is God that teacheth and enableth vs to honour him. Our children haue no beha∣uiours more ciuill, to our credit, which we do not traine them vnto. None by nature vnder∣standeth, none enqui∣reth after God; nor yet care to glorifie him as God; as he is the God that teacheth vs to pro∣fit
in all points so in this. The vse of it is to teach vs to referre all vnto God, that we do prospe∣rously this way, who worketh it in vs, not our selues; as also to teach vs on whom we must hang with conscience of our own wants, that we may more and more be ena∣bled this way. Thirdly, hence we see what care we must haue neither to dishonour God our selues, nor to partake with it in others: for so doing we seeme to mocke God, and de∣nie in deed, that which
we beg in words: he that asketh his daily bread, and is carelesse to get, or saue any thing by some lawfull calling, should deride and tempt the li∣uing God. Finally, from hence we perceiue, that spying Gods dishonour, wee must be grieued: For who can desire that tru∣ly but it will grieue him to see the contrary? Yea we must by eiaculation of our mind renew our requests, (when we see such spectacles) that God himself would pro∣uide for the maintaining
the honour of his owne Name. Thy kingdome come. A kingdome is such an order or state of men, in which one gouerneth, the rest are subiect, vnto their good. So Gods kingdome is such an or∣der, or estate, wherein God hath all suprema∣cie, and men acknow∣ledge themselues liege∣men to his Maiesty, to their great benefit tem∣porall and eternall. For the kingdome of power is not here meant vnder which the diuels them∣selues liue: but that king∣dome
of heauen pro∣phecied by Daniel: which is such a gouern∣mēt in which God most graciously ruleth, & we willingly obey, to our e∣uerlasting happinesse. This kingdome God ru∣leth partly mediatly by his Vice Roy Iesus Christ; partly immediat∣ly when Christ shall re∣signe vp that Mediator-like kingdome, as hauing now brought all to God his Father. Who then shall alone with his Son (as the second person, not as Mediator) and Spirit, be all in all. So we
pray that God would that the honour of his Name may be ampli∣fied, make his gouern∣ment spread in the hearts of men, that the number of his subiects may be increased, and subiection augmented, who are all brought vn∣der him, till all be perfe∣cted in the kingdome of glorie. The things that we aske are: First, that God would cast downe the king∣dome of Sathan, and all the props and pillars of it, where yet it is vnsha∣ken;
in this God is glo∣rious, as a lawfull King in subiugating vsurping tyrants. Secondly, that God  would plant both out∣wardly and inwardly the externall face, and in∣ward substance of his kingdome where yet it is not. Thirdly, for our selues  conuerted, that God would roote out there∣lickes of darknesse in vs; which are as yet not sub∣dued to his grace. That he would con∣tinually  increase in vs all those heauenly vertues
that he hath begun of his mercie. That he would sub∣due all the enmities and impediments which Sa∣than raiseth to let vs this way. That he would giue vs all meanes seruing to this end. Lastly, that he would bring vs to his king∣dome of glorie. For such as are vncal∣led, not belonging to Gods mercy we pray: That Gods power may bring them on their knees, and that they may be crushed with a rod
of iron. Motiues to the de∣uoure asking of those things. First, to consider the  breadth of the diuels possession, how potent and numbersome his subiects are. Who could see the King holding some Shire within his kingdome, and enemies spread like Grashoppers ouer the face of all his countrie? Besides, what good subiect that loued the honor of the King, could thinke on this, or the wilt with drie eyes? Secondly, we must
weigh what a glory it is to God, and security to vs, when true hearted Is∣raelites are increased, as a Princelike Diademe; such is the multitude of well ordered subiects. Thirdly, we must con∣sider the strong battell which this strong man the diuell & his Angels make (hindring the en∣trance of Gods king∣dome nationally or per∣sonally) to all sincere or∣dinances of God, to all the more full conformi∣tie and subiection of those who are already conuerted from Sathan
to God. Fourthly, to obserue  what a deale of darknes and lusts of darknesse remaine, like Cananites, as prickes and thornes in vs. Fiftly, how prone we  are to fall away and be brought backe againe, and how farre we are frō being fully subdued to God. Finally, what miseries  we are here subiect to, what blessednesse wee want, because the king∣dome of God is not yet fully come. These things well
pondered will make vs feelingly crie to God that his kingdome may come. Doth not euery good subiect wish the enlargement of the Kings territories, the rooting out of all oppo∣sites, that set themselues against the prosperity of his kingdome? So must we if we be true subiects to the kingdome of glo∣rie. Did we border vp∣pon the Turkish Em∣pire, so that we were of∣ten forraged, would it not make vs crie to God for helpe? and shall the diuell still sinke vs in our
persons, euery where in∣uading, and shall we be silent? What tyrannie to Sathans and sinnes ty∣rannie? What wants to the wants of righteous∣nesse, peace, ioy? &c. in which things Gods kingdome cometh. We should seeke it so farre as we want it, and ioy in it so farre as we partake in it: to be naturalised in∣to our kingdome is a be∣nefit great ones esteeme; but to be within Gods kingdome, ô how bles∣sed? Doctrines to be de∣duced.
First, who it is that can trample Sathan vn∣der our feet, & dissolue the workes of the diuell: it is God alone: it is he that must turne vs be∣fore we be turned out of the kingdome of darknesse. Praier presup∣poseth both want of that we aske, and impo∣tency in our selues to at∣taine it, or that it is out of our power. Againe, the strong man holds possession till a stronger cometh. Now who is, of any other creature, stronger then Sathan, in such degree that to
cast him out the Papists giue some place in this worke to the libertie of our will? But though it be true, we turne because we will turne to God, yet (we will turne) doth note, not the principall cause, but a cause subor∣dinate, working by way of free disposition, which disposition it re∣ceiueth from God, not from naturall strength, so that still all is by him. Men turne not, because they will not conuert; [because] here noteth the fundamentall, radi∣call, prime cause of im∣penitent
not conuer∣ting, which the wil doth by way of disposition, which it hath by nature of it selfe vnto sinne. But it is otherwise when we say, This man conuerts to God because he will conuert; for here God is presupposed the princi∣pall Agent; man a se∣condary and instrumen∣tall; the habite disposing him to do this, being grace receiued frō God, not deriued to him with his nature. Away there∣fore with Papists do∣ctrine, which make the will of man in a manner
almightie. God offers grace like as a Merchant setteth his wares to sell, leauing it to our will whether we will buy or no. Were this true, if you aske what discer∣neth me from another vnconuerted? I answer, My will; I by the free∣dome I had of will, took that proffered, which another by the same li∣bertie refused. Secondly, marke who must strengthen, con∣firme, and perfect all things begun in vs; he sanctifieth vs through∣out. Euen as the Sunne
first bringing light, doth more and more subdue all the darknesse of the aire, till it come to full strength; so the same God that first dispelleth the darknesse of sinne and ignorance, doth more and more perfect the light begun, till it come to glorie: and as the same Physition which first recouereth vs from some deadly lin∣gering euill, must after restore decayed strength and cleanse all relickes of sicke matter, by such diets as Art aduiseth, so God, &c. What then if
we see all weake, ready to ouerturne; many gra∣ces in a manner vtterly wanting, so weake they are in vs? God that cal∣leth the things that are not, as if they were, is the beginner and perfecter of his kingdome. Thirdly, that Gods kingdome is but in part come vnto vs; we see not all things as yet put vnder him; many not called, many enemies & euils vnsubdued, many works of darknesse han∣ging about vs: which must comfort vs, though we find these things; we
could not say this praier, were there not matter of this nature still dwel∣ling with vs, in our con∣flicting course. We are said to be translated out of the kingdome of Sa∣than, in regard yt we do not volūtarily suffer vn∣der him as a lawful King, but vnwillingly as vnder an vsurper too strong for vs. Againe, he is be∣gun to be, and certainly shall be cast out. Now that is said to be done, which a while is so in doing that it certainly shall be finished. Lastly, note what e∣uery
true Christian must seeke with his vt∣most endeuour, that both himself and others be in subiection to God. We should with Ieremie and Dauid bewaile the auersenesse of others, & rebellions they liue in a∣gainst God: and like Paul, bemone the lawes of euill which dwell in vs, &c. Euery one would haue God to saue him, but few heartily desire that God would rule o∣uer him. How do Pa∣pists seeke to propagate the Popes kingdome? They find out new
worlds, rather then his subiects should not be made vp: & how would a naturall subiect grieue to spie in himselfe much falshood, much rebel∣lion against his Soue∣raigne? So must wee grieue that wee haue hearts so false and rebel∣lious against God. How do men professe perfect conformitie and totall subiection to men? Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. In which words two things are to be noted; first, the doing of Gods will: secondly the
manner. The wil of God signifieth not his secret vnresistable will, but his will as it is reuealed to vs, that we should walke after it. [In earth] Earth, in this place, is put by a Metonymie of the sub∣iect, for men dwelling on the earth. [As it is in heauen] that is, readily in all parts, constantly, with some resemblance to the heauenly crea∣tures, though not with like perfection. The summe is, that whatsoe∣uer God reuealeth as his will vnto vs, which he would haue vs do, or
by euent maketh known as his will, which wee must suffer, that we may obey him both in the one and the other; like as the heauenly crea∣tures obey him, though not with like perfection. The things we aske are  these: That God would bring such as belong to his mercie frō the snare in which they are taken to do the diuels & their owe will, to do his owne pleasure and worke in  his vineyard. Secondly, for our selues, that he would giue vs grace more and more to re∣nounce,
and die to our owne works; and that he would strengthen vs with grace more fully in all parts to obey him: so that we may increase like good trees, in bea∣ring the fruites of righ∣teousnesse, till we feele not our selues, but Christ, thinking, spea∣king, working in vs. Thirdly, that he would  make vs perseuer in his obedience to the end, and in the end. Fourth∣ly  that he would giue vs in all the euils we en∣dure, to make his will our will, and blesse his
Name. Considerations mouing to the more de∣uout making of this re∣quest are these. First, to think how most liue in the open breach of all Gods Comman∣dements. Would it not grieue a good subiect to see men trample downe the Kings lawes, and euery one runne vp∣pon his owne head? Se∣condly,  to thinke in how many things daily wee offend in our vnfruitful∣nesse, which maketh vs rather be vtterly idle, & picke strawes, then gird vp our selues to holy
thoughts? Our idle light discourse, our inor∣dinate affections, our trespasses euery where, & following our owne lusts. Thirdly, how im∣perfectly, and in a sorrie  fashion, we performe our daily duties both towards God, and one another; what a deale of sinne cleaueth to them, that we find not , we cannot per∣fect ye things we desire. Fourthly, our inconstan¦cie, which maketh vs no  sooner in a good thing, but we are out againe: and as little birds leape
from pule to sprigge, so we are out and in, and through sloth cannot hold out at these works, which are a dead worke to our vnregenerate  parts. Fiftly, our vtter impotencie to thinke, will, do, perfect (in some sort) and perseuer in a∣ny good things; and the strength of our naturall inclinations carying vs another way. Lastly, the manifold discomforts which the diuell doth muster a∣gainst vs, that he might keepe vs from entring into, or continuing on,
in any good action. The conclusions are these: First, that it is God  that giueth vs both will and deed, maketh vs perseuer in euery good word and worke, teach∣eth vs to profit in obe∣dience. Hos. 13. In me your fruite is found. Ioh. 15. Out of me you can do nothing. In thoughts and words we are like eckoes, we cannot speak inwardly or outwardly till God hath spoken first to vs in the deeds we do: he prepareth thē and worketh them first,
we after him in nature, as a boy writing vnder one who leadeth his hand in that he writeth. For, longer then God acteth the grace we haue, it moueth not at all: for as an instrument now set in tune giueth no sound if some Musi∣tian touch it not; so we when Gods kingdome coming hath disposed vs by grace, and made vs fit to worke well, yet cannot worke any thing till God moueth vs vnto it, nor yet continue in working, longer then he vpholdeth vs in it. This
then is our sanctuary a∣gainst all our vnfruitful∣nesse and disobedience: hold the Lord who hath vndertaken to write his Law in thy heart, and to put his Spirit in thee, and make thee obey his commandement. And this must teach vs to giue all glorie to him, who is the first and prin∣cipall worker of euery good thing in vs. Secondly, we note  hence, that no mans o∣bedience is perfect; for that we pray for is not yet attained. In many things we sinne, in the
good things we do, we cānot perfect them: the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit a gainst the flesh, that we cannot do the things we would. Not that our deeds are sinnes, but the best of them is sinfull: As wine hauing some water mingled with it, yet is called wine; for the best part giueth de∣nominatiō to the whole. The Papists know not what it is truly to make this petition, that write so much for the iustice of workes. Thirdly, note that
Christians must not cō∣tent themselues in any thing they haue attai∣ned, but must striue to perfection:Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect as your heauenly Fa∣ther is perfect. We must shoote at the highest marke, though we take our arrowes vp short enough daily. When we call men still on, they thinke wee know not what we would haue; do they not thus, and thus? &c. but he that laboreth not to be better, will grow worse and worse, for who gathereth not, scattereth.
Fourthly, we see true Christians must be as carefull to haue good liues, words, workes, &c. as good hearts. We say not onely thy king∣dome come, but thy will be done. Euery man will hope he hath grace in his heart, and yet no man careth for obedi∣ence in his life; but the not doers of Gods will deceiue themselues. Petition 4. Giue vs this day our daily bread: The words are easie all but the last [Bread;] it is put for whatsoeuer thing sustaineth this
present life and comfor∣teth it. Ionathan eating honie, is accounted to breake the oath of ea∣ting bread. Daily bread is whatsoeuer is conue∣nient for vs to possesse for the present; so giue of mercy to vs, and then renewing our faith and inuocation daily to∣wards thee, who carest for vs, all such things which thou seest we may conueniently pos∣sesse for the present time. First for those who are Gods, but yet vncal∣led, whether hauing a∣boundance, but with∣out
the title of inheri∣tance, or haue neither title nor possession of a∣ny thing, (for many belonging to mercie conflict with extreame pouertie) we pray in the behalfe of these, that God would giue as a Fa∣ther to the one, as chil∣dren & heires in Christ, the things they haue; for the other, that God would be pleased by a new grant, to furnish them with necessaries, who haue iustly, as we all, forfeited all things. We who haue some∣thing about vs, yet find
want of others; we wish that God would supply vs so farre, as he seeth good for vs. We who are called, and haue for outward things more then we could in mode∣stie aske, (for God doth for his sometimes this way, and other, aboue that they can aske or thinke:) we do beg at God to maintaine these things vnto vs; for he must vphold our lot as well as deale vs forth our portion. Secondly, we wish that God would giue vs his leaue to vse the things wee haue.
Thirdly, that he would giue vs power to take a taste of such comforts which through his al∣lowance, we haue liber∣tie of conscience to vse. Fourthly, that he would with his blessing make them comfortable to vs, so that we may with gladnesse of heart vse them. And from hence we may see that euery one hath reason to make this petition which shall be. Now if we be in Christ, and yet poore, hauing in a manner no¦thing, wee pray that God out of his secret
would minister to vs, & make the fruite of his daily prouidence a con∣tented portion vnto vs, be it neuer so little; and finally make vs see him by faith our all sufficient God, that will not leaue vs, nor forsake vs. The motiues breeding deuo∣tions this way are, First,  for all that find the want yet of something, for the more comfortable seruice of God, that they would well weigh the wants of others and of themselues. Second∣ly,  consider what a sweet thing it is, to feele this,
that God or his grace giueth this or this to vs. If we sit at boord with great personages, if they carue vs a bit and giue it vs, the whole feast is not so sweete to vs, as their honorable remembrāce of vs. All the creature is a deafe ut, and no bet∣ter if God be not percei∣ued in it. Lastly, that he would blesse all meanes we vse, tending to pre∣seruation of this present life. Thirdly, for such as haue abundance, they must consider, how he that giueth these things is the maintainer of thē;
how easily God might bring the things they haue to nothing, letting riotous seruants and children like back dores, bring downe the house. Secondly, how many wayes God can keepe them frō being able to vse or find comfort in a∣ny thing they take or possesse; if he send a scru∣ple into the conscience touching the lawful∣nesse of it, if he send sicknesse, deepe discon∣tents, lingering after that we haue not; or o∣therwise, if he should giue vs to such weak∣nesse
in vsing any thing, that we should breed our selues more bitter∣nesse in the end, then we take comfort in the first tasting of them; how lit∣tle things put vs out, that for the time all we haue is nothing to vs? Lastly, we must consi∣der how all things with∣out Gods blessing are nothing, clothes warme not, meates nourish not, physicke heales not, la∣bors prosper not to ef∣fect any thing: which those well know, whose false affiāced harts haue bene well whipped out
of all the creature. The  cōclusions follow. First, that God giueth and maintaineth to vs all things belonging to this life. God giueth, God taketh, faith Iob.Iob 1.21. His bles∣sing maketh rich, saith Salomon; Euery good & perfect gift descendeth from him.Iam. 1.17. Mine is all the earth, I giue it to whom I will: he ope∣neth his hand and filleth euery liuing thing. For as in a house the Maister of the family keepeth (to the dogs) euery creature in it, giueth one greater another lesser wages:
putteth some in honou∣rable place, others in the scullerie: so doth God the great Pater familias, Father of all the family in heauen and in earth; neither can any deale vs a fit state but he. For as the Physitian onely can prescribe the diet, so God he seeth where a full and liberall measure, where a more sparing is expedient. The diuell he taketh vpon him that all kingdomes are his, he giueth them as he will; a lowde lie; he cannot touch a hog till God sealeth him a warrant:
and as an executioner that killeth by poyson, serueth the Magistrate: so doth he serue God in giuing a deadly sweete poisoned cup to those God leaueth to his po∣wer. Againe, though our good, friends and our meanes helpe vs with this or that, yet God is the first donor; these are instruments conueigh∣ing that which God of grace deuiseth to vs, and bestoweth vpon vs. He that sendeth a present is the giuer of it, not the man that putteth it into our hands; which doth
teach vs to be content with that wee haue. We looke our children & seruants should take that of vs which we giue them, without murmu∣ring, or discontented semblance, be it fine or course, &c. How much more must we be willing to stand to Gods car∣uing, and not dare to quetch against his dis∣position? Secondly, it teacheth vs thankfulnesse to him. If we soiourne a weeke or two with any, how thankfull are we? But we are Gods daily
guests al the yeare long: he layeth the cloath e∣uery where. The second thing is, that the least outward thing is the gift of Gods grace to vs; we deserue it not, we are lesse then the least of his mercies, saith Iacob. No∣thing is more free then gift, yea we aske it on gift, challenge it not as due. These are the chil∣dren which God of his grace hath giuen me; such therefore as will challenge heauen by forme of commutatiue iustice, because they haue giuen a penny an∣swerable
to that penny worth, were neuer taught by the Spirit of Christ. Thirdly, obserue hence, that our faith and inuo∣cation must be daily re∣newed towards God for his care on vs in this life. Whatsoeuer we haue, our faith must be no lesse on him, then if we were stripped naked of euery thing; yea our mouthes must be no lesse open wide, to him. Dauid though a King, saith, The Lord is my potion, & the sustainer of my lot. Had we done
much for one, if he whē he felt himselfe warme should not respect vs, but looke at his owne strength, would we not count it treachery? If a substantiall man, who deserued credite alone, should be lesse trusted when he layeth downe a sufficient pawne, would it be well taken? Apply this. But what need we euery day to do thus? Answer. Because all we haue, God doth let vs no longer leases of it then for the day. Againe, this we haue of anothers; we cannot vse it though we
haue it without the ow∣ners leaue; as the ser∣uants that keepe things vnder vs, we allow them not without our leaues to do their pleasure with them. Besides you heard aboue, that God can keepe vs frō touch∣ing them, or finding any cōfort in them (though we vse them) or feeling his sweet grace, as who is the giuer of them. Wherefore let vs take heed of the sensuall con∣fidence in the creature, and flie vp in spirit to him that giueth and maintaineth with vs all
things; as the Sunne which both bringeth & continueth the light with vs. Let vs not set downe our rest vpon things present, and sing with the glutton: Take thy rest soule, or with the Priest: His requies mea; but by benefit of the things we haue, let vs, as by wings, flie vp higher into beleefe on our Creator. God there∣fore delighted in this, & often to heare vs, doth keepe vs Tennants at will, as it were, frō hand to mouth often, that we might waite on him. E∣gypt
had Nilus to water it, but the land of the Is∣raelites was to expect, the first and the latter raine, when God should as a gardener with his spout pot, so from the bottels of the cloudes powre vpon them. Fourthly, obserue that we must not trou∣ble our selues with di∣strustfull cares for time to come: some are neuer well but while they haue things so flush, that they are not forced to go to God. Some though they haue neuer so much for the present,
yet if they haue nor pro∣uision for times to come, so yt they seeme to themselues out of gun-shot, they are not contented. Hence it is that many rent them∣selues a sunder with fore-casting, and fearing, touching things to come: otherwise proui∣dence for time to come, which falleth within the reach of our daily course is not forbidden. Ioseph laid vp in yeares of plen∣ty against scarcitie. We are sent to the Ant to schoole, that we may learne in Sommer to
prouide against winter, and parents de iure do lay vp treasures for their children: God would not haue vs superstiti∣ous Capuchians, who thinke it an offence to haue any thing vnspent ouer night; nor pro∣phane companions that sing Care away, and set cocke on hoope, whose money burnes in their pursses till it be consu∣med; nor yet foolish vn∣prouident ones who buy their fuell when it freeseth; but care of time to come, which cometh from vnbeleefe, and de∣sire
to be greater then that we should need to care. Lastly, marke hence what he teacheth vs vn∣der the name of Bread which is necessary, and commonly begged for food. Marke hence that our desire must be mo∣derate touching things of this present life. Thus Agur prayeth in the Prouerbs 30.8. Lord let me not want, nor a∣bound, feed me with food conuenient for me. Iacob saith, Seeing thou giuest me bread and rayment, thou shalt be
my God for euer: Paul; Hauing bread and ray∣ment, let vs be content. Nature is content with small things; and as a lampe with a litle oyle is maintained, with much extinguished; so is this light, this naturall life which the soule causeth in the bodie. And it is to be marked; for not the hauing, but the louing, and affecting of great things is sinfull. For, what God casteth vpon vs walking within the compasse of our wayes, we are with thankful∣nesse to embrace it. A
mans prosperitie is not in abundance; for the dinne and tumult which accompanie the expen∣ces that follow vpon it, are more irkesome then that exceeding of ones estate is contentfull. A moderate estate hath more ease and comfort, another more distur∣bance and ostentation. Let vs therefore bridle in our inordinate appe∣tites, which know not how to say enough. If we haue but smal things let vs learne to be con∣tent, and desire no grea∣ter. But how may we
know what is a lawfull from an vnlawfull de∣sire? Euen as you know a thirst naturall, from an vnnaturall thirst, which a dropsie or ague cau∣seth; the one with a draught is so satisfied that another is not ca∣red for: the other once serued, doth make way for fresh desire after a second: so these sinfull ones, the enioying one, is but the beginning of another. The 5. Petition: And forgiue vs, &c. This petition hath two thing to be marked.
First, the request it selfe. Secondly, the insinua∣tion of it. To forgiue a sinne is to quit vs, and set vs free from the guilt and punishment, which by reason of sinne we haue brought our selues into; and to accept of vs, and to vse vs as if we ne∣uer had offended by our sinnes: for sinne maketh vs stand debtors to Gods iustice, indebted so farre as to satisfie by suffering deserued pu∣nishment. As we forgiue. These words do not pleade a cause, vpon which God should for∣giue
vs; for we cannot loue, and so by conse∣quent cannot forgiue o∣thers, till God hath for∣giuen vs first: as the wall cannot reflect heate vp∣pon a stander by, till the Sunne hath shined vpon it. Neither do they make comparison, in this wise, to forgiue me no other∣wise; but as thou seest me ready to forgiue another; as if our for∣giuenesse were a master sampler or picture, after which God were to cō∣forme his forgiuing of vs: but they do serue partly to insinuate with
God by argument taken from the greater; We that haue much of the old leauen, by the sparke of thy grace in vs, are ready to forgiue; be thou much more: or by holding forth a signe testifying of vs, that we are persons to whom be∣longeth forgiuenesse, not shewing why wee should be forgiuen: and thus strengthening our faith to beleeue that we are heard in that re∣quest. Lastly marke; we are said to forgiue trespasses against vs; for the sinne
against God we cannot, but the iniurie or dam∣mage against our per∣sons we may; as if the Magistrate take a theefe wronging vs, we may forgiue him his iniuri∣ous mind towards vs, but cannot absolue him from the offence against the law. First, we aske that God would apply that mercie of his, reaching to forgiuenesse, vnto them that are yet the children of wrath, ouer whom yet his anger a∣bideth through their vnbeleefe: and this we
aske in respect of our brethren by grace of e∣lection, yet vncalled. Secondly, for our selues, we do not aske that God would iustifie vs; for God is not off and on, he playeth not fast and loose. Whom once he iustifieth and forgiueth their sinnes, he neuer remembreth sinne against them. We therefore whose sinnes he hath pardoned, aske three things; the conti∣nuance  of his grace, that his mercifull pardon may be a gift without repentance. Secondly,
we aske the manifesta∣tion of it, that he would make vs see and feele this forgiuenesse of his; for our daily sinnes do weaken our comforta∣ble apprehension, and dim the spirituall sight of our soules, and do blot the counterpaine with vs of this release God hath made vs. Now we get by this pe∣tition our release newly exemplified, our sight cleared, our sence resto∣red. To this second branch therefore must be referred these three things as asked by vs.
First, that God would heale the doubtings and darknesse of our minds. Secondly, that he would strengthē our faith to ful assurance in this point, that our sinnes are par∣doned. Thirdly, that he would make vs feele our peace in the ioy follow∣ing it. Thirdly, we aske in this petition, that God would spare vs as a fa∣ther doth his children, remouing from vs those temporall chastisements which our sinnes might euery way bring vpon vs, to our great smart:
for though God as a Iudge hath pardoned our sinnes, yet as a father he may scourge them in  vs. The first meane of the more deuotionall propounding this peti∣tion, is, to let our hearts smite vs in the sinnes which of infirmitie we we fall into; for because men passe by sinne im∣penitently, without con∣science of it all the day, therefore they without life and power, and fee∣ling desire, propound this request to God at  euening. Secondly, to marke how vncomfor∣table
it is when Gods countenance this way is hid from vs, and how heauie it is when dark∣nesse and doubting do grow vpon vs. Thirdly, we must get a feare of Gods fatherly corrections which we prouoke. The child that feareth the rod will be afraid and crie to haue a fault pardoned: So we must thinke what a ioy and sweet state it is to haue our Quietus est dai∣ly by vs. Let vs then ear∣nestly and affectionatly cry to our God, Forgiue vs our trespasses. What
will a Malefactor now in danger leaue vnat∣tempted to get his par∣don? what it one might be released from his debt, but asking to haue it forgiuen? who would not seeke instantly, who would spare to speake that haue this hope? The conclusions fol∣low. First, against the Pa∣pists, here is to be no∣ted, that God onely can forgiue sinne, and re¦store the feeling of his grace to vs. No man can haue the life of God before iustification vnto
life on Gods part. Now contrition out of loue to God is a supernatu∣rall life, and therefore must needs follow Gods pardon. This is a de∣monstration against the Papists; none can for∣giue sinnes but God. Secondly, against the  Papists note, that Gods forgiuenesse is free; we do not redeeme it with our satisfactions, but beg it of mercie. Thirdly, marke that  no man liueth without his daily sinnes; we like infants haue our scapes; like wounded persons
cured, our scarres, like white swans our blacke feete. Fourthly, that we may come to assurance that our sinnes are forgiuen. For whatsoeuer we aske in Christ agreeable with his will, we know that we are heard in it. They who beg a par∣don of sinne, are not sure of pardon.  False; for then Saint Peter who knew (by Papists confes∣sion) his sinnes pardo∣ned, could not say this prayer. Secondly, the construction before, sheweth, that the conti∣nuance
in forgiuenesse, not the first beginning onely is here asked. We may inuert it; they who may aske forgiuenesse may come to assurance that they haue it. Fiftly, marke that our faith and inuocation touching this point, must daily be renewed. Out of the insinua∣tion, that our forgiuing others, is a signe we are such to whom forgiue∣nesse belongeth, or a helpe strengthening vs to beleeue the forgiue∣nesse of our sinnes, ob∣serue:
All Gods actions to vs imprint their stampe in vs: his election ma∣keth vs chuse him, and chuse the houshold of faith before all others: Know, as the Apostle saith, according to the spirit, not the flesh; his loue of vs maketh vs loue him and our bre∣thren; his forgiuing vs maketh vs forgiue our brethren. Againe, when we find that a sparke of grace maketh vs readie to forgiue; how much more may we assure our selues, that God will out of his endlesse mercies
be readie to forgiue vs? and this Act of ours though it is no cause, yet it is a condition, in which God doth make vs come to feele the par∣don of our sinne which he freely forgiueth. So that as he who seeth a print of this or that I∣mage, doth know that the seale hath bene set there and applied: so wee feeling our selues readie to forgiue, do come to know this more surely, that Gods forgiuenesse hath bene applyed in vs. And as one that doth see that
done which is greater, will easily beleeue the lesser; so we seeing our selues made by his grace though sinfull ones, rea∣die to forgiue, may much more be perswa∣ded that God so infinite in goodnesse hath par∣don for vs, that we may feare him. Thirdly, as they who haue the con∣dition on which a thing is to be done, may bold∣ly expect performance of that which depen∣deth on it; so we hauing forgiuenesse, in which God hath promised vs forgiuenesse, may be
bold to assure our selues that we are pardoned. Let vs therefore nou∣rish this grace, and put away implacablenesse, which once out, will ne∣uer returne; we so for∣giue as neuer to forget: whereas Gods, and so all true forgiuing, is his neuer remembring any more that which is re∣mitted. Petition 6. And leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill. Here are two things to be considered. The petition, the explana∣tion, or correction an∣nexed
to it. Petition, Leade vs not into temp∣tation; the explanation, But deliuer vs, &c. that is, leade vs not so into temptation, but saue vs from the euill of it. We reade of three tempta∣tions. First, Gods temp∣ting man. Secondly, mans tempting God. Thirdly, the diuels temp∣ting man. The first is two-fold, as when God manifesteth his grace he hath bestowed on man, and thus he tempted Abraham: or when he maketh man see his weaknesse, and how vn∣able
he is to stand with∣out his grace. Man tempteth God, when leauing his ordinary way of waiting on God in meanes, he will put him to it, to shew his mercie, power, &c. be∣fore his time. Thus the Israelites tempted him. But the third belongeth to this petition: the di∣uels temptation, who la∣boreth to bring vs into sinne, and to with-draw vs from God to our temporall and eternall destruction. Euill here signifieth that which maketh vs worse, not in
regard of our feeling onely, but in truth and before God: as which doth harmefully sepa∣rate our vnion, or dimi∣nish our communion with God, who is our onely God and all-suffi∣cient portion. The summe is: O Lord we know it is to thy honor our life should be a warfare, neither can we here liue without temp∣tation. Do not ioyne vs against Sathan in battel, but so as still to haue vs in remembrance, that whether he tempt vs by aduersitie, or prosperity,
or what way soeuer, yet he may neuer seuer vs from thee, take vs out of thy hand, nor diminish the blessed communion we haue with thee, far∣ther then thou seest it needfull, to the end we might receiue it in great abundance. The things we aske are these. First, that God would  of his mercie keepe vs, from knowing tempta∣tion, so farre, as he may with his glory; not suffe∣ring the diuell to assaile vs this way, much lesse preuaile against vs: for though we cannot ab∣solutely
make this re∣quest, yet vnder the Lords correction, and with condition it may be propounded; If it be possible, let that cup passe. Secondly we desire, that if we needs must conflict, that yet God would vphold vs and make vs superiors; euen conquerors in euery thing, wherein we are to be tempted. Now this we do not aske ab∣solutely, for sometimes it is good that we should be foiled. Thirdly, we desire in
this petition, that God, if he see it good so to humble vs, as to let vs take the fall, yet he would not let our faith faile finally; but would so strengthen vs, that we may see all the euils that we haue suffered wor∣king to our good, and our selues at length more then conquerors, in him who loueth vs. Finally, as we aske  this presently for our selues who are alreadie in this warfare, so we wish it to all Gods elect when they shall be cal∣led to the like condi∣tion.
Now the motiues. First, to thinke to what the temptations of the diuell tend: this is the white he shooteth at, that he might make vs naked before God; stripped of his fauour, which is better then life. For the diuell seeketh by them to make vs dis∣honor God, rob our hearts of his kingdome, setter vs so with our sin, that we may be disina∣bled from obeying him; to take away all our peace and prosperity in things outward, to fill vs with feare and weari∣somnesse
in all the du∣ties we go about, and vncomfortable doub∣tings, yea despairings touching the pardon of sinne; in a word, to bereaue vs of all good which in the former pe∣titions we desire; and to bring vpon vs the con∣trary euils which are most horrible. He play∣eth no small games when he beginneth his temptations. Secondly,  we must remember how tedious his former tempting & preuailing against vs hath bene; for we (like children, who
remember beating no longer then it smarteth) we I say, remember the bitternesse of our daily falls the diuell giueth vs, no longer then God let∣teth the sting of them stick in vs; and this doth make vs that we feeling∣ly cannot pray against that whose anguish and euill we do not remem∣ber.  Thirdly, we must consider, how we are e∣uery where subiect to temptations, at home, abroad, in wife, children, seruants; in good com∣panie, to securitie and vnfruitfulnesse; in bad,
yea in good deeds; be∣fore we do them, when we haue done them: as to securitie and pride af∣ter thē, at bed, at board. For as fooles and chil∣dren, not knowing euils feare them not, so we not knowing this euill, are lesse fearefull, and flee not so fearingly, praying to haue it pre∣uented; euery where snares of temptation are laid for vs. Who that should go such a way, in which he could not take a step without danger, would not go warily, and often lift vp his
heart for protection?  Fourthly, we must think how diligent and watch∣full the diuel is; he know∣eth what baites we bite at, and will cast them out euery where: he knoweth where we are weakest, and he will ne∣uer want occasions to prouoke vs. Againe, we must thinke how migh∣ty he is, what can he not do with vs if God keepe vs not? he would carrie vs to any euill, as a whirlwind doth the dry  stubble. Fiftly, we must often repent our owne infirmities, how we be
so farre from being able to withstand him, that all we haue of our owne, is readier to follow then he to whistle vs after him. Sixtly, we must re∣member  such examples of worthies as haue bene grieuously foiled; as Da∣uid, Peter, &c. Yea presi∣dents we haue of some hanging themselues, some tempted to it; for such examples are like the thunder, though it striketh a few, it feareth all: and are not we sub∣iect to haue our minds distracted, assaulted, with any euen the most
grieuous things that e∣uer we heard to haue befallen others? Lastly, we must con∣sider what a ioy it is when we go a day more freed. Lord what an ease is it to the soule? or if we be in a litle forward∣nesse to sinne, yet if we be rescued seasonably, how doth it reioyce vs? what peace doth it speake to vs? Looke 1. Sam. 25.32. Now could we worke vpon our hearts the feeling of this benefit when he haue it, the sweetnesse of it would enforce vs to beg
it heartily; whereas not heeding the worth of it, we aske it vnaffectio∣natly. Now follow the conclusions. First, this petition  compared with the 1. Cor. 10. about the 13. God will not suffer you to be tempted: we see how that Gods suffe∣rance is to be vnder∣stood without his action, he is a voluntary agent in these things which he suffereth. We must not thinke his per∣mission is a pure permis∣sion, either without his will, or working in the
thing permitted, as of∣ten mans is; for man may be said partly to suffer this, not to do it, because other causes haue their actiuity with∣out him, and depen∣dencie on him; but it is otherwise with God. Secondly, obserue that God doth leade vs into all our temptati∣ons. It is said, Math. 4. Christ was carried of the Spirit to be tempted. God is the , he onely when he seeth meete doth bring his champions forth, and letteth the power of
darknesse encounter them; neither can the di∣uels stirre, neither we bid battell of our selues. Can the Lions stirre till the keeper bring them out? can a dog runne till he that hath him in a leasse loose him? So it is, God he hath them chai∣ned vp in his almightie power, yea throwne downe to the prison of hell: farther then he doth loose them, and bring them into the earth, where this shew is represented, and battell to be seene, they are not able to do any
thing. Againe we can∣not on the other side, being set vpon, buckle with the aduersarie po∣wer till God doth leade vs to it. The Kings champion is not to play at his owne pleasure, no more are we farther then God designeth it. But how can God leade vs into those temptati∣ons which he seeth will certainly bring vs into sinne? Answer. Because sinne it selfe is not ab∣solutely euill, but onely in respect of man sin∣ning, who would in so doing peruert the di∣uine
order, though he is vnable; as who accom∣plisheth Gods will, whē he doth contrary it, for ought he knoweth. A∣gaine, as vipers are euill substances, or natures, which yet are good to that art which maketh vipers of them; or any poison which is euill, as it is poison in it selfe considered, yet is good as it is poison, to a skil∣full physitian: and as a blister on the flesh is a naturall euill as a blister, yet a blister as a blister is good when a cunning physitian doth draw it,
and may see it for good vse; so is sin to God: we must then not cast our selues into temptation; he that loueth danger shall perish. We must not make our selues poore as those he∣ritickes that renounce all their substance, that in voluntary pouertie they may commend themselues to God. A∣gaine, this must teach vs contentment in all our temptations: not that we must preuent repen∣tance by this considera∣tion; but we must when we are truly humbled by
this meanes, keepe our selues from being swal∣lowed vp of sorrow. For Gods will, and Gods turning all to good; the diuell will whisper them so as to make vs passe by all exercise of a broken spirit in those things wherein we haue offen∣ded. Thirdly, from this consideration we must walke in feare before our God, who as a sheep∣heard setteth his dog on a stray sheepe, so can he set the diuell on vs to hound vs home if we stray from him. Lastly,
we see from this to our comfort, that the diuell cannot come against vs at his pleasure; we are in the hands of our hea∣uenly Father. Thirdly, we note hence, that all our strength against temptation is in God onely; he onely dissol∣ueth the workes of the diuell, trampleth Sathan vnder feete, keepeth him that he cannot so much as be disturbant to vs; when it pleaseth him we are downe with the least blast; were we in state of innocencie we would not stand a moment: let
vs therefore trust per∣fectly on his grace, put on the shield of faith onely. Our forefathers acknowledged yt God, not their strength, gaue them all saluation a∣gainst corporall ene∣mies; how much more must we confesse it a∣gainst spirituall? Who knoweth the power of Sathan, or the infirmity of their owne flesh, that will not confesse this most entirely? But what serueth the armour for? Answer. Onely to this end, that we may be a∣ble to get and hold God
with vs, fighting for vs. Fourthly, we see hence, not temptations, but e∣uill of them is simply to be prayed against; for these are often most be∣neficiall. We must ther∣fore learne to yeeld o∣bedience, and bid our God smell a sacrifice from the bitterest things we taste, so farre as they are his disposition; ta∣king shame to our selues in them, as they are the fruits of follie. Fiftly, we may note hence, that no tempta∣tion shall be able total∣ly or finally to separate
the Saints from God; for that we are taught to pray agreeable with his will, we are heard in that. Now this were the grea∣test euill, not onely in regard of our seeming or appearance to vs, but of the matter it selfe. Sixtly, this is a great daily mercie, when God keepeth vs from temp∣tation: not to know a disease is better, then ha∣uing it to be healed of it; indeed Gods men∣ding is better then his making, which somwhat alters the matter. Not to fall when we are readie
to fall, is a great fauour. If one when our feete are ready to fall from vs, should hold vs vp, we would count it a great benefit; but to haue our damages aduantage vs, this is the euidence of power and goodnesse it selfe. The conclusion fol∣loweth, partly contai∣ning a reason why wee aske all these things at Gods hands; partly a confirmation of faith asking; partly a praising of God. From which, three things are to be marked. First, that none
is to be inuocated on, but he who hath the kingdome, power and glorie: therfore no crea∣ture. These words then containe the reason, why we come petitio∣ning to our heauenly Father. For as one lac∣king this or that in a house which is the mai∣sters, cometh in by the backe doore, if he pray a seruant to giue it him whose it is not, who hath no power so to do, &c: so if we seeke our neces∣sities temporall and e∣ternall, at Angels or
Saints, which are ser∣uants to God, who haue no power to do any thing farther then bec∣koned to by God, we take a wrong way to the wood. But the Papists thinke all is made whole while they do call vpon Saints or Angels, not as the principall authors of the things they aske, but as secondary patrons, who vnder God worke these things for vs. To which is answered, that not onely to do religious a∣doration in any kind to them, as the principall
and chiefe power, is sin: but also to call on them, or trust in them, as being some secondarie diuine powers, although infe∣rior to God. The Angel-worship among the Colossians, did not de∣fer thus much, as if they had bene the chiefe di∣uine powers; and yet is condemned. Nebuchad∣nezar did not enact that he should be worship∣ped as the highest God; yet because he would haue honour, in some degree diuine, Daniel did decline it as flat ido∣latrie. Againe, this distin∣ction
with which they would salue their fact, may be turned vpon them, as making against themselues. For there∣fore these may not be called vpon, neither may be trusted to religi∣ously, because they are secondarie workers of things vnder God who is the principall agent. Secondly, we see what may confirme vs in assu∣red hope to receiue our requests, namely, to thinke that God hath the kingdome ouer vs, that he is powerfull and glorious. There is a re∣spect
betweene Kings and their people, which bindeth them mutually one to another. Hence it is that we promise our selues protection, main∣tenance in our life, the benefit of subiects from them, because we are their subiects, and they haue the kingdome o∣uer vs. That God who by reason of this obli∣geth sinful men to seeke the weale of all their people, because they haue receiued a king∣dome ouer them; him∣selfe will not faile on the same ground, to pro∣cure
all good to vs, who liue vnder the regiment of his grace. Yet because it is not enough that God should haue the regall authoritie ouer vs, vnlesse he had the power also of working all things for our weale, therefore this is ioyned [Thine is the power.] What were subiects the better to be vnder a gra∣cious Prince, but weake, hauing as short hands to do them good, as a large heart to wish it them? So should it fare betwixt God and vs, if he were not almighty,
able to subdue all things to himselfe; our faith were shaken. For we cannot expect the trea∣ding of Sathan vnder our feete, the quickning of vs in our soules to e∣uery good worke, the iustifying, the prote∣cting of vs; we cannot expect these things from one who hath not all power. Thirdly, had God the right to helpe vs, had he the power also; yet were it a thing that made not for his glorie, respected not the aduancement of his honor, our beleefe
might wauer: which now it need not do, it being Gods honour to performe all good things for his chosen. Honor is with men the spurre of actions: haue men right and power to effect this or that, not∣withstanding if it con∣duce not to their honor and glorie, they will not moue a finger to it. But now there is nothing that wanteth to our as∣surance, while we know that we are such to whō God hath right; such for whom he hath all po∣wer; such, whom to pro∣tect
and blesse with all things spiritual and cor∣porall, is his great glory. The case standing thus, how can we doubt of re∣ceiuing the things we aske at his hand in the Name of his Christ? Amen] True it is; we thus flie to thee, ô Lord, be it according to our desire. An asseueration, wish, or expressing of earnest longing to ob∣taine all the things in this prayer aboue named.
A TREATISE VPON THE SIXE PRINCIPLES: Written by that faithfull ser∣uant of God, Maister PAVL BAINE, sometime Preacher of Gods word at S. Andrewes in Cambridge. ANCHORA SPEI printer's device of Richard Field LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Milbourne. 1619.
THE FIRST PRINCIPLE. Question. VVHat dost thou be∣leeue concerning God? Answ. There is one God, Creator and Gouer∣nor of all things, distin∣guished into the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. All necessary know∣ledge which man is bound to know, may be reduced to two heads; The knowledg of God,
Iohn 17.1. This is life e∣ternall, to know God; and the knowledge of himselfe, heathens ac∣knowledging their nosse teipsum, the chiefest wisedome. Now the knowledge of God is first in order, as who is the first sampler after which man was created (for we were made after his likenesse,) as also in whose affectionate knowledge the blisse of the creature consisteth. Concerning God three things are set downe to be beleeued: first, the v∣nitie of his diuine na∣ture;
secondly, his ope∣ration or working with∣out himselfe: thirdly, his distinction of persons. For the first: beside the euident testimonies of Scripture, on which our faith is builded, we may by reason demonstrate this truth. First to vnfold it, then to prooue it. God is one not in be∣ginning and kind, in which regard all men may be said one: nor in consent, as the multi∣tude of beleeuers were said one, Act. 4. But one in nature, the spirituall essence of God which is
eternall, knowing all things, past, present, and to come; almightie, &c. being but one, and no more in number: as this elementary lightsome body of the Sunne is but one, so that spirituall nature of God, which is a light to which is no ac∣cesse, is but one singular nature, which is not nor cannot be multiplied. Sound reason teacheth that God is infinitly perfect aboue all that man can imagine; but were there many gods that had euery one seue∣rally their diuine nature,
as there are many men and Angels, that haue seuerally their distinct, humane, and angelicall natures in them; then we might conceiue a more perfect God then any, viz. such a one as had in himselfe the perfe∣ction of all the other. This therefore doth teach vs how to con∣ceiue of the diuine na∣ture; not as the hea∣thens did, who thought it multiplied as the na∣ture of other creatures, but as of one singular essence, which admit∣teth not any other by it,
as hauing it in selfe all perfection which can be found in the diuine na∣ture. Secondly, we see hence the incomparable vnity which the Father, Sonne, and Spirit haue; as who haue euery one the selfe same nature. To this we must looke, that we may in our owne measure expresse it in being of one heart, thin∣king and affecting the same things. Father, I pray thee that as thou and I are one, so these may be one, one mysti∣call person. The second thing is
his working without himselfe, that is, his vo∣luntary bringing forth the whole creature visi∣ble and inuisible, in na∣ture and being different from his owne. For as man and woman do some works within their owne nature, as propa∣gating their like; some without, as build houses, make other artificiall de∣uices: so God hath his worke within his diuine nature, as the eternall begetting of his Sonne, & breathing of his Spi∣rit; as also his workes without his nature, such
as he doth voluntarily of his owne accord, ha∣uing had libertie of will not to haue made them, or otherwise to haue framed them then they are. Now first he is said the Creator, which im∣plieth two things: First, his giuing a being to all these things we see, and to all spirituall natures which are not seene with the eye, when they were not at all in the na∣ture of things. Nothing can make it selfe: and therfore as seeing good∣ly buildings in cities peopled, we gather that
there were excellent workmen; so beholding this earthly habitation with the furniture of it, we may conclude, there was some most wise and mighty Spirit that fra∣med these things. The second thing in creating is, that God doth conti∣nue the kinds of things, and vphold the being which he giueth them. For nothing that is not this or that by nature, can longer continue to be so, then the working of the cause lasteth which first brought it to be so. As water is not
hote by nature, there∣fore longer then fire is vnder, which first made it warme, it will not continue in heate, but by little and little draw to coldnesse. So the aire is darke, and therefore as the Sunne maketh light∣some day, so longer then it abideth, the day lasteth not. So things not hauing of them∣selues their being, kinds, law of propagation, but receiuing these things from God; longer then he vpholdeth them in this estate they could not endure, but would
returne to nothing, whence they were pro∣duced. A man when he hath made an house, doth leaue it, & it stan∣deth without him, be∣cause he giueth an arti∣ficiall order onely, not the substantiall being, which the matter of the building hath in it selfe, not from the builder. But did man giue the being essentiall as well as order artificiall, were he withdrawne, the whole frame would be dissolued; as if he stirre any thing that moueth not of it selfe, where his
motion stayeth, the thing so mooued doth stay likewise. Secondly it is said, the Gouernor, that is, he moueth them to such ends as are plea∣sing to him. A wise housholder ordereth his whole familie. A wise King keeping in his Court, doth by his au∣thority and lawes rule the remotest parts of his countrey. So God, Fa∣ther of all the family in heauen or earth, King & Lord of all the crea∣tures; he in the heauens which is the court of his Maiestie, doth by his
power, lawes, Spirit of grace, rule heauen, earth, hell; for hell is but a pri∣son to the great God. But how fareth it then that such wicknednesses are committed? Answer. There is nothing simply euill, but onely in regard of the inferiour instru∣ment, who is willing, but not able to peruert the diuine order; and therefore these euils we see are like two faced pi∣ctures, which seeme on one side beautifull wo∣men, on the other vglie monsters. So looke at the lewdest workes, as
from God they are most beautifull, as from the sinner monstrous; as in the crucifying of Christ the cursed Iew wrought despitefully, but God most graciously. Ob. He that is a Creator & go∣uernour, which some∣times he was not, is changed; but God now is thus, and before the world began he was not, and therefore he is changed. The first part is false, because the termes of Creator, and gouernor, put no reall change inherent in God, but imply a chang
in the creature. For as the Sunne enlighteneth the earth euery day, and changeth the face of the creatures, without be∣ing it selfe changed; so God createth and go∣uerneth. Vses. First, we see here a ground of thankfulnesse to God; we count an vnthankfull child a monster of men, because he is vnthank∣full to them by whom he receiued his being; but how much more grosse is our vnthank∣fulnesse to God, whose instruments onely our parents were in bringing
vs forth. Secondly, we see hence what cause we haue to walke in feare: for we moue, haue be∣ing, liue in him. If one should haue vs so ouer a riuer, that if his hold should ceasse we could not but drowne forth∣with; ô how would we feare to prouoke him who had vs at such van∣tage? but thus it is with God, that if his power vphold not, we should come forthwith to vtter nothing. Thirdly, we see what a leud part it is, not to acknowledge God. Not to acknowledge a
King in his gouern∣ment, yea not to be rea∣die to take the oath of allegiance, we disclaime it in any as a part vnwor∣thie a subiect; so not to subiect our selues to the liuing God, is a part vn∣worthie any creature. The last thing to be beleeued is the distin∣ction of this one God, in regard of persons, in∣to the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost; for the conceiuing whereof foure things are to be noted. First, that these respects of God, beget∣ting, begotten, and pro∣ceeding,
do not make any composition as di∣uers essentiall parts of one thing, but distin∣ction onely; as East, West, North, South, so distinguish the heauens, that they are not essen∣tiall parts whereof they are compounded. Se∣condly, it is to be obser∣ued, that these three, though there is order of precedency in nature, as the Father before the Sonne, the Sonne be∣fore the Spirit, yet they are all coeternal in time; as fire is in naturall con∣sideration before heate
or light, yet in time they are altogether. Thirdly, it is to be noted, that there are said three per∣sons, not three Gods: for neither tres dij, nor tri∣plex Deus are fitly spo∣ken, because the one multiplieth, at least in appearance, the diuine essence; the other resi∣steth the diuine simplici∣tie. Three persons there∣fore there are, hauing all one and the same diuine nature, as if Thomas, Iohn, and Mathew could be supposed to haue one singular soule and body common to them
all, & entirely possessed of euery one. Fourthly, we must know that no carnall thing is to be thought of the genera∣tion, natiuitie, proces∣sion, but the mysterie is altogether spiritually to be conceiued; but this mysterie is in regard of clearer knowledge, reser∣ued, till we shall be like Angels. In the meane while aspici potest, intro∣spici non potest, lest that befall vs which happe∣neth to them that looke full against the Sunne, viz. lest our eyes be da∣zeled.
The second Principle. Q. VVHat dost thou beleeue con∣cerning Man, and con∣cerning thine owne selfe? Answ. All men are wholly corrupted through Adams fall, and are be∣come slaues of Sathan, and guilty of eternall condem∣nation. The knowledge of man followeth, which standeth in these foure points: First, to know how he was in his state of creation; which is pas∣sed ouer, and is left to be
gathered by the contra∣ry. Secondly, what is his estate as he is fallen. Thirdly, what by grace. Fourthly, what it shall be in glorie. The three last are opened in this, and the questions fol∣lowing. The second estate this answer vnfol∣deth, setting downe our miserie, first in respect of our corruption; second∣ly in respect of punish∣ment. The corruption is set downe by three cir∣cumstances, first from the parties corrupted, all; secondly from the quantity of it, wholly;
thirdly from the first author of it, Adams fall. The latter of punish∣mēt hath two branches. First, our thraldome vn∣der Sathan. Secondly, our guilt of damnation euerlasting. First then it is to be marked, that no creature coming of A∣dam is exempted from corruption. Rom. 5. In whom all haue sinned: We, saith Paul of the Ie∣wish people, are by na∣ture the children of wrath as well as others. For like as the roote, like will be the branches, and who can bring any
thing cleane from that which is vncleane? So that the Virgin Mary is not exempted, who nei∣ther was conceiued, nor yet liued without cor∣ruption; who was more blessed in beleeuing on God her Sauiour, then in bearing his flesh with∣in her belly. Christ in∣deed was free. For though he was in A∣dams loynes, yet he was not of Adam, but mira∣culously framed by the holy Ghost; and so, as he was exempted from the ordinary line of ge∣neration, so likewise frō
the corruption which was a consequent of it. Secondly, it is to be no∣ted, that we are not in part, but wholly corrup∣ted, there is nothing in vs sincere and vndefiled. So that looke as a man who hath a leprosie o∣uergrowing him from top to toe, so are wee: The imagination of mans heart is euill, yea onely euill continually. Gen. 6.5. & 8.21. There∣fore the Scripture ma∣keth vs voide of all strength to good. Rom. 5.10. We cannot thinke a thought as of our
selues. Nay, full of enmi∣tie against all righteous∣nesse. Rom. 8. The wis∣dome of the flesh is en∣mitie against God: prone to all euill. Rom. 3. We are, in a word, dead in sinne and tres∣passes. Eph. 2. Which doth let vs see how the Papist is deceiued, who dreameth of a power in the will vnto good, if it be loosed & awakened; as in a man asleepe, or fettered, there is power to go, and so forth, if he be waked and set at li∣bertie. But the life of God, in which all the po∣wer
vnto good was grounded, is gone from vs. Ephes. 4. They were estranged from the life of God through igno∣rance: now twixt them and vs by nature there is no difference. Ob. Man hath by nature some knowledge of God, and his dutie to God and man. Answ. None at all that is true and sauing, but such as may shew the ruines of time in him, & make him more inexcusable. Secondly, we must labour to haue conscience of this our total defilement: I know
in me there dwelleth no good thing: for it hum∣bleth vs, and maketh vs haue no confidence in the flesh, but haue all our reioycing in Christ Iesus; and know that what good thing we do, it is in him and through him. The third thing to be marked is, that sinne wherewith our nature is defiled, is as a loathsome corruption in it: it is the death of the soule which maketh it rot in filthie qualities, as odious be∣fore God, as the stinke and filthie sauour of a dead corps is in the no∣strils
of man. Yea it doth putrifie the body and make it mortall, fretting it through, often before it be discerned, as a moth doth a garment: which must the more af∣fect vs. Were we with Iob from top to toe co∣uered with biles, it would grieue vs: but our whole spirits being fraught with more filthie cor∣ruption thē which brea∣keth out at the eye, mouth, eare, &c. we are not touched. The fourth thing, through Adam, teach∣eth vs whence our mi∣serie
is deriued, euen from our first parent, whose sinne we are guil∣tie of, and whose cor∣ruption is propagated vnto all his posteritie. For if parents rebelling against earthly Princes, their children are tain∣ted and disinherited, much more is this iust with God. And as we haue the guilt of his fault, so we cannot be free from his infection: Parentem proles sequi∣tur: Like egge, like bird; as often men hauing the falling sicknesse, and be get children hauing the
same diseases; which must make vs further be∣waile our condition. Were we descended of one that had bene exe∣cuted for treason, and so were pointed at as a trai∣terous brood, without inheritance in earth; had we but with our nature the stone, or falling sick∣nesse from our next pa∣rents, we would bewaile our vnhappy natiuities. The second part of our misery first teacheth vs, that all of vs by nature are slaues of Sathan. To be a slaue or vassall is hard, but to be the di∣uels
vassals most misera∣ble. Hence it is we are said to be in his power, and in the kingdome of darknesse, and he to be the god of this world. For looke as a man is seruant to whom he yeeldeth himselfe volun∣tarily to obey, so are we, as who reuolting from God haue voluntarily enthralled our selues to Sathan. For as the soule leauing the body, the body dieth, so God lea∣uing the soule, not in re∣gard of the presence of power but of grace, the soule forthwith dieth. A∣gaine,
as a iailour hath from the King & chiefe Iusticer power ouer his prisoners, so hath Sa∣than as being iaylour & executioner to Gods iustice, power ouer vs; which must make vs still see our miserie. Woe to the sheepe whom the wolfe gouerns: were we slaues seruing vnder the Turke in his gallies, how would it grieue vs? but thus one might be more free then the Turke him∣selfe. Were we as the Is∣raelites in Egypt, wee would lament: but to be thralled to him that like
a roaring Lion seeketh to deuoure vs, is much more intollerable. Lastly marke that we are sub∣iect to eternall death, death endlesse and ease∣lesse, both of soule and body; the soule is dead, while we liue we feele it not, because wee are dead: the body is mor∣tall tending to death, for as a moth is in a gar∣ment, so lieth sin in vs, corrupting our body by little and little without ceassing, till it be dissol∣ued. In death the soule is gathered to those Apo∣state spirits, who keepe
it imprisoned in hell till iudgement; then at the great day soule and bo∣dy, hauing sinned toge∣ther, shall suffer toge∣ther euerlastingly. If a man sinne against the maiesty of an earthly mortall Prince, he is pu∣nished with temporary death or perpetuall im∣prisonment, if he could be supposed to liue al∣waies, he should lie in for euer; how much more deseruedly are we subiect to eternall death who haue sinned a∣gainst an eternall God? Which still moueth vs
to take notice of our estates, and lament them while there is hope. If our bodies were in such case, threatning death, would we not be tou∣ched? if we were con∣demned to die as male∣factors, would we not wring our hands to thinke on such miserie? How much more shold it mooue vs to thinke that we are subiect to euerlasting death, which hath already seized vp∣pon vs in the spirituall death of our soules, and mortalitie or dying states of our bodies?
The third Principle. Q. VVHat meanes is there for thee to escape this damna∣ble estate? Answ. Iesus Christ the eternall Sonne of God, be∣ing made Man, by his death vpon the Crosse, & by his righteousnesse, hath perfectly alone by him∣selfe, accomplished all things that are needfull for the saluation of man. The answer setteth downe two things, first, the author of saluation, secondly his perfect sa∣uing of vs. In the first
there are two things, first who it is, viz. Iesus Christ: secondly what kind of person he is, af∣ter a sort compounded, viz. the eternall Sonne of God, God with the Father and Spirit; and man also, that is, God the Sonne hauing such a soule and body, as we haue for the essentiall nature of them, assumed to him into ye fellowship of his person. The se∣cond, his perfect sauing of vs, is likewise set downe, first from his actiue obedience, that is, his fulfilling the righ∣teousnesse
of all the cō∣mandements; and his passiue obedience, that is, bearing the cursed death, which are the things whereby our-sal∣uation is wrought for vs: Secondly, from the solitary manner of wor∣king these things, viz. that he did and suffered all things due to this end, by himselfe, with∣out leauing part of this businesse to the Saints and our selues. First, for his Name: such as re∣taine to great persona∣ges, they know their names and their whole
style; which comprehen∣deth all their Signiories, honours, and offices which they haue and beare in the common wealth; and we, if wee heare of some person more famous for this or that, are not well till we haue learned his name: how much more should we be affected toward the name of him, that hath wrought the salua∣tion of mankind? Now as great men haue their proper names and styles of office, honour, &c: so Christ hath his proper name Iesus, which signi∣fieth
a Sauiour; and of office, Christ, which sig∣nifieth one annointed. Names should admo∣nish vs somewhat con∣cerning the nature of things named by them: so do these names. For he was called Iesus, be∣cause he was to saue his people from their sins, not only from the guilt, which he doth when he bringeth vs to see in him the pardon of our sins; but from the power of sinne: which he doth euery day, yea houre, while he tameth & sub∣dueth our sinne in vs,
preserueth vs from the rage of it, and preuen∣teth the occasions wher∣upon it would swell and rage in vs, and trampleth Sathan vnder our feete, who is the vnquiet moo∣uer of sinne in vs, and musterer of all occasi∣ons against vs. Now he is the Christ, or annoin∣ted of God; because that which ye priests & kings annointing did signifie, is accomplished in him, in whose humane na∣ture God dwelleth per∣sonally; adorning it with innumerable gifts of grace and glory super∣naturall;
as the soule doth bring forth in the body many naturall properties, while it abi∣deth therein as perso∣nally conioyned with it: and thus he was annoin∣ted, that he might be a fit King and Priest, and Prophet to his Israel. How sweete then are these names of our Sa∣uiour, so refreshing the heart as a sweete oint∣ment doth the senses! they are mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilum in corde. We must therefore en∣quire after them & glad∣ly know them. He were
a sorrie seruant that should not care to know his maisters name to whom he belongeth. What shall become of vs, who, professing our selues to belong to God our Sauiour, know not the first letter of his name? Secondly, marke what kind of person our Sa∣uiour is, such a one who is the eternall Sonne of God made man, that is, God and man in one person; the eternall Son being a perfect person from all eternitie, taking our nature into the vni∣tie
of his owne person. To open it, first note who is incarnate, the e∣ternall Sonne; then how. To the first, we are sons but by grace and adop∣tion, begotten in time by the preaching of the Gospell. The Angels, & Adam in innocencie were called sonnes, but in time brought forth of nothing, viz. when time began: but Christ is begotten of the selfe-same spirituall essence the Father hath, coeter∣nall with himselfe. Now to know how they are vnited, we must consider
that the three persons of the Trinitie are one, but in nature which is one and the selfe same in all the three; but here two natures are vnited in one person, God the Sonne hauing a perfect personall being, did take a soule and body, not into vnion of his diuine nature, but into com∣munion of his person. So that the nature di∣uine and humane are distinct, but the per∣sonall being, which one∣ly before subsisted in the nature of God, doth now subsist in the nature
of man, which doth no lesse essentially belong to the Sonne of God his person, then the di∣uine nature it selfe, in which before it onely subsisted. The summe is, God the Sonne from e∣uerlasting a perfect per∣son, being onely in the nature of God, did in his time appointed, create a soule and body, not hauing personall being of themselues within his owne person; that his personall being might as really exist afterward for euer in mans nature, with the diuine, as be∣fore
it had done in the diuine nature alone. So that as the soule and bo∣dy make vp the personal being of one man, so the diuine nature and hu∣mane are one Christ af∣ter a sort. This is the dif∣ference, the soule hath no perfect personall be∣ing of it selfe before the body, but the soule as one part, and the body as another, do mutually conspire in constituting the personall being: a third thing, which nei∣ther hath by it selfe. Whereas God the Son, doth not take our nature
as to make vp a perso∣nall being, which him∣selfe had from euerla∣sting; but to receiue frō him, hauing perfect be∣ing, that which it selfe had not. So that our na∣ture is a part of his per∣son, not constituting any perfection in it, but superadded to it, as in it selfe most perfect from euerlasting to euerla∣sting. This comparison shall serue; for others of the oake and misceltoe, of a sience engraffed into a tree, are not more plaine in expressing, how the two natures of
God-man become sub∣stantiall parts, as it were of one person: and all si∣militudes here must needs be defectiue, be∣cause there is nothing in nature that hath the essence and substance of any thing without the being this or that thing; as Christs soule and bo∣die were the common nature and substance of a man, without being this or that man. Againe there is nothing in na∣ture, which being this or that, can communi∣cate that being it hath with another, as the
Sonne of God doth his personall subsistēce with this body and soule, which were alwaies without any being but in him. Our great Saui∣our then is God-man. Were be not man, he could not die, nor haue right to redeeme vs, as being not our kinsman, with many such like cō∣siderations: were he not God, his obedience and sufferings wold not be of value: God hath redee∣med vs with his bloud. Againe, man could not sustaine the curse, and those powers of dark∣nesse
fearefully assailing it; hence it was that Christ man was not swallowed vp, because the Godhead did sup∣port it: as one man may be planted in some stan∣ding so impregnably, that he may beare the assault of a whole army; so how strong was this man which God had created within himselfe? This must aboue all be thought of, this, as the rocke: The naturall Son of God is our Sauiour. Mat. 16. What shall the gates of hell do against him? The vse of this is,
first, to consider his infi∣nite loue, that hath not abhorred the Virgins wombe, that hath made our flesh and bloud a substantiall part of his person. If great men vouchsafe but to be free of some worshipfull Company, if they con∣descend to be heads of some Corporation, it is held a great matter: but suppose there were a great kindred of poore Iacke strawes which had rebelled against the King; should the Prince match himselfe with some poore maide of
the tribe, that so he might pacifie the King toward them, here were grace, such as no report of storie could second. The King of heauen hath, when we were all poore rebels, matched himselfe with our flesh and bloud, by couenant of personall cohabitati∣on with it, neuer to be dissolued. Secondly, we must hence see what reason we haue to come to God with boldnesse. God in himself is a light, to which is no accesse, a consuming fire: but loe
he hath made himselfe God-man, that looking at thy owne nature thou mightest not be afraid of him. The ancient sheepheards to make themselues lesse awfull, and more louely to their sheepe, were wont to go couered with their skinnes: So this sheep∣heard of our soules, that he might not be terrible vnto vs, maketh him∣selfe like vnto vs in flesh and bloud. Though we feared some great man, yet were he married to our house, very neare vs, this circumstance would
animate vs not a little: thinke the same of thy God, married as afore∣said to thy flesh. Third∣ly, as this sheweth loue, and encourageth; so to consider, that God is he that dwelleth in our na∣ture, will be a ground of hope against all euils whatsoeuer. Naked man could not helpe vs: thou must neuer stay in see∣ing man. But as when thou seest a body, thou knowest it is such a ones body; so when thou imaginest that glorious body and spirit, still thinke whose they are,
the eternall Sonnes of God. On this person as God fixe all thy trust; as man, thou hast encou∣ragement, but as God, thou hast matter of con∣fidence, as who cannot be withstood in his gra∣cious pleasure toward thee: our affiance is built vpon the person that is man, but as he is God, not as he is man. For cursed is he that trusteth in flesh. Lastly, seeing Christ hath for our sake taken our base nature, how equall is it, that we at his request should la∣bour to be partakers of
the diuine nature, that is, of heauenly qualities and condition? Should the Prince hauing done such a thing for the poore snakes aboue na∣med, intreate nothing at them but that they would liue at Court with him, and partake in his glorie, were it not an easie suite? The next thing that followeth, is that at Christ hath done and suffered all things for vs; euen the cursed death. We of our selues are bank∣rupts, who stand indeb∣ted vnto all obedience
to euery commande∣ment, which is that per∣fect righteousnesse the Law requireth; who likewise are in debt to the iustice of God, be∣cause we haue sinned, in debt, I say, so farre as to beare the cursed death. Cursed is he that conti∣nueth not in all to do it alwaies. Now God hath put himselfe surety for vs, he hath in our roome bene obedient to euery commandement, if this be to be asked of vs; and he hath put his body & soule twixt this cursed death and vs, that so we
might be discharged. If a man do this or that of∣fice for vs when absent, ô how kindly we take it, especially if he do it out of his meere good will vnspoken to of vs? But how should we take this to heart, that Christ hath, when we could not through our graceles∣nesse once aske him, ful∣filled all righteousnesse, which we were to fulfill? We take it as loue in men, if spoken to, they will do small matters of∣ten for vs. Againe, he that will beare a blow in our behalfe, be bound
for vs in great summes of money, especially he that will lie by it for our good: but how much more are we to acknow∣ledge this grace of Christ, who hath bene our surety, payed for our deliuerance, not siluer or gold, but his precious bloud? Againe, this is the sure anchor of our faith, our surety hath dischar∣ged all that can be requi∣red at vs. Now a debt in iustice once payed can∣not againe be deman∣ded. Who then shall lay anything to our charge? it is Christ that is dead,
yea risen from the dead for the iustifying of vs. He hath once satisfied all in the behalfe of vs who beleeue; who then shall be able to demand ought at vs? The next thing is, that Christ alone hath done and suffered all things for vs; not Saints, nor our selues are to be Sauiours, but the glorie of this belongeth to that Name alone: shall dust and ashes beset to helpe out the great God in that he goeth about? Let the Sunne borrow light of candels when this
may be prooued. What∣soeuer mooueth God to saue vs as without himselfe, whatsoeuer ef∣fectually applieth it, all is in Christ. Christs pas∣sion the medicine, Christs diuine power the vertue which wor∣keth all in all. True it is that faith, repentance, thankfull confession are required: but first, not as causes working our sal¦uation, but as meanes without which we come not to this saluation. I am sicke, there is a Phy∣sician which healeth such as I am onely; he
would haue his patients haue a good perswasion of him, be thankfull to him, be sorrie if they rudely prouoke him. Now such he with his medicines (by his art ap∣plying the same) resto∣reth to health. Who would say, that a mans going to the Physician, his sorrow for offending him, his thankfulnesse toward him, do properly cure him of his disease? euery thing necessary to this or that end, is not a cause of that to which it concurreth as needfull. We haue need of meate
and drinke that we may serue God, yet meate & drinke are no causes of godlinesse. Secondly, these things needfull are begun in vs, continued, perfected by Christ, the author and finisher of faith and all other gra∣ces in vs. Now the Pa∣pists do in these two branches derogate from Christ his absolute sa∣uing of vs. First, that they make man in part to do and endure that which is the medicine healing of him. Secondly, that they make him out of the power of his wil, not
created in him when he is onely regenerate, but remaining in his corrup∣ted nature, to bring forth those things which are necessary to con∣curre, that saluation may be applied. Let vs therefore know that in Christ we are compleat, and hauing such an one who is able perfectly to saue vs, let vs not looke any other way to any creature in heauen or earth. It is Christ that is dead, risen, yea that ma∣keth intercession. If the Prince should vndertake a thing, who would wish
he might for his further securitie haue some poore subiect ioyned with him; that which is perfect is marred by ad∣ding ought vnto i. And who will say that Christs sufferings, righteousnes, effectuall application are any way defectiue? Let vs then with the A∣postle care to know no∣thing but Christ, and him crucified. A fift wheele helpeth nothing, troubleth not a little; so it fareth with all ad∣ditaments of righteous∣nesse and sufferings that are ioyned with Christs,
in iustifying and satisfi∣ing for vs. The fourth Principle. Q. BVt how mayest thou be made partaker of Christ and his benefits? A. A man of a contrite and humble spirit, by faith alone apprehending and applying Christ with all his merits vnto him¦selfe, is iustified before God, and sanctified. This Principle layeth downe foure things, first what is the qualitie of the person to be saued,
in those words, a man of an humble and broken spirit. Secondly, the grace, by which as a meane he is saued, or the grace apprehending that whereby we are sa∣ued, viz. faith alone. Thirdly, the thing ap∣prehended, Christ & his benefits. Fourthly, the fruits following vpon Christ and his benefits apprehended, our iustifi∣cation and sanctificati∣on. For the first, obserue that none whose spirit is not broken with con∣science of sinne, hath be∣nefit by Christ. I came
not to cal the righteous, but the sinner; not such as thinke themselus iust enough, but such as through my working in them see their sinnes, to call those to repentance. Come to me ye that are weary and heauy laden. God commanded that the Paschall Lambe should not be eaten but with bitter herbes; to teach vs that without the salad of godly sor∣row and contrition for sinne, Christ sauoureth not. For looke as man must be hungry yer he will care for bread, and
must feele himselfe sicke before he will care for the Physitian; so it is with vs: if our soules feele not themselues empty of all goodnesse and sicke of sinne, they will not care for Christ, the bread of life, the Physitian of distressed soules. We must labour therefore to be cast downe in the sense of our misery. Were we guilty of faults for which the law of man would seuerely punish vs, how would it go neare vs? for our breach of Gods lawes we take no care: if
we haue lost little things on the earth, we grieue; but to be cast out of heauen our eternall in∣heritance, this stingeth vs not. Such is the wor∣king of sin, it is a death of the soule, which ta∣keth away sense of sick∣nesse, as in the body, the nigher death ye lesser we feele, & the more dead∣ly the sicknesse the lesse it is perceiued. Againe, it doth like drunken∣nesse take away the spi∣rituall vnderstanding of our miseries. A drunken man feeleth no knocks; so we, the diuell hauing
made vs drunken, feele not how we are woun∣ded. Secondly, obserue what we must do to be saued, Beleeue on Christ. Such as would be cured of their stings which by serpents they had receiued, must looke vp to the serpent of brasse, which God did set vp: So we that will be cured of the poison which the old serpent hath conueyed into vs, must looke to Christ with our eye of faith. What shall we do that we may be saued? Be∣leeue,
saith S. Paul. For as it is not enough that there is a Physitian which hath a medicine readie for this or that griefe; but the patient must go to him and take it: and as it is not e∣nough for vs being hun∣gry, to see and know that there is bread, but we must eate it if we will haue fruit by the one or other: so in Christ, we must come to him by faith, feede vpon him in our hearts by vnfained beleefe, before he will profit vs any thing. Wherefore let vs not
content our selues with the Papists faith, which confesseth that there is a Christ the Sonne of God, but doth not lay hold on him as their Sa∣uiour. This is an histori∣call faith which letteth Christ hang in the aire, doth not bring him to dwell in the heart. We must say with Thomas, My Lord, and my God: With Paul, Galat. 2.20. Who hath loued me, & giuen himselfe for me. For plaisters must be spread on the sore, and medicines taken, before the patient can be a∣mended.
Thirdly, ob∣serue that faith onely is it which as an instru∣ment applying Christ doth saue vs. Not that faith goeth alone with∣out other vertues, and care of good life; but be∣cause no other grace doth lay hold of Christ, as in whom we come to haue forgiuenesse of sin, & life euerlasting. (Loue indeed claspeth Christ, yet not seeking righte∣ousnesse and life by him, but cleauing to him for that which we discerne him to be vnto vs through faith:) euen as
the eye in the head is not alone without other senses, yet it onely seeth, and no other sense with it. Which doth let vs see what a precious thing this faith is, as Peter cal∣leth it, and why the di∣uell doth so much la∣bour against it, because this is it alone which ty∣eth vs vnto Christ our Sauiour, which holdeth him as all in all to vs. Suppose one did hang ouer the sea, clasping a rocke with his hands; he that wished his destru∣ction, need no more thē to loose the hold he had
with his hands; so it is with vs. Fourthly, marke what it is that faith lay∣eth hold on to saluation, onely Christ dying for vs, & fulfilling all things in our behalfe. This is the onely obiect, or matter about which faith is occupied, as it is the instrument of iusti∣fying and sauing of vs; and in regard of this that it apprehendeth, it is said onely to saue vs. Faith iustifying doth be∣leeue the story of the Bible, the threatnings of God; yea may vpon some particular word by
instinct or otherwise coming to vs, worke a miracle: but it doth not iustifie, and saue vs, but onely as it looketh to Christ, who is the righ∣teousnesse and the sal∣uation of our God; not as beleeuing other things. As a reasonable soule in man doth bring forth sense and motion, doth concoct, expell, doth exercise, animall, sensitiue, and naturall functions in the body; yet it is not reasonable as it doth these things, but as it conceiueth of things simple, or other∣wise
discourseth: and in this respect onely it is said to saue vs, because that it layeth hold on Christ our Sauiour; so that the meaning of this, faith saueth vs, is, Christ apprehended by faith doth saue vs. Whence Rom. 3.9. and Act. 3.9. these phrases are made aequiualent, to be iusti∣fied by Christ, and by faith, to be healed by the Name of Christ, and faith in his Name. As if one should say, this pot of money maketh me a rich man; we would not thinke the pot made
him rich, but the trea∣sure in it. So when faith is said to saue, it is not to be meant that the act of beleeuing absolutly cō∣sidered doth saue vs, but respectiuely in regard of Christ our Sauiour, whom faith holdeth. Wherefore let vs onely hold Christ as beside whom we lacke nothing fully to saue vs. This ma∣keth the diuell as he la∣boureth against faith, so he seeketh to corrupt men in resting onely vp∣pon Christ. Hence he teacheth them to trust on their good prayers,
seruing of God, mea∣ning workes; and in the popish Church many o∣ther things, the Church treasury, the intercession of Saints, humane satis∣factions, indulgences, workes; that thus he might bring them, while they catch at a shadow of righteousnes, to let fal the true righteousnesse; as Aesops dog making to the shadow of meate he saw in the water, let fall that which he had in his mouth. Christ and these will not stand together; so much as we lay hold on these, so much we let
go out hold on Christ. Lastly, note what bene∣fit we haue being in Christ; we haue righte∣ousnesse and life eter∣nall. We by Adam, first stand guiltie of sinne: se∣condly, of euerlasting death. Now Christ ha∣uing bene made a sacri∣fice for sinne, that is, for the taking away of sin, and pacifying of God his Father, doth not one∣ly obtaine forgiuenesse of sinne for vs that are his, but the grace of a∣doption and free dona∣tion of life euerlasting. Hence it is, that as by
generation and coming of Adam we partake in sinne and death; so by regeneration, being set into Christ, we are made partakers of righteous∣nesse, and life from him. And look as a griffe par∣taketh in the sap which the stocke containeth, or as a member coupled vnto the head, commu∣nicateth in the sense and motion which is thence deriued: so we by faith set into Christ, haue his righteousnesse cōueyed vnto vs, God imputing it to vs as ours; and life likewise conueyed from
him the fountaine of it. Ob. But then we are saued and made righte∣ous with anothers righ∣teousnesse, as if any can be made wise with ano∣thers wisedome. Answ. Christs is not anothers, but after a sort ours, when we by faith are made one with him. Se∣condly, how was Adams sinne made our sinne? Thirdly, if the Pope be pleased, he may in his in∣dulgences impute the sufferings & righteous∣nesse of other men, to such as neuer knew thē;
shall it then be vnlawfull for God to impute to vs the righteousnesse of his Sonne? And it is to be noted that he saith: we are iustified, that is, haue in Christ forgiuenesse of sinne; and are sanctified, that is, haue the life of glorie begun in vs. For grace is the beginning of eternall life, accor∣ding to those sayings: To such as are in Christ there is no condemna∣tion: &, Who so belee∣ueth hath euerlasting life: whom he hath iusti∣fied those also he hath glorified; by faith their
hearts were purified. For looke as not onely Adams fact in eating the forbidden fruite was im∣puted to vs, but his cor∣ruption which was in his nature, being the death of the soule, was also propagated to his poste∣rity: so not only Christs obedience to the cursed death, is reckoned as if we had borne it, but the glorious life which re∣steth in him as a roote of it, is conueyed to vs. We see then what won∣derfull benefits we haue being in Christ. If we had faulted against some
great man, we would count it no small bene∣fit to haue it released & freely forgiuen vs. A∣gaine, to be recouered vnto bodily life out of some great dangerous sicknesse, is no smal mer∣cie; what blessednesse then is this, to be set free from all our offences a∣gainst God, and of dead men in soule, to be made aliue to God? Secondly, if any thirst after these things, whi∣ther must they go? euen to this fountaine. Third∣ly marke, that the par∣don of sin neuer goeth
to a man, but that clen∣sing of his nature and sanctifying of him go∣eth with it also. A coun∣terpoyson coming to the heart, poyson is ex∣pelled. So Christ and Belial will not dwell to∣gether in one person. The fift Principle. Q. VVHat are the ordinarie or vsuall meanes for obtai∣ning of faith? Answ. Faith cometh onely by the preaching of the word, and increaseth daily by it: as also by the
administration of the Sa∣craments and prayer. This answer layeth downe two things, first, the meane or instru∣ment both of begetting, and increasing faith, viz. the word preached. Se∣condly, the meanes which serue only to the further increasing, not to the first begetting of it, viz. the Sacraments and prayer. For the first, we may note hence that true faith is bred in vs by the hearing of the word, and nourished by the same. Rom. 10. How can we beleeue without
hearing? so the Gospell is the powerfull instru∣ment of God to salua∣tion, from faith to faith, I commend you to the word which is able to build you vp. For faith is the credit and assent which we giue to mat∣ters: now how can we giue credit to any thing we neuer heard of? A∣gaine, as we cānot heare what is done in France till some messenger do bring vs word of it; so wee cannot heare what Gods pleasure in heauen is toward vs, till he dispatcheth his mes∣sengers
vnto vs. The same word doth after in∣crease faith in vs: for if we beleeue an honest mā so much the more, because he often goeth ouer, which affirmeth this or that to vs; how much more must we be strengthened to heare God reiterating his te∣stification of this or that which he formerly had spoken? Euen as in the naturall birth, the same bloud of the mother whereof as a seede it is framed, the same I say, is after her deliuery by be∣nefit of the kernels in
the breast turned into milke, wherewith the babe is nourished: so this word is both the seed which breedeth, & the sincere milke of the Gospell which feedeth faith in vs. Yet we must not thinke that this word we preach is the principall worker of faith, for it is but an ex∣ternal instrument which God vseth; which as it cānot worke faith with∣out God, so God will not worke faith without it; It hath pleased God by the foolishnesse of preaching to saue his:
otherwise. Eph. 1. The same power which rai∣sed vp Iesus from the dead, is it which brin∣geth vs to beleeue. If one were borne without an hand, none could set a naturall hand on such a body, but the power which createth and ma∣keth a body; so much lesse can any power but the Lords, create this grace in the soule which is as an hand that reach∣eth into heauen. The vse of this, is, first to exa∣mine our faith in this point, by what meanes we found it wrought in
our hearts, by what meane it is preserued & increased in vs. If it be a true faith, the word preached did beget it, & it feeleth it selfe to grow in strength by meane of the same word. When as many that say they beleeue, they neuer found any vse of the word to begin their faith; for they cannot re∣member they say, that e∣uer since yeares of rea∣son, they were without a good beleefe to God-ward; neither do they feele any need of the word to grow by; the
lesse they haue of it, it is the better with thē; such mens faith is a diuel∣lish delusion. Contrari∣wise, if we haue come to our faith by hearing, & find that the word is ef∣fectuall in vs to the aug∣menting of it in vs; in all this, it is with vs as it is with true beleeuers. Se∣condly, we see how needfull the word prea∣ched is for vs; no word, no faith; no faith, no sal∣uation. This maketh the diuell so malicious to perswade the contempt of it, or at least to beare vs in hand that it is not
so necessary. What, were none saued that had not Preachers? may we not reade, & pray at home, and serue God without this? who are worser thē many that gad after it? What can they tell thee more then thou knowest? They speake great things of it, but what dost thou feele? He knoweth that if he can keepe vs from attending on the Word, we shall neuer be brought to faith, and so neuer haue benefit by Christ Iesus. Wherefore let vs come within this net; and if
we be already borne to God, let vs like new borne babes crie after this milke that we may grow by it. Secondly, note that by the Sacra∣ments our faith is con∣firmed in vs. For euen as men do further secure those they deale with, by putting to their seale vnto their couenants; so God, willing to giue vs full assurance, hath not contented himselfe to make a will paneld by word onely, but hath written it, yea hath by oath confirmed it by the witnesse of his Spirit. Fi∣nally,
hath put to his seale, that nothing might be wanting which might the better secure vs; and all this is not to make his word more sure in it selfe, but to make it more sure in our perswasion. This is the vse of Sacraments; for the Scripture calleth thē the Couenant, signes of the Couenant, signes & seales of the righteous∣nesse of faith: and there∣fore signes confirming the weakenesse of our beleefe, ratifying Gods couenants with vs; not distinguishing onely frō
vnbeleeuers (which is Anabaptistrie) nor yet instruments infusing the first grace into vs; for Abraham the father of all the faithfull, now be∣ing a beleeuer, receiued circumcision: so Corne∣lius now an approoued beleeuer, was baptized; and we neuer find the fruite of our Baptisme or the Lords supper, till we be taught to beleeue. This then should teach vs both to acknowledge Gods great grace to∣ward vs, that thus con∣descendeth to our infir∣mitie. If a man of worth
be not beleeued on his word, especially if he giue a deed of his hand, he will snuffe at it, not take it well; but our God who cannot lie, dealeth otherwise. As also we must reioyce to come vnto these Sacraments: should we come to haue the seale passed of some great earthly matter made ouer to vs, how would we reioyce? shall we not be glad when we come to haue the seales which assure to vs par∣don of all our sinnes, and life euerlasting? Thirdly, we must hence giue glo∣rie
to God, in beleeuing him without all doub∣tings and vncertaintie, which popish religion perswadeth. If an honest man should giue vs his word, deed, oath, before witnesse should seale this or that; would we not be ashamed to be incredulous? Much more shamefull it is to distrust the liuing God. Lastly marke, faith is increased by prayer, not begotten, for we cannot pray to him on whom we haue not beleeued; it is the first fruit that faith bringeth. When
babes are borne, they say they crie presently; but when by faith once the babe of the new creature is borne in vs, it presently crieth, Lord helpe my vnbeleefe; I beleeue Lord, Lord in∣crease my faith. And as children haue no more compendious way to get any thing then to beg it at their parents, no more haue we then to beg at our God; who, if parents sinfull giue good things to their children that aske them, will much more giue vs his Spirit that desire it.
Let vs then beg increase of this and all other gra∣ces. Spare to speake, and spare to speed; open thy mouth wide, and God will fill it. The sixt Principle. Q. VVHat is the estate of all men after death? A. All men shall arise againe with their owne bodies, to the last iudge∣ment; which being ended, the godly shall possesse the kingdome of heauen: but vnbeleeuers and repro∣bates shall be in hell, tor∣mented
with the diuell & his Angels for euer. Hauing thus inclu∣siuely laid downe our state by nature, and ex∣presly handled our estate present by grace, he now vnfoldeth what shall be the future estate of man in glorie, or end∣lesse torment. In the an∣swer three things are laid downe as matters to be beleeued; first, the generall resurrection of vs all; secondly, the end to which we are raised, that we may come to iudgement: thirdly, the things which shall fol∣low
vpon iudgement: viz. the execution of Christs sentence, both touching the blessednes of the faithfull, and the cursed damnation of the wicked. For the first marke this, what we are to perswade our selues of our bodies and the bodies of all other, viz. that they shall at length be raised vp. This resur∣rection of the body, and of euery mans own pro∣per body to himselfe, is a point of beleefe grounded in the Scrip∣ture, and power of God, which can subdue all
things to it selfe. Yet sounder reason may make it probable: for as the seede sowne doth not so corrupt that it should come to no∣thing, but that a new body may be ingen∣dred; so our bodies do not returne to dust, that so they might vanish to nothing, but that so in their time they might through Gods power fpring vp into immor∣tall, and strong bodies. And why is it not as cre∣dible to think that God can bring againe all those bodies that haue
bene, as to be perswaded that he can create new generations of bodies that neuer yet had be∣ing? for, that this should be, which sometime hath bene, is not more maruellous then that such a thing should be, which neuer yet had be∣ing in the nature of things. He that should see a little portion of seede in a glasse, and should see the portrai∣ture of a perfect man, (say he had neuer seene the procreation of man∣kind) he would as hard∣ly beleeue that euer such
seede should become such a creature, as that dust should be raised vp, had he no more seene the one then the other. But God hath spoken it, and his power can sub∣due all things to it selfe; and these two are the props of our beleefe in this point. Now though all shall be raised vp, yet in diuers manner, to di∣uers ends; these by Christ as a head bring∣ing saluation, those by him as a iudge of all flesh: these to glory, those other to shame. For as for the wicked it
were better for them if they did not rise; as Christ saith, it was bet∣ter for Iudas he had ne∣uer bene. The vse of this is com∣fortable to the godly, they die not to be held for euer vnder it, but to rise more glorious. Who doth not endure to haue an old house pul∣led downe, that may haue a new built vp in the roome? Who taketh it grieuously to lie downe to sleepe, that knoweth he shall rise a∣gaine in the morning? Yea this is true, if wee
could be as sure of this our rising, as we are of the other. Answ. Why should we doubt? God hath said it, who gaue being to all things out of nothing, and can much more make vs this or that, being somthing. Againe, reason doth de∣monstrate it as being not absurd. Finally, thou hast in thy selfe alreadie the first resurrection of thy soule from death in sinne, which is greater; wilt thou not then be∣leeue, that he whom thou hast found able to raise thy soule frō death
in sinne, is able to raise vp thy body likewise? And it is terrible to the wicked; it were well with them if death coming there were an end. Nay the body must rise, that as it was partaker with the soule in sinning, so it may be partaker with it in iudgement. The second thing is the end to which all are raised, to iudgment. Ob∣serue then, that euery one shall come before Iesus Christ the great God to iudgmēt. Earth∣ly Princes haue their Iu∣sticers riding their cir∣cuits,
and in fit times iudging all causes, and persons subiect to iudg∣ment. So God hath his Christ, to whom he hath committed all iudge∣ment, who shall come gloriously from heauen in his time, and iudge all flesh righteously. And needs it must be, for here in this life is not seene, the punishment of wic∣kednesse, nor the reward of vertue. Now if a King in his common wealth cannot iustly suffer sin vnpunished, nor vertue without encouragemēt, how much lesse shall the
iust God let the wicked carry it away for euer, & the godly vnrewarded? shall not the iust Iudge of all the world set all at right in his time? But the Scripture saith, that he that beleeueth shall not come into iudge∣ment, Ioh. 5. and that he who beleeueth not, is al∣ready condemned. Ans. The righteous shall not come into iudgment of condemnation, but he shall appeare to be for∣mally and publikely ab∣solued. The wicked is al∣ready iudged and con∣demned by the word, in
his cōscience, Sententia Iudicis interloquutoria, not definitiua. The word iudgeth him, his consci∣ence condemneth him, but the definitiue sen∣tence is not solemnly pronounced. This then is to be thought on, that God will haue all brought to iudgement, yea he shall reckon with malefactors to the least idle word. As malefa∣ctors are brought out of darksome prisons, so shall the bodies & soules of wicked ones be drawne forth of the pri∣sons of hell & the graue,
to receiue their doome. This not thought vpon, men are bold to commit wickednesse, as we say, the theefe wots not the hemp groweth when he stealeth. Many thinke, let them haue but this day, they will make shift good enough; but the more thou presumest, the more shalt thou be confounded; the lighter thou settest by it, thou shalt feele it the more vnsupportable. We are afraid to fall into ye lapse, to do any thing amisse which we are sure to an∣swer before our betters,
if we do it: how is it then that we are not afraid, to do any thing, though we must answer it before God? This is cōfortable to the godly, that they haue yet an appeale ly∣ing to a higher iudge∣mēt then vpon the earth. The last thing follow∣eth, the glory of the be∣leeuing, the eternal dam∣nation of the vnbelee∣uers. When sentence is once passed in earthly affaires, forthwith there are inferiour officers, which see execution ac∣cordingly: so when this great God hath passed
his sentence, he hath good and euill Angels which shall be executio∣ners vnto him. First, the godly shall enter their e∣ternall lise, and be made partakers with Christ in his glory: for, this is part of their dignity, yt they should as benchers sit∣ting with Christ, ap∣plaude his most righte∣ous iudgement on wic∣ked ones, who haue not beleeued, nor obeyed the Gospell; and so after a sort iudge the world with Christ. Know ye not that the Saints shall iudge the world? Now
their eternall life is a thing we beleeue. I be∣leeue life euerlasting; for if a man do out of his bounty giue often to some seruitor that hath done him the better ser∣uice, a free hold to him and his heires after him for euer, and so (if the world could be suppo∣sed to continue, and his name not to grow ex∣tinct,) an euerlasting re∣ward; how much more doth it agree with Gods bountie to recompence the momentany seruices of his children, with gi∣uing thē this euerlasting
inheritance, which out of his fatherly loue he before worlds prepared for them? Here then is matter of ioy, the best dish is to come, our life is yet hid; we liue now as a tree in winter, whose life is hid at the roote of it, so is ours with God in Christ, the roote of vs: but when the Spring of our resurrectiō cometh, it shall be manifested. Finally, marke what is the end of wicked ones, eternall damnation with the diuell and his An∣gels. I shewed in the end of the second question,
how it is meete that mo∣mentany wicked ones should haue euerlasting punishment; for it is a∣gainst an infinite and e∣ternall maiestie: & kings may iustly punish with perpetuall imprisonmēt, which a man should e∣uer endure, could he be supposed to liue alwaies. What paine shall here be, when the paine of one tooth may be so great as seemeth vnsup∣portable; what shall it be when euery part shal be filled with such horri∣ble griefe as neuer en∣tred into the heart of
man? To see one diuell often, is so fearefull that it exanimateth those that behold it; what shal be this horror, when the soule and body shall liue in one mansion with the diuell and all his An∣gels, and be tormented by them for euer? for euer, euer while God is God, no hope of re∣demption. To be put by little things and misse our marke in this or that earthly hope, how doth it grieue vs? but to be put by the ioyes of heauen, the blessed fellowship of God, his Angels, the
righteous, how shall this sting vs? When after-thought, of hauing o∣uershot our selues in lit∣tle matters, doth go so neare vs, that we are in a hell for the time; what shall it be when this thought shall vexe vs, to thinke of our follies in reiecting, and not regar∣ding eternall blessed∣nesse when it was offe∣red vs? The Lord there∣fore keepe vs from sin; it is sweet, but the sawce is sowre, this last dish will marre the feast: a wofull shot will come in for vs, who learne not
to know God, our mi∣serable estates, and with sorrowfull hearts to flie to his mercies in Iesus Christ. FINIS.
