16722 99838673 3060
By the Mayor. An Act of Common Councell, prohibiting all Strangers borne, and Forrainers, to vse any trades, or keepe any maner of shops in any sort within this Citty, Liberties and Freedome thereof. At a common Councel holden at the Guild-hall of this Citty, on the xv. day of April, In the fourth yeare of the Raign of our Soueraigne Lord IAMES, by the grace of God, King of England, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. and in the xxxix. yeare of his Raign of Scotland. It is ordained, & established as followeth. WHere by the auncient Charters, Customes, Franchises, and Li∣berties of the Citty of London, confirmed by sundrie Actes of Parliament, no person not being free of the said Citty, may or ought to sell, or put to sale any wares or marchandises within the said Cittie or the Liberties of the same by retaile, or keepe a∣ny open or inward shop, or other inward place or room for shew sale, or putting to sale, of any wares or marchandises, or for vse of any Arte, Trade, Occupation, mysterie or handicraft with∣in the same. And whereas also Edward sometime King of England of famous memorie, the third of that name, by his Charter made and granted to the saide Citty in the fifteenth yeare of his Raigne, confirmed also by Parliament amongst other things granted, that if any Customes in the said Citty before that time obtayned and vsed, were in any part hard or defectiue, or any things in the same newlie arising, where remedie before that time was not ordained, should need amendment, the Maior and Aldermen of the said Citty and their Successors, with the assent of the Communalty of the same Citty, might put and ordaine thereunto fit remedie, as often as it should seeme expedient vnto them. So that such or∣dinance should be profitable to the King for the profite of Cittizens and other his people re∣pairing to the said Citty, and agreeable to reason. And wheras by force of the said Customs, Franchises, and Liberties, and of the Charter last afore mentioned, confirmed as is afore specified by Parliament, the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Commons of the said Cittie, did the twelfth day of October in the third year of the raign of Edward somtime King of Eng∣land the fourth, as a thing thought fit and conuenient for that time, (amongst other things) agree and ordaine, that the Basketmakers, Gold-wyerdrawers, and other forraines, con∣trarie to the libertie of the said Cittie, holding open shoppes, in diuers places of the Cittie, and vsing mysteries within the said Citie, should not from thenceforth hold shoppes within the libertie of the Cittie aforesaide. But if they would hold any shoppe, or dwell in the same Cittie, they should dwell at Blanchapleton, and there holde shoppes, so as they might haue sufficient dwelling there. And where also the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Commons of the said Cittie, did afterwardes the sixeteenth day of May, in the seuenteenth
yeare of the Raigne of our late Soueraign Lord of famous memory King Henry the eight, as a course thought fit and agreeable for that time, ordaine, establish, and enact, that no manner of person or persons being estrange from the Liberties of the saide Cittie, from thenceforth should holde or keepe any open shoppe or shoppes within the saide Cittie or liberties of the same, neither with any Lattesses before, nor yet without Lattesse, certain numbers of the poore men occupying the feate of Botchers, Taylors and Coblers, onelie except, vpon paine of imprisonment, and also to forfeite and to pay xl. s. to the vse of the Communaltie of this Citty, as oftentimes as he or they should doe the contrarie. And where also the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Commons of the same Citty, did after∣ward the xx. day of Ianuary, in the said xvij. yeare of King Henry the eight, (reciting that where at a common Councell holden the xvj. day of May, in the seauenteenth yeare of the raigne of King Henry the eight. It was ordained and enacted, that no manner of person or persons being estrange from the Liberties of this Citty, from thenceforth should holde or keepe any open shoppe or shoppes within this Citty or Liberties of the same, nei∣ther with any Lattesses before, nor yet without any Lattesse vpon pain of imprisonment) Further, ordaine, and establish, that if any person or persons being forraine, should holde and keepe open any shoppe or shoppes as is aforesaid, he should forfeite for euery time so doing xl. s. to be leuied by distresse, to the vse of the Communaltie of the saide Cittie, by the Chamberlaine for the time being, or other Officer of this City, and also haue imprisonment by the discretion of the Maior and Aldermen for the time being. Now forasmuch as diuers and sundry strangers borne, and likewise Forreiners from the liberties of the saide Cittie, nothing regarding the said auncient Charters, Franchises, Cu∣stomes, or liberties of the saide Cittie, and actes and ordinances heretofore made according to the same, but wholie intending their priuate profit, haue of late yeares deuised and practized by all sinister and subtil meanes, how to defraud and defeat the said Charters, Li∣berties, Customs, good orders, and ordinances, and to that end, do now inwardlie in priuie and secret places, vsually and ordinarily, shew, sel, & put to sale, their Wares, & Marchandi∣zes, and vse Arts, Trades, Occupations, Misteries, and Handicraftes within the said Cit∣tie and Liberties of the same, to the great detriment and hurt of the Freemen of the said Cittie, who pay Lot and Scot, beare Offices, and vndergoe other Charges which Stran∣gers and others not Free are not chargeable withall nor will performe. For reformation of which disorders, and for auoiding of such preiudice and damage, as thereby groweth to the Freemen of the said Cittie, and is more now of late vsed then was in any time here∣tofore suffered, and to prouide for the common profite and good of the Freemen and Citti∣zens of this Citty. It is therefore by the Lord Maior and Aldermen and Commons in this common Councell assembled, ordained and established: That no person whatsoeuer not being free of the Cittie of London, shal at any time after the feast of Saint Michael now next ensuing, by any colour, way or meane whatsoeuer, either directly or indirectly by him∣selfe, or by any other, shew, sel or put to sale any wares, or marchandises whatsoeuer by re∣taile within the Citty of London, or the Liberties or Suburbes of the same, vpon paine to
forfeit to the Chamberlaine of the Citie, for the time being, to the vse of the Maior and Com∣munaltie & Citizens of the said City the summe of fiue pounds of lawfull money of England, for euery time, wherein such person shall shew, sell or put to sale any wares or marchandi∣zes by retaile, within the said Cittie, Liberties or Suburbes thereof, contrarie to the true intent and meaning hereof. And it is further ordained and established, That no person whatsoeuer, not being free of this Citty, shall at any time after the said Feast of Saint Michael, by any colour, way or meane whatsoeuer, directly or indirectly, by himselfe, or by any other, keepe any shoppe, or other place whatsoeuer, inward or outward, for shew sale, or putting to sale of any wares, or marchandises whatsoeuer, by way of retaile, or vse any Arte, Trade, Occupation, Mystery or Handicraft whatsoeuer within the saide Citty, or the Liberties or Suburbes of the same, vpon paine to forfeite the summe of fiue poundes of lawfull money of England for euery time, wherein such person shall keepe any shoppe or other place whatsoeuer, inward or outward, for shew, sale, or putting to sale of any wares or marchandizes whatsoeuer, by way of retaile, or vse any Art, Trade, Occupation, My∣stery or Handicraft whatsoeuer, within the said Citty or Liberties or Suburbes of the same contrary to the true entent and meaning hereof. All which paines, penalties, forfeytures and summes of money to bee forfeyted by vertue of this Act, or ordinance, shall be recouered by action of debt, bill or plaint to be comensed and prosequuted in the name of the Cham∣berlaine of the Citty of London for the time being, in the Kings Maiesties Court, to be hol∣den in the Chamber of the Guild-hall of this Citty, before the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the same Citty, wherein no essoigne or wager of law shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant. And that the Chamberlaine of the said Cittie for the time being, shall in all sutes to be prosequuted by virtue of this Act or Ordinaunce against any Offender, recouer the ordinarie Costs of sute to be expended in and about the prosequution thereof. And further that one equall third part of all forfeytures to be recouered by vertue hereof (the costes of suite for recouery of the same, being deducted and allowed) shall be after the reco∣uery and receipt thereof paide and deliuered to the Treasurer of Christes Hospitall, to be imployed towardes the reliefe of the poore children to be brought vp and maintained in the said Hospitall, and one other equall third part to him, or them which shall first giue infor∣mation of the offences, for which such forfeitures shall growe and prosequute sute in the name of the Chamberlaine of the saide Cittie for the recouery of the same, any thing in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding. Prouided alwayes, that this Act or ordinance, or a∣ny thing therein contained, shall not extend to any person or persons, for bringing, or causing to be brought any victuals to be solde within this Citty and the Liberties thereof, but that they and euery of them may sell victuals within the said Citty, and the Liberties thereof, as they lawfully might haue done before the making hereof, any thing herein to the contrarie thereof in any wise notwithstanding. God saue the King. Imprinted at London by John Windet, Printer to the Honourable Cittie of London, 1606.
