18276 99845684 10600
THE Mirrour of Mutabilitie, or Principall part of the Mir∣rour for Magistrates. Describing the fall of diuers fa¦mous Princes, and other me∣morable Personages. Selected out of the sacred Scriptures by Antony Munday, and dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earle of Oxenford. Honos alit Artes: ¶ IMPRINTED at London by Iohn Allde and are to be solde by Richard Ballard, at Saint Mag∣nus Corner. 1579.
VERO NIHIL VERIVS A happy race God graunt the woorthy wight, to whom this Creast of honnor dooth pertain: To liue in ioy, vnto his harts delight, and after death among the Saints to reign.
¶ TO THE RIGHT HO∣norable and his singuler good Lord & Patron, Edvvard De Vere, Earle of Oxenforde, Uicount Bulbeck, Lord of Escales and Badlesmere, and Lord great Chamberlayne of England, Antony Munday wishesh in this world a triumphant tranquillitie, with con∣tinuall increase of Honorable Dignitie, and after this life, a Crown of euerlast∣ing felicitie, in the eternall Hierarchie. AFter that I had de∣liuered (Right Honora∣ble) vnto your courteous and gentle perusing, my book intituled Galien of Fraunce, vvherein, ha∣uing not so fully compri∣sed such pitbines of stile, as one of a more riper In∣uention could cunningly haue carued: I rest Right Honorable on your Cle∣mency, to amend my errors committed so vnskilfully But at that time beeing very desirous to attaine to some vnder∣standing in the languages, considering in time to come: I might reap therby some commoditie, since as yet my vvebbe of youthfull time vvas not fully vvouen, and my vvilde oa∣tes required to be surrovved in a forreyne ground, to satis∣fye the trifling toyes that dayly more and more frequented my busied braine: yeelded my self to God and good Fortune, taking on the habit of a Traueler. And hauing sustayned in
the colde Countrey of Fraunce diuers contagious calami∣ties, and sundry sortes of mishaps. As first, beeing but nevv∣ly ariued, and not aquainted vvith the vsage of the Coun∣tref, betvveene Bulloin and Abeuie, my Companion and I vvere stripped into our shirts by Soldiars, vvho (if rescue had not come) vvould haue endamaged our liues also. Me thought this vvas but an vnfreendly vvelcome, considering before I thought that euery man beyond the Seas vvas as frank as an Emperour, and that a man might liue there a Gentlemans life, and doo nothing but vvalke at his plea∣sure, but finding it not so: I vvished my self at home again, vvith sorovve to my sugred sops. But calling to minde that he vvhich fainteth at the first assault: vvould hardly indure to fight out the Battell: tooke Courage afresh, hoping my hap vvould proue better in the end, since it had such a bitter beginning, and so passed forvvard to Paris. Beeing there ariued, to recompenee my former mishaps: I found the vvorld vvell amended, for not only I obtayned nevv garments, but diuers Gentlemen to be my freends al∣so, some that had sustained as ill fortune as I, and therfore returned back againe into England, and other some that vvere very glad of my comming, in hope I had beene such a one as they looked for. But repelling such Sathanicall illusi∣ons such golden proffers of preferment, to aduaunce me vn to my larger contentment: I gaue them the hearing of all their politique deuises, vvhich (as they thought) had taken deep root at their first planting. And considering that I had enterprised this iourney for my pleasure, and in hope to attaine to some knovvledge in the French tung, if that I should seeme to scripulous in their presence: it might turn to my farder harme. For there no freends I had to help me, no vvelth to maintaine me, no succour neere to saue me,
but if I denyed, my nevv freends vvould disdaine: persvvae∣ded my self in their presence to doo as they bad me, but vvhē they vvere absent: to doo then as pleasd me. By these mea∣nes I obtayned their lavvfull fauoure, in so much, that they thorovvly prouided me for my iourney to Roome. VVhere for my more prefermēt likvvise, they deliuered me diuers let ters, to sundry persons (vvhose names I remit) that there I should be placed in the office of a Preest. VVell my freend & I gaue them a thousand thanks for their liberall expences, and freendly Letters, and so vve departed. But vvhen vve had vvith an nights rest pondered of our iourney, and considered the emminent daungers before our eyes. First hovv ready Sathan stood to tempt vs, and prick vs forvvard stil to the eternall perdition of our soules. Secondly, that vve should forsake so soone the title & name of a Christian, and yeeld our necks to the yoke and slauerye of the Romaine Decretales, in that vve professing our sel∣ues before faithfull follovvers of our deere Maister Christe, should novv so vvilfully for sake him. Thirdly, vnto all our freends, (espetially our Parents) vvhat an hart sorovve it vvould be, to heare hovv their liberall enpences bestovved on vs in our youth, in trayning vs vp in verteous educati∣ons is novv so lightly regarded: as able to cause the Fa∣ther to yeeld his breath, for the sorrovve conceiued through th negligence of his Sonne, and all ingenerall lament our vnnaturall vsages, Fourthly, from the Seruants of one e∣ternall true God, to come to be Idolaters, VVoorshipers of stocks and stones, and so forsake the feare of God, our duty to our souereign Prince, and our looue to our parents, and all affection to our freends. All these (beeing the principall points) thorovvly cōsidered: vvithdrevv my mind from my former intent, as hauing knovvledge of my Lord the Eng∣lish
Ambassadour then lying in Paris, to him vve vvent, & deliuered our aforsaid Letters, desiring the prudent coun cell of his Honnor therin. His Honnor perceiuing our imbi cilitie, and opening the Letters: found therin vvhere of I haue before certified your Honnor, vvhich vvhen he had vvoorthily ballanced in the brest of a second Solon sayd. My deere and faithfull Countrymen (as I hope you are) not so glad of your vvelfare, as sory for your ariuall, in that you hazard your selues on such a staylesse state, to become as freends to your enemyes, and foes to your Countrey, heere standing at the mercye of a rauening VVolfe, vvho not on ly vvould deuoure you from your Countrie: but bothe body and soule from Heauenly felicitie, Better therfore to abide the pouertie, of this your vvant and necessitie, then to sell your selues vvilfully into such perpetuall slauery, and not on ly to your great ignomy, but to your freends perpetuall infa∣my, to your Prince and famous Countrie, if you leaue your Captaine thus covvardly. Take hart afresh corragiously, & dread no calamitie, take patient all aduersitie, & God vvil assist ye. This excellent Discourse pronounced by so prudent a per sonage, me thought did demonstrate the excellencye of true nobilitie. And then departing from his Honnor, I iournied into Italy, to Roome, Naples, Venice, Padua, and diuers o ther excellent Citties. And novv returned, remembring my bounden duty to your Honnor, I present you vvith these my siple labours, desiring pardon for my bolde attempt. Faccio fine, è riuerentemente baccio le vostro valorose Mani. Humilissimo, e Diuotissimo, e sempre Osseruandissimo Vasallo, e Seruitore. Antony Munday.
¶ The Authors Commendation ofthe Right Honorable Earle of Oxenford. Except I should in fréendship séeme ingrate, Denying duty, where to I am bound: With letting slip your Honnors woorthy state, At all assayes, which I haue Noble found. Right well I might refrayne to handle pen: Denouncing aye the company of men. Down dire despayre, let courage come in place, Exalt his fame whom Honnor dooth imbrace. Vertue hath aye adornd your valiant hart, Exampled by your déeds of lasting fame: Regarding such as take God Mars his parte, Eche where by proofe, in Honnor and in name. Eche one dooth knowe no fables I expresse, As though I should encroche for priuate gayne: Regard you may (at pleasure) I confesse, Letting that passe, I vouch to dread no paine. Eche where, gainst such as can my faith distaine. Or once can say, he deales with flatterye: Forging his taes to please the fantasye. Of mine intent your Honnor iudge I craue, Xephirus blowe your Fame to Drient skyes: Extoll I pray this valiant Brittayne braue, Not séeming once Bellona to despse. For valliantnes beholde young Caesar héere, Or Hanniball loe Hercules in place: Ring foorth (I say) his Fame both farre and neere, Dout not to say, De Vere will soes deface.
¶ Verses written by the Author vpon his Lords Posey. VERO NIHIL VERIVS. Vertue displayes the trueth in euery cause, Eche vaine attempt her puisance dooth disprooue: Repelling falsehood, that dooth seek eche clause, Of dire debate Dame Trueth for to remooue. Nothing vvee say that truer is then trueth, It follie is against the streame to striue: Hard is the hap that vnto such ensueth, In vain respects the trueth for to depriue, Let such take heed for folly dooth them driue. Vaunt not to much of thy vainglorious state, Esteeme the trueth for shee vvil guide thee right: Refrain alvvay to trust to fickle fate▪ In end shee fayles so simple is her might. Vse tried trueth so shalt thou neuer fall: Svveet is the yoke that shall abridge thy thrall. FINIS.
To the Reader. YOur freendly courte∣sies considered (gentle Readers) I finde my self more largely inde ted: then any possibili∣tie that lyeth in me is able to counteruayle. But more building on thy bounty, then my simple demerits, more on thy freendship, the any deserued fauour. I haue now the third time presumed on thy clemency. Confessing it might haue been far better deliuered, if a more expert & cunning Artificer had taken it hand. But some I knowe will finde more fault then needeth, some will carp vpon no occasion, & some will condemn before they haue read. Yet some agayne, though they finde a scape, they wil beare with the Authors simplicitie, and consider his good will indiffer ly / concerning his want of learning, and also his Adolocencye. Not as yet able to vaunt his Muse so Heroycally, as writers of longer libertie / who are dayly practised in the rules of Poetric. To all those he giueth place, and suffiseth his want on courser cheats, till time serueth to prefer him to a daintier dish. Thus desiring thee to accept this till the third part of this woork be finished: I lea∣ue thee, listning to the clock, to take vp my books and hye me to Schoole. Nil tam difficile est, quod non solertia vincat. Tuus dum suus. Antony Munday.
¶ Claudius Hollyband, in the Commendati∣on of his Schollers exersise: SItu veux fuir plusieurs vices damnables, Moyennement au monde te tenir, Et voir àloeilles choses conuenables: Lis moy cest oeuvre, pour te bien contenir: C'est vn Flambeau our clairement venir Au lieu ou fait Vertu sa demeurance, Sanspoint avoir du peruers l'accointance, Qui ne peut point à ce bien paruenir: C'est le guidon droit, facile et plaisant De bonnes moeurs, et miroir euidant, Te dirigeant à fuir toute meschance. M. Claudius Hollyband, his Verses thus Englished. IF thou wilt flye from diuers Uices vayne, And in this world abide in quiet stay: And with thine eyes perceiue a Mirrour plain: Of things conuenient for thy self eche day. Peruse this woork, where thou no dout shalt finde: A rule to keep thy state in stedfast kinde. For like a Torche it cléerely giueth light, Unto Dame Uertues famous Mansion place: Without acquaintaunce with the wicked wight, Which by no meanes such honor can purchase. This is the guyde of manners prooued playne: To teach thée flye the feare of farder payne. Dum spiro spero. Finis. C. H.
¶ Thomas Procter in Commendation of this Woork, and the Author therof. WHat, shall I speak, or shall I holde my peace? I knowe not wel which of them bothe were bes If of my fréend my pen in prayse should preace, Some would alledge of fréendship I exprest. But sith his matters are so manifest. To speak my minde what shall I néed to feare: Since good report his Woorks well woorthy are. If I should séeme hauing perusde the same, And sée no cause why I should not commend: To let it passe I should deseru but shame, Beside displeasure of my loouing nd. I would be loth in either to offend. But to say trueth, bothe daungers to preuent: He well deserues because so well he ment. He showes how fraile our earthly Honor is, How soone our pleasures perish vnto nought: What daunger turnes to bale our worldly blisse, By elder Age which haue such frailtie sought. At length how Death che state to earth hath brought. The hautyest hart that vaunts of Uictors force: His direfull dart vnbreaths without remorce. The Wise whose wit inferiour vnto none. Through his abuse bewayles his follyes fall: The Ualliant yéelds, and conquerd makes his mone, The Rich complaines to minde his fault to call, By these estats he séemes to warne vs all. Lest through our Wit, our Strength and Riches store: We vainly vaunt, and last their losse deplore. Of pamperd Pride, of Enuye and of Wrath. Of lothsome Lust and filthie Gluttony: Of Couetousnes and sluggish Sloth he hath, Prescribde the shame and greefe that comes therby.
Last biddeth vs such shamelesse sius to fly. For feare as those who haue them selues abusde: Wée waile to late their warnings good refusde. Some of these Men were Kings, Dukes, Earles and Lords, Some woorthy Knights some learned Iudges weare: But what of that? no fauour Death affordes, Hée striketh vs vncertain when or wheare. Hée vnregardes of what estate wée are. As soone the King that rules the regall Crown, Yeelds vnto him as dooth the siely Clown. And piercst with Death wherto wée all shall yéeld, Their shameles sins wit sorow they bemone: Whome neither VVit  force of Mars his shéeld, Can sauegarde them through their abuse orethrone, Ne Worldly VVelth may proffit any one. Nor earthly ioyes wherin th séemd to trust. Auailes a whit to help their sutes vniust. Of Elder Age hée showes the il estate, Who in their liues Inferiours were to sin: Besides hée dooth vnto vs all relate, A perfect path for vs to walk therin, And to amend hée wils vs o begin. For at the length eche one account shll giue: If one the Earth hée wel or il did liue. Hée wel deserues because hée ught so wel. To publish that might teach vs what wée are: And took in hand our Elders liues to tel, Whose shameles sinnes might warne vs to beware. And by their fall wils vs to haue a care. Wherfore let mée your Uerdits wholely tel: And MVNDAY thank that vsde his Wit so wel. Nil melius arte. T P.
T N. in commendation of this vvoork. THe Caruer often cuts from hard and craggie stone▪ Some rare deuise  curio{us} woork in hope to please ech one But some that look theron oft times at randō talk / chalk When they them selues can hardly me the like of teer So likewise he that pd with pain this  y ease Is sure though some slow his pains that that some e shall displease. The woork it sf no fables are but wouen from holy . Wherto he hath in Tragick wise some prety Soues kni. All which are doon for thy delight wherin he freendly showes: That lofty mindes are subiect sure vnto a thousand woes. eerin he showes example wise / the guerdon due to pride: To Treason / Wurder / Lechery / and  beside. Which if you shun or if it be thou fee some priuie prick: quick. Then thank him who dooth wish thee wel though he do outch the And if thou know thy self for to be  from these▪ Lend him good will  he deserues who seeks none to displease. Who though he haue not loomd so farre as fer wits could weaue it yet as it is vnto thy skil he is content to lee i. Allow his labour yet accept what he hath du▪ And thou  see the  seps that Wuny means to run: And I his Freend and thine shall think as wel of thee▪ As Wundayes woork dooth wel deserue accounted of to bee. Petit ardua Virtus. Finis. T N. E K. Gentleman in commendation of the Author. THe hart of man ightly ech gift should commend, that man vnto man for freendship dooth send. For so Christe him self left ensample behind, As Scripture dooth declare concerning such minde. The gift of the rich men Christe did reiect, But to the poore VViddowe hee gaue good respect. For shee of her need did offer mies twain, And they of their plenty, abundan and gain. Her minde was the cause that Christ did beholde, The smalnes of the gift and not handfuls of Golde. My goodwil therfore likewise must commend, The labours of any that to Vertue dooth tend. VVherin is contained things woorthy of sight, Heerin wel perfourmed and now brought to light. Finis. Ed. Knight.
¶Mathew VVighthand in the behalf of his Freend Antony Munday. SVch vvoful vvights as vvayle the vvant of vvelth, And drovvnes their dayes in gulfs of gaing greefe: Such siely oules as scornes their holsome helth, To run a race deuoyd of re releese. Such vvilfull vvights that svvims in follies fond: And drovvnes their dayes in depth of dollours pond▪ Such simple Sots as sits in sullen seats, And soules to shroud in seas of stayed state: Such mirthlesse mates as mouthes no sugred meats, But drencht in dole and drovvnd in dark debate. If such (I say) vvould once peruse this vvoork, They vvould denounce in lothed life to lurk. Eche fond attempt vvith greefe they vvould bemone, Eche heauy hap that hath them past of yore: And in this Glasse discerne their faults eche one, And frame their liues for to offend no more. Their Ancesters dooth them heer vvarning giue: In vvhat estate beseemes them best to liue. Then let my freend obtaine your good report, Since for his paynes he craues no other hire. His hope is good, that of e freendly sort, He shall receiue th vvhich he dooth require. I leaue you heere to iudge and say the best: So Munday shall obtayne his due behest. Ad huc Coelum voluitur. FINIS. M. VV.
¶VVilliam Hall in commendation of is Kinseman Antony Munday. Thy tender time to take such task in hand, Demonstrates playne thy zeale & good intent: Which when I had at leysure ouer scand, And finding proof wherto thy minde was bent. I thought it good in mine vnskilfull verse: A Kinsemans looue in breefe for to rehearse. Yet lest some think that I affectly vse, My pen in praise thy deeds for to display: To wiser wits I leaue the same to chuse, And let them iudge if I doo rightly say. So shall I rid my hands of farther blame: And nerthelesse thou shalt obtaine thy fame. Vse time therfore as Wisdome shall direct, And take thy time as leysure shall admit: Lest in thine age Dame Science thee reiect, And so thy time with speedy foot dooth flit. Few woords and sweet, occasion bids me end: A thousand thanks I yeeld vnto my freend. Ouid. Dum vires annique sinunt, tollerate laborem: Nam veniet tacito curua senectapede. Respice finem. Finis W H.
Thomas Spigurnel in praise of the Book and the Author. FOr all that Chaucer had great praise▪ For penning verse which he did vse: By pratling pen his fame to raise▪ And so to occupy his muse. Yet therin sure he did abuse, His muse, his minde and eke his wit: By leauing things that were more fit. My Freend heer paynfully hath pend, A Mirrour playne for vs to view: A Blasse wheron wee may depend, To see what mischeef dooth ensue, Of wickednes and eke the crue. Of such as do delight therin: And so their owne destruction win. The Historyes be sacred sure, And such as be moste woorthy prayse: For Uertue by them shall indure, And so cut of all wicked wayes, And so I leaue by pen to prayse, The same of this moste woorthy Book: And eke the pains that Munday took. FINIS TS
THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE Mirrour of Mutabilitie, rightly named, the Principall parte of the Mirrour for Magistrates. The Author. MARCVS, TVLLIVS, CICERO, that flourishing floure of all Eloquence, hath in diuers and sundry places prescribed the direct rule of a verte∣ous life, declaring many excellent exhortations to auoyd the vices which are inci∣dent to the weakned minde. As the Pride of life. The Enuye of the minde at the prosperitie of an other. The Wrath which wasteth and molesteth the hart. The Bluttonous excesse of belly Gods and pampred paunches, in their daintie fare and drunken delights. The lasciuious and vnlawful desire of the flesh. The Couetous consciences of welthie worldly misers. And lastly, the sluggish Sloth and idle life, enemye to all verteous acti∣ons. The consideration wherof: caused me to write this Discourse, as a plain and sufficient ex∣ample to all ingenerall, wherin they may see, the dissolute life of diuers personages forepassed, as the Scripture by credible authoritie maketh de∣liberate mention. And first for the entraunce in to these Discourses, since occasion serueth so fit: I haue elected and chosen King Nabuchodonozor, sometime King of Babilon, who through the great
and inordinate Pride, from his regall dignitie: was brought to such base extremitie, that in shape of an Oxe he was made to eat on the ground in the company of other beasts and Dxen. There∣fore this Discourse following, suppose it to be spo ken by the King himself, sorowfully lamenting for his former offences, and so all the rest in their order as followeth. PRIDE. PRIDE is the root, from vvhence all vice dooth spring, Rich is that man, that can auoyd the same: Infernall vvoes for guerdon it dooth bring, Deserued due to their perpetuall shame: Eche one therfore regarde his verteous name. THE COMPLAINT OF King Nabuchodonozor, some time King of Babilon, for the inordinate and excessiue PRIDE, that he vsed in his life time. Caput. 1.
OR highest tipe of Honors lofty name, I some time did in Princely pomp remayne: Bothe farre and néer I bore the golden fame, And who but I in chéefe estate did reign? Till suddainly in all my peacocks plumes: I was throwen down for all my freating fumes. What so thou be that fayne wouldst knowe my name, And how I liu'd, attend vnto my tale: Nabuchodonozor, I am the very same, Who suddenly was turnd from blisse to bale. In Pride I rulde, and flaunted with the best: Who me denayd, by power I supprest. I am that King which did the Image frame, Wherto all men should treble homage giue: Those that rebeld should taste the scorching flame, This in my Pride I vsoe while I did liue. Blood, blood, was all I dayly did desire: Such was the rule wherto I did aspire. When Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, To homage did my golden God disdayne: In flaming Fornace soone I did them throwe, Wherin I thought to woork their cruell payne. But of my will, sée how I was deceiued: God by his might my puissant pomp bereued. His Angell did preserue them in the flame, So that they did no harme at all sustayne: No, not one hear did perish out of frame, This when I saw, did gorge me with disdayne. I thought my self inferiour vnto none: But I as God triumphant rulde alone.
I thought eche wight was subiect vnto me, I thought it prayse to beare a loftie name: Pride rulde my hart, I could not Uertue sée, Uice did abound my pleasure for to frame. A mortall man? no, no, a God and eke obayd: My whole estate in pamperd Pride I swayd. No one I thought that could my power suppresse, Much lesse I thought to finde my equall mate: With woordes I causde to bow bothe more and lesse, With hauty déeds I maintaynd still my state, This stomack stout disdaynd to stoupe all: This mightie minde no feare could once apall. But yet the Lord to make me féele his might, Bereft me cleane of mine Impeeiall seat: For seuen yéeres space, my Pride for to requie, In shape of Oxe on ground he made me eat. A iust reward which I did well deserue: Since so I did disdayne his name to serue. Yet at the length his mercy tooke such place, That he restorde me to my Seat agayne: And where before I ran an vncouth race, With treble ioy my Crowne I did attayne. Now I perciu'ed God brought my state so lowe: And raysd me vp, that I my self might knowe. Beholde how gratious was the Lord to me, That lined long moste odious to beholde: See how at length his mercy set me frée, And brought me home agayne into his folde. And though that I did run awhile astray: Loth was the Lord to sée me cast away.
You Potentates that rule in high degrée, Remember how your state is héere vnsure: And though on Earth a while your bidings be, It is but lent, it dooth not aye indure. Think as to day your life you doo sustayne: To morrowe dead, the proofe héerof is pyne. Think not to liue as Gods vpon the land, Remember still that Pride will haue a fall: Consider you are Subiect to Gods hand, And in a moment passe away you shall. Liue stil to dye, that you may redy be: When God shall call eche one in his degrée. Sée how my Pride was quickly layd in dust, Beholde you may my Mutabilitie: My Princely rule wheron I whole did trust, Did naught auayle my state to fortifie. He set me vp, agayne, he brought me lowe: That I to you a warning plaine might showe. Remember diuers past in preter time, That haue receiu'd as sudden fall as I: And haue likewise offended in this crime, Now wisely looke, you like tread not awrye. Proud Lucifer fell down from Heauen hye: And all through Pride God did in him espye. Beware of Pride therfore my Brethern all, With your estates still holde your selues content. Pride, Pride, was only cause of my great fall, And for my Pride beholde how I was shent. Example take, be warned now by me: Let me suffise your pattern for to be.
And to my graue with spéed I haste agayne, Since I haue tolde that which I did destre: For now I hope that you will shun the payne, Tt comes through Pride, whose lew is lasting fire. And thus adieu, God graunt eche one may sée: Uto his state, and so content to be. FINIS. The Author. NABVCHODONOZOR, hauing thus ended his dolefull Discourse, and heauily from his hart lamented his straunge preter Mutabilitie, yet re∣ioysed hartily, that God had so boū∣tefully extended his mercy vpon him, as to recall him from his former follyes, and giuen him the Spirit of true repentaunce. Quoth he vnto the Author. My freend, since thou hast heard this my sorowfull discourse, how lewdly I spent my life, and how wauering I went from princely poten cye, from regall rule wherin I should haue show en dutifull authoritie, and blinde Ambition ha∣uing so secretly seduced me, as to bend and bow at euery wanton beck: I ran into vtter obliuion of my self, and also of the Almighties Maiestie. But beeing now reclaimed, and hauing thorow∣ly surviewed my lewd and lothesome libertie, as thou hast heard: for the better warning therfore, of all other which shall come after me: I haue re hearsed this mournfull tale, and (as my freend)
my confidence I repose in thee, to publish this my preter pleasure, mingled with a grieslye gall, as a Marck wherat all men may perfectly leuell with their stedfast eyes, and so to shun the daun∣gers emminent to followe. Wel (quoth the Au∣thor) my good will shall not want heerin, though my skill be but base and simple, wherfore referre this vnto me, and dout not but I will doo mine endeuour with as much diligence as lieth in me to doo, wherfore return, and trouble yourself no more, for my plighted promise shall be presently fulfilled. With that he departed. And then ap∣peered in sight a griesly Ghoste / with long shag∣ged hear / grim visaged / and attired in Black, a moste ougly creature to beholde, he desired the Author that he would also attend vnto ye straunge Mutabilitie of his estate. Wel (quoth the Author) proceed / and let me heare what thou hast to say. Then stretching out his armes, grinning with his teeth, and frowning in the face: he began his sorowfull Complaint. ENVYE. ENVYE disdaines his neighboures prosperous state, No Looue can liue vvhere ENVYE bearethsvvay: Vse therfore so your dealings in such rate. You need not shame your liuing to display. Exile all fraud, serue GOD, thy Prince obay.
THE COMPLAINT of King Herod, the first Straunger that reig∣ned ouer the Ievves, for the exceeding ENVYE that in his life he vsed. Caput. 2. WHat, shall I speak? or shall I holde my peace? What shall I doo? all lothes my face to sée: The more I muse, the more dooth woe increace, The more I shun, the more it followes me. My former déeds I wish recalld to be. But arlet fye, thou speakest to to late: For right reuenge is falne vpon thy pate. Why should I shun, or hide to showe my name? To all the world I am an open gaze: The infant young on Herod cryeth shame, So black Defame my name abroad dooth blaze: That to looke vp, oh how I stand in maze. To Heauen, no, cast down thy head to Hell: There is the place, where thou of right must dwel. But that all men may mirrour take by me, List to the tale that héer I will vnfolde: Héere warning take, let me your mirrour be, See how at length I trapped a in holde: You Gallants gay, take héed, be not to bolde, Least that you run to soone in Enuyes snare: And so be caught before you can beware. I Herod am, whose hart with gréefe did gore, When Christe was borne, whom men their Sauiour call: I sent foorth Mages to foresée therfore, Which way I might procure him for my thrall:
In hart I still desirde his finall fall. But God who sawe such Enuye in my brest: Did me bereaue of that I hoped best. Unto my hart it was an endles spight, That of the evves a King he nam'd should bée: O then (quoth I) if catch that wretch I might, All were mine owne, mine honor then were fr, The pomp of all might then redound to me. But they in whome I fully fixt my trust: Returnd no more, their promise was vniust. I vowed to come with homage to this King, Dissembling then my ardent zeale of hart: Hoping that so I might him vnder bring, And by this drift fulfill my bloody part. But all in vayne, the more returnd my smart. And how I frye, and freat in spight therfore: Iudge you if one may any wayes doo more. Condemd I am to the infernall flame, For lothsome life which I would not preuent: Proud Pluto now torments my noble name, Now to to late I lothe my life lewd spent. Be warnd therfore, eche man kéep him content. Clime not to high, for sudden comes the fall: Which leads you to an euerlasting thrall. You stately Kings that haue the charge in hand, To gouern those that doo them Subiects vow: Foresé by me such sinne for to withstand, Be not to proud, vnto your duties bow. Rememember you but Subiects are as now. I can instruct how other should deplore: But I my self could not take héed before.
Call vnto minde the slaughter that I made, Of tender infants from their mothers brest: Sée how Dame Enuye led me by her shade, That mercilesse poore Sucklings I opprest. And through my Realme none could haue any rest. But what reuenge did light on me therfore: Is to well knowen, I néed to speak no more. For suddenly I caught a bloody knife, Incenst with ire, to woorke mine owne decay: My Seruaunt would not let me spill my life, But he perforce constraynd my hand to stay. Els desperatly I meant my self to slay. But now at last, beholde a greater chaunge: Woe to reporte the matter is so straunge. A loathsome creature then I was to sée, Upon my carckasse Uermin vile did eat: Such odious sauours did procéed from me, None could abide for to approche my Seat. For to beholde my body vermins meat. My fréends and all, now suffered me to lye: My stinck was such, that none could come me nye. A iust reward for Enuye that I vsde, A mirrour playne for all that come behinde: To think how much my self I haue abusde, And altred cleane from out of natures kinde. A man, a beast, such doome was me assignde. And as I was, euen so I doo remayne: Til iudgement come, to quit me for my payne. Sufficient warning héere I haue you tolde, For to beware how like you doo offend: Now hence I must to troubles treble folde,
Which will abide continuall without end. If therfore thou wilt to thy self be fréend. Shun Eyes snare, take héed of lofty minde: So neuer shalt thou wauer out of kinde. FINIS. The Author. THe Author hauing wel and diligent ly attended to this Discourse, vtte∣red of this hellish Herod: would ∣ry faine haue entred into some tal with him, but seeing him so terribly turmoyled with a multitude of griesly assaults, so greedily gnawing on his cursed carkass, was content to let him passe, yet seeing that he would not depart out of presence, but expected yet (as it were) to declare some what more of his mishap. The Author sayd. Thou hatefull Herod, when in thy surpassing pleasure, thou hadst the world at will: little was these afterclaps in thy remem∣braunce, but now beeing woorthiy punished for thy former offences: thou lamentest when it is to late. O my freend (quoth Herod) thy woords I haue approoued, for indeed my lawlesse lier∣tie with vnridled affection: hath trayned me in to these mercilesse misseries, which perforced I
constrayned to abide. But beeing thus broyled in this bathe of bitternes: faine would I dye, and can not, fayne would I escape and may not. So that woorthily and deseruedly, I abide this my vnlooked for destiny. With that (giuing a hidious grone) he departed. And presently there entred as grim a Sire as he, as ougly to be∣holde, as beastly in behauiour, and as deformed in his stature. After he had awhile well beheeld him self, and looked in eche place about him: he began his Discourse as followeth. VVRATH. VVhere vvrathfull vvights in common vvale remain, Regarded small is vitie of life: All vice abounds, Discord, dooth Reason stayne, Trueth lyes in dust, and still increaseth strife. Haue good regard in all thou goest about: Esteeme Dame Trueth for she vvill beare thee out. THE COMPLAINT of King Pharao, sometime King of Egipt, vvoorthily punnished of GOD, for his vvrathfull dealings tovvard the Children of Israel. Caput. 3.
AM I that Pharo that did guyde, The noble Land of Egipt late? Am I that Pharao that did slyde, From happy helth, to wayling w▪ And am I he, that sought eche way▪ For to subuert the Israels state; Then iustly is mine owne decay. Faine downe on me, for dooing so. I haue dese'ud the trueth to say, A thousand times as many moe. For all the Plagues that God me sent: Could not inforce me to repent. Ten seuerall Plagues God sent to me, Ere I would let his Children goe: With Frogs and Lice moste straunge to sée, To mooue my hardned hart with all: With diuers Plagues he payd me pat, For to reclaime my stoutnes so. But I esteemed not of that, I thought my state should neuer ll. I thought to beat all nations flat, Before that I would gayne the thrall. But who so fights agaynst the Lord: He spéeds but bad, as I accord. I did perseuer in my thought, I did not force the Lord on hye: I thought my power should euer spéed, And that his might I could deface: My harned hart with VVrath was bent, I thought to mount vp to the Skye. But cling, see how I was shent, For down I fell i lothesome case. And now my deed I doo repent,
For running such a wretched race. Beholde how héer I due in paine: Yet can not dye though almoste slayne. The furious Fiends torment my ghoste, For pleasure vsed in my life: Trounst and turmoyld in fréesing frost, Ye burnes this frost as whot a re Thus doo I passe my dollye dayes, Amid a thousand heaps of strife: And from them can escape no wayes, To late it is for to retire. But iust desart (as all men sayes, Fell down on me in midst of ire. O loathed life, fayne would I dye: Cease Pharao, thou in vaine doost crye. Be warned now you Lordings all, Let Pharaos fall teach you beware: Spit foorth that griesly goring gall, Which makes you Enuyes seruile slae: Sée Pharao, who of late inioyd, What hart could wish, deuoyd of care. And see, how now I am annoyd, Iudge if a guerdon right I haue. Because my time I aye imployd, To fancyes fond which I did aue. And now my pleasure spent before: With sowry sce I doo deplore Say now you sée a pattern playne, That you the like mischaunce may shun: See héere the lue of déep disdayne, That fostred was in Enuyes lay: Respect your state ere you begin,
How you yaur after steps may run, So shall you scape the sinck of sin: Which Pluto proud dooth round bewrap, When you espy another in: I think you may escape the trap. Say notbut you haue warning had: Ofenc that féeles his state to bad. And thus adiew, I must return, As Gally slaue vnto my paine: To place where sily soules doo mourne, In lothsom lake of Enuy fell: I must not slack my seruice due. But with all speed must turne again, And there be locked fast in mue: Among a thousand féends of Hell, Take héed therfore, think on my lue: And of the place where I doo dwell. Then neuer wil you fall in this: But still take héed to doo a misse. FIMIS.
The Author. PHARAO, hauing thus ful ly finished his mournful Dis∣course: soone after departed, which when the Author per∣ceiued, and calling to minde his former talke: took his pen and noted it down, as neer as he could in the same order as he pronounced it. And before he had brought to full effect his pretended purpose: he espyed appro ching in place a modest and comely Personage, attired in the weeds of a Gentleman, very sorow fully walking, drying the tristfull teares which flowed from the Fountayne of his eyes with a Handkertcher. The Author perceiuing this: la∣boured very diligently, till he had ended King Pharaos Discourse, greatly desiring to knowe the name of this pensiue person. For still he erected his eyes, and heaued his hands vp to Heauen, representing the forme and maner of a sorowfull Sinner, bemoning his former offences, and only aspecting for his eternall comfort from the ioyful habitation of the perpetuall Paradise. This so sudden and sorowfull sight, so amazed the Au∣thor: that he stood in a great quandary, not know ing what were best to doo. But at last this wo∣ful wight gaue a greeuous sigh. and folding his armes togither: began his tale.
LECHERYE. Life better lost, then liue in such a sinne, Eternall shame dooth follovve lavvlesse Lust: Corrupted mindes doo first this vice begin, Hating the trueth vvheron they ought to trust. Eche one therfore his staylesse state regard, Remember (man) the day dravves very neer: In vvhich all sinne shall haue his due revvard, Erect thy minde, that then thou mayst be cleere. THE COMPLAINT of King Dauid, (by Gods permission) annoi∣ted King of Israel, sorovvfully from the bottome of his hart, bemoning his vnbrideled Lust of Lecherye, committed vvith BERSABA the VVife of VRIAS, and for the procuring of her Husbands death, therby ob∣tayning his purpose. Caput. 4. DId Adam fall for breaking Gods behest, From tipe of ioy to den of wayling wo? And did his fact deserue to be supprest? Then Dauids deed, deserueth treble so.
Did Cayne offend when he his Brother siue, And was subornd from presence of Gods face? And if his fact did force his hart to rue, O Dauid, then thy doed deserues like case. What greater sinne then soeke the guiltlesse Blood? What greater shame then loathsonie Lecherye? The World my fact hath open vnderstood, My cruell déed of lawlesse libertie. O Bersaba which so did blinde mine eyes. That I forgot my rule and Princely sway: Her seemely shape did force me to deuise, A thousand thoughts my purpose to assay. O when as thou didst laue thy body white, As in my windowe thée I did beholde: Me thought I saw a Gem of rare delight, A Phenix faire stampt out of beaen Golde. Then that I might my purpose bring about, On thy sweet shape to mittigate my payne: To bloody Warres I sent thy husband out, With giuing charge that there he should be stain. Then did I gayne my long desired trust, Thoe Bersaba for to suffise my will: But I a wretch to deale with lawlesse Lust, Thoe to defile, and husband thine to kill.
O wicked déed, me thinks I still doo heare, Vrias blood for vengeaunce on m call: O mazed man, where was thy heauenly feare? What, didst thou think there was no God at all. O yes (my God) but sore deceiu'd was I, Before thy face so wretchedly to sinne: Thy mercy milde (O Lord) doo not deny, That yet I may thy dwellings enter in. O Bersaba, forgiuenes I doo craue, For that I wretch thy body did defile: Unlawfully desiring thée to haue, To spot thy name by such an vnkinde guyle. And thou Vrias through my déed was siayne, O where remaind the bounds of Princely sway: That for my Lust should so desire thy payne, And to thy foes vniustly thée betray. Thy dolefull death in hart I doo Lament, And sory am for this my wicked déed: Beholde (O Lord) my fact I doo repent, Wheron to think dooth make my hart to bléed. You Princes great that rule in regall state, Beholde how I did blindly run astray: And brought my self vnto destructions gate, But that my God redéemd me thence away.
Take hée how you doo lawlesse looue require, Fly from such vice as from a Serpent vile: In feare of God your pleasures doo require, Then shall you not seduced be with guyle. Be warnd by me who am your preter past, Sée how I fell that neuer thought to fall: Gods mercy yet receiued me at last, And sorowing teares did make a mends for all. Direct your wayes as Iustice dooth beséeme, Assure you, then you can not walke a stray: And of this crime none can you guiltie déeme, Remember me, and thus I haste away. FINIS. The Author. THe Author stood meruelously ama∣zed, to heare this dolefull Discourse vttered by King Dauid, to see how sorowfully he bewept his so vniust attempt, and how earnestl he cra∣ued pardon for his lewd offence. Atlast the Au∣thor approched nerer vnto him and sayd. Un∣doutedly my moste gratious and Souereigne
Prince, this your careful complaint / wilmooue ye mides of other such like siers, to driue into vt∣ter obliuiō their vnsatiat desires, wherby moste greeuously they offend in the presence of the Al∣mightie. O my freend (answered King Dauid) this my fact, was bothe odious in the sight of God and man. yet cheefly in disobedience of the Almighties commaundements / but hartely I lament the same, and wish that this deed may be a mirrour vnto all to beware how they fall in to the like, and thee my freend and all other, I wish wisely to foresee vnto your selues, be fet∣uent in prayer, and continuall in contemptation, so the Aduersary shall haue no power to assayle, and so my Freēd far wel. Adieu good King (an∣swered the Author) and GOD of his inestima∣ble mercy, arme vs all constantly in thy repen∣taunce. After this entred a crabbed creature, de∣formed to beholde, his belly so mon∣sterous and huge, and his vi∣sage so ougly to beholde, & after a whiles pausing he began to speake as followeth.
CLVTTONY. GL not thy self vvith vain desire of vvelth, Let modest mean alvvay thy state suffice, Vse not excesse for to impaire thy helth, The drunken S all vertue dooth despise, The  paunch his belly makes his God. O happy man that keeps the golden mean: Nought more reproche, or more deserues his rd, You vel may see then such a life vnclean. THE COMPLAINT of Diues for his Gluttony vsed in bi life time: Caput. 5. DRound in the gulf of endlesse woes am I, A Glutton vile, moste odious to beholde: My life I led so lewdly out of frame, That all the World my presence doo despise. "And why, for that I might haue shund before: "But fond desire to that repugnant was.
"I Lordly liued and fared of the best, "I like a Prince had all the World at wil: "To see the poore did gorge mée with disdaine. "I thought all much that went beside my mouth. "No, at my gate they should for hunge ye: "Ere I a whit wld pity their estate. When Lazarus lay begging at my gate, I gaue great charge that none should him reléeue: No not the crummes that from my table fel, To saue his life hée should them not obtain. The dogs to him more gentle was then I: They lickt his sores when els hée naught could get. And now beholde what haue I for my hire, An endles flame wher I ry my hart: The helhounds stand and claw mee with their ▪ A thousand plagu I suffer in a day, And all not half so much as I deserue: Though ten times more they were adioynd to mée. Poore Lazarus that ping lay in , In Abrahams bosome  from ha : Where I had all the pleasure on the , And hée the woe, his ioyes are treble folde: My daintie diets now hath lae ful sower, Now simple meat would seru for daintie fare. But hée they say, that wil o warning take, Deserueth wel to haue a like rewarde: And hée that makes a God vpon his drosse, Must buy it deer, as I alas haue doon: The pleasure that I had on earth before: Ful hard I now doo buy it to hy cost.
Sée what it is to trust in massy murk, sée what it is to make a God of drosse: Beholde what gain returns vnto my share, for thinking that my life would alway last I am the wretch that did contemne the poore: but for contempt, beholde what did ensue. You Wordlings all that yet remain behind, remember Diues drencht in deadly dole: Sée how desartful rightly hath him sped, for lawlesse life deuoid of any gr. Who scornes at God, God sure wil scorne at him: Let him not trust that weith wi negarde b. Wel since you haue my fatall fall beheld, I doubt not but you wil preuent the like: If so you d, your pleasure may be more, If not, your woe shalbe as great a mine. But while you haue a space alotted you: Remember mée, and feare wil force you . And so Adieu, to  I st retur. Where trl  se my caren corse: There must I li, there must I neuer dye, O grily gréef that neuer wil haue end. Fye on all mu that brought mée vnto this: Farwel my Fréends, stil think on Diues life. FINIS.
The Author THis grisly tale of Diues perplexed ye Au∣thor in a dazed dump, to consider with him self, what desert obtayned the ex∣cessiue desire of Gluttony, what au irksoe sore it is vnto the soule, bringeth the body into a brutish beastlines, and maketh him consue his dayes in canckred conceits, the flaunting fare, vsed at their tossing tables, ye rieto{us} regard they haue their owne sish sloth, from morning to night passing their pleasure in irksome excesse of detestable drunkennes, then wallowing in the mire of mortall miseries pamperd with all secu∣curities possible to bring him to ye bck of subtil Sathan, then is hedlong hurled, into a thousand crabbed cares, a multitude of mischeefs, compa ssed with cruel calamities, all hope abandoned, faith vtterly suppressed, and vice egregiously im∣braced, no tung can possible expresse ye diuers do∣lors brought about by slauish sin, & man so vn∣stedfast by nature, to run hedlong into the ame. But then to driue him out of his former fanta sies, approched one in place with a currish coun tenance, his paunch corne out and round about beset with fearfull flames of fire:  sight wher of the Author stood quaking and quering, yet refreshing him self with assured hope he attēded to hear what he would say.
AVARICE. As God hath sent and vvel increast thy store, Vaingloriously doo not therin excel: And eke again, doo not disdain the poore, Regarde on earth thou but a time shalt dvvel, In time therfore this odious vice expel. Consider vvelth dooth florish but a space: Erect thy minde in heauen to gain a place. THE COMPLAINT of Iudas bemoning his Auaritious hart in sel∣ling his Maister Christe for thirtie pence. Caput. 6. WHat doo I liue, wil death not end my car is crooked fate so luckles vnto mée: that wil not end my mortall misery, No greater plagues must be thy shamelesse share For lothed life which thou before didst vse, In crauing that which moste did the abuse. Lothe cruel wretch to showe thy filthy face Or that the World should think vpon thy déed: For whose offence ful many harts doo bléed. For that I wretch transgrest in cruel case. My Maister milde for lucre t betray: Woe woorth thée wretch to think vpon that day.
I Iuda am that once Disciple was, To Christe that was my Lord and Maister déer: Beholde mée wretch that stands in presence héer. Who Traitour like his sorowes brought to passe. For béeing gréedy of a golden gaine: For money put my Maister vnto paine. I am the Wretch that dipped in the dish, When as hée said, euen hée shall woork my woe: And see bow I assented to doo so. For in the Garden with a traiterous kisse. I brought to passe how hée should Captiue bée: Led like a Lamb his slaughter for to sée. I thirtie pence receiued for my déed, Which after warde when I recalld to minde▪ For my offence great wrath to mée assignde. Before the Préests I hasted then with spéed, And threw the money in despight away: Confessing I the guiltlesse did betray. And foorth I went ashamed to showe my face, For stil my déed did gore mée to the hart: In that I had doon such a vilain parte. I could not rest nor bide in any place. But went and hangd my self vpon a trée: In place wheras all might mée plainly sée. Then Belzabub began to play his parte, Hée came to fetch my sinful soule to hel: Where to to bad in torments I doo dwel. Without remorce as is my iust desart. Loe what an end my Auarice did gain: For preter ioyes, an after treble pain.
Learne you therfore that sée my gréenous fall, To flye from that which wil incurre your woe: If on your welth you set your pleasure so. Undoutedly to Sathan rest you thrall. From whome be sure you cannot start awrye, But in the lake of deadly dole shall lye. Take warning now from hart I you desire, Let Iudas stand a mirrour in your eyes: That Auarice in hart you may dispise. And not to hye abooue your reach aspire. For if you doo, your fall is straite at hand: Prepare before, séek therfore to withstand. And now I turn vnto my lasting paine, Destrous stil to end my Iingring life: But stay a while, I must haue longer strife. Example take, to you I call again. Fly, flye I craue from presence of this vice, Who wil your woe a thousand wayes intice. FINIS.
The Author. IF now this rare reporte vttered by this Iewish Iudas, may mooue a man to minde his mazed miseryes, procured by his vnsatiable auaritious hart: Iu∣dge you, to whome is permitted the perusing of this Craiterous trechery, for minding more his money then regarde to his Maister becāe mer∣chant to barter his Maister away for a small va lue, an intire looue proceeded frō this seruisable seruant, who exempting all curteous constancy, all faith and fidilitie, all looue and obedient du∣ty, towards his Maisters safetie, with a flatte∣ring face, in deep deceit betrayed him with a cur sed kisse. O wretch far beyond desert desetuing such a Maister, whome neither outwarde ver∣tue could perswade thee, miraculous dealings content thee / nor loouing loyaltie mooue thee, rightly didst thou gain the name of the Childe of perdition as thou proouest periurde in thy great vnconstancy: so iustly & deseruedly reapest thou thy duty. Then to driue the Author out of dūps wherin he remayned at this tale of Iudas approched one in place seemly apparailed like a preacher or Pro phet very modest and sage, to whome the Author listened to heare what he would say,
SLOTHE, Sloth is a foe vnto all vertuous deeds, Learning surmounts the golden heaps of gain: Of Idle life therfore destroy the vveeds, Think vvhat renovvn Dame Science dooth maintaine. Hence foorth subdue all idle thoughts in thee: Example good to all thy life vvil bee. THE COMPLAINT OF Ionas for his slothfull slacking the commaunde∣ment of the Lord beeing sent to preach to the Niniuites, Caput. 7. MUse not my Fréends though Ionas now, appéere before your face: I come to vtter foorth my crime, gainst Gods Almightie grace. For béeing straitly chargde by him, that I to Niniuie: Should goe and fel the People how, they liued in great miserye. I would not doo as I had charge, but went an other way: To Ioppa wher in secret sorte, to Tharsus I would stray.
And finding hoyssed sayles at hand, and ready to depart: I entred ship not minding that, which was my chéefest part. So foorth wée launcht and vnder hatch, I went to take my rest: Desiring for to sleep my fil, for that did please mée best. But suddainly vnlooked for, a mightie storme did ryse: The anger of the God abooue, was threatned in the skyes. The ship was tossed wunderously. a greeuous sight to see: For death each man did then awayt, no way els might there bée. And stil the Maister plied his charge, to ease the heauy wait: Suspecting that should be the cause, wherwith the ship was frayght. So foorth hée cast his merchandise, into the swelling seas: When that was doon, yet nere the more, the tempest did appease. Then euery man fel on his knées, and loude to God did cry: Yet was the tempest terrible, and raged cruelly.
Then vnder hatch the Maister came, where mée a sléep hée found: Awake quoth hée, and pray with vs, shun Sloth wée now are bound. Then to our prayers fel wée hard, yet all would not content: For stil it raged more and more, in vain their time was spent. At last the Maister thus gan say, my Freends if you agrée: Wée lots wil cast which of vs all, procures this rage to bée. The Lots were then immediatly, deuided twixt vs all: And when each one had tooke his chaunce, the lot on mée did fall. Wel then (quoth I) since that this rage, procured is by mée: Into the seas doo cast mée strait, then all content shall bée. To which for sauegarde of their liues, they gladly did consent: But God though I offended had, would not my perishment. But present sent a mightie VVhale, when I was throwen in sea.
Within whose paunch frée from all harr I did remain thrée dayes. And at the last deliuered was, this did my God for mée: So that by this the seas were calm▪ and they escaped frée. And though that I offended had, and slackt my duty so: God would not leaue mée succourlee, but shéelded mée from w. For when I called vnto minde. my great and lewd offence: The sighing sorowes from my hart, made spéedy recompence. For God delighteth more to sée, a sinner wayle his sin: Then hée should vengeance present▪ or iudgment enter in. So for example you may sée, my sin which was so sore: Gods mercy soone did mittigate, to make mée sin no more. You therfore that remain on earth, let this your minde suffise: Feare stil for to displease the Lord. be not to worldly wise. Fix stil your minde on heauenly th that neuer wil decay.
The rest are but as shadowes héer, and soone wil passe away: What vantage is it for a man, to haue of riches store: And for to want the feare of God, which stil should be before. The more a man dooth fix his minds, vpon that filthy drosse: The more endamagde is his soule, vnto the vtter losse. For welth dooth pamper him somuch, that God is clean forget: And then at last vnto his pain, vpon him falls the lot. So that all good and verteous men, from company refuse him: And where before hée was estéemd, now they disdain to vse him. Then is hée throwen into the lake, of euerlasting pain: Where as no fish shall rescue him, to cast him vp again. But shall among the damned soules, in endlesse torments dwel: Where wéeping wayling dooth remain, euen to the pit of hel.
Beare this in minde in all your woorks, before you doo begin: Remember God is merciful, and be afrayd to sin. Turne vnto God, and God to you, wil turn his chéerful face: Flye slauish Sloth, and then be sure, that God wil you imbrace. For idlenes is enemye, to goodnes as men say: Therfore doo shun the enemy, and one the Vertue stay. Let all that haue you preter past, examples be to you, How you may learn in all assayes, vile sin for to eschew. And thus if you direct your wayes, you walk the path so right: That heauen is your inheritance, in foyle of Sathans spight. FINIS. Antony Munday. Memor esto breuis aeui. THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK of the Mirrour of MVTABILITIE.
¶ THE SECOND BOOKE OF the Mirrour of Mutabilitie, discoursing of diuers other excellent Historyes, bothe pleasant and profitable. To the Reader. SOme men fix their fancies on simple shado∣wes / esteeming Vanitie as a Vertue to vaunt of addicting their mdes to Carnall , wishing their Bags wel sted with , which is their whole pleasure. Some againe to hauti∣nes of hart, which (as they think) is a goodly  ry. Some to seek the ruinate spoyle of his Prince and Countrye to pleasure the Enemye, and thinketh his deed woorthy of eternall memory. Some to the vtter vndooing of their Neighbours, labou∣ring by all meanes possible to depriue him of his honest name, hoping therby to get great cōmen∣dation. Some to vnawfull liking, which moo∣ueth their vnbrideled nature to stretch beyond the bounds of loyaltie, and hopeth for prayse all∣though it be with great infamy. Some also de∣lighteth in corragious Carowsing, with the su∣perficiall qualities of Quaffing, the which some frequent only for the name of a Lusty Carovvser, though all honesty is vsed with such an Arti∣ficer. And some giue themselues to sluggish Sloth, wishing rather three houres sleep▪ then one inch
of profit. Of all which, seuerally in these Chap∣ters before passed: I haue drawen some declara∣tion, compacting therin (The seuen deadly Sinnes) with their due obtayned hire. And now for that some occasion is offered vnto me, to proceed far∣ther in my enterprise: I haue adioyned heerto di∣uers other exeellent Historyes, selected out of the moste sacred Scripture, desiring (Gentle Reader) thy freendly inderencye, although I want the rules of practised Poetrye / wherwith I might haue flaunted it more gallantly, I referre that to those of more riper excellencye, and accept this (though homely) yet offered willingly / and if I had been experienced, or es might haue come aquainted with such eloquent spe : be sure that I would haue then launched it out with an Emperours liberalitie. But finding my store house so far vnfur∣nished, and that trueth need not be so brauely burnished, I yeeld my self to thy gentle courtesie, & bud my defence on thy freendly clemency. Sempre Amico vostro. A. Munday.
The Induction. ABSALON, Sonne to the illust∣rious King, and peerlesse Pro∣phet Dauid King of Israell, who was so adorned in Beauty so boū∣teous, in stature so excellent, and in all points of personage was so comely and apparant: stretch∣ing beyond the bounds of naturall affection, and more regarding Vanitie, then the welfare and pro speritie of his father Dauid: disloyally desired his Kingdome, and proceeded so far in his purpose: that he forced his father to fly out of his Realme / requesting counsell which way he might cleane vanquish and ouercome his Father. But this his bolde enterprise turned to his owne destructi on, for bothe the Armyes beeing ioyned in Bat∣tel: Absalon & his company sustayned the foyle. And he seekig to escape secretly away, as he rode the he  head ed about the branches of a tre & his hsse ning away left him hang ing there. Then I  Captaine of King Da∣ids hoste, and the Sonne of  King Dauids Sister pursu him▪  thorowe with his Speare, a iust  for his wicked attempt.
BE AVT IE. Be not to proud of that vvhich is but vayne, Esteeme not BE AVT IE as a thing of price: As Scripture dooth to vs giue credit plaine, Vaine BE AVT IE hath oft times deceiude the vvise. Take heed therfore, she slyly dooth intise. Infairst vvoords, dooth deep deceit oft lye: Eche man therfore lift vp his hart on hye. THE COMPLAINT of Absalon, for his vayne aspiring to the Im∣periall Crovvn and Diademe of his Father King D'AVID, and for his sudden fall he ob∣tayned in his pretended purpose. Ca. I. ON whom the fates in lowring sorte did frown, I am the wight and Absalon by name: Whō hauty hart (at last) perforce threw down Unto my woe, and thrise eternall shame. But he that eeks to clime beyond his reach: In end dooth fall, experience dooth me teach.
So I for proof the sonne to Dauid King, Presumde  vnto my Fathers place: A thousand woes I compast for this thing, And wisht as King his kingdome to imbrace. For stil desire id prick mee to the same: But duty said that I deserued blame. Wel what o that let duty quake with colde, Let wanton wil prick foorth his lusty prime: My Fathers Age stil made mée very bolde, And stil mée thought hée liude to long a time. His hoary heares were far vnfit to guyde: So great a charge, this thought I in my pride. Wel at the last betide mée weale or woe, I would aduenture for this rare renown: By puisant force my might I ment to showe, that therby I might a  the crown. In  of ,  cold: His crown and rea obta perforce I would. My Fathers force I naught estéeme (quoth I) I (present) wil erect a martiall and: For either hée wil graunt, orels wil flye, Then Dauids seat comes pat into thy hand. O Absalon chéer vp thy noble hart. Proceed in this to play a Uictors part. Then luy Lad I present did prepare, In led coes t bring my purpose right: A mightie band I leuied for my share, Not doubting but to foyle my Fathers might. Both noyse of Drum, and clangering trumpet shril, Did prick mée foorth for to obtayne my wil.
For what more same vnto a hauty hart, Then to encounter with his mortall foe? What infamy obtaines hée that will start? And Cowardly like from out the skirmish goe. So euery houre I tho a yéer o twain: Til I by fight m Father crown did gain, Wel then at last with courage foorth I went, And all my traine for to perfourme the déed: At last wée came where onter for was bent, Gainst mée and mine for to resist with . With Cannon cracks▪ the  then began: Eche one to showe him self a martiall man. On each side then began the bloody blowes. Assault, assault the Captaines cry amain: The Ensignes spred the battels force forshowe, The horsmen they the ranks haue broke in twain. the hurling shats and ery balles d flye: With such a force as darkned is the skye. My men although they were the greater part, A number slaine, the rest began to faint: The other side are Uictors by desart, then dark annoy my courage did attaint. I had the wurst I thought it best to flye: Without I would before myne enmyes dye. Then fled I thence, and glad my life to saue, For God was angry with my vnkinde act: Considering I my Fathers crown did craue, And entred féeld, which was a bloody fact. For this my déed reuengement soone hée sent: to make mée knowe my hart was wicked bent.
For in my flight my heare caught on a , Out of my saddle it did take mée quite: And there I hung most woful for to sée, And could no way redresse my heauy plight. A guerdon iust thus fel vnto my share: Because against my Sire I would prepare. Then knew I wel my hainous great offence. Had brought mée to my due deserued hire: Which from the heauens was sent for recompence, Because so hye in hart I did aspire. Then wished I all were to doo again▪ Because as now I felt therof the pa. So long I hong in this my doleful pain, That Ioab did at last retire that way: When hée mée saw, incenst with ire amain, At mée hée ran perforce, and did mée say. This sharp reuenge from heauen on mée fel: to teach mée gainst my Father to rebel. Sée gallant Brutes by mée a pattern plain, Of hauty hart aspiring to renown: Who did attempt my Fathers right to gain, And would haue robde him of his stately crown. But loe what guerdon dooth on mée betide: To pay mée home for my excessiue pride. Content your selues therfore with mean estate, Kéep that which Iustice dooth to you allowe: Take héed by mée remember this my fate, Perforst the wrath of God on mée to bow. Wherfore beware this filthy vice preuent: Least as I am, like case you may be shent. FINIS.
The Intduction. TRIPHON, a man of great repu∣tation, who assisted Alexander in fight against the noble King Ptolo∣lomye, when this Alexander was de parted his life, by subtle sleights, and craftie conceits, found such meanes, that he got the yung Antiochus the only heire, to this King Alexander, from the Arabian Emascuel, who nourisht him vp in vertuous educations, to ob∣tain the crown after his Fathers death. And when he had obtained the yung King vnder his iurisdiction, he began to compact  against him, which he could not fully com∣passe, so long as Ionathas (whome the King had made high Preest) enioyed his life, wherfore to preuent the same, he sought which way he mi∣ght slay Ionathas, and beeing at Bethsan where Io∣nathas met with him, accompayned with fortye thousād men, was greatly discouraged because the force of Ionathas was so great, and therfore to coullour the matter, he commaunded his Ar∣mie to yeeld as due renerence vnto Ionathas in all respects as to him self, And beeing met togi∣ther / quoth Triphon in dissembling sorte, vpon what occasion compellest thou these thy People to take such tedious trauail, consdering wee be at peace / and no warres is between thee & mee, return them home again, reseruing those whome thou pleasest to haue to attend, and to waight
vpon thee, and so walk with me to Ptolomais, for I wil frankly bestowe it vpon the, beside diuers other strong & fortified holdes, and for no cause els come I, and so I wil depart. Ionathas repo∣sing confidence in the dissēbling tale of Triphon: commaunded his Army to depart, & then went with Triphon to Ptolomais, where as soone as Io∣nathas with his men were entred the Cittie: the gates were fast shut, and Ionathas put in Prison and all his men slain. Then afterward departed Triphon in to the land of Iuda leading Ionathas with him as priso∣ner: and hauing intelligence that Simon the Bro ther of Ionathas stood vp in resistāce against him: in flattering sort he sent woord to Simon that the cause why he kept Ionathas in warde, was but for certaine money due by him in the King's ac∣count, and if so he would send an hūdred talents of Siluer, and also the two sonnes of Ionathas for surety in their fathers behalf, Ionathas should return home again. But Simon wel perceiued the craftie deceit of Triphon / and yet douting least he should become a greater enemy to the people of Israel. and that they should an other day reporte that because no money was sent by Simon his Brother Ionathas was dead, did send him bothe money, and the two Children. This fel right euen as Triphon did wish for and would not release Ionathas, but soone after / put bothe him and his Children to death, and now
at last beginneth he to bring about his long and ancient grudge toward the yung King, for as he walked abrode to disporte with him: traite∣rously did murder him, and so obtained the real∣me crowning him self King of Asia, & did much hurt in the land. But in the end this Triphon became so hated of all men, that when Antiochus Sonne vnto Demetrius came against him: the moste of his men returned, and hee beeing so per secuted by Antiochus, that he took ship on sea / af∣ter which he was neuer seen. CRVELTIE. Content thy self to liue in quiet stay, Remember sti! the end ere thou begin: Vaunt not to much of thy poor  pray, Except thou nk that thou  uer si. Let CRVELTIE in thee be cleane supprest, Think that thou canst not alvvay Victor bee: In thyne affayres respect thy quiet rest: Esteeme thy Freend that vvell dooth councell thee.
THE COMPLAINT of Triphon for his crueltie committed against the yung King ANTIOCHVS, vvhome hee cruelly murdered as hee vvalked to disporte him, and for his cruel putting to death IONATHAS, and histvvo Children, through vvhich hee crovvned himself King of ASIA. Caput. 2. IF loftie looks might gain immortall Fame, Or double dealing merit woorthy prayse: Then Triphon I by right deserue ye same, Because long time I sought it many waies But if that Vertue vaunteth for her fée: Destance then is open come to mée. Promotion stil did prick my hart on hye, With whole desire to gain a Princes place: For by deceit I thought to mount the sye, But at the last deceit did  deface. Deceit they say so long may vsed ée▪ That at the length his Maister shame wil hée. For so by mée the proof appéereth plain, When Alexander shrined was in graue: Antiochus his Sonne I did obtain: Thinking by him that I the Crown might haue. But Ionathas did make mée stil to doubt: Wherfore for him I brought a fetch about.
When hée mée t with fortie thousand Men, A mightie hoast that made mée for to quake: A subtle shift to gloze that matter then, Dissembling I this drift did vnder take. And set my tung a philed phrase to frame: That no suspect there might be found of blam. I promised him ful many a gentle gift, So that at length his men hée sent away: I séeing I, so fine had playd this drift, This Ionathas for Prisoner I did stay. And at the last went out through Iuda Land: That they abroad my fame might vnderstand. To Simon who my prisoners Brother was, I message sent declaring that the cause: Why I retaind his Brother in this casse, Was for due det claimd by the Princes lawes. And if that hée would séek to set him frée: His Children hée with spéed should send to mée. Of Siluer eke an hundred talents more, To mée should come, els would I kéep him stil: My wish was sent, of mony I had store, And eke his Children resting at my wil. Whome afterwarde to death I did commit: That so therby my purpose might fall fit. Then I of Asia was proclaimed King, This was the wish I looked for so long: But Fortune fel reuengement sharp did wring, And made mée for to sing an other song Demetrius Sonne Antiochus by name: Pursued mée fast to woork my open shame.
And to my ships perforce made mée to flye, Els had I death sustayned at his hand: But ne the lesse on seas I wretch did dye, Deseruing wursse if that my fault were scand. But God this sharp reuenge on mée did taite: A guerdon  for treason I did maite. Flye, Flye therfore take warning by my fall, Let this my deed take place within your brest: To make you flye the suddain sweetned gall, Which in the end prouoketh your vnrest. Fye on all treason, woe vnto the day: When first I sought this moste accursed way. Wel since I haue so slyly falne in snare, And haue to mée incurrde an endlesse pain: You gallant wights I wish you to beware, Betime, see you from wi  refrayne. So of my woe for euer you shall misse, And for my gréef, shall reign in lasting blisse. FINIS. The Induction. ACHAB King of Israel espoused Iezabel Daughter of King Eth∣bael of the Sidonites, by meanes of the which Sezabel, he fel into all straunge Idolatry, and ex treame persecutiōs, for which
offence hee receiued such a plague of God: that in three yeers should no raine nor dewe fal from heauē on the earth, wherby ensued a great death bothe of men and beasts (that a number dyed through his wicked offence. This King as reporte is made in the sacred Scriptures was so wicked, that euen it was his whole delight to doo lewdly contrary to his duty, and yet God suffered him to obtain a vait∣ant victory ouer Benhadab the Sirian King, who retayned in his company xxxii. Kings, & twise hee harmed him by great and blody skirmishes but ye third time he was forced to come prostrate before this Achab▪ who for all his crueltie yet pit tied the case of Benhadab, and making a bond wt him, gaue him licence to departe, now for the mercy showne to this wicked Benhadab, whome God had cursed and brought into the subiection of Achab to the intent he should be slain: GOD was very wrathful against Achab▪ promising his ruinate distruction for the same. Shortly after, this greedy Gainer not satis∣fied with his owne kingdome and signories, wt his battels, spoyles, and wunderful victoryes, which God had suffered him to conquer: but the guiltlesse and inocent Naboth hee forced to bee cruelly murdered, for naught but for a Uiniard pertaining vnto this silly wight, whose innocēt death such vengeance obtained in ye sight of God that the Prophet Elia brought him message that where the Dogges had licked the Blood of Na∣both, in the same place should they lick his also. And ye God to him & his posterity would do a
had doon to the house of Ieroboam and Baasa. These fearful threatnings sent from GOD, so terrified Achab: that with repentaunce he hum∣bled him self in sorowing Sackcloth / which did mooue the Lord to permit his plague farther of. But this his repentaunce was but plaine dissi∣mulation, to winne the harts of men, wherfore he refused the councel of Micheas the true Prophet of GOD: and reposed confidence in foure hundred false Prophets, and after their councel took his iour ney to Ramoth, where beeing in Battell with the Sirians: an Arrowe pearced into him sitting in his Chariot, of which wound he died. And then his Chariot going toward the Poole of Samaria to be washed: the Dogs licked vp his blood. So was the promise of the LORD fulfilled vpon this wic∣ked and cruell King, for his great trangression. WICKEDNES. VVhile time thou hast, remember life misspent: In all thy thoughts respect a Christian care: Consider still the end ere thou attempt, Knovve that thy sinnes innumerable are. Examin vvell therfore eche fault amisse, Dread that the LORD vvill angrye vvith thee bee: Novv seek therfore to gaine the lasting blisse, Erect thy hart, that men good vvoorks may see, So then to all thy life shall vvitnesse be.
THE COMPLAINT of King Achab King of Israel, for his wic∣ked life led in IDOLATRIE and cruell Persecutions, and for sparing the life of the vvicked BENHADAB, King of Siria, vvhom GOD had deliuered into his hands only to put to death. Also for his procuring the poore NA BOTH to be cruelly murdered, therby toget his Viniard, by the counsel of IEZABEL his Queene (vvhose blood the Dogs licked vp on the ground) and also his ovvne blood, in the Battell fought at RAMOTH, according to the vvoord of the LORD. Caput. 3. LAsciuious life deserueth like rewarde, And disobedience must haue punishment: Where falshod rules ye trueth cannot be heard The rod must come to force them to repent. Where man disdaynes to stand of God in aw: Reuengement néeds must come by Iustice law. Where Crueltie dooth harboure in the brest, And Rigor puts poore séely soules to paine: Where feare of God is vtterly supprest, And eke the minde addicted to disdaine. The sharpned swoord dooth hang abooue his head: If God so please, to strike him present dead. "For proofe wherof, I Achab may suffise, "Whose wayward wil from Wisdomes wayes was bent
I lawlesse liued my God I did despise, In Idols I did fix my whole delight: That Iezabel whome I did take to Wife: Maintaind mée stil in this my lothsome life. For mine offence no raine for thrée yéeres space, Fel on the earth, all barren was and dry: So that by this a murrain came a pace, That man and beast a multitude did dye. The Prophet I Elia did disdain: Auouching hée was cause of all my pain. But moste of all. that wicked cursed King, Dispisde of God for wickednes of life: God did vouchsafe into my hands to bring, That so I might abridge him with my knife. But for because hée homage did to mée: I sau'd his life, and so did set him frée. But yet alas poore silly Naboths death Puts mée in minde my vile and lewd desire: By wrongful meanes to stop his guiltlesse breth Procured vengeance on mée for my hire. His viniard I perforce would take away: So by these meanes poore Naboth I did stay. The Lord then sent his Prophet vnto mée, Who thus did say, for this thy wicked déed: In place wheras all men did plainly sée, The Dogs on Naboths guiltlesse blood to féed: There shall they lick thy blood in self same case: Because thou didst all feare of God deface.
When this I heard, because all men should say, That I was sory for my great offence: I sackcloth got and so began to pray, But this I faind, and glozed with pretence. And God who knew how I did glozings fain. Preparde a meane to pay mée for my pain. For as I sought how I might get again, The Cittie Ramoth which to mée was due: The Councel of Micheas did refrain, And followed those that false weare and vntrue. So there in fight an Arrow perced mée: Of which I dyed in my tranquilitie. Let now therfore this tristful tale of mée, Giue warning how you run likewise astray: Feare God and kéep your selues in your degrée, Follow the trueth, exile all fraude away. And think on mée that passed you before: To giue you warning that you sin no more. FINIS. The Induction: IEPHTAH the Sonne of Gile∣ad base borne, and hated of his Bretheren, was fain to flye, & so went and remained in the Land of TOB, as a Straunger from his Bretheren and Fami∣liars, but within a while it fortuned ye Ammonites
oppressed the Israelites greatly with warres, and stood in hazerd of subuertion, so that the Elders of Gilead remēbring Iephtah was so goodly a man of personage, strong and coragious: they went to desire him to be their Captaine. But he alleadged vnto thē ye small regard they had of him before, & now in their distresse came to seek succour of him. So at last through prōising to make him their go uernour: he returned with them. And preparing him self against the Ammonites. he vowed vnto GOD that if the Uictory might redound into his hands: the first quick thing that should happen to meet with him at his return, he would sacrrfise in honor to the LORD, It so fortuned that GOD gaue him such good successe in Battell: so that he returned Conquerour. And as he came home∣ward: the first he met withall was his owne be∣looued Daughter, who met him with pleasant Hermony, at sight wherof he rent his heare, tea∣ring his garments, with many sorowfull lamen tations, declaring to her his vow. Well Father (quoth she) content your self / & that is sayd fulfill it, although it be I. And then for two monthes space among the Mountaynes she bemoned her virginitie / with other virgins of her company, and then returned, and was sacrifised of her Fa∣ther as his promise was. I right and rare exam ple for all men to take heed of vaine othes.
RASHNES. Regard alvvay to liue in modest meane, ARASH attempt thou after mayst repent: Shun such vayne thoughts as make thy life vncleane, Haue good regard lest thou be sharply shent, Novv is the time thy daungers to preuent. Esteeme therfore that vvhich shall last for aye: So shalt thou liue vvhen Sathan vvould say nay. THE COMPLAINT of Iephtah sometime Iudge of Israel, for his so rash vo vv, in the sacrifising of his Daughter, for the foyling of his enemyes. Caput. 4. THe loftiest minde dooth catch the fall at length, The Wisest man is subiect to a stroke: The Champion stout ye vaūteth in his strength Is forste at length his boasting to reuoke. All is but vayne to purchase mortall prayse: Which lasts awhile, and soone departs his wayes. Man dooth appoint, but God dooth all dispose, Euen so by me that sought vainglorious Fame:
I vowde to God if I might foyle y foes, And to return as Uictor of the game. I vowed what thing did méet mée by the way: As sacrafice to him I ment to slay. Welfoorth I went, such good successe God gaue, That all my foes by force I did suppresse: I had the wish that I did wholely craue, I bare the name among bothe more and lesse. My vow I made remayned yet behinde: I little knew what shing I first should finde. Returning home with all my mightie train, My Daughter first in presence I did spye: A treble gréef did agrauat my pain, My mirth was turnd to many a doleful cry: My hear I rent, and garments did deface: Twixt weale and woe I stood in doutful case. My promise made alas perfourmd must bée, For vnto God I firmely vowde the same: My Daughter eke brought treble woe to mée. That I on her my sacrafise should frame. No remedy but death shée must sustaine: And vnto her this tale I tolde with pain. O Daughter déer which earst was cause of ioy, Unto thy Sire to blemish dark debate: Now art become (alas) his great annoy, In that thy death is wrought by lucklesse fate, My rash attempt to purchase lasting prayse: Hath wrought the mean to end thy tranquil dayes.
To God I vowed if I the féeld might win, What first I met, his sacrifise should be: My foes now foyld that would haue entred in, Beholde (my Déere) the lot dooth fall on thée. If I should seeke to saue thy tender life: My promise made would more procure my strife. What shall I say (alas) amazde I stand, My promise I must bring to full effect: Thy life therfore yéeld subiect to my hand, And be content this World for to reiect. The Maiden milde this answer made her Sire: Content to graunt to that he did require. Since you (O Father) haue supprest your foes, And since your vow dooth fall so right on mée: I yéeld my self to ease your after woes, I shall suffise your sacrifise to be. But for two Moneths to Desert I must wend: My state to mone before my life dooth end. The time expirde, the Mayden turnd agayne, Then offered I to God my Sacrifise: Thus my rash vow, returned to my payne, To hunt for praise, which did me moste despise. When Man wil make a vow without respect: It God offends, his soule it dooth detect. You yunger yéeres therfore be warnd by me, Unto your vowes alwayes haue good regard: Respect in time the daunger for to flée, Least vnto you doo happen like reward. Stil vow no more then well perfourme you may: And so be sure you cannot goe astray. FINIS.
The Induction. SAMPSON, a man thought inuinci∣ble for his strength and magnanimitie receiued a womā of the Philistines to his wife, wherby he came to his distructiō, for by her alluring woords did open the Riddle put foorth at the mariage, how out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetnes. This Sampson after that hee had sent the Foxes through the Philistines corne had three thousand men against him / who by his owne permision suffered them to binde him, and they seeing that they had gotten him: greatly tri∣umphed, where withall he brake his bands, as though they had been of no force. And presently caught vp the Iawbone of an asse / and therwith all killed a thousand Philistines, and after fainting for drink, God forced the water to issue foorth of one of the teeth, and therwith refreshed him self. Then he perceiued the Citizens of Gaza layd wait for him to kill him, he rose at midnight, and rent the barres of the gates of the Cittie, and bare thē on his shoulders to ye top of an hill before the Cit∣tie of Hebron. But at length through his fond af∣fection to his wife Dalila, he lost Gods excelent gift, in cutting the here from his head, wherin cō∣sisted his strength, and so was hee betrayed to the Philistines, and had his eyes put out, and was made to grinde in a mill like a slaue. But in their day of delight holding ye feast of their God Dagon. Sampson was sent for out of Prison to play before them and make them sporte, the house being full of people, so that in the rofe there was three thou
sand. But as Sampson was playing before them: he caught the two great Pillers that bare vp the house, he called vpon his GOD saying. O Lord strengthen me at this time only, that (according to my vocation, executing thy iudgemēt) I may be auenged on the Philistines for my two eyes. And saying so: he shook the Pillers saying. Let me dye with the Philistines, and so the house fel down and killed them all, his body by his Bretheren was taken and buried with his Father Manoath. MAGNANIMITIE. Muse vvith thy self the subtiltie of sin, As entred hath the vvisest men aliue: Great is the fraude, shee slyly dooth begin, None can escape so neer shee dooth them driue. As shee hath Beautie trained to her lure, Next flaunting pride shee forced hath to bend: In all estates of this I am right sure, Meere shifts she hath, her craft for to defend. If then the stoute, the proud and all doo yeeld, The simple vvretch hath need to vvalk a right: If shee perceiue him in the openfeeld, Euen then shee comes to harme that simple vvight. THE COMPLAINT of Sampson, for his fond declaring to his wife vvhere his cheefest strength vvas, vvhich made his eyes be pulled out by the Philistines. Caput 5.
IF I be he whose hauty hart and strength, Throughout the world extelled was by fame Suruey my life, peruse my déeds at length, And sée how Women brought me vnto shāe. For I bewraid my Riddle to my Wife: Which did procure to me a heauy strife. When as I set the Corne in flery flame, The Philistines conuincst me through the déed: They bound me strait in hope to spoil my name, But yet the Lord did ayd me at a néed. For nothing I estéemed of my bands: But valiantly broke them betwéene my hands. Then Gaza gates on shoulders I did beare, Remoouing them vnto the Hebron hill: My might was such, of none I stood in feare, Til at the last through fondnes of my will. Unto my Wife my secret did bewray: And so by her obtayned my decay. I had example twise of her before, But yet (alas) no warning would suffise: If I had kept my self in Wisdomes lore, And her refraynd that did me so despise. I had not falne so soone into mishap: Nor ouer whelmd with terrors tristfull trap. But now to late my folly I repent, And now I moue when as it is in vayne: When vnaduisde I sought my self to shent, And willing run vpon my bitter bayne. Wel may you say his payment he deser'ud: hat saw his payn, & would not haue it sweru'd.
For twise the guyle I plainly did espye, When as she sayd, O Sampson now arise: The Philistines doo séeke to make thée dye, But quickly I preuented their deuise. Yet foolish man could not be warnd by this: But néeds must tell wheras thy secret is. Her Sirens songs layd me a sléepe on lap, Then she from me my valiant force bereft: The Philistines then caught me in their trap, And then (alas) small comfort had I left. But that in God my trust I firmly héeld: Protesting him my Buckler and my Shéeld. They traitour like mine eyes puld from my head, And in the Mill did vse me like a slaue: Beholde my Wife what courtesie she bred, Sée for my looue what recompence I haue. Now grinde poore wretch thy liuing for to get: To finde thée clothes, and also bread and meat. O séely Sampson now depriued of ioy, Where is the life that thou didst lead of yore? Is comfort turnd to direfull dark annoy, Is all thy fame now dead thou hadest before? Why? is it thou that burnt thy enmyes Corne? Beholde thy self (alas) thou art forlorne. Why, is it thou that shund the piercing pawes, Of Lion fierce that sought thy dire decay? And is it thou that rent his rauening iawes, And Honny hadst as thou wentst by the way? Looke on thy self (alas) to much vnwise: Sée how the world thine honor dooth despise.
If with the Iaw of on poore stely Asse, So many men thou broughtest to the ground? Why then reléeue this thine afflicted case, And haste thée strayt thy fos for to confound. Nay, stay a while, thy folly rst lament: Remember well how Wisdome hath thée shent. Would'st thou to féeld to fight against thy foes? O naked man, where is thy chée defence: How canst thou now resist the battering blowes? Fye, Coward fye, goe shroud thy hot pretence. Think on the state thou did inioy before: And sit thée down thy folly to deplore. Say, once thou hadst, that which thou now doost misse, Say, once thou wast frée from all women kinde: Say, Sampson, once thou didst remain in blisse, And now reporte, O Sampson thou art blinde. Thou well mayst say, that once thou hadst the power: But now Dame Folly cleane hath cropt the floure. Goe cary Gaza gates vnto their place First take thy strength that brought them thence away: And then perhaps thou mayst thy foes deface, But til that time in thrall thou néeds must stay. The scourging whip must teare thy tender skin: A guerdon iust which thou of right doost win. This is the thing the Philistines did craue, Thy thrall it is procures their iocond ioy: Since they haue got stout Sampson for their slaue, They him detaine their pleasure to imploy. And as a foole they vse thée at their Feast: With thy blinde sporte to frame some mery Iest.
But yet one day as they did celebrate, Their Dagons Feast, I béeing then in place: To make them sporte, to God did yéeld my state, Desiring then I might them all deface. The house with olde, yung, great and small: I puld it down, so kild my self and all. Woe woorth Dalila that so wrought my shame, Woe woorth Dalila my vnconstant foe: Example take, let Sampsons bitter blame, Forewarne you how you trust to Women so. No more in secret to a Woman showe: Then you would haue that all the world should knowe, Sée héer stout Sampson valiant in his strength, Yet could he not a Loouers looke resist: For all his might, sée how he fel at length, And forste to yéeld to Wom as they list, Take héed by me, let Sampsons great mishap: Learne you beware to fall in such a trap. Ful many moe haue fallen in like case, And all through this, wherfore I warning giue: Remember Beautie beares a fickle face, And Beautie asks a treble cost to line. You haue your choyse, which you wil take or leue Refuse the bad, the best you may receiue. FINIS
The Induction. SALOMON beeing the Son∣ne of Bethsabe, was annoynted King to reigne after his father Dauid, and when he was esta∣blished in his Kingdome: first executed Iustice vpon Adonia his Brother, who would haue aspired to the Kingdome. Secondly vpon Ioab, who had slayne Abner and Amasa, and he also con∣spired with Adonia. Thirdly vpon Semei, who cursed his father Dauid. This King was so great ly belooued of GOD: that in a dreame he had him aske what so euer he would, and he should haue it. Salomon considering his youth, and ruling in a Kingly office, how difficil a thing it was to rule: desired of GOD to haue an vnderstanding hart, to iudge the people with Iustice and equitie, and to discerne good from euill. His request found fauour in the sight of GOD, and not only he gaue him such great and excellent Wisdome: but also abundaunce of worldly Riches, wherin he excel∣led all the Kings of the Earth, that were either before or after him to this day. So that all the World came to see and heare his graue and excel lent Wisdome, which farre surpassed Ethan, Her∣man, Chalcal and Darda, who were foure of the no∣tablest men that then liued in the World. But the rare Wisdome of this Sapient Salomon: caused them all to stand astonished, bothe for his excel∣lency, and also for his Riches. For he had twelue
Officers, which dayly prouided the victuals for his housholde, and his ordinary expences, was euery day thirtye quarters of fine Manchet flow er, and sixtie quarters of meale, ten stalled Oxen, and twentie out of the pasture, one hundred sheep beside Harts, Bucks, wilde Goates, Capons & other Foules. Also he had fortie Thousand Hor∣ses, and xit. Thousand Horsemen to keep them. And the weight of Golde that came euery yeere out of Ophir to Salomon: was six hundred, three score and six Tallents, beside the bringing in of Merchaunts and other men. His riches was so abundant: that he made all the ornaments of the Lords Temple of pure Golde, and euery drinking pot in his house was of cleane Golde, and he vsed Siluer as plentifully as the stones in the street. But yet (alas) for all the worldly possessions and Wisdome that he had: he fell into vnlawfullly∣king of Outlandish women, wherof he had such store: that he made seuen hundred Queenes, and three hundred Concubines, all which turned his hart to straunge Gods, and of a wise King, made him in maner a stark foole and wicked Idolater. So that for this his greeuous offence, he lost the fauoure of God, and so after he had reigned for∣tye yeeres / he dyed, and was buryed in the Cit∣tye of Dauid.
SAPIENCE. Since mans estate corrups as dooth the Flovver, And in short time his pomp is layd in dust: Perceiue you may, hovv that this earthly hovver, Is still vnsure, Mans pleasures vade as rust. Eftsoones vve see as soone goes yung as olde, No King nor Keysor, VVise nor yet the Foole: Can Death deny, they all must to one Folde, Earth must to earth, so teacheth VVisdomes schoole. THE COMPLAINT of King Salomon King of Israel, for his in∣ordinate looue borne to Outlandish VVomen, vvho brought him from the vvisest and richest King that euer vvas, to be cast out of Gods fauour, and to be euen in maner, like a stark foole. Caput. 6. BEholde (my fréends) the wight whose fickle safe Through wanton wil procurde his wofull fall: Sée héer the man that thought his stedfast state Unlikely was to come in such a thrall. But wel ye sée that Sinne deceiues the Wise: When fond conceits hath power to blinde his eyes. I Salomon whom God with Wisdome deckt, And worldly Welth wherof I had great store: Did think that sinne could neuer me infect, Because Dame Folly stil did stand before. And through the world blew foorth a golden blaze: That thousands came on Salomon to gaze.
For when I had giuen sentence on the Childe, For whom two women stroue before my face: Such rare reporte went of my Iustice milde, That Salomon was knowen in euery place. Loe thus my God adornd mée frank and frée: That all the World amazed stood at mée. Beside of welth I had the World at wil, To straunge it is to hear my large expence: Of golden gifts I aye enioyd my fil, My princely port, my Garders and defence. Were to to long to you for to recite: For all this welth did naught but blinde my sight. So that alas I cruelly transgrest, For fond delight intangled had my minde, Outlandish Dames did like my pleasure best, I clean forgot the wrath to mée assignde. Seuen hundred Quéenes I Salomon did make: Of Concubines thrée hundred I did take. O wicked wretch, where was the feare of God, where was the wise foresights ye thou didst vse: what didst thou think there was no scorging rod That would correct thy hainous vile abuse. If so thou thought'st? why then ye didst but well: To liue so lewd, gainst duty to rebell. Why? did not God in dreame appéere to thée, And bad thée aske what best thy hart could craue? Did God not graunt thy wish perfourmd to be, And did permit that thou shouldst Wisdom haue? How thinkest thou? this canst thou not denay: How happens then thou wentest so astray.
Alas, because thou didst not God regard, But in thy welth didst set thy whole delight: Eche wanton Dame with welth ye didst reward, This made thée fall in such a wofull plight. And where before thou west estéemed wise: Now as a foole eche man dooth thée surmise. What wilt thou doo? thou sinned hast so sore, By knéeling down to Gods of stocks & stones: That God will now respect thy case no more, Down on thy knées, sound foorth thy heauy grōes Lament, lament (O wretch) thy wicked crime: Desire thy Lord to saue thy soule in time. You Potentates beholde my wofull fall, How wanton will hath throwen me in the dust: That now to sinne I rest a seruile thrall, Loe what reward obtaines vnlawfull Lust. My hainous faults recount before your eyes. And learne in time such vices to despise. Remember me that thought my self so wise, That I no way could gayne so great a fall: But when I did the feare of God despise, Ah wofull man, my comfort then was small. My trickling teares found fauour in Gods sight: And for my gréef did yéeld me harts delight. So shall your liues be frée from spotted blame, Your whole delight shalbe in feare of God: Then after death you gayne immortall fame, If so your liues be swayd with Wisdomes rod. Then shall you liue, and euermore be blest: Among the Saints in the eternall rest. FINIS.
The Induction. AMMON the eldest Sonne of the famous King Dauid, was so raui shed with the beautye of his Si∣ster Thamar: that he refrained the sustenaunce of his body, only lā∣guishing for his deep desire. Io∣nadab his Kinsman often espying the crooked cares wherwith poore Ammon was opprest: demaunded of him one day by chaunce, what should mooue his minde to such straunge motions? To whom Ammon brake foorth and sayd. O Looue it is to whom I am enthralled, and except I may obtayne my looue: I am but dead, but yet I blush to showe on whom I am so affectioned, yet vnto you it skilleth not greatly, it is my Sister Thamar that procureth my sorowfull sighing. Ionadab beeing one who furdered his in∣tent sayd. Faine thy self vanquished with debili∣tie of sicknes, and when thy Father Dauid cōmeth to visit thee: desire that thy Sister Thamar may dresse meat for thee, and also bring it thee. The which counsell Ammon fulfilled, and when Tha∣mar brought him meat: he neuer restēd vntill he shamefully forced her. And hauing obtayned his pleasure he vtterly disdayned her, thrusting her out of his Chamber. To whom she sayd. In thy vsing me ths discourteously, and in repugning now: is farre greater then the villainy thou didst vnto me. But for this his wicked deed: his Bro∣thr Absalon afterward slew him at a Banquet in cheefest of his pleasure.
THE COMPLAINT of Ammon, the eldest Sonne of King Dauid, for the rauishing of his Sister THAMAR, accomplishing his desire, through the craftie deuise of IONADAB his kinseman, vvho causing AMMON to fayne him self sick: obtayned of his Father DAVID, that THAMAR his sister should come and visit him, and vvhen she came, bringing vvith her a dish of meat: rauised her, and aftervvard cruelly despised her. Ca. 7. INCONTINENCYE. If men respect their fickle date of time, Novv in delight, then drovvnd in dark annoy. Computing Age vvith their vnbrideled time, Of all estates hovv brittle is their Ioy. Needs must they say they taste a svveetned gall, That as to day their pleasure dooth procure: In tract of time it leaues their comfort small, No Rock it is that euer vvill indure. Exampled be by preter time vnsure. No man (although he liue in vvorlds of ioy) Can keep him there as in a certayne stay: You see the proofe, vvhat greef it dooth imploy, Euen at a clap dooth fetch all pomp avvay.
OAmmon fond, borne vnto great mishap, O lawlesse Lust that made thée doo the déed: O wicked wretch now throwen in terrors trap Where griefly gripes vpon thy carkasse féed. Fye on thée wretch, lothe for to showe thy face: Thy hainous act condems thée in eche place. Hadst thou the hart to woork such villany? No point of manhood did remaine in thée: So to dispoyle thy Sisters déere virginitie, A wicked wish desired for to be. No merueil though at sound of Ammons name: That all the world cryes on thée open shame. What art thou now? a man depriu'd of ioy, And subiect to a thousand heaps of woes: Thy pleasures past is sunk in dire annoy, Beholde thy fate how froward still it goes. Thy déed is more then is thy punnishment: Yet wicked wretch thou canst not be content. But moste of all when thou the déed hadst doone, And gotten that which thou didst wholy craue: Then in despite her presence thou didst shun, And thought great scorne her company to haue. O hardned hart yfraught with mallice fell: So gainst all law thy Sister to compell. O Thamar, I my wicked déed lament, I sorowe sore for my vnkinde offence: Deserued doome, full right my state hath shent, And for my déed, beholde my recompence. A iust reward, since so I did neglect: My duty bound to God in eche respect.
For as I sat in midst of mirth of ioy, At Banquet with my Brother Absalon: Not thinking to receiue so great annoy, With bloody blade he killed me annon. Loe what a guerdon did befall to me: That so from natures law did disagrée. If I had rulde my self in Reasons law, And framde my life vnto a good intent: Or if I had of God remaind in awe, Then had not I my time so vayuly spent. But where self will is suffered so at large: Great is the paynes that after will him charge. For idle life procures this lawlesse Lust, And idlenes is foe to Learnings lore: Where wanteth faith, hope and assured trust, There Sathan still hath libertye the more. And Sathan aye dooth forward frame the will: To that which would bothe soule and body spill. Therfore of Ammon héer a warning take, Learne in your youth to walke in vertues waies: Least sinne in age your pleasant ioy dooth slake, And so forget bothe God and blisfull dayes. Remember God, alwayes set him before: And your affayres shall better spéed the more. Then vaine desire can neuer you assault, Nor no such sinne as I wretch did commit: Be warnd therfore by this my present fault, And shun such drifts as dooth no Christian fit. In all thy thoughts, woorks, woords, or déeds I say For good successe to God continuall pray. FINIS.
The Induction. ADONIA Sonne to the Godly Prophet king Dauid, perceiuing his father conuinced with de∣bilttie in his aged yeers: began with proud Courage to exalte him self to the Kingdome, and prouided for him self bothe Chariots, horsemen, & footmen, to goe before his father, as though he were King. Which his father well perceiued, but yet he said nothing, because he would not displese him / to incurre his enuye toward him. So Ado∣nia went forward in his pretended purpose, and following the counsell of Ioab the Captaine, and Abiathar the Preest (who greatly took his parte heerin) he made a sacrifise of Oxen and Sheep, wherunto he inuited his Brethern and the kings Seruaunts, who in his presence reioyling sayd. God saue King Adonia. But when as Bersaba his mother and Nathan the Prophet had giuen know∣ledge to King Danid of his wicked intent: he cau∣sed Sadock the Preest, and the Prophet Nathan, to an noint his Sonne Salomon, and to set him vp on his owne Mule, and then goe foorth and proclaim him King. These tidings blazed in the new vp start Kings Court: caused all his company for to shrink away from him, and so Adonia was left all alone, who for his more safetie sted to the Ta∣bernacle of the Lord, and would not depart from thence: till Salomon had graunted his pardon, so at last vpon this condition that afterward there should no more disquietnes arise by him: remit∣ted him free. Thē he departed home to his house
and when Dauid his father was dead. Adonia fell in looue with Abisag the sunamite▪ and so desi∣red) Bethsaba Salomons mother to speak to the king that he would giue him Abisag to his wife. Salo∣mon hearing his mothers request, and seeing that Adonia (beeing his eldest Brother) through his Pride would aspire to the Kingdome: thought it good to cut of his pretended purpose, and so put him to death. VOLVPTVOVSNES. Vertue surmounts all vayne desire of vvelth, Orpriuate gaines got vvith vnhonest vse: Let man therfore consider of his helth, Vainglory dooth bothe minde and life abuse: Proou'd it hath beene by reasons manifolde, That mortall Fame dooth run by he adlesse chance: Vertue, her Fame cannot to oft be tolde, Ordayned aye the Godly to aduaunce. Vayne then it is on bad I vvist to glaunce. Stay fast thy faith in him that rules abooue: No time deferre to turn from vvickednes: Eternall Fame, Faith and assured Looue, Shall you adorne in vvorlds of rich increase.
THE COMPLAINT of Adonia Sonne, to King Dauid, for his proud aspiring to his Fathers kingdome, & also for his pride vsed against his Brother King Salomon, in crauing ABISAG the Sunamite to his mate vvho vvas a faire and verteous yung Da∣mosell, and nourished King DAVID in his extreme age, thinking by that meanes to attaine to his desired pretence. Caput. 8. ALthough my déed dooth well demerit blame, My stately Pride and hautines of hart: Although my life so farre spent out of frame, Néeds no reporte for such a vitious part. Yet that the world may warning take by me: Ile tell my tale that all my life may sée. And when you haue perusde my life at large, My mallice bent against my Fathers state: How blinde ambition did me ouercharge, With péeuish Pride (alas) vnfortunate. Reporte that I did well deserue my fall. In running headlong in to such a thrall. I Adonia Sonne to Dauid King, Perceiuing age bedewe my Fathers state: By sundry sleights I sought about to bring, Presumpteously to pearch to be his mate. I thought his yéeres were so farre gon  spent: that well I might presume to my intent.
O what renown did I in pride suppose, To be a King and beare the souereign sway: By force of Armes to irritate my foes, By woords to cause my Subiects to obay. No life me thought in all the world more fit: Then princely pomp in regall throne to t. It did me good to heare the braue reporte, Of boldened brests indued with valiancy: Who trye their fate in mightie Mars his Court, Protesting faith to Magnanimitie. On carued Creast to shake the shiuering Launce: This valiant sporte their honors dooth aduaunce. This is the way to win them rare renown, This is the ioy that chéeres a Princes hart: This is the way to vaunt on Honors crown, And lasting Fame dooth quit them with desart. O valiant youthes, welfare your plied paines: Whose happy helths are valiant Wictors gaines. Well in this minde so farre I did procéed, That I had got such as would take my parte: Abiathar and Ioab bothe indéed, Ood giue consent to my presumpteous hart. A feast I made, where many did resorte: Wishing me King as woords did make reporte. O gallant ioy to heare so many say. With valiant voyce erected to the skyes: God saue our King, our woorthy Adonia, O wished pray so gladsome to mine eyes. But when my Father of my déed did knowe: My loftie pride was quickly laid full lowe.
Those which before had called me their King, Left me alone, they durst it not auouch: O straunge euent to sée such sorrowes spring, So soone a king and made so soone to couch: Dame Iustice scornd that I should mount so hye: And threw me down in twinckling of an eye. With that I fled and hid my self for feare, To see what tidings would approche of this: Then Salomon for to preuent this geare, Was crowned King in moste triumphant blisse. At last of him my pardon I did gayne: So that I would in quietnes remayne. Yet wicked wretch through loftines of minde, I could not holde my self with state content: But once more would reuert to former kinde, Aspiring still my purpose to attempt. And for to bring my matter more aboute: This prettye shift on sudden I found out. I sought to haue Abisag fayre to wife, Which when my Brother Salomon did spye: I could not kéepe my self in quiet life, But still I sought to pearch my head on hye. Deserued death for pride I did attayne: So all my pomp on sudden did distayne. Now Lordings sée my proud presumpteous hart, What liew I gaynd in recompence for all: Sée Iustice scornd at my vnlawfull part, And from the top did headlong make me fall. I which was Sonne vnto a famous King: By pamperd pride my ruin great did bring.
Consider  will haue her rightfull place, touchstone tries & sounds eche mans intent: Though for a while Uaine glory her deface, Yet at the lengh her foes she will preuent. For Falshode dooth a while holde on her glose: But trueth at length her dealings will disclose. Now what auailes my lostines of minde, My princely pomp in midst of all my flowers: My hauty hart which made my sences blinde, And made me séeke to rule in Kingly bowers. What, haue I gaind immortall fame therby: Or such renown to pearch the azured skye? O no my fréends, small honor is my share, Small is the fame that will redound to me: Shame is my due for this my rechelesse care, My wicked life so lothesome for to sée. Rebelling so gainst Natures stayed state: And séeking so to be my Fathers mate. What, didst thou think thy Father liu'd to long, And duty bad thée to cut of his dayes? And did obedience mooue thee offer wrong, To him whose life so many men did prayse. Or canst thou iudge Dame Wisdome did agrée: That so thou shouldst vsurp his dignitie? Alas, no, no, thy duty had thée séeke, To serue thy Sire with reuerence in eche place, To stand in awe to showe thy self so méeke, In euery point Obedience to imbrace. How saist thou how, hast thou doone so or no? Alas my fréends in life I thought not so.
Remember me which past before your time, Remember how I fell from blisse to bale: Be mindefull still of my presumpteous crime, Which forced me to tell this tristfull tale. Respect the end before you doo begin: Feare to offend in such a gréeuous sinne. Consider life is but a puffe of winde, And worldly pomp is but a brittle blaze: Your earthly drosse dooth naught but make you blinde while you abide within this mortall maze. Ful many sin, but fewe their liues repent: Nor think how soone their folly will them shent. Gods Iudgement stands to cut down lofty grafts As séeme to reach more then they can aspire: Though for a time you faine such cunning crafts, As well you think to gaine your whole desire. The end brings all, the proofe hath oft béen séene: Pride hath his due, iudge what therof I meane. And thus I wish you well your liues to frame, In modest meane to kéepe your selues content: Auoyd this vice, and so you shun the blame, Which dooth belong to such as it frequent. Let Adonia serue example due: For perfect proofe that this his text is true.. FINIS.
The Induction PTOLOMYE King of Egipt, es∣poused his fayre Daughter Cleo∣patra to Alexander the Sonne of the Noble Antiochus, the which contracted betweene them two a great bond and league of ami tie / the which Ptolomye afterward periurd ely for∣look, in recalling his former fauour from Alexan∣der, labouring by all possible meanes for to defeat him of his Kingdome, and Alexander remayning for a time out of his Realme: serued fit for the pur pose of Ptolomye, for he leuyed a great Armye of men, and iournyed into Siria, where he was very honorably receiued into euery Cittie, because it had beene so commaunded before by Alexander, & his trecherous treason was not suspected / for be cause he was the Kings Father in law. But Pto∣lomye whose going was only for that intent: in e∣uery Cittie left certayne well armed men, to for∣tifye them for his practise. And hauing subdued all the Citties on the Sea coasts: ioyned in Lea∣gue with Demetrius, and took Cleopatra his daugh ter from Alexander, and gaue her to Demetrius, ray∣sing vp a slaunderous reporte of Alexander, how that he sought all meanes to kill him. When as his greedy and vnsatiable couetousnes was no∣ted and espyed: he departed to Antioche, where he set two Crownes vpon his owne head, the one of Egipt / the other of Asia. Alexander at that time making his aboad in the dominions of Cicilia, & hauing been ixcitated with the cruell attempt of his rather in law: returned home, making open
warres against him. But Ptolomye beeing more puisant in strength: forced him for to flye into the Countrey of Arabia, wheras the king of that land smot of his head, and sent it vnto Ptolomye, which was the thing he cheefly desired. But small ioy had he therof, for within three daies after he was slaine, and after his death, his men that were left in the Citties: were all put to death. VAINGLORY. Vaunt not to much of that vvhich is but vayne, And beare in minde thy state is heer vnsure: It is not vvelth that can abridge thy payne, Nor loftie looks thy vvelfare can procure. Greeue not to see thy neighbour prosper vvell, Let blinde Ambition rule thy hart no more: Or seek not gainst the simple soule to svvell, Regard to haue discretion good before. Your happy helth shall aye increase the more. THE COMPLAINT of King Ptolomye King of Egipt, for his vnnaturall crueltie vsed tovvard the Famous ALEXANDER, vvho vvas his Sonne in Lavv. Caput. 9.
NO greater Foe, then gréedynes of minde, No seruile life like to contemptuous pride: No greater sinne then willing to b blinds, No folly more then in vain hope to bide. What more deceit? then look thy Fréend in face: And woork his death, in most vngentle case. For proof wherof I Ptolomye may serue, Whose hauty hart, and moste ambitious minde: Procured mee from Princely rule to swerue, And cruelly to stray from Natures kinde. Wherfore my tale let peirce the flinty hart: How like they fall in such vnlawful part. My Daughter fair that Cleopatra hight, To Alexander of illustrious fame: In nuptiall band contented I did plight, Til Enuie vile contempt did séek to frame. My gréedy minde my honor soon let fall: That in the end I lost both fame and all. My former vow I wretch did clean reuoke, Of faithful fréendship to my sonne in law: Now perching pride had quickly strook the stroke Gainst verteous life wherof I had no awe. But banishing all fauour from my hart: Did seek to frame a moste vnlawful part. My noble Sonne from Kingdome béeing gon, Whose absence wrought the more for my intent: I ruled at home and none but I alone, Now thought I good my Sonne for to preuent. And of his Kingdome clean him to bereaue: By traitrous déeds I purposde to deceiue.
Then I likewise to all his Citties went, Wherin I left of armed men good store: That at such time as serude for mine intent, I might obtain that long I wisht before. Yet for his sake vnto his Citties all: I was receiude with Fame imperiall. More Traitour I that such a déed could frame, Considering that I was receiude so wel: And only hée did yéeld to mée such fame, Gainst whom I did vnkindly so rebel. Wel, looue nor fauour could my minde intreat: But enuiously I went about this feat. When as I had eche Cittie fair subdude, That on the seas did harbour there about: By other shifts my fetches I renude, And now I had an other plat drawen out. Demetrius I did ioyne in league with mée: And so to war til all consumde might bée. My Daughter fair I took from rightful mate, And to Demetrius did her giue againe: Then had I raysde a slaunder vp of hate, How Alexander sought to haue mée slaine. And so through this such enuie vile I bred: That Kingdomes twain I crowned on my hed. O braue delight as braue as beaten Golde, O happy life long looked for before: I droue my Sonne into Arabian holde, Wheras to make my honor larger more. His hed was sent as present vnto mée: Oh how I ioyd when I this sight did sée.
But yet this pomp to short a time did la, Within thrée dayes I dyed in gréeuous case: What vauntage then when honor all was past, Did I obtaine in my new Kingly place. My sonnes déer blood for vengeance stil dooth cry: Gainst me a wretch that wrought this villany. You Noble harts sée héere a pattern playne, Of painted Pride contemning verteous life: Sée héere a gulf of Enuye and Disdayne, A mortall foe that still procured strife. Sée héere the wight whose folly made him fall: In séeking that which did return his thrall. Sée what I gaynd for gréedines of minde, Sée how the Lord did pay me for my payne: In that I went so farre from Natures kinde, As woork the meanes to cause my sonne be slayn. Whose guiltlesse death beholde I now lament: Desiring pardon for my life mispent, Learne now therfore like Enuy to eschew, Least that your selues doo fall into like snare, Dout not but you shall finde the end to true, Therfore in time I wish you to beware. So are you sure the daunger to preuent: Of such a sinne as I poore wretch am shent. FINIS.
The Induction. IEZABEL espoused to king Achab, pricked her husband forward vnto all wickednes and Idolatrie, and also cau∣sed the Prophets of the Lord to be slayne, and was cheefe cause that Naboth was stoned to death, therby to enioy his Uiniard. But when she had intelligence of the comming of Iebu: she tricked her self vp in her flaunting fines, & look∣ed out at her windowe as he came in at the gate, to whom she sayd in this maner. Had Zimei peace which slew his maistere meaning. Could a Trai∣tour, or any that presumeth against his superiour haue good successe in his enterprise. After which woords she was throwen out at the windowe, with such great violence: that her bones were all brused in peeces, and so tramped on with horses / that when they came to take her vp to bury her: no more was found, then her scull, her feet, & the palmes of her hands. Heerin was Elias Prophe∣cie brought to passe, when he said. That Dogs shall eat the flesh of Iezabell, and her carkasse shall lye as dung vpon the earth, so that none shall say This was Iezabell. VANITIE.
Vivv vvel the state of euery mortall VVight, Although they boast of Beauties beames so much: Note hovv that Death dooth equall all aright, Ineath degree hee spareth not to touch. The VVise, the Foolè, the King and Begger bace, Is àll alike that commeth in his cloutch. Excepteth none, hee takes in euery place. THE COMPLAINT of Iezabel Wife to King Achab, for her in∣forcing her Husband to all kinde of vvickednesse and Idolatree, & causing the Prophets of the Lord to be slain, and procuring the guiltles death of Naboth shee beeing iustly therfore plagued of the Lord. Caput. 10. IF Beautie be a thing of such respect, If hauty hart the Body doo adorn: Why did my shape and beautie mée detect? Why did my pride make mée somuch forlorne And if all these were Uertnes in a Wife, Why did so soon my pleasure turn to strife? O no déer Dames these vaunts are worldly vain, These are the pomps wherin you glory so: This painted pride procures your after pain, Which you lament distest in double wo. And why? because you did not séek before: A souerain salue to cure so vile a sore.
But lo déer Dames to much you be deceiude, To much you trust to that which is vnsure: For péeuish pride your sences hath bereude, Which makes you think for aye you shall indure. O think not so, for beautie is but vain, To day a ioy, tomorrow, pinching pain. Beholde by mée if beatie might haue boast, Or hauty hart to haue Dame Honors place: Beholde her héer who through each forrain Coast Knew not her Péer for loftie lookes in face. But now what dooth my mounting minde auaile So long on flote, that glad to strike my saile. I Iezabel, soometime King Achabs Wife, Disdaining God and Idols did obay: Surmounting in all viciousnes of life, And only Pride did force mée run astray. For Pride from God did force my wilful fall: That grace nor vertue I esteemd at all. But in a World of pranked pleasures gay, I flaunted foorth as much as hart could crane: I was the cause the Préests of God to slay, And Naboths death desired for to hane. Why who but I. so many fetches had: With subtle sleights to make my fancy glad. But what at length was my deserued due, From windowe down I fel and brake my neck: By prophecie which I approoued true, This hire I had that Uertue would detect. In inders small my Body lay on ground: Trod so with Horse that little could be found.
Now sée what came to Iezabel at last, See what became of my alluring face: My Peacoks plumes down in the dust were cast, What guerdon did my loftie pride purchase. Beholde my déeds, and then beholde my fame: Beholde my life, and then beholde my shame. Now daintie Dames your Mirrour take by me, To warne you pull your hauty heads more lowe: Let me you learne your welfare to foresée, And teach you how more grauitie to showe. Let Modestie your outward vestures be: And Uertue deck you inward frank and frée. Leaue of these braue and sundry flaunting sutes, Leaue of to wish for euery straunge deuise: Milde Modestie your statelines rebultes, She would not haue you goe so coy and nice. But prudently to guyde your dealings so: That in eche place with vertue you may goe. Now when I smart I can you warning giue, That you may shun the sorrowes which I haue: Now I confesse, that verteously to liue, By due desart dooth endles honor craue. Counsell once had is better suer then neuer: Feare God, and then thou shalt be crowned euer. FINIS.
The Induction. ZEDEKIA Sonne vnto Iosia was by Nabucodonozor elected and made King ouer Iuda, in the sted and place of Ieboachin his Brother, to whome he made him faithfully to vow that hee would truely obay the Chaldeis, and so in tokē therof from Mathania he changed his name to Ze∣dekia. But he neglecting his duty and falsifying his othe, suffered sinne and wickednes to reigne and abound in his Land, euen aswel among the cheef Rulers and Preests / as also among ye meā and common sort. So that God was not regar∣ded, his woord vtterly despised, & his Prophets vnlawfully misused: therfore the Lord stirred vp the Chaldeis with whom he had before broken lea∣gue, and falsified his faith, that they came and ruinated the Cittie of Ierusalem and sacked the Temple with fire, and there took the King Zedekia his Army beeing scattred abrode, in the plain of Iericho & led him to the King of Babilon, where first his two Sonnes were destroyed in his presence and then his owne eyes pulled out, and then led him Captiue to Babilon, bound in chaines, wheras hee dyed, and his People re∣mained threescore and ten yeers in captiuitie, til the dayes of King CIRVS.
WILFVLNES. VVhere men doo more respect their priuate gayne, In vaine excesse, then VVisdomes stayed state: Light to contemne, slovve to release their paine, From vvhom bothe helth and riches is ingrate. Vsing them selues as belly Gods so rude, Leaning vpon the honor of their pelf: Not scorning still them selues for to intrude, Eche man to pole, for to inrich him self. Soslides from God to greater greefe renued. THE COMPLAINT of Zedekia sometime King of Iuda, for neg∣lecting his vovved othe and faithfull promise made to King Nabuchodonozor, in suffering all sinne and vvickednes to abound in his King∣dome, beeing iustly plagued of GOD therfore. Caput. 11. AMid the rest giue Zedekia place, Iosias Sonne to tell his great mishap: Whom Folly fond so gréeuous did deface As in my pomp depriu'de me at a clap. Such crooked chaunce that for a time did smile: But at the length displayd a hidden guyle.
First was I King and ruled Iuda Land, In promise that I constant would remain: When as this Welth was brought into my han I suffred sin to much to haue the raine. Gods woord was clean suppressed in the dust: The Preests and Rulers find in filthy lust. The Chaldies then Ierusalem destroyd, The holy Temple burnd with flaming fire: My Soldiars all with terror were annoyd, I taken was, so did my sinnes require. My sonnes were slayne (O gréefe) before my face: Mine eyes puld out in moste accursed case. Then captiue I to Babilon was led, In fettered chaines with direfull dole yfraught: My people poore with tirrany were fed, All long of sinne which I (alas) haue wrought. Thrise twentye yéeres and ten they bid the pain: Till Cirus came their fréedome to obtaine. Loe thus I liu'd, loe thus I had my shame, A guerdon iust to counteruaile my hire: take héed therfore how you contemn Gods name, For your reward is euerlasting fire. My sinfull life, my death so voyd of grace: Let now suffise to warn you in eche place. Fewe woords shall serue, in haste I goe my way, And wish you well my perill to foresee: Be rulde by trueth, let Uertue beare the sway, Think on the end the daunger for to flée. For I haue proou'd that which I rew with payn: And wish to late I had not liu'd so vayne. FINIS.
ADPRECLARVM et nobilissimum Virum EO. NAuta Mari medio vectus spumātibus vn∣depositis portu, sperat reerire salutē: dis, Conscius extremo procumbēs Carcere latr sperat fortunam lucis sentire ministram. Pallidus attonito vultu tardatur Amator Finem tamen dominam confidit habere benignam. Apatrijs sperat Petigrinus finlbus exul: Orbe pererrat sibi, conciliare quietem. Hac ratione meum viuo visurus Alexin, Tristitiaeque meae lt as perstringere fines, Speque rereabor, medicum Fortuna resistat, Donec opemferat, et morbo mediatur acerbo. No aliquando diem tantae peresfere tenebrae, quin redeat spargens glebis sua fulmina Phaebus. Aequora quando metam certam posuere furendi, Gaudia securis ego sic possessa tenebo. Mi formose vale, valeat tua grata voluntas, Deprecor optata tutus potiaris arena. Te, canctosque tuos CHRISTO committo tuendos, Donec praestentes sermone fruamur amico. FINIS. Honos alit Artes.
THE TABLE discoursing the sum of the Chapters contained in this BOOK. The contents of the first BOOK. THe complaint of King Nabucodonozor, sometime King of Babilon, for the inordi∣nat and excessiue pride that hée vsed in his life time. Caput 1 ¶ The Complaint of King Herod, ye first Straunger, that reigned ouer the Iewes, for the excéeding Enuie that in his life hée vsed. Ca. 2. ¶ The Complaint of King Pharao, sometime King of Egipt woorthily punished of God, for his wrathful dealings to∣ward the Children of Israel. Caput. 3. ¶ The Complaint of King Dauid, (by Gods permission) an noynted King of Israel, sorowfully from the bottome of his hart bemoning his vnbrideled lust of Lechery, com∣mitted with Bersaba the Wife of Vrias, and for the pro∣curing of her Husbands death, therby obtayning his pur∣pose. Caput. 4. ¶ The Complaint of Diues, for his Gluttony vsed in his life time. Caput. 5. ¶ The Complaint of Iudas, bemoning his Auaritious hart in selling his Maister Chirste for thirtie pence. Ca. 6. ¶ The Complaint of Ionas for his slothful slacking the com∣maundement of the Lord, beeing sent to preach to the Niniuites. Caput. 7. Heer endeth the sum of the Chapters conteined in the first BOOK. The Contents of the second Book.
THe Complaint of Absalon for his vain aspi ring to the Imperiall Crown and Diadem of his Father King Dauid, and for his sud∣dain fall he obtayned in his pretended pur∣pose. Caput. 1. ¶ The Complaint of Triphon for his crue 'tie committed a gainst the yung King Antiochus, whome hée cruelly mur∣dered as hée walked to disporte him, and for his cruel put∣ting to death Ionathas and his two Children, through which hée crowned him self King of Asia. Caput. 2. ¶ The Complaint of King Achab King of Israel, for his wicked life led in Idolatrie and cruel persecutions, & for sparing the life of the wicked Benhadab King of Siria, whome God had deliuered into his hands only to put to death. Also for his procuring the poore Naboth to be cru elly murdered, therby to get his Uiniard, by the councel of Iezabel his Queen whose blood the Dogs licked vp on the ground, and also his owne blood in the battel fought at Ramoth, according to the woord of the Lord. Ca. 4. ¶ The Complaint of Iephath sometime Iudge ouer Israel, for his so rash vow, in the sacrifising of his Daughter, for the foyling of his Enemies. Caput. 4. ¶ The Complaint of Sampson, for his fond declaring to his wife where his chéefest strength was, which made his ey es be pulled out by the Philistines. Ca. 5. ¶ The Complaint of King Salomon king of Israel, for his in ordinate looue borne to outlandish women, who brought him from the wisest and richest King that euer was: to be cast out of Gods fauour, and to be euen in manner like a stark Foole. Caput. 6. ¶ The Complaint of Ammon the eldest Sonne of K. Dauid for the rauishing of his Sister Thamar, accomplishing his desire, through the craftie deuice of Ionadab his kins man, who causing Ammon to fain him self sick, obtai∣ned of his Father Dauid that Thamar his Sister should
come and visit him, and when shée came, bringing with her a dish of meat, rauished her, and afterward cruelly despised her. Caput. 7. ¶ The Complaint of Adonia, Sonne to King Dauid, for his proude aspiring to his Fathers kingdoome, and also for pride vsed against his Brother King Salomon, in cr a∣uing Abisag the Sunamite to his mate, who was a fair and vertuons yung Damosel, & nourished King Dauid, in his extreme Age, thinking by that meanes to attain to his desired pretence. Caput. 8. ¶ The Complaint of Ptolomye King of Egipt, for his vn∣naturall crueltie vsed toward the famous Alexander, who was his Sonne in law. Caput. 9 ¶ The Complaint of Iezabel, Wife to King Achab, for her inforcing her Husband to all kinde of wickednes, & Idolatrye, and causing the Prophets of the Lord to be slaine, and for the procuring the guiltlesse death of Na∣both, shée béeing iustly therfore plagued of the LORD. Caput 10. ¶ The Complaint of Zedekia sometime King of Iuda, for his neglecting his vowed othe and faithful promise to K. Nabuchodonozor, in suffering all sinne and wickednes to aboūd in his Kingdome, béeing iustly plagued of God therfore. Caput. 11 The end of the Table of the Chapters contained in this BOOK. Honos alit Artes. FINIS. Antony Munday.
