18507.91 S115600 99850818 16046
Nouemb. 28. Numb. 9. BRIEFE ABSTRACTS OVT OF DIVERSE LETTERS OF TRVST. RELATING The Newes of this present Weeke, out of Persia, Egypt, Babylon, Barbary, Turkey, Italy, Spaine, Germanie, Silesia, France, and the Low Countries, with diuers passages from Sea. Wherein are remembred the Troubles in the Tur∣kish Empire, the Strength of the Pyrates of Argier, with a touch of the giuing vp of the Towne of Glatz, and the holding out of FRANKENDALE. With the Victories of Count Mansfield in the Land of Embden, and the flight of the Count of that Countrey; And the going of the Prince of Orange towards Lingen. Together with the Sea Businesses of the Spanish and Hollandish Fleetes. In the end is added something of the French Affaires, with some other Occurrences. LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and William Sheffard. 1622.
From Rome Octob. 18. WEe told you before in our Newes, prin∣ted Nouember 7. That the Cardinall Lu∣douici had purchased the Dutchy of Zaragola, of the Duke of that place, for 800000. Crownes, which is againe confirmed by letters from Rome, October 18. and there is added, that after the Cardinall had gone through with his pur∣chase, that the Pope himselfe went from Frescati to see it. At this Frescati the Pope had most delicate and admirable deuices of Waterworkes, as forced Foun∣taines, Springs, Conduits, and the like, the most cu∣rious in the world. From Rome Octob. 25. In regard that the riuer of Po, hath by a late inunda∣tion and ouerflowing, done much hurt in the territo∣ries of Bologna and Perrara, with the Bishopricke of Farenza; they haue taken order to looke to the ma∣king vp and strengthening of their bankes, and the draining of their Sluices thereabouts: And the Car∣dinall Capponi hauing an intention to leade the sayd riuer ino the water called Panara, the proiect is with∣stood by the neighbouring Princes, who are likely to sustaine great losse if it should goe forward.
From Rome the same day. From Messina in Sicilia wee heare, That the Prince Philiberto hath sent a Galleon, with eight hundred Spa∣niards in it, towards Vado, for the State of Millan: But the people of Medena and Parmegia are vp in Armes, to stay the passage of any Warlike Bands, that should be brought that way; seeing that the great Duke of Tuscanie will send Forces to the ayde of the Duke of Mantua, who feareth an inuasion from the Duke of Sauoy, because there is an Allyance betweene these two Dukes; the Duke of Sauoy hauing marryed the Empe∣rours Sister, and the Emperour hauing lately marryed the Duke of Mantua's Daughter. In Salerno in Sicilia, the great Marchants, Varnest and Como are broken for 60000 Crownes, and Iohn Baptista for 80000. Don Lewis di Marades is made Great Master of Malta, in place of the old Master, lately decea∣sed. From Venice, Octob. 22. Marcus Antonius de Dominis, the late Archbishop of Spalato, hauing lyen at Antwerpe some whiles, passed from thence homewards: and about the 20 of Octo∣ber was safely gotten to Millan in Italy, whence hee goes directly towards Rome.
From Constantinople, Octob. 3. The Letters from thence report these particulars following. First, That there was arriued there an Embassadour out of Poland, who came with a stately trayne of an hundred followers. His Errand was, for confirmation of the League, and continuation of the Peace, in the Reigne of this present Sultan Mustapha; which was after the end of the late Warres, made betweene his King, and the former Sultan Osman. Secondly, That the purpose of making Warres against the King of Persia holds still: but that the preparations haue beene much hindered, and there haue fallen out many difficulties, which crosse the Tur∣kish intentions: The chiefe of which was, That hee hauing committed most of the preparations vnto the Bashaw of Babylon, because his Gouernment lyes next vnto Persia; the Natiues and Subiects of Babylon had before made their Bashaw to disobey the Great Turkes Commaunds in that point: And when hee since seemed willing to obey his Lord and Master, the Babylonians haue taken and burnt their Bashaw and Mufti (the Mufti being their chiefe Priest or Pope of the Mahometan Religion) and haue since chosen to themselues new Gouernours; whom, if the Grand Seignior shall offer to disturbe, or displace, they re∣solue to defend themselues against him, and to put themselues, for the more securitie, vnder the protec∣tion of the Sophi, or King of Persia; who, for some
differences in Religion, is still, and now especially, the mortallest and powerfullest Enemy that the Great Turke hath. This is also confirmed by other Letters, which came by the way of Venice: which affirme also, That the Re∣bellion in Babylon is most certaine; and that the Ba∣shaw there (I take it, they meane the new Bashaw of the Peoples chusing) holds great correspondencie with the King of Persia. Thirdly, these disturbances in the Easterne parts of the Turkish Empire, were also much encreased by a Sedition in Egypt: Which Countrey also beeing vn∣der the Turkish Dominion, refused to accept of their new Bashaw, and made a most furious Faction against him; so that the whole Countrey was also ready to reuolt: but by the perswasion of the former Bashaw, then going out of his Office, the common people were something appeased, and entertayned their new Go∣uernour. And thus you see the distractions of this huge and vaste Turkish Empire; which begins to change their Obedience, with the Murther of their former Prince: Which Seditions in the people, no doubt will be ea∣gerly apprehended by the King of Persia, who could willingly see euery one of the Bashawes (like the Captaines after Alexanders death) catch a share for himselfe, that so hee might be too strong for any one of them single; and at last, whilest they fight with him seuerally, hee might ouercome them all gene∣rally.
From Algier, Octob. 5. From Algiers the Letters come by the way of Ve∣nice, whence they write; that the two famous En∣glish Pyrats, Captaine Ward, and Captaine Sampson, and diuers others of their crew, are lately dead of the plague, which is extremely rife in many parts of Barbary. From Algiers againe they write, that the Ambas∣sador of the States of the Low Countryes Doctor Pinacker, had so well sped himselfe in his ambassage, that he had obtained an agreement betwixt those of Algier, and the vnited Prouinces; and that hee had gotten libertie for diuers of his Countrimen, whom the Pyrats of Algier had taken at Sea, and made Gal∣ley-slaues of, which he hauing obtained here, went for the same purpose towards Thunis, to discharge those Dutchmen, who were there held either in the Prisons, or in the Galleys. From Algier againe they write, that the Pyrats had 42. saile at sea, excellently well prouided: And that some of them had lately brought in a most rich Prize to Algier, which was a Spanish Carrick bound from Lisbone in Portugall, for the East Indies; whee∣in were found diuers Chests of money, of Gold and Siluer, &c. And they brought in also another Spa∣nish Galleon, with 16. brasse and many yron peeces of Ordnance, manned also with 250. Souldiers and Sailers, and besides both these, they had gotten 4. other ships also.
From Marsilia, Octob. 27. Some of the Galleys of Algiers haue done great hurt to ours hereabouts, and haue nere to Tarracona taken a Spanish vessell comming from Botri, and a∣nother from Marsilia, both richly laden; but the Ma∣riners saued themselues by getting a-shoare: But whiles the Pyrats were pillaging the Ships, certaine Spanish Galleys came and rescued them out of their hands. From Rome, Octob. 18. By the way of Rome also the newes comes from Algiers, that the Turkish Pyrates there haue lately taken a ship, comming from Noua Hispania, wherein were to the value of 20000. Crownes, and 200. men which were found aboard of her, were all made slaues. Thus you heare, that though Ward and Sampson, be dead, yet the Turkes haue Pyrates and Rouers enough to trouble all the Merchants that trade that way. From Venice, Octob. 28. From Madrid in Spaine we heare, that the Duke de Alua, is departed the 20. of the last moneth towards Barcellona, to take vpon him the Viceroyes place, o∣uer the Kingdome of Naples. And that there are some Commissioners of the Kings priuie Counsell appointed to examine the Duke of Ossuna, vpon di∣uers particulars: This Duke de Ossuna, was the for∣mer
Viceroy of Naples, and for some misdemeanors brought in disfauour with the King of Spaine. Hence also they write, that the King of Spaines Master of the lease, or of the kings game, is declared Viceroy, or Lord Deputie of Barcellona, and Gouer∣nour of Millaine. Further they write, that the Duke of Pasterona is made Lord Chamberlaine of Spaine. And that the Count of Monteri was to haue an Am∣bassage towards Rome, with the entertainment of 30000. Crownes of yearely pension during that seruice. There is also newes, that the King of Spaine hath giuen the City of Matera vnto Don Gonzales de Cor∣dua, with the title of Prince, or Duke, as hee shall please to like best of. From Genoa, Octob. 29. Here are arriued 7. Galleys of the Duke de Oria, and 4. others belonging to our Common-wealth of Genoa, with the Duke de Alua, who is landed at Nis∣sa: from whence he dispatcht a Post to the Gouer∣nour of Millaine, desiring him to meet him at Final to conferre there together: But the Gouernour an∣swered him, that hee had yet receiued no order from Spaine to leaue Millaine. The said Galleyes haue brought a Million of Royalls of 8. out of Spaine.
From Leverno, Octob. 30. The good shippe called San Pietro is here arriued from Alexandria, with very rich lading, and also the ship called Sancta Maria, from Algiers, which a∣mongst other commodities, hath brought also two small bales of Diamonds. From Vienna, Octob. 26. On Saturday morning the Persian Ambassador comming hither, had Audience the next Sunday, his message is, to continue the league with his Emperiall Maiestie, which the father to this present King of Persia so much desired: It seemes this King purpo∣ses to make himselfe gracious with the Christians, and to giue certaine Christians of the Greeke religi∣on, freedome of conscience. From Breslaw in Silesia, Octob. 27. The Plague is still so great and raging in the lower Hungary, that whole villages dye all vp of it. From Franckford. Nouemb. 12. We haue lately made mention of the surren∣dring vp of the Castle of Manheim to the Empe∣rour, which being performed, the Garrison marched out thence betwixt nine and eleuen a clocke in the
forenoone, hauing 10 Companies of English, and 14 Companies of Dutch, but yet nothing neere whole and full Companies. There were found in the Castle 5000 malter or sacks of corne, and 300 Fuder or Tuns of wine, and 52 peeces of Cannon; but as for powder, and such other prouision, nothing at all, for the besieged had bestowed that vpon their enemies before. From Franckford. Nouemb. 18. The siege of Franckendale yet continues, for they in the Towne being indifferently well prouided, purpose not to giue it ouer too suddenly, without honourable conditions. The Enemie hath not much dry ground to entrench himselfe vpon, so that the besieged care not much for him, vntill the hard frost comes, when the Enemie may both lye dry, and haue firme ground to draw his Ordnance, if the siege lasts so long, which is expected to be raised be∣fore that time. From Hamborough, Nouemb. 12. Since our last newes printed Nouemb. 21. wherein we told you of the resolute holding out of the siege of Glatz; we haue heard since, that that strong towne is surrendred to the Emperour, by the young Count of Tourne, who before so brauely defended it: But the particulars we yet haue not: Only thus much from Hamborough, that the young Count was
there arriued, with intention to goe into Holland, and that he was enforct to giue it vp for want of powder. But of this, the next faire winde, will (we hope) bring vs the particulars. In the meane time, you may please to obserue this, that the two strong peeces of Glatz and Manheim, were much about a time giuen ouer, not for want of valour, but for want of powder. From the Dyet of Regenspurg. Here are also some letters in London, which re∣late, that the Count Mansfield hath inuaded the Count of Embdens country, vpon this quarrell (as it is thought) that he maintayned ten Companies for three months space in Spinolaes Armie, against the States and the Prince of Orange: And that the Marquesse Spinola hath sent vp forces to inuade the Duke of Holsteins country. From Amsterdam, Nouemb. 18. The Prince of Orange (who we told you before in our last Newes, was gone vp) is now they say gone to take in Lingen, which Count Mansfield had a farre off blocked vp before. That which may make this passe for truth is, for that Lingen (as we told you) was sometimes the Prince of Oranges owne inheritance, which he now desires much to recouer. The Count Mansfield is now got into Embden-land: He is thought to haue neere 10000 horse. He de∣manded,
as they say, 200000 Rixe Dollars, and two principall Townes (the very keyes of the country) of the Count of Emden, in satisfaction to the States, whose enemies hee had ayded. Whereupon the Count fled with his houshold furniture, towards the Bishop of Bremens country, and sent his two daugh∣ters to the towne of Embden to be there in more safetie. It is confirmed, that the Count of Anholt, who hath beene the Bishop of Cullens Generall, hath had his towne of Anholt taken from him by Count Mansfield. The country comes in so fast to Count Mansfield, that he cannot entertaine them all, but is faine to thanke and dismisse diuers. The money which should pay those 16000, which the Colonel Kniphowsen is gone to leuie for the Duke of Brunswick, in Bremenland, Wesphalia, and Brunswick, is made ouer to Embden by the States of the Vnited Prouinces; where it lyes ready for them. The Duke of Brunswick was conueyed vp towards Count Mansfield, by the Count Henry of Nassaw his horse: which peraduenture were those 30 Cor∣nets, or some of them, which we in our last Newes told you of, that Count Henry had at Schencksconse. We haue here in London heard it againe repor∣ted, that Count Mansfield and Henry Vandenberg haue had some bickering, wherein Mansfield had much the better: but for that we wonder, how that
Count Mansfield should go on so quietly into Emb∣den-land, and why the Count should flie, if Henry Vandenberg were so neere; as also for that we haue heard no further of Henry Vandenbergs march that way, vnlesse it be he that is gone into the Duke of Holsteins country; we will not report this as a cer∣tainty, till we see better authoritie for it, in the Low Dutch relations. From the Hague the 26 of Nouemb. 1622. The Newes here is, That the Count Mansfield is with his forces in the County of Embden, ransacking the country: And that the Bishop of Collen, and others, raise also forces to doe the like, meaning to reuenge themselues vpon the Duke of Holsteins country, or thereabouts. The Prince of Orange is also ready with 12000 men to march vpwards.
From Duynkercke, the first of Nouember. Our valiant and famous Captaine Whitbok is here deceased the six and twentieth of Octob., those that employed him haue lost much by his death, in the iudgement of the whole world: for he was a valiant and wary Captaine. Hee was buried with great state and pompe. Burgundy was drawne be∣hinde him, his Corpes were wrapped vp, in the ha∣bite of a Frier Predicant: the Hearse was followed by an hundred Muskettiers, who gaue him three vollies before the Church at his buriall. Hee hath left behinde him a Brother of his, who is likewise a very valiant Captaine. Concerning the tyranny of the Reformed Bro∣thers (so the Dunkirkers here, call the Hollanders who professe the Reformed Religion) vpon those of Captaine Michael Iacobs Ship of Ostend, whom they fisht and gate out of the water, to hang them, it will breed ill bloud, for wee are aduised from Brussels, that the seuenty Rotterdammers and Em∣huyseners, which are here in prison, must cast Dice for their liues, to make vp two and twenty out of them all, to be hanged; which are iust so many as the Hollanders hanged of ours. And our Princesse the Archduchesse shewes her selfe very mercifull, seeing shee will haue but number for number put to death; and not all of these, which are here im∣prisoned. Touching the Spanish Nauie, seeing it is not arri∣ued here with the last good winde, we thinke that it is returned backe againe.
From Flushing the 22. of Nouember. After the finishing of this Letter, here comes certaine tidings by a man of warre, that the Spanish Fleete some foure and twenty or seuen and twenty Saile strong, is vpon the Coast of France, betwixt Boloigne and Diepe, being resolued to land fiue thousand Spaniards in Flanders. Whereupon wee are here in all haste making diuers saile ready, ten lying ready in the Hauen, went presently away. It was some whiles since reported here in Lon∣don, that the Spaniards had alreadie landed these fiue thousand men in France, to goe from thence into Flanders. And now if you please to see what warlike pre∣parations the Low-country-men haue lately made, against the Spanish Nauie, you may reade these three particulars, which though they be not al new, because not all done at once; yet we thought good to impart them, for that we would shew you their whole Fleet, or as much of it as we know. From Amsterdam the eleuenth of October. Two daies agoe all the ships which were ap∣pointed at Dordrecht, Rotterdam, and Ganda, sailed towards the Blaeke, which lyeth vpon the way of Breda, what, and whither they intend wee doe not know. From Amsterdam the 22. of Octob. Seeing the newes of the comming of the Spanish Fleet continueth, they are arming here diuers great
and small Vessels to goe meet the same, and to this effect there are likewise diuers Merchants ships arrested in Texel, and some East-India ships are euen discharged, to doe the like seruice. From the Hage the 28. of October. It is agreed againe that the Poll-money shall bee paid in this Countrey againe, beside the fiue hun∣dreth penny of euery ones estate. Yesterday there came certaine Letters vnto his Excellencie, and the States Generall, whereupon they consulted, and resolued to set presently an hundred saile forth. The Harangue or Speech made vnto the King, by the Deputed Committies of the Reformed Churches of France, and the Soueraigntie of Bearne. SIr, We are sent in the name of all the Reformed Churches in France, and the Soueraigntie of Bearne, to beseech your Maiestie in all humblenesse, to grant them Peace, Our hearts and mindes being more humbled than our bodies do prostrate them∣selues before your feet to craue the same; and re∣quest most humbly your Maiestie to beleeue, that the false reports which were spred abroad amongst vs of the designes of your Maiesty against our Re∣ligion, haue cast vs into this present misery and mishap: We intend not to colour or excuse our faults: We confesse our selues guiltie, and therefore present our selues here before your Maiestie to sue
for pardon, and intreat your highnesse most graci∣ous fauour, beseeching you to imitate God, whose Image you are, and to consider our infirmities, and to attribute something to the feare which we con∣ceiued by the false presages of the oppression of the libety of our consciences, and how much the more cupable your Maiestie shall finde vs, so much will your clemencie be more glrious and renowned. Henry the Great, your Father, of happy memo∣rie, hath vsed our seruice, did rely his trust vpon vs, and loued vs We beseech your Maiesty most hum∣bly, that like as you are Heire of his Royal Vertues, you will be so likewise of the good will, which hee bare vnto vs, and not otherwise to distinguish vs hereafter, from your other Subiects, then by that seruice, which wee shall performe vnto your Highnesse. For hereby it is, that we hope to shew that none can be more than wee, your most obedi∣ent, and most loyall Subiects and Seruants. Vpon this Oration and submission followed the Kings Proclamation, which being not as yet prin∣ted in our language, wee here giue you as fit to be added to the former things, of that subiect. The Proclamation of the King, concerning the Peace, published at Paris the one and thirtieth day of October 1622. Printed at Paris by I. Morel and Peter Mettayer, Ordinary Printers to the King, 1622. By the King. IT is made knowne by these presents, that his Maiestie hauing been pleased of his bountie and
clemencie, to grant peace to his Subiects of the prded Reformed Religion (after the assuran∣ces m vnto his Highnesse in their behalfe, for their comcie and loyaltie hereafter) willeth and commandeth expressely all his Subiects, of what qualitie and condition soeuer they be, to keepe and obserue inuiolably the Peace in all places and parts of his Kingdome, Countries, Lands, and Seignio∣ries within his Dominion: and to liue hereafter in good vnion, friendship and concord, according to the Edicts and Proclamations, without any contra∣uention, or prouocation of any, either by deede or word, directly, or indirectly, either of one side or the other, in regard of matters past and happened, i the late commotions, which his Maiestie will haue abolished and forgotten: The infringers and refractory persons shall be punished as disturbers of the common quiet and Tranquillitie, by the Iudges and Officers which are to censure them, and to enquire in such cases, whom his Maiestie com∣mands and ordaines, to vse all diligence and good endeuour, to the said effect. Willing also to the said end, this present Proclamation to be read and published in all the quarters of his Campe, and in all the Towns and places of his Kingdome, Coun∣tries, and Territories vnder his obedience. And because none should pretend ignorance, and that euery one may conforme himselfe hereunto, This is giuen in the Campe before Mompellier, the eigh∣teenth day of October, 1622. It was Signed, Lewis, and Lower De Lomenie.
The one and thirtieth day of October 1622. this Proclamation and Commandement of the King, ere aboe written, hath beene by me (who haue set  hand hre vnder) a sworne and ordi∣nary Cier o he Kings, read and published with the sound of mpet, and publicke crie thorow∣out the Cittie, and Suburbs of Paris, and affixed on the vsuall plas: bing accompanied with Mathurin Noyret a sorn Trumpet, and three other Trumpeters. Signed Le D. Vpon this agreement and the Kings pleasure certainly knowne, heare what followed. From Lions the 23. of October The gates of Mompellier haue beene now many daies set open, and many sicke and hurt, are out of the Kings Campe, conueyed into the Citie. Both the Queenes are as yet here, and in health. Yesterday and the day before are here arriued diuers of the Kings souldiers ou of Champaigne, vnder the command of the Duke of Angoulesme, who is resolued to conduct them vnto his Maie∣stie to get their pay, but it is thought our Gouer∣nour will not suffer them to goe further. They are lodged here in the Suburbs and the neighbouring villages, where they doe geat hurt amongst the country people, which would they were deliuered of their guests. FINIS.
