1953 S113310 99848546 13647
IOSVAHS GODLY Resolution in conference with Caleb, touching houshold gouerne∣ment for well ordering a familie. WITH A twofold Catechisme for instruction of youth; the first short, for the weaker sort, set forth in sixe prin∣cipall points; the latter large for other of greater growth, and followeth the order of the common Authorized Catechisme, and is an explana∣tion thereof: both set forth for the benefit of his Christian friends and wel-willers. By RICHARD BERNARD preacher of Gods word, at Woorksoppe in Nottingam-shire. 1. Pet. 2. 2. As new-borne babes desire that sincere milke of the word, that ye may grow thereby. Printed at London by IOHN LEGATT, Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, and are to be sold in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Crowne by Simon Waterson. 1612.
To the right Worship∣full Sir Henrie Pakenham Knight, and to his religiously affected Ladie, all good and sound comforts ten∣ding to the best and most as∣sured ioyes in glorie are heartily wished. RIGHT Worshipfull: man was made for his Creators glorie; the way is to know him, to obserue his good pleasure, and with alacrity of spirit to doe his will; Though all receiue Being of him, yet most, as the Heathen, know him not at all. Some sort in the world professe him: but are little obseruatiue of his will: these onely say, Lord, Lord; and therewith rest so con∣tent: other doe aske, what he would haue done; and when they know his pleasure, they haue it onely vpon their tongue, but far from practise. Very few know with faith, and doe what they be∣leeue and know, with conscience. Turks for their liues, are as good as many Christians: and these
no better then other, but for an idle profession. Meanes sure haue we many to amend this; as his holy word, his multitude of mercies and ma∣nifold chastisements: But the first is despised, therefore it preuaileth not: the second is vn∣thankefully abused, and mercies mooue vs not: and the last is contemned, we grow hard, and therefore o Lord saue vs, for iudgements re∣claime vs not. But the godly wise, will I hope, lay these things to heart, though most be carelesse: lest correction turne to destruction, mercies be remooued, and of the Gospel we be vtterly de∣priued. The Lord may thus doe, it is our deser∣uing; that by iustice he reuenge not himselfe of vs, it is mercy still without any mans merit God make vs thankefull, that our knowledge may cause an acknowledgment heartily, with a∣mendment seriously, so shall we enioy what we haue, and haue what yet we possesse not, for our greater good. My words of complaint and my heartie wish tend to stirre vp some to well doing, that, if so. God please, in a world of wickednesse, there may be found Noahs preparing the Arke, and god∣ly Lots dwelling in Sodome, that when de∣struction commeth, such may find in that day fauour in Gods sight for themselues and their families. For this end I haue sent forth, with the principles of religion, and the points of Cate∣chisme,
certaine instructions deliuered Dia∣logue wise, teaching and perswading all Chri∣stians, to a mutuall care of one an others saluati∣on, & euery houshold gouernour, with the mem∣bers thereof, to an orderly disposing of them∣selues, that Iesus Christ may dwell amongst them, and that the houses of Christians may be lodgings for the Lord, and not dennes of infidells, or habitations of diuells. What hath bin deliuered after an other ma∣ner, the same changed for a more easie informa∣tion, I now offer (right Worshipfull) thankefully vnto you: let it please you to accept my litle la∣bour for your Worships so large kindnesse alrea∣die shewed. I do acknowledge my selfe beholden: I professe readinesse, to expresse still more thank∣fulnesse, as time shall afforde fit occasion. In the meane space I shall not cease to pray for you, that Iosuahs resolution may be euer in you, that you may follow the steppes of Father Abraham, and your good Ladie imitate the holy graces of Sarah, to your housholds happinesse, and both your endlesse comforts here and in heauen, A∣men. Worksoppe, August. 1. Your Worships to be commanded, Richard Bernard.
Iosuahs resolution of houshold gouernment. Iosua. 24. 15. But I and my house will serue the Lord. IOSVA, CALEB. LET me speake vnto youCoherence of the text with that which went before. (O yee house of Israel) our fathers haue recei∣ued mercy diuers wayes, wee their children haue experience of the good∣nes of our God; we haue sound proofe of his assured promise, vs hath he deliuered, our enemies confoun∣ded, & hath giuen vs possessiō ouer Cana∣an, as appeareth this day. Now my aduise and will is, that you would therefore feare the Lord, & serue him in vprightnesse and truth, and serue him alone, abandoning all idolatry, and not follow your own corrupt wayes, nor errors of Forefathers, in so great an euill. If it seeme good vnto you, so to
doe, I shall reioyce, it is that I wish heartily for your good: but if you will not, bee it knowen vnto you all this day, and take no∣tice of my full determination herein, that I and my house will serue the Lord. Cal. God forbid, God forbid, that wee should (O most noble Prince) be of any o∣ther mind, then so also with thee, to seeke the honour of our God, and to serue him. Ios. Surely you well perswade mee of Gods continuing mercy to vs hereby, for if we seeke him, he will be found of vs, if we2. Chr. 15. 2 1. Sam. 2. honour him, he will honour vs, but if wee forsake him, he will forsake vs. It is also my hearts ioy that we do conioine as one here∣in: but neuertheles this know, that though company doe encourage men to serue the  Lord, yet if a man be alone, and all do for∣sake him, that is no barre that a resolued Christian should desist in his holy purpose. Cal. Godly men tie not their religion  vpon other mens sleeues, they resolue with Peter to follow Christ, if all els doe forsake him: thy words (Iosuah) declare herein thy iudgement, and thy promise, what wee all ought to practise. Ios. Therefore, as I purpose, so ought  ye to walke with God alone, if none will else ioyne with you.
Cal. Vrge, I beseech thee, this point vp∣on the people with reasons, that they may see how they may perswade themselues herein to a resolution. Ios. The Lord in giuing his law doth  speak singularly in the second person, as to  one man, Thou shalt haue no other Gods before me, Thou shalt make no grauen I∣mage, and so in the rest, as if he had said; Though other will not serue me, though some will haue other Gods, though all o∣ther will commit idolatrie, yet see thou doe not so, I charg al as one, & one as al, that e∣uery man may be obediēt to single himselfe forth alone to serue me the Lord his God. Againe, we all do couenant one by one  at our baptisme, and some doe promise as much for this & that Infant, that in parti∣cular God shall by them be worshipped: now God will require the performance of the couenant, which bindeth vs vpon the holy Sacrament, and by that signe of the sprinkling of Christs blood vpō vs, that so we do serue the Lord, albeit other do not. Cal. Indeed it is an honest mans part to  keepe his word with men, as we see when two are bound in a bond, one, he that re∣spects his credit, will performe the conditi∣on, though the other be careles: how much
more ought we to regard to keep our word with God, the promise being made so vo∣luntarily, before so many witnesses, and sealed with the blood of Christ? This rea∣son were sufficient to perswade, but if you haue any more, I beseech you proceed, for we need much spurring to run on the race to eternall life. Ios. Our Sauiour tels vs, that we are to  forsake father and mother,Luke 14 wife and chil∣dren, yea to hate them for his sake and the Gospel, els can we not be his Disciples: by which he teacheth this instruction, that we are to depend on none in our religion to God, be held backe by none, from our wal∣king with God: that all earthly affection must be laid aside, and we must embrace Christ and the Gospel alone, if none nei∣ther father nor mother, sister nor brother, will goe with vs. Cal. Indeed men in matters of this life,  will, for wealth, honor, pleasure: single thē∣selues from other, they would be in honor alone, they would dwell alone, that the poore cannot tell where to haue rest for them, they can be singular in vanity, be pointed out for a new fashion, be loathed for beastly liues, be hated for oppression, be talked of for pride, be abhorred for vnchast
conuersation, blasphemy, & prophanenes, and yet men are loath to be any whit more religious towards God, thē other be. Thus alas, we see, men hold it no shame to be no∣torious in and for the world, in & for their pleasures, in & for honor; Sathan can make them grow more vaine, more wicked, then other, without shame, without daunt of spi∣rit, without feare of man, either to be no∣ted, or pointed at: but the Lord cannot per∣swade vs by his word to become more ho∣ly then other; that is forsooth singularity, and men feare now a dayes more to be no∣ted for any strict course of life, from a common road, then for crying sinnes. Ios. This sheweth the power of Sathan in the one, & the litle loue or zeale of God in the other, the wicked herein shall con∣demne these, though they shall not so saue themselues: but to proceed; If we consider that we are made alone, brought out alone, that we die in our appointed time alone, & that though wee shall all appeare before God in the last day, yet must euery one giueom. 14. 13. Cor. 5. 10. an account for himselfe vnto God, we should walke and liue, if so we needs must with God alone. Cal. I know if a man haue a long iour∣ney  to goe, & that vpon a hard penalty, he
would desire honest company, but if he can get none, the feare of punishment maketh him set forward alone. We all are in our iourney to heauen by our profession, and we must be so by our practise, vpon paine of damnation; if we can get any to goe in a good life with vs, it is well, but if not, must we therefore herein stay our course? Ios. Be it farre from vs; the example of  holy men, who are as marks set vp for pas∣sengers to look vpon, shew vs the contrary. Noah would serue God alone, when all theGen 6. old world was drowned in wickednes. LotGen. 19. was in his singular way from al the Inhabi∣tāts,1. King 19. 2. Chro. 18. Ruth. 1. in the midst of Sodō. Eliah was alone, Michaiah auouched the truth alone: & to cōclude, Ruth would go alone with Naomi, whē Orpha her sister left her. We must be of Ruths mind towards religion, as shew was in her loue to Naomi. If anything would with∣draw vs, if any person would disswade vs from a godly & deuout course, let vs say toRuth. 1. 16. 17. them with Ruths speech, Intreat me not to leaue religion, nor to depart from it, for whither it goeth, I will go; and where it dwelleth I will dwell: the true professours of it, shall be myThy peo∣ple, my people. companions, God, the Author thereof, shall be my God, where it resteth, will I rest, and there will I die: the Lord doe so to me, and more
also, if ought but death depart it and me. Cal. Without doubt these examples are very pregnant, and doe giue liuely en∣couragement to serue God, if we be alone. But (my Lord) is it not grieuous to be a∣lone?  did not Eliah sorrow, and vexe his spiritat this, that he was left alone, yea and desired therefore to die? Ios. True it is, that Salomon saith, woe toAnswer to the obie∣ction. him that is alone, but alone without helpe from the Lord: but this his children want neuer finally, the Lord is with them, and if he be their familiar friend, they may with Dauid say, We care not what man can doe vnto vs, for the Lord is on our side. By him more is with vs then against vs; this Elisha being alone saw, and prayed that his ser∣uant Gehezi might see: & albeit Eliah see∣med to himselfe to be alone, yet was he not alone, God was with him, and 7000. not seene, who bowed not their knee vnto Ba∣al: and whereas he wished to die for bodi∣ly presence of men, it was his weakenes, in which the Lord did shew mercy, and affor∣ded him comfort afterward; the like mer∣cy may we expect, as holy martyrs haue experienced. Cal. Doth it not derogate (Renowned Duke) from your greatnesse, to professe sin∣gularity
from all nations in religion, andPreuention of an obie∣ction. from all Israel, though they doe follow their forefathers, which were beyond the flood, and in Egypt seruing strange Gods? Ios. Albeit God hath exalted me here  vpon earth, to rule ouer his people Israel, and though I succeede their vnmatchable Moses, that man of God, yet iudge I true religion to be my chiefe honour, and to differ from all men differing from their way wherein they should walke towards God, to be my glory: therefore is it that I say, But I and my house will serue the Lord, euen I Iosua, though Duke, though Prince in Israel, and a guide to Gods people, I will with my family serue him, who hath shew∣ed me this great mercy. Cal. You haue great cause to blesse God, that you in such glory, haue so great humi∣lity, in so great prosperity such zeale. It is rare for men of note to entertaine religi∣on, but most rare for such therein to be∣come singular. Ios. Such as truely seeke God in heart  without hypocrisie, whatsoeuer their estate be, they hold it a speciall duty to do seruice vnto God, & that they can be in no estate, be it neuer so glorious with men, but that religion and the grace of sanctifica∣tion
maketh the same more glorious. By  deuotion in true religiō, we become Saints on earth, we haue the fruit of the spirit, the earnest and assurance of our adoption. By  sensible life are we better then things with∣out life, and are but equall with beasts: by  reason we are better then these, but no bet∣ter then Heathen: by religion, though false, are we worshippers of a diuine power, and therin more then Sauages; but by true re∣ligion are we Christians, and by sincerity therin with religious practise, are we more then common Christians, euen true and liuely members of Christ, in whom we are Gods adopted children, righteous before him: we haue inward peace of conscience,  and outward grace by the approbation of  the godly, Angels are giuen to attend vp∣on  vs, who are the children of the great King: Heauen is our inheritance, we haue  seats prepared, and shall with Christ iudge  the whole earth, and with him enioy the e∣ternall  happinesse for euer, when the dam∣ned wicked shall be tormented world with∣out end. Cal. The weight of these reasons may force any man to hold religion and sincere walking with God, to be a grace vnto him, be he neuer so mightie in this world. He
hath here honour, and men attend him, but by a holy conuersation he hath honor with God Alsufficient, & Angels wait vp∣on him. Here a man hath wealth, but by re∣ligious holines, he hath an euerlasting tre∣surie, and a supplie of all wants by grace. Here hath he, as a man, his pleasures and delights, but by deuout seruing of God, he hath peace which passeth all vnderstan∣ding, that which the eie hath not seene, nor eare heard, nor the heart of a naturall man able to comprehend. Therefore ought we  in what glory so euer we be before men, to adde religion to our state, and iudge it our crowne and glory. Ios. Els may we rightly be iudged with  out it, no better then Heathen, rich Barba∣rians, honourable Atheists, & if men haue  delights without pietie, they be but pro∣phane Epicures, which things indure not:  and without Gods good mercy, men with∣out grace quaile by that very same thing whereby among men they be of highest e∣stimation. Achitophels policie ouerthrew him: Absoloms beauty brought him to de∣struction: Hamans honor was his ruine. Re∣ligious feare of God is mans stay in euery  earthly estate; els the higher he is aduan∣ced, & the more he possesseth without reli∣gion,
the worse he is, farthest from God, and nigher to confusion. I therefore and my house will serue the Lord. Cal. Mee thinke (Sir) by adding theseAnd my house. The groūd of the do∣ctrine fol∣lowing. words, my house, in your speech, you insinu∣ate your care to haue other religious, as well as your selfe. Ios. True it is you say, I now desire as did my Master Moses, Would to God all the people could prophecie. Indeede rather then God be vnserued, a man ought alone to serue the Lord, this is his feruencie & zeale to God; but true grace rests not in the bo∣some  of a true beleeuer, as gold in a nigards chest, but sprouteth forth to the benefit of other, for he desireth to make other like himselfe, this is his compassion and loue. Cal. I am able to avouch this from my  owne feeling, blessed be God, and I find it   true in that worthy Apostle who saith, MyRom. 10. 1. hearts desire and prayer to God is for Israel that they may be saued: who after his con∣uersion did labour in the Lords vineyard with vndurable paines to bring men vnto God. Ios. So ought all of vs to doe in our places:  the Lord commandes it, Returne & cause other to returne; & our Sauiour said to  Peter, When thou art conuerted strengthen thyEzec. 18. 33 Luk. 22. 32.
brethren. The hatred of sinne should mooue vs where we may, to roote it out, the griefe which we ought to take, when we see men to sinne, should cause vs as far forth as wee be able to reclaime them, and not suffer sinLeu. 19. to rest vpon them. That we ought to grieue for sinne in our selues, so for the same in o∣ther,Psal. 119. 136. wee see by Dauid, whose eyes gushed out riuers of water, at the sight of other men breaking Gods law. Our Sauiour weptLuk. 19. 41. Ier. 13. ouer Ierusalem, Ieremies soule mourned in secret, S, Paul writ with teares; shall we haue a passion for sinne committed, and not vse meanes to haue it amended? Cal. He that is truely touched with the sight of sinne, cannot possibly neglect the meanes to winne men from sinne. It is the nature of griefe to manifest it selfe, and workes in man an endeauour, to vse means to haue the cause of grief taken away. Ther∣fore if wee truely grieue that men offend God, wee will not suffer them to goe on in sinne, if we may amend it. Ios. And as griefe may mooue vs, so the consideration of the sinners misery, may enduce vs to care for their saluation. The sinner is Sathans slaue, subiect to wrath, the heire of confusion, who may daily looke for damnation and vengeance; oh, who
can but pitty a man in so great misery? is he not mercilesse and cruell that seeth one in a deadly danger, and may releeue him, and yet will not? Can wee see a man hanging himselfe, stand by, and not cutte the cord? Can we beholde one running into a pit to drowne himselfe, and if we may, not holde him backe? These be mercilesse cruelties, if so we should neglect our brothers bodi∣ly life: and it is no lesse hardnesse of heart to suffer men by sinne, if it lie in vs to re∣claime them, to runne headlong to hell, where they shall hang in torments, and be drowned in the gulfe of perdition. Cal. Condemnation mercilesse belon∣gethIam. 2. to such as will shew no mercy, it is true touching soule and body. No doubt  holy men iudged rightly of this, and ther∣fore did discharge their duty herein. Abra∣ham our Forefather taught his housholde; Dauid the King was so minded, who pro∣fessed to teach Gods waies vnto the wic∣ked,Psal. 51. 23. that sinners might be conuerted vnto the Lord. Philip we see sought out Natha∣niel, & brought him to Christ; and the wo∣man of Samaria did runne hastily for her neighbors to behold the Messias; all which are written for our learning, that wee by their examples should doe the like.
Ios. A man would thinke that enough were said to stirre vp one to care for ano∣thers saluatiō, but for that men herein are too remisse, and indeed professe a careles∣nes of this with cruell Cain; What, am I myGen. 4. 9. brothers keeper? I will the longer stay vpon this point, as a matter of absolute necessity, the neglect wherof is the cause of so great encrease of wickednesse at home and a∣broad. It is the fruit of loue in the commu∣nion and holy fellowship of Saints: One  article of our Creed is to beleeue this com∣munion, but we by no mutuall care shew a∣ny such spirituall coniunction. The mem∣bers of the body in the bodily communi∣on doe teach vs this, where euery member careth for the welfare of each other, and if any one be out of ioynt, all with one con∣sent seeke to bring it in againe. The bodily fellowship worketh this mutual compassi∣on, which keepeth the body in welfare; so ought our spiritual ioyning together work the like commiseration towards euery er∣ring mēber, to keepe the Church in peace. Cal. You haue here from a naturall worke, plainely set out our duty in a spiri∣tuall action: nature forceth the one, and therefore grace I hope will set vs forward to the other.
Ios. If this suffice not, let this mooue vs,  that our not seeking to saue them, in our place, is to make our selues guilty of their sin, he that is silent consenteth, & he that consents is worthie of death, Rom. 1. 31. He is accessarie to treason who knoweth it, and reuealeth it not: sinne is rebellion a∣gainst God, we must attach the partie, at least by a brotherly rebuke, lest we let him escape, as Achab let goe Benadad, and his sinne be made our transgression, and so procure vnto our selues death. Againe, let  the enlarging Christs kingdome incite vs to this duty, yea the great reward and glo∣rie  which belongeth to him that saueth a soule, he shall couer the multitude of sinnes, heIam. 5. Dan. 12. 3. shal shine as the starres for euer and euer. The  care of sauing a soule, and the goodnesse ofIoh. 3. 16. the worke mooued God the Father to giue his onely Sonne to die, and Christ  himselfe was willing to suffer great and vnspeakeable torments to bring a poore sinner vnto safetie. Cal. If neither the commandement of God, the griefe of heart for sinne, the sin∣nersAbriefe re∣petition of all the rea∣sons. misery, holy mens exāples, the bond of fellowship & mutuall communion, our own danger in the neglect hereof, the care to enlarge Christs kingdom, the reward of
happines, nor the loue of god, nor Christs sufferings, can mooue vs to doe our best to saue a poore sinner; let the deuill teach vs to look vnto it, who with his members stu∣diously endeauonr to draw men frō God, to thēselues, & to bring them to destructi∣on: If he & his be so forward to ill, the re∣ward whereof is death, why should not we do more to oppose him & his instruments for mans life and saluation? especially mi∣nisters in feeding their flocke, who are charged to do it vpō their loue to Christ,Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2 Ezec. 33. 8. Gouer∣nours of fa∣milies shold teah their houshold. vpō their alleageance to their soueraigne, to avoid blood guiltines, and to preuent e∣ternall vengeance: And nothing lesse are gouernours of families tied thereunto, they see & blame, and not vnworthily, mi∣nisters that neglect their flocke: but they find not the same fault in themselues for carelesse omitting the instruction of their family, which they be in their own persōs  as much bound to discharge, as a minister is to feed his flock; the Congregatiō is the  ministers cure, so the family is the masters  charge, wherein the chiefe of the house, theDeut. 5. 7. Eph. 6. 4. 1. Cor. 14. 35 Gen. 18. 19. 2. Tim. 1. 5. with 3. 15. father, the mother, the master and Gouer∣nour is to teach their children and hou∣shold in the waies of God. So are they cō∣manded, so examples teach them to doe.
Ios. Thou hast truly spoken (Honoura∣ble Caleb) for we that haue charge of fami∣lies are commanded to informe thē; euen necessitie to keepe a holy vnity among vs,  should hereto perswade vs, how else can there be peace, if the Lambe and the Lyon dwell together, a Cain and an Abel, a moc∣king Ismael, and faithfull Isaac, a scorning Michol, & a zealous Dauid? How can mi∣nisters reforme whole Assemblies, if we do not our endeauour to help them in our fa∣milies? This want of priuate helpe maketh  the publike ministery so vnprofitable, as cōmōly it is. The whole burthē of care for soules is laid vpō the Ministers shoulders, when a priuate watch is imposed vpō eue∣ry man, & houshold instructiō vpon euery faithful & religious Gouernour of a fami∣ly.  Therefore families haue bin called the Churches of God, wherein God was, & e∣uer ought to be worshipped with holy ex∣ercises. And how can a master be a dome∣sticall head, and let his members perish? The diuell so much opposing it, mans na∣ture  so much distasting it, all so vsually  neglecting it, doe declare it sufficiently to  be a most holy and worthy worke to be carefully vndertaken, and with all good conscience performed. Cal. Vndoubtedly, if the benefit which
hence would arise, first to our selues, to our children and houshold, then to the help of the publike ministery, were well weighed, there be none that haue either care of thē∣selues, wish well to their children, desire faithfulnesse in their seruants, and couet to see Ierusalem in prosperity, but they would betake them speedily to this so great, so ne∣cessary and godly a worke. How come chil∣dren  often to destruction, but by parents negligence in their religious education? If we bring them vp well, wee may by Gods mercie preuent their ill ende: if wee vse meanes, and they perish, yet our soules re∣ceiue comfort, that we are no way guilty: whereas otherwise the childe may say: Wo is me, and wo to you my parents, who haue neglected my education: and parents may answer, Wo to vs our sonne therefore, see∣ing thee now so miserable, and our selues hereby so vncomfortable. Ios. I therfore and my house, by Gods help, will serue the Lord, as God hath giuen mes grace to see and know the euill, I will en∣deauour to preuent it in me and mine. Cal. Your speech in the order thereof teacheth mee, as I take it, not onely your care herein to do what you ought, but your wisdome in an orderly proceeding therein.
Ios. It is well noted of you: I set my selfe  before my houshold, because the head lea∣deth first the body, before the body can mooue by the members to performe any office. So it is in the naturall constitution of a body, so in the politicall gouernment of the common wealth, let Princes leade, the people will follow, for from the head  commeth life & motion to the body. And the same order is to bee obserued in well guiding of a family. There is litle hope to finde a godly family, where the master is either carelesse, or prophane. He must set on and go before, if he intend to haue the rest good. His life is of authority, his ex∣ample draweth other to him, his words are of force, and in doing his duty may he ex∣pect a blessing. Cal. I doe perswade my selfe, that some haue good desires hereunto, & more per∣happes by this may bee set forward to set∣tle their housholds in order: but euery one that gladly would doe well, know not how to doe so; therefore let me obtaine (most Noble Lord) the knowledge of 3. things at your hands, both for mine owne, and the peoples instruction herein. I. How a fa∣milyThree que∣stions. may bee at the first religiously plan∣ted? II. How a family irreligious may be
reformed? III. How it may be so kept, and preserued? Ios. Three necessary questions propoun∣ded and worthy to be answered. To satisfie you in the first. To plant a family in religi∣ousAnswer to the first. How a fa∣mily may be religi∣ously plan∣ted. feare of God. I. Parents must bring vp such children well, with which they will build vp a house, acquaint them with the Lords will, with duties of a husband and wife, of a father and mother, and so marry in iudgement, before they marry, and not in carnall lust. Without knowledge of the former christian duties, mens mariages are but Turkish, and to marry in the latter on∣ly, is sensual & brutish. II. Parents must see that the parties to be maried be fitted, that their be no dislike in affection, nor iarre in religion, but that the marriage be made in loue, and setled in Gods feare; both belee∣uers, both imbracing one & the same truth, as neere as may be. Abraham doth fetch a Rebecca for Isaac, from his fathers house, & there is religion; when Iehosaphat taking an Athalia for his sonne, bringeth into his house idolatry and superstition. To plant religion, wee must bring in religion into a family, by education, and by a holy con∣iunction of them togither in the feare of God. III. and lastly, Parents must care
that the religious persons, religiously mar∣ried, bee religiously serued. And therfore, that such as become seruants to them, bee of the same holy profession with them, and of like conuersation. And thus may a family be planted religiously. Cal. What direction giue you for the se∣cond, viz. to reforme a disordered family? Ios. The gouernour must do, as in ma∣kingAnswer to the second question. How a fa∣mily may be refor∣med. a new house, where an olde stood; hee must remooue the old wholly as far forth as it is vnprofitable, and make the rest all new. The man and the wife must be sound, they bee the two side posts; so their chil∣dren, who are as the beames laid ouer∣thwart, if they be rotten, though all the rest be new, at the length the worke will fall. Cal. How must they be made sound, if they be rotten? Ios. By repenting of all former sin, and negligence past, and by vndertaking this work sincerely with a cōstant durablenes. Cal. What timber is so rotten, as wil ne∣uer serue to be put in the new building? Ios. Euery one that persists in euill, and will not be reformed. Cal. But what if there be some such, whom the master of the family cannot cast out? Ios. Let such so be in the house, as they
beare no rule in it, neither any sound part depend or stay vpon them; so shall there be neither breach nor ruine thereby. Cal. What other meanes is there to re∣forme by? Ios. Secondly, the gouernour must bring all his houshold in subiection to Gods word, to heare and attend vnto the pub∣like ministerie thereof, as the ordinarie meanes to reclame men. It is the power ofRom. 1. 18. Heb 4. 12. Psal 19 9. Pro. 2. 11. 12. 16. The bene∣fit of religi∣ous exerci∣ses in hou∣ses. God to saluation, it is mighty in operati∣on, it cleanseth our waies, and keepeth vs from all euill. Thirdly, he must set vp with∣in his house religious exercises; these make publike meanes more profitable, more highly to be esteemed, and the iudgement better to be setled; euill hereby is preuen∣ted, yea thrust out from the family, bad persons hereby are tried and found out, the well disposed made more religious, and God not a litle glorified. Cal. What are the holy exercises which you here speake of? Ios. Reading of the holy Scriptures, the voice of God, Catechising, telling some short storie of some notable example in the word, making vse thereof, singing of psalmes, and when the publike sermon hath bin heard, to repeate therof as much as is remembred.
Cal. This, say some, will make seruants wearie, and none will come to them. Ios. It were better to be without seruants then haue such as hate goodnesse, but this same which is obiected, and so much fea∣red, may be answered easily, and the feare taken away. The master to hold vp such good exercises, and not to wearie his hou∣shold, must I. be towards all his seruants mercifull, in giuing them a time to rest, not to dogge them day and night to their labour, as beasts. II. He must performe al things seasnably, not late in the night after toylsome labour, & whē wearines & time it selfe doe inforce the body to sleepe. III. He must not haue the same exercises held long, at one time, but auoid tedious pray∣ers, least one be speaking, whilst the rest be sleeping; as it falleth out sometime by the weaknesse of one, & the zealous indiscreti∣on of an other. IV. He must regard much a religious seruant, reward him well, and pray to God for such, & he shall not want godly seruants, and be well rid of the lewd and prophane. Caleb. If seruants be encouraged, godly discretion be vsed, honest libertie graun∣ted, competent wages allowed, tollerable labour onely vrged, difference made, and
the best answerably rewarded, there is no doubt either of getting or retaining ser∣uants: but how may a family reformed so be preserued? Ios. I. The chiefe must themselues keep  good orders established; their neglectAnswer to the third question. How to keepe in order a fa∣mily refor∣med. breeds in other carelesnes, their omission occasioneth in other transgression. II. They must make knowne their ful resolu∣tion to all, in matters of religion, that they will walke vprightly in the midst of the house, that they will allow no order to be  broken. III. They must see to offencesPsal. 101. against God and religion more narrowly,  then iniuries done to themselues, and re∣buke and correct the one more, then the other, so doe they shew greater regard of God, then respect of themselues. IV.  They must shew fauour to th towardly, pardō easily the first or second offence, but not be remisse in punishing duly, where and when the fault and partie offending iustly deserues correction; this is so to be courteous in loue and compassion, as an awefull hand may be kept ouer the fa∣mily with godly discretion. V. They  must cast out the vile persons, wilfull andPsal. 101. obstinate, mocking Ismaels may not re∣maine with Isaacs: a little leauen leaue∣neth1. Cor. 5. the whole lumpe, one lewde person
may doe much hurt. VI. They may not  receiue in any knowne wicked person for feare of infection. VII. They must will  one to exhort another to a mutual emula∣tion of grace, louingly to admonish one an other, and to pray one for another. VIII.  They must keepe all frō idlenes, the nurse, or rather mother of all wickednesse, as of pride in apparell, wastfull expences, vaine pastimes, and other sinnes of the flesh to be abhorred among Christians. IX. They  must performe mutuall duties one to ano∣ther, masters to seruants, and these to their masters, but chiefly the husband and wife must loue each other: if wrongs bee be∣tweene them, let themselues between thē∣selues, or with the good liking of a faith∣full secret friend to both, be ended. They must beware that the houshold become not partners in the matter; for seruants by slander, flattery, and whisperings will kin∣dle the contention, and make a prey of them. The contending of man and wife must neuer want loue, but if any smite ei∣ther by the tongue, both must ioine in one against the smiter. But to preuent this, let none faile to performe what is due to be done. Complaints arise first vpon neglect of duty, the performance whereof is the
touchstone of profession: where the hus∣band is louing, the wife learnes obedience; where the wife is obedient, the husband is mooued to bee kinde, by their well liuing the house is preserued in peace, and where they two do as they ought to themselues & their family, the children & seruants learn to walk in subiection, and do in an awefull loue discharge their duties, and hereby do they prouoke one another vnto piety, con∣tinue loue and vnity in the spirit, and keep vp holy exercises with prayer. Lastly, they  must vpholde the publike ministery and preaching of the word, without which, by reason of the loosenesse of al other neigh∣bours, who do not voluntarily take a god∣ly course priuately, they can neuer conti∣nue long in good order. Cal. It remaines only now to giue some reasons, why the seuerall sorts in a family, and so that all therein should be religious, as first why the father, master & husband, which are all one person in the house, should be religious?Why the husband should be religious. Deut. 6. Exod. 20. Ephes. 6. 4. Ios. I. Because he is specially charged with instruction of the housholde, and to see to thē. Secondly, because the family hath frō him chiefly the name. Thirdly, because he is the head. Fourthly, for a speciall exāple,
as most forcible to draw other on. Fiftly, because of the exāples of good gouernors of families, as Abraham, Cornelius, & other. Sixtly, for that he shall answer for his hous∣hold, as the minister for his flock. Seuenth∣ly, to bring a blessing vppn his children.Exod. 20. Cal. Why should the wife, mother, mi∣stresse of the family be religious? Ios. First, because she is the husbands sha∣dow,Why the wife should be religi∣ous. or rather picture to represēt him in al good things, and as the moone doth from the sunne, so she is to receiue her light from him, which she also is to let shine out to o∣ther. Secōdly, because she is to be an help to her husband; now she can be in nothing more a helpe, then in being with him reli∣gious to further his instructions taught to his houshold. Thirdly, for that the husbād is often from home, & shee is to supply his place, to see the houshold kept in good or∣der. Fourthly, for mutuall peace sake; if she bee not religious, shee will oppose him, as a mocking Michol, or as an idolatrus Iesabel, cause him to forsake the worshippe of the tru God. Fiftly, because godly wiues are cō∣mēded for religion in scripuure, which are to be followed. Sixtly, because shee is the first that instructs the child, as being most with it, causing it to vnderstand that which
she doth please to teach it. Seuenthly, for that she beeing fraile by nature, and apt without grace to goe astray herselfe, may sooner, as vsually it commeth to passe, cor∣rupt the child then the father, by being so continually with it. Cal. Why ought childrē to be religious? Ios. First, for their godly parents sake.Why chil∣dren should be religi∣ous. Secondly, because they bee the second linke in a family, and so in the middle be∣tweene the highest and lowest; they there∣fore next Parents must be religious, that seruants by them grow not vicious. Third∣ly, for their fathers ioy, whose true & sure comfort is not that their children can hunt, so could prophane Esau; nor that they be faire; so was Absolom beautifull, & came to anill end; nor that they be in Honour; so was Saul a cast-way; nor great Church∣men, so were Elies sonnes who perished in their sinnes: but euen because they be reli∣gious, for the grace of God endureth euer. Fourthly, for a blessing vnto themselues, as God hath promised to all that feare him. Fiftly, for encouragement vnto their Pa∣rents, beholding grace in them, which will cause them to continue gracious, lest their children lose grace. Sixtly: because they preserue the good name vpon their Pa∣rents,
get them honour, and are a crowne of glory to them, euen after death. Cal. Why ought seruants to be religi∣ous? Ios. 1. For their masters praise. 2. ForWhy ser∣uants ought to be god∣ly. their owne comfort. 3. Because good ser∣uants are recorded in Scripture for imita∣tion sake. 4. Because whilest they be mens seruants, they may bee the Lords free men by religion. 5. To doe their seruice ho∣nestly, as looking for reward from God. 6. For childrens good, whome leud seruants may easily misleade. Cal. So then, all ought to be religious, that the master with his whole family may be said to serue the Lord, as thou hast (most noble Iosua) promised this day for thy selfe and thy housholde. Ios. So it is, and great is that blessing, where all become the Lords true seruants, religion their practise, the holy word their guide: there man and wife are brother and sister, parents & children of spirituall kin∣dred, and haue one father: masters and ser∣uants mutuall members & co-heires with Christ Iesus: there haue they one voice in prayer with deuotion, one care to aban∣don superstition. All performe mutuall duties; one seeketh to please another, to
hold loue, to keepe peace, and to preserue a holy communion in charitie with pietie. One distrusteth not another, one wron∣geth not another, there is a godly striuing together, who shall doe the best to please God. They beare with weaknesses, they ioy in each others goodnesse; here they desire peace of conscience, the fellowship of the godly; Gods glorie they doe ayme at: the world they liue in, but euer with desire of heauen, which God hath promised to all that walke righteously before him, and serue him; which grace the Lord vouch∣safe vs now and euer. Cal. Amen, Amen. But yet (Sir) before we end, I beseech you commend to my meditation some speciall Scriptures to stir me vp vnto deuotion. Ios. If it please you for the godly mans blessednesse, reade Psal. 1. for his comfort, Psal. 37. Heb. 12. for his holy desires to Gods word, and his obedience, Psal. 119. for his religious practise, Iob. 31. Rom. 12. Heb. 13. for his faith, Heb. 11. for his loue, 1. Cor. 13. and for the effectuall markes of his vocation, and eternall saluati∣on, Rom. 8. Cal. I thanke you humbly, and blesse God for you, whome I beseech to prosper
these things to our comfort, and that they may further vs to a holy practise, to the praise of the God of Israel, that we may be found the Israel of God in the last day. Amen. FINIS.
The Catechisme. Question. HOw many things are need∣full for you to vnderstand, that you may know both God and your selfe? A. These sixe things: I. rightly to conceiue of God what he is, by his word and workes: II. to vnderstand the creation: III. mans miserie by the fall. IV. our redemption: V. our sanctification. VI. the certaintie of our glorification. Of God. Q. Who made you? A. God. Esa. 42. 5. Gen. 1. 26, 27. Q. What a one is God? A. God is a spirit, Ioh. 4. 24. holy, Exod. 15. 11. Iust, 2. Chron. 12. 6. and mercifull, Exod. 34. 6. Q. How many Gods are there?
A. But onely one God, Deut. 6. 4. yet three persons, Mat. 3. 16. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. Q. Which are the three Persons? A. The Father begetting, the Son be∣gotten, and the holy Ghost proceeding, 2. Cor. 13. 13. Mat. 28. 19. and these three are God, Ioh. 1. 1. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. Act. 5. 3. 4. Q. Which of these three became man? A. The second Person, Iesus Christ both God and man, Esa. 9. 6. Heb. 2. 17. Of our Creation. Q. Of what did God make man? A. His bodie was of dust, the woman of Adams ribbe, Gen. 2. 7. 22. Q. What a one did God make them? A. He made them both good, Gen. 1. 31. holy and righteous, Gen. 1. 26. Eph. 4. 24. Colos. 3. 10. Q. What was then mans estate and happi∣nesse? A. It was the state of innocencie, with∣out sinne or miserie, and to God was he ac∣ceptable, Gen. 1. 27. 31. & 2. 25. & 1. 28. Of mans fall and miserie. Q. Are you now such a one by birth, as he was by creation?
A. Alas no: I am by nature full of sin, Psal. 51. 5. Iob 25. 4, 5, 6. Rom. 3. from vers. 9. to 19. And so most miserable, Iob 14. 1. 2. Rom. 5. 14. Eph. 2. 1, 2, 3. Rom. 3. 23. & 2. 8. 9. And to God detestable, Psalm. 11. 5. Gal. 3. 10. Mat. 7. 23. & 25. 41. Q. What is sinne? A. The breaking of Gods commande∣ments, by thought, word, or deed, 1. Iob. 3. 4. Q. How many commandements are there? A. Tenne, Deut. 10. 4. diuided into two Tables, Deut. 4. 13. Q. Which be the Commaundements? A. I am the Lord thy God, &c. Exod. 20. Deut. 5. 6. Q. Doe these tenne commaund or forbid no more but onely what there is set downe in shew? A. Yes: they command or forbidde all the kindes contained vnder the samethng mentioned, and all the causes, with occasi∣ons thereunto, 1. Ioh. 3. 15. Mat. 5. 28. 32. Q. Are they a prayer? A. No, nor so to bee vsed: they are a rule for me to liue after, and doe teach mee my duty to God and my neighbour, Deut. 6. & 31. 12. Psalm. 119. 105. Eccles. 12. 13. Mat. 22. 37. 39. Q. What is your duty towards God?
A. My duty towards God, is to beleeue in him, to feare him, and to loue him, &c. 2. Chro. 20. 20. Eccl. 12. 13. Mat. 22. 27. Q. What is your duty toward your neigh∣bour? A. It is to loue my neighbour as my selfe, &c. Mat. 22. 39. Rom. 13 9. Q. Can you keepe the Commaundements, and not offend God, or your neighbour? A. No: I breake them euery day in thought, word, & deed, hating both God, and my neighbour by nature, Psal. 14. 1, 2, 3. Rom. 8. 7. & 1. 30. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Tit. 3. 3, Q. What is then now your estate, and what deserue you by thus offending God? A. I am in the state of corruption, and doe deserue Gods curse, which is eternall destruction of body and soule. Deu. 27. 26. Mat. 25. 41. 46. Gal. 3. 10. Of mans redemption. Q. What are you in this case to doe? A. To cry vnto God for mercy, & seeke for deliuerance. Luk. 15. 17. Ps. 51. 1. 2. &c. Q. Are you of your selfe able, or is there any good in you to mooue God to set you free? A. No indeed: Rom. 3. 10. & 7. 18. Luk. 17. 10. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephe. 2. 8, 9.
Q. Then who doth redeeme you? A. Onely Iesus Christ. Rom. 7. 25. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Rom. 5. 19. Gal. 2. 20. & 3. 13. Q. What is Iesus Christ? A. He is the eternal Sonne of God. Mat. 17. 5. Heb. 1. 23, a King to gouerne vs, Psa. 2. 6. Mat. 28. 18. a Priest to offer for vs, Ps. 110. 4. & a Prophet to teach vs, Deut. 18. 18. Esa. 51. 1. Mat. 17. 5. Q. What beleeue you concerning him in the Articles of the Creede? A. I doe beleeue that he was conceiued by the holy Ghost, &c. Q. What is this to you? A. I do perswade my selfe hereby, that his puritie is for my corruption, his obedi∣ence for my transgression, his death for my debt, and his ascension for my eternall sal∣uation. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 20. Q. But as God made all, will so Iesus Christ also saue all? A. No verily, many shall bee damned, few shall be saued, Mat. 7. 13. 14. Onely the elect, which take hold of Christ by a liuely faith. Ioh. 3. 16. 36. Mar. 16. 16. Q. What is this liuely faith? A. It is a true perswasion of my heart, grounded vpon Gods promises. Eph. 3. 17 Rom. 4. 21. that Iesus Christ is giuen to
me, Ioh. 3. 16. and the merits of his death and passion, are as truly mine, as if I my self had wrought them, 2. Cor. 5. 21. Rom. 8. 1. Q. How come you by this faith? A. From my effectuall calling by the word preached, & the worke of Gods spi∣rit, Act. 13. 48. Rom. 10. 14, 15. Eph. 1. 13. Q. Where is set downe the summe of your beleefe? A. In my Creed, I beleeue in God the Fa∣ther almightie, &c. Q. Are these a prayer, or so to be vsed? A. No: it teacheth me what to beleeue concerning God and his Church. Q. What good hath Gods Church, the true beleeuers, aboue the rest of mankinde? A. They are in the state of grace, they haue communion with Christ, & one with another, the forgiuenes of sinnes, the glo∣rious resurrection of the body, and life e∣uerlasting. Of Sanctification. Q. How may it appeare, that you haue this faith, and also these benefits? A. By my sanctification. Q. Who doth sanctifie you? A. The holy Ghost, Rom. 15. 16. Q And what is sanctification?
A. It is a making new of the whole man, whereby he daily dieth to sin, and increa∣seth in holinesse and righteousnesse, Eph. 4. 23. 24 Gal. 5. 24. 1. Thess. 4. 1. Q. What grace proceeds from this sanctifi∣cation? A. True repentance, leauing that which is ill with hatred, and performing new obe∣dience with gladnesse of heart continual∣ly. Ier. 31. 19. Act. 26. 20. Psal. 119. 10. 14. 34. 35. 44. 113. 115. 136. Q. What estate stand you in, beeing sanctifi∣ed and penitent? A. I am in the blessed estate of grace, wherein if I continue, I shal inherit eternall life, Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. Rom. 11. 12. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Q. Why hath God thus made, redeemed, sanctified, and hitherto preserued you? A. To serue him truly all the daies of my life, Eph. 2. 10. Tit. 2. 11. 12. Luk. 1. 74 75. Q. How must God be serued? A. Onely after his will reuealed in his written word, Deut. 30. 8. 10. and 4. 2. 2. Cor. 4. 6. Of our strengthening in the state of grace, for the certaintie of our glorification.
Q. Is it needfull for such as are elected, and once called, iustified, and sanctified, that they should continue stil in vsing meanes to saluation? A. Yea truely: else they will fall away, Pro. 29. 18. 2. Chro. 15. 2. Heb. 3. 12. 13. Q. What things must you continue in to as∣sure your selfe of saluation, and to grow strong in the way of life? A. I. In the knowledge of Gods word, Psal. 1. 2. Act. 2. 42. 2. Pet. 1. 19. Ioh. 10. 27. 28. II. In faith, Ioh. 3. 36. III. In loue to the godly, Ioh. 13. 35. 1, Ioh. 3. 14. IV. In obe∣dience. Eze. 36. 26. Psa. 15. 5. Ier. 32. 39, 40. V. In patient suffering for Christ, Rom. 8. 17. Iam. 1. 12. VI. In alonging after Christs comming, 2. Tim. 4. 8. VII. In sincerity without hypocrisie, which will appeare by my appealing to God in these things, Ioh. 21. 15. Of the Sacraments. Q. Hath God giuen any helpes and com∣manded further any other meanes besides the word, for the strengthening of vs herein? A. Yes, these two: Sacraments & praier. Q. What is a Sacrament? A. An outward signe and seale of inui∣sible graces. Q. How do the Sacraments strengthen you? A. By a reuerent vsing and meditating
of them rightly vnderstood, as signes re∣presenting Christ and his benefits, and sure seales of his couenant with vs. Gen. 9. 9. to 18. and 17. 9, 10. Q. How many Sacraments are there? A. Only two: Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 28. 19. and 26. 26, 27. 1. Cor. 11. 23, 24 25. Q. What is the signe and thing signified in Baptisme? A. The signe is water, and the grace is the blood of Christ, by which I am washed from my sinnes. Act. 2. 38. and 22. 16. Q. What are the signes and things signified in the Lords Supper? A The signes are the bread and wine; the things signified are the body & blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 11, 23, 24, 25. Q. Why come you to receiue? A. To strengthen my faith, and to keepe in remembrance Christ his death, till his comming again, Rom. 4. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 26. Q. What ought you to doe before you come? A. Prepare my selfe by examination, 1. Cor. 11. 28. Q. What ought you to come with, to the Sa∣crament? A. With 4. things. 1. Knowledge both of my misery, Gods mercy, & the doctrine of
the Sacrament. II. With faith in Iesus Christ, Heb. 11. 6. III. VVith repentance for all my sinnes, Esa. 1. 10. 11. 14. 15. 16. Prou. 21. 27. IV. VVith heartie loue vnto my neighbour, Math. 5. 23. Q. What if you come vnprepared without these? A. I come vnworthy, I am guilty of the bodie and blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 27. I doe eate and drinke my owne damnation, verse 29. God may punish me, verse 40. and the diuell may enter into me, as he did into Iudas, and bring me to destruction of body and soule, Ioh. 13. 27. Of Prayer. Q. What is prayer? A. It is a right hearty, and faithfull re∣quest made vnto God, in the name of Iesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. Rom. 8. 26. Iam. 1. 6. Ioh. 14. 14. and 15. 16. Math. 3. 17. Q. Can or doth euery one pray, that vttereth words, and vseth a forme of prayer? A. No. It is a speciall gift to Gods chil∣dren, and such onely pray, as haue know∣ledge what to aske, a heartie desire in as∣king, and faith to beleeue. Q. What direction of prayer haue you? A. The same which our Sauiour Christ taught his disciples, Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
Q. What desire you of God in this prayer? A. I desire my Lord God our heauen∣ly Father, who is the giuer of all goodnes, to send his grace vnto mee, and to all peo∣ple, that we may worshippe him, serue him, and obey him, as wee ought to doe; and I pray vnto God, that hee will send vs all things that be needfull, both for our soules and bodies, and that hee will be mercifull vnto vs, and forgiue vs our sinnes, and that it will please him to saue and defend vs in al dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep vs from all sinne and wickednes, and from our ghostly enemy, and from e∣uerlasting death. And this I trust hee will do of his mercy and goodnes, through our Lord Iesus Christ, and therefore I say, A∣men. So be it. The first part of Ca∣techism: Of new birth. Q. WHat is your name? A. Channanuel, God is gracious to vs. Loue wholly the Lord with the heart. Benalleuel, God is gracious to vs. Loue wholly the Lord with the heart.
Q. Who gaue you this name? A. My Godfathers and my Godmo∣thers, who with my father, brought mee to the Minister, into the congregation, to be baptized, and were especiall witnesses of the same, and professours of my faith and obedience to God for me. Q. Why were you baptized? A. That I might receiue a badge of my Christian religion, & be admitted into the Church, to liue amongst the professors of Christs name, and to be receiued of them, and accompted as a member of Christ, the child of God, & an inheritour of the king∣dome of heauen, vntil I shew the contrary. Q. Whereby may you now be certaine that you are such a one in deede? A. If I doe what my Godfathers and Godmothers did make professiō of for me. Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmo∣thers make profession of for you? A. They did professe three things in my name: the first was the forsaking of the Diuell, and all his workes, the pompes and the vanities of this wicked world, & all the sinfull lusts of the flesh. Q. What, were you then bound to them, that you haue promised to forsake them? A. Yea verily, I am a bondslaue to Sa∣than,
by the corruption of my nature, prone to all vice, hauing the seede of all sinne in me, and do hate both God and my neighbour. Q. How can you then forsake this wofull e∣state, and cease from any euill, being thus bound and prone thereunto? A. Not by any naturall power, in, or of my selfe, but onely by the grace of God, when it is giuen vnto me. Q. Are you sure you haue forsaken them, are you not deceiued? A. I am not deceiued: for I hate vnfai∣nedly the workes of the diuell, the worlds vanity, all the vngodly manners of euery man: and I labour by all good meanes, to die to all sin daily, louing the word of God, following it & all godly examples, endea∣uouring to kill speedily euery ill motion, but cherishing the good in my heart, by meditation, vowes, fasting, and prayer. Q. But can you tell me what are the works of the diuell, the worlds vanitie, and the ill mo∣tions of the heart? A. Whatsoeuer I, or any other, doe thinke, speake, or doe, against the will of God, reuealed in his written word. Q. What hath mooued you to forsake the diuell, the world, and the flesh?
A. For that I haue learned, and do well perceiue, by knowledge from the word, & mine owne experience, that these three be the onely malicious, spirituall, powerfull, subtill and continuall enemies of my eter∣nall felicity. Q. What are the other two things, that your Godfathers and Godmothers made profession of for you? A. They secondly made profession of my beliefe to all the twelue Articles of my Christian faith: and thirdly, of my willing∣nesse to learne diligently Gods holy will & commandements, and to walke obedient∣ly in the same all the daies of my life. Q. Where is this will of God to be learned? A. Not from mine owne fantasie, mans wisedome, traditions, or examples of men, but onely out of the Scripture, which is the word written by his Prophets and Apo∣stles, in the bookes of the old and new Te∣stament, which is sufficient to teach vs all things necessary, that we neede to beleeue for our saluation. Q. What reasons haue you to perswade your selfe, that this Scripture which we holde, is the true word of God, and none other? A. First, from the pen-men, being ma∣ny, and most of them simple & plaine per∣sons,
who doe mutually consent, setting downe their owne faults without partiali∣ty. Secondly, from the matter, aboue natu∣rall mens reach; of mans creation, resurre∣ction, last iudgement, and of the Trinity in vnity, prophecies also fulfilled in all cir∣cumstances. Thirdly, from the manner of speaking, peremptorily reproouing or al∣lowing, without sinister respects. Fourthly, from the effect, binding conscience, con∣uerting men, to hate euen life it selfe for Gods glorie. Fifthly, the miraculous pre∣seruation thereof, with punishment of such as seeke to ouerthrow either it, or the pro∣fessours thereof. Lastly, that it ascribes all glory to God, the maine end that it ay∣meth at. Q. What meanes must you vse to come to the sauing knowledge of Gods word? A. 1. Daily reading. 2. Learning the Catechisme, the grounds of religion. 3. hearing the Word with mind & affection both read & preached publikely, by Gods Ministers. 4. Meditation in minde, to vn∣derstand the doctrine gathered, & in heart to affect the vse made, after I haue either read or heard it. 5. Conference by asking of superiours and Ministers, by reasoning with equals, and teaching inferiours, all in
reuerence and humility, to vnderstand that I know not, to be resolued in that I doubt of, and to call to memorie what I haue forgotten. 6. Continuall prayer, with practise of it in my particular calling. Q. Doe you thinke you are thus bound to forsake the diuell, the world, and the flesh, to be∣leeue in God, to learne to know and doe his will, as they haue promised for you? A. Yes verily, and by Gods helpe so will I endeauour to doe, or else were I vn∣thankfull to God my Father, that hath called me into the state of saluation, ma∣king me his child; and also vnmindfull of my sureties, that haue made such a pro∣fession for me. Q. But tell me, how could any perswade themselues, that you should doe as they haue made profession for you? A. By beeing assured by faith, that the seede of the faithfull are blessed, they iud∣ging me charitably to be one of them, did hope by the grace of God belonging vn∣to me in Christ, and through the meanes which should be vsed, I would performe the same. Q. What are the meanes which ought to be vsed? A. 1. To be taught so soone as I shall
be able to learne, what a solemne professi∣on I haue made by them. 2. To be exhor∣ted to heare Sermons, and to learne all things which a Christian ought to know for his soules health: but especially the principles of religion, contained in these foure: the Creede, the Lords prayer, the tenne Commandements, and the doctrine of the Sacraments. The second part. Q. Let vs then see, whether these meanes haue beene vsed, and how you haue profited: re∣hearse the articles of your beleefe? A. I beleeue in God the Father, &c. Q. What doe you chiefly learne out of these articles of your Christian faith? A. 1. I learne to beleeue that there is a God, to beleeue God, and also in him. 2. That he is but one in substance, yet distin∣guished into three, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, which distinction is in per∣son, property, and manner of working. 3. That this God hath a Church, to which onely he is truly knowne, and by the same sincerely worshipped. Q. How can you be perswaded that there is a God?
A. 1. By his created workes declaring: 2. by my conscience accusing: 3. by iudge∣ments terrifying: 4. by order obserued in all things: 5. by heathen authors consen∣ting: 6. by the Scripture confidently auou∣ching the same. Q. What is God we cannot tell, therefore tell me what a one he is? A. A spirituall substance, most holy, & of glorious maiestie; in finite in his beeing, as euery where present; in wisedome, fore∣seeing and rightly disposing all things: in power, doing what he list; in iustice, punish∣ing whom he will iustly; and in mercie, to saue whom he pleaseth. Q. How doe you behold and conceiue of this God? A. Not by any bodily shape, but spiri∣tually, by his word, as he hath therein ma∣nifested himselfe, and by his workes of creation, preseruation and gouerning eue∣ry thing, according to his foreknow∣ledge, and appointment therein, to his owne glory. Q. What beleeue you concerning God the Father? A. That he is God almighty, in order the first Person in the Trinity, begetting the Sonne from euerlasting, of his whole
substance: maker of heauen and earth, men and angels, and all things else very good, onely by his word, of nothing, at the beginning, in sixe daies, and still by his prouidence preserues the same, for my be∣nefite. Q. What was man especially made of? A. Man consists of body and soule, the first mans body was made of the dust of the earth, but our bodies come by genera∣tion, and are with his mortall: and both his and all our soules by inspiration, and are immortall. Q. What estate stood man in by creation, and what a one did God make him? A. In the estate of innocency, void of all sinne, free from any punishment and was made after Gods Image, that is, holy and righteous, hauing perfect knowledge of God and his will, as much as was neede∣full for him, and also readinesse of will in hearty affection, with bodily strength to fulfill the same: and had withall the rule of all Gods creatures, made for his bene∣fite. Q. How then come you into this wretched estate? A. By the fall of Adam and Eue, my first parents, who wilfully disobeyed God, by
the diuels inticement, infidelity and pride possessing their hearts, and stood and fell in the roome of all mankinde. Q. How can our soules be sinfull, that come not by propagation, but by inspiration? A. 1. For that his soule was deputy for all soules of men naturally begotten. 2. Because man sinned, and man is not man, before body and soule bee knit togither, which being conioyned, become togither, as man, partaker of mans fall and corrup∣tion. Q. Doth any thing of that Image of God remaine yet in vs? A. Yes: 1. In the minde a certaine ge∣nerall corrupt knowledge of nature, con∣cerning good and euill, to make vs inexcu∣sable before God. 2. In the conscience a power to reprooue and represse in part vn∣bridled affections. 3. In will, though a free, yet a weake choice, in euery naturall and ciuill action. Q. What euils doe we receiue by this fall? A. 1. In the mind ignorance of heauen∣ly things, vnaptnesse to learne them, or to iudge of them aright; but apt to learn euill, and to inuent the same. 2. In conscience impurenesse to excuse sinne, not to accuse, beeing dead or benummed: and to accuse
for well or ill doing: 3. In will, want of power, to will any true good, but to resist it, and only to will that which is euill. 4. In affection, to hate good, and runne after ill. 5. In body, fitnesse to begin sinne, by recei∣uing outward obiects and occasions there∣of by the senses, and also to execute the same, when the heart hath conceiued it in word and deed: and this is called originall sinne, which is in euery man. Q. Doe all men continue in this sinfull and cursed estate for euer? A. No: but onely the reprobate, whom God hath not decreed to saue, to manifest his iustice: for the elect, beeing predesti∣nate to eternall life, are in this world in their appointed time called effectually, through Gods word and his spirit, iustified and sanctified, and so shall continue in this estate of grace to bee glorified, for that God will also shew his mercy, and all for his owne glory. Q. Are none of the reprobate euer in the estate of grace, and Gods fauour? A. No verily: though many of them, indued with the common gifts of the Spi∣rit, may in outward appearance, for a time seeme to be of the elect, in the iudgement of the Church.
Q. Can any of the elect then be euer before God in the state of damnation? A. No indeed: albeit both before their conuersion: and also after they bee called, they falling by infirmity, and lying a time in their sinne, may appeare in shew to the Church, to be none of the elect: yet can they not fall away, wholly or finally. Q. May not men then liue as they list, si∣thence he beeing a reprobate, cannot be saued, or an elect cannot be damned? A. Not so: for that one elect cannot but vse the means which are ordained for him to walke, to make his election sure to him∣self, which who so doth not, cānot be saued. Q. What beleeue you concerning God the Sonne? A. That he is God the second person in the Trinity, Christ Iesus, the only natu∣rall Son begotten of the Father, our Lord, made man, conceiued & sanctified by the holy Ghost, ioyning two natures into one person, borne according to the promise, of the virgin Mary, who perfectly fulfilled the law, humbled & suffered vnder Pontius Pi∣late, was crucified, bearing vpon him Gods curse, and hellish torments, who died and was buried, and being a while held captiue of death in the graue, hee was exalted, and
victoriously rose againe the third day, and is ascended vp into heauen, and there he sits on the right hand of God his Father, hauing all power in heauen and earth to rule and gouerne his Church; where his manhood doth, and shall at all times re∣maine (though in his godhead he be pre∣sent with me euer) vntil he shal come from thence, to iudge vs all, here on earth, both quicke and dead at the last day; which day cannot be now farre of. Q. Why should he neede to be both God and man? A. That he might be the only Mediatour betwixt God and man, to satisfie for sinne, which neither the manhood by deseruing, nor godhead by dying, alone could doe. Q. Why is he called Christ? A. To declare, that he was the promised Messias, and to signifie his offices, that he was annointed, not with material oyle, but with the gift of the spirit without measure, to be our King, Priest, and Prophet: from which name we are called Christians, and are by him Kings, Priests, and Prophets. Q. How is Christ a King? A. I. He is King, not onely as God, but because he is the head gouerning the Church, without any general Vicar vnder
him, by his word and spirit immediately, making lawes, and ordaining Ministers to the gathering together and preseruation thereof. II. By destroying Sathan, his an∣gels, vnbeleeuers, idolaters, heretikes, anti∣christ, and the whole kingdome of darke∣nesse. Q. How is Christ a Priest? A. I. By satisfying for all the sinnes of the elect, by his passion and fulfilling of the law. II. For that he maketh prayer continually to God for them. Q. How is Christ a Prophet? A. By immediatly reuealing from his father, his word and meanes of saluation contained in the same. Q. Why is he called Iesus? A. To signifie that he is a Sauiour to e∣uery true beleeuer: neither is there any o∣ther meanes of our selues, or by any other, either in part or whole, to obtaine saluati∣on, but onely by him alone. Q. Why is he called Lord? A. Because we owe all homage and duty in loue to him, for our redemption. Q. What beleeue you concerning the holy Ghost? A. That he is God, the third person in the Trinity, proceeding frō the Father &
the Son, who spake by the Prophets, dwel∣ling in the faithfull, sanctifying them in part in this life, working by the word and holy motions, an vtter loathing of sinne, and a heartie loue of righteousnesse, lea∣ding them into all truth, perswading them of Gods fauour, teaching them in prayer, bearing them vp in temptation, quicke∣ning, renewing, and increasing his gifts in them; that they may know, beleeue, loue, and doe that which is good, which he will perfect fully in the life to come. Q. Why did this God thus make, redeeme, sanctifie, and hitherto preserue you? A. That I might praise his name, in li∣uing godly, righteously, and soberly, ac∣cording to all his commandements, in my calling, in all things, whatsoeuer my estate be, in this present world. Q. What doe you beleeue concerning the Church? A. That it is but one mystical body whe∣ther militant or triumphant, visible or in∣uisible, in heauē or in earth, being a cōpa∣ny of the Lords elect, holy by Christ, Ca∣tholike, gathered of the dispersed abroad, & hauing speciall prerogatiues aboue the rest of mankind, cōmunion with Christ, & one with another by the bond of the spirit,
the forgiuenes of al sins, the ioyful resurre∣ctiō of the body, & life euerlasting, wherof I beleeue my selfe to be one, & therefore, that the same things belong also vnto me. Q. What are the markes of the true Church here on earth? A. Inwardly faith and loue, outwardly, (besides the vncertaine notes, of vniuersa∣lity, antiquity, and consent) these two: Christs word truely preached, his Sacra∣ments rightly administred, whereto adde, faithfull prayer, and holy discipline. Q. Is the Church of Rome a true Church of Christ? A. No: but of Antichrist the Pope, the chiefe teacher of the doctrine of diuels. Q. What reason haue you to disallow that religion? A. For that it is a false religion. I. The author is the diuel. II. The meanes vsed to vphold it, are vnlawfull: 1. deceiued Coun∣cels: 2. vnwritten verities, and forged au∣thors: 3. falsifying the Fathers: 4. corrup∣ting Scripture, by adding thereto: 5. by ta∣king from it, by false interpreting: 6. retai∣ning the people in ignorance, by forbid∣ding to study the word, & teaching it in an vnknowne tongue: 7. pretending reuelati∣ons, & shewing lying miracles: 8. counter∣feit
holines: 9. bloody persecution. III. The matter of their religion is vntruths, idola∣try, heresie, & nouelties inuented by man. IV. The forme in the seruice ridiculous, by foolish gestures: carnal, by fleshly pomps and delights, their worship is by hypocri∣sie. V. The end to aduance men, by wor∣shipping of Saints, & extolling mans pow∣er & merits. VI. The benefit gotten there∣by is nothing, because it keepes a man in the state of damnation: and alloweth the breach of all the 10. commandements. 1. To feare God by mens doctrines. 2. To worship images. 3. Magick & coniuring. 4. idol-seruice. 5. Treason against Christian Princes. 6. Assoyles for murtherers. 7. Stewes, and restraint of mariage. 8. Wages for no lawful labour, to Masse-mongers, & for deceits. 9. To breake an oath to a Chri∣stian made lawfully. 10. That cōcupiscence is no sinne. VII. Gods iudgments against many of the most fiery professours there∣of, which is neuer seene to happen to zea∣lous and constant professours of the truth. Q. What must bee done to maintaine the Church, and to ouerthrow heresie, that destroies the foundation, errors corrupting religion, scis∣mes breaking the peace of the Church, and vi∣ces staining our profession?
A. 1. To cleaue only to the written word, which is both in time before, and in autho∣rity aboue the Church, to iudge all con∣trouersies in religion. 2. To call sufficient men, and ordaine them ministers to teach, allowing necessary maintenance; but suffe∣ring no insufficient to creep in, or to abide still: neither the able to liue idlely, by care∣lesnesse, pride, or couetousnesse. 3. That there be a godly order established & peace∣ably kept of euery one, without giuing of∣fence. 4. That there be a holy and right vse continually of true discipline, to admonish, suspend, and excommunicate obstinate offenders whosoeuer they be. Q. Are not the articles of your beleefe a prayer? A. No: but only a summe of the Gos∣pel: which is one part of Gods word, con∣taining the promises of saluatiō by Christ, and is also a rule by which I must examine my faith. Q. What meane you by faith? A. Not faith to work miracles, which is past: nor historicall, only beleeuing that to be true which God saith; nor tēporary, to know, professe, & to teach Christ, feare to commit sin, sorrow after, to make satisfa∣ction, to destroy the wicked, to make many
praiers wishing heauen, & to liue for a time in shew honestly, yet out of Christ: but iu∣stifying faith is here meant. Q. What is iustifying faith? A. It is a gracious and true perswasion in my heart, grounded vpon Gods promi∣ses concerning Christ, whereby I do apply him and all his benefits to my selfe, beeing assured, that hee is my wisedome, strength, righteousnesse, holinesse, and redemption, and that what hee hath done, it is as well done for mee, as for any other, and so is mine, as if my selfe had done it. Q. How came you by this faith? A. By the holy Ghost, working the same inwardly by the outward ministery of the Gospell preached ordinarily, and is by the same word, sacraments, and prayer, confir∣med, continued, and increased. Q. What profit reape you by this beleefe? A. I a wretched sinner in my self, being pardoned of sinne, and Christ giuen to me; am in him the adopted sonne of God, and righteous before him, my heart purged, my conscience quieted, my imperfect workes doe please him, all crosses are for comfort and further to saluation: holy An∣gels tend vpon me, heauen is mine inheri∣tance, I am set at liberty from the curse of
the law, Satan, the world and fleshly lusts, without feare of death, damnation, and hell fire. Q. Hath euery one this faith, and so these benefits? A. No: but onely such as shew repen∣tance, the fruits of faith. Q. What is repentance? A. It is a true turning of my mind, will, and heart wholly from the world, the flesh and diuell vnto God, with full purpose to attend carefully to the counsell of his word and spirit, and through the whole course of my life, readily and constantly endeauour to follow the same. Q. What are the true tokens of this true re∣pentance? A. 1. A continuall striuing of the flesh and spirit. 2. A hatred of my former va∣nities, auoiding occasion, company, coun∣sell, or example to ill, with loue vnfained to the contrary. 3. Increase of peace in con∣science: with an affection for righteousnes sake. 4. A ioy full expecting and wishing Christs comming to iudgement. Q. May not a man that truely repenteth, fall afterward? A. Yes indeed, and into the same sinne, or some other.
Q. How then may a man be perswaded, that his repentance was then true before? A. 1. If this be of infirmity, feeling be∣fore, and in the committing a dislike ther∣of: for after true repentance sinne is neuer wholly committed. 2. If that godly sorrow follow, which is not either for earthly shame, temporall punishments, hellish tor∣ments, or losse of heauen: but for displea∣sing God so mercifull a Father, and this is called renewed repentance. Q. How should this appeare to be true? A. 1. By an vtter loathing and condem∣ning my selfe for the sinne newly commit∣ted, with desire and perswasion of pardon. 2. A godly anger and burning zeale a∣gainst my selfe, with taking reuenge, vow∣ing and practising strictly the contrarie vertue for offending. 3. A watchfull care and continuall feare, lest I fall afterwards at any time againe into the same. Q. What may comfort a troubled consci∣ence? A. These things: 1. That God can par∣don any sinne. 2. That he will by promise made, pardon euery penitent. 3. That he which feeleth a true desire to leaue sin, and to please God, is bound to beleeue his sins are both pardonable & pardoned. 4. That
doubting of saluation, with feare to offend God, is a signe of saluation. 5. No condem∣nation to such as are in Christ, and there∣fore their sins cannot damne them. 6. Iu∣stification must not be iudged after sancti∣fication, there is no perfection here, & the best children of God haue grieuously fal∣len, & haue felt this sting of conscience. 7. The assurance of saluatiō must not be iud∣ged as men feele assurance in afflictiō, but by the stability of Gods promises, from former comforts and tokens of grace, but in trouble from present desires onely. The third part. Q. You said that your Godfathers and God∣mothers did promise for you, that you shold keep Gods cōmandements, tel me how many there be? A. Ten, and are diuided into 2. Tables. Q. What doth the first Table teach you? A. The duty which I owe vnto God in holinesse, whom I must loue with all my heart, with all my mind, and with all my soule, and with all my strength, set downe in the foure first commandements, contai∣ning the matter, manner, end, and time of Gods worship. Q. What doth the second Table teach you? A. The duty which I owe vnto my neigh∣bour.
which is euery one in righteousnesse, whom I must loue, as my selfe, set downe in the sixe last Commandements, contai∣ning his dignitie, life, body, goods, credit, and more spiritually all of them. Q. Which be the Commaundements? A. The same which God spake in the 20. of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, which is no commandement, but the pre∣face vnto them. Q. What is the first commaundement? A. Thou shalt haue none other Gods but me. Q. What doth this commaundement teach you? A. To make choice of one, and the true God, to be my God, and not to take that for God, which is not God by nature: the occasion whereof was the lusting after strange gods. Q. What are the things for bidden by this commaundement? A. Ignorance of God & the truth, not to pray, distrust of God, impatiency, to feare, loue, or ioy in the creature more then in the Creatour, to deny God, or his word, power, presence, iustice or mercy, openly
or secretly in heart: security without feare of God. The contrarie is commanded. Q. What is the second commandement? A. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, &c. Q. What doth this commandement teach you? A. I must neither worship false gods, nor this true God with selfe worship: but in spirit & truth as his word onely teacheth. The occasion of this commandement was a foolish desire of a carnall worship, and a false conceipt, to be able to prescribe a manner of worship to God of our selues. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. Idolatry, picturing of God, or Christ, Papistry, wil-worship, good intents with∣out warrant, our owne fantasies, mens tra∣ditions, worship of images, pilgrimages: not to destroy errors, heresies, and monu∣ments of idolatry. The contrary is com∣maunded. Q. What is the third commandement? A. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine, &c. Q. What doth this cōmandement teach you? A. Not to bereaue God of his honour that is due vnto him: but in all things to giue him his due glory. The occasion of this commandement was our readines to
abuse God, his name, word, and workes. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. To thinke or speake of God, of his word, or works lightly or contemptuously, without reuerence: to sweare by any thing, but by God: or by him without a calling, in our ordinary talke, where neither Gods glory, our brothers saluatiō, nor magistrate requireth it: to sweare falsely. So blasphe∣my, witchcraft, coniuring, and cursing: to deny the known truth: to professe piety, & liue wickedly. The cōtrary is commanded. Q. What is the fourth commandement? A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, &c. Q. What doth this cōmandement teach you? A. That euery day in the weeke I pre∣pare my selfe to keep the Lords day holy, that when it comes, it bee not prophaned, nor the publike worship of God letted, but furthered by me & mine. The occasion of this commandement, was our aptnes to fal from God, without daily meanes be vsed. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. To do vnnecessary labours without godlinesse and charity: Faires, iourneies, or vaine sports, eating and drinking, that may hinder deuotion: not to heare Gods word preached, or to heare carelesly, sleepily,
with wearinesse, or without purpose to a∣mend. To omit meditation and conferēce. For Ministers to omit ordinarily the prea∣ching of the word, to preach in a straunge language vain-gloriously, falsely, hypocri∣tically, flatteringly, or by constraint, with∣out chearefulnes; for any to absent them∣selues negligently or wilfully from the Sa∣crament: the contrary is commanded. Q. What is the fifth commandement? A. Honor thy father & thy mother, &c. Q. What doth this cōmandement teach you? A. To preserue the dignity of euery one by all meanes, that is any way to be prefer∣red, either by his place, age, or gifts, & that no waies I diminish the same. The occasion of this commandement was our proud & enuious nature, that cānot abide to be vn∣der gouernmēt, nor to giue men their due. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. Contempt of our betters, vnreue∣rent behauiour towards them, by word or deede, to disobey their lawfull commande∣ments, counsels, or aduice. All treason and rebellion: the contrary is commanded. Q. What is the sixt commandement? A. Thou shalt do no murther. Q. What doth this cōmandement teach you? A. I must neither hurt nor hinder either
mine own life, or my neighbors life, but by al meanes preserue the same. The occasion of this commaundement, was our impati∣ence and vncharitable desire of reuenge. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. Want of loue, anger, malice, enuy, grudging, a frowning countenance, desire of reuenge: contention, railing, quarelling, mocking, offensiue ieasting, oppressiō, figh∣ting, murther, & bodily hurt: to neglect to vse means of health, or to hinder the same: to bee contentious, and not to seeke after peace. The contrary is commanded. Q. What is the seauenth commandement? A. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Q. What doth this cōmandement teach you? A. I must not any way hurt or impaire the chastity of my neighbour, but euery way seeke to preserue the same. The occa∣sion of this commandement, was our lust∣full and fleshly nature. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. Lustfull desires, fornication, adulte∣ry, with all occasions hereunto: idlenesse, wanton attire, a rolling eye, corrupt and vnhonest talke, wanton songs, lasciuious pictures, vnchaste plaies, mixt dauncing of men and women, vnseemely gestures and acts, and companying with wantons.
The contrary is commanded. Q. What is the eight commandement? A. Thou shalt not steale. Q. doth this commandement teach you? A. That I must not any way hinder or diminish my neighbours goods, but by all meanes preserue & increase the same. The occasion hereof was our couetous nature, discontent euer with our present estate. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. Pilfering and robbery, any way to take or keep that which is not ours vnlaw∣fully: all theft, with al occasions thereunto. Not to restore things found, borrowed, or left only to be kept in trust: to giue what is not thine, either whole or part. Not to liue contentedly, all couetous desires, idlenesse out of calling, or lithernesse in it. The con∣trary is commanded. Q. What is the ninth commandement? A. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour. Q. What doth this commandement teach you? A. That I must not diminish the good name or credit of my neighbour, whether friend or so, known or vnknown: but care∣fully preserue the same. The occasiō of this commandement was our seditious nature. Q. What things are hereby forbidden?
A. Lying in ieast or earnest, backbiting, slandering, reuealing secret infirmities and priuate offences before admonition, false witnesse, by adding or detracting in words or sense: to take a doubtfull matter in the worst part: also all occasions to this sin, as enuie, disdaine, anger, selfe-loue, to be too suspitious, to be readie to receiue a false re∣port against our neighbour. The contra∣rie is commanded. Q. What is the tenth commandement? A. Thou shalt not couet, &c. Q. What doth this commandement teach you? A. That I may not haue once an vnlaw∣ful lust to that which is my neighbors: but for euer think good towards him. The oc∣casion of this cōmandement was the frail∣ty of our' flesh which intermitteth the work of the holy Ghost, by sinful fantasies. Q. What things are hereby forbidden? A. Lust, and sudden motions against our neighbour, without consent, which come from the corruption of nature: & also such as be offered by Sathan, or man, so farre as we giue any way consent thereto: not to re∣sist il motions. The contrary is cōmanded. Q. Are these commandements a prayer? A. No: but the summe of the morall law, which is the other part of Gods word, tea∣ching
the righteousnes of God, and shew∣ing me my sins and cursed estate, and is a schoolemaster vrging to Christ: and ther∣fore ought in order first to be preached, and then the Gospel shewing deliuerance, and giueth grace withall. Q. How must this law be obeyed? A. Perfectly, willingly, and continually to God and my neighbour in thought, word, and deede, agreeing with Gods na∣ture, and our first estate by creation. Q. Can you then keepe the commandements? A. No: for I breake them alwaies, either wittingly or ignorantly, in committing e∣uil, or omitting my duty: besides that, I am guilty of them by naturall corruption, through Adams fall, before I could in my selfe, either thinke, speake, or do any euill. Q. What is this breach of the law called? A. Sinne, whereby the infinite iustice of God is iniured. Q. What is then the reward of sinne? A. The infinite wrath of God, and his vengeance for euer, in this world and in the world to come, is due for the least sinne, whether it be mortall or veniall. Q. What are the punishmēts of sin in this life? A. In name, slander and shame: in goods, losses: in his bodie, paines and sicknesse: all
maner of aduersity, & all corporal plagues befalling in this life. In the soule, igno∣rance, madnesse, an ill conscience accusing, benummed, dead, or desperate: a heauie stony heart, likewise disobedient and wic∣ked children, a disloyall wife, false friends, cruell aduersaries: to be suffered to fall into sinne, God taking away his grace, especial∣ly the sin of whoredome, as a punishment for sinne. And lastly, bodily death, ordina∣rie or sudden. Q. Comes alwaies afflictions as punishments for sinne? A. Afflictions first came for sinne, but are also to try our patience, faith, and constan∣cie: to weane vs from our selues and the world, & to become cōformable to Christ in persecutions: that Gods power and goodnes may appeare to vs: & these affli∣ctions be called fatherly chastisements of the godly to euery one in his measure. Q. How may you perswade your selfe, that afflictions are chastisements, and not punish∣ments of a Iudge, when they befall? A. If I can make good vse of them, to further me in godlinesse: els are they but fore-runners of my eternall destruction, as they be to the reprobate, that are not bettered by them.
Q. What are the punishments for sinne after death? A. The separation from God, the losse of heauen, and of the ioyfull company of Angels, Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, & Saints, the true professours of Christ, for euer: to be damned with the di∣uel, & his angels, the infernall fiends, with all the wicked accursed to hell, there to be tormented vnspeakably without end. Q. How must you escape this vengeance of God? A. By no good deeds that I can doe, but only faith in Iesus Christ, who is the merit onely and wholly of my saluation: & with∣out whome my best thoughts, words, and deedes, are abhominable before God, seeme they neuer so holy in mine and o∣ther mens iudgement. Q. Why then should you doe good workes, if you cannot nor may not thinke to win heauen by them? A. I must do good works, because I am already ordained to be saued. 1. To make my electiō the more sure to my self, which is certaine with God. 2. To shew my loue and thankfulnes to God for it, by obeying his commandements. 3. To confirme the conuerted, and to winne others not yet
called. 4. To stop the mouthes of the wic∣ked, & to shame them by well doing, when they speake ill of v 8. 5. To benefit one ano∣ther for our quiet peaceablenes in Church and common-wealth. Q. Are not then workes necessary? A. Yes verily, to such as will haue assu∣rance of saluation: for without works, bap∣tisme, hearing the word, knowledge, faith, loue, hope, fasting, sorrow, prayer, and pro∣fession, are in vaine. Q. What is a good worke? A. Whatsoeuer is done or spoken with∣out doubting, from the warrant of Gods word, of a true beleeuer, in charity, and to Gods glory. Q. Though our good workes merit not, may we not yet thinke that they shall be rewarded? A. Yes verily: for in his mercy he hath so promised to doe, both in this world, and in the world to come. Q. What is the blessing and reward in this life? A. Increase of knowledge in Gods word: assurance that his gifts in vs are graces, and not only common fauours: al earthly bles∣sings, a good name, wealth, honor, friends, and prosperous successe, so farre as it shall be for Gods glory, and my spirituall safe∣ty:
faith, to apprehend as much as shall be ne∣cessary. 6. My hope to waite without ap∣pointing God either time, place, manner, or quantity of the matter. 7. My will, to vse afterwards all the honest meanes appoin∣ted to obtaine the same. Q. What be the true properties of prayer? A. 1. That it be in true loue: for we must remember to pray for all our brethren not departed this life, for there is no Pur∣gatory. 2. It must be made only to God, for him only can we call heauenly Father, nei∣ther to Saints nor Angels. 3. In the name of Christ, through whom onely hee is our Father by adoption. 4. In faith, for that hee is a Father, and will not deny his children. 5. Without a carnall conceipt of God, vaine babling, or wandering thoughts: for he is in heauen. Q. Which be the sixe petitions? A. Hallowed be thy name, &c. Q. What doe these teach you? A. The sum of al the things which I can lawfully aske at Gods hands, for body or soule: wherof the first 3. concerne the glory of God, and the latter 3. the good of man. Q. Which is the first petition, and what de∣sire you in it? A. The first is, Hallowed bee thy name:
and I desire therein, in the first place, that I and all other may acknowledge God so truly, in his word and workes, as in euery of our thoughts, words, and deeds, he may be highly worshipped and praised. Q. Which is the second, and what desire you in it? A. The second is, Thy kingdome come: and I desire that he will send vs the meanes, thus to honour his name, that is, his word and Spirit, with all things that do further thereunto: that so the elect may be gathe∣red, and Christ come to the last iudgement to giue vs his kingdome of glorie. Q. Which is the third petition, and what desire you in it? A. The third is, Thy will be done, and I de∣sire, that as we pray to do, not ours, but his will, as all his commandements and word teacheth vs: and as the blessed Saints and Angels doe in heauen, heartily without hypocrisie, willingly, without grudging, readily without lingring, faithfully without sinister respects, ioyfully without murmu∣ring, and constantly without wauering, vn∣to the end. Q. Which is the fourth petition, and what desire you in it? A. The fourth is, Giue vs this, &c. and I
desire, that he will prouide those necessa∣ries for our bodies, without which we can∣not serue him: and that we may depend patiently vpon his prouidence, vsing dili∣gent labour, and all honest meanes to help our selues and others. Q. What is the fifth petition, and what de∣sire you in it? A. The fifth is, And forgiue vs our trespasses, &c. and I desire that he would forgiue al of vs, friend or foe, our sinnes, lest they either hinder vs of the former mercies, or cause them to be taken from vs: and that he will perswade our consciences, that we are for∣giuen, by giuing vs grace to forgiue freely, and to forget those offences, whereby in a∣ny thing, or any way, our neighbours haue beene grieuous vnto vs. Q. Which is the sixth and last petition, and what desire you in it? A. The sixth is, Leade vs not into temptati∣on, &c. and I desire, that as he will pardon vs, so he would also giue vs the gift of con∣tinuance, that though we be tempted, yet may we ouercome, and be deliuered from sinne and Satan, and neuer fall againe any more from God. Q. Which is the confirmation? A. For thine is the kingdome, &c.
Q. What learne you by this? A. I do learn hereby 2. things: 1. that it is a reasō, not to moue God, but to stir vp our affectiōs. & to strēgthē our faith in asking. Q. How doth it this? A. When it teacheth mee to acknow∣ledge the kingdome of God our Father, that is, his dominion and right ouer al: and that his power is the greatest to compell all to doe what he will, and as he will: and his glory the highest, which himselfe maintaines, and we seeke aboue all. Q. What is the second thing we learne? A. 2. A thanksgiuing & praising of God, which we ought to vse in the end, as the se∣cōd part of praier: which is done, in giuing to God his owne, the rule, power, & glorie, which we desire him to manifest by gran∣ting our petitiōs, & we wil acknowledg the same; not for a time, but for euer & euer. Q. Which is the conclusion? A. This word, Amen. Q. What meane you by this word? A. That I am perswaded by the afore∣said reasons, that my request is granted, and shall be performed, as my Father shall see it conuenient for me and his glorie, in time and place. And therefore I say, it is so, or it shall be, which is Amen.
The fifth part. Q. What is a Sacrament? A. It is a visible signe, and seale of inui∣sible graces, commanded & ordained with a promise by Christ in the Church, to be administred publikely, by a lawfull Mini∣ster, with the preaching of the word: which Sacrament with all the rites thereof doth represent and conuay by proportion and relation, in the present vse, inuisible graces, first Christ, and then all his benefits, for further assurance of the same things, which God hath made by the promise of his word, vnto a true beleeuer, who is with Christ by the H. Ghost vnited & made on. Q. What meane you by Christ, and all his benefits? A. Whole Christ, God & man, with his righteousnes, iustice, holines, & redempti∣on; who as he is Christ, one person of two natures, is truly said to be really present in the Sacrament, not properly in his huma∣nitie, but by the communiō of properties. Q. How may you be sure that you haue re∣ceiued true benefite by the Sacraments? A. If I do feele a dying to sinne, and li∣uing vnto righteousnes, getting strength, and also increasing therein daily, by the
force of Christs death and resurrection. Q. How many Sacraments are there? A. Two, and no more: Baptisme, and the Lords Supper. Q. What is Baptisme? A. It is the first Sacrament in the new Testament, by which such as are within the couenant, are either washed, sprinkled, or dipped in the water, in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost. Q. What is the outward signe and rite? A. Water and washing. Q. What is the inuisible grace? A. The blood of Christ which clenseth vs of all sin, original & actual, past & to come. Q. Are we then no sinners? A. Yes in our selues: for originall sinne still is sinne in vs, but wee are washed from it, because it shall not be imputed, nor any sinne else vnto me a true beleeuer. Q. Who are to be baptized? A. Not only such as be of yeares, that can and do testifie their faith: but also in∣fants of either father or mother professing Christ & baptized: for the promise of sal∣uation belongs to them & to their childrē. Q. Is baptisme so necessary to saluation, that without it children cannot be saued? A. It is necessary to al that haue it, but not
of necessity, to such as cannot rightly come by it: for not the want, but the careles neg∣lect and contempt thereof condemneth. Q. How oft should we be baptized? A. But once, for wee may not be bapti∣zed againe after true baptisme: for beeing once borne, wee cannot bee borne againe naturally, nor spiritually. Q. What is the Lords Supper? A. It is the latter Sacrament in the new Testament, whereby we are nourished and preserued in the Church to eternall life. Q. What be the outward signes? A. Bread and wine. Q. What be the things signified? A. The body and blood of Christ. Q. What are the rites? A. The actiōs of the Minister & receiuer. Q. What are the actions of the Minister? A. 1. To take the bread and wine into his hands. 2. to blesse it. 3. to breake the bread, and powre forth the wine. 4. to offer and giue them to the receiuer. Q. What are the actions of the receiuer? A. 1. To take the bread & wine offered into his hand: 2. to eate the one, and drink the other, and so digest & concoct them, as that they feele nourishment to the body. Q. What learne you by all these actions? A. I am assured that the visible actiōs of
the Minister do represēt the spiritual acti∣ons of God the Father to my soule, who hath decreed his Son, and elected him the Mediator, to haue his body broken, & his precious blood shed for me, being offered to all, but giuen only to the true beleeuer, that can by the hand of faith take hold of him, who shewes as liuely the vertue of his death to preserue his soule, as the vertue of the bread & wine is felt to norish the body. Q. Is the bread turned into Christs bodie, and is the wine into his very blood? A. No verily: for then, 1. it were no Sacrament, 2. it is against reason, 3. against scripture, 4. against an article of our Creed, 5. against the iudgment of ancient Fathers true writings, 6. against the iudgement of reformed christian churches, 7. against the opinion of holy Martyrs, who shed their blood for the contrary, 8. it is against ex∣perience of our senses, that the bread shold be flesh, or wine blood: neither is Christs body in, with, or about the same. Q. Is there then no difference of this bread and wine, from that which we vse commonly? A. There is no differēce in the substance, but in the holy vse: being at that time set a∣part to be signes of Christs body & blood. Q. May euery one offer to receiue that will? A. No: but onely such as come prepa∣red,
and be fit, that both are able in know∣ledge to examine, and also by a good con∣science wil iudge themselues, whether they be in any measure prepared thereunto. Q. What if you come vnprepared? A. I am an vnworthy receiuer, prouo∣king Gods wrath against mee, and so eate and drinke my owne damnation. Q. Who are those that ought not to come? A. Open impenitent sinners, fooles, mad persons, children, all that be of yeares, and yet ignorant, not being able to try & iudge themselues: & if such prophane ones do of∣fer thēselues, they are not to be admitted. Q. What be those things whereof you must trie and iudge your selfe? A. 1. Of my knowledge, concerning my miserable estate through sin; of Gods mer∣cy & our deliuerance by Christ, and the vn∣derstanding of this Sacrament. 2. Of my beleefe in Christ, which I may doe by the Creed. 3. Of my repentance towards God, for old and new sins, examined by his com∣maundements. 4. Of my brotherly loue, which I do owe to euery one, which I may try and iudge by my forgiuing others, as I desire God to forgiue mee, and by my see∣king to satisfie whome I haue offended of my knowledge either in word or deede. Q. May any by omitting these duties be free
from sinne, if therefore they will not receiue the Sacrament with others? A. No: for as to come vnprepared is damnation, so to neglect to prepare for a∣ny earthly occasion, is a great wickednes, such liuing in disobedience without repen∣tance and charitie. Q. Why doe you goe to the Lords Supper? A. 1. To testifie my loue in obedience to God commanding. 2. To strengthen my faith being weake. 3. To maintaine and in∣crease the holy communion & fellowship of brotherly loue amongst vs the mem∣bers of Christ: & 4. to keepe a remēbrance of his death till his second comming. Q. How must you be exercised in the time of administration, and afterwards? A. I must 1. meditate vpon the death & passiō of Christ, how grieuously I haue sin∣ned. 2. Gods endles mercy. 3. the vnity and fellowship that is amongst the true mem∣bers of the Church with Christ, and one with another: reioycing in heart, and prai∣sing God therfore with the congregation. Afterwards 1. I must giue almes to the needy brethren, & doe other good workes of charitie in token of thankfulnesse, that day especially, for so great a mercy. 2. Grow from thenceforth in obedience, faith, and vnfained loue to my liues end.
The sixth part. Q. Can you briefly shew me any rules to be obserued, that you may doe so, as you haue bin taught? A. I. Euery morning before other busi∣nes, I must, 1. thanke God for my safety, 2. desire pardon of sin, 3. Gods further prote∣ction against ghostly and bodily enemies. II. I must know that, that day, and all o∣ther times after giuen me to liue in, are for more earnest repentāce, encrease of know∣ledge, faith, and practise of godlinesse: and therefore of these continually I must be mindfull, setting some part of the day aside for reading, hearing, or meditating vpon heauenly things: that the vanities of the world short & vncerten cary me not away. III. I must haue, or els prepare my self to some particular calling, fit to keepe me frō idlenes, and to exercise the duties of religi∣on, in which calling must I be both ho∣nest, & profitable to others: to which, 1. I must betake me speedily, that no time be lost: 2. to do therin as I would be done vn∣to: 3. to seeke first in my labour Gods glo∣ry, thē my own good with my neighbours profit: 4. labour therin painfully & cōstant∣ly, in aduersity vsing good meanes, hoping for prosperitie, in prosperity neglecting no
humble duties for feare of aduersity: 5. my present estate I must accoūt it euer the best for me, and most for Gods glory: 6. I must not feare to spend where God & charitie requireth, sparing from idle expences, and onely lay vp, for the time to come, whatso∣euer shal remaine, when I haue discharged necessary duties honestly and righteously. IV. I must retire my selfe sometime frō my wearisome labour, when I see need, which must be: 1. at times conuenient: 2. in things lawfull: 3. short, delightsome to the mind, & healthful for the body: 4. to make me more chearefull to returne to labour, and not to draw me to loiter and to idle∣nes, no end appointed to man or beast. V. I must warily see to mine own waies. I. My thoughts & heart must: 1. be far from vnlawfull affection: 2. vpon lawfull things on earth moderate, & no more thē needs: 3. vpon God & heauenly things often, fer∣uently, & reuerently: 4. that I striue against selfe-loue, thinking of my selfe basely, and waxe, by more and greater gifts, the more humble & lesse enuious: 5. Of other I must thinke highly and charitably, iudging well without suspitiōs, what I heare or see good in them, receiuing with ioy: and hoping of better what I see or heare to be ill in them, taking doubtfull words or deeds from thē
in the better part. II. My eies must be shut against obiects to sin, that they let thē not into my heart, to stirre vp ill motions: but quick to obserue euery good example and occasion to goodnes. III. My eare must be exercised in hearing the truth, good coun∣sels, friendly admonitions, and godly ex∣hortations, but shut against flattery, lyings, slander, filthy & wicked speeches. IV. My tongue must keepe silent, vnlesse iust cause & conuenient time & place be to speake. In speaking the matter must 1. be gracious to profit the hearers, and also necessary to be vttered: 2. in wisedome regarding cir∣cumstances: 3. in sinceritie to speak it from the heart: 4. speaking of God & his word, it must be religiously and ioyfully: of our selues modestly, of others louingly: 5. to praise moderatly without contempt: to dis∣praise meekely shewing loue, to be cōstrai∣ned by necessity rather thē of will, to speak of other mens faults, expressing sorrow in vttering: 6. to speake well of men in ab∣sence, what good we know of thē, & to de∣fend them, & in presence without flattery: 7. to vse few words and effectuall to the matter without tediousnes: 8. not to talke of needlesse matters, or which con∣cernes vs not, as busi-bodies, neither of
any thing against religion, charity, commō good, or chastity. V. My behauiour, 1. it must be lowly to superiours, 2. gentle to in∣feriours, and 3. louely to familiars. VI. My apparell, it must bee first for necessity, and then for honest decency, as wee are able, & agreeing with our calling. VII. My diet must be 1. sparing, ordinarily a kinde of fa∣sting rather then a feasting: 2. taking my food with hunger & thirsting: 3. at seasona∣ble houres: 4. that thereby 1. my strength may be maintained & encreased, 2. my me∣ditation and deuotion nothing hindred, 5. that we be prepared in the beginning, may feele a necessity & pray to God: and in the end sufficient refreshing, may thank God. VI. I must take heed what company I keepe with, 1. that I make my familiars none but honest and religious, 2. that they be my equals in estate and place, not supe∣riours to auoid suspicion of pride; nor too much inferiours, lest it bring contempt, 3. that of these, not many, but one of all, I wa∣rily, deliberately, & with much triall, chuse my secret friend, 4. that in going or kee∣ping with any, I must euer purpose either to do good, or receiue some. VII. At night, the time of rest, 1. I must call to mind Gods benefits receiued, either
by preuenting euill, or by bringing good vpon me, to thanke him. 2. I must recount what I haue done, either in euill to repent, or what good I performed, to iudge either of my encreasing or decaying in grace: sor∣rowing more for the duties omitted & sins committed, then ioyful of any good done. 3. In taking rest I must commit my selfe to God, by a deuout & faithful praier, as thin∣king no more to rise. 4. to haue my last thoughts of heauenly things, by commit∣ting or recalling somewhat to minde, of which I haue either heard, or learned out of Gods word. 5. that I take sleep to refresh nature, and not to satisfie slouthfull flesh. VIII. and last is, that all the weeke long I remember to labour in my calling, and dispose of my ordinary busines, that I bee prepared for the Lords day to keep it ho∣ly: but especially at the end of the weeke, so that when it comes, I may neither by them breake it, or be hindered. Thus liuing to God holily, to my neighbour charitably, & towards my selfe soberly, my conscience shall bee comforted, my weake brethren strengthened, the strong confirmed, the wicked made ashamed, the diuell confoun∣ded, and God greatly Glorified. FINIS.
