20562 99839208 3610
LET QVILIBET BEWARE OF QVODLIBET.
To the true English harted reader. Whereas the right Hon. the L. Keeper, signified in uild hall, that some In¦vasion was pretended by the spaniard, and sup∣poseing it might be against England, Her Ma∣iestie (according to her motherly and princely care) is minded to prepare forces accordingly. It is therefore necessary, that the state were made acquainted with those dangerous, sediti¦ous, and treasonable poynts, which (vnder the pretence of contention betweene secular priests and Isuits) are published, To prepare papists to rebellion. Some few whereof are here collected and sett dwne in the priests their owne words the short notes vpon some of them beinge print∣ed in a different letter.
LET QVILIBET, BEVVARE OF QVODLIBET. To omitt their often and greivous charge∣ing of our Church with heresy and Schis∣me. Let vs wislye (to prevent a mischeife) exa¦myne their dealeinge with our state, for they are not a fraid to write as followeth. viz. Execution of Iustice slaundred: 1 It is true that towards the number of 50 Prists & Catholiques of all sorts with in the compasse of 10. yeares (meaneing from 80. to 90.) were put to death we say vpon our knowledges (concerning the most of thē) for their consciences but our aduersaries affirme for treason. Important considerati∣ons page. 29. line. 21. 2 They (speakeing of wisemen) cast their eyes a side, to Turkes, to Persians, and to all pagan provinces, to see if they can espye any one sect, profession, or professors of re¦ligion, tossed, turmoyled, and tormented, as the English are, & through all this wast Macrocosme, they finde not one patterne or example left to posterity to be recorded like ours. Quodlibets pag. 274. line. 33. 3 The afliction of Catholiques in Eng∣land hath bine indeede very extraordina∣ry, and many an innocent man hath lost
his life. Quod. pag 276. line 37. Authoritie of the Parliament diminished. 4 The 5. statue there made (speakeing of a parliament held by Iesuits) was concern∣ing calumniation, not much vnlike that sta∣tute of Association. Quod p. 95. l. 10. Note that Association enacted is scornefully compa¦red. The reason is evident. To witt because it bindeth faithfull subiects to sett themselus a∣gainst such competitors, as shall attempt any thinge against the Queene or, state. 5 If Princes should take from the Church all temporall possessions, it would little a∣vaile, to bringe in our distinctions. How parliaments may giue what they list to the Church, and churchmen, but they can take nothinge from them or the church Quod. pag. 294. l. 24. Note that it is saide our dis∣tinctions. The Popes authoritye advanced aboue her Maiesties.
6 It being affirmed, that A premunire was incurred, and treason vpon treason com∣mitted, in procuring the Archpriests autho¦rity from the Pope, yet the priests their ap¦peale to the Pope, is iustified for these (amōg other reasons) 1. To whom the Iniurye is done, to him the right of revenge doth ac¦crewe: But the Popes holines was iniured by the Iesuites their suggestions in obtayn¦ing that authoritye, ergo. As if her Maiestie were not hereby iniured. 2. The Iesuits in procuring that authority: made it a matter of state, but the seculars in appealing made it a matter of conscience. As if the Pope had in matters of conscience authority aboue her Maiestie. 3 Iesuits boulster out that autho∣rity, and theire treasonable practises vpon his holines authority ergo, none other to appeale to, for Iustice against them. As though the Queene had not authority to iudge treasonable practises of Iesuits. Quod. page 171 line 13. 7 The Seculars being charged with schis∣me, to cleare themselues do thus say, All ap∣peale is intrinsically an acknowledgeing of authority, in the highest degree to the par¦ty appealed vnto. Answere to a Iesuited gentleman p. 24. l. 1. But they Seculars ap∣peale to the Pope: ergo they acknowledge his authority in the highest degree.
8 I know that (iure ecclesiastico, and by authority and sentence of the Popes holi∣nes) much more may be done than I will heere speake off. But yet I thinke it will proue (in the ende) the best course for men not to doe so much as they may. Many things are lawfull (viz. Excommunication of Princes) which are not expedient in this ir∣riligious and most vnfortunat age Quod. pag 293. line 27. and pag 158. line 21. 9 Vnto the writings not only of Parsons but of Thomas Aquinas also, and other scholemen, and learned Papists. All avouching that sub∣iects may and ought depose Princes with holding popishe religion, if they had force en∣ough, it is thus answered. Loe what doctrine is this to be divulged in this so dangerous an age, I leaue to others to conceipt these thinges in as good sence as may make for our generall safety, and common good of the Catholique cause. Quod. pa. 296. l. 34. Soe that it appeareth, how cuningly priests would wright this doctrine, in the hartes of their proselites, by them to be practised, when they may haue hope to prevaile.
10 Haueing most impudently affirmed that Pius Quintus his Bull was called in againe (whereas the truth is, that Gregorie 13. was only content, that it should not binde papists: who durst not but iobey her Maiesties lawes, vpon cndition they should rebell when time might serue, but her Maiestie was left excom∣municated) here VVatson the priest and wri∣ter of the Quodlibets, discouereth himselfe in these words: Amongest many examples of the fatherly compassion of the Popes ho∣lines, towards the inhabitants and princes of this land, in times of eminent com∣mon wealthes danger, the cheife (since the Normā cōquest) was shewed in the reignes of Kinge Hen. the 2 & his sonne K. Iohn. Against whom haueing vsed his fatherlye correction (as Pastor vniuersall over the whole flocke of Christ, for their great tiran¦ny vsed towards their naturall subiects, yet vpon repentance etc. Surrendered vp the crowne of England to Kinge Iohn and his heires and successors, from off the head of Cardinall Pandulphus, who had sit inthro¦nized 3 dayes theirwith, in the popes right. Thowsands there are in England which de¦sire as much, and wilbe ready to lay theire liues to pledg for it, that if any Lancastrian forrenner shall gett possession of this land, yet would this Pope Clement the 8 (accor¦ding to his predecessors example) revoke and force him, or her, to retire, and withall wovld of his meere mercy (a gift appropri¦ated to S. Peters chaire) graunt to our nati¦on, to chuse a Kinge of our owne natiue soyle, vpon like submission of former prin∣ces in this, and other kingdomes. Qoud.
327. l. 24. Note what authority to the Pope is attributed, and what submission of our stat is required. 11 VVe wish with al our harts (& groane every day at the contrary) that her Maies∣tie, had continued in her obeydience, to the sea apostolique as Q. Mary her sister (of famous memory) had left her a worthy example Import. consi. pag 5. l. 3. 12 They labour by their appeale, for secu¦rety to her Maiesties person, for quyet to the state, for avoydance of all invasions, for cutting off all consperacyes, state tamper∣ings, & exasperating libels, & for assurance of freedome from their heavie persecuti∣ons Quod. p. 171 l. 27: As if these thinges could not be without their appeale, but if this be not preiudiciall to her Maiestie and state, what is▪ Alteration of state conceined. 13 Their witts (meaneing priests & papists) being occupied with conceites of the pre∣misses (viz. Ease and securitie) makes ma∣ny one wish in their hartes for a change. Quod. pag 152. line 27.
13 This land aswell by the suppression of Abbies as by sundry other dangers wherin it stands, especially by popular doctrine of Iesuits, is brought to ly open to the spoyle of who that first can catch it Quod. p. 186. line 11. Note this seditious giueing of hope to traitors and Invadours, but withall examine that popular doctrine which is this, and so cal∣led in the margent where it is set downe.
15 By this (meaneing a poynt of Iesuitisme) the popular multitude may depose theire princes and chuse others at their pleasure, By this no difference shalbe put in theire choise, vpon any right or title to crownes, or kingdomes, by byrth or blood, or other wyse than as the father (forsooth) shall ap∣proue it, by this althings must be wrought, and framed, conformable to the oportuni∣tie of tymes and occasions as verba gratia. they people haue a right & interest in thē to doe what they list in choyse of a kinge: marry yet lymitted by reason, of the times occasions now offered to one of these two, the Kinge of Spayne or the Lady Infanta. And then againe the tymes and occasions changing, after a Spaniard is settled in the crowne, it must be holdē for a mistakeing, yet such, as seeing it cannot be holpen, the people must beware hereafter, of ever at∣tempting the like againe by this a checke must be giuen to the publishers of such pa∣radoxes. After that a dispensatiō procured for restoreinge the offendor, and then all shalbe well everafter. Quod. page 68. l. 11. Here remember the seculars opinion of chusinge a Kinge of our owne nation sett downe in the end of the 10 article, and if you find it to dif∣fer but a little (if any thinge) from the Iesuits opinion, touchinge the authority of the multi∣tude etc, then consider whether the Priests doe not conspire with the Iesuits as in a conceipt of alteringe the state, so in takeinge a course to bringe their purpose to passe, which must be cō¦trolled after their purpose is effected. viz. In their politique inveighing against Iesuits alreae¦dy in disgrace, theirby to draw our stat in hope of mainteineyng a supposed contention to fa∣vour them, that by their proceedinge practise may (in time) bringe in popery againe, as fur∣ther appeareth in the 17 article.
16 The many libertyes, free education, and great wealth of nobles, gentlemen and other subiects cōsidered, especially, In that an English nature, even in the meanest member of the body politicall (sil. in the comminalty) is in this respect noble, free of highe courage, and not able to endure lin∣gering deathes, torments, gustes & greifes, as other people are, that notwithstanding subiectes, as well noble as ignoble, should should be put to those exigents, that catho∣liques haue bene a long time put vnto: the world hath mused and admired at it Quod page 270. line 30. Is not this an instigation to rebellion? 17 The latter doth vrge against the for∣mer (viz. Iesuits against seculars) that it is their falt if they be not of strength enough. For if all would slyde one way: they are a¦ble to match their adversaries at al assayes. Quod. pag 208. line 20 Here we perceiue the Iesuits mynd: with whom most papistes are saide to concurr: let vs now marke and consider they priests their opinion and purpose. n8. If we our selues, within our selues, ba∣nish religion: why may not we our selues, within our selues, by the proceeding prac∣tise of the Seminaries: bringe it in againe, the peotestant being now no more vnlike∣ly to be a voyded, than the catholique was then. Ans. to a Iesuited gent. pag. 54. lin. 31. & p. 66. l. 28. Doth it not appeare that change of religion is one: and the same end of priests and Iesuits: their wicked practises? But read: and consider what is acknowledge viz. Conspiracy of priests & Iesuits.
19. All mainteineyng (speakeing of papists in generall) one and the same opinion: con¦cerninge what might be done by a postoli¦cal authority and power: and neuer talke∣yng what is necessary. Quod. p. 277. li. 17. Whereby it is evident, that howsoever Priests & Iesuits seeme otherwise to disgrace: yet here in they iumpe: That her Maiestie is to be held lawfully excommunicated by the Pope: when it shalbe expedient so to doe. But let this full confession following be diligently considered. 20 The Seminaries were willinge at the first to couler hyde, and conceale all, make∣ing the Iesuits cause, attempts, intends prac∣tises their owne in every thinge, vntill at last they were intangled by penall lawes. pag 6. line 25 of the preface to the Quod. 21 Lastly it is to be noted, that howsoever the seculars doe grevosly charge the Iesuits, & other (executed for the same) with horrible trea∣sons & fellonies, denyed in other popish bookes, yet (in the end) they conclude thus. VVhatsoe∣uer is written or contained in these bookes we submit all to the censure and Iudgment of our holy mother the catholique Romain Church Import. consi. pag 43. & Quod. p. 361. lin 12. which doth imply, that Papistes knowes these traitorous bookes to be written a¦gainst Iesuits but of policye, & that priests are ready to vnsay all, when the Pope shall either requyre the same, or els, pronoūce those treasons and felonies, to be holy practises of popish zeale, where of more is said in the 15. article.
