20522 99846077 11016
MVSARVM DELICIAE. CONTAYNING MORE then a select Century of royall Latine Anagrams, besides diverse written in English, upon the sacred name and titles of our Dread Soveraigne and of his dearest Consort, and their most Princely Progeny. Together with apposite Anagrams upon all the English Monarchs that have lived and died since the union of the royall roses and houses of Yorke and Lancaster. Some few of those extracted from his Maiesties Imperiall Name, have been heretofore presented to his Royall hands with gracious acceptance. The Latine Anagrammes are expressed in English verses in the opposite Columne. Perused anew, and now published altogether, (with the Authors assent) by Arthur Pyne Esquire, to whom the Anagrams made in honour of the Prince his Highnesse were in speciall manner directed. Cicero. Non contentio animi, sed relaxatio. ❧ London printed by Anne Griffin. 1635.
PRAEFATIO POETICA. Ad Carolum Regem Augustum. Carole qui triplicis fulges diademate Regni, Ter populo dilecte, Deo dilecte ter-uni; (Virgil. Semper honos nomen{que} tuum laudes{que} manebunt;) Scripta tuam accipias in laudem, nomen, honorem. Great Charles with three rich diadems high-crowned, Thrice lov'd of men, the Trinities delight; For your greatLike Gods peculiar peo∣ple, high in praise and in name, and in honour. Deut 26.19. honour, name, and praise renowned: In praise of your most honour'd name I write. To the Queenes Maiesty. Great Queene, great Britaines other greater light; My Muse (although least worthy) here brings forth Choice Anagrams (in which French wits delight) To testifie her service, and your worth.
Ad Carolum Principem infantem. Haeredum flos summe, haeres dignissimesorum & liliorum. florum, Gallica quos tellus, quos{que} Britanna tulit; Ecce tibi, Princeps, Musarum flosculus horti Ad Tamisim à Tamarae margine missus adest. YouHe alludeth to the flowring moneth of May in which the Prince was borne. flow'r of Princes whom French lillyes shield, And the faire roses of these British Realmes; Accept some flow'rs of the Pierian field, FromThe author li∣veth neere the bankes of Ta∣mar. Tamar brought to Thames the Prince of Streames. To the Duke of Yorke. Iames now is what Charles was in th'unions Spring, Yorkes duke descended from the royall race: Charles is what Iames then was, the Soveraigne King Of all this Island, through Gods Soveraigne Grace. Sith th'heav'ns are pleas'd thus to transpose great names; Deigne your acceptance to these Anagrams. To the Lady Mary. Most princely Lady, some poeticke Layes, Presuming on your leave, I here advance To you, who raised are to be the praise And ornament of Britaine and of France. My chaste Muse free's from feares of just offence, Clad (like your infant yeeres) in innocence.
The fourefold Anagram following compareth the Kings Maiesty for his princely literature to the Laurell, the crowne of learning; for his rare eminency and constant piety, to the Cedar, whose leae never falleth, and whose fruit never faileth; for the gracious brghtnesse of royall maiesty, to the morning inlightening and enlivening the earth; and for all perfections of grace and government, to that sacred and learned king Alured, otherwise called Altred, whose valour and vertue are so highly extolled by our historians. Anagramma quadruplex. Carolus Stevvarde. 1. Tu laurûs es decôra, 2. Tu sola vera Cedrus: 3. Sed luces vt Aurora, 4. O sacer vt Aluredus! Like the faire laurell you appeare, You like the goodly Cedar spread: But you shine at the morning cleere, A sacred King like Alured. In the next Anagram his maiesty is most fitly likened to that gotlly and gracious king Oswald, whose name (saith our Antiquary)'s equivalent in signification with Steward. This Oswald having beene baptized among the Scots was afterward crowned King ouer the English, and (so Bede writeth) did cause this whole Island to flow with peace and flourish with plenty. Anagramma Carolus Stewardus. Tercarus Oswaldus. Like deare Saint Oswald whom historians found In Scotland christend and in England crown'd. Other Anagrams acknowledging his sacred Maiesty to be as the cleare light, and the deare de∣light of his loyall people. Anagramma duplex. [Carolus Steuarde.] 1. Dote rarus luceas; 2. Sol acer et arduus, Enrich'd with heau'ns rare dower, continue shining; Like th'high plac'd Sun in power, not in declining. Carolus primus Steuardus totius Albionis Rex serenis∣simus. Anagramma. Nostra lux or suet usu clarissima, nos si deseris tu, peribimus. Our light whose ray and rising doth us cherish; Should you away, we drown'd in teares must perish. The two following Anagrams, the latter of which is contryved into an exact hexameter and pen∣tameter verse, doe declare his majesty to be the beauty and safety, the ornament and the muni∣ment of his dominions. Carolus Stevvardus Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha. Anagramma. Suorum decor, ac genti suae laeta salutis anchora. He under God his great Protectour, stand. As th'ornament and anchor of his Lands. Carolus primus Stevvardus, et Anglorum, et Sco∣torum Rex ac Monarcha serenissimus. Anagramma. Arx suprema suis, summus decor, anchora grata, Cor, turris, columen, lumen et esto suis. His peoples stay, their refuge, and safe fort, Their heart, their eye, their beauty, and support.
Hi Maiesties royall marriage with the Lady Mary Burbon was thus celebrated in Heroicall Ana∣grammaticall verses, and in sundry other Anagrams to them annexed. Carolus primus Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha. Anagramma. Carus amore cito, ac Gallis pius, enthea Norma. His nuptiall loue was deare and undelayd; Hee to the French an heav'nly rule and ayd. Carolus unitae Angliae et Scotine Monarcha. Anagramma. Sic volat alina, venit castae Regina coronae. The fairest Queene came flying on loves wing Vnto the crowne of Charles the chastest king. Anagramma Carolus Stevvartius Rex. Creaturus Vxori Salutes. He having taken her to wife, will make her Of most aboundant happinesse partaker. Anagramma Carolus primus Stevvartius Angliae Rex potentissimus. Erat (sic Gallae notus, unitus) Pius semper Vxoris Maritus. Thus knowne and knit vnto his peerelesse Queene, A pious Husband he hath ever beene. Anagramma. Carolus Stevvartius Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha. Sis Cato, Numa, Curlus, Ter carae Gallae vita et honos. Like Numa, Curius and Cato chaste; Her life and honour whom his love embrac'd. Carolus I. Stevvartius Monarcha Britanniae. Anagramma. Constans Mariae turtur haberis, vnica viola. The Turtle deere that to his Peere hath constant love exprest; The violet that heav'n did set for Maries fairest breast. Carolus I. Stevvardus, et Britannorum Scotiaequè Monarcha optimus. Anagramma. Vultu atquè motibus perdecotus, Nova norma sancti et casti amoris. Whose modest looke and life are rules to move Our looser times to learne a chaster love. Carolus I. Stevvardus praecellentissimus et Rex et Monarcha Britannicus. Anagramma. Sic tursus virtus ipsa amorum excellens et alta viret, bina corda nectens. Wee now behold (like those of old) loves highest power to raigne, Which in this faire and high borne paire hath made one heart of twaine.
Carolus Stevvartius vnitae Angliae simul ac Scotiae Monarcha serenissimus. Anagramma. Sunt Musis aevo hoc natis verè aurea secla, Nam Regum castis lilia iuncta rosis. The golden age, as I presage, Shall now the Muses nourish; Sith with the Rose the Lilly grow's, and being crown'd doth flourish. Carolus I. Steuartius vnitae Angliae Scotiaequè Monarcha. Anagramma. Lilio casto iuueniquè natae Amantur Rosae, succis gratae. The tender Lilly through loves chaste device, Enioyes the pleasant Roses cordiall iuyce. The heavenly protection extended towards his Maiesty through the whole course of his life is thus anagrammatically acknowledged. Carolus Steuartius et Rex et Monarcha Angliae. Anagramma. — Te amavit (O terrâ laetans Rex!) chorus Angelicus. O king on earth triumphing! from above, You, the triumphant Angels guard and love. The late deplored condition of his Maiesties exiled onely Sister was thus commiserated in an Anagram. Anagramma Carolus Rex, Britonum Caesar. Cur soror exul sacra manebit? Why shall his sacred Sister thus remain An exile and expos'd to foes disdaine? The following Anagrams were composed in relation to his Maiesties most pious and vertuous en¦dowments, which make him parallel to the most famous Princes, and pretious to his loyall people. Anagramma Carolus Steuart. Clarus sorte tuâ. His lot befell him in the fairest field. Anagramma Carolus Steuartus. Solus sacra tuetur. Hee's under God, our Churches onely shield. Anagr. duplex Carolus Steuartius. 1. Vt cor salutare suis 2. Ortu et ausis clarus. His loyall Subiects healthfull heart and mirth; Renowned both for enterprise, and birth. Anagramma Carolus Stuartius est Carus et ut ros salutis.
Carolus Stevvartius Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha. Anagr. Tuae et ara gentis ac oculus: Amor, oris ac anhelitus. His peoples refuge, love and sweet delight, Breath of their mouth, and of their eyes the light. Anagramma Carolus Stevvardus. Ades vt rarus oculus. Anagramma Carolus Stevartus Rex Britanniae. Virtute Rebus annexâ, stas clarior. Who stand's the more renown'd in mens opinions For ioyning vertues great with large dominions. Anagramma Carolus Steuartus Britannorum Monarcha serenissimus. Musis en Constantinus rarus; Orbi almus, ter amore charus! A Constantine unto the Christian Muses; The fair'st and dear'st Prince that the world produces. Anagramma Carolus Stevvartius Verus auctor salutis. Whom all true-hearted Britons doe confesse To be th'Augmenter of their happinesse. Anagramma duplex. Carolus Steuartius. 1. Tuta salus. vires, cor. 2. Sicut rosa salvetur! Their safe health, and their strength and heart is he. O let him as the Rose preserved be! Carolus primus Stevvartus validissimè po∣tens vuitae Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha. Anagramma. Carum adeò cor, vita, salus Anglis venit; Ipsi Mars venit, et Musae, Clio, Arethusa, potens. When he our so deare heart, life, health bècame, Breath of our nostrils, glory of his name: Mars and the Muses with Diana's mate Came to him to attend his royall State. Carolus primus Steuartus, Angliae Scotiae Hiberniacquè Monarcha ter honoratissimus, et munificentissimus; valdè acer ac mitus Veritatis et Fidei Defensor. Anagramma. En fecit nostris Is sanè haec otia Musis: Verum Virtutis gloria calcar habet. Nam laudi est huic mitis amor, nequè forma fereno Ipsi, nec virtus rara, fidesvè deest. Loe thus the glory that our king hath won, Gave spurre to my dull verse, and made it run. For, gentlenesse, faith, ewy, vertues rare, Crowne Charles theTitles given by historians to the royall name of Charles. wise, the welbelou'd, the faire. A twofold Anagram. Charles Steuart. 1. Cal's true hearts. 2. Hate's cruel arts. Mercy and Truth have met in him as Mates, He cal's true hearts, and cruel arts he hate's.
The Queenes Maiesty is compared in the six fold Anagram following to the Turtle for her conju∣gall chastity and fidelity; to the Asian myrrhe and Phaenix for her incorrupt sincerity, and singu∣lar excellency, and concluded to be a most gentle and gracious Lady. Anagramma hexasticon. [Maria Stevvartia.] 1. Ea turturi amasia, 2. Marita, vera, iusta. 3. Vt avis etiam rara. 4. Aut ut Asiae mirrha. 5. Viris amata vt hera 6. Mitis, aurata, vera. Shee's mate vnto a Turtle faire, A faithfull wife and ever true. Shee's of her sexe the Phenix rare, And like Myrrhe which in Asia grew. A Lady, of all men belov'd, Most gentle, excellent, approv'd. The royall aboundance of the Queenes vertues, and her earnest desire to bynde the British and French scepters in an everlasting league, together with our devout prayers that shee may flourish like the pleasant Vine in her royall branches, and long liue with her Lord, the King, have occasio∣ned this fourefold Anagram, Anagramma quadruplex. Maria Stevvartia Regina. 1. Ara virtutis regia, amaena; 2. Vis maritare regna avita. 3. Ramis vireat grata vinea, 4. Vna sit vera, regia Marita. Vertues faire Altar, richly furnished, You royally will ancient kingdomes wed. O let this pleasant Vine her branches spread, And never deck a—coniuge gaudeat uno, Et semper natis gaudeat illa tribus. Martial.. epig. 54. lib. 11. second husbands bed! Vpon her Maiesties admired vertues, mildnesse, beauty, royall descent; happy marriage, peace-loving disposition, rare perfection and excellent sharpenesse and ripenesse of wit and judgement, these Ana∣grams have beene written. Anagr. Maria Steuarta Regina. Tn' Astraea mira, regia? A iust Astraea you have ever beene, Iustly admired, and most royall Queene. Anagr. duplex. Maria Stuartia Regina. 1. Avê Martis atri ignara; 2. Mitis, niuea, grata, rara. Haile Lady taking no delight in war, Most calme and comely, gracious and rare. Anagramma duplex. Maria Stevvarta Regina. 1. Avê nimis arguta et rara; 2. Grata tuis Minervae ara. Haile worthiest Queene in wit excelling far, You to your traine Minerva's Altar are. Maria Stevvartia Anglorum Regina. Anagr. —natu Tu re regalis, magna (Maria) Viro. Borne of a royal house, and grownelike Maud the Empresse who was also the daughter of an Henry, of whom we reade Magna ortu, maier{que} Viro— great since, By being the Spouse of so renoun'd a Prince.
Maria Stevvartia Anglorum Regina. Anagramma Regali or natu sum margarita nivea. For royall ornaments deserving praise, As the white orient pearle of these our dayes. Maria Stevvard vnitae et Angliae ac Scotorum Regina. Anagramma. —Advenit (ô) sic Alma Ceres, et Iuno grata, arguta Minerva! Fruitfull as Ceres, for a gracefull gate Like—incedens Iuno, Minerva loquens. Ang. Iuno, for sharpe wit Minerva's mate. Anagramma. Maria Steuard. Marti adversa. Anagramma Maria Stevvart. Tu Martia versa. Your selfe you shew (through all your life) To be a Foe to warre, and strife. Anagramma Maria Steuarta. Atas tueti amat. Your love to peace that lovely mak's, Staye's crownes and altars which warre shake's. Anagramma Maria Stevvart. Maturitas vera. You in true ripenesse of perfection shine, Anagramma Maria Stevvarta. Aurea maturitas. Like perfit gold dig'd from the purest Mine. Of the Queenes thrise amiable countenance and admirable carriage winning affections at first view, these Anagrams have beene written. Anagramma Maria Stevvart. Visa ter amatur. This gracious Queene of all approv'd, Where shee's once seene, is thrice belov'd. Anagramma Maria Steuarda Regina. Tu hera digna eras amati. A Lady meerely for great worth affected, Belov'd sincerely, worthily respected. Maria Steuarda Regina Anglica. Anagr. Amati digna es vt rara, Angelica. Love's precious Iemme, the deare delight of all; Beauties bright beame, rare, faire, Angelicall. Anagram. Mary Steward. Draw's my heart. O how attractive are her vertuous parts, The load-stone and the load-starre of mens hearts.
Anagr. Marie Steuard. Vesta married. Shee's chaste as Vesta, and vpon fames wing Mounts higher, marryed to the chastest king. The great Blessings which Great Britaine hopeth to enioy in her young Prince Charles have beene anagrammatically expressed as followeth. Anagr. Carolus Stevvartius haeres Britannicus. Tun' ut alba viris rosa sua viter crescens? Like to the faire white rose you doe arise, Which so, delightfull growe's to all men's eyes. Anagr. duplex. Carolus Stevvartius. 1. Vir esto lautus, catus. 2. Coelitùs satur arvus. Grow fayre and deare by grace and nature dressed, And like a field with heav'nly fulnesse blessed. Carolus Stevvartus regiminis haeres. Anagr. Cum vestris iunge laurea serta rosis. Still with your royall english roses ioyne The Laurell garland of the Arts divine. Anagr. Carolus Steuartius haeres. Arte charus sis et aureolus. Grow deare through learned arts (while wars wax cruell) Bee in this iron age a golden Iewell. Anagramma Carolus Stevvartius. Cultus ut rosa vireas. Grow faire and flourish, and fresh odours yeeld, Anagramma Carolus Steuartus. Vt rosa cultus eras. Deck'd like the rose that doth adorne the field. Anagramma Carolus Stuartius haeres. Iustus heros arte clarus. Most nobly iust, and for cah art renown'd, Carelus Stevvartus Princeps Angliac. Anagr. Is aptè ornatus, clarus, Angelicus puer. From heaven fitly furnish'd to be crown'd, Anagramma Carolus Steuardus Walliae Princeps. Ille novus, purus, ac reparatus Alcides In whom Alcides is restor'd a new, Strengthned with vertue, vices to subdue.
In the following Anagrams the Prince as the hopefull heyre of his royall Fathers resplendent ver∣tus, is compared to those glorious heavenly bodies the Sunne and Starres, and to those renowned Princes of Britaine King Arthur and King Lucius, of whom the former hath his name deri∣ved from that northerne fixed starre Arcturus, and the latter from the light which the Sunne shed's upon the earth, &c. Anagr. Carolus Steuartius haeres Britannicus. Essicut Arthurus ac verè Sol Britannis. Yare like Prince Arthur in our British Story, And like the Sun rising in perfit glory. Anagramma Carolus Steuartus. Tu Sol es, ac Arthurus. Carolus Stevvartius Insulae Britannicae Princeps. Anagr. Ortus an is iuuenis praeclarus páce Britannis Lucet?— Shining from th'youthfull Spring with radiant rayes, Vpon the Britons in faire peacefull dayes. Carolus Princeps Stuartius Borboniusquè, et proles Britannica. Anagr. —Sol perbonus, atque Britannis Ac orbi Princeps Lucius ortus erat. In you both we and all the world have won AnotherLucius Rex, agnomine magni splendoris. Nennius. Lucius, yea another Sun. Anagr. Carolus Stevvardus Princeps Britanniae. Tu rarus orbi Natus, principale sanè decus. A rare sonne borne vnto the world, and sent To be its honour and chiefe ornament. Anagramma Carolus Stevvartius. Tu carus ut sol äerius. Deare as the Sun which from the heav'n doth shine; Anagranma Carolus Steuartus. Orsu ut astra luces. Cleare as the Starrs, and every way divine. Anagr. To Charles Steuart. Thou clearest Star. Anagr. Charles Stevvard. Such a dear lustre! Thou clearest Starre now rising in the North, The load-star of the Christian Worlds affection: Spreading bright beames of rarest Princely worth, Stand fix't, and give to Sea and land direction. Shining in graces and in vertues here, Such a deare lustre to the Britons give, (Till thou reach heav'n like to a Starre most cleere) That in that light they may see how to live,
Anagr. Vnto Charles Stevvart. No Turtle was chaster. Anagr. Charles Steuart. As the chast Ruler. Hee's fit to rule, then whom no Turtle's chaster, Whom chastity it selfe shall rule and master. Anagr. Charles Stuart. A Rachels trust. Our Royall Rachel link't with Iacobs heire Long trusted for a princely propagation, Till God fulfill'd unto that happy Paire Both Rachels trust, and their realmes expectation. When this young Prince from Charles his loynes descended, Then Rachels mourning for lost issue, ended. Anagr. Charles Stevvarte. A true sure castle. A true sure Castle providence divine Hath given to Britaine since her civill warres. Princes descended from the regall line Are sorts 'gainst forreigne foes, and homebred jarres. Anagr. Charles Stevvarte. Shal Vertues trace. Your steps (if you your Parents paths regard) Shall vertues trace: vertues shall you reward. The happy expectation raised by the birth of the Duke of Yorke, hath beene attended by the following Anagrams. Iacobus Steuartus regius Eboracensium Heros. Anagramma. Svavi ego virtute crescens Musis rosa habebor. Behold the rose that (as the Muses say) Most sweetly growes in vertue every day. Anagramma Iacobus Steuart. Tu satus Eboraci. Planted at Yorke through honours princely due, Where anciently the royall white rose grew.
Anagramma Iacobus Steuartus. Tuis ô carus, beatus! O deare, O blessed Babe, borne to encrease Anagramma Iacobus Steuartius. Tuos carus beavisti. Your Parents hopes, your Countryes happinesse. Anagramma Iacobus Stevvartus Princeps. Tunè pius ac castus Puer Orbis? Mirrour of pious and chast moderation To all the world in happy expectation! Anagramma Iacobus Stevvartius Heros. Herus eis vocabor, at Iustus. Follow your Grand-sire (as your name doth bynde you) So shall your followers aIames Stuart. A Iust Master. Sylvesters Anagram. iust master finde you. Anagr. Iames Stewart of Britayne. Streames of a witty braine. Anagr. Iames Stewarde of Brittayne. Of rarest maiesty and Bewtie. Anagr. Iames Stevvart. Aim's at vertues. Wee in the fountaines whence you sprang, descry That you shall flow with streames of wit most cleare, That vertue, bewty, and rare maiesty Shall you endow, and to the World endeere. The great hopes that Great Britaines Inhabitants have conceived of the Lady Mary their Princesse, and the great loue they beare her, are set forth in the following Anagrams. Anagramm. De Matia Stevvartia Caroli prole. Clara viris Dea, vita, amor et lepor. To Men you'le prove a goddesse bright, Their life, their love, and their delight.
Anagr. Maria Stevvartia Regis Proles. Grata viris Matris lepore suae. Pleasing in shewing forth your mothers Grace. Anagramma duplex. De Maria Stuartia. 1. Ter viris adamata. 2. Amata terris Diva. Thrice lov'd for princely worth in every place. Anagramma Maria Stevvartia. Vita aurea Matris. Your mothers life, a childe whom Heav'n endeer's; Borne to prolong the Parents golden years. De ter-foelicis et regalis tori prole, Maria Steuartia ac Borbonia. Anagramma. Foelicitèr de alterâ orbis securitate bonâ gloriari Maria potes. Well may you glory that you did supply The World with other goodfor royall succession. securitie. Vnto the fayrest Brittaine Lady, Mary Stevvard. Anagram. Art vertuously maintain'd by thy dearest Father. Let golden vertues crowne your mayden dayes, And in your nurture spred your Parents prayse. Anagr. To the Ladie Mary Stevvarde. Al doe admire at thy vertues. A double Anagr. [Marie Stevvarde.] 1. True as ever Maid. 2. A sure true Maide. Anagr. To the Lady Mary Stewarde. Art esteem'd a worthy Lady. A double Anagr. [Vnto the Ladie Marie Stevvard.] 1. Art the vertuousDiana. Delian maide. 2. Art the vertuous maiden Ladie. You are in riseing worth and vertues rare, Like that chaste Delian Mayd Diana fayre.
Anagrams upon all the English Monarches that have lived and dyed since the union of the royall roses and houses of Yorke and Lancaster; from Henry the seventh surnamed Theodore alias Tider, the author of that happy union, un∣to Iames the first, the blessed vniter of the kingdomes of Great Britaine. Anagr. Henricus septimus Theodorus Monarcha. Tu rosis numen eras ac decor optimus. You were that power which did both roses raise, Adorning them with faire and peacefull dayes. Henricus septimus Theodorus Monarcha Angliae. Anagramma duplex. 1. Tu rosis decor, ac ope tuâ munimen Anglis eras. 2. Tu notus unione rosis pacem declaras regiam. To th'English Roses which did long dissent, You were a safegard and an ornament. Fame spread's your worth, whose wisdome did connect The Roses, and a royall peace effect. Henricus octavus Theodorus Monarcha Angliae. Anagramma En viramatus! O decor Anglis, ac novus Hector! Loe he was Englands beautious love and praise, And like another Hector in his dayes. Edvardus VI. Tiderus Rex Anglicus. Anagramma. En dulcis arvus Dei dextrâ riguus! This Prince like some faire plot of pleasant land, Was water'd euery jot with Gods right hand. Maria Theodora olim Regina Anglorum. Anagramma Oh genti molli dura! An mot igero amata? Hard to the milde! Biller in indignation To the obedient childe! Oh where's compassion? Anagramma duplex. Elisabetha Regina. 1. An hera sit Belgiae. 2 Sitne Belgiae Ara? This royall Maid, in Belgia's great distresse. Was her reitse, her ayde, her Governesse. Elisabetha Theodora Regina Angliae. Anagramma. Lactabaris Regina, Deo magno vltore. Though foes arose, she had a joyfull raigne: God did revenge her cause; their force restraine. Iacobus primus Stuartius, Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha pacificus, doctissimus. Anagramma. Rectiùs (ô!) doctus chartis, Legis pia meta, Norma fuit Musis, ac pacis vi, Hic, bonus Asa! Through learnings better helpes be sought to hound Strict Lawes within right limits. Him we found A Rule vnto the Muses, and invested With peace, likeThe Land had rest and he had no warre. 2 Chron. 14.6. Asa, when all Iudah rested. FINIS.
