20787 99854991 20461
CHARACTERS OF TRUE BLESSEDNESSE, Delivered IN A SERMON Preached at Saint Maries Church in Dover. Sep. 21. 1637. At the Funerals of Mrs. ALICE PERCIVALL, Wife of ANTHONY PERCIVALL Esquire. By Iohn Reading. Memoria Iufti in benedictionem, & no∣men impiorum putrescet. Prov. 10. 7. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Ioyce Norton and Ric. Whitakers, at the Signe of the Kings Armes in Saint Pauls Church yard, 1638.
To my honou∣red Friend Anthony Percivall Esq. Cap∣tain of Arcliff Bulwark neere Dover: Comptrol∣ler of his Majesties Customes for Kent, &c. Sir, I doe at your request venture this rough draught to the pub∣like view; being more confident of good mens
acceptance, than fear∣full of others rash cen∣sure: I had rather the busie should question my ability, than the iust my will to serve my friends: in which office he is not blame∣worthy, who cannot though he would, but he that will not though he can. The subject is accommodate to com¦fort concerning the deceased, in whose lives wee found these markes (the blessed are
not lost, but gone be∣fore us:2. Sam. 12. 23. I shall goe to him, but hee shall not returne to mee, said David of his good childe, the evill hee bitterly bewailed) and to informe us what is Blessednesse, lest in the pursuit of the false, we misse the true. None envie the dead a convenient tombe: no good man will, these kind of mo∣numents, which equal∣ly preserve the me∣mory
of the Saints departed, and more profitably, than the most curious Epitaphs instruct the survi∣ving: I have sup∣plyed some things which time straitned in the delivery. The Lord so direct and as∣sist us in the use of his ordinance, that when these dayes of sinne are ended. we may at∣taine the end of our hopes, jalvation and eternal happines in the
world to come, through our most blessed Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. In whom I am Your faithfull friend I. READING.
Characters of true Blessednesse. 1. VNity with God and his Church. 2. Constant praysing of God in every estate. 3. Confidence and Trust in God, 4. Sincerity of heart toward the waies of God.
CHARACTERS of True Blessednesse, &c. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will stil be praysing thee, Selah.Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the wayes of them, Psal. 84. 4. 5. COncerning the scope of this Psalme▪ there are some different opini∣ons
among divines: some refer this bles∣sednes to thePisator after R. Kimhi. Priests & Levites ministring in the tabernacle:Lyra citat doctores Hebr. o∣thers say, it expresseth the desire of Israel in captivity, to re∣turne and repaire the temple.Musoulus, Fabritius & Calvin. Some re∣ferre it to Davids zeale & desire to re∣turne (from the exile to which Saul or Abso∣lon had driven him) to the tabernacle and publike worship of God.Hn Ains worth in Psal. Psaltes à sacris coei¦bus exulans, desiderium suum expo∣nit: prum in ecclesia conversan∣tium faelui∣tatem expli∣catun. Others, neere to that, say that the Prophet longing for the communion of
the Sanctuary, shew∣eth how blessed they are that dwell there∣in.Vidlurj ihi qod magis ex∣primat desi∣derim san∣ctorum adhkc in ha valle m seriae de∣gnium de∣veniendi ad ad u su∣per om civim, yra Lyra is more ge∣nerall: it seemeth to him, that it setteth out the desire of the Saints (yet living in this vale of misery) to attaine the ioyes of heaven. Neither dothErgo in peuris . Saint Augustine seem to be of other iudge∣ment, who having discoursed of the tri∣bulations and pres∣sures of the Saints in this life, conclu∣deth, Therefore when we are under the weights of tentains set us sound
out this voice, and send out our desires before us, how amiable are thy dwelling places, O Lord of hosts? certainely those Levites were a Church representa∣tive, and a type of the whole, who be∣ing a1 Pet. 2 9 Exod. 19. 6. Rev. 5 10. Rev. 8. 3, 4. royall Priest∣hood, an holy Nati∣on, doe now daily appeare before God with our incense of Prayers, and shall ioyne in one heaven∣ly quire before his throne, to which our present assembling in his publike service, doth now tune and
prepare us. So that this Psalm may seem written, not only for the holy Pen-man thereofFsal. 42. 1, 2. who loved and longed to re∣turne to the Taber∣nacle, publike ser∣vice, and people of God, but also for their use, whose hearts are by the same spirit touched with a reverend love of Gods house and service, through which their faith lookes on the state of glory and blessed life to come. The title of this
Psalme (as of the 80.) is commonly gi∣ven,Vulgar & Vatab. ad torcularia. ad torcularia,Augusi. pro torcularibus. , ad praecinen∣dum super torcularibus. Musculus or pro torcularibus, for the wine-presses.. torcular, aut instrumen∣tum musi∣cum torcu∣lari aut vin∣demae ad∣h br oli∣tum. sal. 8. 1. Targ. Cyhara quam atu▪ it David ex Gah, um apdrgm Achis exu∣laret. Valent. Shindler. lex. Penteglot. The word hath two significations: it signifieth either a wine-presse, or musi∣call instrument,  the Gittith, or kinde of instrument which David brought with him from Gath.Eo quod isle Psalmus propriè antabatr in medio Septm. collects vindemiis—& in figuram collections Sanctorumin-regno coeloru. Lyra. Ly∣ra giveth this reason: This Psalme was (saith hee) wont to
be sung about the middle of Septem∣ber, when they had gathered their grapes to the presse. Deut. 16. 13, 14. Levit. 23. 34. for a figure of the gathering together the Saints, by Gods great harvesters, the Angells, into the kingdome of hea∣ven: and therefore this was a feast of great ioy and reioy∣cing. Deut. 16. 14, 15. as that shall be to the Elect. This Psalme hath two parts: The first sheweth, that eternal
Blessednesse is desira∣ble above all things in this world. The second sheweth how we must attain it; by loving and frequent∣ing Gods house. Blessed are they: tru∣ly blessed, how ever the beguiled world account. That dwell in thy house, by a Synechdo∣che, the house of God is put for the whole Church, whether as∣sembling in the1 Sam. 1. 3 ta∣bernacle in Shiloh, or1 Chron. 21. 29. Gibeon, the tem∣ple at Ierusalem, or whereever now the
holy word of God soundeth, and the Sacraments are truly administred in the society of Saints. They will still be pray∣sing thee: Declaring thy mercies, and li∣ving to thy glory. Selah. Wee reade this word onely in the Psalmes, and thrice in Habakkuk.Iunis & Tremel. Some give it summè, or planè: the Chalde Paraphrase, iugiter, perpetuo. The Greeks expresse it by ,. Sidas. which seemeth to be that which we call a change ofOr as chrysst. poem. in Psal, thin∣keth, an antphony. the
mood.Shindler. Pengl. The He∣brew Doctours say, that  musicae aut melodiae in servit. It on∣ly serveth for the musicall note,Vox tst non sign  10h. Foster. dict Hebr. and is of no signification els.I. Foter. citat. R. David Kim∣hi. com. in Ps. 3. Some thinke it importeth, certitu∣dinens & veritatem. Iohn Foster followeth R. Abraham, Ben Ezra and Burgensis, addit. 3. super Psal▪ 46.Tantùm ad supplen∣dm modu∣lamen can∣t, est dctio elytica, seu paragogica. b. that it is put onely to sup∣ply the song (as o∣ther syllables in the Psalmes) carmini gra∣tiâ.Vt dili∣genti medi∣tatioe ex∣pendeet quod pe∣cssisset. A∣vnarius. Some take it for a signe of the voices exaltation, so as that
the mind might have time to be elevated to a serious considerati∣on of that which was sung: to which opini∣on I willingly sub∣scribe: if you will, adde, that it now im∣porteth the same to the Reader, and as a marke of some ex∣cellent matter there written, Whose strength is in thee: cuius suscep∣tin abste. August. Lyra giveth it, Cuius auxili um est à te: for,nec hom nec alqua creatura po∣test constq beattudin ultimam per  naturalia. Th. Aqin. 1. 2. . 5 a. 5. c. attai∣ning of true Blessed∣nesse exceedeth all power of the crea∣ture—fortitudo ei in
te; Montanus. quorum robur in te situm est, all to the same pur∣pose. In whose heart are the waies of them, or thy waies. It importeth a consideration of their wayes, to which they are exhorted, Hag. 1. 5. which the wicked seldome doe, but run on headlong to de∣struction: or because their waies are put for Gods waies, which they goe, and not their own; hence 'tis said their waies, or the waies of them (the blessed Saints)
are in their hearts. High waies are in their hearts, that is, those which leade them to thy Taber∣nacle, as some inter∣pret:Ascen sio∣nes in corde suo disposuit-Vulg. Lyra. &c. the Vulgar hath it, hee hath dis∣posed ascensions in his heart:  following the Septuagint here∣in.. 70 Vatablus inter∣preteth, in quorum cor∣dibus semitae tue, that is, who thinke of no∣thing else, but how they may come to thee. Take these Ascensions for the degrees of vertues, by which wee must
goe to heaven, or for the holy flights of thoughts into Gods presence, by faithfull prayer and meditati∣on, take these  literally, for the high waies which leade to the house of God, and spiritually for that same Via regni, knowledge of Gods word and sanctity, as 'tis taken Iai. 40 3 Isai. 5. 8. The way shall be called holy▪ the pollu∣ted shall not passe by it, and all may be easily reconciled, the sense being like that, Psal. 1, 1. 2. Blessed is the man
that doth not walke in the counsaile of the wic∣ked—but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law doth hee meditate day and night. For parts observe, First, the state and condition of those who serve the Lord, They are blessed. Secondly, the de∣scription of them by their Characters. 1. Unity with God and his Church, that dwell in thy house. 2. Practice, they will still be praysing thee.
3. Confidence, whose strength is in thee. 4. Sincerity, In whose heart are thy waies. Blessed are the servants of God: yea as 'tis here  doubly blessed, terque quaterque beati: unspeakably blessed, because1 Cor. 6. 9. eye hath not seene, nor heart conceived the extent of their blessednesse, that which God hath prepared for them that love him: yet are they upon un∣doubted
Detefli∣monio mi∣nime dbi∣tandum est. Sufficit enim beat lingua quae dixit, sicut scrip∣tum est. The∣odoret in 1 Cor. 2. 9. record, (as 'tis written—) and God hath revealed them to us by his Spirit, which search∣eth all things,Illud, , non pro ignoratiose, sed pro per∣secta cogni∣tioe posuit. ib. Theodar. not as doubting, but as knowing perfectly the deepe and incom∣prehensible secrets of God, making us able to search out the pro∣mised rest by the two spies of our soules, Faith and Hope, which bring us some clusters from Esool, and tasts of that bles∣sednesse, which hee will once make us perfectly know by
enjoying. That there is a summum bonum and true blessednesse of man, the affecti∣ons of all men desi∣ring it, doe as cer∣tainly conclude, as the motions of natu∣rall bodies out of their proper place, doe a centre and ter∣minum ad quem:Beatitudo pertinet ad voluntatem tanquam primum ob∣jectum ejus. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 3. . 4. 2▪ all men desire their own good: That most men are the sole wor∣kers of their owne evill, commeth ei∣ther from their mi∣staking true blessed∣nesse through igno∣rance, or wilfull in∣dulgence
to their owne exorbitant af∣fections, through a miserable impotency of minde, caused by naturall corruption, wherein they are not able to forbeare those thingsVido me∣liora, pro∣boqe, dete∣rior a sequor. they know will make them fi∣nally unhappy. The first will appeare, if we consider thatOmnibus in terris,  sunt à Gadb sqe Auroram & Gange pau∣ci aignoere pssnt Vera bona. uve. Sat. 10 few men can know true good. 1. Because they so much live the life of sense, that they doe too farre trust to the testimo∣nies thereof concer∣ning good and evill,
Even in the state of innocency, when man had in himselfe from his creation, a power not to have sinned, the will was perver∣ted by the senses ap∣probation of the for∣bidden fruitGen. 3. 6. (so the woman, seeing that the tree was good for meat, an that it was plea∣sant to the eyes—tooke of the fruit there∣of, and did eat, and gave also to her hus∣band—) how much more easily doth the naturall man now erre, when the un∣derstanding darken∣ed,
and the will mi∣serably subjected to the insulting power of sinne, like a blindIudg. 16. 26. Samson led by the hand of his servant to the pillars of the house, hee obtaineth his will with his owne destruction? 2.1 Cor. 15. 34. Be∣cause all have not the knowledge of God, the sole fountaine of blessednesse,1 Cor. 2. 14. and the things of God, are like the rayes of the Sun, which can bee seene by no light but his owne. Therefore the heathens, whoseRom. 1. 21. foolish hearts were
full of darkenesse (being given over to vile affections, be∣cause of their impie∣ty and unthankful∣nesse) like theGen. 19. 11 blin∣ded Sodomites, gro∣ping for Lots doore, sought one happines, every man as his own sense and opinion led him, all in vaine.Lactan. l. 3. c. 8. Tertul de pal▪ c. 5. Ambros To. 1. off. l. 2. c. 2. Epiourus in pleasure and quiet: Aristippus in corporeal delights: Calliphon and Dioma∣chus in honesty and pleasure: Diodorus in immunity from grief: the Peripate∣ticks in the goods of
minde, body and for∣tune: Herillus in knowledge: the Sto∣icks in vertue: where∣as indeed true hap∣pinesse isFinis ulti∣mus rationa∣lis creaurae tantùm. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 3. a. 2. c. dicit, beati∣tudo est ulti∣ma hominis pefctio. the su∣preme and ultimate end of the reasona∣ble creature▪ enabled by understanding to apprehend it, and by will to desire it; that is,Et ib. q. 5. 1. c. bea∣titudo nomi∣nat adeptio∣nem perfecti bom. b. q. 3. 2. 4. his attaining a perfect good,Qua homo conjungitur Deo—& q. 3. 1. 1m. which is a conjunction with, and enjoying of God, the Deus est beatitudo per essentiam suam: non enim per adep∣tionem ut participationem aicujus alterius beatus est, sed per essentiam suam; homines autem sut beati per participationem—absolute, eter∣nall, independent,
and self blessed good, which is in three things. 1. In such a vision of the foun∣taine of blessednesse, as the creature is ca∣pable of: of which our Saviour saith, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matth. 5. 8. Se∣condly, In a divine conformity to God, and participation of his image, who is most holy and glori∣ous.1 Ib. 3. 2. We are now the sonnes of God, but yet it doth not appeare what wee shall be; and wee
know that when hee shall appeare, wee shall be like him—Which Saint Peter sti∣lethq 2 Pet. 1. 4. a participation of the godly nature. Thirdly, in perfect & interminable joy, of which 'tis said,Psal. 16. 1 In thy prefence is the fulnesse of ioy, and at thy right hand are plea∣sures for ever. Perfect, because in respect of the subject, nothing can be added, seeing it shall be an absolute fulnesse,In quibus nec desiderium paenam generat, nec satiet as sa∣stidium. without all satiety, or desiring more. In all other fruitions, desire is
restlesse, everƲnus Pel∣loj veni non sufficit orbis. flying beyond all worldly acquests; but when there is attained an absolute blessednesse, then all affections, like thoseEzek. 1. 24. 25. creatures in the Prophets vision, let down their wings, and stand still: for perfect blessednesse filleth all desire of man (Homo non est perfecte beatus, quam dre∣fiat  quid deside¦randum, & quredum. 1. 2 . 3. 8. c. Cum per∣ventum fu∣erit ad beatitudinem, unusquisque attinget termi∣num sibi praefixum expraedematione divinâ; nec restabit ulterius aliquid quo tendatur; quam vis in illa terminatione unus pe venia ad majorem propinquitatem Dei, alius ad minorem: & ideo uni∣uscujusque gaudiumerit plenum ex parte gauden tis; quia uniuscujusque desiderium plne quietabi∣tur. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 28. a. 3. 2. otherwise it were not perfect) be∣cause it is a participa∣tion
of Gods blessed∣nesse, who is. &c. Greg. Nazi∣ze▪ oat.  pst iit. ,.  lem. Alex. rom. 1. 7▪ of all that is desirable the chiefe and most ex∣cellent: when the Disciples (being not yet free from those secular affections, which are inherent in the most holy and re∣fined earthly taber∣nacles (had but a glimpse of that bea∣tificall vision of the Deity in the transfi∣guration of Christ in the mount: Mark▪ 9. 5 6 though Peter, sur∣prised with joy, knew not what he said, yet
hee said the truth, Master 'tis good for us to be here.—That tast of heaven made him forget earth, and de∣sire to build there, where hee percei∣ved such excellencie dwelt. This joy is likewise interminable, because it is a state,E ga∣dium in fi∣ne, sed sine fine. Ber∣nard. de verb. Apost. which being once had, can never bee lost: The longest terms of time expire, but eternity is an infinite and im∣measurable continu∣ation: We may lose that which the be∣guiled world calleth
happinesse, consisting of things temporall, but that which is true blessednes, once had, we cannot lose;Aquin. 1. q. 6. 8. . be∣cause it is in the visi∣on and fruition of God,Cum ipsa beatitud si perfctum om & sfficiens, portet quod desiderium boinis quietet, &  ma∣lm exclu∣dat. which as it ex∣cludeth all sinne,—lioqi necesse est quod tiwore amitendi, vel dolore de certiudine amissioni aigaur—so all misery, and conse∣quently change, and feare of change:Perfect a beatitudo bminis in visione drvinae essentie consisti: est autem im∣possible quod aliquis vdns divinam entiam, veit ea non videre: quia omne bonum habim quo aliquis carerae vult, aut est isufficiens, ant habet aliquod incommodum annexm, propter quod in fastidim veit: visio autem divin es∣sentiae replet animam  bnis, cum conjun∣gat fontitotius bonitatis. both which are in∣compatible
with true blessednesse: because where there is no sin, there can neither—propria voluntate, beatus non potest beati∣tudinem de∣serre: Si∣militer eti∣am non po∣tst eam per∣dere, Deo ubtrabente—non potest talis subtra∣tio à Deo jsto judice provenire, nifi pro ali∣qua culpa, in qua c∣dere non potest, qui Dei essen∣tiam videt, cum ad banc visonem ex necessitate sequtur rectis udo volntatis—nec alquid ali∣ud agens potest am subtraere, qua mens Deo conjuncta, super omnia alia elevatur. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 5. a, 4. c. be a voluntary desertion of God, nor a just ab∣jection from him. Now wee must know, that though there bee but one true blessednesse in the conjunction with God, the onely foun∣taine thereof, yet hath it two states in man. First, In viâ, in this life, where 'tis
begunne in our com∣munion with God, through faith in Christ. Secondly, In patriâ, that is, abso∣lute and compleat in the life to come: the one in grace, the o∣ther in glory. Which being laid downe, we have two considera∣ble points. First, that none but the good can bee blessed: for none other enjoy the blessed presence of God, or partake of his image. Secondly, their happinesse nei∣ther consisteth in any secular, externall, or
worldly condition (and consequently cannot be lost in the losse of any of these things) nor is it com∣pleat in this present life. Concerning the first, the Scripture a∣boundeth with testi∣monies: Blessed is the man that doth not wike in the counsaile of the wiked—but his de∣light is in the law of the Lord—hee shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters—the wiked are not so—Psal. 1. 1. 4. 5. blessed is every one that fereth the Lord, and walketh in his
waies, Psal. 128. 1. Blessed i hee whose wic∣kednesse is forgiven, and whose sine is covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imuteth not iniquity. Psal. 32. 1, 2. Blessed are the peo∣ple whose God is the Lord. Psal. 144. 15.Mat. 5. 3 Bles∣sed are the poore in spi∣rit▪ Blessed are the eek, and those that hunger and thirst after righte∣ounesse. Blessed are the mercifull, the pure in heart the peaceakers—All is to the holy:Isa. 59. 2. sin disjoyneth man from God:Aqu. 1. . 94. by how much more any crea∣ture
is like God in holinesie, by so much more doth hee enjoy true bleslednesse in him. The blesling is (saithHacest eneictio loriari in Do, & in∣habitari a Deo. Aug. in Psl 5. Augustine) to rejoyce in God, and have him dwell in us. For the second, it appeareth by that which hath bin said, that the Saints happi∣nesse is not in any se∣cular, externall, or worldly matter; for none of all these make us more accep∣table to God, more holy, or moreThey hut most mn who attaine them, and make it more diffi¦cult for them to be saved. Luk. 18. 24, 25. Egoverd vego illud essi bonum, qud oceat habn—divitiae pos∣siden bs persaepe no∣cet. Bo∣t. deous. l. 2. pros. 5. secure from eternall misery:
and by reason groun∣ded on Gods invio∣lable justice: for if riches could make happy, never should any wicked man bee rich, or good man poore: if pleasures, Christ would never have said,Luk. 6. 25 woe bee to you that are full, for yee shall hunger; woe bee to you that now laugh, for yee shall waile and weep. If for this lifes sake onely, we have hope in Christ,1 Cor. 15. 19. we are of all men the most mi∣se rable; and therfore1 Iob. 3. . it doth not yet ap∣peare
what wee, the sonnes of God, shall be. Blessednesse is aBeatitudo cum si per∣fectum & sufficiens bo∣num, on∣alum ex¦cludit, & omne desi∣derium im∣plt. 1. 2. q. 5. a. 3. c. perfect and sufficient good, not onely ex∣cluding all evill, but filling all desire; and who is so meere a stranger to the world, that hee knoweth it not to beQum multis ama∣rit dinibus humanae fae∣licitatis dul∣cedo espersa est, quae si etiam fru∣ntiesse jo∣cunda vide∣atur: taen quo minus cum veli abeat, retineri non possit. Boēt. de con. l. 2. pros. 4. ful of evil? or the condition of temporall possessors, that he isQuis est enim ta compositae fae∣licitatis, ut non aliqu ex parte cum status sui qualitate rixetur? axia enim res est human∣rum conditio honorum, &c. Bt. de consolat. l. 2. pros. 4. not consci∣ous of desiring some∣thing more? When
we duely consider of any of those things, which the world now adoreth, pleasures, riches, honour, wee shall find their splen∣dour to bee no better than that of glow∣wormes, how ever beautifull it seemeth in our want of true light, all that lustre vanisheth when wee can clearely see it. Speake wee of wic∣ked men growing rich and great? are they not like thoseAct. 14. 13. bulls of Lystra, a∣dornd with garlands and flowers for the
slaughter? are they notMiseri in oc altius tollntur, ut decidant altius: hi e∣ni ut vi∣ctime ad suplicium saginantur: t ostiae ad paenam coro∣nantu—like the Shell∣fish, carried up to be broken in their fall? What ever wee have of the world, is it notabsque notitia Dei, quae potest sse solida faelicitas, cum sit som∣nio similis? antequam tenetur el∣bitur. Mi∣nut. Fl. Otav. like the riches of a dreaming man? what ever wee rejoyce in, may prove an occasi∣on of sorrow,Quod enim volptate dissolvir, id contraria ncsse est tristitia contrahatur: nec imune eistere ab anxieate oerris, quod lae∣tia trepidt, aut levitatibus extollitur gaudiorum. Arnob. adv. Gent. l▪ 7. see∣ing these affections are conversant about the same things: and if happinesse bee not in any of these things, then it necessarily fol∣loweth,
that the want or losse of these, that is, pleasures, honours, riches, or the like, can no more take a∣way from a Saint of God his true blessed∣nesse, than the violent winde can move the beames of the Sunne, which against all force thereof shine through the aire; or thā the furious storms which somtimes draw hideo curtaines o∣ver Starres or Sunne, can extinguish their light. And lastly, this happines is not com∣pleat
in this life, wee are yet but in via, to∣ward it: as Moses said to Isrel in the wil∣dernesse,Deut. 12. 9 Yee are not yet come to rest, and to the inheritance which the Lord thy God giveth thee: So may I here, the blessednesse to which we tend now, is, like theExtra portm Col∣linar. Aug. de C. D. l. 4. c. 16. temple of Rest at Rome, set out of the gate:Ego con∣jectua d∣cor, Quie∣t an ad moros pertinisse. Lodovic. Viv. com. in Aug. dec. D. which some thinke impor∣ted rest to the dead onely: as Revel. 14. 13. the voice from heaven pronounced, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord—they
rest from their labors: according to whichHeb. 13. 13, 14. 'tis said Let us goe forth therefore out of the camp bearing his reproch: for here wee have no continu∣ing City, but we seeke one to come. Such are the Saints, that they who will not live their life, would yet faine dy their death:Num. 23. 1. all desire their last con∣dition: O that I might dy the death of the righ∣teous! lt my last end ee like his. The—dicique beatus, Ate obitum nemo, sup▪ e∣maque fne∣ra debet▪ Ov. Met. hea∣then Solon knew that happinesse could not be before the end of this life, pronounced
it so. Others confes∣sed the same: expe∣rience preacheth it: reason concludeth it: ▪tis the end which maketh compleatly happy: and there∣foreNemi∣nemque om∣nino sse securum, nec debere sfe securum, do∣ne ad illam patriam ve niatur, unde nemo exit amicus, quò nemo ad∣mittitur inimicus. Aug. ar. in Psal. 67. Phil. 2. 12. no wise man ought to bee secure, untill hee arrive at that countrey, from whence no friend de∣parteth, to which no enemy is admitted: therefore Saint Paul saith, make an end of your owne salvation with feare and trem∣bling, not with such a feare as leadeth to despaire, but with
such a feare as sha∣keth off presump∣tion and security: which is the soules guardian, Timor cu∣stos inno∣cntiae, de quo Cyprian. l. 2. ep. 2. Sit tantum timor in no∣bis inno∣centiae cu∣stos—ne accepta se∣curit  in∣diligentiam pariat, & veus denuò hostis obre∣pat.—and ver∣tues keeper. Such a trembling, as like Io∣nahs storme, giveth that no rest, for which the anger was, which none can calme, till that sinne bee cast o∣ver boord, which God pursueth, like the needle in the compasse, which con∣tinually trembleth, and by continual sha∣king returneth to the Cnosure to guide us tight: Such is true
faith,Modo enim nihil quietis aut securitatis invenire possumus, dura adhuc in nobis ip∣sis ingemi∣scimus gra∣vati: adop∣tiim ex∣pectantes redemptio∣nem corporis nostri, &c. Gregn 7. Psal. poenit. which heere can never bee secure, till the last enemy be destroyed, till death bee swallowed up in victory: it hath here continuall trialls, so agitating it, that it never resteth, till it returne to a blessed confidence in God; according to which the Psalmist, after his feares and dangers said, Returne unto thy rest, O my soule Psal. 116. 7. like the wea∣ry Dove to the Arke; so faith, after its flight over a vast deluge of trialls, returneth
with assured signes and Emblemes of peace. All this is to teach you, not to seeke hap∣pinesse with the de∣luded children of this world, in those things, concerning which a true experience shall at last pronounce with the Preacher,Ecles. 2. 11. Eccles. 1. 14. Quid igitur O mortales extra peti∣tis intra vo positam fae∣liitate? Bo. de cons. l. 2. pros. 4. All is Vanity and Ve∣ocation of spirit. In all their labours, cares, and most diligent in∣quests, they seeke happinesse, as those fifty men Eliah▪ 2 King. 2. 17. which sought but found him not.
'Tis only to be found in our union with God, and that in san∣ctity: for what com∣munion can there bee betweene CHRIST and Belial? thereforeNemo ma∣ls faelix. Iuv. Sat. 4. no wicked man can be happy, though he have what hee desi∣reth:Omnes be∣i abent qud v∣lunt, quam∣vis & st miser, qu vl nn ha∣bent quod volun, vel id habent quod non re∣cè vln: prprir ergo betitudini voluntas recta, etiam non adepta quod cupit, qam prava, etasi quod cupit, obtinuit. Pre∣sper. snt. x Aug. 62. 'Tis true, all the blessed have what they would (yea in the middest of wants) though having of our wills maketh us not blessed: but they are ever unhappy, who
either have not what they would, or have that which they should not desire: Neerer then to Bles∣sednesse is an holy wil, without successe, than a wicked, which obtaineth what it de∣sireth: and this thePrima s haec ultio, quod se I∣dice, nemo nocens ab∣solvitur; improba quamvis gratia fal∣lacis Prae∣toris vice∣rit urnam. Iuvenal. Sat. 13. testimony of the sin∣ners owne conscience maketh evident to him, which will con∣demne him, though all the world would absolve him: which is no other but a por∣table hell in the wic∣ked man. And in∣deed if there were no
hell to punish him, his owne wickednesseA . Synes ep. 32. is enough to make him unhappy, who thereby forsaketh God, the sole foun∣taine of blessednesse, making man unlike him, and like the most unhappy crea∣ture. Vertue is a re∣ward to it selfe, and every mans owne sin is a sufficient punish∣ment, if there were none other. Wouldst thou have theRev. 2. 10. crown of life, true blessed∣nes, that which1 Pet. 1. 4. wi∣thereth not? the. Ciem. Alex. Pad. l. 2. c. 8 earth beareth no such flow∣ers:
they are set like those lillies and pom∣granates on the tops of Soloons pillars, 1 King. 7. 18, 19, 20. rooted in heaven, and shewing to the world the unsearcha∣ble height of GodsQuid ist caten—is altiss∣mas signi∣fiat ra▪ ones jam di∣c judicii atqe mise∣ricord  am alae in oelo dies fix a babens—equa∣qua com rehede, &c. per∣tus in Reg. l 3. c. 20. justice, and mercie never failing. The best things of this world become evill, through the wicked∣nesse and folly of the owners though mens affections say, blessed are the people which are so, where is pros∣perity and all quiet, yet that very peace
and prosperity is evill to the wicked: be∣cause it maketh them worse: for that, in their security they heape up wrath a∣gainst the day of wrath: and so all thisTranquil∣litas ista tempestas est. Hie∣ron. p▪ Heliodor. calme doth but be∣get hideous stormes to follow. When in ages past the sober Philosophers avow∣ed the world to bee a creature, and ex∣pressed an admirable contempt thereof, there was found oneCl. Alex. adm. ad Gent. mad Zeocrates, who adored it for a God: how many thousands
of that sect are now living? how many now, like those foo∣lish Israelites, make an idoll of their jewels, and in their blind af∣fections say, that Mammon is their God, which must bring them into the pro∣mised rest, and whose hearts desire, is that vote of theNum. 32. 1. 5. Reube∣nites & Gadites when they saw the Land of Iazer, and the fruitfull Gilead, if wee have found favour in thy sight, let this land (this world) bee given unto thy servants for a posses∣sion,
and bring us not over Iordan. They desire no other hea∣ven, nor happinesse: and yet the truth is, thatIpsa quae in rbus hu∣manis vo∣catur faelici∣tas plsti∣ end quam miseria, &c. Aug. in Ps. 67. which the world calleth happinesse is more to bee feared than misery, which many times is a schoolmaster to ver∣tue, when prosperity corrupteth the minde with perverse securi∣ty, and leaveth open a doore to the temp∣ter, who setteth some on the pinacles, to cast them downe; of∣fereth others riches, and glory, to make
them forsake true happinesse, by ado∣ring him: When he offereth bread, 'tis but a stone: When hee feedeth, he stea∣leth in, like that slie Knite, Iudg. 4. 21. with his tent-naile, to fasten them to the earth, that they might not aspire to true blessednesse: When hee sheweth them false heavens, 'tis but to plunge them into a true hell. Setting aside, that in the best worldly thingsIn omni conditione & gradu optimis mixi sunt pessima. Ierom. R∣slico p. there is a mixture of some evill, that
Impiorum felicitas tran sioia est. Aug. in Psal. 36. the happines of the hypocrites is as tran∣sitory asAmve∣runt praesen∣tia, & dor∣mierunt in ipsis.—& sic illu fa∣cta sunt ipsa praesentia, delitiosa, quo mod qividet per somnium invenisse thesauros, tamdiu di∣ves, qam∣diu non evi∣giet: som∣nium di∣vitem fecit, evigilatio pauperem. Aug. in Psal. 75.—cum sit somnio simi∣lu; antequam tenetur, elabitur. Minut. Fel. Octav. a dreame (which in a moment leaveth us waking void of all wee see∣med to possesse) in the most prudent use of them, they are as farre from true hap∣pines, as the centre of the earth from the highest heaven. Take all that the beguiled world useth to adore, honours, riches, plea∣sures; let all acces∣sions of this kinde (which the wit of
man can invent, or his desire measure) bee heaped one upon another, like Peleon, Ossa, and Olympus; all shall come as farre short of making thee happy, as Babels in∣tended toppe would have beene from lan∣ding those ambitious builders in heaven. How miserable is it then, to build our vaine hopes heere? theVitae summa bre∣vis spes ve∣tat inho∣are longas. short summe of life forbiddeth us to beginne long hopes therein. Here is no sincere joy; God hath set many Marahs in
our passage to the Holy Land: Here. Dion. Rom. ist. l. 38. is nothing permanent; neither are we: here's nothing fully happy, neither are we: here's nothing without con∣tinuall change, nei∣ther can we be. Our present joyes com∣monly aggravate our succeeding sorrowes, leaving us doubtfull whether our content in enjoying, were so much as our sorrow losing: at the best, what ever good, time produceth, it taketh away againe; and all which springeth
hence, is but as that. Hi Eunchus a Philippo bpzatus est. Ieom. om 4. de loc Heor. fountaine by Bethso▪ro (where 'tis con∣ceived Philip baptised the Eunuch. Act. 8.) whose streames are swallowed up in the same field in which they rise. The se∣curest voice of our present joy soundeth discord, like thatEzra 3. 13 compounded noise at the second temples dedication; the voi∣ces of them that re∣joyced could hard∣ly bee distinguishedEam  in ∣l se gloria agsermus voes▪ i∣bulatnis nor. Aug. in Psal. 67. from their cries that mourned. Therefore now
sound a retrait to your affections which follow these ignes fa∣tuos of the world; false happinesse, and learne to make strait steps unto your feet, you that follow the true; that is, through holinesse, without which it is impossible to bee happy; in which feare not the wheelings of a giddy world; feare not af∣flictions, theyCalamitas Jaepiùs disci∣plina virtu∣tis est. Mi∣nut. Fel. Oct. many times amend that which Prosperitie marred: the Saints have experience here∣of; BeforePs. 119. 67. 71. I was affli∣cted,
I went astray but now I keepe thy word—'tis good for mee that I have beene afflicted, that I may earne thy statutes. 'TisMagna ira est, quan. do peccani∣bus non ira∣scitr Deu. a misery to want correction, and to be given over to our selves: butPsal. 94. 12 blessed is the man whom thou cha∣stisest, O Lord, and tea∣chest him thy law.At nim Di  nec in do∣lore deseri∣tur, nec morte ni∣t —iser videri po∣test,  Minut. Fel. Octy. The souldier of Christ is not forsaken in his sorrow, destroyed in death, nor dishonou∣red in his wounds: he may be called un∣happy, or seeme so, but not bee so. All that hee suffereth for
Christ is▪ Ignat. ep. ad Polycap. his honour and matter of rejoy∣cing who overcom∣meth. Therefore the Apostles departed re∣joycing in their stripes: Act. 5. 41. Therefore our Sa∣viour pronounced them blessed who mourne. True hap∣pinesse is of so divine a condition, that floods of teares can∣not drown it; yea, like thatGaga∣tes lapis accendi∣tur aqu▪ ole restin∣guitur. Plin. nat. hist. l. 36 c. 19. stone which they say is inflamed with water, and quenched with oile. There's no danger of affliction, if prospe∣rity
corrupt not: darke night extingui∣sheth not the starres, but shewes their light more excellent: nei∣ther can any affliction put out our happi∣nesse; it shall make it more glorious.Rom. 8. 35. 37, &c. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tri∣bulation, or anguish, or persecution?—In all these things wee are more than conque∣rers, through him that loved us: for I am perswaded, that neither death, nor life,—nor any creature shall bee able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Yea,Rev. 14. 13. blessed are the dead in the Lord, because living or dying, we are the Lords,Eph. 2. 19. fellow ci∣tizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of the God of the li∣ving. Which bring∣eth mee to the next part, the Saints Unity with God and his Church. That dwell in thy house. This tearme sometimes importeth the materiall temple, or house of prayer, 2 Sam. 7. 13. 1. 1 King. 5. 5 1 King. 6. 37. Ioh.
2. 14. 16. 17. Somtimes the Church of the li∣ving God, 1 Tim. 3. 15Ecclia columen & firmamn∣tum verita∣tis appella∣tur, quod unum est propter fir∣mitatem fi∣dei, & quiae doctrinā coelesti & miraculis divinis fir∣mata est. Remigius in 1 Tim. 3. the pillar and ground of truth, that is, the faithfullCo▪os. 1. 23 there∣on grounded andDmum Dei & Ecclesiam appellavit Coetum eorumqui crediderunt—spra petram enim sundai stabeles & immobiles permanent—Theodoret. in 1 Tim. 3. . Chrysb. e∣stablished. The living temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and so all the faithfull, and all the Churches of Christ are but one Catholike Church, as all seas (however they receive divers
denominations from the divers shores they wash) are but one sea. And this house of God isEcclesia, quae est ve∣rum templū Dei, quod non in pa∣rietibus est, sed in crde, ac side homi∣num, qui credunt in cu, & co. cantur fi∣deles—Lact. l. 4. c. 13. not in walls, and roofes, but in the faith and truth in mens hearts:haec est dom fidelis hoc imor∣tale tem∣plum: in quo si quis non sacrifi∣saverit, in mrtalitatis praemium non habbit. ib. c. 14. this is a faithfull house, and an immortallNa , &c. Clem. Alexandria. srom. l. 7. tem∣ple, which Christ (of whom Solomon, the sonne of David, was a figure) did build, and to which hee cal∣leth all nations of the earth, in one faith,
one baptisme, one truth, and one hope of salvation in him, who is the sole Savi∣our and Mediatour betweene God and man, 1 Tim. 2. 5. Act. 4. 12.Hic est templi mag∣ni janua, bic lucis vi, bic dx salutis, bic estium vitae. Lact. l 4. 5. 29. the onely doore of the great temple, the way of light, the guide to life. So that wee are here to consider these three ascensions in the house of God: First, the house of prayer, set apart, and consecrated to the service of God, where the holy oracles of
God, and Sacraments are rightly admini∣stred, whence the spi∣ritual incense of pub∣like prayers, and sweete odours of thankesgiving are of∣fered from the gol∣den censer, by the Angell of the Co∣venant, before the throne of God, Rev. 8. 3, 4. where the blessed assemble on earth, where the ho∣nour of God dwel∣leth among men: where Christ hath promised to bee pre∣sent, Matth. 18. 20. where that blessed
AnnaEt in pro∣speris, & in adversis ab hoc opere non cessat. Alcuinus in sest. purif. continued ser∣ving God with fast∣ings and prayersContinuè & perseve∣ranter, ut 1 Tim. 5. 5. Lc. Br∣gens▪ in Lu. 2. night and day, Luk. 2. 37. neither in pro∣sperity, nor in adver∣sity ceasing: this house the Church militant in sundry parts of the world frequenteth, and reverenceth for his sake, who there, most evidently mani∣festeth his presence on earth, and in his ho∣ly ordinance and sa∣cred mysteries is there worshipped: it was Davids greatest griefe inPsal. 42. 1. 4. his exile, as of o∣ther Saints, that they
could not be present here: for this theyPsal. 84. 2. 3. emulated the spar∣row and swallow, who had free accesse to the places neere Gods altars. And undoubtedly, all the Saints on earth beare the like affection to the house of God, above all amiable places of the earth. With this wee may joyne all that are by the outward seales of the covenant, admit∣ted into the visible Church, as Guests in∣vited to theLuk. 14. great Supper, without, or
with the wedding garment, to which the2 Chron. 4. 9. 1 King. 6. 3 the great court or porch, before the Temple, whichsome would have of 4. divisions, some 3. some 2. Azorius instit▪ moral. l. 6▪ c. 5. 3. tom. 1. ib. c. 52. atrium Iudaerum answered, or that to which cleane and un∣cleane might come. 2. The communi∣on of Saints, who are the body of Christ, and temple of Gods holy spirit, built up∣on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner stone, in whom all the buil∣ding coupled toge∣ther, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord; into which are
admitted onely thoseEzek 9▪ 4 who have the in∣ward seale of Gods covenant, whom hee hath marked for his owne, as a royall Priesthood and holy nation: to which the Sanctuarie, inward house, orAdiho∣mius de secund part. ten pli. Atium sa∣cerdoum answered. 3. The Coelestiall Temple, the greatRev. 21. 10. 27. city, holy Hierusalem, into which no un∣cleane thing shall en∣ter, prefigured by that Sanctum Scto∣rum: into which ChristHe'. 9▪ 11▪ 12▪ our blessed High-priest is entred,
to obtaine eternall re∣demption for us: which house of God, In  yra. Lyra here understan∣deth: Ierusalem, which is above: the Saints Metropolis, Galat. 4. 26..  o a. 1. not now visible, but by the eye of faith: whereof Christ is a citizen, the Concives, the Patriarkes, Pro∣phets, Martyrs, Saints and Angells. Into the second sate of grace, and this third of glory, may comeEzk. 44. 9, 10. no stranger, none of uncircumcised heart; that is,. cle. Al. strom. l. 4. unblever, or unholy: they▪ on∣ly
who. ib. are holy, are truly Priests unto the Lord: whence it may appeare, that Vnity with God and his Church is a character and mark of true happinesse: Uni∣ty, I say, in love and sanctity,Magna omiis mi∣seria est, cum ill non esse, sine quo non poest esse, &c. Prosper. Epigram. out of which is misery:Ecclefia na est—quood sos mut: radii, sed lumen nm & rami arboris mul∣ti, sed rour unum tenci radc fundatum. E-t de fte uno rivi plimi dflunt, umeroit as▪lic  t diffsa videtur exundantis copiae largiae, unit as tae servatur in origine, &c. and indeed hee cannot have God his Father, who hath not the Church for his Mo∣ther, which, as I said, isHaere jam non potest De paren, qui cclesiā non  Si potuit vadere, qui extra arcan Ne suit: & qui extra  foris fuerit, evadet▪ Cyptra. 3. de simplpraela. but one, and that
(as Iacob said of Behel, Genes. 28. 17.) is the house of God, and the gate of heaven: the house of faith,Quod i quis non in∣traverit, vel a quo si quis exvert, à pe vitae ac sauis aeter∣nae alieus st. Lactant. l. 4. c. ult. into which if any enter not, out of which if any wilful∣ly goe out, he aliena∣t th himselfe from all hope of eternall life. Hee that eateth the Paschall Lamb out of this house,Qui extra n doum agnus com ederit, po∣phanus est: Si qis in ad Noë non ueit, prbit reg∣nane ilu∣vio. Hieron. Damso. lb. 1. ep. 25. is pro∣phane: out of thisQuo Sa∣ramento declraur, in  domm solm, d est, in ecclsiam, icturos, & ab inteitu mundi evasu∣ros, colligi oportere. Cyprin. l. 1. ep. 6. arke there is no sal∣vation. This is as Ra∣habs
house, Iosh. 6. 22. the covenant of peace is onely with them that keepe within, if any go out, his blood shall be upon his own head: this is the bo∣dy of Christ, where∣of he is the head and Saviour, Ephes. 5. 23. in whom onely, and through whom is true blessednesse. 1. Bee not decei∣ved; the Laver set betweene the taber∣nacle of the congre∣gation, and the Al∣tar, to clense all who entred thereinto, de∣clared in the figure,
that1 Cor. 6. 9 Rev. 21. 27 Ezck. 44. 9. no unrighteous person, unclean thing, alient or uncircum ci∣sed in heart, shall en∣ter into the house and kingdome of God. 2. Beguile not thy selfe with the fruit∣lesse name of a Chri∣stian:. Ignat. p. ad Magn. not to bee called so, but to bee so maketh happy. If thou art so named, but not so natured, thou art but as the Church of Sardi, Rev. 3. 1. thou hast a name that thou livest, but thou art dead: It were lesse evill to bee wicked any where,
in the world, than in Gods house: theƲbi subli∣mior praer∣gativa, ma∣jor est cla; ipsa enim errores no∣stros rlgi quam profi∣temur accu∣sat. Salvian de gubern. Dei . 4.  hoc magis ul∣pabiles su∣mus, i le∣gem ba climus, & aliltores sumus. ib. Minor cri∣mini reatus est lege escire, quam sper∣nere. ibid. Salv. l. 4. fine. ex∣cellencie of the pre∣rogative aggravateth the fault committed, which (like dirt upon the Raven) were lesse conspicuous in per∣sons of lesse emi∣nence: and the very religion which a wic∣ked man profesleth, and dishonoureth, ac∣cuseth him. Lesse sin hath he, who know∣eth not the Law of God, than hee that contemneth it: they cause the ho∣ly Name of GodRo. 2. 24 to bee blasphemed,
Per eos tantummodo blaspema∣tur Dus, qi ona dicuni, & mla faciunt ib. Salv. who in words pro∣fesse to know God, and in deedes deny him: therfore is thatMagis  enins dam∣nabilis est malitia, quam tituls bnitatis ac∣cusat, & re∣atus impii est pium no∣men. ibid. most damnable wickednesse, which some title of good∣nesse accuseth, and the guilt of the impi∣ous, is an holy name. Looke therefore to thy foot, thou that commest into the house of God: he is not blessed who dwelleth here as1 Sam. 2. 12. 17. E∣les sonnes, to make men abhorre the of∣fering of God: asIob. 2. 14. Matth. 21. 12, 13. the buyers and sel∣lers, to the propha∣nation
of the holyf Ezek. 8. 11. Temple: as those seventy Ancients of Israel, to worke a∣bominations in the place of Gods wor∣ship: as they who bring hither aures insi∣diarices comming in∣to the Church1 Sam. 21. 7. as Doeg the Edomite to Nob, to observe and ac∣cuse, as false Apostles creeping in (like ser∣pents into the gar∣den) to spie out some occasion to sting us: asIob. 1. 6. Iob. 2. 1. Sathan among the children of God: as Hereticks and con∣tentious Schismaticks
who are in this holy body, as thornes in the flesh, as the Ca∣naanite in the Holy land:1 Iob. 2. 19 They were not of us saith Saint Iohn, say wee, would God we could once say the rest, they went out from us. They are not blessed who come in hither like impious Cham into the Arke, whom the curse fol∣loweth out: like the Blackmoore into the bath, going out with the same complexion with which hee en∣tred: who bringeth hither itching eares,
who is like thoseLegimu—auriculas in tantum magnitudi∣nis gentibus excrescere quibusdam, ut totum corpus iis contegatur, vestium mo∣do, Fanesios vocant. Cal. Rhodiginus lect. antiq. l. 3. c. 29. monstrous Fanesii, all eares: such as are all for hearing, that's the cloke which must present them for holy to the worlds view. But the hearers of the law are not righteous before God, but theRom. 2. 13 doers of the law shall be justifyed: 'tis true,Exod. 29. 20. Aarons eare must be toucht in his consecration, but his hand must be toucht also: to teach us that wee must heare, and practise also, if wee will bee an holy Priest-hood to the
Lord. Neither are they blessed, who ap∣pear before the Lord empty-handed, with∣out due provision; nor they, who receive the distilling dew of Gods word often fal∣ling on them, as rain into the sea; whose briny floods are no∣thing changed there∣by, or on theHeb. 6. 7, 8 barren ground that's neere to cursing, whose end is to be burned: but blessed is the fruitfull ground, they of whom Christ said (and we in his name say) Blessed are they
that heare the word of God, and keepe it. This shall bee thy present assurance of thy fu∣ture dwelling in the presence of God to e∣ternity. 1 King. 10. 8. The Queene of Saba pronounced So∣lomons servants hap∣py, who stood in his presence to heare his wisdome, but here is a greater than Solo∣mon: greater happi∣nesse, because true and permanent: well mightTeste Au∣gustino, dice∣re solitus est, magis se gadere, qo mem∣brion eccle∣sie Dei esset, quam qud interis regnaret. Abraham Bucholcer. jd. Chron. I heodosius the great (that same Ec∣clesiae nutricius) rejoyce more, that hee was a
member of this Church, a servant of God, than that hee was a Lord of men: this Psalmists choice was, rather to keepe a doore in the hse of God, than to dwell in the ta∣bernacles of wickednesse. Here is a constant blessing:Ps 84. 10 Wee are but pilgrims on earth, though wee dwell in the houses of Kings. This world is to us, as 'tis said of Iacobs Ca∣naan, Gen. 36. 7. terra peregrina∣tionum eorum: here's no long stay, nor security: in GODS house are both: in
In domo tuâ ti eis latrones, domus Dei murus est ipse Deus. Ae. in Psal. thy house thou maist feare theeves, but God is a defence to his owne house,Ma. 6. 19. there is neither theef nor moth. The blessed possesse thisSine di∣vernate & divisione limit omnes ha∣bent eam, & singuish∣bent totam. ibid. without any diver∣sity or division of bounds: all have it, and every one hath it all. Here's no want of any thing, nor care to get, nor feare to lose: all is heere se∣cure fulnesse without satiety: no wonder if their mouths bee al∣waies filled with Gods praises, who are so filled with his
blessings, which is our next part, and cha∣racter of the blessed man. They will ever praise . The Saints onely praise God truely and constantly: according toQuando bexè et, au∣da misericor∣diam; quan∣do malè est, lada vei∣tatem, quia pecata fla∣gellat. Aug. in Psal. 91. S. Augustines rule; in prosperity praise his mercy, in adversity his truth, according to which hee punisheth sinnes. 'Twas Plinies report to the Em∣perourf Plin. se∣cund. l. 10. ep. Trajao. concerning Christians, that they were wont before day to sing praises unto Christ: and so it see∣meth to have beene
the practice of Chri∣stiansExtra Psalmos si∣lentium est: quocun{que} te verteris, a∣retor stivam teners alle∣lujab de∣cantat: su∣dans messor Psalmis se avcat: & curv at∣tondn▪ vi∣tes falce vi∣nitor, ali∣quid Davi∣dicum canit. Ierom▪ Mar cellae. lib. 2. ep. 7. in S. Ieroms time, to spend their lives in singing Psalms and praises to God: the toyling Plow∣man, the sweating Mower, the pruner of Vines; in every corner you might have heard them sin∣ging their Hallelujahs: The reason hereof is, becauseSee Exod. 15. 1. Iudg. 5. 1. 1 Sam. 2. 1. &c. these have a lively sense of Gods mercy and benefi∣cence: Others are filled, but not sensi∣ble: these onelyPlus nim laudat unsqis{que} quod pos∣sit. Irem 9. love
and enjoy God, and therefore praise him: they onely have true faith,Psal. 116. 10. which is ever apt to breake out into praise, because of the blessedRom. 5. 1. peace of conscience, which they have with God: they onely have san∣ctified wils and affe∣ctions: theyLaudare nemo solet nisi qud ei placet. Aug. in Psal 14 Secritas ego landis, in lade Di est: ibi lau∣dator secu∣rus est, ubi non timet ne de laudato rubsat. Aug. in Psal. 94. Init. onely delight in the Lord, therefore praise him: the security of praise is in the praises of God: therefore they praise him, ore & opere, and that constantly: Thy praise shall bee ever in my mouth, Psalm. 34.
1. without cessation, though not without intermission. What ever thou dost, let thy soule ever praise the Lord: Whether thou eate or drinke, doe all toAug. in Psal. 102. his honour, 1 Cor. 10. 31. even in thyInnocentia tua etiam in dormiente vox est ani∣maetuae. Aug. ib. si semper à nobis ama∣tur ille, sem∣per laudatur Aug. in Psal. 103. sleepe innocence is the voice of thy soule; love him ever, and thou dost ever praise him. Therefore no man is excused from this du∣ty: what can he doe, who cannot love? and indeed, God not so much requireth the voice, as the heart; neither that forLaudarise vul Dus, & b ut tis procias n ut ille subli∣metur. ib. in Psalm. 102. his
owne sake, but for thy benefit. The out-goings of the morning and eve∣ning praise him: all creatures (the oneape∣state excepted) praise him: how many times doth the Psalmist in one Psalme exhort thereto? yea all the Psalmes are quod maer Psalmorum pars Dei lau∣des continent Valent. Shin dler. lex pen∣teglo. a booke of praises, because GODS praises are the principall part thereof. That which most Interpreters give here perpetuo, the vulgar giveth in secula secu∣lorum: the blessed
do but tune here, and record: sometimes their de profundis; sometimes their ve∣nite exultemus, and Hosanna's, the gene∣rall vote of all the Saints, the Canticum novm: TheChrysostom. in Psal. 95. old song was confined by the borders of Cana∣an; among the stran∣gers,Psal. 137. 1. 4. by the Rivers of Babylō, they hanged up their harps on the willowes: they might weepe in remem∣brance of Sion, but how shall we sing a song of the Lord in a strange Land? but the new
song, of anSi eim admirabilm & omnem excedentem ntuam in∣canaom Domini ar∣rae s: si regenratio∣nem—uni∣versi os expeco invetera tunc dem recens ac no∣vum canti∣cum cania∣bis. Basil. in Psal 32. admira∣ble matter, excelling all the courses of na∣ture, the incarnation of Christ, the renuing of the World, the mysteries of our resu¦rection:Luk. 2. 14 the Angels began this in the day of Christs nativity, and now it soundeth through theVniverso decantatur obe. Chrys. whole World: and so ad∣mirable a worke, is the praise of God, that death it selfe shall not interrupt it, nor time end it, wee shall sing our Gloria in altissimis Deo, for ever and ever: be∣cause
wee shallLaus sine fine crit, qui sine fine a∣m. Augu∣si. in Psal. 142. love him eternally: wee shall joyne in a fh Queere with those heavenly creatures, who now praise the LORD before his Throne. The Saints praise God constantly: it well becommeth the just to be thankefull: but hee that is silent now, shall not sing with Saints and An∣gels in the life to come.Psal. 107. , 13, 21, 31 The Psalmist recounting the mer∣cies of God, maketh this the sweet bearing of his song: Let them
therefore confesse before the Lord his loving kind∣nesse▪ and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men. Begin to rec∣kon ('tis all thou canst, for there is no end of his goodnesse) he2 Tim. 1. 9. Tit. 1. 2. 1. Pet. 1. 20▪ Gen. 1. 27. elected us when wee were not: hee made us to his owne Image, heRom. 5. 10. redeemed us with the precious blood of his onely Sonne.Quod si totum me debe pro me facto, quid addum jam pro refecto, & refecto be modo? in primo opere me mihi dedi, in secundo e: & i se dedit, me mihi reddidit: das ergo & editus me pro me debeo & his debeo; qid retruam p snam eiamsi me millies rependere poss  sm ego ad Deum? Bernard. de diligena. Deo cap. 2. If I owe so
much for my creati∣on, what owe I for my redemption, with so great a price? in the worke of creation hee gave mee to my selfe; in the second hee gave himselfe to me; and when hee gave himselfe for me, he restored me to my selfe. What shall I render the Lord? if I could give my selfe a thousand times over, what am I to the Lord? there is no∣thing in Heaven or Earth among all the creatures, so divine, so excellent as Christ:
hee that hath himAffatim di∣ves est, qui m Ohristo panper est. Ierom. l. 2. p. ad Heliodor. hath all things, and having nothing else aboundeth: no won∣der if the Saints ever praise him, yea when they goe per vallem flets: here is theirLaus fla∣gellais me∣dcina est  Aug in Psl. 144. wounds medicine: here is the tryall, here is the Selah set to erect the mind to conside∣ration: 'tis an easie matter to praise the Lord blessing us, and giving us good things (yet too many forget that plaine song) but if thou art a blessed man indeed, thou must praise the Lord
in the Valley of Baca, in teares and bitter forrowes, when hee afflicteth thee and ta∣keth away all earthly comforts from thee:Iob 1. 21. In▪ boc ita{que} mens jsta ab injusta discernitur: quod omni∣potentis Dei laudem & inter adver∣sa conside∣r: qod no cum re∣bus srangi∣tur, non cum casu gloriae exterioris cadit: sed in hoc magis qualis cum rbus suerit demonstrat, quae & sine rebus robus∣tius stat. G. ego. Mor. in Iob. l. 11. . 1. 'twas Iobs resolution, The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken it, bles∣sed bee the Name of the Lord: such is the pos∣session of Christ, as that no externall e∣state, no nor death it selfe can make that possessour unhappy, or any more take a∣way his blessednesse, than the stormes wee feele on earth can shake downe the orbs
of heaven: what ever God taketh away, if he take not himselfe from thee, thou art blessed, neither canst thou be otherwise, no not when thou see∣mest, to others and thy selfe most mise∣rable: Therefore the Psalmist (though in bitternesse of spirit and present affliction he recounted his hap∣pinesse past) yet re∣calleth his affections, Why art thou cast down,Psal. 4. 11. O my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within mee? waite on God. For indeed we may not be
ingratefull.1 Sam. 1. 8 Why wee∣pest thou? (said Elkanah to afflicted Hannah) why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart troubled? am not I better to thee than tenne sonnes? how much more may our blessed Jesus say to us (when wee turne our debt of praises into dedolency, and2 Sam. 19 2. our victory, for1 Cor. 25. 57. which the Saints praise GOD, into mourning, and de∣jectednesse of soules) why mourn you thus, who have such inter∣est in me? what ever GOD doth to the
Saints, 'tis best for them: the Physitian, better than the pati∣ent knoweth what is good and necessary for him: if it be some∣times best for a man to bee grieved with thePutridae carnes ferro curantur & cauterio. D. Hieronym.  lancer and caute∣ry, how much bet∣ter is it for a sinner to bee cured by affli∣ctions? 'Tis a character of the blessed man, ever to praise the Lord: theLaudantm vde,  poba amā∣em. Aug. in Psa. 04. wicked can ne∣ver doe it: because they neither love nor serve the Lord: the sinner dishonoureth
him in all his actions, and therefore can but subdolously praise him in words: Tis a dishonour to a good man, to have some notorious lewd fel∣low praise him,Melius est ut tu vitupe∣rares, quam dolosè lau∣dares. Aug. in Psal. 119. twere more honour to have such a one dispraise and con∣demne him: feldome doe they condemne any but the good, orNo nisi grande bo∣num à Ne∣roe damna∣tum. Tertull. adv. Gent. applaud any but the evill, because every one loveth his like: he that knoweth him (saidQuis e∣nim nesciat nibil nisi flagiisum to ore lau∣dari? Ierom. l. 2. ep. 3. Sabiniano. Tertullia of Nero) might under∣stand, that hee con∣demned
nothing but some great good? when a wicked mouth (used to cur∣sing, prophanation, and filthy talke) pre∣sumeth to sing the praises of God, I may say (asQuomodo Deum vio∣la, qui boc modo placal? M. Fel. Octa. Minucius Foe∣lix, in another kind) how doth he violate the sacred Majesty of God, who would so please him?Edixit, ne quis ipsum alis quam Appelles pin∣geret, quam Pyrgoteles sculperet, quam Lysip∣pus ex aere duceret. Plin. nat. bist. l. 7. c. 37. Alexan∣der would not suffer a∣ny but apelles to take his picture, least by unskilfull hands his countenance should be misreported to po∣sterity: with how
much better reason doth GOD forbid any but his Saints to praise him, least they that know him not, should blaspheme & thinke him evill whom such men praise? he therefore that saith,Psal. 50. 5, 14. 16. Gather my Saints to gather unto me—offer unto God praise: saith unto the wic∣ked▪ What hast thou to doe to declare mine or∣dinances, and that thou shouldest take my cove∣nant into thy mouth; seeing thou hatest to bee reformed? praise is notEclus. 15. 9. seemly in the mouth
of a sinner: when the divell confessed Christ,Mark. 3. 1, 12. Luke 4. 41. hee sharpely rebuked those un∣cleane spirits, and suf∣fered them not to say that they knew him to bee the Christ;. Theophylact. in Luc. 4. that we might know, such are not to bee heard though they speake truth, because they doe it to some evill end: and that Christ needed no such witnesses as both, ib▪ i Matth. 8. professed enmity, and in their best pro∣fession call the truth of Religion into que∣stion; for who would
not suspect that to be evill, which the wic∣ked seeme to like and allow? therefore if thou wilt bee admit∣ted into this blessed Queere, be thouNeli bonae cantilene tuae obstrepe∣re moribus malis—qui laudatis, be∣ne vivile—audaio im∣pii ffendit Deum▪ Au∣gustin, in Psal. 146. ho∣ly, that thou maist truely praise God, and trust in him, which is the next character of the bles∣sed man. Blessed is the m whose strength is in thee. Blessed are they whose confidence and trust is in the Lord.Psal. 121. 2 My helpe
commeth from the Lord who hath made Heaven and earth, saith the Saint: Some putPsal. 20. 7 their trust in Chariots and some in horses; but wee will remember the Name of the Lord our God. And good reason: for 1. TheyPsal 125. 1. who trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which cannot bee removed. This is a trust which cannoti Psal. 9. 10. deceive. 2. None but the Saints which are the sonnes of God can trust in him: the re∣probate (though he may have a false con∣fidence
for a time, as he may haveMath. 13. 20, 21. Lke 8. 13. a tem∣porary faith) know∣eth what he must ex∣pect, and therefore beholdeth God as an angry judge: but he is the justIsai 63. 16. mans fa∣ther: and not onelyPsal. 103. 13. pittieth him as a tender father doeth his childe, butRom. 8. 14, 15, 16. gi∣veth him the spirit of adoption to lead him, and assure him that hee is indeed a child of God. 3. They only haveRom. 5. 1, 2 accesse through faith unto his grace, by theEph. 2. 18 spirit which
dwelleth in them, they have peace with God who are justifi∣ed by faith in Christ. God will no more re∣member their sinnes and iniquities, and thereforeHeb. 10. 17, 22. they may bee bold to draw neere in assurance of faith to the Throne of grace, Christ being their advocate to ap∣peare alwaies and to mediate for them. He ever offereth up their ▪petitions for themRevel. 8. 3 upon the golden Altar (his precious merits) which is be∣fore the Throne of God.
4. Hee giveth hisPsal. 91. 11, 12. Angels charge over them: and theyPsal. 34. 7. pitch their tents round a∣bout them: so that when they seem most forlorne,2 King. 6. 16. they that are with them are more than can be a∣gainst them. 5. Hee hath not onely given themEph. 1. 13, 14. 16. 4. 30 Rom. 8. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Galat. 4 6, 7. the first fruits of the Spirit, the earnest of his cove∣nant;Qum▪ ddum enim nobis arrabonem spiritus reliquit, ita & a nobis arrabonem caris acepit, & vexit in coelum, pignus totis sumae iluc qun∣d ue redigendae: securae eo Caro & saguis, u∣surpastis & celum & regnum Deiin Cisto. Ter∣tull. deresur▪ carnis. c. 51. but ascending into Heaven, he hath
taken up with him an earnest and pledge of their flesh and blood, which shall through him at last possesse the same blessed inheritance with him. 6. There can bee no sure trust in any other: all earthly things are subject to the Lawes of time, and therefore to sud∣den and continuall changes: Thou that risest cheerefully in the morning,N sis qid srs  ve∣bal. know∣est not what the late evening may bring. There are many
chances in this life, & one certaine change in the end thereof: Looke on proudDan. 4. 27 30. Ne∣buchadnezzar, osten∣ting his magnificent Babel, built for the honour of his Maje∣sty; while the word was in the Kings mouth, the voice from Heaven told him his Kingdome was departed from him; and the very same houre was it ful∣filled. Looke on pro∣phaneDan. 5. 1, 2, &c. 5. 30. Belshazzar, fea∣sting with a thousand Princes drinking in the impropriated ves∣sels
of the Temple of Ierusalem an unknown hand writing a terri∣ble doome upon the wall, and the same night executed. Be∣hold the rich man, projecting for greater barnes, singing a re∣uiem to his soule, but presently hearing,Luke 12. 19. Thou foole, this night shall they take away thy soule; and thou shalt in these examples see a true scene of hu∣mane changes. TheIob 14. 2. flowers are Emblems of ourƲita ita{que} in carne fs in fan est.—homo e∣nim more floris proce∣dit ex ccl∣to; & subitò apparet in public; qui statim ex publico per mortem re∣trabitur ad oultum. Carnis nos viriditas oftendit: sed ariditas pulveris ab apectibus retre∣bit. Gregor. Moral. in Iob. l. 11. . 27. pre∣sent
lives, now sweet∣ly flourishing in the vigour of their youth, vying beauty with the fairest Rachels, and lustre with the most magnificent (Mat. 6. 29 Salomon in all his glory, was not arayed like one of these.) presently cropt and withered. AnAristot. Ephe∣meron, whose whole story is but, oritur, mo∣ritur, such is man; A morning vapour, wch a little heare dissol∣veth; such is man. AIonah 4. 6, 7. Ionahs Gourd, in the height of the owners joy, smitten and wi∣thered
quite away; such is man. 1. O vaine hopes of men, and idle thoughts, how often doe you beguile us? how often are you broken in the middle of your flight; or like ceiled Doves, mount till you die? or likeExod. 14. 25, 27. Pharaohs Chariot wheeles, there falling off, where wee are most deepely enga∣ged in the returning floods of sorrowes? vaine confidence in riches:Fluxa est dviturum naura, &c▪ Basil. in Psal. 61. they ebbe and flow uncertaine∣ly: their gliding
streames continually change their masters: this field is thine to day, to morrow it passeth to another: looke upon this place; how often have these mountaines changed Lords, and these hou∣ses, owners? all earth∣ly goods, at the last houre of our lives, shall (like2 King. 2 13. Elihs mantle, in his ascen∣sion) fall from us to some others use: vaine confidence in any of the sonnes of men: the wise, the illustri∣ous, the noble, the vertuous, the strong,
the faire, the chaste, the lovely, the young, all die: experience teacheth it: one day telleth another, one night certifieth ano∣ther (I would we had wanted this daies ex∣ample) none are ex∣empted, let us not therefore strive with our Maker, but hum∣bly subject our hearts and affections to his blessed will, who ever will doe that which shall bee best for us: let us consider that tis our owne fault when we are to dis∣consolte, if wee will
needs build on any but God, that ground failing us, our hopes are broken: but the foundation of the Lord remaineth sure:Fixis rati∣onibus pera∣guntur res eius, & quod semel decre∣tum est fi e∣ri, nulla po∣test novita∣te immutari Arnobius. advers. Gent. l. 2. his immutable de∣crees are certaine, and shall take effect at the appointed time. 2. Examine thy trust in God, whether it be faithfull before the time of tryall: many professe confi∣dence, and yet in try∣als it faileth them. Examine therefore first, whether thy trust be grounded on Gods
Word: that onely is infallible, and cannot deceive: the confi∣dence which crosseth this, must needs faile, because this cannot: if an incorrigible sin∣ner, trust toDeut. 29. 19, 20. impuni∣ty: that confidence must faile him: if any man trust in wrong and robbery; that confidence must faile him, because Gods justice cannot: if any man trust in lying va∣nities, hee forsaketh hisIonah 2. 8. owne mercy. If any man make him∣selfe rules of wise∣dome, and counsell,
against the revealed will of God, and trust therein, (were those counsels as profound as Achitophels) the Lord will infatuate and make them voyd. If any man will trust in riches, or in his heart serve idols: his trust against Gods Word, must faile: they that make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that put their trust in them: all senselesse  when theNc sentit sua nativi∣tatis injri∣am—ita nec pslea de vstra vene atione &c. Miut. Eel. q. s. line is sretched over the idoll, when tis hew∣ed, finished, adored, it perceives not: it
cannot defend it selfe: when, the birds sit on their heads, and spi∣ders derive their slen∣der webs from their mouths (Quant veriùs e diis vestris animalia muta natu∣raliter jdi∣cant? non sentire cos sciunt, r∣dunt, insul∣tant, insi∣dent: ac nisi abigatis, in ipso Dei ve∣sri re ni∣dificant: aranea ver fciem ius intexunt, & de capite sua fia sspndun▪ Minut. Fel Octav. more rea∣sonably judging of them, then superstiti∣ous men) they feele it not. Tis not easie to resolve, which was the most unreasona∣ble and ridiculous custome of heathens setting dogges,Est & anser vigil cura Capitolio testta defense, per id tempus canum ilentio proditis rebus: quam∣obrem cibaria anserum, censores in pri is locane. Plin. nat. bst, l. 10. c. 22. vid. ib. l▪ 29. . 3. . &c. 4. init. and
geese to keepe their Capitoll and Gods; orNam de Senonibus quid loquar? quos Cpito∣lii secreta penetrantes, Romanae re∣liquiae non ulissent, nisi eos pavido anser strepi∣pitu prodi∣disse: en∣quales tem pla Romana praesules ha∣bent! ubi tuc rat Jupiter? an in ansere io∣quebatur? Ambros, ad Valenti. relat. Sy∣mah. re∣spond. senselesse gods to keepe their bodies, soules, lives, and states. 2. Whether it bee built upon that which is unchangeable: Cur∣sed be the man that trust∣eth in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and with∣draweth his heart from the Lords for he shal be like the heath in the Wilder∣nesse. -Blessed be the man that trusteth in the Lord, -for hee shall bee as a tree planted by the water, -her leafe shall be greene, and shall not care for the yeere
of drought, neither shall cease from eelding fruit. Iere. 17. 5, 6, 7, 8. That sailers trust must faile, who in the storme, layeth hold on a loose rope. If a man trust in Physiti∣ans as Asa did, 2 Chron. 16. 12. to an Egyptian confederacie, as Ioha∣na and the Captaines of the host would doe, Ie. 42. that trust shall faile, and this prove but a staffe of reed, Ezek. 29. 6. If a man trust in riches, as that wealthy foole in the Gospell did, Lke 12. 19, 20. If in
strength of armies, and prosperity, as Vzziah did (when he was strong, his heart was lift up to his de∣struction. 2 Chron. 26 16.) they shall not helpe in the day of affliction; and the Lord will breake these: if a man trust to his owne counsels, or assistance of friends, hee may have those prove like Achi∣thophels, and these like Iobs misrble comfor∣ters. If a man trust in any thing in this life, or life it selfe, it must faile:Iob 17▪ 13 14. I bough I hope
the grave shall bee mine house, and I shall make my bed in the darke. I shall say to corruption thou art my father, and to the worme▪ thou art my mother—all things under the Sunne are subject to change: there can bee no sure trust in them. 3. Examine whe∣ther it be a firme and continuing trust: not onely when thou art prosperous, but ap∣pearing in the grea∣test of afflictions.Iob 13. 15 Though he slay me▪ yet will I trust in him, said Iob. This is true con∣fidence
which will hold the fiery tryall: and trueNunqum est patientiae virtus in prosper; lle atem est verè pai ens, qui & adversis atteritur, & tmen a pei suae retudine non nr∣aur. Gre∣gor. mor. in Iob l. 11. c. 18. patience, which will endure adversity Tis not the trust of the bles∣sed, which, like that seed which fell on stony ground, com∣meth up and dureth but for a season: Mtth. 13. 21. or like theIob 6. 16, 17. rivers which are ranke in Winter, but in time are dried up with heate and con∣sumed: and when it is hot, they faile out of their places▪ Which least appeare when wee have most need:
As those tellae caedentes, were never any part of the celestiall orbs: so that trust which at any time faileth, was never true. To him thatMah. 24 13▪ 46. Revel. 2. 10. persevereth un∣to the end, are all the promises: resolve therefore to trust in the Lord in every estate, and that shall demonstrate thee blessed. So we come to the last character of true blessednesse, Sinceri∣ty of heart: And in whose heart are thy waies. Not mans own waies, but the commande∣ments
and waies of God:Isai. 55. 8. Galat. 5. 19, 20. My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your waies my waies, saith the Lord. The waies of man are the workes of the flesh, Adultery fornica∣tion, uncleannesse, wan∣tonnesse, idolater witch∣craft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, con∣tentions, seditions, here∣sies, envy, murthers, drun∣kennes, & such like: but the way of God, is the fruit of his Spirit, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, meekenee, tempe∣rance. Concerning the
wicked, 'tis said, their inward parts are ve∣ry wickednesse: ThePsal. 14. 1 foole said in his heart, there is no God.Luk. 12. 17, 18. The rich man thought with himselfe, I will build greater barnes: there was the way of the world in his heart: but the way to blessednesse is Gods way: theMath. 7. 13. narrow way of faith and o∣bedience to all his commandements, & (that which is not the least difficulty) con∣stancie therein. Hi∣lrie saith well,Semitam esse qae trita est▪ in Ps. 118. a way is that which is a
beaten path: 'tis not a pace or two, which maketh the way, but a constant walking the same way. The hypocrites heart is like an anvill, for a∣ny thing to be forged thereon: like a thea∣ter, on which is repre∣sented, sometimes the Saint, sometimes the Devill: like a mer∣cenary presse, whose Letters are somtimes set for holy pages, sometimes for impi∣ous and lascivious pamphlets. But our present character is of Gods waies in the
blessed mans heart: in this way was Enoch walking with God, till he was translated. Some goe a little way willingly, but likeRaeth. 1. 14 Orpah, are easily per∣swaded to goe backe to Moab. You may sometimes fnde Saul among the Prothets: 'tis but for a  you shall after have him at Endr. You may finde Iuas among the holy Apostles: 'tis but a flash; you shall have him after∣wards with the High Priests, selling his Masters blood. Mad
men have their lucid intervalls: the worst have some better fits, and resolutions, but in the blessed mans heart are the waies of God. Not in the tongue, and outward sem∣blance onely:Rom. 2. 29 hee is an Israelite, which is one within. Such a one wasIob. 2. 47. Nathanael, in whom was no guile. 'Tis the sin∣cerity of the heart, which is the seale of the covenant of God, and marke of the blessed man. All is, as is the heart to God:
some (like thatClem Al.  Paed. l. 2. c▪ 1 fine. Asel∣lus piscis) have Cor in ventre; as saith the Apostle, Phil. 3. 19. Whose God is their belly. Some have the world and riches there: If riches increase, set not your ea po them: they are the thornes which commonly choke up the seed of Gods word: there. Theophyct in Mat. 13. is a lawfull posses∣sion; the danger is for him that will bee rich, 1 Tim. 6. 9. there is a good use of ri∣ches; the danger is, if a man trust in them, or fixe his
heart upon them: there is a good use of thornes; if they bee orderly set about the field, they make a good fence; the mis∣chiefe is, if they grow up in it. Such are ri∣ches, good in any place, but the heart of the owner. But thou blessed man, have the feare, love and worship of God in thineVerus cul∣tus est in pctore. Arnob. l. 4. adv. Gent. heart, there all is sincere: doe not thou desire toNe ppe∣t ultra videri quàmes, t possis l∣traesse quàm vi∣ders. Greg. l. 4. cp. 58. seeme more than thou art, because the searcher of hearts be∣holdeth all thy waies.
Fronti nulla fids: a very hypocrite may have the waies of God in his externall behaviour, and yet be but like anClem. Al. Pad. l. 3. c.  Init▪ Aegyp∣tian temple, with a re∣verend comelinesse without; but if you examine the inside, you shall finde a cat, a goat, or serpent, in stead of a God. Such Christ stileth painted Sepulchers, which have ib. strom. l. 4. onely an in∣scription, & name of sanctity, no more. Thou must have these ascensions of heart, to thinke of
God, if thou wilt be blessed. The more Moses conferred with God in the moun∣taine, of the more divine countenance was hee: the more thou thinkest of God, and conferrest with him, the more like him, the more blessed shalt thou be: which that thou maist doe,Quanto plus ama∣veris, tanto plus ascen∣des. Aug. love him, speake to him in frequent pray∣er, and study his word,Rom. 3. 16, 17. which shew∣eth destruction and unhappinesse in our owne waies, but life and blessednesse in
his.Rom. 8. 7. For if yee live after the flesh ye shal dy—But as many as are lead by his spirit, are the sons of God. OnceNum. 7. 89. Exod. 25. 22. the soft voice whispered from the mercy seat, to declare all things which he would give in commandement to the children of Israel. Once the cloudy pil∣lar lead them in the way, but now the word of God, the holy Scripture, is our oracle, and cloudy pillar. The Arke, which the Priests bare,I sh. 3. 6. went before Israel into Canean.
Why they first? why not the prudent Ma∣gistrates? why not the armed legions? that wee may know that there's no en∣tring▪ into the hea∣venly rest, true bles∣sednesse, but by fol∣lowing the Arke of GODS testimonie, which the Priests beare before the peo∣ple, the word of God: this is as thatMath. 2. 9 starre, which lead the wise men to Christ; this is2 Tim. 3. 15. able to make a man wise unto salvation, and therfore blessed: this is as that river
Ez k. 47 1. 9. 12. issuing from the threshold of the house of God, every thing that liveth by it, shall grow and bee fruitfull: to this the Saints resort, as doves to the waters: let us all sit downe by this, that as wee goe theMoritur omne quod nascitur. Minut▪ Fel. way of all flesh to death, wee may with the same paces goe the way of all the blessed to eternall life. To you that mourn for the deceased, is my last addresse.Gen. 37▪ 31. 34. Ia∣cob sorrowed for his loved Ioseph, when he
had seene his coat dipped in blood: but when hee was assured by theGen. 45. 26, 27. Chariots, which Ioseph sent to carry him, that hee was alive, and happi∣ly honoured in Pha∣raohs court, then the spirit of acob revived. 'Tis your great losse which you bewaile, and Christs teares at Lazarus grave war∣rant an holy mourn∣ing for the dead: yet not beyond faith and reason:1 ▪I bes. 4▪ 13. Sorrow not even as other that have no hope. Faith must stay excesse: and in
reason,Dld  est qo na∣b i ra∣tus sit: con∣soladum quod ad me∣lioa transt∣erit Amros∣de Valentin∣orat. setting our owne interests aside, why should wee mourne for them that are blessed?Cem. Al∣citat. Empe∣dol. Euripi dem, &c. strom . 3. Some ancients, which knew no more but rules of reason, wont to cele∣brate their friends Natalls with mourn∣ing, because all are borne to miseries, but their Funeralls with rejoycing, because in death they rested. If this our deceased Si∣ster could heare and reply, would she not cry from Heaven, Weepe not for mee, for I am blessed? the
whole course of her life proclaimeth it:Ps. 128. 1 Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord—I am confident to say, shee did so.Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are the peace makers: to what controversy did shee ever approch, but like the Dove to the Arke, with overtures of peace in her mouth? Blessed are they that have Unity with God and his Church: Shee was a constant lover of the Saints, and the place where Gods honour dwelleth. The bles∣sed praise God: it
was her constant pra∣ctice: witnesse this Psalme, often in her mouth, and one of the last shee sang a∣mong the living. Is confidence in God a marke of the bles∣sed? her conversati∣on sounded out, Whom have I in heaven but thee—her last, Lord, Lord. expressed with breaking heartstrings and an expiring spi∣rit, when death shut up her senses by a suddaine arrest, wit∣nesseth for her. Is it happinesse to have the waies of God in
the heart: I am con∣fident, that malice it selfe never layed on her the imputation of hypocrite. Excuse mee in the abridge∣ment which I now ga∣ther. I know the light of one starre obscu∣reth not another, be∣cause all borrow from the same Sun; neither doe the due praises of one Saint derogate from ano∣ther,1 Co. 4. 7. seeing all re∣ceive of one God. She. Naz. at. 11. was an ornamēt of women a paterne of vertue; a blessed childe to her parents:
a faithfull Sarah to her husband: aAct. 16. 14 Ly∣di to the word of God; aAct. 9. 36 39. She was none of them, of whom Cl. Alexandri∣nus said, pueru Or∣panm non admtnt, quae ps∣cos &  enu∣trut. Paed. l. 3▪ . 4. Dorcas to the poore widowes and orphans: a Martha to strangers: to all, as Nzianzes Gorgoia, Citrà superciliu pdi∣c. Therefore bles∣sed, shee now reseth in Christ, and her workes follow her. Which that wee may likewise do, the good Lord teach us all so to live, and number our daies, that wee may apply our hearts unto wisdome, wher∣of his feare is the be∣ginning,
and eternall salvation the end and consummaion: heare us O Lord, and have mercie upon us, through the merits of thy Son, our bles∣sed Lord and Saviour JESUS CHRIST, to whom with thee, O Farhr, and the Holy Ghost, be all honour, praise, and glory as∣scribed in heaven and earth, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS. PErlegi concionem hanc Fune∣brem, cui titulus est, Chara∣cters of true Blessednesse: e∣amque Typis mandari permitto. Dec. 2. Sam. Baker.
