21074 99851191 16457
decorative, engraved title page A SACRED SEPTENARIE, OR THE SEVEN last wordes of our Sauiour Christ vttered vpon the Crosse, (with the necessary circumstances of the same:) Expounded by a Commentary, gathered out of the holy Scriptures, the writings of the ancient Fathers, and la∣ter Diuines. BY ALEXANDER ROBERTS, Ba∣chelour in Diuinity; and Preacher of Gods word at Kings-Linne, in NORFOLKE. God forbid that I should reioyce but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christen hereby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world, Galath. 6. 14. . Ignatius Epistol. 12. ad Romanos. Grata ignominia Crucis ei, qui Crucisixo ingratus non est, Bernardus super Canuca. sermone, 26. LONDON. Printed by E. G. for SAMVEL MAN, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Churchyarde at the Signe of the Ball. 1614.
ΣΥΝ ΘΕΩ. ILLVSTRISSIMO ET HONORATISSIMOVIRO, EDOVARDO COKO, MILITI AVRA∣TO, MVSARVM GRATIAR VMQVE ALVMNO, SACRAE THEMIDOS ET IVSTITIAE, HIEROPHANTAE, TO∣TIVS ANGLIAE SVPREMO IVSTITI∣ARIO, SACROSANCTAE REGIAE MA∣IESTATI A SECRETIS INTIMISQVE CONSILIIS. OB FIDEM, INTEGRITA∣TEMQVE, REBVS IN GRAVISSIMIS SPECTATAM, INTER PRIMOS MAX∣IME ACCEPTO. QVA VIRTVTEM, QVA PRVDENTIAM, QVA PIETA∣TEM, RERVMQVE OMNIVM PRAE∣CLARISSIMARVM SCIENTIAM, LONGE PRAESTANTISSIMO, DOMINO∣QVE SVO SVBMISSIME COLENDO, SA∣CRVM HOC , DEVOTIS∣SIMI OBSEQVII TESTIMONIVM, LVBENS MERITO, D. D. D. ALEXANDER ROBERTS.
To the Reader. IT may iustly (Christiā Reader) be lyable to the censure, eyther of indiscretion, or presumpti∣on, that I, who might haue lien hid in obscurity, should offer my selfe to the view, and sight of the world; & so consequent∣ly to the sondry iudgements of the refined wits of this learned age. But yet herein I haue some refuge and excuse left; for I take not vp∣on me Scribo relato∣ris potius fide, quam Authoris praesumptione. Vincentius Ly∣riensis aduere sus Haereses. the stile, to be titled an absolute Author, but accounted a faithfull relator of that, which in former times holy Fathers, & reuerēd Diuines of succeeding ages, haue committed to writing; and so shrowde my selfe vnder the wings of their authority. Yet if any shall conceiue, that euen in this I might haue made better choice of their sentences, and more artificial∣ly disposed the same, I will not stand to make any A∣pology for my selfe: for howsoeuer, it shall not bee vnprofitable, that I haue giuen the attempt, to han∣dle an argument of so eminent quality, as is these heauenly and last speeches of our blessed Sauiour, because Mens boni studij, & pij rot, si effectum non inuenerit caepti operis, ha∣bet tamen prae∣mium volunta∣tis. Salulanus in praefatione ad libros suos de Gubernatione Dei. where there is a good purpose, and a religious end propounded, though the effect bee not answerable,
yet euen those are not to be vnrespected. And it may be, that some hereby will be stirred vp hereafter (to whom God hath vouchsased more happy wittes, and greater lysure) to supply my wants, and amend my faults. In the meane while, happily time shall not be altogether euill spent, in reading this so inartifici∣ally & rudely penned Treatise. For oftentimes those who are fed with delicates, doe finde better Saepenumro inter quatidia∣nas de, e∣a  sapiunt, &c. Gregorius Maues in praef ti suas in Prphe∣t . taste, & receiue greater contentment in homely and country fare then in their owne meates so exquisitely dres∣sed; or else haue their stomackes whetted, more desi∣rously to eate of their owne former diet. And wee know that for the furniture of the Tabernacle, not onely golde, siluer, purple and precious stones were offered and accepted; but also goates haire, and bad∣gers skinnes, Exod. 25. 45. Neither am I ignorant, that Schoole diuinity, & handling of controuersies, is now more in request then positiue; yet I thought it not a∣sse, in this, rather then the other to bestow my paines. For L licus lib. 3. discordia, Carolum Quin∣tum, . it falleth out most vsuallie, that in the heate of contention, some men wrest the holy scrip∣tures, and stifly maintaine their owne conceits; onely that they might not seeme to consent in opinion with them, from whom they dissent in affection: whereby the truth of Religion is eftsoones gn ibus ribus, e . obscured, and our holy profession wounded, and such points of faith cal∣led into question, (through importunity) which should haue continued vntouched, and vnmoued. For hereby weake consciences are vnsetled, all reli∣gion is made questionable, and holy discipline of life and conuersation vtterly neglected. And so thou hast (Christian Reader) the reason of my labour thus
imployed in this Treatise (first penned in Latine for my owne priuate vse, in the intermission dayes of a lingring Quartane, and then also Englished at the request of some friends;) which I submit to thy iudge∣ment. He therefore who suffered those things for vs all, which euery one should haue done for himself, but none could; open the eyes, not of our bodies, as he did those of Thomas, but our soules, that wee may behold his side, and wounds, and bee rauished with the loue of that glory he hath prepared; vntill he shal shew (comming in power) that his face in the clouds which the wicked spitted on vpon earth, and pro∣nounce the irreuocable definitiue sentence vpon all flesh, and take vs (whom he reconciled to the Father, for whom he died and suffered) vnto himselfe; that wee might be one with him, as he is one with God, who is with the Father and the holy Ghost, God e∣ternall, blessed for euer, Amen. Forsitan, hunc aliquis verbosum dicere librum Non dubitet; forsan, multo praestantior alter Paperta puet, quum plura inuenerit ipse; Deses, & impatiens, nimis hac obscura putabit: Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli, &c. TERENTIANVS MAVRVS.
MIhi absit gloriari, nisi in cruce Domini nostri Chri∣sti (ait Apostolus:) poterat dicere, in sapientia Do∣wini nostri Iesu Christi, & verūdiceret; in maiestate, & verū diceret; poterat, in potestate, & verum dicere; sed dixit in cruce; vbi mundi Philosophus erubuit, ibi Apo∣stolus the saurum reperit: non contemendo vile inuo∣lucrum peruenit ad pretiosum inuolutun. Beda, in Col∣lectaneis suis, ad Pauli Epistolas, ex Augustino. NOn est morbus Animae, cui his floribus mederi non possis; collige tantum folia florum florentis Iesu, stillas sanguinis rubicundi, & tanquam pillulas (Sine quibus esse nolo) in cubiculo cordis tui reconde: erit tibi earum sapor & odor, in medecinam salubrem, mor∣bos, si qui fuerint, repellentem, venturos{que} cauentem: vi∣de tantum, ne vnquam, sine illis esse velis, quae verè no∣men habent, (quolibet fideli dicente) Sine quibus esse nolo. Hauri ergo, toto cordis tui affectu, odorem vitis verae Iesu Christi Nazareni; & delectare in illo, sicut Pater coelestis in illo delectatus fuit. Bernardus in li∣bro de passione Dowini, ex verbis Euangelistae Iohan∣nis, cap. 15. (Ego sum vitis vera) cap. 43.
The names of such Authors whose Testimonies are alledged in this TREATISE. ABbas Vrspergensis. Aben-Ezra. Adrianus Papa. Adrichomius. Aenaeas Gazaeus. Aerodius. Agapetus. Agathias. Agatharcides. Agrippa. Alexius Rharturus. A. Gellius. Ambrosius. Anselmus. Antiphanes. Antoninus. Angelus Caninius. Apologia Catholica, contra faederatos in Regno Franciae. Apologia Ecclesiae Graecae, de ig∣ne purgatorio, in Consilio Florentino exhibita. Alciatus. Aquinas. Arnoldus Carnotensis. Arnobius. Arrianus. Aristoteles. Aristophanes. Arbiter. Arator. Aretius. Athanasius. Athenodorus. Athenagoras. Athenaeus. Augustinus. Auentinus. B Bar-Cephas. Barclaius. Baleus. Basilius Magnus. Basilius Isaurienfis. Beda. Benno Cardinalis. Bellarminus. Bernardi. Berchetus. Beza. Tho. Bilneius. Dr. Bilsonus Episcopus Vinto∣niensis. Bernardinus. Bibliander. Biel. Beumlerus. Bodinus.
Bonauentura. Bonsinius. Boquinus. Brechaeus. Brissonius. Bcanus. Bucholcherus. Budaeus. Bullingerus. Bullingerus. Buntingus. Burchardus. C Caietanus Cardinalis. Caluinus. Caluisius. Callimachus Experiens. Chaldaeus Paraphrastes. Callimachus poeta. Philippus Camerarius. Ioachimus Camerarius. Cardinalis Cusanus. Ioh: Carion. Cardanus. Capitula Patrum. Cassander. Cassiodorus. Cassianus. Casabonus. Cedren. Celsus. Censorinus. Cheramon. Ioh. Chekus. Censura Coloniensis. Nichol. de Clemangijs. Chemnitius. Cicarella. Ciaconius. Cicero. Chytraeus. Chrysostomus. Chrysologus. Ciscrus. Claudianus. Clemens Alexandrinus. Ioh: Climachus. Columella. Costaerus. Cornelius Seuerus. Consilium Aurasiacum. Consilium Trisentinum. Crinitus. Curtius. Cuiacius. Cyprianus. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Cyropolates. Continuatio discursus de rebus Gallicis incerto authore. D Danaeus. Demosthene. Diascorides. Dicaearchus. Diogenes Cynicus. Diogenes Iertius. Dictionarium Pauperum. Dinothus. Dion Chrysostomus. Dion Cassis.
Dionisius Carthusianus. Dionisius Areopagita. Dionisius . Diodorus Siculus. Discursus de rebus Gallicis. Drogo. Drusius. Dominicus à pace. Dorothaeus. E Elias Cretensis. Elias Venetus. Epictetus. Epiphanius. Epistola, siue supplex libellus ad Hispaniarum Regem, nomi∣ne Principis Auriaci. Eutbymius. Eustathius. Eustocium. Euscbius Caesariensis. Eusebius Captiuus Hyronimi Marij. Euscbius Emissenus. Euagrius. Euripides. Eugubinus. F Petrus Faber, Fabricius. Fernelius. Ferus. Ferronus. Festus. Flaccius Illiricus. Ficinus. Florus. Forsterus. Foxus. Franciscus de Verona. Fulgentius. Fredericus 3. Imperator. Fulgosius. Fuluius Vrsinus. G Galatinus. Galenus. Garcaeus. Gemistus Pletho. Gentiletus. Genebrardus. Gerson. Glossaordinaria. Gonsaluus. Glycas. Gregorius Magnus. Gregorius de Valentia. Gualterus. Guichiardinus. Guntherus. Gueuara. Grinaeus. H Halicarnassaeus. Harmenopulus. Hansmillerus.
Haymo. Helmoldus. Heraclides Poutious. Heliodorus. Hemingius. Hero. Herodotus. Heresbachius. Hyronimus. Historica narratio condemnati∣onis & supplicij Ioh: Hussi. Historia persecutionis Walden∣sium. Historia de statis Religionis & Reipub: in Gallia. Historia Tripertita. Hierocles. Hilarius. Hippocrates. Homerus. Holcotus. Horatius. Horologium Graecū. Hospinianus. Hotomannus. Hugo. Humfredus. Ioh: Hussus. Hymnus vetus. I Ignatius. Iansenius. Innocentius. Iornandes. Ioh. Chassanio. Ioh: de sacro bosoo. Iosephus. Isidor: Hispalensis. Isidorus Pelusiota. Iuellus Episcop: Sarisburiensis. Iunius. Iunctiuus. Iustinus Martyr. Iustinus Historinus. Iuuenalis. Iustinianus Imperator. Iustinianus Patriarcha. Iulius Obseques. Iulianus Apostata. L Lalamantius. Langius. Guil: Laurentius. Lactantius. Lectius. Leo Afer. Lemnins. Leunclaius. Leo primus, Papa. Leo decimus, Papa. Lexicon Iuridicum. Libauius. Lipsius. Lycosthenes. Lombardus. Lonicerus. Lutherus. Ludonicus Viues. Ludouic: Granatensis. Lucas Gaurious.
Lucretius. M Macarius. Macrobius. Machiauellus. Malchus. Malsburiensis. Manuel Paleologus Imperator. Marlorotus. Marcilius Ficinus. Marcilius Patauinus. Maximus Scholiastes Dionisij Areopagitae. Meierius. Melanthon. Menander. Mercurialis. Mestlinus. Meursius. Minutius Felix. Mollerus. Mornaeus. Carolus Molinaens. Petrus Molinaus. Munsterus. Musculus. Mylius. G Nadab Aginonius. Natalis Comes. Nauclerus. Nazianzenus. Nemesius. Nicephorus Calistus. Nissenus. Nonnus Iohan: Paraphrastes. Nonnus Interpres Historiarum quae à Naezianzeno citantur in orationibus contra Iulia∣num. O Olympiodorus. Oppianus. Origenes. Orofius. Orus Apoll. P Pachimeres. Papias. Paraeus. Parrhasius. Paulus Diaconus. Paula. Paulus ab Eitzen. Paulus Iurisconsultus. Paulinus. Pausanias. Pelargus. Petrus Guaphaeus. Petrus de Cauilleria in tracta∣tu, cui titulus, Zelus Christi. Petrus de Viueis. Pezelius. Phauorinus. Phlegon. Philo.
Phocillides. Pindarus. Pierius. Phagius. Philo Iudaus. Plinius. Plato. Platzius. Platina. Plautus. Plutarchus. Polanus. Antonius Pous. Porphyrius. Protestatio concionatorum ali∣quot Augustanae Confessionis. Prateolus. Prosper. Procopius Caesariensis. Procopius Gazaeus. Proctus Licius. Pythagoras. Pythoens. Q Quintilianus. Q. Smyrnaeus. R Rabanus. Rabbi Maimon. Reinerius. Rennecherus. Elias Reusnerus. Richterus. Ritherhasius. Rhodinginus. Rollocus. Rosinus. Rungius. Rupertus. S Sabellicus. Saluianus. Sanderus. Iosephus Scaliger. Scotus. Sedarolam. Sedulius. Seluercrus. Senarclus. Seneca. Seruius Grammaticus. Sextus Rufus. Sibilla. Sidoniu Apollinaris. Simters. Sixtus Senensis. Sleidanus. Solinus. Sonhius. Spartianus. Spinaeus. Sophocles. Stephanus de Ʋrbibus. Strilius. Strabo. Stuckis. Suetonius.
Suidas. Sulpitius Seuerus. T Tacitus. Tanlerus. Terentianus Maurus. Theocritus. Theodoretus. Theophilactus. Theophrasius. Conradus Theodoricus. Theophilus. Tilenus. Tertullianus. Tunocles. Tindallus. Tiraquellus. Tritemius. Thuanus. Tossanus. Tzegedinus. V Ʋalerius Mazimus. Valesius. Tho: Walsinghamus. Ʋarro. Venantius Honorius. Weinrichius. Ʋerrius Flaccus. Veteres Rithmi. Whitakerus. Virgilius. Georgius Wirth. Victor Vticensis. Vindicia Ecclesiae Gallicana. Vincentius Lyrinensis. Wolphius. Wolphangus Franzius. Ʋopiscus. Zaoharia Vrsiuus. X Xenarchus. Xenophon. Z Zanchius. Zeno Veronenfis. Zenocharus. Zepperus. Zonaras. Zezomenus. Zuinglius. Zygomalas. FINIS.
To the Reader. THe faults and ouersight of the Presse, be more then I wished, fewer then I feared; for there was a care∣full eye ouerseeing, and a heedfull regard had, for the a∣uoyding of all errors: but it is not incident to humane di∣ligence, to preuent euery escape. Therefore amend these, which are here signified, being as I hope of the greatest moment. If there be any more, pardon them, whether in letters misplaced, or mistaken. Faults in the context. PAg. 2. lin. 13. for more, reade then, p. 15. l. 24. adde (is) before but once vsed, p. 51. l. 34. for grge purge, pag. 53. lin. 13. for them him, pag. 56. lin. 18. for practise practique, pag. 62. lin. 12. for Zomen Zzemen, pag. 74. lin 29. for his her, pag. 84. lin. 12. after comfortable hope, adde Of, pag. 102. l. 11. for but a few, reade not a fewe, pag. 112. lin. 25. for cause case, pag. 110. lin. 35. for then when. Faults escaped in the margent. Pag. 5. for migrent migret, pag. 9. for , pag. 10. for rep: rerum, and for , p. 13 for lib. 8. 3. pag. 25. for hu synodi, huiusmodi, pag. 28. adde Senarclaeus indignam Iohannis Diasij, &c. pap. 73. for .
A COMMENTARIE, OR EXPOSITION vppon those seuen last wordes which Christ vttered vpon the Crosse, (with the necessary circumstances of the same,) gathered out of the holy Scrip∣tures, the writings of the Aun∣cient fathers and later DIVINES. THE FIRST WORD. A word of mercy. When they came to the place which is called Caluary, there they cruci∣sied him, and the euill doers: one at the right hand, and the other at the left. Then said Iesus: Father, forgiue them, for they know not what they doe. LVK. 23. Vers. 33. 34. THat Augustinus tractat. 119. in Iohannis Euangelium. Crosse wheron Christ suffered, was the Chaire from whence hee taught and preached. Arnoldus Carnotensis de septe vltimis domini verbis. And in these his last words, vttered in the last houre, when now he was to vn∣dergoe his passion, rehearseth in a briefe summe, all his instructions, before deliuered at large. That in this short Abridgement, the reason and substance of Chri∣stian faith might be apparantly manifest, and from a small seede a plentifull increase growe vp, to the benefit of all
beleeuers. For the shorter the wordes be, and vttered then, when the very circumstance of the tyme requireth thinges only of weight and importance to be spoken, with so much the greater care and diligence are they to be searched in∣to of vs. Wherefore vnfouldinge the causes, and bringing forth into light as out of darkenesse, and from a rich and beautifull Cabinet, the excellency of the inward and secret meaning, the trueth shall come foorth and shew it selfe o∣penly in her glorious beauty, which before thou knewest not, being couered and vayled from thine eies; and the nearer thou commest, she shall enlighten thine vnderstan∣ding with her diuine and bright shininge beames: thou shalt more apparantly perceiue a flame of fire inclosed in a sparkle, and a great sea or ocean included in a droppe of water, and in a 2. King. 4. 23. cruse of oyle such abundance, out of which thou maist satisfie thy creditors debt, and 1. King. 17. 14. largely feede thy selfe in the time of want. The Analysis or resolution of the wordes. This passage of Scripture conteineth in it two generall pointes; First the reproach and gnoiny of Christs-death, and that is laid forth, 1. by the loarthsomnes of the place, for in Itlay scattered the souls and other boanes of male∣factors, who were there executed for their offences. (when they came to the place which is called Caluary.) 2. From the kinde of death which hee suffered, which was base and accursed: (They crucified hi). 3. From the society and company among whom hee suffered (And the euill doers). And these are described by their number that they were two: Math. 27. 36. and by their position, that one was placed at his right hand the other at his left, he in the midst: The second generall point obseruable is the Alij hanc Christi oratio∣nem sic distri∣buunt ex circū∣stanijs suis, hoc modo. 1 Quis petit: Christus. 2 Que? Pa∣trem. 3 Quid, remis∣sionem. 4 Vbi in monte Golgotha. 5 Quando: cum crucisigeretur. 6 Pro quibus: Crucisixoribus sul. 7 Qumedo ar∣denter um va∣lido clamore & lachrymis, nam huc referūt illud Heb. 5. 7. prayer hee there made, in which be to be considered. 1. the obiect to whom it was directed, God the Father (Father) 2. the matter or subiect (forgiue) 3. the parties for whom hee entreated (Them) his crucifiers, in which is the cause of
his petition, and the excuse or extenuation of their fact. They know not what they doe: When they came to the place which is called Caluary. &c. A  in bis le us lē descriptione. Eurchardus cap. 6. § 42. Butingus in Iterario sacr tom. 2. Quod hic mons idem sit cum illo in quo Abraham  rerum capita∣lium, haec fuit  lictor, , &c. Brissonius de formulis lib. 5. & ex emplu insign est apud Snecam lib. 1. de ira, cap. 16. de Cneij Pssonis iracun∣dia amentia plena. Caluary was a stony hill called in Hebrew Golgotha Ioh. 19. 17. scituated without the wals of the Cittie Ierush∣alem, lying toward the west, ouer against the ould gate, so named of the suls and bones of dead men, there scat∣tered, who were condemned and executed for their mis death of the Crosse: And propter imitationem, therein leauing vs an example of imitation that we should goe forth of the world, and abandon all the delights thereof, at the least in affe∣ction: Therefore saith Paul, let vs goe forth of the campe bearing his reproch: Heb. 13. 13. And in testificationem: to be a testimony of the Aquinas in sunma pte. 3. q. 47. artic. 10. Ludolplus de  Christis parte. 2. ca. 63. common and generall saluation purchased by him for mankinde, that as there is one Veluti est vnum pro omni victima sacrificium, sic vnum de omni gent sit regnum: Leo primus de passione: serm. 10. ob∣lation in stead of all sacrifices, so should there bee also one kingdome of all nations.
Wherefore the Lord Iesus Chrysostomus de passione. would not suffer in secret,  nor in the temple of the Iewes, least any should conceiue that he was offred to make the Attonement alone for that one people, but without the City, without the wals thereof, that we might know, he was a common sacrifice, the obla∣tion for the whole earth, an vniuersall purification whose sweete smell was to be spred ouer the world as well to Gen∣tiles as to the Iewes: Rom. 3. 29. 30. Therefore albeit God for a time did chose, and set a part to himselfe, a peculiar people, that so it might bee vndoubtedly manifest, from whence the Messias, the redeemer was to bee looked for; yet this did detract nothing, from the generall promise, made to mankinde by the . first Gospell preached in Para∣dise after the fall, Gen. 3. 16. nor hinder, why the couenant of Gods sauinge mercy, should not be communicated vn∣to all, of what nation so euer, which doe beleeue. Elgnter Petri visionem (cuius Lucas) uc accommodat Augustinus lib. 50. Homiliarū. homilio 45. vi∣de & Glossam ordinariam. Act. 10. 34. 35. 36. and that by Christ, who hath broken downe the partition wall Eph. 2. 14. At whose commandement, giuing his Apostles that large commission, they, by the preaching of the word were to propound and offer saluati∣on to all nations, Math. 28. 19. to euery creature, Mark. 16. 15. And from the most auncient times (as a foreshew∣ing token of this benefit) euen vnder Moses himselfe Ergo veteres patres in hoc sa∣cramento, non tantum specta∣bant commo∣rationem libe∣rationis prioris, sed etiam pro∣missam Christi redemptionē: Quid enim ad exteros haec libe∣ratio, cum n{que} mores hoc be∣ sicium ccepe∣rant, noque ipsi sortem in terra sancta habe∣bant? Symlerus in 12. cap. Exod. Bibliand. de misterijs sa∣lutiferae passio∣nis Iesu Messiae: lib. 1. ex Iustini martyris Dia∣logo cum Try∣phone. and the strict obseruation of the legall ceremonies, strangers might be admitted (vpon some conditions) to the eating of the passouer: Exod. 12. 48 And there were (as the first fruites of a more plentifull haruest to follow) Iob an Edo∣mite fearing God: Iob. 1. verse. 1. the Queene of Arabia 1. King. 10. 1. Cyrus the Persian 2. Chron. 36. 22. and the Cananitish woman, whose vndaunted faith did and suffered great thinges, remouing those Chrisost. homil. 20. in Epist. ad Hebreos vocat : Particularitatis ten∣tatio. Non sum missus nisi ad oues perditas domus Israelis: mountaines of two feirce and stronge temptations, one of particularity the other of Indignity Math. 15. 28. and so made it apparant, that the heathen had right to begge the blessing, which was giuen the Iewes by promise: and that the crummes of Gods
mercy did belong also vnto them: And S. Chrysst .  est ere liberorum & abijcore catellis. the wise men of the East, who came to seeke Christ, directed through the guidance of a starre Sermone ei . the entrance of the Gen∣tiles vnto grace, and the dissolution of idolatrie; who were wonderfully called & taken out (as it were) from the depth of hell: and thus is fulfilled the propheticall prayer of Noah, For God hath perswaded Iaphet to dwell in the Ta∣bernacles of Shem Gen. 9. 27. And, they who in times past were not a people are now the people of God, &c. yea a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, a holy nation Osea. 2. 23. 1. Pet, 2. 9. 10. And it is obserued by some of the Paula & En∣stochium ad Mrcellam, sua∣dentes vt mi∣grent Beth-le∣hem: apud Hi∣eronimum: to∣mo primo Epi∣stolarum. Augustin. bo∣milia dominicae 2. post festum Trinitatis de plaga de. aunci∣ent Fathers, that after Dauid had numbred the people, and the reuenging pestilence raged amongst them, the destroy∣ing Angell (stretching forth his sword to punish the wicked Citie) appointed the threshing floore of Araunathe Iebu∣site for the site of the temple, and a place where an Altar must be built, and sacrifice offered to appease the wrath of the almightie; euen then signifying that the church of Christ, was not to be confined within the territory of Israell, but should be spred also amonge the nations; which thing the Apostle maketh more plaine and apparant, sharpely repro∣uing the Iewes for the contempt of the Gospell, thrusting the same from them &c. and thereupon turned vnto the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. and yet for greater confirmation of this point Georg. Wirth in Harmonia Euangelij lib. 1. cap. 3. Aquinas in Cathena. Christ our Lord and Sauiour was contented to discend according to the flesh, as well of Ruth the Moabite, Rhahab a Cananite & harlot, Tamar an incestuous person, as of the holy Patriarkes and Kings, Dauid, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Iehosophat, Ezechias, &c. Math 1. 5. Thereby mani∣festly declaring, that he came into the world to saue sin∣ners, and gather to himselfe a Church from amonge the Gentiles, that where sinne abounded, there grace might o∣uerflowe Rom. 5. 20. And at the very end of his life, when he was ready to die and to suffer for vs, hee consecrated all nations by the Hyronomus tom 1. Episto∣larū, in Epi∣taphio Nepoti∣ani. title of his crosse, written in Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine, tongues spred wide and farre ouer the face of
the lib. 5. 5. obscure prophesie of the Gospell of Christ to be published in languages, that euerie tongue might confesse that Iesus is the King of Kinges to the glory of the Father Philip. 2. 1. And therefore should no more be said, God is knowne in Iudah, his name is great in Israel, in Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Syon, Psal. 76. 1. 2: but from the rising of the Sunne to the going downe of the same his name is great among the Gentiles: Malach. 1. vers. 11. Hyronimus Epistola ad Sal∣uianum. Iudges. cap. 6. 37. 39. For the Church is remooued from the streight and narrow inclosure of circumcision, into the large and wide boundes of vncircumcision; neither hath God rained now only vpon the slce of the Iewes, but also vpon the floore of the Gentiles. 1. God is no respecter of persons, but offereth his mercy to all beleeuers: for so he loued the world that he gaue his only begotten sonne, that all that beleeue in him, should not pe∣rish but haue euerlasting life, Ioh. 3. 16. Who is the Medi∣ator . betweene God and man, and gaue himselfe a ransome for all men to be a testimony in due time, 1. Tim. 2. 6. So that now there is neither Grecian nor Iewe, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian, Scithian, bond, free, but Christ is all in all thinges Colos. 3. 11. and we all, one in him Ga∣lath. 3. 28. 2. Herein is shewed the vnmeasureable mercy of God, who doth chose vnto himselfe a Church of the weake, sinners, and his enemies, Esay. 56. 3. 4. Rom. 5. 8. 10. and this loue or mercy appeareth, not that we loued him, but hee loued vs, and sent his sonne to be a propitiatior for our sinnes 1. Ioh. 4. 10. For they that were without Christ and aliants from the common-wealth of Israell, and strangers from the co∣nenaunt of promise, and were without hope, and had no God in the world, now in Christ Iesus are made neare by his bloud, Ephes. 2. vers. 12. 13. 3 This should stirre vs vp both to holinesse and inno∣cency of conuersation, because the grace of God which bringeth saluation to all men hath  appeared, and .
Viuen∣dum. Sobriè quo ad nos ip∣sos, in munditia cordis custodia oris disciplina corporis Iusse quae ad alios, tribu∣endo Superiori∣bus obedi∣entiam Paribus concordiā Inferiori∣bus bene∣uolentiā. Prè quo ad ad Deū, redden∣do illi Honorem vt creatori Amorē vt Redēptori Timorent vt Iudici. teacheth vs that we should deny in god∣linesse Obedience and worldly luster, and liue so∣berly, and iustly and godly in this pre∣sent world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the al∣mighty God, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, who gaue himselfe for vs that he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people vnto himselfe zealous of good workes, Tit. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14. Augustinus sermone de te∣pore. 29. & 114. Acknowledge therefore, ô man, thy value, and thy debt, and seeing so great a price is paide for thy freedome and redemption, be ashamed of sinne, which is thy thraldome, and be carefully heed∣full, that the Deuill wound not that, which God hath healed, least by the consent of thine heart, and transgression of thy bo∣dy, thou be found to performe that seruice to thine enemie which thou owest to thy Lord. And also to a most religi∣ous and carefull thankefulnesse; wee are made a chosen ge∣neration, Thankfulnes. a royall priesthood and holy nation, a peculiar people, that we should set forth the vertues of him that hath called vs out of darkenesse into his maruay lous light, 1. Pet. 2. 9. Therefore blessed be the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath blessed vs with all spirituall blessinges in him Ephes. 1. 3. 4. This cherisheth in vs good hope, and from hence ariseth a certaine and vndoubted persuasion for the obteining of eternall life, for as Christ must suffer and so enter into glory Luk. 24. 26. in like manner we must be saued, so many for whom he died: he carried our sinnes vpon his body on the tree, by whose woundes we are healed 1. Pet. 2. 24. and hath put out the hand writing of ordinances which was against vs and contrary to vs, he euen tooke it away and fastened it vnto the
crosse, and hath spoiled the principalities, and powers, and made a shew of them openly, and tryumphed ouer them in the same crosse Coloss. 2. 14. 5 Herein is an example propounded vnto vs for imitati∣tion. Christ is ledde out of his owne citie to be vniustly exe∣cuted, why should not we then willingly for his sake, leaue our houses and children, & other benefits of this life? espe¦cially seeing hereafter wee shall receiue a superabundant recompence in heauen Math. 13. 29. And as Christ now ready to enter into his glory, left this earthly Citie, so let vs willingly forsake this earthly tabernacle and house: 2. Corinth. 5 1. Bernardus de Ascensione. and that in affection, so that we loue not the world; in effect, that we both in soule and body vtterly re∣nounce it, in desiring perfection, breathing and endeauouring to bee made one spirit with the Lord: and thus followe Christ to the place of his passion and suffering, bewayling our selues (as he aduiseth the women of Ierusalem) and mournefully lamenting the brittle and miserable condition of our estate, Luk. 23. 28. When they came to the place which is called Caluary, they crucified him. They crucified him:] This kinde of death was alwaies ac∣compted base, reproachfull and grieuous, appointed for a punishment to such men as were of the worst condition and Lypsius de Cruce lib. 1. cap. 12. 13. Petrus Faber. semesirium lib. 2. cap. 8. desperately wicked. Base: for seruants and slaues (most vsually) did vndergoe the same: whereof the Crosse carried the name, to be called a seruile punishment for the common rascall people of meanest and least reputation, such as dif∣fered not much from seruantes and bondmen. Sometime also it was inflicted vpon free men, of no seruile condition, but such as were degenerate from their birth, dishonesting their stocke by wickednesse and outragious offences, as theeues, robbers, murtherers and such like: reproachfull, for it is branded with a curse by God himselfe Deut. 21. 23. and therefore was it obiected vnto the Christians by the hea∣then Arnobius con∣tra nationes siue gontes lib. 1. to the discredite and infamie of their profession, that Christ whom they worshipped for God, was nayled to the
Crosse, that he was a man put to the worst death for his de∣sertes; Miutius in Octanio. and the Iewes in reproach call him Munsterus in annotationibi ad Euangelium  Matthaeum Hēbraite ab ille editū: & quā contemptibiles sucre christiani mnifestm est ex Turtul. A∣polog. cap. 16. Sic Christum & dis 1 per  voc∣ Iulianus Imperator in Epistolis. hanged or cru∣cified. Chrysostmus homil. 2. epist. ad Rom. And hereof it came, that if any man of place or qualitie, did receiue the Gospell and professe Christ, pre∣sently in all hast his alliance, and kindred, and friendes, would come and disswade him from his purpose, by this onely reason, what? doest thou worship such an one, who was condemned, crucisied and died among theeues? and suf∣fered so many and so great extremities? And out of question from hence proceeded those protestations and speeches of the Apostle confronting (as it were) the dishonourable and slaunderous reproaches of Christ, vsuall in their times. As that, Rom. 1. 16. I am not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ, and, we preach Christ Decruce, quo∣modo scandalū, stalitia & sa∣pientia sit, vid Forsterū in Le∣xico hebraico in radice . Et Seuerceū in primū caput 1. Epist. ad Cr, & Phagiū in suis annotat. ad Pa∣raphrasin Chal. Deut. cap. 21. Iesus crucified, a scandall to the Iewes and foolishnes to the Gentiles, 1. Corinth. 1. 23. 29. And, God forbid that I should reioice but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. Galath. 6. 14. As also those attributes of the Crosse so often mentioned, how full soeuer of disgrace they seemed vnto the world and the men thereof, as when they name it the shame of the Crosse Heb. 12. 2. and the scandall Gal. 5. 11. And concerning the sharpe and grieuous paine of the torment, or (to vse the wordes of Innocentius) Lib. 1. de con∣temptu mundi siue de misaria humanae condi∣tionis cap. 26. in quo de innume∣vabilibus speciebus agritudinis. the vnsufferable sufferance thereof, out of all question it was most extreame and painefull; if either we consider the manner of the punishment; Augustin. in Ench. c. 53. Misericordiae genus est cito occi∣dere. for the persons to bee crucified, were most forceably stretched vpon the Crosse, and fastned vnto it by nailes, pearcing through their handes and feete, and then lifted vp on high: or the continuance of their suf∣fering, for leysurely by little and little, and with much lin∣gring, amids most horrible and intollerable paine finished their liues:  the end (which is the best in any punishment) being deferred: so that it was not without cause stiled by the Actione quinta in Verrem. Romane Orator the most cruell and hideous punishment, and of others most Drogo de mysterio passionis. dreadfull and terrible, and by way of ex∣tremity the Paulus receptarum sen∣tenti l. 5. cap. 17. & ad  Caicius de arbore . Andreas Liba∣nius, de vniuer∣sitate & origi∣nibus rep. lib. 4. ad opus dici tr∣tij Hexameri. Ciuilians tearme it the chiefest or greatest; for
so Paulus the Lawyer ranketh the principall punishments vsed in his time (Crucifying, burning, beheading) and placeth the Crosse in the highest roome as that which excelleth the rest: and hence came that vsuall prouerbe, that when any would wish the greatest Plautus Pseudolo. & dignus mala cruce. apud Ver∣ium Flaccum in vocabulo masculin. euill he could to another, it was in this forme abiin malam crucem: goe and be hanged. Paulus recep. tarum sententi∣arum lib. 5. cap. 12. And here it may be enquired, but religiously and with reuerence, what pretence the Iewes had (for there was no cause) to enforce and vrge Pilate with such earnest vehe∣mency as they did, that Christ might be crucified. The an∣swere is easie and offereth it selfe at hand. They accused him (but falsly) of sedition, and desire to inuade the kingdome, & aspiring to obtaine the crowne: for by the law of the Romanes (whose prouince then Iudoa was) the Au∣thors of sedition or tumult, respectiuely according to the qualitie of the persons, were either condemned to the crosse there to die, or to wilde beastes to be deuoured of them: and it is apparent that Christ was charged with this transgressi∣on, as Luke doth make it most manifest, cap. 23. 1. 2. For thus the synagogicall assemblie frameth their accusation a∣gainst him before the deputy: we haue found this man per∣uerting the people and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, saying that he is Christ a King &c. Suetonius lib. 5. cap. 25 & hos Iudaeos, fu∣isse Christianos manifestum: nam hos  vo∣cat Arrianus in dissertationi∣bus ad Epicte∣tum: & qui baptizati nisi Christiani? Et remtra omnem contro∣uersiam ponit Sulpitius Senc∣rus in Historia sacra lib. 2. de Hadriano agens.  per cont mlum &  quasi minime vtiles vocabant ethnics, & eos crinunab.  tanqum malorū omniu causas, blli, fam, pestis &c. vide sis Iustinum Martyrem Aplog. 2. Cleme. Alex.  lib. 2. Tertul. Apolg. cap. 3. 40. 42. Theophil. ad Autolychum. Purum Pythaeum Aduersario∣um lib. 2. cap. 3. Plippum Camerarium hrrum succisirum Centuria, 1. cap. 39. And this opinion or rather ielousie setled it selfe and tooke deepe roote in the mindes of the Romane Emperours; for Claudius is said to ex∣pell and driue out of Rome all the Iewes who troubled the quiet state of the commonwealth and raised tumults, Christ being the persuader and incensour thereunto. Now why it pleased our Sauiour Christ to suffer and vndergoe the death of the crosse, many reasons are alledged by diuines, and amongst them these are the chiefe and principall. 1 That it might be atestimony how he suffered vnder the go∣uerment
Hypotheseo Theolog. lib. 3. of the Romane Emperour, when the scepter was ta∣ken away from Iuda, and therefore the true Messias, who was foretould Gen. 49. 10. and borne the fiue and thirtie yeare of Herod, who being a stranger obteined the king∣dome of Iudea, by the fauour of Augustus and Antonius, and three yeares before that, destroyed the Sanhedrin the supreame counsell, and procured all the elders to bee mur∣dered, that so no hope might be left vnto the Iewes euer to recouer the kingdome; and albeit this punishment of the Crosse was in vse amongst most people in the world Agathar in fragmentis ab Henrico Stephano : Brissonius de Persarum prin∣cipatu lib. 2. Iornades de re∣bus Geticis cap. 48. as Sy∣rians, Iewes, Aegyptians, Persians, Affricans, Greekes, Gothes, and those of the Ilandes of Ioseph. Scag. in annotationi∣bus ad Eusebiū Andraeus Liba∣nius de vniuer∣sitate & origi∣nibus rerum lib. 4. ad opus tertij diei. Iaua: yet was it most of all put in practise by the Nicephorus Calistus Histor. lib. 7. cap. 46. Halicarnassus lib. 5. Romanes; and that aunciently since any me∣mory of man. 2 That so hee might deliuer vs from the curse. For this kind of death was accounted accursed, not onely in the opinion of man, Caluinus In∣stitutionum lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 6. but by the decree of God himselfe, inso∣much that the earth was thought, to be defiled, if the body of one so executed were not taken downe before the Sunne setting: Deut. 21. 23. Therefore truly did Lib deincar∣natione. Athanasius that starre of the east affirme, if therefore Christ came to purge our heynous offences, and beare the curse due vnto vs, how could he any way performe that, but becomming an expia∣tory sacrifice and curse, and suffering a cursed death, and that is the death of the crosse? So the Apostle: Christ hath de∣liuered vs from the curse being made a curse for vs Gal. 3. 13. 3 It was that there Hyronimus in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 3. might be fit and equall correspondence betweene the medecine and the malady, that as the tree was the cause of death, so the tree might be the cause of life: For when Christ did vndergoe his passion, then was there Nazian. . 21. quae est apo∣logeticon fuga. the tree against the tree, and a hand against a hand: this obediently stretched forth, against that disobediently put out: these pierced with nailes, against that loose and wanton; these conioyned the vttermost endes of the earth together, against that which sepe∣rated Adam from the delightes of Paradise Per lignum pn est em∣tracta, per lig∣num ulpa re∣dimitur. Eusib. Emissenus Hem. 11. de passione: Nos à damnatione ligui retustt dissoluit Christus. Ve tius H∣norius in enegis. Symboli Apostol..
4 Thus the foretellings of the Prophets are fulfilled, and the shadowes of the types remooued: Concerning the predictions: Dauid doth so liuely expresse (as though hee had then stoode vnder the Crosse with Mary and Iohn) the maliti∣ous hatred, the prophane scoffes, the biting tauntes of the behoulders, the cruell percing of his handes and feote, the ve∣hement strayning of his body (that the bones might be num∣bred) the parting of his garments and the casting lottes for his seameles coate Psal. 22. vers. 8. 16. 17. 18. And that his side should be opened with a speare, it is expresly affirmed by Zachary cap. 10. 12. yea in a word Esay doth declare all things that did befall him so fully, especially in the 53. chap. that he seemeth  & Eu∣stochium de nstatione Esaie. rather to be called an Euangelist then a Prophet, and not so much to foretell thinges to come, as hi∣storically to relate thinges done. Concerning signifying types which are almost numberles, amongst the rest these are most eminent. Isaacke Nazian. . de Theolog. vo∣cat  magnae victimae & in eum Elias Cretensis. Gre∣gorius magnus Homil. 6. in Ezechielem: Procopius Ga∣zeut in 22. Ge∣neseos. Buchol∣cher in Chrono∣logia: de colla∣tione-Isaaci & Chri. crucifii plenissime. Da∣uid Rungius in Genesin, cam{que} in octo membra distinguit. when he was to bee sacrificed vnto God, carieth himselfe the wood In Hymno quodam veteri pulchrè. De parentis pro∣toplasti Fraude factum congraens; Quando pomi noxialis Morsis in mor∣tem corruit, Ipse lignum tum notauit Damna ligni ve solueret. Hoc opus nostrae salutis Ordo depoposcerat, Multiforis proditoru Ars, vt  falleret; Et madela spir inde Vnde hostu laserat. vnto the place where he must be offered, and suffereth it patiently to bee laid vppon him, as also to be bound, and to be stripped by his Father, performing obedience vnto the expected stroke of death Gen. 22. 10. of whom Gregory thus: Isaac is bound and o∣peneth not his mouth, is laid vpon the Altar, and striueth not; ready to bee sacrificed, asketh where the sacrifice is, and when himselfe is to be offered, is silent; So Christ our Lord, made a sacrifice for vs, taketh and carieth the Crosse vpon his owne shoulders, suffereth himselfe to be bound, openeth not his mouth Esay. 53. 7. and is obedient to his Father euen to the death Phil. 2. 8. Abraham carieth in his hand a sword and fire, and in a religious crueltie maketh hast to the death of his sonne: God the Father for the sinne of man, afflicteth his sonne Christ Iesus, and striketh him with the sword, and therefore is said not to spare him, Rom. 8. 32. but hee is wounded for our sinnes Esay. 53. 5. Moses setteth vp in the wildernesse a brasen serpent
Salut fuit hoc spectaculū, & dominica crucis vim in∣tentabat, qua srpons Prabo∣lus pubiicaba∣tur, & Iaeso cui à sprit lib is colubris, intu∣ent, & rednti in , sanits morsuum pecca∣t rum, & salus exinde praedica∣batur. Terull. aduer∣sus Marcionem lib. 8. vpon which whosoeuer looked, were healed from the sting of the fiery serpents. Num. 21 8. This Christ inter∣preteth of himselfe, and the benefit of his death, how hee healeth those who are wounded with sinne, and with the wrath of God, and freeth them from eternall destruction, beholding him by the eye of a true faith, spred & lifted vpon the crosse. Ioh. 3. 14. 15. Augustinus sermone de tem∣pore 101. & in Eangelium Io∣hanuis Tractat. 12. Prosper de prae∣dictionibus & promissionibus in saris litris. The Isralites beheld the dead ser∣pent, to escape the liuing: the brasen serpent set vpon a pole, o∣uercame the venom of the liuing serpent: Christ hanging & dying vpon the crosse, quenched the old & consuming poy∣son of the deuil, & healed all those who were smittē of him. 5 He would giue an example Augustinus de symbolo ad ad Catechume∣nos, lib. 1. cap. 3. to his Martyrs, who should suffer for his Names sake, not to feare any kinde of death, seeing he himselfe did chuse that which was most exceeding euill of all other. It is therfore said of the auncient Christi∣ans in their truely named Golden Legend, that some of them were tryed by Lothu â So∣domitis, Gen. 19. 14. Llizaeus à pu∣ris Bethelensi∣bus, 2. Reg. 2. 23. Ieremias per Passur, cap. 20. vers. 2. Paulus & Sylas Act. 16. 23. Zacharias 2. Chron. 24. 21. Stephans Act. 7. 59. Esaias, vt scribit Lyra in 6. cap. eiusdem prephtiae. Vzia Ier. 26. 23. Ioh. Baptist. Mat. 14. 10. mockings and scourgings, yea moreouer by bonds and prisonment, that they were stoned, that they were hewen asunder, that they were slaine with the sword, were racked and would not be deliuered, that they might re∣ceiue a better resurrection, Heb. 11. 36. 37. 38. That speech of Ignatius Epistoia 12. quae est ad Romanos. Eusebius histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 8. cap. 7. was full of faith and Apostolicall zeale, who now caried vp to Rome there to bee torne in pieces of wilde beasts, desired that they might shew their fiercest cruelty towards him, otherwise he would allure them, if not pre∣uaile so, then prouoke them, that they might not spare him as they had done other of the faithfull, whom they would not touch. And addeth further: come fire, Tor∣menta, carcer, vngul, Stridensque flammis lamin, Atque ipsa paenarum vltima Mors, Chri∣stianis est. Prudentius . hymno In laudem Vincentij. crosse, wilde beasts, slaughter, tearing of bones, dismembring of the parts of my body, yea let all the torments of the deuill rush vpon me, so I may enioy Christ: better for me to be a Martyr, than a Monarch; my loue is crucified. To leaue the auncient professors, in
whose hearts the bloud of Christ was yet warme, and to desuend to later times. Ex narratio∣ne historica, de condemnatione & supplicio Ioh. Hussi Consilis Con∣stantiensi. Iohn Husse after many reproches and contumelies, was condemned in the Counsell of Con∣stance to be burned, and led forth to the place of execution, hauing a cap of paper set vpon his head, in which three deuils of an vgly and ill fauoured shape were painted, and an inscription added, this is an Arch-heretique: when he be∣held it, said very mildly: my Lord Iesus Christ who was inno∣cent, vouchsafed to weare a sharpe crowne of thornes for mee wretched sinner; and therefore will I beare this, though imposed as a scorne, for his trueth and names sake. And to comprehend all in a word. The constant Martyr (Sermone super cantica 62. Ab ista constantia, mars siue suppli∣eium Martyrū, triumphus dici∣tur (vt non se∣mel à Gunthe∣ro, de rebus ge∣stu Frederici Barbaross) nam patiendo, moriendoque vincunt, & Satanā, mun∣dum, carnem triumphant: Leo sermon 1. in natali Apo∣stoli Petri, & Pauli.  Sunittitur. saith Barnard) stan∣deth reioycing and tryumphing, while his whole body is in tearing, and the butchering executioners knife ransaking his entrals; and doth not onely resolutely with a good cou∣rage, but cheerefully also behold the sacred bloud to streame from his flesh. where then is the soule of the Mar∣tyr? truely in the rocke, in the bowels of Iesus Christ; his woundes lying open, that it may enter. Neither is this to be wondred at, if an exile from the body, feele not the paines of the body; which proceedeth not from astonish∣ment, but loue, wherein sence and feelinge is not lost, but brought into subiection. And concerning this whole mysterie, Isodorus His∣palensis de Ec∣clesiasticis offi∣cijs l. 1. c. 27. Quatuor causas eur Christus mortem Crucis sustinere vo∣luit, ponit Phagius ad 21. caput Deuter. Isodore comprehending many thinges in fewe wordes, speaketh thus: we, who were wounded by Adam diso∣bediently eating of the tree, are againe healed by the tree, on which Christ obediently suffered. And there is a threefould reason of this his passion. The first, that Christ paying the price for the redempti∣on of the world, the old enemy might be taken with the hooke of the Crosse, and so compelled to cast out those whom he had swallowed & loose that prey which he held; not ouer∣come with power, but iustice &c. The second, to be an effectuall instruction vnto men. For Christ ascended the crosse, that he might giue vs an example of his passion and resurrection; of his passion, to confirme pa∣tience: of his resurrection, to strengthen hope: and to shew
two sort of liues; one miserable, the other happy miserable, which we must suffer: happy, for which we must hope. The third was, to beate downe the puffed-vp pride and swelling wisdome of the world; that by the foolish preaching of the crosse (as men esteeme it) they might be cast downe: and so appeare, how much the foolishnesse of God is wiser than men, and the weaknesse of God exceedeth all humane strength. Barnard in his sentences hath the like, and referreth all to three ge∣nerall heades; thus. Illa omnia prop∣ter quae Domi∣nus Iesus mort & Crcis igno∣miniam tulit, ad haec tria re∣ferri possunt: primum filialm obedientiam, quae prioris ino∣bedientiae piacu∣lum slueret; Secundum Com∣passibilem & communem mi∣seriam, qua Dei iustitiam inflexibilem, virgom ferreā, ad miserecord hortabatur; Tertium, Cele∣berrimam & solenuem victo∣riam, cuius successu, ineuitabilis Diaboli & mortis potentia, in momento glorise & efficaciter erat imminuenda. The store-house is opened, full of all souereigne Bonauentua in Stimulo ameris, parte prima cap 10. medecines; enter by the windowe of Christes woundes, and take from thence Phisicke or remedy, curing, restoring, comforting, and preseruing; from thence receiue what simples thou de∣sirest, what delicate electuaries thou wilt. For the merite of Christ suffering, is the price of our redemption; he was woun∣ded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was vpon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Esay. 53. 5. His bloud doth purge vs from all sinne, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. And this is the confession of the foure beastes, and foure and twentie elders who fall downe before the lambe, Thou hast redeemed vs to God by thy bloud, out of euery kindred, and tongue, and people and nation Apoc. 5. 8. 9. And so he is an all sufficient ransome for vs 1. Timoth. 2. 6. which word . Haec subest verbo huic notio, vt sit precium aequiualens, quo captiui redempti demittuntur, & in pristi∣ libertatem restituuntur. Seluecerus in locum Apostoli. rnsome in the originall but once vsed in the newe testament, and in it the proposition where with it is compounded, noteth an opposition, and sheweth that Christ our deliuerer or redeemer, is so sett a∣gainst Adam the author of all bondage, as he is stronger and of greater power, then he by whom sinne entered into the world, Rom. 5. 17. Now this captiuitie or bondage, in which the deuill holdeth man fast bound, is threefold. The first, of blindnes and error. For when Eue listened to the contagious and infecting hissing of the serpent, that both shee and Adam by eating the forbidden fruit should
become like vnto God knowing good and euill, Gen. 3. 5. she was ensnared by the first question that euer was Beda. Duo promissa sum mulieri, Immortalitas & Diuinitas; neutrum proue∣nit, fed iumen∣torum conditio & hominum, sub vnius simi∣litudinis com∣paratione & damnatione premulgata censetur. Arnoldus Car∣notensis de ope∣ribus sex dierū, simado illius li∣ber sit, de quo non leues suns dubitādi causae: sed censuram omnem Criticis relinquo. asked in the world, and deceiued by the first lyethen made: from whence all their posteritie and off-spring walke in darknes, strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance which is in them, Ephes. 4. 18. The second of sinne. For whosoeuer committeth sinne, is the seruant of sinne, Ioh. 8. 34 Nothing more grieuous, nothing more base, and vnbeseeming a man. For as a ser∣uant is not at his owne power and liberty, but dependeth wholy vpon his Lord or Master, doing that which he wil∣leth and commandeth: so the sinner is giuen ouer to the deuill, and altogether subiect vnto him, and aduersary see∣king whom he may deuoure. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Theodericus, in Analyse Enā∣geliorum domi∣nicalium. Seruitus Dia∣boli, 1. vilissima. 2. vitiosissima. 3. Durissima. 4. Necentissima. And this estate is 1. most base, for hee is constrained to obey infinite lusts, which the better sort of Heathen thought dishonorable; 2. most wicked, for he heapeth sinne vpon sin, offence vpon offence, euill vpon euill, and those contrary each to other: and with these vexeth and tormenteth his slaues; 3. most grieuous and cruell, for the sinner is a drudge to so many deuills as offences. 4. most hurtfull, for the wages and re∣ward of this seruice, is the destruction of soule and body the losse of eternall saluation, and endlesse condemnation in hell fire prepared for the deuill and his Angels. There∣fore, partly to make the Romanes ashamed, partly to con∣uict them by the witnes of their owne conscience, the Apo∣stle demaundeth of them, propounding a comparison of the estate of life in which they serued sinne, and that wherin they liued vnto righteousnesse, what fruit they had? and an∣swereth, no other, but that whereof they were now ashamed, Rom. 8. 21. 22. And it is the confession of the wicked concerning themselues, and their endeauours, that they were wearied in the way of sinne and destruction, and had gone through dangerous wayes, and now knowen the way of the Lord. Wisdom. 5. 7. The third is of corruption and death. For man borne of a woman hath but a short time to liue, and is ful of misery,
Iob 14. 1. the truth of this sentence, not words but wounds haue taught. Man borne of a Bernardus in in Hemilia fe∣riae 4. Nebdo∣madis pa. & lib. 2. de con∣sideratione. & Gregorius Magnus in Moralibus ad 14. cap. Iobi. woman, therfore with guilt, and nothing more contemptible then hee: hath a short time, therefore with feare: so in the very entrance into life, he is dreadfully admonished of his departure: full of mi∣serie, therefore with teares and mourning for the miseries of the body, miseries of the soule, miseries when hee sleepeth, miseries when he waketh. For what calamitie can be wan∣ting vnto him, who is borne in sinne, with a weake body and a barren soule? And thus the penaltie of man in a short summe is expressed; for after Leo p s. 3. d io D. that first and vniuersall ruine, thorough which sinne entred into the world, and by sinne death went ouer all men, none could auoide the rule and souereignitie of the Deuill, none shake off the fetters of his cursed and terrible bondage, neither could any haue beene reconciled vnto God, or had entred into life, except the sonne of God coeternall and coequall vnto the father, had vouch safed to be the sonne of Man, and come to seeke and saue that which was lost, Luc. 19. 10. that as by Adam was death, so by our Lord Iesus Christ should be the resurrection from the dead; and from all the wretchednesse before mentioned hath hee obtained deliuerance for vs, of his Father, euen then when he offered himselfe vpon the Altar of the crosse, and was made vnto vs righteousnesse, sancti∣fication, wisedome and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. But this benefit is not bestowed in one moment, but suc∣cessiuely and by degrees. For wee are made partakers of the first freedome or de∣liuerance, 1. liberasin à caecitaete & ∣rere. when Christ doth call vs by the voice of his Gospell, and enlighten our darke vnderstandings with the bright shining beames of his holy spirit. For he conuer∣sing heere vpon earth, preached deliuerance to the captiues, &c. Luc. 4. 18. and when hee ascended vp to heauen, gaue gifts to men, &c. Ephes. 4. 11. ordeyning a perpetuall ministerie, by which the eyes of the Gentiles should bee opened, that they might be conuerted from darknes to light, and brought from the power of Satan vnto God; that
they might receiue forgiuenesse of sinnes, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in him, Act. 26. 18. whereof is a notable remarkeable example, of the people, Publicans, and souldiers, Luc. 3. 10. 11. and those Iewes, who so vehemently desired, that Christ might bee crucified, and Barrabas a theefe and murderer let loose. Act. 2. 36. 41. We obtaine the second freedome, when he giueth sauing 2. Liberatio à peccato. faith, by which we embrace the pardon of our offences, and being regenerate, the holy Ghost doth so abate and re∣presse the power of sinne, that it beareth not rule in vs. And in this sence we are said not to sinne, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. because it reig∣neth not in our mortall bodies, that we should obey the lustes thereof; so that though in the flesh we serue the law of sin yet in the minde we serue the law of God. Rom. 6. 12. & 7 23. and so offend not stubbornely and obstinately, but be∣wayle our corruption, and bee exercised in continuall repen∣tance. For the third deliuerance, it shall bee performed, when 3. Liberatio à corruptione & morte. God by his mighty power doth raise our putrified and cor∣rupted bodies, from out of the earth vnto glory. For then shall we all be Iust, Esay 60. 21. the sonnes of God, and of the resurrection, equall vnto the Angells. Luk. 20. 36. That as we haue borne the image of the earthly, so shall we beare the image of the heauenly &c. And when this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortalitie, then shall be brought to passe the saying that is written, Death is swallowed vp in victorie, Deridet A∣postolus mortē, quae gloriabatur quasi victriu, cciso seruatore & posito in se∣pulero. Arnoldus Car∣notensis de opa∣ribus sex die∣rum. O death where is thy sting? O graue where is thy victorie? The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the Law. But thankes bee vnto God which hath giuen vs victorie through our Lord Iesus Christ. 1. Cor. 15. v. 49. 54. 55. 56. 57. From hence we may behold as in a glasse, the exceeding iustice, mercy, wisdome, and trueth of God; iustice, for his First vse. wrath could not be appeased, nor sinners receiued into fa∣uour without a full and perfect satisfaction made for trans∣gressions committed: and therefore hath punished the ini∣quities
of all mankind in his sonne; neither doth hee ac∣knowledge or receiue any, but such as are clothed with his obedience. For the offence committed against the grea∣test good, was to be recompensed with the greatest punish∣ment of the offendor, that is, the extreame destruction of the nature transgressing: for the reward of sinne is death. Rom. 6. vers. 23. Mercy, for Augustinus in meditationibus. when we were dead in trespasses and sinnes, wherein in times past, we walked according to the course of the world, and after the Prince which ruleth in the ayre, euen the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobe∣dience, &c. and were by nature the children of wrath &c. God rich in mercy, through his great loue wherewith he lo∣ued vs, &c. hath quickned vs in Christ, by whose Grace wee are saued, and hath raised vs vp, and made vs sit in the hea∣uenly places in Christ Iesus, &c. Ephes. 2. 1. 2. 3. &c. And this is that bottomlesse depth Bonauentinae De stimulo a∣moris diuins parte 1. cap. 2. Bernardus ser. in 4. feria Heb∣domadis Pa∣nosae. of mercy which cannot bee sounded; for the father that he might redeeme a seruaunt, spared not his owne sonne: not the sonne, himselfe. Wisdome, for God did so temper and intermingle his iu∣stice and mercy in this worke of redemption, that he re∣mained both infinitely iust, and infinitely mercifull; Infinitely iust, for he punished our sinnes to the full: infinitely mercifull, laying this burden not vpon vs, but vpon our pledge and suerty Christ Iesus; for we all, as sheepe haue gone astray, we haue turned euery one after his owne way, and the Lord laid vpon him the iniquitie of vs all, Esay 53. 6. And this is that wonderfull worke of God, which the Angels, bow∣ing themselues downe with reuerence, desire to behold; and that misterie of godlinesse dimly shadowed by the two cherubims, couering the propitiatorie of the Arke of coue∣naunt, (a type of Christ) and turning their faces one toward another, as desiring to looke into it. Exod. 25. 20. Trueth; For God requireth the deserued punishment: our surety vndertaking for vs, hath deriued the same, toge∣ther with our sinnes, vpon himselfe, according to that decree, that the breaking of the serpents head should not be with∣out
the bruising of the heele of the seede of the woman, Gen. 3. 15. euen Christ, whom God sent at the fulnesse of time, Gal. 4. 4. and he by death ouercame him (the deuill) who had the power of death: Heb. 1. 14. and therefore tooke vpon him our nature. For Thaeodoretus. bare man could not heale so deepe a wound, because in Adam all haue sinned, are cor∣rupted in the roote, and conceiued in iniquity, Psal. 51. 6. neither was this in the power of any Angell; a finite creature vnable to beare an infinite punishment, or to vphold it selfe from falling. For Angels Augustinus in Enchiridis cap. 100. Fulgentius ad Trasimundum Regem lib. 2. cap. 2. stand by that grace, by which we were raised. Such an one therefore was to bee sought for, whose benefit might renew, wisdome informe, and power confirme the creature; so as eternall equalitie might iustifie the wicked, trueth instruct the ignorant, strength confirme the weake: and he must be, not onely man, but G, such an helpe did both our nature and case require. For nei∣ther could Augustinus. Maiesty without humilitie, nor humilitie with∣out maiestie restore mankinde; therefore is God said to redeeme the Church with his owne bloud, Act. 20. 28. and hee is that lambe killed from the beginning of the world, Apoc. 13. 8. who was not taken by the handes of the wicked otherwise, then deliuered by the determinate counsell and fore∣knowledge of God, and so crucified and slaine. Act. 2. 23. & 4. 28. For so it was foretold by the mouth of all the Pro∣phets, Act. 3. 21. euen that Christ should suffer; neither could it be, but that the euent must answer the infallible prae∣diction Luc. 24. 26. So he suffered necessarily, though by no necessitie. That thus the iustice, the mercy, the trueth and wisdome of God might be made knowen, and our freedome from bondage procured. 2 Hereby appeareth how Bernardus in natale Domini serm. 3. & 6. grieuous a thing sinne is, and how Second vse. odious vnto God; for deepe must needs those wounds be, which could not be healed but by the wounds of the sonne of God. And furder Augustinus serm. de tempore 29. we may vnderstand, at how high a rate God doth value the transgressions of man, from which debt that we might be deliuered, he sent not downe to earth an Angell nor Archangell, but God. The greatnesse of the remedie, bewrayeth the greatnesse of the maladie. Leo I. serm. l. de passione. Such were the
fetters, in which we were hard bound: that we could not be loosed from them, but by this meanes: so great was the price by which we are redeemed, so great is the expense by which we are cured. For what returne could there be from impiety to righteousnesse, from misery to happinesse, except the righteous had bowed himselfe downe to the wicked, and the blessed to the miserable? Augustinus serm. de tempo∣re 114. Behould therefore, holinesse is scourged for the vngodly, wisedome is mocked-at for the foolish, righteousnesse condemned for the wicked, trueth mur∣dered for the lyer and deceitfull; sincerity it selfe drinketh vi∣neger for the wretched, sweetnesse is filled with gall, innocency is accused for the guiltie, and life dieth for the dead. Let vs not then be ashamed of the Crosse of Christ, we haue victo∣rie and triumph by his death; for as he the euerlasting son of God, was not borne for himselfe, but for vs Esay. 9. 6. so the same immaculate and spotlesse lambe of God suffered not for himselfe, but for vs, 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. wherefore let vs carefully auoyde sinne, and crucifie the flesh with the lustes and affections thereof Gal. 5. 24. least wee seeme to tread vnder foote the son of God, and accompt the bloud of the testament as an vnholy thing, wherewith we are san∣ctified: and dispite the spirit of grace: Heb. 10. 29. 3 Let vs not doubt of the loue of God towardes vs. For how can he but loue those, for whom he gaue his beloued? Ioh. 3. 16. And this is Pauls comfort, who sometime was a blasphemer, an oppressor, a persecutor, that he was cruci∣fied with Christ, and the life that he now liued, was by faith in the son of God: who loued him & gaue himselfe for him: Gal. 2. 20. And one of our Thomas Bil∣neius apud Foxis in Martyrolo∣gio. owne Martyres, standing at the stake, ready to offer vp his body a sacrifice for the cōfirming of his faith and profession of the Gospell, there rehearsing the Apostles creede, the summe of his beliefe, when hee came to the Article of Christ crucified, in most submisse and humble manner, bended his body lowe to the ground, and gaue God most dutifull thankes, (so great as he could conceiue) for this infinite and vnspeakeable mercy: who by the death of his sonne had deliuered vs from out of the
power of the Deuill, by whom we were taken aliue to doe his will. Then brethren Augustinus lib. de virgini∣tate cap. 54. 55. 56. behould the woundes of Christ hanginge vpon the crosse, the bloud which hee shed dying, the price which hee offered redeeming, the scarres which he shewed after his rising: his head is bowed downe to kisse thee, his heart opened to loue thee, his armes spred abroad to em∣brace thee, his body sacrificed to redeeme thee. Wonder with thy selfe, how great these giftes are, wey them in the ballance of thy heart, that he may be wholy fastened of thee in thy soule: who was wholy fastened for thee vpon the Crosse. And they crucified him. This was the purposed intendement of the Iewes, priestes and Pharisies, to brand Christ with the greatest infamie they could deuise, and that euen by the Tanlerus in meditationibus de vita Christa cap. 37. fellowship (if I may so call it) of those two theeues between whom he was crucified; endeauouring thereby, to perswade the people, that hee was guilty of the same offences for which they suffered, and therefore was placed in the Iansenius in Harmonia E∣uangeliorum cap. 143. midst betweene them (where∣of more afterward) that so hee might, not only be reckned among the wicked, but also accompted as the chiefe: so fore∣tould of the Prophet Esay 53. 12. Fulfilled accordingly: Mark. 15. 28. As Christ the Redeemer of the whole world, tooke vpon  his shoulders the burden of the sinnes of vs all, hangeth crucified betweene two theeues, is laden with tauntes and reproaches, and esteemed publikely for a most wicked one, so we by faith in him, and through his absolute obedience are accompted righteous, For hee that knewe no sinne was made sinne for vs, that we might bee the righteousnes of God in him: 2. Corinth. 5. 21. In which one diuine Aphorisme of the Apostle, the whole summe of the doctrine of our Re∣demption is briefly comprehended. For the Redeemer him∣selfe is by way of description expressed (hee knew noe sinne, but was pure, vndefiled, innocent: Heb. 7. 26. Christus filius crat carnis A∣dae, non filius praeuaricaonis Adae. S. Bernar∣dus in fesso pen∣secostis serm. 2. the sonne not of the sinne, but of the flesh of Adam, Luc. 3. 38. and in
this place the word (sinne) signifieth the vitious habite in∣herent in our corrupt nature, from which our blessed Sa∣uiour was most free) The manner of the redemption (made sinne for vs) that is, a propitiatory sacrifice, or offering for attonement, a Augustinus in Enchiridio cap. 41. Chytraeus in Leuiticum. phrase of speech taken from the law, Leuit. 7. 2. Osea. 4. 8. The fruit and benefite, (that we might be the righteousnesse of God in him,) for he came to seeke and saue that which was lost, Luk. 19. 10. who being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery to be equall with God, but k Non sumpsit modo formam serui, vt sub∣esset, sed & ma∣li serui vt vapu∣laret; & serus peccati, vt pae∣nam solueret, cum poenā non haberet. Ber∣nardus in serm. feriae quartae in hebdomade paen. he made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant, and was made like vnto men, and was found in his shape as a man; humbled himselfe and be∣came obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the crosse, Phil. 2. 7. 8. and putting out the hand writing that was a∣gainst vs, fastened it vpon the Crosse Coloss. 2. 14. so can∣celled, and by death ouercame him that had the power of death (the Deuill) Heb. 2. 14. and dissolued his workes 1. Ioh. 3. 8. For we fell in the handes of the prince of the world, who deceiued Adam, made him a Captiue, Nam quum dei opere vintulo tenebatur diae∣bolici operis, apparuit filius dei vt illud sol∣ueret, hoc sana∣ret. Fulgentius ad Trasimundum Regem lib. 1. cap. 5. and tooke vs as his discended bondmen. But our redeemer came and the Captiuator. vsurper was dispossessed; what did hee Augustinus serm. de 5. pa∣bus & duo∣bus piscibus. The reioycing of faith. to the vsurper? he layd his crosse for the trappe, his bloud for the baite: and so was taken. Therefore farre be it from vs, and God forbid that we should reioyce in any thing but in the crosse of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. Now this reioycing is two fould; The one of faith, the other of pa∣tience: of faith, when we are perswaded in our heartes, (not∣withstanding the greatnesse and number of our sinnes) that we are receiued into fauour, reconciled vnto God, and saued, because it pleased the father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell, and by him to reconcile all thinges to him∣selfe, and to set at peace through the bloud of his crosse, both the thinges in earth and the thinges in heauen &c. Coloss. 1. 19. 20. And from hence proceedeth that holy boasting of the Apostle, that he spared not his owne sonne but gaue him for vs all; Who then shall lay any thing to the charge of the chosen? It is God that iustifieth; who shall condemne, it is
Christ which is dead, yea rather which is risen againe, who is also at the right hand of God, and maketh request also for vs: And (as it were treading vnder foote and trampling vppon all those extremities, indignities and disgraces, which the world can offer) breaketh out further with ioy, what shall se∣parate vs from the loue of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sword? and so forth to the end of the chapter: Rom. 8. 32. 33. 34. &c. The reioycing of patience is, when in any the most grieuous The reioicing of patience. affliction, we humbly submit our selues vnder the mightie hand of God, and comfor our fainting soules by the exam∣ple of Christ crucified, reioycing that we are made partakers of his sufferinges, 1. Pet. 4. 12. For if we suffer, we shall also reigne with him, 2. Timoth. 2. 12. So the Apostles when they were beaten with roddes, departed from the councell (by whose sentence they were adiudged to this punishment) reioycing that they were accompted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: Act. 5. 41. And thus did the an∣cient holy Martyres stand affected. Nicephorus Califius lib. 6. cap. 36. Suidas in voca∣bulo Babilas. Babilas ready to lay downe his necke vpon the blocke, requested this one thing at the executioners handes, euen to bee buried with the chaine, wherewith he was bound; that rising at the last day from the dead, it might appeare hee once carried it for Christs sake. And it is very remarkeable that Lib. histor. Ecclesiastica. . cap. 6. Eusebius re∣porteth, how the Christians, willingly and (as it were stri∣uing who should be the first) hauinge made confession of their faith, offered themselues to death: and receiuing the sentence of condemnation, went aside to a place adioyning vpon the walles of the Citie, tied with no other fetters, then the bondes of faith, yet none of them fought to escape, when none watched them, but all, yea one preuenting ano∣ther, put themselues into the handes of the butcher; and while the first were executed, the rest cheerefully sunge psalmes and praises vnto God, waiting their course and place of Martyrdome. Wherefore let vs runne with patience the race that is set before vs, looking vnto Iesus the Author and fi∣nisher of our faith, who for the ioy that was set before him,
endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Heb. 12. 1. 2. And they crucified him. The chiefe Priests had hyred Iudas the Apostle Matth. 26. 14. 15. who for thirty pieces of siluer the price of a Iohannes Drusius ad 27. caput Matthaei. slaue or bond-man, (at so low a rate was he valued,) be∣trayed his Master: hee is brought before Caiphas, char∣ged with false accusations, deliuered ouer to Pilate, that hee might pronounce the condemnatory sentence vpon him: who though he was found guiltlesse and innocent, (euen by the testimonie of the Iudge himselfe) in a furious rage they cryed out that Barrabas a murtherer and desperate villaine (the offer being tendred which they would choose) might bee set free, and the Lord of life crucified. Neither did the Iewes ouerslip any thing, which might either make to his reproch, or encrease his torment. For his body was torne with whipping, his head crowned with thornes, led De forma eductionis ple∣niss. Lipsius do cruce lib. 1. cap. 6. & Petrus Faber somestriū lib. 2. cap. 8. forth to execution with all disgrace and contumely, is constrained to carry his crosse vpon his mangled shoul∣ders, (and that the whole for a time, Luc. 23. 26. for else what needed a helpe to be taken vp, and enforced to take a part?) he is stripped of his garments, hands and feet nay∣led to the crosse, which is the peculiar torture of this kinde of death, Pilate writeth a title, and causeth it to be set ouer his head in Iansenius in Harmonia E∣uang. cap. 143. Sixtus Senensis sacrae biblioth. lib. 2. Hunc Sinodi ti∣tulum Dion Cassius vocat . Caietanus Ientaculo prim. quaest. 4. Obseruation. scorne and contempt, vpbrayding and taun∣ting him, as though he had sought to vsurpe the kingdome ouer the Iewes, and intimating thereby that for this cause he was adiudged to this present punishment, and all to this end, thereby to procure the fauour and good liking of the Emperour toward him, as one who defended his Royall authoritie ouer the Iewes against the Iewes. The cruelty of the wicked against the godly is outragious, and cannot be appeased but by their vtter destruction, and therefore are said to deuour the poore, as with fire, and to consume them to ashes, Psal. 10. 2. and are described in the holy Scriptures, by such titles as expresse their conditions, for
they are named Lyons (Neroes Eusebius Hi∣stor. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 12. style 2. Timoth. 4. 17. the first who stayned his sword with the bloud of Tertull. in Apologetico, cap. 5. Christians, and dedicated persecution against the Gospell) wayters for bloud, hunters of their brethren, Micha 7. 2. Caniballs, mon∣eators, Psal. 53. 4. and (in one summe to comprehend all,) such, whose mercies are cruelties, Prouerbs 12. 10. clay stee∣pod in bloud, as , dictus est ob¦saeuam & lontā naturam Tybe∣rius. Suetonius lib. 3. cap. 57. Theodorus was wont to call Tiberius. The view of the Scriptures, the histories of the primitiue Church will afford for confirmation of this, plenty of ex∣amples. Wicked Cain murthereth righteous Abell his brother, Gen. 4. 8. (the first Martyr who watered the field of the Church with his bloud.) Pharaoh commaundeth the sucking infants to be pulled from their mothers breasts, and cast into the riuer Nilus. Exod. 1. 22. Manasses, while he was yet an Idolater, to other his wickednes added this, that he shed innocent bloud, till he filled Ierusalem from cor∣ner to corner. 2. King 21. 16. It was not a sufficient satisfa∣ction to Hamans minde, that Mordecay should be destroy∣ed, but (sparing no cost, by a lauish offer of great summes of money to be brought into the Kings coffers) obteyned, to haue the whole nation of the Iewes rooted out, Hester 3. 6. and in the day of Ierusalems calamitie, the Edomites cry out Race it, race it, euen to the foundation thereof, Psal. 137. 7. and, to descend to the first times of the Primitiue Church, the endeuours and practise of the enemies of godlynesse was to choake it new borne, and being as it were in the swa∣thing bands, and a tender infant in the cradle. Such and so great was the cruelty which the Tyrants practised in The∣bais, that Eusebius hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 8. cap. 3. 10. 11. 13. plura ne∣fanda crudeli. tatis exempla (Si qu tant amor veteram cognoscere ca∣sus) invenie est a∣pud Victoreus de persecutions Africa. Bullingerum, in libro de persecu∣tionibus Eccle∣siae. In histo∣ria persecutionū Waldensium ab anno 155. ad . 161. & Reginandum Gonsalum in detectione In∣quisitionis His∣panica. Eusebius affirmeth, it farre exceeded the credit of any relation. For they rent and tare the whole body with poerdes, vntill the skin was scraped off, they han∣ged vp women naked by one foote, vpon certaine engines, with their heads downeward, without any respect to the modestic of the sexe, a detestable spectacle; some they pulled a pieces, hauing their legges and armes tyed to the boughes of trees, bended by force to that purpose; and these, & the like for many yeares together; in which, euery day ten (when the fewest) sometime an hundred men, wo∣men
& children were vnmercifully massacred by these tor∣ments Stigelius in 3. partolocorum Theolog. Christo, vsque ad Con∣ M. sunt ann 300. &  plures. in quibus sue∣riat per∣secutienos, sed omnium ∣issima sub Dio∣, quo regnante dibijt, quin Alexandriae ad minimum decem Christiani tru∣ sint. And it was lawfull for euery one who had deuised any new or strange kinde of torture, to make tryall of the same vpon the bodies of the Christians; so that some were beaten to death with clubs, others with rods, some with whips, many hanged, (their hands tyed behind them) and, stretched vp with pullies, pulled asunder by peace-meale &c. And Tacitus reporteth, that Nero Annalium lib. 15 & de hoc intelligoudus est Iunenalis, satyra 1. lib. 1. one Tygillinū lucebis in illa. afflicted them with most exquisitely deuised torments, adding therevnto whatsoeuer might, to their reproch and mockery: as coue∣ring them with the skinnes of wilde beasts, that so they might be sooner torne of dogs: and, nayling them to cros∣ses, enwrapped them with combustible matter, that set on fire they might serue to giue light in the night: Nauclirus in historia, Gene∣ratione 10. Zgon in historin politices Constantino po∣leos. Crusij in eam annorationes. Mahomet the second when he tooke Constantinople, commaunded the Christians to be chopped into gobbets, in his owne sight, and some to be set vp, with a sharpe stake thrust throw their secret parts, pearcing the ridge bone of the backe. The Hotmānus in bruto sulmine. Pope of Rome importuned Frances the first, king of Fraunce, that the professors of the reformed Religion might haue their tongues cut out (by which meanes they should not complaine) and then to be burned. In the Historica nar∣ratio de vita & morte Iohannis Hussi. Councell of Constance, when Iohn Husse was consumed with fire, the Papists finding his heart yet whole, spitted it vpon a sharpued  of wood, rosted it with a new fire, gathered vp his ashes, cast them into the Riuer Rhene, that there might not so much as the dust of him (so far as they could preuaile) be left vpon the earth. Who knoweth not, how, in the memorie of our Fathers, (for now I come to touch those things which are incident to our times) they Ioh. Foxus in martyrologio. & Iuollus Episcopus Sarisburiensispiae memoriae in dfnsione Apo∣logiae Eccles. Anglicanae cap. 4. sect. 3. tooke the infant issuing out of the mothers wombe in the midst of the flame, and the executioners with their forkes cast it into the fire? that, as the off spring of an heretike, it might burne together with hir. Adde to this, how they mur∣dered Dinothus lib. 2. hist. de bello Gal. gionis causa suscepio. aged men, sucking babes, people lying sick in their
beddes vnable to stirre, women bigge with child, and cast them downe headlonge from the rockes, breaking their neckes and crushing their bones in peeces; such, who, with shedding of many teares, and promising large rewardes, haue begged life: yea buried some quicke, and disturbed the rest of others laide at peace in their graues, spoylinge them of their winding sheetes, and casting them in sauage manner to be deuoured of dogges. Our ancestours haue Epistola siue le∣bellus supplex ad Phm Hispa∣ Regem, nomi∣ne princip Auri∣ari & ordinū Hol∣landiae, & Lelau∣diae, oblatus. seene the bodies of the dead digged vp, and most dispite∣fully hanged vpon gibttets; men aliue fleaed, and drummes couered with their skinnes: and many plucked asunder with hot tonges. And not to reckon vp more of this sort (the remembrance of them is a terror to my soule) hee is but a child and ignorant of the history of his owne times, who knoweth not, how, from the Vespera Parisi∣me, de quibus ver∣sus numeralis an∣num tam stragis denotans (vz 1572) Bar∣thoLoMeVs fLet, qVla GaLLeVs oCCVbat At Las. twenty foure of August (which day is consecrated to the memory of Saint Bartho∣lomewe) vnto the first of December, in Paris and other Citties of Fraunce one De haec Laniena vide historiam de statu veligiou & Reipub. i Galli lib. 10. Hdrici Zuinglij Epito de Regibus Galli, in Carolo 9 Th∣num, qui in hi∣storia sui temporis lib. 52. minorens numerum ponis; & illsus liberum de hac faeda tēpesta∣te, & dium li∣entia, quod pro∣fert lib. 35. non prcul ab initio. hundred thousand of the religion were murthered; and that after a most treacherous and bloudy manner. These and the like transcendent outrages may be sufficient testimony, that Rome is that scarlot-co∣loured harlot, drunken with the bloud of the Saintes Apoc. 17. 6. For by the space of these Aglinus in A∣pocalipsin Bullin∣gerus con Pij. Quinti Bullam. 1 Testes sisut omniū atatum historiae, qua doc, Papam Reges inter se cō∣cōsisse;  in dominos sicos, fios in patrei concitâsse, Authores fuisse, & iuramentis, vt prum astragalis vsos; ado vt verò dicatur, Pontifices Romanes Romulo succedere in parricidiis, non Petro in pascendis ouibus, vt & Adrianus 4. priusquam moreretur, dixisse fortur: Amoninus 17. § 9. 2 Exempla sint Paschalis secundus, primus bellator, vi agni ingenij atque , à religious ad conuersus est. Platina in Pascals 2. Hunc sequntus Innocentius 3. Budeus in Innocentio 3. Julius 2, qui in Gal∣lias emissurus coptas, ense & clauibus accinctus, in Tiborim proiecit clas, hoc referens, quando quidem Petri claues nihil prodessent, Pauli ensem quem  auxilio futurum: Arnoldus Ferronus Gallesarū lib. 3 in Ludouico 12. De Iuliano Cardinale cicius suasis ruptum cum Turcis  est & insoliciter pugnatum. Bonsimus rerum Hungaricarum decad. 3. lib. 5. De vrbano 2. qui & Turbana dictus est. Abbas Vrspergsis. De lijs. Auctinus lib. 5. annalium. Sumptus Pontificis ad Bellum Germanium contra protestantes commentora Sladanus lib. 17 Thuanus histor. parto prima lib. 2 Quid om & per mach siut in Augliam nostrem,  & apud Maisburionsont. Mathaum Parisiensem, Tho. Walsinghamum, Tdellum de artibus prlatorum: Antonium Ciraullam in vita Sixti 5. 3 De Paulo 3. Bale in illius vitae De Gregorij 7. & Vrba machs contra Henricum 4 Imper. Helnoldes in Chronicis Sclauorum, cap. 28. 29. Abbas Vrspergensis indignum Ioh. Diasij cedem descripsis gro libello 4 Huius sceleris conscij. Bernardus , Gregorus 7. de quibus Nicholaus Cisnerus De Henrico Lun∣burgico, Simon Schard in Hypo. Cardinalis. Quid mo sius ad tollendam vitam Di Elizabeth Regi nuper memorie, legere est apud Bilsonum Episcopum Wimensim, in io crdi∣issimo suo opere contra Apolog Catholicorū Anglicanorū. In recenti adhuc memoria sius Henrico 3. & 4. Galliarum Regum paicidia. De quibus  Galli Ecclesiae, Tuss , lib. 6. 5 Quam in ha arte priti sunt docet aperte Moneus con∣tra paruas da∣ta. Machauel∣lu in principe suo cap. 18. Gudinus l. 1. de Alex. 6. 6 Hae sunt Pon∣tificum arts. Apologia Ca∣tholica contra Federatos, in Regno Franciae parte 2. Petrus de vineis passim in epistolis. Si∣mon Scardiuc in Hypomne∣mate. Cisiacrus. Marsilius in de∣fonsore pacis. Ioh. Meierius de schismatibus. Et Petrus Cri∣nitus de honest disciplina. Pe∣trarcha epist. siue titulo epist. 7. & 15. &c. fiue hundred yeares, what 1. euilles, 2. warres, 3. murthers, parricides, 4. King-slay∣inges,
5. periuries, 6. seditions, rebellions, treasons, hath there beene in the Christian world, whereof the Byshops of Rome were not either principals or accessaries? And therefore the Apostle doth not without cause maruaile, that so great power is giuen vnto them; but let vs possesse our soules in patience, for God at the last will iudge them, and deliuer his from the iawes and crueltie of raginge Antichrist. 1. Vse. Trust not those who are vngodly & irreligious, neither be familiar with thē, howsoeuer they fawningly slatter you, and pretend loue; for they are wolues in sheepes cloathing: Math. 7. 15. siluer drosse layd vpon a potshard, and though they speake fauourably, yet there be seuen abhominations in their heart, hauing one thing ready in their tongue, ano∣ther close in the minde. Pro. 26. 25. And bee well inured with Plinius histo∣riae lib. 11. cap. 44. & similis est Dolonis Gestus apud Homerū, Iliade decima. Ioabs salutations who tooke Amasa by the beard with one hand (a complement of great humility) and vsed sweete wordes, art thou in health my brother? but smote him with the other, and shed out his bowelles to the ground: 2. Sam. 20. 9. and Iudas treasonable kisses, Luk. 22. 48. hee counterfeited affectionate loue, with a patheticall repeti∣tion, Rabbi, Rabbi: Mark 14. 15. making a way to the per∣formance of his Leo primus serm. 1. de passi. Lupinofurore, vim sceleris per speciem pacis incipiens, signū traditionis, saeuiore , telis osculo prabuit. woluish fury vnder the shewe of peace: and gaue a smoth kisse a token to betray his master, sharper then any dart. And of such the holy Ghost speaketh by Dauid that their wordes are softer then butter, but warre is in their heartes; smother then oyle, sharper then swordes; Psal. 55. 21. They are sweete in their lippes, and can make many good wordes and speake many good thinges, yea weepe with their eies, but in their heart imagine how to throwe thee into the pitt: and if they can finde oportunity, will not be satisfied with bloud. Thus are the crafty and fox-like con∣ditions of the wicked described in liuely colours, Ecclesiast. 12. 17. The only preseruatiue against these Sinons (who haue euery one a Troian horse in themselues) is, not to trust them Ierem. 9. 4. For as the Greeke orator Demost. orat. 2. contra Philippum. aduised the Athenians, concerning Philip King of Macedon, who laie
in waite to ensnare them, and surprise their City, the greatest bulwarke to withstand his attempts, was distrust, the strongest sinewes of true wisedome: so for Christians the surest meanes of safety, is (according to the auncient Clemns A∣lexandrinus lib. 7. Stromatum. & simile quid est apud Nis∣snum de vir∣ginitate (si modo illius liber sit.) prouerbe of the Church,) to ioyne the serpent with the doue. And this is that direction which our Sauiour commendeth to his dis∣ciples, that they should be wise as serpents, & simple as doues. Matth. 10. 16. but wisdome must be first and guard sim∣plicitie. Let vs striue with God by earnest prayer, that we may be pre∣serued from such vnreasonable men. This was the desire of the Patriarke Iacob concerning his two sonnes Simeon and Leui, (who deceiued the Sichimites by a fained pretence and glosing tearmes of making a perpetuall league and friendship with them, conditionally that they would bee circumcised, and then murthered them all, vnable to make resistance by reason of the griefe of their wounds, and spoy∣led their goods,) Into their secret let not my soule come, my glory bee not ioyned with their assembly &c. cursed bee their wrath &c. Gen. 49. 6. 7. For such be false brethren 2. Cor. 11. 26. vnreasonable and euill men, 2. Thess. 3. 2. And the cause why these dregs of the world wherin we liue, is so foule and muddy, and such Mala tempo∣ra facit nobis contemptus Dei, temporū cursus non facit. Chrysolog. ser. 4. Non Planetae, non sydera, nos ipsi mutamus re∣ naturam nostrū iniqui∣tatibus; & quae Deus bona facit munere pictatis suae, nos facimus mala esse mori∣bus malis. Salutanus de prouidentia Dei lib. 6. daungerous daies in these last times; for they haue a shew of godlinesse, and deny the power thereof, 2. Timoth. 3. 5. and are of Hannibals minde, in whose eyes no ight was more pleasing, than a ditch swim∣ming ouer with mans bloud; Dauids petition therefore may well fit euery man, Deliuer me O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, and out of the hand of the euill and cruell man. Psalm. 71. 4. There they crucified him, and the euill doers, one at the right hand and the other at the left. A strange spectacle in one place at one time; the guilty and the guiltlesse are executed by one manner of death: Ie∣sus the Sauiour and two malefactors are hanged vpon their
seuerall crosses: of those, one condemned, the other saued. And the very creatures seemed to detest this crueltie shew∣ed vnto the Lord of life; for the earth now trembled, the sunne (the ioy of the day) couered his bright shining with darknes, as with a mourning blacke, the Moone (the nights comfort) is turned into bloud, and lost her light, Mark. 15. 33. Matth. 27. 51. For Bernardus sermone in feria 4. hebdomadae poenosae. then the wicked killed the righte∣ous, and laid their sacrilegious and cursed hands vpon the sonne of God; mercilesse murtherers of men, (and if I may so say) of God himselfe. At this sight the wholeframe of the world was afraid and astonied, and waxed pale, and all things ready to returne to their auncient Chaos and confu∣sion. The Iewes Isodorus Pe∣lusiora lib. 1. epist. 255. & 256. purpose herein was, and all their attempts tended to this onely end, that Christ being crucified among theeues might be thought partaker of those offences, and ac∣compted the ring-leader of the wicked, or at the least bee stayned by the society of their companie: or as the moderne Greekes now Alexius Rhaturus . Charlophylax fuit, & quid hoc officij ganus vide Ioh. Mour∣sinum in Glos∣sario Graeco∣barbaro. speake, (for God hath a remnant of Saintes, and a Church euen in the middest of Mahumetisme) be esteemed as the chiefe theefe, a deceiuer and enemy vnto God. But they were disappointed of their purpose, and all their subtile-deuised counsells made frustrate. For as nei∣ther the loathsomnesse of the place, could hinder, but that there he erected a Trophe and monument of his glorious victorie, nor the stench of the carcases, which lay there pu∣trified and rotten, abate the sweet smell of his sacrifice, why it should not spread it selfe ouer the face of the earth, and ascend vp euen to heauen: so this infamy and disgrace which is now offered, did Horalogicum Graecum. nothing at all obscure his spot∣lesse glory: for the crosse of Christ was a ballance of righteous∣nesse, betweene the two theeues, the one caried downe to hell by the weight of his blasphemy, the other lightned of his sinnes, brought to the knowledge of God. Or, as Saint Sermone de passione. Chrysostome, a iust and equall scale weighing out, and try∣ing faith and infidelitie; and thereby also intimating the office of his mediatorship, betweene God and man, betweene the Iewes and the Gentiles.
—Sedulius Po∣eta Christianus eleganter in carmine pas∣bali. Insontis latere ex vtro cruentos Constituere viros; meritum licet omnibus vnum Non faciat similes, similis sententia: nam{que} Inter Garnisices sancto pendente latrones, Par est poenatrium, sed dispar causa duorum &c. The bare and naked act of suffering doth not make vs Obseruation. acceptable to God for the same, but the cause is to be con∣sidered. The Israelites died in the wildernesse, in many of them God was not well pleased, I. Corinth. 10. 5. Moses also the seruant of God dyed there, and taketh a view of the land of promise from the top of the hill, but tasteth not of the good things thereof, nor entreth into it, Deut. 34. 5. Achab fell by the sword, a iust punishment, 1. King. 22. 35. Iosias also perisheth by the sword, and this is a mercifull cor∣rection, and is gathered to his Promissio haec cum grano salis est intelligenda. Nam promissio∣nes corporales semper habent annexam condi∣tionē crucis. & mminit huus pugnae Herodo∣rus in Musis. in Euterp. lib. 2. fathers in peace, according to the promise. 2. Chron. 34. 28. In the same prison Pha∣raohs seruants for their offence against their Lord, are shut vp, and Ioseph with them falsely accused, Gen. 39. 2. 20. For in the likenesse of the sufferings, there is oftentimes a difference of the Augustinus de ciuitate Dei lib. 1. cap. 8. sufferers. Therefore our Sauiour Christ doth not absolutely and without exception pronounce all blessed, but with a limitation, Caietanus Ientaculo 4. de Beatitudinibus. such as suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, Matth. 5. 10. For there cannot bee the trueth of Martyrdome, where the trueth of God is wanting. Wherfore this is the cōfort of the faithful vnder the crosse, For Vox martyrū (Occidimur tota die) Causa Martyrū (Pro te Domino causa tua.) Augustinus in Psal. 43. thy sake O Lord are wee killed all the day long, and are ac∣compted as sheepe to the slaughter. Psal. 44. 22. Rom. 8. 36. Vaine therfore are the swelling boastes of Iesuits, Masse∣priests and Papists, foolish is their cracking of persecution and martyrdome, which they suffer; and the canonization of them for Saints in this respect altogether ridiculous, a meere toy and mockery. For these disguised Impostors, doe vndergoe nothing for religions sake, but suffer deser∣ued punishment, for their rebellion and sedition against the common-wealth, whose vtter ruine and destruction they haue plotted. Such Historia tri∣partita lib. 8. cap. 13. Martyrs had the Arriant, of whom
we read in Church histories. Such were the Donatists men∣tioned by Saint Augustine, Epistola 167 who sought to scrape vp praise for the due correction by seuerity imposed, to restraine them from outragious wickednesse; being ignorant either throw wonderful blindnes, or dissembling by damnable boldnes, to know thus much, that none can die the death of a Idem Epist. 61. & contra Crescoriū Grā∣maticum lib. 3. cap. 47. & in Psal. 34. Mar∣tyr, who liueth not the life of a Christian. For grant all to be Martyrs who suffer punishment, from these premises will follow an absurd conclusion, that euery Prison then should swarme with Martyrs, euery chaine should draw a Martyr after it, euery gallowes should make a shew of Mar∣tyrs, euery one, howsoeuer executed, should bee crowned with glory. But in good earnest to affirme this, were little better then madnes it selfe. Therefore in those sad and wofull times of the Church, the ancient Christians iudged him who pulled downe and tare in pieces the cruell edict of Aeuodius de∣cretorum lib. 5. ad legem Corne∣liam tit. 13. sect. decima. Dioclesian and Maximinus, and was therfore put to execra∣ble torment, worthy of the same, and did not enroule his name among the Martyrs; for not the punishment but the cause giueth that honorable title to any. Therefore in this Calender no place is left for Story and Felton (traytors a∣gainst their country,) whom notwithstanding, as it were disdayning to ranke them in any low order, De visibili Monarchia lib. 7. Saunders cal∣leth great and excellent Martyrs. No roome heere for the inconstant runagate Campian, none for Garnet, guilty and conuicted of so strange and hellish a treason, as no former age can paralell; except happily he be such a Martyr, as was his miracle, counterfeit, and a wispe of straw. And by no better right may either the youth Chastell, or father Guiguarde, infamous for their bloudy and vnnaturall mur∣thers, challenge to haue their memories regestred in the catalogue of Saints, extolled by In Apologiae pro Iohanne Chastello parte 3. & 5. Vindiciae Ec∣clesiae Galli∣canae. Franciscus de Ʋerrona aboue the common and vsuall condition of all other, to be noble Gentlemen, halfe Gods: and their deeds heroycall, and so exempt from any staine of sinne. But why should we mar∣uell at all these strange Paradoxes? For Prateolus lib. 3. cap. 19. Petilian worship∣ped Iudas Iscarioth who betrayed his Master, as a Martyr,
a Deuill and the sonne of perdition Ioh. 6. 70. & 17. 12. And they shall haue good leaue to be numbred among the antient Martyriani, which were also called Satanists, Epiphanius Heresi 80 & Augustinus de heresious cap. 57. be∣cause with all submisse humility they honoured Satan, as protector of their liues and gouernour of all their actions; But let these passe, and receiue such reward at Gods handes, as is their due. Because such heretofore hath beene, and may hereafter bee the estate of the Church, that either through the good workes and purity of Cyprianus epistola 9. the brethren, she be clothed in white, or died purple in the bloud of Mar∣tyres (for among her flowers there be as well roses as lilies) let the professors of Christian religion striue, and with all diligence endeauour, that none suffer as a murtherer, or a theife, or an euill doer, or as a busi-body &c. but if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not bee ashamed, but glorifie God in this behalfe, 1. Pet. 4. 15. 16. then shall hee vnder∣take a good triall Tertullianus libro ad Mar∣tyres. De his à Gym∣nastica sumptis vocabulis. Pe∣trus Faber in Agonistica. Et Hyronimus Mrcurialis de arte Gym∣nastica. of Maisterie, whereof the liuing God is the cheife author, the principall ruler the holy Ghost, Christ Iesus the ouerseer, who hath annointed vs with his spirit, and brought vs sorth to this triall, the reward a garland of eternity, glory in heauen for euer and euer &c. They crucified him and the euill doers, one at the right hand, another at the left. In this action lyeth couered a secret misterie. For vnder these two malefactors is represented the whole body of all Crux Christi Tribunal. mankinde, which may well be deuided into two sortes, the godly and faithfull, who shalbe saued, the wicked and vn∣beleouers, who must be condemned: and the site and placing of them; shadoweth out the difference of their estate; For in this position of the Leo primus serm. 4. de passi∣one. Pelusi∣ota pisiolarum lib. 1. epist. 255. & 256. crosse, is not obscurely shewed vnto vs, that seperation which Christ shall, in that day when he commeth to iudgement, make of all men; the faith of the beleeuing theife, beinge a representation of such as shalbe saued, and the impiety of the n other blaspheming, a figure of the damned. For he shall appeare in the end of the world,
in the glory of the Father, and flaming fire, to take venge∣ance of those who haue not knowne God, and obeied the Gospell, and to be glorified in his Saints and made wonderfull in all that doe beleeue: 2. Thess. 1. 7. 8. Then shall he seperate the sheepe, and put them at his right hand, and the goates at his left, these shalbe cast into euerlastinge fire, with the Deuill and his Angels, and vndergoe that dreadfull sentence, de∣part from me you cursed: they shall be put in the possession of the kingdome prepared for them from the beginning of the world, with that sweet Duae senten∣tiae ferentur in iudicio vltimo, vna pro bonis, altera contra malos; sententia pro bonis haec continet, prim amabilem voca∣tionem (venite) Secund. diuinā benedictionem (benedicti.) Tert. paternam dilectionem (patris mei) 4. remuneratio∣nis retributionē (percipite) 5. praemij assig∣nationem, (Regnum,) 6. gloriae prae∣parationim (quod vobis pa∣raum) 7. aeernā prae∣destinationem (ab origine mundi.) In sententia contra malos 1. est à Deo separatio (ite) 2. maledictio (maledicti) 3. poena (in ignem.) 4. libera∣tionis desperatio, (aeternum) 5. infelix assciatio (paratum Diabolo, & Angelis cius.) Albertus in compendio Theologiae lib. 7. cap. 19. inuitation come yee blessed of my father: Math. 25. 31. 32. 34. 41. &c. And from hence two especiall doctrines doe arise. After the ignominies, contumelies, sufferinges and af∣flictions, of this life, God will giue, vnto those that are his rest and glory; for to euery one that doth good shalbe honor and peace and glory: Rom. 2. 10. Glory, in the soule and body. In the soule; for it shall haue the knowledge of God & likenes with him, and we Nazianzenus. shall see him, at the last, as he is: and ne∣uer be depriued of that sight: 1. Ioh. 3. 2. face to face 1. Cor. 13. 12. euen behoulding him (as with the eye) who is nei∣ther comprehensible in humaine vnderstanding, nor ex∣pressible by any word of man. Then God Bernardus in Psal. 91. Sublatis omnibus imperfectionibus  cuus nunc est erodore, tunc videbit.  cuius hîc ect sperare, obtinebit fimiter id, quô enitebatur; , cuius est anre, tunc diliget perfectè, vnde perfecta visio, perfecta dilectio, & perfecta fruitio. Tilenus 2. parte, Syntagmatis Theologici, loco de vita aeterna. shall enlighten fully our vnderstanding with brightnes of wisedome, gouerne our will and bound it in the limites of righteousness, and quiet our affections so, that they shall repose themselues in heauenly peace; that whatsoeuer grace hath prepared and begunne, glory may perfect; And then wee shall bee freed from sinne and misery. For as in Danaeus de homine lib. 1. cap. 5. creation we were so made, that we might not haue sinned, and by the fall of Adam so corrupted, that we cannot but sinne; so being glorified, shall be so restored, that we shall not sinne at all. For then shall we
be perfectly regenerated, Math. 22. 30. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. effe∣ctually gouerned in all our actions, 1. Corinth. 15. 28. and transformed into that Image according to which wee were first made; that there might be in vs Haymo lib. 1. de varietate librrum, cap. 1. light without darknes, wisedome without errour, life without death: and be Sancti dupli∣cem glorificati∣onis stolam ha∣bebunt, vnam sp. alteram carnis: stola sp. in tribus con∣sistit, in cogniti∣one, dilectione, & dilectatione. stola carnis in 4. claritate, subtilitate, agi∣litate, impassi∣bilitate. Inno∣centius in ser∣mone, de Diuo Gregorio: A∣quinas in sum∣ma partis 3. supplemento quaest. 82. 83. 84. 85. transla∣ted from the glory of beleeuing, to the glory of behouldinge, and enioy the fruition of our hope. In the body, De his quali∣tatibus Holo∣tus in librum sapientiae, cap. 3. vers. 7. for that shall be made conformable to the body of Christ, Philip. 3. 21. and furnished with seuerall endowments, particularly laid out and illustrated of the A∣postle by opposite tearmes of mortality, basenesse, infirmitie, and frailety, which we all so longe as we liue heere, doe carry about vs. 1. Cor. 15. 43. 44. Of both for soule and body shall then bee in peace, and honour; and this honour is manifold: because wee shall bee manifested to be the friends, sonnes and heires of God, and coheires with Christ, Rom. 8. 17. who will commend vs be∣fore his heauenly Father and holy Angels, and acknow∣ledge wee belong to himselfe, Math. 10. 32. Luc. 12. 8. and place vs for euer in the house of his father, the king∣dome of heauen, Iohn 14. 23. Math. 25. 34. and make vs as it were fellowes with the Angels, the spirits of the righ∣teous, and himselfe, Heb. 12. 22. that wee may bee with him for euer, 1. Thess. 4. 17. when wee Gaudbi propter loci a∣maenitat quam pssidebi∣mus, propter ucundam socie∣tatm, cum qua regnabimus, propter corpris glorificationem, quam habebi∣mus. Bonauentura Dieta 9. cap. 50. shall haue comfort of the pleasant place we shall possesse, of the ioyfull company with whom wee shall liue, of the glorification of our bodies which then we shall enioy. And concerning our peace, it shall be peace with God, peace with the elect Angels, peace with men, peace from the Deuill, peace from our enemies; quietnesse without warre, and se∣curity from aduersaries, and all teares be wiped from our eyes, Apoc. 21. 4. clothed in white garments, washed in the blood of the Lambe, and carrying triumphant palmes in our hands after many and great tribulations; Apoc. 7. 14. Then our life shall be nothing else but a continuall Augustinus Epist. 146. Ibi erit aeterna sanias, sana ae∣ternitis. secura ranquillitus, tranquilla incunditas, incunda foelicitas, foelix aeternitas, & aeterna flicitas. Prosper. Saboath, an
endles Halleluiah, and an eternall Iubelye, wherein wee shall enioy liberty and rest of our soules in the beholding of truth, loue of goodnesse, assurednesse of eternity; sorrow shall bee forgotten, ioy shall bee perpetuall, all griefe and mourning remoued, Esay 35. 10. and wee satisfied with the fulnesse of Gods house, and drinke of the riuers of his plea∣sures, Psalme 36. 8. For this present life Basilius mag∣nus in Asceticis is the place & time of labour and combat; that to come of the Crowne and reward in the new heauen and new earth, in which Righteousnesse shall dwell and wee enioy those good things which no eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor can enter into the heart of man, 1. Corinth. 2. 9. so Vitae aeternae beatitudo, om∣nem sermonem effugit, omnem sensum humanae mentis excedit, desideria & ve∣ta transgredi∣tur: acquiri po∣test, aestimari nō potest. August. Trinitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 21. Vide loco Apo∣stoli Iosephum Scaligerum in notis ad Eusebi∣um. great as cannot be measured, so many as cannot be numbred, and so abundant as cannot be comprehended. Let vs learne to possesse onr soules in Patience, Luc. 19. 21. and humbly with willingnesse vndergoe the calamities of this life, in hope of a better hereafter; so the Apostle, pres∣sed out of measure, passing strength, 2. Corinth. 1. 8. wiped Gregorius Magnus moral. lib. 8. cap. 8. away with the assurednes of reward (as with a towell) the fullage of all his suffered calamities; for the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory that shall be reuealed vn∣to vs, Rom, 8. 18. And in truth there is no reason which may induce vs to look for ioy vpō earth, it is the valley of tears, & the place of temptation; here is the race, els where the garland; here is the battaile, in heauen the victory, into which wee must enter by many tribulations, Acts 14. ver. 22. and follow the steppes of Christ our Lord and captaine, (who thus de∣dicated the way, Luc. 24 26.) and bee made conformable vnto him. Rom. 8. 29. both in bearing the crosse and shame, (you shall drinke of my cup) Math. 20. 23. and in the enioying of glory and honour, Luc. 22. 29. (I appoint you a Kingdome as my Father hath appointed me.) And in a Rhartu∣rus, . resemblance of this, Moses commanded to eate the Passeouer with sower herbes, thereby insinuating, that all who will bee vnited with Christ, must endure sorrow and griefe in this worlde, 3. Tim. 3. 12.
Let vs Augustinus tractatu vltimo in Euangelium Iohannis. earnestly desire another life, and striue with all Ʋse. 2. endeuour, how we may come from labour to rest, from faith to fruition, from the way to the country, from action to con∣templation, and at the last to that kingdome, in which is light without darknesse, good without euill, Idem in soli∣loquijs. youth neuer waxing old, life endlesse; where beauty shall not fade, loue decay, nor health become feeble nor ioy decrease; in which no griefe shall be felt, no mourning be heard, no discomfiture seene, no euill feared, all delight enioyed, because in it is the pos∣session of all good; which is, to behold the face of the Lord of hostes. And to conclude with the words of an auncient Father, Those who are made partakers of this Haymo de va∣riet ate librorum siue amore coe∣lestis patriae. cap. 1. blessed life, doe behold the author of their happinesse, vnsatisfied with the same: and, assured of that estate, are secure of their continuance in it: filled with vnspeakeable ioy doe with a foruent and vntyred ende∣uour, serue their God: so blessed, that they neither desire to be nor can be more blessed, &c. If we Bernardus in meditationibuc cap. 16. loue so much this fraile and brittle life, wherin we liue with great trouble, and by meate, drinke and sleepe, Ʋse 3. hardly satisfie the desires of the flesh: how much more should we take pleasure in eternall life? where wee shall vn∣dergoe no calamitie, in which is exceeding ioy, great hap∣pinesse, happy liberty, happy blessednesse; when men shall bee like the Angels of God, and the righteous shine as the sunne in the kingdome of their Father; how surpassing (thinkest thou) shall the brightnesse of the soule bee, when the bodies shall bee glistering as the Sunne? Paul wished with an earnest desire, to be . de natiua huius verbi significa∣tione, Iohannes Luuenclaius, in suis ad Nisseni libellum, de ho∣minis opificio, annotationibus. dissolued, and to remooue out of the weake and fraile house of this mortall life, that hee might dwell for euer with God the eternall creator, and Iesus Christ his redeemer. Philip. 1. 23. Let vs therefore runne speedily with the Apostle vnto the goale, and to the Bernardus de ascensione ser. 4. & 6. reward of our high calling, not by the steps of our body, but the affections, desires and breathlesse sighes of our soule. For God the Father doth expect vs as his children and heires, that he might set vs ouer all things: God the Son
expecteth vs as his brethren, and coheires with him, that hee might present vs vnto the Father (the fruit of his birth and passion:) God the holy Ghost expecteth vs, who is the loue and gratious goodnesse, by which we were predestinated from all eternitie, and (no doubt) will haue this benefit fulfilled, the whole companie of heauen attendeth for vs, and desireth our comming. Let vs therefore our selues in most earnest manner desire and long for the same. The wicked shall be tormented with such punishment, as Another ob∣seruation. can neither be Quantitatem & qualitatem poenarum infor∣nalium nulla mortalium asse∣qui potest co∣gitatio, nulla exprimere ora∣tio. Augustinus serm. 8. de tem∣pore, & de spe∣culo peccatoris cap 3. Generalitie of the punishmēt of the wicked. conceiued nor expressed; and in that day of reuelation and the iust iudgement of God be inflicted vpon them: which the Apostle expresseth vnder the tearmes of Anger, wrath, tribulation and anguish. Rom. 2. 9. 10. intolle∣rable, and aboue measure grieuous; and that in respect of the generalitie, diuersitie, sharpnesse, and continuance of the same, and the company among and with whom they shall bee suffered. All which seuerall points may easily bee confir∣med, by the testimonies of holy Scripture (the pure foun∣taines of Israel,) without borrowing any thing from the muddy puddles of humane conceit. Therefore, for the generalitie of these punishments, it is of large extent, rea∣ching to the soule and bodie, to all and euery seuerall parts of the one, and sundry faculties of the other, when both shall be cast into hell fire. Matth. 10. 28. The diuersitie is Diuersitie. manifold; fire vnquenchable, the worme neuer dying, Esay 66. 24. brimstone, Apoc. 19. 20. Fletus ob ignem qui non extinguitur, stridor ob ver∣mem, qui non moritur: fletus ex dolore, stri∣dor ex furore. Vide & Grego∣rium de poenarū diuersitate. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 27. & dialog. lib. 4. Augustinus de Baptis. contra Donat. cap. 19. Isidor. Hispal. de summo bono lib. 1. cap. 32. weeping, wayling, gnashing of teeth, Luc. 13. 28. outward darknesse, Matth. 22. 13. and those inflicted according to the proportion of the sinne. Therefore our Sauiour Christ saith, it shall be easier in the day of iudgement for Tyrus and Sidon, Sodome and Gomor∣rha, then for Bethsaida, Corazim and Capernaum despisers of the Gospell, Matth. 11. 21. &c. The sharpenesse vnestimable; for hell, and the vnsufferable torture of the damned, doth without mercy afflict those, whom it once taketh hold of; in so much that men (for the greatnesse of the paine) seeke death and cannot finde it, desireth it, but it fleeth from
them Apoc. 9. 6. And a liuely example is De hac para∣boli vide plum & moeratum iudicium Au∣gustini lib. 8. de Genesi ad lineram cap. 5. Continuance. propounded vn∣to vs in the person of the rich glutton, who by his gesture and the effects, sheweth the exceeding greatnesse of his in∣tollerable torment; and is said, to desire but a litle refreshing, a drop of water, and cannot obtaine it Luc. 16. 24. The con∣tinuance, that is endlesse; for the punishment though Gregorius Magnus homi∣lia 6. in Ca∣cum Salomnus. Paulinus de obitu Celsi. Dorotheus do∣ctrina 12. neuer so great yet would be tollerable, if there were hope to those miserable wretches of deliuerance: but from this they are eternally excluded, Wisdom. 3. 13. the tormenting fire shall be vnquencheable, Matth. 13. 30 the shame euerlasting Dan. 12. 2. the destruction eternall, 2. Thess. 1. 8. the smoke of the torment shall ascend for euer Apoc. 14. 11. neither are the Augustinus serm. 57. tormentors, at any time wearyed, neither can the tormen∣ted die; for there the fire doth so Tertull. Apo∣loget. cap. 45. Ignis arcani subterraneus thesaurus ad poenam destina∣tus. consume, that it doth not waste, so spend that still it is renued, so destroy that it preser∣ueth; and the life of those miserable ones made immortall, that their punishment might bee endlesse: and that iustly. For man sinned against the eternall, infinite God, therefore must the punishment of the offence be eternall and infinite; and he Agitola est haec quaestio Augustini tē∣poribus, an in∣iusium non sit, pro peccatis, quamlibet mag∣nis parmo tem∣pore patratis poena damnari sempiterna. lib. 21. de Ciuitate Dei, cap. 11. Albertus in compen∣dio Theologiae lib. 7. cap. 21. worthy, whose life was dead in sinne, that his death should liue in torment. And this is agreeing with the strict iustice of God, that they should neuer be freed from pu∣nishment, whose minde in life was neuer free from transgres∣sion; neither should they haue any end of reuenging paine, who, while they might, would neuer make an end to pro∣uoke God by offending; woe to those, for whom those hel∣lish torments are prepared; better they had neuer beene borne, then euer bee enwrapped in them. The societie and Society. company with whom they shall be, are the Deuill and his An∣gels Math. 25. 41. thrust downe into hell, deliuered to the chaines of darknesse, reserued to damnation, 2. Pet. 2. 4. to euerlasting chaines: Iud. vers. 6. where the Bernardus in sermonibus. satyre shall call to his fellow (one to another, deuill to deuill) smite, teare, rent, kill, spoile: Esay 34. 34. where the wicked shall haue no rest, night nor day Apoc. 14. 115. but be alwaies in
sorrow and mourning; where Hugo de anima. shall be griefe intollerable, incomparable stench, dreadfull feare, death of soule and body, without all hope either of pardon or mercy. This may serue for an effectuall and piercing sermon of Ʋse. repentance, and be as the loud voice of a cryer in the wildernes of this world, sounding into the eares of man, Amend. For the wicked shall goe to hell, and all the nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. Fruitlesse trees are cut downe, and cast into the fire, Math. 3. 10. Listen therefore, and be attentiue vnto the Apostles admonition, Take heed Brethren, least there bee at any time in any of you an euill heart and vnfaithfull, to depart from the liuing God: but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you bee hardned by the de∣ceitfulnesse of sinne, Heb. 3. 12. For this life is but a nest of of straw and clay soone shaken a peeces; many haue seene a faire bright morning, who neuer beheld the euening (as the Sodomites Gen. 19. 24.) vpon many the Sunne hath sett in the euening, to whom it neuer appeared rising in the mor∣ning. So was it to the rich glutton in the Gospell Luc. 12. 20. And, for this cause, let vs liue soberly, iustly and godly in this . now present world, Titus 2. 12. For now is the accep∣table time, now is the day of saluation, 2. Cor. 6. 2. heere life is either lost or kept; and what shall it profit a man, to get the whole world and loose his soule? Matth. 16. 26. And therefore let vs worke forth our saluation with feare and trembling. Philip. 2. 12. and bee carefull, least at any time, our hearts be ouerladen with surfetting and drunken∣nesse, and the cares of this life, &c. Luc. 21. 34. And so I close vp this point with the holy prayer of the Apostle, The God of peace sanctifie vs throughout, that our spirits, and soule and body may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus. 1. Thessal. 5. 23.
But Iesus said, Father, forgiue them, they know not what they doe. Hitherto hath been opened some antecedent circumstan∣ces of this prayer, now followeth the prayer it selfe, which Christ made vpon the Crosse. In which, as in the rest, no∣thing is of little respect, nothing to be neglected. Among Pelargus in 7. Christi verba. men it is vsuall, that wee obserue carefully the last wordes of our friends, especially such as are vttered vpon their death beds, and esteeme them either as Plato in Apo∣logia Socratis, . prophesies of future euents, or as testimonies of their nature and faith; for, that one day of our departure from hence, doth as it were giue sentence of the qualitie of all the daies before past. There∣fore some called the testaments and last wills of men, the loo∣king glasses of their conditions. Much more are those words of Christ remarkeable, and worthy deepe consideration, vttered then, when he was ready to vndergoe and suffer a shamefull death, for the reconciliation of our sinnes: and are as the swanlike song before his funeralls; and that not onely an euident witnesse of his innocencie, patience, and other vertues, and certeine infallible proofes of his tender loue toward his Church, and wholesome instructions how we may die well and happily, but also the perfection of all those actions, which are propounded vnto vs for imitation. The Holy Ghost hath vouchsafed to record in Scripture, the last speeches of the Saints, as of Iacob, Gen. 49. 1. 2. &c. Moses, Deut. 31. & 32. Ioshua, 24. Dauid, 2. Sam. 22. & 23. Zachary the sonne of Iehoiada 2. Chron. 24. 22. Stephen Act. 7. 6. In all which though there be something wor∣thy especiall note, yet aboue all, these passing speeches of Ie∣sus Christ our Sauiour, Apostle and high-priest of our profession, Heb. 3. 1. are deepely to bee engrauen in our hearts. To come then to the doctrine and instruction of this place, nothing is heere done without the will of God; for it is expresly said of the Apostles in their prayer, after they were cast out of the Temple and sent away, with sharpe
threatning, by Annas, Caiphas, the Elders, Scribes and o∣thers of the kindred of the High Priest, that whatsoeuer he suffered, was before determined by the counsell of God to be done, Act. 4. 28. Therefore in his great extremities, and a∣gony in the garden, Math. 26. 39. where he swet bloud, and the . clodded droppes trickled vpon the earth, Luk 22. 44. (an example singular, and without Parallel:) hee acknowledge God for his louing Father. When wee wrastle and struggle with most grieuous ca∣lamities,  and bee compassed about with greatest sorrowes; yet euen then, wee must vndoubtedly perswade ourselues, that God standeth no lesse kindly and gratiously affected toward vs, then if we did enioy the greatest worldly ease and pleasure that could be, and were free from all trouble and griefe whatsoeuer; for whom he loueth, he doth chastise, Prou. 3. 16. And the greatnes of his loue appeareth thus; for we are now corrected, that hereafter wee might not bee condemned, 1. Corinth. 11. 32. and feele the Rodde of a father to amendement, not the sword of a Iudge for punishment. And therfore the Apostle enformeth vs after this fort, my Sonne despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him; for he scourgeth euery sonne whom he doth acknowledge; if you bee without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards and not children. Moreouer, we had the fathers of our bodies, which corrected vs, and wee gaue them reuerence, should we not much rather be in subiection vnto the father of spirits, that we might liue? for they verily for a few dayes chastised vs for their own pleasure, but he correcteth vs for our benefite, that we might be partaker of his holinesse, Heb. 12. 5. 6. 7, &c. And hereby is brought to passe that many emi∣nent vertues doe spring vp, and flourish in vs; as Faith, 1. Pet. 1. 5. 6. Prayer: Esay 26. 16. Patience, Iob 1. 21. Humili∣ty, 2. Chron. 32. 26. Obedience, 2. Sam. 15 25. 26. And Dauid (else where) doth freely and from his heart acknowledge, that before he was afflicted, he went astray, and therefore, good that he was troubled, Psalm, 119, 67. 71. For as the stars shine brightest in the darkest night, and sweet spices when they
are bruised, smell most pleasantly: so true Christian pro∣fession is most apparant vnder the Crosse; Therefore wee glory in tribulation, saith the Apostle, Rom. 5. 3. For God striketh not, with a purpose to wound, but heale; and hee is not more acceptable, amiable, pleasant, and familiar, then af∣ter he hath made triall of vs, by some meanes or other: and the sunne of his fauour and loue doth not at any time shine out more clearely, then after a showrie, darke and tempe∣stuous day. But of this point more hereafter. Let vs not then grow out of heart, though we doe vndergo ma∣ny calamities, and suppose that Gods fauour is lesse towards vs, when we be hardly handled vnder them. For , Clemens Alexand. nearest to God, fullest of sorrowes. A Christian is a Christianus Crucianus Lutherus. Crosse. bearer; and (as one Seneca de prouidentia, ca. 3. 4. no Christian spake, in this respect not vnchristianly,) fa∣thers and mothers do not, in one and the same manner. shew them∣selues louing and indulgent to their children, &c. and God beareth a fatherly mind and affection towards good men, and putteth them to labour, sorrow, losses, that so they may gather some strength, and betryed and hardned, fitted for himselfe; and this is no cruelty, but a conflict. Righ∣teous Abel dedicateth the Church in bloud, Gen. 4. 8. Great Elias is weary of his life, and betaketh himselfe to the wil∣dernesse for feare of Iesabel, 1. King. 19. 4. Gods delight, Io∣siah falleth by the sword, 2. Chron. 35. 24. Iohn, then whom none was greater among the begotten of women, Luk. 7. 28. hee who Chrysologus, serm. 91. reioyced in his mothers wombe, and declared Christ before he was borne, 9 murthered in prison; with whose in∣nocent bloud, Herod besprinckled his table, and defiled the feast of his birth-day, at the request of a wanton dancing Minion, Math. 14. 10. Let vs then runne with patience the race that is set beforevs, Heb. 12. 1. that when wee haue fi∣nished the course, and gotten the goale wee may obtaine the garland of righteousnes in the day of reward. 2. Tim. 4. 7 Father forgiue them. This is the holy and sacerdotail Polycarp. Li∣zorous, de passio∣ne. prayer of Christ our
high Priest, when hee offered himselfe the true paschall Lambe once vpon the altar of the Crosse; herein shewing the incomparable Theophyla∣ctus in locum. greatnesse of his meeke loue; and ma∣keth this supplication, and that for his enemies, as was foretold, Esay, 53. 12. for his accusers, for the souldiers, by whose labour he was nayled to the Crosse, by whose cruelty he suffered most sharpe paines, by whose violence all the parts of his body were stretched, and both his hands and feet pearced with nayles: yet for all this hee breaketh not forth into any impatiency, maketh no bitter complaint a∣gainst them; but now bethinketh how hee may obtaine their pardon, and procure the saluation of their soules. A Anselmus in speculo Euan∣gelici sermonis siue stimulo a∣morus, cap. 12. speech of great patience, of much sweetnesse, of ineffable loue; a speech of blessing, such a one as hath not bin heard from the beginning of the world, and that for persecutors: He regardeth not his own wrong, maketh no reckoning of his punishment, seemeth not to feele the reproches of his enemies, but sheweth compassion vpon those, of whome hee suffered his passion, heales them of whom hee is wounded, gi∣ueth life to those of whom he is killed; for he Leo primus serm. de passio∣ne. c. 19. that came to forgiue the sinnes of all that doe belieue, doth not exclude from his indulgence and pardon the outragious and despe∣rate offence of the Iewes. Mercy praieth, that misery might learne to pray. This action of Christ is our instruction. Wee must not onely be glad, that the prodigall wande∣ring Obseruation. sonne, findeth the way againe to his fathers house; but pray also, that such as be dead in sinne, may be quickned to righteousnesse, Luke 15. 24. For true loue seeketh nothing but the glory of God, and the saluation of others. Thus A∣braham often with great humility, and earnestnesse becom∣meth a suiter for the vncleane Sodomates, Gen. 18. 23. and Moses obtaineth mercy for the rebellious Israelites, who rose vp against him, Numb. 14. 13. and had rather bee blotted out of the booke of life, then that they should die. Exod. 32. 32. Samuel when he was causlesly remoued from his digni∣ty and gouernment, yet thinketh it a sinne that hee should cease to pray for this people, 1. Sam. 12. 23. And from he
proceeded that patheticall and compassionate complaint of the Prophet, Oh that my head were a fountaine, and mine eyes a ri∣uer of teares, that I might bewaile day and night the destruction of my people. Ierem. 9. 1. For the Godly doe, and must e∣specially ayme at this, that the wicked might leaue his wayes, and the vnrighteous his imaginations, and the glory of God bee aduanced among the sonnes of men. Aspring which ariseth vppon the toppe of a mountaine, doth ea∣sily send downe his waters vnto the low vallies: and where the loue of God is grafted in any mans heart, it cannot but bud forth and spread his branches, in shewing charity to∣wards his neighbours. And therefore are the precepts con∣cerning these two, so married together, that there can no diuorce be made. Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all heart, &c. and thy neighbour as thy selfe: Materially, in respect of the matter whereabout this loue is occupied; that as thou bearest the tenderest affection toward thine owne soule; so shouldest thou doe to his; and finally, for the same end for which thou louest thy selfe, that is, for thē obtaining of Grace now, and the enioying of glory hereafter, Philip. 1. 8. 9. 10. 11. &c. The punishment of the Arnoldus Car∣notensis de 7. vltimis Christi verbis. Crosse must be both a medicine and example vnto vs. Christians ought to learne of Christ to loue their enemies, and so much as lyeth in them procure their good, and labour to bring them to eternall life. For 1. It is the Hunc Euan∣gelistae locum eleganter  Ter∣tullianus in li∣bropationtiae, non procul ab initio. precept of God, Math. 5. 44. 45. Loue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, pray for them that hurt and per∣secute you; be perfect as your heauenly father is perfect. Where the patterne propounded, (as your heauenly father etc.) doth not signifie equality of perfection, but prescribeth the Rule of imitation: (Loue) this requireth the affection of the heart (pray) the duety of the tongue (doe good) the worke of the hand. For in the greatest and deadliest enemy that can be, 1. there is the same nature common to him and vs; 2. the fault hee hath committed; 3. the want whereunto he may fall. Nature, because the worke of God, is to be loued; the fault by which hee hath offended, prayed for; and his
want to bee supplyed, that so wee may bee like our heauen y father. Augustinus homilia 50. de tempore, & homilia incerti Authoris, quae ter Augusts, serm. 47. de sanctus. Choose then which liketh thee best; if thou lo∣uest thine enemy, thou art not onely the friend but the sonne of God; but if thou loue him not, neither canst thou haue God mercifull vnto thee. 2. Wee haue the example of God, an effectuall motiue; for hee so loued the world Ioh. 3. 16. (men, weake sinners and his enemies) that for such hee gaue his beloued sonne, Rom. 5. 6. and the sonne gaue himselfe, an offering and sacrifice of sweet smell vnto the fa∣ther. Eph. 5. 2. And it is obserued by some Diuines, D minicus à part. . 2. part. 2. serm. 23 that then he saluted Iudas by the name of friend, when hee came to betray him, and execute in deed that wickednesse he had conceiued in mind. Math. 26. 50. esteeming him so to bee, because hee reached vnto him that cuppe, whereof the fa∣ther had decreed hee should drinke: thereby teaching, that we should also patiently suffer those who doevexe & wrong vs, for they doe but offer vnto vs that cup where∣of Christ hath begunne; and the seruant is not aboue his Master, Ioh. 15. 20. Suppose a father had a sonne sicke of a phrensie, hee rayleth and striketh at him, who commeth to visite and comfort him: hee is grieued to see the ex∣tremity of his sonne, sorroweth for it, and beareth all things with patience, thinking with himselfe, this is not the for∣getfulnesse of duety in my sonne, but the vehemency of his sicknesse. And euen so speake thou, the man hath not done this, or spoken thus and thus, but his malice; loue nature: accuse corruption. But Sermo imery∣ti Authoris de Martyr bus, qui inter Au∣gustinianos re∣peritur de san∣ctis. De exceptioni∣bus irreconcilia∣bilium Theodo∣ricus in Analy∣si Euangeliorū Dominucalium, diminica 6. Trinitatus, parte 2. obseruatione 4. & dominica 22. obser. 7. ple∣nissimè exanti∣quis Patribus, Augustino precipuè & Chrysestoms. happily thou wilt say with thy selfe, hee hath dealt so euill with mee, that I cannot loue him: but consider what hast thou done to God: For if thou do narrowly sift thine owne conscience, and search euery cor∣ner thereof diligently, thou shalt finde thy sinnes, without comparison, greater against God then any mans are, or can bee against thee. 3. The holy Saints Augustinus sermone 68. de tempere. treading the steps of their Lord and Sauiour, haue gone before vs in this due∣ty. Blessed Ioseph requited not his brethren with answe∣rable vnkindnesse, who solde him for a slaue, but shewed vnto them all sweet loue that possible could be: kissed euery
one of them, wept vpon their neckes, bestowed many bene∣fits, and was most kinde both while their father liued, and after he was dead Gen. 45. 15. & 50. 21. Faithfull Moses passing by the contempts of the people, when they would haue stoned him, mindfull of the diuine loue towards man, made such vehement intercession for them, that he desired to be blotted out of the booke of life, so they might be saued, Exod. 32. 32. Dauid, a man enriched with singular en∣dowments of vertues, when Shemei ray led vpon him to the face, gaue place to reuenge, left that to God, and repressed his owne affection, 2. Sam. 16. 12. Therefore hee confi∣dently spake that which no man ought to doe, but with feare and trembling; if I haue rewarded euill to him that had peace with mee, (yea I haue not deliuered him that vexed mee without a cause) then let the enemy persecute my soule, and take it. Psal. 7. 4. Stephen the first Martyr, and a glorious fol∣lower of his Master, when hee was beaten downe with a shower of stones, prayed for his enemies, and vpon bowed knees, and all his force cryed: Lord lay not this to their charge. Act. 7. 60. This and much more hath Saint Idem serm. de tempore 5. & 68. Au∣gustine left written vnto vs. 4. Adde Tanlerus In∣stitutionū cap. 31. & ra∣tiones particu∣lares septem af∣fert, propter quas Christus Iudam prodito∣rem benigne tu∣lit. & 17. qui∣bus nos iucite∣mur ad inimicos diligendos, qua∣rum omnium summam, paucis complecti sum conatus. further, our enemies taken at the worst, and to be more malitious than wee con∣ceiue of them, yet they are created according to the image of God, as well as wee. Gen. 1. 27. and they haue him also their heauenly Father; Christ, by taking our humane na∣ture vpon him, and suffering a most cruell death, offered indifferently his loue to both. And to conclude, let vs thus resolue our selues humbly to beare our aduersaries and those that hate vs, as a deserued scourge of God, sent for the chastising of our sinnes; and be perswaded that it pro∣cedeth from his loue: Those that walke after this rule, peace is vpon them, and mercy &c. Gal. 6. 16. Father forgiue them. O blessed word, Bernardus de passione Dom. super illis verbis Ioh. 1. 51. Ego sum vitis vera. beseeming the Word of the heauenly Fa∣ther: this good teacher practiseth his owne precept, doth that
which he commandeth, and prayeth not onely for his perse∣cutors, and malitious accusers, but also for his mercilesse and barbarous murtherers. Let vs then consider the forme and manner of his prayer. Children when they will entreat any thing most affectionately, are wont to vse the name Father in their requests, that so calling to remembrance that naturall loue, which is ingrafted in the heart of a Pa∣rent, they may the more readily obteine their petition. So our Redeemer, good and mercifull, and of great kindnesse vnto all, though hee knew, that his Father did alwaies heare him, yet that he might make knowen vnto vs, with how great an affection he prayeth for his enemies, prefixeth this sweet name. As though he should haue said; Father, I doe en∣treat thee by that loue, by which wee are one, that thou wouldest heare mee for these my crucifiers, and pardon them; acknowledge the loue of thy sonne, and forgiue mine enemies. (Forgiue) Gutuarade monte Caluariae cap. 3. 4. 5. 6. Oscared word, O blessed speech, which was made of the sonne, vttered from the tree of the Crosse, powred forth amidst many sighes, receiued of God, washed with the bloud of Christ, and offered with the teares of the Redeemer. For hee saith not, (Lord) but (Father) forgiue them. The name of Lord is full of feare and dread, the name of a Father amiable and procuring loue; whereof it commeth to passe, that hee who is named Father, is bound to answer accordingly, and not deny the request of the petitioner. Againe (Father forgiue) absolutely without condition, not (if thou wilt, forgiue;) asking pardon not according to the rigor of iustice, but of fauour and mercy. And thus with greater Rabanus. earnestnesse hee prayeth on the Crosse, for his crucifiers; then he did in the garden for himselfe. For there conditionally, Father, if thou wilt, let this Cuppasse from me; heere now absolutely (Fongiue them.) Them, (asuite and supplication not for any one in particu∣lar, but generally for all:) for hee is the lambe of God, who taketh away the sinnes of the world Ioh. 1. 29. Neither did he say to that harlot Mary Magdalen, thy sinne is forgiuen thee, but sinnes: Luc. 7. 48. without exception of number,
or greatnesse. (Forgiue them) them? whom? those, by whose hands hee was apprehended; of whom he was scourged, spitted vpon, shamefully reproched, crowned with thornes, giuen gall to drinke, laden with his crosse, constrayned to carry it, vnmercifully strucken through in his handes and feete with nayles, and at the last lifted vp on the same, for these he prayeth, that they might not incurre the wrath of God, and suffer deserued punishment. For he did not re∣gard that hee suffered death by their meanes, but for their saluation. Hee saw among them such who belonged not vnto him, many Augustinus tract. 31. in Iohannem. who were his; and for their sakes is this request made. A wonderfull thing. The Iewes cry, cruci∣fie:  Chrissost. Ho∣milia Beda in Mar∣cum, apud Pe∣largū in Que∣stionibus in Matthaei Euan∣gelium. Christ, forgiue; great was their sinne, but greater was thy loue ô Lord. That bloud which they wished might be vpon them and their children, the sonne of God prayeth might bee for them. When Moses and Aaroa Origenes in Matthaeum. beheld the wrath of God kindled ready to deuoure the people, they hasten into the Tabernacle, the one to pray, the other to sacrifice; and became mediators betweene God and them. That which these two did in the wildernes, the same Christ per∣formed in mount Caluary. For when he saw the elements troubled, the lights of heauen darkned, the earth tremble, and all creatures in a sort prepared to bee reuenged vpon the wicked vniustly putting him to death: hee stoppeth their course and withholdeth them from the intended pur∣pose: Father forgiue them. None Augustinus tractatu 31. in Iohannem. now can despaire to obteine pardon of his sinnes,  when he doth remember that those who killed the Lord of life, are washed from their sinnes with the bloud which they shed. Of these, three thousand are conuerted by one sermon of Peters, beleeue and repent, Act. 2. 41. They Bernardus serm. 3. super Missus est. cannot pe∣rish for whom the sonne of God hath prayed, that they might not perish: for whom the Father hath giuen the Son to death, that they might liue. Righteousnesse and Arnoldus Carnotensis de septem vltimis Christi verbis. peace are met, and kissed ech other, and Christ hath made him∣selfe a faithfull pledge for vs captiues; and the Letter Patents for the pardon of the sinnes of mankind, is strongly con∣firmed,
written, in the Parchment of Christ crucified, with his owne bloud, and vntill this day, the scale thereof perfect, euen the wound of his side, which he presenteth alwayes in the sight of his father. And therefore our Testator hath conueied the perpetual inheritance of this mercy & grace vnto all succeeding posterity, &c. Let vs not then vtterly be dismayed, and cast down, seeing we haue such an Aduocate, Iesus Christ the Righteous, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. making intercession for vs. Rom. 8. 34. and, abiding for euer, hath a Priesthood which cannot passe from one to another; wherefore hee is able perfectly to saue them which come vnto God by him, &c. Heb. 7. 24. 25. and calleth all who labour, bee heauy burthened, and grone vnder the heauy weight of their sinnes, and promiseth rest vnto them, Math. 11. 28, De hac scrip∣turae  est Iohannu Gersonu Tra∣ctatus. For there is no malady, which the Almighty Physitian can not heale; and therefore Cain did God wrong, when hee saide his iniquity was greater then could be forgiuen, Gen. 4. 13. yea, that horrible fact of Iudas, (the superlatiue of all wickednesse) when treacherously he betrayed his Lord and Master, did not Ambrosius de Poenitentia, Nyssenus in ra∣tione contra cos, qui alios acerbius iudi∣cant, Augusti∣nus in libro 5. Homiliarum, homil. 27. shut him out of heauen, and from hope of mercy, but his impenitency and despaire after the deede committed, when he became his owne executioner, Math. 27. 5. & Act. 1. 18. Let vs striue therefore to bee resolued of the loue of God to∣wards vs; who is so Fulgentius Epistol. 7. cap. 4. good and mercifull as hee is Almighty, and infinite; but neither the goodnesse of the Almighty can be ouercome, nor the mercy of the infinite brought to an end. Let vs then take words with vs, and turne vnto the Lord, & say vnto him: Take away all our iniquitie, and receiue vs gratiously, Osea, 14. 3. For with him is compassion, Dan. 9. 9. He is the father of mercies, and the God of all com∣fort, 2. Corinth. 1. 3. and of forgiuenesses, Nehem. 9. 17. to whom if we confesse our sinnes, hee is faithfull and iust to forgiue them and gurge vs from all iniquity, 1. Iohn 1. 9. faithfull, Grineus in primam Episto∣lam Iohannu. shewing himselfe so to be, when hee fulfilleth his promise of pardoning offences: iust, requiring the Righ∣teousnesse of Christ, which is made ours by imputation,
and testifieth his Iustice to bee satisfied, &c. For the case Sidoniue A∣pollinaris, lib. 4. Epist. 14. doth not so stand with vs, before the heauenly Iudge, as be∣fore an earthly; for whosoeuer to this confesseth his fault, hee is conuicted from his owne mouth, and receiueth the sentence of death: but hee that acknowledgeth his sinne vnto God, is cleared and absolued: Therefore let vs open vnto Christ the putrified soares and rotten vlcers of our consciences, for he will heale them; and come with bold∣nesse vnto the throne of Grace, that wee may receiue mer∣cy, and finde grace to helpe in the time of neede, Heb. 4. 16. Of this more hereafter in the third word of Christ; and of it I haue spoken in the Exposition vpon Psal. 130. For they know not what they doe. What is it oh Lord thou Arnoldus Carnotenjis, de 7. vltimis Christi verbis. sayest? thou accusest not these thy cruell aduersaries, thou seekest not reuenge, thou ex∣cusest, thou doest extenuate and lessen the greatnesse of their conspiracy, and take from the wicked their heredita∣ry burthen; thou doest not lay against them their maliti∣ous offence, but rather iudgest it to bee pardoned, because thou doest affirme it ignorantly committed: but where is that which before thou spakest; If I had not come and spoken vnto them, they shoulde haue had no sinne but now they haueseene and hated mee and my Fa∣ther, Iohn 15. 22, They saw indeed and hated thee, and euery Saboath read and expounded those things, which Moses and the ancient Prophets writ of thee. Thou wentest into their Synagogues, and (as was apparant) didst expound the booke of Esay; not as one receiuing vnder∣standing from the writings of others, but from the abun∣dance of the spirit in thy selfe, Luke 4. 17. How could they be ignorant of thee, when they themselues asked the questi∣on; how thou knewest the Scriptures and neuer learnedst them? Iohn 7. 15. And this indeed was a sufficient proofe of thy diuine wisdom, that they did not at any time see thee ascholler, learning the principles of knowledge in their
schooles, and yet themselues bare witnesse with astonish∣ment, of thy skill in the law, and approued the same, Math. 13. 55. And what reason can there be of doubt? what cause of ignorance? when the blind receiue sight, the lame walke, the lepers are clensed, the dead arise, the Gospell is prea∣ched to the poore. But neither perswading signes, nor mi∣raculous workes can preuaile with such who are obstinate, and will not vnderstand: and although the Caluinus in Harmonia E∣uangeliorum. Pareus in 1. Cor. 2. 8. authority of the Mediator did remoue the weight of this great and hea∣uy offence, yet the rebellious and stubborne infidelity was not excusable of it selfe. But when Christ beheld the peo∣ple and the souldiers, with a blind and furious violence to rage against them, though they were not acquited in re∣spect of their ignorance, yet hee did so pitty them, that he became a suiter intreating for them. In the meane time knowing that God would bee the iust reuenger of this wic∣kednesse, left vnto him the iudgement against these despe∣rate transgressors. For it is very probable, that he prayed not indifferently without exception for all, but for the wretched and seduced multitude, who were carried away headlong with an inconsiderate zeale, and no deliberate and purposed malice: And Bernardus de passione Do∣mini, cap. 8. questionlesse this prayer of his was heard of the heauenly father, whereby it came to passe, that many dranke of that bloud to saluation which before they had shed. Among many instructions which from hence might bee obserued; As first, that there be two kinds or sorts of sinners; one voluntarily offending against the checke of their owne conscience, and of purpose with deliberation, wittingly and willingly running into all kind of euill, and defiling themselues: another, transgressing of weakenesse and frailety, seduced by the diuel, and corrupted by his sub∣tlety; and yet Idem in tra∣ctatu de praecep∣to, & dispensa∣tione. this not altogether excusable, nor exempted from punishment: for man should not bee ignorant of God his Creator and Redeemer, yet he spareth, knowing our weake condition, Psal. 103. 14.
Secondly, wee may learne by this example of Christ not too farre to aggrauate and augment the offences of a'∣ny. For he frameth an excuse for his aduersaries, and when hee might haue giuen them ouer to eternall destruction, doth diminish and make lesse the heinousnesse of their sinne. Thirdly the Scribes and Pharisies did sit in Moses chaire, who wrote of Christ, the Priests and people were auditors of his heauenly doctrine, and beholders of his strange mi∣racles, which did testifie of him, Iohn, 5. ver. 36. so that they could not be ignorant who he was: but the sauing know∣ledge of Christ is an especiall gift of God, exceeding all humane apprehension; so that if he doe not vouchsafe to open the eyes of our vnderstanding, wee cannot but con∣tinue in darkenesse; wherefore when Peter had made that true confession, how Iesus was that Christ the sonne of God, hee is pronounced blessed; for flesh and bloud re∣uealed not this secret vnto him, but the father in heauen: Math. 16. 17. For Nicodemus a great Rabbi and doctor in Israel, doth very childishly trifle in the point of Regene∣ration, Iohn, 3. 4. And the Athenians famous ouer the world for their skill in Arts, and all kind of learning, laugh Paul to scorne, discoursing of eternall life to come, and the misteries of saluation, and tearme him but a babler, and word-sower. Act. 17 18. 33. None can behold the sunne, but by the benefit of the sunne: none can De Deo dis∣cendum, quid de Deo intelligen∣dum, quam non authore ognoscitur, a de Trinitate, lib. 5. & 10. know God with∣out God enlighten them, 1. Corinth. 2. 14. Therefore the Scotus quae∣stione prima, in prologum sen∣tentiarum Pe∣. conclusion of the Schoole Diuines is true, that there is some spirituall doctrine, supernaturally infused, necessary for a man, so long as hee is a traueller, wandring here vppon earth; to which hee cannot attaine by any humane vnder∣standing; for Godlines is a great and deepe Mistery, 1. Timoth. 3. 16. And for this cause our Sauiour Christ doth giue thankes vnto the father, both for the hiding the same from some, and opening it to others; and ascribeth them both to his good pleasure. And that can
no way bee vnrighteous which pleaseth the most Righteous, Math. cap. 11. verse 25. But to let these and other the like passe, one thing shall be sufficient to obserue now. That ignorance is here made the cause of that strange  and horrible sinne, whereby the Iewes laide violent hands vpon the Sauiour of the world, and nayled him to the Crosse, 1. Corinth. 2. 8. and those not of the com∣mon sort, or the barbarous Gentiles, who knew not the true God, but the chiefe amongst them, and of most eminent note, who read the Prophesies, foretelling and describing most plainely the Messias euery Saboath in their Synagogues, but without vnderstanding, without af∣fection: From hence it followeth, that the ignorance of God and of his will, is the originall of all euill. So the holy Ghost speaketh plainely, that after the death of Ioshuah, the Israe∣lites did euill in the sight of the Lord, serued their Baalims, and forsooke the Lord the God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, &c. and addeth the reason of all this, they knew not the Lord, Iudg. 2. 10. 11. & Iob. 21. 14 maketh this the very root from which sprung all those outrages, which the vndgodly doe commit, and that desperately, for they say vnto God, depart from vs, wee will haue none of the knowledge of thy wayes. And Saint Paul laying forth the extreame lewdenesse of the Gen∣tiles who liue in the vanity of their minds, doth as it were point the finger at the originall, when hee sayth, hauing their cogitations darkened, being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, Ephes. 4. verse 17. 18. And this is the cause why God hath a con∣trouersie with the inhabitants of the earth: there was no mercy, no truth, no knowledge of him: and from hence proceeded both those great euils of sinne amongst men, & dreadfull euils of punishment threatned of GOD, Osea, 4. 2. 3. Ignorance then is not (as the Romanistes conceite themselues,) the mother of deuotion: for how can that be
acceptably worshipped, which is negligently vnknowen? you cannot be ignorant what Christ saith to the Sadduces, that therefore they erre, because they know not the Scriptures, Math. 22. 29. And they are lyable to a grieuous punish∣ment, who know not God, and are not obedient to the Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ: 2. Thess. 1. 8. Cardinalis Cusanus. Impi∣ous then is that saying of Cardinall Cusan, who affirmed that blinde obedience, without any reason leading thereunto, was the most perfect. Dauid, a man by whom the holy Ghost spake 2. Sam. 23. 1. was of a farre other iudgement, who vpon his death bed, bequeathed as a Legacie vnto Salomon his sonne this admonition: know the God of thy Fathers, serue him with an vpright heart, and a willing minde &c. 1. Chron. 28. 9. Let vs seeke to obteine all those good meanes by which wee Ʋse second. may come to the true knowledge of God; and suffer his word to dwell richly or plentifully in vs in all wisdome, (speculatiue, for the informing of our iudgment, and practise, for the refor∣ming and directing of our conuersation,) Coloss. 3. 16. For the holy Scriptures are able to make wise vnto saluation. 2. Timoth. 3. 16. And amongst the rest, these are the most speciall. First: Feruent and humble prayer, for if any want wisdome hee must aske it of God Iames 1. 5. So did Salomon for himselfe, Lord giue thy seruant an vnderstanding heart, 1. King. 3. 10. Paul for the Ephesians, I bow my knees vnto the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that he would giue you, ac∣cording to the riches of his glory, that ye might be strengthned by his spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that you beeing rooted and grounded in loue, may bee able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the bredth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the loue of Christ which passeth vnderstanding, and that yee may be filled with all fulnesse of God. Ephes. 3. 15. 16. 17. &c. The second, Codicem acce∣dens, interlegen∣dum, saepius ocu∣los & cordis, & corporis, in coelū eleua, & Chri∣stum breui sus∣pirio, & humili desperatione, c∣iusque gratiam implora, ci ip∣se solus sit, qui operatur omniae, in omnibus. Lutherus. diligent reading of the Scriptures. Of this an excellent and singular example in Daniel, who when he was in Babilon, in the Kings Pallace, by reading of Ieremies
Prophesie vnderstood that the seuenty yeeres determined for Iuda, were now ended, and then God would take pitty of his people, free them from their grieuous bondage, and bring them home againe into their owne country and for∣mer dwelling; whereupon hee poured forth that sweete prayer, the very iewell of the whole booke Dan. 9. 2. And ancient Histories testifie, how In vita Ful∣gentij cap. 2. Cyprian and Fulgentius, (two shining lights of the Church in their daies,) were conuer∣ted vnto the Christian profession, the one by reading the Commentaries of Saint Augustine vpon the thirty sixth Psalme, the other of the Prophet Ionas. And In oratione de funere Patris. Gregory Nazianzen reporteth the like of his Father how he became a Christian and embraced the Gospell. The third, the often, reuerent and Soloecismi au∣ditus apud Eth∣nicos obseruati. 1. . 2. . 3. . Et de auditorū diuersis generi∣bus veteres Rabbini in Ca∣pitulis Patrum sic statuunt. Quadrplices conditiones in∣venuntur in his, qui sedent coram sapienti∣bus audiendi causa; videlicet, Conditio spon∣giae, quae sugen∣do attrabit om∣nia: Clepsydrae, quae vna ex parte attrabit, ex altera rursū effundit: Sacci secinacei, qui ffundit vinum, & colligit feces: Cribri, quod omittit farinā & colligis similā. Paulus Phagius vien∣dus est in scholijs suis ad Capitula Patrum, & in illo, Rabbi Maimonis interpretati. diligent attention vnto the publike ministerie, which God hath appointed to open the eyes of men, that they might be brought from darknes to light, from the power of Satan vnto God, and receiue now in earth forgiuenesse of sins, heereafter inheritance amongst the Saints, through faith in Christ Iesus Act. 26. 18. For when the world by wisdome knew not God in the wisdome of God, it pleased God by the foolishnesse of preaching to saue them that beleeue. 1. Corinth. 1. 21. And therfore the Gospell is called the power of God to saluation Rom. 1. 16. and the immortall seede, by which wee are begotten to Insigne exemplū de se concusso, dum Ambrosium concionantē audirt, narrat Aug. confess. lib. 5. c. 13. 14. eternall life. 1. Pet. 1. 23. The fourth, the denyall of our owne reason. For hee that will bee truely wise in this world, let him be a foole that hee may be wise. 1. Corinth. 3. 19. For the wisdome of the flesh is enmitie with God: Rom. 8. 7. In which manner of speech, Saint Paul hath a speciall reference to Moses, sentencing man, that all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart are onely euill continually. Gen. 6. 5.
In the fift place, whatsoeuer thou learnest out of the word, lay it vp in the closet of thine heart, Psal. 119. 11. Expresse and shew the power thereof in thy life and deedes. Keepe the commandements of the Lord and thou shalt liue, and his instructions as the apple of thine eye, binde them vpon thy Sicut species ar matica aili∣genter debet masticari, vt virtus, & sua∣uitas ius senti∣atur, sic & mādata. Iuxta legem, animal quod non rumi∣nat est immundum: sic homo non ruminans in corde praecepta Dei. Seruanda ergo illa in corde periugem meditationem, in ore per frequentem loquutionem, in manibus per operum executionem. Nam probatio dilectionis, est exhibitio operationis. Pelargus in 6. cap. Deuteronomij. fingers, and write them vpon the table of thine heart. Prou 7. 2. 3. For the foundation of God standeth sure, and hath this seale, The Lord knoweth who are his, and let Sanctum nomen sine sanctis moribus est annulus aurous in naribus suis, & qui Christiani dicuntur, perdunt vim tanti nominis, vitio prauitatis; vita à professione discordans, abrogat il∣lustris tituli honorem per indignorū actuum vilitatem. &c. Saluianuc de prouidentia siue guber∣natione Dei lib. 3. & 4. Nomen congruat actioni, & actio respondeat nomini, ne sit nomen ina∣ne, & crimen immane. Ambrosius de dignitate Sacerdotum cap. 3. Multa in hanc sententiam Nissenus . Cyprianus de vnitate Ecclesiae. Chrysost. serm. 23. ad populum An∣tiochenum. Nam multos est vbique in venire, qui Christum simulant, & Satanalia viuunt; vt non inepte diceret Linacer noster, cùm 5. 6. 7. . Matthaet caput percurrisset, (abiecto quaentum potuit totis viribus libro) aut hoc non fuisse Euangelicum, aut nos non esse Christianos, quorum tam discrepans, & dissentanea vita esset à professione. Iohannes Chechus in epistola quadam ad Stephanum Episcopum Wintomensem de pronunciatione linguae Graecae. euery one that calleth on the name of Christ depart from iniquitie, 2. Timoth. 2. 19. And (to conclude) grow therefore in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, to whom bee glory now and for euermore. AMEN. 2. Pet. 3. 18.
THE SECOND WORD a Word of Carefulnesse, and naturall affection. IOHN, 19. VER. 25. 26. 27. Then stood by the Crosse of Iesus, his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary (the wife) of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen, And when Iesus saw his mother, and the Disciple standing by, whom hee loued, He said vnto his mother; Woman behold thy Sonne: Then said he to the Disciple, Behold thy mother: And from that houre, the Disciple took her vnto him. The Analysis or resolution of the words. THis is put in the second place a∣mong the words of Christ, by Di∣uines. And in it are obseruable three points. The occasion thereof, the forme, and the euent: The occasion is the presence of his mother; who is described by her site, place, and at∣tendants, her site (shee stoode,) place, (by, or neare to the Crosse) attendants, (her sister Mary the
wife of Cleophas, Mary Magdalen:) And each of these are illustrated by their proper attributes; the first, of her kindred (his mothers sister) & from the state and condition of life (the Filiam potius fuisse, put at Caluinus, in commentarijs suis ad Iohennis Euangelium. wife of (leophas.) The second, from the Country or place of birth: (Mary Magdalen, for Buntingus in Itinerarij sa∣cri, tom. 2. Magdala ciui. tas, siue castrum in occidentale littore maris Galilei sita est, habetque plani∣tiem magnam quam D. Mar∣cus c 8. Dalma∣nutham vocat. Magdala was a Castle or Ci∣tie wherein shee was borne.) The forme is the vtterance of the words, and that twofold: To his mother, (Woman behold thy sonne) to the Disciple, (Behold thy mother:) The Euent, (The Disciple tooke her home vnto him) which obedient ac∣tion is amplified from the circumstance of time: (from that houre.) Then stood by the Crosse of Iesus his mother. All fower Euangelists make mention of these women, Math. 27. 55. 56. Marc. 15. 41. Luc. 8. 2. 23. 15. 5. And S. Iohn in this place. For the remembrance of the righteous shall be blessed. But there seemeth to bee some opposition or contrariety amongst them, in the relation of this history: for all the other affirme, that they stood a farre off: Iohn here in manifest termes, that they stood neere vnto the Crosse of Iesus. This doubt is soone remoued: for wee may vnderstand it, that Augustinus de consensu Enangelistarum lib. 3. cap. 21. Daneus in E∣nangelium Marci, quaestio∣ne 66. Iansenius in Harmonia, cap. 144. they stood in a distance, truly said both to bee neere, because they were in the sight of Iesus: and farre off, in respect of the multitude who enuironed him with the Centurion and Souldiers: Or wee may con∣ceiue, that the women accompanying Christ our Lord, after hee had commended his mother to the care of Iohn the Apostle, beganne to goe backe out of the throng of the people; and so further off, beheld the things which afterward were done. But this is admirable, that Iohn testi∣fieth of these women: for when the Disciples fled, and made no appearance, forsaking their master: Peter deni∣ed, the Priests scorned him, the Iewes were all in an vp∣rore, his pensiue and carefull mother, and the beloued Dis∣ciple stood neere to his Crosse, with Mary Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen, women by nature, Euripides in Medea. weake and feare∣full:
Arnoldus Carnotenfis de 7. vltimus Chri∣sti verbis. Shee (which is a thing most grieuous) now died, and could not die; and concealing the inward torment of her griefe, shewed outwardly another countenance, so that by it could not be knowne the crucifying of her soule, and crosse of her spirit: in which shee was a liuing sacrifice well plea∣sing God, &c. And here mightest thou see two Altars set vp: one in the Soule of Mary, the other in the body of Christ: Christ offered his flesh, Mary her spirit; so that she seemed not to stand neare the Bonaventura in stimulo a∣meris, parte, 1. cap. 3. Crosse, but to be fastned to the Crosse with her sonne. And this was that sharpe two edged sword, whereof Simeon prophesied, that it should pearce through her soule, Luc. 2. 35. The weake sex of women sheweth it selfe here more manlike, and of better courage then the A∣postles. What wee are to gather from hence for instruction, let vs heare Saint Paul teaching vs; Brethren you see your  calling, how that not many wise men, after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God hath chosen the foo∣lish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weake things of the world to confound the mighty, and vile things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are. 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27 &c. Lot is laughed to scorne of the vncleane Sodomites, and his admonitions derided; but he is preserued, and hath a place prouided for security: then the Lord rayneth vpon them In praesenti quod suturū est Deus voluit de∣clarare iudici∣um, quando super impium populum Gehen∣nam misit è coelo: Saluianus de gubernatione siue prouidentia Dei, lib. 1. Hell out of Heauen, a shower of fire and brimstome: for as their sinne was extraordinarie, so likewise īs the pu∣nishment, Gen. 19. 26. Dauid the least among his breth∣ren, young, and the keeper of his fathers sheepe, is made choise of, to be made king & annointed with the holy oyle, though the other were tall & goodly personages; for God seeth not as men, 1. Sam. 16. 7. Who more contemptible and vile in the eye of the world then Lazarus, full of sores, extreame poore, a beggar; pined with hunger, cast at the Rich mans dore as a thing abominable, and there could not obtaine so much as the crummes from his Table, to supply his wants? but none more deare beloued of God;
for being dead, hee is carried by the hands of Angels into heauen, and placed in Abrahams bosome: Luc. 16. 23. And they are tryed with mockings and reproaches, tortured vp∣on the racke, and sundry wayes afflicted, of whome the world was vnworthy, Heb. 11. 36. The Augustinus in quaestionibus in s & o∣unm Testamen∣tum quest. 1. & de v rbis Dom∣ni, serm. 59. de Ciuitate Dei. lib. 18. cap. 49. & lib. 22. cap. 5. Apostles in num∣ber few, ignorant of all liberall sciences, not skilfull in Grammar, not armed with Logicall arguments, not furni∣shed with Rhetoricall inchanting perswasions, but poore, rude fishermen, sent to cast the nets of saith into the wide sea of the world, inclosed in it great fishes, learned Philoso∣phers; a thing of the most wonder, because of the raritie; for seldome such are caught. Thus Augustine, and so Lib. 1. hist. r. Ecclesiasticae c. 18. Zo∣men maketh mention how in the Councell of Nice, an a∣ged Christian, simple and vnlearned, conuinced & brought to the faith a subtile Sophister by the power of the word, (himselfe confessing it to be so) who before deluded, and scorned the Bishops, and shifted off their arguments when they disputed with him. Fond therefore and vntrue is the position of Cardinall Lib. de Lccle∣sia militante 4. cap. 18. nota decima. 5. Bellarmine, and other Papists, who make temporall feli∣city and worldly glory a note of the Church, whereby it may bee knowne, and an vnseperable attendant on the faithfull; for first the Scripture is manifestly opposite to this their opinion, which doth euery where teach, that the wicked flourish, and spread forth their greene boughes in this life, when the godly are withered with sorrowes, Iob, 21. 7 8. & Psal. 73. 5. &c. And therefore the Prophet desi∣reth that hee might talke with God of his iudgements, and bee informed why the way of the wicked doth prosper, and why all they are in wealth, that rebelliously transgresse, &c. Ierem. 12. 1. Abacuc. 1. v. 3. expostulateth this case with the Lord. And it is the Apostles constant resolution; that all who will liue godly in Christ Iesus, must suffer af∣flictions, 2. Tim. 3. 12. yea our Sauiour Christ telleth his Church what they are to looke for in the world, euen many tribulations, Iohn, 16. 33. The Church herevpon earth is a Tertullianus, Apologet. cap. 1. pilgrime and stran∣ger,
and therefore findeth but hard entertainment, (know∣ing that no better can bee looked for amongst enemies,) poore and subiect to all kind of wrongs, and iniuries: and therefore is compared to a doue, dwelling in the rockes: Cant. 2. 14. to a ship tossed with the raging waues of the sea, but not ouerwhelmed; to a house builded vpon a rocke, against which the flouds beate, the stormes fall with vio∣lence, but cannot be ouerthrowen. Math. 7. 25. Also she is said to flie into the wildernesse, and there hide her selfe for a time, and vtterly to loose her beauty Apoc. 12. 14 And Aduersus Auxentium. Saint Hillaris tells vs, that we must seeke her rather lying in caues and dens (thereby to auoyd the tempest of perse∣cutions,) then shining in high places aboue others; so that if there were not another life besides this, then should wee Christians, be more miserable than all the rest: 1. Corinth. 15. 19. This argument of Bellarmine is the very same and all one Ʋse 3. with that which the Pagans vsed against the ancient Chri∣stians; and by this reason, the same note should agree as well to the heathenish as to the Christian Church. For Lib. 10. epist. 54. cui respon∣det Ambrosius epist. duabus 30. & 31. lib. 5. Et Pruden∣tius Christianus poeta duobus libris. Symachus alledged none other wherby to perswade Theo∣dosius the Emperour, that he should continue in the old re∣ligion of the Romanes then this, how their ciuill estate and common-wealth, was most abundant in riches, and large in dominions, when they worshipped Iupiter, Apollo and their other Gods. Wherefore let vs serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce before him in trembling, Psal. 2. 11. 12. and both in prosperitie and aduersitie continue stedfast in saith and be thankefull, Iob 1. 21. For as well euill as good proceed from the mouth of God, Lament. 3. 38. and both are his gifts; the one Augustinus epist ad Rusticit & Foelicitatem. comforting, the other chastising; neither ought wee to haue our eyes too much dazeled with the glittering of worldly prosperitie, (which we see the vn∣righteous doe for the most part enioy) nor accompt aduer∣sitie absolutely and without Augustinus de ciuitate Dei lib. 1. cap. 23. Neminem mo∣ueat magis im∣piorum faelici∣tas, quàm mo∣uere debe, prin∣cipatus Diaeboli in mundo. Prus de la Caualleria in tractatu qui insoribitur Zelus Christi. exception euill, wherewith the Saints and deere children of God are enwrapped. For
it hath pleased the diuine prouidence to prouide hereafter good things for the righteous, which the wicked shall neuer enioy: and euill for the wicked, wherewith the righteous shall not be tormented. But for these outward and tempo∣rall goods and euils, God would haue them indifferently common to both, least wee should too greedily desire the one, which the wicked doe obteyne: or ouer basely seeke to auoide the other, which falleth in the lot of the most These rea∣sons, & more of the same sort hath that worthy pro∣fessor of Diui∣nitie Doctor Whitakers gathered a∣gainst Bellar∣mine. holy. Then stood by the Crosse of Iesus, his mother and his mothers sister, Mary (the wife) of Cleophas, and Mary Mag∣dalen.Controuersia de Ecclesiae notis, quaestione 5. cap. 16. This narration, doth greatly set forth and manifest the grieuousnesse of Christs death; that he suffered so terrible and shameful a punishment, in the sight and beholding of his deare Mother, and beloued friends: who all (out of qnestion) did exceedingly sorrow at the same, and with melting hearts followed him. But so it must be, that no kinde of extremity should be wanting in his death, who was to be the sacrifice for the sinnes of the world. And to this end that he might sanctifie vnto those who are his, all yea euen the most grie∣uous sufferings. These women accompanied him, glorious in working miracles, and teaching with the astonishment of the hearers: and now forsake him not, apprehended, condemned, whipped, crucified. Also great multitudes of people, and women of Ierusalem, came forth of the Citie, to see what should bee done, which bewayled and lamented him: Luc. 23. 27. As God in the creation hath engrafted in the mindes of  men naturall affections, and would haue them resemblan∣ces, and (as it were) pictures of his loue toward vs: so doth he not disallo, or condemne them in any, so long as they doe abide and are confined within their bounds and limits. And therefore the Apostle commandeth, that we should weepe with them that weepe, and reioyce with them that
Affici nos do∣lore vult Pater coelestis, & in nostris & prox∣imorum afflicti∣onibus, quo in nostris patien∣tes, in alienis benigni ergae fratres ac mise∣ricordes simus; In prosperis gaudio, & laeti∣tia exultare, quae indicat nos, nec invidere aliorum faelici∣tati, nec inso∣lentes esse. reioyce Rom. 12. 15. which precept he giueth in respect of the double condition of man, prosperous, and aduerse; and vrgeth the performance thereof, by an argument taken from comparison of the like, (that sympathy, and mutuall compassion, which is between the members one toward a∣nother, of the same naturall body.) 1. Corinth. 12. 25. 26. For if the head doe ake, all the rest of the parts doe suffer with it; yea if the Chrysostomus in 12. caput 1. epist. ad Cor. foot be pricked with a throne, the griefe is spred ouer the whole body: the head boweth it selfe downe, the eyes looke carefully where the hurt is, the hand maketh haste to pulle it out, the tongue asketh for a mede∣cine to apply vnto it, and to ease the paine. The same af∣fection and fellow-feeling ought thereto bee, between the members of one and the same mystical body, the Church. For first wee haue all one beginning, and are brethren of one Tertull. Apo∣loges. cap. 19. Minutius Fae∣lix in Octauio. Father, (the heauenly God, the earthly Adam,) all framed of the same clay, wherof we are named the sonnes of Adam: with whom the world was replenished, Deut. 32. 8. and (that which is greater than this) so many as doe beleue in Christ, haue drunke of one spirit of Tertull. Apo∣log. cap. 39. sanctification, and haue brea∣thed from out of one wombe of the same ignorance vnto one light of truth. 1. Corinth. 12. 13. Ephes. 4. 5. 6. Secondly, there is in all a conformitie and participation, of the same nature; from which ground ariseth that exhorta∣tion of the Prophet, Breake thy bread vnto the hungry, bring y Quod cuiquis contigit, cuiui potest continge∣re. Cùm mimu recitaret hac verba, Iulius Caesar largas fu∣dit lachrymas, & quaerentibus causam respon∣dit, Ego casum Pōpeij deploro, & meam for∣tunam metu. Plutarchus in vitae Caesaris. Vide de simili Socratis exemplo, & huius generis alijs apud Pezeliū, in explicatione Examinis Theologici Philippi Melansthonis parte 2. loco de causis calamitatum. the wandering poore into thy house, when thou seest him naked, cloth him, and turne not thy face from thine owne flesh: Esay 58. 7. In which Marlarocus locū Prophetae. speech there is a certeine inward and piercing power; as though he should say, hide not thine eyes from him, who is one of thy owne members, (for vn∣der the name of flesh is comprehended all mankind) none whereof we can looke vpon, but in him behold our owne image, which to despise and neglect, is the highest degree of crueltie. &c. Thirdly, such is our condition that whatsoeuer hath be∣fallen
any one, the same may befall euery one; we are all sub∣iect to the same darts, wherewith both soule and bodie are wounded; wherefore Isocasius, when he was convented be∣fore Posaeus a gouernour of Constantinople, and brought bound with his hands behind him, at his backe, vnto the barre, falsly accused, that hee had of a Christian turned Pagan, answered him well, (asking disdainefully, if he knew in what plight hee now was:) and said: hee knew it well, neither thought it strange, that being a man, hee was fallen into those calamities which are incident to Cedrenus. men. And De resurrecti∣one Domini serm. 2. Bernard reporteth of a certaine aged holy man, who when he heard that any of his brethren, had sinned, wept bitterly: saying, he hath fallen to day, and I may fall to morrow; for euen the most perfect do offend sometimes and grieuously, as Lot by drunkennesse and incest, and is buried in his Lutherus in  19 cap. Gen. re∣pentant teares, no mention afterward made of him: or how he dyed &c. Gen. 19. 38. Moses sinned by distrust, at the waters of strife, who before through faith diuided the red Sea: Num. 20. 12. Aaron the anointed Priest of God, by Idolatry, Exod. 32. 6. Religious Ezecinas by pride and vn∣thankefulnesse, 2. Chron. 32. 25. and not to insist vpon more particulars, there is no man that sinneth not, as Salomon (without exception of any) confesseth: 1. King 8. 46. Let vs then listen to the wholsome admonition of the Apo∣stle, Brethren if any man bee preuented, or suddenly taken in any offence, you that are spirituall restore such an one with the spirit of mecknesse, considering thy selfe least  numeri diligen∣tr notand. est, in qua est speci∣alis applicatio, vt quis quan∣scun donis instructus sit, se excutiat, & qui stat videat ne cadat; nam iuoeta versiculum anti∣quum, Aut sumus, aut umus, aut possumus esse quod est. Vale si non dixie, (dm ait, inten∣dens teipsum ne & tu tentoris) sias tanquam ille, vt illum lucrifacias, non  vt ipsum delictum fallaciter ageret, aut se id habere sim daret, sed vt in alterius delict, quid etiam sibi accidere possit attenderet; atque alteri, tanquam sibi, ab altero vellet, misericorditer subveuere; hoc est non menentis , Iod compatientis affectu. Augustinus in Epistola ad Hieronymum. thou also be temp∣ted. Gal. 6. 1. 2. Ʋse. Farre therefore be from vs that Adamantyne sence∣lesnesse (as Plutarchus. Plutarch calleth it,) of the Stoicks, and sottish
benumming of the Anabaptists. For the heathen them∣selues haue passed the sentence against their owne Philo∣sophers, when they compare them to ships, which haue Good fortune written vpon the Sterne, and yet neuerthe∣lesse, as well as others, sticke fast in the shelues of sand, are battered against the rockes, torne with the rage of the windes and tempest, and oftentimes make shipwracke a∣mongst the raging waues of the sea. And all this not with∣out cause. For affections in men haue their manifest pro∣fit, and euill would it goe with vs, if nature were wholy de∣priued of them. For Iohannes Spi∣naeus de tran∣quillitate animi lib. 5. Melan∣thon in Epiom, moralis philoso∣phiae. they are placed of God in man, as apt meanes of conueyance for the soule, wherby she might e Lactantius lib. 6. cap. 14. 15. 16. 17. Melanthon de anima. Iob. Ludouicus Vius de anima lib. 3. Danaeus in Ethica Chri∣stiana lib. 1. cap. 23. more easily attaine to that end, whereunto reason directeth &c. As for example, That griefe which stingeth sharpely, stirreth vs vp to bee earnest suiters both for our selues and others; as in the Cananitish woman, whose daughter was miserably vexed of a deuill, Math. 15. 25. Loue is an ef∣fectuall meanes which prouoketh and pricketh forward to well doing, necessary for the preseruation of mankinde. Anger kindleth the minde to take due punishment of de∣seruing offences; and so of the rest. Wherefore these pas∣sions are to bee Theophrasius de historia plā∣tarum lib. 2. cap. 3. & de causis plantarum lib. 3. cap. 23. Iob. Costus de stirpium natura lib. 1. cap. 37. 38. 39. Perstium pomū in Perside vene∣ni vice fungi∣tur: in Italia tamen mutato solo salubre est, & cibus inno∣cens. Colmilla de cultu hortorū lib. 10. ordered and guided by iudgement and the aduise of reason, not vtterly rooted out. But herein we are to follow the practise of Horse-riders, who when they will breake young colts, doe not depriue them of their swiftnes and stomacke, but so moderate and temper them, as they may become fit for the sadle; or of Husbandmen, who do not pull vp wilde plants by the rootes, but with diligent manuring, insition, and remouing into another soyle, change their f qualitie. Euen so by industry, and the bles∣sing of God, these motions may be restrained and their fiercenesse bridled. Now for this purpose, among many other, these rules be most especiall. First, because sence is mooued by the outward offered obiect, before either the vn∣derstanding doth conceiue, or the will desire it, (as Eua seeth the forbidden fruit, that it is beautifull to the eye, then after taketh and eateth. Gen. 3. 6. the wedge of gold and the
costly Babylonian garment glistereth in Achans sight, be∣fore hee putteth forth his hand to take and hide it in his tent, Ioshua, 7 21.) therefore we must with humble & ear∣nest prayer, entreat God, that hee would turne away our eies that they behold not vanity, Psal. 119. 37. but that which is right; and direct our eye-liddes the way before him, Prouerb. 4. 25. Secondly, as a man findeth himselfe most inclinable to these passions, so let him least trust them, (eyther in making choise, or iudging any thing) except they be cal∣med and appeased. For when Caine giueth place to ha∣tred and anger, hee becommeth a murerer, Gen. 4. 4. 5. And the Diuels Basilius Mag∣nus homilia de inuidia. scholler learneth of him those two con∣ioyned sinnes, (hate and murther) which Saint Paul hath yoked together, Rom. 1. 29. who else where doth giue this most holy caueat, be angry but sinne not, neyther let the Sun  goe downe vpon your wrath, and giue not place vnto the Diuell, h Hotuilia 14 in cap. 4. Epist ad Ephesios. vt sicut adueni∣ens nox, maxi∣mum de aestū, sole occumbente extinguit: sic etiam iniquum irae aestum depo∣namus vna cum vestimentis cum inous cubitum. Zanchius in 4. ad Ephesios. Eph. 4. 26. 27. It hath risen (saith that goulden Doctor Chrysostome) vnto vs by the goodnes of God, let it not go downe vpon vs as vnworthy the same: And that olde aduersary of ours, seeketh nothing but to bring vs to reuenge, and from one sinne to another, from the lesse to the greater. That counsell which Athenodorus Apud Plu∣tarchum in pro∣blematibus Ro∣manis. gaue vnto Iulius Caesar, is not to be reiected, who being desired (when he made sute to retire himselfe, and to leaue the Court in respect of his yeeres) to giue him some instruction worthy such a Philo∣sopher for a remembrance, onely aduised, that before he eyther did or spake any thing, he should reckon ouer in his mind, the names of all the letters in the Greeke Alpha∣bet: for hee knew right well how by nature, he was chole∣rike, inclined to anger and hastinesse: and that no better medicine could be for to abate this humour, and cure this disease, then delay. If a man will as it were, take truce with himselfe, before hee breake forth into open violence, or be withheld by another, the first heate and fury of the affecti∣on, will waxe colde and faint, and that mist which darkned his mind, will eyther settle or be dispersed. And hereof it
was, that those batchets which were carried before the Ma∣gistrates of Rome (ensignes of their authority) bee bound a¦bout with roddes, that Idem in pro∣blematibus Rom. questione 82. Rsinus, Antiquitateum Romanarum, lib. 2. cap. 3. when punishment was to be taken of any, in the meane time while they were vnloosing, there might bee space to bethinke themselues, lest they should command that thing to bee done vpon the sodaine, where∣of they might afterward repent, eyther too late, or in vaine. And vpon this occasion, after the massacre of Historiae Tri∣partit. lib. 9. c. 50. Theodoret lib. 5. cap. 18. Augustinus de ciuitate Dei, l. 5. cap. 7. Thessalo∣nica, wherein were killed seuen thousand, as well strangers, as inhabitants, without difference, and such as were inno∣cent, &c. Ambrose obtained of Theodosius the Emperour, author thereof, that betweene the time of sentence passed vpon the offendors, and execution, should bee thirty dayes respite: that so any error committed, might be recalled; and this was enacted for a perpetuall law, yet Iustinianus in Codice, lib. 9. tit. 47. de poeni lege si vindica∣ri. extant: Wherefore in the heate of passion, nothing is to be deter∣mined; for the vnderstanding being troubled; is not able to petceiue that, which it could hardly doe, though quiet: for wee cannot behold Gregorius magnus moral. lib. 5. cap. 33. the Sunne mantled ouer with cloudes, nor any image in disturbed waters; but as those which vse Spectacles, (whereby things seeme greater then in truth they are) correct the error of the sense by iudge∣ment; so must we be carefull not to let loose the reines to affections, and licentiously do what they suggest, for so may wee soone bee wrested from that which is iust; as Nebu∣chadnetzar growing full of rage, (insomuch that the forme of his visage was Nullum est animal tam horrendum, tam perniciosum, vt non appareat in illo si ira inua∣sit nouaeferi. tatis accessio: Pauhasius in Commentarijs ad Claudianum de rapta Pro. changed) gaue commandement to haue the fiery furnace seuen times more heated then it was be∣fore, and Shidracke, Mesach and Abednego to be cast into the same by the most valiant men in his Army, because they would not fall downe before the golden Idoll, hee had made, Dan. 3. 19. And Dauid (otherwise a holy man) violently transported by a sodaine motion, condemneth Mephibosheth, and bestoweth all his goods vpon subtile and insinuating Siba, 2. Sam. 16. 4. Thirdly, let vs not yeeld too much to our selues, e∣specially,
in those things, vnto which eyther by the Ludouicus Granatensis in locu. tem∣perature of our body we are inclinable, or drawn by some present offered occasion. For as those who are sicke of an ague, doe alwayes suspect their thirst, because they know it rather proceedeth from the force of the disease, then a∣ny necessity: euen so they who boile in their passions, should alwayes bee suspitious, whatsoeuer is suggested by them. For if they obey, it cannot be, but they must needes incurre great and manifold inconueniences: wherefore the fittest meanes to represse and keepe them vnder, is this, to bee earnest with God by humble and feruent praier, that hee would bridle and restraine them by the grace of his spirit. For the earth cold and drie by nature, vnapt to bring forth any thing, yet being watered with the sweet dewes, & fructifying showers of heauen, is by the moisture of ano∣ther element made fertile; so borroweth that else where, which it hath not of it selfe; In like manner should euerie one endeuour to amend by grace his barren nature, infected with corruption of sinne; that it may bring forth fruit plea∣sing and acceptable vnto God; This was Dauids petition; Create in mee a new heart O God, and renew a right spirite within me. Then stood by the Crosse of Iesus, the mother of Iesus, and his mothers sister, Mary the wise of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen. There is in these wordes an effectuall power, to wound, euen the most stony, and hard flintie heart. For first, in miseries and distresses, the presence of friends is, and should be, an especiall comfort to the afflicted: now it is far otherwise; here nothing but sorrow; his mother stan∣deth by the Crosse almost dead, Tanlerus in meditationibus vitae Iesu. cap. 30. & 44. yet not touched with death, and the eyes of her sonne beholding her, doth in∣crease his sorrow, hanging now vpon the Crosse, and loa∣den with contumelies: Secondly, the place it selfe, ap∣pointed
for the execution of the worst sort of men, and greatest offenders: Thirdly, the kind of death most dread∣full and cursed, doe all encrease the griefe: for what hath the holy virgine Ferns in tra∣ctatu de passio∣ne Domini, part. 4. to doe with the Crosse? what partici∣pation is there, betweene the vndefiled Temple of God, & this contemptible place? But I withdraw my hand from picturing of this wofull mourning: I take not vpon me to expresse the sharpenesse of this heauy griefe, neyther do I perswade my selfe, that I can be able in words to expresse the teares, and perplexed anguish of this blessed virgine; and therefore leaue it to the estimate and apprehension of the Reader, as Valerius Maximus, lib. 8 cap. 12. Tymanthes sometime did (if I may ioyne in comparison prophane Examples with diuine) Agamem∣nons sorrow; present when his daughter was to be sacrifi∣ced: for because hee could not draw with his pensill, the sadnesse of his countenance, such as it then was, and repre∣sent in diuersity of colours, the sundry passions and chan∣ges appearing in the same, couered it ouer with a vayle: But the holier the virgine, the more sorrowfull, and such a virgine, suffered so great affliction. God (many of whose Iudgements are secret, none vn∣iust:)  doth oftentimes cast his dearest children into the dee∣pest Sea of tribulation. So Christ Iesus the onely sonne by na∣ture, bare the Crosse of shame, before hee ware the Crowne of glory, Luc. 24. 26. and the sonnes by Adoption, must looke for no other order to be kept with them. 2. Timoth. 3. 12. The Israelites come to the Land of Promise, flowing with milke and hony, by the red sea, (betweene the waters ly∣ing in heapes on both sides) not without feare; and through the vaste and terrible wildernesse. And by many tribulations must all Christians enter into the Kingdome of heauen, Act. 14. 22. Of this before in the former word, &c. This may bee vnto vs a lesson of Humility, and a re∣straint of rash iudgement, and hasty censure, that wee do not ouer sharply sentence those, or account them for wic∣ked ones, and reprobate, whom wee see to bee exercised with hard trials, and sondry sorts of afflictions. Thus did
the Iewes sometimes erre in their iudgement of Christ, E∣say. 53. 4. and (if wee may ioyn the seruant with his Lord) the like peremptory doom did Iobs friends pronounce vp∣on him and his children) whose lamentable distresse, and manifold calamities they did behold, Iob. 8. 4. But the case in truth standeth farre otherwise. For the Crosse is the precious stone inclosed in that ring wherewith Christ weddeth his Church; and therefore if any will be his Disciple, hee lea∣ueth this admonitory rule, to deny himselfe, take vp his Crosse and follow him: Math. 16. 24. For the life of a Christian in this world consisteth in the deniall of himselfe, the taking vp of the Crosse, and imitation of the vertues of Christ; that renouncing his owne iudgement and will, resigneth himselfe wholly ouer vnto him, and doth not beare, but take vp the Crosse and embrace it, and so follow the Lord Iesus, who hath suffered whatsoeuer we can snffer. And at the last all things shall turne to the best, and therefore doe we reioyce in tribulati∣on, Rom. 5. 3. For blessed is the man who is tempted, because when hee is tried, hee shall receiue the crowne of life which God hath promised to all those whom hee loueth, Iames, 1. 12. When Iesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple whome hee loued. Christ now being in great extremity and perplexity is in this very howre not carelesse of his mother; hee hath no part free, but his eyes and his tong, with this he louingly speaketh vnto her, with those, he tenderly beholdeth her; that so he might shew how deare she was vnto him, how deeply she was engrauen in his heart. A strange miracle, a lamentable conflict of the eyes. His eyes at the same time did hasten to be closed vp in death, yet did turn themselues towards his mother. The power of death did enforce thē to faile, the greatnesse of loue opened them to behold her: and not only so, but giueth comfort with his speech, and proui∣deth for her future estate: and thus sheweth himselfe obedi∣ent
to his heauenly father, in the meane time not neglecting or making light account of the performance of the duetie of humane loue vnto his earthly mother. That precept, that wee Augustinus tractatu 119. in Iohannis . should honor our parents, and not in death it selfe be vnregardfull of them, is no humane ordinance, but the commandement of God; & that ancient and religious decree, Arnoldus Carnotsis de . vltimis Chri∣sti verbis. which Christ our Sauiour gaue, hee doth himselfe practise. And though the speech be short in words, yet therein is included a dutifull affection, and sin∣gular loue expressed. Wherefore since he hath consecra∣ted this duety by his owne Theophilactus. example, for the better vnder∣standing thereof two points (but briefly) are to be discussed: The one, wherein this duety doth consist; the other, by what equity wee are bound to the performance thereof. For the first, Iesus the sonne of Syrach doth vnfold the force and power of this word (honor) cap. 3. And therein are comprehended 1. Filij in pa∣rentes ria par∣ticularia pecca∣ta numerantur à Summistis, 1. irreurentia, 2. iobedientia, 3. omissio subuenti∣onis. Caieta in summa. Reuerence, that is, an acknowledgement of dignity and superiour power, and that in the mind, body, action, Diogenes quendam de pa∣tre malè loquē∣tem castigans, Quid inquit de eo malè loque∣ris, absque quo, si non fuisset, tu non modo loqui non potuisses, sed nem natu∣ra quidem rrum fuisses. Epictotus in Enchiridio. cap. 37. speech, and gesture; (for oftentimes piety is wronged by an outward countenance.) So Dauid when he speaketh vnto Saul his fa∣ther in law, & professed enemy, stileth him with those sub∣misse terms, my Lord and King, 1. Sam. 26. 17. and Solomon when Bath-shebae his mother commeth vnto him, riseth vp from his Royall throne, goeth to meet her, boweth downe to the ground, and causeth her to bee placed in a seate at his right hand, 1. Kin. 2. 19. Vide Agellium noctium Arti∣carum, lib. 2. cap. 2. & Plutuorim in eodem dissertationem. . Timocles.. 2. Obedience: the performance and execution of their parents commandements, so far forth as lyeth in them, & Gods glory may be preserued safe & vnstained. Thus Iacob resteth himselfe in the counsell of Rebecca his mother, and yeeldeth to her admonition: Gen. 27. 14. The Rhecabites are commended by the mouth of God himselfe, who abstained frō drinking of wine & dwelt in Tabernacles, because their father Ionadab had so enioined thē, Ie. 25. 19. & in truth this
is one of the chiefe vertues that can be found among men, b  Menander. and the very sinewes and preseruation of all societies. There∣fore Paul doth expound the word (honour) by . obedience, and subiection, Eph. 6. 1. Coloss, 3. 20. 3 Gratitude, the supply of their wants, if . Menander. Harmenopulus in Promptua∣rio miris. lib. 3. titulo 5. §. 83. Insignis locus est apud Am∣brosium, in Luc. Euangelium, l. 8. cap. 18. Illud obs. quid habes, quibus debes, quantum debes, &c. they stand in need of our goods, labour and counsell. When the famine preuailed in Palestina, Ioseph sendeth for his father into E∣gypt, receiueth him honorably, & prouideth him and his fa∣mily of a fit and conuenient place of habitation, & feedeth them most plentifully, Gen. 45. 11. And among the very heathen, who are (as the apostle speaketh) without God in the world, Eph. 2. 12. this part of honour was both wondred at, and rewarded. Pli∣nius historiae naturalis. lib. 7. cap. 36. sangui∣nis ingenui mulierem ap∣pellat Valeri us Maximus, l. 4. cap. 4. apud quē multa eisdem generis exem∣pla inuenies, & apud Fulgosium illius imitato∣rem. For a yong woman of the meanest ranke & sort of people, fed her mother condemned to die by hun∣ger, with the milke of her breasts, when shee might haue ac∣cesse vnto the prison: and was diligently searched by the Iayler that she should bring no meat; but afterward per∣ceiuing what she had done, the mothers life was giuen to the daughter, the daughter honoured for her care, both nourished of the common allowance, and the prison con∣uerted into a temple: Nunc Sancti Seruatoris de pictate. Fabrici∣us in Roma sua lib. 1.  Regione vrbis 11. quae Circus Maximus appellabatur. Sextus Rufus P. victor. The history of Trogus Pompeius apud Iustinum in Epitome, lib 2. Cymon the Athe∣nian is well knowne, who willingly offered himselfe to be bound in fetters, and lye in that prison, into which his father was cast for robbing the common treasury; that so he might redeeme his body, being there dead, to decent bu∣riall. For children if they vndergoe any trouble for their Sophocles in Oedipo Coloueo. . Antiphanes. parents, must not once make mention thereof, because they can neuer doe too much for them, for whom they can∣not doe enough; as Ismene in the tragedy speakes to his si∣ster Antigone, commending vnto her the care of their father Oedipus, while he was absent. For the second generall point, which is the equity, & right, whereby wee are obliged to the performance of this office, it is threefold. Daneus Ethices Christianae lib. 2. cap. 12. Zepporus in legum Mosaicarum forensium Explicationem, lib. 3. cap. 12..
First theologicall, or diuine; for God himselfe hath com∣manded it, and therefore simply iust, because agreeing to his will. Ephes. 6. 1. 2. For of him is named all the family in heauen and in earth Ephes. 3. 15. and giueth this precept Deut. 15. 16. Prou. 3. 15. and hath confirmed this bond, that it should euer stand firme and inviolable, and approued of the duty that is performed. It is a very memorable historie, and recorded by many writers, of two brethren; who when the hill Aristoteles de mundo. Strabo lib. 6. Geographiae. Pausanias in Phoeicis. Valerius Max. Solinus cap. 11. Claudimus E∣pigrammate 35. Ausonius de claris vrbibus. Cornelius Seue∣rus in Aetna. Quod poema Virgilio olim ascriptum fuit. & vide in illud Iosephi Scali∣geri comment. Aetna was set on fire, and cast out abundant flames like to a riuer, caried out their weake and aged parents vp∣on their shoulders, the flame diuiding it selfe in this holy action, (God approuing the deed,) to make a passage, and after returned to his former course; in remembrance of which action, posteritie honoured the place where they laid downe their religious burden, with this title: Campus piorum, the field of the godly. The second, Politicall; for vnlesse children may be kept vnder the awefull feare and gouernment of their parents, of necessitie must follow the confusion of all things, or∣ders, and magistracie. And therefore by the law of euery nation, it is established, that Parents should bee honored, and that they might haue an action of ingratitude against their vndutifull children. For the Xenophon de dictis & factis Socratis. Imò & lege Dei confirmatur. Deut. 21. 18. Athenians gaue autho∣ritie to disinherite such; and the Dionysius Ha∣licarnasseus l. 2. Romanes granted full power, by all sharpe meanes to represse and keepe vnder the stubbornnesse and vndutifulnesse of their children, if by gentle and milde admonitions they could not bee re∣claimed. And therefore it was lawfull to cast them into prison, to scourge them, to send them fettered with chaines into the field vnto rurall labours, that they might cast them off and depriue them of that right which otherwise did be∣long vnto them; Quintius lib. 7. In∣n Oratoriarū. and, if they did not ransom their father taken prisoner by the enemie, Tiraquellus de legibus con∣nubialibus part. 2. glss. 8. nu∣mero. 284. seclude them from the right of succession; as we read of Iacob the Patriarch, who bicause of his filthy and vncleane act, tooke from Ruben the king∣dome, the priesthood, and the double portion, which by
the right of his birth, as the eldest sonne, were his. Gen. 49. 22. 23. The third naturall; for the creatures who want reason, do not want this dutifull respect. The Solinus Poly∣histor. cap. 53. Philo in Iabis. Basilius Magn. Hexamer. homilia 8. Ambros. Hxa∣mri lib. 5. c. 16. Cassiodorus va∣riarum lib. 2. epist. 14. Ioachimus Ca∣merarius emble∣matū Centuria 3. Emblem. 40. Alciatus in Emblematibus. apud Aristophanē in Aubus. Oru Apollo appollat Cucupham cap. 51. & 58. Pierius Hiero∣glyphic l. 17. Storkes nourish their aged dammes; yea, looke how much time they bestowed in feeding them, so much doe the young ones employ again for their benefit: and couer and keepe warme their naked bodies wanting feathers; and vnable to lift themselues vp, with the benefit of their wings, doe helpe them to flie againe. That is not grieuous which is due, nor burdensome which is natures debt; and this no written law enforceth, but that which is ingrafted, teacheth; and thereof, among the Latins is cal∣led Pia auis, the mercifull, or iust and honest birde, and from his name is taken . that word which signifieth a thankefull requitall of benefits receiued; and among the sacred Hyro∣glyphickes of the Aegyptians, his picture carieth with it the signification of pietie: and is to bee seene in the coine of Adrian the Emperour, with this added inscription, Au∣gustus, benignitie and gentlenesse. A great example for imi∣tation for men, who haue receiued so many benefits from their parents; Conradus Ho∣tesbachius in Christianae Iu∣risprudentiae Epitome. being by generation; life by nourishment; instruction and doctrine by good education. And therefore it is prouided by the ciuill and imperial lawes, that children should be bound to supply the necessitie and wants of their parents, and prouide foode and nourishment for them; who might, in the time of famine and extreame want, sell them for their reliefe; for there is nothing more iust and agreeing with reason, then that children should recom∣pence their kindred; for that is a thing honest and accep∣table before God. 1. Timoth. 5. 4. First then, vnkindnesse and disobedience towards parents are Ʋse. 1. sinnes of the highest degree, and signes of a reprobate minde; in which, the reserued notions of iustice, ingrafted of God, and engrauen in the minde of man at the day of his creation, are choked, and conscience (a particular testimonie which the minde of euery one beareth vnto himselfe, and witnes∣seth
either the good or euill which is in their actions, how∣soeuer secret and vnknowen to others) is corrupted and broken. Yet these are the poysonfull affections of this doting and dying age of the world, in the which the Apo∣stle foretold (among the rest) that men should be disobedi∣ent to parents, vnthankefull, vnholy, vnnaturall, 2. Timoth. 3. 2. 3. and are reckoned among those sinnes, whereof the principals and accessaries are indifferently lyable to the wrath and vengance of God, Rom. 1. 30. And not without iust desert, because they breake the bond of all ciuill society, and procure iust punishment. For the first commandement with promise, is, to honour Father and Mother Ephes. 6. 2. that they may prolong and lengthen their daies vpon earth; where In expositione Decalgi. Sic Chaldaeus Paraphrastes, & in suis ad eum annotatio∣nibus Paulus Phagius. Aben Ezra obserueth, that the word vsed is of the actiue forme; for by them God doth conuey his bles∣sings to posteritie, infuseth a certaine secret and powerfull vertue into their prayers: and bestoweth many benefits, when they become Est plorū pa∣rentum benedi∣ctio, efficax pre∣catio pro liboris, & multū valer; maldictio, quasi domestica excommunicatio & prophetia, de poenis sequu∣turis. Paulus ab ∣zen in decalogū. Triste exempū refrt Augusti∣nus cuius ipse ex∣parte  fuit, de ciuitate D lib. 22 c. 8. & huis non dis∣sile est apud Louicenum in Turcica historiae tom. 2. lib. 1. c. 4. petitioners for the same, vpon the suc∣ceeding issue. So Iacob prayeth for Iuda his sonne Gen. 49. 8. and is fulfilled 2. Sam. 8. 13. But such as be stubborne and vndutifull, (as monsters of nature) haue pulled vpon their owne heads many and grieuous vengances. There∣fore, among other causes for which the Iewes are giuen ouer into the hands of Nabuchadonezer, and caried to bee slaues into Babilon, Ezech. 22. 7. putteth this for one, they despised their Father and Mother. And we read among the ancient verses of the Oraculorū l. 1. Sibills, that God destroyed the men of the first world, because they laughed their Fathers to scorne, and dishonoured their Mothers. And, though but heathen, and guided onely by the dimme light of nature, Illiade 4. Homer telleth vs of one Symoisius, and lib. 11. . Quintus Smyrnaeus of another Hypasus, who both were cut off by vntimely death, because they refused to nourish their Parents being old, and strucken in yeares. For the sounder sort among the Gentiles, doe deliuer many wise and discreet precepts, concerning this obseruance of children toward their Pa∣rents; as Pythagoras in his golden verses, Honor thy Father
and Mother, and those who are neere vnto thee in bloud; which In Commen∣tarijs ad aurea carmina Pitha∣gorae. Malhus siue Porphyrius de vita Pythag.  Charemon. . Menandor. Hierocles expoundeth thus, that we should performe like honor to God and our Parents, and leaue nothing vndone, (what vrgent occasions soeuer we may seeme to haue to the contrary) which doth make any way to their good and quiet; and the more laborious and seruile the office bee, to thinke it the more comely and honest: and therein to spare for no cost; for nothing can bee more beseeming, then, by all meanes to further their benefit, and to bee cheerefull and glad in all expences, which we bestow and lay out vpon them. For whosoeuer doth this, obserueth the law of vertue, and requiteth or repayeth that loue which nature requireth. And so In poemate admonitorio. Phocillides ioyneth the honour of God and Parents together; for they are (saith In expositione Docalogi. Philo) visible Gods. And, without alledging more testi∣monies, Iesus the sonne of Sirach handleth this point with choice wordes, and exquisite sentences, all the third Chapter. Vse 2. God will haue this bond authenticall and constantly ratified, and vpon no change or occasion altered. And there∣fore it is obserued, that when Christ raised the widow of Nayims sonne from death, who was caried out of the gates of the Citie to buriall, deliuered him to his mother, Luc. 7. 15. teaching by this example, that by no Emancipation or liber∣tie this subiection can bee frustrate. Therefore the practise of the Romane Antichrist is no way iustifiable, who stirreth vp the children against their Benuo Cardi∣nalis in vita Henrici 4. Parents, and prouoke them by force and armes to depriue them both of life and dig∣nitie; and compelleth such whom they receiue into their Hansinillerus in historia Iesu∣itica cap. 3. monkish orders, vnder a solemne oath to renounce for euer all that honor and reuerence, which they owe vnto their parents; and so that aduersarie seeketh cursedly to breake that Paulus ab Eitzen in do∣ma Ethica. obligation and bond, which God and nature hath ratified; neither doth hee vnderstand how sharpely they are reproued of Christ, who vnder the vizard and pretence of superstitious religion, either doe neglect their Parents, or teach the same. Therefore you (saith he, spea∣king
to the Pharisies, Math. 15. 4. 5.) transgresse the com∣mandement of God to maintaine your owne traditions. For God hath giuen the charge, Honour thy father & mother, but you teach, that whosoeuer shall say to father or mother, Corban, by the gift that is offered by me, thou mayest haue profite, and so though hee honour not his father or mo∣ther, shall bee free, &c. Which obscure place, that Noble Ioseph In Elencho Triheresij. Non tam enum mile, quam est Papismus Pharasismo, de quo libellus Bo∣quini est elegā∣ter scriptus. Scaliger (while he liued in earth the Phoenix of lear∣ning, now enioying heauenly blisse) doth thus illustrate out of the Iewish Rabbins, when any offered his corban or gift, hee then saide, (being taught before hand of the Pharisies) Let this gift which I now offer, profite both me and mine; and by this meanes supposed, that he was discharged from the performance of all loue and duety vnto his parents: inso∣much that if he were by them challenged of any good of∣fice or helpe, hee put it off with that exception and restrain∣tiue clause of his offering made; in respect whereof hee thought himselfe blamelesse, though hee did shake off all naturall duety. When Iesus saw his mother, and the Disciple standing by whom hee loued, hee sayde to his Mother: Woman (be∣hold thy sonne.) There is mention here made of three persons, Christ hanging vpon the Crosse, and amidst his vnspeakeable torment, carefull and pensiue for his mother: and shee, a wowan most distressed: and Iohn the beloued Disciple, to whose charge shee was to be committed for her comfort, (a Beda in Ho∣milia 2. post E∣piphaniam. virgine to a virgine;) for now the Lord is moued with a compassionate and tender affection, and assigneth the Cyprianus li∣bello quod et astribitur de passione Christi, Sect. 9 Edition Pamilianae. Bedàe of his humanitie to his dearely beloued Chamber∣laine: and appointeth her, blessed among women, to the tuition and safegard of the Apostle, who being adopted, taketh the place of a naturall sonne. At the last Supper he g Arnoldus Carnotensu, de 7. vltimis Chri∣sti verbis. leaned vpon his masters breast, and is now honoured with another priuiledge, to be the faithfull keeper of an vnualua∣ble
treasure: The Iohannes Hussus de passi∣one Domini ex quaetuor Euan∣gelistis. meaning then and sense is, as if hee should haue saide thus, Receiue (Mary) a seruant for the Lord, a Disciple for the Master, a fisherman for God: Iohn for Iesus Christ, a kinsman for a sonne; hitherto I haue had a vi∣gilant care of thee, and now am ready to depart this life, & commend thee vnto him, who shall see to thee: and to his watchfull care doe I commit thee. Christ is alwayes Pelargus in 7. Christi ver∣ba. present with spirituall Mary, & com∣forteth  the faithfull; for these are his mother and sister, Mat. 12. 44. hee will raise vp nursing fathers for his Church, Esay, 49. 21. & 60. 4. and in the midst of the greatest dangers, k Duplex Chri∣sti cognatio, carnalis & spi∣ritualis. Nazi∣anz. orat. 22. in laudem Ma∣chabeorum. Iso∣dorus Pelusiota, lib. Epist. 159. & lib. 4. Epist. 46. Hilarius in Mattheum. deliuer them. All flesh perisheth in the vniuersall deluge and ouerflowing floud of waters, Noah with his family is preserued, 1. Pet. 3. 20 and after some monethes is brought forth (a new inhabitant of the earth) with the beasts & fowles, who are inclosed with him in the Arke. Lot is led out of Sodome by the Ministery of Angels, and that supernaturall tempest of fire and brimstone deferred, vntill hee be placed in safety, Gen. 19. 16. Pharoh and the Egyptians are consu∣med with sondry Augustinus quaest. 26. in Exodum obser∣uat in omnibus plagis fcisse , siue . Nouit Deus in medijs poenis, interbonos, & malos discernere & Ecclesiae suae rationem habere. 2. Pet. 2. 13. kind of plagues, but in euery one the Lord maketh a difference betweene them and his people, l In terram no∣uam nouum , Theodoretus. : Philo in libro de Abrahamo; duo miracula, humani generis deletio, & No∣hae conseruatio. the Israelites, Exod. 8. v. 23. & 9. 16. And when that fa∣tall time drew neere, which Ghrist bewayled with teares, Luc. 19. 41. in which Eusebius histor. Ecclesi∣ast. lib. 3. cap. 5. Ierusalem was to bee laide waste and ruinated by Ʋespasian and Titus the Roman Generals: God by an Oracle gaue warning to the Christians, before any siege was laide vnto it, that they should depart the Citie; and so in Pella a towne beyond Iordake, saued their liues & escaped the common calamitie. Gods Church shall continue vpon earth, hell gates may not preuaile against it: Math. 16. 18. It is that tabernacle which cannot be remoued, and the stakes thereof can neuer be taken away, neyther shall any of the cordes thereof be re∣moued, Esay, 33. 20. It may be pressed, but it shall not be
oppressed: Though Caines anger be enraged against A∣bel, and shed his bloud, yet Seth shall stand a foundation im∣moueable, Gen. 4. 25. Israel complaineth that he is oftentime, afflicted from his youth, but they could not preuaile against him: Psal. 129. 1. 2. For God will bee as a wall of fire about his, Zach. 2. 9. those who seeke to harme them shall not es∣cape free: and therefore for their security hee hath made an Edict, Touch not mine annointed, Psal. 105. 15. Whatsoeuer the enemies plot, and contriue against them, shall not preuaile; all their treacheries and violent cruel∣ties shall be frustrate: Iezabel persecuteth Elias, and when he is taken vp into heauen, thinketh none is left to reproue her impieties, or that God hath any to serue him, but might now wallow carelesly in her sinnes, and the Baalims be wor∣shipped according to his owne will: yet seuen thousand are left, which neuer so much as bowed the knee to that I∣doll; and when he is receiued into eternity, Elisha succee∣deth, furnished with a double spirit of knowledge and po∣wer, 2. King. 2. 15. Stephen is stoned to death, the professors of Christianity are scattered, but by this meanes the Gospell is spread abroad in the world, Act. 8. 1. 2. For the Church shineth brightest vnder Tyrants. It is Discursus d∣rebus Gallicis continuatio. plowed vp with the share of torments, fatned and compassed with the contempt and dung of the world, sowen with ashes, watered by bloud and teares: it vseth the flame of consuming fire, as nourishing sunne; the butchery of executioners, as the dewe; flourisheth in the autume of calamities, and bringeth forth most sweete and plentifull fruit in the deepe winter of tribulation. And (as In Apologeti∣co, cap. 45. Tertullian speaketh) the exquisitely deuised cruelty of perse∣cutors, is an effectuall allurement to embrace the profession; Christians are made more, when they are cut off, they fall by v∣nities, but rise by multitudes: the bloud of the Martyres is the seed of the Church. Let all the righteous cast their care vpon God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. for hee is mercifull and will, Almighty, and can, most wise and knoweth how to deliuer his out of the greatest dangers, and
free them from the narrowest streights, wherein they were enclosed, Esay, 43. 1. 2. Neither are we to despaire of Gods mercy and louing kindnesse, though hee seeme sometime to deale hardly, and bring vs to his Crosse; for though for a moment he doth Vt in Solstitio Hibernali tunc Soli Horizon∣tem spectes) nobis proximus est; & tamen ob aëcis incle∣mentiam, lon∣gissime videtur distare. Ita Christus iusti∣tiae sol tum no∣bis prxime a∣stat cum longis∣sime abesse puta∣mus. Psal. 145. 18. forsake, he will gather vs again in great compassion, Esay, 54. 7. and not suffer vs (because hee is faithfull) to bee tempted aboue that wee are able, but will giue the issue with the temptation, 1. Corinth, 10. 13. Wher∣fore wee must contentedly vndergoe all afflictions, and set before our eyes those who haue suffered greater. God pro∣uideth Saropta a refuge for Elias, when he is constrained to forsake Israel, and a poore widow to giue him food with en∣tertainement, whose store is miraculously encreased, and he triumphantly carried vp into heauen, when hee can finde no rest in earth; 2. King. 2. 11. The Israelites go out of Egypt with great honour, where they had for many yeers beene grieuously afflicted, Exod. 12. 41. And when Peter the next day should hane beene brought forth to executi∣on, and for that end was guarded with a strong watch of sixteene Souldiers: the night before, the fetters fell from his feete, the prison gates opened, and he obtained sodaine and vnlooked for deliuerance, Act. 12. 7. For it is an vn∣doubted truth, that many bee the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord will deliuer them out of them all, Psal. 34. 19. Woman behold thy Sonne. This Christ said in the presence of Iohn, who stood with her neare vnto the Crosse, and the words are in effect thus much: I am now ready to depart this life, and do appoint in my place, and substitute this Iohn, who in my stead shall performe the duety of a sonne vnto thee. But here it is que∣stionable among the Diuines, why Christ said not mother, but woman behold thy sonne: and they render these rea∣sons among other. First, that hereby hee might not Iansenius in harmoniae E∣uangeliorum cap. 143. encrease her griefe,
which doubtlesse he should haue done in calling her by that sweet name of mother: For great and forcible is that naturall loue which is betweene parents and children. A∣braham then wrastled with a strong temptation, Origines in 22. Geneseos. Nissenus in o∣ratione habita in funere Pul∣cheriae. Basilius Isauri∣ensis oratione de Abrahamo. Lutherus in Ge∣nesin, cap. 22. when I∣saacke spake vnto him, my father, and he answered, behold my sonne, Gen. 22. 7. This for the present was the voyce of a great temptation, wounding the fathers hart, who though in respect of his faith, hee was resolute and vnbendable; yet notwithstanding shewed a tender and relenting affecti∣on, when he answered, my sonne. And Dauid doth most passionately bewaile the deserued death of graceles Absolom, went vp to his chamber, and wept, and as he went said thus; O my sonne Absolom, my sonne, my sonne Absolom, would to God. I had died for thee: O Absolom, my sonne, my sonne: 2. Sam. 18. 33. And when Iacob heard that Ioseph his sonne was torne of some euill beast, hee rent his garment, put on sackcloth, mourned for him many dayes, and would not be comforted. Gen. 37. 35. for so it is ordained of Saluianus l. 1 de auaritia. Nature, that all parents loue their children more then themselues, and they bee dearer vnto them then their owne eyes: Oppianus, 1. Halieuticn. be∣cause by succession of them, they obtaine a certaine kind of immortality Iustinianuc in nouellis collatione, 4. de nuptijs; titulo. 1. in their descendents, and by the mercifull appointment of God the stocke and kindred is continual∣ly renewed: And we reade in the histories of former times how the Sabellicus. women of Carthage, accompanied their sonnes vnto the Sea-shore, with shedding many teares (who were to be carried ouer into Sicily for hostages) and when the shippes were out of sight, impatient for their want, cast thē∣selues into the water and perished, The second cause, was, lest hee should bring her into danger; for, if the crucifiers had knowne that she was his mother, they would haue dealt more hardly with her; for they hated Christ most malitiously, and oftentimes it so falleth out, that wee doe not onely wish euill to those by whom wee thinke wee are iniured, but also euen to all who belong vnto them. So Dauid vpon this ground, fearing such measure, when Saul persecuted him vnto the death,
with an inward hatred, conueied his Father and Mother vnto the King of Moab, that with him they might be safe; lest for his cause the enemy should also wrong them, 1. Sam. 22. 4. The third was, to put vs in mind of that gratious Semen tuum conteret caput Serpentis Gen. 3. 15. pro∣mise made in Paradise; and that wee might know, he was appointed of God to take our flesh, and offer himsefe vpon the altar of the Crosse a sacrifice for the redemption of the world: for thus God spake vnto our first parents after the fall, and torture of their soules, arising from the sensible feeling of that good and blessed estate they had lost, ray∣sing them vp to the comfortable hope saluation: The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent, Gen. 3. 15. And hereof Saint Paul, God when the fulnes of time was come, sent forth his sonne made of a woman, and vnde the law, Galath. 4. 4. The last reason, and that most especiall; Christ fore∣seing and Augustin de nup ijs & concupiscenti. lib. 1. cap. 12. &. 24. prophesying, that many heresies and blasphe∣mous opinions should arise, vayled vnder the name or title of godlinesse and deuotion, calleth her by the name of wo∣man; for who is ignorant, that the Epiphanius contra hereses. lib. 3. tom. 2. heres. 79. Daneus in Au∣gustinum de heresibus, cap. 83. Collyridians, very superstitiously vpon an appointed day of the yeere, offered Cakes, (in honour of the virgine Mary) to a certain mai∣den sitting in a stately chaire, or chariot, couered ouer with a curtain, and her they esteemed as a Goddesse; whom Contra He∣reses, lib. 3. tom. 2. heres. 78. & 29. Epiphanius calleth a people carried away with a brainsicke rage and mad fury of mind, and their fact vnlawfull, blas∣phemous, an idolatrous practise, and diuelish attempts: for indeed the virgin Mary is to be honoured, but not wor∣shipped, shee her selfe worshipped him, whom shee barc, and who tooke flesh of her, but came from heauen, and the bo∣some of the father: yet all this in comparison of the Ro∣mish Idolatry is but little, who haue taught that shee is to be worshipped after a supereminent Anselmus de excellentia vir∣ginis, cap. 9. 10. 11. Antoninus in summa titul. 22. cap. 8. §. 2. Bernardinus in Mariali, & Ia∣cobus de voragi∣ne in Mariali, buius , author Petrus Gra∣pheus Hereticus Nicephorus, lib. cap. 11. manner, and enti∣tle her to all those attributes, which properly doe belong vnto Christ, that as hee is our Lord, so shee our Lady, he King, shee Queene of heauen, &c. and blush not to call
her their hope and life, saluation of the world, throne of grace, the Queene of mercy, the aduocate, helper, & comfort of dispai∣ring soules, the onely Innocentius in oratione de 300. dierum indulgentia. Sauiour of sinners and haue corrupted the whole Psalter, that whatsoeuer Dauid speaketh of God the father, sonne, & holy Ghost, they changing the word, (Lord into Chemnitiutin examine confi∣lij Tridentini parte 3. itul de veneratione, & inuccatione Sanctorum. Lady) from one end to the other, doe blasphe∣mously apply it to the virgine Mary, and so christen that booke with a new name, the Ladies Psalter. After that first and vniuersall ruine of man, whereby through one, sinne entred into the world, and by sin death,  and so death went ouer all men, in whom all haue sinned, none could escape the Leo prim sermone 1. de passione. dominion of the Diuell, & bee loosed from fetters of his cruell bondage, neyther bee re∣conciled for the obteyning of pardon, nor haue ac∣cesse vnto life, vnlesse the sonne of God coeternall and coequall vnto the Father, had vouchsafed to bee the son of Man, and come to seeke and saue that which was lost; for he our Lord, in the Augustinus serm , 1 14. de tempore. ballance of the Crosse, hath weighed out the price of our saluation, and by his once suffering death, acquited the whole world, that as he was the Crea∣tor of all things, so hee might bee the restorer. Wherefore we must vndoubtedly belieue, that he hath redeemed the world, who hath payed a greater ransome then the worth of the world. For Christ alone is the author & perfecter of that grace and mercy we do obtaine, Heb. 12. 2. and there∣fore before he was conceiued in the wombe, is named Ie∣sus, because hee should saue his people from their sinnes, Math, 1. 21. and is made vnto vs of God the Father, wis∣dome, righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Neither is there saluation in any other; for among men is giuen no other name vnder heauen, where∣by wee must bee saued, Act. 4. 12. and no man commeth to the Father but by him; for hee is the way, the truth and the life, Iohn 14. 6. He is the way, Cyrills lib. 1. Thesauri cap. 1. Bernardus in paruis sermoni∣bus, sermone 23 by which wee returne out of exile into our Country; the gate of reconciliation betweene God and man; He is truth, true righteousnesse, whereby the wrath of God is appeased, and wee accepted
as children, and heires of his kingdome: he is life, the only author of life; himselfe alwaies and essentially life. Thou hast not how to goe, but by him, nor whether, but vnto him; and (to comprehend all in one summe,) he is the way, lea∣ding k Augustinus in Iohannis E∣uangelium tract. 21. vs: the truth, directing, the life perfecting; for there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, euen the Man Christ Iesus, who gaue himselfe a ransome for all men, 1. Timoth. 2. 5. and if any man sinne, he is our Aduo∣cate 1. Ioh. 2. 1. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell, and through peace made by that bloud of that his crosse, to reconcile to himselfe, all things, both which are in earth and which are in heauen: Coloss. 1. 19. For no man (so In lib. 2. Cur Dus homo, cap. 15. Anselmus truly) can haue pardon of his offences, but by that man, who also was God, and made sin that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him: 2. Cor. 5. 20. and did beare our sins vpon his body on the tree, by whose wounds we are healed. 1. Pet. 2. 24. he alone hath troden the winepresse Esay 63. 3. he alone endured that bitter passion, for the transgressions of the world, hath washed away with his bloud the wickednesse of all: for he is that lambe of God, which layeth vpon his owne shoulders, and taketh away the sinnes of the world. Ioh. 1. 29. By this is ouerthrowen all humane merit both of congruitie and De merito congrui, digni & condign, Rinerius in summa tom. 2. titulo meritum cap. 5. Aquinas 1. 2. quaest. 114. art. 3. Pelargus in no∣uo Iesuitismo loco 10. condignitie, and all challenged reward to bee due for good workes. And yet are the Proctors of the Romish Church neuer louder speakers, neuer greater orators, then in extol∣ling and commending workes, euen to heauen: neuer pro∣fesse themselues more skilfull Phisitions then in couering their owne, and disclosing the diseases of others; heerein not much vnlike the frogs, mentioned in the fable, among whom one professed great art in curing all sicknesses, but by her pale and yellow colour, bewrayed how vnfit shee was to heale others, who could not heale her selfe. For these are the embossed commendations they set vpon workes, that they are the Bellarminus de Iustificatione lib. 5. cap. 4. merchandise of the kingdom of heauen, that they Costerus in Enchridio de meritus bonrum operum. merit with God, and to them eternall life is due, that they are of Gregorius de Valentia tom. 3. disput. 7. quaest. 20. Censura Colo∣nieusis Dialogo 5. satisfactorie power for deserued punishment, &c.
But because according to the rule of Paepias in Eusebius, Historiae Ec∣clesiast. l. 3. cap. 39. we must not listen to those who speake much, but deliuer sound doctrine: trueth onely which proceedeth from the holy Scriptures, and is approued by the most pure and an∣cient times, ought to be embraced, from which these coy∣ners of new doctrines are farre departed. For first, the workes of the most regenerate are not absolutely good, nei∣ther Adriani Pap. sententia pia. Quotidie super pannum bonae vitae, quem texi∣mus operibus Iustitiae, stilla∣mus sanim di∣uersorum cri∣minum. extensiuely for number, nor intensiuely for perfection as is manifest by vncontrolable euidence of Scripture. For wee all haue beene as an vncleane thing, and all our righte∣ousnesse is as filthy cloutes, and we doe all fade like a leafe, and our iniquitie as the winde hath taken vs away: Esay 64. 6. And as Salomon confesseth, there is no man iust vp∣on earth, that doth good and sinneth not, Ecclesiast. 7. 22. The Apostle (of himselfe and others) in many things wee sinne all, Iames 3. 3. And Paul, though for righteousnesse which is in the law vnblameable, yet basely accompteth of his workes, and dignities, calleth them dung; and therfore reiecting them, desireth to bee found not in his owne righ∣teousnesse, which is in the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ Philip. 3. 8. 9. Secondly, Adam in his first estate yet vndefiled, and be∣fore None can merit, not Adam stan∣ding in his integriue. his fall, Philip. Mor∣naeus de sacrifi∣cio Missae lib. 3. cap. 18. could deserue nothing, keeping the image in which hee was created Gen. 1. 27. which is, as Saint Paul interpreteth it, righteousnesse, holinesse of trueth and knowledge of God, Ephes. 4. 24. abiding in Paradise, a place full of de∣light, which Dauid calls, to be in honour, Psal. 49. 22. where∣by he had not onely a being, but a good being, grace and glory according to the good pleasure of the Creator and his meere mercy and vndeserued goodnesse: and yet had no power to deserue well of him, from whom hee receiued all things, hauing nothing of himselfe, but was wholy his. Let it then be granted that our first Parent vsed the gifts of God bestowed, in the best manner, that he possessed them in such reuerent feare as he ought, fulfilled the law, as then naturally he might: yet could he not say, (except he should
speake from that pride which cast him downe headlong from the toppe and height of his dignitie) I haue deserued that God should bestow this or this more vpon mee &c. But heere must that take place which God saith to Iob, chap. 41. 2. who hath preuented me, that I should make an end? all vnder heauen is mine. Wherefore, if Adam continuing Not in his fall and cor∣ruption. still in his innocency could not merit, who is so absurd and repugnant to godlines, yea to the light of reason, that dare ascribe vnto vs so degenerate, any such power? For being corrupt, what can we deserue but the wrath of God, curse, and eternall death? because that staine of sinne wherewith wee are defiled, hath corrupted euen all the most noble powers and faculties both of the diuine soule and humane body; the will, so that now it is subiect and a slaue to vn∣bridled appetite: the vnderstanding caried aside by imagina∣tion; and thus by their inbred corruption, the will is estran∣ged from the loue, and the minde from the knowledge of God, and both the one and the other, turned from their naturall and good estate, to the contrary: from their owne and pro∣per benefit, in the desiring and knowing that which is of∣fensiue to God, and hurtfull to themselues. It is the gene∣rall sentence of God concerning all men, that the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts, are onely euill continually, Gen. 6. 5. and doth represent (as it were) with liuely colours our condition in a table, that we may behold the same Rom. 3. 10. & Eph. 2. 12. wherefore to saue this wretched flesh, the Word became flesh, and, to free vs from the bondage of sinne, hee that knew no sinne was made sinne &c. 2. Cor. 5. 21. yea, the regenerate, and such as are sanctified by the holy Not in his regeneration. Ghost, cannot climbe vp into heauen without Iacobs lad∣der, the helpe of the Lord, the merit of Christ: without which they shall sooner, by their pride loose that benefit of their regeneration, then did Adam the excellent endow∣ments of his creation, at the entising suggestion of his wife Eua. Therefore the Apostle ingenuously acknowledgeth that he liueth not now, but by faith in Christ Gal. 2. 20. and
bewayleth with deepe sighes, sent from the very heart and soule, his manifold sinnes, and miseries Rom. 7. vers. 15. 16. 17. 18. &c. Thirdly, the immediate and next causes of our workes are not altogether spirituall, regenerate and pure, because there dwelleth yet the Iebusite in Ierusalem with the Israe∣lites: in the soule, the olde man with the new: the flesh with the spirit: and the law of sinne with the law of the minde, Rom. 7. 23. & Gal. 5. 17. and no worke, no not of the most holy Saints vpon earth, is wholy free from the spots of corruption; and therefore commeth farre short from deseruing any good at Gods hands; for which cause, it is their humble petition, Lord enter not into iudgement with thy seruaunts, for no flesh can be iustified in thy sight. Psal. 143. 2. Fourthly, the nature and essence of a Bucanus in Institutionibus. merit, requireth three things; first, that the worke whereby wee would deserue any thing, be free without hope of recompence, not due from vs to him, vnto whom it is performed: but whatsoeuer wee doe, is part of that dutie we owe vnto God; For we are his worke∣manship, created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, which God hath prepared that we should walke in them; Eph. 2. 10. and, therefore hath he deliuered vs from the hand and feare of our enemies, that we should serue him in holinesse and righte∣ousnesse all the daies of our life. Luc. 1. 74. wherefore, when we haue done all things that are commanded vs, we must say that we are vnprofitable seruants, for wee haue done no more then we Vae enim nobis, s non facisse∣mus, & hac est vti magna virtus, & sum∣ma securitas, quando & pi viuis, & tamen plus attendis quid desit tibi, quam quae obti∣nuisse videris, oblitus quae re∣tro, & exten∣domite in ante∣riora. Bern. in Psal. qui habi∣tat. serm. 4. ought, Luc. 17. 10. and we are debters Rom. 8. 12. Secondly, the thing offered of vs, must bee answerable in value and dignitie, vnto that which we receiue, but no workes of ours are any way comparable vnto saluation and eternal life which God bestoweth; for these are finite, those infinite, between which, there is no proportion; and the sufferings of this present time are not worthy the glory which shall bee re∣uealed, Rom. 8. 18. (where the Apostle vseth a metaphor or borrowed speech taken from these things which are exa∣mined by the ballance and found to be of like weight,) but all our deeds are too light. And therefore God rich in
mercy hath saued vs Ephes. 2. 8. and, euerlasting life is the free gift of God Rom. 6. 23. and the kingdome which we hereafter shall possesse, is prepared for vs from the begin∣ning of the world, not purchased by our labours and en∣deuours Math. 25. 34. Thirdly, the worke which should bee meritorious, must be both our owne, and beneficiall also to him of whom we would deserue, but we are not fit to thinke a good thought as of our selues, but it is of God. 2. Corinth. 3. 5. and he worketh in vs both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure, Philip. 2. 13. our good reacheth not vnto him, Psal. 16. 2. neither doth he stand in neede of any thing that is ours. Iob 22. 1. Fiftly, (for further proofe, we may adde the consent of the purer times of the Church,) the Fathers in the Coun∣cell held at Confilium Arausicanum sess. 2. can. 19. circa annum Domini 444. vel vt alij 450. Est autem Ar∣ausia vrbs Gal∣liae, prope Aue∣uionem, qui nunc Orenge nominatur. habitum est au∣tem hoc consiliū tempore Theo∣dosij Iunioris, &c. Orenge, decreed against the Pelagians, that though man had continued in that integritie wherein he was created, yet he could not saue himselfe, but by the mer∣cy and help of the Creator. Wherfore, if without the grace of God he cannot keepe saluation giuen, how can he repaire and restore it againe without the same? Therefore, the mercy of God is from euerlasting to euerlasting. For euen the workes of righteousnesse are not sufficient to merit perfect blessed∣nesse, except the mercy of God (in the most holy sancti∣fied will) doe not impute and lay to our charge the sinnes and defects of humane motions; as In Psal 51. Hilarie religiously speaketh. After we be redeemed from all corruption, what remaineth but the crowne of righteousnesse? that indeede remaineth but neither in it nor vnder it must there bee a swelling and proud head, that it may weare the Crowne. Heare attentiuely what God saith, who doth crowne vs with his mercy: For thou wert not worthy whom he should call, nor iustifie being called, nor glorifie being iustified: so Augustinus de verbis Apo∣stoli serm. 22. Augustine. And these are the confessions of the worse and declining ages. Although Gregorius Magnus moral. in Iobum lib. 9. cap. 11. & est insignis locus apud An∣selmum in libro de miseria ho∣minis, sed quū longior esset quamuis lectu digrssimus, eum de industria transribere oisi. I exercise my selfe in the workes of vertue, yet doe I not recouer life by merit, but by pardon: grace can haue no entrance there, where desert before hath taken vp the roome. To end, let the publishers of desert, who despise the oracles
of sacred Scripture, and decline the iudgement of diuine truth, make their appearance before the Tribunal of the Sorban, and giue eare vnto Ethicorum ad Nichomachū lib. 8. cap. 14. Aristotle, who saith, that wee can neuer requite the benefits receiued from God, and our Pa∣rents; which one sentence doth vtterly ouerthrow the san∣die foundation whereupon the merit of condignitie is buil∣ded: and shew, that there is sounder heads in the Philoso∣phers schooles, than in the Popish Church. It were to be wi∣shed, that De Iustifica∣tione l. 5. cap. 7. Bellarmine, who will neither heare the Scripture, nor Aristotle, would heare himselfe speake where he thus concludeth, that in respect of our owne righteousnesse, (or ra∣ther certeinty of our vnrighteousnesse) and danger of vaine∣glory, it is the safest course, to repose our whole confidence in the onely mercy and goodnesse of God. Which one speech of his, is the very sponge, which wipeth out with one blot, the whole Aiax of this Sophister, Tilenus Syn∣tagmatu Theo∣logici parte 2. cap. 48. de meri∣rit operum. painted out and described in those his fiue bookes written of Iustification. Woman behold thy Sonne. The circumstance of time when Christ vttered these words, is very remarkable. For if we consult with humane reason it may seeme that all this which he now doth, should haue beene disposed of and perfected long before: especi∣ally, considering that hee was not onely man, but God also, and therefore knew the time of his passion, which also hee foretold vnto his Disciples, Math. 26. 21. Marc. 8. 31. Luc. 9. 22. But there is in this his deed, some thing which wee ought both to know and follow; for euery action of Christ (in Moralls) is our instruction. Therefore (that now, and not before, he doth manifest his care, for the fafety & protection of his mother, when he was ready to fulfill the decree of God, for the reconciliation of Mankind, to bee made by his death, and not long after gaue vp the Ghost) great consent is there and agreement between the precepts of the first and second Table: yet to be placed in their seue∣rall order: that so the duties towards God must haue the
precedencie, and that follow, which belongeth vnto man, as issuing and flowing from the other. Rollecus in locum Euang. Those things which God commandeth, are carefully  and in the first place to be performed. Therefore so soone as Abraham receiued the charge to sacrifice his sonne, (which was reuealed vnto him in the night) very earely in the morning, hee ariseth and fitteth himselfe to the worke enioyned: Gen. 22. 3. Christ will not haue that disciple whom he calleth, to goe home and celebrate his Fathers fu∣neralls, but presently follow him, Math. 8. 21. And when he sendeth out his Apostles to preach the Gospell, they must make haste, and salute no man by the way Luc. 10. 4. (not thereby forbidding the common offices of ciuilitie, but the hinderance of their calling:) wherfore not vnfitly, doth one of the ancient Iohannes Cli∣machus gradu 4. de obedientia. Diuines call obedience, the graue of our will, the denyall of our minde shewed by the body; and in respect hereof, maketh euery Christian, a holy soul∣dier, whose compleat armour is the shield of faith beating downe all thoughts of disloyaltie; the sword of the spirit, whereby all aduerse suggestions are killed; the brest-plate of mildnesse and patience, by which we receiue contume∣lies, the stinges and darts of reprochfull speeches; the hel∣met of saluation, which is prayer, a spirituall safegard; fur∣thermore he must not be foot-bound, but haue one ready for euery seruice wherein he shall be employed, the other standing stedfast and immoueable, in earnest prayer and humble supplications: and we are therefore bound to fol∣low God commanding, and to obey his will, because we are his seruants. Thus Dauid acknowledgeth, that he would doe his good will, for hee had prepared or pierced his care: Psal. 40 6. which forme of speech is taken from those so∣lemne ceremonies, vsed among the Iewes when one sold and gaue himselfe into the seruice of another; which what they were vnder Moses we may read, Exod. 21. 5. when a seruant louing his Master, and will not goe out free, he is brought to the Iudges, and set to the doore or post, and his Master shall bore his eare through with an awle, and
then he shall serue him for euer; that is the Theodoretus in exod. quaestio∣ne, 45. Paulus Phagius in suis annotationibus ad Chaldeum Paraphrasstem. yeere of Iu∣bily; the boared eare signifying his attention to listen to that which is commanded, and the standing at the doore, where this is done, that he should not go forth without the leaue and permission of his master. For the vse of this doctrine, the religious soule must obserue two things; first, the motiues inducing to this due∣ty, secondly, the signes or tokens manifesting the same. For the Motiues they be diuers. 1 Let vs set before our eyes, Christ Iesus our Lord, who was obedient to the father vnto the death, euen of the Crosse, Philip. 2. 7. and in his Agony prayed with a submission, Father, if it be possible, let this cup passe from mee, but if I must drinke thereof, thy will bee done, Mat. 26. 39. 42. 2. Wee must behold the examples of the Saints; as of Dauid, 2. Sam. 16. 26. For when hee was persecuted and driuen out of his kingdome by his owne sonne, he thus re∣signeth himselfe ouer vnto God, willing the Priests that bare the Arke before him, to carry it againe into the Ci∣ty, not doubting, but if he found fauour in the eyes of the Lord, he would bring him to see it, and the Tabernacle hereof: but if he haue no delight in him, then he should doe, as to himseemeth good, &c. 3. Let vs but looke vpon the Creatures, for they are obedient; the Angels doe his will, Psal. 103. 21. the sea stayeth his waues, and passeth not the appointed bounds, Iob. 38. 11. God speaketh to the Whale, and hee casteth out the runnagate Prophet vpon the land, Ionas, 2, 11. and Psal. 105. 34. in the plagues of Egypt, the Lord spake, and there came Locusts, and darknesse, and tempest, &c. all at the day appointed: yea oftentimes they obey contrary to their nature, the Moone waiteth, standing still, Ioshua, 10. 13. and the Sunne goeth backe, 2. Chron. 32. 31. 4. Heare the blessings promised from mount Gerasimsim; Deut. 28. 1. 2. (for in keeping the commandements, there is great reward: Psal. 19. 11.) and listen to the curses de∣nounced
vpon Mount Ebal. Leuit. 26. 14. besides al which, after this life remaineth eternall punishment for the refra∣ctary and disobebient, 2. Thess. 1. 8. The signes of true obedience, among other, are these. 1. If wee perswade our selues, that we do not therefore please God because we heare him, but that we doe his will, Psal. 119. 11. Ioh. 10. 27. Math. 7. 26. 2. If wee obey in such things, to which no law of man doth enforce vs, and whereof God onely, who is the know∣er of the heart, can be Iudge. Iob. 32. 22. 3. If that thing which is commanded bee contrary and repugnant to nature, and yet notwithstanding, euen in this wee doe obey. So Moses goeth vp to the mount, and con∣tented to see the land of Promise, willingly there dyeth, as the Lord had tolde him, Deut. 34. 5. And Abraham hast∣neth to sacrifice his onely sonne, according to the comman∣dement, Gen. 22. 3. of which action, thus Zeno Bishoppe of Ʋerona, Zeno Vere∣nensis, sermone depatientia. Basilius Isauri∣ensis, sermone de Abrahamo. O strange spectacle, and worthy whereof God should be the beholder, in which it is a hard matter to determine whether the sacrificer, or the sacrifice were more patient: the counte∣nance of neither once changed; the one stretched forth his sword, the other his necke; the one buildeth the Altar, the other brin∣geth the wood, whereon hee was to be burned, and both are ioy∣full: vnder the feare, not of humanity, but of nature it selfe, both shew a wonderfull example of glory; a pearlesse and vn∣matchable patterne of Gods worshippe to succeeding ages. Those who walke after this Rule, peace and mercy is vpon them, and the Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16. Woman behold thy sonne. If wee ballance and weigh considerately in our hearts that which is here spoken, so many words, so many mira∣cles. For could not Christ sooner prouide for his mother? out of all doubt he could, (hee is the Lord of the whole world, the earth is his, and the fulnesse thereof, Psal. 24. 1.) would he not? God forbid, that such a thought should euer
enter into the heart of any Christian, once to conceide a thing so blasphemous: (for now in the extremity of his vnexpected sorrowes and tortures, and that incomprehen∣sible ioy, whereinto hee was presently to enter, and where∣of hee made the thiefe partaker, Luc. 23. 43. is mindfull of her.) But in the secret of this deede, there is an especiall thing, whereof hee would haue vs take knowledge; to witte, this virgin was descended of the bloud royall, the stocke of Dauid, and mother of the sonne of God manifested in the flesh, yet hath not of her owne wherewith to liue, but is poore, and therefore committed to another, by whome necessary sustenance should bee procured. And the truth hereof, how meane her estate was, may thus appeare, both in that shee was despised of all in the time of her trauell, (thrust Saluianus de Gubernatione Dei, lib. 6. & l. 2. contra auari∣tiam. Nulla do∣mus ambitio ni∣sireclinatorium in stabulo; ma∣ter in faeno, fili∣us in praesepio: tale elegit mun∣difabricator hospitium, hu∣iusmodi habuit delicias sacrae virginis puer∣perium; pānicu∣li pro purpura, pro bisso in or∣natu regio laci∣niae cōgeruntur. Cyprianus in sermone de Na∣tiuitate Christi. vp into an outroome a stable, not vouchsafed a more conuenient place in the Inne;) and when shee had brought forth her first borne Infant, wrapped him in rag∣ged cloutes, and laide him in a cratch for want of cradle: Luc. 2. 7. But so it must bee; for hee came into the world, that he might bring man cast out of Paradise for sinne, in∣to his heauenly Country; and when (according to the pre∣script of Moses law) shee was to bee purified, bringeth a payre of young pigeons, (an vndoubted proofe of her po∣uerty) Leuit. 12. 8. For God (hauing respect of the poore) in stead of a Lambe permitted them to offer a payre of tur∣tle doues or yong pigeons. Thus is hee poore in his birth, (Bernardus de natali Domini, serm. 4. & idem apud Anselmū. Tribus exem∣plis viam nobis o stendit, qua eum sequi debemus, 1. Paupertatis, quia in hoc mundo diuitias habe∣re noluit. 2. Humilitatis, quia mundigloriam spreuit, 3. Pattentia, quia mala sustinuit. wrapped in ragges) poore in his life (he had not where to lay his head;) poore in his death (spoyled of his gar∣ments, diuided by the Souldiers, and for which they cast lots.) Thus did he sanctifie holy pouerty. Be of good com∣fort therefore, be of good comfort, such as are borne in the basenesse of pouerty: for God himselfe is poore with you. Doctrine. Pouerty and want of things necessary for the
sustenance of this life, are not of that quality, for which we should eyther be vtterly Optimi viri, spe pauperri∣mi; bonae men∣tis soror pauper∣tas: Petroni us. Arbiter in sa∣tyrico. Aristo∣phanes in Plu∣to. Exemplum in Abdolomino, pud Q Curtiū, lib. 4. causas erudi perse∣quu Aristo∣eles problema∣tum sectione 24 problemate 4. discouraged, or imagine that for these we are lesse in Gods fauour, or that hee will not bee so mercifull vnto vs, as if our case were better in the worlde. Iob is stripped of all, yet beloued of God, who hath of him an especiall care: Iob, 1. 8. None more grieuously distressed then Lazarus in his life time: Angels attend him dead, and place him in Abra∣hams bosome: Luc. 16. 22. Great Elias, (who for the heat of his burning zeale, is said of the ancient, to Epiphamu de vitis Pro∣phetarum. sucke ire out of his mothers breasts; and bridle heauen Basilius Isau∣iensis Homili Elia. with his tongue, so that neyther dew nor rainefell vpon the earth, but ac∣cording to his word) when hee flyeth for feare of Iezabell, breathing out threatnings, is fed with a dayly portion, morning and euening, first by the Rauens, and afterward by a poore widdow, 1. King. 17. 4. 13. Ruth a holy woman, and one of the Grandmothers of Christ, Math. 1. v. 5. con∣strained by famine, goeth dayly to gleane in other mens fields, where she might haue leaue; such was her neede: Ruth, 2. 2. They wandred in sheepes skins and goates skins, destitute, afflicted and tormented, of whom the world was vnworthy: Heb. 11. 37. And Paul the teacher of the Gen∣tiles, complaineth of hunger, of thirst, of cold, of naked∣nesse, 2. Corinth. 11. 38. Wee reade in the Ecclesiasticall hystories, Eusebius hi∣stori Ecclesi∣est. lib. 3. cap. 20 that when the kinsfolke of our Lord Iesus Christ were accused vnto Domitian for to be of the linage of Dauid (which hee desired should be vtterly razed out,) after he saw their hands partly hardned and brawned, part∣ly rent with dayly labour, in plowing and tilling the ground, contemned their poore condition, and they esca∣ped with life. Wee are not to be ouermuch grieued, or storme against God, if it please him to lay pouerty vpon vs, so that we want some things necessary for the maintenance of this life: and meanes to ap∣pease our impatiency herein, be these. First, the condition of that estate, to which wee are all
nature subiect vnto; for wee brought nothing into the world, neither shall wee carry any thing out thereof: 1. Timoth. 6. 7. Iob dispoiled of all his goods, acknowledgeth so much: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither againe: Iob: 1. 21. and some haue obserued from the forme and structure of our bodies, that all the sences are placed in the head, the higher part, (feeling onely excep∣ted, which is dispersed through all the members) as in a tower: the feet are set in the lowest roome; and that as an instruction, teaching that wee should trample vnder feet, and tread vpon earthly things, and looke vp to heauen, and the vnspeakeable treasures there reserued for vs: seeking first the kingdome of God, and his righteousnesse, Math. . 33. For no want or need can exclude vs from grace; yea God hath chosen the poore, Ian. 2. 5, and heareth their desires, Psal. 9. 18. Ecclesiasticus, 21. 5. onely let vs be patient in silence, E∣say, 30. 15. And God will for euer satisfie vs, &c. Luc. 6. 21. The second, take the witnesse of our owne eyes; Let vs looke vpon the Patriarkes and Prophets: which of them all did ouerflow in wealth and abundance? Iacob when he wandreth from his fathers house, hath the earth for his bed, a stone for a pillow, and heauen for his couering, Gen. 28. 11. Those vpon whom God set his loue, went vp and downe in the vast deserts and wildernesse out of the way, and found no City to dwell in, but hungry and thirsty, their soule fainted in them, Psal. 107. v. 4. 5. Another vse of this doctrine; and that is generall, not to thinke it a strange thing, for the fiery trial, which is amongst vs to proue vs, as though some new thing had come vpon vs, 1. Pet. 4. 12. in which Nicholaus de Clmangijs de fructum duersarum. place of the Apostle, as else where in Scrip∣ture, tribulation is signified vnder the name of fire, for the like and commendable effects that are found in them: first, it is the property of fire to mount aloft, and ascend to his own Region: and tribulation rayseth the soule, lying groueling vpon earth: lifteth it vp vnto the Lord, and heauen from
which it had the originall. 2. Fire heateth and enflameth, & afflictions kindleth the heate of the Creator, in a cold and fainting soule. Thirdly, fire shineth, and giueth light in dark∣nesse. so trouble and calamity is the wholesome eye-salue to cure the dimnesse of our sight: which the Angell of the Church of Laodicia is aduised to buye, that hee may see: A∣poc. 3. 18. And it seemed that Nebuchadnetzar vsed this medecine, who for his exceeding pride was turned from a man into a beast, and lost the eyes of his mind, but reco∣uered it after long time againe, and then could looke vp in∣to heauen, and giue thanks vnto the most high, and prayse and honour him who liueth for euer: Dan. 4. 31. Fourth∣ly, the quality of fire is to melt and make soft things that are hard: and the Spouse, Cant. 5. 6. sayeth thus, my heart was melted when my beloued spake: now God speaketh vnto vs by tribulation, not by words, but by roddes; and those hearts which are not mollified by this fire, are altogether clay, which is hardned with heat. Fiftly, fire trieth the Potters vessels, and make them strong; and to this purpose is that of the Wise-man, the furnace proueth the Potters vessell, ten∣tation the righteous. And therefore not vnfitly stiled fire, in respect of those, & other the like effects it worketh in son∣dry men, as fire doth vpon sundry matters, &c. Woman behold thy Sonne. The words are in meaning this much; this my disciple shall take care of thee, as if he were thine owne sonne; and therefore he saith not, behold thy guardian, or defendor, but thy sonne; and this he speaketh, for her further comfort: thou hast now one sonne dying, and, ready to giue vp the ghost, taken from thee: but another left; this in care and du∣tie: him in nature. God according to the measure of affliction sendeth the  answerable measure of comfort, the rules whereof are these. That of Dauid, In the multitude of the thoughts of mine heart,
thy comforts haue reioyced my soule Psal. 94. 19. Another of Saint Paules, As the sufferings of Christ abounded in vs, so our consolation aboundeth through Christ, 2. Corinth. 1. 5. And for examples, Iacob is consumed with griefe, for want of his sonne Ioseph, whom he supposed to be deuoured of some euill beast, (for so the rest of his children would haue per∣swaded him) reioyceth at the newes brought that he was li∣uing: made haste to goe downe into Aegypt to see him, Gen. 37. 34. & 45. 28. The Israelites for a long time groane vnder the heauy yoke of bondage; but when the determi∣ned foure hundred and thirty yeares are fulfilled, they come forth with triumph out of the land of their captiuitie, Exod. 12. 41. Ioseph is sold by his brethren vnto the Isma∣lites, of them brought into Aegypt, and there bought of Putiphar, and in his house accused of his Mistris, who dayly entised him vnto vncleane lust, and yet laid to his charge that he would haue offered her violence, (when he would not yeeld to her vnchast allurements:) is cast into prison, hardly entreated, so that the iron pierced through his soule, Psal. 105. 18. (for hee was held in fetters thirteene yeeres, seing and suffering many extremities;) at the last is set free, interpreteth the Kings dreames, is exalted to honour; for his iron chaine receiueth one of gold: for the cloake left behind in the escape from his wanton mistris, a vesture of silke; for the loathsome filthinesse of the prison, the high digni∣tie of the gouernment; is made Viceroy of the king∣dome, fourescore yeares managing all the affaires of the estate: so that his glory did six times Hee liued 110. yeeres; is sold when he is 17. yeere old, when 30. standeth be∣fore Pharaoh, and interpre∣teth his dreames: so his bondage was 13. yeeres his honor 80▪ and six times 13. make 78. exceed his mi∣serie, compare Gen. 37. 2. & 2. 28. & 41. 46. & 50. 22. Iob after the rifling of his goods, the driuing away of his cat∣tell, the murthering of his seruants, the crushing in pieces of his children (by the ruine of his house, while they were banquetting) and thesmiting of his body with biles, from the crowne of the head to the Hanc Iobi ca∣lamitatem duo∣decim menses perdurasse tra∣dunt Iudaei in Sedar Otani siue Chronico maiorum. sole of the foot, is blessed of God with doubled riches, plentifull issue, length of daies, & the latter end is more happy thē the beginning. Iob 42. 12. Let vs cast our care vpon God, he careth for vs, 1. Pet. 5. 7. Ʋse.
for though great be the troubles of the righteous, yet the Lord will deliuer him out of them all. Psal. 34. 19. and, doe one of these things for vs, either grant full and perfect deliuerance from all euill, (as he did the three children, Dn. 3. 26.) or mitigate the sharpnesse of the tryall: (so he delt with the Is∣raelites in the captiuitie of Babilon, and sent his Prophets to comfort them, Ezech. 36. 8.) or susteine them by the in∣ward grace of his holy spirit, (as he did Stephen, in the midst of that deadly and Per tot lpides Perae cou∣gitur vi. rator lib. 1. in Acta Apo∣stolorum. stony shower, Act. 7. 56. who saw Christ standing at the right hand of the Father to behold his Ambrsius epistolarum lib. 10. epist. 82. Augustinus quaest. 88. in nouum Testa∣mtum. champion, and ready to crowne his Martyr.) and ath promised, that he will gratiously be present with all tha are his: so that if they passe through the waters, the waters shall not ouerwhelm them, if they walke through the fire, they shall not be burnt, neither shall it kindle vpon them, Esay 43. 2. Wherefore let vs onely commend vnto him our cause by earnest and humble prayer, who is able to doe ex∣ceeding abndantly aboue all that we aske or thinke, according to the power which worketh in vs. Eph. 3. 20. Then said He to the Disciple: Behold thy Mother. This Disciple is Iohn, who leaned De veterum accumbendi mo∣re vide Ciacco∣nium de Tricli∣nio. & luij Vrsini ad um appendiem. & Hyronimum Mercurialem de arte Gymna∣stica lib. 1. ap. 11. vpon Christs breast at his last supper, and from thence drew the heauenly wa∣ters of sauing knowledge: and now hath another preroga∣tiue granted him. Neither did Christ this because he dis∣trusted his other Apostles, or doubted either of their loue or faithfulnesse towards him: but now, (such was their in∣firmitie,) they all fled, this only persuered and followed him euen vnto the death; and therefore committeth the care to prouide for his Mother, to him standing by the Crosse. They onely are to be accompted true friends, in whom  we may repose our confidence; which continue stedfast, in the most distressed . times of our estate. The poore is ha∣ted of his owne neighbour, but the friends of the rich are
many Prou. 14. 20. It was a wise sentence of the Ancient, Prosperitie getteth, aduersitie proueth friends; more worship the Sunne rising then setting. Of this number was that craftie Ziba, who to curry fauour with Dauid, basely forsooke his Master Mephibosheth, and falsely accused him, 2. Sam. 16. 1. and those, who sometime dazeled with the shining brightnesse of Hamans aduancement, honored him with all respectiue care; so soone as they perceiued the King of∣fended, no one became a suiter for his pardon, but all in word and deed furthered his ouerthrow; and, after the manner of the Persians, couered his face (a Drusiu in locum. forerunning ceremonie of his death) Hester 7. 8. 9. But what neede I stand to make this manifest by gray-headed testimonie of antiqùitie? there is no age, but will afford more then suffici∣ent proofe. Those who pulled the boughes from the trees, spred their garments vpon the ground, enterteined Christ entering into Ierusalem with all obseruance, (crying Hosanna in the most highest, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord, Matth. 21. 8. 9) the next day cry louder, crucifie him, crucifie him: and instantly desire of Pilate, that Barrabas a thiefe, (who for raysing an insurrection and committing murther, was cast into prison,) might bee deliuered Luke 23. 19. Be not too hastie to entertaine friendship with any: looke di∣ligently Ʋse. whom thou mayest loue; trust after try all; for there be many lurking holes, and secret corners in mens mindes; many . sorts of friends, as the Wiseman distinguisheth of them. For First, there is a time-seruing friend, who like the Swallow will in the summer of thy fortunes cherish himselfe in the heate thereof, but in the cold of winter, will treacherously forsake thee; neuer Isodorus de summo bono lib. 3. cap. 29. longer continuing then hee may get some gaine. Secondly, many be false hearted friends; and these will counterfet loue, onely to this end and intendment, that so they may get knowledge of thy Scire vlunt secreta domus at{que} inde timeri. secrets, and by this means keepe thee in awe, and hurt at their pleasure; effecting that
by close and secret craft, which they neuer could bring to passe by force and violence. Thirdly, there is a masked counterfeit: whose plots are for the aduancement of himselfe, and increase of his owne gaine, and murdereth vnder the visard of dutifull kindnes; such an one is all lyme, his wordes are lyme, his gestures, his countenance: riseth by thy fall, and profiteth by thy losse. This and much more you may read Ecclesiast. 6. ver. 7. 8. 9. &c. Therefore it is good, not to be too hastie, to beleeue euery one, that seemeth smooth and perfectly comple∣mentall; for there be but a few, who when they salute thee with the tongue, All haile, say in their hearts, take heed: poyson is neuer giuen but with some pleasing and sweet mixture; wickednesse is committed, but vnder pretence of vertue; and therefore it standeth men in hand, to be heed∣fully-warie, and circumspect: which the Apostle long be∣fore prophesied of; that they should bee euill, and dange∣rous times, because of men wanting naturall affection, truce-breakers, hauing the shew of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof. 2 Timoth. 3. 4. 5. And from that hower the Disciple tooke her home vnto him. In this place is set downe the euent, and effect of Christs speech, which is the ready and prompt obedience of the Dis∣ciple; and in this clause euery word hath his especiall and particular force. For first herein is the deed it selfe, (Hee tooke her.) Secondly, the alacritie to performe the com∣mandement giuen, (the same hower) presently. Thirdly, the care and diligence vsed (vnto his owne▪) It is idle, and without any sure ground, that some trifle and confidently affirme, concerning the great wealth of Iohn. For it is not heere said that he tooke the virgin into his house, but into his owne; to make prouision for her as he was able, in which the great loue and faith of the Apostle is manifest. For he excuseth not himselfe, from the taking vpon him this bur∣den,
vnder the pretence of want, and disabilitie to vndergoe the same: neither doth he cast doubts, how or by what means he should maintaine her, but obeyeth the commandement giuen, nothing doubting but that God will be present and a helper. Those who vndertake any worke imposed of God, or Doctrine▪ are employed in any kind of life acceptable and approued vnto him, are no way to doubt of helpe. For his eye of prouidence, shall euer watch ouer them. Elias taketh his iourney at the appointment of God, the Rauens (who vn∣naturally hate their Isidorus Pelu∣siot lib. 4. epist. 43. owne brood) morning and euening bring him bread and flesh, 1. King. 17. 5. 6. Daniel and his fellowes refusing to eat of the portion allowed from the Kings table, (partly, because it was consecrated to Idols, partly, for that they were such meates as were forbidden the Israelites to eat of,) his countenance appeared fairer, and he better liking with pulse and water, then the rest of the children which did eat the portion of the Kings meate, and dranke wine: Dan. 1. 12. 15. And the widow of Sarep∣ta, in that long continued famine of three yeares and a halfe, Luke 4. 15. hath abundantly for her selfe and hers; for neither did the little meale in the barrell, nor oyle in the cruse waste in all that time, vntill the Lord sent plenty. 1 King. 17. 11. 16. But what doe I reckon vp these ancient testimonies? God at no time hath left himselfe without wit∣nesse in doing good Act. 17. 17. Aretius, a Problematum Theologicoru part. 2. loc. 119. Anno Domini 1570. 14. die Iunij. Diuine of good note, doth confidently affirme, that in some places of Austria and Bauaria, it rained wheate, which the people gathered and made therof wholesome bread. And when Rochell was besieged, in the heat of the ciuill warres in France, raised against the professors of the reformed Re∣ligion, and their store began to faile; miraculously a cer∣teine Anno Do. 1573. histori de statu religio∣nis & Reip. in regn Gal∣liae. lib. 11. sub Carlo 9. kinde of fish euery day in great multitudes cast themselues vpon that shore; which so soone as the Kings power was remoued, departed also, and afterward were not seene there. And thus is fulfilled that of the Prophet, No∣thing wanting to them that feare God: the Lyons doe lacke and
suffer hunger, but those that doe seeke the Lord, shall want no good thing. Psal. 34. 9. 10. We may then from hence learne, not to bee dismayed and too much cast downe, in the straitest and hardest times. And this is a doctrine most profitable in euery condition of life; for our affections are vehement, fierce and vnruly: neither do we any thing (for the most part) but vpon assurednesse of good hope; now hope maketh the minde alwaies doubt∣full: from whence feare riseth and distrust. But against this immoderate care (so we vse honest and lawfull meanes for to procure our good, because we are to labour, and diffidence not diligence is forbidden) our blessed Sauiour doth stren∣then vs by many perswasiue arguments Matth. 6 26. &c. of which the first is taken by comparison from the greater to the  vitae dtr, & dator esae est. Prudenius in Psych mchia, in auitiae & largstatis pg∣na. lesse, The life is more than meate, God hath giuen that: therefore, he will not deny this. The second, from the foules of the aire, and in particular of the Rauens, Luk. 12. 14 Dauid Psal. 147. 9. and Iob 9. 3. for these when they haue hatched their yoong, neglect to Gregorius Magnus moral. lib. 30. cap. 8. Genebrardus in Psal 147. Pierius hyrgli∣phic lib. 23. sed vesimiltor est op Vale∣ de sacra phi∣losopia cap. 55. & sangi Franz ij in hi∣storia animali sacra. parte 2. cap. 14. qui tradnt coros vi primum volandi potest as est, pulls sus nido ijcere, qui quod infirm sint, nil possunt aliud qm hu & il c vaganes, querislos m res in are sundere: quod nhil aliud est, qum ipsum rrum on pantm, Dem nara invcare. Ari∣stoteles de hst. anm lib. 9. cap. 31. feed them, vntill they bee ethered and wax blacke like themselues: in the meane time they are nourished either with the deaw from heauen, or the flyes which houer about them, or of wormes which breed of that heape of matter which their dams haue gathered together in the nest, before they left them. The third is from an impossibilitie; thus, None by all his labour and industry, can adde any thing to the stature of his bo∣dy; therefore not to the nourishment. Nourishment is ordey∣ned for the Cub meminit, non quasi nos, aut palmam, aut di∣gitump ssemus adijcere, sed quis mnsura hominis rspondet quadruplae proporimi cubiti eius. Est autem cubitus, interuallum à flexu bij, ad supremm pariém medij diiti: & si quis, maximè indignetur, mrmrt, & qutidiana itud se crucit, nih tamen : cut im rius & de modus mensurae in statura cui attributus est: ita certam mensurā fortunae & successus in alijs nego defi Dus ra quam progrdi non pot, vtu . Enthimius. encrease and growth of the body; then, if we
cannot procure or further this; neither is the other in our power. Therefore the care of both is to be left vnto him, who made the body, and determined it should be of such a bignesse. The fourth, is framed from the example of the flowers, and by name, the lillies: whose naturall beauty without any labour of theirs, doth farre exceed the glory of Salomon, wherein was wanting nothing that either arte or industry could afford: now, if the flowers, Quod sericū? quae Reg pur∣pura? quae pi∣ctura, textura potest floribus comparari? quid ita rubet vt Ro∣sa? quid ita candet vt Liū? Hieronymus. grasse, and hearbs, which to day are greene, to morrow cast into the furnace, are so ador∣ned of God it cannot be, that the heauenly Father should be care∣lesse, to cloth men, his children. The fift, This torturing care for foode and rayment, is hea∣thnish. For the Gentiles who haue no hope of a better life, nor looke for the ioyes of the world to come, put their hap∣pines in these temporall things, and (according to the stile of the holy Ghost,) are men of this world, Psal. 17. 14. but Christians seeke for things to come, Heb. 13. 14. and know that the fashion of this world passeth away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. and, that they brought nothing into the world, 1. Tim. 6. 7. neither, when they die, shall they carry any thing from thence. Psal. 49. 18. The sixt is deduced from the prouidence and foreknowledge of God our eternal Father. He is a Father therfore will; heauen∣ly, therefore can supply our wants. For this is an infallible truth, that God who knoweth and made nature, vnderstan∣deth our necessities, farre better then we our selues, who are pinched with them. And therfore (as we learne of Moses, in his records of antiquitie) before he created man, he framed the whole world, & euery Nazimzenus in oratione de Tlogi. Nssnus de o∣pificio homini. part therof, and furnished them with their seuerall endowments; and then, after the pallace was builded seated the King therin, whom he had fashioned after his owne image, preparing all things Philo Iudus de mundi fa∣brica. necessary, for his vse and delight. And therefore he will neuer be defectiue in any thing belonging to the good of those that are his, since he had such a respect of them, while they were yet hidden in Adams loynes. Wherefore, let vs commit our wayes vnto him, &c. Psal. 37. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 7. he careth for vs.
THE THIRD VVORD, A WORD of Loue, Grace and Comfort. LVKE, 23. VER. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. And one of the euill doers which were hanged, rayled on him, saying, If thou be that Christ, saue thy selfe and vs; but the other answered, and rebuked him saying; Fearest thou not God, seeing thou art in the same con∣demnation? we are indeed righteously here, for we re∣ceiue things worthy of that we haue done; but this man hath done nothing amisse. And he said vnto Ie∣sus, Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome: Then said Iesus vnto him, Verily I say vnto thee, to day shalt thou be with me in Para∣dise. ANALYSIS. THis is the third Word of Christ. In which are to be obserued the speech or word it selfe, and certaine antecedents; and these are things spoken: that is to say, the diffe∣rent speeches of the two theeues, who were crucified together with him: One, of him hanging at the left hand, which is contumelious and
reproachfull; in it these particulars, 1. the fact (hee rayled on him) 2. the forme of his reproach (if thou bee sonne of God, saue thy selfe and vs:) The other is the speech of the thiefe vpon the right hand, partly prehensiue of his fellow, (sharpely reprouing his impudent sawcinesse; and in it are manifestly shewed, his faith and obedience: his obedi∣ence first appeared in checking his fellow (fearest not thou God?) 2. in the acknowledgement of his own sinne, (we are indeed right∣ly heere) and this is illustrated from the cause, wherein his patience is shewed (for we receiue things worthy of that we haue done) and by way of opposition, in respect of Christ, (but this man hath done nothing amisse) 2. his faith, for hee con∣fesseth Christ in this wofull plight to be a Lord, (Lord re∣member me) partly petitory, desiring helpe and mercy of Christ (Remember me) enlarged by the circumstance of time, (when thou commest into thy Kingdome.) The second generall point, is the word it selfe, and the answere of Christ made. In which is a promise consolatory, (Thou shalt be in Paradise,) and this laide forth, first from the time and speedy perfor∣mance thereof (To day) 2. from the company or society which he shall enioy there (with mee.) 3. from the certainety, for the promise is confirmed by an oath, (verily, I say vnto thee) And this is the summe of the whole. And one of the euill doers which were hanged, rayled on him, &c. Before I come in particular to open these words, a doubt is to bee remoued. For S. Math. 27. 44. & Marc. 15. 32. doe constantly affirme, that both the theeues reproached Christ. But wee may thus answere, that this is spoken by a Figure, which is called of the learned Synecdoche, when one number is put for another, the plurall for the singu∣lar; which manner of speech is very frequent, and often v∣sed in the Scripture. As when Paul sayth; They shutte the mouthes of the Lyons. Heb. 11. 33. it is to bee vnderstood of Daniel alone; So when Peter knocked at the dore they
opened; Rhode in the act, the rest (it may be) by the com∣mandement, Act. 12. 16. And Ipth is buried in the Cities of Gilead, that is, in one of them: for in a many at the same time, he could not: Iudge 12. 7. So Luke here expoundeth Mathew and Marke. Or wee may say (which is S. In Luc. cap. 23. & potuit sic fuisse in princ∣pio, sd vnus conuersusst, Ioh. Gorson in Monotessaro. vel Hebraismus tantem est, vt illud Ionae ca. 1. 6. Drusius Hbraicarum, quae stionum, l. 1. quaest. 5. Ambrose his iudgement) there is to be vnderstood a change of time; that first both the theeues ayled, but one sodainely was conuerted, and did repent. Wee reade in the Gospell, that many Primumge∣mu fuit seden∣tium, qui um obseruabant, secundum prae∣tereuntium qui blasphemabant Trtium sacer∣dotum & seni∣orum. Quartum pen∣dentium latro∣num: udol∣us de i a Christi, parte 2. cap. 63. reuiled Christ, and rayled on him most biterly: as the passers by, who nodded their heades and said, ah thou that destroiest the temple, and buildest it in three dayes, saue thy selfe; if thou bee the sonne of God, come downe from the Crosse. The chiefe Priestes, Scribes, Elders and Pharesies in this manner, he saued others and cannot saue himselfe, If hee be the King of Israel, let him come downe, and wee will belieue in him; he beleeued in God, let him deliuer him, if he will haue him. So now this thiefe, If thou be that Christ, saue thy selfe and vs: Math. 27. 39. 40. &c Marc. 15. 29. 30. And all this they said, supposing it impossible to be done; and that only vp∣on none other ground, but reasoning from his present e∣state, hanging now vpon the Crosse, in shame and extream torture; and therefore concluded hee could not bee that Christ, sent of God to saue others. But herein they were farre mistaken, and greatly erred; for that Crosse was the on∣ly way to obtaine perfect glory and true happinesse; Then did he destroy the Temple, that he might rayse it vp again in three dayes, by his glorious resurrection, 1. Corint. 15. 4. Then did Christ truely execute his Sacerdotall office, (as a Priest offering his body vpon the Altar of the Crosse: 1. Pet. 2. 24.) yea▪ by the Crosse vpon the Crosse, triumph o∣uer his enemies, Coloss. 2. 14. and by death ouercame him, (that is the Deuill) who had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. Thus it may be apparant, how wretched men are blinde to iudge aright of this mystery of the Cosse. Wee must not then determine of spirituall things ac∣cording to humane reason: for as the eyes of an Ole  are dazeled with the brightnesse of the Sunne: so is our
vnderstanding in the apprehension of matterscelestiall. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse vnto him, neyther can hee know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1. Corinth. 2. 14. So the Iewes passe their iudgement of Christ, (as the Prophet foretolde it should be:) that he was despised and reiected of men, that he was a man of sorrowes, and had experience of infirmities; And they hid their faces from him, that he was despised, and esteemed him not, but deemed him pla∣gued and smitten of God, Esay 53. 3. & 4. Iobs friends con∣demne him for an hypocrite, and dissembler, when they see his afflicted estate, and peremptorily affirme, that his children oppressed with the ruine of the house (wherin they banquetted) were iustly sent into the place of their iniqui∣ty, Iob, 8. 4. but God acquiteth them of this imputation, and giueth a very honourable testimony of Iobs vpright∣nesse, cap. 42. 7. Neither is it to be maruelled at, that these men should be so grossely mistaken, with whom that axi∣ome Plinius secundus. goeth for currant, that those are no better then fooles who belieue such things as be aboue the ordinary course of nature▪ and vnto which reason cannot attaine. The Apostles premonition: Beware lest there bee any man that spoile you through Philosophy, and vaine deceit, Coloss. 2. 8. and bring into captiuity euery thought to the obedience of Christ, 2. Corinth. 10. 5. Chrisostom in cap. 11. ad Rom. A mystery is a thing vnknowne, and vnutterable, full of wonder, and of a Iustinus Martyr, in ex∣positione fid, de Trinitae. higher nature, then can by any humane vnderstanding or reason bee appre∣hended: and therefore as men of right minde doe take hold of hote yron with tongs, not with their hands: so the godly doe embrace the determination of the Church, not by the scantling of their own capacity, but the light of faith; Wherefore wee may not iudge sinisterly or euill of any in  Chrysostous regard of the outward things of this world, for the best mē for the most part find the worst entertainement here. Righte∣ous Abel is murthered of reprobate Caine; hee flourisheth, buildeth Cities, inuenteth Artes, and wanteth nothing: Gen. 4. 17. 18. 19. &c. Israel groneth vnder the heauy yoke
of bondage in Egypt: Pharaoh liueth at ease, and enioyeth all kind of pleasure, Exod. 1. 10. 14. Innocent Naboth is falsly accused, and vniustly condemned, 1. King. 21. 12. 13. While Herodias daughter danceth (abloudy Idem Hemi∣lia . whelpe of a cruell Lionesse) the . & Basi∣lius Isauriensis homilia. . deuill leading the round, Iohn Bap∣tist, the bright shining light of the world, is beheaded in prison, Math. 14. 10. And oftentimes so grieuous and af∣flicted is the estate of the Saints on earth, that if there were not another life beside this, then were they of all men most mi∣serable, 1. Corinth. 15. 19. but God hath prepared Augustin de Ciuitate D. lib. 1. cap. 8. for them good things, whereof the wicked shall neuer be partakers; and then shall they know by happy experience, that this light affliction which is for a moment, causeth a farre more ex∣cellent and eternall weight of glory: 2. Corinth. 4. 17. Thus the Apostle opposeth present things to future: a moment, to aeternity: lightnesse to weight; affliction to glory, for which cause wee must by faith, hope, & patience willingly beare and sustaine, and ouercome all those euils and tribulations which are incident to our calling; for the sufferings of this k Rollocus in cap. 19. Iohannis time are not worthy the glory which shall be reueiled: Rom. 8. 18. And one of the euill doers which were hanged, rayled on him. If we weigh this diligently, we shall finde that whatso∣euer now is obiected vnto Christ, both by others and this gracelesse theefe, is nothing else but the same, whereof hee was accused, and for which condemned, and at the last nay∣led to the Crosse. For Math. 27. 40. thus they malitiou∣sly spake vnto him: Thou that destroiest the Temple, and buil∣dest it againe, if thou be the sonne of God, saue thy selfe and come downe: And this is that which the Iewes doe so vehement∣ly enforce before Plate, that they haue a law, by which he is to be put to death, who maketh himselfe the son of God, Iohn 19. 7. Bu for their sakes, and at their instance, he was crucified, and did vndergoe those extreame torments; then
this might haue contented them who had obteined their desires; but the death of the holy and innocent cannot quench the vnsatiable thirst of bloud, which is the enemies of Christ, and his grace; yea they neuer cease to teare them with scornings and reproches: that if it were possible, they would not destroy the body alone, but driue the soule into dispaire, yea after death they spare not to persecute their very ashes and bones: so bitter, so vnappeasable is their hatred. What doctrine is from hence to bee gathered, and the vse we are to make thereof is, before mentioned in the first word of Christ, praying for his enemies. And one of the euill doers that were hanged, reuiled him, saying, If thou be Christ, saue thy selfe and vs. This blaspheming thiefe is an example of a man, whose heart is hardened, and is not amended by any corrections of God, but becommeth worse; such were the Iews of whom the Lord complaineth, the people returneth not vnto him that smiteth them, neyther doe they seeke the Lord of hostes, Osea, 9. 13. And Ieremy, cap. 5. 3 speaketh thus, Oh Lord thou hast smitten them, but they haue not sorrowed, thou hast consumed them, but they haue refused to receiue correction, &c. So by Hippcrates Aphoris. lib. 2. Aphrismo 6. Galenus ratio∣nem reddit in suis ad eu commentarijs Cornelius Cel∣sus, lib. 2. cap. 7. degrees God proceedeth to punishment, and by them the sinne is encreased, and the offenders brought to insensibi∣lity and want of feeling. For as the cause of the patient, or sicke man is desperate, who feeleth not the force and vi∣olence of his disease: so they are neere to the death of the soule, who perceiueth not the rods of God when he striketh. And there is in the reproach of this thiefe, somewhat speciall and proper aboue the rest, when hee thus speaketh (if thou be Christ) saue thy selfe and vs, me and my fellow; in mea∣ning thus much: Shew forth now thy power that we may haue triall thereof, by which hitherto thhast helped many. And herein bewrayeth his impatien no abiding the sharpenesse of the punishment, from which he would be
freede, and breaketh forth into open blasphemy, as though God could not deliuer him: therefore saith, if thou bee that Christ, the annointed, and sent of the father to saue mankind, why then doe so much for thy selfe and for vs. But hee vnderstandeth not, that Christ must suffer those things, and so enter into glory, and open the gates of hea∣uen; that those who belong to him, may enter thereinto: no more then did the chiefe of the Priestes, Scribes and Pharesies, who scoffed at him, and tauntingly willed, if he be the King of Israel, that he should then come downe now from the Crosse, & they would belieue in him: Mat. 27. 41. 42. But this is the voyce of the sonnes of the diuell, and here∣in follow their Father, whose request this was (when in the Chrysostomu de passione. wildernes he tempted him) if thou be the sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe headlong. But Christ did a greater matter then this, when he arose from the dead, yet they be∣lieued not, but with bribing the souldiers, in a manner bought their infidelity. And therfore Christ did not descend from the Crosse, because hee came into the world to bee crucified. And thus thou hast forgotten (O Iew) what thou hast heard, that the Lord raigned from the tree, and doest de∣ny thy King, because he tarried Iustinus Martyr in Di∣alogocum Try∣phone Iudaeo, fals accusat Iu∣daeos, quod ex Psalmo 95. secundum 70 In∣terpretum ver∣sionem: eraserūt illa verba, à lig∣no , & prodicite in Gentibus Dominus reg∣nauit à ligno: legunt mutila∣tedicite in Gentibus Do∣minus regnauit: reliqua omit∣tents. vpon the tree, and did not refuse the title of his Kingdome, nor lay downe the scep∣ter of his Empire, the Bernardus in Dominica san∣cta Paschae de signaculis. gouernement is vpon his shoulder, E∣say, 9 6. And if hee had come downe from the Crosse, he had then saued none; Augustinu tract at. 37. in Iohanis Euan∣gellum. and therefore he continued there, leauing the same when it was his pleasure. For what great thing had it beene for him to come from the Crosse, who was able to come out of the graue? if he himselfe had not beene willing, hee could not haue suffered: if that bloude of his had not beene shed, the world had not beene rede∣med. Let vs therefore be thankefull to the power of his Deity, and the compassion of his infirmity, and to his se∣cret working, which the Iewes knew not. Calam and tribulations, except God vouchsafe to sactifie theto men (for vpon that word must the ac∣cent beey breake forth into blasphemy, eyther a∣gainst
his power, or mercy. Against his mercy; so Cain cited, arraigned, examined, convicted and condemned, for the vnnaturall murther of his brother, despaired of pardon, sup∣posing his sinne to be greater then could be forgiuen, Gen. 4. 13. And Saul inclosed in a streight, and seeing no way to escape from his enemies, falleth vpon his sword, and is his owne vntimely executioner 1. Sam. 31. 4. Idas when hee knew what hee had done, in betraying innocent bloud, hangeth himselfe hopelesse of mercy, Act. 1. 18. Caium terrā{que} perosus, Inr vtrum{que} prit. Arator hisor. Apsiol. lib. 1. Against his power, and of this we haue an example in that Prince, who in the time of a long and grieuous famine, when the Prophet promised abundance, and plenty of food, distru∣sted of the performance, though God should make windowes in heauen. 2. King. 7. 2. and the Iewes (as though the Lord had not been able to bring them from captiuitie, into their owne country againe,) contrary to the expresse prohibitiue commandement, fearefull and dismayed, flie into Aegypt for refuge and safety; and therefore against them is a hea∣uie iudgement denounced. Ier. 43. 7. 11. 12. Wherfore let vs entreat God by earnest and humble prayer, Ʋse. that hee would make his rods and chastisements profitable vnto vs. Augustinus in Enchiri cap. 96. For he is so good, that he would suffer no euill, except he were so almighty and of such souereigne power, that hee were able to bring good out of euill. Therfore, for the che∣rishing of Christian patience in our hearts, these few re∣membrances may be effectuall. First, we must be resolued, and perswaded that whatsoeuer doth befall vs, is before decreed and determined of God. Ther∣fore Dauid, when Shemei ayled vpon him, and Abishai would be reuenged, thus represseth his purposed intende∣ment, God hath bidden him curse Dauid, and who shall then say, why doest thou so? 2. Sam. 16. 10. Secondly, wee are to thinke, that the greatest extremitie we suffer, is far lesse then our desert; for the mercifull Lord would rather spare, then punish; he dealeth nowith vs accor∣ding to our sinnes, neither rewardeth vs accord to our iniqui∣ties. Psal. 103. 10. wherefore when A reenteth
(though but as an hypocrite,) deserued vengance is defer∣red, 1. King. 21. 29. and the Lord mitigating the sharpenes of the sentence against the house of Eli, (least his eyes should faile, and his heart bee discomfited) addeth this clause of mercy, neuerthelesse I will not destroy euery one of thine from mine Altar, 1. Sam. 2. 33. For he Nicephorus Calistus lib. 17. cap. 3. Eagrius hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 7. cap. 6. whetteth the sword of his anger with the oyle of mercy; he is good and mer∣cifull and of great kindnesse Psal. 76. 5. slow to anger, and re∣penteth him of the euill, Ioel. 2. 13. Thirdly, this is stedfastly to bee held, that vnto such as doe belong vnto him, God turneth all things to good, Rom. 8. 28. And therefore the Prophet acknowledgeth, It is good for mee O Lord that I haue beene afflicted. Psal. 119. 71. and the truth hereof the faithfull haue alwaies found by happy experience. For when hee sendeth calamities, by them, either their dull prayers are whetted, (and so is made a more deuout dependance vpon God) 2. Chron. 33. 13. or sinne is repressed, (for our proud flesh by such sharpe and cor∣rosiue salt is to be abated) 2. Corinth. 12. 7. or our constancie is at the last crowned (ob 42. 10.) Blessed therefore are they that be tempted: and such ought to reioyce, though for a season they be in a heauinesse; that the tryall of their faith being farre more precious then gold that perisheth (though it be tryed with fire,) may be found to their praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Iesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 4. But the other answered, and rebuked him saying, fearest thou not God seeing thou art in the same con∣demnation? Hitherto something hath been spoken of the blasphe∣ming thiefe, hanging at the left side of Christ; now we are to handle the words of the holy and repentant thiefe, cruci∣fied on his right hand: who brake not forth into the like offence, with his fellow, neither was prouoked by the ma∣nifold example and number of reuilers, or enraged with the rigor and grieuousnesse of his punishment, but repre∣hendeth
him, and laboureth to bring him to repentance. And herein sheweth Christian charitie, reprouing his fel∣low Ioh. Hussus de passione Christi ex quatuor Euangelistis. offendor: and (as beseemed the witnesse of Christ) professed his true faith in a Arnoldus Carnotensis de septem vltimis Domini verbis. publike auditory; and by a new kinde of profession, (vnmindfull of his owne torment) disputed with that blasphemer, of righteousnesse and the feare of God, &c. The wronges and iniuries done to God, are by no means  sufferable to passe vncontrouled. It is a Christians duety x Aquinas 2ae. 2ae. q. 33. artic. 2. Danaeus Ethices Christianae lib. 3. cap. 6. Ioh. Gersen in tractatu de cor∣reptione prox. sharpely to reproue transgressors. And therefore the pre∣cept, thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shalt plainly rebuke thy neighbor, Leuit. 19. 17. For if the suppling oyle of admonition will not preuaile, to heale the wounded (that is, such as securely goe on in their sinnes) then must we vse sharper medicines, and poure in the wine of compun∣ction. So Moses expostulateth vehemently with Aaron, for making the golden Bernardus in Cantica serm. 44. calfe Exod. 32. 21. Elias is not afraid to set before Achabs eyes, both his exorbitant sinnes, and the heauy wrath and vengeance of God for the same, 1. King. 21. And Iohn the Baptist telleth Herod Antipas bold∣ly, that it was not lawfull for him to haue his brothers wife, Matth. 14. 4. Paul withstandeth Peter to his face, when he dissembled and went not with a right foot De hac Petri reprehensione sunt Augustini & Hieronymi Epistolae. Gal. 2. 14. And there be many weighty causes which may enforce this duty vpon euery Christian. First, the earnest desire and zeale, to aduance, and pre∣serue the glory of God: of which Dauid, the zeale of thy house hath consumed mee, Psal. 69. 9. And Elias, I haue been very zealous for the Lord of hostes, because the children of Is∣rael haue broken thy couenant 1. King. 19. 20. Nehemias re∣buked the Princes and Rulers when they oppressed their brethren with vsurie, and he set a great assembly against them, Neh. 5. 7. Secondly, the profit and benefit arising from thence; for if thy brother heare thee and thy reprehension, thou hast gained him, Math. 18. 15. And in this regard, we are char∣ged, with feare to pull some out of the fire Iude 23. For there
be no bowels of mercy in him, who can weepe for a body from which the soule is departed, and doth not lament that soule which God hath forsaken. Thirdly, the danger of neglect in this case; and that both in the offendor, and the sparer to reproue. For the sparer is hereby made, through his conniuencie, an accessarie to the transgressor, and to all the Agapetus in Capitulis admo∣nitorijs ad Iu∣stinianum. Augustinus de Ciuitate Dei lib. 1. cap. 9. Gregorius Mag. in pastorali. sinnes which he committeth, and might by his meanes haue been hindred. And this is that which God said to Eli the Priest, how he would iudge his house for euer, for the iniquitie which he knew: because his sonnes ranne into a slander, and hee stayed them not: 1. Sam. 3. 13. For they which behold euill done, and be tongue-tyed to finde fault, doe deny to apply remedie to those wounds which they might heale. In the offendor, for hereby when in the beginning there is no restraint, hee is heartned to goe on and increase in his wickednesse. Abso∣lom, who had no punishment for the vnnaturall murther of his brother Ammon, falleth into a relapse, and commit∣teth parricide, seeking to take away the life and kingdome of his Father, 2. Sam. 13. 28. & 15. 13. Seeing then this duty is so needfull, but hard to be per∣formed, which In Paedagog. lib. 1. cap. 8. Clemens Alexandrinus very fitly calleth the Chirurgerie of the soule, Augustine a In Enchiridio cap. 72. spirituall almes: that we may apply and bestow the same to the recouering of health, and increasing benefit vnto others, these two rules are to be obserued. The first, that we labour to bring the offendor to the knowledge of himselfe and his fault, that he may vnder∣stand how grieuous it is and displeasing vnto God. Thus Nathan the Prophet delt very cautelously with King Da∣uid, setting before him his offence, first vnder the couert and vaile of a Parable, afterward shewed him (the curtaine pulled aside) in his true shape the vglinesse of his adulterie and murther: wherby forthwith confessing his wickednes fled vnto God for mercy, intreating pardon, by most ear∣nest and humble prayer, 2. Sam. 12. 7. 13. Psal. 51. 12. &c. The second is, that when the transgressor once knoweth
his wickednesse; we striue to obtaine thus much of him, that he may be heartily sorry for the same, and endeuour by all meanes to amend it, and to reforme himselfe; wherof there is a singular and cleare example in the Corinthians, whom the Apostle sharpely reproued for tolerating and bearing with an incestuous person amongst them, 2. Cor. 7. 8. 9 10 for thereby they were made godly sorrowfull: that is, seriously fearing iudgement and vengeance, wrought by the sentence of the law, accusing and reuealing sinne, and the wrath of God against the same, yet not dispairing, but comforting themselues vpon the confidence of a Media∣tor, and for his sake crauing mercy: from whence proceed many sweet and pleasant fruites: Wenrichius in locum.. 1 Care, in amending those defects which the Apostle reprehended. 2 Clearing of themselues, desiring pardon (an vndoub∣ted proofe of their vnfained repentance and amendment.) 3 Indignation, an holy anger against the incestuous person, author of the publique scandall. 4 Feare of the anger of God, & heauy punishments which be alwayes attendants vpon sinnes, when they are not tur∣ned away by true conuersion. 5 Desire to see and embrace Paul, who with so fa∣therly and tender a care laboured to procure the saluation of this Church of Corinth. 6 Zeale, which is such an affection, whereby the heart is stroken and pearced with that offence which is committed and wrong offered to a person beloued, and specially when the glory of God, and saluation of the Church is in questi∣on: And this was now most vehement in these Corinthi∣ans, in witnesse and confirmation whereof they excommu∣nicated that wicked one. 7 Reuenge, the effect of zeale, and hath reference to the excommunication of the incestuous party: whereby they defended the glory of God, and maintained the honour and reputation of their Church. And by this example ter∣rified others from committing the like sinne.
8 Demonstration of their innocency, disallowing both that present vncleannesse, and all other disorders by which the Church of Corinth was defiled and stained. And vpon those, by whose industry and labour offenders are brought to stand thus affected, the blessing of God resteth, Prou. 24. 25. Rebuked him saying, fearest thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation. The solemne forme of the good theeues reprehensi∣on is expressed in these words; and that for which hee re∣buketh his fellow, is not so much his outward blasphemy, which with an vncleane mouth hee spewed forth against Christ, as the puddle and filthy sinke from whence that came, which was the want of the feare of God in his heart. Those who feare not God run headlong into all kind of wickednesse; and therefore the Apostle after the rehear∣sall  of a long beadrowle of many lewde and abominable actions, he addeth this as the cause of them all, There was no feare of God, Rom. 3. 18. And the selfe same doth the kingly Prophet affirm of Hypocrites and Epicures, setting down their shape (as it were) vnto the world thus: Wicked∣nesse saith to the wicked man, euen in my heart, that there is no feare of God before his eyes, Psal. 36. 1. And Abraham when he went from the valley of Mambre into Palestina, & soiourned in Gerar, dissembled Sarah to be his wife, because he thought the feare of God was not in that place, and therefore they would kill him to enioy her a beautifull wo∣man, Gen. 20. 11. 12. And such in Scripture are named sons of Belial, who casting off the yoake, let loose the raynes to their owne lusts, and defile themselues with all manner of wickednesse, and thinke nothing vnlawfull, Deut. 13. 13. cast away God, and seduce others also: Iudg. 19. 22. The men of Gibeah in Beniamin, impudently defend their exe∣crable filthinesse, and without all respect of shame desire to abuse the Leuite, comming as a stranger amongst them. O
detestable wickednesse, thereby manifesting that they were the schollers of the Sodomites. And it is said of the sonnes of Eli, that they were wicked, knew not the Lord, tooke the portion due to the Priest by force, from those who came to offer sacrifice, and lay with the women that were assembled at the dore of the Tabernacle of the congregation, 1. Sam. 2. 13. 22. But in whose hearts the reuerent feare of Gods name is ingrafted, there shineth in their liues, spotlesse in∣nocency, for it is holy, Psalme 19. 9. And therefore very aptly doth Augustine Tractatu. 9 in Iohannis Epistolam primam. compare it to a needle, which when any thing is sowed, maketh a passage, & draweth the threed after it: and this once entered into the soule, carrieth with it the whole Cassianus In∣stitutionum. l. 4 ranke of vertues, and is the introduction to all religious dueties, and therefore euery where feare and o∣bedience are ioyned together. So Iob is saide to bee a iust and vpright man, and one that feared God, and eschewed euill, Io, 1. 1. And it is the commendation of Simeon, that hee was a iust man, and feared God, Luke, 2. 25. that is, watchfully carefull not to offend. And this was the effe∣ctuall reason that moued Ioseph to set his brethren free (vp∣on a certaine condition) who had deserued so euill of him: and the onely engine whereby hee ouercame the dayly entisements of his wanton mistresse, soliciting him to yeeld to her vnchast desires, Gen. 39. 9 & 42. 18. and that which encouraged Obadiah, steward of Achabs house, to hide the Prophets of the Lord, (whose bloud persecuting Iezabel thirsted after,) and fed them dayly with bread and water: he feared God greatly: 1. King. 18. 3. 13. Sanctifie the Lord of hostes, let him bee your feare, and let him bee your dreade, Esay, 8. 13. and (as the wise man concludeth his book,) Feare God and keepe his com∣mandements, for this is the whole man: hee will bring euery worke to iudgement, with euery secret thing whether it be good or euill, Eccles. 12. 14. 1. For his power is inuincible: hen hee will punish, none can deliuer; and this is pro∣ounded to men, that the should consider thereof, Psal. 50. 22. For, by the confession of proud Nebuchadnetzar,
his power is euerlasting, and his kingdome from generati∣on to generation: and according to his will hee worketh in the army of heauen, and in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, and say, What doest thou? Dan. 4. 31. 32. 2. His wisdome is infallible; all things are  de nati∣ua huius voca∣buli significati∣one, Faber in Agonistico, lib. 1. cap. 11. naked and o∣pen vnto him, Heb. 4. 13. hell and destruction are before his eyes, much more the hearts of the sonnes of men, Prou. 15. 11. He knoweth our downe sitting and vprising, and vnder∣standeth our thoughts afarre off. Psal. 139. 3. 4. Wherefore he pulled off the vizard from the face of dissembling Ana∣nias and Saphira, who dealt closely as though God had not knowne the heart, (but men may lie to him, yet cannot de∣ceiue him) and they both perished by sodaine death, Act. 5. 5. 10. Hee sheweth his Prophet all the abominations of the people, committed in secret, Ezech. 8. 5. 6. And this is that wherof Dauid giueth Solomon warning vpon his death∣bed, 1. Chron. 28. 9. For he knoweth what euery man doth, hee seeth them inwardly, examineth them inwardly, Augustinus Tractatu 26. in Iohannis Euan∣gelium. and accordingly doth eyther condemne or crowne them. 3. His Iustice is inflexible; he is not corrupted with bribes, nor deceiued by craftinesse; to him nothing is secret, no∣thing vnpunished. Therfore Saint Paul terrifieth sinners with former examples, 1. Corinth. 10. 4. 10. and also Peter, 2. Pet. 2. 4. 13. And Ioshua taking his last farewell of the Is∣raelites, exhorteth them in this manner, feare the Lord, & serue him in vprightnesse and truth: Ioshua 24. 14. For that that man is blessed who feareth the Lord, and delighteth great∣ly in his commandements. Psalm. 112. 1. &c. And indeed this feare is a rich and fruitfull Paradise, yeelding abundant blessings; some whereof the Diuines haue reckoned in this sort. 1. Sauing knowledge; for the feare of God is the beginning of wisdome Psal. 111. which Aquas 2. 2. quaest. 19. artic. 7. is not to be considered onely as it is speculatiue for knowledge, but also as practique for di∣rection of life, whereby men doe reuerence God and o∣bey him.
2 The repressing of sinne, Eccles. 1. verse 21. For from whence commeth it, that so many arc hardened in their wickednesse? onely because they haue no feare of God: Rom. 3. 18. But happy is that man whose heart is filled with this Bernardus in serm. 55. in Cantica. threefold feare, first, for grace receiued, secondly, for grace lost, and thirdly for grace recouered. And he that doth thus, is one of that stone water pots in the marriage house, where Christ was present, filled vp to the brim, containing not two, but three measures, that so hee may obtaine the bles∣sing of Christ, who turned water into the wine of gladnes. 3. The auoiding of sinne; for the feare of the Lord is to hate euill, and pride and arrogancy, and the euill way, Prou. 8. 13. As the Sunne beames comming in at a little chinke or crany of the house, do manifest the Iohannes Cli∣machus. least things that are in it, euen the smallest dust that flyeth vp & down; so the feare of God setled in the heart, bewrayeth all the faults thereof, though they lurke in neuer so secret corners: whereby a man is made wary and circumspect in his wayes: And in this respect, the spirit of feare (as Barnard Sermone de primordijs me∣dijs & nouissi∣mis nostris & sermone 6. in Psal. Qui habi∣tat. affir∣meth) is more forceable to withstand sinne, then eyther shame or sorrow; for it Laurentius Iustinianus in tractatu, de ligno vitae. reformeth the offendor, abandoneth wickednesse, and prepareth the will continually to doe well. The Gregorius Magnus, mo∣ral, lib. 6. cap. 24. weight of feare is the anchor of the soule, so that such as tremble at the thunder of Gods wrath, though they had Giges Plato de Rep. lib. 2. Hom. Iliade 5. et in eand em Eustathius. Nonnus, in  seu histo∣riarum quibus vsus est Nazi∣anzenus in pri∣ma oratione contra Iulianū, cap. 54. 55. Caelius Rhodin∣ginus Antiqua∣rum, lib. 6. cap. 11. 12. Ring or Plutoes helmet, that they might goe in∣uisible, and haue fit opportunity, yet would they not be pro∣uoked to doe any thing amisse. 4 Gods mercy, for as a father hath compassion on his chil∣dren, so hath the Lord on them that feare him. Psal. 103. 13. and looketh on him that is poore, and of a contrite spirit, and trem∣bleth at his word, Esay, 66. 2. Nothing more sweet then this promise, nothing more effectuall to comfort a languishing soule; especially, such who feele the griefes and calamities: vnto which our nature is subiect. For if God carry a father∣ly affection towards vs, then there can be no sinne so hai∣nous, no Mollerus in Psal. 103. aduersity so great, which may shut vp this way, whereby Gods mercy should come vnto vs, so we be found
among the number of those who feare him: that is, rest in him, aske pardon of sinnes and mitigation of punish∣ment. 5. A sufficiencie of those things which De his omni∣bus consulatur Dictionarium Pauperum. belong to the sustentation and maintenance of this life. Therefore feare the Lord all yee his Saints; for nothing wanteth to them that feare him; the Lyons doe lacke and suffer hunger, but they that seeke the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psal. 34. 9. 10. He feedeth those who contemne him, shall hee neglect those that feare him? This were iniustice, but there is no vnrigh∣teousnesse with the Lord; Godlinesse hath the promise of this life, and that which is to come: &c. 1. Timoth. 4. 8. He then who would haue a perpetuall and infallibly-true prognosti∣cation of all euents which can fall out in the world, let him looke into the 26 of Leuiticus and the 28. of Deuteronomie because the things mentioned in them are not fore told by starre-gasing Augustinus de doctrina Chri∣stiana cap. 21. Astrologers, nor Natiuitie casters, who (sell vn∣to men miserable bondage, and bring the cursed thing of Ierico into Origenes in Iosuam. Ierusalem, and defile the tents of the Lord) but of him who is not as man, that he should lye, nor as the son of man that he should repent, Num. 23. 19. All whose words in respect of the Philo Iudaem. certeinty are of like force with oathes. 6. Euerlasting life and glory; for it shall goe well with them at the last and in the day of their death who feare the Lord, Eccles. 1. 13. And excellent is that goodnesse which God hath set apart for those that feare him. And in that great day of retribution, wherin all that doe wickedly shall bee stubble, and burnt vp, and haue neither root nor branch left, to such as feare the Lord shall the sunne of righteousnesse arise, and health bee vnder their wings, Malach. 4. 2. Serue the Lord therefore in feare and reioyce in trembling, kisse the sonne least he be angry and yee perish in the way: when his wrath shall suddenly burne, blessed are all those that trust in him: Psal. 2. 11. 12.
Rebuked him saying, fearest thou not God seeing thou art in the same condemnation. Condemnation by a Synecdoche is heere put for punish∣ment; and the whole speech is thus much in sence and mea∣ning, as if he should haue said, Fearest thou not God, but addest this to the rest of thy outragious sinnes formerly committed (to encrease the number and heape threof) thy heynous blasphemie? and that now, when thou art to stand and be arreigned at the iudgement barre, where thou must giue an accompt both of all thy life before passed, and of this present impietie. And thus the good thiefe sheweth a iust cause of his former reproofe, by an argument taken from the likenesse of the condition, in respect of punishment. When the hand of God lyeth heauy vpon vs, specially  in any extraordinarie tribulation, or agonie of death, then we must submit our selues humbly vnder the same. And so Dauid, thrust out of his kingdome by the subtile practise of his disloyall sonne Absolom, yeeldeth himselfe to bee disposed of, according to Gods will 2. Sam. 16. 10. was dumbe and opened not his mouth because the Lord had done it, Psalm. 39. 9. Ezechias after he receiued the message, to set his house in an order, (for he should not liue, but dye,) chatters like a Quoties ex∣pendimus, quae à nobis perperā facta sunt, pro cantu cum co∣lumba gemilum edamus. Hirū∣do ore patente, in nido pict a auxilij implora∣ti est Hierogly∣phicoy. Picrius in lib. 22. Hieroglyphicis Crane or a Swallow, mourneth like a doue, lifteth vp his eyes on high vnto God, and desireth com∣fort, Esay 38. 14. Aaron when he is commanded to goe vp to the mount Hor, and disrobe himselfe of his Priestly gar∣ments, and put them vpon Eleazar his sonne, and so re∣signe ouer his office, and there be gathered to his Fathers, obeyeth. Numb. 20. 26. Iust it is, that wee should beare the wrath of God, because wee haue sinned against him. Micah 7. 9. Vse. In all our calamities therefore how grieuous soeuer they be, let vs acknowledge. God to berighteous; we haue sinned and committed iniquitie and done wickedly (saith that great Historiographer of the world, now a captiue in Babi∣lor,
yea wee haue rebelled and departed from thy precepts O Lord, and from thy iudgements, &c. Righteousnesse be∣longeth vnto thee, and vnto vs open shame, Dan. 9. 5. 7. And Dauid, Righteous art thou O Lord, and iust are thy iudge∣ments: Psal. 119. 137. which verse of the Prophet, Integra hi∣storia extat a∣pud Zonarum, Annalium tom. 3. & Gly∣com, Annaliū suorum parte 4. Mau∣ritius the Emperour then vttered, when he saw his wife and children put to death before his eyes: and fitting himselfe to lay his owne necke vpon the blocke, confessed that hee had deserued thus to bee dealt withall, who might for a small summe haue redeemed the life of his souldiers ta∣ken by the enemy, and would not, but suffered them all to bee put to the sword. For as Gregory truely, the Patient that knoweth the rottennesse and putrifaction of his vlcer, is willing to bee lanched by the Chyrurgion; and hee who vnderstandeth rightly the number and greatnesse of his of∣fences, thinketh all which hee suffereth to bee lesse then is deserued; entreateth for mercy, and willingly beareth the chasticement imposed, Ierem. 10. 24. For if God should enter into Iudgement with his seruants, no flesh could bee iustified in his sight, Psalm. 143. 2. And therefore wee must appeale from his iustice to his mercy, Heb. 4. 16, We are indeede righteously heere (for wee receiue things worthy of that we haue done) but this man hath done nothing amisse. The blaspheming Iews Arnoldus Carnotensis, de vitimis septom Christi verbis. sharpned their poysonful tongs, and with one consent cryed out against Christ, spewed forth taunts and reproaches, vaunted as though they had ouer∣come him, now hanging vpon the Crosse. The Apostles fled; the cursed multitude onely hartned with wicked spee∣ches of others, made themselues sport, by scoffing at him; and the other thiefe consented, vpbraiding that hee could neither saue himselfe, nor others, and scorned his fellow, who looked for helpe of him, which was in the same plight and punishment that they were, and thought it a vaine and idle thing to belieue that he was a King and God, who suffe∣red
the same torment and ignominie which they did; so one of them was a scoffer, the other a Confessor; he reproacheth, this prayeth, hopeth, loueth; and betweene those two, is pre∣sent a Iudge to decide the controuersie; who pronouncing the sentence, condemneth the blasphemer to hell, and ap∣pointeth the Confessor to the kingdome. This thiefe of whom wee now speake, is of a meeke and milde heart, such as beseemeth the witnesse of Christ; hee bringeth forth proofes of his faith before the publike Auditory: and af∣ter a new manner of instruction, not mindfull of his owne torment, disputeth with the blasphemer of righteousnesse, and the feare of God. For thus hee speaketh (Fearest thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation. Wee are indeed rightly here, for wee receiue these things worthy of that wee haue done, but this man hath done nothing amisse:) hee beleeueth and confesseth, giueth testimony of Christes innocency, rebuketh the slanderer, spareth not himselfe; is his owne accuser, and pronouncing a true sentence against himselfe, the condemnation is like, but the cause differeth; for he (meaning Christ) is appointed vnto this, performing o∣bedience vnto his Fathers will; wee according to our de∣serts, for our offences. But from whence had this thlefe so sodaine a change wrought in him? who a little Tanlerus in meditationibus, de vita Iesu. cap. 43. before was a blasphemer, now become a Confessor, that hee was able to discerne good from euill, accusing the trespasser, excusing the innocent. O sweet Iesu, this was the soddain alteration wrought by the power of thy right hand, at which hee now hanged: this inwardly touched him, and presently turned him into another man; O Lord thou diddest hereby de∣clare thy diuine omnipotency, who so speedily of a stone, didst make a sonne of Abraham; hee receiued this light from no other meanes, but that which was set in the can∣dlesticke of the Crosse, and shining in darkenesse, turned the night into day. And what was this else, but that the Lord Iesus of his infinite and meere goodnesse beheld him with the eye of mercy, in whome was no merit? for so it was his good pleasure. For as God of his onely loue giueth that
to the Elect, which he oweth not vnto them; so according to the Rule of his Iustice, hee repayeth that to the wicked, which is due vnto them. Therefore this thiefe, before the Lord shined vpon him with the beames of his grace, was as deepe in blasphemy, as the other his fellow: and thereby shewed, what he was then of himselfe by nature, and what he was now made by the worke of grace. The conuersion of a sinner is the free worke of Augustinus in Enchiridio, cap. 32. grace;  for wee are all flesh, exiled from the kingdome of heauen, and children of wrath, Ephes. 2. 3. conceiued of vn∣cleane seede, Iob. 14 4. corrupt with iniquity from the wombe, Psal. 51. 7. carrying about with vs the image of earthly Adam, 1. Corinth. 15 49. depriued of the glory of God, Rom. 3. 23. the frame of whose heart is onely euill, Gen. 6 5. and wicked, Ierem. 17. 7. the vnderstanding blind, Ephes. 4. 18. the will rebellious, Rom. 7. 15. & 8. 7. hauing no power or aptnesse to that which is good, 2 Corinth. 3. 5. but it is God who worketh both the will and the deed, and that of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 1. August, de bono perseue∣rentiae, cap. 13. & 17. This we must belieue with the heart, and acknowledge with the mouth this is holy, this is true, that so there may bee humble and submisse confession, and all ascribed to God, who doth not onely Idem Epist. ad Iulianum. reueale knowledge, that we may vnder∣stand what to doe, but inspire charity, that wee may liue ac∣cording to that which wee haue learned. For no man com∣meth vnto Christ except the Father draw him, Iohn 6. 44. and this is the great commendation of Idem in E∣uang: Iohannis tractatu 26. Grace, &c. if wee haue neede to bee drawne vnto Christ, then are wee vnwilling of our selues to belieue, then are wee enforced by a kinde of violence; and the will not onely raysed vp and wakened. and they are saide to bee drawne, Caluinus in 6. c. put. Iohan∣nis. whose minds God en∣lightneth, and boweth, and frameth their hearts vnto obedi∣ence. This tearme of drawing doth not imply any violent or outward compuision, yet signifieth an effectuall and power∣full working of the holy Ghost, whereby the vnwilling are made willing. And the truth hereof is to be seene in all the degrees of our conuersion. For 1. the beginning it selfe is of God from whom commeth euery good gift, Iam. 1. 17. hee taketh a∣away
the flinty and stony heart, Ezech. 38. 26. by his preuen∣ting grace making vs willing, and by his subsequent grace ena∣bling that our willingnesse be not vaine and to no purpose. For that which is borne of flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3. 6. and without me (saith Christ) you can doe nothing: Ioh. 15. 5. Least any should thinke that the Augustinus in Euangelium Iohannis tract. 81. branch could bring forth some fruit though little (for he persisteth in the borrowed resem∣blance taken from a vine) he saith not, that without me yee can doe but little, but nothing; therefore whether little or much, neither is done but by him, without whom nothing can be done: the diuine grace following, helpeth forward a good purpose, but that should not haue been at all, except grace had gone before. A good endeauour begun is furthered by grace, but euen Idem contra duas epistolas Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 9. that is inspired by him who worketh the will and the deed, &c. Phil. 2. 13. 2. That we rest in any wholesome and good inspiration, this also commeth of the Lord; for faith is his gift, Ephes. 2. 8. 1. Timoth. 1. 12. And of Lidia it is said, when shee atten∣ded to the word which Paul preached, that God opened her heart, Act. 16. 14. For this is to be holden as an vndoub∣ted truth, that wee haue no Fulgentius ad Getam cap. 20. power to will, or worke that which is good, except we receiue it from the free gift of Gods mercy: who Augustinus in Enchiridio cap. 32. Aquin. 1 ae. 2 ae. quaest. 109. articulo 6. prepareth the will which is to be helped, and helpeth it once prepared, &c. 3. He giueth the grace of obedience, inspiring both the affection and the Augustinus epist. 105. effect. Therfore Dauids request is, O Lord open the eyes of mine vnderstanding, that I may see the wonders of thy law, Psal. 119. 18. and Salomons speech, Bow our hearts vnto thee, that we may walke in all thy waies, and keepe thy com∣mandements and thy statutes, and thy lawes which thou hast commanded. 1. King. 8. 58. 4. From him also proceedeth Bernardus de aduentu Dom. serm. 7. perseuerance and conti∣nuance in any good; for the best and the most perfectly rege∣nerate, liuing in this region of the shadow of death, in the in∣firmitie of the body, and place of temptation, are easie to be se∣duced, weake to any holy worke, fraile to resist; if they would discerne between good and euill, they are deceiued:
if doe good, they faint: if withstand euill, they are ouer∣come. Therefore God must strengthen the endeauours of such as are sanctified, or else they will faile Ephes. 4. 13. hee susteyneth those that runne, that they fall not, but goe forward till they obteine 1. Corinth. 9. 24. Hee directeth and gouerneth their course, that they goe not astray Psal. 119. 11. Therefore Dauid elsewhere prayeth, leaue me not, nor forsake me O God of my saluation, Psal. 27. 9. And the Apostle expresseth this spirituall blessing in the forme of a prayer: thereby teaching, where we must aske, from whence wee must looke for it, and that in most choice wordes: desiring the God of all grace, which hath called vs vnto his eternall glory by Christ Iesus, to make you perfit, confirme, strengthen and sta∣blish you. 1. Pet. 5. 10. 1. If then there come into our Granatensis in postillae parte 1. concione 1. feriae 4. post Do∣minicam passio∣nem. minde any good thought, Ʋse. or doe proceed from our mouth any holy word, or we per∣forme any religious worke, if we can send forth any hearty figh for sinne, or haue any sanctified desire, if any sparkle of Gods loue, if any spirituall comfort, if any feare of hell, or care of eternall life be in vs, if we ouercome any temptation of the enemie, let vs remember, that these are the sweet drops of the deaw of Gods mercy falling from heauen and making vs grow vp into eternall blessednesse. Wherefore we must ascribe nothing to our selues and our owne power, but all to his grace: and say with the Prophet, vnto thee O Lord my strength will I sing, for God is my defence and my mer∣cifull God, Psal. 59. 17. 2. Because these Chemnitius in lecis The gicis titulo de viribus humanus. gifts are not ours, but wrought in vs by the holy Ghost, therefore let vs yeeld our selues obedient to his motions, and quench them not 1. Thess. 5. 19.  For as fire (to which it is resembled) is quenched two wares, either by powring vpon it water (the contrary element,) or by with∣drawing the fewell, whereby it should be maintained: so is the working of the spirit hindered either by our sinnes, op∣posite vnto the same, or negligence; not cherishing that gra∣tious inspiration. This Dauid felt after his fall, when hee prayeh, make me to heare ioy and gladnes, create in me a cleane
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within mee, restore to me the ioy of thy saluation, and stablish mee with thy free spirit, Psal. 51. 8. 10. 12. And the Apostle after many both ex∣hortations vnto speciall vertues, and dehortations from sun∣dry vices, concludeth with this admonition, Not to grieue the holy spirit of God, by which wee are sealed vp vnto the day of redemption. Ephes. 4. 30. 3. From hence ariseth comfort vnto vs, who liue in the weaknesse of the flesh and rebellion of the law which is in our members; not the flesh, but the holy Ghost hath be∣gun this worke, (our conuersion) therefore he will perfect it, Phil. 1. 6. For his gifts and graces are without repentance, Rom. 11. 29. and, whom he loueth, those he loueth vnto the end. Ioh. 13. 1. 4. When we finde in our selues any happy beginnings of faith, loue, repentance, and the like, let vs not be reach∣lesse, and without care, or puffed vp therewith, but continue in humble and constant prayer, and bee earnest suiters vnto God for the continuance of his mercy; because we can neither pro∣cure any spirituall blessing which is wanting, nor increase that which is bestowed, but by him alone without whom we can doe nothing; for euery good gift and euery perfect gi∣uing commeth from aboue, from the father of lights, Iam. 1. 17. And God who hath commanded to aske, hath promised to giue. Matth. 7. 7. We are indeed righteously heere, (for we receiue things wor∣thy of that we haue done) but this man hath done nothing amisse. There is in this clause an Occupation or the preuenting of a doubt, which the blaspheming thiefe might make, reaso∣ning thus; that because it was said, they all were in the like condemnation, suffered the same torment, that therefore the desert of them (crucified together) was one and the same. To which his fellow answereth by a distinction, Thou and I suffer righteously, and receiue, by the sentence
of the Law, things worthy of that we haue done, but this man is innocent, vniustly condemned, vndeseruedly pu∣nished. In all chastisements, how sharpe and grieuous soeuer  they be, God is to bee acknowledged righteous in laying them vpon vs. For first the punishment is euer lesse then our offences; he dealeth not with vs according to our sins Psa. 103. 10. Secondly our transgressions are the enforcing causes of all the euill which we suffer; I will beare the wrath of the Lord, saith the Prophet, because I haue sinned against him. Micah 7. 9. For except he were prouoked, he had ra∣ther spare than punish; and when he is prouoked, remem∣breth Saluianus lib. 1. de proui∣dentia & gu∣bernatione Dei. mercy in iustice. Therfore albeit the whole people had trespassed in making the golden Calfe, yet vengeance came not vpon the whole, but the merciful God stroke one part with the sword, that he might amend the other by that example; shewing vnto all both his seueritie in punishing, & pitty in pardoning. But of this point I haue spoken before. First, Let vs humble our selues vnder the mighty hand of God 1. Pet. 5. 6. and, when he striketh with his rod, cry, spare Lord, Ioel 2. 17. for it is his mercy that we are not consumed, Lament. 3. 12. Therefore Eli when he heard the determi∣ned punishment against his house, for the wickednesse of his sonnes, submissiuely thus said, It is the Lord, let him doe whatsoeuer pleaseth him, 1. Sam. 3. 18. Secondly, let vs, sinfull and miserable wretches, subiect to infinite miseries, iustly inflicted, make our whole life a continuall practise of vnfayned repentance; and, for the better effecting hereof, these considerations, are to be me∣ditated vpon, by euery Christian soule. 1. The commandement of God himselfe; for thus he spea∣keth vnto Israel, returne and I will not let my wrath fall on you, for I am mercifull, and will not keepe my anger. Ierem. 3. 12. And, Iohn the voice of the Word cryeth in the wildernesse, Repent, bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Math. 3. 8. This doctrine began and was first preached in Paradise, when God rebuked Adam and Eua, by the law, and com∣forted
them with the Gospell, Adam vbies? per hoc quod vocat, signum dat, quod ad paenitentiam re∣uocat, quod re∣quirit, apertè insinuat quod damnare iure possit peccatores. Gregor. Mag. 2. Moral. Tertull. lib. 2. aduersus Mar∣cionem. Gen. 3. 9. 11. LEX. 2. The threatnings denounced and the examples of venge∣ance executed vpon the rebellious and disobedient should be vnto vs powerfull admonitions for amendment; and to this end are vrged by the two chiefe Apostles Paul 1. Cor. 10 5. 6. &c. and Peter, 2. Pet. 2. 3. 4. &c. for he who is merci∣full to beare with weake sinners, is iust to punish stubborne con∣temners; and so he did manifest himself to Moses Exo. 34. 6. and as it were thundring from mount Sinai, God iudgeth the righteous, and him that contemneth God euery day: except hee returne, he hath whet his sword, he hath bent his bow, and made it ready. Psal. 7. 11. 12. 3. The certeinty of the last iudgement; for because the hea∣uens shall passe away with a noise, and the elements melt with heat, and the earth with the workes that are therein be burnt vp, Euangelium. Ponam inimici∣tiā interte &c. & hic incipit liber bellorum Domini. Rupertus de vi∣ctoria viri lib. Premittitur Christus qui de∣struat opera Diaboli 1. Ioh. 3. 8. & hac de venturo semine  primos parentes afflictos & mae∣rentes erexit Deus. &c. what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conuersation and godlinesse? 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11. For we must all appeare before the iudgement seat of Christ, that euery one may receiue the things which are done in this body, according to that he hath done whether it bee good or euill, 2. Cor. 5. 10. And if any other thing, then much more the remembrance of this may strike terror into mens hearts: For it shall be a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heauinesse, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscuritie, a day of clouds and darknesse, a day of the trum∣pet and alarum against the fenced Cities and high towers &c. Zeph. 1. 15. a day of reuelation Rom. 2. 5. and therefore is elegantly called by one of the Fathers, Gods Macarius homilia 4. nam hoc mense herbarū radices quae in terra quasi sepultae iacebant, resur∣gere & se o∣stendere incipiunt. & inde nomen habet quod tunc tellus recludatur ad profundendum fetus va∣rios hieme conceptos. Aprill. And then, on the one side shall stand accusing sinnes, on another terrifying iustice; beneath the gulfe of hell opened, aboue an angry Iudge: within a stinging conscience; without, the world burning: the iust shall scarse be saued, the wicked thus ouer∣taken, whether shall he turne himselfe? It is impossible to escape, intollerable to appeare. Therefore what remayneth, ô sinner, but that thou should with teares bewayle thy life all thy life time.  Anselmus de miseria hominis.
4. The sweet fruits and benesits which spring and arise from true and seasonable repentance (for God receiueth such who turne vnto him) as pardon of sinnes, reconcilia∣tion, the gift of the spirit, tranquillitie and peace of consci∣ence arising from faith, the hearing and acceptance of our prayers, mitigation of punishments, and at the last blessed∣nesse in heauen: for God doth assure, vnto such as truely repent, mercy confirmed by his oath Ezech. 33. 11. Ther∣fore let him that wil receiue life (which be Augustines words) change his life; for repentance is the medecine of sinne; and ef∣fectuall is that religious admonition of Gregory, to Gregorius, & apud eundem multa sunt huc pertinentia. Homil. 25. & in cap. 10. primi Regum. nou∣rish good hope in vs: Dauid fell, let no man presume of himselfe and be high minded: Dauid rose againe, let none bee too much cast downe and despaire. But this man hath done nothing euill. This thiefe hitherto hath vsed two arguments of re∣proofe against his fellow; the one taken from the paritie of their condition, (thou art in the same condemnation,) the other from the right of their desert, (we suffer things worthy that we haue done) now addeth a third reason, from the innocency of Christ, (but this man hath done nothing euill) which is in summe thus much: none of all those things which he suf∣fereth, hath he procured should be laid vpon him, for he neuer committed act worthy of death; wherefore, is there no feare of God before thine eyes, who doest so impudent∣ly reproch this innocent, whom we see vndeseruedly puni∣shed: and by this malapertnesse shewest, that thou art voide of all pietie? And God did indeed sundry wayes manifest, the vnspotted innocencie of his sonne; as by the testimony of Pilate himselfe Matth. 27. 18. 23. 24. Iohn 19. 10. of his wife, by sending a message vnto him when he sate vpon the iudgement seate, admonishing that he should doe no∣thing against that holy man Matth. 27. 19. the mournefull lamentation of the women of Ierusalem, who followed him vnto the crosse, Luk. 27. 37. the confession of the Centu∣rion,
when he beheld the miracles at his death Matth. 27. 54. and the commendation of this thiefe; for such an High priest became vs, who was holy, blamelesse, vndefiled, se∣parate from sinners, and made higher then the heauens, Heb. 7. 26. Besides other instructions which the diligent meditation  of this speech would afford, and doe offer themselues to the deuout consideration of euery Christian soule, I will con∣tent my selfe now with this one: Christ our Sauiour and Redeemer is pure and holy, free from all stayne of trans∣gression; for he did no euill, neither was there any guile found in his mouth Esay 53. 9. hee knew no sinne 2. Corinth. 5. 20. And such he is by the qualitie of his nature, because he was conceiued without spot by the holy Ghost, liued alwaies purely and vncorruptly, and so he neuer offended in word nor deed; and therefore his name is Iehouah the Lord our righteousnesse, Ierem. 23. 6. the most holy, Dan. 9. 24. sha∣dowed vnder the type of the Paschall Lambe, which must be without blemish, Exod. 12. 6. From whence the Apostle fra∣meth his exhortation, to keepe the feast not with old lea∣uen, neither in the leauen of malitiousnesse and wickednes, but with vnleauened bread of sinceritie and truth, 1. Cor. 5. 8. And Saint Peter his admonition, that therefore we should be holy, knowing that wee are not redeemed with corruptible things as siluer and gold, from our vaine con∣uersation receiued by the tradition of the Fathers, but with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a lambe immaculate and without spot, 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. And the Angell sent to Mary (a maiden and a mother) when shee put the question how she should conceiue, since she knew not a man, thus resol∣ueth her doubt, The holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the most High shall ouershadow thee, therefore also that holy thing, which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the sonne of God, Luk. 1. 35. First, from hence wee may gather an vndoubted assurance of Ʋse. 2 our saluation. For as by the offence of one (which is Adam) the fault came vpon all men to condemnation, so by the
iustifying of one, (Christ Iesus) the benefit abounded to∣ward all men to the iustification of life: &, as by one mans disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of that one, shall many also be made righteous, Rom. 5. 18. 19. He hath deliuered vs Heb. 2. 14. and blotted out the hand writing which was against vs Coloss. 2. 14. Let vs ther∣fore striue that we may be found in him, not hauing our owne righteousnesse, but his. Philip. 3. 9. For the Lord pay∣ed the seruants debt, the iust suffered the offendors punish∣ment, he bare our sinnes vpon his body on the tree, and by his stripes we are healed. 1. Pet. 2. 24. Secondly this is vnto vs an vnspeakeable comfort, the body and soule of Christ our mediator was sanctified in the conception, therefore are they a holy and spotlesse sacri∣fice, whereby all our corruption is purged; and his bloud doth clense vs from all sinne, 1. Iohn 1. 7. By which we that once were farre off, are now neare, &c. for he hath reconci∣led vnto God both Iew and Gentile by his Crosse, Ephes. 2. 13. 16. Christ his death hath freed vs from death, his life from error, his grace from sinne, &c. Thirdly, the fulnesse of his saluation and innocency doth clense our poliuted Masse, and at the last shall wholly and perfectly deliuer vs from corruption; and by the same spi∣rit, wherewith the word sanctified his owne soule and bo∣dy, shall hee in the time appointed of God restore also our soules and bodies vnto his image, 1. Corinth. 15. 49. 50. For flesh and bloud, (Tertullianus de resurrectio∣ne. vnderstanding the sinnefull quality, and not the essentiall substance,) cannot enter into the King∣dome of heauen. Sweete are those words of Bernardus in sententijs. Barnard; Man∣kind was sicke of a threefold disease: in his beginning, middle and end; his birth vncleane, his life wicked, death dangerous: Christ was borne, liued and dyed: his birth hath clensed ours, his life instructed ours, his death destroyed ours. Lord remember mee when thou commest into thy Kingdom. There is in these wordes an Arnoldus Carnotensis de 7. vltimis Chri∣sti verbis. Apostrophe, wherein the
holy thiefe turneth his speech, from reprouing his fellow, and offereth vp a supplication to Christ; and becomming a famous Preacher, offereth the sweet smelling odours of prayer and confession and put his blasphemous fellow vn∣to silence, requireth the reward and honor of his victory, and fayth, Remember me O Lord, &c. This petition is misti∣call, Gueuara de monte Caluar. parte 2. cap. 21. & 22. and full of zeale; for in sense and meaning he sayth thus much: Oh holy In hac ratio∣u ista adpri∣mè notanda sunt: 1. Quiseam fudit, latro. 2 Cui Chri∣sto in  vna pendenti. 3. Vbi, à cruce in qua ipse pepēdit. 4. Quando, cum tam morti vici∣nus esset, &c. Arnoldus Car∣notensis. Prophet, O blessed Lord Iesu, I doe adiure thee by the bloud which thou sheddest, and entreate thee by the loue in which thou sufferest, that when thou commest into thy Kingdom, thou wouldest be mind∣full of me; And herein may we beholde a wonderfull faith; if we consider eyther the person of this petitioner, or of Christ, to whom he maketh his request: Of Christ, hee now did hang vpon the Crosse, the most despised amongst men, most shamefully entreated, loaden with tauntes and re∣proachfull contumelies; yet this thiefe acknowledgeth him whom the Disciple Maximus Episcopu sermone, qui est inter Ambrosi∣anos, 44. Leo primus de passione, serm. 2. Ioh. Hussus in Harmonoa pas∣sionis ex quatu∣or Euanglijs. denied: honoured him suffering, whom Iudas kissing betrayed; of him the sweete witnesse of peace is treacherously tendred; of this the griuous wounds of the Crosse are honoured. If the person of the Petitioner, that which we heere reade, is Idem, ibidem. miraculous; 1. hee confesseth his sinne, 2. the innocency of Christ, 3. raueth mercy, is not with∣drawne or held backe, neyther by feare of the Iewes, stan∣ding by, nor of his owne torment, nor his fellowes blas∣phemy, nor the apparant infirmity of Christ: but belee∣ned in him, whom he beheld dying in humane weakenesse (as a fraile man) whom the Apostles denied, though they had seene him worke miracles by diuine power. And in the course of his forepassed life, no Leo primu de passione, serm. 2. exhortation perswaded, no instru∣ction taught, no Preacher kindled this faith: he saw none of those things which Christ before had done, the healing of the sicke, the giuing sight to the blind; the raysing of the dead now ceased; hee was not brought vp in the Schoole of Christ, but in the dnne of theeues, where he lost (if euer he had any) all sense of humanity and godlinesse; and yet now acknowledgeth him to to bee a Lord and King, whom
hee saw partaker of the like punishment; asketh and looketh for a Kingdome of one crucified: glory from a man ex∣treamely dishonoured: saluation from one condemned; And indeed this consideration may astonish any; For Abraham beleeued God, but speaking from Chrysostomus sermone de l∣trone. Iansenius in concordia Euangdica, cap. 143. heauen, Gen. 12. 16. Esay, but setting vpon his throne of Glory. Cap. 6. 1. Moses, but appearing in the bush that burnt, and was not consumed, Exod. 3. 4. 5. others beleeued Christ, but when hee was yet aliue, and being present saw him call the dead out of their graues: Iohn 11. 45. But this beholdeth him dying, and prayeth vnto him, as setting in heauen, and maketh sup∣plication vnto him as a King, Tanlerus in meditationibus, de vita Iesu Christi, cap. 43. whom the Iewes (who knew the Law and the Prophets) despitefully crucified: acknow∣ledgeth that it is in his power to giue the Kingdome of heauen, and that then, when his owne Disciples eyther de∣nied or forsooke him. Wonderfull therefore was this faith, running from that cluster of grapes, which was wrung from vnder the Wine-presse of the Crosse. I speake not this to the end, that any should too much admire this wretched man, but worshippe and embrace Christ, who at this time, so deba∣sed in the eye of the world and according to the outward shew, declared so great power, and vouchsafed such mercy vnto him; that, so whosoeuer doth reioyce, might learne to reioyce in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So rich is the mercy, and so great the loue of God to∣ward repentant sinners, that hee doth not onely forgiue their trespasses, but furnish them . Manuel Pale∣ologus Impera∣tor, oratione senta. also with speciall giftes and endowments. What were the sinnes of Manasses, and how outragious wee may reade, 2. King. 21. from the se∣cond verse to the senenteenth; yet God shewed mercy, and imployed him in the restoring of both religion and po∣licy decayed, 2. Chron. 33. 14. who more offended Christ then Peter, whom he denied simply in word, afterward by oath, and cursing that hee knew him not, Math. 26. 70. 72: 73. yet when hee rose from the dead, as his especiallcare, would haue his resurrection by name, & in particular tolde
vnto him Mar. 16. 7. that so he might comfort Georgius Wirth. de vita Christi ex qua∣tuor Euangeli∣stis, lib. 5. c. 66. Si hune Ange∣lus non nmina∣tim exprimeret, qui magistrum negauerat, ve∣nire inter disi∣puls non a∣deret: vocatur ergo ex nomine ne desperet ex negatione, Gregor homilia 21. him, lest he should bee discouraged for his deniall, and conceiue that hee was vtterly cast off, and depriued of his Apostleshippe: and doth most graciously, as it were, confirme againe vnto him his dignity, and commit his sheepe and lambes to bee fed of him: Iohn 21. 14. What benefite we are to receiue from this so great & tender mercy, Saint Paul teacheth vs by his own example, when hee sayth, It is a faithfull saying, and worthy by al means to bee receiued, that Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners; for I my selfe was a persecutor, a blasphemer, and an oppressor; neuerthelesse for this cause was I receiued to mercy, that Iesus Christ should first shew on me all long suffering, vnto the example of them, which should in time to come belieue in him vnto eternall life: 1. Timoth. 1. 15. 16. And is all Augustinus de his verbis, Apostoli. one, as if hee should, thus haue spoken to euery spiritually-sicke person, dispairing of himselfe: hee who healed mee, sent mee vnto thee, and bad me goe and tell thee how long I was diseased, and how soone healed; how he called vnto me from out of heauen, and with one word cast mee downe, with another raysed me vp, with the third, freed and crowned mee: what feare you? why doe you doubt? I who am now sound, standing and secure, speake to you sicke, weake, and distrusting; Are you diseased? come and be healed; blinde? come and receiue sight: and you that are recouered, bee thankefull. And the Euangelist doth propound vnto vs this vnspeakeable loue of Christin three Parables: of the wandring sheepe lost, grt, and prodigall child; in the first whereof, as the cause of default, may bee noted infirmity: in the second, ignorance. in the third, stub∣bornenesse: yet the wandring sheepe is sought vp & brought home, the lost groat found, the vnthrifty childe recey∣ued at his returne; for there is no malady so great, but that the Almighty and mercifull Phisitian, will and can heale Luke, 15. And therefore calleth the wearied and heauy loa∣den to come vnto him, and promiseth rest, Math. 11. 28.
Est inter Grsonis opera de hac Christi sententia trac∣tatus noninu∣tilis. that where sinne hath flowed, grce may ouerflow, Rom. 5. 20. Of this point more hath already beene deli∣uered. Iesus said vnto him, Ʋerily I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Hitherto some thing hath beene spoken of the good theeues reproofe of his blaspheming fellow, and his owne Peti∣tion made vnto Christ: now followeth Christs answere, and grant made vnto the same. Wherein hee promiseth to giue him Paradise; and this promise is illustrated from the cir∣cumstance of time (this day) from the society of those with whom hee shall conuerse there (with me) from the certain∣ty of performance, confirmed by an oath, (Ʋrily I say vnto thee.) Ʋerily I say vnto thee. This Amen D vocabulo Amen, Ange∣lus Caninius, de locis Scripturae Hebraiis, cap. 5. A Christo vsurpatur in Euangelio Io∣hann quin∣quagie; ab Apo∣stolo Paulo de∣cies & octis, in Apocalypsi quinquies: in Epistolis Iohan∣nis ter. here vsed, and Englished verily, is a ve∣hement asseueration, and frequent with Christ, oftentimes doubled in the Gospell, according to Saint Iohn; and an Hebrew word now receiued euery where, and is (as it were) made a free Denizon in all languages, deriued from that Roote, by which fidelity and truth is signified: and the vse thereof is twofold; first, in wishing or desiring, and is translated by the 70. Interpreters, So be it, Deut. 27. 15. As in those solemne blessings and cursings, to which all the people answered, Amen. Secondly in earnest affirmations; and is as much as truely, and stedfastly, without any doubt: and hath the force and power of an oath, Esay 65. 16. Math. 6. 18. Iob 14. 12. And is added in the shutting vp & ending of publike prayer, when the whole Church, the Minister pronouncing the words, testifieth thereby their assent, 1. Cor. 14. 16. And Respicit A∣pstolus ad mo∣ren & consue∣tudinem ve Ecclesiae, in qud praeeunte voce Ministri pepulus cū precando tum gratias agendo respondebat Amen. Andre lud . Chrysost. Homilia, 35. i. . Episiol ad Corinthios: & sao tempore ait Hyronimus Ecclesiam, instar tonitrui rebore Amen. G. lats. in this place it is a strong and
forceable affirmation, whereby erernall life is assured vnto the thiefe. Neither did Christ beginne the tenure of his pardon vnto him (for any other cause) with this Amen, or verily I say vnto thee, but onely to secure his soule, that whatsoeuer hee promised, should accordingly bee perfor∣med. It is the Gueuara de monte Caluariae parte 2. cap. 22. vsuall practise amongst men, first to make a bare promise, afterwarde to adde an oath, for greater strength: but the sonne of God doth here the contrary; first, sweareth, then promiseth Paradise. The reasons, why he did so, are these: 1. The thing promised was excellent; 2. the thiefe to whom it was promised, a great sinner, 3. the promi∣ser seemed to the world, but of small credite, who did now hang vpon the Crosse in shame and torment. 4. there was present at the same time the dregges and base off-scowring of the people, and the malitious Iewes; wherefore seeing the stubbornenesse of the Iewes was inflexible, and the faith of the thiefe yet weake and tender, Christ added an oath, then his promise, that so all occasion of doubt and mi∣strust might be remoued, Christ is not onely mercifull vnto those that belong Platzius in luco succiso erro∣rum Pontificio∣rum loco 30. Sadael contra Monachos Burdigalenses Articul. 33. Ioh. Scharpius de Iustificatione heminis coram Deo controuer∣sia 4. vnto him, but will haue them also resolued of his loue and kindnesse; therefore, surely (saith the Prophet) he hath borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrowes, Esay 53. 4. And, as I liue (the Lord himselfe speaketh) I desire not the death of the wicked, but that he returne from his way and liue, Ezech. 33. 11. And to this end offereth to our view breathing examples; for he Bernardus sermone de festo Magdale∣nae & super Cantica. serm 23. disdained not the sinnefull womans teares, the Cananitish supplication, the theeues confessi∣on, the woman taken in adultery, the denying Disciple. nor the persecutor of his Disciples: For it is a saithfull say∣ing, and worthy to bee receyued, that hee came to saue sin∣ners, &c. 1. Tim. 1. 15. And the thiefe Idem Epist. . ad Brunonem Coloniensem. hauing this aduan∣tage of a short way vnto saluation, content with the bridge of the Crosse, passed ouer from the region of death to the land of the liuing; from the myre and clay of this world to the pleasant delights of Paradise. Vse. Wicked therefore and irreligious is that Achademicall
opinion of doubting, full of danger, the forge of despaire, the gulfe of hell, confirmed by the late councell (or rather as∣sembly) of Sssione 6. c. 12. Trent, against God admonishing Nam in fine Sessionis tertiae, habuit pam de Iustificatione concionem fra∣terculus quidā Carmelita An∣tonius Marine∣rius, in qua do∣cebat perspicuè eos qui Christi Iustitia nitun∣tur per dubia∣tionum labyrin∣thos non errare: Gentiletus in examine consi∣lij Tridentini, lib. 2. sessione 4. the contra∣ry: taught of Cardinall Bellarmine Lib. 3. de Iu∣stificatione, cap. 3. with others, but very Flacius Illiricus de sec∣tis, dissentioni∣bus & contra∣dictionibus doctrinae, reli∣gionis, scriptorū & doctorum Pontificiorum. Cassander in consultatione articulo 4. vncertainely: For Catharinus Archbishop of Compsa, and Dominicus a Soto, a Spanish Diuine, for diuers yeeres toge∣ther, did write sharpely one against another, about some weighty points of Religion, (and the books are yet extant:) Among the which, the first of fiue (for so many were que∣stionable betweene them) was this, concerning the full as∣surance of the fauour of God, of doubting and despaire. The summe of the Chemnitius in examine con∣silij Trident: parte prima, titulo de fide Iustificante. Platzius in Luco succiso errorum Pontificiorum, in titulis, 74. 75. &c. Church of Romes doctrine is this; That the godly in a generall are not to doubt of the promises of God, of the power and merit of the death of Christ, of the vertue of the Sacraments: but concerning the application to euery particular man, (considering his owne indisposition) they ought to feare, becausE none is able to know by the certainety of faith, that he standeth in the fauour of God; so he may hope well, and promise to himselfe all good, but must leaue it tossed in the vnquiet waues of vncertainety, without hauing any assured confidence; and there be strong reasons, why they striue so eagerly in the maintenance of this position. For they Tregedinus in locis. know full well that all the gaine of Popish Marchandise dependeth vpon it; for the conscience seeking some certaine and stayed comfort, hearing that e∣uen faith apprehending Christ in the promise, must doubt of the pardon of sinnes, beginneth to bethinke her selfe of some other meanes, whereby shee may bee assured; and for this purpose, besides the duties commanded of God, are deuised, will worships, vowes, Pilgrimages, inuocat on of Saints, vndue workes, and of supererogation, and that gainefull traf∣fique of buying and selling of Masses; and in a word, the whole puddle of Romish superstition. But if all these will not serue to quiet and appease the troubled conscience, then
they are put off to the benefit Pargatorium est instar foci, missallae. Mili∣us in expliati∣one Augustanae confessionis partesecunda. Luther deeply considering these abuses, affirmed boldly, that if there were no other cause why we should forsake the Church of Rome, yet this one were sufficient, their doctrine of doubting. Wherfore that this so dangerous an error may both more plainely be dis∣couered, and also remoued out of the minds of such as bee truly religious, these few considerations are soberly & with reuerence to be weighed. 1. The holy Ghost Tilenns Syn∣tagmatis Theolog. parte 2. titulo 43. de Iustificatione. doth testifie that those, who be iustified by faith, are reconciled to God, their sins paerdoned, and shalbe partakers of eternall life, and witnesseth to our spirits that we are the sons of God, Rom. 8. 16. and is the earnest of our inheritance, Eph. 1. 14. Wherefore, seeing there is a double certainety, one plaine and easie to be known (of those things which may be perceiued by the light of sense and reason, of which sort are the first principles and conclusions de∣duced from them, & matters taught by experience) another lesse apparant and euident (of such things which do rest vpon the credit and reputation of a true witnes, so that the grea∣ter the authority of the witnes is, the assent of the beleeuer is more firme and strong) therefore it must follow of ne∣cessity, that such things as are assured vnto vs by the testi∣mony of God, whose authority is the chiefest, are without all question infallible, and do beget in the heart of man the highest degree of assurance. And for this cause, whosoeuer doth belieue and knoweth that he belieueth, must resolue with himself, that as certainely his sins are pardoned, as he doth belieue the Gospel, which promiseth this grace and gift of God to the faithful: otherwise he maketh God a liar, Ioh. 5. 10. 2. This Popish doubting is Chemnitius in Exam. Concilij Trident. parte Iitulo de fide iustificant. contrary to the nature of sauing Faith, which is not an opinion or coniecture, or wauering, but an vnmoueable Bernardus Epistola contra Abailardum Hereticum: Nō∣ne si stuctuat fides, in anisest & spes nostra? stulti ergo mar∣tyres nostri su∣stinentes am acerba proper incerta, &c. ground of things hoped for; (because Faith is the substance of those things, which depending in expectation, seeme to bee without any es∣sence, and by beleeuing are made to appeare, and to be in a sort present. And in this respect is called a conuincing argu∣ment
and demonstration of things not scene; and therefore the Tilenus in Syntagmatis Theologici part. 2. titulo 43. euidence which by the light of nature is incomprehensi∣ble, is made cleare and manifest by the light of grace;) and a full perswasion of the heart, vpon which whosoeuer resteth, hee quencheth all the fiery darts of the deuill, (among which the sharpest are these; distrusting, doubtings of the fauour of God, and deceits of vnconstant coniectures, and as a purified instrument of sense discemeth blacke from white, sweet from sowre, so doth it know diuine trueth, from humane va∣nities, and the assurance of faith from fleshly securitie. For he is taught by the holy Ghost, to vnderstand what bles∣sing God hath bestowed vpon him.) The safe and strong anchor of the soule; for it stayeth and holdeth vs fast amidst all the waues of doubting, arising in the Sea of this world; so that our ship is brought at the last by a right course to the quiet hauen of heauenly tranquillitie Heb. 6. 19. & 10. 22. & 11. 1. For the Hilarius Ca∣none 5. in Mat∣thaum. kingdome of heauen, which the Pro∣phets spake of, Iohn preached and Christ professed, and was in his power to bestow, must be perfectly hoped for with∣out any doubting, else no iustification at all, if faith be in∣constant and variable. 3. The vse of the Tilenus ibid. vt supra. Sacraments should be vnprofitable, and not without suspition of mockerie, if that grace whereof they are seales vnto the beleeuers, be doubtfull and vncer∣taine; neither can or may he who receiueth the signes of the body and bloud of Christ, certainly beleeue, that that body was crucified, and that bloud shed for him, and that he doth now and shall liue euer by the power of his death. But, all that are baptised into Christ, haue put on Christ. For bap∣tisme is properly the sacrament both of the new birth, and adoption and investiture of the sonnes of God, Galath. 3. 27. and the Cup of blessing which we blesse, is the communion of the bloud of Christ. 1. Corinth. 10. 16. into whom through faith by the power of the holy Ghost, wee are ingrafted, as branches into the vine, members to the head, and shall be made partakers of eternall life and glory. For Sacraments are the seales of righteousnesse, Rom. 4. 11. which the Lord
hath added to his promise of grace, thereby to strengthen the weaknesse of our faith; and to be (as In locis com∣munibus classe 1. cap. 31. de Sacramentis. Luther speaketh) the day starre, vpon which we looke, pointing at the rising of the sunne of grace. 4. This doctrine of theirs chargeth the holy Ghost with vntruth, who doth in particular testifie to euery beleeuer the forgiuenesse of his sinnes; whom God hath sent forth into our harts, and by whom we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. who also hath sealed vs, and giuen vs the earnest of that his spirit in our hearts, 2. Corinth. 1. 22. Ephes. 1. 14. Now sealing is vsed in such things which we desire should be safely and as∣suredly conueyed to those vnto whom they doe belong; and that to this end, that all suspition, and the least doubt which may fall out, may be taken away. And an earnest is a pledge or caution put in, whereby a promise giuen is so ratified, as there be no place left for doubting. And yet we cannot deny, but that faith is oftentimes tryed and shaken with temptation, for there is a strife between the spirit and the flesh, euen in the holiest and best sanctified, Romanes 7. 19. &c. And iustifying faith is not alwaies a bright bur∣ning lampe, but sometimes a smoking flax, yet Christ who is full of mercy and compassion will not quench it Matth. 12. 20. neither must we iudge of our selues at all times ac∣cording to the present feeling of spirituall comfort and ioy; for often God doth deny that to his deare children, whose iudgements are a great depth; but if there abide in vs an endeuour and a desire, it is enough. So he accepted of Per, in whose heart faith failed not, but Amabatintus quem negabat foris, tametsi affectus metu, constrictus tor∣peret. Leo primus serm. 9. de passione. Mansit files actu primo, secundum inter∣cepit periculi metus. confession of his mouth. In a moment and for a little while God may forsake his, but with great compassion will he gather them, Esay 54. 7. Therfore let euery faithfull one Augustinus de verbis Dom. serm. 28. & in Psal. 88. presume not of his owne merit, but of Christs mercy, for by grace we are saued Eph. 2. 8. To publish that which thou hast receiued is not pride but duty, and because the promise is sure, not according to our deserts but his goodnesse, therefore none should feare to tell of that whereof he cannot doubt. 5. Neither small nor few absurdities would follow, if we
be vnresolued of the assurance of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes. For first, if by doubting wee Sonius tom. 2. expositionis articulorum confess. August. articulo 4. de iustificatione. could apprehend eternall life, or if it did iustifie a man, then no promise more fit and conuenient for the same, then that of the law; which, by reason of the vnperformable condition annexed therevnto of perfect obedience, and fulfilling the same, doth leaue the conscience in continuall doubting. Se∣condly, if iustification and pardon of offences be vncer∣taine, or if beleeuers are to doubt thereof, then should we not pray with the Apostles, Lord encrease our faith, Luke 17. 5. nor with the Father in the Gospell, I beleeue, Lord helpe my vnbeliefe, Mark. 9. 24. Neither the Apostle rightly admonish vs, to prooue our selues whether wee bee in the faith, and examine whether Christ Iesus be in vs, except we be repro∣bates. 2. Corinth. 13. 5. 6. This doctrine of Tzegodinus in locs, titulo de dilectione Dei. doubting is to be auoided, and hated of euery Christian, as many waies hurtfull. For first, it nourisheth and mainteyneth that proud confidence which ariseth from the conceit of our owne righteousnesse. Secondly, it is the very butchery and torment of weake consciences. Thirdly, it offereth occasion to despaire of Gods mercy. Fourthly, it extinguisheth the trueth and sinceritie both of faith and loue towards God. Fiftly, it taketh away the patience and constancie in suffering perse∣cution, for the name of Christ, and witnesse bearing vnto his Gospell. Away then with this vnsetled doubting, let it be remoued out of the hearts of the faithfull, which ma∣keth God a lyar Ioh. 5. 10. for Chrysostomus de compunct. true faith and constant hope is the ground-worke of our saluation, and the guide vnto euerlasting life. It is a worthy speech of an ancient Bernardus in serm. de frag∣mentis septem misericordiarū. Fa∣ther, I consider three things in which my whole hope consisteth; the loue of Gods adoption, the trueth of his promise, and power of performance: now then let my foolish thoughts murmure so much as they will, saying, who art thou? how great is that glory? what merits hast thou to obtaine it? I will answer confidently, I know whom I haue beleeued, and am perswaded, because he hath adop∣ted me in his exceeding loue, who is true in his promise, and able
to make performance, can doe whatsoeuer hee pleaseth. And this is a threefold corde, which can hardly bee broken, (which I beseech you let vs take fast hold of,) and is let downe vnto vs from heauen our country, vnto earth our pri∣son; this draweth vs vp into the presence of the great God who is blessed for euer. AMEN. Ʋerily I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with mee in Paradise. Christ in mercy prayed for his enemies, in loue prouided for his mother and disciple, now in truth sweareth vnto the thiefe, and by oath assureth entrance into Paradise &c. O how great is this bounty of God, how Idem in me∣ditationibus. vnspeakeable the change wrought by the power of the hand of the most highest! yesterday thou wert a thiefe in darknesse, to day a Saint in brightnesse of light, yesterday in the mouth of the Lyon, today in the hand of the Mediator: yesterday in the gate of hell, today in the ioy of Paradise. Now this name of Paradise is of a twofold acceptation or signification; the one according to the letter, a materiall and terrestriall place wonderfully situated Tertull. in A∣pologet. cap. 43. Lactnt. lib. 2. August. lib. 8. super Genes. ad literam cap. 10. & de ciuitate Dei l. 13. c. 21. asilius  hom. 11. Suidas in vce Paradiso. Bar-Cephas in suis de paradiso libris tribus. Isidorus Hispa∣lensis in Ety∣mologico. Francisus Iunius in exposi 3. prim. cap. Gneseos. toward the East in Eden, (the very storehouse of all delightfull pleasure,) vnder a sweet climate and influence of heauen, and wished tempe∣rature of aire, replenished with euer greene and flourishing trees, casting forth most pleasant smell, full of light, farre exceeding all the delectable beauty and grace which sense is able to comprehend. A diuine place, wonderfully fitting that honorable estate of man, wherein he was created, &c. and in which before the fall God set him, as in a stately ca∣stle or pallace. The other Leo primus serm. de conuer∣sione latronis. figuratiue and mysticall, that heauenly receptacle wherein the faithful shal enioy eternall blisse 2. Cor. 12. 2. 4. Apoc. 2 7. And Christ hath opened vnto vs the way Arnoldus Carnotensis de ltimis septem Christi verbis. into this garden, by the key of his crosse and death, that so wee may bee made partakers of those good things which
neyther eye hath scene, nor eare heard, nor can enter into the heart of man: 1. Cor. 2. 9. And this is that Paradise which Christ here promiseth to the thiefe; and this promise far exceedeth all humane possibility to make it good, and is vttered not from the wood of the Crosse, but the throne of power: for now he who complayned before Nam sunt qui hoc Christi ver∣bum, quarto in loco pronunciatū existimat. that hee was forsaken, doth not entreate the Father in behalfe of the thiefe, but by his owne authority taking away the guilt of all offences, presently sanctifieth the wicked, exalteth him to heauen, and placeth him in glory. Christ Iesus our Sauiour is not a bare and naked man,  but also true and euerliuing God: For 1. the Chimnitius in locis communi∣bus parte 1. Danaeus Isago∣ges, parte 1. l. 1. cap. 41. titles giuen him doe euince this truth; as when hee is stiled Iehouah, Esay 8. 13. Zach. 12. 10. Lord of Lordes, Apoc. 17. 14. our righteousnes, Ierem. 23. 6. the wisdome of God (which is in God his Essence, and therefore must Christ bee the sonne by nature) 1. Cor. 1. 24. the searcher of the reines and heart, Apoc. 2. 13. by his infinite knowledge foretelling things to come, Math. 24. 2. Marc. 13. 2. and this is proper to God, 1. King. 8. 39. 2. His workes doe testifie his Godhead; for hee created the world, Ierem. 17. 10. all things in heauen and earth, vi∣sible and inuisible, Coloss. 1. 16. and without him was made nothing that was made, Iohn 1. 3. hee saueth vs, Titus 3. 5. and giueth eternall life, Iohn 10. 28. hee doth the same workes which the Father by equall power, not by com∣mandement from another, but of his owne authority. 3. His astonishing miracles are demonstrations of his Deity, Iohn 14. 11. neyther doth hee worke them himselfe, but giueth others also power to doe them in his name: and this power is from God alone: 1. Corinth. 12. 9. Math. 10. 28. Act. 3. 6. And that it should be so, was long before told by the Prophet, Esay. 61. 1. 4. He is eternall, and therefore God; (this consequent was held to bee most certaine by the Iewes, who belieued that Christ must abide for euer, Iohn 12. 34. Ezech. 37. 25)
Infinite, and in all places; Math. 18. 20. sustaining and pre∣seruing all things by his prouidence, and bearing them vp by his mighty word, Heb. 1. 3. But I cease to adde more reasons for the confirmation of this point, whereof none amongst vs maketh any question. Let vs oppose the power of Christ, against all the attempts of wicked men, and temptations of the diueil whatsoeuer: for, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God who iustifieth, Rom. 8. 33. neither can wee doubt of his me∣rit or power: not of his merit, for hee is the beloued sonne, Ephes. 1. 6. not of his power, for thus hee comforteth his Church; My sheepe heare my voyce, and they ow me, and I giue them euerlasting life, and none can pul them out of my hands Ioh. 10. 28. 2. We are not to be ashamed of Christ, or by any feare drawn Ʋse, 2. from our faith and confidence, neyther in respect of the multi∣tude, or greatnesse of those, who in the world set themselues against him; Wherefore that exhortation of Saint Paul, to his scholler, is most excellent: I charge thee in the sight of God which quickneth all thinges, and before Iesus Christ, who vnder Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confessi∣on, that thou keepe this commandement, to follow after righteousnesse, godlinesse, faith, loue, patience and meek∣nesse: fight the good fight, and lay holde on eternall life, without spot and vnrebukeable, vntill the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ, 1. Timoth. 6. 13. 14. And doth himselfe openly confesse, that he is not ashamed of the of Christ, for it is the power of God vnto saluation to euer none that be∣leeueth, Rom. 1. 16. And Basilius Ho∣milia de 40. Martyribus. Eusebius hist. Ecclesiast. l. 8. cap. 3. hereof proceed that speech of the Christians so often vttered, when pcuting Ty∣rants endeuoured, eyther by the allurement of sweet pro∣mises, or threatnings of dreadfull torments to draw them from their holy profession, (We are Christians.) And Ig∣natius Iguatius. stood so resolued, that (if the choice were offered) hee had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch. 3 Our whole trust and confidence must bee setled on no
man, nor Angell whatsoeuer, but Christ alone, who is onely able to saue vs: for hee is the way, the truth and the life, and no man commeth to the Father but by him, Iohn 14. 6. neither is there saluation in any other name, Act. 4. 12. for it pleased the father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell, and through peace made by the bloud of his Crosse to reconcile to himselfe all things both which are in earth, and which are in heauen. Colosse. 1. 19 20. who is made vnto vs of God, wisdome, righteousnesse, san∣ctification and redemption (as it is written) let him that reioyceth reioyce in she Lord: 1. Cor. 1. 30. 31. Ʋerily I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Christ heard the Bernardus de passione Domi∣ni cap. 9. request now, not of a thiefe, but his confessor, his spouse, and comforteth him with a fitting pro∣mise according to the petition made, (verily, in truth, I say vnto thee, this day thou shalt be with me in Paradise,) To thee, who diddest hang vpon the Crosse in torment; with me, thou shalt now bee in the Paradise of pleasure: wonderfull loue! exceeding goodnesse! for he saith not, thou shalt bee  Paradise, but in Paradise with me; thou shalt be sa∣tisfied with the fruition of him whome thou desirest: thou shalt beholde him in Maiesty, whom thou diddest confesse when hee was in infirmity: neyther doe I delay to performe that which I promise, but to day thou shalt bee with me, &c. Thus sweet heareth, promiseth, giueth speedily, &c. This Con not put ouer to Arnoldus Carnotensis, de septem vltimis Domini verbis. Purgatory, (to sinne re∣uenging ) to darke and obscure places: none con∣trary affected dare presume to alledge ought against this vouchsafed fauour. The punishment of the Crosse, (nay grace not punishment) abolisheth all offences, and the soule now hastning to leaue the Tabernacle of the body, wil∣lingly departed; neyther did any feare of punishment molest or grieue the conscience, which knew she was washed with the abundantly-flowing bloud of Iesus Christ. The Souls of men so soone as they be loosned from the
prison of the body, are z either receiued into heauen (do en∣ioy y Laurentius Humfridus contra Campia∣num Ratione prima. endlesse blisse) or thrust downe into hell (bee afflicted with eu erlasting torment.) For there be only two wayes, the broad and the narrow; two gates, the wide and the straight, Math 7. 13. Luc. 13. 24. two different conditions of men, sheepe on the right hand, and goates on the left; two rewards after this life, the crowne or condemnation; two places, the bosome of Abraham for Lazarus, or the gulfe of hell for the gluton; no Augustinus Hypognosticcon, lib. 5. third can bee found in Scripture; and hee that is Idem de pec∣catorum meritis & remissione, cap. 28. not with Christ, cannot bee but with the diuell; For the holy word of God propoundeth vnto vs but Tilenus Syn∣tagmatis Theo∣log. parte 2. Titulo de Pur∣gatorio. a twofold time, one of the race, another of the goale; of sowing and rea∣ping, of seedetime and haruest; of labour and rest, of the battel, and the victory, of the fight and triumph: whereof that is li∣mited within the boundes of this life, Rom. 8. 18. Gal. 6. 10. and therefore this presently beginneth when we once haue ended the other. And the Schoolemen themselues vnderstand none other, vnder the name of their Viatores or Trauellers, then such as yet liue in the world. Therefore that Meteor or Ignis fatuus Purgatorij. imagined fire of Purgatory, vanisheth & commeth to nothing; which the curious Chemnitius in Exam. Con∣silij, Trident. parte 3. tit ulo de Purgatorio Plato in Phe∣done, & de Re∣pub. lib. 10. spe∣culations of Philosophers, (Tertullianus aduersus Her∣mogenem. Patriarkes of heretiques) the doubtfull Chemnitius plenissime in examine consilij Tridentini, parte 3. Titulo de Purgetorio. disputations of some Fathers first kindled, the vain toies and fables of lying Homrus Odyssea: 11. Virgilius Aenead. lib. 6. Poets, tickling the eares of foolish men, afterward nourished; fained apparitions of Ghosts, Platzius in Luco suceiso errorum Pontifici∣rum loco. 76. and spirits, and idle dreams of wel fed Monks. increased; & at the last the Chemnitius, loco superius citato. Schoole-Diuines quickned when it was dying; whose learning proceeded from the Sorbon of Paris, and consisted vpon a mixture of Scripture & Philosophy, much like a double formed Cornelius Agripade vanitate scienti∣rum, cap. 97. Carnicina Vtopiana. Centaure; and these hucksters of Gods word (especi∣ally the latter sort) violently wresting the scriptures vnto a strange sense with their Questions and Quodlibets, haue ex∣posed our holy faith and profession to the scorn & dirision of Epicures and worldlings. For of this Ʋtopian shambles of
mens soules, no one title can bee found in the bookes of the old & new testament rightly vnderstood, which notwith∣standing they striue to hale by enforcement to the confir∣mation of their opinion. Therefore for the remouing this error out of mens minds, who are not besotted with their owne follies, the strength of arguments, the authority of Fathers, the confession of the Patrons hereof themselues may bee effectuall. Of all which somthing shall be said, but very briefly: following the maner of those, who when they will sell a great Athenagoras in Apologia pr Christianis. quantity of corn, or any other cōmodity bring but a little for a sample of the whole; or make trial of wine or hony by the tasting of a small portion, or of Cos∣mographers, Florus in prologo historiae suae. Arguments. who describing the globe of the habitable world, comprehend the whole in a narrow table. 1. Death taketh Lectius in praescriptionibus Theologiis contra fabrum. away all the meanes of procuring saluation after∣ward; for when wee are once departed from hence, there is no place left for repentance, satisfaction is to no purpose; life is here either lost or Cyprianus ad Demetrianum: Iustinus Mar∣tyri Dialogo cum Tryph one Iudaeo. kept; as God findeth thee in the day, when he calleth thee out of the world, so shal he iudge thee in the last; and this is the vtmost bound of things Augustinus de Fide, ad Pe∣trum Diaconū. be∣longing to happines; for the time to obtain euerlasting life, God hath giuen men only in this; in which repentance also is auailable. For a man may here forsake his sin, and amend it: which whosoeuer doth not now, in the world to come hee may haue a sorrow for his offences, but shal find no pardon at Gods hands; there may be a prouocation to grief, but no amend mentiof the will; therfore the dead can receiue then no be∣nefite from the care either of themselues or of others. 2 God in Christ hath pardoned the sin and remoued the punishment; it is therefore meere folly that any should bee disquieted in his mind, seeking by what means of satisfacti∣on he may deliuer himselfe out of Purgatory: for the death of Christ is the remission of sins, the abolishing of transgression, the freedom from error, & the receiuing of grace; therfore let vs then boldly without feare come vnto our Redeemer, who by vndergoing the punishment without taking the of∣fence hath remoued both the offence & the punishment. And
though God exercise with sondry afflictions those his chil∣dren, whose sins he hath forgiuen, yet they be chastisments not punishments, (inflicted for admonition, Augustinus tractatu 1 24. in Iohannis Euan∣gelium. not vnto condem∣nation) and wholesom medicines, which are applied to this end, for the manifestation of our deserued misery, amendment of our slippery life, subiect to falling into offences, and exercise of necessary patience. 3 If we grant that there is a Iohannis Chassanio in locis communi∣bu, l. 2. c. 3. de commentitio Purgatorio. Purgatory, then it is to be sup∣posed to haue been, either before the comming of Christ or after, but neither of these can be proued, & therfore there is none: That there was any such place before Christ, wherein the soules departed the body were tortured, there can bee found neyther testimony nor example, in the Law or Pro∣phets to auer and confirm the same; & if we yeeld that such tormeuts were first appointed vnder Christ, then is the con∣dition of Christians far worse then that of such, who liued vnder the law: and so much should bee derogated from the benefit of our Sauiour, whose grace is opposed to the law of Moses, Ioh. 1. 7. for by it we are saued, Eph. 2. 8. And God sent his son into the world, not to condemne the world, but that it might be saued through him, Ioh. 3. 17. Neither could this a∣gree with that promise; whereby he assureth refreshing vnto those who labor and be heauy laden, Mat. 1 1. 28. but it should rather lay more burdens vpon vs then release any; and not take away but retaine sins, to be satisfied for, and to be purged after death. And so the death of Christ should be frustrate, of no moment or power. But to thinke or speake this, is ab∣surd, and contrary to all godlines, for he himselfe hath purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3 and his bloud doth clense vs from all our trans∣gressions, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. & Reuel. 1. 5. 4 If the faithful be iustified (which none can wel deny, but he who denieth the scripture to be true) then haue they peace with God, Rom. 5. 1. Esay 57. 2. and the spirit pronounceth them blessed who die in the Lord; for presently they rest from their labors; & there is added a N. particle of consent, (euen so;) Apoc. 14. 13. But to be in peace and rest from labour, and to suffer hellish torments for some yeeres together, are incompeti∣ble,
and cannot stand together, whatsoeuer the Tridentine councell hath decreed; of which it may truly be said in way of admonition which was to the Troians of the Virgilius 2. Aed. haec in vstros fabrica∣ta est machina murs. Ips dli fabri∣cator Epaeus. Greciā horse. (This engine is made to be the destruction of your Citie,) and of the Pope, as of Epaeus (he is the deuisor of that frau∣dulent work.) For there be no disputations which were had there, extant (as was the vse in ancient and lawful councels) but a few rotestatio concionatorum aliquet Augu∣stanae Confessi∣onis aduersus Concisium Tri∣dentinum. Gentileus in examine Conci∣lij Tridenti, lib. 5. Carolus Moli∣naeus in consilio super actis Con∣silij Tridentini sectione 99. Pluressi quis desideret ratio∣ones, petere eas licet in Apolo∣gia Graecorum,  in Synodo Flo∣rentina habit. Authority of anciēt fathers against Pur∣gatory. Iustinus Mar∣tyr lib. quaeso∣n & resonsi∣onm ad Ortho∣doxos, quastio∣ne, 75. naked decrees & Canons published, because for the greatest part they were deuised at Rome by the Bishop of that See, and (his fit instruments and creatures) Monks and their Sophisters: and so continually sent vp & caried by the swift messengers, who went to and againe from Rome to Trent: so that it grew to be a common By-word, that short∣ly the Post would bring the holy Ghost in a capase or budget from Rome, whereby the irreligious dissembling of these Tridentine deceiuers was scoffed at; who pretended that by earnest prayer, disputations and conferences they searched out the truth, and so as the holy Ghost inspired them pen∣ned and made Canons, when as in very truth those holy Fathers, euery one in his order, did nothing else, but with a graue nod confirm the decrees of their Iupiter of S. Angelo, pronouncing one word onely (but that very misticall) Pla∣cet it liketh vs. After the x departure of the soules from the body the righteous are forthwith separated from the vnrighteous, and brought by the ministery of Angels to their appointed pla∣ces; the soules of the righteous vnto Paradise (where they enioy the company and sight of Angels and Archangels & of Christ Iesus the Sauiour of the world) the soules of the wicked into the pit of hell; & euery one kept in his deserued place vntill the day of the resurrection and recompence. In what Olympiodo∣rus in 1 1. caput Elesiasiis. Ful∣g re∣mne pecca∣to rm lib. 2. . 8 place soeuer a man is taken, when he dieth, whether light or darke, that is, whether in the filthy puddle of sinne, or in pure holines, of conuersation; in the same degree and order shall he continue for euer; for either he doth rest in the light of endlesse blessednes with the righteous, and Christ our Lord; or shall be tormented in darknes with the wicked, and the diuell, Prince of this world. God when
hee healeth our sinnes, and suffereth no skar, no token of any wound to remaine; but with the cure giueth also beauty, and comelinesse; for so soone as he freeth vs from punishment, he bestoweth also righteousnesse; where is mercy, there is forgiuenesse, where forgiuenesse, no punishment. And, descri∣bing the funerall rites and ceremonies of his time, speaketh elegantly in this sort, Tell mee what meaneth the burning torches at burialls? why are Psalmes and Hymnes then sung? Is it not because we thanke and glorifie God who hath crowned him, who is deceased, deliuered him frō sor∣rowes, griefe and labours, and keepeth him freed from an∣guish and feare of death with himselfe? Are not Psalmes and Hymnes for this end? for all these are the actions and exercises of such as be glad and do reioyce. Remember what is then sung, O my soule return vnto thy rest, for the Lord hath been beneficiall vnto thee. And againe, I will feare none euill, because thou art with me, He that departeth, goeth to rest, (for death is the hauen of quietnesse;) and being Gregorius in lib. 5. expositio∣nis ad 13. cap. 1. lib. Regum. redeemed by the mercy of our Creator, we haue this hea∣uenly gift, that when we are taken out of the earthly taberna∣cle, we be placed in a heauenly mansion; neither is there any forgiuenesse, but in the bosome of our mother the Church, before the day of our departure from hence: for now is the acceptable time, now is the day of saluation, &c. 2. Corinth. 6. 2. If we behold Christ with the right eye of faith, who was P. Lombard. lib. 3. sentent. distinct. 19. crucified vpon the tree for vs, we are then loosned Confession of the aduersa∣ries. from the fetters and chaines of the deuill, so that he cannot finde any thing, wherfore after this life he should punish vs; for by his death (the onely true sacrifice,) what sinne soeuer there was, in regard whereof the deuill held and made vs liable to punishment, that hath Christ taken away: so that he cannot by his temptation preuaile against vs, no not in this life. Though there be Petrus à Soto in Iustitutioni∣bus Christianis. & Roffensis contra Lutherum de Purgatorio. nothing in Scripture which do plain∣ly proue a Purgatorie, yet many things are to be beleeued which are not written. But whatsoeuer hath not authoritie from the Scriptures, we may so iustly deny it, (which be Ie∣romes
words) as it is affirmed. We know, that so long as we liue in this world, wee may be helped by the counsell and with the prayers one of another; but when we shall once come and be cited to stand at the Tribunall and Iudgment seat of Christ, then neither Iob, nor Daniel, nor Noah can en∣treat for any. With what probabilitie then doe the Triden∣tine Fathers decree, that the soules held fast in Purgatory may be released through the intercessions of the faithfull? but especially relieued by the acceptable sacrifice of the Masse? Lib. 2. de Purgaterio cap. 7. & 14. Bellarmine doth ingenuously confesse, that the Church hath not yet determined where this Tantū absse hunc ignem à purgandis pec∣catis putarunt Graec, vt ijs au∣gendis maximè conducere recep∣tam de illo opi∣nionem puta∣runt. ideoque explosam illam condemnatam fuisse à Sancta Quinta & vni∣uersali Synodo, . Apo∣ligia  philosophia medicinable place should be, whether in his green & florishing medow, or in some Noblemans house, an honorable prison, or in a darke and streight dungeon. And indeed it is hard, euen for those, to finde a place for that which is no where, who by their re∣fined wits can vnderprop accidents to stand without subiects. Dialog. lib. 4. 40. & 55. Beda histor. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 1. Eugubinus de lib. 10. cap. 27. Pope Gregorie, who carieth the title to be Great, dare not presume to define any thing thereof vpon the sodaine; yet some other boldly affirme, that it is in Historia Lombardia, Legenda 157. & Danaeus Isagoges Christianae lib. 5. c. 51. St. Patrickes hole in Ireland; others, that it was found out by one Odillo to bee in Aetna a mountain of Sicilie; or in the Popes kitchin, in which a true fire is well maintayned by the reuenewes of this imagi∣narie flame. But I take my hand from the table, and recall my selfe, least I should commit like folly in confuting this monstrous and idle fiction, as the authors did in deuising it; and that which seemeth to be spoken to the honor of God, should tend to his iniurie: for no man can euer perswade these fellowes to forsake their conceiued errors, but (like the Giant Antaeus) when they be cast downe, take stub∣bornnesse for strength; or as Eutolida, who are so farre in loue with their owne sancies, (as she was with her beauty, when she saw herselfe (instead of a better glasse) in the wa∣ter) that they obiect continually their old wornesophisti∣cations g De his omnibus copiosissimè nobiliss. & dectiss. Plssus, de sacrificio Missae supposititio lib. 3. cap. 8. 9. 10. 11. Et Eusebius Captiuus in Actis primi diei, titulo De Purgatorio.
and cauills, and repeat so often ouer, that they be∣come lothsome. No end of disputation can be had with these, neither will they suffer any moderator to take vp the question, and therefore I leaue them to themselues. This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Who is this that shall be in Paradise, and with Christ, and this day? euen the thiefe, not onely not brought vp and instructed in the schoole of Christ, but by committing de∣testable murthers, and vnnaturall bloud-shedding, had en∣raged himself, & endeuoured to extinguish all sense of hu∣manitie: yet neuertheles, he who for his wickednes was con∣demned to shame, is by his faith translated into glory: and the crosse was rather to him an occasion of saluation, then a place of torment. A blessed thiefe therefore, who while he suffered deserued punishment, obteyneth the heauenly kingdome! for vnto him (a man poenally crucified, and hum∣bly confessing,) the Lord saith, this day shalt thou be with mee in Paradise. Arise therefore, ô man, learne to forgiue o∣thers  offending; Arnoldu Carnotensis de vltimis septem Christi verbis. Agebat myste∣rium, qui solue∣bat precium, in Petro demon∣strans, non in se Iustum quicquā debere praesume∣re: In latrone nullum impium posse perire. i∣meat bonus ne pereat per super∣biam des∣peret malus, de multa malitia sua. August. lib. 2. de symbolo & in Psal. 68. increase not the number of transgressions, defer not the time of pardon, the mercy of God is not strei∣ghtned toward any, nor so soon ended that he cannot take away many transgressions: let there be one to aske, there will not be wanting one to heare; let there be a repentant offendor, there will be a gratious forgiuer. This Poenitent is not enioyned fasting for many yeeres, to goe barefoote, or weare sackeloth, but at one instant confesseth, is iustified, is glo∣rified. Consider the time, marke the person: it is the last howre, and a sinnefull person; many were his offences and of long continuance, mercy in a moment taketh them all away; grace and pardon doth not successiuely (by little and little) file off, or eat out his trespasses, but the holy Ghost by asound suddenly made from heauen, discendeth; and all the putryfied rottennesse of his sinnes is dried vp: neither doth there remaine any token of a corrupted wound, which is cleansed with the waters of mercy. Lazarus buried foure
Idem de re∣suscitatione La∣zari quatri∣duani: de verbis Dom. in Euan∣gelim secundū Iohan. serm. 52. daies, and lying in his graue stinketh; now raised, langui∣sheth not with any feeblenesse, commeth forth, is loosed from his bands, setteth at the table, and eateth: Symon is clensed, no stayne of the leprosie appeareth in him, no de∣formitie disfashioneth his countenance, hee enterteyneth Christ, and offereth no signe of feare or infection to such as attended their Master, and eat with him. Mary Magdalen falleth downe at Christ his feete, Quot in so habuit oblecta∣menta, tot de se invenit holo∣causta; convertit ad virtutm numerum, nu∣merū criminū: vt totum serui∣ret Deo in p∣nitentia, quic∣quid ex se Dū contempserat in culpa. Gregor. Mag. hom. 33. weepeth, prayeth, wash∣eth them with her teares, wipeth them with the haire of her head, kisseth, and annointeth them with oyntment; he doth not cast in her teeth, her former lewd and infamous life, nor vpbraid hir by that which he had forgiuen; what∣soeuer he doth, the holy Ghost speedily perfitteth: seeketh supply of helpe from none other; instructeth presently whom he enlightneth, maketh vpon a sodaine fishermen, fishers of men; the ignorant able to teach. In this grace, expectation is not discouraged by delay, neither is there any distance of time between prayer and performance: Da∣uid saith, I haue sinned, the Prophet answereth, the Lord hath put away thy sinne, thou shalt not die. What should I mention the Ninutites, whose repentance found the reuersion of a denounced sentence against them? What should I speake of those two transcedent-sinning Kings Achab and Manasses, whose repentance (such as it was) God infinite in mercy refused not. And among other examples of mercy, this thiefe (of whom we now speake) offereth himselfe a testi∣monie of pardon; an example of hope: who mournefully seeking, findeth; and asking, obteyneth; This day shalt thou be with mee in Paradise. He came to the crosse, besmeared with the Tanlerus in meditationibus vitae Iesu Chri∣sti cap. 43. bloud of others, is washed with the bloud of Christ; he came bloudily affected, and enflamed with crueltie, but was made milde hearted, compassionate, all possessed with loue &c. He had but one member or part of the body free, and came at the last howre of the day into the vineyard, and yet so plyed his worke, that he did his stint, and receiued the wages before the other &c. His prayer was humble and wise, (asking nothing but grace and mercy:) God
therefore who knoweth the secrets of all hearts, in his e∣ternall wisdome, heard him, and opening the abundant rich treasures of his mercies, giueth more then was desired: O Lord how incomprehensible is thy goodnesse! how gratiously hast thou shewed, that thou wouldest not the death of a sinner, but that he should turne and liue! And by this shewing of loue, God hath gotten vnto himselfe a Granatensis postill. pate 2. fria 5. in cna Dom. canone 2. new name; for before, he was called the God of the righte∣ous, (as the God of Abraham, of Isaac and Iacob) and saith, that this is his name, and memoriall for euer, from gene∣ration to generation; and was named their God, because he shewed his sweet loue and almighty power in comforting and defending them, after an especiall manner: but now, when he saith, that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matth. 19. 13. is not onely the God of the righteous, but of sinners also, as those whom he hath saued by his death, healed by his wounds, and redeemed by his bloud. Thus he openeth his bowels, thus he offereth to his the abundance of his mercy. Adde this if you thinke so good, Christian Reader, to the like whereof I haue spo∣ken before in the first word, and tenth obseruation or do∣ctrine; where also the vse and application is set downe: yet I would not let passe this exposition, conteyning both matter of wholsome instruction and much comfort. This day shalt thou be with mee in Paradise. It is not to be passed ouer sleightly that Christ promising heauen to the thiefe, yea confirming it by oath, yet doth neither ease in any part, nor take away that corporall tor∣ment which he suffered. For now hee hangeth pale and wan, with a torne body, waiting for the last office of the hangman executioner; and a little after the souldiers came and brake the legges of him and his fellow, to hasten their death, Ioh. 19. 32. because it was the day of the preparation before the Sabaoth, and that the bodies might not remain vpon the Crosse, on the Sabaoth; for which there was a
particular and speciall law, Deut 21 23, and obserued of Ioshua. cap 10. 26. yet trusting in their owne righteousnes, by vnrighteously murthering of Christ, they brake the whole law of God, streyning a gnat, and swallowing a Camel. Math. 23. 24. Wee are not to measure the greatnesse of Gods loue  towards vs, by the scantling of our sense, and feeling the same. For oftentimes he suffereth those to bee most grie∣uously afflicted, whom he most entirely loueth. The word deuideth and Lutherus in locis, classe. 3. titulo de cruce & calamitate. distinguisheth of Tribulation, into the be∣ginning and the end: and this direction must be ours, and not follow herein our owne conceit, which thinketh euery euill wee suffer to be infinite, and of euery Mathematicall pricke, maketh an endlesse line, so vnskilfull is our reason; death, pestilence, famine, hatred, contempt of the world, and such like are indeed euill, and if wee doe make reason iudge in these, wee must of necessity faint vnder the bur∣den; but for helpe, wee are to lift vp our eyes vnto the hils, and listen to that voyce, I am the Lord thy God: and there∣fore we must iudge of the Crosse, as it is in relation and refe∣rence vnto Gods sauing helpe, and louing kindnesse: for when the Lord doth sometime hide from vs his fauourable countenance, this is no argument of direction, that hee hath forsaken vs, but of dispensation, disposing all things to our good and benefit, who absent and present worketh our saluation, Iob. complayneth, 9 17. (he destroyeth me with a tempest, and woundeth mee without cause, hee will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth mee with bitternesse,) yet neuerthelesse the man so perplexed is tenderly beloued: cap. 42. 8. 12. 1 The vse of this doctrine is twofold; first this may serne to abate the ouer ranke censures of wanton heades, who iudge all castawayes and reiected of God, that are afflicted; and from this imagination, was that outcrie bred, which some made against the Galilaeans, (whose bloud Pilate had ming∣led with the goare of the beasts sacrificed; and those eigh∣teene
vpon whom the Tower of Siloam fell) that they were more grieuous sinners then all the rest. But Christ repres∣seth this malepert and ouer sawcy censure, by adding a wholsome admonition, that they who brought this tidings should themselues speedily repent, lest they also perish, Cursuos affligi patitur Deus rationes à Chry∣sostomo vnde∣cem afferuntur in Homiliae 1. ad Antiochenos de verbis Apo∣stoli, vtere pauco vino, &c. Luke 13. 1. 2. For the calamities which befall any one, should be sermons of repentance vnto eueryone; because they are inflicted, that by them wee might conceiue the sharpenesse of Gods seuerity against sinne. For all who are distressed, are not to be thought, without difference, wic∣ked, because whom the Lord loueth hee doth chastice, Prou. 3. 10. and by many tribulations wee must enter into the kingdome of heauen. Act. 14. 22. The second vse is, for instruction, teaching vs to seeke out some, certaine signes and tokens, whereby wee may be assured that in all our sufferings, God doth remember his mercy, and euen then when hee seemeth to deale most rigorously with vs; and of many, these few may giue some contentment. 1 When he enableth vs to beare whatsoeuer burden is Grineus in com∣mentarijs ad Prophetam Abacuc. layed vpon vs by him: Micah 7. 9. Dauid, Psal. 39. 9. 2 If we retaine in our hearts loue towards God, and faith in him, (so Iob 13. 15. though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, and reproue my wayes in his sight.) 3 If wee continue constantly in the true worship of God, and doe not suffer our selues to bee withdrawne from the same, eyther by alluring promises, or dreadfull threat∣nings, whereof there is a very remarkeable example in the three children, Dan. 3. 17. 4 When God leaueth vs not to our selues, that (induced by the example of others, desperately minded) we offer vi∣olence to our bodies, as Saul did, 1. Sam. 3 1. 3. 5. 5 If the Lord denying earthly help and comfort gran∣teth inward and spirituall consolation, (a change of brasse for siluer:) so was it with Ambros. E∣pist. l. 10. Epist. 82. Stephen, the first Martyr of the new Testament, Act. 7. 56. 6 When God performeth his purposed work by con∣traries,
as to giue liberty by imprisonment, to bring to honour by shame, to deliuer by oppression, to quicken by death, which is most apparant in Ioseph; for God brought him into E∣gypt through the enuy of his Nazianze∣nus. brethren, tried him there by the wantonnesse of a woman, honoured him by the distri∣bution of corne, instructed him with knowledge of inter∣pretation of dreames, for which hee was esteemed of Pha∣raoh. For the diuine wisdome knoweth long before, how to lay the foundation of weighty and great successes to fol∣low, and to dispose and bring to passe things, by meanes seeming contrary: so this Gregorius Magnus, moral. lib. 6. cap. 12. Ioseph was therefore sold of his brethren, that hee might not bee reuerenced or honoured by them; but therefore is hee honoured, because solde; Thus Gods counsell and decree, while it is auoided, it is fulfilled, and mans wisdome when it resisteth, is entangled, Genes. 37. 19, &c. 42. 6. Verily, I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. The thiefe desireth Christ that he would be mindfull of him when he commeth into his Kingdome; Christ pro∣miseth the fruition of his Kingdome vnto him, and enioying of his company there: and this to be performed without delay, or deferring of time: To day thou shalt bee with me in Paradise; and therefore secureth it vnto him by an oath. God is more bountifull in Ambrosius in 23. Lucae. giuing, then man is de∣sirous  in asking. Hee would bestow more then wee can receiue, for he is rich in mercy toward all, Rom. 10. 12. Iacob prayeth,, and the whole of all his petition is boun∣ded in this narrow compasse; Deliuer me O Lord from the wrath of my brother Esau, (who had sworne in the dayes of mourning for his Father, to solemnize two fune∣rals at once) but God superabundantly changeth his mind, maketh him of an enemy a friend; a defender of a destroyer:
Gen. 32. 10. & 33. 4. Solomon requireth but an vnderstan∣ding heart for gouernement, there is added an admirable encrease of honour and riches, such as none of all the Kinges in his dayes should bee like vnto him, 1. King. 3. 9. 13. E∣zechias receiueth the message of death, is warned to set his house in an order, and dispose of the succession, at this hee turneth his face to the wall, prayeth, weepeth, desi∣reth to haue the sentence reuersed; his petition made with the sighes of his heart onely, is accepted, and not life alone, but certaine life of fifteene yeeres addition to his dayes; and as an ouerplus, the remouing of Senacheribs host, who then beleagured Ierusalem, Esay, 38. 5. 6. The thankefull Leper in the Gospell asketh but the clensing of his body, his soule also is washed, Luke 17. 13. 19. And the woman of Canaan tenderly affected toward her daughter thinketh this full satisfaction, if shee may bee dispossessed of the Deuill; but continuing earnest in prayer, receyueth an honou∣rable commendation and a promise so large as heart could wish; (great is thy faith, bee it vnto thee as thou wilt,) and hath her desire fulfilled, her daughter healed in the same moment: Muth. 15. 28. Bee carefull for nothing, but in euery thing by prayer and supplication with thankesgiuing, let your request bee knowne vnto God. Philip. 4. 6. And come with holdnesse vnto the throne of grace, not doubting to obtaine fauour in the time of need, Heb. 4. 16. For the whole Trinity furthereth our prayers; God the sonne setteth vs downe what forme of words wee should vse, Luke 11. verse 2. And, because wee know not what to aske as wee ought, God the holy Ghost helpeth our infirmities, and himselfe maketh inter∣cession for vs with gronings which may not be vttered, Rom. 8. 26. God the Father receyueth our supplications, and most louingly granteth them, Iohn 16. 23. Wherefore thrice happy wee were, if wee could as readily goe vn∣to God in our necessities, as hee is willing to accept vs; for hee is nigh vnto all that call vpon him in truth, hee
will fulfill the desires of them that feare him, and will heare their crie, and will saue them, Que est mi∣sericordia. Deus non tantum postulata tri∣buit, sed inter∣dum etiam non sperata largi∣tur. Tante{que}, si dicere licet, maior est loomi∣nibus humanitate, & beneuolentia, quanto potestate & natura. Saluianus Epistola quarta. Psalme 145. 18. 19. To him then that is able to doe exceding abundantly aboue all that wee aske or thinke, according to the power that worketh in vs, be glory in the Church by Christ Iesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen. Ephes. 3. 20. 21.
THE FOVRTH WORDE. MATTH. 27. 45. 46. Now from the fixth howre was there darknesse ouer all the land vntill ninth houre, and about the ninth houre Iesus cryed with a loud voice saying, ELI ELI LAMMAHSABACTHANI, that is, my God my God why hast thou forsaken me. THE ANALYSIS. THis is the fourth speech or word which Christ our Sauiour spake vpon the Crosse; and some of the ancient Consule Pe∣largum de septē Christi verbis in cruce pro∣nunciatis. Fathers, haue not without iust cause affirmed, that there neuer was a more dolefull or sorrowfull speech vttered in the in the hearing of any man, then is this lamentable complaint of Christ. For the former were wordes mooising to repentance, shewing pietie, and manifesting power: but this is a testimonie
of the greatest humilitie and infirmitie that can be. Before, he prayed for his persecutors, spake to his Mother and be∣loued Disciple, and with the thiefe hanging by him; now, after three houres silence, when he felt the wrath of God, and heauy burthen of sin, (not his but ours, the ransome whereof he payed,) then powred forth with great vehemen∣cie thismournefull complaint out of the 22. Psalme, which he at that present then rehearsed, with the rest vnto the 32. verse, as we may read in Saint Ierome. For when hee was a man of sorrowes, and susteined torments vnconcei∣uable to any humane vnderstanding, and vnexpressable by any earthly tongue, (now left desticute of all worldly com∣fort, yea and of Gods also,) complaineth, and saith that he is forsaken, because he was now in the houre of darknesse, giuen ouer to the will of his persecutors, and had none to help him, Esay 63. 5. stucke fast in the deepe myre, Psalm. 69. 2. compassed about with the sorrowes of the graue, and ouertaken in the snares of death Psal. 18. 5. And in this word are obseruable two things, first the word it selfe vttered, secondly, the precedent miracle. The miracle was the supernaturall and prodigious eclipse of the Sunne, (for so S. Luke in expresse tearmes. Cap. 23. 45. the Sunne was darkned:) and it is described by the greatnesse thereof (darknesse was ouer all the earth; or as some translate it, ouer all that region,) by the continuance (from the third houre vnto the ninth.) For the word it selfe, the second generall point, that is il∣lustrated, first, from the adiunct of time, in which it was spo∣ken, (about the ninth houre.) Secondly, from the formall termes, in which it was deliuered, and those, expressed both in the originall tongue, (the Hebrew, or rather, Syriacke,) and in the Greek, by interpretation, (Eli Eli Lammahsabacthani; that is, my God my God, why hast thou forsaken mee?) And in them are considerable, first the person complaynant, (Christ hanging vpon the crosse.) Secondly, the person to whom the complaint is made, God the Father (my God.) Thirdly, the matter of the complaint: desertion, (why hast thou forsaken
me.) Fourthly, the grieuousnesse of the sorrow then felt, ex∣pressed in the affectionate doubling of the wordes, (my God, my God.) Fiftly, his faith and patience, signified in this pronoune (my) yea manifestly declared, while he confesseth that hee is his God of whom he is forsaken. Now from the sixth houre was there darknesse ouer all the land, vnto the ninth houre. For the better and more full vnderstanding of this place, we must know that the Iewes in the latter times, (for before the captiuitie of Hospinianus de origine & progress sestor apud Iudaeos lib. 1. cap. 1. Babylon there is no mention made of houres in the Scripture) deuided the Censrinu do die natali c. 23. Ioh. Garcoeus de sphera mundi & tmporum ratione. naturall day, which comprehendeth the day and the night, into foure and twenty houres, and these againe into two Cur in 24. horas dies di∣stribuatur. Mestlinus in Epitme Astro∣nomiae lib. 3. twelues; so as they reckoned twelue from the setting of the Sunne to the rising, and so many againe from Sunne-rising to Sunne-set, whereof our Sauiour Christ saith in the Gospell, Iohn 11. 9. are there not twelue houres in the day? so their six a clocke is our twelue, or noonetide. And concerning this eclipse, it was not naturall, but miraculous. For first, no eclipse of the Sunne Augustinus epist. 80. Chitraeus in 27. Matthaei. Lucas Gauricus in Calendari Ecclesiastico. Sethus Cali∣ius in Isagoge Chrono. cap. 48. Garcaeus de Sphera. Elias Rousuerus in Isagoges historicae lib. 1. Mestlinus in Epitome Astro∣nomiae lib. 3. falleth out but at the new moone in the coniunction, when shee commeth to those imagined knots, which the A∣stronomers call the head and taile of the Dragon, and is in∣terposed diametrally between the Sunne and our sight; and, receiuing in her thicke body the sunne beames, kee∣peth the light from vs, and causeth, by her shadow, darknes in some climates. But this eclipse fell out in the time of the opposition of these two lights. For the Iewes solemnized the feast of Passeouer the fourteenth day of the first moneth, Exod. 12. 6. and they vse Mensisdicitur quaudo luna lustrata cursu suo, solem est consequnia, vnd & Hebraeis  nominatur: ficut Graecis , & nos moneth appellamus. Henricus Wolphius de tempore lib. 1. cap. 3. Lalamantius de tempore & cius partibus. Varro de lingu Lata lib. 5. Synodicall moneths, the first day of which, is the coniunction.
2. No eclipse of the Sunne is vniuersall, Lucas Gauri∣cus in Calenda∣rio Ecclesiastico e Nicephor Calisto. Lcus est historiae suae lib. 1. cap. 31. but this couered the whole earth with darknesse, and that by the space of three houres. For knowing that the body of the Moone is lesse then the Sunne, the shadow it makes is sharper aboue then below, in forme of a spire, and couereth but a small part of the earth; so that they who dwell without the com∣passe of it, doe feele either none or very small defect of light: but at this time the inhabitants of the whole earth were enwrapped in darknesse; for Diomsius A∣reopagita epist. 7. ad Polyca pū si modo eus sunt, quae illi at∣tribuuntur ope∣ra. Vide & i eundem Georgij Pachymerae pa∣raphrasin: & Maximi Scho∣lia: de his & Sdas, & Iohannes de sacro Bsc, & Iunctius, as vinctus, & Hero in suis ad ium scholijs. Apollophanes being now with Dionisius Areopagita, in Heliopolis a Citie of Aegipt obserued it, and examining it according to the tables of Aridaeus a famous Astrologer in those daies, which hee composed of the eclipses of the two lights the Sunne and the Moone, perceiued that it was miraculous. The constitution of Heauen at the time of the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, who was crucified in Ierusalem. In the 34. yeere of his age, but accor∣ding to the vulgar accompt in the beginning of his 33. yeere, the third day of Aprill at high noone, when the 4000. yeeres after the fall of Adam and Eua our first Parents were exactly compleat and fi∣nished, Gal. 4. 4. God said vnto the serpent, I will put enmitie betweene thee and the woman, and between thy seede and her seede, it shall breake thy head and thou shalt bruise his heele, Genes. 3. 15. Christ was partaker of flesh and bloud &c. that hee might destroy through death, him, that had the power of death, that is, the deuill, Heb. 2. 14.
The Sunne contrary to nature lost his light in the midde heauen at high noone not farte from the Dragons head, when the Sonne of God brake the head of the Dragon; at the full Moone, at which time the Sunne cannot naturally bee eclipsed, and therefore that darknesse was supernaturall. The Moone cannot shine except shee receiue light from the Sunne, therefore the same now being eclipsed, shee at the same time vnder vs was bereft of her light among the An∣tipodes in Magellaneta, neere the tayle of the Dragon, when our Lord Iesus Christ felt the stinge of the venemous dragon or olde serpents tayle vpon the altar of the Crosse: Saturne now began to arise vpon our horizon, with a quatile malignant aspect, and be∣held the eclipse of both the lights, and by these wee may gather how terrible the face of heauen was at this present. Henricus Buntingus in Chronolog. & in Itinerario sacro.
3. All totall eclipses of the Sunne are not onely seene but to some part of the earth, but also be of a very short continuance; for the Moone being caried with a continuall and swift motion from the West toward the East, cannot long ouershadow the body of the Sunne; but this eclipse continued by three houres, and therefore was not natu∣rall. 4. The Sunne Mstlinus in Epitme Astro∣nomiae lib. 4. beginneth to loose his light, on that part of his body which is toward the West, because the Moone by her proper motion, going from the West to the East, in the beginning of the eclipse, toucheth the westerly brim of the Sunne, with the Easterly skirt of her body, and k Dionisius A∣reopag. epist. 7. & Thomas Ambrosius in suis ad eam Cō∣mentarijs. Nicolaus Lyr Mathi. so by little and little passeth vnder the Sunne, while at the last leaueth him of the East side: but now that part of the Sunne toward the East was first obscured, and last recoue∣red his light againe; and so the Moone began to depart from that side of the Sunne, which she had last couered; and this is aboue and contrary to nature. This strange darkening of the Sunne, contrary to the course of nature, was an apparant token, signifying the  wrath of God, the destruction and blindnesse of the Iews, (in which they continue vntill this day,) as the darkenes of Egypt was a forerunner of Gods displeasure, and the de∣struction of that people, Exod. 10. 22. 23. And so the Sunne and Moone shall lose their light before the dreadfull day of iudgement, and dissolution of the world, Math. 24. 29. For this is the vsuall manner of Gods dealing, to warne before he strike, & (to borrow that speech from the spoiles of the Polybius. . Herodotus in Musis, lib. 6. Gentiles) he sendeth his Heralds to proclaime war, before he maketh it: or (to vse Origens Lib. 4. contrae lsum. Richte∣rus in Axioma∣tibus Ecclesia∣stitis Axioma∣e, 46. words) punisheth none before that hee admonisheth him, threatneth iudge∣ment, and denounceth the ensuing danger. For threates & menaces are premonitions of following vengeance to bee powred vpon obstinate sinners: no otherwise then if a man should liken threatnings to the Physitians practise, who vse thus to vrge their Patiens: If you obserue not my rules and keepe not that dyet which I prescribe, then I
must bee enforced to come vnto launcing and apply cor∣rasiues and sharper medicines, and put you to more paine. Now the most mercifull Lord doth sundry wayes premonish. 1 By the publike Ministery of his word; so he gaue Noah the preacher of righteousnesse to the olde worid, and holy Lot to the vncleane Sodomites, 2. Pet. 2. ver. 5. 6. And sent to the Israelites by the hand of his messengers (whom they laughed to scorne and contemned) before hee raysed vp the King of the Chaldeans to come vp against them, 2. Chron. 36. 15. 16. And by his Prophet denounced destru∣ction vnto the Niniuites except they did speedily repent, Ionas, 3. 2. For wisdome Vide Merce∣rum in sui ad cum locum com∣mentarijs. crieth without, shee vttereth her voyce in the streetes, O yee foolish how long will yee loue foolish∣nesse, and the scorners take pleasure in scorning, and the fooles hate knowledge? turne you at my correction, Pro. 1. 21. 22. 2 By Signes and wonders; of which sort was the earth∣quake in the dayes of Vzziah, Zach. 14. 5. a blazing starre Iose phus, , lib. 6. cap. 31. Cornelius Tacitus histo∣riae, lib. 5. Dionisius refer in Illirico esse duo saxa, quae crpitante concurrunt, cu aliquod impe∣det incolis ma∣lum. Gregorius Magnus Homi∣lia primae in E∣uang elia: prius∣quam Italia gentiligladio ferienda trade∣retur, in coelo, acies vidimus. ipsumque qui postea, humani generis qui fusus est san∣guin ru∣scantes. Ambrosius de funere Theodosij signa quaedam narrat precedentia. Et Cladem Varnen∣sem, in qua grae accepit vulnus Christianus orbis, mult precesserunt prodigia. Callimachus Ex∣periens in sua Attila. De prodigijs & ostentis Integri sant libri Iu Obsequentis, & Lycosthenis de signis Iulij Caesaris necem antecedentibus, Virg. lib. 1. Georg. like a sword, which hung ouer Ierusalem, a whole yeeres space, the Eclipse of the Moone for twelue nights toge∣ther; horses and chariots, and armed troupes of men seene in the ayre, and appearing in the cloudes; a voyce heard in the temple, the night before the feast of Pentecost, (Let vs depart from hence;) the constant clamors of one Iesus the sonne of Anani a Countriman, (for a long space continued) crying, Woe to Ierusalem. Of which and others the like, Iosephus hath written at large, and they went be∣fore the comming of Titus and Ʋespasian the Roman Ge∣nerals, as was foretold, Math. 23. 38. But the Iewes not regarding these things, perished in their folly and stub∣bornesse; and the remainder of those who escaped the sword, the famine, the plague, and sedition which was in the City, are scattered ouer the face of the world, and re∣maine
vntill Ioh. Lunclai∣us in pandectis historiae Turci∣ae scribit inter hord as Tarta∣riae, versus partē cius magis A∣quilonarem, nnnullas no∣mina Dan, Zahulon, Nep∣thali retinere, & in Regae vi∣cini esse natio∣nem quandam barbaram Let∣torum, qui perpetuo in ore quasi lament∣tionem quandā habent, quam ociferando per agros assiduo repetunt. Iure Mascalom; qui∣bus verbis Ieru∣shalem & Da∣maseum intel∣ligere credun∣tur, hanc Israe∣litici Regni , illam Iudaici. this day a dreadfull example to all flesh; so that bloud of Christ, as they desperately wished, is fallen vpon the heades of them and their children, Math. 27. vers. 25. 3 By tragicall and lamentable examples; Among which, may be ranked those eighteene who were crushed to death by the sodaine fall of the Tower of Siloam: and the cru∣ell murther of the Galilans committed by Pilate, so that the goare of the beasts which they sacrificed, and their bloud ran mingled together, Luc. 13. 1. 2. 3. 4. And this our age will furnish vs with plenty of such mournfull accidents, if men had eyes to see, and hearts to vnderstand them. 4 The vntimely death of eminent men, and endued with rare qualities, whether they be in the Church or common wealth: so it is obserued, that Hieronimus de Hebraicis traditionibus in Genesin 16. Cedrenus in Annalibus. Methusalem (the longest liuer a∣mongst men) died the yeare when the all-destroying floud came; Enoch stiled a God among the people, being first ta∣ken vp into heauen: and when Iosiah was slaine in Megid∣do, Manc sed corruptè nrat Herodotus in lib. 2. historiae Euterpe; munduipse defleuit eu principem (Theodosium) continuo rapiendum, per quem dura mundi istius temperari solerent, cum criminum pas Indulgea pruenire. Abrosus oration de rte Theodosij. 2. Chron. 35. 25. not long after followed the captiuity of Babel, and Zedechiah the King of Iuda was taken, his eyes pulled out, and bound in chaines, Ierem. 52. 11. and in that graue wherein he was interred, the liberty, glory and peace of Iewry lay also buried▪ This is the same whereof Esay speaketh, cap. 57. 1. the righteous perisheth, and no man considereth it in heart, &c. and are taken away from the e∣uill to come. 5 By gentle and fatherly corrections; for eftsoone God taketh his rod in his hand, and setteth before vs the infe∣ction of the plague and other like euils, that taking war∣ning by these, wee may bee turned vnto him, and escape further vengeance. And thus the Lord rich in mercy delt with wicked Pharaoh; for after the Orosius lib. 1. cap. 10. conuersion of the wa∣ters of Egypt into bloud, (offering to the thirsty more grie∣nous
remedy of their punishment, then it selfe was;) after the loathsomefilthinesse of the frogges, (creeping vpon all things cleane and vncleane,) after the fierie stinging flies, swarming ouer the ayre and vnavoydable; after sud∣daine death and generall ruine of their beasts and cattell; after the furious boyles and runningsoares, breaking forth of the whole body; after the hayle mixed with fire, destroy∣ing man, beastes, trees: after the cloud of Caterpil∣lers, eating vppe euery greene thing, and destroying the rootes of that which was sowen; after the palpable darkenesse, wherein hideous and dreadfull apparitions presented themselues; after the vnsparing and vniforme death of the first borne in all the land; followed the choa∣king of the prophane king with all Quinquag in∣ta milli Equi∣tum & ducenta millia peditum armatorum nu∣merat Iosephus Antiquitatum, lib. 2. cap. 6. his in the red sea: which made an end of this Tragedy, Exo. 14. 28. And Amos to the same purpose, c. 4. 8. I haue smitten you with blastings and mil∣dew, your great gardens, and your vineyeards, & your fig trees, & your Oliue trees did the palmer-worm deuoure: yet you haue not returned vnto me, saith the Lord: Pestilence haue I sent a∣mong you after the manner of Egypt, your young men haue I slaine with the sword, and taken away your horses, &c. I haue o∣uerthrowne you as God ouerthrew Sodome and Gomorrah, &c. And thus rising by degrees from the lesse to the greater. 6 By the degeneration of all things; Memoria dignum est, qud vtere quidam tem∣pora mundi si distribuernt, iuxta praeipa partes quae sn in homine, Ita dicunt initio in genere human praecipue reg∣nasse , idst, ex∣celuisse sapien∣tiam, cum artes inuentae sunt, &c. secunda aets sui , in qua sortitudo dominabatur in bell & imperia censi tuta sunt, &c. à Nroo d Iulium Caesorem, in hac regnat , t si enim inse∣necta mundi ltum est bellrm, amen non geritur res simli vigore animorum & labore Carion in Chronicorum, lib. 1. Godlinesse, religion, discipline, order, fruites of the earth, the faculties of soule and body: For wee may behold with our eyes, how all things languish dayly, and haue not that power & vertue in them now, which they had some few yeeres agone: they are eneebled, frayle, corrupted, without any vigour and strength; the sasons of the yeere haue not the same temper which their nature requireth; the Sun Slis minor iam iam est, qnam uit Hipparchi & Ptomaei temporibus, quae res proecto admiratione digna est▪ dubitari eum ptest, virum propter senctuem mundi, quasi dilaatur sol (factus languiior, paulatim ruente natura rerum▪) an vero in hac sencta terrae tanquam essiae epus sit vicinire positu solis am ouentis, &c. Philippus Melan∣thon Physis, l. 1. seemeth not to shine,
and cast foorth his bearnes with such brightnesse now as heretofore; the fruites, hearbs and plantes want their for∣mer pleasant sweetnesse; yea the whole frame of this world, and all things in it seeme to lie a dying, and fetching the last gaspe; those euer honoured morall vertues, Con∣stancy, Fortitude, Patience, Truth, Chastity, Temperance and the rest are become bare names; we may reade of them in bookes, that once they were, wee cannot see them now in practise among men, &c. Veteres Rithmi. Recessit hoc tempore Lex à Sacerdotibus. Iustitia à Principibus. Consilium à Senioribus. Fides à Populo. Amor à Parentibus. Reuerentia à Subditis. Charitas à Praelatis. Disciplina à Literatis. Studium à Scholaribus. Religio à Monachis. Deuotio à Monialibus. Honestas à Iumoribus. Timor à Senioribus. Fidelitas à Militibus. Concordia à Ciuibus. Comitas à Rusticis. Ʋeritas à Mercatoribus. Largitas à Diuitibus. Castitas à Virginibus. Maeror à Viduis. Pudicitia à Coniugatis, &c. First wee may from hence learne to acknowledge the all-ruling prouidence of God, who disposeth euery thing accor∣ding to his owne pleasure, Esay 44. 24. And to his will worketh hee in the Army of heauen, and inhabitants of the earth, Dan: 4 32. Psa. 135, 6. that men may say, verily there is a fruit for the righteous, doubtlesse there is a God that iudgeth the earth, Psal. 58. 11. Secondly, hereby also is manifested the wonderfull and exceeding mercy of God, who had rather spare then pu∣nish, and is slow vnto wrath, Rom. 2. 4. and therefore before hand warneth, threatneth, exhorteth, &c. for as hee liueth, so will hee not the death of sinners, but that they should repent and turn from their euill wayes, and be saued, Ezech. 33. 11.
Thirdly, from this practise of God, the wicked are made vnexcusable in the day of anger and vengeance; Valerius Maximus, lib. 1 cap. 2. for he goeth on slowly vnto reuenge, but recompenseth the slacknesse of his comming, with the greatnesse of his punishment; hee doth not strike so soone as wee offend, but for the most part long after, and when wee haue for∣gotten our misdoings Agathias de Imperio & re∣but gestis Iusti∣niani, lib. 4. Est elegans Plutarchi libel∣lus, . consulatur Cae∣lius Rhodin∣ginus Lection Aiquarum, lib. 3. cap. 14. and euill deserts. Therefore I seale vp this place with that earnest and hearty request, God grant of his vnmeasurable and infinite mercy, that wee may heare him so now warning, feare him threatning, o∣bey him teaching, patiently suffer him chastising, as by him at the last wee may bee made partakers of those good things, which neither eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor can enter into the heart of man, but such as he hath prepared for them that loue him, 2. Cor. 2. 9. Now from the sixth howre, was there darkenesse ouer all the land, vnto the ninth howre. The Iewes despised Christ the light of the world (for he is the true light which lightneth euery man that commeth in∣to the world: hee was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not; hee came among his owne, but his owne receyued him not, Iohn 1. 9. 10, &c. yea, so much as lay in them, endeauoured by their vtter∣most to extinguish it, for they denied the Holy one, and the Iust, and desired a murherer to bee giuen vnto them, Act. 3. 14.) and therefore are they, according to de∣sert, now ouerwhelmed in blindnesse of their minde, and vnderstanding; and vpon their Land (though not alone) darkenesse was ouerspread at this present, when Christ hung vpon the Crosse: which betokened the darkenesse of their hearts, Leo primus de passione Do∣mini, serm. 2. vpon whom the Sunne went downe at noone, Amos, 8. 9. and the glistering bright∣nesse thereof, mantled ouer with thicke darkenesse, chan∣ged their day into night.
This is a misterie. Without Christ the Sun of righteousnes,  there is nothing in man but a dreadfull horror, and thicke fogge of darknesse, both in the minde and vnderstanding, and also in the will and outward actions. In the vnderstanding; for such as are ignorant of Christ, are named darknesse it selfe in the abstract, Ephes. 5. 8. And therefore when hee came into the world, he is said to giue light to those that sate in darknesse, Luk. 1. 79. and when he departed from thence, and ascended to heauen, he appointed the Ministerie of the Gospell for this end, to open the eyes of men, and bring them from darknesse to light &c. Act. 26. 18. And hereof it was, that the ancient Fathers called Christians, (though vnskil∣full in other literature, and vnlearned in Artes) Illuminated, in Iustin. Mar∣tyr in dialogo cum Tryphone Iudaeo. Et est Cyristi Catechis∣mus. respect of that light and knowledge: and the Heathen, (howsoeuer they diued into the deepest secrets of nature, and were furnished with extraordinarie knowledge and sci∣ence) they named Blinde. So distinguishing the condition and dignitie of the faithfull from the faithlesse; of the godly from the wicked; of the righteous from the vnrigh∣teous; as Matth. 15. 14. Rom. 1. 29. In the will and outward actions; For those who are not enlightned of Christ, and into whose hearts the Gospell hath not shined, they fall from vertue to vice, goe from one sinne to another, from the lesse to greater; vntill they come to the height of all iniquitie. And hereof proceeded those outrages we read of: as that the Moabies (most beastly without any Iosephus plu∣ribus historiam persequitur Antiquitatū l. 4. cap. 6. regard of modestie,) prostituted their daugh∣ters, Num. 25. 1. 2. 3. And the Cananites, so surcharged themselues with vncleannes, that their land spewed them out, Leuit. 18. 25. It is said of Manasses, that hee did much euill in the sight of the Lord to anger him therewithall, such was his desperate wickednesse, 2. Chron. 33. 6. Corinth, the Dio Chryso∣stomus oratione 37. qu inscri∣bitur Corinthi∣a. Strabo Geogra∣phiae lib. 8. & de Comana vrbe lib. 12. wantonest Citie (once) of all other, and most lasciuious, maintained to the honor of Venus, (who made their bodies common for gaine) aboue a thousand harlots, and yet daily prayed for the increase of them, and enlarging of
their Athenaeus Dipnosophiston, lib. 13. cap. 11. Alex. ab Alex∣andro dierum geminalium lib 6. ap. 26. Et hinc  in diuerso gene∣re flgitiorum dicebatur apud Graecos, vthodie Florentizein apud Itales, de ijs qui lustris & vagis libidini∣bus indulgent. Stephanus de vrbibus in Corintho. & videtur haec lasciuia fuisse omnium Genti∣lium morbus  Nam & ade∣lescentes Athe∣nis viuentes admonet Dicae∣archus, summā in vitandis me∣retricibus adhi∣bendam esse diligentiam; ne quis per imprudentiam malo suaui intereat: in Geographias cap. 3. ab Henrico Stephano editae. stewes. And therefore doth Scint Paul iustly affirme of all who know not Christ, that they are giuen vp of God, to their hearts lusts, vnto vncleannesse, to defile their owne bodies between themselues, which turned the trueth of God into a lye, and worshipped the creature forsaking the Creator who is bles∣sed for euer, Amen. For they did change the naturall vse into that which is against nature, &c. being full of all vnrighteousnes, fornication, wickednesse &c. Rom. 1. 24. hauing their vnder∣standings darkned, and being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their hearts. And being past feeling, haue giuen themselues vnto Inverecunde & planè portentesae obscaenitatis & caecitatis stu∣pendae exemplum refert, cuiu ipse  fuit, Ioh. Leo lib. 3. descriptionis Africa: & turpissimā Proculi libidinē atro carbone notauit Vopiscus in Proculo. Similia multa his exempla passim le∣guntur in historis, & antiquis & recentioribus Ethnicorum, vt in Linscoti nauigatione a Indos Orientales & alios. wantonnesse, to worke all vncleannesse euen with greedines, Ephes. 4. 18. And for this cause are their deeds in Scrip∣ture stiled the workes of darknesse. 1. In respect of the efficient cause or author the deuill, the spirit of darknesse; who as he fleeth the light himselfe, so teacheth his slaues and vassals to hate the same. He entred into the heart of Iudas before he betrayed his Master, Ioh. 13. 2. and filleth the mindes of Ananias and Saphira, that they should lye to the holy Ghost and keepe away part of the price of the possession they sold. Act. 5. 3. 2. Of the matter; for they be especially done of those, whose mindes are blinded and couered with the thicke clouds of darknesse, so that they cannot se the cleare light of the trueth, Ephes. 4. 18. 3. Of the forme; for their workes are very darknesse, which breed nothing but feare and Omne malum aut timore aut pudore natura profudit. dread; so Adam and Eua, entangled with the slippery and fraudulent promises of the old serpent, and eating the forbidden fruit, flie at the Hîc primum pal∣lori & pauori templum est conditum. Bucholcherus in Prolegomen is ad suam Chronologiam. voice of God calling, hide themselues in the thicket of
trees, and confesse they were afraid, Gen. 3. 8. But in vaine doe they flee from him whom they cannot escape: who is all eye, all hand, all foot, to see, punish and ouertake them. 4. Of the end; for those who are giuen ouer to such a∣ctions, at the last by them are brought to vtter darke∣nesse. Let vs listen to the Apostles counsell and aduise, The Ʋse. night is past, the day is come, cast away the workes of darknesse, and put on the armour of light; so that wee walke honestly as in the day; not in gluttonie and drunkennesse, neither in chambe∣ring and want onnesse, nor in strife and enuying: but put on the Lord Iesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts Augustinus ex huius  lectio∣ne totus est con∣uerss, vt de se scribit essio∣num essio∣num lib. 8 c. 12. therof, Rom. 13. 13. 14. that we may be pure, Phil. 1. 10. such as can abide to bee tryed by the . sunne-light; and in all humble submission acknowledge, how deepely wee are engaged to Christ our Lord, King and Teacher, by whom wee are taught true vndesiled religion, and, abando∣ning the errors, and barbarous customes of Paganisme, doe worship the liuing God; and, reiecting the toyes and follies by which the Heathen were misled and deceiued, doe rightly apprehend his benefits, and shew forth the vertues of him who hath called vs from darknesse vnto his maruelous light, 1. Pet. 2. 9. Now from the sixth howre was there darknesse ouer all the land vnto the ninth howre.. Some interpret the wordes of the Euangelist (Sixtus Seuen∣sis biblioth. sacr. lib. 6. cap. 124. Caluinus in Hani Euangeliorum. Bez in notis matoribus ad nouum Testa∣mentum. Tossanus in Harmonia. Andreas Libanius de vniuersitate & originibus rerū lib. 5. ad ops diei 4. Hexameri. ouer all the earth) by a limitation, ouer all that Region, vnderstanding onely Iud; but, without the preiudice to any other, or de∣traction from their skill, wee may vnderstand them, that this eclipse was vniuersall, miraculous and supernaturall; ob∣serued by Apollophanes and Dionisius Areopagita, when they were in Aegipt in the Citie Heliopolis: of which more after∣ward. While the wicked doe vniustly murther the iust, and
lay violent hands vpon the Bernardus in feria 4. hebdo∣mdae paen sae. Augustinus Sermone de tempere, 114. sonne of God, (most merci∣lesse and cruell murtherers) at this their impious and de∣testable fact, the whole frame of the world changeth countenance, looketh pale and wanne; Euery Athanasius ad Epictetum. creature withdraweth it selfe, and will not behold the death of their Lord: and is abashed at his Saluianus de gubernatione Di, lib. 6. hanging on the Crosse; now the Sunne in his height, possessing the Midde-heauen (for the sixth howre from the rising thereof, by the account of the Ancient, Breches in Commentarijs ad Titulum di∣gesti de verboris significatione lege 2. § 1. is our noone) withdraweth his light, and, as it were cloathed in a mourning robe, sheweth (in that sorte hee can) compassion and sorrow for his Creator, so distres∣sed, so tormented; as though the Father, whose nature is subiect to no affection, nor can bee touched with any griefe, nor shed teares, did command the Creature to la∣ment and performe the funerall rites of his sonne in his stead, and ioyne it selfe a second mourner with the Tanlerus in meditationibus vitae Iesu Chri∣sti, cap. 48. Ludolphus de vita Christi, parte 2. cap. 63. vn∣spotted virgine, who then alone bewayled the passion of Christ. And this so strange an obscuration of the Sunne was famous among the heathen, Phlegon au∣thor exactus O∣lympiadum a∣pud Originm, lib. 2. aduersus Celsum: & Ea∣sebium in Chro∣nico cuius frag∣menta edidit Graecè Lumen ilud literarum Iosepbus Scali∣ger, apud quem & Africans quoddam de ea Eclipsi testimo∣nium extat, quem consule, & ad Eusbium illius animaduersiones. who left it to memory by writing to haue beene so great, that the starres appeared in heauen. And Tertullian Orosius lib. 7. cap. 4. Apologetici. cap. 21. boldly chargeth the Romans, that they had this strange wonder of the world registered in their Records: Neither could Plinie be ignorant there∣of, who kept a diligent memoriall of all the Roman estate, and euents befalling in the same, (but yet would neuer open this, which he knew the Princes and Emperors would haue to bee kept secret, and smothered vp in forgetfulnesse.) For the Lib. 4. De Asse. doctrine of Christ was nothing plausible (among those proud and haughty minded men, giuen to pleasures and delights) which teacheth humility, patience, and suffe∣ring affliction. And at this time indeed Christ was extream∣ly deiected and cast downe, and as it were trampled vnder the feet of death; neither could there bee deuised a lower degree of abasement, then that wherein now hee was: yet
at this very instant, the father left him not without testimo∣ny of his innocēcy as we heard before (to say nothing of the free and ingenious speech of Pilate) in the confessor thiefe; and now the Deity which dwelt in Christ, though it shewed not itselfe, in freeing the manhood from death (for that was not expedient, because appointed by the immutable decree of the father that hee must die) yet brake forth into Iansenius in Harmonia, cap. 143. astonishing miracles; vndoubted witnesses, that this man who in so great shame and reproach did hang vpon the Crosse, was the Lord of glory and life; and Glrificats est Christus in conspectusenio∣tum in Ierusa∣lem, quando fuit crucifixus. Petrus de la Cauelleria in tractau cui titulus Zlu Christi contra Iudaeos & Sa∣racenos, &c. therefore senselesse and vnreasonable creatures, least they should seeme to bee wanting in duety to their Creator, do (as they are able) yeeld him all honor. Doctrine. In the extremest disgrace and basest contempt, God beginneth to honour his sonne, and so will hee doe vnto all his, whom hee hath adopted through grace, and made the members of Christ Iesus; Ioseph is taken out of prison, aduanced to the highest toppe of dignity, receyueth for his iron fetters a chaine of gold, for his cloake cast off to auoide his mistresse enforcing allurements, a roabe of silke; for his seruile condition, a ring, the signe of freedom; changeth the filthy prison for a stately pallace; his base dishonour is turned into glorious soueraignety, Gen. 41. 42. Pharao despiseth Moses; his seruants and Courtiers haue him in great reuerence, Exod. 9. 20. Daniel and his compa∣nions are carried captiues into Babylon, sundry times accu∣sed through Enuy, brought into danger of their liues; God is present with them, and they exalted to manage the grea∣test affaires of state in the land of their thralome, Dan. 3. 28. & 6. 28. Wherefore, let vs alwayes submit our selues vnto God, and Ʋse. serue him in all holinesse and righteousnesse; for hee will honour those who honour him, 1. Sam. 2. 30. and that in life, and in death, and after death. In life, beautifying them with inward gifts of the mind, as of illumination. Thus the name of Solo∣mon is spred ouer the world for his diuine wisdome; so that
the Queene of Sheba came from the vttermost ends of the earth to heare him, 1. King. 3. 12. & 2. Chron. 9. 1. 23. Math. 12. 42. of sanctification; when according to the promise made he doth write the reuerent feare of his name in their hearts, and by the effectuall power of his holy spirite bow them to obedience, Irem. 31. 33. &c. With the outward en∣dowments of the body, and things belonging to this life; as Abun∣dance of riches; Iob. 1. 1. 2. Comfort of friends, Gen. 33. 4. for when the wayes of a man please the Lord, hee will make his enemies to bee his friends, Prou. 16. 7. Dignity and ho∣nour, as is manifest in Ioseph, the first of the posterity of Abraham, who is aduanced to the Kingdome, Gen. 12. 2. & 41. 42. 43. In death; When olde Iacob had blessed his children, as a father, and premonished them of things to come, as a Prophet, he sweetly falleth a sleepe: Gen. 49. 33. The Iewes bury Ie∣hoida in the sepulchre of the Kings, in the City of Dauid, becaus hee had done good in Israel, and toward God & his house, 2. Chr. 24. 16. Ieremiah honoured the funerals of Iosiab with compassionate mournings, & all singing men and singing women, and all Iudah and Ierusalem lamented for him, &c. 2. Chron. 35. 25. After death; for their memory shalbe blessed for euer: Prou. 10. 7. Lazarus is carried into heauen by the Ministery of Angels, the rich glutton is tormented in hell, Luk. 16. 22. Wherfore if any will be happy, let him be religi∣ous; for godlinesse hath the promises of this life, and of that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. which Aphorism of the Apostle, S. Beda in suis collectionbus ex Augustin in Epistolas Pauli. Augustine stileth the heauenly marriage-song of Christ, and the Church his Spouse: and what saith the Bride of her be∣loued? his left hand is vnder my head, and with his right hand he doth embrace me, Cant. 2. 6. for God will not bee wanting to furnish his with gifts temporall for necessity, & will bestow e∣ternall blessednes vpon them hereafer. Do you desire supply of wants in things belonging to this life? seeke first the king∣dome of God (that is, the right hand) and his righteousnes, and all these things shall be ministred vnto you, Math. 6. 33. And in another place Wisdom thus speaketh, length of dayes are in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory, Prou. 3. 16. And so at the last shall enioy the benefits of the throne and the footstoole, heauenly and earthly. And about the ninth howre, Iesus cried with a loude voyce, saying, Eli, Eli, Lammah sabacthani; My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me? There is nothing here lightly to be passed ouer, nothing superficially to bee considered; let vs therefore come to the complaint of Christ, in which two things diligently are to be considered; first, the circumstance of time whē, secondly the quality, how it was made. Concerning the time, about the ninth howre, sayth the Euangelist (which is answerable to our three a clocke in the after noon) Iesus cried with a loud voice, when now hee was neere vnto the point of death, after hee had giuen testimony of great and admirable patience, vn∣dergone the sentence both of the Ecclesiasticall Consistory by the high Priest, and at the temporall tribunall of the Roman Iudge, after his scourging, crowning with thornes, spitting vpon, beating and carrying his Crosse, of the scorning and bitter taunts of the Princes, and people, after the diuision of his garments made by the souldiers. And before this, all that while, wee reade not of any thing spoken eyther by Christ hanging vpon the Crosse, or the Iewes who stoode beholding his torments; for it is very probable, for the space of those three howres, in which the Sunne was dark∣ned, they were amased and silent: but Christ all this while powred forth in his heart earnest prayers, with vnexpres∣fable sighes, both for vs and himselfe; so performing the office of a true Priest. God doth not presently, and at the first, disburden his  children, eyther of outward afflictions, or giue comfort in inward trials and temptations; but suffereth them long and sharpely to be exercised. A woman, a daughter of A∣braham had a spirit of infirmity eighteene yeeres, and was bowed together, and could not lift vp her selfe in any wise,
Luc. 13. 11. and another is held in with a languishing sick∣nesse eight and thirty yeeres, waiteth for health, lyeth dayly at one of the porches of the Poole Dpiscina hc ide Ium in 3. Nehemiae, & B. zamin maic∣ribus annotati∣onitus ad 5. caput Iohannis. Behesda, and could not obtaine the helpe of any man to put him into the wa∣ter when it was moued, whereby many before were healed of their diseases, Iohn 5. 5. 7. and one continueth a Criple from his mothers wombe (aboue forty Distut De santionem eius vt opra fil D manifsta∣rentur in o. Sunt autom morbi aut poena pccaorum e Dent. 28. 59. ut fide proba∣tiones, Iob. 2. 67 aut gloriae Dei∣illustratio, Ioh. 9. ver. 3. Georgi∣us Wirth de vi∣ta Christi, ex 4. Eungelistis, lib. 2. cap. 1. yeeres) vntill his feet are restored to strength by Peter in the name of Iesus, Act. 3. 17. & 4. 22. And God hath his reasons, why he doth oftentimes delay and deferre his helpe. Of which the first is, because he hath appointed in his sret counsell, definite times, and immutable seasons, in which hee will doe that which hee hath purposed. So after the accomplishing of foure hundred and thirty yeeres, euen the same day God brought his people out of Egypt, the land of their captiui∣ty, Exod. 12. 21. And when the seuenty yeeres were fulfil∣led, Israel returneth from the captiuity of Babylon: and the same night Balshasher is depriued of his life and Empire by Cyrus the Perian, Dan. 5. 30. De hoc Babi∣lonis excidio, & Imper astatione, & edicto Cyri, Xephon. lib. 7. de Institutione Cyri. whose spirit God stirred vp, by his proclamation to grant freedome vnto the Iewes, and liberty to returne to their own Country; to repayre the decayed wals of Ierusalem, and build vp the ruines of the temple, Ezra: C. 1. V. 1. 2. which seemed a thing so in∣credible vnto them, that they supposed the Edicts when it was published, to be but a dreame, Simile qui accidit & Grae∣cis, Philippo Rge, Macedonibus{que} deuictis cum Senatus R. & T. Quintius Imperator liberos immunes suis legibus osse iubet. Nam audita voce praeconis, mius gaudium fuit, quam quod vniuersm homi∣nes capeent; vix satis credere se Quis{que} audijsse, al alos intueri mirbundi velut somnij vanam speciem, quod ad quem{que} pertineet, suarum aurium fidem minimum credentes, proximos interro∣gabaent. Liuius Decad. 4. lib. 3. Psal. 126. v. 1. The second is, the triall of his children, Deut. 8. ver. 2. and the awakening Acrbus condimentis irritatur appetitus cibi, mora exi∣mulat & aget in nobis desiderum consolationis & opis diuinae. their drowsie spirits, prouoking them to earnest prayer; for in trouble men visite the Lord; and powre out their supplications, when his correction is vp∣on them, Esay, 26. 16. And from hence proceeded that holy stubbornenesse of the Cananitish woman, who against all a∣saults
of hard temptations, shewed an vndaunted mind, and continued stiffe in her purpose, and after two repulses pres∣seth on the third time (for if God doth not grant presently at our first request, he doth not despise his suppliants, Augustinus in Psal. 65. & tractatu 6. 10 primam Iohan. epistolam. but whetteth their desires) at the last neareth that wished voice woman great is thy faith, bee it vnto thee euen as thou wilt, Matth. 15. 28. The third, that he might try their constancie, and as it were clense them with the Hieronymus super Abacu Prophetam. fire of tribulation, and make them ap∣peare more pure. Thus stood the case with Iob; whom neither the driuing away of his flockes, nor the losse of wealth in his heardes, nor the sudden death of his children by the ruine of a house, nor the loathsome and ouersprea∣ding botches wherewith his body was couered, could with∣draw him from patience; and the deuill (but to no purpose, and all in vaine) assaulted him: for by none of these cala∣mities was hee alienated from his obedience due vnto God, but stood stedfast and immoueable. An example and Tertullianus de Patientia. wit∣nesse vnto vs in the spirit and flesh, in his soule and body, of true patience, that neither for the losse of worldly goods, nor of our most dearest beloued, nor for the troubles and griefes of our owne bodies, wee should faint or fall from God. For what a pegeant did hee in that man make of the deuill! what a trophe did hee erect to his glory by him the enemie of his glory! who at all the lamentable messages which were brought, neuer vttered word of discontent∣ment, but euer answered blessed be the name of the Lord; and reproued his wife as a foolish woman, wearied with afflicti∣ons (one rushing in vpon the necke of another) and per∣swading him to vnlawfull meanes, for the auoyding and ending of his suffered miseries, &c. As the fining pot is for siluer, and the furnace for gold, so the Lord tryeth the hearts, Prou. 17. 3. Iam. 5. 11. Fourthly, God in the slownesse of bestowing his benefits commendeth them; Augustinus. Chrysost. hm. 67. in cap. 20. Matthaei. Afflictiones sunt 1. . 2. . 3. . Gemistus Pletho . Et de his olimplura scripsi ad Psal. 130. for such things as wee haue for a long
time desired, are most delightsome and pleasant vnto vs, when they are obteyned; in a moment and for a little season, hee may hide his face from vs, but in euerlasting mercy will hee haue compassion, Esay 54. 8. for hee will surely come and not stay, Abacuc 2. 3. the later, the more comfortably; there∣fore aske, seeke, knocke, Matth. 7. 7. God keepeth that for thee, which he will not giue at thy first demaund, that thou mayest learne to be an earnest suiter, and so obteine great things at his hand. Ʋse. Then, let vs not vtterly bee discouraged and growe Ʋse. heartlesse, if God doe not presently (when we euen with passi∣onate and enforced prayers desire comfort, and deliue∣rance) answer, and heare our petitions, but defer his helpe, and seeme to passe by our petitions offered. For it is vsuall with the Lord, to . Theocritus. recompence the slacknesse of his comming with abundance of comfort; and he that is resolued to be a de∣uoted seruant of God, must beleeue things to flesh and bloud incredible; hope for things delayed: and loue God, though he shew himselfe an enemie: and notwithstanding all these continue constant to the end. Let vs therefore commit our waies vnto the Lord, and trust in him, and hee shall bring it to passe, Psal. 37. 5. And for ourselues not bee slug∣gish and drowsie in prayer, Luke 18. 1. For God doth ma∣ny times effect his determined purpose by meanes which seeme contrary. So when hee will make supply of the best wine, he commandeth that water should be filled, Ioh. 2. 7. he first killeth, then quickneth; carieth downe to hel before he bringeth vp to heauen, 1. Sam. 2. 6. Ioseph must be wor∣shipped of his brethren, (this God had long before so ap∣pointed;) but to preuent it, they sell him for a slaue; yet the same meanes by which they sought to Gregor. Mag. mralium in Iobum lib. 6. cap. 12. auoide the de∣cree (manifested by a dreame) furthered the fulfilling ther∣of, and they honoured him whom they hated. And this is one of Gods . Haeliodo∣rus in Aethio∣picis. wonders, to bury his children as it were in the graue of miseries, and then to raise them vp from death to life. Thus the three children are cast into the fiery fur∣nace, extraordinarily heated; and Daniel into the Lyons den,
yet these are deliuered and aduanced to the greatest and most high places, Dan. 3. 28. & 6. 28. Thus God sheweth himselfe wonderfull in his Saints, Psal 4. that is, leadeth, go∣uerneth and deliuereth them from dangers, by admirable meanes, which passe the apprehension of our reason, and the deepest reach of our vnderstanding. For Gods diuine helpe recouereth forelorne humane hopes; and supplying grace Philo Iudaeus apud Eusebium Historiae Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5. beginneth, where heartlesse nature endeth. And about the ninth houre Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, Eli, Eli, lammah sabacthani, that is, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? Cryed with a loude voice; In this clause the qualitie of Christ his complaint is expressed, and that it was exceeding vehement, vttered with great and earnest enforcement of speech: for in the daies of his flesh he did offer vp prayers and supplications, with strong crying and teares vnto him who was able to saue him from death, Heb. 5. 7. And, out of question, the Apostle had an especiall respect in these wordes, vnto those which Christ in his passion with Paraus in locum. compassion now vttered. Christ tooke vpon him (in respect of the essence) our  whole humane nature, soule and body; and therewithall the blamelesse naturall and vncorrupted affections of both; of the soule; as naturall Damascenus Orthodoxae fidei lib. 3. cap. 20. Nicetas in the∣sauro l. 3. c. 37. Ambrosius de incarnationis Dominicae sa∣cramento cap. 7. Danaeus in Isagoges parte 1. cap. 43. Polanus in Syntagmate Theologico lib. 6. cap. 15. ignorance: for he increased in wis∣dome and stature, Luke 2. 52. And thus he knew not that there was In hac  explicanda multum se euercuerunt Patres, sed facilis est omnium quaestionum responsio, non requisiuisse Christum maturas ficus , nam non erat earum tempus, sed prococes siue grossos. Aretius in quaestionibus, in Euangelium Marci quaest. 48. de varietate fructuum ficut arboris. Theophrastus de causis plantarum lib. 5. cap. 1. & Iulius Scaliger in suis ad cum com∣mentarij. figges vpon the tree, vntill he beheld it, and for want of such fruit as it might haue had, was cursed: and so is also said to bee ignorant of the day and hower of the last iudgement, Mark. 11. 13. & 13. 32. to be heauy and sor∣rowfull
euen to the death, Matth. 26. 38. to reioyce with glad∣nesse, Ioh. 11. 15.  be astonished with admiration, Matth. 8. 10. to be stirred vp with anger, Ioh. 2. 17. Of the bodie; and those common to the whole nature, not appropriate to the person of man. For he is weary with trauel, Ioh. 4. 6. hungry after fasting, Matth. 4 weepeth in com∣passion, Luk. 19. 41. Which Augustinus de ciuitate Dei lib. 14. cap. 10. affections by the grace of dispensation Christ assumed, when he would; as, when he would, he became man; for in all things it behoued him to be made like vnto his brethren (sinne onely excepted) that he might bee mercifull and a faithfull High-priest i things concerning God, and make reconciliation for the sinnes of the people, Heb. 2. 17. Therefore the difference of these Tilenus Syn∣tagmatis Theol. part. 2. disputa∣tione 1. Zacharias Vrsi∣nus de filij Dei incarnatione lib. 2. passions which are in Christ and vs, standeth in these points. First, in the subiect, or (at the least) the cause thereof; for our affecti∣ons are seated either in the irascible facultie of the soule, or the concupiscence; and, for the most part preuent, or very Christi affectus differunt à nostris. 1 A ratione imperante. 1 Praeter ratio∣nē irrept in∣pinantibus &c. 2 Christi affectus sunt. In sola ob∣iecta licita. 2 nostri In obiecta illi∣cita feruntur. 3 Non tur∣bulenti aut rationem de grada deijcien∣tes. 3 Traecipites sunt & rationem à statu suo deijci∣unt. hardly obey rea∣son: but those of Christ, though, Aquin. summa part. 3. quest. 14. per totum. Clictomenus Damasceni com∣mentator ad lib. 3. cap. 20. or∣thodox. fidei. wee place them in the sensitiue, yet, (because hee is without the least touch and infection of sin) did alwaies obey the direction of the vnderstanding and reason, and was led rather by it, then by appetite. Secondly, In the obiects: our affections are of∣tentimes caried to that which is euill, his onely is good. Thirdly, in the measure thereof; for ours by reason of that Bonduenturae cap. 8. Brenilo∣quij. disorder which is in vs, doe, not seldome, exceede and breake order; but his were euer tempered with a sweet har∣mony
and concent. Therefore two sorts of passions there bee, not incident vnto him; one of those which are not naturall, nor doe arise from the generall sinne of man, wherewith all are defiled; as bee sundry diseases, (agues, Iohannes Langius Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 13. leprosie, gowte, blindenesse, and the like) which God inflicteth as due punishments, reuengers of transgressions: The other, such as be culpable and sinnefull; as for example, vntoward∣nesse to that which is good, readinesse to doe euill, &c. From these, and all of the same kind, Christ is free; for Extitit Iusti∣niani tempori∣bus circa annum Domini, 536. Apthartadoci∣tarum & Seue∣ritarum hresis, dicentium quod c quam ex vir∣gine Seruator noster assump∣sit caro, ante passionem fui incorruptibilis &  id est, omnis in∣firmitatis, & Interritue ex∣pers; & opini∣n h a∣plexus est Iu∣stianus ipse qui ferre no potuit, propter amorem suum in Christum, vt quispiam diceret corpus eius esse corruptibile: Quare & edictum sanciuit, quo Corpus Domini incorruptibile appellauit, & in quod null omnino passiones ca∣derent: At illi resiterunt, eam{que} illius opinionem veriati contrariam esse liquido ostenderunt Anastatius, Antiochenus, & Agapetus Romanus Episcopus, Euagrius historiae Ecclesiast. lib. 4. ca. 39. & Niceph. Clstus, l. 17. cap. 29. Aug. de Heresibus. they bee nothing pertinent to that shape of a seruant, which in mer∣cy he tooke vpon him for our sakes. Vse. The first is, a demonstration manifesting the truth of his humane nature; who being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery to bee equall with God, but hee made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant, Philip. 2. 7. not Bernardus. of a seruant onely, to be subiect, but of an euillser∣uant, for our sakes to be beaten. The second, an example of patience and meckenes in suf∣fering all kind of misery, for the aduancement of the glory of God, and procurement of mans saluation, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 12. 3. Thirdly, his suffering in soule and body; was sustained and vndergone for our sakes, & for the purging of our sins, surely he bare our infirmities, and carried our sorrowes, & was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was laid vpon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Esay, 53. 4. 5. Assumpsit Christusdefectus nostros, 1. propter pretium nostrae salutis, 2. propter exemplum virtutis, 3. propter fulcimen∣rum nostrae fragilitatis: Pretium salutis, quia proposuerat nos redimere, non auro & argen∣to, sed pretiosissimo sanguie suo, & animam sucm poere pro animabus nostris; ad he autem non esset idoneus, nis naturam deficientem & passibilem assumpsisser: & prinde defectus nstros & poenalitates, debuit in seipso habere: propter exemplum virtutis, specialiter, humilitatis, pati∣entia & pietatis: Propter ulcim entum nostrae fragilitatis, in quafacultas animae Rationalis habet in se difficultatem ad cred endum vera, & Irascibilis ad speranduns ardua, & cocupiscibilis ad amandm bon, &c. Benauentura in lib. 3. senten. distinct. 15. Aquinas in summa parte, 3. Quaest. 14. Articul. 1..
4 The fourth may serue for the comfort and strength of our faith; for when we wrastle with many calamities, and be tried with sondry temptations, Christ Iesus our Lord doth suffer with vs in the same; Wee haue not such an high Priest, which cannot bee touched with the feeling of our in∣firmities, but was in all things tempted in like, yet without sinne, Heb. 4. 15. therefore when Saul persecuted his members vp∣on earth, he the head complayneth in heauen, Act. 9. 4. and sayth of them, whosoeuer toucheth you, he toucheth the apple of mine eye: Zach. 2. 8. Let vs therfore go boldly vnto the throne of Grace, that wee may receiue mercy, and finde grace to helpe in the time of need. Heb. 4. 16. Iesus cried with a lowde voyce, Eli, Eli, Lammah sa∣bacthani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? There is no speech of Christ, nor of any other in the Why Christ vttered this speech in two seuerall lan∣guages. history of the Gospell, vttered and recorded in two seueral tongues besides this one; and the reason doubtlesse is this. The holy Ghost would therefore set it downe in the Syri∣acke (which Christ then vsed) that both wee might better Tossanus in consensu Euan∣gelistarum. Clminus in Io∣cum. conceiue the cause, why the Romane Souldiers and o∣ther standers by, said, that hee then called for Elias; in re∣spect of that affinity, and likenesse of sound the wordes, Eli and Elias: as also, that it might make a deeper im∣pression in the minds and memories of Men. For it is as much, as if he should represent him speaking the selfe same words in the same manner, which he did hanging vpon the Crosse; wherefore they are the more aduisedly to bee weighed, for in them is liuely described an Musculus in Math. 27. & Psal. 22. expresse Image of the qualities of hope and faith, wrastling against despaire; and how it encreasth, and by what degrees it waxeth, and cannot in any resemblance, eyther more fully or better be expressed, then in this temptation of Christ. For; first, hee willingly entereth into the beginning of his bitter passion, and therefore when the time thereof drew neare, and hee
was to eate the last Paschal Lamb with his Disciples (him∣selfe the true Lambe ready to be sacrificed) thus speaketh vnto them, with desire haue I desired, (or heartily longed) to eate this Passeouer with you before I suffer, Luc. 22. 15. And that heauenly discourse which Continetur ille sermo, cap. 14. 15. & 16. Iohannis hee made with those his Apostles, partly at supper time, partly after it was ended, (when now the howre of his death was at hand, so appoin∣ted by his Father) with what prompt readinesse and cheer∣fulnesse of mind he vndertooke it, that one clause is suffi∣cient proofe, As the Father hath commanded so I doe, Iohn, 14. 31. shewing apparantly the truth of that position, he made his soule a sacrifice for sinne, and was so offered because he so would, Esay 53. 10. Heb. 10. Secondly, in the Garden, stricken with feare, & entring as it were into the Lists, to combate with death, and sensi∣blie feeling the infirmity of the flesh, which hee tooke, fal∣leth flat vpon his face, and prayeth: Father, if it be possible, let this cuppe passe from me, that I drinke not of it: but that wee may know how this was the voyce of weakenesse, not vnwillingnesse, he recalleth it by a spirituall correction, yet not as I will, but as thou wilt; And lest it should enter into the heart of any to conceiue, that this was not vttered in earnest; he three times repeateth it, three times resigneth himselfe ouer to his Fathers will, Math. 26. 36. 39. 42. &c. Thirdly, the temptation increasing, he beginneth to feele a grieuous agony and incredible torment of minde; sorrow melting the soule, whereby the body is not onely dissolued into sweate, but trickleth forth vpon the ground in congealed droppes of bloud: and, extreamely weakened in all the powers thereof, vtrereth so lamentable a com∣plaint, as is vnmatehable, and vnheard of in all the worlde before this. For now the tempest of Gods wrath rushed vpon him, the whole burden of our sinnes lay heauy vp∣on his soule, hee was touched with the sensible feeling of all that woe and misery which all mankind had deserued: and therefore crieth out, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken
mee? yet not desparing, but tempted with despaire; apparant in this, for he doth in the very extremitie, acknowledge that God to be his God, who seemed to haue forsaken him. And therefore doth not charge the Father, as though he had exposed him without cause to the shame, ignominie and torment of the Crosse, but of his owne accord spreadeth his armes, and stretcheth forth his hands to be fastened vn∣to it with iron nayles: and how great and Arnoldus Carntnsis de sptem vltimis verbis Dmini. entyre this obe∣dience was, he then manifested, when he shewed how he was leser and equall vnto him. Thus standeth the case with the godly in the sharpe as∣saults  of tempation, First, they are ready and contented to beare all extremities, whatsoeuer it pleaseth God to lay vpon them; as Paul, not to be bound onely, but to dye for the name of the Lord Iesus, Act. 21. 13. And this was that reso∣lute minde of those choice and deuoted souldiers, the first planters of religion, who enlarged the territories of Christian profession on euery side among the Gentiles, and made an honorable and worthy on set vpon the difordered and fierce multitude of Barbarous nations. Secondly, when the heate of temptation increaseth and the deuill, (that Lyon seeking whom hee may deuoure, no lesse then destruction will satisfie him) violently throweth out his fiery darts, they begin to feele the weaknesse of flesh and bloud, and horrour of death; yet so, as they refuse not to beare the most grieuous things which can bee laid vpon them. And this is t whereof Christ put Peter in minde, when thou wert thou girdest thy selfe, and wentest whe∣ther thou wouldest, but when thou shalt be olde, thou shalt stretch forth thy hand, and another shall girde thee, and lead thee whi∣ther thou wouldest not; signifying by what death he should glo∣rifie God, &c. Ioh. 21. 18. 19. For Nicephorus Calistus lib. 2. cap. 36. Caluius in 21. Iohannis. Georgius Wirth in Harmonia lib. 5. cap. 73. whether he endured the paines of the Crosse (as some thinke.) or any other kinde of torment, yet in him the flesh did iust against the spirit: for death is one of the last most terrible thinges, the king of feares, as Bildad nameth, Iob 18. 14. Therefore the Apo∣stle giueth this precept to his scholler, to be partaker of the
afflictions of the Gospell, according to the power of God, 2. Timoth. 1. 8. that which hee giueth; for both beleeuing and suffering are gifts, Phil. 1. 29. 3. In this force and rage of tryall that suspition doth sometime creepe into the mindes of the most righteous, and grieuously affright them, that their faith and hope whereby they rely vpon God and trust in him, is vaine and fruitlesse, because they see no present helpe, no light of comfort to shine forth vnto them. Thus Iob cap. 11. 17. 18. powreth out his distressed soule, and complayneth himselfe vnto God, thou renuest thy plagues, and increasest thy wrath against mee, changes and armies of sorrowes are against mee, wherefore hast thou brought me out of the wombe? O that I had perished, and that no eye had seene mee. And Dauid by a strong asseueration, certeinly I haue clensed my heart in vaine, and washed my hands in innocencie, for daily haue I been chasti∣sed and punished euery morning, &c. Psal. 73. 13. 14. The whole Church of Iudaea, after a most humble and affectio∣nate petition for mercy, being now ouerwhelmed with the swelling waues of numberlesse tribulations, at the last brea∣keth forth as hartlesse and despayring of any reliefe: I haue powred out before thee O Lord my wounded heart, wherefore doest thou forget vs for euer? and forsake vs so long time? Turne thou vs vnto thee O Lord and we shall bee turned, renew our daies as of old: but thou hast vtterly reiected vs, thou art ex∣ceedingly angry against vs. Ierem. Lament. 5. 20. 21. 22. First, doctrinall, teaching, that wee should take knowledge of our infirmitie; and so withstand, with all our best endea∣uour, the lustes of the flesh, and helpe forward the spirit, (striuing and wrastling against the same) by earnest and hearty prayers vnto God. And this is the same whereof Christ putteth the Apostles in minde of: Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation, Matth. 26. 41. for the spirit is ready, the flesh is weake. This flesh therefore is to be mor∣tified; the flesh of the vnderstanding, which oftentimes gree∣dily receiueth falshood in stead of truth, truth for fal∣shood: for the naturall man is not capable of those things which
are of the spirit of God, 1. Corinth. 2. 14. The flesh of the will, which is onely and continually caried vnto that which is euill, Gen. 6. 5. The flesh of vnbridled lusts; whereof Iob a singular patterne, in that golden legend of his owne; wher∣in among other particulars, thus; I haue made a couenant with mine eyes, why then should I thinke on a mayde? for what portion should I haue of God from aboue? doth he not behold my wayes and tell my steps? Iob 31. 1. 2. 4. Secondly, consolatorie; that being priuy to our owne ma∣nifold Ʋse 2. weaknesses, should not bee too farre cast downe vpon the consideration thereof: for in the most entirely beloued children of God, and the absolutest Saints among men, who euer were from the beginning of the world (after the fall) no few nor small defects are to be found, but in many things all doe offend, Iam. 3. 2. And the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and these are contrary one to another, so that they cannot doe those things that they would, Galath. 5. 17. Rom. 7. 16. Wherefore, let vs alwaies, casting our eyes vnto Gods will, (searching what hee requireth,) and our owne corruption (hindering the performance of obedience) pray vnto him with inward sighes, Teach vs thy way O Lord, that wee may walke in thy trueth, knit our hearts vnto thee that wee may feare thy name, Psal. 86. 11. And deepely consider the exceeding goodnesse of God toward those who are his, and doth pitty them as a Father his children. Psal. 103. 13. And, because he is faithfull, will not suffer them to be tempted aboue that they shall bee able to beare, but will giue the issue with the temptation, 1. Corinth. 10. 13. Further we may mitigate and allay the griefe of our miserie by making a speciall indu∣ction vnto our selues, of all the holy men in former ages. For what one of them had not his wants? did not fall? was not ouertaken with humane imbecilitie? Abraham (that great Patriarke the father of the faithfull,) to free himselfe from the danger of death, dissembleth, & instructeth Sarah his wife to doe the like, fearing lest the Aegyptians (among whom now hee soiourned) should kill him for hir sake (a woman of singular and extraordinarie beauty &c.) that
shee might be taken into Pharaoh the Kings Court: Gen. 12. 11. &c. Elias fleeth into the wildernesse, and dare not abide the threatnings of Iesabel, and there in great distresse and anguish desireth to haue his soule taken from him; and complayneth that he is left alone, not another in the world, who maketh any care to serue God, 1. King. 19. 10. There was a great eclipse and obscuration of the light of faith in Iere∣mies heart, when he brake forth into those impatient terms: Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, and let not the day wher∣in my mother bare me, be blessed; cursed be the man who shewed my Father, saying: a man child is borne vnto thee, and comforted him, &c. Ierem. 20. 14. 15. 16. &c. Medici com∣pleta est praedi∣ctio, & aegroti conuicta prae∣sumptio. Au∣gustinus tract. 1 13. in Iohan. Euang. Nemo de sua virtute audeat confidere, quan∣do mutabilita∣tis periculum ne quidem Petrus potuit effugere. quid enim est homo sine gra∣tia Dei, nisi quod fuit Pe∣trus cum nega∣uit Christum? Idem lib. 1. contra Pelagi∣anos. Peter thrice denyed his Master, first, in the High Priests hall; after in the porch (adding an oath for confirmation,) that hee knew not Christ: and both, being charged onely with the speech of a maide: lastly, by banning and cursing, when he was as∣ked of them, by those which stood by, Mark. 14. 66. Therefore disauowing and distrusting our owne strength, let vs humbly and desirously come vnto Christ, who will not breake a bruisedreede, nor quench the smoking flaxe, Matth. 12. 20. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? The suffering of Christ for vs, was of two Tilenus Syn∣tagmatis dispu∣tationum Theo∣logicarum part. 2. disput. 5. Pelanus in prae∣lectionibus ad Psalmum 22. sorts; inward or spirituall, and outward or corporall. I call that outward, which was perceiuable by sence, (as when his sacred name was reproched, his head rent with thornes and smitten with reeds, his face defiled with spitting vpon it, and bruised with strokes, his eares pierced with scoffes and reuilings, his eyes sorrowfully afflicted at the sight of his deare Mo∣ther and beloued Disciple, his tongue parched with thirst, distasted with gall, his feet and hands digged through with nayles, his body spoiled of clothing, torne with whippes and despitefully hanged vp betweene two theeues:) By the spirituall and inward passion, wee are to vnderstand that most grieuous, dreadfull and intollerable burden of
Gods wrath, which pressed him so heauily, (taking vpon him our sinnes) that it wrung from his body, a sweat of bloud, and from his mouth a lamentable complaint, crying out that hee was forsaken of God. Now this desertion or forsaking implieth two things: a separation from all good, the fountaine and ofspring whereof is God, and the ouerwhelming in all euill; wherewith Christ, by reason of the dispensation of his office vndertaken for vs, was to striue, that so he might free vs from our deserued punishment. Among which, this is the chiefe and greatest, to bee forsaken of God; yet while in this complaint and expostulation, he calleth him his God; it is a sufficient euidence, testifying that hee was not vtterly swallowed vp, and drowned in this deluge and gulfe of miseries, but should at the last swimme out and escape safe from the same, and triumph ouer all temptations; and shew, that in the midst of the raging heat of these assaults, still God remayned his father, and therefore was not simply and altogether forsaken, but respectiuely, and in some sorte onely: that is, in regarde of the end, ordained for the ac∣complishment of the mistery of our Redemption; which dereliction Lib. 2. de Orthodoxa fide, cap. 31. Plura si libet, petere li∣cet ex Clicto∣naeo veteri illius commentatore, & varias de∣sertionis species plenissimè re∣censet Polanus; Syntagmatis Theologi. lib. 6. cap. 4. Et con∣sulendi sunt Arnoldus Car∣notensis de 7. vltimis Christi verbis. Iraeneus apud Theodoretum Dialogo tertio. Leo primus sermonibus de passione 16. & 17. Cyprianus de passione Christi. Epiphanius haeresibus contra Ariomanitas. E∣lias Cretensis in Nazianzeni orationem secundam de filio, vbi quatuor ponit modos deserti∣onis generales, 1. Explorationis causa, vt in Iob. & Iosepho, quo ille tanquam fortitudinis, hic castitatis columna clarus fieret, 2. Ad castigationem, vt in Apostolo, quo semel demit∣tendo & humiliando, summam illam Gratiam conseruaret, 3. Per auersionem; vt in Iu∣daeis, quo puncti ad poenitentiam flecterentur, 4. Supra hos omnes restat mod ille desertio∣nis, in administratione Domini pro genere humano, vt perillam quae videretur esse de∣sertio, nos primo deserti, deinde recepti per incarnationem Christi, cruciatibus ipsius saluemur. Damascene therefore calleth dispensatiue; when, as he was man, left for a while the Dietie (resting, and not shewing it selfe, in the time wherein he was crucified, temp∣ted and died) yet euer vnited to the humanity, that hee might ouercome, rise againe, iustifie and redeeme vs. Therefore when we are plunged in the sea of the grea∣test calamities, ouerloaden with the heauiest burden of manifold tribulations, when those complaints are wrung from vs, (How long wilt thou forget mee O Lord? for euer?
How long wilt thou hide thy face from mee? will the Lord ab∣sent himselfe for euer? and will he shew no more fauour? is his mercy cleane gone for euer, doth his promise faile for euermore? hath God forgotten to bee mercifull, hath hee shut vp his tender mercy in displeasure? Psal. 13. 1. & 77. 7. 8. 9.) and crusheth our bones as a Lion, Esay 38. 13. that wee know not what to doe: 2. Chron. 20. 12. euen then let vs submissuely powre forth our hearts before God; and like humble sup∣pliants, flie to his mercy, as our onely Sanctuary; for the Lord doth heare the desire of the poore, and maketh his eare to attend, Psal. 10. 17. he neither can nor will forsake his. And therefore, thus doth he refresh Sion (weeping and mourning as though God had left his) Can a woman for∣get her sucking babe, that shee should not haue compassion on the sonne of her wombe? yea they forget, yet I will not for∣get thee: behold I haue grauen thee vpon the palmes of mine hands, and thy walles are continually before me, Esay 49. 15. 16. And is also saide, to see the afflictions of his people in Aegypt, and to heare them crie, by reason of their taske∣masters, and to know their sorrowes, and come to deliuer them from the hand of the Aegyptians, and bring them out of that land, into a good land flowing with milke and hony: Exod. 3. 7. 8. And what can bee added to this tender, or rather officious and seruiceable care of God, whose eyes watch, eares attend, hands are ready, and feet hasten, to helpe those who belong vnto him, that they might not bee too much wronged? but if there may bee any addi∣tion, the holy Ghost doth expresse in these most sweete words, saying, that the Lord raysed vp to the Israelites Iud∣ges when they were vexed of their enemies, and was with the Iudge and deliuered them all the dayes of the Iudge (for it re∣pented the Lord) because of their gronings, by reason of those who oppressed them, Iudg. 2. 18. There is no reason then why wee should imagine that the fauour of God is the lesse towards vs, when wee are exerci∣sed, though with many and great afflictions; for whom hee lo∣ueth, he doth chastice, Prou. 3. 10. and as he seemeth to for∣sake
them for a while, but to their benefite, 1. For their triall; as in Iob and Ioseph; the one whereof was a piller of patience, the other of chastitie. 2. for their correction; of this is the Apostle an example, who was humbled, that hee might preserue the grace bestowed. 3. by withdraw∣ing his comfort to moue them to repentance; as hee dealt with the Iewes. Of this more in the former words, and vpon the 130. Psalme. O my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? The Redemption which Christ purchased for vs, was not externall of the body alone, but internall of the soule also; and therefore did not onely offer vp his body vnto the Father to reconcile vs, but the soule likewise suffered the punishment wee had deserued: and as though hee had beene the guilty person, standeth out at the Barre before the Iudgement seat that wee might be absolued. Then sinne is a dangerous euill, and which God hateth.  All flesh corrupteth their wayes, all flesh therfore is ouer∣whelmed in the floud, Gen 6. 7. & 7. 21. The cry of Sodomes iniquity ascended vp into heauen, a reuenging shower of fire and brimstone descend down to earth, deuoured the offenders, turned their Cities into ashes (an example to them that hereafter should liue vngodly:) 2. Pet. 2. 6. The earth openeth her iawes, and swallow vp rebellious Corah, Da∣than and Abiram; they, their tents, theirs, and all goe downe quicke vnto hell, Numb. 16. 31. Canaan speweth out her inhabitants, because of their abomination, Leuit. 18 25. Of all that infinite multitude that came out of Aegypt, Exod. 12. 37. onely two, Caleb and Ioshua entred into the land of Promise: Numb. 14. 38. the rest perished in the wildernesse, because they prouoked the Lord. And at this present, the Iewes hated, despised, scattered, and wandring ouer the face of the earth, remaine a visible example of Gods wrath against sinne; the greatnes wher∣of
sheweth it selfe in the variety of the punishments, Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. 15. in the generality, Gen. 7. 23. Osea, 4. 2. 3. in the sharpenesse, 2. Chron. 21. 18. 2. King. 9. 36. In the suddaines of the execution, Dan. 4. 30. Act. 12. 23. These and the like testimonies of Gods anger against sinne and sinners, are registered in holy Scripture. But the vndeser∣ued death and bitter passion of his onely and beloued son, by which alone his iustice could bee satisfied, doth farre exceed them all; which if hee for vs had not once tasted, wee must haue felt eterually. Let vs auoide sinne, lest wee pull vengeance vpon our own heads, and tread vnder foot the sonne of God, and account as as a prophane thing, that sacred bloud by which wee are iu∣stified, Heb. 10. 29. For all sinne is (to speake it in the words of the Schoole-Diuines) First, iniurious to God, Dionisius Carthusianus in Tractatu de Grauitate, & Enormitate peccati, cap. 1. and wronging the most holy. For we despise his commandements, who would haue vs 1 Deo iniuriati∣num. holy as he himselfe is holy, Leuit. 11. 44. And therefore eue∣ry one that calleth vpon the name of the Lord, must depart from euill, 2. Timoth. 2. 19. For when wee were not, hee created vs, Gen. 2. 7. When wee were lost, hee redeemed vs, Eph. 2. 1. 2. &c. and sanctifieth, being redeemed, that wee should not liue according to our owne will, but his, 2. Cor. 5. 17. Secondly, ioyfull to the Diuell, (who teacheth euill and 2 Diabolo laetificatiuum. delighteth in filthinesse) and that three wayes; 1. in regard of subiection; for he that committeth sinne, is the seruant of sinne, Iohn, 8. 34. (nothing more base:) 2. of assimilation, or likenesse; and of this, murthering Caine is said to bee of the diuell, who was a murtherer from the beginning, 1. Iohn, 3. 8. 12. 3. of inhabitation, for such the diuell possesseth & dwelleth in them; so an euill spirite is saide to vexe Saul, 1. Sam. 16. 14. and in the Parable, when he goeth out of a man, to returne againe, and bring seuen other worse then himselfe, there to take vp his lodging; and his end shall be worse then the beginning, Math. 12. 43. 44.
Thirdly, most hurtfull to man; for without repentance it 3 Homini sum∣me nociuum. depriueth of the blessing of grace present, and of future glo∣ry; Of grace; If the righteous turne away from his righteous∣nesse, and commit impiety according to the abominations of the wicked man; all the righteousnesse that he hath done shall not bee remembred, Ezech. 18 24. And this is the threatning to the Church of Ephesus; who vnlesse shee remember her fall, and rise againe by repentance, and doe her first workes, the Candlesticke shall be remoued out of his place, Apoc. 2. v. 5. that is, she shall cease to be any longer a Church. I purpose not, to heape vp eyther more confirmatory testimonies or ex∣amples; yet may not let passe that one so famous a myracle of iudgement, vpon the abuse of a miracle of mercy; which is, that in the persecutions of the Christians in Africa (raysed by the Arrians) when their tongues were pulled out by the rootes, and notwithstanding spake distinctly, and vttered both the miseries they endured, and the truth of their pro∣fession. Among whom, two dishonouring their profession, by committing vncleannesse with women, were strucken Iustinianus Imperator ipse  Cedi∣cis, lib. 1. titulo 27. de officio Praetoris Afri∣cae: lege quas Gratias; Mar∣cellinus comes in Chronico, qui & illud addit, precepisse Hu∣nericum adoles∣centis linguam à natiuitate muti, praescindi, eundem{que} mox loquutum esse, gloriam{que} Deo in primo vocis exordio dedisse. Paulus Diaconus, lib. 16. non procul à fine: Procopius Caesariensis Vandalico∣rum, lib. 1. Aeneas Gazaeus in Theophrasto. dumbe, and could speake no more for euer: God would not haue them declare his ordinances, nor take his couenant (any longer) in their mouthes, &c. who were partakers with the adulterers, Psal. 50. 16. 17. 18. Of Glory; for no vnclean thing shall enter into the new Ierusalem. Apoc. 21. 27. Ney∣ther shall any vnrighteous person, nor fornicators, nor Idola∣ters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselues with mankind, nor theeues, nor couetous, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherite the kingdome of God, 1. Cor. 6. 9. Fulmen est hoc terribile, quo innumera hemi∣num multitudo ad infernum deturbatur; & capienda est Apostoli sententia disiunctiuè, nō copu∣latiuè, vt de singulis  intelligatur comminatio: sed nec eo trahenda est oratio, quasi qui vnius vel plurium reus factus est, exolui reatu nulla ratione queat; & notandum probe in hunc sensum referri etiam ebrietatem cui hodie dediti sunt ferè omnis loci & ordinis homines, & in qua laudis & laetitiae materia vulgò quaeritur. The sentence of condemnation is passed a∣gainst all and euery one of these offenders, except it bee re∣uersed
by repentance, and amendment of life. Therefore let vs listen vnto that admonition of the Wise man; Feare God and keepe his commandements, for this is the whole man. & the Lord shall bring euery worke into iudgement with eue∣ry secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it bee euill, Eccl. 12. 13. 14. and we must all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ, that euery one may receiue the thinges done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad, 2. Cor. 5. 10. Therefore let vs endeour (waiting & looking for that day) that wee may be found of him in peace without spot and blamelesse, 2. Pet. 3. 14. For the Via peccati ingredientes contaminat, progredientes obstinat, egre∣dientes exter∣minat. Bernar∣dus in senten∣tijs. way of sinne in the first entrance thereunto defileth, in the progression, hardneth, at the go∣ing out, destroyeth.
THE FIFTH WORD A VVORDE OF want and distresse. IOHN 19. vers. 28. 29. After this Iesus knowing that all things were now accom∣plished, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled, saith, I thirst; now there was set a vessell full of vineger, and they filled a sponge with vineger and put it vpon hysop, and put it to his mouth. THE ANALYSIS. THis is the fifth word (I thinst.) And this thirst of Christ, is described from the circumstance of time, when he suffered it, (when hee knew that all things were accomplished.) from the end, (that the Scripture might be ful∣filled) from the manner, how it is quen∣ched (with vineger,) from the persons who offered the same, the souldiers; propounded generally, (they filled a sponge with vineger.) particularly, by the instru∣ment, (a sponge filled with vineger.) and the application (put to his mouth) from the occasion: There was set a vessell full of vi∣neger, &c.
After this, Iesus knowing that all things were now accomplished. Christ now sheweth, that none of all these things, which he suffered, fell out by chance, or fortune, but were long before determined, and set downe that they should be so. And heere ariseth a question, how it may truely bee said, that all things were fulfilled, seeing Christ, was not yet dead, nor risen againe, and neuerthelesse these are specially requi∣red to the perfecting of our redemption; for he was deliue∣red for our offences, and raised againe for our iustification, Rom. 4. 25. which manner of speech, doth not exclude the me∣rit of Christs death, from the act of our iustification, but by a figure, called Synecdoche, comprehendeth all those things, which Christ did, and suffered, for our sakes. Now because there is a twofold Duplex est Imputatio, vna  qua videlicet pecca∣ta, non impu∣tautur. Altera , quaimputatur institia. imputation, one, by the remoouing of the contrary, whereby our sinnes are not laid to our charge, ano∣ther, by way of position, whereby wee are accounted righte∣ous, therefore when the seuerall benefits, are distinguished, and each appropriated to his speciall cause, it is truely affir∣med, that his death ouercame our death, and his returne vnto life, purchased life for vs. And because whatsoeuer befell Christ, in life and death, had been vnprofitable, and to no purpose, except he had ouercome death, therefore is our iustification ascribed to his resurrection, for it is the complement and fulfilling of all whatsoeuer wee hope for. 1. Cor. 15. 17. 1. Pet. 1. 3. 2. Timoth. 2. 9. Then the doubt propounded may be thus resolued. 1. It is vsuall by the phrase of Scripture, to speake so of things which are in the doing, as if they were done and per∣fected. 2. All things were Augustinus in tractat. 47. & 119. in Io∣han. Euang. fulfilled, as was prophesied should be performed before his death, therefore Christ vseth heere both his knowledge, and power; for he did not yeeld vp the spirit, vntill he had perfected whatsoeuer was appointed should bee imposed vpon him hanging on the
crosse: for, he layeth downe his life, himselfe, no man taketh it from him, but hath power to lay it downe and take it againe, Ioh. 10. 17. 18. And therefore now asketh drinke. The instruction from hence to be gathered, is in a more  fit place, afterward set downe, in the seuenth and last ward. After this, Iesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled. The Scripture mentioned heere by the Euangelist, is writ∣ten, Psal. 69. 21. And Christ, that he might manifest him∣selfe, to be the same, whose person Dauid susteined, and of whom he was a type, would now drink evineger, for the quenching of his thirst. For besides the other iniuries, which the Iewes offered vnto him, they added this, contra∣rie to all sense of humanitie and the custome euen of most barbarous nations, that they gaue him (now already torne in the Iudgement hall, and beaten with scourges till life failed,) vineger to drinke for further torture; who should rather haue offered wine, to refresh his languishing spirit and comfort his decayed strength, Prou. 31. 6. But all this he was willing to vndergoe, for the confirmation of our faith, because the hand of God and his counsell, had determined before, that these things should be done, Act. 2. 23. & 4. 28. The doctrine of the Gospell, is no new nor lately deulsed in∣uention, but most ancient, from the beginning; for whatsoe∣uer befell Christ, both for the matter and the manner was foretold. As, That he should come to Ierusalem riding vpon an Asse, Zach. 9. 9. Bee entertained of the children with Osanna, a ioyfull shout and exclamation, Psal. 118. 26. Be sold for thirty peeces of siluer, Zach. 11. 12. Matth. 27. vers. 3. His death conspired both by Iewes and Gentiles, the
chiefe rulers and people, Psal. 2. 1. 2. Act. 4. 25. Betrayed of his friend and disciple, Psal. 41. 9. Taken spitted vpon, reprochfully handled, Esay 50. 6. Forsaken of his Apostles, Zach. 13. 7. Marc. 14. 27. Accused by false witnesses, Psal. 55. 11. Hanged vpon the tree, Deut. 21. 23. Between two theeues, or malefactors, Esay 53. 12. Marc. 15. 27. Haue his side opened with a speare, Zac. 12. 10. Apoc. 1. 7. And rise againe, Psal. 16. 8. 9. Act. 13. 35. the third day after his death; whereof Ionas was a type, Matth. 12. 40. For as Georg. Wirth in Harm  Euangelij lib. 3. cap. 13. de tiduana Chri∣sti in sepulchro mra. Sic Au∣gustinus Quae∣stionum Euan∣gelicarum lib. 1. cap. 7. Prima dies ac∣cipitur secun∣dùm parem sai postremam. Secunda, scun. dùm se totam. Teria, secun∣dum partm sui primam; sic sint res dies, & quaelibet suam habet noctem. concerning Ionas, there were three seuerall degrees obseruable; his swallowing vp by the whale, his dot enon in her belly, and casting forth againe. So the swallowing of Christ was death; the graue his tention; and his casting forth his resurrection. Iustinus Mar∣tyr. in quaestio∣nibus ad Orthe∣doxos. Thus the aw, is the Gospell promised; the Gospell, the law fulfilled. The Augustinus in Psal. 143. . Epianius contra Epicureos. grace of the new Testament, was vayled vnder the shadowes of the Law, reuealed in the brightnesse of the Gospell. 1. Ʋse. Therefore, in iudging and discening of mat∣ters holy and spinituall, let vs confine ourselues, within the bounds and limits of the Scripture; and not presume to bee wise, aboue that which is written, I. Corinth. 4. 6. for the ho∣ly Scriptures are able, to make vs wise vnto saluation, through faith in Christ Iesus, 2. Tim. 3. 15. 2. Ʋse. Christ is the true Messiaes, and appointed Saui∣our of the world, sent of the Father, at the idnesse of time, Gal. 4. 4. as he promised Gen. 3. 15. And vnto whom all the Prophets giue witnesse, that through his name, whosoeuer belee∣ueth in him, shall receiue forgiuenesse of sinnes, Hoc Petridictum notum & commedatum esse debt pijs omnilus: tum qua recitatur in prima concione habita inter Gentes, & miraculo manifesto confirma est & obsignatū, & effica∣cissimè refutat mults errores Ponficios, & ex professo expressè consensum omnium Prophetarum in veteri Testamento citat: sed de his plurain exemplari Latino. Act. 10. 43. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell, and hauing made peace by the bloud of his crosse, by him to re∣concile all things to himselfe, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heauen, &c. Coloss. 1. 19. 20. that is, the whole Church militant and tryumphant, for he is the lambe, slaine from the Dicitur Chri∣sius agnus ma∣ctatus á mundi origine. 1. Respectu diuini decreti. 2. promissionis, Gen. 3. 3. typorum, Abelis, Abrahami Isaacum immolaturi, Sampsonis, Dauidis, sacrificiorum, &c. 4. officaciae, naem mors Christi profuit aneequaeam fuit, & aequè veteris Testamenti fidelibus ac noui; vnde Abrahamus, dim Christi vidisse, & laetatus esse dicitur. Ioh. 8. 56. foundation of the world, Reuel. 13. 8. Iesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for euer. Heb. 13. 8. After this, Iesus knowing, that all things were now accom∣plished, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled, saith, I thirst. Hee, Pelargus in septem vltima Christi verba. who was the fountaine of liuing waters, and quen∣ched the thirst of the people in the wildernesse, from the rocke Num. 20 11. gaue Sampson drinke out of the iawe∣bone of an asse, Iudg. 16. 19. who can onely bestow that water, whereof whosoeuer tasteth, shall not thirst any more, Iohn 4. 14. and leadeth the wearyed vnto the still waters, Psal. 23. 2. now amidst his anguish and sorrowes, and boy∣ling desire to performe the worke of mans redemption, complayneth of thirst. And this his thirst was naturall, and mysticall; Naturall, for from midnight, (at which time he began to bee in an agonie in the garden, and his sweat was like great . drops of bloud trickling vpon the ground) con∣sumed with griefe, beaten, crowned with thornes, scorned, drawen from place to place, laden with his crosse, and fain∣ting vnder it, it was no Ianseniue in Concordantia Euangelita. cap. 143. maruell, if hee were scorched with drought, both in regard of his body (ouer wearied with la∣bour, and losse of bloud by reason of his many wounds) but especially dryed through the feeling of the heate of the wrath of God; so that he became like vnto a pot sheard, Psal. 22. 15. for sorrow troubleth the naturall heat, Cyrillus lib. 11. in Iohan. cap 35. wasteth, the inward moysture, and burneth vp the bowels, by a fiery qualitie; whereof, the vsuall prouerbe amongst vs (Sorrow
is dry;) And we read that Melancthon de anima. Marquesse Casimire, when hee was dead, and bowelled, had his heart withered like a dry peare; and the cause thereof supposed to haue proceeded from those cares and manifold griefes, he susteyned: wher∣by that moyst  vocat Galenus de vsu partium lib. Hyppocrates , lib. 6. de corde. Fernelius de partium corpo ris humani de∣scriptione c. 8. Laurentius hi∣storiae Anato∣micae lib. 9. c. 9. & quaest. eiusd. lib. 5. humour like vnto water was consumed, which nature had inclosed in the skinny casket, which co∣uereth and compasseth the heart, lest it should be scorched vp, with too much vehement heat in his perpetuall moti∣on. Of the mysticall thirst, afterward. Doctrine. Christ was true man, subiect to the same affe∣ctions, vnto which wee are. Arguments proouing his hu∣manitie are the Chrysost hom. 7. in Matth. swathing bands wherein he was wrapped, and the cratch wherein he lay; and is called in the Scrip∣ture flesh, Ioh. 1. 14. The sonne of man, Matth. 8. 20. the seed of Dauid, Psal. 89. 36. the sonne of the virgin, Esay 7. 14. borne of a woman, Galath. 4. 4. partaker of flesh and bloud, as the children, Heb. 2. 14. found in the likenesse of man, Phil. 2. 7. and, to comprehend all in one word, nothing diffe∣ring from vs, but that he was without sinne, he Cyprianus serm. de natini∣tate Christi. had not sin∣full flesh as ours is, yet the same in nature; for sinne is not Cbrysost. in 8. ad Romanos. Damascenus orthodoxae fidei lib. 3. cap. 20. Vide plura ar∣gumenta veri∣tatem humanae naturae in Chri∣sto confirmantia Zachariam Vr∣sinum lib. 2. de incarnatione cap. 2. quaest. 2. Thesi. 1. naturall, nor the worke of the Creator, but infused by the suggestions of the deuill, and proceeding from the cor∣ruption of our owne will yeelding vnto his alluring and de∣ceitfull intisements. Ʋse. First; the great, and vnspeakable loue of Christ, offereth it selfe to our diligent consideration; who being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery, to be equall with God, but hee made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant, and was made like vnto men, and was found in shape as a man, Phil. 2. 6. 7. and gaue himselfe for vs, to be an offering, and sacrifice of a sweet smelling sauour, vnto God. Ephes. 5. 2. A deed without example. humilitie without measure, loue without merit. 2. Ʋse. Secondly, from this ariseth, an assured ground of the certeintie of our saluation; for Christ, hath fulfilled all the parts thereof, and done whatsoeuer was requisite for purchasing the same; he dyed for our sinnes, and rose againe
for our righteousnesse, Rom. 4. 25. his Augustinus serm. de tempo∣re, 101. vnde serued death hath ouercome our deserued death, and he deliuered those who were iustly guilty, vniustly slaine for them: so hee hath payed the price of our redemption, and sustained the punishment of our transgression; for the death of the sonne of God, is the all sufficient remedy for the sinne of the whole world: and his holinesse and purity of nature, auaileth against the staine and corruption of our iniquity, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 31. That the Scripture might bee fulfilled, sayth, I thirst. This thirst of Christ was both naturall (of which som¦thing hath beene already spoken) and misticall; wherein Arnoldus Caruotensis in vltima Christi verba. Tanlerus in me∣ditationibus vitae Iesu Chri∣sti, cap. 47. he doth not so much desire drinke, as mans saluation; for he could not expect any comfort and benefite from his persecuters and scorners, who were more ready to adde griefe to his sorrowes, then shew pitty and compassion vnto him: and although they contemned that price which he now payed for sinne, yet (the olde serpent being swal∣lowed vp) he hastneth to the fountaine of liuing water, therewith to wash his enemies, dieth for the wicked, adop∣teth the disobedient and rebellious vnto the right and honour of sonnes, and bestoweth so great a benefite vpon the Bernardus de passione, cap. 13. Ludolphus de vita Christi, parte 2. cap. 63. vnthankefull. And hereby declareth his earnest de∣sire, that all might be saued. Christ saith, I thirst, and not I suffer; O Lord what doest thou thirst? your faith, your saluation, your ioy: the care of your soules doth touch mee nearer, then the torment of mine owne body; haue pitty vpon your selues, if you will haue none vpon me. VVhen he saith I thirst, he desireth their Augustinus in Psal. 68. faith for whom he prayed; Father forgiue them. Christ doth vehemently desire the saluation of man∣kind;  wherefore when hee was presently to bee crucified, and he the true Lambe ready to bee offered for the sinnes, of the world, in his last Supper with his Disciples, brea∣keth forth into this earnest and affectionat speach, with de∣sire
haue I desired to eate this Passeoner with you before I suffer, Luc. 22. 15. and there is in the doubling of the word (Desi∣ring with desire) and in the Article (this) the last when hee knew hee should bee sacrificed; Iohn 13. 1. great force, and singular declaration of the loue of Christ towards vs, and our saluation which he sheweth. First, by his most sweet and gratious inuitation, Esay. 55. 1. And, come vnto me all yee that are weary and heauy laden, I will ease you, Math. 11. 28. Come Iohannes Gersouin tra∣ctatu de bis verbis Euange∣listae. vnto me; wonderfull loue that he should in treate vs to come vnto him, whose duetie is, to bee humble suiters, he would vouchsafe to accept vs. All that are weary and laden; for he can rayse vp the dead carkase foure dayes lying in the graue, and stinking, And I will ease you; hee doth abhorre no sinnes, no wickednesse, bee it neuer so great; no bonds of custome in euill, but hee can loose, although exceeding strong, and at the last will giue grace and glory: Grace now of a happy departure from hence, and hereafter glory and eternall blessednesse. Secondly, by Bernardus sermone in vi∣gilia Natiuita∣tis Domini. his comming down from the bosome of the Fa∣ther into earth, for our sakes, for he came to seeke and to saue that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. Receiue health of him, you that are deseased; who healeth those that are contrite in heart with the ointment of his mercy. Reioyce you that desire comfort, the sonne of God is descended vnto you, that hee migbt make you partakers of his Kingdome: he came Georgius Wirth, vita Christi, eu qua∣tuor Euangeli∣stis. lib. 5. cap. 4. willingly (by his incarnation, passion, death, and resurrection), to seeke (by the preaching of the Gospell) and to saue that is lost; to deliuer from sinne, death and hell; and to restore them to righteousnesse and euerlasting life. Thirdly, by the sending of his seruants to preach the Gospell the power of God to saluation, vnto euery one that doth belieue, 1. Corinth. 1. 24. The ministery, whereof is, to open mens eyes, that they may turne from darkenesse to light, and from the power of Sathan vnto God, that they may receiue remission of sinnes, and inheritance among them which are san∣ctified by faith. Act. 26. 18. Therefore when he, that great
Prophet had opened the will of the Father, Luke 4. 18. 19 &c. and accomplished the worke of Redemption; ascen∣ding vp into heauen, gaue some to bee Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Euangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the repayring of the Saints, for the work of the Ministery, and for the edification of the body of Christ, Ephes. 4. 11. 12. No be∣nefite greater then this, none more pretious. For, the word taught, is a word of saluation, a Lutherus in locis à Theodo∣sio Fabricio col∣lectis, titulo de Euangelio, seu verbo pro∣missionis. word of Grace, a word of comfort, a word of ioy, the voyce of the Bridegroome, and the Spouse, a good word, a word of peace, the Chari∣ot wherein Christ is brought vnto vs with his righteous∣nesse, and all spirituall blessings. Fourthly, By the threatning of wrath, and foretelling of punishment, against the vnfaithfull and disobedient; that by this meanes, as with a strong hand, he might draw them vnto him: so he admonisheth the Iewes vnto repentance by the example of others, lest they also perish, Luc. 13. 3. 5. And there is nothing more vsuall and frequent in Scripture, then this manner of dealing, as Leuit. 26. 14. 2. Sam. 7. 14. Osea. 4. 1. 2. 3. &c. Let vs therefore, thirst after our owne saluation, that as the Hart panteth after the water brookes, so our soule may pant after God. Psal. 42. 1. For as Aristoteles de historia ani∣malium, lib. 6. cap. 9. Lucretius lib. 6. Nicander in Theriates. Oppum, lib. 2. de venaetione. Drusius Mis∣cellarorum centuria, 1. 2. Ioaohimus Camerarius Symbolorum & Imblema∣tum Centuria 2. Emblem. 40. 42. &c. the searchers into Natures se∣crets haue taught. Harts either pursued by dogges in hun∣ting, by reason of heate and losse of breath, hasten to the Riuers, or wearied in fight with the Serpents (whom they draw forth with their breath) or stung and wounded by them, while they lie and rest themselues vpon the ground, seeke to some colde fountaine, whereby the infection of the venome receiued, may bee abated. Euen so, snch as are wounded, and strucken of the olde Serpent, must haue recourse vnto Christ, to behold him with the eye of faith, that they may bee healed, Iohn 3. 14. For he Bernardus in die Natali Domini de fon∣tibuc seruatoris semon, 1. is the abundant well-spring of mercy, from whence doe now the waters of remission, to wash away sinnes; of Wisdome, yeel∣ding waters of discretion, to quench our thrist; of grace
where wee may draw waters of deuotion, to maine∣taine the render plantes of good workes, of Charity, sending forth waters of zeale, to boyle our corrupt af∣fections. Now there was set a vessell of vineger, and they filled a sponge with vineger, and put it vpon hy∣sope, and put it to his mouth. This Euangelist speaketh this, as of a  in locum, Bza in maioribus annotaionibus ad nouum Te∣stamentum. thing vsuall, for there was now ready placed a vessell full of this li∣quor (as some thinke prouided by deuoute women, vp∣on compassion, to hasten the death of the offenders if necessity so required,) And Saint Matthew, 27. verse 34 giueth vs to vnderstand, that there was offered vnto him before this, vineger mixed with gall; or as Saint Marke speaketh, wine mingled with De hoc myr∣ pcul ex Ribbinis, Ga∣latinus de ar∣omis Catholica ver, lib. 8. cap. 19. . Myrhe, cap. 1. 23. which, and the other, wee must make a difference: for the wicked Souldiers, as be∣fore they pearced his head with a Crowne of thornes, so now in  and contempt, they compasse and bind a sponge round about, with a wreath of hysope, (and that according to the manner vsed among the heathen, D coronandis: Homeros Odys∣sa prim, . Vide Fustathium ad locum illum. Sic & Virgibus, Aeneid. lib. 1. Crateras magnos atuunt, & vina coconant, ad quae verbo . Coronant autem, est aut implent vsque ad marginem, aut quia Antiqui coronabant po∣cula, &c. Iohannes Stuckius antiquitatum conuiualium, l. 3. c. 13. & 16. whereof there is much mention in ancient Writers) and this they put to Christs mouth vpon , who now was aloft vpon the crosse and by this cuppe, which they wantonly and him (ne∣uer dreaming of any such thing) was shadowed out, both the sharpenesse and bitternesse, as also the sa∣uing power of his death and passion. For the gall and myrrhe mixed with vineger and wine, was a signification of his bitter death, Psalme 69. 21. And therefore (if so it
were the will of the Father) prayed that hee might not taste of that cuppe: and the hysope wherewith it was compassed, did singularly expresse the sauing power of his passion and bloudshedde vpon the crosse. For hysope in the ceremoniall Law of Moses, was often vsed. First, in the sprinckling of the Lintell, and the cheeke postes of the dores of the houses of the Israelites the might before their departure out of Aegypt, with the bloud of the Passeouer Lambe, that the destroying Angell might passeouer those houses, Exodus. 12. 22. 23. Secondly, in the cleansing of the Leaper, Leuinus 3. Lemnius de herbis biblicis cap. 26. Leuitious 14. 4. Third∣ly, in the sacrifice for transgression or sinne offering, Numbers 19. 6. Therefore this ceremoniall hysope was a type ad figure of the bloud of Christ, when pur∣geth and clenseth those which belieue in Christ from all their sinnes, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. and dooth refresh and com∣fort them, affrighted and cast downe with the remorse of their sinnes, Psalme 51. 9. 1. Peter 1. 2. Hebrewes, 9. 19. & 10. 12. Thus Christ was Cyprianus de bono patien∣tiae. sedde with gall, who is the heauenly foode, and giuen vineger to drinke who hath offered to vs the cup of saluation. God doth oftentimes giue ouer his deare and be∣loued  children into the hands of their enemies, by whom they are euill and extreamely handled. Thus Caine preuailed against Abell, Genesis, 4. 8, Pharao did so vn∣mercifully oppresse the Israelites that they were weary of their liues, Exodus, 1. 14. Zacharias the sonne of Iehoiada, was euill required of King Ioas; notwithstan∣ding his Fathers kindnesse shewed; and his owne faith∣full admonition giuen vnto him, 2. Chron. 14. 21. Reli∣gious Iosiah falleth by the sword of Pharo Necho, 2. King. 23. 29, Herod Antipas murthered Iohn the Baptist, and Agrippa Iames the Apostle, Mathew, 14. 10. Act. 12. 1. 2. And those Saints of whom the world was vnwor∣thy, are tryed with diuersitie of torments, Hebrewes 11. 36. &c.
Therefore if it shall please God so to deale with vs, for the comforting of our soules, confirmation of our faith, and strengthning of our hope in such distesse and ial. Let vs then Religiously thinke vpon these thinges. First, Grinaeus in Prophetā Aba∣ne. that this commeth not to passe, without the especiall prouidence, of God; for two Sparrowes are folde for a farthing, and one of them doth not fll vnto the ground without the will of our Father, Mathew, 10. 2. So Da∣uid when hee was constrained to flie, for feare of his vnnaturall Sonne Absoiom, who rose vppe against him; hee submitteth himselfe in that humble forme, If it please the Lord, 2. Samuel, 15. 26. for none falleth into the hands of men but such whom God giueth ouer vnto them, Psal. 66. 12. Secondly, let vs also know, that God hath iust cau∣ses, why hee so doth; for by this meanes, (to the glo∣ry of his mercy and iustice) hee doth eyther proud vs, as hee did Iob, by the Chaldeans, Sabeans, and the Diuell. Iob. 1. 14. 15. or profitably humble vs, and bring vs to the better knowledge of him, and our selues; and thus hee gaue Rehoboam and his people into the hands of Sheshacke, that they might know a difference betweene his seruice, and the seruice of the Kinges of the earth; 2. Chron. 12. 8. or hee doth thereby mildely as a father, chasten and correct those, that are his; and therefore wee reade so often in the booke of the Iudges, that hee deliuered his people into the handes of their enemies, but had pitty vpon them, and sent Sauiours, as Chapter 3. 8. 9. & 9. 4. 16. & 6. 1. 14. &c. Thirdly, howsoeuer for a season God seeme to hide his countenance, yet in due time, and when it is the best, hee will send deliuerance. Thus Paul sayth, that he was taken from the mouth of the Lyon (meaning Nero) Eusebius historiae Eccles. l. 2. 6. 22. 2. Tim. 4. 17. for hee is the Father of mercies, and
God of all comfort, 2. Corin. 1. 3. whose bowels are trou∣bled, and surely will haue compassion, Ieremy, 31. 20. Onely let vs crie vnto him in our affliction: for hee seeth our trouble, and beholdeth our mi∣series, and will heare in a time appointed, Psalme, 9. 10. and not suffer vs to be tempted aboue that wee shall bee able to beare, 1. Corinth. 10. 13. nor the righteous be moued, Psalme, 55. 22.
THE SIXTH WORD A VVORDE OF Perfection and Perseuerance. IOHN 19. vers. 30. Now when Iesus had receiued of the vineger, he said, It is finished. THE ANALYSIS. THis word of Christ is a Commentarie of the Deuterono∣mium secundū cat Arnold Carnotensis in praefatione ad septem ltim Christi verba. Theodorus Beza homil. 32. in hist. passionis. olde Testament, and summe of the New; and therefore worthy of diligent, and earnest considera∣tion, and whereof carefull applica∣tion is to be made for the comfort of our whole life. For in it is ex∣pressed that office and charge, which he receiued of the Father; wherein is conteyned the reall, and actuall execution or performance of those things which were requisite for our deliuerance from death, and obtevning of euerlasting life: which was promised vnto the Fathers immediately after the fall, and successiuely fi∣gured
and shadowed in the whole forme of the ceremoniall worship. And in it two things be obseruable. 1. The speech it selfe, (It is finished.) 2. The time, when it was pronoun∣ced, (after he had receiued of the vineger.) Now when Iesus had receiued of the vineger. Both the fact of Christ, that he receiued of the vineger, and the time of receiuing, hitherto deferred; are diligently to be weighed; for therefore now he tasted thereof, because God had so decreed; and he had performed all those things which were enioyned him: and in this declared the highest degree of obedience to the Father, both in his suffering, and also in the order, and manner of suffering; and giueth vs an example, in all things to obey God; and not depart one iot from his commandements. But of obedience I haue spo∣ken already, in the former wordes. He said, It is finished. This is Christ his song of triumph, ouercomming death by dying, preuayling in suffering, and finishing the whole worke of redemption. For he being the Priest, and the sa∣crifice, after he had offered himselfe vnto the Father, by his owne bloud entred in the holy place, and obteined eternall redem∣ption for vs, Heb. 9. 12. And that nothing should be de∣fectiue, or wanting to the perfection of this propitiatorie sacrifice, he endeth this holy action performed vpon the crosse with that clause (It is finished.) You see the Augustinus tractat. 31. & 47. in Euang. Iohannis. power of Christ dying; for he willingly expected this time, vntill all those things were fulfilled, which were foretold he must doe before his death: after they were done, he said, It is fi∣nished. Thus he departed from hence by his power, who came not hither of necessitie: and because Arnoldu Carntensis de vltimis septem Christi verb. it was written in the volume of the booke, that the Sonne should doe the will of the Father, and this thing was long delayed and in sundry sorts praefigured: he brought that to light, which in so many
ages had laid hidden; and suffered not the people laden with sinne, any longer to be burdened with superfluous and vnprofitable worship. For this had not been religion, but su∣perstition, to mingle the dregs of old ceremonies, with the pure wine of the Gospell. And also would haue them vn∣derstand, that not onely the end of his sufferings was come, but also of those legall obseruances; and that the truth being present, the shadowes must vanish; that the Ephod was to bee folded together, and the Teraphim no more applyed; whatsoeuer Aholiab and Bezaleel either embrodered or en∣graued, was to giue place to liuely instructions; and the typicall robes, to the truth shewing it selfe in his owne and perfect beauty. Therefore in the end of Christs suffering, was the end of the law; and whatsoeuer it commanded an∣ciently to be performed by the bloud of goates and calues, &c. orincense or sacrifices, for the explation of sinnes, that grace hath brought to a compendious summe: and, short∣ning the tediousnesse of so long a iourney, appointed one bloud, one incense, and one burnt offering, conteyning all the rest; with such moderation, that how poore soeuer the man be, he should haue sufficient to purchase this; neither doth place or person exclude any from the accesse vnto so great a benefit. The Chuch therefore hath one lambe, &c. For now being at the point of death, he shewed that what∣soeuer was promised to the Fathers, shadowed vnder the types of the Law, foretold of the Prophets by diuine inspi∣ration, is accomplished: and therefore now no other sacri∣fice, no other helpe needfull, for the Bezaein histo∣riam passioni homilia 32. Vide antea ad verbum quintū in initio, de si∣mili loquendi formula. freedome of man∣kinde from death and condemnation. But yet there is a scruple which must bee remooued, how Christ is said to haue perfected all things, when as yet his buriall, ascension, re∣surrection, and full glorification remained, articles to be be∣leeued vnto saluation. And how the Fathers who liued be∣fore the comming of Christ in the flesh, weresaued, seeing the saluation of man doth rest vpon this fulfilling of Christ. But the answer is easie, that all these, his buriall &c. with the rest, are, by an vsuall  figure comprehended in his death,
which is the equiualent ransome for our sinnes, a sacrifice powerfull to procure saluation, abundant to pay the price, and sufficient to make satisfaction, &c. By the merit therefore of the death and passion of Iesus  Christ, wee are perfectly and fully redeemed; for hee was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was vpon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Esay 53. 5. And, it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell, and (hauing made peace by the bloud of his crosse) by him to reconcile all things to himselfe, Coloss 1. 19. 20. For he hath deliuered vs both from the corruption, and the guilt; from the materiall, and formall of sinne: in respect whereof, his bloud is said to purge vs from all sinne, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. (and is the true Vide Biblian∣drum de miste∣rijs salutiferae passionis, pag. 19 & 20. Panacea, de panace, & eius speciebus Dioscordes, l. 3. . All-heale of of∣fences;) And he, to bee made a curse for vs Galath. 3. 13. So that there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Ie∣sus, Rom. 8. 1. And hereof, he is stiled our ransome, 1. Pet. 2. 5. wisdome, righteousesso, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. De hoc Apo∣stoli Aphoris∣mo, Grinaeus problematum, lib. 3. For as by the desobedience of one man, (Adam) many are made sinners, so by the obedience of one, (Christ) many are made righteous, Rom. 5. 19. We must therefore know, and beleeue in him; that in beleeuing wee may haue life through his name. Iohn 20. 31. who with one offering, hath consecrated for euer, them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. and giuen eternall pardon. And for our assurance and cer∣teinty thereof, hath vttered his seuenwords, nayled hand and Alexius Rharturus, . Cuius extant Homiliae, mixa∣barbara Graeco∣rum dialecto conscriptae. foote vnto the crosse &c. Hasten, hasten, ô people, to eat the crummes falling from this table of Christ crucified; and lay them vp in your hearts with May his mother &c. These are the patheticall wordes of Alexius Rharturus, in one of his Sermons to his auditors; with whose and the like testimonies I am much delighted: and doe giue so great and humble thankes vnto Almightie God, as my heart can conceiue, that at this day he doth preserue in the midst of Mahumetisne, some reliques of Christianitie, and so forth. Ʋntrue then is that, which Lib. 5. de u∣charistia, qu est primas de sacrific Missae cap. 5. & lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 2. &c. 7. 8. Bellarmine teacheth by the Ʋse.
authoritie of the Sessionis 22. cap. 2. Tridentine Councell, That the Masse is a true, outward, reall, and propitiatorie sacrifice, not onely for the satisfying of punishment, but for taking away also of the filthinesse of sinnes, and not those light and veniall, but such as be the most grieuous; seruing not alone, to obteyne spirituall benefits, but likewise temporall: and therefore may iustly bee offered for the liuing, vpon earth, the dep∣ted in Purgatorie, and the Saints which doe reigne with Christ in heauen. But against this so fowle an error, or ra∣ther blasphemie, amongst almost the infinite number of arguments, vsed by ancient and later Diuines, these few may stand in stead of a more full confutation. 1. First, by the comming of Christ, all Chrysost. hom. 16. & 17. in Acta Aposto∣lorum. sacrifices are ta∣ken away, for the Church must not rest vpon shadowes, when the body is present, nor in types and figures, when the truth is exhibited; for the Altar of the crosse, was the end and dissolution of all other Altars: and we must so conceiue of the sacrifice offered vpon it, as of that solemne sacrifice, wherein Aaron, once a yeare, caried the bloud of the beast offered, into the Sanctuarie, Heb. 9. 7. Exod. 30. 10. Leuit. 6. 14. For as that sacrifice, was not thought fully done, vn∣till the Priest came forth out of the holy place, (the people in the meane while standing, and praying,) neither was there any other sacrifice all that time offered, so Christ af∣ter that he had sacrificed himselfe vpon the crosse, entered into the sanctuarie of heauen, and there offered his owne bloud, neither shall there be any end of that oblation, vntill hee come againe in the day of iudgement. Which com∣ming, while we waite for, let the Church continue praying, and celebrate the remembrance of his passion, in the Sa∣crament of his last Supper: and abstaine from all propiti∣atorie sacrifices, not daring to renew that offering once made. And therefore Christ when hee departed from vs, did not ordeyne any sacrifices, neither willed, by any obla∣tions to appease God, nor commanded to build altars; but did celebrate his last Supper vpon a table, not an altar, Luc. 22. 14. And hereof came that admonitorie speech of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. v. 21. you cannot bee partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Diuels. For the better & more cleare vnderstanding of which place, you must know that the Gentiles De is Eth∣nicorum Epulis plenissimè Gu∣lielmus Stucki∣us. Antiquita∣tum conuiua∣lium, lib. 1. c. 33 & in libro sa∣crorum sacrifi∣ciorum, Genti∣lium. Tertullia∣nus de Idolola∣tria; & Hero∣dotus in Clione de Clebis & Buteonis conui∣uio, &c. custome was (after their sacrifices ended) to feast, not onely at home in their own houses, but also in the Temples; as is manifest in the same Epistle, c. 8. v. 10. And this banquet, the Apostle calleth the Table of Diels, and opposeth it to the Table of the Lord. The issue and point of the question is this, that the sacrifice of the Crosse, or the death of Christ, is the onely ransome for sinnes: now the Masse is not this sacrifice, nor this death, and therefore no price of redemption. Secondly, the sacrifice of the Crosse was bloudy, sharpe, visible, performed in one place, but the Masse (according to the determination of the Romanists) is vnbloudy, inui∣sible, and without all paine, and may be offered in a thou∣sand sundry places, in one moment. Then these two must needes be contradictory. 3 Further, in the sacrifice of Christ, hee is wounded, and dieth, and his side being opened, water and bloud issued forth; in the Masse no such matter is performed. 4 Adde further, the vertue of this sacrifice is infinite, the power of the Masse is little, and the value small: for a thou∣sand Masses will not serue to release one soule out of Pur∣gatory; and they may be purchased for a groat or two; and at euery corner of the Scribit Ga∣briel Biel, sibi à quibusdam, subleuandae me∣mori causa, traditum esse modum, per omnes omnium declinationum casus applican∣di, hoc modo. In Nominatiuo Missa pro. Sipso. Genetiuo. Patre, matre. Datiuo Fundatoribus & be∣nefactoribus. Accusatiuo Inimicis & accusa∣oribus. Vocatiuo Peccatoribus, & in∣fidelibus. Ablatiuo. Obtrectatoribus & maledicis. nos singul pee ades suas priuatas habuerunt aras, ad quas pro exiguastipe sacerdos aliquis missā caneyet. streetes, stand Priests, who may bee hyred for a little reward, to sing Masse in a corner. 5 Againe, in the sacrifice of the Crosse, Christ offered him∣selfe to the Father: in the Masse, a Priest vsurpingly taketh vpon him this office. 6 Christ is a Priest for euer, to reconcile vs to the father by
his owne facrifice, Psal. 110 4. Heb. 7. 16. And then hee eyther obtained his purposed end, and so was perfect, to which in the same kind nothing may bee added, or else hee fayled thereof, and so is imperfect, which once to con∣ceiue in thought is wicked and irreligious. But because it is as great a commendation to know how to end, as to begin; Debis Hospi∣nianus histor. Sacramentari lib. 5. Sadeel de vnico Christi sacrificio. Ge∣orgius Milius in Augustanae confessionis Explication; parie 2. Artic. 3. de Missa. Quo sensu in∣cruentam dica∣tur sacrificim Ritherhusius docet in suis ad Guntherum notis, de rebus gestis Frederici Barharssae. Let vs for conclusion, heare the spirite of God, teaching vs by his Apostle, Heb. 10. 14. With one offering be (Christ) hath consecrated for euer, them that are sanctified; and least we should dreame of any iteration, hee said before, ver. 10. the offering of his body was once made; and cap. 9 ver. 27. 28. as it is appointed for man, that they shall die once, and then commeth the iudgement: So Christ was once offered, to take away the sinnes of many, and vnto them, that looke for him, shall hee appeare the second time without sinne vnto saluation. Words demonstratiuely prouing, that the offering can no more the second time be reiterated, then our death, which is a thing contrary to reason: yea, and in the 22. verse, he saide, that without bloudshedding there is no remission of sinnes, then the vnbloudy sacrifice of the Masse, must needs proue idle, and vnprofitable for this purpose. And albeit they bestirre themselues, and striue by all meanes to perswade that these passages are meant, and must bee vnderstood of the sacri∣fices legall, and the olde Testament; yet these slippery Pro∣teusses, Proteus quis su & cur ga∣tur mutare for mam suam, Diodorus Sicu∣lus bibliotheca lib. 2. cap. 62. Natalis Comes Mythologiae lib. 8. cap. 7. Homerus Odys∣seae, 4. Proclus Licius de dictis aduersus Ho∣merum, cap. 7. & Heraclides Ponticus Alle∣gorijs in Home∣rbulas de Dijs. though they can turne themselues into all shapes, are faster bound, then that they can escape. For the Apo∣stle sayth not, that there was no remission, but that there is no remission without shedding of bloud; and therefore affirmeth, that in the time wherein hee liued no pardon of offences could be, but by that bloudy sacrifice. And if the sacrifices of the law were not propitiatory, but through his bloud, why shall that of the new testament bee de∣priued of this prerogatiue? These things are clearer then the day, and as bright as the Sunne, and of such efficacy and power, that the aduersaries are constrained to acknowledge the same truth we professe, and closely to take our part, that the Masse is but the application and commemoration of the sa∣sacrifice
of Christ: so from this premisse it followeth: ther∣fore no sacrifice: for the applying of: plaister to a wound, or the laying of the rule to the timber, is not the rule, nor the plaister; neither the commemoration of a battell, is the battell: no more can the application and commemorati∣on of the sacrifice of Christ, bee the sacrifice it selfe. But how vnhallowed this Romis sacrifice is, they may aily vnderstand, who will but take the paines to reade ouer the learned Treatises of Caluin, noble Mornay, Lord of Plesses, Chrastonius, Hospanus, Polanus, Tilenus, Lectius, Musculus, Whitacherus, Humfeedus, Sutlinius, &c. Petrus Molineus, siue quis alius in tracttu de Perigrinationibus, altaribus, & sacrifi∣cys. Lutherus de captiuitats Babilonics, & missa abroganda, &c. He said, It is finished. Hee speaketh, of that wonderfull worke, now in hand, which was the redemption of mankind, and saith it is finished, because hee had performed, and fulfilled all those things which the Law praefigured in the sacrifices and holy rites, or the Prophets foretold, or God from all eternitie decreed. The passion of Christ, which he suffered for the salua∣tion of man, was predestinated of God, by his eternall de∣cree; and that for the manifestation, both of his mercy and iustice. Therefore Peter concerning this point Act. 2. 23. & 4. 27. affirmeth that Christ was deliuered by the deter∣minate counsell, and foreknowledge of God, after he was taken with wicked hands, crucified and slaine; And against his holy sonne Iesus, whom he had annoynted, both Herod and Pontius Pi∣late, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel gathered themselues together, to doe whatsoeuer his hand, and counsell had appointed before to be done. And this is one of Gods admirable Augustinus in Enchiridi cap. 100. works making a good vse of the euill (because he is the chiefe good) to the condemnation of those, whom he hath iustly prede∣stinated vnto punishment, and the saluation of them, whom hee hath mercifully chosen vnto glory. For, so much as lay in them, they did that which God would not;
but in respect of his power, by no meanes could doe that. And therefore euen from the beginning of the world, the Lord propounded this comfor to our first Parents, pre∣sently after the fall, the seed of the woman shall breake the head of the serpent, Gen. 3. 15. And when the fulnes of time was come, he sent forth (this seed) his sonne made of a woman, and made vnder the law, that he might xedee them ht were vnder the law, and receiue the adoption of the sonnes, Galath. 4. 4. 5. who for this cause, humbled himselfe and became obedient vnto the death, the shamefull death of the crosse. Phil. 2. 6. 7. For application, hereby we are taught, religiously and Ʋse. with reuerence to meditate vpon the passion of Christ. Now the meditation is threefold. First, historicall, testifying that Iesus the sonne of the Vir∣gin Mary crucified, and dead vnder Pontius Pilate, is the true Messias, promised to the Fathers, foretold of the Prophets; in whom all things are exactly fulfilled, who redeemed the world, and gaue a price of Huius sanguis tam potens ad priuilegium, tam diues fuit ad pretium, vs si vniuersit as captiurum in Red-ptorem suum crederet, nullum planè tyrannica vin∣cula retinerent. Leo ferm. 7. de passione Dom. greater value, then the world. And in this part of meditation these circumstances are re∣markable: first, who suffereth. 2. what. 3. where. 4. when. 5. why. euen that hee might deliuer man from sinne, the wrath of God, and eternall death, and bestow vpon him blessing and euerlasting life: for there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, euen the man Christ Iesus, 1. Timoth. 2. 5. The second spirituall, Lutherus in concione de Christi passione meditanda. when we considerately, and deep∣ly discusse, the impulsiue, and small causes, of his passion, with the effects, and fruitfull application thereof: which being rightly balanced in our hearts, doe represent before our eyes: 1. The seueritie and rigour of Gods iustice, which Christ (perfectly obeying the law and susteyning the pu∣nishment due to mankind) hath fully satisfied. 2. The grie∣uousnesse of the wrath of God against sinne, which could not bee mitigated and appeased, but by the bloud and death of his onely begotten sonne; the greatnesse of the medicine, sheweth the greatnesse of the wound, Esay 53. 5. 3. The
abundant riches of the mercy and loue of God, who so loued the world, that he spre not his owne (and onely) sonne, but gaue him for vs all, Rom. 8. 32. Ioh. 3. 16. 4. The Vulera Chri∣sti, Ciuitates Refugij. Fidenter dico, quod ex me, mihideest. Vsurp mihi, ex vulneribus Do∣mini. Bern. serm. 6. in Cant. exceeding loue of the Sonne toward vs, who willingly (the Dietie resting and not shewing forth it selfe) did vndergoe so many mise∣ries, and laid downe his soule for our sake;. Ephes. 5. 2. The third exemplarie, that we should imitate his vertues, obedience toward the Father, loue towards his Church, hunti∣litie, mildnesse, patience, faith, and hope of endlesse glory; as both himselfe and Apostles ex∣hort, Matth. 11. 29. Ioh. 13. 14. Phil. 2. 5. 1. Pet. 4. 1. &c.
THE SEVENTH AND LAST WORD, a VVord of Obedience and Deuotion. LVKE, 23. VER. 46. And when Iesus had cryed with a loude voyce, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, and hauing said thus, he gaue vp the Ghost. THE ANALYSIS. THis is the happy End of Christ his passion, and as it were a tri∣umph, wherein he doth pro∣fesse God, to bee the faithful keeper of his soule; and is the last word hee vttered vpon the Crosse. In which, two things offer themselues to our consideration; the word it selfe, and the circumstances thereof. The circumstances, are partly precedent, partly consequent: Precedent two, one of time, (when he had cryed) the other of
the manner, how it was pronounced (with a loude voyce;) Subsequent; and those twofold, first of time (hauing saide thus) second, of an Action following, (he gaue vp the Ghost.) The word it selfe; in which be obseruable, 1. the person com∣mending his soule, necessarily implied in the verbe of the first person, Christ Iesus; (I commend) 2. the commende (if I may frame such a word;) God, (Father:) 3. the thing com∣monded (my spirit:) 4. the place of keeping that which is com∣mitted, (Into thy hands.) Or, according to the vsuall distribu∣tion of circumstances, Who, what, to whom, when, where. And when Iesus had cried with a loude voyce. This speech Theophilact calleth a word of freedom (wher∣by he procured liberty for vs, taken out of the prison of hell;) and was not naturall: for men who are afflicted with long and grieuous torment, drawing neere vnto death, doe vsually faint, and speake with a languishing, and scarce au∣dible voice, their strength being consumed and wasted. Barnardus sermone in e∣ria 4. hebdoma∣dae penosae. To die is great infirmity, but to die thus, great power: he alone could lay downe his soule, and take it vp againe. Doct. Christ willingly, & by no constraint dyed, Ioh. 10. 17. & therefore the Prophet by a peculiar phrase of the Hebrew tongue, vnusuall in other languages, expresseth the same, when hee saith, that Renueherus in 53. caput Esaiae. . Alexius Rhar∣turus . his soule made it selfe a sacrifice for sinne, Esay, 53. 20. and in the Gospell, commending his loue to∣wards vs, he doth it vnder the figuratiue name of Baptisme, Luc. 12 20. I haue a De varia vo∣cabuli Baptismi acceptione: Damscenus fidei Orthodox, lib 4. cap. 10. Baptisme to be baptized with, and how am I strayned vntill it be accomplished? thereby manifesting his vehement and earnest desire, and therefore foretelleth his Disciples, how hee must suffer, and goeth vp with them, vnto Ierusalem, the place appointed for his death, Math. 20. 17 If hee would not haue vndergone his Georgius Wirth de vita Christi ex E∣uangelijs, l. . cap. 39. passion, he might haue auoided it (which he foreknew) and easily made frustrate all the the plots, and vtterly ouerthrowne the power of the Iewes, Math. 26. 53. but hee yeelded, and therfore, first, goeth into the garden, well known to Iudas
the traytor; Secondly, meeteth his enemies, who came to apprehend him; thirdly, asketh whom they seeke; fourth∣ly, openeth himselfe vnto them, vnknowne before; fiftly, by his word striketh them to the ground, and suffereth them to rise againe: sixtly, reproueth Peter, vsing the sword in his defence: seuenthly, admitteth not the assistance and protection of Angels, which he might haue done: eightly, exerciseth not his almighty power, for his escape and safety (which hee shewed in healing of Malchus) but suffered himselfe to be taken, led away vnto Caiphas and Pilate, Ioh. 18. 1. 2. 3. &c. For so it Non ex ne∣cessitate passio Christi fuit, sed voluntaria; ne captus est a Iu∣daeis, sed à seipso bltus: quando vult, apitur, quando vult elabitur, quando vult suspendi∣tur, quando vult tenetur. Ambrosn 4. Lucae. was requisite, both for the ef∣fecting of our iustification, Rom. 5. 6. 7. and making the attonement with God, 2. Cor. 5. 19. The vse of this doctrine is, that we should willingly giue our selues againe to him, who gaue himselfe for vs. So Paul, I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, that yee present your bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reaso∣nable seruice; and be not conformed to this world, but be trans∣formed by the renuing of your minds, that ye may proue, what is that good, that acceptable and perfect wil of God, Rom. 12. 1. 2 For in that hee died for all, they that liue, must not from henceforth liue to themselues, but vnto him, who di∣ed for them, 2. Cor. 5. 15. And the holy Apostle, inflamed with this so great loue of our blessed Sauiour, doth ioyful∣ly embrace bonds and all afflictions whatsoeuer for Christs sake; neither counted he his life deare, so that hee might finish his course with ioy, and the Ministery he had receiued of the Lord Iesus, to testifie the Gospell of the grace of God, Act. 20. 24. And Epis. 4. ad Tarsensi. Ignatius, condemned to bee deuoured of wild beasts, brake forth thus; I nothing esteeme these punishments, neyther doe I value my life at such a price, that I would loue it more then my Lord; wherefore I am ready to suffer fire, beasts, the sword, the crosse, so I may behold Christ my God and Sauiour, who died for me. And when he was now at point to bee torne in peeces, I am Epist. 12. ad Roanos. Gods corne, let me bee grownde betweene the teeth of the Lions, that I may be fitte to make pure breade: then shall I be a true scholler, and Disciple of Iesus Christ, when their bow∣els
are become my graue, and my body be no more seene. And Eusebius histor. Ecclesi. st. lib. 4. c. 15. Polycarpus, now tyed vnto the stake, and beset round about with faggots, (for hee was adiudged to bee burnt) praysed God, that vouchsafed to bring him to that day and howre wherein he might be partaker with the Martyres, and tast of the cup of Christ. These were diuine speeches, beseeming the Auditors, and Successors of the Apostles; And euery Chri∣stian must stand so resolued in his soule, that neither tribu∣lation, nor distresse, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakednesse, nor perill, nor sword, &c. can bee able to separate him from the loue of Christ, whether we vnderstand it actiuely or passiuely, Rom. 8. 35. 36. &c. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Christ seeing, that hee could not preuaile with men, calleth now vpon his father; and doubteth not of his affe∣ction and loue towards him, in the extream pangs of death, but sheweth that he is, and euer was, his beloued sonne. And his speech is in effect thus much: I Ferus in parte 4. Domi∣nicae passionis. haue passed ouer the deepe and tempestuous sea of tribulations, with great and vndaunted patience, I haue made knowne thy name vnto men, glorified thee vpon earth, finished that worke thou ga∣uest me to doe; and now I come vnto thee, giuing thanks for thy gracious assistance, and offer vp my selfe vpon this Altar of the Crosse, an acceptable sacrifice. And this saying the ancient Diuines call a word of perseuerance. Christ twice cried out with a loud voyce vpon the Crosse; once, inforced by the sensible feeling of extreame torment, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me? againe, of a tender affection, and hauing gotten the vpper hand, and ouercome that agony, and ful∣filling the will of the father, Coloss. 1. 19. Doctrine. In euery good and holy worke, we must continue vn∣till it be perfected: onely Barnardus Epist. 129. Prorsus absque perseuerantia, ne{que} qui pugnat victoriam, nec palmam victor consequitur; tolle perseue∣rantiam, nec obsequium mercdm ha∣bet, nec bsi∣ium grat ec laudem fortitudo. Saul cum esset paruulus in oculis suis, Rex est super Israel constitus, non perseuerans in humilitate, & Regnum amisit & vitam; Si aucela Smpson, si Solomon deio, perseuerantiam retinuissent, nec is profecto priuaretur sapientia, nec ille viribus. Perseuerance striueth lawfully,
onely is crowned, is the sole daughter of the great King, the perfection of vertues, the treasury and storehouse of all good things, without which, no man can see God. Who would beare with that tree, which onely in time of yeare buddes and blossoms, but bringeth forth no ripe fruite? What is more cowardlie then for a man to put on his armour at home, and when hee commeth into the field, in the face of the enemy, refuse to fight? Is there any thing more foolish, then to lay the foundation of a house, to rayse the walles, and goe no further, but neglect to co∣uer it with the roofe? What benefite is it to sayle safely a long time, to escape many dangers by sea, and make shippewracke in the harbour? To what end shall it bee for the virgines to buy oyle, to trim their lampes, and then to bee vnprepared when they should enter with the Bride in∣to the Chamber? Is it any prayse to make a glorious pro∣fession of Religion, to ascend vp to heauen, to walke with the sonnes of God, and againe to descend into hell; and of a young Saint to degenerate into an olde diuell? Hyronimus Epistola ad Furi. Not the beginning, but the ending is commended in Christians. Iudas was numbred among the Apostles, went forth with the rest, preached the word, wrought miracles, but at the last be∣trayed his master, and perished miserably, Act. 1. 18. Lots wife, escaped the shower of fire and brimstone, which con∣sumed Sodome and Gomorrha, but when shee looked backe, was turned into a piller of salt, Gen. 19. to Augustinus de Ciuitate Dei lib. 16. cap. 30. season others by her example. Demas for a long time followed Saint Paul the Apostle; but to no end, for he left him, embraced this pre∣sent world, and went to Thessalonica, 2. Tim. 4. vers. 10. Wherfore let vs remember him, who loued vs vnto the end, for our sakes remayned vpon the Crosse; vntill all was finished; for none shall be saued but he that continueth vnto the last, Math. 24. 13. Many runne in the race, one getteth the garland, he that commeth to the goale, 1. Cor. 9. 24. and can truely say, I haue fought the good fight, fini∣shed the course, and kept the faith. 2. Tim. 4. 7. I haue spoken
heretofore of this point, in the exposition of the 130. Psalme. B  ecause those who exhort any to vertue, and teach not how they may attaine the same, do all one, as to kindle a lampe, and powre in no oyle, to maintaine the flame, so that it must soone faile and die: therefore the vse of this doctrine shall bee a few rules and directions, whereby this vertue may bee first gotten, and afterward preserued. And among a great multitude, these as the most choice, are no∣ted of the Diuines. First, earnest and humble prayer vnto God; for it is a gift of grace, not an endowment of nature, and therefore to bee asked of him, from whome commeth euery good thing, Iam. 1. 17. Men Aquinas 2. 2 quaest. 137. rlicul. 14. Rinerius in summa, parte 2. titulo de per∣seuerantia. c. 6. easily transgresse and offend, of their owne, accord fall into sinne, but cannot of them∣selues rise againe; and therefore lye still in euill, but con∣tinue not in goodnesse. Dauid priuy vnto himselfe of this our corruption, prayed; Teach me thy will O Lord, and I will walke in thy truth, knit my heart vnto thee that I may feare thy name, Psal. 86. 11. And Curopaates, de officiaus Palatij Con∣stantino polita∣ni, & in eum Nadabi Ag∣monij notae. to signifie the necessitie of con∣tinuall prayer, the Patriarch of Constantinople had al∣wayes a cushion carried about with him. Secondly, carefull and diligent meditation. Thinges of small continuance, are of little value among men; for they are contented to carry flowers in their hands, Spectaculi & spiraculires: Tertullianus de Resarrectione. matters of sight and sent) so long as their sweetssmell and delight∣full colour continueth, but when these are lost, then bee cast vnto the dunghill. And God vsoth a like example concerning his owne people, resembling them to a basket of summer fruit, soone ripe, soone rotten Anios; 8. 2. Thirdly, the danger of recidiuation: for the case is alike as in the body, so in the soule; that, if it fall into relapse, after a sicknesse recouered, hath small hope of amendment; because, weakened by the former disease, is now disabled to beare the remedies of physicke prescribed: this once healed and offending, hardly or neuer riseth againe; for
the transgressor is made more vnfitte to repent, wickednes getteth greater strength, and becommeth harder to bee resisted and the diuell returning, will not so easily be re∣moued. The Parable in the Gospell is well knowne, Math. 12. 43. and the dreadfull censure of the Apostle, concer∣ning such who haue escaped from the filthinesse of the world, through the acknowledging of the Lord, and of the Sauiour Iesus Christ, and are entangled againe therein, that the latter end is worse with them then the beginning; for it had been better for them, neuer to haue knowne the way of righteousnes, then after they haue acknowledged it, to turne from the holy commandement giuen vnto them, 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. &c. Fourthly, call to mind the singular effects of perseuerance; As, 1 It obtaineth of God what it will, Luk. 11. 8. When the rest of the Gregorius magnus in E∣uangelia H∣milia 25. Disciples, after Christ was buried, departed from the Sepulchre, Mary Magdalen tarried still, and therefore alone saw the Lord, whom she sought; for the perfection of a good worke is perseuerance. 2 It keepeth the blessing obtained; So the woman of Cana∣an possesseth her daughter in health, Math. 15. 28. And the thankefull Leper continueth clensed, both inwardly and outwardly, Luke 17. 19. And the wise men going on still in their purpose to seeke Christ, haue the direction of the same starre renewed, which first appeared vnto them, Math. 2. 2. 9. 3 It maketh all things, though difficult and distastfull, easie and pleasans. Hee that commeth suddenly from ease to la∣bour, from a priuate and retired life, to action and busie im∣ployments, thinketh euery worke grieuous and burden∣some: but after hee is once inured with them, that see∣meth easie, which before was thought impossible to bee done. 4 It leaueth nothing imperfect. A small kernell, in conti∣nuance of time groweth vp into a tall and great tree. A tra∣ueller, though sicke and weake in body, yet euery day going forward, by a little at a time, accomplisheth a long iourney. Nothing is softer then water, but, by assiduitie and often
falling vpon it, peireeth through the hard flint. Lastly, cast thine eye to the promised reward; this will put new life and strength into thee, and kindle afresh thy fain∣ting and dying spirts. Thus Christ hartneth the Angell of the Church of Smyrna, Be faithfull vnto the end, and I will giue thee, the crowne of life, Reuel. 2. 10. And it is said of Moses, that hee refused to be called Pharaohs daughters sonne, chosing rather to suffer affliction, with the children of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ, greater riches, then the treasures of Aegypt; forsooke that coun∣try, feared not the fiercenesse of the King for he endured, as he that saw him which is invisible, Heb. 11. 24. 25. 26. Where∣fore for a Adhuc in aci constituti su∣mus, de v nostra quotidie dimicmus; danda pera est, vt postitia, ad incrementa perveniatur. Parum est adipisci aliquid ponesse, pl est, quod acceptum est, posse seruare &c. Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 5. conclusion of this point; Let vs goe forward in euery holy dutie, with an vnwearied endeauour and an vn∣danted courage breake through all opposite hinderances; for to those who with patience in wel-doing, seeke glory, and honor, and immortalitie, shall be euerlasting life, Rom. 2. 7. Father; into thy hands I commend my spirit. There be many speeches in the Hilarius de Trinitate lib. 6. Scriptures, which attri∣bute vnto God (who is a spirit) somthing which is corpo∣rall; for they descend to our capacitie, and speake to vs, after the mariner of men; teaching things invisible, by those which are visible, and spirituall, by corporall. And it Dionisius Areopagita cap. 1. de lesti ierarchi. can∣not bee, that man should attaine to the knowledge of hea∣uenly matter, except his vnderstanding bee informed by plaine and familiar examples. Therefore oftentimes, ascri∣beth vnto him, both the Augustinus de ciuitate Dei lib. 15. cap. 25. Gregor. Mag∣moral. lib. 2. cap. 24. affections of our humane minds, and parts of our naturall bodies, in which wee must hold the rule of Dialogo ae Trinitate. Athanasius, to vnderstand those things, which are spoken according to the apprehension of man, as is beseeming the maiestie of God. For the Epiphanius in Audiani. Augustinus de heresibus, cap. 50. Anthropomorphites, men of
dul conceit, brought vp in the cells and cloysters of Monks, wanting all elegancie of learning, leading an vnciuill and rude life, could conceiue nothing of God, but that which was earthly, grosse, and sensible; and therefore dotingly de∣termined, that he had the parts of the bodie like vnto ours. Zanchius de natura & attri∣butes D-i, lib. 3. cap. 4. Wherefore, the passions of the minde which wee attribute vnto God, are not affections, but effects. As, when hee is said to repent, Gen. 6. 6. this signifieth no change in his will, and decree, but in the thing hee either promised or threatned. Dam scenus fidei orthodox lib. 1. Cyrillus Alex∣andrinus de sro-sancta Trinitate cap. 12. Forgetfulnesse is nothing else, but the delaying, to send help, or execute punishment, as Psal. 13. 1. Anger and hatred of sinne, implyeth the due punishment thereof, Num. 25. 3. Matth. 3. 7. And so his eyes are the tokens of fauour and loue, as Elihu in Iob, 36. 7. Eares, of hearing and accepting our pe∣titions, as Psal. 34. 15. Hands, of helpe, liberaelitie, power, and protection. So Exod. 13. 9. Nehemiah, 2. 8. Esay 51. 16. When wee are ouerwhelmed with calamities, and can find no comfort or releefe in man, then let vs disburden our  griefes into the bosome of God our Father, resting vpon the hope of his gratious promises, and call vpon him in all our tryals and afflictions. Thus Iacob, when he feared the rage, and festered wrath of his brother, I pray thee, O Lord, deli∣uer me from the hand of Esau, Gen. 32. 11. And Dauid, thrust from his kingdome, by his rebellious sonne Absolom, Thou art a buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter vp of my head, Psal. 3. 3. Iehosophat, environed with the great, and sundry troups of his enemies, There is no strength in vs, to stand before this multitude, that commeth against vs, neither doe wee know what to doe; but our eyes are towards thee 2. Chron. 20. 12. And the Iewes, who presently and out of hand should haue been vtterly rooted out, by the subtle plots and deuises of Haman, betake themselues to prayer and fasting, as their onely refuge, Hester 4. 16. Great are the troubles of the righ∣teous, but the Lord deliuereth him out of them all, Psal. 34. 19. Let vs then bee patient in all tribulations, submitting our Ʋse. selues humbly vnder the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. And,
as the eyes of seruants looke vnto the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a maide vnto the hands of her mistris, so should our eyes, waite vpon God, vntill he haue mercy vpon vs, Psal. 123. 2. For we must depend on him alone, in him repose our selues, and rowle our waies vpon the Lord, Trust in him, and he shall bring it to passe, Psal. 37. 5. none is such a Father, none so tender ouer vs, and louing. Tertullianus de Patientia. Commit thy wrongs done, vnto him, he will be the reuenger: thy losse, he will restore it: thy sorrow, hee will comfort: thy life, he will raise thee vp from death. Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit. Christ vseth heere an especiall  terme of Lexicon Iuri∣dicum ex Brisso∣nio, Hotomēno, aeijs collectum, in vocabul Depositum. speech, and of singular efficacie, I commit my spirit: for it signifieth to lay down, as a pretious thing, presently to be required againe; and he to whom it is so committed, is bound to a carefull and dili∣gent keeping thereof, and to restore the same. Christ hath bound vp, in the Athanasius de susceptione humanae naturae bundell of life, not onely his owne soule, but of all the faithfull likewise, and together com∣mended them vnto God, and to be quickned by him. For we are his members; and therefore it is without any question, that the soules of the righteous loosed from the body, passe into eternall life, and the companie of the triumphant Church in heauen. For to bee in heauen, with Christ, in the hand of God, in Paradise, in Abrahams bosome, are phrases aequi∣pollent, of one and the same signification. Wee know there∣fore (saith St. Paul) that if our earthly house, of this tabernacle, be destroyed, wee haue a building giuen of God; that is, an house, not made with hands, but eternall in the heauens, 2. Cor. 5. 1. And for this cause, desireth to depart, that he might be with Christ, Philip. 1. 23. And Stephen in the last conflict, pray∣eth, Lord Iesu receiue my spirit, Act. 7. 59. Lazarus after he is dead, is said, by the Angels to bee caried into Abrahams bosome, Luk. 16. 22. And Paradise is promised to the con∣fessing and beleeuing thiefe, Luk. 23. 43. Iohn saw the soules of the faithfull, vnder the altar in heauen, Reuel. 6. 8. The
holy Ghost pronounceth them blessed, who die in the Lord, Apoc. 14. 13. And the wise man, distinguishing of the two parts of man, (the soule and the body) expresseth the dissi∣militude of their condition thus, dust shall returne to the earth as it was, and the Epicharmus, Sapient is ver expressit, . Apud, Plutarchum in oratione Conso∣latoria ad A∣p: & similem Xenar∣chi iocum, quo nec Graecorum quisquam nac Rmanorum sus est, obser∣uauit vir claris∣simus Isaacus Casaubnus in s ad Athaene∣ animaduer∣si nibus lib. 13. cap. 3. qui▪ est, . quomodo & Daid loquutus est Psal. 119. Anima mihi assidue est in manu mea. spirit, to God that gaue it, Eccles. 12. 7. My purpose is not, more fully to prosecute this point; the summe of all is this, the soules of the iust are in the hands of Sic mors nihil est ad, quam xi: us anim dcrre, finis exilij, laboris consummo, ad porum applicatio, pereorinatiis fi∣nio, neris grauissimi depsio, de domo rinos lib. ratio, aegridinum mium terminatio, redi∣tus in patriam, ingressus in gloriam. Holcos in 3. cap, Sapi. God, Wisdom. 3. 1. in peace and rest, in their beds, Esay 57. 1. 2. Ierome thus speaketh of Blesilla, that hauing cast off the burden of the flesh, the soule hastened to her Creator, and being a pilgrim long in earth, came at the last to her an∣cient possession. Ʋse 1. First, by this, are ouerthrowen the fantasticall con∣ceits of naturall men, and the wicked blasphemies of Heretikes. of which sort were the Diogenes Lartius. Herodotus in Euterpe. Malchus de vita Pithagorae. Ter d a. & in Apologetico cap. 8. Hieronymus adersus Ruffinm. Lactais lib. 3. cap. 18. A o de bon mor∣tis cap. 10. Tbeodoretus in haeroticom fabularum compendi%, & in Epitme  deretorū Pythagorians, and Valentinians, who imagined a wandring of soules out of one body into another: with which idle dotage, Iulian the Srates histr. st. lib. 3. cap. 21. Apostata was possessed, and therfore boasted, that somtime he had been Alexander the great: Empedocles could remember when he was a fish: and among the Iewes, the Phariies were bewitched with this heathenish folly. Iosephus antiquitatum lib. 18. cap. 2 & de bello Iudaico lib. 2. cap. 8. Herod Antipas, seemeth to haue asted of this error; for when hee heard of the fame of Iesus, perswa∣ded himselfe, that it was Iohn the Baptist, whom he had put to death, Math. 14. 2. And in this ranke, the Anabaptists are to be marshalled, who haue deuised a new kind of soule∣sleeping, and thinke they are held in this drowsie Lethargy, (being once separated from the body) vntill the day of iudgment, when they shall bee awakened. But the soules of the godly are said, after death when they are departed, to prs the Lord, Reuel. 9. 1. 2. to returne vnto him, Eccles. 12.
but this cannot bee, if they bee cast into a deepe sleepe. Furthermore in this mortall life, while the body sleepeth, the soule neuer resteth, but is occupied: much more then, when it is free, and vnburdened of the Caluinus de . Petrus Martyr in 1. Cor. 13. Danaeus Isago∣ges parte 5. l. 1. cap. 19. flesh. But I will not bestow more time to confute this absurd, and sencelesse opinion: against which, many learned Diuines haue written so plen∣tifully. A second vse; and that serueth, both for instruction, and also for comfort, that we alwaies cast our selues vpon God, and depend on him. For it is blasphemous that the Papists haue done, In Psalterio beaae Mariae. corrupting the words of that Psalme, from whence this testimonie is alleged, turning them, thus, O Lady in thy hands I commit my spirit, vnderstanding the virgin Mary. And let vs not doubt, what shall become of vs, when we are dead, as the Heathen, who haue no future hope: so Spartianu in Adrian. Adrian the Emperour, (now at the point of death) is reported to haue made these verses: Animula, vagula, blandula, Hospes, comes{que} corporis, Quae nunc abibis in locae? Pallidula, rigida, nudula, Nec vt soles dabis iocos. which a Renerend Doct. King now Bishop of London, in his 8. Lecture vpon the Pro∣phet Ionas. Prelate of this land thus sometime en∣glished My floting, fond, poore darling, Bodies guest, and equall, Where now must be thy lodging? Pale and starke, and stript of all, And put from wonted sporting. But we be taught, by the holy Scriptures that there is a king∣dome prepared for vs, Matth. 25. 34. and immortalitie pur∣chased by Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 4. Therefore let euery one make Dionisius prayer his owne: Sweet Lord Iesu, thy last word vpon the crosse bee my last word in this life; and when my speech is taken away, that I can vtter no more words, accept the sighs and desire of my heart: so that I may rest among those, who shall come from the East and from the West, and st down with A∣braham & Isaac & Iacob, in the kingdom of heauen. Mat. 8. 11.
Thirdly, we must not listen, and giue eare to the patrons and Ʋse 3. defendors of the apparition of Ghosts and spirits: which they themselues (first mised) doe imagine, that they bee the soules of men departed, now broyled in Purgatorie, or tor∣mented in hell, and would perswade others to enterteine the same error. But it is without all controuersie, that neither the soules of the godly, nor wicked, after they bee once dis∣solued from the body, doe wander in earth, for there is no returne from death, Iob 20. 9. the spirit passeth and commeth not againe, Psal. 78. 39. and, in what place the tree falleth, in the same it lyeth, Eccles. 11. 3. So Dauid answereth the de∣mand of his seruants, asking why he mourned not for his young sonne, being now dead, when hee was before so sor∣rowfull, Can I bring him againe any more? I shall goe to him, but he shall not returne to me, 2. Sam. 12. 23. These visions then and apparitions, are nothing else but the deceits, and illusions of Sathan. Augustinus de Ciuit. Dei lib. 13. cap. 8. For the soules of the godly are at rest, the soules of the wicked in torment, vntill the bodies of the one shall rise againe vnto eternall life, and of the other vnto euerlasting death. Neither of Tertullianus de Anima. their owne ac∣cord, nor by the commandement of any else, doe they wan∣der vp and down; but euill spirits practise this craft, to faine that they are the soules of the departed; and if a Chrysost. in 8. Math. hom. 29. & serm. 4. de Lazaro. cry bee heard, I am the soule of such an one, this Proceedeth from the fraud and treacherie of the deuill. For God doth not per∣mit, that any one once dead, should come again, and tell the liuing what things are there done: and to this end, that we should rather beleeue the Scriptures, then any other re∣ports. And indeed from hence Athanasius quaestionibus ad Antiochnos, quaest. 11. ariseth many grosse er∣rors; for the deuils, can take vpon them the shape of men, and by this meanes spred abroad their lyes. Therefore the voices, which some say they do hear, are nothing els but old wiues fables, & childish mockeries; no smal number wher∣of haue been deuised by the crafty iugling and Insigne exem∣plum de Mona∣chis Aurelia∣nesibus recita Sidnus lib. 9.  annum 34. Et alterum Chi∣traeus de Paro∣cho quodm: lib. de vita & morte. hanc flultitiā & nimam ho∣minum creduli∣tatem salsè deride Erasmus in Exorcismo, siue Spectro. & similes olim in Pagnis saerdotilus fraudes deprehensas fuisse, & patefactas, refert Theodoretus lib. 5. histori, cap. 22. S plura desideret, consulat Aretium problematū part. 2. loc. 146. Titulo de spectras: & auaterum de spectris, lemuribus &c. cosening
impostures of Baals Priests, whereof both the records of our owne times, and the histories of former ages, will afford plentifull examples. I conclude therefore with that religi∣ous and discreet admonition of Saint Augustine, De vnitate Ecclesiae. cap. 16 Let no man say, that therefore it is true, because hee or shee affirmeth, that sleeping or waking they haue seene such and such a vision, but remoue farre out of your minds, these either forgeries of de∣ceitfull men, or wonders of lying spirits. Father into thy hands I commit my spirit. I commend my spirit, that is, my soule; for the word spi∣rit is oftentimes in Scripture vsed in this sense; as Eccles. 12. 7. 1. Corinth. 2. 11. Heb. 12. 23. and doth aptly ex∣presse the nature thereof, that it is spirituall, and therefore immortall. The soule is not subiect to death, neither doth it perish with the Tertul. de resurrectione carnis; Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 63. 64. 65. Cyprianus de duplici Marty∣rio. Ambrosius de fide resurre∣ctionis, cap. 31. 32. Fulgentius ad Mominium, lib. 1. Barnar∣dus in 8. versū Psal: 91. body: wherefore they are manifestly distinguished,  Gen. 2. 7. where Moses thus speaketh; The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrels the breath of life, and man became a liuing soule: In which sentence, there bee included three arguments, confirming this truth; the first, the soule is not made of the earth, but inspired of God: the second, that it is called an Pelargus in locum. Phagius in suis ad Pa∣raphrasin Chaldaicam notis. Imbreathing, a diuine and heauenly thing; the third and last, in the word of the . duall number signifying, not life, but liues (long life) this present now, and the future hereafter. Againe, when Cain had murthered. Abel, his bloud is saide to cry vnto God, Gen. 4. 10. and the word there vsed in the . Originall, is, as much as to complaine for exceeding Martyrium Abelis ad omnia mundi tempora pertinet, & nostras mentes de animae immortalitate, futuro iudicio, & poenis, & de vita aeterna conuincit. Buchalcherus in Chronologia. griefe: where there is no mention of the body, but the bloud, the receptacle of the soule: if therefore it doth make complaint, then li∣ueth with God, and accuseth his vnnaturall brother. And so the soules of them, that were killed for the word of God, * .
and for the testimony which they maintained, are said to crie with a loude voyce vnder the Altar for vengeance; Reuel. 6. 9. 10. Furthermore, it is an vsuall phrase in Scripture, con∣cerning the dead, that they are gathered to their people; (as of Abraham, Gen. 25. 8. and Aaron, Numb. 20. 24.) there∣fore, that people is, and liueth; for this cannot truely bee affirmed of the bodies laid and rotten in the graues, because they bee no people but carkases, and so come not to the company and societie of the Saints. And for this cause the Iewes call the place of buriall, the house of the liuing.  There∣fore the soules of the faithfull departed, doe liue eternally in the sight of God: And that testimony of our Sauiour Christ is most pregnant, whereby he doth strengthen and comfort his Disciples against the terror and cruelty of per∣secutors, in this sort; Feare yee not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soule: Math. 10. 28. And beside all this, the dead are often in Scripture stiled inter mortem & somnum ista est, 1. Somnus ob∣repit nescient∣bus. sic mors. 2. Somnus quietē praestat labori∣bus, mors curis & miserijs om∣nibus, 3. Som∣nus non animā sed corpus occu∣pat, Mors non animam sed corpus occidit. 4. Somnus alijs laeta, alijs tristiae offert somnia: Mors alijs solatia, alijs tormenta. 5. Somnus habet esurgendispem, mors resus∣cuandi. 6. Somnus recreator est corporum (vt Tertulūanus de anima) redintegrator virium, probator valetudinis, pacator operum, medicus laborum: ita morsrenouat, & recreat, & repa∣rat hominem. 7. Somnus facile cedit inclamanti; mors Christo excitanti. Et apud virtus lio∣guae authores Grecae, & Latinae, Mors somnas appellatur,  Nam sic Lycophron in Cassandra, . Orpheus in Argonauticis, . In Eumenisi Aesehili; mortui  dicuntur. Callimachus Epigramate 14. & 21. Moschus Iu∣dillio. 3. Virgilius 10. Aeneid. Dura quies, ferreus somnus. Horatius Carminum lib. 1. 24. Perpetuus sopor. sleeping, as 2. Sam. 7. 12. 2. Chron. 9. 31. Dan. 12. 2. 1. Corinth. 15. ver. 18. Iairus daughter, Math. 9. 24. of whom it is re∣markeable that Saint Luke saith, cap. 8. 55. how when Christ raysed her to life, her spirite came againe, therefore it was not extinguished with the body. And Paul desired to be dis∣solued and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 22. Lastly, to conclude, our Lord and Sauiour thus reasoneth against the Saduces, who denied the resurrection from the dead, and the immor∣tality of the soule, Math. 22. 32. Those whose God the Lord is by an euerlasting couenant, they must also liue euerla∣stingly; for he is not the Zanchius de operibus creationis, Parte 3. lib. 2. cap. 8. Hemingius in Syntag∣mate; loco, De statu animae post mortem corporis. God of the dead but of the liuing: And the reason is, for no eternall couenant is made or kept, but
with those, who liue also eternally: because if one part of the confederators vtterly perish, then the league made, cannot be perpetuall, but ceaseth. For how can it performe that which it hath promised, or how can God make his promise good vnto it, except he preserue it aliue? But God is the God of Abraham, Isaacke and Iacob, and therefore they liue. And so much hitherto of this: for it were needles, to heape vp many arguments and proofes for confirmation of that whereof no Est integer liber Augustini de immortalita. te animae: & Aeneae Dialogus de eadem. Nice∣tas in Thesauro lib. . cap. 16. Christian doubteth; much lesse fitting, to adde the reasons of Philosphers, Si cui animus sit Philosopho∣rum rationes cognoscere, qui∣bus animae im∣mortalitatem confirmant, consulant Pla∣tonem, l. 10. de Repub. & l. 10. delegibus eius∣dem etiam Phe∣onem, Axio∣chum, & Apo∣logiam Socratis. Ciceronem, Quaestionum Tusculan. lib. 1. Xenophon∣gem Institutio∣nis Cyri, lib. 8. Macrobium. Cardani etiam de hac materia, Integrum tra∣ctatum. Marsilium Ficinum Antonij Poli libros septem de veritate animae rationalis ad Gregorium 13. & Bodinum, in Theatro Naturae. among which, it cannot bee denied, but that some are demonstratiue, yet ma∣ny thorney, and hard to bee vnderstood, and scarce intelli∣gible euen to those, who are most conuersant in their wri∣tings: Therfore to end with the words of Nemesius, Lib. de natura homini, cap. 2. Let the doctrine of the holy Scriptures suffice & content vs, whose proofe is infalliable, because inspired of God. This may be a powerfull motiue to stirre vs vp to the practise of holinesse, and abstinence from sinne, and all vncleannesse, knowing, that after this life, the soule shall returne, and be re∣united to the body raysed from death; and so, eyther enioy e∣ternall happinesse, or bee tormented with endlesse punishment: for there is a double sentence; Goe yee cursed into euerlasting fire, appointed for the diuell and his angels: or, Come ye bles∣sed and possesse the Kingdome prepared for you from the begin∣ning of the world, Math. 25. 34. 41. and, they shall come forth that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of life, and they that haue done euill, into the resurrection of condemnation: Iohn, 5. 29. for the vnrighteous shall not inherite the Kingdome of heauen, 1. Corinth. 6. 9, neyther any vncleane thing enter into the new Ierusalem, Reuel. 21. 27. And indeed, this is the onely or chiefe reason, why men runne headlong into all kind of wickednesse, and defile themselues with most vile and base vncleannesse, because this opinion is deeply setled in their hearts, that the soule and the body doe perish together, Wis∣dome, 2. v. 3. 4. And by this you may easily iudge, what spi∣rit
it is, by which the Bishops of Rome are led: For it is repor∣ted of Grinaeus. Leo the tenth, that he procured two famous Philo∣sophers to dispute before him; the subiect matter of whose discourse was, touching the state of the soule after death, the one reasoning so strongly as he could, for the immorta∣litie thereof, the other against it: and the determination be∣ing referred to himselfe, (as the chiefe moderator) tooke vp the controuersie with this conclusion, that the speech of the former seemed to bee true, but the latter better pleasing, and made a more cheerefull countenance: adding that the old verse of Redit in ni∣hilum, quod fuit ante nihil. Cornelius Gallus liked him wel,—That which some∣time nothing was, nothing becomes again. But wee must hold this for an vnquestionable and vndoubted truth, that God is iust; rewardeth the righteous, and punisheth the wicked: For many of them that sleepe in the dust, soall awake, some to euerlasting life, and some to shame and perpetuall contempt. Dan. 12. 2. And hauing thus said, he gaue vp the ghost. The death of Christ is expressed, by three seuerall formes or manners of speech in the Gospell; hee . breathed out the spirit in this place; Christ cryed with a lowd voice, and yeelded vp the Ghost, Math. 27. 50. he bowed down the head, and gaue vp the Ghost. Which varietie of words, are therfore more seriously to be weighed, because in them is expressed a great difference, betwixt the death of Christ and others: for his alone was willing, and therefore hee laid down his soule, Iohn 10. 18. so that the Centurion at this wonderfull sight, is mooued to beleeue, and vttereth so much in plaine termes, that he was the sonne of God, Marc. 13. 39. Crying with a loud voice, yeelded vp the Ghost. Hee did not 1 . now speake as other men doe, when the time of their disso∣lution is come, and be ready to cast forth the last breath, but of his owne accord, with a loud voice calleth vpon death, not daring otherwise to presume for to come: hee yeelded the Ghost; at his own pleasure fulfilling all the Arnoldus Car de vltimis septem Christi verbis. legall sacrifices,
and making an end, of all the darke and obscure ceremo∣nies; Who, so sleepeth? who, so putteth off his garments? who, so departeth from any place when hee will? as Iesus dyeth, vnclotheth himselfe of the flesh, and leaueth this 2 . world? Bowing downe Tanlrus de meditati us vitae Iesu Chri∣si cap. 51. his head; giuing his last farewell, and bid∣ding adew to the earth, and offering the kisse of peace. In Gegius Wirth in Har∣moniaex Euan∣gelijs, lib. 5. cap. 59. vs it is otherwise: wee first dye, then dow down the head, but he boweth downe his head, then dyeth; declaring that hee is the Lord of death, and doth all things according to his owne will: hee gaue vp the Ghost, being obedient vnto the death. Hee left to breath, Hee gaue the last breath: his holy soule passing out of his vndefiled body. Christ died not in Hertici non∣nulli veters fictè & puta∣tiuè tantum pass blasphe∣med euerunt; vt Simoniani, Siturniani, Ba∣silidiani, Mar∣cionitae, Mani∣chaei. Alij di∣uinitatem pas∣sam esse tradi∣derūt; v Theo∣paschitae, Eutu∣chiani, Seue∣ritae, Armnia∣ni: de quibus Epiphanius, Augustinus, Theodctus. shew and a false appearance, but in truth, the soule being locally parted and separated from his 3 . body; yet the deitie forsooke neither, but continued hypo∣statically vnited to them both: the Sonne of God died not  in his Godhead, but in his humanitie and flesh, 1. Pet. 3. 18. for otherwise neither could the iustice of God haue been sa∣tisfied, nor his truth answered: as hath been more fully handled in the first word. Vse. The benefit and fruit which wee receiue from this his death is manifold. 1. First, Iustification, and the pardon of our sinnes, that they come no more into the sight of God. Christ is exalted and lifted vp vnto the Leo primus depassione Dom∣serm. 10. crosse and so turned death vpon the author of death; and by opposing his passible flesh, hath broken all principalitie and aduerse power: being content to admit the boldnesse of that ancient enemie against him∣selfe, raging against that nature which was obnoxious vnto him, and presuming there to bee a challenger of the debt, where he could not find the least signe or token of any sin. Therefore that generall and deadly hand-writing, of our thraldome and misery, is cancelled, and the bond of our captiuitie is come into the hand of the Reeemer, whom
the Father sent to bee a propitiation for our offences. 1. Ioh. 4. 10. 2. Secondly, deliuerance from the power of the deuill; for the seed of the woman hath broken the head of the serpent, Gen. 3. 15. and loosed the workes of the deuill, 1. Ioh. 3. 8. 3 Thirdly, the restitution of our peace; for by his bloud we are reconciled, Coloss. 1. 19. and, he hath broken down the partition wall, Ephes. 2. 14. and tasted of the deadly cup for our sakes. The bloud of the Augustinus de 5. heresibus. Phisitian is shed, and made the curing medicine of the phrentique patient. 4 Fourthly, the destruction of death, and feare therof; so that it is to the godly no more but a bare name, yea the birth-day of life, the entrance into heauen. Threfore the Apo∣stle tryumphingly, asketh, O death where is thy victorie? O graue, where is thy sting? The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law, but thanks be vnto God, who hath giuen vs victo∣rie through our Lord Iesus Christ, Osea. 13. 14. I. Cor. 15. 54 For hee tooke vpon him the nature of mankind, that the Cyrillus lib. 4. in Iohan. cap. 12. Leo primus serm. 2 de Na∣tiuitate. & hac similitudine videntur mul∣tùm delectari Patres; nam ea si sunt Na∣zianzenus, cra∣tione de Pas∣chate: Gregor. Magnus, hom. 25. in Euange∣lia. Damascen∣orth▪ dexae fidei, lib. 3. cap. 27. &c. deuill, the first author of death, might bee ouercome by his owne invention: for swallowing the baite of his man∣hood, hee is strucken with the hooke of his Godhead. Heb. 2. 14. 5 Fiftly, the regeneration and restitution of our nature by the holy spirit; for Christ hath not onely by his death, obtei∣ned the pardon, but the purging also of our sins, and is made vnto vs wisdome, righteousnesse, redemption and sanctifica∣tion, 1. Corinth. 1. 30. Once dead, that wee might for euer dye vnto sinne, Rom. 6. 6. and liue now, no more according to our owne will, but his who hath died for vs, 2. Cor. 5. 17. De his, vide plura in Dictio∣nario pauperū. Thus haue I finished the Augustinus de Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 30. taske of this worke (such as it is) small in volume, great in labour. If any thinke I haue spoken too much, let him pardon that: if sufficient, giue thanks, not to me, but to God. Amen.
CERTAINE RVLES and directions, teaching euery Christian how to die well, ac∣cording to these seuen last words of Christ. Vt of these last words of Christ, some very de∣noute and religious persons, haue collected & framed an Art how to die well; which I will, (as it were) in a little table (Christian Fredericus tertius Impera∣tor, aliquando interrogatus, q in praei∣pam operam om in hac ∣ta ponere debe∣ret, respondit, in agnitione Dei, arte mori∣. Reader) represent vnto thy sight, that we may learne to number our dayes aright, Psal. 90. 12. and end our liues with comfort. Therefore, 1. Let vs forgiue our enemies; as Christ here did: for if we doe not, neither will our heae∣ly father forgiue vs, Matth. 18. 35. And it is not enough, thus to doe in word, but the tongue and the heart must concurre in one, 2 Let vs, take order for our outward estate, and dispose ther∣of. Thus Christ commended his mother to the care of Ihn the Euangelist, by him to bee prouided for: And, God commandeth Ezechias now sicke, to set his house at a stay, Esay, 58. 2. And this hath alwayes beene the practise of the godly; (to preuent thereby future inconueniences, which might insue:) as appeareth in Abraham, Cen. 25. 5. 6. and Dauid, 1. King. 1. v. 33. 34. &c. 3 Wee must acknowledge and bewayle that time of our life, which we haue formerly mispent, (so did the good theefe) not trusting in any works or merites of our owne, but craue pardonat Christs hands, for all our offences committed. (It
is a righteous confession of Bernard: I haue liued wrt∣chedly, forgiue O Lord my transgressions, it is sufficient for e, vnto all righteousnesse, to haue thee mercifull, against whom I haue sinned.) And repent speedily; life is here eyther lost or gained; No repentance is too late, so it be true, so long as wee continue in this world; yet put not off (deluded by vain hopes,) thy conuersion vnto the last breath: for why should we appoint that time, in which wee are not masters of our owne thoughts? 4 Pray feruently; Christ out of the 22. Psalme powred forth the complaints of his soule vnto the father. And for this cause, haue in a readinesse some choice places of Scrip∣ture, and by continuall meditation, make them familiar vnto thee, that they may bee helpes and furtherances in stirring vp and kindling thy deuotion. Remember thy Crea∣tor in the dayes of thy youth, Eccles. 12. 1 (for cursed is he that consecrateth the beautifull flower of his youth vnto the diuell, and leaueth the corrupt dregs of old and decaied age for God;) Hide the commandements of God in thy heart, th thon sinne not against him, Psal. 119. 11. The Gregorius magnus, homili sexta in Ez∣chielm. Word of God sheweth his nature in the reformation of thy life; excellency in promises of reward; dread fulnesse, in terrors of punishment: t is holy in precepts, glorious in promises, terrible in threatnings. 5 Thirst after the kingdom of God, and desire it as the Hart doth the forntaine of water, Psal 42. vers. 2. For as those who trauell in the night, doe long to see the morning arise, and the day dawning: so the godly, wandring in the thicke & misty darkenes of the world, doe expect with desire, that blessed light of which the Prophet, In thy light we shall see light, Psal. 6. v. 9. Wherof they haue some taste in thi life: (as Peter in mount Tabor, Matth. 17. v. 4. and Paul when he was taken vp into the third heauen, 2. Cor. 12. v. 4.) in that to come, we shall behold the things themselues, and bee partakers of the ioyes which now are not seene; wherein no voyce of mour∣ning shall be heard, Esay 65. 19. but God shal wipe all teares from our eyes, Reu, 22. 4. and Christ our Lord set a crown of glory vpon the heades of his children, 1. Pet. 1. 4. Monacha, St,
Augustines Augustin. Conf. l. 9. c. 10. mother, discoursing of these & the like things with her sonne, rauied by the consideration therof, brake forth; What doe I here? I am delighted with nothing of this life? let vs fli, let vs flie from hence, out of the miseries of this world, to the eternall ioyes of heauen. 6 When wee are tempted of the diuell, let vs oppose against him this Consummatum est of Christ, it is finished; and driue him baeke with the word: It is that rod and staffe by which wee are comforted, Psal. 23. vers. 4. and sword of the spirite, Ephes. 6. 17. with which wee may fight prosperouslie a∣gainst sinne and Sathan, and a shield to those that trust in the Lord, Prou. 30. 5. 7 Resigne thy soule to God, and die in the middest of humble and hearty prayers. As they who desire to sleepe quietly, pro∣cure themselues a bed of soft feathers: euen so, those who would haue an happy departure out of this life, and rest sweetly in Christ, must be frequent, and continually exer∣cised in prayer. Lord Iesus, saith Stephen, receiue my spirite, &c. and he fell a sleepe, Act. 7. 60. And Polycarpus, standing at the stake, ready to be consumed to ashes, giueth God hearty thanks, that vouchsafed to make him worthy to suffer death for his sake. Iohn Hus ledde forth to the place of his Mar∣tyrdome, yeelded his blessed soule with these words; Iesu thou Sonne of God who didst suffer for vs, haue mercy vpon me. It is reported of the Emperour Gulielmus Zenocharus, de vite Charli. 5. lib. 5. Charles the fift, that a little be∣fore his death, he had cominually in his month, that of the Prophet: In thee O Lord haue I put my trust, let mee not bee confounded; deliuer me in thy righteousnesse: Into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou hast redeemed me, O God of truth. And let vs all continue in prayer and supplications, and sende Ioachimus A∣eust in Postil∣la, & libelle peculiari, de Artc orind conscripte. forth vnto God the sighes of sorrowfull, and contrite heartes. These are the heauenly weapons, the spirituall defences, and the dii Armour. FINIS.
AMa amorem illius, oui amore tui amoris, descendit in vte∣rum virginis; & ibi amorem suum amori tuo copulanit humiliando se, sublimando te; coniungendo lumen suae aeternit at is, limo tuae mortalitatis. Augustinus de catechizandis rudibus. MEditatio Dominicae passionis praecellit omnia mundi huius exercitia, si cum deuotionis intimae feruore fuerit continu∣ata: conscientiam meditant is purificaet; intellectum, in omni cogi∣tatione verit at is illuminat; affectum, in Dei amorem suauiter in∣flammat; facit omnia huius mundi oblectamenta contemnere, & nulla quantumlibet dura, vel contraria formidare; libidinem ex∣terminat; luxuriam, tam ment is quam corporis edomat; invi∣diam fugat; gulam refrenat; auaritiam sedat; acediam inflam∣mat; iram mitigat; superbiam radicit us extirpat: Mentem deni{que}, quam passio Christi veraciter occupat, nulla rei carnalis passio fatigat. Tritemius in Operibus spiritualibus; homil. 16. de Quadragesimae jejunio. HOdie crux sixa est, & seculum sanctificatum est; Hodi crux fixa est, & Daemones dispersi sunt; Hodie crux fixa est, & mors subuersa est; Hodie crux vicit, & mors victa est; Hodie Diabolus vinctus est, & homo solutus, & Deus glorifica∣tus est. Augustinus in sermone de Parasceue. FINIS.
