21322 99837033 1337
A TRVE RELATION of the most prosperous voyage made this present yeere 1605, by Captaine George Waymouth, in the Discouery of the land of Virginia: Where he discouered 60 miles vp a most excellent Riuer; to∣gether with a most fertile land. Written by IAMES ROSIER. a Gentleman employed in the voyage. LONDINI Impensis GEOR. BISHOP. 1605.
TO THE READER. BEing employed in this Voy∣age by the right honourable Thomas Arundell Baron of Warder, to take due notice, and make true report of the discouery therein performed: I became very diligent to ob∣serue (as much as I could) whatsoeuer was materiall or of consequence in the businesse, which I collected into this briefe summe, intending vpon our returne to pub∣lish the same. But he soone changed the course of his in∣tendments; and long before our arriuall in England had so farre engaged himselfe with the Archduke, that he was constrained to relinquish this action. But the com∣modities and profits of the countrey, together with the fitnesse of plantation, being by some honourable Gen∣tlemen of good woorth and qualitie, and Merchants of good sufficiency and iudgement duly considered, haue at their owne charge (intending both their priuate and the common benefit of their countrey) vndertaken the transporting of a Colony for the plantation thereof; be∣ing much encouraged thereunto by the gracious fauour
of the KINGS MAIESTY himselfe, and diuers Lords of his Highnesse most Honourable Priuie Councell. After these purposed designes were concluded, I was a∣nimated to publish this briefe Relation, and not before; because some forrein Nation (being fully assured of the fruitfulnesse of the countrie) haue hoped hereby to gaine some knowledge of the place, seeing they could not al∣lure our Captaine or any speciall man of our Company to combine with them for their direction, nor obtaine their purpose, in conueying away our Saluages, which was busily in practise. And this is the cause that I haue neither written of the latitude or variation most exactly obserued by our Captaine with sundrie instruments, which together with his perfect Geographicall Map of the countrey, he entendeth hereafter to set forth. I haue likewise purposedly omitted here to adde a collection of many words in their language to the number of foure or fiue hundred, as also the names of diuers of their gouer∣nours, aswell their friends as their enemies; being reser∣ued to be made knowen for the benefit of those that shal goe in the next Voyage. But our particular proceedings in the whole Discouerie, the commodious situation of the Riuer, the fertilitie of the land, with the profits there to be had, and here reported, I refer to be verified by the whole Company, as being eye-witnesses of my words, and most of them neere inhabitants vpon the Thames. So with my prayers to God for the conuersion of so in∣genious and well disposed people, and for the prospe∣rous successiue euents of the noble intenders the prose∣cution thereof, I rest. Your friend I. R.
A TRVE RELATION of Captaine George Waymouth his Voyage, made this present yeere 1605: in the Discouerie of the North part of Virginia. VPon Tuesday the 5 day of March, about ten a clocke afore noone, we set saile from Ratcliffe, and came to an anker that tide about two a clocke before Grauesend. From thence the 10 of March being Sunday at night we anke∣red in the Downes: and there rode til the next day about thrée a clocke after noone, when with a scant winde we set saile; and by reason the winde continued Southwardly, we were bea∣ten vp and downe: but on Saturday the 16 day about foure a clocke after noon we put into Dartmouth Hauen, where the continuance of the winde at South & South∣west constrained vs to ride till the last of this moneth. There we shipped some of our men, and supplied necessa∣ries for our Ship and Uoyage. Upon Easter day, being the last of March,Vpon Easter day we put to sea. the winde comming at North-North-East, about fiue a clocke af∣ter noone we wayed anker, and put to sea, In the name of God, being well victualled and furnished with mu∣nition and all necessaries:Our Compa∣nie 29 per∣sons. Our whole Company be∣ing but 29 persons; of whom I may boldly say, few voy∣ages
haue béene manned forth with better Sea-men ge∣nerally in respect of our small number. Munday the next day, being the first of Aprill, by sixe a clocke in the morning we were sixe leagues South-South-East from the Lizarde. At two a clocke in the afternoone this day, the weather being very faire, our Captaine for his owne experience and others with him sounded,Sounding. and had sixe and fiftie fa∣thoms and a halfe. The sounding was some small blacke perrie sand, some reddish sand, a match or two, with small shels called Saint Iames his Shels. The foureteenth of Aprill being Sunday, betwéene nine and ten of the clocke in the morning our Captaine descried the Iland Cueruo: which bare South-West and by West, about seuen leagues from vs: by eleuen of the clocke we descried Flores to the Southward of Cueruo,We fell with the Ilands of Azores. as it lieth: by foure a clocke in the afternoone we brought Cueruo due South from vs within two leagues of the shore, but we touched not, because the winde was faire, and we thought our selues sufficiently watered and wooded. Héere our Captaine obserued the Sunne, and found himselfe in the latitude of 40 degrees and 7 minutes: so he iudged the North part of Cueruo to be in 40 degrees. After we had kept our course about a hundred leagues from the Ilands, by continuall Southerly windes we were forced and driuen from the Southward, whither we first intended. And when our Captaine by long bea∣ting saw it was but in vaine to striue with windes, not knowing Gods purposes héerein to our further blessing, (which after by his especiall direction wée found) he thought best to stand as nigh as he could by the winde to recouer what land we might first discouer. Munday, the 6 of May, being in the latitude of 39 and a halfe about ten a clocke afore noone, we came to a riplin, which we discerned a head our ship, which is a breach of water caused either by a fall, or by some meeting of cur∣rents,
which we iudged this to be; for the weather being very faire, and a small gale of winde, we sounded and found no ground in a hundred fathoms. Munday, the 13 of May, about eleuen a clocke afore noone, our Captaine, iudging we were not farre from land, sounded, and had a soft oaze in a hundred and sixty fathomes. At fowre a clocke after noone we sounded a∣gaine, and had the same oaze in a hundred fathoms. From 10 a clocke that night till thrée a clocke in the morning, our Captaine tooke in all sailes and lay at hull, being desirous to fall with the land in the day time, be∣cause it was an vnknowen coast, which it pleased God in his mercy to grant vs, otherwise we had run our ship vpon the hidden rockes and perished all. For when we set saile we sounded in 100 fathoms: and by eight a clock, hauing not made aboue fiue or six leagues, our Captaine vpon a sudden change of water (supposing verily he saw the sand) presently sounded, and had but fiue fathoms. Much maruelling because we saw no land, he sent one to the top, who thence descried a whitish sandy cliffe, which bare West-North-West about six leagues off from vs: but comming néerer within thrée or fowre leagues, we saw many breaches still néerer the land: at last we espi∣ed a great breach a head vs al along the shore, into which before we should enter, our Captaine thought best to hoise out his ship boate and sound it. Which if he had not done, we had béene in great danger: for he bare vp the ship, as néere as he durst after the boate: vntill Thomas Cam, his mate, being in the boat, called to him to tacke about & stand off, for in this breach he had very showld water, two fathoms and lesse vpon rockes, and sometime they supposed they saw the rocke within thrée or fowre foote, whereon the sea made a very strong breach: which we might discerne (from the top) to run along as we sailed by it 6 or 7 leagues to the Southward. This was in the latitude of 41 degrées, 20 minuts: wherefore we were constrained to put backe againe from the land: and soun∣ding,
(the weather being very faire and a small winde) we found our selues embaied with continuall showldes and rockes in a most vncertaine ground, from fiue or sixe fathoms, at the next cast of the lead we should haue 15 & 18 fathoms. Ouer many which we passed, and God so blessed vs, that we had wind and weather as faire as poore men in this distresse could wish: whereby we both perfectly discerned euery breach, and with the winde were able to turne, where we saw most hope of safest pas∣sage▪ Thus we parted from the land, which we had not so much before desired, and at the first sight reioiced, as now we all ioifully praised God, that it had pleased him to deliuer vs from so imminent danger. Héere we found great store of excellent Cod fish, and saw many Whales, as we had done two or three daies before. We stood off all that night, and the next day being Wednesday; but the wind still continuing betwéen the points of South South-West, and West-South-West: so as we could not make any way to the Southward, in regard of our great want of water and wood (which was now spent) we much desired land, and therefore sought for it, where the wind would best suffer vs to refresh our selues. Thursday, the 16 of May, we stood in directly with the land, and much maruelled we descried it not, wherein we found our sea charts very false, putting land where none is. Friday, the 17 of May, about sixe a clocke at night we descried the land, which bare from vs North-North-East; but because it blew a great gale of winde, the sea very high, and néere night, not fit to come vpon an vn∣knowen coast, we stood off till two a clocke in the mor∣ning, being Saturday: then standing in with it againe, we descried it by eight a clocke in the morning, bearing North-East from vs.The descrip∣tion of the Iland. It appeared a meane high land, as we after found it, being but an Iland of some six miles
in compasse, but I hope the most fortunate euer yet disco∣uered. About twelue a clocke that day, we came to an anker on the North side of this Iland, about a league from the shore. About two a clocke our Captaine with twelue men rowed in his ship-boat to the shore, where we made no long stay, but laded our boat with dry wood of olde trées vpon the shore side, and returned to our ship, where we rode that night. This Iland is woody, growen with Firre, Birch, Oke and Béech, as farre as we saw along the shore; and so likely to be within. On the verge grow Gooseberries, Strawberries, Wild pease, and Wild-rose bushes. The water issued foorth downe the Rocky cliffes in many pla∣ces: and much fowle of diuers kinds bréed vpon the shore and rocks. While we were at shore, our men aboord with a few hooks got aboue thirty great Cods and Hadocks, which gaue vs a taste of the great plenty of fish which we found afterward wheresoeuer we went vpon the coast. From hence we might discerne the maine land from the West-South-West to the East-North-East, and a great way (as it then séemed, and as we after found it) vp into the maine we might discerne very high moun∣taines, though the maine séemed but low land; which gaue vs a hope it would please God to direct vs to the discouerie of some good; although wée were driuen by winds farre from that place, whither (both by our directi∣on and desire) we euer intended to shape the course of our voyage. The next day, being Whit-Sunday; because we rode too much open to the sea and windes, we weyed anker a∣bout twelue a clocke, and came along to the other Ilands more adioyning to the maine, and in the rode directly with the mountaines, about thrée leagues from the first Iland where we had ankered. When we came néere vnto them (sounding all along
in a good depth) our Captaine manned his ship-boat and sent her before with Thomas Cam one of his Mates, whom he knew to be of good experience, to sound & search betweene the Ilands for a place safe for our shippe to ride in; in the meane while we kept aloofe at sea, hauing giuen them in the boat a token to weffe in the ship, if he found a conuenient Harbour; which it pleased God to send vs, farre beyond our expectation, in a most safe birth defen∣ded from all windes, in an excellent depth of water for ships of any burthen, in six, seuen, eight, nine, and ten fa∣thoms vpon a clay oaze very tough. We all with great ioy praised God for his vnspeaka∣ble goodnesse, who had from so apparent danger deliuered vs, & directed vs vpon this day into so secure an Harbour: in remembrance wherof we named it Pentecost-harbor,Whitsundy. we arriuing there that day out of our last Harbor in Eng∣land, from whence we set saile vpon Easterday. About foure a clocke, after we were ankered and well mored, our Captaine with halfe a dozen of our Company went on shore to séeke fresh watering, and a conuenient place to set together a pinnesse, which we brought in pie∣ces out of England: both which we found very fitting. Upon this Iland, as also vpon the former, we found (at our first comming to shore) where fire had béene made: and about the place were very great egge shelles bigger than goose egges, fish bones, and as we iudged, the bones of some beast. Héere we espied Cranes stalking on the shore of a little Iland adioyning;Cranes. where we after saw they vsed to bréed. Whitsun-munday, the 20 day of May, very early in the morning, our Captaine caused the pieces of the pin∣nesse to be carried a shore, where while some were busied about her, others digged welles to receiue the fresh wa∣ter, which we found issuing downe out of the land in ma∣ny places. Héere I can not omit (for foolish feare of im∣putation of flattery) the painfull industry of our Cap∣taine,
who as at sea he is alwayes most carefull and vi∣gilant, so at land he refuseth no paines; but his labour was euer as much or rather more than any mans: which not only encourageth others with better content, but al∣so effecteth much with great expedition. In digging we found excellent clay for bricke or tile. The next day we finished a well of good and holesome cléere water in a great empty caske, which we left there. We cut yards, waste trées, and many necessaries for our ship, while our Carpenter and Cooper laboured to fit and furnish forth the shallop. This day our boat went out about a mile from our ship,We fished. and in small time with two or thrée hooks was fish∣ed sufficiently for our whole Company thrée dayes, with great Cod, Haddocke, and Thornebacke. And towards night we drew with a small net of twen∣ty fathoms very nigh the shore:Abundance of many good fishes. we got about thirty ve∣ry good and great Lobsters, many Rockfish, some Plaise, and other small fishes, and fishes called Lumpes, verie pleasant to the taste: and we generally obserued, that all the fish, of what kinde soeuer we tooke, were well fed, fat, and swéet in taste. Wednesday, the 22 of May, we felled and cut wood for our ships vse, cleansed and scoured our wels, and dig∣ged a plot of ground, wherein, amongst some garden séeds, we sowed peaze and barley,Corne sowed. which in sixtéen dayes grew eight inches aboue ground; and so continued growing euery day halfe an inch, although this was but the crust of the ground, and much inferior to the mould we after found in the maine. Friday, the 24 of May, after we had made an end of cutting wood, and carying water aboord our shippe, with fouretéene Shot and Pikes we marched about and tho∣row part of two of the Ilands; the bigger of which we iudged to be foure or fiue miles in compasse, and a mile broad.
The profits and fruits which are naturally on these Ilands are these: The fruits of the Ilands.All along the shore and some space within, where the wood hindereth not, grow plentifully Rasberries. Gooseberries. Strawberries. Roses. Currants. Wild vines. Angelica. Within the Ilands growe wood of sundry sorts, some very great, and all tall: Birch. Béech. Ash. Maple. Spruce. Cherry-trée. Yew. Oke very great and good. Firre-trée, out of which issueth Turpentine in so maruellous plenty, and so sweet, as our Chirurgeon and others affirmed they neuer saw so good in England. We pulled off much Gumme congea∣led on the outside of the barke, which smelled like Frank∣incense. This would be a great benefit for making Tarre and Pitch. We stayed the longer in this place, not only because of our good Harbour (which is an excellent comfort) but be∣cause euery day we did more and more discouer the plea∣sant fruitfulnesse; insomuch as many of our Companie wished themselues setled héere, not expecting any further hopes, or better discouery to be made. Héere our men found abundance of great muscels a∣mong the rocks; and in some of them many small Pearls: and in one muscell (which we drew vp in our net) was found fouretéene Pearles,Pearle. whereof one of prety bignesse and orient: in another aboue fiftie small Pearles: and if
we had had a Drag, no doubt we had found some of great valew, séeing these did certainly shew, that héere they were bred: the shels all glistering with mother of Pearle. Wednesday, the 29 day, our shallop being now finish∣ed, and our Captaine and men furnished to depart with hir from the ship:A Crosse erected. we set vp a crosse on the shore side vpon the rockes. Thursday, the 30 of May, about ten a clock afore noon, our Captaine with 13 men more, in the name of God, and with all our praiers for their prosperous discouerie, and safe returne, departed in the shallop: leauing the ship in a good harbour, which before I mentioned, well mored, and manned with 14 men. This day, about fiue a clocke in the afternoone,The Saluages came first to vs. we in the shippe espied thrée Canoas comming towards vs, which went to the iland adioining, where they went a shore, and very quickly had made a fire, about which they stood beholding our ship: to whom we made signes with our hands and hats, weffing vnto them to come vnto vs, because we had not séene any of the people yet. They sent one Canoa with thrée men, one of which, when they came néere vnto vs, spake in his language very lowd and very boldly: séeming as though he would know why we were there, and by pointing with his oare towards the sea, we coniectured he ment we should be gone. But when we shewed them kniues and their vse, by cutting of stickes and other trifles, as combs and glas∣ses, they came close aboard our ship, as desirous to enter∣taine our friendship. To these we gaue such things as we perceiued they liked, when wée shewed them the vse: bracelets, rings, peacocke feathers, which they stucke in their haire, and Tabacco pipes. After their departure to their company on the shore, presently came foure o∣ther in another Canoa: to whom we gaue as to the for∣mer, vsing them with as much kindnes as we could. The shape of their body is very proportionable, they are wel countenanced, not very tal nor big, but in stature
like to vs:Three sorts of colours of painting. they paint their bodies with blacke, their fa∣ces, some with red, some with blacke, and some with blew. Their clothing is Beauers skins, or Deares skins, cast ouer them like a mantle, and hanging downe to their knées, made fast together vpon the shoulder with leather: some of them had sleeues,Their clo∣thing and buskins. most had none: some had bus∣kins of such leather tewed: they haue besides a péece of Beauers skin betwéene their legs, made fast about their waste, to couer their priuities. They suffer no haire to grow on their faces, but on their head very long and very blacke, which those that haue wiues, binde vp behinde with a leather string, in a long round knot. They seemed all very ciuill and merrie: shewing to∣kens of much thankefulnesse, for those things we gaue them. We found them then (as after) a people of excée∣ding good inuention, quicke vnderstanding and readie capacitie. Their boats.Their Canoas are made without any iron, of the bark of a birch trée, strengthened within with ribs and hoops of wood, in so good fashion, with such excellent ingenious art, as they are able to beare seuen or eight persons, far excéeding any in the Indies. One of their Canoas came not to vs, wherein we imagined their women were: of whom they are (as all Saluages) very iealous. When I signed vnto them they should goe sléepe, be∣cause it was night, they vnderstood presently, and poin∣ted that at the shore, right against our ship, they would stay all night: as they did. The next morning very early, came one Canoa abord vs againe with thrée Saluages, whom we easily then enticed into our ship, and vnder the decke: where we gaue them porke, fish, bread and pease, all which they did eat: and this I noted, they would eat nothing raw, either fish or flesh. They maruelled much and much loo∣ked
vpon the making of our canne and kettle, so they did at a head-péece and at our guns, of which they are most fearefull, and would fall flat downe at the report of them. At their departure I signed vnto them, that if they would bring me such skins as they ware I would giue them kniues, and such things as I saw they most liked, which the chiefe of them promised to do by that time the Sunne should be beyond the middest of the firmament; this I did to bring them to an vnderstanding of exchange, and that they might conceiue the intent of our comming to them to be for no other end. About 10 a clocke this day we descried our Shallop returning toward vs, which so soone as we espied, we certainly coniectured our Captaine had found some vnex∣pected harbour, further vp towards the maine to bring the ship into, or some riuer; knowing his determination and resolution, not so suddenly else to make return: which when they came néerer they expressed by shooting vol∣leies of shot; and when they were come within Musket shot, they gaue vs a volley and haled vs, then we in the shippe gaue them a great péece and haled them. Thus we welcomed them, who gladded vs excéeding∣ly with their ioifull relation of their happie discouerie, which shall appeare in the sequele. And we likewise gaue them cause of mutuall ioy with vs, in discoursing of the kinde ciuility we found in a people, where we little expected any sparke of humanity. Our Captaine had in this small time discouered vp a great riuer, trending alongst into the maine about forty miles. The pleasantnesse whereof, with the safety of harbour for shipping, together with the fertility of ground and other fruits, which were generally by his whole company related, I omit, till I report of the whole disco∣uery therein after performed. For by the breadth, depth and strong flood, imagining it to run far vp into the land, he with spéed returned, intending to flanke his light hors∣man for arrowes, least it might happen that the further
part of the riuer should be narrow, and by that meanes subiect to the volley of Saluages on either side out of the woods. Untill his returne, our Captaine left on shoare where he landed in a path (which séemed to be frequented) a pipe, a brooch and a knife, thereby to know if the Saluages had recourse that way, because they could at that time see none of them,Trifles left on shore. but they were taken away before our re∣turne thither. I returne now to our Saluages, who according to their appointment about one a clocke, came with 4 Ca∣noas to the shoare of the iland right ouer against vs, where they had lodged the last night, and sent one Canoa to vs with two of those Saluages, who had beene a bord, and another, who then seemed to haue command of them: for though we perceiued their willingnesse, yet he would not permit them to come abord: but he hauing viewed vs and our ship, signed that he would go to the rest of the company and returne againe. Presently after their de∣parture it began to raine, and continued all that after∣noone, so as they could not come to vs with their skins and furs, nor we go to them. But after an howre or there about, the thrée which had beene with vs before came a∣gaine, whom we had to our fire and couered them with our gownes. Our Captaine bestowed a shirt vpon him, whom we thought to be their chiefe, who séemed neuer to haue séene any before; we gaue him a brooch to hang about his necke, a great knife, and lesser kniues to the two other, and to euery one of them a combe and glasse, the vse whereof we shewed them: whereat they laughed and tooke gladly; we victualled them, and gaue them aqua vitae, which they tasted, but would by no meanes drinke; our beueridge they liked well, we gaue them Sugar Can∣dy, which after they had tasted they liked and desired more, and raisons which were giuen them; and some of euery thing they would reserue to carry to their compa∣ny. Wherefore we pittying their being in the raine, and
therefore not able to get themselues victuall (as we thought) we gaue them bread and fish. Thus because we found the land a place answereable to the intent of our discouery,The intent of our kind vsage of the Salua∣ges. viz. fit for any nation to in∣habit, we vsed the people with as great kindnes as we could deuise, or found them capable of. The next day, being Saturday and the first of Iune,We traded with the Saluages. I traded with the Saluages all the fore-noone vpon the shore, where were eight and twenty of them: and because our ship rode nigh, we were but fiue or sixe: where for kniues, glasses, combes and other trifles to the valew of foure or fiue shillings, we had 40 good Beauers skins, Otters skins, Sables, and other small skins, which we knewe not how to call. Our trade being ended, ma∣ny of them came abord vs, and did eat by our fire, and would be verie merrie and bold, in regard of our kinde vsage of them. Towards night our Captaine went on shore, to haue a draught with the Sein or Net. And we carried two of them with vs, who maruelled to sée vs catch fish with a net. Most of that we caught we gaue them and their company. Then on the shore I learned the names of diuers things of them: and when they per∣ceiued me to note them downe, they would of themselues, fetch fishes, and fruit bushes, and stand by me to sée me write their names. Our Captaine shewed them a strange thing which they woondred at. His sword and mine hauing béene touched with the Loadstone, tooke vp a knife, and held it fast when they plucked it away, made the knife turne, being laid on a blocke, and touching it with his sword, made that take vp a néedle, whereat they much maruel∣led. This we did to cause them to imagine some great power in vs: and for that to loue and feare vs. When we went on shore to trade with them,Their Bowes and Arrowes. in one of their Canoas I saw their bowes and arrowes, which I tooke vp and drew an arrow in one of them, which I found to be of strength able to carry an arrow fiue or sixe
score stronglie: and one of them tooke it and drew as we draw our bowes, not like the Indians. Their bow is made of Wich Hazell, and some of Béech in fashion much like our bowes,Their Bowes. but they want nocks, onely a string of leather put through a hole at one end, and made fast with a knot at the other.Arrowes. Their arrowes are made of the same wood, some of Ash, big and long, with thrée feathers tied on, and nocked very artificiallie: headed with the long shanke bone of a Déere, made very sharpe with two fangs in manner of a harping iron. They haue likewise Darts,Their Darts. headed with like bone, one of which I darted a∣mong the rockes, and it brake not. These they vse very cunningly, to kill fish, fowle and beasts. Our Captaine had two of them at supper with vs in his cabbin to sée their demeanure, and had them in pre∣sence at seruice: who behaued themselues very ciuilly, neither laughing nor talking all the time, and at supper fed not like men of rude education, neither would they eat or drinke more than séemed to content nature; they desired pease to carry a shore to their women, which we gaue them, with fish and bread, and lent them pewter dishes, which they carefully brought againe. In the euening another boat came to them on the shore,Tabacco excellent. and because they had some Tabacco, which they brought for their owne vse, the other came for vs, making signe what they had, and offered to carry some of vs in their boat, but foure or fiue of vs went with them in our owne boat: when we came on shore they gaue vs the best welcome they could, spreading fallow Déeres skins for vs to sit on the ground by their fire, and gaue vs of their Tabacco in our pipes, which was excellent, and so gene∣rally commended of vs all to be as good as any we euer tooke, being the simple leafe without any composition, strong, and of sweet taste: they gaue vs some to carry to our Captaine, whom they called our Bashabes: neither did they require any thing for it, but we would not re∣ceiue any thing from them without remuneration.
Héere we saw foure of their women, who stood behind them, as desirous to sée vs, but not willing to be seene: for before, whensoeuer we came on shore, they retired into the woods, whether it were in regard of their owne natu∣rall modestie, being couered only as the men with the foresaid Beauers skins,The descripti∣on of their Women and Children. or by the commanding iealously of their husbands, which we rather suspected, because it is an inclination much noted to be in Saluages; wherfore we would by no meanes séeme to take any speciall notice of them. They were very well fauoured in proportion of countenance, though coloured blacke, low of stature, and fat, bare headed as the men, wearing their haire long: they had two little male children of a yéere and half old, as we iudged, very fat and of good countenances, which they loue tenderly, all naked, except their legs, which were couered with thin leather buskins tewed, fa∣stened with strops to a girdle about their waste, which they girde very streight, and is decked round about with little round péeces of red Copper; to these I gaue chaines and bracelets, glasses, and other trifles, which the Sal∣uages seemed to accept in great kindnesse. At our comming away, we would haue had those two that supped with vs, to go abord and sléepe, as they had promised: but it appeared their company would not suf∣fer them. Whereat we might easily perceiue they were much gréeued: but not long after our departure, they came with thrée more to our ship, signing to vs, that if one of our company would go lie on shore with them, they would stay with vs. Then Owen Griffin (one of the two we were to leaue in the Country, if we had thought it néedfull or conuenient) went with them in their Canoa, and 3 of them staied aborde vs, whom our whole compa∣ny very kindly vsed. Our Captaine saw their lodging prouided, and them lodged in an old saile vpon the Orlop; and because they much feared our dogs, they were tied vp whensoeuer any of them came abord vs. Owen Griffin, which lay on the shore, reported vnto
me their maner,The ceremo∣nies of ye Sal∣uages in their idolatry. and (as I may terme them) the ceremo∣nies of their idolatry: which they performe thus. One a∣mong them (the eldest of the Company, as he iudged) ri∣seth right vp, the other sitting still, and looking about, sud∣denly cried with a loud voice, Baugh, Waugh: then the women fall downe, and lie vpon the ground, and the men all together answering the same, fall a stamping round a∣bout the fire with both féet, as hard as they can, making the ground shake, with sundry out-cries, and change of voice and sound. Many take the fire-sticks and thrust them into the earth, and then rest awhile: of a sudden be∣ginning as before, they continue so stamping, till the yon∣ger sort fetched from the shore many stones, of which eue∣ry man tooke one, and first beat vpon them with their fire sticks, then with the stones beat the earth with all their strength. And in this maner (as he reported) they continu∣ed aboue two houres. They lie with their wiues secretly.After this ended, they which haue wiues take them a∣part, and withdraw themselues seuerally into the wood all night. The next morning, assoone as they saw the Sunne rise, they pointed to him to come with them to our shippe: and hauing receiued their men from vs, they came with fiue or sixe of their Canoas and Company houering about our ship: to whom (because it was the Sabbath day) I signed they should depart, and at the next Sun rising we would goe along with them to their houses: which they vnder∣stood (as we thought) and departed, some of their Canoas coursing about the Iland, and the other directly towards the maine. This day, about fiue a clocke after noone, came thrée other Canoas from the maine, of which some had béene with vs before; and they came aboord vs, and brought vs Tabacco, which we tooke with them in their pipes, which were made of earth, very strong, blacke, and short, contai∣ning a great quantity: some Tabacco they gaue vnto our Captaine, and some to me, in very ciuill kind maner. We
requited them with bread and peaze, which they caried to their Company on shore, séeming very thankefull. After supper they returned with their Canoa to fetch vs a shore to take Tabacco with them there; with whom six or seuen of vs went, and caried some trifles, if peraduenture they had any trucke, among which I caried some few biskets, to try if they would exchange for them, séeing they so well liked to eat them. When we came at shore, they most kindly entertained vs, taking vs by the hands, as they had obserued we did to them aboord, in token of welcome, and brought vs to sit downe by their fire, where sat together thirtéene of them. They filled their Tabacco pipe, which was then the short claw of a Lobster, which will hold ten of our pipes full, and we dranke of their excellent Tabac∣co as much as we would with them; but we saw not any great quantity to trucke for; and it séemed they had not much left of old, for they spend a great quantity yéerely by their continuall drinking: and they would signe vnto vs, that it was growen yet but a foot aboue ground, and would be aboue a yard high, with a leafe as broad as both their hands. They often would (by pointing to one part of the maine Eastward) signe vnto vs, that their Bashabes (that is, their King) had great plenty of Furres, and much Ta∣bacco.The dwelling of Bashabes is Eastward frō ye great Riuer. When we had sufficiently taken Tabacco with them, I shewed some of our trifles for trade; but they made signe that they had there nothing to exchange; for (as I after conceiued) they had béene fishing and fowling, and so came thither to lodge that night by vs: for when we were ready to come away, they shewed vs great cups made very wittily of barke, in forme almost square, full of a red berry about the bignesse of a bullis,A red berrie which they feede on. which they did eat, and gaue vs by handfuls; of which (though I liked not the taste) yet I kept some, because I would by no meanes but accept their kindnesse. They shewed me like∣wise a great piece of fish, whereof I tasted, and it was fat like Porpoise; and another kinde of great scaly fish, broi∣led on the coales, much like white Salmon, which the
Frenchmen call Aloza, for these they would haue had bread; which I refused, because in maner of exchange, I would alwayes make the greatest estéeme I could of our commodities whatsoeuer; although they saw aboord our Captaine was liberall to giue them, to the end we might allure them still to frequent vs. Then they shewed me foure yoong Goslings,We had yong Goslings of the Saluages. for which they required foure bis∣kets, but I offered them two; which they tooke and were well content. At our departure they made signe, that if any of vs would stay there on shore, some of them would go lie aboord vs: at which motion two of our Company stayed with them, and thrée of the Saluages lodged with vs in maner as the night before. Iune 3.Early the next morning, being Munday the third of Iune, when they had brought our men aboord, they came about our ship, earnestly by signes desiring that we would go with them along to the maine, for that there they had Furres and Tabacco to traffique with vs. Wherefore our Captaine manned the light-horseman with as many men as he could well, which were about fiftéene with rowers and all; and we went along with them. Two of their Canoas they sent away before, and they which lay aboord vs all night, kept company with vs to direct vs. This we noted as we went along, they in their Canoa with thrée oares,Their Canoa outrowed vs. would at their will go ahead of vs and a∣bout vs, when we rowed with eight oares strong; such was their swiftnesse, by reason of the lightnesse and artifi∣ciall composition of their Canoa and oares. When we came néere the point where we saw their fires, where they intended to land, and where they ima∣gined some few of vs would come on shore with our mer∣chandize, as we had accustomed before; when they had often numbred our men very diligently, they scoured a∣way to their Campany, not doubting we would haue fol∣lowed them. But when we perceiued this, and knew not either their intents, or number of Saluages on the shore,
our Captaine, after consultation, stood off, and wefed them to vs, determining that I should go on shore first to take a view of them, and what they had to traffique: if he, whom at our first sight of them séemed to be of most respect a∣mong them, and being then in the Canoa, would stay as a pawne for me. When they came to vs (notwithstan∣ding all our former courtesies) he vtterly refused; but would leaue a yoong Saluage: and for him our Captaine sent Griffin in their Canoa, while we lay hulling a little off. Griffin at his returne reported, they had there assem∣bled together, as he numbred them,283 Saluages. two hundred eighty thrée Saluages, euery one his bowe and arrowes, with their dogges, and wolues which they kéepe tame at com∣mand, and not any thing to exchange at all; but would haue drawen vs further vp into a little narrow nooke of a riuer, for their Furres, as they pretended. These things considered, we began to ioyne them in the ranke of other Saluages, who haue béene by trauel∣lers in most discoueries found very trecherous: neuer at∣tempting mischiefe, vntill by some remisnesse, fit opportu∣nity affoordeth them certaine ability to execute the same. Wherefore after good aduice taken, we determined so soone as we could to take some of them, least (being suspiti∣ous we had discouered their plots) they should absent themselues from vs. Tuesday, the fourth of Iune,Fish in the Harbour. our men tooke Cod and Hadocke with hooks by our ship side, and Lobsters very great: which before we had not tried. About eight a clocke this day we went on shore with our boats, to fetch aboord water and wood, our Captaine leauing word with the Gunner in the shippe, by dischar∣ging a musket, to giue notice if they espied any Canoa comming: which they did about ten a clocke. He there∣fore being carefull they should be kindly entreated, reque∣sted me to go aboord, intending with dispatch to make what haste after he possibly could. When I came to the ship, there were two Canoas, and in either of them thrée
Saluages; of whom two were below at the fire, the o∣ther staied in their Canoas about the ship; and because we could not entice them abord, we gaue them a Canne of pease and bread, which they carried to the shore to eat. But one of them brought backe our Canne presently and staid abord with the other two; for he being yoong, of a ready capacity, and one we most desired to bring with vs into England, had receiued excéeding kinde vsage at our hands, and was therefore much delighted in our compa∣ny. When our Captaine was come, we consulted how to catch the other thrée at shore, which we performed thus. Our manner of taking the Saluages.We manned the light horseman with 7 or 8 men, one standing before carried our box of Marchandise, as we were woont when I went to traffique with them, and a platter of pease, which meat they loued: but before we were landed, one of them (being too suspitiously fearefull of his owne good) withdrew himselfe into the wood. The other two met vs on the shore side, to receiue the pease, with whom we went vp the Cliffe to their fire and sate downe with them, and whiles we were discussing how to catch the third man who was gone, I opened the box, and shewed them trifles to exchange, thinking thereby to haue banisht feare from the other, and drawen him to re∣turne: but when we could not, we vsed little delay, but suddenly laid hands vpon them. And it was as much as fiue or sixe of vs could doe to get them into the light horse∣man. For they were strong and so naked as our best hold was by their long haire on their heads: and we would haue béene very loath to haue done them any hurt, which of necessity we had béene constrained to haue done if we had attempted them in a multitude, which we must and would,We caught fiue Saluages, two Canoas, and their bowes and arrowes. rather than haue wanted them, being a matter of great importance for the full accomplement of our voy∣age. Thus we shipped fiue Saluages, two Canoas, with all their bowes and arrowes.
The next day we made an end of getting our wood a∣boord, and filled our empty caske with water. Thursday, the 6 of Iune, we spent in bestowing the Canoas vpon the orlop safe from hurt, because they were subiect to breaking, which our Captaine was carefull to preuent. Saturday, the eight of Iune (our Captaine being de∣sirous to finish all businesse about this harbour) very ear∣ly in the morning, with the light horseman, coasted fiue or sixe leagues about the Ilands adioining, and sounded all along wheresoeuer we went. He likewise diligently searched the mouth of the Harbour, and about the rocks which shew themselues at all times, and are an excellent breach of the water,Sounded a∣bout the rocks and mouth of the Harbour. so as no Sea can come in to offend the Harbour. This he did to instruct himselfe, and there∣by able to direct others that shall happen to come to this place. For euery where both néere the rocks, & in all soun∣dings about the Ilands, we neuer found lesse water than foure and fiue fathoms, which was seldome; but seuen, eight, nine and ten fathoms is the continuall sounding by the shore. In some places much déeper vpon clay oaze or soft sand: so that if any bound for this place, should be ei∣ther driuen or scanted with winds, he shall be able (with his directions) to recouer safely his harbour most securely in water enough by foure seuerall passages, more their which I thinke no man of iudgement will desire as necessarie. Upon one of the Ilands (because it had a pleasant san∣dy Coue for small barks to ride in) we landed, and found hard by the shore a pond of fresh water,A Ponde of fresh Water. which flowed o∣uer the banks, somewhat ouergrowen with little shrub trées, and searching vp in the Iland, we saw it fed with a strong run, which with small labour, and little time, might be made to driue a mill. In this Iland, as in the other, were spruce trees of excellent timber and height, able to mast ships of great burthen. While we thus sounded from one place to another in
so good déepes, our Captaine to make some triall of the fishing himselfe, caused a hooke or two to be cast out at the mouth of the harbour,Great plenty of Cod fish. not aboue halfe a league from our ship, where in small time only, with the baits which they cut from the fish and thrée hooks, we got fish enough for our whole Company (though now augmented) for three daies. Which I omit not to report, because it sheweth how great a profit the fishing would be, they being so plentifull, so great, and so good, with such conuenient dry∣ing as can be wished, néere at hand vpon the Rocks. This day, about one a clocke after noone, came from the Eastward two Canoas abord vs, wherein was he that refused to stay with vs for a pawne, and with him six other Saluages which we had not séene before, who had beautified themselues after their manner very gal∣lantly, though their clothing was not differing from the former, yet they had newly painted their faces very déep, some all blacke, some red, with stripes of excellent blew ouer their vpper lips,Their orna∣ments of gal∣lantnesse. nose and chin. One of them ware a kinde of Coronet about his head, made very cunningly, of a substance like stiffe haire coloured red, broad, and more then a handfull in depth, which we imagined to be some ensigne of his superioritie: for he so much estéemed it as he would not for any thing exchange the same. O∣ther ware the white feathered skins of some fowle, round about their head, iewels in their eares, and bracelets of little white round bone, fastned together vpon a leather string. These made not any shew that they had notice of the other before taken, but we vnderstood them by their spéech and signes, that they came sent from the Bashabes, and that his desire was that we would bring vp our ship (which they call as their owne boats, a Quiden) to his house, being, as they pointed, vpon the main towards the East, from whence they came, and that he would ex∣change with vs for Furres and Tabacco. But because our Company was but small, and now our desire was with spéed to discouer vp the riuer, we let them vnder∣stand,
that if their Bashabes would come to vs, he should be welcome, but we would not remoue to him. Which when they vnderstood (receiuing of vs bread and fish, and euery of them a knife) they departed; for we had then no will to stay them long abord, least they should discouer the other Saluages which we had stowed below. Tuesday, the 11 of Iune,We went vp with our ship into the Ri∣uer. we passed vp into the riuer with our ship, about six and twenty miles. Of which I had rather not write, then by my relation to detract from the worthinesse thereof. For the Riuer, besides that it is subiect by shipping to bring in all traffiques of Marchan∣dise, a benefit alwaies accounted the richest treasury to any land: for which cause our Thames hath that due de∣nomination, and France by her nauigable Riuers recei∣ueth hir greatest wealth; yet this place of it selfe from God and nature affoordeth as much diuersitie of good commodities, as any reasonable man can wish, for pre∣sent habitation and planting. The first and chiefest thing required, is a bold coast and faire land to fall with; the next, a safe harbour for ships to ride in. The first is a speciall attribute to this shore, being most frée from sands or dangerous rocks in a continuall good depth, with a most excellent land-fall, which is the first I∣land we fell with, named by vs, Saint Georges Iland. For the second, by iudgement of our Captaine, who knoweth most of the coast of England, and most of other Countries,The profits of the Riuer. (hauing béene experienced by imployments in discoueries and trauels from his childhood) and by opi∣nion of others of good iudgement in our shippe, héere are more good harbours for ships of all burthens, than Eng∣land can affoord, and far more secure from all winds and weathers, than any in England, Scotland, France or Spaine. For besides without the Riuer in the channell, and sounds about the ilands adioining to the mouth ther∣of, no better riding can be desired for an infinite number of ships. The Riuer it selfe as it runneth vp into the main
very nigh forty miles toward the great mountaines,The breadth of the Riuer. bea∣reth in bredth a mile, sometime thrée quarters, and halfe a mile is the narrowest, where you shall neuer haue vn∣der 4 and 5 fathoms water hard by the shore, but 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathoms all along, and on both sides euery halfe mile very gallant Coues, some able to conteine almost a hundred sails,The ground soft oaze and clay. where the ground is excellent soft oaze with a tough clay vnder for anker hold, and where ships may ly without either Cable or Anker, only mored to the shore with a Hauser. What flowe of water.It floweth by their iudgement eightéen or twenty foot at high water. Dockes to graue and ca∣rine ships.Heere are made by nature most excellent places, as Docks to graue or Carine ships of all burthens: secured from all windes, which is such a necessary incomparable benefit, that in few places in England, or in any parts of Christendome, art, with great charges, can make the like. The Land.Besides, the bordering land is a most rich neighbour trending all along on both sides, in an equall plaine, nei∣ther mountainous nor rocky, but verged with a gréene bordure of grasse, doth make tender vnto the beholder of hir pleasant fertility, if by clensing away the woods she were conuerted into meddow. The wood.The wood she beareth is not shrubbish fit only for few∣ell, but goodly tall Firre, Spruce, Birch, Béech, Oke, which in many places is not so thicke, but may with small labour be made féeding ground, being plentifull like the outward Ilands with fresh water, which strea∣meth downe in many places. As we passed with a gentle winde vp with our ship in this Riuer, any man may conceiue with what admirati∣on we all consented in ioy. Many of our Company who had béene trauellers in sundry countries, and in the most famous Riuers, yet affirmed them not comparable to this they now beheld. Some that were with Sir Walter Ra∣legh in his voyage to Guiana, in the discouery of the Ri∣uer
Orenoque, which echoed fame to the worlds eares,This riuer preferred be∣fore Ore∣noque▪ and why. gaue reasons why it was not to be compared with this, which wanteth the dangers of many Shoules, and bro∣ken ground, wherewith that was incombred. Others be∣fore that notable Riuer in the West Indies called Rio Grande; some before the Riuer of Loyer, the Riuer Seine, and of Burdeaux in France; which although they be great and grodly Riuers, yet it is no detraction from them to be accounted inferiour to this, which not only yeeldeth all the foresaid pleasant profits, but also appeared infallibly to vs free from all inconueniences. I will not prefer it before our riuer of Thames, because it is Englands richest treasure; but we all did wish those excellent Harbours, good déeps in a continuall conuenient breadth, and small tide gates, to be aswell therein for our countries good, as we found thē here (beyond our hopes) in certaine, for those to whom it shall please God to grant this land for habitation; which if it had, with the other inseparable adherent commodities here to be found; then I would boldly affirme it to be the most rich, beautifull, large & secure harbouring riuer that the world affoordeth. Wednesday, the twelfth of Iune, our Captaine manned his light-horseman with 17 men, and ranne vp from the ship riding in the riuer vp to the codd▪ thereof, where we landed, leauing six to kéepe the light-horseman till our re∣turne. Ten of vs with our shot, and some armed, with a boy to carry powder and match, marched vp into the countrey towards the mountaines, which we descried at our first falling with the land. Unto some of them the ri∣uer brought vs so néere, as we iudged our selues when we landed to haue beene within a league of them: but we marched vp about foure miles in the maine,We marched vp into ye land about 4 miles. and pas∣sed ouer thrée hilles: and because the weather was par∣ching hot, and our men in their armour not able to trauel farre and returne that night to our ship, we resolued not to passe any further, being all very weary of so tedious and laboursom a trauell.
Good pastureIn this march we passed ouer very good ground, plea∣sant and fertile, fit for pasture, for the space of some thrée miles, hauing but little wood, and that Oke like stands left in our pastures in England, good and great, fit timber for any vse. Some small Birch, Hazle and Brake, which might in small time with few men be cleansed and made good arable land: but as it now is will féed cattell of all kindes with fodder enough for Summer and Winter. The soile is blacke, bearing sundry hearbs, grasse, and strawberries bigger than ours in England. In many places are lowe Thicks like our Copisses of small yoong wood. And surely it did all resemble a stately Parke, wherein appeare some old trées with high withered tops, and other flourishing with liuing gréene boughs. Upon the hilles grow notable high timber trées, masts for ships of 400 tun: and at the bottome of euery hill, a little run of fresh water: but the furthest and last we passed, ranne with a great streame able to driue a mill. Deere. Hares. Hogges.We might sée in some places where fallow Déere and Hares had béene, and by the rooting of ground we suppo∣sed wilde Hogs had ranged there, but we could descrie no beast, because our noise still chased them from vs. We were no sooner come aboord our light-horseman, returning towards our ship, but we espied a Canoa com∣ming from the further part of the Cod of the riuer East∣ward, which hasted to vs; wherin, with two others, was he who refused to stay for a pawne: and his comming was very earnestly importing to haue one of our men to go lie on shore with their Bashabes (who was there on shore, as they signed) and then the next morning he would come to our ship with many Furres and Tabacco. This we perceiued to be only a méere deuice to get possession of any of our men, to ransome all those which we had taken, which their naturall policy could not so shadow, but we did easily discouer and preuent. These meanes were by this Saluage practised, because we had one of his kinse∣men prisoner, as we iudged by his most kinde vsage of
him being aboord vs together. Thursday, the 13 of Iune, by two a clocke in the mor∣ning (because our Captaine would take the helpe and ad∣uantage of the tide) in the light-horseman with our Com∣pany well prouided and furnished with armour and shot both to defend and offend; we went from our ship vp to that part of the riuer which trended Westward into the maine, to search that: and we carried with vs a Crosse, to erect at that point, which (because it was not daylight) we left on the shore vntill our returne backe; when we set it vp in maner as the former.We set vp an∣other crosse. For this (by the way) we diligently obserued, that in no place, either about the Ilands, or vp in the maine, or alongst the riuer, we could discerne any token or signe, that euer any Christi∣an had béene before; of which either by cutting wood, dig∣ging for water, or setting vp Crosses (a thing neuer omit∣ted by any Christian trauellers) we should haue percei∣ued some mention left. But to returne to our riuer, further vp into which we then rowed by estimation twenty miles, the beauty and goodnesse wherof I can not by relation sufficiently de∣monstrate. That which I can say in generall is this: What profit or pleasure soeuer is described and truly ve∣rified in the former part of the riuer,Conueniency of transporta∣tion. is wholly doubled in this; for the bredth and depth is such, that any ship draw∣ing 17 or 18 foot water, might haue passed as farre as we went with our light-horsman, and by all our mens iudge∣ment much further, because we left it in so good depth and bredth; which is so much the more to be estéemed of grea∣ter woorth, by how much it trendeth further vp into the maine: for from the place of our ships riding in the Har∣bour at the entrance into the Sound, to the furthest part we were in this riuer, by our estimation was not much lesse than threescore miles. From ech banke of this riuer are diuers branching streames into the maine, wherby is affoorded an vnspeak∣able profit by the conueniency of transportation from
place to place, which in some countries is both chargea∣ble, and not so fit, by cariages on waine, or horsebacke. Héere we saw great store of fish, some great, leaping a∣boue water, which we iudged to be Salmons. All along is an excellent mould of ground. The wood in most pla∣ces, especially on the East side, very thinne, chiefly oke and some small yoong birch, bordering low vpon the ri∣uer; all fit for medow and pasture ground: and in that space we went, we had on both sides the riuer many plaine plots of medow, some of thrée or foure acres, some of eight or nine:Meddow and Grasse. so as we iudged in the whole to be be∣tweene thirty and forty acres of good grasse, and where the armes run out into the Maine, there likewise went a space on both sides of cléere grasse, how far we know not, in many places we might see paths made to come downe to the watering. The excellencie of this part of the Riuer, for his good breadth, depth, and fertile bordering ground, did so ra∣uish vs all with variety of pleasantnesse, as we could not tell what to commend, but only admired; some com∣pared it to the Riuer Seuerne, (but in a higher degrée) and we all concluded (as I verily thinke we might right∣ly) that we should neuer see the like Riuer in euery degrée equall, vntill it pleased God we beheld the same againe. For the farther we went, the more pleasing it was to e∣uery man, alluring vs still with expectation of better, so as our men, although they had with great labour rowed long and eat nothing (for we carried with vs no victuall, but a little chéese and bread) yet they were so refreshed with the pleasant beholding thereof,We were loath to leaue this Riuer. and so loath to for∣sake it, as some of them affirmed, they would haue conti∣nued willingly with that onely fare and labour 2 daies; but the tide not suffering vs to make any longer stay (be∣cause we were to come backe with the tide) and our Cap∣taine better knowing what was fit then we, and better what they in labour were able to endure, being verie loath to make any desperate hazard, where so little neces∣sitie
required, thought it best to make returne, because whither we had discouered was sufficient to conceiue that the Riuer ran very far into the land. For we passed six or seuen miles, altogether fresh water (whereof we all dranke) forced vp by the flowing of the Salt: which after a great while eb, where we left it, by breadth of channell and depth of water was likely to run by estimation of our whole company an vnknowen way farther: the search whereof our Captaine hath left till his returne, if it shall so please God to dispose of him and vs. For we hauing now by the direction of the omnipotent disposer of all good intents (far beyond the period of our hopes) fallen with so bold a coast, found so excellent and secure harbour, for as many ships as any nation profes∣sing Christ is able to set forth to Sea, discouered a Riuer, which the All-creating God, with his most liberall hand, hath made aboue report notable with his foresaid bles∣sings, bordered with a land, whose pleasant fertility be∣wraieth it selfe to be the garden of nature, wherin she on∣ly intended to delight hir selfe, hauing hitherto obscured it to any, except to a purblind generation, whose vnder∣standing it hath pleased God so to darken, as they can neither discerne, vse, or rightly estéeme the vnualuable riches in middest whereof they liue sensually content with the barke and outward rinde, as neither knowing the swéetnes of the inward marrow, nor acknowledging the Deity of the Almighty giuer: hauing I say thus far proceeded, and hauing some of the inhabitant nation (of best vnderstanding we saw among them) who (learning our language) may be able to giue vs further instruction, concerning all the premised particulars, as also of their gouernours, and gouernment, situation of townes, and what else shall be conuenient, which by no meanes other∣wise we could by any obseruation of our selues learne in a long time: our Captaine now wholy intended his pro∣uision for spéedy returne. For although the time of yeere and our victuall were not so spent, but we could haue
made a longer voyage, in searching further and trading for very good commodities, yet as they might haue béene much profitable,The cause of our speedy returne. so (our company being small) much more preiudiciall to the whole state of our voya which we were most regardfull now not to hazard. For we sup∣posing not a little present priuate profit, but a publique good, and true zeale of promulgating Gods holy Church, by planting Christianity, to be the sole intent of the Ho∣nourable , rth of this discouery▪ thought it gene∣rally most expedient, by our speedy returne, to giue the longer space of time to make prouision for so weighty an enterprise. Friday, the 14 day of Iune, early by foure a clocke in the morning, with the tide your two boats,  an a little helpe of the winde,We ankrd at the mouth of the Riuer. we rowed downe to the riuers mouth and there came to an anker about eleuen a clocke. After∣ward our Captaine in the light horseman searched the sounding all about the mouth and comming to the Riuer, for his certaine instruction, of a perfect description. The next day, being Saturday, we wayed anker, and with a briese from the land, we sailed vp to our watering place, and there stopped, went on shore and filled all our empty caske with fresh water. Our Captain made his cer∣taine obserua∣tion.Our Captaine vpon the Rocke in the middest of the harbour obserued the height, latitude, and variation ex∣actly vpon his instruments. 1 Astrolabe. 2 Semisphere. 3 Ringe instrument. 4 Crosse staffe. 5 And an excellent compasse made for the variation. The certainty whereof, together with the particulari∣ties of euery depth and sounding, aswell at our falling with the land, as in the discouery, and at our departure from the coast; I refer to his owne relation in the Map of his Geographicall description, which for the benefit of o∣thers he intendeth most exactly to publish.
The temperature of the Climate (albeit a very im∣portant matter)?The tempera∣ture of the Climate. had almost passed without mentio∣ning, because it affoorded to vs no great alteration from our disposition in England; somwhat hotter vp into the Maine, because it lieth open to the South; the aire so wholesome, as I suppose not any of vs found our selues at any time more healthfull, more able to labour, nor with better stomacks to such good fare, as we partly brught, and partly found. Sunday, the 16 of Iune, the winde being faire, and because we had set out of England vpon a Sunday, made the ilands vpon a Sunday, and as we doubt not (by Gods appointment) happily fell into our harbour vpon a Sunday; so now (beséeching him still with like prospe∣rity to blesse our returne into England our country, and from thence with his good will and pleasure to hasten our next arriuall there) we waied Anker and quit the Land vpon a Sunday. Tuesday, the 18 day, being not run aboue 30 leagues from land, and our Captaine for his certaine knowledge how to fall with the coast, hauing sounded euery watch, and from 40 fathoms had come into good déeping, to 70, and so to an hundred: this day the weather being faire, after the foure a clocke watch, when we supposed not to haue found ground so farre from land, and before sounded in aboue 100 fathoms, we had ground in 24 fathomes. Wherefore our sailes being downe, Thomas King boat∣swaine, presently cast out a hooke, and before he iudged it at ground, was fished and haled vp an excéeding great and well fed Cod: then there were cast out 3 or 4 more, and the fish was so plentifull and so great, as when our Captaine would haue set saile, we all desired him to suf∣fer them to take fish a while, because we were so delight∣ed to sée them catch so great fish, so fast as the hooke came downe: some with playing with the hooke they tooke by the backe, and one of the Mates with two hookes at a lead at fiue draughts together haled vp tenne fishes; all
were generally very great, some they measured to be fiue foot long, and thrée foot about. This caused our Captaine not to maruell at the shoul∣ding,A fishing banke. for he perceiued it was a fish banke; which (for our farewell from the land) it pleased God in continuance of his blessings, to giue vs knowledge of: the abundant pro∣fit whereof should be alone sufficient cause to draw men againe, if there were no other good both in present cer∣taine, and in hope probable to be discouered. To ampli∣fie this with words, were to adde light to the Sunne: for euery one in the shippe could easily account this present commodity; much more those of iudgement, which knew what belonged to fishing, would warrant (by the helpe of God) in a short voyage with few good fishers to make a more profitable returne from hence than from New-found-land: the fish being so much greater, better fed, and abundant with traine; of which some they desired, and did bring into England to bestow among their friends, and to testifie the true report. After, we kept our course directly for England & with ordinary winds, and sometime calmes, vpon Sunday the 14 of Iuly about six a clocke at night, we were come into sounding in our channell,We came in∣to sounding. but with darke weather and contrary winds, we were constrained to beat vp and downe till Tuesday the 16 of Iuly, when by fiue a clocke in the morning we made Sylly; from whence, hindered with calmes and small winds, vpon Thursday the 18 of Iuly about foure a clocke after noone, we came into Dartmouth: which Hauen happily (with Gods graci∣ous assistance) we made our last and first Harbour in England. Further, I haue thought fit here to adde some things worthy to be regarded, which we haue obserued from the Saluages since we tooke them. First, although at the time when we surprised them, they made their best resistance, not knowing our purpose, nor what we were, nor how we meant to vse them; yet
after perceiuing by their kinde vsage we intended them no harme, they haue neuer since séemed discontented with vs, but very tractable, louing, & willing by their best meanes to satisfie vs in any thing we demand of them, by words or signes for their vnderstanding: neither haue they at a∣ny time béene at the least discord among themselues; in∣somuch as we haue not séene them angry, but merry; and so kinde, as if you giue any thing to one of them, he will distribute part to euery one of the rest. We haue brought them to vnderstand some English, and we vnderstand much of their language; so as we are able to aske them many things. And this we haue obser∣ued, that if we shew them any thing, and aske them if they haue it in their countrey, they will tell you if they haue it, and the vse of it, the difference from ours in big∣nesse, colour, or forme: but if they haue it not, be it a thing neuer so precious, they wil denie the knowledge of it. They haue names for many starres, which they will shew in the firmament. They shew great reuerence to their King, and are in great subiection to their Gouernours: and they will shew a great respect to any we tell them are our Commanders. They shew the maner how they make bread of their Indian wheat, and how they make butter and chéese of the milke they haue of the Rain-Déere and Fallo-Déere, which they haue tame as we haue Cowes. They haue excellent colours.Indico and o∣ther excellent colours in the countrey. And hauing séene our Indico, they make shew of it, or of some other like thing which maketh as good a blew. One especiall thing is their maner of killing the Whale, which they call Powdawe; and will describe his forme; how he bloweth vp the water; and that he is 12 fathoms long; and that they go in company of their King with a multitude of their boats,Their killing of the whale. and strike him with a bone made in fashion of a harping iron fastened to a rope, which they make great and strong of the barke of trees, which they veare out after him: then all their boats
come about him, and as he riseth aboue water, with their arrowes they shoot him to death: when they haue killed him & dragged him to shore, they call all their chiefe lords together, & sing a song of ioy: and those chiefe lords, whom they call Sagamos, diuide the spoile, and giue to euery man a share, which pieces so distributed they hang vp a∣bout their houses for prouision: and when they boile them, they blow off the fat, and put to their peaze, maiz, and other pulse, which they eat. A briefe Note of what profits we saw the Countrey yeeld in the small time of our stay there. TREES. Oke of an excellent graine, strait, and great timber. Elme. Beech. Birch, very tall & great; of whose barke they make their Canoas. Wich-Hazell. Hazell. Alder. Cherry-tree. Ash. Maple. Yew. Spruce. Aspe. Firre. Many fruit trees, which we knew not. FOWLES. Eagles. Hernshawes. Cranes. Ducks great. Geese. Swannes. Penguins. Crowes. Sharks. Rauens. Mewes. Turtle-doues. Many birds of sundrie co∣lours. Many other fowls in flocks, vnknowen. BEASTS. Raine-Deere. Stagges. Fallow-Deere. Beares. Wolues. Beauer. Otter. Hare.
Cony. Hedge-Hoggs. Polcats. Wilde great Cats. Dogges: some like Wolues, some like Spaniels. FISHES. Whales. Seales. Cod very great. Haddocke great. Herring great. Plaise. Thornebacke. Rockefish. Lobstar great. Crabs. Muscels great, with pearles in them. Cockles: Wilks. Cunner fish. Lumps. Whiting. Soales. Tortoises. Oisters. FRVITS, PLANTS, and HERBS. Tabacco, excellent sweet and strong. Wild-Vines. Strawberries abundance. Raspberries abundance. Gooseberries abundance. Hurtleberries abundance. Currant trees abundance. Rose-bushes. Peaze. Ground-nuts. Angelica, a most soueraigne herbe. An hearbe that spreadeth the ground, & smelleth like Sweet Marioram, great plenty. Very good Dies, which ap∣peare by their painting; which they carrie with them in bladders. The names of the fiue Saluages which we brought home into England, which are all yet aliue, are these. 1. Tahánedo, a Sagamo or Commander. 2. Amóret Gentleman. 3. Skicowáros Gentleman. 4. Maneddo Gentleman. 5. Sassacomoit, a seruant.
