21523 99849327 14467
THE TOVCH-STONE of Prayer. Or A true and profitable expo∣sition of the Lords Prayer, according to the holy Hebrew of S. Mathews gos∣pel: to which is prefixed certaine necessary circumstances to be obserued in Prayer. Also thereunto is annexed a Table shewing the agreement betweene the Lords prayer, and the ten comman∣dements of Almighty God. By T. S. Whatsoeuer yee shall aske, if yee beleeue, yee shall receiue it. Mat. 21. 22. Oratio pia penetrat coelum. Imprinted at London for Arthur Iohnson, dwelling in Paules Church-yarde, at the signe of the Flower de Luce and Crowne. 1602.
To the religious gentle∣men Maister Robert Bate, and Maister Edmund Sleigh: T. S. wisheth in this life the feare of God, and in the life to come euerlasting rest with Iesus Christ. HAuing compiled this little Treatise, at the motion of a priuate friend, most especial∣lie for his benefit and mine owne comfort, once an entrance be∣ing made into the matter: I found so ma∣nie good and profitable lessons, naturally to arise from this so excellent a subiect, be∣ing a most absolute forme of prayer, deli∣uered by the blessed mouth of Christ our Sauiour, vnto his disciples, at his instant request, I thought it could not, but be ve∣rie profitable to others, as I finding the meditation hereof so sweete vnto my
selfe. Now this serious cogitation was a strong motiue vnto me, to publish that abroad, which I thought to keepe priuate to my selfe and to my friend; who first mooued me to take in hand this taske, to which so much the rather I condiscended: being instantly vrged therevnto, by some of my very friends, to whom I imparted the sight of this small worke: affirming that our knowledge should not be inclo∣sed within the narrowe bounds of our owne brest, but to be extended, as much as is possible, to the benefit of others. And al∣though many vigilant watchmen ouer Christes flocke, and industrious labourers in his great haruest: haue taken great paines in the vnfoulding the misteries of this most perfect platforme of prayer, without doubt to the benefit of the church) yet I know, it is not a thing super∣fluous (as it may seeme to some) but most necessarie in these times, to refresh the memorie of their learned labours. For al∣though praier be a daily exercise amongst vs, yet the number is very small that know
to performe this holy action with true sincerity. So that indeedo, that which should be a shield vnto them to defend from the assaults of our olde enemie: is a iust cause to make the Lord to vnsneath his two-edged sword against them. Some are so nousled in securitie, that they offer vp the calues of their lippes, as Caine did his sacrifice, that is by hands of others, and thinke all is well, if they giue a consent with their voice to a generall prayer, al∣though God knoweth, their hearts are wandring abroad at that instant; others haue a zeale, but it is without vnderstand∣ing, so that they know not how to pray aright, nor to whom to pray as they ought; but like the Athenians, worship an vn∣knowne God, and others are so besotted with a blinde deuotion, that they thinke their prayers cannot be sanctified, vnlesse they be holyed with Popish reliques. All these things with many more duly consi∣dered, it is as cleare as the light, that it be∣houeth euery true Christian, (so farre as it shall please God to enhable him) to labor
to remoue these impediments. And albeit I humbly acknowledge my selfe to be one of the meanest among my bretheren to vndergoe this labour, yet seeing it plea∣seth the Lord, by weake meanes, to bring mighty things to passe, whereby his glory shineth the brighter. I was not discoura∣ged to employ my small talent, which it hath pleased him to bestow on me, to the benefit of others, (I hope,) aswell as of my selfe. And as I wish it may be to the glory of God, and the vniuersall good of all, so more perticulerly, to the comfort of you my very good friends and louing countri∣men, whome I haue chosen, as patrons of my small worke, aswell to testifie my gratefull minde towardes you, as that by your protection it might the better be se∣cured, from the malicious tongues of such as shall carpe against it: being fully resol∣ued of your fauourable acceptance, be∣cause I know you are religious obseruers of this diuine exercise, and well instructed in the word of God, which is our true Py∣lot to direct our course aright. In the ex∣position
of this short, but most absolute and sweete prayer, of which our Sauiour Christ Iesus, is the author, and therefore is vsually named the Lords prayer: I haue followed the Hebrew text, especially for three respects. First, because it is the natiue tongue of the Gospell, wherein this pray∣er was first penned: secondly, because more necessarie, more significant, and hea∣uenly lessons are naturally to be learned from the holy Hebrew words, being con∣sidered by themselues, then from any o∣ther language. Thirdly, I was instigated to take this course by the examples of di∣uers famous and learned doctors, namely that learned and reuerend Doctor Saint Ierome, deuine Theophilact, Simon Grineus, and Sebastian Munster, and many others, both old and new writers, who follow the Hebrew text of this Gospell, and may be vnto me as strong defensiue Bulwarkes, against such as might happily impeach this maner of proceeding. But if it shall please God to reueale to any other a more expedite course, let him in Gods name,
with a good conscience vse his owne li∣bertie; It shall suffice me amongst the rest to bring somewhat to the building of the Lords spirituall Temple, be it neuer so meane, so it doe serue for the edification thereof. But to auoide tediousnesse, fear∣ing least I haue offended already in this respect, I commit you and all the rest of my louing friends and Country-men to the protection of the omnipotent, and onely wise God, and my labours whatsoeuer, to his good blessing. Your Country-man most humbly to commaund T. S.
To the godly and Chri∣stian Reader. FOr as much (gentle Reader) as nothing is more necessary and profitable to all Chri∣stians, yea more plea¦sing to God: then is the faithfull prayers of his elect. And because all in the church, haue not like measure of knowledge: to know eyther for what: or after what manner to pray, I haue thought it good for the benefit of such weake ones, to set forth this exposi∣tion of the Lordes prayer: which is the absolute for me of all holy prayers, the doctrines I haue drawne from the natu∣rall meaning of the wordes, as they are set downe in the holy Hebrew of S. Ma∣thewes gospell, vsing no curiositie in method: but handling euery word as it lyeth in order in the text, which is the
plainest, and easiest, for the capacity of the simpler sort, that can be: And for their better vnderstanding how to pray, I haue prefixed certaine circumstances of prayer, which are seriously to be consi∣dered of euery one that will pray aright. Lastly to the end of the Lordes prayer, I haue added a table, shewing thee the agreement of the Lordes prayer with the ten commaundementes. And whereas in reading, thou shalt see this marke *. At the beginning of any sentence, looke on the margent, and it sheweth thee the writer, from whence that sentence was borrowed: and because that some may thinke my enterprise bould, yea and this my doing to be altogether needelesse, in as much as I haue but busied my selfe, with that which my betters haue both learnedly taught, and writ: the which notwithstanding, we still continuing in our security, and carelesnesse, thinking in
our prosperity, we shall neuer be cast downe: putting farre from vs the euill day, which amongst many, is the most desperate disease to the soule, that can be. Also considering with my selfe, the duty I owe to God, remembring, how euery one must giue an account how he hath vsed his talent: yea religion bindeth me to haue a louing care of the saluation of my brethren, and the duty and loue I beare to the church, wherein I liue, and of which I am a member: these and ma∣ny more such like reasons, cause me to say, the loue of God in Christ Iesus constraines me to speake that I doe: and with the Apostles in the Acts, I cannot chuse but speake the things I haue heard and seene. Neyther gentle reader, let this worke seeme to thee superfluous, because some learned haue entreated of the same mat∣ter before, we see by lamentable expe∣rience how soone their learned labours
are forgot, and how seldome put in prac∣tise, therefore we cannot heare a good thing too often, nor learne it too well. And I beseech God for his sonnes sake to take the scales from our eyes, that our affections may be illuminated, and we be∣ing strengthened in the inner man: may the better discharge so waighty a duty as praier is. Read this booke, (christian bro∣ther) with a single eye, not onely so much to know, as to practise: and to be penitent for that which hath beene amisse: and that humility, and meeknes, dwelling in thy soule, God may guide thy iudgement, and teach thee in his way▪ and that thou Psal. 25 vse this booke, no otherwise then it was meant, to thy good and comfort, which God grant vnto thee, Amen. Thy louing brother in Christ Iesus Tho. S.
QVisquis amas Christum, sanctè componere vota, Discas, Diabolum sic superare potes. Ipse licet nobis minitetur vulnera Daemon, Saepe precare Deum, vulnera nulla feres. Contrà nos tumidae minitantur praelia Gentes Exitiumque parant, Perdere nemo potest. Nam Dius, exaudit iustorum tempore duro Cum clamant, gemitus, auxilium que feret. Corda leuate Deo, mundanas spernite curas, Impediunt votum, pondere corda premunt, Sanctificet que fides semper pia dicta precantis, Haec mentem sanctam redere sola solet. Hac iter ad vitam, hac magnitecta Tonantis Scandimus eloqvio, Pax vbi sola manet. Sintque manus purae nobis, sint pectora pura, Sic Dominus precibus cuncta petita dabit. Christus discipulos docuit pia verba referre, Hoc docet exemplo, nos quo que verba pia. Quis poterit Christi magnae praeconia laudis Dicere pro meritis? dicere nemo queat. Qui monstrare viam voluit, qua culmina coeli Scandimus, atque patri sacra referre suo. Non pudeat sanctos sanctam didicisse loquelam, Omnia nam sanctis obuia sunt precibus Ʋt docuisti tuos olim mitissime Christe
Discipulos, verbo nos quoque pasce tuo. Tempora, concedas vitae faelicia nobis, Sit tibi, sitque patri gloria lausque tuo. Oratio absque fide, est quasi corpus sine anima. W. P. To the secure and carelesse saith S. Iames. Yee lust and haue not: because yee aske not. Iam. 4. verse. 2. To the lasciuious and carnall. Yee aske and receiue not: because yee aske amisse. verse 3. To the regenerate Christian saith S. Iohn. This is the assurance that we haue in him, that if we aske any thing according to his will, he hea∣reth vs. John. 5. verse 14. 15. Before we crie will hee answere: and whilst wee speake will he heare vs. Jsa. 65. vers. 24.
❧ Obseruations to praie aright. Eight lessons, or necessary obseruati∣ons, to be learned of all, that will pray aright. AS no exercises can be wel performed, without some cir∣cumstances & ob∣seruations necessa∣rylie thereto be∣longing: whether we respect exercises of the body, or of the minde. So prayer being an ex∣ercise ordained of God: then the which nothing is more profitable, can in no good measure on our part be performed: without some ne∣cessary circumstances thereto be∣longing. The consideration where∣of,
hath caused me, to place before the Lordes prayer, these eight ne∣cessary circumstances, belonging to To whom we must pray. prayer. The first whereof is, to whom we must pray. For as it is ridiculous to vtter  much speach vnto them, who are neither carefull, nor capable of that we say: and as it is great simplicity, for any to deliuer a supplication vn∣to the cooke, which perteineth to the king, so much more folly is it, for any to pray vnto Angell or Saint, Papists in so do∣ing like the A∣theni∣ans. seeing we may iustly doubt, whe∣ther they heare, or can giue vs what we want. And if any so doe, he is as blinde as the Athenians, to pray to an vnknowne God. Therefore we must pray to him, that is willing to helpe vs, which also is incompre∣hensible in all places to heare vs, and alsufficient able to giue vs, els can∣not
our prayers be made in faith. And if they be not in faith, the A∣postle saith, whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. But prayer to Saints cannot be of faith: therefore such prayers are sinne: Againe we can pray to none, but to them we be∣leeue in. But we must beleeue onely in God: Therefore pray to him one∣ly. Our sauiours wordes, which ought to be without contradiction, teach vs that plainely. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God: Mat. 4. and him onely shalt thou serue. And that this is a part of Gods worship, and honour to be prayed vnto: heare what the Prophet saith in the person of God. Call vpon me Psa. 50. and I will deliuer thee, and thou shall glorifie me: and looke into the verse before, and thou shalt finde: he that
giues this commandement, is the most high and blessed Trinity. The second Circumstance. THe second obseruation is, to We must pray in the name of Christ. know through whom, or in whose name, to offer vp our praiers: and that is, in Christes name: so doth 1. Tim. 2. 3. the Apostle Paule teache vs. There is one God, and one mediator: betweene God and man, the man Christ Iesus. And the Apostle Iohn saith, if any 1. Ioh. 2. 1. man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christ the righteous. And Christ him selfe hath witnes∣sed, whatsoeuer we shall aske the fa∣ther Ioh. 16. in his name, we shall receiue it. Therefore sath the blessed Apostle, we haue boldnes, and entrance, with confidence, through faith in him, that is in Christ, and not in any An∣gell or Saint.
The third circumstance. IN the third place, obserue for what For what to pray. Mat. 6 to pray, of this doth Christ teach vs, in Mathew the sixt. Euen in the Lordes prayer, which is a true pat∣terne for all holy prayers: whereof shall be spoken more at large in his place, In the meane time obserue this lesson of S. Paule. I exhort (saith 1. Tim. 2. 1. he) that prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and giuing of Why we must pray for Kings. thankes be made for all men: for kings, and all that be in authority; that we may leade a quiet & peace∣able life, in all godlinesse and hone∣sty for this is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Sauiour. Wherefore with Theophilact I con∣clude Theo: on Luke cha. 11. this point: that he which as∣keth that which is not profitable for the soule, nor necessary for the body,
shall not be hard. For saith that ho∣ly father with God, such are no pe∣titions, if they aske, Quae non expedi∣unt, such things, as are neither ne∣cessary nor fit. The fourth Circumstance. THe fourth point to be conside∣red, is the causes that mooue vs to prayer, and amongst many I will only name foure. First, because God hath comman∣ded it. Call vpon me, saith IEHOVAH. Psal. 50 Aske, saith CHRIST. Secondly, the promise of God: Mat. 7. And I will deliuer thee, and yee shall re∣ceiue it. Here is the promise of God, therefore said a writer well. I Deus Gulia∣dus on Mat. 6. pa. 132. simul iussit or are, et promisit exaudire. God at once commanded to pray, and he hath promised to heare per∣fectly or louingly.
Thirdly, the feeling of our owne  miseries: By the example of Dauid of Iob, of Ionah, also the Hebrew word set downe by Saint Mathew. Psa. 4. 2 Iob. 6. VEATTEM KEN TITHPALLELV. Yee shall pray thus, the roote of which Ionah. 2 Mat. 6. worde is PALAL, which in the first sence, or to speake according to the Grammer, it is in the first, or light coniugation, to iudge, and as here it is, in the fourth coniugation, called with Grammarians HITHPALL, it signifieth, to iudge a mans selfe, for actio eiusdem in seipsum, is an action of the same man vpon himselfe; so it signifieth here in this place, as if he should haue said, For our Sauiour hath left vs a prai∣er wher∣by we may iudge our selues, our prai∣ers, and all our actions. And yee shall iudge your selues thus, &c. For indeed, no man can pray aright, except he first iudge himselfe: and if he do so, the Apostle telleth him he shall not be iudged of the Lord. And here
we may consider, the very ende of prayer, vt obediamus Deo et impetre∣mus Gulia∣dus on Mat. 6. pa. 132. à deo: euen that we may obey God, & obtaine by our requests frō God, 4. Mo∣tiue to prayer. & this may wel be considered in the last motiue to praier: which is the benefits we receiue by prayer. The benefits are exceeding great, and he most faithfull which hath promised the same, which is Christ; whatsoeuer you shall aske the father Ioh. 16. in my name, ye shall receiue it (saith Mar. 9. our Sauiour) what neede I to recite Mat. 15 28. here, how all the godly haue beene deliuered by prayer, in their grea∣test dangers: how fathers haue had their sonnes healed, the mothers their daughters, Yea Cornelius had Peter to cure his soule, a iust re∣proofe is this his example to all se∣cure and lukewarme Christians, for he delighted in prayer, before his Acts. 10
conuersion. Abraham by prayer receiued a sonne: an † Isaack a sonne of laughter, Of שחק to laugh. for God turned his mourning into ioy. For he meaned because he was childelesse as appeareth. Gen. 15. 2. Anna prayed and had not onely a Sonne, but euen a Prophet of the highest: for she begged him of God and therefore shee called his name Of שאל to aske. 1. Sam. 1. 20. § Luk. 1 Shemuel § also Zachary by his prai∣ers obtained a sonne in his old age, for by his prayers he found grace with God. Therefore he called his name Of חנן to shew mercy. Iohn. To conclude there is no ende of Gods mercy to a man re∣plenished with prayer.
The fift Circumstance. THe fift lesson to be obserued is the place where to pray, the The place where. Predicament vbi, as Logicians call it, maketh much for the praise or dis∣praise of any thing, & therefore the Pharisies loued to stand in the mar∣ket place and pray. But Christians Ma. 6. 5 haue another lesson, for Christbid∣deth thee, enter into thy secret cham∣ber, (not but that it is lawfull to pray any where.) For saith Christ to the Ioh. 4. 21. 23. Samaritane woman. The true wor∣shippers, shall neither worship in Ierusalem, nor in this mount: but in spirit and trueth, and the Apostle 1. Tim. 2. 8. Paule saith, pray euery where, lifting vp pure handes with out wrath or doubting. For publique prayers, we haue Christes promise: when two or three are gathered togeather Mat. 18
in my name, there am I in the midst of them; and from this an ancient father saith very well, et propterea Theo. saepe precantes non accipimus, eo quod mutua concordia caremus. And there∣fore often times praying, we receiue not, because we haue not brotherly fellowship: for where there is loue, consolation, piety, and religion: there Christ doth not say, I will be, but Iam in the midst of them: but for our priuate prayers, Christ tolde vs, our secret chamber was the fit∣test, and he confirmed it vnto vs, by his owne examples: as when he said to his disciples, sit you here, whilst I Mat. 26 go and pray yonder. Also whereas he went vp in to the Mountaine to pray: from whence that reuerend Archshop Theophilact, noteth thus much, oportet nos solitariosesse, et nullis rebus terrenis intendere orando: it be∣hooueth
vs to be solitarie, and to ap∣ply our mindes to no earthly mat∣ter, whilst we are in praying. The sixt Obseruation from the predic a∣ment of time, when and how long to pray. OVr sauiour saith it must be con∣tinually,  this continuance in prayer, will liuely set forth our faith and constancie in God: to wrastle with God as Iacob did, till wee haue Hos. 3 a blessing, which must be obtained by the same manner, that this was, by weeping & praying, neither with Luk. 18 the widow must we giue ouer, till our cause be heard; Anna continued Luk. 1 in prayers night and day. And Dani∣ell three times a day. How oft hath Dan. 5 Christ prayed all night? and was it not for our sakes miserable sinners.
Therefore let vs watch one houre Mat. 26 and not sleepe as Peter did, least we fall into temptation. Seauenthly with what affections we must pray. WIth zeale and feruencie, so  saith Paule, be feruent in prai∣er. Also the Apostle Iames, the pray∣er Ro. 12. of a righteous man auayleth much if it be feruent. With the Publican wee Iam. 5 must knock our brest, and with Da∣uid say Lord enter not into Iudge∣ment Psalm. 133. 2. with thy seruant. With Abra∣ham pray vehemently, to cry with Ier. 14. 7. Ieremy our iniquities testifie against vs: with Daniel, O Lord heare, O Lord Dan. 9. helpe, O Lord consider: and howsoe∣uer our affections are maruelously dulled, by reason of the frailenesse Rom. 7. of the flesh, yet to wil is present,
and the spirit will be willing though Mat. 26 the flesh be weake, and this is our comfort, the spirit doth not onely teach vs what to aske, but maketh intercessions for vs, with sighes and Rom. 8. 26. groanes, which cannot be expres∣sed. The eight and last lesson, to learne to pray aright is the necessity of The ne∣cessity of prayer. prayer. FOr although this be the last, yet it is not the least: for this well con∣sidered  will make vs diligent to learne all the former; I meane how necessary prayer is for all Christians, and especially for this last age of the world wherin we liue: if we obserue but the time, it is in the last dayes, wherein Satans mallice is so much the more increased: by howmuch the more his time is diminished, the
place wherein we liue, beeing the We haue 3. conti∣nual ene∣mies, the world, the flesh, and the deuill. place where our enimy hath many and great partakers: the flesh & the diuell are two maine captaines, the world I mean the wic∣ked of the world are the souldiers, which are seruant to both. If therefore we con∣sider the pollicie of our arche enimy Satan: his rage, his watchfulnesse, his strength, yea the world, which are at his command: and on the other side, behold the flesh, which euer giueth vs battell at home, as also the fraile∣nesse of our owne flesh, and weake∣nesse of our owne nature: how vn∣able it is to withstand him, if these things were considered, they would keepe vs, not onely from sleeping in so great a ieopardy, but to bee watchfull, and call by prayer to God for mercy: (the which if we doe) wee shall make him and his great armie to fly. So saith Iames
the blessed Apostle, Resist the Deuill, and he will flye from thee. God giue vs faith, and loue in him: so shall we be more then conquerors. Thus louing brother thou seest. First, who to pray vnto, not to 1. Hea∣thens. false Gods, as Heathens doe. Secondly, by whom and through whome, to offer vp our yrayers, nei∣ther 2. Pa∣pists. by the virgin Mary, or any saint as the Papists doe. Thirdly, what to pray for, not 3. Bala∣mists & world∣lings. with Balaam, altogether to set our mindes on mony, nor with carna∣lists for worldly pleasure. Fourthly, the causes that moue 4. We must learne this lessō before our prai∣ers can be heard. vs to prayer, which is the very foun∣dation of prayer. From which mo∣tiue causes, we learne these lessons. First to pray in obedience to Gods commandement. Secondly, with faith in his promises.
Thirdly, in humilitie of spirit: then shall we be sure to receaue a re∣ward. Fiftly, where to pray, not like 5. Iewes, Brow∣nists. Iewes, no where but in the temple: nor like Brownists neuer in the tem∣ple, but pray thou without any su∣perstitious conceit of the place, lift∣ing vp pure hands to God. Sixtly, when, and how long to 6. Tem∣porisers. pray, continually, not with tempori∣sers to vse holy exercises, only when religion bringeth gaine & pleasure. Seuenthly, with what affection to 7. Lao∣dicean like pro∣fessors. pray, not like our Laodician profes∣sors, who pray with such zeale, that they can say nothing, if you take their booke from them: else, when they read their prayer, they be halfe a sleepe before it be ended. 8. Not to liue idlely as Dauid did. 8. Secure Christi∣ans. 2. Sam. 11. 12. 3. nor to sleepe as Ionah
and Peter did, Math. 26. 40. for Sa∣tan is watchfull, and goeth about seeking continually whome he may deuoure. These obseruations I thought good to set downe for thy better vnderstanding of the Lords prayer, because therein; I purpose to be very briefe, setting downe such doctrins, as naturally arise from the true sig∣nification of the words in the text: the holy and ancient Fathers haue Forma est per quā res est quod est, in∣quit Rā: in dial: called it, formula precationum, the forme of prayers: and Logitians say, forma dat esse. And surely this holy Prayer is the patterne, whereby wee may frame our prayers: and if they be not agreeable to this prayer, they be no lawfull prayers.
The holy prayer of our Sauiour. Mathew 6. Chap. verse, 9. OVr father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy king∣dome come. Thy will be done as in heauen so also in earth. Giue vs this day our daylie, or continuall bread. And forgiue vs our debts, as we for∣giue our debters. And lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill for thine is that kingdome, the power and the glory, for euer and euer, Amen. VVHich prayer I deuide into foure parts: into a preface, in these wordes, Our Father which
art in heauen. Secondly, into six petitions, wher∣of three belong vnto God, and three vnto vs. The three that belong vnto God, are in these wordes. 1. Halowed be thy name. 2. Thy kingdome come. 3. Thy will be done, as in heauen so also in earth. The latter 3. which concerne vs are, 1. Giue vs this day our daylie or continuall bread. 2. And forgiue vs our debts as we forgiue our deb∣ters. And lead vs not into tempta∣tion, but deliuer vs from euil. 3. Part into a conclusion, for thine is that kingdome, the power & the glory. 4. Part the seale of faith, Amen. The first part of the praier, which is the preface, I deuide into 4. Branches.
First, that God is a father. Secondly, that he is our father. Thirdly, that he is. Fourthly, the place which is hea∣uen. For the first, that God is a father, it needes no proofe, the scriptures are so manifest, & we are boūd by our Christian faith, to beleeue that God is a father almighty, in this generall sence he is the father of good, and bad. But in a more pecu∣liar sence, he is our father, both by creation & adoption, and this doth the Prophet tell the Iewes, and in them vs: that we ought not to re∣paie God, for so high & marue∣lous workes, with ingratitude. Do Deut. 32. 6. ye so reward the Lord, O ye foolish peo∣ple and vnwise? is not he thy father that bought thee, and that made thee: also Isai. 63. 16. Isaijah saith, doubtlesse, thou art our
father though Abraham know vs not, and Israel be ignorant of vs: yet thou art our father, and our redeemer, thy name is for euer. Obiection. CHrist calleth God, father: is he therefore his father, as he is ours? Answere. NO: For he is our father by his creating, and adopting vs in Christ. But he is Christes father, Nota. ☞ by eternall generation, he the na∣turall sonne of God: but wee by grace. Therefore well did he euer make this distinction. I thanke thee ô my father, for so hee is in the most peculier manner. Also, where he saith, I go to my father & your father, & my God, and your God.
What doth he teach, but that God is his father by eternall generati∣on, and ours by adoption? Now from this word Father, let vs learne fiue lessons. First, let vs learne to pray in faith. For saith Theophilact, faith is the very foundation of prayer, and he 1. Of stedfast∣nes in his promises. goeth further, and saith. Nisi enim crediderit homo, quòd hoc quòd petet accepturus est, in suam vtilitatem, vanaest oratio, quam facit. Except a 2. Of our loue. man beleeue he shall receaue that 3. Of our honoring him. which hee shall aske for his pro∣fit, that prayer which hee dooth make is vaine. The very worde in 4. Of feare to his ma∣iestie. the originall which is The word Fa∣ther, put¦teth vs in mind. AB of ABAH to will, it sheweth, that God willeth our good. And what will a father deny his sonne, 5. Of o∣bedience & dutie. Mat. 7. 7 that is for his good, saith our Sa∣uiour: yea saith the Lorde, can a
woman forget her childe, and not haue compassion on the sonne of her wombe? though it could be, yet, will I not forget thee, saith the Eter∣nall. Secondly, it teacheth vs to haue a louing affection, when we come to appeare before a mercifull Fa∣ther, and not as a seuere Iudge, therefore saith Dauid, (and with him let vs say,) My soule thirsteth Psa. 42. after the liuing God: when shall I come to appeare before the presence of God? Thirdly the name Father, tea∣cheth vs honor. If I be your Father, Mal. 1. (saith God,) where is my honor? Fourthly, Feare, If yee call him 1. Pet. 1 13. Father, which without respect of per∣sons, iudgeth euery man according to his workes: passe the time of your dwelling in feare.
Fiftly, obedience. As obedient children fashion not your selues, to the 1. Pet. 1. 4. former lustes of ignorance. Lastly, this word Father: telleth our consciences, that God is apea∣sed for our sinnes: and that Christ hath fully satisfied his fathers wrath for vs, & so we are not only friendes, but also coheires with Christ: & therefore the spirit bold∣neth vs to call God, (ABBA) father: herein is the great loue, of our mer∣cifull father, maruelously set forth euen in this, that when we were Rom. 5. 8. 9. yet sinners, he sent his sonne to die for vs. How much more being ius∣tified by his bloud, we shall be sa∣ued, and seeing he hath giuen vs Christ, how shall he not giue vs all things? (O Christian) remember thy du∣ty, ☞ God hath beene twise a father
to thee: but thou not once wor∣thy the name of a sonne. Thus much of the first worde Father: now for the AFFIX, [our] I haue shewed before how God is our Father, both by creation and adoption. It followeth to set downe, what lessons wee may learne from this worde [our,] which are in number foure. First, it teacheth vs charity: for  loue seeketh not her owne, but we must seeke to edifie one ano∣ther, to be like minded one to∣wards another, to pray one for an∣other. Therefore dooth Christ teach vs, to pray one for another, saying, Our Father, not my Father. Secondly, it doth teach vs, to a∣gree  in saith and doctrine with our brethren.
Thirdly, it teacheth vs humility, to say with Peter, there is no re¦spect  of persons with God. And with Paul, there is neither Iewe, nor Graecian, bond, nor free, male, nor female, but wee are all one in Christ. Therefore said Iob, If I con∣temned the iudgement of my seruant, Iob. 31. 13. when he contended with me: what then shall I do, when God standeth vp and visiteth me? what then shall I answere? Lastly, it teacheth vs to beware  of Sectes and Scismatickes, which haue indeed the spirite of Babell, saying, I am holyer then thee, stand from me: or with the proud Pha∣risie, I thanke thee Lord, I am not like this Publican.
The third part of the Preface. Which art. FOr the first word, Which (SHE) an abstract of ASHER, the re∣latiue, of the roote of the verbe ASHAR, of which commeth also ASHRE: Blessed, or blessings, giuing vs to vnderstand thus much, that God is the fountaine whence all blessings come. And if we be blessed, it is by receiuing it from God, for when God and wee are relatiues. I meane when we are his sonnes in Christ, then doth he impart of his bles∣sings vnto vs, as ASHRE NES VI Psal. 32. 1. PESHANG, Blessed is he whose sinne is forgiuen.
Art. THis word (Art) is not in the originall, but is necessarily יהוה vnderstood, and this adiunct of Future. י Preterp. ה Present. ו time in the Present-tense, yea in all tenses, agreeth to God euermore, as the learned well know. The let∣ters in the name Theo. Beza in Apoc. 1. Iehouah doe Reuel. 1. 14. note to vs, as much, as S. Iohn in the Apocalips: Which is, which was, and which is to come. The Present, Preter-perfect, and the Future tense. The consideration of this eter∣nitie  of God, strengtheneth vs in faith, if we obserue the Apostles words, all the promises of God in Christ, are Yea, and Amen. With God there is no shadowe, nor vari∣ance of change: for whome he loueth, he loueth to the end.
Iesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same is for euer. The vse of this is, that we should not wauer in faith, nor be incon∣stant  in religion, but faithfull in all our promises, then haue we a bles∣sing: for Christ saith, be faithfull vnto death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. In Heauen. AS, in the first word of this pre∣face,  we are taught that God is our father: therefore willing to heare vs. So in this last word (hea∣uen) we are put in minde of his might, that he is able to helpe vs. Psal. 99. 2. (Dauid saith) the Lord is great in Sion, he is high aboue all people. Christ saith, My father is greater Ioh. 10. then I, and none is able to take my
sheepe out of his hands: therfore feare not Satans subtiltie, nor his childrens tirranie. Secondly, we must not admit  any base, or earthly conceit of our father in heauen: for the Prophet Isaijah saith, Gods thoughts are not our thoughts: neither are his wayes our wayes. But as the heauens, are higher then the earth: so are his wayes, higher then our wayes. Thirdly, the place heauen, must  teach vs, that when we come to speake to God by prayer: our mindes must not be drawne away with earthly matters, or worldly affaires: for we must consider that we are in the presence of one, that is so infinit in maiesty, that he fil∣leth both heauen and earth, yea this glorious God, maketh the
thunder to be at his command, and his voice breaketh the Ceders of Li∣banus. Therefore with Moses let vs Exo. 34. 8. Psal. 95. Kneeling seemly in prayer. bow downe to the earth when we worship, also with Dauid bow downe and kneele, and with great reuerence to God, let vs say, with the Publican. I am not worthy to looke vp to heauen. With Dauid let vs cry, I will lift vp my soule vnto thee. Whereas it is said (Which art in heauen) that doth not contradict the other place of scripture: where God saith, the heauen of heauens cannot containe me, how then will yee build a house for mee to dwell in? for Gods omnipotencie is euery where: so saith Dauid, Psa. 139 whether shall I go from thy pre∣sence, if I take the winges of the
morning, and fly to the vttermost part of the world: yea in the deepe, and in hell, also there art thou. But as the soule is said to be in the head and heart: so Gods seate is in heauen, and that is as it were his Austin. temple, saith an aunci∣ent father, yet is he resident in all places: euen as the soule is in all the parts of mans body, but hath chiefest seate in the head and hart: so God is in all places, but hath his temple, and doth most manifest his glory in heauen. Lastlye, it comforteth the chil∣dren  of God, to thinke of hea∣uen: seeing God hath promised The last conside∣ration of the word heauen. that they shall be inheritours of so glorious a place, which Christ hath purchased for them. This made all the fathers to behaue themselues like strangers here, it made Paule Heb. 11
say, he had fought a good fight (though bitter to the flesh) because saith he, is layd vp for me a crowne of glory. Also in another place he saith, I suppose that all the afflicti∣ons of this life, are not worthy the ioyes, that shall be reuealed. Now follow the petitions. Hallowed be thy name. VVHich Petition hath two  parts, principally to be con∣sidered as. First, what is meant by the name of God, in this place. Secondly, what it is to halow  the same. For the first, the glorious name of God, who can fully expresse
What is his name, or what is his sonnes name, saith Agur the sonne Pro. 30. 4. of Iakeh. But it hath pleased the Holy and Highest, to condiscend to our weake capacities, and in mercy to call himselfe, by such meanes: as either note to vs his essence, as 1. Iehouah, 2. Ehieh, 3. Iah, or his presence and power, as, 4. El, 5. Eloah, 6. Elohim. Iehouah, denoteth vnto vs the יהוה essence of God, euen, that one de∣uine Essence, which hath beene from all Eternitie: is, and shall be, without any change, for euer, and for euer, the vse of this, is handled before in the worde Art. Ehieh, is of the same roote that אהיה Iehouah is, it signifieth, I will be, The sonne of God being Iehouah,
equall to the father: appearing to Exod. 3. 14. Moses, saide vnto him, thou shalt go and tell the children of Israell, I will be hath sent me vnto you. Sig∣nifying indeed Saith Doctor Forster. that he it was, that was to be come man, who was promised to Adam, and their father Abraham: euen God, stron∣ger then all the sonnes of Adam, who should breake the head of the serpent, and destroy him of his might. This true IEHOVAH called himselfe EHIEH to Moses, but when he had taken our nature vn∣to him, and was constituted in the ministry, & worke of our redemp∣tion, then he that before said to the children of Israell, I will be, sayd I am, Ihon 8. 17. Before Abraham Iohn. 8. 17. was, I am. Yea as soone as hee had sayde to Iudas and his company,
I am he.) They fell backward. Iohn. 8. 58. Therefore let me conclude this, with this exhortation of our saui∣our Ioh. 18. 5. to his Apostles, beleeue yee in GOD, beleeue also in Iesus Ioh. 14. 1. 2. Christ. The third name, which de∣clareth the essence of God, is יה IAH, an abstract of IEHOVAH: signyfying Christ humbled and abased in the flesh. And as E sheweth the pre∣sence of God, in his might and gouernement with ELOAH. So doth IAH denote to vs the essence of God, as well as IEHOVAH. As you may reade in the 146. Psal. In which the office of Christ is very plainelye set foorth: to bee the Creator of the worlde, and faithfull in his promises, who feedeth the hungrye, re∣leaseth
prisoners, giueth sight to the blinde, raiseth the crooked, loueth the righteous, keepeth them that are destitute of worldly succour, releeues fatherlesse and widdows: and ouerthroweth the way of the wicked. For he came to destroy sinne, and therefore Dauid in this place saith further, blessed is he, that hath the God of Iacob for his helpe: and shut∣teth vp this Psalme with HALLE∣LV-IAH. And that this is spoken of Christ: will more plainely appeare, when the new testament is compared with this Psalme. Euen the workes of Christ, which he did amongst the Iewes, as he himselfe said, if ye will not beleeue mee, because the Prophets beare witnesse of me: yet beleeue for the very workes sake.
Also he saith, if I had not done workes amongst them, that no man could doe, then had they not sinne, but now are they without excuse. Therefore when Iohn Baptist, sent his disciples to Christ: for the instructing of them in the faith of the true Messiah. Our sauiour had recourse to this, 146. psal. and said, go tell Iohn: the blind see, the lame are made whole, the dead are rai∣sed vp, the deafe heare, the poore Luk. 7. 22. receiue the gospell, and blessed is he that is not offended in mee. And the children of God, which were deliuered from the bon∣dage For he was Sa∣tans in∣strument to af∣flict the church. of sinne, the tyrannye of Sathan † and the Pope, by Christ: sing HALLELV-IAH, which is in English, prayse yee the eter∣nall.
Let vs therefore in our prayers,  and in all our songes of reioycing: also praise God for our deliue∣raunce, from the slauery of sinne and Satan. And for our happye deliueraunce from Romish Babell: God giuing vs free liberty, to prayse him in the congregation: yea to pay the praises of God with the Prophet Dauid in psalme. 56. 12. יהוה אהיה יה Because hee hath deliuered our life from death, and our feete from falling, praysed be IAH, A∣men. ab היה esse. The three names of God, that put vs in minde of his presence and power be these, EL, ELOAH and ELOHIM, which are all of one signification: declaring to vs, that our God is strong, against whome, there is no resistance.
Conso∣lation to the chil∣dren of God. Therefore what greater comfort אל אלוה אלהים Fortis victor. can a Christian haue then this: The Lorde is on my side, I willnot feare what man can doe vnto mee. For the mighty God is my refuge, euen the God of Iacob, is my de∣fence. God is terrible to the wicked. And what a terror is it to the wicked, that God euen the strong one, is against them, ready to send them to vtter confusion when it pleaseth him: bee they neuer so strong and mighty here? Therfore a little, is better to the Godlye: then much spoyles, and the great wealth of the wic∣ked. For they stand in slipperye places. ELOHIM, also importeth the tri∣nity, Elohim the plural of Elo∣ah: when it is either ioyned with a verbe of the singuler number,
as Gen. 1. In the beginning, Gods, he When it impor∣teth the Trinitie. made heauen and earth. And ELO∣HIM he sayd, Let there be light. And againe, ELOHIM said, Let vs make man: with many such like places, as Deuter. 10. Exod. 8. and when this Nowne Plurall is ioy∣ned with a Relatiue singular, as Iosu. 24. but most liuely doth the 35. Chapter and 7. verse of Genesis, expresse the Trinitie. And Iacob built there an Alter, and called the name of the place ELDETHEL, because, (saith he) KI SHAM NIGLV ELAV HA ELOHIM. Quia reuclati sunt ad eum dij, be∣cause Gods were there reuealed vnto him: where it importeth the Trinitie, and most liuely sheweth the three persons in the Deity. First, ELOHIM importeth the In how many di∣uers sen∣ces this worde is vsed in the scrip∣tures. Trinitie, as Gen. 1. Iosu. 24. Gen. 35. 7.
Secondly, this name is giuen to false Gods, as Deut. 5. 7. Thirdly, to men in office, as Deut 1. Also where God saith to Moses, I haue made thee Pharaohs God. Fourthly, to Angels, as Psal. 8. GOD, also calleth himselfe שדי God v∣seth this name for the strēg∣thning of his chil∣dren in faith and obedience as, Gen. 17. SHADDI, which signifieth Om∣nipotent, Al-sufficient. Some lear∣ned deriue this word of SHAEL, which in the Hebrew tongue sig∣nifieth a womans Brest, or Pap: tea∣ching vs thus much: that as the mother doth nourish and che∣rish, her young childe, by the milke of her brests: Euen so doth the Lord his children, with his grace and louing kindnesse. Gen. 28 S. Ie∣rom. Other learned say, it is a com∣pound word of SHE, the Rela∣tiue,
and DAI, which signifieth a∣boundancy, sufficiencie, and plen∣tie, for he not onely aboundeth with all good things himselfe: but Iohn. 1. 14. 16. also giueth aboundantly to all. For of his fulnesse wee receiue Tim: 6. 17. grace for grace. And therefore the Apostle Paul, willeth men not to trust in vncertaine riches: but in God that giueth aboundantly to all. Yea, this word SHADDAI doth not only signifie, that God is Almightie and Al-sufficient, but that he affecteth all things in all creatures, to which sence, Saint Paul alludes, when he saith, God Act. 17 24. 5. 6. 7. that made the worlde, and all things that are therein, seeing that he is Lorde of Heauen and Earth: dwel∣leth not in temples made with hands, 1. Cor. 6. neither is worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any things,
seeing he giueth to all, breath, and life, and all things. And hath made of one bloud, all mankinde, to dwell on all the face of the earth. And hath assigned the times, which were or∣dained before: and bonds of their ha∣bitations, that they should seeeke the Lorde: if so be they might haue gro∣ped after him, and founde him, though doubtlesse hee is not farre from euery one of vs. For in him wee liue, and mooue, and haue our being. Also the Apostle saith to the Church of Corinth, there are di∣uersities of operations: But God is the same that worketh all in all. And in the same chapter, ha∣uing repeated diuerse and sun∣drye giftes, hee saith, all these things worketh euen the selfe same
spirit distributing to euery man, seuerally as he will: for of his pro∣uidence, wisedome and bounty, all men and creatures in the world, haue their being, moouing, and liuing, receiuing all from his eter∣nall treasury. These and such like names, bring most heauenly con∣templation, yea and consolation, to the children of God, who are desirous to know their fathers name: so farre forth as he is wil∣ling it shall be knowne, and as he hath reuealed it vnto vs, in his word. Many and most singuler (for heauenly comfort,) are the attri∣butes of God, in the scriptures: as Iust, mercifull, prudent, wise, true, and holy: these and many such like, shew the properties that be in God. Which dooth not onely comfort vs in affliction, but also
leade forwarde, our affections to∣wardes perfection. Therefore, these names are not to be vsed of vs at our pleasure: but with all re∣uerence, least in steade of halow∣ing, we prophaine the name of God; But alas, we stay not in this sinne: but euen many times, blas∣pheme the name of God. Sure∣ly, such as remaine in this despe∣rate sinne, cannot haue any assu∣rance, that, that which they pray for, shall be granted. For Godly his Prophets hath sayd, hee will not here the praiers of such. Yea, those that be scor∣ners Ier. 17. 16. of God, and his word, hath God said, they shall call vpon me, Ezek. 8. 18. when affliction, and anguish shall Prou. 1. 28. fall on them: but I will not an∣sweare. Also against vayne bab∣lers, Pro. 15. 29. hath the Lorde sayde, that
when they crye he will be a farre of. Pro. 15. 29. How much more then, when the blasphemers cryeth: for blasphemers are farre from a bles∣sing, when they call to God, be∣cause they delighte in cursing, and indeede that is their portion from the Lord, Zach. 5. 13. 4. euen curses and woes a whole booke full, and the Wise man saith thus, Eccl. 23. 9. Accustome not thy selfe to swea∣ring: Eccl. 23. 9. (for therein is many falles,) neither take for accustome the na∣ming Also Exo. 20. 7. of the holy one: (for thou shalt not be vnpunished for such things.) cha. 27. 15. For as a seruant which is often Math. 5. 33. punished cannot be without some scar, so he that sweareth, & nameth God continually, shal not be fault∣lesse, and a man that vseth much
swearing, shall be filled with wick∣ednesse, and the plague shall neuer go from his house: when he shall offend, his fault shall be vpon him, and if he knowledge not his sinne, he maketh a double offence: Yea, if he sweare in vaine, he shall not be innocent, but his house shall be∣full of plagues. Thinke vpon this, yee that vse swearing: and learne to halow Gods name, els yee but mock God, in saying (halowed be thy name) and yet profane his sa∣cred name: bind not two sinnes to∣gather for euen in one shalt thou not go vnpunished. And here in this petition by What is here vn∣derstood, by name. name, I vnderstand the power of God, as to cast out deuils in the name of Christ: it was to do it in the power and vertue of Christ.
Also, where the Apostle saith, At the name of Iesus euery knee shall bow, &c. is meant that euery crea∣ture shall be subiect to the power of Christ. Therefore we will con∣clude that man blessed, whose strength is Iehouah Prou: 18. 20. For the name of the Lord, is a strong tower, the righ∣teous runne to it and are exalted. Secondly, note whereas we say What is meant by halowing the name of God in this place halowed be thy name. We do not meane that God, or his name, is vnholy in it selfe: but as it is said of wisedome which is most iust, that shee is iustified of her chil∣dren: (because they so account Sebus: Mun. his, and acknowledge her:) so heere meane wee that by the halowing of Gods name, that hee would graunt vs to confesse, acknowledge, honour, and o∣bay this holye name of his, and
this is the halowing of the name of God. First therefore wee learne from  hence, that both by faith & obedi∣ence, in knowledge & practise, we must sanctifie the name of God. Also, with soule and body, in word and thought, whatsoeuer yee doe in word or deede, do all to the glory of God, saith Paule. Secondly, let vs take heede, that whatsoeuer we aske, it may bee to Gods glory, and that we preferre the glory of God, before any other thing in the world whatsoeuer, and then haue we promise to be heard. The 2. petition, Let thy Kingdome come. THe kingdome of God is three∣fold.
1. His kingdome of power. 2. His kingdome of grace. 3. His kingdome of glory. For the first, that is his king∣dome of power, whereby he cau∣seth all his creatures to serue him: as well bad as good, that is not meant in this place, for God will neuer lessen and take away this his authority: Therefore saith the Psalmist, whatsoeuer it pleased the Lord, that did he in heauen, in earth, in the sea, and in all deepes. But in this place we meane the kingdome of grace, that God would raigne in our hartes, & that he would put to flight, all our old sinnes, both originall, and actuall: that our bodyes might be prepa∣red fit temples for the holy ghost, for this kingdome is neither meat, nor drinke: but righteousnesse,
peace, and ioy in the holye ghost. For this kingdome, comes not by obseruation; but it must be consi∣dered within. And saith that god∣lye Father Theophilact. Nam si quempiam videris, quasi absque carne viuere vitam Euangelicam, an non diceres, quod regnum coelorum iam habet? for if thou shalt see any man to liue an Euangelicall life, as be∣ing not in the flesh, wilt thou not say, that he hath already the king∣dome of God? And in another place he saith, to beleeue aright, and to walke ac∣cordingly, is called to be worthy our vocation, which is indeede to be subiects of this kingdome. And the same author saith, on Mat. chap. 23. vppon these wordes, the Scribes and the Pharises would neither enter into the kingdō of God nor suffer other,
It is, saith he, they would neither be∣leeue in Christ, nor yet suffer others that would. In this petition there∣fore wee pray, that God would raigne in our hearts, by a true and a liuely faith. And if we vnfained∣lie beleeue, we haue the promises of this life, and of that, which is to come. For saith Christ: Seeke first the kingdome of God, and the righte∣ousnesse thereof, and all other things shall be cast vnto you. Also note, that in this petition, we pray for the meanes to beget faith, which is preaching, also for the right vse of the Sacraments, which is a meanes to strengthen our faith: and god∣lie Magistrates, for to keepe the Which is the Church. body in order: and how can any good Christian, but remember our good Prince in his prayers. Praising God for her, and praying
him to prolong her dayes, to raigne long amongst vs here, and after this life, with God for euer. The third kingdome, is the kingdome of glorie, the state of happinesse after this life, which we in deed pray for in this petiti∣on, but it is mediatly, as being first, members of the kingdome of grace: for whome God rules, Rom. 8. them he sanctifieth, and whome hee sanctifieth, them also he iusti∣fieth, and whome he iustifieth, them also he will glorifie. Application. But alas, what shall we say, by such as haue such wauering and vnstedfastnesse in religion: can they pray in hope to be heard? Surely no, for seeing they haue
delighted to wander, saith the Lord, and haue not refrained their seete: therfore when they fast, I will not heare Ier. 14. 10. 11. their crie: and when they offer burnt offrings, and oblations, I will not ac∣cept them. Therefore purge your harts, yee wauering minded men, else are yee not subiects of this kingdome: the admission where∣vnto is by faith: and if yee be not subiects, God taketh you for his enemies, against whome he will execute a heauie iudgement. Luk. 19. 2. 7. Bring hether those mine e∣nemies, that would not I should Luk. 19. 27. raigne ouer them, and slaye them be∣fore me. Oh consider this, yee that forget God,) Least I teare you in peeces, and there be none that can deliuer you, saith the Eternall. But he that offe∣reth praises, shall glorifie me, and to Psa. 50. 32.
him that disposeth his waye aright: will I shewe the saluation of God. The 3. petition. Thy will be done, as in heauen, so also in earth. THis petition rightly, and fitly, agreeth with the former: for in the other, we pray that GOD may rule our hearts to beleeue, which cannot be, if we be vnwil∣ling to doe the will of God our heauenly Father. Therefore apt∣lie wee pray in the next place, for the effects of faith, obedience to Gods lawes, in these wordes, Thy will be done. Which petition hath two prin∣cipall parts, that is:
First, what the will of God is. Secondly, that is not enough to know the same, but to doe it. For the first, the will of God we pray may be done, is his reuealed will in his word. This teacheth vs how precious knowledge is, and that it is a great meanes to make vs able: in some good measure to doe Gods will, for first we must know, what is to be done, before we can doe it. Secondly, it teacheth, that wee must not do our owne wils, eyther in prayer, or in any matter of reli∣gion. For God will be prayed vn∣to, and serued, as he hath comman∣ded in his word, and therefore hee saith, obedience is better then sa∣crifice. Wherefore, let vs looke to our feete, before we come to pray: least we offer the sacrifice of fooles:
and let vs learne the will of God. This saith Christ, is the will of God, to beleeue in him, whome he hath sent, and the Apostle Paule saith. This is the will of God, euen our sanctification. So that here we see, that faith and a holy life, are ioyned together, God requiring the one, of him that hath the other: for indeed they be Relatiues, and S. Iames saith, faith that is without workes, is dead. Yea our sauiour saith, not euery one, that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen: but he that doth the will of my father, which is in heauen. Therefore, whosoe∣uer is truely iustified, is in some good measure sanctified: and in∣deede, faith can no more be with∣out good workes, then fire can be
without heate. The vse. FIrst, we learne to aske nothing in our prayers, which is not a∣greeable to Gods word. Secondly, we learne to take all crosses patiently: that with Christ we may say, not my will, but thine (ô father) be fulfilled. Lastly, we are here taught, to striue towardes perfection, for Gods children haue an earnest desire to doe his will. And with Dauid to say, it is written, (O Lord) in the volume of thy booke, that I shall doe thy will, O God, and loe I come.
Application. SVch therefore, as despise know∣ledge, and set light by the word of God: their prayers will God despise, for saith the Prophet Za∣chary Zach. 7. 13. as God cried to them: and they would not here, so when they cry he will not here them. But where the worde of the Lord is imbrased: there the Lord is nigh to vs in all that wee call vppon him for. Yea they that Deut. 4. 7. keepe Gods commaundements, receiue whatsoeuer they aske, but as for such, as haue no care to doe 1. Ioh. 3 22. Gods will, the Lord is farre from them. Therfore (ô man,) if thou woul∣dest that God should here thy prai∣er, Pro. 15. 29. when thou callest vpon him:
heare thou the Lorde, and amend thy wayes: when by his good spi∣rit he calleth vnto thee, els thy prayer is vaine babling. Pro. 35. 13. The second part of this petition: As in heauen so also in earth. THis saith one, is no otherwise, but as the Angels serue thee in heauen: euen so should we serue thee in earth, with all alacritie and willingnesse, in all humility and faithfulnesse. And howsoeuer no Christian can performe such obe∣dience in this life: yet this petition teacheth, that we ought to haue a desire so to do.
From the consideration of these things we learne three profitable lessons. First that God ought to raigne here in our hartes on earth, as well as hee doth in heauen, but seeing it is not so: how ought we to bee humbled, and cast downe in our selues, when we consider how dis∣obedient we haue beene, to the will of our heauenly father. Secondly, it ought to mooue vs, to all possible thankfulnesse, for our redemption, when wee consi∣der this example of the Angels, who were but once created, but we miserable sinners put God to a new worke, to redeeme vs by the bloud of his owne sonne. Lastly it teacheth vs that we ought to loue God, more then the Angels: in as much as wee haue
put him to a greater busines, and haue receiued greater mercies then they: and they which haue much forgiuen them, ought to Luke. 7. loue much. Application. BEhold thy duty (ô man) consi∣der but the Angels: the scrip∣tures describe them to haue six winges, two to couer their face, by which they signifie to vs, that they are not able to looke into the depth of Gods counsailes, they haue two also to couer their feete, shewing their owne insufficiencie, and vnworthynesse, to serue so glorious a God, yet haue they two wings also about their hart, to sig∣nifie vnto vs, that with hearty o∣bedience, they do the will of God.
Therefore, ô sinfull man, looke to the heauens, and beholde the An∣gels, looke into the firmament, behold the Sunne, the Moone, & the starres, yea in the earth also be∣hold, times and seasons, all these obay Gods will. Therefore ô man∣kinde for whose sake these were created, and for whose sake God, equall to the father, thought it no scorne to take vnto him our na∣ture, and to be our brother accor∣ding to the flesh, that hee might condempne sinne in the flesh: let vs not therefore walke after the flesh, but let our conuersation be in heauen: whether our eldest brother is gone before vs, that in his time we may be with our head Christ Iesus, Amen.
The 4. petition. Giue vs this day our dayly or continuall Bread. O praise the Lord of Lords, for his mercie endureth for euer, which gi∣ueth foode to all flesh, for his mercie endureth for euer, Psal. 136. 2. 25. Bread. לחם THis word Bread, is tooke in di∣uers sences in the Scriptures: whereof there are fiue principall. 1. First, it is taken for bread pro∣perly, as Gen. 14. 18. Exod. 25. 30. Prou. 28. 19. 2. Secondly, for bread corne, as Gen. 47. 15. Iob. 28. 5. 3. Thirdly, it is neither tooke
for bread nor corne, but for Manna Exo. 16. 15. Behold I will raine to you bread frō heauen. Also Psal. 105. 40. he satisfied them with bread from hea∣uen:) which Manna was a figure of Christ, who is the true bread of heauen, and many of the ancient fathers vnderstand by Bread in this petitiō, Christ, who is the true bread of life: whom we are to desire, and pray for, before all other things. 4. Fourthly, it is tooke for sa∣crifices Leuit. 3. 11. Mal. 1. 7. What is meant by bread in this peti∣tion. 5. Lastly, it is taken generally, for all things necessary for this life, as Gen 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face, shalt thou eate thy bread: That is thou shalt get thy liuing. Also in Psal. 38. 25. Which giueth food to all flesh. Also Pro. 30. 8. So doth Treme∣lius vn∣derstand it in his Hebrew catechis∣me. Feed me with food conuenient for me. So likewise in this petition, we
vnderstand saith Bucer, Victum qui∣buscunque Bucer in Mat. 6. pag. 62. vita praesens opus habet: all things that be necessary for this life, from which word wee may consider, the bountifull liberallitie of God, towards all his creatures, but more especially towards man: for whom he both careth and pro∣uideth. And therefore the Apostle in the 1. Tim. 6. saith. Trust not in∣vncertaine riches, but in God that gi∣ueth to all aboundantly. Secondly, this word Our bread, doth not import that it is ours by Riches are not ours pro∣perly, but lent vs, and wee are stew∣ards of them, & must giue account for them. desert, but being got with a good conscience: not by defrauding of our brother any way, that so we may eate our owne bread. The which cannot be, except we liue in a lawfull calling. Oh thou that hast no calling, or an vnlawfull
calling, how canst thou say this pe∣tition? Let gamesters, and such as haue no lawfull calling, consider, in what state they stand in, and let them (saith the Apostle,) rather la∣bour with their hands, for he that will not labour, let him not eate. Our continuall or dayly Bread. BY this word continuall or daylye Bread, I gather these lessons. 1. First, that none must aske ri∣ches, or any other thing to satisfie the flesh withall, for because Salo∣mon did neither aske riches, honor, not long life but wisedome: there∣fore the Lord gaue them al to him. So that the like was not vnto Salo∣mon, 2. Chro. 1. 12. before nor since, for wise∣dome, riches, and honor. 2. Secondly, it teacheth vs, that
euery day we must come to God by prayer. 3. Thirdly, these words (daily bread) or as in Luk. 11. (Bread for the day.) It teacheth vs this lesson, not to haue any mistrustfulnesse of Gods promises, nor vse no vnlaw∣full meanes to get our liuing, see∣ing the Lord is faithfull, that hath said, I will not leaue thee, nor forsake Heb. 11 thee. Yea the scriptures say; cast your care vpon God, for he careth for you: Math. 6. and knoweth whereof yee haue neede before ye aske. Neither will he that clotheth the Lillies, & fee∣deth Rauens, suffer any of his to want their food. For if God cloath the grasse of the field, which to day flourisheth, and to morrow is cut downe. Then much more will he man: whome he hath so dearely loued, and so dearly bought. And
this made Dauid say: The Lions shal Psal. 34. be hunger bit: but those that feare God, shall lacke nothing. Beleeue we not this (O we of little faith,) are we like the Israelites in the wilder∣nesse, to tempte God? or are we as incredulous, as the Prince that told the Prophet, though God should 2. Kings 7. 17. make wonders in heauen, yet that great dearth could not be turned into such a plentie, as God by his Prophet tolde it should be? And surely infidelitie and vnthankful∣nesse, is the cause of all wante. Therefore if we would want no∣thing, let vs trust God (ô we of lit∣tle faith,) then, fides Famem non ti∣met: Faith feareth not Dearth. Giue. So the word in the originall, sig∣nifieth Gen. 3. 20. to giue, or bestow freely. Psa. 4. 7.
From which, we learne these lessons. Pro. 23. 26. First, that all we haue, commeth Ps. 104. from God, and therefore whether Gen. 43 14. we haue little or much: we must giue him praise for the same. Isa. 9. 6. Secondly, that man may toyle and labour, and if God giue not a blessing all is in vaine, for saith Dauid, promotion is neither from the east nor from the west: but of the Lord. Therefore (ô rich man,) seeing thou hast nothing of thy selfe: but all that thou hast, thou hast recei∣ued, boast not of it, as if thou hadst not receiued it, neither be thou proud, of that which is not thine owne. To vs. BY this, we learne euery one, to seeke anothers good, and eue∣ry
man to pray for the good of his brother. Not like Ahab, neuer to be at rest, till we haue got Naboths Iob. 31. 19. vineyarde. But with Iob, not to eat our morselles alone, but the fa∣therlesse to eate with vs: neither to see any perish for want of clo∣thing, but to couer them, that whē the Lorde shall call vs to account for these earthly riches: we may be found faithfull stewards▪ & hauing beene faithfull in small matters, he The old Pro∣uerbe e∣uery mā for him∣selfe, but true di∣uinitie teacheth, one for another, and God for vs all. may make vs rulers ouer greater: saying wel done, faithfull seruāts & true, enter into your maisters ioy. Application. BVt what shall a man say to these last dayes, wherein charity is waxed cold, & men do not relieue, but reuile the poore members of Christ, shall such men bee heard,
when they pray? or doe they vn∣derstand what they pray when they say (Giue vs) and yet are for no man but themselues? Surely these men are no better, then moc∣kers of this heauenly prayer, and therefore, bootelesse is it for them to call vpon the Lord: For Salomon hath told them, they shall not be Pro. 21. 13. hard † yea and he that iniureth the poore, doth as one, that sacrifiseth Eccle. 34. 21. the sonne before the fathers eyes. Therefore, if any would haue his prayers hard of God, to whome he is a begger: let him shew mer∣cy here to his brother. That with hart, as well as with tongue, he may say this petition, least there be iudgement mercilesse, to him that sheweth no mercy: other∣wise Iam. 2. 13. make they neuer so faire a shew of religion, all is hipocrisie.
And God will not here the prayers of hipocrites, Iob. 27. 9. Wherefore (ô rich men) here the counsaile of Daniel: Breake of your sinnes by righ∣teousnesse, Dan. 4. 24. and your iniquities, by mer∣cy towardes the poore: and let there be a healing of this errour. The 5. petition. And forgiue vs our debts, euen as we forgiue our debtors. LEt vs consider, that this follo∣weth the other petition very fitly, for in the former we begge foode of God, to the end our life might be preserued: in this we beg remissiō of sins, that we may liue in God. In the former we aske those things which concerne this life:
but in these two latter, those things which concerne vs here-after. These petitions as all the former, are grounded on Gods promises, if we haue a repenting hart. Their iniquities (saith GOD) I will Ier. 31. 34. forgiue, and remember their sinnes no more. Forgiue. Selach signifieth freely to forgiue, as 1. Ki. 8. 36. THe First word of this petition which is forgiue, teacheth vs, that we are saued & imputed righ∣teous through faith in Christ only, Psa. 103 2. and without any of our own good Psal. 86. & 130. 4 workes, for saith Paule, we are iusti∣fied freely by faith, not of workes, al∣so, Rom. 3. 14. we haue the forgiuenesse of our sins through his rich grace: for by grace Rom. 9. 11. are we saued through saith, not of our selues, it is the gift of god. Thus was Rom. 11. 6.
Mary, Peter, and the publican saued, yea, all are saued by grace. This must teach vs humility, and not to say, I thanke thee, ô Lord I am not like this publican: but to say with Paule, But pa∣pists that say they cā merit heauen are the successors of the proud Pharises, and Pub∣licans shall be iustified before them. Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners: of whom I am cheife, and then if we humble our selues, God will exalt vs. Secondly, the word, (forgiue) teacheth vs, that we ought to con∣fesse our sinnes to God: that so we may finde mercy, for Dauid said whilst I helde my tongue my bones consumed. Therefore he confessed Psal. 32. to the Lord his owne wickednes against himselfe, and he forgaue the wickednes of his sinnes: & Iob saith, though God should kill me, yet wil I trust in him, & I will reproue my Iob. 13. 15. wayes in his sight. Also wise Salomon giues vs this lesson, he that hideth
his sinnes, shall not prosper, but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, he shall haue mercy. Iust Iob, confessed his sinnes, so did Dauid and the prodi∣gall sonne, also the Publican and the theife on the crosse. Thus by these examples we see that confession of sinnes, must go before remissiō. If thy sinne be pri∣uate, then confession to God, may be priuat, but if it be publique, then must there bee publique confession, that the Church may take notice of thy true contri∣tion. Thirdly, it teacheth vs the great  patience of God, in not confoun∣ding of vs when we haue first sin∣ned, but suffering vs so long, and giuing vs space to repent. This patience of God saith Saint Pe∣ter, should leade vs to repentance,
and not to say with the foole, tush God seeth it not. The Prophet Dauid saith, the Lord is full of mercy, and of great goodnes, but he also saith, if a man will not turne, he will bend his bow and whet his sworde. And the longer hee deferreth his punish∣ment, the higher he heaueth his hand, the greater will the blow bee. Therefore though God haue but a leaden heele: yet hath he Psal. 2. an Iron scepter. Thus much of the first word forgiue. Vs, or to vs. BY this word (vs,) we are taught to pray for the saluation of our brethren, yea of all, if it were Gods will, by the example of Saint Paule, who could haue wished to haue
beene seperate from God, for his countrie mens sake the Iewes. But few go so farre with Paule, for if they wish their friendes any thing, it is rather worldly wealth, honor, and dignity, then the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and increase of spiritu∣all graces, forgetting Christ his wordes, what will it profit a man to winne the whole world, and to lose his owne soule? but this is the frailenes of our flesh, and sinnefull nature, to be more prone to earthly pro∣fis, then feruently to desire, hea∣uenly blessinges. Our debts. Breach of the lawe is debt, which is our sins. INdeede sinnes are rightly our debtes. Which make vs indeb∣ted vnto God by transgression of his diuine law. Alas, goodnesse was
once ours, but we in our first pa∣rents lost the very will of dooing well, how much more the power to do well. So that God now saith, Gen. 6. the thoughts of mans heart are altoge∣ther euill. Therfore sinnes are right∣ly ours now indeed. The blessed Apostle Saint Iames, sheweth this, where he prooued that God temp∣teth none to doe euill, but all such temptations are of our selues, and Rom. 8. he saith further, whence are wars, se∣dition and enuyings, are they not euen of your selues? yea the Apostle Paule, The con∣fession of Paule differeth from the preten∣ded Ca∣tholique. that chosen vessell, could say, I know in me, (that is in my selfe) dwelleth no good thing, and howsoeuer to will is present with me, yet I finde by the law of God, that I do that which I should not doe.
Debts. Well may our sinnes, the breach of the law, be called Debts: tel∣ling vs of our neglect of duty, and of our playing the bankrupts, with the graces of the good spirit of God, as also to bind vs to the iudge∣ment seat of God, laying before vs the haynousnesse of our sinnes, and the ritch mercy of God in Christ, who when we had nothing to pay, forgaue vs all. The second part of the fift Petition. As we forgiue our debters. This forgiuenesse of our bre∣thren, it is a sure testimony, that God in the first place hath forgi∣uen vs, and so saith Saint Iohn, by
this we know, we are translated from death to life, because we loue the bre∣thren, and Christ his commande∣ment is, be yee mercifull, as your hea∣uenly father is mercifull O how can they looke for mercy which conti∣nue in malice, for Christ hath said it, (therefore it is true) With what measure you meate to others, it shall be measured to you againe. Therefore let not the sunne go downe on thy wrath: for what knowest thou (ô man) whether thou shalt liue till to morrow, and if thou shouldst dye in malice, thou dyest not in God, for God is loue: In the feare of God consider this, and first be reconciled vnto thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, for if (saith the Wiseman) one pray, and another curse, which will God heare. Nay such as bee full of
cruelty and reuengement, what in this Petition do they pray for? but this, that Gods curse and ven∣geance might light on them, there∣fore, whosoeuer thou art, that ca∣riest malicious minde to thy bro∣ther: thou art altogether vnfit to say this prayer, or any holy prayer. Yea, and God will not heare thee, when thou callest vnto him, when thou stretchest forth thy hands, he will hide his eyes. And though Isai. 1. 15. thou make many prayers, yet will he not heare thee: because thy Mic. 3. 1 hands are full of bloud. Therefore take the aduise of Christ; First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. But here may arise a doubte, whether that God will heare me or no, see∣ing I confesse my selfe to be a sin∣ner: 1. Pet. 4. 17. and Salomon saith, God heareth
not sinners. How therefore will He is a sinner that be∣leeues not the gospel this stand with this petition? very well: for by sinners in that place, is meant such as be not incorpo∣rate into Christ: and such as de∣light and continue in their sinne, 1. Ioh. 2 and such men indeede God will Rom. 4. 25. not heare. But they that haue put on the righteousnesse of Christ, by Heb. 9. 26. a true and a liuely faith, them will God heare: and for their sinnes, was Christ the reconciliatiō. Ther∣fore, Iere. 50. 20. with Ieremie, let vs say, and beleeue, That Gods mercie maketh sinners pure: for God imputeth not sinne to his faithfull children, Psalm. 32. 2. Obiection. Yea, but how saith S. Iohn: that they which are borne of God, sinne not, and, That hee that committeth
sinne is of the deuill, but euery man sinneth, and euery one commit∣teth sinne? Answere. That is true: But if you well ob∣serue the words before, and consi∣der the drift of S. Iohn, you shall plainely see, that he meaneth, such as are of the deuil, as perseuer with willingnesse in sinne: euen such, as in whom sinne raignes in their mortall bodyes. But vnder that power of sinning, cannot the chil∣dren of God be, because the spirit of God, checketh and correcteth, their euill and corrupt affections. For this victory ouer sinne, and death, hath Christ giuen vs that beleeue. Giuing vs both a will, and a feruent 1. Cor. 15. 57. desire, to doe his commaundements. And this is his commandement, that we beleeue in Iesus Christ, and loue one
another: for he tbat keepeth this com∣mandement, 1. Ioh. 3 23. 24. dwelleth in him, and he in him, and hereby know we that he abidetb in vs, euen by the spirit which he hath giuen vs. The 6. petition. And leade vs not into temptation, but The word Temptati∣on, is of a verbe that signifieth to lift vp, shewing that God somtimes prooues is childrē further & higher by degrees, as he did A∣braham, Gen.  also Heb. 11. For first he tempted but in cō∣manding him to go out of his owne coū∣trie. Se∣condly by Sarahs cō∣ception, who be∣ing past age, and was as dead in regarde of strength of nature: and third∣ly God tempted him in of∣fring vp his onely sonne Isaack, of whom it was said, in Isaack shall thy seede be called, therefore is Abram called the Father of the faith∣full. deliuer vs from euill. IN the former petitions, we beg∣ged pardon for sinnes past, and here we craue Gods grace, to resist sinnes to come. And surely if we looke into our selues, how prone we be to fall, we shall see that we had need to craue of God, that we come not into temptation, for that Satan intendeth euill towards vs, and surely, as S. Iames saith, God tem∣teth none to euill, but man is eyther tempted by his lustes, as the Apo∣stle
obserueth, which is a volun∣tary temptation, as drunkennesse, whoredome, theft, and such like, are voluntarie temptations, or else by cruell tyrants, to do that which is against religion and consci∣ence, and this is called vnuolun∣tary temptation, when wee are compelled by force, to do against Gods lawes, these temptations we are not to desire. But if any such happen, the Apostle Iames willeth vs, to account it exceeding ioye, and sheweth the benefits that fol∣low to them that feare God, and if God tempt or prooue his chil∣dren, it is to manifest their faith to the world, and for example to o∣thers: so he tempted Abraham in offering his sonne Isaack: also the Israelites and Iob; yea indeede he tempted all his children so, and
his onely Sonne also, that we might not thinke much, nor faint in our temptations. And therefore said Moses to the children of Israel: Yee shall not feare, because the Lorde commeth to tempt you, for he com∣meth to tempt you, to manifest what is in thy heart: But Satan he doth it to an euill end, Yea euer when he tempteth, it is not for conuer∣sion, but subuersion of the party he tempteth, and this is euident through all the Byble. But what shall we say of those which are dead in sinne, and haue no feeling of temptation, nor remorse of conscience, (O God deliuer vs from that euill.)
The second part of the sixt petition. But deliuer vs from euill. THerefore in the next place we pray, that God would Deliuer vs from euill: that is saith olde and new writers from the Diuell, which is indeede the very fountaine of euill. Thus we pray not simply a∣gainst temptation, but against the euill of temptation, for we see our sauiour was tempted with three capitall & great temptations, such as fewe of the best members do withstand, and what were they? Theophilact telleth thee, they were auaritia, Gula, etinanis gloria, coue∣tousnes, gluttony, and vaine glory. Consider therefore him that was equall to God, yea thought it no
robbery to be so: yet for thy sake he tooke to him the shape of a ser∣uant, and euen was buffeted of Satan, that he might the better strengthen those, that are tempted (was not all for thy sake ô vnthank∣full Heb. 2. mankinde;) learne therefore to take vp his yoke, for it is easie, and the burden light, and God is faithfull that will not suffer thee to bee tempted aboue that thou art a∣ble, but in all our temptations hee will giue vs a happy issue, which God grant vnto vs, Amen. The Conclusion. For thine is that kindome, the power and the glory for euer, and euer Amen. The first part FOr thine is that kingdom, this she∣weth Reue. 21 vs a reasō, why we should
pray, to God onely, because he on∣ly is King, and to him we owe this duty, therefore the Angell told Iohn in the reuelation, that he must wor∣ship Reu. 21. God, for he was but his fellow seruant. Obiection. Why, Dauid saith, the earth is the Lords, with the fulnes therof, the roūd world and they that dwel therein, why therfore say you (that Kingdome?) Answere. Surely God ruleth all Kingdomes indeed, & preserueth bad to, from outward dangers, as you may read in Dan. ch. 5. also Ester ch. 16. 16. but here we speake of the Kingdome of grace: by which God rules in the harts of his childre after a more peculiar manner, & therefore well may we say (that kingdome,) for he sheweth (Mysteria regni) the miste∣ryes of that kingdome to his chosen, but
he hath not dealt so with euery nation. The second part of the conclusion. The power. THe Lorde our God, is a God of Gods and Lord of Lordes, a great God, mighty and terrible, which accepteth no persons, nor taketh rewardes, and this is the se∣cond reasō, why we ought to pray to God, because all power is his, and he onely able to helpe vs. In the first place, as he is, our king, he willes our good, & as he is of pow∣er, he is able to performe, what him∣selfe pleaseth. Therfore are we to pray to him, that he would preserue vs, & keepe vs, reade Num. cha. 6. 24. But alas, how often hath God manyfested his
power to euery one of vs, so that we may say with Moses, there is nei∣ther God in heauen nor in earth, that could do like thy workes and like thy power. How did the Lord manifest his power against the cruel & blou∣dy spaniards in 1588. yea and how hath he diuerse and sundry times ouerthrowne our enimies since, hath not this father of ours, pre∣serued our gracious Queene most miraculously? from secret conspi∣racy and most vile treachery? (oh) that we would therefore, praise the Lord for his goodnesse, & declare the wonders he doth for vs in this little Iland. Hast thou remembred Gods power, in deliuering thee from Satan and sinne, and for pre∣seruing thee all thy life: (oh thou redeemed Christian) thou subiect of the realme of England? say thou
with Dauid, Psal. 106. 2. who can ex∣presse the noble acts of the Lord, or shew forth all his power. The third part of the conclusion. And the glory. THou art worthy O Lord to receiue glory, honour and power, for thou Reue. 4. 11. hast created all things, and for thy willes sake they are and haue beene created. And the blessed Apostle S. Paule saith, whatsoeuer we do, it must be to Gods glory, for that is his due, and our duty. Therfore well said a learned writer on this place, Habes hic etiam causam, cur nullae omnino creaturae sint inuocandae, quia ipsarum non est regnum, non habent omnipo∣tentiam, nec debetur illis ea gloria. (that is to say) thou hast here also
the cause why no creatures are to be called vpon at all because (saith he) the kingdome is not of them, neither haue they the power, nei∣ther Illiricus pa. 325. may that glory bee due vnto them. Wherefore, let vs say, with the Prophet Dauid in Psa. 108. 5. my hart is prepared, O God, so is my tonge, I will sing and giue praise. (And) ex∣alt thy selfe O God aboue the heauens: and thy glory aboue all the earth: and let vs as (Ieremy exhorteth) giue Ier. 13. 16. glory to the Lord our God, for he is the king of glory. Yea, and he onely is Psal. 24. 8. to haue glory, for he will not giue his glory to another. And for this end are Isai. 48. 11. we saued, euen to the praise of the glo∣ry of his grace, wherewith he hath made vs accepted in his beloued son, by whom, we haue redemption through his Ephes. 1. 6. 7. bloud, euen the forgiuenes of our sinnes through his rich grace.
The last reason of the conclusion, why we must pray to God. For euer, and euer. THat is, thou must not pray so, this yeare, & that, for thy Gods name is IEHOVAH, (that is the eter∣nall,) and his time cannot be dimi∣nished. Isai. 50. Therefore is he called the auncient of dayes, and Dauid saith, the heauens wax olde, but thou art the same for euer: for his power is not dimi∣nished, nor his hand shortned; Therefore continue thy prayers onely to him, and rob him not of his glory, doe thy duty betimes and God will rewarde thee in his time Eccle. 51. 30. (saith the Wiseman) for the Lord is neare to all them that call vpon him, to all that call vpon him in truth,
he will fulfill the desires of them that feare him, he will heare their cry, and Psa. 145 18. 19. will saue them. Amen. OVr Christ is Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, who hath The seale of faith. commaunded vs to begin and end our prayers in faith. And he tolde his Apostles, and in them vs, that whatsoeuer we aske, beleeue we shall re∣ceiue it, and we shall receiue it. Thus Amen, is diuersly taken in the scrip∣tures, and many profitable signi∣fications, arise from the roote in the holy Hebrew, I will but onely name some of them, leauing them to thy consideration, and so I com∣mit thee to God. First, it signifieth trueth, second∣ly, faith, thirdly, stedfastnesse, and perseueraunce, and surely most pro∣fitable
lessons may we learne from these. First, to come before God in  truth, without any hypocriticall shew, for he is the God of truth, & hath assumed the name of (Amen) to himselfe. Secondly, it teacheth vs faith,  to beleeue God in his promises for all the promises of God in Christ are yea, and Amen. Thirdly, that we must not bee  vnconstant in our prayers, for then Iam. 1. S. Iames telleth vs that we shall re∣ceiue Luk. 18. 4. nothing. Fourthly, it teacheth vs perseue∣raunce,  to continue in prayer. Fiftly, Amen is truely, which is a kind of oath, shewing that we must  not deliuer vp our prayers coldly, but in vehemency of spirit. Also Pagnine saith, it is Constitutum, a matter throughly determined that
so our prayers be not a sacrifice of Fooles. And lastly in this place it is an earnest wishing, that, that we haue prayed for, may come so to passe, & so is it vsed at the end of all prayers, through the Bible, in this sence, (so be it.) As Deut. 27. 1. Kin. 1. Nom. 5. Ier. 28. Psal. 95. Reuel. 1. Here followeth a table, shewing the agreement betweene the Lords prayer, and the ten comman∣dements of Almighty God. The Preface to the Reader. NOw I remember the saying of the Greeke Father Theophilact, that if the Lawe and the Gospell, were compared together, there is Christ reuealed in the midst of both. And surely, at the mouth of two or three witnesses, is euery word established. Seeing therfore,
Christ hath taught vs a praier, agree∣ing to the commandements: let vs not thinke the sonne of God came to giue liberty to sin, but indeed to deliuer vs from sinne: yea Zachary saith in Luke, though we serue him with Luke. 1. out feare, yet it is, in holinesse and righteousnesse, all the dayes of our life. Therfore said a godly father, vpon Luk. 9. where it is said, that Moses & Elias were with Christ, when he praied in the Mount: this sheweth (saith he) that he was no aduersary, nor contrary, either to the lawe, or Prophets. And that this may more plainly appeare, behold the table, I haue here set down, for thy further instruction; & chiefly for their in∣struction who talke so much of Christian libertie, that their life is nothing, but licencialitie. Now followeth the Table.
Psalme 119. verse. 130. The entrance into thy words sheweth light, and giueth vnderstanding to the simple. The Preface of the Lawe. I Am IEHOVAH thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Ae∣gipt, and out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt haue none other Gods before my face. Thou shalt make thee no grauen im∣age, neither any similitude of things that are in heauen aboue, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters vnder the earth. Thou shalt not howe to them, neither serue them: for I am Iehouah thy God, a iealous God, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the children, vpon the third generation, and vpon the fourth of them that hate me: and shew∣ing mercy vnto thousands, to thē that loue me & keepe my commandements.
The Preface of the Lordes prayer. Our Father which art in heauen. THis preface of the Lords pray∣er very aptlye agreeth with these two first commandements: For it teacheth vs that our Father is Iehouah Elohim, the blessed Tri∣nitie, as that reuerend Father Bi∣shop Babington, hath well obserued on this place. The word Father teacheth vs, that we are sonnes of God, & that is, by grace and adoption in Christ, and telleth our conscience, that he hath deliuered vs from Egipt, that is, from the power of Satan, and from the cursed Pope. And there∣fore the godly in the Reuelation
are bid to come out of Egipt, of bondmen he hath made vs free, and therefore him we ought to serue, and none else, yea alone to pray to him, to honor, obay, and serue him, and feruently to loue him, as a childe doth his father. Neither ought we to pray to saint or picture of any: but to him that is almightie. The worde Heauen, sheweth he onely ought to be fea∣red, and that he alone is holy, to whome belongeth all holy wor∣ship, neither must any be worship∣ed but he, least the all seeing God looke downe from heauen and punish vs. Thou shalt not take the name of Ie∣houah  thy God in vaine, for Ieho∣uah will not holde him guiltlesse, that taketh his name in vaine.
Remember the Sabboth day to keepe it holy. Six dayes shalt thou labour and do all thy worke, but the seauenth day, is the Sabboth of Iehouah thy God, in it thou shalt not doe any worke, thou nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy man seruant, nor thy maide, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six dayes Iehouah made the heauens and the earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seauenth day: Therefore Iehouah blessed the Sabboth day, & halowed it. Halowed be thy name: answereth  fitly to the third commandement. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be done, as in heauen,  so also in the earth: agreeth with the fourth commandement. This king∣dome is in righteousnesse, and peace, and ioy, in the holy Ghost.
The onely meanes to attaine this, is by beleeuing in Christ, and see∣ing faith is by hearing the worde preached, therefore hath God or∣dained one day of seauen for that purpose. For surely he that keepeth not the Sabboth day, which was ordained to meditate on Gods workes, and to heare Gods worde preached, can neither be skilfull rightly to know, the vse of creatiō and redemption: and if he be ig∣norant in this, neither is God his King, nor he anye way fit to doe Gods will, for that is farre more hard to attaine to, then but barelie to know it: & surely if any should aske me the cause, of so much lose∣nesse in our conuersation, and so great blindnesse in this glorious time of the Gospel, I should say, it was the neglect of the Saboth day.
Therfore I would desire all Chris∣tians, to remember when God bids vs remember, and especiallie the Magistrate in his place, that where no conscience of this dutye is, there may be correction duly ad∣ministred. For the neglect of this commandement, is the cause of breaking all the rest, and it is the very gate either to knowledge, or an entrance for all the workes of darkenes. (Consider Christian reader) if the Lordes day were kept of euery one, and spent in rea∣ding & hearing Gods word prea∣ched, what delight & knowledge, would it bring thee to, in a very short space. Therefore saith God remember to do my will, not thine owne. Neither can we pray thy kingdome come, and let vs do thy will: when in deed Gods will is,
we should spend the day in hea∣ring, reading, and meditating, of his meruelous workes, both of cre∣ation, and redemption, Thus we see the three petitions Sab. Mun. on the 5. of Mat. answer to the foure first cōmande∣ments: both, liuely shewing our duty to God, for frō the first table, I vnderstand the whole worship of God, namely faith in God, feare of God, confidence & loue of God, euen as it is said, thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thy hart, with all thy soule, and in thy whole endeuour, for loue, trust, faith, and feare, are in the hart, and in them consisteth the true wor∣ship of God. The second table of the law. Honor thy father and thy mother that thy daies may be prolonged vpō the land
which Iehouah thy God giueth thee. This saith Paule was the first com∣mandement with promise. Thou shalt not kill. Christ expoundeth this in Mat. 5. The second part of the Lords praier. Giue vs this day our daily bread.  This sheweth that we may lawfully pray for earthly things that are ne∣cessary, but God euer maketh the disobediēt to parents to want, or at leastwise curseth the labour of their hands, for the lord hath said, cursed is he that curseth father or mother. Therefore Salomon saith, his light shalbe put out in obscure darkenes. This was the first commandement with the promise of Canaan annex∣ed to it, which was the land that had aboundance of earthly riches and was a figure of heauen.
Forgiue vs our debtes as wee forgiue our debtors, which teach∣eth  vs, that we must not onely do no murther, but euē shew no crab∣bed looke, nor to vse a churlish word, nor conceiue a hatefull ire, against our brother. So far should we be from making him our prey, as euer we should remēber him to God in our prayers, this our saui∣our taught expounding this com∣mandement in the fift of Mathew. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steale. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse  againe thy neighbour. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours  house, neither shalt thou couet thy neighbours wife, nor his man seruant, nor his maid, nor his oxe, nor his asse, neither any thing that is thy neigh∣bours.
Leade vs not into temptation  but deliuer vs from euill. This an∣swereth to the foure last comman∣dements, for man is most subiect to be ouercome by these workes of the flesh, which are adultery, theft, lying and couetousnes. And so the sum of the second table, is to loue our neighbour as our selues. But deliuer vs from euill, sheweth, we are to desire that God would grant vs his assistance, to walke in obedience to his holy commāde∣ments: and this ought euer to be the desire of all Christians, in their prayers to God, as is shewed be∣fore. Thus beloued brethren we see that the law is holy and good, also that Christ came not to destroy the law, or to giue men liberty to sin, but to establish the same, and to
fulfill the same, which none but he could doe: therefore in a worde, know the vse and end of the law. The vse is, that we should striue towardes perfection: and bring  forth fruite, as beseemeth trees of Gods planting. The end is, that  our own infertility, & barennesse, should make vs confesse, the equi∣ty of the law, the iniquity of our selues, and the euerlasting mercy of God: for wheras by the law we are vnder the curse, because it con∣cludeth all vnder sinne. By the Gospell, we are made happy through faith in the sonne of God, for that which the law could not doe, Christ did, for he turned the wa∣ter into wine, (saith Theophilact) and that, that was not able to norish vs, he hath made good to vs, and pro∣fitable for vs. And whereas before,
we were bond men vnder the law, that is the curse: we are now made free men, by him which became a curse for vs, yea he hath made vs a chosen generation a royall priesthood Titus. 2. 14. a holy nation, a pecultar people: let vs not now therfore sinne, that grace 1. Pet. 2. 9. may abound, God forbid that wee should do so, for if we be his cho∣sen, we haue crucified the flesh, & with Paule we must be crucified to the world, and the world to vs, so we may be the more able to resist sathan, when he shall tempt vs in our prai∣ers, or otherwise, & let vs that pro∣fesse Christ, walke as Christ hath walked; and aboue all things, let vs not faint in our praiers: for if we be faithful, God is louing & merciful, and he wil giue whatsoeur we haue neede of, for as the Psalmist saith, there is no good thing; that he with∣holdeth
from them that feare him. Now the God of peace, that brought againe from the dead the Lord Iesus, Heb. 13 20. the great shepheard of the sheepe, through the bloud of the euerlasting couenant, make vs perfit in all good workes, to do his will: working in vs that which is pleasant in his sight through Iesus Christ: to whome be praise for euer and euer. Amen. FINIS.
