22372 99850001 15182
A LOOKING-GLASSE FOR THE POPE. Wherein HE MAY SEE HIS owne Face, the expresse Image of ANTICHRIST. Together with THE POPES NEW CREEDE, containing 12. Articles of superstition and treason, set out by Pius the 4. and Paul the 5. masked with the name of Catholike Faith: Refuted in two Dialogues. Set forth by LEONEL SHARPE Doctor in Diuinitie, And translated by EDWARD SHARPE Bachelour in Diuinitie. 1. KING. 18. How long will you halt betweene two religions? if GOD be GOD follow him, if Baal be GOD follow him. LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN dwelling in the little old Bayly neere the Kings-head. 1616.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY to the most Reuerend Cler∣gie of ENGLAND. IT must not seeme strange (most Reuerend Fa∣thers in GOD, and my much beloued Bre∣thren) if, seeing the Captaines of Israel be gone forth to warre a∣gainst Antichrist, a Souldier of a meaner rancke, moued with the goodnesse of the cause, enter the battaile, and ioyne himselfe to the standard. For all doe see the Pope re∣new the old warres, and cannot rest quiet, but assayes by all meanes,Papistas nostros, nostras dicerem. how he may recouer the possession of GREAT BRITAINE being lost, and in a vaine hope thereof our Papists in the masculine, (I should haue said in the feminine but that I should seem to some
to haue spoken false Latine) are growne more in num∣ber, and farre more insolent then they were wont here∣tofore. Who then; though he be the meanest seruant of Christ borne vnder, or rather with the Gospell restored, without which he would not deeme Paradise it selfe to be a pleasant Country; would not resist and withstand to his teeth Antichrist himselfe renewing his forces, and taking courage vnto him with such earnestnesse, to recouer that seat from whence aforetime he was iustly cast out? I was not ignorant what labours were to bee vndertaken, what wronges were to be digested, by them who enter combate, and maintaine fight with so cruell an enemie: so that it were better for them to be silent, if they thought what were auaileable rather for their owne priuate, then for the publicke estate of the Church of Christ. But that which vsually falles out in warre, that the tried prowesse of the Captaines doth by their ensample whet on the courages of the Souldiers, and doth stirre vp and pricke forward their sluggish mindes to the effecting of some exploite: The very same doth happen to Gods Ministers in this spirituall warfare, to whom there is abilitie giuen from God, to some greater, to some lesse, to all some. Whereby though they can adde nothing to the matters in controuersie, and it may bee they ought not: because not new things are to be de∣liuered by Diuines, but after a new manner as Vincentius wrot, nor with a diuers faith, but with a diuers stile as Austen warneth: yet notwithstan∣ding both by the consent of their testimony, & with the difference of their giftes and the varietie of discourse they can and ought giue their helping hand to the Gos∣pell. That was also an encouragement that assoone as
the beast wounded with the kings speare began to grunt,Bellarmine Parsons. Pacenius. Christano: Becan. Coquaeus, and many others. it presently cast vp out of his mouth a great swarme of Iesuites, who should not so much refute with argu∣ments, as traduce with slanders, written with the hand of scorpions, the Kings maiestie, being not onely the best of Kings, but the best of men, and vndoubtedly the true Defender of the Faith. Right Heretickes; who murther men not with the sword, but with their wiles, as Ierome writeth: for a mans style may bee counted aswell a cutthroate, as a sworde drawne against Kings, whose honour seemes to be more deare and ten∣der vnto them then their liues. So that Iames Cle∣ment, or Francis Rauillacke, were no more cruell in wounding the Kings body, then Bellarmine, or Pace∣nius in wounding the Kings name. It is said that Eth∣nicke Rome did imprint that letter, whereof Cicero makes mention not to the table of iudges, as diuers in∣terpret it, but as Cicero and Pliny, to the head and forehead of false accusers; to the leaden head, and iron forehead, that they may carry countenances as stigmati∣call slaues branded with the markes of those letters in disgrace of their slanderous tongues, whom Plautus doth therefore tearme litered men. Truely it may seeme very vniust, if I doe not desire that those Iesuits should be accompted litered, whom popish Rome doth nourish and cherish within her, as those old geese, and dogges, who by their cackling and barking, did pursue any that assaulted the capitall. Adde that those two staues, whereof Zacharie the Prophet maketh menti∣on, the authority of Magistrates, and the obedi∣ence and agreement of Subiects,Za: cap. 1. vers. 7. calling the one the staffe of beauty, the other the staffe of
bondes, These gracelesse Iesuits endeauour to breake them both, making rebellion an Arittle of their faith, wherein they goe so farre that they be not only conuin∣ced of our side, but euen of their owne. For of late certaine secular Priests as they are called, more mode∣rate in shew then the rest, that they may the more free∣ly disperse abroad closly among vs the seedes of super∣stition, do cunningly inueigh against the Articles of treason, brought in by the Iesuits; whenas Alan and many other secular Priests do both command and pra∣ctise treason. Our men therefore both as good Pa∣triottes and as faithfull Ministers, being bound with the double bond of warfare, euery one of them for his Graces, for his time and place, much more for his power ought to oppugne both these Articles, whereby we may maintaine according to our vocations the liberty of the kingdome, vnder which we were borne, together with the truth of the Gospell by which we were borne again. Wherein the most learned Byshoppe of Elye doth very iustly taxe the Ministers that are luke-warme and si∣lent in a businesse of such importance,Epist Dedi∣cat. to the KING. who do not bestow their paines in writing, when as this cause, as hee saith, is to be reckoned among those, wherein he that gathereth not with Christ, doth scatter a∣broad with the enemie of Christ; wherein if any man shall not deliuer his faithfull knowledg, ee shall not deliuer his owne soule. And doth adde this, that in such a busines you were better want power then will, and abilitie then faithfulnesse. Which I remember was sometime tould me of that most Reuerend Archbyshoppe D. Whitgift, then when the quarrell on both sides was not so hot, when hee wished
that in so great a plenty of excellent Diuines among vs there were more that would imploy their spare times from their duty of preaching, in the paines of writing. I am come therefore into the fielde being thereto prouo∣ked with the goodnesse of the cause, the ensample of the Captaines, the iniury of the enemie, the Oath of war∣fare, the encouragement of the Fathers, that I might somewhat daunt the enemie, insulting so vnworthily. To which purpose I thought good to set this taske to my selfe, that I might lay open the new creede of faith, gathered out of the new Articles of faith both open and secret by the Byshoppe of Rome himselfe, not so much for our owne Countrimen that are Papists, whom if so many bookes so excellently set foorth in English cannot satisfie, nothing at all can satisfie; as in a Latine Dia∣logue for their sakes that are in forrain parts. And this Dialogue is diuided into three bookes, whereof two of them are now set forth, the third God willing, which at this time lieth in scattered papers, if my health will permit shall be committed to print assoone as may be. In all which I first bring in a certaine Iesuite Robert Sa∣turnine a turbulent and wicked fellow, who with his choisest arguments doth egerly defend heresie and trea∣son: And I ioyne with him for an answerer Antonius Patriotta an Orthodoxall Diuine.Cicero. You know the man∣ner of Dialogues, that men speake those things in them, which they neuer spake. Therefore Saturnine will happily complaine, that those things are laid to his charge which he neuer spake, whenas I dare religiously affirme, that this factious Priest doth not vse onely the arguments of the chiefest Iesuits, but their methode and their wordes, chiefly of Alan, Bellarmine and
Parsons, that any of them in all things may seeme to be Robert Saturnine. I haue prefixed before the Dialogue a true looking-glasse for the Pope, i. a liuely picture of Antichrist pro∣phetically drawne out by S. Paul and S. Iohn, expoun∣ded by the antient Fathers as farre as they could fore∣see, and by the new more certainely by the euent; I thought good to set it together with short conclusions, prest to that end, wherein the Pope with all his rabble may discerne himselfe. For the order of nature did re∣quire, that he should euict the Pope to be Antichrist, which appeareth by the Glasse, who had a purpose to proue poperie to be Antichristianity, which is taught in the Creede. I thought good to set before them both, the Glasse of Christ, and a short compendium of Chri∣stianity, fetcht out of the Gospell, and expressed in my Epistle to the Christian Reader. For you know that two duties belong to the Minister, one that hee preach Christ sincerely: the other that he plainely lay open An∣tichrist, as that worthy man and Martyr of God Iohn Husse thought in his time. Now all this (I know not how little or nothing) fa∣thers and brethren, I submit to your iudgement, and commit to your patronage. For those reasons which seemed equall to me to take in hand the defense of the busines, should seem so to you for the defense of my per∣son. I, when I read that there was mention made of the popish creede by our men, but saw that it was laid open by none to my knowledge of set purpose with any of their discourses, I tooke the matter in hand not so much in hope to performe that I should doe, as for desire to trie what I could doe, hoping thereby to stirre vp other
mens cares who can deale in the busines more learned∣ly and eloquently. You haue hitherto heard why I vndertooke this labor: now if it please you vnder∣stand, why I dedicated it to you. For when I percei∣ued that the whole body of Religion was to be hand∣led by me in this Creed, I thought good most humbly to call together the Religious Clergie to bee Pa∣tron of this worke, of whom the Romish Clergie haue taken so many deadly blowes, that they feare no Clergies forces and blowes more; and whom it greeueth them to see endowed of God with so ma∣ny excellent parts of pietie, knowledge, tongues and prophesie. Therefore that great Tiberine fisherman, when as his trade of fishing began to be laid aside, and waxe cold, because that certaine great fishes had bro∣ken out of his netts torne and worne for age, drew vnto him certaine skilfull workemen out of our Vni∣uersities, with deceitfull rewards, who might mend againe the netts being so tatterd and torne, and make them fit to catch not Soules but Crownes; and those whom he first caught with his golden baite as fishes, he sent backe againe as fishermen. Whereto agreeth that of Martiall. He sent vs great rewards, but sent them on a hooke: How can the fish on fisherman in louely manner looke? With the same cunning deceipt he doth daily ende∣uour to entangle young learned students, and to en∣tise them with deadly gifts vnto him, that they may helpe, and vphold his forlorne and desperate quarrell. Wherein he seemes to be like to that Pithius the vsu∣rer
in Cicero,Cic: Offic: 3. who that he might cosen Cannius a plaine countrey Gentleman, calld to him all the fisher∣men, and taught them what they should do, that they should fish altogether, and bring the fish when it was caught, and lay them at his feete, by which deuise hee might sell his farme at a dearer rate. So the Bishop hath sent for fishermen out of Germanie,Which is the Popes signet. but chiefly out of England, vnder the ring of the fisherman, who should secretly returne to the fish ponds whence they came, and being caught themselues should catch others, and should bring their boates, and fishes of all sorts, to him, that by that meanes he might make the marchandise of his Church the more salable. This is the Bishops cunning. Was this the reason he allured our youth vnto him with rewards, and placed them in his Colleges of Rome and Rhemes, that he should send them backe twise worse than hee found them? This cousenage of our young men, wherewith this grand cousoner of the world doth vphold his seat, is to be preuented with all the aduise we can. Whereby hee doth plainly shew, what great confidence he puts in our mens witts, wherewith he perceiueth, that the tower of Babylon is both most egerly defended and impugned in this age of ours. Hee hath none of his side more learned than the English-Priests, chiefely the Iesuites, who that they might infect the English, write in English, in the iudgement of wisemen ele∣gantly, in the iudgement of fooles probably, that they may supply that by the goodnes of their style, which is wanting to the goodnes of their cause. Neither yet doe they bring any new matter, but they pol sh and trim ouer their old stuffe, obiected a hundred times
by their side, and refuted a hundred times by ours; and they cast a new colour and flourish ouer there thred∣bare and withered arguments, that the Iesuites schoole may seeme to haue refined old poperie, as Medea did Pelia with her enchantments.The discrip¦tion of a Papist. But it doth bewray in the encounter both her feare and diffidence, while she doth enlarge the Canon with the Apocriphals, diminish the Scripture with her traditions, ouerthrow the originall with her translation, peruert the text with her glosse. In the meane while she sends out bookes wherein she stuffes out hir arguments concluded commonly out of meere al∣legories, enforced proportions, lame similitudes, fained miracles, foolish reuelations, naked names of Fathers, hired testimonies of Scholemen, which she (I must con∣fesse) hath furnished with fine words and well polished, and with a curious composition of sentences, attiring the Romaine harlot with all her trimmings, with the entisements whereof the vnstable and vnwary young age of many may be caught and deceiued. Vpon the Fauorers of which bookes, who either bring them ouer to vs, or by reading defend them, or giue them to other to be read with allowance of them; I wish that punish∣ment might be inflicted,D. Ed. Cok. do: com: place in his Epistle pre∣fixed before the case of Postnati. which a most Reuerend Iudge declareth to be prescribed by law. The authors of these bookes, assoone as the Italian ayre hath blowne vpon them, do thinke the northerne people to be scarce men, who write against them though they write with a better conscience and greater faithfulnesse then themselues. For they hold themselues to the true Canon, they trust wholy to the writen word, they go to the originall,The discrip¦tion of a Protestant. they haue the same text and commentarie, but that they bring in the Apostles breaking the way, and the Fathers
following after, as witnesses of their owne times, as those that iudge the Apostles in a matter of faith are to hee harkened vnto without the Fathers, and not the Fathers without the Apostles. So they doe not play with reedes in their hands like the Aduer∣saries, but strike thorow with their dartes: neither doe they alleage arguments without testimonies, or testimonies without argumentes: which they doe not reckon vp for number, but consider for the weight: neither do they deceitfully vrge parcells taken out of the body of the Scripture, as the Aduersaries, who read them reported out of some magistrall booke or other; but alleage them being furnished with all circumstances, that from thence they may inferre and vrge the truth: neither doe they follow after types and allegories, but search out the inward substances and natures of things, neither doe the vse any whorish trimmings, but such sound and sober ornaments, which become the cause of God. Fearefull opponents, great Orators, such as ma∣ny more are to be esteemed who doe not write, whose stinges if any shall thinke are lost because they lye close, he is much deceiued. By hearing of whose learned Lec∣tures and Sermons, and reading their bookes I ingenu∣ously confesse, I come better instructed and prepared to defend the cause. That as we read the familie of the Scipios were borne to the ruine and ouerthrow of Carthage, so me thinke I may hope, that our Clergie is borne againe of God and sent into the world to the vtter ruin: and destruction of Rome. Whom therefore may I better desire to be the Patrone of my labors, then that Clergie that is the fatall vanquisher of Rome? I may adde thereto, that seeing my selfe in the former course
of my life haue beene ioyned with many notable men in the Vniuersitie, either in the fellowshippe of studies, or in the Court in the dutie of preaching, or in conuersati∣on in the bond of friendship: I thought by this my duti∣full Dedication I should renew the memorie of our ac∣quaintance in Christ. Last of all, who is ignorant that our writers, when once they haue stirred vp more ear∣nestly the God of this world, and haue touched Anti∣christ to the quicke, with what virulent calumniati∣ons the professed enemies will traduce them? And it is not to be wondered at, if they spare not their bookes whose throates they would cut: and detract from their good names, whose liues they seeke after? who when they cannot doe mischiefe to good men by themselues, will attempt to effect it by false brethren. If this were done in the greene tree, how much more in the wither∣ed? and if they deale thus with the tale Cedars, how will they presse downe the meane trees, and lower shrubbs? The greater is my hope, that it will come to passe that they who write, being moued with the sense of their iniurie: and they that do not write being mou∣ed with the goodnes of the cause, will by their authori∣tie maintaine another, that offers himselfe to danger for the glory of Christ. For the Doctors and writers in the cause of the Gospell as they be most odious to such as bee wicked so should they be most deare to them that be well giuen. For these causes (Fathers and Brethren) I haue thought good to haue these my small labours to be most humbly and dutifully dedicated vnto you, in whose re∣ligion I thought faithfulnesse; in whose doctrine assi∣stance; in whose loue comfort; and in whose authority helpe did consist. You haue seene as I said at the first the
insolencie of the Papists, your Fathers haue felt their crueltie, you cannot neither ought you to forget the powder or rather the Iesuits treason; which threatned the Kingdome; the massacres of Paris, and the Church; the fires of Queene Marie: whose imbers the Pope your old friend O ye Clergie of England doth hide and couer, he doth well remember your dutie, he forgets not your loue toward him. Against your argument drawne from the Scripture he fetcheth his drawne from the fa∣gots. You passe ouer the fire couered ouer with false ashes. Therefore that which ministreth occasion to many to write, the same must be an occasion for all to take heed. And that which was cause to me to seeke for your pa∣tronage and helpe, the same should be the cause of stir∣ring vp our zeale, and watchfulnesse. GOD preserue the KING and Kingdome, GOD defend the Clergie the most flourishing of the whole world, being the eye of the Kingdome, from the iniuries and treacheries of all their enemies. Your Lordships and Your worships most deuoted in Christ LEONEL SHARPE.
THE EPISTLE to the Christian READER; Wherein the glasse of Christ, and Chri∣stianitie is conteyned. YOV are not ignorant, Christian Reader, that the hatred of the Synagogue of Rome, hath been a long time very deadly and open against the refor∣med Church, and that it hath been secret against the Scrip∣ture, and couered ouer, with a shadow of outward Religion, and a vayle of deuotion. For although shee be much moued with the enuy at our florishing Church, and with the iniurie of her owne beauty so despised; yet because shee feeleth hirselfe so wounded in her head with a weapon from heauen, cast by the hand of man, shee is no lesse angry with God, that gaue the weapon, than with man that cast it. Which if it were not so, truly shee would neuer haue endured so manyAesops fa∣bles, a nose of waxe, a ship∣mans hose, a Delphian sword, blacke and inkie Di∣uinitie. Scripture men, inckie Diuines. slanders, so wickedly & prophanely vtterd against the holy Scrip∣ture to haue been published in print: shee would ne∣uer haue furthered such deuises in her inward Laterane Conclaue, which should haue framedMatth: Paris: in Hen: 3. pag: 104. a new Gospell,Li consor: Franisi pag: 304. a new Iesus,The Bull of Pius 4. about the profession of the oath of ortho∣dox faith annex. to the Con: Trent: sub Innoc: 3. a new Creede. But shee was displeased
with the foure Euangelists, because they passed by their Pope as a vnknowne man. And therefore she created a fift Euangelist, who by the helpe of the Monkes might coyne a fift Gospell fitter for their purpose than the other. They deemed the true Iesus the sonne of Marie, crucified by Gods decree vpon Mount Calua∣rie for the saluation of men, to be but halfe a Sauiour. Therefore they deuised Francis, Peter Barnardons sonne, as if hee had beene pierced with the same wounds of Christ, and in the same parts, and consecrated him in the Laterane Councell to be the Typicall Iesus. Shee thought the twelue articles of the faith, gathered to∣gether by Christs 12. Apostles, not to be sufficient for saluation. And therefore published twelue new arti∣cles of the faith composed in the Councell of Trent, and brought by Pope Pius the fourth, into the forme of a Creede, Paul the fift being the furtherer of it. O holy mother the Church, but ô father far more holy. In the meane time she preached Christs great loue & bounty toward the Pope, and the Popes reuerence and obsequi∣ousnes toward Christ. But seing Babylon that old whore had learned to trimme and paint hir-selfe, but to dis∣semble her inward affections, and cunningly to cloake her hatred with loue, and her loue with hatred, euery wise-man is to forecast, being taught by former hurt and mischiefe, not any more what shee doth pretend, but what shee doth intend. Shee knoweth that the Scrip∣ture is a reuealer of her idolatrie, luxurie, couetousnes, pride and crueltie. Shee fretts and chafes that no por∣tion of honour and gouernment, but of labour and paines is allotted vnto the Pope by Christ his Testa∣ment. Shee is greeued at the heart that shee is foretold by the Apostles to be mysticall Babylon, and the Pope to be that Antichrist. Shee abhorres the Scripture as a theefe doth the gallowes; shee despiseth the Apostles as her accusers; shee hates Christ as her Iudge, but with a secret hatred; as shee loueth Antichrist with a secret
loue, whose enemie shee doth earnestly counterfeit hir-selfe to be, that shee may seeme to be at familiar en∣mitie with him. So shee doth counterfeit hirselfe to be a most dutifull worshipper of the Scripture, as of the former Councells: and doth often alledge it as the Di∣uell doth, turned to a contrary sense, and doth alledge it but as a falsifier fraudulently corrupted: and shee is inwardly vext, that such a blow is giuen to her head by the Scriptures, not as they be expounded by vs, but as they be vnderstood by those Synodes. But shee takes nothing more greeuously then that in the supremacie of her iurisdiction, .i. in the chiefe article of her pub∣like religion, that two of their chiefest founders, as shee calls them, be so silent witnesses in this cause S. Peter,1 Pet: 5. & S. Paul. S. Peter who did plainly forbid superioritie to any one Priest ouer the Clergie: & styled himself most truly & most humbly not an Arch-priest, but a fellow-priest: S. Paul who when of purpose he sent an Epistle to the Romanes, made no mention at all of the Pope and the prerogatiue of the Church of Rome, nor of the after-borne articles of the faith, which shee in great plenty brought in afterward. And when as of set pur∣pose he had reasoned of the perpetuall gouernment of the militant Church, and had gathered together many vnities; one God, one faith, one spirit, one body, one Lord, hee ouer-past one visible head,Ephes: 4. being forgetfull of their Peter. And no maruell, when as Peter him∣selfe was forgetfull of himselfe. He did rather diuide the gouernment of the Church among all the Bishops, and would rather haue it an Aristocraticall gouern∣ment with many vnder Christ, than Monarchicall vnder one: as the practise of the Church next fol∣lowing for many ages did approue. For that the fiue Patriarches had equall authoritie, both Balsamon doth witnes, and the Councell of Neece doth confirme. And Francis Duarene writes, that Boniface the third,Francis: Duar. de sacris benef: lib. 1. cap: 10. not before the 607. yeares, not without much adoe could obtayne of
Phocas to be created the vniuersall Bishop. The Pope then is indebted to a King-killer for all the glory of his king∣dome, and yet he seemeth to giue thanks to Christ, as if by his word, Feede my sheepe, hee had ordeyned the Bishops of Rome in Peter, as he writes himselfe, a fellow-minister, to be Kings so many ages before they were borne.Cic. ad Petū ep: 9. : 8. As Cicero when as a false decree of the Senate, was brought into Armenia and Siria as made against his minde, writes that thanks were giuen him from foraigne Kings, because he had named them to be Kings by his consent, whom he knew not that they were not onely named, but not so much as to bee borne. But the Nicene Councell doth greatly discon∣tent the Romane Bishop, whom he maketh but equall to the Bishop of Alexandria. For therefore the Bishop had corrupted that Canon, which had restreyned the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, nor being there∣with content, did adde many yeares after fifty false Ca∣nons to twentie true of the Nicene Councell, that hee might make the whole world beleeue, that his supre∣macie which was apparantly shortned by the Nycene Fathers being aliue, were enlarged by them being dead. As the same Cicero doth pleasantly sport himselfe with Antonie,Philip: 1. when as he had published certaine false decrees of Caesar, that the Citizens that were sent into banish∣ment of him aliue, should be recalled being dead: and that the Citie that was denyed them of him aliue, should be granted being dead: and that many immu∣nities and priuiledges that were taken of him being a∣liue, should bee sold of him being dead: by which meanes Antonie did affect both an infinite and hurtfull power. So the Pope doth publish many acts as procee∣ding from Christ, as from the Apostles, as from the Nicene Fathers, whereby hee doth vsurpe most proud and cruell gouernment in the Church. And he fetcheth them from the dead, for they were neuer made by them when they were aliue. In like manner hee brin∣geth
in the Chalcedon Fathers being dead,Coup: of a Can: of Chal∣cedon. denying that which they affirmed when they were aliue. Iud∣ging, say the Fathers of Chalcedon, that the See of Con∣stantinople in matters Ecclesiasticall bee as well aduanced in matters ecclesiasticall as the Romane, being the next vnto it. Which words are falsly recited,Distinct: 22. Renovantes. or rather filthily corrupted in the Canon Law; while he addeth a nega∣tiue to the last words, which altereth the sense of the whole Canon into a cleane contrary: yet notwithstan∣ding let it not be aduanced in matters ecclesiasticall as shee, but let her be the next vnto it. What should I make many words? The first six generall Councells, which may be thought to haue best of all knowne Christs minde, and to deliuer it most faithfully about the go∣uernment of the Church, although they granted a pri∣macie of order, and difference to the Bishop of Rome; yet they denyed him a supremacie of power and iuris∣diction: and according to the sixt Canon of the Ni∣cene Councell hembde in the See of Rome into cer∣taine limits, wherein being included shee should not breake forth. Yet for all that they brake ouer the bounds set downe both by God and Men. God that he might punish the contempt of the Gospell, brought so grieuous a sluggishnes vpon the world, and so gene∣rall an apostacie vpon the Church, that the time it selfe laying vp and hiding all meanes of helpe, did not only bring to light the bramble formerly hid in the ground, but brought it abroad, and set it aloft, and placed it aboue all the Cedars of Libanus: First, aboue Bishops in Boniface the third: after aboue Kings and Emperors in Gregorie the 7, whose wings being so often clipt by foure Councells, Wormes, Papta, Brixis and Montze, grew againe in the successors so farre that they flew at the last aboue Councells. Till the three generall Coun∣cells of Pisa, Constance, and Basil,Constant: Con: Sess: 1. did not only displace Popes out of the Popedome, but decreed that Councels were aboue the Popes. For the Pisan Councell did cast
two Popes Gregorie and Benett out of their seats; and choose Alexander the fift. And the Councell of Con∣stance assembled by the summons of Iohn the 23. for refusing their tryall, and for his abominable symonie, and wicked life and manners, depriued him of his Popedome,Sess: 10 & 12. Sess: 4. & 5. and after condemned Gregorie the twelfth not appearing, and cut him of as a withered member, and an incorrigible heretike and schismatike as they plainly termed him. And that it may seeme not to haue dealt rashly, This holy generall Synode, say they, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, and representing the Church militant, hath immediate power from Christ (not from the Pope but from Christ) whose power any whosoeuer, of what estate and condition soeuer, euen the Pope himselfe is bound to obey. And farther declareth, if the Pope do ob∣stinately refuse to obey the statutes, ordinances, and iniuncti∣ons, which either this holy Synode, or any other, hereafter ge∣nerall Synode lawfully assembled, either now haue or hereaf∣ter shall decree, that he is to be constreyned to a condigne sa∣tisfaction, and worthily to be punished: and so Iohn the 23. being deposed and cast out, it choose Martin the fift for Pope. The Pope and the Councell did long contend about the maioritie and superioritie as they terme it: but the Councell had the vpper hand. Here comes to my minde a certaine tale, not vnpleasant, of the spawne of a frog, which a Calfe had troden vpon in the ab∣sence of the Damme, which Calfe when one escaping from the rest, had described to the frogge his damme to bee a great beast; how bigge I pray said shee, and (puffing out hir selfe) thus bigge? greater by the half said the young one:Horaec. Sermo: 2 Say: 2. what by so much, said the Frog, when shee had blowne vp hir-selfe more and more? not if you breake your selfe, said he, can you be equall to it. The Councell of Constance with her foote trode vpon two frogs, though they would haue fled from tryall, and declared it selfe to be greater and higher than
the Pope though he sweld neuer so bigge. The Coun∣cell had done well, if it had not crusht in peeces two Doues; and had not decreed that cuppe which Christ for diuers causes had commanded in his supper should bee giuen to the people, for moe and more weigh∣ty causes, as they say, was to bee taken from them. Which the Councell of Basill did restore afterward,Sess: 13. being assembled by Martin the fifts Bull, and confir∣med by the letters of Eugenius the 4. whom shee depo∣sed, and being ratified by the Bull of Nicholas the fift, who succeeded Eugenius, declared the decree of the Councell of Constance about the power of the generall Councell against the Pope to be a truth of the catholike faith,Basil: Con: Sess: 16. and adiudged him an heretike that did obstinate∣ly resist the two former truths. Therefore let the Pope either submit himselfe vnder the generall Councell, or by the iudgement of the ge∣nerall Councell he must needs confesse himselfe to be an heretike. Hence is all their griefe, and their secret quarrell against the Scriptures, and the former Synods, and the latter also, (though they somwhat fauoured the Romish superstition) because they did represse her am∣bition. Till at the last two other Councells, the Late∣rane and the Tridentine, did lift vp the Pope, not onely aboue all Councells, but aboue all Scriptures, that hee at his pleasure might put out the Crowes eyes, as the Pro∣uerbe is, and as if hee were the 13 Apostle, set forth a doctrine at his owne liking contrary to the Scripture. After this sort after many ages, and dangers, the Pope got place aboue Bishops, Kings, Councels, and Scrip∣tures themselues. So great a worke it was to build the Romish seate. The very naked name whereof is opposed against all our encounters, as it were Gorgons head. Do we alledge the Fathers? what maruell is it, if when he perceiueth they stand against him, hee reiects them in seuerall, when hee contemnes them all in generall? Do we al∣ledge
Councels? The former are corrected by the la∣ter, the better by the worse, and the more by the fewer. Do we alledge the Scriptures? what good do we there∣by, when we haue a Sphinx at home, who can lay open the Scripture as it were a riddle according to his owne sense and his best auaile. Thus they reduce all things at the last to the mother the Church, or rather to the father of the Church. For they make the mother to be of the masculine gender, and bring the most generall generall, to one that is singular, that is, to the Pope for the time ruling. With whose spirit that Synagogue being filled, it seemeth closely to be offended with none of the Apostles more than with S. Paul: by whose silence, shee taks her selfe not only not to be assisted, but to be hurt by his testimonie, when as the merit of workes being abandoned, hee concludeth the onely mercy of God in Christ being apprehended by faith, to be mans iustice before God. Which conclusion doth ouerthrow all Poperie, as it shall afterward appeare. It doth plague the Synagogue: for it toucheth two things to the quicke, the Bishops miter, and the Monkes bel∣lies: for faith being placed in the only merits of Christ, hath diminished the Indulgences, the treasure of the Church, and makes the offrings to images to be more rare and sparing. So that the Synagogue, doth some∣time as well closely accuse S. Paul of heresie, as Luther and Caluin. I once heard two old popish Doctors, one of them a Fryer Ieronimite in Portugall, another a Iaco∣bine in France say, when they were prest with Pauls au∣thoritie, one of them that S. Peter without doubt was a Catholike, but Paul if he be not warily expounded seemes to smell of heresie. Thother, that places out of Paul, by the testimonie of Peter, were hard to be vnderstood, and had need of a Romish Commentarie; Peter I said made men∣tion of the hardnes, but not of the commentarie. In whose Epistle say they, whatsoeuer soundeth against the Romane faith therein wee do not attaine to the true sense,
that which the Rhemists haue obserued.Rhem: testam argument: epist: in gene. For he in the first chapter (say the Fryers) did commend the faith of the Church of Rome, whereto Cyprian denieth that vnfaith∣fulnes can haue accesse. But in the 11. chapter, I say,Epist: 50. he warned the same Church, that if it departed from the bountifulnesse of God, it should take heed lest as the Church of Israel was cut off, so shee were not cut off also. It may therefore be cut off be it spoken by Cypri∣ans leaue. For it is in act cut off, when it is fallen from that foundation, which is placed in the only mercy of Christ, apprehended by faith. That faith therefore of the Church which Paul the Apostle so much commen∣ded, and taught by his writings is one: and the faith of this Church which Paul the Pope hath left so defor∣med with his vnwritten traditions is another. And yet shee glorieth much, as I said, that Paul is hir founder; I had rather they would vse him as an author. But she will neuer doe it. Shee maketh more accompt of Pauls Bulls, than Paules Epistles: which the ancient Fathers did rightly tearme the key of the Scripture. Which most of the popish sort do so feare, that they cannot reconcile Paul and S. Iames together, but oppose them one against thother,The reconci∣ling of Paul and James. as if Iames the Apostle had concluded that a man is iustified by his workes before God, not with faith alone, against the Apostle Paul; when as Paul doth not vnderstand the same faith and the same iustifica∣tion which Iames doth. For hee requireth faith placed in the heart: this reiecteth faith bragged on in the tongue. Hee requireth a liuely faith, this reiecteth a dead faith. Hee doth enforce a heauenly faith, which layeth hold on the promise: this casteth of a diuelish faith, which doth onely acknowledge Christs historie without application: hee doth commend and extoll fruitfull faith working by loue: this doth rightly con∣demne a barraine faith voide of the duty of holinesse: he doth set forth the iustification before God, which Aquinas calleth the righteousnes of imputation, Iames
the iustification before men, whom the same Aquinas calleth the righteousnesse of declaration. Moses, from whom either Apostle drew his testimonie, doth ex∣pound ech, and doth take vp the controuersie, begun by the Aduersarie. The imputation of righteousnesse, whereof Moses maketh mention Gen: 15.6. went thirty yeares before that worke, for which they dreame that Abraham was iustified before God. Which circum∣stance of time Paul most earnestly weighing, conclu∣deth that faith was imputed to Abraham to obtaine righteousnesse before God 15 yeares, as Moses noteth, before hee begat Isaac, and other 15 yeares at the least before he would haue sacrificed him. They know not well how to loose themselues out of this indissoluble knot, whosoeuer thinke that righte∣ousnes was imputed to Abraham before God, because he killed his sonne who was not as yet borne, when as the Holy Ghost doth pronounce him to be righteous: which S. Iames himselfe v: 23 seemeth to vnderstand, as Oecumenius gathereth out of the place. that Abra∣ham was the image of iustification, which is wrought by faith alone, when it was imputed to him for righteous∣nesse,ver: 23. ver: 21. that he beleeued: and of that iustification also which is by workes, when hee would haue offred his sonne Isaac vpon the Altar. Therefore faith did make perfect the person of Abraham, and the worke did iu∣stifie the faith, and declare ech to be perfect. Is this a fight? is this an opposition? especially betweene two holy Apostles, who writ their Epistles with the instinct of the same spirit. But no one thing doth more neerly gaule the Synagogue, then that Paul the Apostle by the direction of the spirit, writ the commentarie of the mysterie,Apoc: 9. 2 Thess: 2. 1 Tim: 4.1. which S. Iohn afterward set forth of that great Antichrist, whom hee maketh to be the falling starre, i. an apostata from the faith, or rather the prince of the apo∣stacie, as Paul expounds it. Iohn calls him the Angell of the bottomlesse pit, the key-keeper of hell, the beast arising
out of the earth, and counterfeyting the lambe with two hornes, and in his voyce resembling the Dragon. Therefore in shew the Vicar of Christ, in deed his aduersarie, in ambition aboue Kings, Gods emulus as Paul explaines it. Iohn in order the 7. King of the Romane state,Apoc: 13. the reviued image of the former beast, to be after reuealed within the Empire decayed, as Paul doth interpret it. Iohn sitting in the common place Lord of the seauen hill'd Citie, in the speciall place in the temple of God,A description of the Pope. that is, in the Church of God, as Paul doth expound it:  for Kings thrones are called Bishops seates. Therfore he is in office a Bishop, in name Romane or Latine, in his disposition a great hypocrite, and a notable dissem∣bler, by his cunning an inchanter and bewitcher of soules, by his worship an Idolater, by his malitious pra∣ctise a murtherer, giuen ouer to sinne, sold ouer to de∣struction, as both of them define. Water is no liker water than Antichrist to the Pope. But S. Paul being not therewith content, defineth Antichristianitie, to be not iniquitie, but the mysterie of iniquitie. And doth after diuide it into three parts; 1. Curious speculations. 2. Absurd superstitions. 3. Iewish ceremonies, whereof it is wholy compounded: which who so holdeth doth not hold the head, as the Apostle speaketh. I beseech thee Chri∣stian Reader tell me what is more like, than old and new Antichristianitie? What is become of them, who deny that Poperie hath his beginning from the antient heresies? which being of the same age with the Aposto∣like truth in many things, as Tertullian saith, was woun∣ded with the Apostolike style, as shall be made manifest in the discourse following. I do therfore more disdaine than admire that the Apostle Paul doth so exceedingly displease the Romane synagogue, who did foreshew that Poperie should be patcht together, of Paganisme, Idiotisme, and Iudaisme.
A little Glasse of Christ and Christianitie.BVt I purposing to set out all the force and nature of Anti∣christ and Antichristianitie in latine, I thought good to set before it a liuely and short forme of Christ and Christiani∣tie, which the Apostle defineth to be the mysterie of godlines: that the truth of the Gospell being brought into light out of the labyrinth, as it were, of discoursing, might put to flight with her authoritie and countenance the Tridentine heresie. Colos. 1.29.God the Father did decree by the testimonie of Paul, that his only begotten sonne from all eternitie,Heb. 1.10. the Creator of heauen and earth,Colos. 1.16. of Angells and men,Heb. 1.3. the brightnesse of his glorie, and Character of his person,Heb. 2.16. should take on him not the nature of Angells but of men,Heb. 7.25. wherein he alone with∣out any fellow helpers might fully finish the whole saluation of man. God the sonne,Rom. 9.5. God aboue all blessed for euer, though Arrius reuiued burst for griefe,1. Tim. 3.16. reuealed in the flesh, ap∣proued in the spirit. True God, true man, brought forth without a father By a maide, whom God begate without a mother. Heb. 7.3.As he was shadowed out by Melchisedech, and there∣fore1. Tim. 2.5. the onely one Mediator betweene God and man in the fulnesse of time, fulfilled the decree of his Father, reconciling God displeased with man that was lost by his owne accord,The meanes whereby sal∣uation is pro∣cured to man. by the excellencie of his person, the sanctitie of his nature, obe∣dience of his life, and sacrifice of his death, did alone deserue eternall saluation, not infusing into him so much grace, wher∣by man himselfe might merit saluation to himselfe,Rom. 4.24.25. but im∣puting the merit of his death, which he might lay hold on with a thankefull and holy minde. God the holy Ghost proceeding from them both, did lay open to the minde of man saluation which the Father decreed, the Sonne deserued, and sealed it vp in his heart,Ephes. 1.14. giuen not as a pledge, but as an earnest (which Austin obserueth out of the ApostleAustin in this place.) because that mony which was borrowed when it is paide againe the pledge is restored; but the earnest when the price is paide againe is not restored, because it is part of the price which is not to be taken away, but is to be suppli∣ed, asAquin. in this place. Aquine teacheth out of Austin. Therefore the
spirit of Christ giuen to man, the earnest of heauenly inheri∣tance is not paide backe againe. So the Apostle hath set three foundations of mans saluation more sure then heauen and earth. 1. The eternall decree of the Father. 2. The infinite merit of the Sonne. 3. The irreuocable earnest of the spirit. So the worke of our saluation is from God alone, the know∣ledge of saluation from the word of God alone, hence he is cal∣led the word of saluation.Gal. lib. 2. de sanitate tu∣enda. Galen writeth that the cause of many diseases in the body as hereditarie proceedes from cor∣rupt seede, and from putrified nourishment. The disease of the soule is hereditarie, from corrupt seede as Iob saith, which is encreased by custome of sinning, as with impure nourishment. Now as the diseases of the bodies are cured by contraries, so the diseases of soules: which God beingPet. 1.23.2.2. dead begetteth a∣gaine by immortall seede, being againe begotten feedeth them with pure nourishment, being sicke & diseased healeth them with holesome medicines, that is with the pure word of God, who is to be accounted the true Father, Pastor and Phisition of the soule. Yet he vseth men to that purpose as instruments, whom he sendeth and moueth, that first they preach forgiue∣nesse and absolution from all their sinnes promised freely by faith in Christ to the penitent: and after enioyne two things to him that is forgiuen; One, that he pay backe againe the dutie of holinesse to the blessed trinitie alone, for so vnspeake∣able a blessing of saluation; The other, that he afford all the helpe of charity to man for Gods sake, being the liuely Image of God: setting before the obedient at the last inward peace vpon the earth, and an eternall inheritance in the heauens. So the men of God doe raise vp a man that is sorrowfull with the promise, direct a man that goeth astray with the comman∣dement, comfort him that is fainting with the reward: but the men of God doe speake outwardly, the spirit of God doth worke inwardly. They do beate these things into their eares, the spirit doth ingender faith, hope, and loue in the heart; faith which doth apprehend the promise; hope which looketh
for the reward, loue which keepeth the commandement.Colos. 1.12. For God doth not finde man fit, but maketh him fit to participate the inheritance of the Saints in light, whom he draweth being vnwilling, and tooke him resisting out of the power of darke∣nesse, and placed him being thus deliuered in the kingdome of light, the kingdome of the sonne of his loue.Ephes. 2.1. For hee found man not yet regenerated, dead in sinnes, not halfe dead, but starke dead: not like to the man with the palsie who lay sicke on his couch, but to Lazarus who lay foure daies stinking in his graue: So that euery sinner, before he heare the powerfull voice of Christ speaking inwardly to him, lyeth putrified, and consumed in the graue of his sinnes. Whence a sinner riseth, and commeth forth as Lazarus, for the power of the Lord is in both, not the power of the dead,Austin: in tracta: of Iohn 49. as Austin doth ex∣pound Saint Paul. So that hee hath neede not of helping grace, whereby hee recouereth health, but creating grace, whereby he is againe brought to life. And a sinner is meerely passiue and can bring no more help to his conuersion, then La∣zarus brought to his rising againe. In whom Christ doth not helpe his weake wil, but create a newGalat. 6.15. Ephes. 2.10., hence the conuer∣sion of a sinner is called new creation; not in respect of the naturall faculties, and of morall virtues which sinne only cor∣rupteth, but of spirituall graces which sinne hath blotted out, as the master of the sentences obserued out of Austin. Therefore the image of God imprinted in the soule, in respect of the substance is deformed, in respect of the qualities is cleane put outGreg. Nyss. de orat. Dom. Serm 5. as Gregorie Nyssen teacheth. The resto∣ring then of the image blotted out, is the rising againe of man being dead. This is the nature, this is the disposition of the Apostles doctrine: it doth depresse man, that it may extoll God: it doth cast off corrupt nature, that it may bring in sa∣uing grace. A man therefore must liue in God, yea farther by God, before he can either will, or thinke any good; a meere passiue subiect of grace at the first, while being as it were made warme by the spirit of Christ, hee beginneth to will his owne conuersion, and is made a voluntarie instrument of grace, by no imbred or infused force of the will, but by the
power of the seede of grace, and of the new life which hee had from God. Paul doth thus distinguish betweene a man to be converted, and converted. He maketh him to be alto∣gether the seruant of sinne, because he is ouercome of sinne; this free in part, because he is made free by the Sonne: not appointing him free in part, lest he make him sacrilegious, nor this altogether a seruant, lest he might make him sluggish. He doth not therefore take from the vnregenerate, all power of willing, but all power of well-willing, that he may not lift vp the crest of his naturall pride; and he granteth to the re∣generate some power of well-willing, that he may not wea∣ken the strength of spirituall diligence. And that God may giue life to the dead, and renew and repayre the lost image of GodEphes: 3.10., he doth fasten and imprint the true knowledge of God and our selues into the minde, and righteousnesse and ho∣linesse into the will of man; he doth enlighten the blinde, with the light of his wisdome shining into him, he doth couer him being naked with the robe of his righteousnes put vpon him, and being vnsauorie, he doth season him with the salt of his holinesse infused into him. Whereby1 Cor: 1.30. Christ is said to be made of God to the faithfull man wisdome, righteousnes, and sanctification. Paul makes mention of a twofold righ∣teousnesse and life of a Christian: one, whereby hee liueth before God; thother, whereby he liueth before men.Gal: 2.20. By faith before God, by apprehending of ChristGal. 5.6., by loue before men by the practise of holinesse. So that good workes are not the cause of iustification, but iustification is the cause of good workes, asAug: de Spi: & li. Austin affirmeth: neither do we attaine faith by virtues, but virtues by faith, as Bede gathereth out of Gregorie. One order is in morall matters, another in hea∣uenly: one in Aristotle, another in PaulArist. 3. ethi.. There a man must doe iust things iustly, before he be iust: Here a man must be first iust in another before he can do iust things, and iustly in himselfe. As Christ is made sinne for vs, so wee are made the righteousnes of God in Christ.2 Cor. 5. vlt. For Christ himselfe most holy was made sinne by the imputation of our sinne, we sinners therefore are righteous only by the imputation of the righte∣ousnesse
of Christ. AtAugust: in Euchirid: c. 41. Austin doth expound the Apostle, and Anselme, Austin. He therefore is sinne as wee are righteousnes: not ours, but wee are Gods, not in our selues, but in him: as he is sinne, not his owne, but ours; not in him∣selfe, but in vs. So Austin. SoAnsel: in loc. Anselme; He is sin, saith he, as we righteousnesse, not ours, but Gods, not in vs, but in him: as he is sinne, not his owne, but ours, not in himselfe but in vs. Both of them doe acknowledge with vs, the imputed righteousnes of Christ with the Apostle, how∣soeuer the Synode of Trent doe make inherent righteousnesse the forme of iustification, and the Rhemists too prophanely scoffe at the imputation of righteousnes, which Pighius that arch-papist doth confesse. A sinner therefore dead in him∣selfe, liueth righteous in Christ, and liueth not to himselfe, but to God: but yet so liueth, that he feeleth in himselfe the fight of the spirit and the flesh, which the Apostle acknowled∣geth not onely in other Christians, but in himselfe, for the comfort of others: I do not that good I will, saith the Apostle, but the euill I would not that I do: which a bad man, did not badly expresse: I hate and what I hate, against my will must be, What I would cast away, to beare is greife to me. But that the Apostle speaketh of the motions of concupis∣cence, whereto the will doth not consent, this of the beastly affections, whereto the will is wholy addicted. Which not∣withstanding by the working of the naturall conscience, hee saith he hateth. But assoone as a man begins to liue in God, sinne begins to dye in man. For it hath receiued a deadly wound in the roote in respect of guiltinesse: while it be cured by perfect buriall it remaines dead, not cut off, that we may be humbled; not imputed, lest we should be cast downe. Sin dwelleth in vs as a Iebusite subdued, not expelled; subdued, it taketh feare from vs; not expelled, it shakes off securitie, that to striue with it, it is farre more safe, than to haue no enemie at all. In this fight Gods grace doth helpe vs, strengthning vs with a double sacrament: of Baptisme, and the Lords Supper: there the fountaine of regeneration is
powred out, here the bread of life is set before vs: there is a healthfull bathe to wash vs when we are fowle, here is a spi∣rituall feast to feede vs when we were faint: so that from each we may take strength to resist. So the power of God is made perfect in our infirmitie, which when out of our owne skarres it stirreth vp in vs a courage to fight, so from helpe ministred from thence it puts into vs sure hope that we shall ouercome. For it bringeth griefe out of the fall for sinne, and stirreth vp strife out of griefe with sinne, and out of strife bringeth the victorie of sinne: So out of poyson it gets a remedy, and out of the sicknesse it getteth health. Nei∣ther doth it in the meane while depriue vs of inward comfort, while wee waite for the eternall tryumph: But in the fight it shewes vs the propitiation; after the fight, which endeth in death, it presently openeth the holy place of holyest, so that neither peace of conscience is wanting to them being aliue, and their soules shall haue rest when they are dead. Thus it commeth to passe, that these broken relikes of sinne in the sonnes of God, by Gods grace do much profit, when out of them they make an antidote against pride, neither are puft vp with the merits of their owne works. Wherby the doctrine of Trent ought to be accounted the more abomina∣ble, which doth decree that eternall life is to be restored to the faithfull, for the merit of workes, which the Apo∣stle propoundeth not as the reward of a seruant, but the in∣heritance of a sonne; not payed for spirituall obedience, but giuen to the spirituall generation, as Austin expounds the Apostle: the crowne of righteousnesse in respect of Christ, who merited: a crowne of mercy, in respect of vs for whom he merited, to be giuen by the iust iudge, not for the weight of mans merit, but for the force of Gods promise: to be ren∣dred according to their workes, not for their workes,Gregor: in 7. Psal: peniten. as Pope Gregorie distinguisheth out of the Apostle. The studie therefore of good workes is to be vrged, because God shall iudge according to thy works: but merit is to be detested, because it shall neuer saue thee for good works. For what∣soeuer you do well is of God, not of the merit of man, but of
the blessing of God. You doe owe it therefore to God, as the creature to the Creator, as a captiue seruant to his redeemer: acknowledge thy selfe a seruant, who of right dost owe dutie vnto thy Lord: and whereas God doth call thee his sonne, ac∣knowledge grace, and forget not nature. Neither thinke thou hast deserued any thing, if thou haue done well, because thou oughtst to haue done so. Besides remember, that there is some filthines from the flesh mingled with thy worke though good, which doth purely flow from the spirit, that that very thing, that we seeme to liue iustly, is a fault, if our work, when Gods seueritie iudgeth it, Gods mercie doe not excuse it before him∣selfe, so that the fault in the worke must first be forgiuen to the penitent, by grace, before the worke it selfe bee crowned by promise. Lastly the Apostle saith that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall bee re∣uealed, that if a man should serue God a thousand yeares, and that most zealously, he should not deserue for the merit to be halfe a day in heauen,Anselm. de mensura crucis. Anselme said, although we die a thousand times, although wee performe all the virtues of the minde, yet wee can doe nothing worthy of earthly blessinges, and such as are present, which we daily re∣ceiue from God, much lesse heauenly and future which wee looke for as Ierome,Jerom. in hunc loc. Chrysostome, and Basill haue taught. But take away merite, and the desire of virtue will waxe cold. It may be in bastardes, who serue God with a ser∣uile, and mercenarie minde, but in sonnes it is not so, who worship God the father with a free & voluntary spirit, which the spirit of adoption hath giuen them, who testifieth to their spirites that they be the sonnes of God, the inheritors of hea∣uen, and coheires with Christ. And if the free loue of God, whereby he being moued did bring thee backe from death to life, and forgaue thee all thy transgressions, and healed all thy infirmities, and hath crowned thee with his mercies, (marke what the Prophet saith) not with thy merites, but with his mercies: if this free loue I say shall not drawe from thee free obedience, nothing shall euer draw it from thee. There be many forceable arguments whereby the Apostle
perswadeth vs to liue holily, soberly, and iustly, that with good workes we set forth Gods glory, which workes though they appease not God, yet they please God, and make our elec∣tion and vocation thereby sure vnto vs. But there is nothing more powerfull then the fatherly loue of God, to prouoke to goodnesse the ingenuous mindes of sonnes. This is the will of God euen the sanctification and saluation of vs all: to the which endes he chose vs from eternitie, hee called and iustified vs in time, and he shall glorifie vs to eternitie. So the mercie of Iehouah toward his sonnes is from eternitie to eternitie, for whom he hath preordained saluation in chosing them, declared it in calling them, begun it in iustifying them, and shall perfect it in glorifying them. They that being per∣swaded by the spirit of God doe certainely know that they bee in the grace of God now present, and shall be euer hereafter, entring into the state of grace by faith, and standing therein by faith, and glorying vnder the hope of the glorie of God, by faith, as the Apostle teacheth: which place Chrysostome doth thus expound, that hee that hath giuen his faith to God, that there ought not onely a full perswasion to be assured them of those things which are giuen presently, but of those that are to come, as if they were now giuen. That the state of regeneration should be thought to bee more certaine, then of creation. The state of the first Adam was changeable, of the second vnchangeable, whose true and liuely members all the sonnes of God are to be esteemed. Wherefore of the state of Christ be vnchangeable, the state of them that are truely Christians, who being grafted into Christ by faith do liue, and shall liue by their faith (as the Apostle noteth out of the Prophet) must needes be vnchangeable. For it was granted to Adam, that hee was able not to die, as Austin speaketh, but to a Christian that he cannot possibly die. Three things saith Bernard I consider, wherein all my hope doth consist: 1. The loue of adoption. 2. The truth of the promise. 3. And the power of the reward.
Which do so strengthen and confirme my heart, that no want of merites, no consideration of our profit, no accompt of the heauenly blessing can driue mee from the depth of that hope wherein I am surely grounded. Therefore let my foolish thought murmure all it can, saying who art thou? or how great is that glory, or by what merites dost thou hope to obtaine it? And I will confidently answere, I know whom I haue trusted, I am in great assurance, because my God in great loue hath adopted me, because he is true in his promise, and able to performe it. Thus Bernard out of the Apostle: Who makes it plaine that the state of regeneration is most as∣suredly confirmed to euery sonne of God, not onely by Gods promise, but by Gods Oath. Whom hee maketh partaker of the right faith, and of working loue, and of liuely hope, and of earnest repentance, and of new obedience, and calleth him the heire of the promise. To whom God as being willing to make the immutable certainety of his counsell knowne plentifully, as to Abraham the Father, so to Abrahams sonne, did not onely promise, but sweare that hee would performe that to him which he had promised.Heb. 6. For in God it is all one to sweare and to say. Yet that we should haue strong consolation, who follow after to obtaine the hope set before vs, which hee hath appointed as a sure and strong anker, entred within the veile, i. heauen, whither Christ the forerunner is entred before vs, he hath confirmed our immutable state vnto vs by two immutable things his promise and his Oath. Let the prayer of Christ be ioyned to the oath of God, wherein hee praieth to God the father, that he would imbrace vs with the same loue, that he embraced Christ himselfe, i. with eternall loue: and would crowne vs with the same glorie, as hee crowned him∣selfe: and did not onely pray for vs, but died also, and rose a∣gaine and was receiued into heauen, that hee should for euer make intercession for vs. Who hath left vnto vs his holy spirit, whereby he hath sealed vnto vs the heauenly inheritance. And therefore God hath assured eternall saluation to his sons, not onely by promise, but by Oath, but by prayer, and
sacrifice of Christ, and by the seale of the holy Ghost, that wee should not doubt thereof. And yet that wicked Councell of Trent decreed, that none could know by the certainetie of infallible faith that hee is in the state of Grace, much lesse shall bee, but that euerie one should bee in doubt and feare of his owne Grace. That it seemeth to haue vtterly ouerthrowne all the foun∣dations of mans saluation laid by the Apostle, as it shall plainly appeare by the discourse vpon the popish Creede. An∣tonie Marinarius did withstand that wicked decree euen in the Councell it selfe, who taught the perseuerance of the faithfull was secure, and their securitie to be perseuered in. Ambrose Catharinus did likewise resist, who maintay∣ned that a sonne of God by the certaintie of faith doth know that he is in the state of grace, as any man may be sure that there is Rome, yea and that without doub∣ting or feare, so that he openly did resist the Councell. Albertus Pighius did afterward oppose himselfe, who of set purpose doth defend that our righteousnesse is imputed to vs by faith alone vnto life. The Councell of Colen may thee ioyned to these, wherein many learned Diuines True it is, say they, and it is required to the iustification of a man, that he certainely beleeue, not only in gene∣rall, that they who do truly repent shall obtaine mercy by Christ, but that the man that beleeueth shall obtaine forgiuenesse of his sinnes by faith in Christ: which they learned out of the Apostle by the interpretation of Bernard. Thou hast Gentle Reader the Glasse of Christ, the summe of the Apostolike doctrine, to be set before the doctrine of the Trent Councell, who doth strike vs with a curse for the same, more fully hereafter to be propounded and maintayned. The power whereof is such, that it doth clip the winge of humane pride, that it doth aduance the glory of Gods grace, that it doth stirre vp an earnest desire of godlines, and doth fasten a sure anchor of saluation: that the sonnes of God may be made lowly in sinne, thankefull in blessing, holy in life, and cheerefull in death.
This doctrine Trent Councell doth ouerthrow, from whence those twelue articles of faith proceeded, which Pius the 4. brought into the forme of a Creede, enioyned to be publikely professed of his, by his Bull vnder an oath: which though they had their birth and beginning from heretikes, yet they carry the name of the true faith, and counterfeit the Apostles to be their parents, that the greater store of Christians may be in∣duced to receiue them. As wee heretofore haue heard that Lambert counterfeting the name and kindred of the Earle of Warwicke, had many followers, when in truth he was the bastard of a villanous Priest: So if any shall compare these twelue bastardly and false articles of the Popes creede, with the true and right articles of the Apostles creede, hee shall finde them to be as like the Apostles, as the bastard of Simon the Priest, was like the soone of the Duke of Clarence. The schoolemen and the Canonists haue had great adoe between them, whether the Pope could make any new articles of the faith. Bellarmine as a worshipfull moderator takes vp the matter in Tortus. He diuides the articles into two sorts. He writes that some are of immediat reuelatiō, others drawn & fetch from them, which notwithstanding are to be recei∣ued with a catholike beleefe. How foolishly I shall shew hereafter, now only I shew what they hold. Articles of the first sort Bellarmine denieth may be made of the Pope. As much as if he should deny the sunne could be made by the Pope, so many ages fastned to his globe by the hand of God. The articles of the second stampe hee doth plainly affirme may be made by the Pope; as if he should say, that he professeth himselfe to be the author and maker of that booke, whereof he is the expounder and interpreter. Now the Iesuites haue diuided those that were drawne from the first into two other kindes, which are so cun∣ningly coucht together that they can hardly be distin∣guished. Some of them consist in practise, whereby
treason is nourished, other consist in doctrine, wherby superstition is cherished. Those they scatter mystically and closely, these plainly and openly. Those I call pra∣cticall and mysticall, which concerne the Popes power in deposing of Kings by the sentence of excommuni∣cation, and absoluing subiects from the oath of fealtie: and conspiracies and rebellions to be concealed vnder the seale of confession; and Clerkes to bee exempted from the iudgement of a secular Prince; and the power of the Pope aboue the Councell, and other wic∣ked conclusions of the same kinde, with the schoole of Paris hath lately condemned. And a certaine Priest termed a more moderate answerer, that hee may more couertly and freely teach the professed articles of su∣perstition, doth ouerthrow those mysticall articles of rebellion: for which cause he complayneth that their salary is denyed him, and the Priests of his order by the Pope. Whom I thinke good hee should answer, as the Asse answered Balaam, Am not I thine Asse, whereon thou wert wont to ride euen till this day? Tell me if euer I did the like before, and now I haue once offended in telling the truth, why wilt thou beate mee, and take my prouender from me? If such Priests will giue eare to me, let them forsake so vnthankfull, and vniust a master, and come ouer to our side. For I feare lest while they secretly sow their open articles of superstition among our Country∣men, that they will draw them from the faith of Christ, and beget schollers for Iesuites, whom they will infect with their hidden articles of rebellion, and bring them from their allegeance and obedience to the King. These are fetcht from the first, bastards borne of bastards, vi¦pers bred of vipers, the last more wicked than the for∣mer, shortly bringing forth an of spring more vilanous. Those that are fetcht from immediate revelations, as they bee supposed, make truth the way for heresie, as the authors thereof pretend iustice for wickednesse. But this is the disposition of all heretikes, that out of
a generall truth propounded, they alway assume and draw out heresie, which as a witch doth cast in a sacred furie into their deceiued mindes. The Pelagians from the generall allegation of Gods grace and helpe, do ga∣ther a speciall rule of their heresie, which as poyson they distill more easily into the mindes of their simple Auditors. The Papists holding those articles of Christ generally, do infuse hereticall poyson deepe into their mindes being seasoned with the sweet of those generals. I will giue you one example, which doth farther spread it selfe. They beleeue in generall that Christ is ascen∣ded vp into heauen, and sits at the right hand of God, and shall come from thence to iudge both the quicke and the dead. Yet the Priest doth daily bring Christ from thence, to wit, out of heauen into the sacrament, so that he is corporally present in the sacrament, when it is manifest that hee is conteyned in heauen till all things be fulfilled. But here they distinguish, that Christ shall come once from heauen visibly to iudgement, but com∣meth invisibly euery day into the sacrament. O notable deduction, that ouerturneth the principle from whence it is drawne! O notable distinction, which doth by di∣stinguishing vtterly ouerthrow the principall article But so doth heresie besmere ouer the lip of the cuppe as it were with honie, that it may be taken and goe downe the more merily. As Pius the 4, who brought in the Constantinople creed, which he calleth the Rom: creed, as a preface before the new creede being their owne. Which when it seem'd to me to be vnworthily done, I thought good to discourse of this new Creede of the faith, composed by the Pope in a wicked intent, being the summe of Antichristianitie, in a Latin Dia∣logue, diuided into three bookes. The first Dialogue bringeth in Antichrist as an Actor on the stage: the second and third as a Doctor in the chayre. The first doth fully describe the practise of the Beast, and there∣fore is termed Pragmaticall Antichrist, or Hildebrand
restored to life. Taking that name from Caesar Baronius,Caes: Baron: in sentent: sua contra Venet. who to prouoke Paul the fift against the Venetians; Me thinkes (saith he) I see sitting in Peters chaire, Gre∣gorie the 7. and Alexander the 3. two rootes of the Church libertie now decayed, both issuing out of the Citie of Senes, whence your Holinesse takes your beginning; whereof the one did bring vnder Henry that obstinate Emperor, thother did vanquish Fredericke very stoutly opposing himselfe a∣gainst him. You must take in hand the same quarrell. Therefore Paul the 5. in Baronius iudgement is Hilde∣brand brought to life againe. And if the Pope by Baro∣nius perswasion doe Gregorize or Alexandrize with Princes, I pray to God for Iesus Christ his sake, to pre∣serue our Prince, that hee may Henrize and Frederize, but with better successe with the Popes. The second and third Dialogue discourse of the articles of Anti∣christ, and therefore is entitled Dogmaticall Antichrist, or The Popes Creede, because it conteyneth the articles publikely to be professed: but chiefly that incompre∣hensible supremacie, which to the Papists is a transcen∣dent, when it had not a being with the Apostles, being the head of Goliah, an euill head, or a head full of all mischiefes, which you shall perceiue in the second Dialogue by all meanes defended, yet you shall say with a stone cast out of the word of God to bee well broken. But because hee hath made a scepter of his Crosiers staffe, the second Dialogue is rightly termed The ruling Pastor. I follow after as I can but not with equall paces, certaine notable Fathers of our Church, who when as they first refute the graue (as they seeme) and probable opinions of Antichrist earnestly and soundly: doe afterward pleasantly and wittily laugh at his foolish and harmefull Institutions. Truth doth somtime laugh at heresie, because shee is safe and secure, as Tertullian saith. Scutile iesting doth not beseeme a Diuine, but a witty conceit, arising from the matter in question, which ridiculous Antichrist cannot choose
but vtter to euery one be he neuer so sober, in his fained grauitie, and pastorall maiestie. Wisely said the Poet, An earnest iest Doth more stoutly and better somtime set out great matters. But the Papists take it in ill part, that their Pope, compared to the King is scoft at, as though hee exten∣ded his Empire in Iaponia beyond the fieldes of Cutica∣lindon: and they be greiued that the Cardinalls vanitie proudly comparing himselfe to the King, is pleasantly flouted at: but that the flourishing meddow in purga∣torie deuised by the old Doctour is scoft at, they take very hainously. But who may not thinke that such o∣dious comparisons, such proud vanities, such foolish old-wiues-tales should not rather bee laught at with a pleasant iest, then put off with an earnest argument? as the Prophet laught at the wicked fooleries of the Ba∣alites and the Apostle called the circumcision of the false Apostles pleasantly concision. So ridiculous bee these toyes, which they tearme holy deceites, their va∣nities be so insolent, which they cast vpon the people as bridles to deceiue them, that a wise man euen in the darke night of poperie could not choose but deride the Pope. Henrie the second when hee had honourably enter∣tained the Popes Legate at Windsor, and in hunting had caught a stagge, Looke my Lord said he, how fat the stagge is, and yet he neuer heard Masse. And when Ottobone an other of the Popes Lagates, was purposed to lay a hea∣uie curse vpon certaine noble men that rebelled, and came to that purpose to Killingworth being attired in his purple robe, and his red Cardinalles hat, it is said that they being all in white, and putting a surplasse vpon a Surgeon whom they had got to curse Ottobone with the like curse, brake out into this iest, that a curse of one in white was as terrible as the curse of a purple Priest. That which was lawfull for Kings and Peeres the popish sons of the Pope, to vtter against the pride and superstition
of the Pope: I pray let it bee lawfull for a King, who doth not acknowledge the Pope for his Father, to re∣prooue sometime with a pleasant iest that superstition which he hath learned out of the word to be not onely very hurtfull, but often very foolish. As that learned Marnixius in his Bee-hiue, when he derideth both the other vanities of poperie, and also those fained cells in hell with a continued irony, and pleasant dissembling: I should maruell if the Pope and Bellarmine should not like the two South-sayers laugh betweene themselues, when they see the world so fit to be cousoned by them. But I my selfe truly will follow after not iests but argu∣ments. And I rather greeue, then laugh when I thinke of the Pope, that great scourge of God. Neither doe I hate a Papist but popery: I taxe heresie not the men: and I wish an ouerthrow to heresie, saluation to the men. Our bookes are taught this fashion to bring in, To spare their persons and to taxe their sinne. I would not haue thought it meete to taxe the person of a Iesuite, if he had not laide open his person who is more deare vnto vs then our liues, to the sword of soul∣diers, being first wounded with the quill of a goose. Whose booke might haue profited the very slaunde∣rers themselues euen to their saluation, if they had had in them but one crumme of grace: whereto agreeth that speech of the wise Poet. He doth deserue both pricke and praise Who so with profite pleasure layes. But whenas the Iesuits do shew themselues not only Aristarchi, that is reprehenders of our writings,Cicero in piso. as the Orator said, but censors like Phalaris, neither doe they set a note vpon our writings, but persecute our writers with fire and fagot: and doe not only sprincle ouer our bookes with blacke salt, but our Court with hell dust: they may con our men thankes, who for such deedes, giue but such wordes: and suffer themselues sometime
to be galled with the freedom of style, whom they haue hurt with the furie of their wickednesse. Where∣in our owne men should haue beene more fauourable to our owne writers being so excellent for holinesse and learning, whom yet I heare of some (I hope they bee but a few false brethren) like to Ianus, are wont to bee though lightly bitten and reprehended. Who if they be not ours, they might doe very well, if, they would more open themselues: if they be ours, as I rather de∣sire, let them fauour our holy labours: vnlesse they de∣sire to heare of some writer of ours, which Lelius a cer∣taine criticall reprehender heard out of Martiall. When Lelius carpeth mine and keepeth in his verse, Or let him hold his prate, or else his owne rehearse. For it is both greeuous and vnseemly that their wri∣tings should be closly bit with a Theonine tooth, by false brethren, whose throates are first assailed with a leonine crueltie by open enemies. There is almost none of our writers, who haue not written that the Pope is Antichrist; But there be certaine men among vs very moderate, forsooth, and politicke, who would not haue the Aduersarie so angered and stirred vp with so sharpe a conclusion, and that thereby all hope of com∣position and peace betweene the parties should bee cut off: betweene whom they thinke to bee a great diffe∣rence of wordes, but little or none at all of things: that God is alike deare to each Church, and that the litur∣gie of each is alike accepted of God, that saluation is in both, when each doth rest vpon Christ the foundation, that a Papist may, although halting come to heauen, and that the hatred of Papists is not so great as we make it, and that it is not conceiued by their owne accord, but that it is encensed by such bitter disputations: and that the quarrell had been ended, if certaine hot spiri∣ted Theologians had not encreased the controuersie. These luke-warme Christians, that seeme to bee of no side and of both sides, seeme to dispute soberly and po∣litickly.
But your religious wisedome, Christian Rea∣der doth better vnderstand, that the Romane Syna∣gogue is full of idolatrie, and that it doth therefore hate God, and by Moses iudgement, is againe hatefull to God: neither was Caine prouoked with any iniurie of Abels, but by his owne malice and hatred of godlines: And though both of them were wont to sacrifice to God in Adames house, yet Caines sacrifice was reiected, A∣bels accepted, and the worke pleased God for the per∣son, not the person for the worke; that which Saint Gre∣gorie gathereth out of Moses, because the person was first made righteous by faith, as the Apostle taught Heb. 11. and that therefore there is no lesse difference of worship and faith betweene a Protestant and a Papist, then was betweene Caine and Abell. And that the Synagogues anger against our Church is as implacable, as Caines a∣gainst Abell, and Ismaels against Isaac, and that before it was stirred vp with the blast of contention, it was mo∣ued with hatred of the promise. And as the hatred of Ismael against the promise, which he derided, being co∣uered with a visard of circumcision, brake out against the sonne of the promise; so the hidden and secret ha∣tred of the Synagogue of Rome against the holy scrip∣tures, the tables of the promise, as I said, being couered with a certaine shew of voluntarie religion, did greiuous∣ly breake and burne out against our Church the heire of the promise, so that Agar doth not leaue off to per∣secute Sara againe, the Haidmayde her Mistris in the house of Abraham. And when it can bee proued that Caines sacrifice was as well accepted of God as Abels, then I will grant that the Papists Masse be as acceptable to God, as the Liturgie of the Protestants; and when it can be euicted that Christ alone apprehended by faith without our workes, is not the foundation of the church I wil grant that the same is the foūdation of both Churches. Lastly, when it shall appeare that Ismael the sonne of the handmaide borne by the power of nature,
is coheyre of the house of Abraham with Isaac the sonne of the free woman borne by the force of the pro∣mise, then I will grant that an obstinate Papist, may come halting to heauen. In the meane time I will warne these luke-warme and halting Protestant, that they will giue sentence in Gods matters according to the certaine truth of God, not out of their prevarica∣ting charitie, and that there be no middle counsell to be taken: neither let them trust, the Pope being more ioyntly and easily intreated by them, will be the more easie and gentle to them. Whom we by short conclu∣sions out of holy Paul and Iohn, excellently expounded by notable worthies of our Church, although a little more bitterly and roughly, then seemeth good to some, we shew to be Antichrist. I confesse that this is a weigh∣ty and darke prophecie, whose importance doth reiect the vanitie of tales, whose obscuritie requireth more cleare light of interpretation. So it falleth out some∣time that the exposition is larger, the conclusion shor∣ter. For a short exposition and a long conclusion are faultie alike when hard and controuersies of impor∣tance are handled. For a short exposition wants light, and a long conclusion wants sharpenesse of wit. The Aduersarie doth offend in both, while hee is busied in the interpretation of the prophecie, for it doth lessen things of weight, neither doth it make plaine matters obscure. For hee doth depresse the excellencie of the prophecy by stuffing it vp with the vanitie of many fa∣bles, and being satisfied with vncertaine coniectures of Fathers, and with their naked names, hath not driuen away the obscuritie. So it falleth out, that from strange and vnkinde expositions of the prophecie, they gather weake and idle conclusions. In the vnfoulding of this mysterie, the holy fathers haue stood vs in good steed, and more had, if they had beene Prophets. But when∣as they (Daniel being the Authour) doe teach that the vnderstanding of the prophesie, is to be taken from the
performance of it, and grant that truth is the daughter of time, we that are fallen vpon the endes of times, confer∣ring all the parts of the prophecie betweene themselues with great study and reuerence, and bringing light to the text, out of the context, and to the context out of the euent, because Christ hath opened the booke that was sealed vp, nor called it anA thing sea∣led & hidden. apocrypse, but anA thing ope∣ned and reuea∣led. apo∣calypse, we do from thence more confidently drawe a conclusion, not as an Article of faith, but as asure de∣monstration of the doctrine of Christ. Although the popish Synagogue, which without any testimonie of Scripture makes this the thirteenth Article of their faith, I beleeue that the Pope is the Ʋicar of Christ, may iustly pardon the reformed Church if being taught by so many testimonies of Scripture, it make this to be an Article of their faith, I beleeue that the Pope is Antichrist. Now I did foresee that when I made a looking glasse for Paul the 5. it would come to passe, that the Iesuites, who do so often traduce the King of great Britaine, with their slanderous and infamous libels, would bee much mooued to anger, that I often vsed the name of their Pope in this manner. For what will they say? darest thou an obscure fellow speake so often to the Pope be∣ing so great a Prince? or conceiuest thou any hope that being an hereticall minister, thou canst conuert so great a Doctor? Whereby thou hast got naught else for thy labour, but that thy folly and pride should be knowne to all men. These I presage will bee the embleames of the Iesuitish stile, whereto (thy selfe Reader shalt bee an Arbitrator) I shortly answere. I see that the Pope of his owne is accounted a great Father, but thrust as a small Prince by his great neighbour Princes into a small corner of the south: but how bigge soeuer he be, I speak to the Pope as not to a politicall Prince, but politicall Antichrist. I fauour his ciuill dignitie whatsoeuer it be, but I spare not his spirituall impietie. But what? doe I take in hand to conuert the Pope? no more then I en∣deuour
to wash an Ethiopian. I am not yet so madde. I know that the belly hath no eares. And it may be Paul the fift, as it is said, is dead. What then? but Paul being dead the Pope is aliue. One head groweth vp vnder an other. For the popedome is a Hydra. I doe not defend that this or that Pope, but that the Pope is Antichrist. It re∣maineth now Christian Reader, that I exhort and in∣treat thee by thy saluation, that the hatred of the Syna∣gogue being contemned, though thou well know Christ, to knowe him with mee daily better out of the Scriptures, that both of vs may more earnestly loue him, and more earnestly follow him being loued, and further that you know him peraduenture suspected by you, to be Antichrist, more certainely by the euent of the prophecie, that being known each may pursue him with an holy hatred, and right execration; to which purpose I first set before thee the Glasse of Christ and view of Christianitie, now I set before thee the Popes looking-Glasse and the picture of ANTICHRIST.
The Translator to the READER. CHristian Reader, I doubt not, but a translation of such a nature, will incur much reprehension, euen of good men, not onely in respect of the matter, which it somewhat obscure for the vulgar, but also for the manner, which must needes come short of the originall. For the first, if the worke be so good, that it was thought fit to be made knowne to some, I see no reason, but it may be made knowne to more; and so may be, Bonum quo communius, eo melius. And for the other, I confesse, it comes farre short of that sufficiencie, wherein it was set out in Latin, and so would haue been, though it had fal∣len on a skilfull workeman in respect of our English, which is farre more barbarous, and is many times the worse, when it is set out with bombasted words and incke-horne termes, such as the world is too well ac∣quainted with at this day. What the Rom-Catholikes thinke of the worke, I care not, they are like to loose by it, and loosers will haue their words. The Latine hath been censured by them already, as I am informed to be well written for the style, but exceeding bad for the matter. Whose censure I will regard, contrary to Ciceroes censuring of a Gentlewomans dancing, wher∣of he said, the better the worse: but I of their cen∣sures, the worse the better. For if nought that was good was heretofore look'd for from Galilie, what good can be looked for at this day from Rome, the forge of
all slanders and villanies. And if Christian Kings cannot be exempted from their obloquies and iniuries, why should we poore men, both the Author and Tran∣slator hope no escape the opprobries of such blacke-mouth'd Orators. Howsoeuer it be, and whatsoeuer befall, the worke was first set out, and now translated not only to reueale Antichrist, who by his gadding Priests is ready to seduce thee: but also to set forth Christ vnto thee, who by his grace is most ready to saue thee. If ought therein be amisse, impute it to the weak∣nesse of men; if there be any good, for thy good yeeld glory to God, to whom I commend thee; and rest Thy Christian well-willer, EDWARD SHARPE.
THE POPES LOOKING GLASSE. CHAP. I. The dedication of the worke. HAuing a purpose to re∣port a Conference had in Latine among great learned men on both sides, about the Popes new Creede, lately re∣printed by your selfe Pope Paul the fift, I thought it good to prefix a short Treatise, termed the Popes Looking Glasse, which is nothing else but an euident and liuely deci∣phering of Antichrist prophetically painted out, by S. Paul and Saint Iohn, before the whole Dialogue, and to set it forth dedicated to your name: partly that I might shew your selfe to your selfe, with those your sa∣crilegious swarmes of Locusts and Frogs about you: partly that I might recall ingenuous Papists from the franticke loue of Popery, when they shall throughly be∣gin
to know the Pope: and lastly that I might vnite the Christian Kings and Princes that yet fauour the Pope,The Pope an enemy to God and man in the defence and quarrell of Christ, and Prote∣stant Princes, when they shall perceiue that he is a dead∣ly enemy to Gods Testament, and Princely gouern∣ment. I hope those excellent workmen that haue of late so copiously picturde the image of the Beast, in euerie her seuerall member and ioynt, will giue me leaue to doe it more compendiously in a lesser Table, and nar∣rower roome, for I haue endeuoured to the vttermost of my power to contract the large discourses of other men, and to draw them into short conclusions. For this being concluded and proued, that the Pope of Rome is that Antichrist which is shadowed out in the glasse, it doth necessarily follow, that Popery which is questi∣onable between vs, is that Antichristianisme which is contained in the Creed. CHAP. II. Wherein, as in diuerse following Chapters, is set downe what Antichrist is. In this the mistaking of the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle Iohn. FIrst therefore I will trulie and briefly propound and expound the state and summe of the principall con∣trouersie what Antichrist is, least when I come to the combat, that is to the conclusion, I may seeme rather to fight with my aduersaries shadow then with him∣selfe. Our men for the most part doe search out for the type of Antichrist in Daniel,Antichrists type in Daniel, himselfe in the Apocalypse. and for Antichrist him∣selfe in Iohn: your men doe seeke for himselfe in Daniel where his Type is, and in Iohn where himselfe is, they are afraid to seeke him for feare to find him. For there in the place of the literall sense, they vrge the mysticall, here in stead of the mysticall they presse the literall. There where Daniel the Prophet doth hystorically and
properly paint out Antiochus Epiphanes, they dreame that Antichrist is properly described, here where Iohn the Propheticall Apostle doth mysticallie, yet purpose∣lie and liuely describe Antichrist, that shall mysticallie giue life to the Beast, rising out of the sea, and mystically bring downe fire from heauen, there they imagine such a hagge and as it were a bewitching Canidia, which shall giue motion to woodden pictures, life to the dead, and speech to the dumbe, and shall call downe for very true fire from Heauen.What is meant by the ten hornes in Daniel. There the ten hornes that are sprung out of the breach and ruines of the Mace∣donian Empire, ten Kings, seauen from Seleucus, and three from Lagis, who succeeded orderly one after ano∣ther in the gouernment of Syria, and opprest Iurie, and were all dead before the comming of Christ,What is ment by the ten hornes in the Apocalypse. they take for ten hornes, or those ten Kings, who after the death of Christ, rose out of the diuision and ruines of the Ro∣mane Empire, that was to be dissolued many ages after: who had the gouernment together with the beast: nei∣ther did in order succeed one another in the same king∣dome, but gouerne in diuerse Prouinces at the same time. Neither did destroy Iury, being destroied already, but shall subuert and ouerthrow the Romane Empire,What absur∣dities follow by the Popish interpretation of Iohn. as your men suppose, but as the truth is the Popedome it selfe. So that, while your Doctors doe in the Apoca∣lypse a bookefull of hidden mysteries, follow after a literall and a proper sense, marke I pray you what a pleasant and comicall Antichrist they haue imagined. Whom S. Iohn doth terme a beast with two hornes, they will make a horned beast indeed. The two witnesses whom Saint Iohn calleth two Oliue trees, and two Candlestickes, if by the Letter they vrge them to be two men, that is Enoch and Elias, who must be slaine by Antichrist they will imagine a very terrible Antichrist that will kill Oliue trees and Candlestickes: If the two witnesses shall cast out true fire out of their mouthes, these fiery fellowes will suddenly consume Antichrist.
If Antichrist contrarily shall fetch downe true fire from heauen, and giue life to Images as it were to so many Pigmalions (which if you forget not they will cause to be worshipped) they will bring a notable magitian vpon the stage; so those prophane companions will cleane alter the Holy Ghosts most weighty prophecie, into their owne ridiculous comedy. Furthermore while they thus peruersly compare Daniels prophecie with Iohns Apocalypse, they doe so confound not onlie things with things, but ages with ages, that vnlesse they raise dead men out of their graues, or make Kings raigne be∣fore they were borne, their interpretations can in no wise hang together. At a word (Paul the fift) they must not bring backe the sunne fifteene degrees, as in the dial of Ahaz, but more then a thousand degrees, that these may agree together. Blessed Iohn of set purpose hath written Antichrist his mysterie; Paul hath made a Commentarie.How far Da∣niels prophe∣cy reacheth for time. Our men while they bring light to Iohns hidden mysterie out of Pauls commentarie, your men doe bring darknesse out of Daniels prophecie: all which (be it spoken by those Doctors leaue who doe thinke otherwise) if you onlie except the comfortable prophe∣cie of the resurrection of Christ, Chap. the 12. I can euict to haue been fulfilled within the compasse of sea∣uentie yeeres, if you reckon from that time wherin Ie∣rusalem was taken by the Chaldees, to that time where∣in it was vtterlie ouerthrowne by the Romanes. Where∣fore let vs take the type of Antichrist if you please out of Daniel, himselfe we shall find in Saint Iohns prophecy and Saint Pauls, which your men do so much labor to obscure, that they may vtterly peruert the state of the question.
CHAP. III. The state of the question, and diuers significations of Antichrist. FOr this is the whole question set downe by Becanus,Bcan. in spec. Antioch refor. c. 10. whether Antichrist properly so called, shall come one an in his owne person? Agreeable to that which Bellarmine had said before; for either of them doe imagine that this Aduersarie shall be one singular person, by reason of the addition of the article , that Antichrist, for that article doth point out alwaies one that is singular, hee is much deceiued. For it doth often point out one kinde,Antichrist not one singu∣lar person, but a succession. as in the same place, , as the Fathers doe ex∣pound it, and the Papists doe acknowledge it, Hee that withstandeth: Hee meanes the Emperour in generall, not this or that Emperor. And Matthew the 16 chap∣ter, vers. 18. not only the article, but the demonstratiue Pronoune is also added, , whereby not onely one Peter (though falsly) is vnderstood of you, but a succession of Popes. Therefore the article doth either settle Antichrist in a succession, or in that place doth not settle a succession in the Pope. Choose of these two whether you will. I perceiue that Becan and Bellarmine doe inquire after both: first, whether he be: then, what hee is. Whether Antichrist bee fore∣shewed in the Scriptures, no man doubteth: whether hee can be pointed out in the world, I will so cleare it, that none shall doubt, if first by inquirie wee finde out, what hee is. In the question, what hee is, as they make him one singular aduersarie by the addition of the arti∣cle, so likewise by the composition of the name,  and . They grant he is Christs opposite and ad∣uersarie, his Vicar they denie him. S. Iohn saith, that the Beast that came vp out of the earth (which by Bellar∣mines confession is that Antichrist)Apoc: 13. had not two Lambs
hornes, but two hornes like a Lambe, and spake like a Dragon. A Vicar or substitute in apparance, an aduer∣sarie in truth; as it is manifest by the definition of the thing it selfe, and of the word. For what can those two hornes of the Lambe signifie other, then the two offices of Christ, his priestly, and his kingly office? which the Beast imagineth that shee weareth in steed of the lambe, whence I conclude, The Beast is a counterfeit Vicar of the Lambe by the witnesse of Iohn. Antichrist is that Beast by the testimonie of Bellar∣mine. Therefore Antichrist is that counterfeit Vicar of the Lambe. No Vicar, saith he, but an Opposite, and an Aduersarie: yea a Vicar to his person, that he may be an opposite to his glory,The diuers significations of . and an Aduersarie to his doctrine. But that the composition of the name will not beare. for  in composition is onely a note of Emulation and Opposition, not so onely but of substitution and surrogation also. For  doth not onely signifie a Captaine of a contrarie part: but also a Propraetor, who had the same authoritie in a Prouince, that a Praetor had in a Citie: sometime him that was in the place of a Pretor, or the Praetors Legate.Aduersarie like to God. Proconsul. You haue all the significations in one word, how much rather in diuers? as  noteth opposition:  equalitie:  sub∣stitution. Antichrist doth comprehend all these significations, who though he be in truth his Aduersarie, yet doth challenge Christ his authoritie, as his equall, and vsurpes his place, as his Vicar. The Pope is Christ his Vicegerent, doth emulate his honour, and oppose his doctrine. Therefore he is in subtletie his Vicar, in pride his Op∣posite, in heart his Aduersarie, that is in plaine termes, he is Antichrist.
Whom S. Iohn affirmeth to haue been in his time,1 Ioh: 2. v. 18 & 22. Cap. 4.3. Antichrist had his begin∣ning in the daies of the Apostles. 2 Thess: 2. for he speaketh of Antichrist properly so called, as Bellar∣mine confesseth, to whom he ioyneth the article : Saint Paul likewise saith, that he began then to worke secretly, after that which hindred was taken away, that he should be reuealed in his time, and should sit and dominere so long in the Church of God, till Christ shall come to iudgement: and that hee should decay, and by litle and little bee consumed with the spirit of the Lords mouth, that is, with the ministerie of the word; but at the glorious appearing of the Lord he should be vtterly ouerthrowne. not therfore one singular enemie shall come in his owne person, as Becan faineth: vnlesse happily he thinke that one and the same man in number could possibly liue from the age of the Apostles vnto the comming of Christ. Thus I therefore argue breefely out of the premisses. If that Antichrist was in the daies of the Apostles af∣ter to be reuealed to domineir in the Church, nor to be destroyed till the comming of Christ, cer∣tainely he cannot be one singular person, vnlesse peraduenture they dreame that Antichrist shall suruiue Methusalah many hundred yeeres. But the Antecedent or former part is true, as S. Iohn and S. Paul doe manifestly proue. Therefore the Consequent that hee cannot be one and a singular person is likewise true. CHAP. IV. The diuers kindes of Antichrists, wherein it is farther proued to be a succession. FOR whereas Antichrist so called in a common sense by Iohn in his Epistle, they say did come in the times of the Apostles: but that Antichrist so pro∣perly called in the Apocalyps is not come as yet; first
they doe not agree among themselues, who vnderstand that it is Antichrist so properly called of Iohn in his Epistle, by reason of the addition of the article: se∣condly, although he there make mention of Antichrists so commonly called, small and litle ones, whom consi∣dered by themselues I confesse to haue beene the fore∣runners of that great Antichrist, yet I say and affirme, that they be truly to be termed parts of that great beast, as Paul in his Commentarie of this mysterie hath so plainly expounded. For he saith, that hee who then be∣gan to worke secretly, should continue till the com∣ming of Christ. That therefore he could not be a beast of three yeeres continuance, soone vp & soone downe. But as small Riuers while they keepe within their owne bankes haue their own names,A similitude between An∣tichrist and a great Riuer. but when they flow into the Thames, or into Seine doe loose their owne names, and make the streame the greater: So is it with these small and common Antichrists: they falling into their owne heresies are considered apart; but when they fall out of their own channels as it were into that great gulfe Antichrist,1 Ioh: 4.3. & 2.18. & 22. they lay aside their owne names, and make vp that grand Antichrist. And therefore Iohn in his Epistle saith, that that Antichrist then was, and after should be. How may that be will you say? that he was then in secret, that he should be in open sight: that he was then an infant, but should after be a man. These were the heresies, this was that Apostacie wherof S. Iohn and S. Paul spake, a disposition as Bellarmine confesseth, tending to the kingdome of Antichrist; he said well to the kingdom, not to his beginning. For then he was borne but to the kingdome of Antichrist, not to the essence of him, that then was as Iohn said, but to the reuealing of him who then lay hid as Paul said. The apostacie therefore began in those heresies, wherein Antichrist did lurke, which Paul doth teach shall last not onely to an appearance, and a kingdome, but to the diminishing and ouerthrow of Antichrist. And this apostacie could
not be of three yeares, and one man onely. And there∣fore it is conuinc't that Antichrist is not one singular man, but a succession of men. Moreouer the two beasts described by S. Iohn in the Apocalyps, the Sea-beast, and the Land-beast; by the Sea-beast you meane the state of the Romane Empire; by the Land-beast the state of Antichrist.Bellar. de Rom: Pont. cap. 10. & cap. 15. lib. 3 But the Sea-beast doth not signifie this or that Emperour, but a succession of Emperours: therefore the Land-beast doth not signifie this or that Bishop only, but a succession of Bishops, whereof many were great beasts indeed. As likewise neither the foure beasts in Daniel, whereof the beast in the Apocalyps is compounded, doe not note singular Kings, but King∣domes. Here Bellarmine disputeth against vs topically, or rather typically. Such as the figure is, such is the thing figured. Antiochus the figure of Antichrist was one singular man. Therfore Antichrist the thing figured is one singular man. If the proposition be generall it is very false, for the proportion between the figure, and the thing figured, doth not hold in all, but in those only wherein they be compared. Many are often the type of one, as many high Priests of one Christ, and one is the type of one, as Melchisedech of Christ, whom you notwithstan∣ding doe make to be the type of many Priests. It hol∣deth not therefore that because Antiochus the type was one man, that therfore Antichrist must be but one man. The comparison stands not in the vnitie of the person, but in the likenesse of nature: And therefore if the pro¦position be taken generally, it is very false, and if parti∣cularly, then it is a meere fallacie. But if it please him to argue from a type, I will requite him with an argu∣ment drawne from a type, the authour whereof is the Holy Spirit. The first Beast that is the state of the Roman Em∣pire is a Beast of many heads.
The second Beast that is the state of Antichrist, is the image of the first by the witnesse of S. Iohn. Therefore the state of Antichrist is a beast of many heads. But so many heads, so many persons. As therefore the state of Antichrist may resemble the state of the Em∣pire, it doth consist not in one person onely, but in a succession of many persons: which when we affirme, it must not be preiudiciall to those holy Bishops, who for Christs sake spent their bloud at Rome vnder the Emperours: but to the shame of their Successors, who forsaking the rule of holy Scripture, haue spilt the blood of other men. For it is not Rome regenerated, and suffering, but degenerated and persecuting must be counted the seat of the Beast with many heads: which notwithstanding is to be vnderstood, that to the Beast there is but one only head at one time, more successiue∣ly, whom God hath permitted The proper∣ties & effects of Antichrist.1 To be like the Lambe in two hornes. 2 To speake as a Dragon. 3 To shew forth the power of the first Beast in his owne sight. 4 To make the earth and the inhabitants thereof to worship the first Beast. 5 To cure the deadly wound of the former Beast. 6 To restore spirit and speech to the image of the first Beast. 7 To kill such as will not worship the image of the Beast. 8 To worke false wonders, namely to make fire descend from heauen in the sight of men. 9 To haue the name of the Beast, and the name of a man, and the number of his name, which num∣ber is six hundred sixtie and six. 10 To imprint the marke of the Beasts name vpon all; either on the forhead, or on the right hand.
11 To forbid that none shall buy or sell without the marke of the Beast. These be the true notes of the second Beast, that is, of Antichrist, by your owne interpretations, which not∣withstanding are miserably detorted, as afterward shall plainly appeare. Now I take this as granted, that these so weighty and admirable matters cannot be brougnt to passe by one singular Beast within the compasse of three yeeres and a halfe, whereunto so many Beasts, and so many ages are required. Antichrist therefore is that ould-aged Animal, not a simple, but a compound beast: for as many Marij were in one Caesar,2 Thess: 2. v. 3.4. so there be many Antichrists in that Antichrist, whom Paul termeth that man of sinne, and that sonne of perdition. They doe therefore but trifle, and say nothing to purpose,A comparison betweene the people of Rome and Antichrist. who thinke that therefore he is called the man of sinne, because he is a single man. For as Florus did paint out all the people of Rome vn∣der the figure of one man, to wit, an infant 250 yeeres; and 250 yeeres a young man; a strong man other 250; and an ould man the last 250 yeeres, the same people still gouerning successiuely in the same Citie, with the same policies, alwaies to the same end, as one man aspi∣ring to greatnesse, till by the lazinesse of some of the Emperours it became decrepite, and exceeding feeble: So it doth seeme, that the Apostles by the spirit of pro∣phecie, did describe many Bishops of Rome, as one wretched man, and one beast successiuely gouerning, in that seuen-hilld Citie, an infant in the Apostles time, after closely growing vp, in certaine of the am∣bitious Romane Bishops, till it came to strength in Bo∣niface the third, and to the full age of a man, and greater ripenesse in Gregorie the seuenth, and others of his suc∣cessors, euer another man, not another thing, the same an infant, the same a youth, and a man, differing not in minde, but in age, by the same meanes breathing and aspiring to greatnesse, the same closely hidden, and
openly reuealed, the same dominering, and the same to be ouerthrowne, and now at the last an ouer-worne and a decayed Antic: so that he seemeth by his long lasting impietie to be vtterly consumed and brought to nothing. The summe of all is this, that Antichrist pro∣perly so termed, is a succession or a kingdome contrary to the kingdome of Christ, in profession a Vicar, in presumption an Opposite, in purpose an Aduer∣sarie. CHAP. V. Wherein is inquired what manner of one Antichrist is. WE haue found out what Antichrist is, now let vs search out, what kinde a one hee is, by that meanes we shall certainely know who it is. Who that hee might not appeare vnto vs in his likenesse, Satan hath abused the witts of certaine good men, being ig¦norant of the euent of the prophecie, who haue out of that first errour deuised a notable tale. For first presup∣posing that Antichrist is but one single aduersarie, hence they haue imagined,The Popish description of Antichrist. that he shall be by Nation and Religion a Iew, of the tribe of Dan, the Messias of the Iewes, and that he shall sit in the Temple of Ierusalem being re-edi∣fied by himselfe, that he shall raigne three yeeres and a halfe, that he shall put to death three Kings, and subdue seauen others, and shall obteyne the Monarchie of the whole world: that those two witnesses, whom they thinke to be Enoch and Elias, reserued aliue in some place all this while, shall re∣turne vpon the earth, and fight with Antichrist, and being slaine by him, shall rise againe after three yeeres and a halfe: and it shall come to passe that the Iewes being conuerted by that miracle, shall kill Antichrist in Mount Oliuet, and shall ioyne themselues with Christ, who shall come to iudge∣ment fiue and fortie daies after. This tale certaine ancient
writers haue deuised, which they so vnconstantly re∣port,Bellarmine an A better of the former tale. that it easily appeareth by the contradiction that it is but a lye. All this false tale Bellarmine telleth as truth, except that part concerning the Tribe of Dan. But let vs reiecting all fables,Antichrist de∣scribed out of the Scriptures and Fathers. seeke after the truth of God, written by the Apostles: being now manifested by euent, the best Interpreter of the prophesie, and by the iudgements of the Fathers agreeing with the Scrip∣tures.Apoc. 9. 2. Thes. 2. 1. Tim. 4.10. Saint Iohn doth call Antichrist a starre falne from heauen: Paul an Apostata from the faith, or rather the chiefe Captaine and Ring-leader of that generall Apostasie; a Renegate from the Lord God as Augustine doth ex∣pound it:August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 10. Greg. lib. 4. epist. 38. That falling starre not Lu∣cifer. Esa. 14. The King of pride with his prepared armie of Priests, and therefore a Bishop as Gregorie the first thinketh. But Bellarmine doth vnderstand that starre to be Lucifer, according to that, how art thou fallen from heauen O Lucifer. And doth vrge the pretertense, that Saint Iohn did not see the starre to fall hereafter, but that it is fallen alreadie. Neither doth hee marke that this his glosse is farre wide from the text. 1. That Luci∣fers fall from heauen went long before the sound of the fift trumpet. 2. Hee is ignorant of the phrase of the Prophets, who when they foretell things to come, for the certainty of them, speake as if they were come already. 3 Neither doth he obserue the sense of this Prophet who by the name of starres meaneth the Pastors of the Church. At the last he calleth Luther that falling starre,That falling starre not Lu∣ther. and the Lutheranes Heretikes, and the Protestants Locusts, whose armie he brought out of the bottomelesse pit when hee fell. Of that anone, now I demand, how an abiect silly Fryer, as they call him out of his cloyster, that exami∣neth all things by Scriptures can bee that starre falling from heauen? not that great Lucifer, much lesse that little Luther, can be called the falling starre, but some great Byshop, as loftie as the starres, Lucifers mate, who a good while since, hath forsaken heauenly doctrin and
holy life, and hath betaken himselfe to earthly busi∣nesses and wicked manners, that is, hath fallen from heauen to earth. For then are Byshops said to stand in heauen,What the fall of a star mea∣neth. when they performe their duties, and then fall to the earth, when forsaking holy life and doctrin they seeke after worldly matters. But this doth not agree with the Pope onely, for many other starres hauing beene pulled downe by the Dragons taile are falne to the earth.The Popes key and the effects of it. True. But none besides the Pope is of that power, as holy Iohn ascribes vnto him. For the key of the bottomlesse pit was giuen to this falling starre. This great Byshoppe while he shined, as a starre in the Church, that is in hea∣uen, he vsed the key of heauen committed to him as he ought; but after he fell from heauen, he tooke to him∣selfe the key of the bottomlesse pit. Therefore Anti∣christ the Angell of the bottomlesse pit is the key keeper of hell.Apoc. 9.1. 1. Tim. 4.1.3. Whereof blessed Paul giueth a double reason. One that by that his key hee brought into the Church the doctrine of Diuells in forbidding meates and marriages: Another, that lifting vp himselfe aboue all that is called god, that is aboue Kings and Emperours, hee doth shut them out of their kingdomes, and thereby hath brought the darkenesse of the bottomlesse pit into the common wealth. Is not this the liuely image of the Pope? who assoone as he left of to be a starre, by his fall, began afterward to be a foolish fire.Ignis satuus. Whose key is now no longer the key of heauen, but of hell. For his hatred to that do∣ctrine and gouernment, that proceede from God is a most certaine brand of Antichrist. Of the key I shall speake more hereafter in the Creede.
CHAP. VI. Wherein Antichrist is proued an Apostata, and vniuersall Bishop. WHom Saint Iohn tearmeth a falling starre, Saint Paul tearmeth an Apostata from the faith, and makes him a Captaine not of a particular, but an vni∣uersall Apostasie; whom he so sets downe with his pro∣per markes, that he seemeth to haue pointed his finger at the Church of Rome, to whom euery way they doe agree. She forbiddeth marriages and meates, not in o∣pen blasphemie, as some old Heretickes did; but in hid∣den hypocrisie, as the forenamed Apostataes, as the Apostle noteth. Whence I inferre thus. The head of the vniuersall and generall Apostasie is Antichrist The Pope is the head of the vniuersall and gene∣rall Apostasie Therefore the Pope is Antichrist. Therefore Antichrist is not a Iew, or head of the Iewes who cannot be said to haue departed from Christ, before they came to him, but an Apostaticall Christian.Lib. 4. Epist. 32.34.38. And as it is obserued by Gregorie the great, A Bishoppe beleigerd with an armie of Priests, not a Bishop onely, but an vniuersall Bishop. Not that hee alone for that cause did depose all other Bishops, but that he aduanc'd him∣selfe before all others. Whence againe I argue thus. An Apostaticall Christian an vniuersall Bishop is Antichrist The Pope is an Apostaticall Christian, and an v∣niuersall Bishoppe. The Pope therefore is Antichrist. And that title of vniuersall Bishop Pope Gregorie cal∣leth wicked, prophane, sacrilegious. Whereunto to consent, is nothing else (saith he) but to lose the Faith. As hee writ
to Anianus; and thereby to aduance himselfe in honour a∣boue the Empire, as he writ to Mauritius: which whoso∣euer doth, as Iohn Bishop of Constantinople did alrea∣dy, and Ciricius did afterward, he doth pronounce him confidently to be the follower of Lucifer, and the fore-run∣ner of Antichrist.The Pope first vniuersall Bishop. Pope Gregory was a true Prophet, a∣las, too too true a Prophet? for within fiue yeers after, that King of pride, whom he foretolde to be so neere at hand with his army of priests, did vsurpe that chaire, from whence Gregory did deliuer that Oracle, and hath held it now aboue 1000. yeeres, being first called the vniuersall Bishop,Then vniuer∣sall Prince. because he hath the iurisdiction ouer all Bishops. As first, Boniface that falling starre. After that, vniuersall Prince created out of himselfe, because he had the soueraignty ouer all Kings and Emperours, as Gregorie the seuenth. So that the Bishop of Rome, is by a Bishop of Rome prophetically concluded to bee for his treason Lucifer,Lastly, Luci∣fer and Anti∣christ. for the losse of his faith Anti∣christ. But the Bishop, as themselues affirme, cannot erre in his definitiue sentence: for hee hath the Spirit assi∣stant, and tied to the Chaire. The Bishop therefore is Antichrist; for that I may cast vp all into a short summe, Antichrist is a falling starre, a degenerating shepheard, a domineering Bishop. CHAP. VII. Antichrist within the Church in stead of God, and how he lifts vp himselfe against God. DOe you not behold your selfe in this Looking-glasse, Paul the fift? suffer not your selfe to bee deceiued by those men, who imagine Antichrist to be an outward aduersarie, whom the Apostle doth make an homebred stubborne Traytor: for as he doth abuse the name of a King, against a King, so he doth oppugn
Christ, in the name of Christ. Whom therefore Paul doth place within the Church, not without it; and sit∣ting not in a bodily gesture, but in a spirituall gouerne∣ment. Besides that,Theod. in 2. Thess. 2. the thrones of Kings are called the seats of Bishops. And he sitteth not in a materiall Tem∣ple, for Temple is not any where so taken in the new Testament, as Bellarmine confesseth; therefore in the spirituall Church, for the which the Temple of God is alwaies taken, as the Fathers expound it.Chrysostomus. Oecumenius. Hieronimus ad Algasium. quae: 11. who all affirm he shall sit in the Church, not in the Tem∣ple of Ierusa∣lem. Antichrist hee sitteth in the Temple of God, not in the Temple which hee shall re-edifie in Ierusalem, as is imagined: for that should not bee called the Temple of God, but of the Diuell. Againe, he is said to sit against the Tem∣ple, as Augustine did well translate it out of Greeke, as if he were the Temple of God, that is, the Church. Wherein the wretched man bearing rule, doth not thinke himselfe to bee God, much lesse God alone, as Bellarmine dreameth (Antichrist is not such a foole) but in stead of God: for he sitteth as God, and taketh vpon him as he were God: not Christ, but for Christ: a Substitute to his Person, and an Opposite to his Glory: for in many things hee makes himselfe equall to Christ,The Pope wherein he makes himself equall to Christ. carrying himselfe like God, forgiuing sinnes, redeeming soules, making new articles of the faith, the Iudge of all men, himselfe to be iudged by no man. That although hee call not himselfe God, yet he makes a shew as if he were God, as the Apostle teacheth. Is not this the liuely pi∣cture of the Pope? Doth it not present him vnto vs, almost palpable? Not so, saith Bellarmine, For Antichrist doth thinke himselfe to be God alone, wherein he doth not agree with himselfe. Bellarmines Antichrist, is the Messias of the Iewes, who doth brag that he is sent from God. He doth not therefore bragge that he is God alone: for God that doth send is one, and God that is sent is another. Againe, he saith, The Pope doth not sit as God, but as a Bishop, but yet as he that hath all the power of God,
both in heauen and in earth: as he saith in another place. He sitteth therefore at the least as a Bishop deified. But he doth not call himselfe Christ. But hee taketh to him, if not the name, yet the power of Christ. This therefore I inferre. Who sitteth as God in the Church, and makes a shew as if he were God, the same is Antichrist. The Pope hath done, and doth this: The Pope therefore is Antichrist. How the Pope lifteth vp himselfe against God.For doe not thinke Paul the fift, that Antichrist is so foolish to lift vp himselfe aboue God, or doth swell with greater pride then doth befit a miserable mortall man. He is sayd therefore, Not to lift vp himselfe against euery God, true and false, as Bellarmine supposeth. Wher∣in he doth contradict himselfe. For a Magician doth not lift vp himselfe aboue all that is God. For he doth not lift vp himselfe a∣boue the Diuell, who is the God of this world. Bellar. de Pont. lib. 3. cap. 14.But Antichrist is a Magician, as Bellarmine saith. Therefore Antichrist doth not lift vp himselfe aboue all that is God: as the Cardinall saith. But hee doth lift vp himselfe aboue all that is called God, as the Apostle teacheth. To whom not the es∣sence of God,The name of God to whō imputed in the Scripture. but the name of God is attributed: for the name of God in the Scripture, is giuen to the Angels in heauen, and the Princes on the earth: for the word , doth not only signifie Maiesticall or Maiesty, but it is also any thing which is worshipped as God, or wherein God is worshipped: And therefore the ima∣ges & alters among the Heathens, were called . Now when as the Pope beareth rule ouer the Angels in heauen, and ouer the Princes in the earth, and ouer holy things in the Church, it cannot be but hee needes must be Antichrist.
CHAP. VIII. How Antichrist doth denie Christ. NEither suffer your selfe, Pope Paul the fift, to be de∣luded by them who shal tell you that Christ is not openly, expressely, and directly denied by Antichrist so properly called. For Antichrist was not so blockish, that hee would openly and directly denie Christ, by whose name and profession hee saw so much profit and honour to come vnto him; you may bee sure hee was not so madde. It was therefore requisite that he might both satisfie his owne hatred, and serue his owne turne, he should denie Christ secretly, by conse∣quent & indirectly: for could Antichrist possibly haue held his gouernment so manie yeeres in the Church, if he had openly denied Christ? certainely hee could ne∣uer haue held it; for all those Christians ouer whom he gouerned, would either haue hist him out for a foole, or burnt him vp for a blasphemour. It was not there∣fore for Antichrists profit to deny Christ after this manner. Adde moreouer that hee is described by the Apostle to be a cunning and a crafty companion, and that he shall come with all deceit of iniustice.Popery is a mystery of Iniquity. Besides all his religion is not called iniquitie, but the mystery of iniquity. And the glosse hath noted, that the mysti∣call impiety of Antichrist shall bee cloakt ouer with the name of piety. It had beene therefore very absurd to haue denied Christ plainely, openly and expressely, for that did no whit agree either with the good of his king∣dome, or the humour of Antichrist, or the mystery of Iniquity. It followeth therefore that he denied Christ secretly, implicitly and indirectly, and retaining the name of Christ, did abolish his faith and doctrine. But that belongeth to petty Antichrists, to denie Christ secretly and indirectly: but to that great Antichrist directly and
openly; wherevpon his comming is called a Reuelation, as Bellarmine doth sophistically gather. By which words is expressed not the manner of the deniall of Christ, but the manner of vsurping his kingdome. For if you consider the manner of doctrine, the apostacie of the great Antichrist is called mysticall, and so is his oppo∣sition, as of all the rest, but that their apostacie from Christ ought to be counted particular, his vniuersall. And therefore for all Bellarmines words, that Antichrist doth denie Christ secretly and indirectly, as the Pope, who though hee doth in word expresly and directly confesse Christ to be God and man, yet he doth closely and indirectly denie hoth Christs Diuinitie, and his Humanitie. CHAP. IX. The Pope taketh away the properties of ech nature in Christ. FOR hee taketh away the properties of ech Nature. The Godhead is infinite, the Humanitie finite. The Pope doth set out the Deitie of the Father in pictures and images; and doth imagine the humanitie of Christ to be present in many places at once: and therefore doth forge a finite Diuinitie, and an infinite Huma∣nitie. He doth confesse directly in word, that Christ is iust and mercifull, but in deed doth indirectly denie both: for perfect iustice doth not admit imperfect satisfa∣ction, that is humane: and perfect mercy doth not grant imperfect pardon; it doth not remit the fault and retayne the punishment. The Pope doth teach that imperfect satisfaction and pardon is performed by Christ to the faithfull: he doth therefore denie vnto Christ perfect iustice and mercy, and so makes Christ a plaine I doll.
CHAP. X. The Pope denieth the three offices of Christ. HE doth in word acknowledge the three offices of Christ, but indirectly denieth them, his Prophe∣cie, his Priesthood, and his Kingdome. His prophesie,First his Prophecie. while hee telleth vs that the Canoni∣call Scriptures, wherein the voice of our Prophet in all things necessarie to saluation is fully conteyned, whe∣ther they be principles of faith, or precepts of life, to be very imperfect. And therefore doth account his De∣cretall Epistles among the Canonicall Scriptures.Distinc. 9. Sic omnes. Fie vpon such blasphemie, and intolerable pride. Herein he is a very Iew, in that he abrogateth Gods comman∣dements by mans traditions. For as the Iewes had the vnwritten Cabala to interpret the old Testament; so the Pope hath brought in his vnwritten traditions, as the Iewish Cabala, whereby hee doth bring a sense of his owne, what pleaseth him of the written commande∣ments of God. But with the same argument that Christ did refute the Iewish, we doe briefely refute the Popish traditions. The obseruation of humane traditions is the abro∣gation of Gods heauenly commundements,Matth: 15. wit∣nesse Christ. But Poperie is the obseruation of humane traditions, witnesse the Decretalls. Here Duarenus said pre∣tily, that it fared ill with mens affaires since the decrees had gotten winges, that is, since the De∣cretalls were so sawcie as to flie into the Church ouer the Scriptures. Therefore Poperie is the abrogation of Gods hea∣uenly commandements. I will bring one example, wherein it appeareth that Bel∣larmine the Popes sweet-heart hath by his exposition
ouerthrowne one of the greatest commandements of the Law.Bellarmines lewd dealing with the se∣cond com∣mandement. God said, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any likenesse to worship. Here Bellarmine distinguisheth; Thou shalt not worship an Idoll: But thou shalt worship an Image. A distinction of the word not of the thing. Far an Image is an Idoll when it is worshipped. But the worshipping of an Idoll is Idolatrie: and in the Com∣mandement there is no mention made of an Idoll, but of a likenes, and that of euery likenes, which as it were the genus or generall doth comprehend equally both Image and Idoll. But Idolatrie is to worship the Crea∣ture for the Creator, yea by your leaue with the Crea∣tor too; for the worship of any likenes is absolutely for∣bidden in the law, whether it be worshipped for God, or with God. And the reason of the prohibition is ab∣solute. Idolatrie is compared to fornication, and God to a iealous husband, who by no meanes will haue the likenes of any thing to be worshipped either before him or with him. Bellarmine seemeth to alledge the same excuse for his idolatrie, which the harlot doth for her adulterie: for shee telleth her iealous husband, I tooke not this Letcher for my Husband, but for my Friend, I tooke him with you, not for you: So this a∣dulterous minde of Bellarmine answereth to God, that is full of iealousie: I do not worship the image for God, but with God, not for the Creator, but with the Creator. But God as a most iealous husband doth ab∣solutely forbid any worship of an image, as the lewd imbracing of an adulterer:Ioh: 9. v. 20. and therefore S. Iohn cal∣leth the worshipper of an Idoll, the worshipper of the Deuill. Now it is plaine that the Pope is a worshipper of an Idoll, therefore the worshipper of the Deuill. The Pope oweth me a good turne for saying he is an Idola∣ter, wherein I feare I shall seeme to prevaricate and dis∣semble, that while I giue him the name of an Idolater, I take from him the name of Antichrist. For Antichrist is not an Idolater, as Bellarmine would haue it.
The Pope is an Idolater, as truth it selfe would haue it. Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. I counsell the Pope that if he giue credit to Bellarmines proposition, he graunt our assumption, so while he take to himselfe the name of an Idolater, hee may happily lay aside the name of Antichrist. But he will resume it, so giddie headed and wauering is Bellarmine. By whose confession, Antichrist doth worship Maozim, that is as he saith the Deuill. But the worshipper of the Deuill is an Idolater. Antichrist therefore is an Idolater. But the Pope hath taken to him the note of an Idolater from holy Iohn: let him therefore take againe to him the note of Antichrist. From hence ariseth that which I intended to proue, that the Pope doth nothing else but abrogate and an∣nihilate a principall commandement of God with his tradition and opposition. What is it to denie the Pro∣phecie of Christ, if this be not? what? as though hee hath not only corrupted but also peruerted the Gospell of Christ,The Popes fift Gospell. while hee hath suffered a fift Gospell to be coyned by his Dominicans, as Matth: Parisiensis doth witnesse. They called it the Gospell of the Holy Ghost,Anno 1254. Math. in Hen. 3. and the eternall Gospell: wherein they taught that Christ is not God, nor his Gospell the true Gospell, and that compared to their Gospell, his was the shell, and theirs the kernell. O blasphemie to be punished with hell fire. Hereof they be the Neptunian or rather Ʋulcanian Fathers, who in that Tridentine furnace haue by their fiering and ham∣mering shap't out that prophane Gospell anew, but without the name of the fift Gospell. Although Cle¦ment the eight did of late gladly and willingly take vnto him the name of the fift Euangelist, put vpon him by crouching Gbriel that detestable Parasite, as though Clement had finished the fift Gospell; which doth not onely giue a blow to the foure Gospells, but a deadly wound. The authors whereof doe incurre Pauls curse,
which is denounced not only to Popes, but to Apostles, and Angells, if any shall bring in not a contrarie but another Gospell. Not if any contrarie, but if any be∣sides that which the Galathians receiued of Paul, that is, besides that which they had receiued out of the le∣gall and euangelicall Scriptures, as Augustine did ex∣pound the place; if they doe not only preach or ouer∣throw the whole Gospell, but if they doe neuer so litle preach beside the Gospell, or doe thwart any thing, as Chrysostome hath explained the place. For another Gospell doth not only corrupt, but peruert the Gospell of Christ. The Pope of Rome doth not onely bring in another, but a contrarie, wherein hee doth not onely adde many things, but oppose many things against the Gospell of Christ. In the one, hee doth weaken the Gospell; in the other, he destroyeth it; for euery ad∣dition doth import an imperfection, euery opposition a falshood. And therefore Poperie is to be deemed not only a corruption, but a subuersion of the Gospell. Out of that fift Gospell is their new Creed of their faith ta∣ken, which conteyneth twelue articles of the faith to be discussed in the Dialogue following. For the ma∣king whereof diuers Popes heretofore tooke great paines, and euery one added a peece of his owne, till it came to full perfection by Pius the fourth, and hath been lately printed by your authoritie Paul the fift, that the great glory of your omnipotent power in the Papa∣cie might appeare. As likewise the conformities of S. Francis are lately brought to light, and by your com∣mandement published in print, I thinke that typicall Iesus being brought againe into the world by you might remoue the true Iesus out of his throne. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. Let true Iesus vtterly confound the typicall Iesus. Do not these things Paul the fift manifestly proue that thou art that great Antichrist, who althogh thou do openly in word confesse that Christ is a Prophet, dost in very deed indi∣rectly
denie and ouerthrow the Prophecie of Christ? More then that, the Pope doth indirectly ouerthrow his Priesthood and his kingdome. His priesthood whereon dependeth the sacrifice and intercession of Christ,2 His Priest∣hood. while hee doth erect another priesthood which doth either offer another propitiato∣rie sacrifice, or doth reiterate the sacrifice of Christ as imperfect. When as the Apostle doth proue through∣out the whole Epistle to the Hebrewes that the propitia∣torie sacrifice of Christ if you seeke for the number is but one, if for the time is but once offered:Heb. 10.14. Well expoun∣ded. if for the Priest: by himselfe; if for the place, vpon the Crosse; if for the manner, bloudily: if for the vertue: exceeding effectuall to make holie the faithfull. With what face therefore doth the Pope either deuise another propitia∣torie sacrifice, or cause that to be often repeated of pro∣phane Priests vnbloudily vpon the Altar; as though the bloudy sacrifice of Christ were not sufficient to make perfect the beleeuers? wherein he sheweth himselfe an vtter Aduersarie vnto Christ. But they doe daily sacrifice Christ say they, that they may apply him to the faithfull. But the Apostles did not sacrifice Christ, but propounded him in the word and sacraments, that they might ap∣ply him to the faithfull. Out of the sacrifice of Christ the redemption of the Church is the first part of his priesthood, which the Pope of Rome hath communicated with the Saints. Thus they speake of Gregorie. Let him saue vs from our sinnes, that in heauen with the Saints we may rest. You would thinke that Gregorians not Christians spake. Of Peter and Paul, Grant that by both their merits wee may obtaine the glory of eternitie.Out of the Romane Bre∣uiarie. It is true that it is said, that the Lord can hardly be dis∣cerned from his Apostles. O blessed mother
In the Pari∣sian MissalSatisfying for our sinne By the right of a mother Command the redeemer. Brnard. in Mart. lib. 1.So that the Iesuites doe thinke meete to saluation to mingle the mothers milke with the sonnes blood: and they do appeale from the seate of Gods iustice, to the seate of his mothers mercy, whom they call the goddesse and Queene of heauen. So that poperie is no more to be called Christianisme, but Marianisme. Now if the Pope doe communicate the office of re∣demption with the Saints, what maruell is it if they im∣part the office of intercession with them? whereas the Apostle doth affirme,1. Tim, 2.5. there is but one God, so but one mediator betweene God and men the man Christ Iesus, one mediator of intercession, who doth offer vp our prayers to God, as he that alone doth pay the price of redemption for vs all, sith the efficacie of his intercessi∣on dependeth vpon the merit of his redemption. 3 His king∣dome.Last of all they professe Christ to be a King in word, in deede they deny him. And whereas Christ doth walke in the middest of the 7. golden candlestickes, and is not onely present in his Church, but President of his Church: this exorbitant Priest, made a Vicar by him∣selfe, and a voluntarie Prince, doth raigne and supplie his turne as if hee were absent, and taking vnto him the whole power of Christ in heauen and earth, makes Christ but a titulare King, and an idle God, so that hee seemeth againe with the Iewes to mocke him in setting a crowne of thornes vpon his head, and giuing him a eed for a Scepter into his hand. But Christ is a king inui∣sible, the Pope visible. But Christ although inuisible yet he is really in the Eucharist, yea carnally, as the Pope teacheth, falsly, yet he teacheth it: but in the reall pre∣sence of the greater that is Christ, there is no reall pre∣sence of the lesser, that is the Pope, so the reall presence of Christ in the Eucharist doth take away the visible and spirituall King out of the Church.
Now seeing in deede he denieth the offices of Christ which he professeth in word,The benefits of Christ di∣minished. what maruell is it if he di∣minish the benefits which spring out of the offices? if making of the crosse, he weaken the merit of the crosse; if teaching his death hee abolish the power of death: if granting the spirit, he extenuate the force of the spi∣rit; if preaching the Gospell he put out the light of the Gospell: while he doth confound free will with Gods grace, mans satisfaction with Christ his bloud, inherent iustice with imputed obedience in iustification: that part of saluation being attributed to man, part to God may diuide the glory of so excellent a worke betweene God and man. Wherein I cannot rightly determine whether Antichrist hath offered more contumely to God or wrong to man. Out of the premises I argue briefly thus. Whosoeuer doth denie Christ closly and indi∣rectly, is Antichrist. The Pope of Rome doth deny Christ closly and indirectly and taketh away his natures, his properties, his offices, his benefits. The Pope therefore is Antichrist. Wherein he doth alwaies one thing and pretendes another. He is therefore a cunning craftie Antichrist. CAHP. XI. Wherein the smoakie Kingdome of Antichrist is plenti∣fully described out of Iohn. SAINT Iohn saith that the key of the bottomlesse pit is giuen to the starre that fell from heauen.Apoc. 9. The Pope the key Keeper of Hell. Now marke in this hellish businesse, how diligent this Angell of darkenesse sheweth himselfe. 2 For assoone as he receiueth the key, hee presently vseth it to opening of the bottomles pit, as it followeth
in Saint Iohn: from whence ascended the smoke of the pit, as the smoake of a great furnace, and the sun and the aire were darkned with the smoake of the pit. 3. Therefore Antichrists kingdome is darke and smoakie.The darknesse vnder Anti∣christ. I doe not thinke that any, who knoweth but his letters, much lesse any learned man to be so weake an Interpreter of the Apocalips, as to think the outward darkenesse is here meant: and that the darknesse of this sunne, which we see, or of this ayre which wee breath, and not rather the darkenesse of soules, and mindes is here vnderstood, or that smoake out of a furnace, ra∣ther then out of hell is heere described. Now the king∣dome of Christ is the kingdome of light, and therefore the kingdome of Antichrist is the kingdome of darke∣nesse.Apoc. 8.12. At the sound of the fourth trumpet, Saint Iohn saith,No compari∣son betweene the old Here∣tikes and An∣tichrist. that the third part of the sunne, the Moone, and the starres were darkned: When Marcion destroyed Christs humanity, Arrius denied his diuinitie, so that the world was turned Arrian, Eutiches confounded his natures, Nestorius diuided them, when Pelagius obscured the grace of Christ, but all these were nothing to those vni∣uersall darknesses brought in by Antichrist. For hee tooke some contagion from each of these, and added much of his owne; When he commanded the Scriptures to be shut vp in an vnknowne tongue, lest the people might vn∣derstand God speaking vnto them: when hee commanded prayers to be made in an vnknowne tongue,Scriptures in an vnknowne tongue. that the people might not speake to God with vnderstanding: when he taught implicite faith, that is brutish ignorance, whereby hee blin∣ded their mindes with incredulity:Implicite faith. Images to be adored. when hee set pictures before them not to be gased on onely, but to bee adored, that he might feede their eyes with vanities, and choake their soules with idolatrie. Doe you not perceiue the bottom∣lesse pit to be wide open? you do not see the smoake rising out of the pit for the darknesse which hath dark∣ned the sunne and the aire. For the kingdome of lyes is the kingdome of darknesse. While hee hath taken a∣way
the Scriptures as pearles from Swine,Scriptures as pearles for Swine. Prayers as chatering for Parots. Faith for asses. Images for Idiots. and prescri∣bed prayers as pratings for parrets, and deliuered faith as an instruction for asses, and allowed images as books for ideotes. So Antichrist hath obscured the eternall Gospell of Christ more cleare and bright then the Sun it selfe, with the thicknesse of hellish darkenesse, being worthy to be choaked vp with the smoake of the pit, that selleth nothing else but smoake: as is euident by the doctrine of Antichrist,A short des∣cription of Christian reli∣gion. cleane contrarie to the doc∣trine of Christ. For the doctrine of Christ doth bring foorth 4. principall effects: 1. It doth cast downe the corrupt nature of man. 2. It doth aduance the sauing grace of God. 3. It doth weaken the strength of concupiscence. 4. It begetteth peace of conscience. 1. So it settles true humilitie in a sinner. 2. Right faith toward God in him being humbled 3. Holinesse in him being faithfull. 4. And security in him being holy. Whereby 1. displeasing himselfe, 2. and tru∣sting in God, 3. And liuing holily, 4. hee is secure in his way, and triumpheth ioyfully in his end. The doctrine of Antichrist doth bring foorth effects cleane contrarie. 1. It doth extoll the corrupt nature of man.A short des∣cription of popery. 2. It doth diminish the free grace of God. 3. It addeth matter to encrease concupiscence. 4. It withdraweth peace of conscience. For 1. it maketh a sinner proud with a conceit of his owne strength. 2. Vngratefull by the diminishing Gods grace. 1. Inwardly filthy, outwardly glorious. 4. Doubtfull in the way and fearefull in the end. That 1. neither he knoweth himselfe truly, 2. Nor beleeueth in God rightly, 3. Nor liueth holily; 4. Nor dieth qui∣etly. You haue Paul the fift the very forme and face of Christianitie, and Antichristianitie set before you and yours, that they might loue the one and detest the o∣ther. No Egyptian darknesses are more grosse, no Cym∣merian
to bee compared with these darkenesses of the Popes kingdome which Antichrist the Angell of Hell hath fetcht out of the smoake of the pit. CHAP. XII. Antichrist his ministers are Locusts, whose pro∣perties are described. WHose ministers, the Locusts and Scorpions be∣ing ingendred of smoake and darknes, it makes well for them, that the world is full of darknes. Blinde superstition will be more bountifull to them, then quick-fighted religion. Apoc. 9.3. What a Lo∣cust is.4 The Locusts came out of the smoake, as S. Iohn saith, the Locust is bred of corrupt smoake, an Anti∣christian Monke out of peruerse doctrine, who neither can flie aloft by heauenly contemplation, nor walke beneath according to Gods ordinance, but being lifted vp by certaine Luciferian speculations into heauen, fal∣leth downe againe to the earth: and when he hath de∣liuered many things truly and grauely about the Trini∣tie, doth presently fall backe to prate of idle traditions, mingling some truth with much falshood; like the De∣uill who makes true premisses to inferre false conclusi∣ons. The Locusts spring out of the ignorance of the people, as it were out of smoake. The diuision of Locusts.The Locusts are either elder or younger. The el∣der out of the familie of Francis, Dominicke, Bennet, &c. The younger out of the house of lymping Loyola, these be more learned and polished, who after they had tran∣slated the Bible into the English tongue; they of Rhemes the New, and those of Doway the Ould, they adde certaine smoakie interpretations, whereby they bring obscuritie to a for or translation. So the translation intricate enough in it selfe, is made more intricate by
their notes. As you may see in this very mysterie,Places of Scripture ob∣scured by po∣pish interpre∣tations. 1 Ioh: 2.18. whose parts being plaine enough, by the text & euent, is much obscured by the darknesse rising out of the Glosse, and Commentarie of the Iesuites. 1. S. Iohn saith, that that Antichrist was in his time, whom Paul saith shall continue till the comming of Christ; what can be more cleare? To this place they bring obscuritie out of the Glosse, when they imagine that Antichrist shall be one man of three yeeres continuance. 2. S. Paul makes him an Apostata not from the name of Christ, but from the faith of Christ, and doth describe the Apostacie by two eui∣dent notes. This place they darken with their Glosse, which tels vs that he is a Iew, who neuer came to Christ, and therefore can neuer depart from Christ. 3. What is more cleare, then that the Citie with seuen Hills, that dominiering Citie, is the seat of Antichrist, as S. Iohn sets it; now made the Temple and Church of God, as S. Paul will haue it,Matth: 24.14. that is Rome by their owne confessions; and yet this light is darkned with another Glosse, that Ierusalem is his seate, whose finall destruction Christ did foretell should be after the preaching of the Gospel ouer the whole world; & the Prophet Daniel, that the de∣solation of the Temple shall continue to the consummation and end, that is the end of the world:Luc: 21.22.24. as not onely Ierome but Christ himselfe hath expounded. Yet they giue the lye both to Daniel and Christ, when they outface the mat∣ter, saying that Ierusalem shall be builded againe by Anti∣christ, together with the Temple, wherein hee shall sit and raigne. 4. What is more euident then that Enoch was translated that he should not see death?Heb: 11.5. yet to this plaine Text they put a darke and contrary Glosse, when they say that he shall returne againe, and see death, and be killed forsooth by Antichrist: Doe you not perceiue that the Locusts doe spring out of the smoake of the pit, which doe darken with their Glosses certaine places of the Scripture, that be as cleare as the Sunne beames. So that all their endeuours are to darken, nor enlighten
this mysterie. They feare nothing more then that An∣tichrists hood should be pluckt ouer his eares, out of which now like Democritus he laugheth at all the world,The Pope like Democritus. which hee hath deceiued with his smoake. As the Poet brought sorrowfull Agamemnon vpon the stage, with his head couered for the greatnes of his griefe: So these good fellowes bring vpon the stage, their plea∣sant Antichrist hoodwinkt for the greatnesse of his ioy, that the world may not see how he fleeres at them. The number of the Locusts5. The multitude and number of Locusts is answe∣rable to the number and power of the Monkes old and new: chiefly the Iesuites, whose swarmes do adde grea∣ter force to doe mischiefe. 6. Power is giuen to these Scorpions ouer the earth, and charge giuen them that they hurt not the grasse of the earth,Apoc: 9. v. 4. nor any greene herbe, nor any tree, but men onely, as it followeth in S. Iohn. These Locusts then are reasonable creatures, yet such as abuse their reason to the destruction of men: for they doe not trample vpon herbes and trees, but doe annoy the bodies and soules of men, whom they strike with their stings, infect with their poyson, and kill with a lingring death. The practise of Iesuites.These Iesuites whom these Locusts and Scorpions doe liuely represent, doe choke vp with their poyson, and extinguish the fidelitie of subiects toward their Prince, and the faith of Christians toward God. The fidelitie of subiects, when they teach they are released from the Oath of Allegeance giuen to their Princes, whom the Pope doth denounce excommuni∣cated:The Popes v∣surped power ouer Princes. who can driue out of his Kingdome, and de∣priue of his gouernment Kings Catholike in the faith, but wicked as goates, hereticall Kings as wolues, as Bellar∣mine writeth, neither only open but secret Heretikes, as Symancha; nor those onely, but their sonnes and fol∣lowers are vtterly to be rooted out, as Creswell agreeth with Symancha, by any meanes whatsoeuer, as Saunders, either by open force,2 King: 33. as Iesabel by Iehu; or by craft, as
Holophernes by Iudith, as Rainoldus & Bourchier write:The cruell practise of Papists a∣gainst Prin∣ces. or by knife & dagger, wherby Henry the 3. & Henry the 4 were most basely murthered, either of them being a Ca¦tholike, as they terme them, only because they fauored hertikes & that before sentence was denounced against them; or els by a dag & poyson,The gun∣powder trea∣son from Ie∣suites. by which means Queen Elizabeth was often assaulted, as Walpoole and Comen∣sus perswaded: or else with gunne-powder, wherewith King Iames with all the Kings Progeny and Nobilitie, and the whole Kingdome of Britaine should haue been vtterly ouerthrowen by certaine wicked English con∣spirators, as Garnet the Prouinciall of the Iesuites in Eng∣land thought meete: whereby it is manifest that the Cheargy-popery, whereof Iesuitisme is the braine; is nothing else but a catechisme of treason. Must we not heere needes acknowledge the poyson of Locusts and Scorpions, whereby the Allegeance of subiects to∣wards their Princes is shaken off? Let vs looke after another kinde of poyson, if you please,The Papists poyson the faith of Chri∣stians. whereby the soules of simple people are infected, to choake vp the faith of Christians, which they teach must be secret and implicite, that the Lay-people must beleeue as the Church beleeueth, when as they know not neither what themselues, or the Church beleeueth, as Bellar∣mine saith, that faith is not placed in the vnderstanding, but in he assent. i. The Colliars faith, or that circular faith which Staphilus so much commendeth, the master of the sentences proueth out of the first of Iob ver. 4. While the oxen were at plow, the asses fed neere them, Many,Mast sent. lib. 3 distinct. 25. saith he, beleeue such things they know not, and they haue their faith couered as in a mystery. He liketh the grea∣ter and Doctors to Oxen,Lombards foo∣lish interpre∣tation. the lesse and the simpler to Asses, who in their humility adhering to the greater, beleeue in a mysterie: an asse-headed interpretation by the masters leaue. 8. Whereby it appeares that Laike-popery is no∣thing else but meere foolery.
Vers. 4. Whom the Lousts doe hurt.9. Neither doe these Locusts and Scorpions hurt all men, but those onely which haue not Gods marke in their fore-head, their mindes they goe about to intoxi∣cate with their poyson. As S. Iohn saith, that the great heapes of vnbeleeuers are onely the prey of the Lo∣custs. Vers. 5. Locusts kill not, but afflict men.10. It is giuen to the Locusts and Scorpions, not to kill men, but to afflict them for fiue monthes, but how can that be true, say some, when as the Iesuites be notable Cut-throates. I answer, that S. Iohn in this verse speaketh of the slaughter of soules, which these destroying Locusts doe chiefely deuoure. Wherein they doe not kill men at a blow, but by afflicting them by little and little, as they which bee stung of Scorpions, consume away by lin∣gring greefe. This is S. Iohns sense, when he saith, that the Scorpions doe not kill men, but torment them. For when these Antichristian scorpions doe infuse and conuay the poyson into men, what gnawing and pritching doe they leaue behinde them? how doe they vexe mens consciences? how doe they inwardly bite and sting? men feele themselues to bee miserable sin∣ners, and after death stand in horrour of iudgement. They heare little of the true fire of hell, much of the false fire of Purgatorie from the Monkes, they feele the bitternesse of sinne, they feele not the sweetnesse of the remedy. They neuer heare of Christ; They giue eare to the monks, preaching historically of the crosse, of the death and resurrection of Christ: but of the vertue of the crosse, of the benefit of his death, of the efficacy of his resurrection, (the force and power whereof doth consist in speciall application) not one word.The Papists enemies to certainty of saluation. Yea, ra∣ther there Doctors cry out that it is presumption and arrogancy, if the wounded conscience of a penitent sin∣ner be certainely perswaded by faith, that Christ Iesus is his Sauiour, or that he may confidently trust he is in the estate of grace, vnlesse an Angell doe specially re∣ueale
it vnto him, as though to a faithfull mans spirit, the spirit of Christ, the God of the Angels doth not giue a more inward, more certaine, and a more excel∣lent testimony that he is the sonne of God, the heire of heauen, and fellow-heire with Christ, so that the faith∣full man feeleth, that hee is gouerned by the spirit of Christ, from whom hee receiued that testimony, and doth ioyne the grace of that gouernment, with the grace of that comfort. Neither of this do those locusts feele or teach, who while they depriue their auditours of the holy confidence in Gods mercy,The manner how Papists torment mens conscience. nor suffer them to serue God with a sun-like, but a seruile spirit, and therefore not with the reioycing of the spirit, nor suffer them to enioy peace of conscience in the middest of their afflictions, and send sinners trembling for feare to the treasure of the Church, as popish indulgences, and humane satisfactions, and such trifling toyes of the same kinde. In the meane time the crafty teachers, and the vnhappy hearers, being vtterly voyd of true faith and repentance, when they haue done all they can doe, for all that inwardly feele, inwardly, I say, feele the hor∣ror of Gods diuine iudgement, and the most greeuous torment of the afflicted conscience, and this falleth out after those scorpions haue strucken them with their stings: whereupon their greefe is like the greefe of a scorpion, when it hath stung a man. For as when a Scorpion stings a man with the sting of his taile, the wound is not presently felt, but the dead∣ly poison doth afterward spred it selfe abroad: So those that be hurt by these Loyolane Scorpions, doe not pre∣sently feele the hurt, but doe by little and little perish without sense, assoone as they sucke in the venome of their poysonfull doctrine. So these Locusts doe hurt men with their number, venome, and sting.
CHAP. XIII. Other properties of Locusts. 11. THese be strange Locusts that are resembled to horses prepared for battell. What comparison can there be betweene a base Locust, and a warre-like Horse? Thus notwithstanding the strength of this vild Locust is expressed. 12. The Locusts doe likewise weare crownes vpon their heads, heere hee setteth downe the cunning and the craft, It is worth the noting, that the heads of those Locusts are sayd to be crowned, when the hornes of the Sea-beast afterward are sayd to bee crowned: why so? Because the Priests haue more preuailed with their sub∣tilty and craft, then the Ethnicke Emperours with their power and force. 13. But the crownes the Locusts weare, are not of golde, but like to gold. Heere hee sets out their pride, true and golden crownes are fit for Kings, false and couterfet for Priests, and therefore are sayd not to bee golden, but as it were golden. Whereat, as if they were true, and their owne, they waxe very proud: for by the sufferance of Princes they are growen to that power, that they haue often cast off their golden crownes. 14. The faces of the Locusts, are as the faces of men, wherewith they deceiue men. 15. They haue womens lockes, which signifie the diuerse enticements and deceipts of false doctrine: where againe their cunning is described. 16. Teeth as it were of Lyons, wherewith like their Master that roaring Lyon, they rend asunder, & tear in peeces those with their iawes, whom they caught with their guile. Heere you haue their fiercenesse and their cruelty. 17. They had habergions, like habergions of
iron. These noble Locusts, very warlike, with crownes vpon their heades, mens faces, womens haire, Lyons teeth, armed at all points are elegantly and liuely described by the holy Ghost. Some will happily obiect, that all this place is not to be vnderstood, of Antichrist, and his Ministers, but of the Turkes. I answere that cannot bee. For whereas at the sound of the 4. Trumpet,Cap. 9. v. 1. the Angell had foreshew∣ed the Arch heretikes, the forerunners of Antichrist: at the sound of the 5. Trumpet, the Angell bringes in the King of the Arch-heretikes, before which the An∣gell beginneth with that dreadful Proem in the 8. chap: about the end, crying with a loud voice, wo, wo, wo, vpon the inhabitants of the earth. By the first wo signifying the darke kingdome of Antichrist: by the second wo the violent tyrannie of the Turke: which cannot be one and the same, be∣cause he saith in the 12. vers: one wo is past, and be∣hold two woes follow after. This is not therefore the same, but an other wo. By the third wo the terrible appearance of the last iudgement. But Bellarmine saith, but proues it not,Bellarmines lewde dealing with the King of England. Bellarmine. Christana vic. Pacenius. Becanus. Personius. Cidonius. Garnettus. Gerardus. Grenwellus. Creswellus. Reynaldus, and infinite other. That Luther is that falling starre, and that Lutheranes, and Protestants are those Locusts. Hauing forgotten that Paul the fift, that Prince, is the Captaine Generall of those warlike Locusts. Who after hee had compared the most re∣nowned King IAMES to Iulian the Apostata; doth se∣cretly signifie that hee is denounced excommunicate, and may be slaine by his Subiects in bataile, but not by cutthroates. Bloody Cardinall, fitly painted out by a Pasquill, a Lyon in the caue: with this Motto well appllied Open the caue, and you shall see his disposition. This iest is too bitter, will some say, to bestow vpon that great learned Cardinall. Is it so? he that allowes the murther of a King in fighting, doth not he deserue
a sharpe reproofe in writing? Hee doth not deale with our most worthy IAMES as a King, and wee doe not meane to deale with him as a Cardinall. Hee was lear∣ned heretofore, now he is malitious: heretofore he was a cheife man in disputation, now in rebellion. Hereto∣fore a close enemie, now an open. Heretofore the scor∣pions venome was not wanting in him, but lurckt in him. Cardinall Comensis set on Parry that Cutthroate, to murther Queene ELIZABETH with his dagger. Cardinall Bellarmine nothing the honester, but the cun∣ninger, denieth that the King may bee dispatcht by a murtherer, but by a Souldier he denieth not: As if there were any difference in the case of murther, whether one kill a King in a Campe, or vnder a canopie, by open warre, or secret treacherie. That may be rightly spoken of Bellarmine, that Cicero spake of a great Lawyer, hee must kill a King, that will vse his helpe. Therefore that may be well said to this slippery Sophister, this armed and bloody Locust, which Martiall said to a certaine Cobler. Good Tortus be not angrie with my iest, I taxe thy craft, I meane thy life none ill; Indure it man: from mirth I will not rest, When thou dost thinke that others thou maist kill. The cruell dealing of the Papists with Hen: 4. the French King.How ready a Scholler Mariana this mans Auditor found of Rauiliake the death of that illustrious French King Henry the 4. neuer sufficiently to bee lamented, neuer of kings sufficiently to be reuenged, doth too too well declare. The first of his Schollers strooke out his tooth, the second tooke away his life, themselues buried his heart. A magnanimous and valiant King murther∣ed of a base rascally parricide, like to Caesar in his life, like in his death, for so hee is bemonde of a Christian Poet. Caesar and He: 4. comparedCaesar in valour I was like to thee, In kinde of death we likewise do agree: The knife before thee tooke away thy breath,
The knife behinde me brought me to my death: Thou by the handes of Senators didst fall, I by a base and Sauage Caniball. But this Rouge you will say was not Marians scholler; no more then Catsby, Percy, Write, and Faux were schollers to Garnet, Parsons, Gerard, and Grenwell. 18. But let vs returne to Saint Iohn,Vers. 16. who giueth the Locusts stings in their tailes, and a short time to hurt. 19. Whose King being the Angell of the bottomlesse pit, he brings in at the last,The descripti∣on of Anti∣christ. whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, in Greeke , that is, destroying. The very Romane Antichrist himselfe destroying soules, o∣uerthrowing common weales, casting downe crownes, dissipating Churches: being armed with so many blou∣dy lawes, so many conspiring Councells, so many war∣like Legions, fetters, halters, gallowses, rackes, fires: inuironed with so many Inquisitors, so many cursatiue Iesuits, some of them dogmaticall, some pragmaticall King-killers, that hee may be rightly called Abaddon and . You see, Paul the fift, the disposition of the Romane Antichrist, by the starre that fell from heauen; by the key of the bottomlesse pit which hee receiued: by the pit which he opened: by the smoake of the pit which he brought forth, by the kingdome of smoake which hee built vp, by the stinch of the smoake that he thrust out, by the Locusts and Scorpions which do very liuely re∣semble the Monkes new and olde: by their infinite swarmes whereby they do hurt: their double venome which they instill: their deadly sting wherewith they strike: their power, pride, cunning, cruelty which they practise: very worthy subiects of their King Abaddon whom they obey.
CHAP. XIV. Wherein is set downe actions of the Beast. OF what kinde Antichrist is wee haue expounded, now wee must shew whereabout hee is occupied. The starre which fell from heauen doth shew his dispo∣sition: The beast that rose out of the earth shall expresse his action. Saint Iohn describeth two beasts, one ascending out of the sea, another out of the earth. The first doth resem∣ble the Romane Empire: the other Antichrist properly so called. Saint Iohns Sea-beast.The Romane Monarchy rose out of the sea: that is out of a turbulent state, out of the factions and disor∣ders of nations, as out of a troublesome sea: who is cal∣led a beast not in respect of his ciuill authoritie, which he hath from God, but of his beastly vices, which hee tooke from the Dragon. Saint Iohns land-beast.The Prophet brings in another beast rising out of the earth, not the same, but diuers from it, like in many things, yet not the same. For I saw saith Saint Iohn a∣nother beast rising out of the earth, which is both the seuenth head of the Romane beast, and yet a beast in it selfe, for her different beginning and nature. The actions of Antichrist the land-beast1 Ascending out of the earth: therefore Antichrist is the sonne of the earth. Therefore from the earth, being borne of earthly and sensuall concupiscence, and diuelish counsell: as Iames the Apostle doth ioyne these 3.Ia. cap. 3.15. signifying all one thing, earthly, sensuall, diuelish. To speake like the Dragon.2 She is said to speake as a Dragon, although shee dissembles the 2. hornes of a lambe, whereof I spake before. And herein Bellarmine doth almost agree with vs. That by the Dragon the Deuill is vnderstood, by the first beast the great number of sinners but vnder the Romane Empire, as we haue set downe by the consent of all In∣terpreters,
neither doth Bellarmine greatly denie it. By the later Beast Antichrist as elsewhere, as also the Prea∣chers and Apostles of Antichrist being the head of the first beast, cut off, and liuing againe, hee doth acknowledge with vs to be the true image of that Beast. 3 She is said to worke all her power in his sight.She worketh in the sight of the first beast. First it is certaine that one and the same seat the citie with seauen hills belongeth to them both, which hath ruled ouer Kings and Princes, which can bee no other then that great Lady Rome. In which seate the land-beast did succeede the sea-beast and deriued all the power of the Romane Empire to herselfe, so that by her owne men it is called the Kingdome of Priests, shee doth shew all the power of the first beast in his sight, that is at Rome. 4 She doth constraine the earth and the inhabitants thereof to worship the beast how will some say? when the Pope doth enforce the inhabitants of the earth not to worshippe the Emperour, but himselfe. So you are to vnderstand the beasts not to be the per∣son that did raigne, either in the Empire, or in the Popedome; but those tyrannicall powers, which those beastly persons did put in practise. Againe you are to consider the Papall power to bee truely imperiall, and although it commend it selfe vailed with the name of Christ, yet that it was brought in by the Dragon, as well as the other; that it might worship the Dragon, and be an expresse image of the Imperial power, which con∣tained in it the Papall.The actions of Pagan Em∣perors. For the Emperor was the cheife Bishoppe. Now the Emperours did belch out blasphe∣mies against God, condemne the true worshippe of God, oppresse the true worshippers of God, maintaine the worshippe of Deuills: and did openly serue the Dragon, from whom they receiued their tyrannicall power. And what did the Popes?The action of the Antichri∣stian Popes. Did they not with a blasphemous mouth challenge to themselues the di∣uine name, and godhead with Domitian? did they not
scoffe at the grace of Christ, with Iulian? did they not persecute the seruants of Christ, with Dioclesian? did they not bring in the worship and doctrine of Deuills? and while they did openly professe the name of Christ, did they not closly and secretly serue the Dragon? So the difference betweene the Emperours and the Popes about the manner of worshipping the Dragon was somewhat but in plaine truth nothing at all. But heere is a necessarie distinction to be vsed. There was in the Emperours a blinde ignorance of Christ, in the first Bi∣shoppes a true confession of Christ, in their successors a fained, who did in word condemne the olde Romane Idolatrie and tyrannie,What popery is. but did call it backe againe in deede. For what is poperie indeede if you doe truely weigh many of the parts of it, but refined paganisme. The Authors whereof were so bewitched of the Deuill, that they in∣tended one thing, and did another: in intention they worshipped God, in very deede the Dragon; as decei∣uers, so deceiued; the principall Authours of the De∣uills worship, as Saint Iohn saith; of the doctrine of De∣uells, as Saint Paul saith. What is popery else therefore whether you consider the worshippe, or the doctrine but secret Draconisme? 1. They thinke that they do gaily well, when they call vpon other Mediators, either Angells or Saints: when they adore the Pictures of Saints: yeelding wor∣shippe to the Image (as they say) which is due to the exam∣ple, whenas the contrary is fit, to giue no worshippe to the Image when none is due to the substance. They thinke they do passing holily, but indeede they wor∣shippe the Deuill, when they worshippe the Image as Iohn teacheth, whence Lactantius concludeth, there is no religion there where there is an Image. Hence it follow∣eth that the Romane Synagogue is voide of religion which is full of Images. The Popes imagine that they be Masters of abstinence and continencie, when for conscience sake they forbidde meates and marriages:
when as in truth they bring in the doctrine of deuills, as S. Paul teacheth. They doe not intend so, you will say. The murtherer doth not intend to kill his Father, but his enemie; but in stead of his enemie hee killeth his Father in the darke: shall we say hee killed not his father but his enemie, because he intended not his fa∣thers but his enemies death? which if it be absurd to speake in this outward darknes, do we not thinke it as absurd in this inward darknesse of the soule, if any man say that he doth worship God when hee doth worship the Dragon, because hee doth intend to worship God not the Dragon? Therefore the Emperours, and the Popes doe agree in a third, that is, in worshipping the Dragon, from whom they haue receiued their power. Adde hereto that the Pope, in whom the image of the first beast doth reuiue and liue againe, as shall appeare afterward; while he driueth men to worship himselfe, it may be said, that he doth compell them to worship the image of the first beast: from whence thus I dispute. He that compelleth men to worship the image of the first beast, is Antichrist. The Pope doth compell men to worship the image of the first beast. The Pope therefore is Antichrist. CHAP. XV. The decayed Emperour reuiued by the Pope. 5 FOR shee is said to cure and heale the deadly blow of the former beast, and to restore to him a spirit, and a voice. That I may not be longer about those things, which are so copiously vnfolded by others, the Empire tooke a deadly wound in Augustulus,The Empire dead, which was the last Em∣perour of the East, from whom the Empire lay as it were dead for 325 yeeres, till it was restored againe by
the Pope, and receiued as it were new life in Charles the Great, as Bellarmine doth vauntingly confesse. For he saith, That the Pope did translate the Empire first from the Greekes to the French,reuiued. afterward to the Germaines, and ap∣pointed that the choice of the Emperour should be made by seauen Electors, on that condition that the confirmation and inauguration of the Emperour so chosen should belong to the Pope: that by this meanes that dead head might seeme to liue and flourish againe by the spirit of the Pope. But reseruing to himselfe the power of the Empire, hee left the title to the Germaines,Cap. 15. de mira: Anti: as Bellarmine doth vnadui∣sedly confesse, that Antichrist shall be the last that shall enioy the Romane Empire, without the name or title of the Romane Emperour.The Emperor but titular. And therefore the Germane Em∣perour in respect of his power is only Titular, for the Pope hath not only deriued to him the spirituall power but the temporall also: therefore the state of Antichrist is the liuely image of the old Empire. The Germaine Empire, is not now the Empire but the title, and dead ghost of the Empire, to whom the Pope giueth spirit, that is authoritie, and a voice, that is his Edicts, when he giueth life to the Emperour by his confirmation. To what end I pray you  that it may sustaine and vphold the Popes Seate, wherein the power of the Empire doth reside without a name, according to Iohns Prophecie. Hence the Germane Emperour is called, the Procurator and protector of the Apostolicall See. I dispute then thus. Antichrist is the restorer of the old Romane Monar∣chie, witnes S. Iohn. The Pope of Rome alone is the restorer of the old Romane Monarchie, Bellarmine not onely wit∣nessing it, but glorying in it. The Pope of Rome therefore alone is Antichrist.
CHAP. XVI. Of bringing downe fire from heauen. BVt Bellarmine doth expound this place according to the letter, as that likewise of bringing downe fire from heauen. Antichrist saith he, and the Antichristian Church doth make the image of the Beast to liue and speake. But the Pope and the Popish Church did neuer make the image of the Beast to liue and speake. Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. Besides, Antichrist saith he, doth cause fire to come from heauen in the sight of men. The Pope did neuer bring downe fire in the sight of men. The Pope therefore is not Antichrist. The proposition of the former syllogisme taken lite∣rally, is not S. Iohns proposition: for not the image of euery beast is to take life from Antichrist, but the image of the first Beast, that is of the Romane Empire, which the Pope in name and title renued in the Emperour, in strength and power retained in himselfe. And there∣fore hee peruersely collecteth out of Iohn, that power is giuen to Antichrist to giue life, and frame speeches to Images, which may seeme as credible to sober men,Popish false miracles. as that the picture of Memnon being enlightned by the Sunne beames, spake very plainely, as Tacitus reporteth. But grant it be so: the assumption literally taken agreeth with the Pope, and the popish Synagogue, if ye beleeue the Legend. How often by them are images counter∣feited to moue, to sweat, to nodd, to speake in the sight, and opinion of simple people, that they may be allured to the worship of those Saints, whose images they be? There was some wonder toward as oft as the image began to speake.Martialis. The Deuill did often speake in the images of the Eth∣nicks,
but a Priest in the images of the Papist, that hee may seeme to take the Deuils turne in deluding of men. I retort therefore this argument. Whatsoeuer Church doth make images to speake, in the opinion of men, is Antichristian. But the popish Church doth make images to speake in the opinion of men. Therefore the popish Church is Antichristian. 6. Now I come to Bellarmines latter syllogisme, if first I shall explaine the sixt action of the Beast: Shee worketh great signes, so that she maketh fire to descend from heauen in the sight of men. The Beast that is Antichrist doth worke great mira∣cles, v: 13. which blessed Paul calls lying signes and wonders. 1. in respect of the end, because they serue to seduce men, Ioh: 14. 2. in respect of the matter; for they be either the counterfeytings of lying men, or the wonders of deceitfull spirits, as Augustine spea∣keth. 3. In respect of the forme, for whereas true miracles doe exceede nature, and are wrought by the omnipotent power of God; false wonders are they which are partly effected by naturall causes, partly by the power of Sathan. Bellarmine doth well agree with vs in all. False miracles.The miracles of the first and second kinde haue been infinite in the darke kingdome of Antichrist: the ap∣parition of Spirits, the visions of Angells, our Ladie how often hath shee come gliding out of heauen? how often haue the miserable soules crept puling out of Pur∣gatorie, besetting high-wayes, and recounting their torments to procure men to pittie them? hence the market of Purgatorie is growne very gainefull, and the bargaines about sinnes very profitable. Then could the Images walke a foote; then could the Bells strike alone without helpe; then could the Angells like Quoristers chant it out in Canterburie Minster, and play vpon Dunstans Harpe; then could the Apostles come downe
from heauen to helpe Basill to say Masse. These lying miracles were faigned by cheating knaues, to confirme strange lyes, and to cozen simple people of their coine. For how often hath a spirit being apprehended by the Magistracie, and an Angell stript, and our Ladie sent to her Cell, been all of them notably whipt? Soules so whipt with rodds, that they had rather beene in Pur∣gatorie. So they couerd all their tricks and conueyan∣ces, their kinde of deceit, and their manner of working with the feare of punishment. Of these miracles Paul spake, which being meerely false had a shew of mira∣cles, but not the power, being the deuises of cogging companions. There were other miracles of deceiueable spirits, which were wrought partly by the force of na∣turall causes, partly by the power of Satan. So that that Synagogue seemed to be another Canidia. Anti∣christ doth make fire to descend from heauen in the view of men, saith S. Iohn, that is in the opinion of men, as they imagine. Whether that be taken mystically or literally, let vs in a word consider. Fire according to the Scrip∣ture descends mystically, either when God doth ap∣proue the religion and sacrifices, of his seruants,How fire des∣cends from heauen in the Scripture. as of Abel and Elias: or when God doth by an extraordina∣rie fashion send downe the graces of the Spirit into their hearts, as in the fiery tongues: or when God did cast downe fire from heauen moued by the prayers of his seruants, as of Elias to destroy his enemies.Three sorts of fire. 1. Is the fire of sacrifice. 2. The fire of grace. 3. The fire of Reuenge. In all these Antichrist is Gods Ape. For he hath con∣firmed and approued the sacrifice of the Masse and Transsubstantiation with miracles:The Masse confirmed by a false miracle. witnesse that pillar of fire from heauen, falling to the earth, euen vpon that place, where by the negligence of the Priest, as the Le∣gend reports, the bodie of God fell out of the pixe vpon the grasse: that pillar of fire shining like the Sunne was
about the bodie of God, so that all the beasts of the field, except a blacke Horse, which bended but one of his leggs, bended all their foure leggs to the bodie. Which miracle I haue brought out of the Legend, that I might gratifie Bellarmine, who knowes that beasts then were well nurtured, like to his leane iade, that forget∣ting to eat his meat, did adore the sacrament vpon his knees: which the beasts had not done if God forsooth had not brought downe the fiery pillar from heauen, whereby they might haue discerned the bodie of God lying vpon the grasse. Adde hereto that Antichrist doth bestow the grace of the spirit, & sanctification, vp∣on his Agneit Dei, his hallowed graines, his holy water, and his bells, as Primasius hath it. Further, hee striketh his enemies with vengeance from God, as it were with fire fallen from heauen, but that in the conceit of men, that they whom Antichrist his furie doth daunt, may seeme to be wounded with heauenly reuenge, as it were with fire falne from aboue. Which whether it be true of the flash of excommunication, which the Pope, who is called the God of reuenge, casts abroad, let Kings looke to it, whose kingdomes haue been often set on fire by such popish lightning. But to excommunicate a King is, say they, no miracle. But so to excommuni∣cate a King that you cast him out of his kingdome, and release subiects from the obedience of their Kings, it is a great miracle, that either Kings are so patient to en∣dure, or Subiects so madde to beleeue. Wherefore this is not materiall fire, but mysticall, brought downe from heauen by Antichrist in the sight of men, not that he doth so indeed, but that he seemeth so to doe. Although if the literall sense doe more content you, I haue found out Gregorie the seuenth,Gregor: the 7. miracle. that notable en∣chanter, who could strike fire out of his bosome, as oft as he listed. Thus I infer. Whosoeuer in the conceits of simple men doth seeme to bring downe reuenging fire out of heauen, is Antichrist.
This the Pope doth and hath done. Therefore the Pope is Antichrist. CHAP. XVII. Of the Popes Character. I Proceede. The Beast is sayd to imprint his chara∣cter vpon all, both great and small, to bee carried ei∣ther in their fore-head, or their right hand. Wherein he doth peruersly follow Christs character, which GOD doth imprint vpon his seruants, subiection to Christ, and the acknowledging of him to bee their head and Sauiour. And it is partly inward, partly outward.Christs chara∣cter of two sorts. The inward character is true faith imprinted vpon the soule by the spirit of God, whereby we beleeue that Christ is our onely Redeemer. The outward character, is the confession of the mouth, & the operation of the hands. And therfore a Christian doth beare the marke of God in his heart by faith, in his fore-head by profession,Rom. 10. in his hand by working, as S. Paul hath expounded: be∣sides that, the two sacraments are the seales of faith, the witnesses of profession, and the practises of holi∣nesse.The diuers characters of the Pope. In like sort Antichrist hath a marke proper to him∣selfe of his owne, which he doth imprint and brand the Antichristians withall. Which character hangs vpon his name, and his name vpon his state. Of the first Beast that is of the Romane or Latine monarchie,The seauen formes of go¦uernment a∣mong the Romanes. there were seauen heads, that is, seuen kingly formes of go∣uerning the common-weale. 1. Kings properly so cal∣led. 2. Consuls. 3. Decemviri. 4. Tribunes of souldi∣ers. 5 Dictators. 6. Emperors properly called. 7 An∣tichrist. The state of the Beast is Romane or Latine. Therefore the character of the Beast is a note of diffe∣rence whereby all they are discerned from all other,
who are of the Romane or Latine Religion, whom we tearme Papists. And the subiection to the Pope of Rome, as to their head, and the acknowledging of that See, the inward and outward marke of Antichrist. The double marke or cha∣racter of An∣tichrist.The inward marke is that implicite faith, which I toucht before. The outward marke is that out∣ward profession of the mouth, and the conformity of life to the Popes lawes: as the obseruation of the hea∣thenish rights was called the character of the Greekes: which is made perfect by the sacraments of confirma∣tion and order, inuented by the Pope. And Antichrist doth so imprint all his with the marke of the Beast, that hee will suffer none to buy or sell, except they be bran∣ded with the Beasts marke. So euery Papist is a stig∣maticke, otherwise he cannot hold his house, or keepe open doores, or haue any contract or businesse, or haue any comfortable society with Christs faithfull ser∣uants, as Martin the fift in the bull annexed to the counsell of Constance did word for word declare. 8. The name of the Beast or of Antichrist doth fol∣low in the last place, it is not a proper but a common name. For if we know what the Beast is, we shall quick∣ly know what his name is. CHAP. XVIII. Of the name and number of the second Beast. THe Beast with seauen heads, as I sayd, is the state of the Romane and Latine Empire, whose sixe Heads or Kings, were called Romane or Latine. The seuenth is Antichrist called likewise Romane or Latin. Therefore Antichrist is the seuenth King of the Ro∣mane or Latine Empire. But the Pope is the seuenth King of the Romane Empire. The Pope therefore is Antichrist.
9. But hee must not onely beare the name of the Beast, but the number of his name, not the number of time, but of his name: for so saith Saint Iohn, no man may buy or sell, but he that hath the mark and name of the Beast, or number of his name. He doth not say the number of the time, wherein Antichrist was to bee re∣uealed, but the number of his name, which he was to stampe vpon his. But the number of the name is the number of the yeeres 666. which is contained,The number of the Beast. both in the Hebrew name, in which language the Prophesie was deliuered to S. Iohn: or in Greeke, in which language it was writ∣ten by S. Iohn, Romanus in the Hebrew, Latinos written in Greeke, maketh vp that number. by Ireneus witnesse: Romanus by Fox his ac∣compt. There the common name of Antichrist is Ro∣manus or Latinus. It is the name of a man also, which is very fitting: for Latinus was the name of a King in Ita∣ly; Romanus of a Pope. Heere is wisdome, saith S. Iohn, hee that hath vnderstanding let him count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his num∣ber is 666. It is an olde tradition not to bee reiected of them that bee addicted to traditions, that Irenaeus tooke the the name  from Ignatius, Ignatius from Polycar∣pus, Polycarpus from S. Iohn. There be other names that containe the same number, as Euandas and , but none of these bee the name of the Beast, nor the name of a man, none such, which Antichrist doth im∣print vpon his, and to whom all the notes of Antichrist doe agree. Whosoeuer doth compell those that bee vnder his iurisdiction to take on them the marke and name of the Beast, the number of his name, and the number of a man is Antichristrist. But the Pope of Rome doth compell those that be vnder his iurisdiction to take vpon them
the mark and name of the Beast, and the num∣ber of his name, and the number of a man, as I haue demonstrated before. Therefore the Pope is Antichrist. CHAP. XIX. Wherein is shewed the place where Antichrist sitteth. The Pope sits in Rome which is Ba∣bylon.WEe haue seene the actions, the marke and the name of the Beast. Let vs see his seat: I haue expounded the starre which fell from Heauen, I added somewhat of the Beast which rose out of the earth: now hearken to the whore which sitteth on the Beast. Ere while the falling starre did represent Antichrist, now the whore of Babylon doth represent the seat of Anti∣christ. A falling starre, because hee left his place: a whore because she broke her troth: ere while the Land-Beast did poynt out Antichrist, so called, not onely be∣cause she tooke a surer and a stronger beginning out of rest and idlenesse, but because shee being a slaue to her beastly affections, sauours nothing but earth and flesh. Now the whore of Babylon doth shadow out by your owne confessions the seate and Church of Antichrist:Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16 cap. 17. & cap. 22. lib. 18. Sic Hieron. in Esa. cap 47. v. 1. and else vvhere often. Demonst. 13. & 18. for they are not afraid to call Rome, Babylon, as the Rhe∣mists, Parsons and Bellarmine: and mysticall Babylon, as Augustine cals Babylon as it were first Rome, and Rome as it were the second Babylon, and the daughter of the first Babylon: whereupon your owne men grant that Rome is that whore of Babylon described by S. Iohn: yea, they proceede farther, for your Saunders calleth it the seat and ity of Antichrist. We take that you grant: for it followes by your grant, that not Heathenish Rome, but the Bishops Rome is mysticall Babylon: for the state of An∣tichrist being the seauenth head, doth follow the state of the Empire, being the sixt head of the Beast. And therfore Heathenish & Imperiall Rome could not be the
seat & city of Antichrist. Therefore Christian Rome, & the Popes Rome. Wherby it is broght to passe, that not Heathenish Rome, but the Popes Rome is mysticall Babylon. For this is the summe of my conclusion. Mysticall Babylon is the seat and city of Anti∣christ, described in the Apocal. chap. 17. But Rome is mysticall Babylon there described. Rome therfore is the seat and city of Antichrist. But they distinguish of Rome in the assumption, and they enforce it to be Heathenish and the Imperiall Rome, which then gouerned & persecuted the Saints. Not this Christian and Popish described by S. Iohn. It is a very waighty and euident prophesie. 1. It had beene a colde and a weake prophesie,Reasons to shew it was not Heathe∣nish Rome: but the Po∣pish. if he had prophesied of that persecution which he saw in others, and felt in himselfe. Prophesies looke not to the present, but the future times. 2. If he had meant that Ethnicke Rome had beene Babylon, which did afflict the Saints at that time, hee had not spoken as of a mystery: for that could not seem to him so mysticall that Pagans should persecute Chri∣stians. That was a plaine mysticall euill, that Christians should oppresse Christians. 3. Neither would he haue called Ethnicke Rome a whore in that sense, which had not giuen her faith to Christ, and therefore had not as yet broken it: neither did shee deceiue the nations with whorish trickes and daliances: but had vanquisht them with military force and weapons. Hee doth therefore call Rome a whore, after it left off to be a faithfull city, which daun∣ted the nations, not as Bellona, but enchanted them as Circe. 4. Neither would he haue made her marchants the Sales-men of soules, or that all nations had beene de∣ceiued by her venemous baits, if he had meant Ethnick Rome, which subdued nations by force, did not infect them with poyson. For that kept a shambles for bodies
not a market for soules. And among all the negotiati∣ons of Popish Rome, none is so gainefull as the traf∣ficke of soules, whereof S. Iohn; which Ethnicke Rome neuer practised. Therfore the Christian Popish Rome is that Babylon,Popish Rome Babylon. whose wares are mens soules, whose Marchants are the Monkes, which make men value their saluation at a high rate. Not without cause, Mar∣tial a pleasant Poet, thought hee might iest with one Calliodore, who had put ouer his seruant tor 2000. pee∣ces of siluer, that out of his mans price hee might suppe daintily, and feede vpon Mullet, and other kindes of delicate fish. I may well cry, ô wreth, that fish is not thy meat. It is a man, a man thou Calliodore doest eat. The same may bee truely sayd of Bellarmine, Becan and such like Iesuites, who sell mens soules to feede their bellies. It is not fish ye Iesuites, whereon you doe so feed, O they be men ye Canibals, ô they be men indeed. Whom if I cannot yet satisfie, (for I know their wrang∣ling and obstinate wits) I will send them to the Angell, the Interpreter of the Mysterie, who doth conuict that Rome, in name onely Christian and Popish, to be that whore of Babylon. First, the seuen heads of the Beast, whereof he spake mystically before, are seuen hils, saith the Angell, and seuen Kings. The hils are the heads of the city, the se∣uen Kings the heads of the gouernment, by them the situation of Rome, by these the seuen kindes of gouern∣ment are noted, whereof I spake before. Fiue went be∣fore Iohns time, the sixt was then, that is, the Empire, which the first Beast shadoweth out, the seuenth was not yet come, that was the Popedome, which the latter Beast doth represent. The Rhemists obiection.But the 7. hills and the 7. Kings say the Rhemists are not taken literally and properly, but mystically, and indefinit∣ly so that they signifie all the Kingdomes of persecutors. Why
therefore doth the Angell adde, of the seauen Kings, 5. are falne, one is, and the other is not yet come? which place the Rhemists do so expound afterward, but vnwit∣tingly, they confesse fiue went before Christ, one then was, the other was to follow, whereby they ouerthrow their former idle interpretation. Whose peeuishnesse I pray behold how great it is. In all other places almost,Their mista∣king. where the sense is altogether mysticall, they imagine a literall sense of their owne. Heere where the Angell sets downe a plaine literall sense they imagine a mysti∣call. Against sense, which seeth the 7. hills of the city, whereupon Rome is called the seuen hild-city: Against the history, which mentioneth 7. Kings, that is the 7. kingly formes of gouernment of that City. Neither doth the Angell say, as they dreame the seauen heades are 7. hills, and the 7. hills are seauen Kings, but the 7. heades are 7. hills, and those seauen heades are seauen Kings as Bellarmine acknowledgeth. The Rhemists ex∣position is very foolish. For the Kings being the heads do shaddow out the heades of the politicke body very fitly, the hills very vnfitly. Besides that, it is very false for if the hills be Kings, the City which is the woman vers: 18. sitteth vpon 7. Kings. For shee is said to sit on the hills vers: 9. The light of which place, did so strike and dasell the English-Rhemists,Anglo-Rhemen in Apoc: cap. 17.5. as it had done Sanders before, that they confesse Rome to be that Whore of Babi∣lon, and that it may fall out not inconueniently, that great Antichrist may haue his seat at Rome. Out of this exposi∣tion of the Angell, and the confession of the Aduersa∣rie ariseth this proposition. That great City placed vp∣on seauen hills, and subiect, to the 7. kingly formes of gouernment, is the seat of Antichrist, hence I dispute both negatiuely, and affirmatiuely. Negatiuely: But Ierusalem although a great City,Antichrists seat not at Ierusalem. yet was not situated on seauen hills, nor euer subiect to seauen such king∣ly formes of gouernment; Ierusalem therefore is not the seat of Antichrist. Affirmatiuely, but of all cities
this scituation and gouernment is proper to Rome. Rome therefore properly is the head-city of Anti∣christ. Now sith Antichrist sits only at Rome, as the An∣gell interprets in Iohn, and the Aduersary confesseth, and sitteth in the temple of God, as Paul sets it downe, that is in Gods Church, as the fathers expound it out of the Scriptures, it followeth both waies necessarily that not that Ethnicke but that Ecclesiasticall Rome is the head-city of Antichrist. Sibilla did foretell both the scituation of the place,Sibilla did foretell Anti∣christ. and the state of Antichrist. And she foretould there would bee great terror and furie of the Empire neere the bankes of Tyber, and that the king would be  and gaue him the name like to a bridge, and should be a Bishop adorned with a white, that is a siluer My∣ter, glistering with pretious stones; as Ireneus likewise fore∣tould. Therefore he was a Latine Bishop, that did hold Peters chaire, as Bernard, who shall bee called most holy Lord, and most holy Bishoppe as Ioachim the Abbot said. Could Saint Iohn, could Saint Paul, could Sibilla, Irenaeus, Barnard, Ioachim the Abbot, touch him neerer then they touch him? Or more plainly shew the scituation of the seate, the kinde of gouernment, the state of the King, the bank of Tyber, the name of the chaire of Antichrist, so that one of the Papists called him most holy Pope? But let vs returne to the Angell, by whom the beast which carried the whore is thus described, (which was) that is a flourishing Empire (but is not) in truth the Em∣pire of Rome for his strength and power but his sha∣dow rather vers: 3. (and yet is) the Romane Empire for name and title: (and is called the eight beast) for 5. are already falne,Vers. 10. as the Angell saith. One King was then, that is the Empire in Saint Iohns time, and a∣nother was not as yet come,Vers. 11. that is the Papacie which drew to it selfe the strength and power of the olde Em∣pire without the name: and is called the seuenth head of the beast,The eight beast. although of it owne selfe it be a beast. But the beast which was and is not (is the eight) that is a
new Empire, for the name and title, and is one of the seuen: that is, of the Emperours. Therefore although the old Empire may seeme to be described by the An∣gell by the name of the beast, yet a new is chiefly set out, which the second beast did renew, that the Whoore might sit vpon it, and be vpholden by it. What is more perspicuous then this Angelicall interpretation, which euent it selfe hath prooued true? for the whore sitteth vpon this heast and is vpheld by it. For therefore the Romaine in name, but the Germaine Emperour in deed is called as I said the Defendor Procurator and Protectour of the Apostolicke sea. Out of the premisses I shortly dispute. 6 The beast whereon the Whore sitteth is a new Empire; for it is not the sixt head but the eight, therefore not Ethnick Rome vnder the Pagans, but in name only Christian vnder the Christian Emperours is that Whore described by Saint Iohn. 7 Now those ten hornes saith the Angell, are tenne Kings vers: 12. which as yet haue not receiued the Kingdome. They be not then those tenne hornes, whereof Da∣niel did prophecie whose kingdomes are at an end. But they shall haue kingly power together with the beast, that is with Antichrist, which cannot be vnderstood but of the Proconsuls, or Propraetors who were vicegerents to the Emperours in the Prouinces, who together after the dissolution of the Easterne Empire had at that time absolute kingly authoritie with the Pope. For while the Empire stood and flourished, neither the Pope at Rome nor the Kings in the Prouinces did rule absolutely; af∣ter it decaied, both hee enioyed Rome and a great part of Italie, and they enioyed the Prouinces. And these tenne hornes together with the beast as Bellarmine confes∣seth it, & euent proues it,Lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. cap. 13. diuided the Romane Empire betweene them. Hence I inferre this.
At that time whenas Rome was accounted the Whore of Babilon by the Angell, then the tenne hornes tooke absolute power with Antichrist. But before Rome was Christian and Popish the ten hornes had not absolute power with Anti∣christ. It followeth therefore that Rome not before it was Christian and Popish, was accounted the Whore of Babylon by the Angell. CAHP. XX. Wherein the qualities of the Whore of Babylon are described. WHose glorious profession is fitly resembled to the golden cuppe of fornication. It is said that Edward the 4. King of England had three Concubines the first very deuout, the second very subtill, the third very plesant. The whore of Babylon alone doth expresse these three dispositions. For what is more deuout, what is more ioconde, what is more wily? shee hath a face none of her owne, as her Husband Antichrist hath not. For he doth alwaies weare a visard, and therefore is a counterfeit Antichrist. A whore, not only for her car∣nall filthinesse, but for her spirituall Idolatrie, whereto she hath entised the nations with her allurements, such as had to do with her. She is therefore a blasphemous and filthy Whore, more then that a proud, couetous, cruell whore. And therefore she is said to bee decked with purple and golden attire, inriched with the spoiles of all sorts, and drunke with the innocent bloud of the Saints.Note For what extremities soeuer impietie could ef∣fect by blasphemie, or lust by laciuiousnesse, or coue∣tousnesse by rapine, or pride by delicacie, or crueltie by torture, the same the Angell so long before foretould that the Church should endure by that whore of Baby∣lon.
Neither if we grant that Ethnicke Rome from her cradell was Babylon, because the beast is said to haue 7. heades, any inconuenience will follow thereby. Nei∣ther if wee shall say that the purple whore began then,The Pope compared to Romulus. when Romulus first founded Rome will it ouerthrowe the exposition of the Angell. For it remained to bee that, which she was in the beginning. Yea a great deale worse when it was falsly Christian vnder Antichrist, then heathenish vnder Romulus. It is reported that Ro∣mulus was a notable theife, a Deflowrer of Virgins, a truce breaker, a brother-killer, and that hee founded Rome at the first by these sinnes. But he was not so no∣torious for his theifts, as this for his sacriledge. Nor he so filthy for the forcing of Virgins, as this for the wor∣shipping of Images: Nor he for his breaking his league with men, as this with God: Nor he such a spiller of his brothers blood, as this of Christian blood. What an one thinke we him to be, who doth surpasse a theefe in robberie, a deflowrer of Virgins in lechery, a truce breaker in treacherie, and a brother-killer in crueltie. Therefore the Angell called the Bishop of Rome Baby∣lon and the purple whore by a super excellencie.The descripti- of the Whore of Babylon. For she was proude by the spoiles of Prouinces, this by the spoiles of all Churches. She was composed or carnall, this of spirituall adulteries and whoredomes. She brak her faith with men, this with God. Shee was enraged against the bodies of the Saints, this against the soules of the Saints. She dealt with the lambes of Christ by open force as a Lyons Whelpe, this as a Foxe with her cunning did sauagely teare them in peeces and deuour them. Wherefore let Rome if you will, bee that whore of Babylon from the beginning: certainely she could not make drunke 10. kings with the golden cuppe of her fornication, before there were tenne Kings. For while Ethnicke Rome did stand, they were the Emperours subiects, they were no kings: They were kings vnder the Pope of Rome, therefore by popish Rome made
drunke, to whom by an excellencie the name of that whore is giuen by the Angell. Neither yet will I euer ac∣cuse that Bishoply Rome, which suffred for Christ vn∣der the ethnicke Emperours. For not Rome regenera∣ted and suffering, but degenerating and persecuting can properly be called that whore of Babylon. Neither doe I wholy excuse the imperiall Rome,Imperiall Rome not to be excused. which vnder Con∣stantine, Theodosius and other holy Emperours professed Christ: because Rome which was Babylon from the be∣ginning, did retaine in her bosome diuers reliques of the former paganisme, and diuers seedes of the future Antichristianisme. Because it is not necessarie that all that were of the same succession should be of the same affection. No I would not exclude Paul the 5. him∣selfe from the hope of saluation, if the wretched sinner would repent, and returne vnto his God. Hence cer∣taine dispute against vs. Antichrist cannot be saued: for he is the sonne of perdi∣tion, as the Apostle teacheth. The Pope may be saued, by your owne confession. The Pope therefore is not Antichrist. Or thus. It is not lawfull to pray for Antichrist, It is for the Pope, The Pope therefore is not Antichrist. This obiection is a fallacie, called the begging of the question. For it doth presuppose Antichrist to be one singular man. We contrary; as by many reasons wee haue proued it. If therefore they keepe them to the point, and take the Pope collectiuely, the assumption is false, if they take him for this or that single man, the assumption is true, if the Pope repent. But then there be foure tearms in the syllogisme. For the Pope is o∣therwise taken in the assumption, then in the conclu∣sion. For there it is taken for singular Popes, heere for a succession of Pope. But of this sophisme I haue spo∣ken enough before.
CHAP. XXI. How the Church of Rome may be said to be the Church of GOD. BVt heere is another doubt to bee resolued, how the seate of Antichrist can be called that purple whore, as Saint Iohn saith, and temple and Church of God as Saint Paul saith. For if Antichrist sit in the Church of God as I taught before, and popish Rome be the seat of Antichrist, as in many wordes I haue declared, it seemeth that popish Rome is the Church of God. I answere and distinguish of the proposition, and that out of Gods booke, which considereth the Church after 2. sorts. 1. After the inward truth, and the outward profession. 2. After the outward profession only. As blessed Iohn calleth the Church of Sardis the Church of Christ although it had greeuously fallen from the doctrine of Christ. Why so? Because as yet it professed the name of Christ, and retained the sacra∣ment of Baptisme, and because certain lay hid among them, who had not polluted themselues. So the Church of Rome may bee called the Church of God and of Christ, because it professeth the name of Christ, because it retaineth certaine footsteps and outward markes of a visible Church, as Baptisme, the Decalogue, the creed,The Papists haue the truth as the Phili∣stines had the Arke. the Lords Prayer: but notes miserably corrupted: as the Philistines who retained among them the Arke of Gods presence, but they felt it to bee to them the Arke of pestilence: as the Cutthites the bastard Israelites, who had Moses bookes, and would at once feare God and worship Idoles: As the Samaritanes their successors, who brag'd that they had Iacobs well among them, when they had infected the well of the water of life.
Therefore the Delegates did iustly complaine of the Church of Rome in the Councell of Trent: That that was true which God complained by Ieremie: This people haue committed two euills; one, they haue forsaken me the fountaine of liuing water: The other they haue digged to themselues cesternes, which can hold no water. Although I cannot denie that certaine relikes of the inuisible Church doe lie hidden in the same, who haue not ben∣ded their knee to Baal. But as it is said to the Church of Sardis, You haue a name that you liue, but you are dead, that may deseruedly be spoken of the Romish Church, in respect of the inward faith the soule of the Church, you are starke dead, although in outward profession you are said to liue. You are called the Temple of God, because you reteyne the name of Christ, but you are the whore of Babylon, because you haue forsaken the faith. The temple of God equiuocally, not vni∣uocally, for an equiuocall Church is good enough for aequiuocating Christians. Now the ten hornes, that is the ten Kings, haue one purpose, as the Angell spea∣keth, to giue ouer his virtue and his power to the beast. Her they will serue, they will loue and seeke after her; her they will susteyne with their forces, at her booke they will draw the sword, and being confederaed in holy leagues both with the beast and within themselues, will fight with the Lambe: but after that, the Lambe shall by litle and litle begin to weaken and consume Antichrist by the preaching of his word, then the ten hornes which before had to doe with the whore, shall begin to hate her, and leaue her forsaken and naked. CHAP. XXII. An aduise to Princes to ioyne against the Pope. 8 WHich cannot bee said of old, but of new Rome, whereof a great part of the prophecie
is now fulfilled. For the Pope hath lost, as Bellarmine bemoaneth, a great part of Germanie, Suetia, Gothia, Noruegia, all Denmarke, a good part of England, France, Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, and Pannonia. He might bet∣ter haue said all England, and ioyn'd Scotland and Ire∣land thereto, but that he would shew he hath a litle vaine hope in certaine secret and broken relicks of Antichrist among vs. I would to God that as the Kings of Great Britannie, with many other great Princes haue cast of the whore,A desire that France and Spaine would forsake the Pope. so the Kings of France and Spaine would forsake her. Rome is more to be feared of them, then of our Britaine King, whose Crowne is more free, whose succession more certaine, whose subiects more loyall, whose kingdome is more remote, and shut vp from po∣pish assaults. I would that so mighty Princes, this Prin∣ces confederates, would follow his valour and holines in this point, whereby they might wholy fulfill the pro∣phecie. It is not for men of meane condition to giue counsell, but to make prayers, while they expound this so holy and waightie prophecie. If not to aduise, yet to wish, first that those two potent Kings would ioyne with the King of Great Britaine, and others those wor∣thy Kings and Princes of the Reformed Church, a∣gainst Antichrist. Next that if they doe make a secret league with Antichrist and within themselues against the Kings and Princes of the Reformed Church, that all our side would make a holy League with all possible haste, and take heed that our neighbours and brethren, the Protestants of France and Flanders, be not vnawares opprest by them, whiles ours neglect them. But wee may not make warres with our neighbour Kings. But we ought to take heed, lest they bring in a very dange∣rous warre vpon vs. But we must be addicted to peace. True, which hath no treacherie nor deceipt; otherwise an holy warre is to be preferred before a trecherous peace, whereto the Holy Ghost doth exhort Kings, that with vnited forces they destroy and ouerthrow the
whore of Babylon, that is Rome, as Bellarmine him∣selfe confesseth. CHAP. XXIII. The ouerthrow of Rome. AS the Angell doth continue his prophecie to the last ouerthrow of the whore, which cannot agree with heathenish and imperiall Rome; for this ouer∣throw doth follow the dissolution of the old Empire, and the diuision thereof into ten kingdomes, which according to the prophecie would that the whore should first perish, afterward themselues should con∣sume and destroy it. Therefore this ouerthrow belon∣geth to Rome that is popish, but christian in name, as the Angell did notably expound it; for whereas shee is said to sit vpon many waters, that is, many people and many nations, as the Angell expounds it, ver: 15. and whereas the woman is called the great Citie, which beareth rule ouer the Kings of the earth, ver: 18. no∣thing doth hinder but that it may be popish Rome. But that popish Rome is not rightly said to haue gouer∣ment: first it is sufficient that Rome then Imperiall, is described to be the seate wherein the whore of Babylon shall beare rule afterward. Againe, they which call her the kingdome of the Romanes,Turrianus. the kingdome of Priests, doe confesse that shee beareth rule, who haue very cun∣ningly changed the secular kingdome into a spirituall, that which Aquinas the Angelicall Doctor doth obserue.Aquinas. But so excellent a prophecie did not onely looke into the age then present, but foresaw the age long after to follow. And therefore the description of the whore is first set out in all her parts as you see, and after her de∣struction, which cannot be vnderstood of the burning of Ethnicke Rome by the Gothes and Vandales,10 but by a finall and sodaine destruction, as it were a myll∣stone
cast by great force into the sea. For it shall not saith the Angell, be found againe any more: which cannot agree to Ethnicke Rome, for after it had recei∣ued that dangerous wound by the Gothes, it was after∣ward cured and restored to health. Besides,  the An∣gell doth adde that the destruction of the whore shall be for euer: which although it doe agree with Rome Ethnicke, yet that you may see it likewise agreeth with Rome popish, the woman saith the Angell, which is the great Citie, together with her false Prophet shall be cast into the lake of fire. Let the litle froggs take heed to themselues, those foule spirits the Iesuites, which issue daily out of the mouth of the Dragon, the beast and the false Prophet. Bellarmine, Becan, and the rest of those frogs, may merrily scoffe and laugh at our men (but with a Sardonian laughter) because the Citie and Anti∣christ, as they write, to vs are both one, as the street & Io∣sephus: for the woman which is the great Citie, together with her false Prophet shall be cast into the lake of fire. Here is no distinction of destruction: for both the seat, and he that holdeth the seat shall perish for euer. But Christian Rome shall not perish, say they. True, if the truth agreed with the name: but the Antichristian whore shall be vtterly ouerthrowne. Therefore the Angell cryeth out, Come out of Babylon my people, lest as yee be partakers of her sinnes, you be likewise partakers of her plagues.  which place Hierome doth alledge in his Epistle to Marcella, whom he perswadeth to come out of Rome now, not heathenish but popish, because it is Babylon: which the very Papists themselues do grant to be the seat of Antichrist.  I demand therefore at the last, whether they make Ethnicke Rome to be the seate of Antichrist, because hee then sate at Rome, when the Ethnicke Emperours gouerned there, or whether he should sit afterward when they were worne out. If they say he sate at Rome with the Ethnicke Emperors, they ouerthrow all the tale of Antichrist vtterly, whom
they imagine shall come in the end of the world: if they say he shall sit after the Emperours be cleane gone,Popish Rome the seat of An∣tichrist. it followeth that Rome is Babylon, and the seat of Anti∣christ, not the former heathenish, but the latter popish. For whereas they goe about to proue out of the Apo∣calyps, that Ierusalem is the seat of Antichrist, thereof I shall haue occasion to speake more properly in ano∣ther place. Now out of these premisses doth arise that principall syllogisme which I tooke in hand to proue. Mysticall Babylon is the seat and Citie of Antichrist described in the 17 and 18 of the Apocalyps by the confession of the Aduersaries. But Rome christian in name and popish is that my∣sticall Babylon, as the exposition of the Angell doth manifestly convict. Rome therefore in name christian and popish, is the seat and citie of Antichrist. This is the Angells exposition, Paul the fift, not mine: this exposition if you haue any sense at all pierceth to the quicke, it galls and wounds exceedingly. This syl∣logisme doth inwardly lanche and wound these your worthy Aduocates, though they seeme to haue litle sense, made like a darte, by the exposition of the Angell, to be cast and aymed at them. For what are they else but the shamelesse bawdes of the whore? what do they else, but with their cunning netts of words, and with their learned snares deceiue and catch simple people,Papists de∣ceiue the peo∣ple. that they may bring them to that withered and ouer∣worne whore, whom they paint out with all their boxes of their slaberments. But as Chrysostome said of a wo∣man that coloured her face with painting, that God would not acknowledge her in the resurrection for his crea∣ture, that may more truly be said of this same hagged and painted whore, of whom we speake.
CHAP. XXIV. Wherein is set downe the time when Antichrist is reuealed. I Haue spoken much of the seat wherein shee doth gouerne, now somewhat of the time when shee shall be reuealed. For Antichrist lurkt closely a long time, and closely grew by degrees, as an earth-quake,A notable si∣militude of an earth-quake. which doth not shew it selfe straight way, but beginneth first by a litle winde, and then being shut vp and kept in, in certaine hollow caues of the earth, making no motion or sound, but by litle and litle gathering great strength, at last violently breaketh out,The degrees of an earth-quake. teares the earth in pie∣ces, shatters rocks, casts downe mountaines, ouerturnes Towers, subuerts Cities, swallowes vp Riuers, inflames the ayre, bringeth forth lightning, filleth the heauens with dreadfull noyse, and the world with terrible feare. Such is the working of an earth-quake, small, litle and hidden at the first, great and terrible after it breakes out. Such for all the world is the working of Antichrist. In the beginning, like a litle winde, it lyeth hid in cer∣taine hollow cells of the Church, afterward by degrees growing bigger, and gathering strength, it doth agaste the world. Insinuating himselfe at the first with a fai∣ned cloake of sanctitie, creepeth secretly into mens mindes: at the last shall appeare, and breake out open∣ly to their destruction, after that which hindreth is ta∣ken away, as the Apostle teacheth. It is agreed on both sides, that which S. Paul saith hindreth,What hindred the reuealing of Antichrist. De resur: car: 2 Thess: 2.6. that Antichrist which then was might not be reuealed was the Roman Empire, as all the Fathers thought, Tertullian, Ambrose, Chrysostome, Cyrill, Primasius, Theophylact vpon this place, Hierom to Algasia quest. 11. vnlesse better you know what deteyneth the comming of Christ, that Antichrist should first be reuealed in his time, as that
learned Iewell doth expound out of the former words. The day of Christ, saith the Apostle, shall not come, vn∣lesse there come a falling away first, and vnlesse Anti∣christ be reuealed ver: 7. hee teacheth who doth keepe backe the comming of Christ, onely he which detey∣neth, shall deteyne till he be cleane taken away: which all the Fathers almost, as I said, vnderstand of the Ro∣mane Emperour, about the end of whose fall they say that Antichrist shall come. The Apostle vsed first the newter gender, v: 6. then the masculine, v: 7. By the one some thinke he meant the Romane Empire, by the other the Romane Emperour. For so long as the Rom: Empire florished, or the Romane Emperour bare rule, Antichrist could not sit & domineere in that seat: he lay close at that time and durst not shew him∣selfe. The Emperour who hindred him was to be ta∣ken out of the way, that Antichrist might openly go∣uerne at Rome; that the Popes chaire might there be placed in stead of Caesars throne. But herein the Ad∣uersaries dissent from vs; That the Rom: Empire they say, should be vtterly ouerthrowne and ended, so as not so much as the name of the Rom: Empire should remaine, before An∣tichrist came. Which as soone as Bellarmine had said, he denied: in which contradiction, as in many others, that great learned Bishop of Ely takes him tardie. Truly that which hee said, neither the Apostle hath said, or any Father hath said. The Apostle hath taught, that that which hindred must be taken out of the way, and remoued out of his place, so farre forth as it hin∣dred the reuelation and domination of Antichrist, hee did not teach it should be abolished and ouerthrowne, as they say, so that he should lose his name: for the re∣mouing of the Empire is one thing, the abolishing is another.The Roman Empire is not dissolued but diuided into 10 Kings. The Emperour is gone out of the Citie of Rome, the Rom: Empire is dissolued and diuided into ten Kings, therefore Antichrist is now come. This is therefore the conclusion of all those Fathers, whom I
mentioned before. Hee that held is taken away, sayth Hierome,Ad Geront. de Monoga. and doe we not vnderstand that Antichrist is neere at hand? for so S. Iohn sayth, the ten hornes shall receiue the Kingdome together with the Beast, that is, with Antichrist, and the ten Kings shall diuide the Ro∣mane Empire among themselues (the number of ten is often taken indefinitely.) You haue heard the prophe∣sie, marke the euent. The tenne hornes haue receiued the Kingdome, and haue diuided the Romane Empire among themselues, together with the Beast, that is, with Antichrist: by the confession of Bellarmine. Therefore Antichrist is now come. But the name of the Romane Empire is not abolished. Neither ought it to be abolished; for S. Iohn hath taught, that the sixt head of the Sea-Beast, that is, the Empire,The sixt head of the Sea-beast. after it was deadly wounded should bee cured and healed againe: not therefore to bee vtterly taken away and finished, as they say, so that it retaine not the name of an Empire. Againe, hee sets out the cause, why the second Beast, that is, Antichrist should renew the image of the former Beast, that the whore might sit vpon her, as I haue taught, and bee sustained by her. And therefore the former Beast was not cleane to be taken away, lest the latter being depriued of her stay, should fall to the ground. But how doth S. Iohn and S. Paul then agree?An obiection ansvvered. S. Paul saith, that the Emperour must be taken out of the way, that he might leaue Rome empty for Antichrist, as the Papists expound it: Saint Iohn sayth, that the whore sitteth vpon the Beasts backe, that is, the Emperour, that she might be vpheld by him. How doe you recon∣cile these? will you say, if you vnderstand S. Paul to speake of the olde, and S. Iohn of the new Empire. S. Paul speaketh of the Empire which hindred or detai∣ned, and of that onely, for so he saith, He onely that now hindreth shall binder, till it bee taken away. The old Em∣pire did hinder Antichrist not the new. S. Paul there∣fore spake not of the new Empire, but of the olde. S.
Iohn speaketh of the Empire that carrieth the Beast, that is so farre off from hindring it, that it doth rather vnderprop and vphold it. And to that purpose was the Empire renewed in the West,The Empire renewed in the West, to vphold the Pope. that it might hold vp the Church of Rome. S. Iohn therefore doth not in this place speake of the olde Empire, but of the new. But the Popish sort, who thinke that not the Maiestie onely, but the name of the Empire is to bee extingui∣shed, before Antichrist come, doe seeme by obscuring the prophesie with certaine contradictions to delude their Auditours. They say that the Romane Empire which now is, shall continue to the end of the world by the prophesie of Daniel, and the same men say, that it shall be dissolued and diuided into tenne Kings (Very foolishly; they say it notwithstanding) before Anti∣christ come. As though tenne very potent Kingdomes could consist of the naked name, and vaine title of an Emperour, or that that could bee said of them, should be vtterly abolished before Antichrist came, which by them is sayd, shall continue till the end of the world. Wherein in the one, they seeme to follow the madnes of Epicurus, who seemes to make the world of moates, as these men make ten Kingdoms of words. For what is now the Romane Empire, but a meere word? In the other they shew their brains to be crackt, who say, that the Romane Empire that now is, shall continue to the worlds end, and yet shall bee vtterly ouerthrowen be∣fore the comming of Antichrist, whom they say shall raigne three yeeres and a halfe before the end of the world. In them both they shew their notable impiety, who while they wrape and infold a most waighty pro∣phesie of Antichrist, within their impossibilities & con∣tradictions they prophane Gods Word, and deceiue Gods Church. The summe of all is gathered by the Apostle, that the olde Empire is to be taken away, and to be dissolued and diuided into tenne Kingdomes, be∣fore that Antichrist should come, that the new was to
be restored and repaired, being the image of the olde, vpon whose backe hee should sit and aduance himselfe when he came. CHAP. XXV. How the old Empire was taken away. THe olde Empire therefore whereof S. Paul spake which hindred the reuealing of Antichrist, let vs consider how it was taken out of the way: whereof we put two degrees. First, when Constantine the Great, did translate the seat of the Empire from Rome to Con∣stantinople:Two degrees of the falling of the Empire. the second after the diuision of the Em∣pire, into the Easterne and Westerne, which did present∣ly weaken them both, and afterward dissolued the We∣sterne, which was properly the Romane Empire, it was first depriued (the Easterne I meane) of all the title and interest to Rome and Italy. The empty seat of the Empire, the Maiesty thereof diuided and diminished, then first in the West, and after in the East put out and ouerthrowen, wee say to bee the two degrees of the re∣moouing of that obstacle, which hindred the reuealing of Antichrist, and his dominion in the city of Rome. I trip ouer the history briefely, they that will set faster footing, may fetch it out of the fountaines themselues, if they please. I doe likewise set downe two degrees of the Reuela∣tion of Antichrist. One wherein he beganne to raigne,Two degrees of reuealing Antichrist. the other wherein hee beganne to bee acknowledged. I note also two degrees of the Kingdome, when it tooke vpon it the cheefe gouernment of the vniuersall Church, Anno 607. when he was called vniuersall Bi∣shop by Phocas that King-killer, at that very time when Mahomet beganne, so that Phocas the murtherer,When Maho∣met began. the Vniuersall Bishop, and wicked Mahomet may seeme to bee of one birth. The winde of false doctrine, and of
Church-ambition, did by stealth creep into the minds of certaine Bishops,Socrat. li. 7. c. 11 who, as Socrates is witnesse, lifting vp themselues aboue the limits of their Priesthood, into strange gouernment, did striue about the primacie and superiority ouer all Churches: and to that purpose Zo∣simus and Celestinus did foyst in a new deuised Canon of the counsell of Neece, detected and reiected by the Bishops of Carthage. But that small winde kept in, I know not how in the heart of the Church, it did not all breake out before Boniface the third had extorted that proud title from Phocas the Emperour, by his importu∣nate entreaty. But yet Antichrist was but a Pupill as it were in his nonage, not onely being subject to the Emperour for a time, but the Emperours Vice Gerent in the gouern∣ment of Rauenna: by whom the election of the Pope first made by the Cleargie and people of Rome, was necessarily confirmed, vntill Benedict the second obtai∣ned this priuiledge of the Emperour Constantine the fourth, Pogonotus, that the Pope should be created with∣out the confirmation of the Emperour. And then An∣tichrist beganne to bee his owne man, liuing after his owne law, or rather without law, as the Apostle speaks. Not long after, as Boniface the third did extoll himselfe aboue all Bishops; so Gregorie the second vaunted, that hee was aboue the Emperour:  Gregorie the third did spoyle Leo the third, being first excommunicated by Gregory the second, because hee went about to abolish images, did spoyle, I say, him of all his reuenues in Ita∣ly, and absolued his subiects from their oath of fealty. And so took from him all the gouernment of the West, as a Popish Authour doth testifie in his booke called, The bundle of times.Faesciculus tem∣prum. At last, that we may not follow af∣ter the meane passages in the history seuerally, Gregorie the seueuth, like an Earth-quake, brake out and shatte∣red both the Church and the Empire.  For hee first set∣tled the Popish gouernment, as Auentinus doth wit∣nesse;
which his successours continued 450. yeeres in despite of the Emperours, so that they made the Empe∣rour his vassall. After that Antichrist was come to his height, being reuealed by his two degrees, and domi∣neering in the Church, first be began to be acknowled∣ged of many holy and learned men in particular: but from the time of Gregorie the seuenth, to the happy age of Luther, and then in generall Rome was acknowled∣ged to be Babylon, the Pope Antichrist in all the Re∣formed Churches. I am not ignorant that this asser∣tion of the Reformed Church, of our owne men is thought doubtfull, of yours madde and doting, but if they doe seriously marke those conclusions following, our men will feele that scruple taken from them, and your men a sting fastened in them. For thus I will di∣spute from all the premisses. To whomsoeuer all those essentiall notes of An∣tichrist set downe by blessed Paul and Iohn, do onely agree, he is onely that great Antichrist. But all those essentiall notes do agree to the Pope of Rome onely. Therefore the Pope of Rome onely is that great Antichrist. CHAP. XXVI. A recapitulation of that which went before. NOw that the assumption may plainely appeare, we will set out, as in one view, all those propositions shortly, which haue beene before more largely and soundly concluded. I tolde you first what Antichrist was. 1.Chap. 3. That Antichrist is not one singular and indiui∣duall person, but a state and a succession of persons. 2. That hee is in a conterfeit shew,Chap. 4. a Vicar or Vice∣gerent, in presumption a fellow-mate, in purpose an
aduersary. Afterward of what kinde Antichrist was. Chap. 5.3. That Antichrist is the head of a generall Apostasie from the faith. Chap. 6.4. That Antichrist is an Apostaticall Christian, and an vniuersall Bishop. 5. That Antichrist is not an outward and a profes∣sed: but an homebred and hypocriticall aduersary. 6. That Antichrist is subtill, denying Christ indi∣rectly. Chap. 7.7. Hee that sits in the Temple of God, as God, and makes a shew as if he were God, the same is Antichrist. 8. Hee that lifts vp himselfe aboue all that is called God, or soueraignty aboue the Angels in Heauen, a∣boue Princes on the earth, aboue holy things in the Church, the same is Antichrist. Chap. 8. 9. 10.9. He that taketh away the natures, properties, offi∣ces, benefits of Christ, by consequent, and indirectly is Antichrist.Chap. 11. I haue shewed what kinde of kingdome and attendance belongs to Antichrist. 10. Antichrist is the key-keeper of hell. 11. Antichrist is the head of that smoaky and dark kingdome. Chap. 12. 13.12. Abaddon or Apollyon is the King of the Locusts. i. Antichrist is the eldest sonne of the Diuell. Chap. 14.I shewed what the Beast doth that riseth out of the earth. 13. That Antichrist is the sonne of the earth. 14. That Antichrist hath two hornes of a Lambe, but vttereth the voyce of the Dragon. 15. He that sheweth all the power of the first Beast in his sight is Antichrist. 16. The image of the first Beast is Antichrist. 17. He that compelleth men to adore the image of the first Beast is Antichrist. Chap. 15.18. The restorer of the old Rom. Empire is Antichrist. Chap. 16.19. Hee that commeth with lying signes and won∣ders, is Antichrist.
20 The seauenth King of the Romaine or Latine Empire is Antichrist.Chap. 17. 21 He that compelleth all vnder his rule to take on them the Character and name of the beast,  and the number of his name, and the number of a man is An∣tichrist, I haue shewed where he sits. 22 Who so sitteth in that imperiall city scituated on 7. hills, and 7. kingly formes of gouernment,Chap. 19. neere to the bankes of Tyber, and is a Latine Bishoppe, and possesseth Peters chaire, and is called most holy Pope, is Antichrist. 23 Whose seat is mysticall Babylon, i: Rome in name Christian and Bishoply, the same is Antichrist. 24 Who so sitteth vpon the whore that is blasphe¦mous, idolatrous, lustfull, proud, selling soules, bloody,Chap. 20 and is the same in all things for wit and disposition is Antichrist. I haue shewed at what time he is reuealed. 26 He that after the fall of the Romane Empire, and the departure of the Romane Emperour out of the city of Rome, sitteth gouerning in the city of Rome, being made the temple and the Church of God, is Anti∣christ. None of all these notes belong to Luther, very few of them to the Turke. But to the Pope of Rome, both e∣uery of them seuerally, and all of them ioyntly, and to him alone as it is euidently proued before. Therefore the Pope of Rome only is that great An∣tichrist. You haue Paul the fift, a glasse wherein you may behold all your selfe: but that you haue certaine about you more desirous of your momentany reputati∣on then your eternall saluation, who haue cast a certain mist vpon the Glasse, that you might not know your selfe therein. To whom I thinke good breefly to an∣swere.
CHAP. XXVII. Wherein is shewed what kinde of one Antichrist is not. VVE haue shewed what kinde of one Antichrist is: now what kinde of one he is not let vs like∣wise set downe. Although that which is straight is the rule both of it selfe and that which is crooked, as the Philosopher well said, yet let vs yeeld so much to our Aduersaries either ignorance or obstinacie, that as wee haue brought out the true and right notes of Antichrist, out of the text of Scripture, so wee may refute the false and fained pro∣ceeding out of the braine of man. Bellarmine writes honestly, that the opinions of the Fa∣thers about Antichrist, which cannot be prooued out of the Scriptures, are not to be held as certaine truths, or to bee be∣leeued as matter of faith. I would hee would follow his owne rule, we should sooner agree among our selues. And he hath reiected some of their fables in this cause, the Scripture being his guide: but I thinke hee refused other mens deuises herein, that with greater authoritie he might shew foorth his owne. Some of them as false and absurd, others as more proba∣ble, but false for all that, both of them he doth reiect. Why so I pray? Because they cannot be prooued out of the Scrip∣ture. Who would not thinke that this man dealeth with vs in good sooth. Of the generation of Antichrist. 1 Antichrist is not as he saith borne of a Virgin. 2 He is not the Deuill as Hypolitus thought. 3 He is not a Deuill incarnate. 4 He is not Nero brought to life againe. These opinions saith he are absurde. Others are more pro∣bable, neither true. 1 Antichrist is not a bastard, as Damascen said.
2 He is not of the Tribe of Dan, as 12. Fathers do thinke and all Papists almost besides Bellarmine. Do you not see Paul the 5. how your Bellarmine re∣iecteth twelue Fathers in this cause? and giues his own side the slippe? He denieth the old Tribe of Antichrist, we looke he should deny his Countrey anone. Hee de∣nieth him to be of Dan: by and by he will deny him to be a Iew. For as for the Tribe of Dan, Bellarmine al∣loweth Hyeromes opinion. Why? This cannot, saith hee be prooued out of the Scripture. Although for the Tribe, diuers Papists bring texts as probable as Bellarmine doth for the nation. But those this plaine dealing man for∣sooth hath reiected. Doe you not see how your men disagree in this matter, that you may no more tell our men of their disagreements. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Nation, Religion, Office, and seat of ANTICHRIST. BVT Antichrist, saith he, shall be by Nation a Iew, by Religion circumcised, and for a time a keeper of the Sa∣both: by his office Messias, for he shall especially come for the Iewes sake, and shall be accepted of them for Messias: and he shall sit at Ierusalem in the Temple of God, reedified by himselfe. A lyer must beare a memorie. Messias of the Iewes, saith he, shall come not in his owne name, but in Gods name. So Bellarmine.Bellarmines contradiction. But Antichrist shall come not in Gods name, but in his owne, saith Bellarmine. Antichrist therefore is not the Messias of the Iewes. But he proueth out of two places of the Scripture that Antichrist is the Messias of the Iewes, one, if another shall come in his owne name saith Christ. Ioh. 5. him you shall receiue. Whereout of a compound supposition of
an indefinite person if another, hee doth inferre a simple proposition definitely, that is that Antichrist absurdly, nor well applied to the purpose. Which sets downe that that Antichrist shall come a little before the end of the world. Those Iewes therefore, whom Christ spake to then aliue now dead, could not receiue Antichrist for Messias. Vnlesse peraduenture as he tells vs Enoch and Elias shall returne before the end who shall resist Anti∣christ,A great absur∣dity. so he imagines the Iewes that Christ spake to shall rise againe before the generall resurrection to receiue Antichrist. But see how vntowardly the parts of this tale hangs together. For he saith, That Enoch and Elias should be killed of Antichrist, and after three daies and a halfe liue againe: and that it shall come to passe afterward, that the Iewes being conuerted by that miracle shall kill their Messias in the mount oliue, and shall returne to Christ, who shall come 45. daies after. Which dreame of his he refu∣teth in another place which he bringeth. The Apostle saith that to them who receiue not the loue of the truth, to their saluation, God will send the working of error, to beleeue lies, and so to be iudged with the iudgement of condemnation 2. Thess. 2.9. Wo be to those, saith he, who haue not receiued Christ, The Iewes. Although the Apo∣stle saith not, who receiued not the truth 1. Christ, but who receiued not the loue of the truth: as false Christi∣ans. But how shall God punish those Iewes? God shall send vpon them the working of error, that they might beleeue a lye 1: Antichrist, and should bee damned. Therefore the Iewes shall receiue Antichrist for Messias. But Bellarmine doth affirme that the Iewes shall bee conuerted by Enoch and Elias, and therefore shall bee saued. The Apostle speaketh of men reiecting Christ, and therefore to be condemned, he speakes not therefore of the Iewes. But the Apostle saith that Antichrist is sent to them, who would not receiue Christ, which of the Iewes is true, of the Christians false. Yea he saith that he is sent to seduce those who haue not receiued the loue of truth,
which doth well agree with the Papists those false-chri∣stians. Who although they receiue Christ,The Papist re∣ceiue Christ but not the loue of Christ. receiue not the loue of Christ. But the Apostle speaketh of the time past. Who haue not receiued the loue of truth, not in the future; Therefore he vnderstandeth the Iewes, who be∣fore the Apostle wrote this, refused to beleeue the preaching of Christ and his Apostles. But the Apostle speaking of the sinne and punishment of Antichristians, which pre∣supposeth a sinne going before, did expresse their sinne in the pretertense, which is not to be referred to the time of the Epistle which Paul writ, but to the time of the punishment which he enioyned. But if the Iesuite doe vrge the pretertense so farre, as if the Apostle should vnderstand, that Antichrist should be receiued of them only, who had reiected Christ before that time, hee must hold that he must be receiued of them in the end of the world who were dead a thousand fiue hundred yeares before. And is not this a worthy demonstration,A popish ab∣surdity. whereby he proueth that Antichrist shall bee in Office the Messias of the Iewes, to be receiued of them in the end of the world? whence as one error begets another, he concludeth that he is by nation a Iew, by Religion cir∣cumcised &c. I haue wonne it now that Antichrist is an Apostata-christian. It followeth therefore that hee can by no meanes bee an Infidell Iew, who as yet was not come to Christ. I prooued that hee was an inward and hypocriticall enemy who denied Christ secretly & indirectly. It followeth then that the Iew no waies can be an outward and professed enemy who denieth Christ directly and plainely. I conclude both out of the Scripture and out of the fathers, that Antichrist was to sit in the Temple of God that was in the Church. And therefore that Antichrist was not to sit in the tem∣ple of Ierusalem. Hierome with many other Fathers haue determined. And yet this Pythagoras who thinks that his he said so will satisfie fooles, doth boldly affirme that he shall sit in the Temple of Ierusalem to be builded againe
by him.Bellarmine fighteth with himselfe. Wherein see I pray you how hee fighteth with himselfe. The temple reedified of Antichrist is the Temple of the Deuill. But Antichrist shall fit saith he in a Temple reedified by himselfe. Therefore he shall sit in the Temple of the deuill not therefore in the Temple of God. Vnlesse happily he will change the temple of God into the temple of the Deuill. Besides that, Antichrist shall sit at Rome, as the Rhemists themselues confesse. Not therefore at Ierusalem, vnlesse peraduenture Ierusalem moued out of her place shall passe ouer to Rome. Which perchance they can bring to passe, who change the three wisemen of the east into 3.The Papists alter east from weast. Kings of Sheba in the west. For Sheba stands west from the citie Ierusalem, and Chaldee whence they came stands east. I cannot see therefore but by the same power, they may as well carry Ierusalem to Rome as turne the east into the west. I haue euicted before euen by the confession of the Aduersarie: That Rome is the seat and citie of Antichrist, and yet they proue by a strang kinde of Logicke, that Ierusalem is the seat of Anti∣christ. For where Gods two witnesses (saith he) are killed of Antichrist, there is the seat of Antichrist: But those two witnesses shall be killed by Antichrist at Ierusalem:Apoc. 11.7. There∣fore Antichrist his seat is at Ierusalem. He takes the pro∣position for granted, which for all that standes in great neede of proffe. For wheresoeuer Antichrist shall kill 2. witnesses of God, that there he shall haue his seat. No more then if some great Prince such an one as they would haue Antichrist to be, should there be said to haue the seat of his Empire, wheresoeuer his authoritie was of power to kill his enemies. Do you not know that Kings haue stretcht-out hands? Ti∣berius hand stretcht out it selfe as farre as Ierusalem to crucifie Christ, though he sate at Rome. Antichrist hath a long hand; whose hand reacheth farther to kill Gods
two witnesses, then where he sits; not euer where An∣tichrist rageth there he sitteth. The proposition then generally taken is false, particularly vnderstood is a pa∣ralogisme. The assumption also is very false: for the holy Ghost doth call not Ierusalem but Rome, or rather the Rom: Empire, that great Citie in whose streets the bodies of those two witnesses shall lye slaine: and that great Citie is called spiritually Sodome and Egipt, where our Lord was crucified. Hierusalem aboue is called the holy Citie after Christ his passion, how then here is it spiritually called Sodome and Egipt?Apoc: 11.8. Ierusalem in the Apocalyps taken for the holy Citie al∣waies. as Hierom writes to Marcella. Ierusalem is alway taken in the Apoca∣lyps for the holy Citie, Rome for the great Citie, which hath the gouernment ouer the Kings of the earth, which cannot agree with Ierusalem. Besides, the word spiritually toucheth Rome very neere: for as Rome is mystically Babylon, so it is spiritually Sodome and Egipt. Sodome for her pride and vncleannesse;Rome com∣pared to Ba∣bylon, Sodom and Egypt. ☜ Egipt for her idolatrie and crueltie against the Saints; for who is so blinde that can not see that Rome is the chap∣pell of Idolls, the stewes of lust, the queene of pride, the shambles of Saints, and the den of King-killers; and therefore shee is truly spirituall Sodom and Egipt. But where our Lord was crucified, there Gods two wit∣nesses were murthered by Antichrist.Christ how crucified at Rome. But not at Rome, but at Ierusalem he was crucified. Therefore not at Rome but at Ierusalem those two wit∣nesses shall be killed. We denie the assumption. At Rome in that great Citie, that is, in the Romane Empire, our Lord was crucified. First, because by the commandement and authoritie of the Rom: Empire Christ himselfe was crucified,Apoc. 17.18. as the Rhemists doe confesse. Secondly, because Christ in his members is often crucified at Rome. Thirdly, he was not crucified within Ierusalem but without, as S. Paul witnesseth to the Heb: cap: 13. v. 12. Lastly, because Ie∣rusalem before the Apocalyps, which was extant about
the end of Domitian, being vtterly ouerthrowne, together with their Temple, was neuer to be built a∣gaine, as we haue formerly euicted out of the prophe∣cie of Daniel, who saith, that the desolation of the Temple and Citie shall continue vntill the end of the world, as Hie∣rom expounds out of the words of Christ. Neither doe the friuolous answers of Bellarmine much trouble me, wherewith he presumes (as he writeth) that Daniel would haue said something that he doth not say: as if hee could not say what he would, and therefore he faines that the Prophet spake thus: Either that the Temple should not be reedified till a litle before the end of the world: or else as it was desolated before it was reedified: so the abomination of desolation, i. Antichrist, should remaine in the same re-edified to the end of the world; or else that it should neuer be fully built againe,Ierusalem the figure of the Christian Church. but that Antichrist should sit in the Tem∣ple begun and not finished. Ierusalem is wholy the figure of the Christian Church, which after it was built vp by the preaching of the Gospell among the Gentiles, there was an end both of the Citie and Temple of Ierusalem,Matth: 24.14. as Christ prophecied, Daniels best Interpreter: who foretold the abomination of desolation, that is the abo¦minable and desolate winges,What is ment by the abomi∣nation of de∣solation. (vnderstanding the Ea∣gles and the Legions of the Romanes, as Luke expoun∣deth) should bring a finall destruction to the Citie and Temple, so that the desolation of them both should continue to the end of the world, as Christ explaineth, foreshewing that Ierusalem being ouerthrowne of the Romanes,Luc: 21.22, 23, 24. shall be troden vnder foote of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, i. till hee shall come to iudgement, which is described in the next words. So that the bounds of the Christian Church be∣ing enlarged, the Citie and Temple should haue their last end by the testimonie of Christ: for the truth ap∣pearing, the type faded away. So that the primitiue Church beleeued that Ierusalem was turned into eter∣nall ashes;Ad Marcel. and Hierom calleth the opinion of some,
who thought the Temple should be restored, a meere Iewish fable. Therefore Bellarmine, in Hieroms iudge∣ment, who dreames of the restoring of the Temple, is not a Christian Doctor, but a Iewish Babler. Vnlesse hee be worse to be thought of,Bellarmine and Julian alike. who with Iulian the Apostata will fasten a lye vpon Christ, while together with him he will as it were carrie stones to the building of it: he in a mocke to Christ, this in the honor of Antichrist: That Bellarmine may feare fire from heauen to disturbe the worke, which as the storie reporteth, Iulian suffred.Theodoret. lib. 3 cap: 20. Sozom: lib. 5. cap. vlt. Cic: de orat. 3. One thing I greatly feare, that Antichrist will not take it in good part, that such a mightie Monarch of the world, as he is like to be, must sit in a Temple bded in part. Cicero did pretily set out the praise of the Ca∣pitol, wherein Latine Iupiter doth reside, that the roofe was not onely good for vse and necessitie, but for orna∣ment and beauty: that although the Capitoll were builded vp as high as the heauen where the raine was not engendred, yet it would haue no name, if it had no roofe. But Bellarmine, although he caried morter and stone to the Temple of Ierusalem by the helpe of Anti∣christ, wherein so great a Prince should sit, so farre of he was for tendring his Masters honour, that he did not supply necessitie: for hee left the Temple with out beames or roofe, hee left it on the earth, where many showres doe gather, many stormes doe sodenly fall, that he may seeme to haue exposed the great Prince to the pleasure of the vnmercifull heauen in the middest of his stately Palace. But let vs make vp the rest of the tale of this imagi∣ned Prince gouerning in an imagined place. For hee addeth many things of his kingdom and his victories, whereof the Scripture hath not one word. It is a very conceited dreame that is fetcht out of Daniel mis-vnderstood; who prophecied of Antiochus Epiphanes the sonne of great Antiochus, the brother of Seleucus Philopater, the successor of that namelesse
beast, the tenth horne literally and properly as of nine others which went before, cap. 11. which Bellarmine himselfe confesseth, and yet concludeth 1. That Antichrist rising out of a most base stocke, by fraud and guile shall obteyne the kingdom of the Iewes. 2. That he shall fight with three Kings, of Aegipt, Ly∣bia and Ethiopia, and shall possesse their kingdomes them∣selues being vanquished. which was not true of Antio∣chus himselfe being the figure of Antichrist. 3. That he shall make captiue seuen other Kings, and shall enioy the Monarchie of the whole world. O noble conqueror, to be preferred before all the Pompeis, Cae∣sars, and Alexanders, who shall doe so great acts in the compasse of three yeeres and a halfe. 4. With his mightie armie he shall persecute the Christi¦ans, and these be the warres of Gog and Magog. Doe you thinke these to be the oracles of the Scrip∣tures, or Bellarmines owne dreames? grant that Antio∣chus was Antichrists type in many things. what then? if we should apply all those things,Antiochus & Antichrist vnlike: to make them the same ma∣ny absurdities do follow. which were proper to the person of Antiochus to Antichrist, in respect whereof he was not the type of Antichrist, and shall inferre from them not the like but the same thing. Let Antiochus be fetcht out of hell, and let his soule passe into Antichrist, that he may performe all those things. And although Antichrist be a most vilde beast, as An¦tiochus, yet he must come not out of a most vilde, but a most honorable stocke, that he the sonne of Antiochus the Great, the brother of Seleucus Philopater, and suc∣cessor in the kingdome of Syria, as Antiochus is plainly set downe by Daniel cap: 11. v. 21. in whose place one that is very vilde shall arise. Platoes great yeere must returne againe, that Antiochus againe must be an ho∣stage at Rome before he come to his kingdome, and kill his Nephew Demetrius, as Richard the third King of England did, and make three voyages into Egipt. And great Achilles must be sent againe to Troy.
Let Antiochus make warre againe, let him in his re∣turne plague the Iewes, and let Antichrist do all the acts of Antiochus, which Daniel the Prophet doth so liuely describe, that to Porphery who knew not with what spi∣rit he wrote, he seemeth to haue compiled an historie rather then a prophecie, whereof more hereafter. Now let vs pursue the rest of the pretty passages of this tale. Enoch and Elias must come againe from heauen to earth, to wit, those two witnesses, who preach the Gospell in their owne persons, and fighting with Antichrist shall be killed by him, and shall rise againe after three daies and a halfe. and the rest which out of the 11 of the Apocalyps, they miserably by force presse out, by wringing the letter, so that they seeme to play the Iewes in no place more. Although in that place neither Enosh, nor Elias,The second beast mistaken for the first. nor An∣tichrist, as certaine learned men thinke is vnderstood: for the beast that makes warre against these witnesses of God, is said to ascend out of hell, which seemes to be the first beast, which is said to rise out of the sea, cap: 13. v. 1. when as the second is said to rise out of the earth. Againe, the floore of the Church is said to be giuen ouer to be trampled on by the Gentiles 42 monthes v: 2. which time is assigned to the persecution of the first beast, cap: 13. v. 5. Againe it is to be troden on by the Gentiles not the Iewes, whose Prince Antichrist is faigned to be. Now they which precisely take the two witnesses to be two men,The two wit∣nesses Apoc. 11. not agreed on. could neuer yet agree among themselues about the persons. Some that they were Elias and Moses: some Elias and Elizeus: some not Elias but Ieremie: others together with Elias and Moses thinke that Iohn the Diuine is added as a witnesse aboue number; of Enoch none of the Fathers make any recko∣ning: of the two Testaments, as two witnesses, and the diuers sincere Interpreters of the two Testaments, who expound the place, they doe more easily shift them∣selues, as it shall be vnderstood afterward; who being
clad with sackcloth, in great sorrow and griefe did preach repentance to the Gentiles, at whose hands in steed of reward,Persecution committed. they receiued most cruell death. The cruell persecution of the first beast, wherein they de∣uoured the most faithfull witnesses of God, lasted 294 yeeres, which made the 42 monthes, according to Da∣niels weekes; whereof more anon. Neither did God suffer his witnesses to die vnreuenged,Persecution reuenged. if wee compare the storie to the Prophecie. For God did punish those bloody Emperors for his two witnesses sake, so that the Nations were consumed by sharpe and quicke diseases growing by long drought, and too great heat of the Sunne, which bred such plagues, that often deuoured whole Cities, and consumed whole armies. So happily the two witnesses may be said to haue shut heauen that it should not raine, and to haue opened it that it should raine, whenas by the prayers of the Christian Legion, the Armie of the Pagan Emperour being enuironed by the Quadi,☞ being presently like to perish for want of water, obteyned a plentifull showre from heauen: while the hoste of their enemies perished, being stricken with thundring and lightning from heauen: whereupon it was called the thundring Legion of the Christians. And when as the witnesses of God being so vnworthily and cruelly dealt withall, threaten eternall fire vpon the wicked Gentiles, and did perhaps foretell that fire should come from heauen, whereby Cities and Camps were deuoured, may they not be said after a sort to cast out fire out of their mouthes, to consume their ene∣mies? And when as Gods cruell enemies the Empe∣rors, did destroy one another by mutuall warre, and committed such massacres by sea and land, that they seemed to turne whole fields and riuers into blood, might not God seeme according to the Prophecie, most iustly to haue reuenged the wrongs of his witnesses? especially when he raised other witnesses, as Phenixes out of their ashes, who should beare witnes to the truth.
and so Gods two witnesses in singular persons, may seeme to rise againe in a succession. And because not onely the triumphant Church, but the militant also is often called heauen, both in the Apocalyps,The Church called heauen. and in the Scripture elsewhere, therefore when the witnesses of God had built againe the Temple of God out of these ruines and reliques, so, as the Prophet speaketh: they seemed to ascend vp, and to bee in beauen. But if any thinke it conuenient to expound this place of the per∣secution of Antichrist, which did liuely expresse the cruelty of the first Beast, and of those Antichristians, which did most cruelly persecute the Church in these latter ages, for the space of 494. yeeres, I will not great∣ly striue against them: when as they did play the Gentiles vnder the name of Christ, as Tertullian speaketh. Onely I shew what other learned men haue probably thought, without preiudice to them that thinke otherwise. But all that I haue sayd, is refuted of the Aduersaries in 3. words: for thus they cry out, Antichrist is not yet come: and they call all things to question, whether there be Antichrist, which if you please we still discusse in the last place. CHAP. XXIX. Wherein it is disputed, whether Antichrist be, that is, whether hee bee come. THat Antichrist is foreshewed in the Scripture it is euident enough: now whether he be to be shewed in the world, it shall yet further appeare, when wee shall haue discussed whether he be come or no.
Of this comming Bellarmin giues sixe tokens. Tow going before. 1. The Preaching of the Gospell ouer the whole world. 2. The subuersion and de∣solation of the Romane Empire, so that the very name remaine not. Two ac∣company∣ing. 3. The preaching of Enoch and Elias. 4. The most greeuous and publike persecution of the Church, which shall clean take away the pub∣like worship of God. Two fol∣lowing. 5. The continuance of the Kingdome of Antichrist for three yeeres and an halfe. 6. The destruction of the world 45. dayes after. Out of the first token thus he disputeth: If the Gospell be not as yet preached ouer the whole world, Antichrist is not yet come. The first is true. Therefore the second is true. The first note whether the Gospell haue bin preached.The consequent of the proposition he prooueth out of the words of Christ, Matth. 24. ver. 14. The Gospell of the Kingdome shall bee preached in all the world, that it may be a testimonie to all nations, saith Christ: but he saith not, that then Antichrist shall come: but then shall the end come, that is, either the end of the world, as Bellarmine thinkes, or the rasing of Ierusalem, as wee haue euicted. But grant that the end of the world is vn∣derstood by those words: yet vnlesse Bellarmine will take that for granted, which is in controuersie, that An∣tichrist shall not come before the end of the world: which we most stifly doe deny, this exposition can help
Bellarmine nothing at all But what if the place be to be vnderstood not of the end of the world,The destru∣ction of Ieru∣salem taken for the end of the world by Papists. but of the de∣struction of Ierusalem, it will auaile him much lesse. Heere therefore first I oppose Chrysostome against Bellar∣mine, which interprets the place not of the end of the world, but of the destruction of Ierusalem, which the context of the place doth conuince: for first Christ an∣swers to his Disciples, to whom he had sayd,The 24. of Matthew ex∣pounded. Vers. 2. it should come to passe that the city and the Temple should bee vtterly ouerthrowen, so that a stone should not bee left vpon a stone, First, I say, answers them about the ouer∣throw of Ierusalem, which they thought should haue stood for euer. They asking him,Vers. 3. Tell vs when these things shall be? that is, when shall the Temple bee de∣stroyed, and afterward they aske him of the end of the world, and of his comming to iudgement. The parts of the question are therefore double, first of the destru∣ction of Ierusalem, the second of the end of the world: which they thought should not continue longer then Ierusalem. To the first Christ answers first from ver. 4.Vers. 4. to 23. to the 23. To the second he answers from the 23.Ver. 23. to the 42. to the 42. And first Christ fore-sheweth the calamities which went before the destruction, to the fifteenth verse, in that verse hee expounds the destruction fore-tolde by Daniel. But if any body thinke that the abomination of desolation, standing in the holy place, be to be taken by an anologie for the sitting of Antichrist in the Church, I will not gaine say it; but if hee expound it properly, and to the lettter, hee shall not haue onely Chrysostome and Luke, but Christ himselfe gaine-saying him. Among other calamities which were before the destruction of Ierusalem, he fore-shewed two spirituall ones especially: a seducing of false Prophets, a defe∣ction of the people. Christ doth therefore forewarne and comfort his Disciples: hee forewarneth them that they beware of false Prophets: hee comforts them with a double promise, one of eternall saluation vers. 13.Vers. 13. if
they shall hold out to the end: another of a prosperous successe, which their ministery by spreading the Go∣spell ouer all the world, shall haue before Ierusalem be vtterly ouerthrowen. That it might be a witnesse to e∣uery nation, that the Church shall endure when Ieru∣salem shall bee destroyed, whose bounds the Apostles and their Disciples by the preaching of the Gospell, be∣fore the destruction of Ierusalem had extended ouer all nations, both Gentiles and Iewes. Neither is it to bee thought, that Christ had confounded all these prophe∣sies in the handling of them, that he might not nourish an errour, which the Disciples had conceiued of the continuance of Ierusalem till the end of the world. Therefore after hee had vers. 15.Vers. 15. described her ouer∣throw, he adioyned both counsell and comfort: coun∣sell the ver. 16.Vers. 16.17.18.19.20. 17.18.19.20. that they that were in Iury should shift for themselues by speedy flight, and that women great with childe should pray that their flight bee not in the winter, or on the Sabbaoth day. Comfort, wherin he promiseth that for the Elect Iewes sake, the time of the siege shall be shortned, and that o∣therwise no Iew should escape as Chrysostome expounds the 22. verse. This exposition of Chrysostome is nota∣bly confirmed by the collation of Luke with Matthew. For as in Matth. 24.15. Christ doth propound those words out of Daniel. When you shall see the abomina∣tion of desolation (which Daniel cals the abominable wings desolating) to stand in the holy place, Luc. cap. 21. 20. expounds it thus. When you shall see Ierusa∣lem enuironed with armies,What the a∣bomination of desolation in Daniel mea∣neth. which Daniel termes abo∣minable wings, then vnderstand that the desolation and destruction is at hand, both to the holy city and the holy Temple: and hee warneth the Iewes that they auoyd these calamities hanging ouer their heads, with flying away vers. 23.Vers. 23. 24. But whereas Christ, Matth. vers. 23. begins to prophesie of the end of the world,Vers. 34. and of his comming to iudgement, vers. 34.
where there seemeth to be the greatest mixtures of ech of the prophesies, hee speaketh so distinctly when hee foresheweth the signes seuerally going before the de∣struction of Ierusalem, and the end of the world, that he defines a certaine time of the one, and leaueth the o∣ther vncertaine. Of that: verily I say vnto you, this ge∣neration shall not passe away, before all those things be fulfilled, (pointing his finger at Ierusalem, as hee sate vpon the Mount of Oliues. But of this, i.The vncer∣taine certain∣ty of the end of the world. of the end of the world, as he noteth the certainty of the thing, so the vncertainty of the houre and the day, which nei∣ther any Angell, or the sonne of man knew, but the fa∣ther alone. By which the consequence of Bellarmines proposition is found out to be very vaine and foolish: which sets,14 15. The preaching of the word dispersed ouer the whole world, out of those verses, to be the signe forerunning the comming of Antichrist: against the literall sense of the prophesie most cleerely set downe, not onely by Chry∣sostome, but by Christ himselfe, Luke being the interpre∣ter. You see the inconsequence of the proposition, now marke the falshood of the assumption (But the Gospell is not preached ouer all the world) as Paul Coloss. 1. vers. 6.The Gospell preached in the world. saith, that the Gospell was preacht in all the world in his time, and therfore before the destruction of Ierusalem, which hapned two yeeres after the Apostles death, as Eusebius writeth lib 4. and the Apostle addes, that the Gospell came so into the wolrd, that it brought forth fruit. True (saith Bellarmine) The Gospell was virtually, then in the whole world, but not actually: No? How then could it bring foorth fruite, if it were not in the whole world actually? but the Apostle there speaketh more significantly vers. 23. That the Gospell was preached to euery creature vnder heauen. Whom shall we beleeue Paul or Bellarmine, the Apostle or the Car∣dinall? Their sound is gone thorough the whole world, saith the Apostle, that is, shall goe out, saith Bellarmine. But Chrysostome by the same testimonies of the Apostle,
doth prooue that the prophesie of Christ was then fulfilled, the Gospell was preached all ouer the world,Chrysost. homil. in Matth. 24. before the de∣struction of Ierusalem. So by Fame the Gospell could come to all nations, saith Bellarmine, not by seuerall preachings. Paul saith not the report of the Gospell in all lands, but that their fruit by their preaching was di∣spersed, which could not bee without Preachers. Yet by the whole world, euery little and obscure corner of the world is not meant, but the greatest part of the knowen and habitable world, Luc. 2.1. Neither by all nations, are ment all seueral nations, but all in generall, that is, both Iewes an Gentiles. For in this place as elsewhere, there is an opposition betweene all Nations and the Iewes. At that time the Gospell was onely heard of in Iury, wherein the Church at that time was enclosed; but the partition-wall being broken downe, and the hedge being broken vp, it made such a sound euery way, with such a number of Preachers, and with such admirable efficacy of preaching, that it is easie to be beleeued that the sound of the Gospell could goe in∣to all lands within the compasse of forty yeeres, for so many yeeres at the least, came betweene the prophesie expounded and fulfilled. Lastly, although it was prea∣ched to all, it was not receiued of all, therefore left as a testimony to all nations, that being offered to all, and reiected of some, it might make them inexcusable. Doe you not see the foolish consequence of Bellarmines proposition, and the apparant vntruth of his assumpti∣on? Therfore I do retort the argument vpon him thus, Christ himselfe prophesying, Paul interpreting, and Chrysostome assisting. The Gospell was preached in all the world before the sacking of Ierusalem. Therfore by the consent of Bellarmin Antichrist is al¦ready come. And Caluine seems to me with very deep iudgement to set the vniuersall preaching of the faith, be∣fore the vniuersall defection from the faith, the head
whereof by the Apostle is said to be Antichrist,The preach∣ing of the Gospell hin∣dered by Ma∣humet in the east and Anti∣christ in the west. for there could not be a generall falling from the faith, before there were a generall preaching of the faith: which when it was interrupted as in the east by Mahomet, so in the west by Antichrist, it was true, that the succession being interrupted, diuers men of God were extraordi∣narily raised vp by God, I say Angells of God, who by the sincere preaching of the Gospell did restore and re∣paire the visible Church miserably torne in peices by him: who did cast downe the wall of the westerne Ba∣bylon, as of Iericho, and did tread downe the glorie of Antichrist as of Dagon, so that by the noise of the Euan∣gelicall Trumpet Babylon seemed to fall in the middest of men, and the world began now not to doubt of the comming of Antichrist,The decay of Antichrist. but to deliberate of his depar∣ture. For with the greatest part of the Christian world, the swelling title of Antichrist failed, his great power fainted, his spirituall by the iudgement of others,☜ his temporall by his owne: his markets of indulgences de∣ceased, his golden Euphrates was at an ebbe, his great streames of money running into that Church wholy dried vp, being brought backe againe into their owne chanels not without great loue shewed to that Tyberine Bishoppe, to whom Luther and Caluixe and other prea∣chers of the word thought such a boundance of wealth to be very pernitious. As Tacitus writeth that Aleius Capito, and Lu: Aruntius, to keepe in the ouerflowing of Tyber, they would diuert the fluds and streames whereby it did swell to that height, that Tyber being cut off from the neighbour riuers, might flow as with lesse glory, so with lesse danger.Ana: 1. The Christian world seem∣eth to haue taken the same counsell, to moderate the hurtfull abundance of the Tiberine Bishop, so that Bel∣larmine may seeme to cast a needlesse doubt of the en∣trance of Antichrist, of whose ouerthrow we so carnest∣ly thinke. We haue heard the mans first demonstration, let vs consider of the second which is thus concluded.
CHAP. XXX. Of the second token going before Anti∣christs comming. IF the Romane Empire be not yet vtterly ouerturned, so that it hath not lost the name of the Romane Empire, An∣tichrist is not yet come. But the first is true. Therfore the second is true. Or thus. If before the comming of Antichrist the Romane Empire was to be diuided into ten Kings, whereof none shall be called the King of the Romanes, Antichrist is not yet come. But the Antecedent is true. Therefore the consequent is true. Let vs see the strength and sinewes of this won∣derfull demonstration, wherin they so greatly triumph, although in opening of the prophecy, it is sufficiently before refuted, the assumption whereof they go about to strengthen on euery side. This is the assumption. But the Romaine Empire is not yet vtterly ouerturned, so that it hath lost the name of the Romane Empire. Which they proue because the Romane Empire is to be diuided in∣to tenne Kings whereof none is called the King of the Ro∣manes. They endeauour to strengthen either part out of the 2.Daniel 2.32. and seuenth of Daniel, and 17. of the Apoc. in the 2. of Daniel they say is described a succession of 4. Kingdomes to last vnto the worlds end, by the Image, hauing the head of gold, the brest of siluer, the belly of brasse, and the feete of iron. The head of brasse signifieth say they the Kingdome of the Chaldees, the brest of siluer the Kingdome of the Persians, the belly of brasse the Kingdome of Alexan∣der and the Grecians, the feete of brasse the Kingdome of the Romanes: the 2. feete the easterne and the westerne Empire of the Romanes: Now as 2. feet haue 10. toes, say they, which are not feete: So the Romane Empire shall bee diuided into 10. Kings, whereof none is, or is called the King of the Ro∣manes.
The very same 4. Kingdomes Dan. 7. are described by 4. beastes, a Lyon, a beare, a Leopard, and a fourth with∣out a name hauing 10. hornes, whereof none is, or is called a beast. But this beast they say signifieth the Romane Em∣pire, and the 10. hornes 10. Kings which shall diuide that Empire. Which they proue out of the 17. of the Apocalips, where Iohn describes the beast with seauen heades and 10. hornes vpon whom the woman sate. For the Angell say they doth so interpret. The woman is a great city which sitteth vpon 7. hills, that is Rome. The 10. hornes are 10. Kings which shall raigne at one time, and shall hate the whore &c. By which wordes the Angell doth signifie that the Romane Empire by them shall be diuided and desolated, so that it shall not retaine the name of the Romane Empire. But that Antichrist is not as yet to come, it is openly euic∣ted out of Daniel cap 7. vers: 14. the ten hornes are the tenne Kings of that kingdome, whereof wee haue spo∣ken hitherto. And another say they, shall rise after them,Dan. 7.24. (to wit Antichrist) and he shall be more potent then the for∣mer, and shall subdue three Kings, and hee shall vtter speech against the most highest, and shal tread vnder foote the Saints of the Almightie, and shall imagine that he can change times and lawes, and they shall bee deliuered into his handes for a time, times and halfe a time. And this they proue out of Hirom. who addeth, that a leuenth little King shal arise, who shall ouercome three of the tenne Kings. Yea Bellar∣mine goeth farther, and out of the 11. Chapter vers: 21. and in his place shall stand vp the most vile, concludeth that Antichrist rising out of a base place shall by fraud and de∣ceit get the Kingdome of the Iewes, and shall not sight onely with three Kings of Egypt, Libia, and Ethiopia, and shall enioy their Kingdomes themselues being vanquished, but shal also make slaues seauen other Kings, and shall haue the go∣uernment of the whole world 3. yeares and a halfe: and in the meane time shall oppresse the Christians with an innumerable armie, and these are the warres of Gog and Magog. By all which prophecies of Daniel and Iohn concerning the
Romane Empire and Antichrist, together with the ex∣tent of his Kingdome, beginning, end, and continu∣ance thereof, all (as he thinkes) so fitly agreeing be∣tweene themselues, hee peremptorily concludeth that Antichrist is not yet come. Whereby there is a greater charge necessarily imposed vpon vs to looke diligently to the expounding of Daniels prophecie, as wee were carefull formerly of expounding of Iohns prophecie: So the argument shal be well satisfied, when I shall con∣fer the historie with the prophecie, and set in order things confused, and make plaine thinges obscure, and shall compare Testament with Testament, booke with booke, chapter with chapter, verse with verse; neither will I adde a long Commentarie to a cleare text, nor too short a Commentarie to an obscure, by this meanes I shall neither admit superfluities, or omit necessaries. Especially when the prophecie is as a riddle which be∣ing darkely in many wordes set downe by the Prophet cannot be made plaine in a few wordes by a Doctour, which doth rather require a Prophet to be the interpre∣ter, till euent hath made it plaine. Wherein the Papists (but chiefly Bellarmine) must deale more fauourably with vs, who hath reiected 12. Fathers in this cause, if we likewise doe reiect the same, and among them Ie∣rome chiefly, so it be without touch of his reputation, seeing Austen saith that prophecies may sooner bee ac∣complished then vnderstood, and doth sometime re∣quire that naked authorities being laid aside, the matter with the matter, and the cause with the cause, and the reason may striue with the reason. Ireneus saith that prophecies till they bee performed are to bee counted doubtfull riddles:Irene lib. 4. ad ver. heres. c. 43. wherein Bellarmine shall not grant lesse to vs, then he taketh to himselfe, who when hee seeth his Master the Pope to bee pincht and stonge by Ireneus,Bellar. de Pon: lib. 3. cap. 18. makes this answere to serue his turne. Ireneus (saith he) thinkes it a surer way and lesse dangerous to ex∣pect the fulfilling of the prophecie, then to suspect it. And the
Papists seeme to haue learned this modestie out of Da∣niel who prophecing of other things as wee shall proue, of Antichrist as the Papists thinke, say that the words are shut and sealed vp to the time appointed. Who if we grant to haue foretould of the Romane Empire and of Antichrist, he will neither much hurt our cause or helpe theirs. For if Daniels fourth beast be the state of the Romane Empire, and the 10. hornes the tenne Kings among whom it shall bee diuided, and the ele∣uenth horne springing thence be Antichrist, assuredly the Pope who is raised out of the fall and ruine of the Empire, is Antichrist. Here if you please I will consider of all those places alleaged by Bellarmine and search-out how they agree within themselues and how with the text. Bellarmine saith, that the fourth Empire,Bellarmines contradiction. which he taketh to be the Romane, shall last to the worlds end. And yet hee saith that the Romane Empire, shall be vtterly destroied be∣fore the comming of Antichrist, who shall raigne three yeares and a halfe. How can hee then alleage it for a truth that the Romane Empire shall last to the worlds end? I send this great Chrisippus againe to Aristotles Analytickes, whither some time he sendeth others without cause, that when he hath reuiewed them he may teach vs how two contradictions can be true at one time. The Romane Empire shall last to the worlds end. The Romane Empire shall not last to the worlds end, for it must haue the finall destruction at the comming of Antichrist, who shall raigne three yeares and a halfe. Now let vs consider how Bellarmine and Daniel doe a∣gree. Many of our age and those very learned, who seeme very exactly to search into Daniel, do thinke that the fourth Empire (which many other without doubt as well learned as they doe take for the Romane Mo∣narchie) was the Kingdome of the Seleucides and the Lagides in Siria and Egypt,The expositi∣on of the 7. of Daniel. as they afflicted Iury hembd in betweene them: and therefore designed to be more
terrible then the three former, because more dangerous to Iury. And that the ten hornes were ten Kings of Siria & Egypt, who did successiuely oppresse the Iewes, and that An∣tiochus Epiphanes was the tenth and last, who more then the rest did plague them most cruelly, and that therefore he was the type of Antichrist who should no lesse afflict the Christi∣ans, and not Antichrist himselfe, as Bellarmine dreameth. Let vs if you please alledge some of the reasons drawne out of the Text. Reasons th t Antichrist is not properly in Daniel.1 The fourth beast was a kingdome to be abolished before the comming and raigne of the Messias, as the Prophet teacheth cap: 7. v. 11. 26. 27. which is true of the kingdome of the Seleucides, false of the Romane. 2. The fourth beast did make warre with the Iewes, and did greuously oppresse them, did hinder the wor∣ship of God, not onely before the comming of Christ, but before the purging of the Temple, and the restoring of the Iewish worship by Iudas Machabeus cap: 7. v. 25. 26. 27. which agreeth with the kingdome of the Seleu∣cides, not with the Romane. 3. Ten hornes and no more did belong to the fourth beast, that is, ten Kings, (I will name them anon) who did oppresse Iurie with their tyrannie, which being vn∣derstood of seuen Seleucides, and three Lagides is very true, of the Romanes very false, who after they got the gouernment of Iurie, were more then ten. 4. Besides, those Kings did succeed one another or∣derly in the same kingdome; this is true in the seuen Seleucides and three Lagides, but not in them who after descended from the Kings in the Rom Empire, who at the same time did raigne in diuers Prouinces, as the Aduersarie himselfe confesseth. 5. Lastly, the Leopard cap. 7. signifying the Grae∣cian Empire, is shadowed by the Goate cap: 8. which appeares by that, that as the Leopard is said there to haue had foure heads, so the Goate, when his great horne was broken of, Alexander, foure hornes are said
to succeed in his place, i. foure Princes among whom the Empire of the Goate was diuided; which to the Romane Empire agreeth not, but to the Greeke it doth.Alexander and his foure Princes. For after Alexanders death, Ptolomey the sonne of La∣gis held Egipt: Philip, Alexanders brother, Macedon: Seleucus Nicanor, Syria and Babylon: Antigonus, Asia the lesse: these were Alexanders foure Princes, as Hierom obserueth. If it bee demanded how the two feet prophecied of by Daniel,What is ment by the 2 feete, and 10. toes. which in Bellarmines iudg∣ment doth fitly resemble the Rom: Empire diuided into the East and West, from whence ten Kings, as ten toes did proceede: I answer from those foure Princes of Alexander, two of them, that is, Seleucus Nicanor, and Ptolomey Lagis were the most potent, who brought the other four Kingdomes by mutuall warres vnder their subiection: from him the kingdom of the Seleucides, and the kingdome of Syria in the North: from this the kingdome of the Lagides, and of the Kings of Egipt in the South did descend, and both these did with their invasions greatly afflict the Iewes, placed in the middest. These were the two feet, which did so miserably trample vpon the Iewes, from whence did spring out ten Kings, as ten toes, which Daniel de¦scribeth cap: 11.Daniels litle horne, who it is. for the three Lagides descended from Ptolomie; the seuen Seleucides from Seleucus, and from thence in the end of the kingdome of the Selcu¦cides ouer the Iewes, a litle horne sprouted out, cap: 7. & 9 that is, a King with a bold face, that is,The ten hornes. Antiochus piphanes, the tenth horne cap. 11. properly and liuely described.1 Ptolomie Lagis. The first horne of the fourth and name∣lesse beast Ptolomie Lagis King of the South, .i. of Egipt, is described v: 5. then Seleucus Nicanor the most puis∣sant of Alexanders Princes,v: 11. 2. Seleucus Nicanor. 3. Antiochus Soer. 4. Anichus Theos. the King of the North is the second horne: for hee preuailed against Ptolomie and recouered Iurie and all Siria from him, and gouer¦ned there himselfe. Him did Antiochus Soter the third horne succeed, whose sonne Antiochus Theos the fourth
horne, that he might establish a league betweene him∣selfe and Ptolomie Philadelphus King of Egipt,v: 6. tooke Bernice, Philadelphus daughter to wife, that thereby he might fulfill that part of the Prophecie of the two feet, one of yron, thother of clay, that they should mingle themselues with mans seede, and yet should not grow together, Dan: 2. v. 43. the prophecie was proued true by euent: for Antiochus Theos had already Laodice a∣nother wife aliue,5. Seleucus Callinicus. of whom he begat Seleucus Calinicus the fift horne, who slew Bernice, her sonne and seruants: Antiochus Theos was poysoned by Laodice his wife, and Ptolomie,v: 7. Bernices Father presently after the mariage died for griefe.6. Ptolomie Euergetes. But in his place arose Ptolomie Euerge∣tes the sixt horne, who being of the same race with Bernice, .i. her Brother, made warre vpon Seleucus Cal∣linicus to reuenge his sisters death,v: 8. and vanquished him, and being crowned King of Siria returned into Egipt with his spoiles and prisoners, and hauing greater power then Callinicus, enioyed Siria many yeeres, and Iurie therein.v: 9. Wherefore the two sonnes of Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus the Great, inuaded Siria, and raised a cruell warre: Ceraunus against Pto∣lomie Euergetes;v: 10. who being dead, Antiochus the Great gathered great forces against Ptolomie Philopater the the sonne of Euergetes. Of this Antiochus the great, the Angell prophecieth from the 10.v: 11. 12. verse to the 20. first of his warres with Ptolomie Philopater, and those first prosperous, wherein he recouered Siria, then vnfortu∣nate,7. Ptolomie Philopator. wherein he lost it againe. Here Ptolomie Philo∣pator lifted vp into pride by this good successe, was the seuenth horne, and slew many thousands of the Iewes and therefore shall not alway preuaile:v: 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. After of the warres and victories of Antiochus the Great, which hee got of Ptolomeus, Epiphanes the sonne of Philopater: and of the depopulation of the Iewes, whence Antiochus the Great is the eight horne.8. Antiochus the Great. He gaue his daughter Cleopa∣tra. in mariage to Ptolomie Epiphanes, that hee might
againe mingle the yron and the clay together, but all in vaine, according to the prophecie, cap: 2. when as hee pretended peace and friendship by that mariage, but intended destruction to Ptolomie, but all in vaine: be∣cause Cleopatra tooke part with her husband against her Father. Lastly,v: 17. of Antiochus the Great his inuading the Isles of Greece, which he subdued,v: 18. and of the warres he made with the Romanes, wherein hee gat great dis∣grace, and of his ignominious death inflicted vpon him in a mutinie by sauage people for his sacrilege.v: 19. Into his roome succeeded Seleucus Philopator his sonne the ninth horne,9. Seleucus Philopator. who did impouerish the people with greeuous impositions, and emptied the treasurie and the Temple of Ierusalem, and perished not by warre but by treacherie: for Heliodore being suborned by Antiochus Epiphanes tooke him away by poyson. Now into his place shall step vp, saith the Angell, a most contemptible fellow, .i. there shall succeed Seleucus Philopator in the kingdome of Siria one very base in manners, not in his Ancestors, Antiochus Epiphanes, the third sonne of Antiochus the Great, the brother of Seleu∣cus Philopator, Demetrius Vnkle, the tenth horne,10. Antiochus Epiphanes. that litle horne so fully described by Daniel in the rest of the 7. and 11. chap: for the Angell doth prophecie, of his entrance, deeds, and end in the rest of the chapter: of his entrance, to note that he came not to the kingdom of Siria by any lawfull right of succession, or election: for Demetrius his Nephew was right heire of the king∣dome; but crept in by cunning and flatterie, as a tutor and a gardian of the young Prince, and a protector of the Kingdome in the nonage and absence of Demetrius, sent to Rome for an hostage in his steed. You haue the historie agreeing with the prophecie, described both by others, and especially by Iosephus.Antiq. lib. 12. cap: 1. Therefore An∣tiochus Epiphanes the tenth and litle horne, out of small and weake beginnings vsurped the kingdome of Siria, a man for his wickednes vile and contemptible, who
did breake off and cast away by his craft, three of the former hornes in the Kingdom of Syria, the father, the brother, and the nephew, that he might attaine to the Kingdome. And vttered speeches against the Almigh∣ty, and so oft trampled vpon the Saints of God, so that the times of persecuting the people of God, Daniels country-men, assigned to the little horne, do precisely agree with the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes:Foure degrees of deliue∣rance. which are diuersly reckoned vp in respect of the begin∣ning and ending: for there are foure degrees noted of the deliuerance from the tyranny of Antiothus, procu∣red at foure seuerall times. The first, cap. 7. vers. 25. when the worship of God was renewed, and the Temple restored by Iudas Ma∣chabaeus: for from the prophanation of the Temple, which beganne the fifteenth of Casleu, anno 145. to this reformation made the 25. of Casleu, anno 148. three yeeres and ten dayes came betweene, which space Daniel cals a time, times, & a peece of time, cap. 7. v. 25. The second degree, when the Iewes hauing vanqui∣shed Antiochus, draue his forces out of Iury, and re-established the new reformation:P Bell. I. de. lib. 1. cap. 1. which happened 3. yeeres and an halfe, as Iosephus obserues, from the time, when the daily sacrifice did cease: which space Daniel cals a time, times and halfe a time, cap. 12. vers. 7. The third degree, is from the prophanation of the Temple, to the deadly sicknesse of Antiochus, which is contained by Daniel in 1290. dayes, cap. 12. vers. 11. The last degree, is from the profanation to his death, which happened 45. daye after, and these daies are ex∣actly cast vp by Daniel to be 1335. By all which it ap∣peareth, that Daniel did shadow out by the fourth beast not the Romane Empire, but the kingdome of the Se∣leucides and the Lagides,The disagree∣ment of Bellar¦mine & Daniel and that he described by the tenth and little horne, not Antichrist properly, but An∣tiochus Epiphanes. And I pray you marke how ill Bel∣larmine agreeth with Daniel. Daniel describeth a beast
with a tenth horne, Bellarmines beast hath an eleuenth Daniel speaks of ten Kings, who successiuely did afflict the Iewes, Daniels country-men. Bellarmine speakes of ten Kings, who together with an eleuenth, at the same time did altogether beare rule in the world: but in di∣uers places. Daniel sets downe ten kings, whereof the three latter were rooted out in the sight, and procure∣ment of the tenth, the other sixe, either all of them, or most of them being dead before he was borne. Bellar∣mine faines that three of them were slaine by him, and seuen others subdued at such time, as they were not in the world. Lastly, Daniel saith, that his horne or king was broken off, being infamous for his cowardly flight, and being infected with a filthy disease, after hee had tormented the Iewes the time appointed, did misera∣bly consume away and perish. Bellarmine imagines his horne the Aegyptians, Lybians and Aethiopians being vanquished, and seuen other Kings subdued should get the monarchie of the whole world for three yeeres and a halfe. O admirable Conquerour, more renowned then the Antiochi, Alexanders and Caesars.☜ Therefore we looke that Bellarmine shall play the Orator for An∣tichrist who may excellently set foorth these warres and victories, as Cicero did Caesars. No man hath so flowinng a wit, so copious and eloquent tongue and stile, who I will not say, can paint and set out, but point at and reckon vp thy worthy Acts, Most Mighty An∣tichrist. Neither could any man so soone passe thorow remote Kingdomes by their speedy iournies, as thou, I will not say, by thy swift marches, but by thy swifter victories. For thou, ô great Antichrist, with thine in∣numerable hoast, shalt subdue all the Christians in the world within three yeeres and an halfe, and shall ob∣taine the monarchy of the whole earth. And this is the warre of Gog and Magog. Let mee then adde the rest which followeth in Cicero. All which vnlesse I should confesse to be so great, that no mans wit or vn∣derstanding
can conceiue, let me be counted for a mad man. But an imaginary victory doth befit an imagina∣ry Antichrist. Thus out of the premisses I argue against Bellarmine. If Antichrist bee found in this prophesie where Antiochus is literally described He is there either in his person, or in his likenesse, or in his identitie, or like substance, or in his image. The absurdi∣ties that fol∣low if Antio∣chus be Anti∣christ. 2. Macc. 9.If Antichrist be in all things Antiochus, certainely as Antiochus is dead, as it is in the end of the chapter, so Antichrist is dead. Then Antichrist must die before his birth: but by what kinde of death Antiochus died, is declared. Lice did crawle out of his swolne bodie in great abundance, which did inwardly gnaw vpon him, heereby his flesh putrified,Wherein An∣tiochus and Antichrist disagree. and fell from him by peece-meales, so that the army could not endure the stinch of the beast. Antichrist therefore must bee eaten vp with lice, and being so putrified, must cast out a filthy stinck, that Antichrist may be another Antiochus. If Antichrist shall get the same kingdome of the Iewes, which Antiochus enioyed: if he shall cast down and root out three hornes, that is, three kings next go∣ing before in the kingdome of Syria, the father, the bro∣ther, the nephew, as Antiochus did to get his fathers kingdome by deceit: therefore these three must bee a∣liue, after they bee dead, and Antiochus the father, and Seleucus the brother, and Demetrius the nephew, must rise againe before the resurrection, that Antichrist may depriue them of their kingdome, and by his cunning cast them off and destroy them. This is the summe of my conclusion. Antichrist is Antiochus in his identity, or in his likenesse: if in his identity, it is a great miracle: if in his likenesse, it is a lame argument: for euery simi∣litude doth halt, as the Logicians teach, and a symbo∣lical argument is not of force to argue, as Aquinas saith. Yet notwithstanding rather for a flourish, then for a proofe of the cause let vs shortly see wherein Antichrist is like or dislike vnto Antiochus. Antiochus came not
out of a base stocke and kindred, as many Popes did, but out of a kingly race. Antichrist is the sonne of the earth, as S. Iohn telleth vs. Antiochus most abiect in his manners, but of a great parentage, but is farther de∣scribed by the Prophet to bee by his country a Syrian, by religion vncircumcised, a breaker of the sabboth, an oppressour of the Iewes, a worshipper of Iupiter Olym∣pius. What Antichrist? how is he painted out by you? Is he not though base in minde, yet baser by birth, by country a Iew, by religion circumcised, a keeper of the Sabbaoth, the Messias of the Iewes, an enemy to Idols, is he not thus described? that he may well enough de∣nie himselfe to be Antiochus, though hee be hanged vp in his picture. You see how vnlike, now marke how like he is to Antiochus. For I will neuer denie that An∣tiochus in many things is the type of Antichrist. Nay, I will say more,Antiochus the type of Anti∣christ, wherin they do agree. that S. Paul and S. Iohn did bring ma∣ny things out of Daniels prophesies into their owne, wherewith they did liuely set out and expresse that An∣tichrist. Antiochus is an enemy to God, and aduersary to the Church, lifting vp himselfe aboue all, & against all that is called God, an Out-law, whose will stands for a law, whose mouth speaketh great things, whose hands doe afflict Gods Saints, such an one is Antichrist de∣scribed by the Apostles. Antiochus as hee did abrogate his country and false ceremonies, so the Iewish and the true ceremonies. Antichrist hath ouerthrowen the I∣dols of the Gentiles, and hath altered the true and Christian worship of God. Antiochus is inwardly an Atheist, and outwardly an Idolater: for he did worship Iupiter Olympius in the Temple of Ierusalem, and cau∣sed others to worship him, whom their fore-fathers worshipped not, who had worshipped Apollo and Dia∣na. So Antichrist is an inward Atheist, and an outward Idolater. Antiochus shall worship in his place the god Maozim described vers. 38. as it is in the vulgar transla∣tion: So Antichrist also, who shall worship the Diuell, as
the author of his strength and power, hee shall worship the di∣uell against God, as your interlined glosse hath it. And Bellarmine, He shall worship the Diuell after the manner of the Magicians, but closely. And this is called the god Mao∣zim, by whose helpe Antichrist shall worke miracles. Anti∣christ therefore shall be an idolater by his owne confes∣sion, which elsewhere he often denieth. But Antichrist shall fight against all Gods, that hee alone may bee taken for God, as he lately hath written. How then shall hee wor∣ship the Diuell, as he writ before? you see that Anti∣christ is like to Antiochus in many things, I grant then that Antichrist is typically described by Daniel, but not prophetically,Bell. lib. 2. cap. 21. de Antichr. whom euen Bellarmine grants to haue spoken literally of Antiochus, when hee seeth that the Pope is so neerely vrged and stung by our men with these notes of likenesse. Although hee cite Ierome else∣where, expounding those words 21. v. cap. 11. not of Antiochus, but properly of Antichrist. Therfore in the same place hee doth both follow and forsake Hierome.In Dan. cap. 11. Neither is it maruell, when Hierome seemes to forsake himselfe. For Hierome in the former part of the 11. chapter confesseth that the Seleucidae are described, and Seleucus Philopater in the twentieth. And one that is most vild, shall stand in his place, that is, Seleucus Philopater in the place of Antiochus the great. What reason had hee then, why he should expound the 21. ver. And the most vild shall stand in his place,Bellarmine contradicts himselfe. not of Antiochus Epiphanes, Se∣leucus brother and successour, but of Antichrist, whom Da∣niel did not prophetically describe? Heere Bellarmine staggers, and speakes as it were out of a tottering boat. He saith it, he denies it, that the Angell spake literally of Antiochus, and Hierome brings such a reason against himselfe, as Hierome himselfe cannot answer. But Bel∣larmine thought it not suffiicient to dissent from him∣selfe,The ten hornes in Iohn and Daniel not the same. but hee must set a iarre also betweene Daniel and Iohn. For hee saith, that the ten hornes in Daniel and Iohn are the very same: yet Daniel speakes of ten horns
broken off and cast aside before Messias came in the flesh: Iohn speaks of those ten hornes, which in his time had not attained the Kingly soueraignety. Daniel speakes of the ten kings of the race of Seleucus and La∣gis, who by turnes successiuely succeeded one another in the Kingdome. Iohn speakes of tenne Kings, among whom the Romane Empire was to bee diuided, who gouerned at one time in diuers prouinces. Daniel tels vs what the little horne, which was the tenth, did doe to the three next foregoing, without mention of the rest. Iohn tels vs what the ten hornes shall doe to Anti∣christ, which is not one of the tenne hornes, but one of the seuen heads of the Beast. Daniels king is a tenth horne, pointing out one singular man. Iohns king is not to bee accompted an eleuenth horne, but a head, and signifies not one singleman, but a state, Daniels tenne hornes rose out of the ruines of the Macedonian Em∣pire, Iohns ten hornes out of the ouerthrow of the Ro∣maine Empire. So that there is no likenesse betweene Daniels hornes and Iohns,Dan. 7.8. but that in either of them they were ten, Daniels ten hornes if you consider the chronologie, were broken & fell off many ages before. Iohns ten hornes did appeare, that is, before they recei∣ued kingly power with the Beast, the Romane Empire being destroyed. Those ten hornes, if you consider cosmographie, beare rule in Syria and Babylon, out of these ten hornes, wherein a certaine number is set for an vncertaine, as our men haue prooued, one had the Kingdome of France, another of Spaine, another of Great Britaine, and other in other nations and king∣domes. Those ten hornes after the captiuity, and be∣fore the comming of Christ did oppresse Iury scituated betweene them, These hornes being conuerted by Christ triumphing in the heauens, shall at the last wound and strike thorow that double horned Beast of Rome. O cunning Chronologie, and skilfull Cos∣mographie, BELLARMINE, that can so well
distinguish the places and times of each prophesie, CICERO did in open place iestingly taxe a certaine Poet,Bellarmine well compa∣red. who was very foolish in the iudgement of others, but very learned in his own, that in one place made Euripides and Menander, and in another Socrates and Epicurus haue conference together, whose liues were seuered not by many yeares, but many ages, and that he had many Schooles in the world, that had as lit∣tle learning as himselfe. He did as wittily sport at other writers, who said that Numa was Pythagoras scholler, when Pythagoras was borne diuers ages after Numa. But another most pleasantly said, that by the ignorance of a foolish Historiographer, he was made a Babilonian of a Grecian, and that his Countrey being cut off from Hel∣lespont with the very wales and towers and people were carried into Mesopotamia. These mens ignorance Bel∣larmine seemeth very well to expresse, who brings in Kings of Siria long dead, conuersing with many Kings of Europe borne a thousand yeares after, transporting Europe into Asia,Absurdities out of Bellar∣mines inter∣pretation. and Paris to London, and the seates of other Kings and Princes who fell from the Romane Empire together with their subiects into Hierapolis and Babylon. That I can hardly refraine from crying out, that this learned Historiographer will one day bring to passe that The Parthian shall drinke Araris, & the German Tygris. A man may easily slippe in the mistaking of a yeare or yeares, but it is a foule fault to confound an age or ages together, which this learned Doctour hath com∣mitted. But I know his answer that he had rather erre with certaine fathers, then hould a truth with vs. Let vs now see the returne of that terrible demonstration, fetcht out of Daniels corrupt interpretation. If the Romane Empire bee not as yet altogether ouer∣throwne, Antichrist is not yet come. For the destru∣ction of the Romane Empire is a certaine token fore∣running the comming of Antichrist (as it appeares
out of Daniel who speakes neuer a word either of the desolation of the Romane Empire or of the comming of Antichrist) But the Romane Empire is not so vtterly ouerthrowne. Therefore Antichrist is not yet come. The generall ouerthrow of the Romane Empire hee thus proueth out of Daniel. If before the comming of Antichrist the Romane Empire be to be diuided into ten Kings, whereof none is, or is called the King of the Romanes, then Antichrist is not yet come. For the generall ouerthrow of the Empire is not come, because the name remaineth. The first is true. Therefore the last is true. He proueth the assumption out of Daniel,What be the two feete and ten toes. out of the first vision of the 2. feete, and out of the second of the ten hornes of the beast without a name. For as two feete, haue ten toes, which are not feete, and as the ten hornes are not the beast, so the Romane Empire shall be diuided into ten Kings whereof none is the King of the Romanes. O full wittily as hee thinkes. But Daniels two feete are not the esterne and westerne Empires of Rome, but Ptolomeus Lagis, and Seleucus Nicauor, A∣lexanders Princes as I said before: And the ten hornes of the beast are not ten Kings rising out of the ruine of the Romane Empire, but ten Seleucides, as toes springing out of those feete, after the destruction of the Macedo∣nian Empire, whence foure hornes arose in Alexanders place, as I shewed before, which fell afterward to bee two feete. Hath not Bellarmine prooued the assumpti∣on doubtely well out of Daniel. But he hath shewed it I warrant you better afterward out of Iohn. For those ten hornes in Iohn are ten Kings among whom the Ro∣mane Empire is diuided. I grant it. Neither so shall I loose the cause But that is not set downe by Iohn which Bellarmine addeth, whereof none is, or is called the King of the Romanes. The cleane contrary is set downe by Iohn as I prooued before. As the Romane Empire was to be
taken away as Paul taught,Why the Ro∣mane Empire restored. so farre forth, as it hindered the reuealing and gouernment of Antichrist: So a new Empire as the picture of the old was to bee restored of the land-beast chap. 13. i. of Antichrist that the whore of Babylon might sit vpon her backe chap. 17. One of the two heades of the sea-beast, i. the westerne Empire of Rome, dead in Augustulus, reuiued in Charles by the land-beast, that is Antichrist, got life againe and ga∣thered strength, and therefore it was not finally ouer∣throwne. The image of the first beast recouered life, and voice: and therefore did not altogether loose her power and name. The image of the old Empire got life againe, the name remained: the thing it selfe perished not, but past ouer from the chiefe secular Prince, to the chiefe spirituall prince: as Aquinas teacheth. So as An∣tichrist was the last state, that held the Romane Empire, without the name of the Romane Emperour as Bellarmine confesseth. Therefore the Pope did transfer the Ma∣iesty and the power of the Romane Empire to himselfe and hath left a bare name and title to the Emperour, that the Emperour might be like him.The power of the Empire in the Pope, the name in the Emperour. A Bishoppe in name, and an Emperour in name. Indeed the Bishop infringeth the faith of Christ, professeth his name, and seemes his Vicegerent. A substitute in name, but a reall Aduersarie. So the maiestie of the Emperour resides in the Pope, the title in the Emperour. Then the titulare Emperour is the Popes reall vassall. Let him be called, and you will the King of the Romanes, to whom the Pope hath not left one foote of land in all Italie. So that the old Romane Empire in substance and power, is so diuided betweene the Kings and the beast, that it is ex∣tinguished, vnlesse happily you would haue the Empire consist, not in the number of landes, but of sillables. I retort therefore the argument that I may ouerthrow the assumption of the first syllogisme which he tooke for granted, that the Romane Empire was not yet sub∣uerted.
The prophecie of Saint Iohn hath taught vs that the Romane Empire is to be diuided and determined, as Bellarmine saith, and then that Antichrist shall come. Euent proueth that the Empire is a good while since ouerthrowne. Therefore Antichristi come. CHAP. XXXI. Wherein the third demonstration is refuted. BEllarmines two former demonstrations as 2. reedes we haue broken in peeces, let vs if you please breife∣ly scatter the rest being fully refuted by others. Any man will see how weake they be being seuered, I haue vnited them that they might bee the stronger, two of the signes accompanying: and two other following be∣ing as notably concluded, whereby he prooueth that Antichrist is not as yet come. The first signe that doth accompanie the comming of Anti∣christ is not only the preaching of Enoch and Elias, but their combate with Antichrist. Wherein Bellarmine doth greatly doat, not vnlike a franticke woman among vs, who imagined shee had such inward acquaintance with the Angell Gabriel, that she receiued many letters from him to be deliuered to many others about diuers businesses, I thinke Elias was the Carrier: And wee haue such an other mad fellow sent to giue light vnto the world. These seeme not to be so mad as Bellarmine, who as if he had conferred with Enoch and Elias three daies since in Paradise,The fable of Enoch & Elias. or at least had receiued letters from them, doth hold so fast, and tell so confidently that Iewish fable receiued from o∣thers, that he seemes to beleeue it, it is this, that both of them being reserued so many ages in a certaine aëreall pa∣radise, liuing in their mortall bodies, shall returne into the world to fight with Antichrist, and shall be slaine by him, and
both of them shall rise againe the third day before the generall resurrection: and by that miracle conuert the Iewes, and en∣force them to kill Antichrist their Messias (as they thought) in the mount of Oliues, and to embrace Christ at the last their true Messias. To proue the truth of all these passages Bellarmine hath misreported diuers testimonies out of the Scrip∣ture and fathers, all which the most excellent and lear∣ned King of great Britaine hath so wrested out of the hands of the silly weake Doctour, that in the iudge∣ment of all learned men hee seemes to haue wonne the cause. It is not needfull then to discusse those testimo∣nies againe, that I may not doe that which is done al∣readie, all which are restored by the King to their na∣turall and proper sense, so that from thence I may fetch arguments, to pursue the beast being wounded with the Kings weapon. All godly learned men will grant, that these two holy Prophets, for their singulare holinesse had an especiall priuiledge from God: when one of them,Heb. 11. that is Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, the other was taken vp in a fiery chariot into Heauen. Let me therefore aske Bellarmine certaine questions for my learning, that I may search out the truth of this bu∣sines, not only for the refuting of the fable, but for com∣forting of the Church.The first que∣stion. First therefore I demand where Enoch and Elias be at this present? Bellarmine answeres and that confidently; in Paradise. What? are they in that Paradise,A discourse of Paradise. wherein Adam was placed at the first, which Moses describes to be planted by God in the region of Eden, a place so full of delights, watered with a great riuer from whence foure other great and noble riuers did flow? Out of which he makes mention, that Adam was expelled, a dreadfull Cherubine being set to stoppe the entrance, that none of Adams posterity may euer reenter? where the Armenians, condemned afterward for Hereticke; in the Florentine counsell, did say that the soules of the Saints did abide after death to the day of
iudgement? yea saith Bellarmine in the very same Para∣dise Enoch and Elias are reserued aliue.Enoch & Elias haue a losse by being in Para∣dise and loo∣sing heauen. A great priui∣ledge forsooth, that when other Saints the citizens of heauen doe liue with God, these for so many ages bee kept out of heauen by God. That wee may grant that Paradise is as well planted and delightsome a place, as euer it was, wherein with the smell of flowers and fruit, the sweetnesse of fountaines, the greenesse of the fields, the chanting of birds, the melodie in the woodes, the shadow of trees they might delight themselues so many ages. Yet for all that, Paradise could not be so pleasing vnto them, that it could content them for the losse of one day, wherein they were depriued of heauen.Ecclesiasticus corrupted. For whereas Bellarmine proues out of the Apocryphal scrip∣ture of Ecclesiasticus, that Enoch was translated into Pa∣radise, he had said somewhat if Paradise had not beene foisted into the Apocryphall text: for though it bee in the Latine vulgare translation, yet it is not in the Greek originall. But what will hee answere for Elias, whom the canonicall Scripture doth plainly set downe to bee taken vp into heauen, not as it were into heauen, but in∣to heauen it selfe? He cannot denie that which many so∣ber Papists do grant, that God in the Scripture did pub∣blish his decree concerning Elias in uery plaine wordes, vnlesse happily in Bellarmines opinion when God had determined to take Elias vp into heauen, he suddainly changed his minde, and cast him into Paradise? Elias therefore doth so much the more greeuously take the losse of heauen, as he was neere enioying of it,Paradise taken away. and mist it. But if Paradise which was sometime a most pleasant and delightsome place, hath beene a long time since ta∣ken away, what comfort then is left to Enoch and Elias wherewith they might comfort themselues for the want of heauen? Now to let passe other Papists, Pererius the Iesuite doth in many wordes proue, that Paradise was ouerflowne with the flood, and grew so wilde and vn∣wholesome, that although it was a place, yet it left off
to be a Paradise.Paradise ouer∣flowne with the flood. But this vniesuited Bellarmine that he might preserue that place free from the inundation of waters, to be more pleasant and wholesome for Enoch and Elias, hath remooued it into a place neere the circle of the Moone.Paradise not neere the Moone. But the Iesuite Pererius doth proue that it is the more incommodious, and vnholesome, and altogither inhabitable. First for the neerenesse of the Sunne and other starres, then for the Element of fire placed next the moone, besides for the perpetuall agita∣tion of the place, being carried swiftly about with the constant motion of the heauen. So that Bellarmine hath prouided very ill for those good Fathers, when he placed Paradise so neere the Moone, & hath done great wrong to the Inhabitants of the earth, as Pererius no∣teth pretily and pleasantly, that the height of Paradise, being in a place opposite to the east, would keepe away the light of the Sunne. It is good sport to see these two learned Iesuits wrangling together about the scituation of Paradise,Papist against Papist. as the Madianites wounding one another with their mutuall blowes. Yet out of this their conflict the truth doth appeare that Enoch and Elias is not in the earthly Paradise. And yet without all doubt they must be in Paradise, then in heauenly Paradise Which when all is done he confesseth they bee not in the ethereall, but aeriall heauen. Aeriall Doctour, who dreames that God will giue, but an aeriall happinesse to these his excellent Prophets. For whereas he thinkes it is a mat∣ter of religion for any to confesse, that heauen gates were open for any before Christ, and to the proofe ther∣of hath gathered, and bent all his forces, that most lear∣ned Byshoppe of Elie hath so weakened and disperst them, that he hath cleane vanquished the Sophister and driuen him out of the field. Enoch and Elias are mem∣bers of the sonne of man: the sonne did first ascend into hea∣uen by his owne power: Enoch and Elias being members of Christ haue ascended by the power of the sonne of man, so that Christ may bee rightly said to tread the way before
them both. Whence seeing it sufficiently appeares that Enoch and Elias doe now liue in heauen; I will de∣mand againe,The second Question. whether they entred heauen in their soules alone, or with their bodies also? For if onely in their soules, as certaine learned men doe thinke, they must twise rise againe, if it be true that Bellarmine saith, once to fight against Antichrist; the second time, to conuert the Iewes to Christ. If with their bodies also, which the greater sort, and better learned on both sides do conclude, that they may not deny the priuilege giuen to them for our comfort, I will not curiousty in∣quire whether they enioy the blessed vision of God, when I heare they be entred into the house of God, that is, the heauens, wherein Christ saith, that he hath many mansion places.Three exam∣ples of God his glory. Enoch. Elias. Christ. It contents me that God for the com∣forting of his Church vpon earth would haue three examples and shewes of his glorie to appeare; Enoch before the Law, Elias vnder the Law, Christ vnder the Gospell; that the two former by anothers, Christ by his owne power entred heauen in their bodies. Enoch for the comfort of married folkes, Elias for the com∣fort of Virgins, Christ for the comfort of either estate, who being borne of a Virgin that was espoused, did adorne both of them in his life, the Virgin by his example, the married by his miracle: but especially, that Enoch being famous for his integritie, Elias for his zeale, Christ for his perfection in all graces, might be openly knowne to haue their entrance into hea∣uen. Hence euery faithfull man may behold the foundation of his happinesse in Christ, the first fruits in Enoch and Elias, in him the working cause, in these a warrantable earnest of their resurrection and ascension into the highest heauen, with the highest ioy; and hence may we conclude against any Iewish heretike, that as there was an entrance into heauen to Enoch and Elias, to perfect their happinesse, so a returne to the earth is denied vnto them, onely Christ who ascended vp into
heauen, not for himselfe alone, but for them and vs, must come againe in the latter day, that hee may bring those that belong vnto him into heauen. Nor let any doubt but that Christ, by which power hee shall carrie those being changed in the twinkling of an eye into heauen, whom hee shall finde aliue at his comming on the earth, hath with that power changed Enoch and Elias in the very moment of their translation, and as∣sumption, that being made like to his glorious bodie, he shall as he hath made them, so also make vs fit for heauen. The third Que∣stion.Here I thirdly demand how Bellarmine can imagine their bodies to be mortall and corruptible, who haue so many ages enioyed in the heauens immortalitie and in∣corruption; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the king∣dome of heauen, and corruption cannot put on incorruption, as the Apostle teacheth,Bellarmine contradicteth the Scripture. whom the Cardinall doth contradict. Enoch was translated that hee should not see death, saith the Apostle; he shall returne that he may see death, saith the Cardinall. so Bellarmine alwaies beates against the rocke, so long till it be to be feared he will be beaten in peeces by the rocke. But if so be that Enoch and Elias doe liue in their bodies in the heauens which is Gods house, as the wiser Papists doe confesse to be agreeable to Scripture, it followeth that their bodies be incorruptible and immortall. The fourth Question.I demand therefore in the fourth place, how it can be, that they should be killed by Antichrist in the latter day? how they can so die that they be raised vp the third day? There is no shew of truth in the inuention, no probabilitie in the deuise. And yet these two inha∣bitants of heauenly Paradise, the possessors of immorta∣litie, as Hierom calls them; not that now they desire, but that they now enioy immortalitie, as Tertullian spea∣keth, the marke-men and first borne of our resurrection, as Epiphanius saith; the most ancient inhabitants of heauen, in whom the worth of grace hath changed the law of nature,
as Athanasius saith,Immortalitie not ouercome by death. euen these two this old doting Do∣ctor Bellarmine doth imagine shall returne againe vpon the earth, that they may dye by the hand of Antichrist. Mor∣talitie shall be drunke vp of life, but immortalitie shall not be drunke vp of death. For God will not giue that glory to Antichrist, that he triumph ouer the death of the Saints in heauen; for they be immortall. If they be heauenly and immortall, what businesse haue they vpon the earth to fight with Antichrist, whom Christ hath purposed by three meanes vtterly to destroy and abolish. 1. By the effectuall ministerie of his word.Three meanes whereby An∣tichrist is van∣quished. 2. By the powerfull forces of Kings. 3. By the glorious appearance of his last comming. But if we should grant them that they should come to fight with Antichrist, it would not follow for all that, that Antichrist were not yet come, which he so labours to proue; this only would follow, that Antichrist were not yet gone, which wee will easily grant. And is not this then a doubtie demonstration? The summe is this. Enoch and Elias are not yet returned out of Pa∣radise. Therefore Antichrist is not yet come. It is reported of Lycurgus,Lycurgus his deuise to make his common∣weale endure. that his cōmon weale might continue, that he faigned as though hee tooke a long iourney, and bound his citizens with an oath, that they should not alter the forme of the common weale setled by him till he returned. Lycurgus neuer meant to re∣turne, therefore hee hoped that his common weale should last for euer. That which Lycurgus did in a good mind, the Popish sort do with an ill intent, dissembling that many things must be endured for the continu∣ance of their Hierarchie, that thereby they may blinde the eyes of their credulous schollers, not to expect An∣tichrist as themselues haue fashioned him, till Enoch and Elias should returne out of Paradise. They know
for a certaine that they shall neuer returne out of Para∣dise, and therefore their Antichrist shall neuer come. CHAP. XXXII. The fourth Note concurring. ANd yet Bellarmine doth adde another signe that doth accompanie the comming of Antichrist, a most greeuous and notorious persecution, which shall take away the publike worship of God; which signe though in the true meaning it do most truly agree with the Pope of Rome,The Pope iustly challen∣ged for a per∣secutor. who hath publikely taken away the true, and pure worship of God, as much as lyeth in him, with his most greeuous and bitter persecution, yet this Romane Aduocate, with a cunning sleight of putting of, doth remoue the infamie of this fiery persecution from the Pope, that inflicts it, and layeth it vpon our Church which endures it; as Tacitus writes of Nero, who when he had set fire on the Citie, laid the fault vpon the Christians. It irkes me to stay any longer in wiping away this bloody demonstration, wherein hee doth so malitiously insult ouer our miseries, & as ano∣ther Fimbria scoffs at our Sauolaes,Fimbrias scoffs like Bellarmines whō Antichrist hath greeuously wounded, because they haue not receiued the beasts whole weapon into their bodies. What? whether is this a more feeble, or more cruell demon∣stration? To the proofe whereof I cannot tell whether he shew more malice or ignorance, in violent wrything of Scriptures after his wonted manner to serue his turne. I will vnloose those knots, and thinke it very necessarie, to defend the Scripture from his miserable corruption. When Antichrist shall come he shall raise the most greeuous and terrible persecution that euer was, such an one, wherein the publike worship of God shall vtterly cease. Therefore Antichrist is not yet come. As if he should say, there was a greeuous persecution, if a persecution vnder the Pope,
but not a most greeuous and notorious: that the per∣secution of the primitiue Church, was farre more grie∣uous, and more notorious, then that of ours, whereof we so iustly complaine, which hee termeth naught else but a chastisement. What is this else but cruelly to scoffe at our miseries, and scornefully to trample vpon our ashes? When the Pope hath consumed so many milli∣ons of innocent men with fire and sword, thus to miti∣gate the Popish persecution with a comparison of the Emperors persecutions? and to name it not a persecu∣tion but a chastisement? Which, if our Princes would reuenge, on Gods behalfe,Charles the 5. plagued Rome as the armie of Charles the fift, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Burbone, is said to haue taken Rome, while he washt away blood with blood, and gelded those Ietcherous Cardinalls, as Sadolett doth pitifully bemone the matter in his Epi∣stles: Bellarmine would leaue of with his sarcasmes to floute at our iust complaints, which his inhumanitie as well as their immanitie hath drawne from vs. But let vs returne to the argument. Hee confirmes the three parts of his proposition. First, that the persecution of Antichrist shall be the most greeuous of all others that euer were, he proueth it out of the 24. of Matthew, out of the words of Christ:Matth: 24. misalleaged. there shall be then great tribula∣tion, such as was not from the beginning, or shall be to the end. which place that it is not to be vnderstood of the perse∣cutiō of Antichrist, but of the calamities of the Iewes, both the context of the place, and the testimonie of Luke, doth most plainly conuince. And wee read out of the 20 of the Apocalyps, saith hee that Satan shall be then loosed, who was bound till that time. Which place is not to be referred to the comming of Anti∣christ, as is made plaine by that which goeth before, and followeth after.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the loosing and binding of Sathan. THe comming of Antichrist doth goe before the loosing of Sathan, who appeareth by the premisses, to be not onely borne and of some yeeres, but being of a ripe and setled age gouerned vnder the figure of the beast cap: 13. so furious that he slew them that refused to worship the image of the beast, his synagogue was described vnder the type of the whore, making the Princes of the earth drunke with the golden cup of her fornication, and her selfe made drunke with the blood of the Saints. I adde also out of the consequents: for the Angell, (by whom Satan is said to be bound for a thousand yeeres, after the end of those yeeres to be loo∣sed for a small time v: 2. & 3. of which small time there is mention made cap: 12.) reciteth that hee saw their soules, who were killed for the testimonie of Christ, be∣cause they would neither worship the image of the beast, nor take his marke vpon them, v: 4. & 5. But for the clearer vnderstanding of this obscure place, I must first speake of some few distinctions taken out of the Text, that thereby the vanitie of this demonstra∣tion may be laid open to euery mans view.The exposi∣tion of the place of the loosing and binding of Sa∣tan. Twise Satan is said to be bound, twise to be loosed: first bound by Christ, that he might not destroy the soule of any of the faithfull: but loosed to afflict the flesh. Bound for euer, that by his spirituall tricks hee might not ouerthrow the saluation of the Church: but loose for a time, that with bodily plagues he might exercise their patience. Here I distinguish the time, from which he was bound, from the time wherein hee was twise loosed. Once from the beheading of Iohn Baptist, to the Empire of Constantine: againe from the gouern∣ment of Constantine to the Empire of Ottoman the first,
and the Popedome of Boniface the 8. Hee was loosed from the death of the Baptist almost 300 yeeres, that he might rage in the Romane Emperours against the pri∣mitiue Church to the Empire of Constantine; when hee was bound againe with the Angells chaine for a 1000. yeeres v: 2. cap: 20. He was againe let loose that hee might rage for a litle while v: 3. as before almost three hundred yeeres in the Turkish Emperors, and the Rom: Bishops, from Ottoman the first, and from Boniface the 8; whereof, he without, this within, 1300 yeeres from the death of Christ, 1000 from the death of Constantine, began cruelly to rage against the Church, one in the East, the other in the West. There are who number the beginning of the 1000 yeeres from the yeere of Christ 73. wherein Ierusalem being defaced, Satan cap: 12. did endeuour to put out the Church dispersed among the Gentiles: the seede of the woman, which fled into the wildernes for a short time, that is, a time, times, and halfe a time: which space doth well answer 42 monthes, and 1260 daies, as the learned teach, which according to the supputation of Daniel, doe make two hundred ninetie and foure yeeres. In which time the Dragon, as is said, being angry with the wo∣man, did goe about to destroy the rest of the womans seed that remained. Now in the 20. chapter, where the same historie is thought to be continued, the Angell is said to haue bound Sathan with a chaine for a thousand yeeres, which was ended in the yeere 1703. at what time Satan is vnderstood to be loosed in Gregorie the 7.Gregor: 7. in whom Antichrist as a strong man began to striue against the Empire.Difference about the loo∣sing of Satan. But they seeme more rightly to interpret this place, who thinke that Satan bound for a thousand yeeres was let loose, at the riuer Euphrates in the outward enemie of the Church Ottoman, the first Emperor of the Turkes, and his posteritie the most bar∣barous enemies of the Christian name, in whom the prophecie of Gog and Magog is thought to be fulfilled.
Vnlesse they be rather to be beleeued, who vnderstand the place not of the Turke only, nor of the Pope only, but of them both; counting, as I said, the second loo∣sing of Satan, from the raigne of Constantine, wherein he was bound for a 1000 yeeres, to the raigne of Otto∣man, and the Popedome of Boniface, wherein hee was loosed after that bloody decree of the counsell of Late∣rane, about the burning of Gods seruants, termed by them Heretikes, which hath most cruelly deuoured and consumed many millions of innocent men tor∣mented with a lingring death, who referre the place to Antichrist only, doe shrewdly gale Bellarmines master, who referre it to the Turke only, doe take away Bellar∣mines demonstration. They that referre it to them both,Two staes erected for crueltie. when both performe the same, they erect two stages, one at Constantinople, thother at Rome, where∣in wee may see a blacke Diuell furiously raging in the one, and a white Diuell in the other. For whereas it is certaine, that the Saracens without, and Antichrist within, did bring many plagues vpon the Church with∣in the compasse of that 1000 yeeres, and did stirre vp many mischiefes, and many garboyles within the bow∣els of the Church, Satan being the leader, and the Pope the author: First I say that the inuasion of the outward enemies neither was so generall, nor so continuall; nor the persecution of the inward enemies, although it was raised vp often for the shew of religion, not so often for the cause of religion, as for a greedy humor to gouerne: that the Church might feele rather the outward peace to be intermitted, then quite omitted, and that Satans chaine did seeme rather to be somewhat slackned by the Angell, rather then altogether loosned. For Satan did rather nourish and increase Antichrist his darling and sweet heart with outward peace then warre: flattering the world rather then threatning it; bound rather then loose: so that in comparison of those continuall inuasions of Turkes, and the perpetuall persecutions
of Popes, wherwith the whole East and West Churches haue bin most miserably torne in pieces these 300 yeers The outward peace may seeme to bee giuen to the Church, as a breathing time for a thousand yeeres, but yet such as the Church may cry out with Esay, behold in peace my bitternesse is most bitter: for by those meanes whereby Sathan did grant an outward peace to the Church, by the same hee assayed to take away the in∣ward: being very carefull to yeeld to the Pope his gain∣full merchandize of soules, while hee solde sinnes,Sathan did more hurt bound then loose. as it were, by the drumme in the Temple at the highest rate; and did racke and gather together great treasures to his companion, compast him with pleasures and got him all authority, all which he could not haue effe∣cted without long peace. Sathan therfore was bound,☜ not that hee should not at all stirre against the Church, but that he might doe it more mildly, and for his owne good: that hee might seeme rather to play then rage in his chaine, and to play not the cut-throat, but the co∣zener; and might rather infect men then kill them, and might not massacre them with murthers, but deceiue them with lies, and shew himselfe more a Comedian then a Tragedian, and deceiue the world more with sweete baites, then mingle any sower, vnlesse it were when he went about to get his eldest sonne the Empire, then he is sayd to play the Tragicomedian. So Sathan being bound did doe more good to Antichrist, then if he had beene loose: yea, rather he lost that being loose, that hee got being bound. For whom Antichrist long held blinded with superstition, and deceiued with the enticements of peace, those he did after so stir vp, worne out with warres, and discontented with persecutions, that they at last rebelled against him, and did very va∣liantly defend the oppressed cause of the Gospell. Now that I haue shortly expounded the place of Sathans loosing, let vs returne to Bellarmines argument, who prooues out of this place, that the most greeuous perse∣cution
that euer was, shall be vnder Antichrist, which if it touch the Turke onely, it taketh away the foundati∣on of Bellarmines demonstration, if it presse the Pope, the argument is brought vpon the authors head. For the most greeuous persecution whereof he speaketh, is come already. And therefore Antichrist is come. Adde that this comes neerer the Pope then hee is aware. For The inward most greeuous persecuter of the Church is Antichrist. The Pope is the most greeuous inward persecuter of the Church. The Pope therefore is Antichrist. But Antichrists persecution must be most notorious (saith he) The Popes persecution is not most notorious: why so? be∣cause all the wicked would oppugne the Church with open warre, and not onely infidels and knowen sinners, but hypo∣crites, and false brethren would ioyne themselues to the Pope, and laying themselues open, would openly inuade the Church. For such persecution becommeth Antichrist, the Pope it becommeth not. And why? because there bee so many hypocrites and false brethren in the Church, hee mea∣neth the Romane. I grant it, it is a defence full of truth. The Pope that great hypocrite,The Pope that great hypocrite. must needes beget sons like himselfe, arrant hypocrites and dissemblers. But I feare I may not grant him that, where hee saith, that hypocrites and syncere Christians, whom as chaffe and wheat, Christ saith, are not to bee diuided before the day of his comming, Bellarmine affirmes that they are to be separated before the comming of Antichrist. Hence thus I dispute. When all hypocrites shall be made knowen, An∣tichrist shall come. When Christ commeth all hypocrites shall bee made knowen. Therfore when Christ commeth, Antichrist shall come. Therefore Antichrist shall bee not a beast of three
yeere olde, but a beast of a day olde: vnlesse he thinke that Antichrist shall come after the comming of Christ, and the end of the world: for that which hee addes in the end, that there shall bee such a persecution vnder Antichrist, that all the publike ceremonies and sacrifi∣ces of religion shall cease, is a meere dotage. He whol∣ly forgets what is set downe by the Apostle, that Anti∣christ shall be a notable hypocrite, not an outward, but an homebred enemy, who with fained holinesse and sanctity, shall entice and deceiue simple people, as Acosta, Ʋiega, Pererius, Ribera, foure principall Iesuits doe plainely set downe: and by this meanes doe great∣ly weaken Bellarmines idle demonstration. Which let vs waigh if you please. The publike worship of God, and the daily sacrifice of Christians vnder the persecution of Antichrist, shall cease at that time when Antichrist shall come. The worship of God, and the sacrifice of Christians is not ceast. Therefore as yet Antichrist is not come. Hee prooues his poposition out of the 12.Dan. 12.5.11. of Daniel vers. 11. from that time, when the dayly sacrifice shall be taken away, are 1290. daies: where Daniel,Bellarmine a∣gainst Daniel. if wee credit Bellarmine, speaks of Antichrist, Daniel himselfe gaine-saying it, who expounds himselfe. chap. 8. v. 11. & chap. 11. vers. 13. directly affirming, that the daily worship of God shall bee taken away by Antiochus Epi∣phanes and his army, speaking not of the daily sacrifices of Christians, but of the daily sacrifices of the Iewes. The manner of the Iewes was to offer sacrifice to God morning and euening, which they called , which sacrifice was taken away by Antiochus, as Iosephus and the author of the first booke of Macchabees, and Chrysostome plainely witnesse. And to Daniel deman∣ding when the end of these euils shall be, God answers, from that time, When the daily sacrifice shall bee taken a∣way, and the abomination of desolation set vp, whereof hee
spake chap. 11. vers. 31. that there should bee 1290 dayes to the restoring thereof, and the deliuerance of the Iewes from Antiochus tyranny. Of this restoring and deliuerance I shewed out of Daniel,Diuers de∣grees of deli¦uerance. that there were diuers degrees noted by Daniel, at diuers times. For from the hinderance of the worship of God, to the first restoring of the same by Iudas Macchabeus, the Pro∣phet saith, there were three yeeeres and tenne dayes: which space chap. 7. vers. 25. hee called a time, times, and a peece of time. To the victory of Iudas Maccha∣beus, when hee draue Antiochus forces out of Iury, and so did establish the first restitution, Daniel saith, there was three yeeres and an halfe, which space chap. 12. v. 7. he calleth a time, times, and halfe a time. To the time, wherein Antiochus strucken by the hand of God, pro∣mised he would restore the Iewish religion, hee vnder∣stands there were 1290.Bellarmine mi∣staken in ta∣king away the daily sacrifice. dayes to the time of his death 1335. in all which numbers the prophesies of Daniel, and histories of Iosephus, and the Macchabees doe very well agree. I maruell the more that Bellarmine was so blinde in the prophesie, and so ignorant in the history, that he dreameth that the publike worship of God, and sacrifice of the Iewes, taken away by the most greeuous persecution of Antiochus within three yeere and a halfe, should bee the like publike worship of God, and sacri∣fice of the Christians, taken away by the persecution of Antichrist, three yeeres and a hafe before the end of the world. Hee confirmes the assumption by experi∣ence, which doth testifie that the publike worship of God was neuer taken away by the Pope, & that the sacri∣fice of the Christians neuer ceased. He means the masse, and other publique voluntary worships of the degene∣rated Church of Rome, which the Creede shall make plaine to be neither worship of God, nor the sacrifice of Christians. So the proposition is fetcht out of the Scrip¦ture misunderstood, the assumption is the begging of the thing in question. And is not this a worthy demon∣stration?
CHAP. XL. Of the 5. note of the continuance of An∣tichrists kingdome. Now to the 2. last signes follow∣ing. 1. The continuance of the king∣dome of Antichrist 3. yeares and a halfe. 2. The dissolution or end of the world fiue and fortie daies after. And doe not these make as doughtie a demonstrati∣on as the former?An impossi∣bilitie. The kingdome of Antichrist must last iust three yeares and a halfe. All which time is not sufficient for the gathering of the Iewes together disper∣sed ouer the face of the whole earth: much lesse for the building againe of the temple, which is so defaced and raced, that not one stone is left vpon another.2. Chr. 2.2. The 2. buil∣dings of the temple descri∣bed. The first building whereof, in great peace, in great prouision of all necessaries, by the most exquisite workmen, the number of whom the scripture sets downe to be a hun∣dred and fiftie thousand could not be perfected in lesse then 7. yeares by Salomon. But the second reedifying of it being oft hindred by the incursion of a neere ene∣mie, and their own frights, that often the worke was in∣terrupted, the high wales and the stately roofe vnco∣uered, and was not finished vnder 46. yeares.Ioh. 2. And yet Bellarmine allots but three yeares and a halfe to so great a worke. He doth to good purpose imagine Antichrist to be an Enchanter, who can call foorth spirits out of hell, and send them as Messengers,Note being carried on the wings of the winde to gather the Iewes with all speede, out of all the coasts of the world, and after may hire Marlines workmen to carry stones, and lay them artifi∣cially in the worke. But that he should in the same three yeares and a halfe bring into captiuitie all Christians,
subdue 10. Kings, get the Monarchie of the world, is a tale so incredible that Turkes may laugh at, and Chri∣stians abhorre. Let him write this to his fooles, whom he teacheth that faith is not in the vnderstanding, but in a blinde assent, that they must receiue without search and enquirie, whatsoeuer is offered to them, be it neuer so incredible, so it be in the name of the Church. And marke at last what this Magitian hath brought to passe. He hath brought in Bellarmine dancing in a circle. For thus he makes him dispute for him. Antichrist shall precisely raigne three yeares and a halfe. The Pope spiritually hath raigned in the Church 1500. yeares, neither hath any other beene taken for Antichrist which did raigne iust three yeares and a halfe. The Pope therefore is not Antichrist. And therefore Antichrist is not yet come. The syllogisme may be thus resolued. If neither the Pope nor any other raigned precisely so long, then Antichrist is not yet come. The antecedent is true. Therefore the consequent. Heere you see Bellarmine to bring the chiefe questi∣on in a round to prooue that which is in controuersie.Bellarmine dancing in a round. Antichrist is not yet come, why so? Because the Pope is not Antichrist. The Pope is not Antichrist, why so? Be∣cause Antichrist is not yet come. Behold the Cardinall dancing in a round. He goes about to strengthen his proposition out of Daniel, and Iohn mis-vnderstood, to wit, that Antichrist shall raigne iust three yeares and a halfe. I haue euicted out of Daniel 7. v. 25. that a time times and a peecs of time, i. three yeares and ten daies was that space wherein the prophanation of the temple and the hinderance of Gods worshippe was first committed by Antiochus as Iosephus the best interpre∣ter of the prophecie hath numbred. Archimedes him∣selfe could not haue set it downe better. So much time
past from the prophanation of the temple to the pur∣ging and reforming of the same made by Iudas Macha∣beus. From that purging to the expulsion of the armie out of Iurie there are counted a time times, and halfe a time Dan. 12. in which two numbers the 1300. daies mentioned chap. 8. vers. 14. are contained, when as that reformation well beganne, was better established and setled, from which time if you accoumpt to the sicknes of Antiochus there arise 1290. dayes chap. 12. 11. if to the death of Antiochus they amount in the Pro∣phets account to 1334. chap. 12. 12.Bellarmines absurdities. Now I pray let vs apply this notable demonstration of Bellarmine about the continuance of Antichrists raigne, and we shall per∣ceiue, not onely how he agreeth with the Prophet, but also with himselfe. First those things that are to bee vn∣derstood literally and properly of the tyrannie of Anti∣ochus, who died so many ages before Antichrist, hee takes it literally and properly for the Kingdome of An∣tichrist, who shall raigne by his owne record in the end of the world. But he alleageth alwaies Ierome who refers that place chap: 8. of the daies 2300. to Antichrist, which make sixe yeares and more. How therefore doe they say that Antichrist shall rule 1260. daies which makes three yeares and a halfe? 1300. daies and 1260. daies how doe they agree? now whereas out of the 12. Chap: they exactly define that Antichrists Kingdome shall endure a time, times and a halfe time, let them tell me how they can reconcile therewith 1260. daies: wherein they say the Kingdome of Antichrist in Da∣niels iudgement must bee contained? how can 1260. daies agree precisely with a 1290? They must deuise a new Arithmeticke and a new Logicke to make these numbers agree. For whereas Bellarmine doth adde, That Daniel after hee had said chap: 12. that Antichrists Kingdome should endure 1290. daies, hee addes presently that he is happie that doth expect and abide to those 1335. daies that is to the 45. daies to the death of Antichrist as he
expoundes, because Christ as hee thinkes shall then come to iudgement,Daniel vtterly mistaken. this is the dotage of a crackt braine, as shall afterward be made as cleare as the light. For the iudge∣ment which Daniel mentions, is not the last iudgement of the world, but the temporall iudgement that shall consume that beastly Antiochus speaking so proudly,Dan 7.11. whenas yet there is leaue granted to the other beast to continue after for a time and times.The sixt and last signe. But Bellarmine doth dreame that the end of the world shall be 45. daies after. That we may come at last to consider of his sixt and last signe; Bellarmine will seeme to be of Gods secret coun∣sell,Bellarmine wi∣ser then Christ and against Christ. who knoweth more then either the Angells or the sonne of man: but that he will not acquaint vs with the day and houre, but with the yeare wherein the world shall haue an end. Yet he lately writes that 45. daies af∣ter the Scripture saith that the day of iudgement shall be put off and longer. Therfore those daies that Christ promiseth shall be shortned for the elects sake, Bellar∣mine that worthy Diuine saith shall be lengthned. And those daies which Christ saith shall bee contracted for the comfort of the elect, those hee saith shall be protrac∣ted for their torment. Fie vpon such paltrie Diuines, that doe shut vp those fountaines of comfort that Christ openeth for the good of his Children. What greater comfort can possibly bee then the promise of Christ, hat the day of iudgement shall be hastned for the deli∣uerance of Gods elect? And yet this worldly Cardi∣nal tels vs that it shal be put off for their affliction. They shall be ignorant saith he that liue after the 45. whether that day shall be deferred any longer. Hee knowes it is well with him in this world and liues in all delight and delicacie with that his latiall Iupiter the Pope,☞ but whe∣ther it will be so well with him in another world that he knoweth not. And therefore he thinkes of the prolon∣ging of this present world. I thinke verily that if God would inuite him presently to his heauenly banquet, he would craue, as old as he is, some more daies; it may
be some more yeare, wherein he may pamper and che∣rish his olde carcase,Mart. lib. 9. and would secretly answere with that prophane Martiall, Seeke others for to feast with Iupiter aboue, I heare vpon the earth my Iupiter will loue. Heere they place their heauen: they put farre from them that day of iudgement, wherein they are to giue accompt of so many impieties against Christ, and so many out-rages against Christian Kinges and people. But let vs come to his argument, wherewith he proou∣eth that we are not to expect Antichrist before his de∣parture, nor before the end of the world to looke for his comming. Thus he argueth. The end of the world is not yet come. Therefore Antichrist is not yet come. This shall bee their euerlasting argument while the world endureth, thus will they argue for Antichrist: this because Bellarmine thought to be very absurd, hee doth alter the question and concludes thus. That it shall not be long before Antichrist come. For If it were long before Antichrist came, the end of the world would be long hence. But the consequence is false. Therfore the antecedent He proues his proposition out of the Apostle. That Antichrist shall come a little before the end of the world, and immediately before the second comming of Christ, and then that ioyly fellow shall appeare, whom the Lord Iesus shal consume, with the spirit of his mouth, and the brightnesse of his comming. But the Apostle doth distinguish betweene the comming and the destruction of Antichrist, betweene the substance of Antichrist and his appearance or reuelation: be∣tweene which and his destruction there is a great di∣stance. He lay close hidden in the daies of Saint Iohn & Saint Paul, as I haue said before; he was therefore. He did appeare after the remouing of the Empire, for that did hinder that he might not appeare: which happened
not till many ages after. Againe the Apostle distin∣guisheth betweene the consuming of Antichrist, and his finall ouerthrow. After he is reuealed, he saith hee shall wast away by little and little with the spirit of the Lordes mouth, but shall bee vtterly put out by the brightnesse of his comming.Bellarmine a prophane Iester. Heere let me a little touch Bellarmines prophane iesting. Surely saith he the spirit of Christ must be very weake, if it cannot dispatch An¦tichrist raging aboue a 1000. yeares. And there it plea∣seth him to distinguish betweene the word of God, and his power. As though there is not power in the word of God to weaken, and breake Antichrist in peeces, the force whereof the beast shall feele in his fall and destru∣ction. Now the thing is a working, now Christ doth enfeeble Antichrist with his word, afterward hee shall destroy him with his presence. Hee shall kill him by weakening him, that I may put off the Cardinals ridi∣culous distinction, who doth thus distinguish, Hee doth not say he shall weaken him but hee shall kill him. And it pleaseth him to scoffe at vs when wee say that now Anti∣christ shall be ouerthrowne by the word of the Lord,☞ when as now the word of the Lord shall be ouerthrown by him. May not a Christian, and an old man, and a Diuine blush for shame, (as for a Cardinall nothing will make him blush) to sport and iest in a matter so weighty and serious? As God himselfe so Gods word is eternall, his Ministers Gods witnesses Antichrist could kill, the word it selfe he could neuer kill, which shall abide when he rots to nothing. Yea truely as the word of God is a liuing word so the Ministers of the word Gods faithfull witnesses being slaine, shall by the power of the word rise againe, if not in their seuerall persons, yet in a suc∣cession, and kill this murthering Antichrist. Christ therefore hath not a weake spirit, but the Cardinall hath a weake braine, who doth not as yet vnderstand, the de∣grees and meanes which Christ vseth in the abolishing of Antichrist. But he tells vs Saint Iohn saith that Anti∣christ
shall come in the last houre:What is ment by the last houre. But he vnderstandeth the last houre to be all that time from the ascension of Christ to his second comming, which God doth call an houre, very short in respect of the Saints glory, but very long in respect of their patience. This testimonie I thus retort. When that Antichrist commeth it shall be the last houre, saith Iohn. But Antichrists are now come (meaning the whole bodie together with Antichrist that head, which elsewhere he affirmeth is come) Therefore now is the last houre. And if then was the houre of the comming of Anti∣christ, he is not to be destroyed three yeeres and a halfe before the end of the world. CHAP. XLI. Of the sixt and last Note. BVt he proues it out of Daniel,Cap: 12.12. that after Antichrist hath raigned three yeeres and a halfe, hee shall be destroyed 45 dayes before the day of iudgement. For when he had continued 1290 dayes, he addes, happy is he that shall liue to see 1335 dayes.Daniel mista∣ken. This place is pro∣perly to be vnderstood of Antiochus, of his death, and of the deliuerance of the Iewes. But grant that the place be to be vnderstood of the kingdome of Anti∣christ, and the end of the world: then it would follow,Three absur∣dities. first, that the kingdome of Antichrist lasted not 1260 daies, which make three yeeres and a halfe, but 1290. Againe, it followes that Antichrist is to be destroyed 45 dayes before the end of the world, whom the Apo∣stle saith must be destroyed at the comming of Christ. Thirdly, it would follow, that the time of Christs com∣ming should be knowne to men, which Christ doth as∣sure vs is vnknowne vnto Angells. If these consequen∣ces
be absurd, then the Antecedent is absurd, from whence they arise. You haue, Paul the fift, Bellarmines six demonstrati∣ons making small proofe that Antichrist is not yet come. Now seeing I haue dilated about Antichrist all the questions, whether he be, what he is, of what kinde, what is his kingdome and retinue, what hee doth and wherein he is busied, the name wherewith he is termed, the marke wherewith he is branded,What Anti∣christ is. the seate wherein he ruleth, the time wherein he is reuealed, and withall what he is not: It is not requisite that I tell you in many words who it is, when you your selfe seeme to haue An∣tichrist wholy in your breast, and to carrie him in your bosome.Antichrists sufferings. You haue heard what hee hath done, now heare what hee shall suffer. For wee are so farre from doubting of his comming, that wee thinke of his de∣stroying foretold of the Angells in Iohn.Apoc. 14.7. The first An∣gell. I saw saith he an Angell flying in the middest of heauen, hauing the eternall Gospell to preach vnto them, that are vpon the earth, and to euery nation, tribe, tongue, and people, speaking with a loude voice, Feare the Lord, and giue ho∣nor to him, because the time of his iudgment is at hand, and worship him, who made heauen and earth, the sea and all that are therein. This Sermon of the Angell, what is it else, but a briefe summe of all those Sermons which Luther and Caluin,The Angell and the Prote∣stants prch alike. and other Preachers of the Gospell preached in all the coasts of the Christian world, that they might bring the people to the faith of Christ, the feare of God, and the worship of him alone? He onely that made heauen and earth is to be wor∣shipped, he only is to be serued. God only made heauen and earth. Therefore we must worship and serue God only. This syllogisme of the Angell, as a Ramme is aduanc't by our men, to batter, ouerthrow, and expell out of the consciences of men all those forces of Idolls, which Antichrist hath erected.
And there followed another Angell, saying,The second Angell. Apoc: 14.8. Babylon is fallen, Babylon that great Citie is fallen, because she hath made all nations drunke with the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Here the spirituall fall of Babylon, not the materiall is to be vnderstood; which being weakned, and shaken by the preaching of the word, while as yet the walls were standing, fell in mens mindes, and was wholy cast downe. For who is there, but of small vn∣derstanding, to whom the iniquitie of the Church, and Court of Rome doth not appeare? to whom their im∣pietie is not euident? to whom shee seemes not to be the mother of fornication, the receptacle of spoiles, the queene of pride, the shop of sinnes, and the sinke of all filthinesse?In what ac∣compt the Pope was heretofore. A hundred and threescore yeeres since one that was no Heretike, as a Lutherane is ter∣med, but a Roman-Catholike, writ thus of the Pope, as it is recited in the catalogue of the witnesses of truth. Iupiter is below. In heauen is Plutoes place. Ʋpon a brutish animal Bestowed is all grace. It is as Iewells in the mire And durt vpon the face. And if he were so hatefull, when the darknes did couer his filthinesse, how much more hatefull doth he seeme to all since the light of the Gospell hath laid him open and naked to the view of all men? The third Angell followed them,The third An∣gell. Apo: 14.10.11 crying with a loud voice, If any shall adore the beast, and her image, and beare her marke in his forehead, or in his hand, he shall drinke of the wine of his wrath, which is mingled with wine in the cup of his wrath: And he shall be tormented with fire and brimestone in the sight of the Angells, and before the face of the Lambe, and the smoke of their torment doth ascend vp for euer. This Angell doth threaten eternall destru∣ction not onely to Rome and the beast, but to all that loue Rome, or adore the beast, whether they carrie the
marke of the beast either openly in their forhead, or closely in their hand.An exhorta∣tion to Mini∣sters. Here I admonish euery man of God, euery messenger of God, my selfe being the least, and last of all Christs seruants, that they seeke not after ease to make them idle, or after wealth to make them couetous, or after pleasures to make them luxurious, or after preferment to make them proud: but that they haue a continuall care to recouer soules fallen to the beast, or preserue them that stand vpright; to whom being stampt with the marke of the beast, the Angell of God doth denounce so greeuous and endlesse tor∣ments. There is no doubt but as soone as any of you doe earnestly vndertake this businesse of God and Christ, but he shall endure many wrongs, not onely from outward enemies, but which is more greeuous from false brethren, those following the quarrell of An∣tichrist, these couering their owne with the name of Christ, so that they can looke for nothing from these but molestation and trouble, from those nothing but death and destruction. But let him for his comfort heare that voice, which Iohn heard from heauen: write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, so saith the Spi∣rit, that they rest from their labours, and their works follow them. And if those dead be blessed that liue and die in the Lord .i. in the faith of the Lord: how much more happy be they that liue and die for the Lord .i. for the faiih of the Lord? We haue three witnesses testifying this happinesse Three witnes∣ses of happi∣nesse.1. The voice from heauen. 2. The Scripture in the Church. 3. The spirit in the consciences. all testifying that the sense of our miserie is short, but the sense of our happinesse euerlasting; that the life weakned by sicknesse, is necessarily to be laid downe, and that it is not greatly materiall, whether a man die vnder a canopie, or in a campe, so he die in Christ, and for Christ; that a momentanie life is here granted to vs, but that the reward of a life well spent is immortall.
And whereas it is appointed that all shall die, Gods seruants may rather wish that their life, which must ne∣cessarily be ended, be rather spent in a holy cause, then reserued for a naturall end: especially against seducing, and bloody Antichrist, and all his adherents, who now if euer are most wrung and grumble, threatning fire and sword to the Saints of God. The wicked there∣fore when they fall, shall be most greeuously punished in hell, for all their impieties, and abominations, but these that are washed and redeemed with the blood of Christ, shall presently from their death in great triumph enioy a place, and rest in heauen.The sixt An∣gell. Apoc: 16.12. For after in the sixt Viol, which the sixt Angell powreth out into that great riuer Euphrates, there is mention of a great battaile, to which those 3. vncleane spirits cōming in the likenes of frogs out of the mouth of the Dragō, out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, doe summon the Kings of the earth against the great day of the Almightie God, who shall gather them toge∣ther into a place that in Hebrew is called Armageddon. In which words the malice of Satan, and of Antichrist, and the Antichristian Synagogue is plainly set downe, as likewise of the Iesuites, those frogs, who croking out of their caues, prouoke the Kings of the earth to warre against Christ, and the Church, but with what successe the place and day doth declare. That is the day where∣in the right hand of Almightie God shall be great and glorious by the fall of Antichrist.The place where the Po∣pish frogs shall be de∣stroyed, The place is called in Hebrew, the hill of theeues and robbers, as Aquinas: or a cursed armie prepared to battaile; or an armie of de∣struction, which shall both bring destruction and endure it. Vnlesse that be better, as diuers read Charmagaddon, that is, a troupe appointed to the slaughter; or Gnarmaged∣don, which signifies a craftie kinde of killing; so that the sense is, that Princes are to be brought into that place, by the cunning sleight of Satan, and Antichrist, where they may vtterly perish. Although another farre other¦wise,
and farre better doe take it not for a noune appel∣latiue, but proper, Megiddo it was a hilly city in the land of Canaan, and because Har in Hebrew is a hill, and that was scituated vpon an hill, it was called Har∣mageddon. That place was renowned for the slaughter of the Canaanites where, where Iabin and Sisera fighting against the people of God, were daunted and vanqui∣shed vnder the gouernment of Deborah, for whom the starres were sayd to fight in their courses: as the windes and seas did fight for our Elizabeth of blessed memorie, against the Spanish inuincible Armado, to whom that distichon of Claudian doth fitly agree. O much belou'd of God, for whom the seas doe fight, And winds conspire to blow, to put the foe to flight. The seuenth Angell.Therefore Harmageddon was the place of this battell that the enemies of the Church with Iabin and Sisera, gathered together by God, might expect the like de∣struction.Apoc. 16. 17. &c. This the seuenth Angell which powred out his viall into the aire, doth notably set out. There went a great voyce from heauen out of the throne saying, It is finished. And there were made lightnings, and sounds, and thunders, and a mighty earth-quake, such an one as was not since men inhabited the earth: And the great city was di∣uided into three parts, and the cities of the Heathen fell, and great Babylon came into remembrance with God, to giue vn∣to it the cup of the indignation of his wrath. And euery Iland did flie away, and the hils were not found, and a great haile like talents fell downe from heauen vpon men, and men did blaspheme God for that great plague of haile. What maruell if when the Creator is offended, all the creatures be likewise offended? for as then the stars abiding in their order & course, did fight from heauen against Sisera for Deborrah; so now the lightnings and thunders, and wonderfull earth-quakes, and the migh∣ty talentary haile shall, when God is angry, fight for his Church against great Babylon. And as then the victo∣ry at the waters of Megiddo, so these now shall not bee
attributed to the force of men, but the powers of hea∣uen. So likewise in the 20 of Iohn, when Sathan shall be loosed after a thousand yeeres, by whom Gog and Magog shall bee mustered to battell, the tents of the Saints, and the beloued city shall bee besieged, but hee addeth, that fire shall issue out of heauen from God, which shall consume the enemies. In which place Iohn doth not vnderstand those enemies, whom Ezechiel describeth, the Seleucidae inhabitants of Syria and Asia the lesse. For Gog doth signifie Asia the lesse, deriuing the name from Giges their king, Magog is Hierapolis the chiefe seat of Idolatry in Syria, builded by the Scy∣thians, & by them so called. So that in Ezechiel, Gog is taken for Asia the lesse, and Magog for Syria: now be∣cause the Seleucidae were the most outragious & cruell enemies of the Iewes, by whom after their captiuity, and before the comming of the Messias, they were to endure most greeuons afflictions; therefore by a vsuall prouerbe among the Iewes, the cruell enemies of the Church are called Gog and Magog,The enemies of God called Gog & Magog. And why. which Iohn did ap∣ply to the setting out of the enemies of the Christian Church, whom Sathan in the latter dayes, vnder the conduct of Antichrist, should stirre vp to warre against the Saints. Not therefore the same, whom Ezechiel describes; but the like, called Gog and Magog, consu∣med and deuoured by fire sent from God out of hea∣uen, that the conquest being got not by earthly, but by heauenly powers might take away courage from the Antichristians, and encrease it in the Saints. In the meane time one of the seuen Angels chap. 17. had conference with Iohn, saying, Come and I will shew thee the condemnation of the great whore which sits vpon many waters, that is, people, nations and tongues, with whom the Kings of the earth haue committed fornication, and the peo∣ple haue beene drunke with the wine of her fornication, who after they haue a long time fought on the beasts side a against the Lambe, at last being conquered by the
Lambe, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, shall ioyne their forces against the Beast,The order in destroying of Antichrist. and shall de∣uoure and consume by fire the Babylonish whore, left naked & forsaken of all men. And marke in what order  the victory shall proceede. First, Antichrist is consu∣med with the spirit of the Lords mouth, that is, with the ministery of the word, but with the brightnesse of the Lords comming is cleane abolished. So saith Paul, so Iohn. After the preaching of the eternall Gospell, by  the second Angell, followeth the spirituall fall of Baby∣lon, denounced by the third Angell, chap. 14. Baby∣lon is falne. Afterwards Gods decree of Antichrists ruine, being published by the seuenth Angell, his de∣struction followes, shewed by one of the seuen Angels,  and the outward ouerthrow of Babylon procured by Princes. That prophesie is fulfilled, this is to bee ful∣filled: let that which is fulfilled win credit to that must  be fulfilled: There followeth at the last, the last con∣demnation and euerlasting destruction of the whore, chap. 18. proclaimed from heauen by another Angell, Babylon that great city is falne, is falne, Antichrists Metropolitane seat is now become a dwelling place for Diuels,An exhorta∣tion to come out of Baby∣lon. and a cage for euery vncleane spirit, and euery vncleane bird. There is ioyned by him an heauenly admonition, to them who as yet abide in Babylon. Come out of her my people, lest as you bee partakers of her sinnes, you likewise be partakers of her plagues. Heere the Angell speaketh to all Papists, cheefely to them that be simple and ingenuous that they be careful of their saluation: if the words of God cannot mooue them, let his deedes moue them: if they will not hear∣ken to men, let them hearken to Angels: if they feare not temporall punishments, let them feare eternall: let them come out of Babylon with all speede: lest as they be found partners of her sinnes, they be found partners likewise of her plagues: which the Angell doth describe very liuely in the verses following. While at the last,
the last Angell being of great strength tooke vp a stone,  as it were a mill stone, and cast it into the sea, saying, with such force shall Babylon that great city bee cast, and shall neuer be found againe. Where the most bit∣ter lamentations of her louers, and the exceeding ioy and triumph of the Saints is described. In which bat∣tell, whereof the Angels prophesie, there is no cause,Comforts for Gods chil∣dren in re∣spect of the Captaines. why the Antichristians should lift vp their mindes, or Christians deceiue theirs. For if wee looke vpon the captaines of either side, on that side the Lambe, on this Antichrist; on that side the inuincible lion, on this a silly beast shal fight. If we look vpon the subsidiary souldiers on that side,Souldiers. most valiant Princes conuerted by Christ shall fight, on this side with old doating Priests forsaken by Christ. If we look for souldiers from heauen, we shal haue the Angels fellow-souldiers in this battell, whom we had fellow-witnesses of the Gospell. So heauenly bands shall fight with earthly forces. If we look for the authors of this war, God on this side shal fight with the Diuell,Authors. powre and eternity with weaknesse and rotten∣nesse. If we looke to the causes of this warre, the truth and the pure worship of that one euerliuing God,Causes. writ∣ten religion, sound faith, heauenly magnanimity shall fight with deceipt, with idolatry, with superstition, with perfidiousnesse and feare. And if God doe suffer some of his souldiers to fall in the quarrell, that they may rise againe and come to him, will hee suffer his cause to be lost, will he suffer his truth and power to be ouercome by errour and wickednesse? Assuredly hee will neuer suffer it. The Christians therefore haue no cause to feare, the Pope hath no cause to insult. For the Pope alone hath all the markes of Anti∣christ. The Pope alone therefore is Antichrist.
CHAP. XLII. The scope and conclusion of the whole worke. I Haue finished the Glasse, Paul the fift, set before you to see your selfe, before others to look on themselues, wherein Antichrist is fully set downe as in preface. Heere you may see contained his right and true marks, the false being reiected and cast by. Euery of them in seuerall, and all of them ioyntly together doe prooue the Pope to be that great Antichrist. Hence it follow∣eth that Popery is Antichristianity. What hee is, and who he is, appeares out of the preface. What he doth and what he teacheth, out of the Dialogue diuided into three bookes. First comes vpon the stage Antichrist pragmaticall. In the two other bookes Antichrist dog∣maticall. There he carries himselfe like a Rebell, heere like a Sophister: there he doth impaire the glory of the Empire, heere the truth of the Gospell, there hee doth vndermine the faithfulnesse of subiects, heere the faith of Christians. The first booke doth propound the rules and grounds of Christian fealty and obedience toward Kings against Christian rebellion, shadowed o∣uer with a shew of Catholike religion. The other two doe erect the foundation and pillers of Christian do∣ctrine and faith, against the Antichristian heresie, compacted of twelue new articles of the faith, brought into the forme of a creede by Pius the fourth, whereup∣on I call it the Popes creede. I doe solemnely professe that I am afaithfull seruant of Christ and the King. I doe not take vpon me, being the meanest and the least of all other, to giue warning vnto Kings, once already warned by the great King, not therefore to bee warned of any, but of Christ the King of Kings Let Iesus Christ therefore bee in our thoughts a while, who al∣though he be absent in body, yet present in spirit, hath
an interest, and being, yea and a gouernment also in the spirits of all Christians, and chriefly of all Princes, his bountie is to be loued, his maiesty is to be dreaded euen of Kings: for as the powerfull gouernment of Kings is to be dreadfull to their owne subiects, so the most powerfull gouernment of God is to bee dreadfull to Kings; of God I say manifested in the flesh, who be∣ing present with them in spirit, seemeth thus to speake, and complaine. CHAP. XLIII. THE PROSOPOPEY. I AM not ignorant, who am ignorant of nothing (ô yee Christian Kings and Princes) that the Byshop of Rome, my Vicare, as he calles himselfe, my Aduersarie,The Pope both an here∣ticke and tray∣tor. as he carries himselfe, hath beene a Teacher of heresie in the Church, and a Practiser of treason in the com∣mon-weale for these many yeares. For euer since hee was made the vniuersall Byshop, he hath done nothing else, but corrupted my Gospell, and peruerted your Empire. And no maruell, for out of the corruption of the Gospell, doth follow the dissolution of the Empire. For whereas I haue erected by the Gospell a twofould pillar of gouernment, Authoritie in Magistrates, and Allegeance in Subiects; it is strange to see the Gospell peruerted in the mindes of men, how each pillar of gouernment falles to the grounds. The greatest fault whereof is in the Byshops treacherie, and in your sloth∣fulnesse, that whereas I had submitted all Byshops vn∣der your power and iudgement, you haue suffered one to fly out so farre aboue the rest, that he dare not onely rebell against yours, but against my Maiestie also. That therefore the ancient dignitie of the Empire, may be recouered being lost, and for euer maintained being recouered; my counsell to you is, that the truth of the
Gospell, shaken and long weakened, by the Popes ty∣rannie, may at last be restored by your princely autho∣ritie. For what is more reasonable, then that I should haue you defenders of my glory, whom I haue appoin∣ted Ministers of my power? And if it were in questi∣on heretofore, whether that Byshoppe, were that Anti∣christ; He is so prophetically described by my beloued Disciples Iohn and Paul, that now it is out of question, seeing that euent hath laid open and made cleare the prophecie. For all the partes of the prophecie are so plainely interpreted,All notes of Antichrist a∣gree with the Pope. of the succession of the persons, the nature and disposition of the King, and kingdome, the acts of the beast, the impression of the Character, the number of his name, the scituation of his seate, the time of his reuealing, the cuppe of the whore, the kind of his marchandise, the fall of Babylon, lastly the com∣ming in, and going out, the birth, and death of Anti∣christ, the last answering the first, and the middle an∣swering both, with such a consent and barmonie, in∣ferring things to be fulfilled, by things that are fulfilled, that I could not haue made it clearer, if I had named the Byshop of Rome himselfe. And Antichristianity is well defined by my Apostle, to be not iniquitie, but the mysterie of iniquitie. For if Antichrist had appear∣ed to you in his owne likenesse, you needed not to haue beene so carefull about the businesse. Now that hee doth insinuate himselfe with a counterfet holinesse, and a dissembled sanctity, how many millions of innocent men hath he cosoned and deceiued with his hidden & mysticall wickednesse? But let the visard be taken off from this hidden Antichrist, then none can hereafter be deceiued, but he that will wittingly and willingly be deceiued. Beware therefore that the old trickes, and stratagemes being laid open, beguile you no more. He faineth himselfe to be the Prince of the couenant, and yet he hath altered my couenant: Hee pretendes him∣selfe to be a Keeper of my will and testament, and yet
he hath not only raced and defaced my testament,The Pope hath altered Christ his Te∣stament and brought in a new. but hath foysted in one of his owne. He termes himselfe the foundation of the Church, and chalengeth to him my peculiar title, and yet hee doth with cunning deuises subuert and ouerthrow my Church. He makes a shew of great zeale to my crosse, and yet doth annihilate the power of the crosse. The holy Scripture makes menti∣on of Gods double gouernment, the Legale, and E∣uangelicall: The legale which hath the condition of working annext vnto it, do this and thou shalt liue.Ierem. 31.31. Heb. 8.5. ad finem. The Euangelicall requireth the condition of beleeuing, Be∣leeue and thou shalt be saued. But it requireth faith not as a worke, but as an instrument, whereby you may re∣ceiue the promises of the spirit, therefore that is called a conditionall, this a free conuenant. Where there is no couenant, there is no faith, and where there is no faith, there is no saluation. Humane faith doth rest vp∣on an humane couenant, heauenly faith vpon a hea∣uenly couenant. Heauenly faith is of two sorts, an∣swering the double couenant: One legale, which be∣leeueth the promises and threatnings of the law to bee true: the other Euangelicall, which is rightly called iustifying faith, which doth beleeue the promises of the Gospell grounded vpon my selfe not onely to be true in generall, but doth apply them to euery be∣leeuer in particular to eternall life. Now saluation is to be expected of you, not out of the forme of each of these couenants, but out of one of them. The forme of the Legale couenant is, as I said, Do this, and thou shalt liue: the forme of the Euangelicall couenant is, be¦leeue and thou shalt be saued. If therefore you looke for saluation out of the legall couenant, you must wholely and entirely, and at all times doe that which is com∣manded. You do it not: you shall die therefore. If you looke for saluation by the Gospell, you must certainely beleeue that which is promised. These bee the distinct formes of each couenant, for the procuring saluation,
by no meanes to bee confounded, yet the Pope hath confounded them: Doe and beleeue; and so hath brought in a third couenant which holy writ doth not acknowledge Thus the Prince of the couenant, hath broken Gods couenant. It is not to bee denied, that faith, and good workes are to bee ioyned together in a man that is iustified, but to mingle and confound these two formes Doe this and beleeue, that thereby a man is to be iustified, is vtterly to bee denied, as my A∣postle Paul hath deliuered. For as the Law doth not ad∣mit the least transgression, so the Gospell doth not ad∣mit your least satisfaction. Now what is more euident then that this hypocriticall enemie, who vants himselfe to be a faithfull keeper of my will, hath not onely in many places ased my will,The Domini∣cans brought in a new Gos∣pell. but which is farre more hei∣nous shuffled in a new will? As when the Dominicans printed their new Gospell by the sufferance and conni∣uency of the Pope: as when Paul the fift caused the conformities of Saint Francis that typicall Iesus my ape,S. Francis typi∣call Iesus. to be reprinted. A meere forger, who hauing abroga∣ted my will, hath brought in one of his owne. A man testament, which is ratified by the death of the testator admitteth not, either addition, or detraction, saith the Apostle, much lesse Gods testament, which is confirmed with my bloud and death. But my testament, say they, is of two sorts, The first nuncupatiue. The second writen. The last doth abrogate the former as my Apostle teacheth. The Pope de∣uiseth Christs nuncupatiue will.But I know what vexeth them. The Legacies set downe in writing, they thinke not sufficient to serue their turnes, and therfore they haue deuised a will nun∣cupatiue, not out of my Sermons, but out of their de∣cretals.A fit simili∣tude between the bod of man & Scrip∣ture of God. How farre better did the old Rabins, who com∣pared the fiue bookes of Moses for the absolute knit∣ting of the parts thereof within themselues, to the body of man? whereto if you adde a part as as finger to a hand, you bring in a deformitie; if you take away a
part, as a iaw from the face, you bring in infirmitie; if you shut vp a part as the mouth, which nature hath o∣pened, or open a part, as the side, which nature hath shut vp, you bring danger to the life. So if the Pope do adde vnnaturall parts to the written will of God, hee doth corrupt Gods booke, as when he addeth Apocry¦phall and decretall Epistles: if hee take away naturall parts he doth deceiue the soule of man, as when he tak¦eth the second commandement out of the decalogue, and taketh the cuppe from the supper: if he open those things that should be shut, he offers wrong to God, if he shut vp those that should be opened, he offers wrong to men. The Rabins shall rise vp in iudgement, and con∣demne both the Pope and all Popelings, who accuse all the written will of God of imperfection, when as they iudge the fiue bookes of Moses to bee a volume most perfect. They who diminish, adde, change euery thing at their pleasure, shaue away with their censure what they mislike, and what they like restore; that curi∣ously open secrets, so that their owne Clergie thinkes basely of them: and of enuie shut vp things to be reuea∣led, that they bee not knowne of the people of God: They I say are contumelious to God, whose last will they haue either corrupted or abolished. They are in∣iurious to the sonnes of men from whom they haue ei∣ther openly stolne away, or priuily filcht away God, heauenly Legacies. Here I appeale to all learned and ingenuous Papists. It is no smale matter that is in hand, but one of the greatest that euer was: the thing in con∣trouersie is Gods Testament. The legacies of all the sonnes of God, are in question, which cannot be of force vnlesse Gods testament be safely kept. Herein the sonnes of God must maintaine their right against men, and Diuels. Your Masters grant that Rome is Babylon, the context and euent conuince it to be Byshoply Rome, against whom my seruant Iohn doth denounce most certaine destruction. Come foorth of her therefore as∣soone
as possibly you can. Yea? out of the Catholike Church doth some of you say? he is euer harping on this string, he should say from the Catholike or com∣mon whore, if he would harken to Iohn. Bid her there∣fore farewell, whose wellfare shee cannot endure. I har∣tily beseech you, that you would be pleased to be saued. Saued you cannot be, vnlesse Gods last will and testa∣ment, wherein the saluation of man is conteyned, be kept safe and sound from the corruptions of Antichrist. The parts of the Testament are two. Remission of sinnes. The sanctifying of a sinner, which consisteth in the true enlight∣ning of the minde, and the re∣forming of the heart.The parts, forme, and Legacies of he new Te∣stament. The forme of the Testament is, I will be your God. You shall be my people. Vpon these, three Le∣gacies doe depend. The remission of your sinne. The imputation of my grace. The gift of eternall glory. The forgiuenes of sinne is free, is perfect, is eternall. It is free: I blot out your sinnes for my owne sake, not for your sakes, but for my owne names sake. I am that lambe that was slaine, who alone take away your sinnes. Are you then so mad that you will goe from the Lambe that is staine, to the golden Calfe that is set vp; that you be∣leeue the sinne of man can be forgiuen by the man of sinne? The dispensing of grace is not in his power, much lesse the forgiuenesse of sinne, which as it is free, so it is perfect. For I doe not remit some sinnes, and reteyne others; I doe not remit the fault, and reteyne the punishment: but I wash away all your sinnes, and forgiue all your punishment, if your confession be ear∣nest, my pardon is perfect. What? Is it not also
euerlasting?Righteousnes imputed. I haue made an euerlasting couenant with you, neuer to forsake you, euer to blesse you, and to send my feare into your hearts, that you neuer forsake me. The imputation of righteousnesse doth necessa∣rily follow the forgiuenes of sinne; the grant of life, and that eternall life doth likewise follow imputation of righteousnes: for he that beleeueth in the sonne of God shall neuer come into condemnation, but shall go from death to life; and let him surely perswade him∣selfe, that being now iustified by me, and now glorified by me, that being saued by my grace, he shall sit in hea∣uenly places with me, and enioy the reall possession of the highest heauens. Your sanctification,Sanctification is the second part of the new couenant, the beginning of your glori∣fication, as your coronation hereafter is the full accom∣plishment. For what is grace but glory begun?☜ and what is glory but grace perfected? Eternall life there∣fore, which is begun in this world, and made perfect in the world to come, doth not differ in kinde, but in de∣gree. Therefore your sanctification is begun in this world, so that the relikes of sinnes doe abide in the most holy, but couered; the inbred corruption did abide in Paul regenerated, but weakned; it remained in him to try him, not to destroy him: that corruption is remitted, not finished; the guilt is released, but the act remaineth. Sanctification is not therefore perfect but true, which inlightneth your mindes to true know∣ledge, and reformeth your wills to the sincere obedi∣ence of the Gospell, and therefore doth change the whole man, both the inward and the outward man, into my likenes, by the power of my spirit, that beholding the same in the Gospell, as in a glasse,Glorification. you may proceed from glory to glory, that is, from the glory of your san∣ctification here, to the glory of your coronation here∣after. And herein behold how ill the Pope, and I agree.How Christ & Antichrist disagree. I set before you free remission, he a mercenarie: I a categoricall and absolute, he an imperfect and hypo∣theticall:
I an euerlasting, he a temporarie. I require a sincere sanctification of a sinner in this life, but imper∣fect: hee faines a perfect holinesse, but a counterfeit. Now your Christ Iesus, as he is propounded in the free couenant, and the new testament, is appointed the on∣ly foundation of the Church by the Prophets and Apostles, vpon whom they are taught to build their good workes, as gold, siluer, and pretious stones, as the superficies fit for that golden, and pretious foundation: but they denie good workes to be the foundation it selfe, because your workes be they neuer so glorious, cannot endure the weight, and burthen of the kingdom of heauen. They make Christ alone, euen Christ alone apprehended by faith, as it were that mightie Atlas, that with his shoulders and his power can beare vp heauen, being made of God for you wisdome, iustice, sanctifi∣cation, and redemption, and therefore the foundation of the whole building. Not that saluation is begun by him, and made perfect by you; for there is one great stone of the whole building, as deepest in the founda∣tion, so chiefest in the corner; as the ground and be∣ginning, so the roofe and accomplishment of saluation. Which your Pope hath not only deformed with wood, hay, and chaffe built vpon it, that is, with foolish and absurd doctrines, differing from the foundation, but with wicked and pestilent doctrines ouerthrowing the foundation, and by that meanes hath most wickedly taken away the beginning, matter, forme, instrument, and end of saluation.The causes of saluation. For whereas the holy Scripture doth appoint the free mercy of God, the efficient cause of righteousnesse; the meritorious my obedience both actiue and passiue; the formall, the imputation thereof by the Holy Ghost; the instrumentall, faith conceiued out of Gods word, founded vpon a free promise; the finall, the glory of Gods diuine mercy and iustice: when as the Pope doth ouerthrow all the foundations of saluation, then doth hee take and stop from you all
the meanes and lights of comfort. While I set before you eternall life  that is a reward of grace, he makes it a stipend for worke: that I make a gift, hee makes a debt: that I make a patrimonie, he makes a stipend; what I make due to adoption, he makes as paid for obe∣dience. Hee doth not say it to him that is obedient, which is very true, but for obedience, which is very false: that he forsooth might set my gifts to sale, and by that meanes depriue me of glory, and you of peace. From whence it doth arise that the Romane Antichrist (let him pretend what he will) is a breaker of Gods couenant, a corrupter of his will, a subuerter of the foundation, being full of Satan, being busie about this one thing, to bring destruction to my Churches, and damnation to your soules. Is it any maruaile then if he bring destruction to bodies, and ouerthrow to Em∣pires?Papists, as Doggs. when as he secretly sends in his runnagate Priests into your Kingdomes, who as mad dogs, with their in∣famous libels may rent in sunder the good name, and fame of Kings, & bring them into hatred & contempt of others. Who as subtle Foxes,Foxes. do with their cunning sleights alienate the Kings subiects from the faith of their obedience due by my commandement, and to be performed by their oath.Wolues. And as cruell Wolues after they haue taken away the Kings good name by false calumniations, and drawne away the Kings subiects from their fealtie and obedience, doe spill the Kings blood by what meanes soeuer, either by open rebelli∣ons, or secret conspiracies, and defend it to be a deed most lawfull and meritorious. They shew their dogs tooth by rayling, their fox-like subtletie by equiuoca∣ting, and their woluish crueltie by conspiring. They doe nothing else but deceiue the simple, bite them that be sincere, and deuoure those that be innocent. They pretend faith, but they teach periurie: They say they reconcile men to Christ, but in deed reconcile them to Antichrist: in the meane while whom they get to ad∣here
to the Pope, they draw from the King. For while they build vp spirituall obedience, they cast downe the ciuill: is not this the qualitie of a Fox? They set vpon those that be weakest, that they may ouercome the strongest, as the Serpent seduced Eue, that Eue might seduce Adam; so these Serpents set vpon wiues, that the wiues may deceiue their husbands; they catch af∣ter women, that they may entangle young men, in whom is greater vigor, and heat to commit any wicked enterprise. So they haue a schoole full of masculine wo∣men, and feminine men; doth not here appeare to you the wilinesse of the serpent? Now with what vi∣lanous slanders these curres haue abused Princes, both liuing and dead, being the excellencies and glories of the earth, witnes those infinite libels cast out against Elizabeth Queene of England, and Iames King of Great Britaine. What maruaile is it if they raile vpon holy Doctors, that doe but write against them, when they reuile great Princes that can proscribe them? But that is no maruaile, that they spare not the good name of a King, when they spare not his blood. For they be not only byting doggs, but deuouring wolues, as appeares not only by the gun-powder Treason, I should haue said the Iesuites treason, but by the cruell death of Henry the third and fourth Kings of France.An exhorta∣tion to Prin∣ces. I am grieued at your sluggishnes; I am greeued at your slaue∣rie, ô yee Kings and Princes, who doe endure such sowers of sedition, such teachers of periurie, such au∣thors of King-killing. Beware of these dogs, catch these foxes, driue away these wolues, as my spirit hath aduised you; to whom slandering is a sport, consening is a game, rebellion and conspiracies is meat & drinke. Foresee that your patience be no longer hurtfull, both to you and me. Awake out of sleepe at the last, and de∣fend my glory together with your owne safetie, take the cause of the Gospell in hand, and laying aside Anti∣christ, put on Christ Iesus, not a false and a faigned Ie∣sus,
as he is deuised by that Apostata, but true and right Iesus, as he is preached by the Apostle. Doe no longer hold shadowes for bodies, shewes for substances, pre∣ferre not things vaine before those that be sound, nor things fraile before eternall. Vaine and fraile is the out∣ward shew of Christ, which deceiues the eyes, sound and eternall is the truth that feeds the soules: it is not the forme but the power of the Crosse that brings salua∣tion. Let not the glistering shew of Antichrist, which wrongs you being aliue, and cannot helpe you being dead, deceiue your eyes, that it may keepe you from Christ, from whom you may expect comfort in life, and true rest in death. Whereby their madnes seemes the more, who groueling vpon the ground, so dote vpon Antichrist, that they neglect the faith of Christ, his name onely being reteyned, who cannot feele the sauing force of the Crosse, nor the inward power of the Spirit, nor the heauenly light of the Gospell, nor the spirituall glory of my kingdome: As if my estate, base and contemptible, in whom there is no outward forme, nor shew to be desired, as my Prophet Esay said, had caused you to turne both your looking and your li∣king from me: or as if I had suffred the most greeuous anguishes of the soule, and the most bitter tortures of the bodie for mine owne sake, and had not been woun∣ded for your transgressions, and broken for your sins, that the chastisement of your peace might reside vpon me, and saluation out of my wounds and miseries might come to you. For this is the very truth, the base∣nesse of the estate, I vndertooke,☜ the weaknes of the flesh I tooke on me, the ignominie of the Crosse I en∣dured, for your sake, seemes vile and contemptible in the iudgement of flesh and blood. But if that heauenly maiestie, if that power, if that glory, which through the vaile of humilitie, weaknesse and ignominie is transpa∣rent to the eye of faith, might appeare to your mindes: euen as I am described by Iohn a lambe slaine, and a
lyon inuincible, that so I may appeare to you a mighty God in the forme of a weake man. How great loue and feare, if you beleeue either a heauen or a hell, would the vniting of so infinite mercy with such infinite power and iustice stirre vp in your soules? Great sin∣ners such as commonly Kings are, had need of great grace, the preaching whereof shall be as acceptable to you as necessarie, when once you shall feele the stinge of an accusing conscience pricking you, whereby you might come to heauen by the way of repentance, that could not come thither by the way of innocencie. But they that vnderstand not the force of their sicknes, de∣sire not the force of the remedie. And while they feele not the wound inflicted by sinne, they looke not for the remedie applied by grace. To whom I denounce that I will proue either a most louing Patron, or a most seuere Iudge, with my right hand to saue them, or to be reuenged on them. All men whatsoeuer they haue or are, owe it all of right to me: but Kings and Princes chiefly, whom by my speciall fauour and grace I haue aduanced a few ouer so many millions of men, and pla∣ced them in mine owne throne. To what end? to what end I pray? that they might giue themselues to lust and idlenesse, to serue the Dragon, to aduance, and adorne Antichrist? not so, not so verily. But that they may watch ouer the Church, may fight for the Lambe may spoile & teare in pieces the Beast: & if that heauen∣ly quire of Saints in heauen fall down before the lambe sitting on his throne, and worship him that liues for euer, and cast their Crownes before the throne, saying: Thou art worthy ô Lord to haue all glory and honor, because thou hast made all things, and being slaine hast redeemed vs by thy blood vnto God. If that innumerable ranke of melodious Angels doe with sweet and loud voices sing of the power, wisdome, and strength of the Lambe, that is slaine, and giue him all honor due vnto him. What ought you to doe, you vnder whose purple robes, as
yet abideth dust and ashes, and who weare but corrup∣tible Crownes vpon your heads, what ought yee to do in the cause of your King and Redeemer? for since I haue brought those holy soules after the end of all their trauels & dangers in my quarrell and battell, into the possession of true happines promised and vowed vnto them: you that as yet are in the very heat & danger of the battell, both the necessity of my helpe, & the expe∣ctance of the reward, ought to stir you vp to a more fer∣uent desire to defend mine honor. Heere I haue a iust & grieuous cause to complain, that your mutual suspitions quarrels haue made Antichrist, weake and contempti∣ble in himselfe, to be so dreadfull and mighty. Hence it is that that Laterane Idoll hath taken to it selfe, the golden head of a swelling title: and spread abroad the siluer armes of his pecuniary inrisdiction: and strouted out the brazen belly of conspiracy and rebellion: and hath mooued and stirred from home, those iron feet of violence and pride, wherewith he hath not onely trod vpon your crownes, but your neckes. I tell you plain∣ly, the discord of Kings hath encreased Antichrist, their amity shall weaken him. Is it for your good to admit of spies, that may search into your counsels? fiery spirits that may cast the seedes of discord betweene neighbor-kings, and set them together by the eares? Harpeyes that may spoyle you of your treasures? Horse leeches that may sucke your blood? secret traytors that with faire words may cut your throats? who when they haue laught at you in their sleeues, that they haue left you lead, and taken your golde, that they may distract your mindes, and stirre them vp to make warre against your brethren, that thereby that Latiall Iupiter waxing great by your discords, may leape for cruell ioy at your miseries and destructions. I appeale to your own con∣sciences, haue you not at all times found the Popes Nuntij, Dataries and Iesuites to be such? Let there bee an end of quarrelling at the last, all these mischiefes
shall bee presently taken away, and now this serpent that hath swolne so bigge with discords to the publike hurt, shall be broken and consumed. Let me therefore be a counseller to you,The duty of Kings. that a true and a sound peace being concluded among you, euerie one of you in your seuerall kingdomes, wherein I haue left you Kings to be my Vice-gerents, that you restore the true worship of God, renew a right faith, establish good manners, purge the true Sacraments of the Church, call backe a∣againe the olde discipline brought in by the Colledge of the Apostles, and confirmed by the counsell of Neece. Further, that what euery one haue done, all the rest doe allow, that you gather together a generall counsell by generall consent, wherein the feare of dan∣ger being taken away, and the partaking of sides being layd aside,An admoniti∣on to the Pontifician Princes, to be¦ware of Syren and Erinnis. the cause of Christ may bee safely and freely handled against Antichrist. Heere I doe seuerally admonish the Romane Ca∣tholike Kings & Princes to beware of two counsellers, whereof I call one of them Syren, the other Erinnis. Syren doth perswade them to follow their pleasures, a∣uoid labour, feare danger, doe not stirre a settled polli∣cy, doe not break truce with their olde friend and com∣panion the Pope, that they goe not about to mend any mischiefe, that is almost past help. For they cannot, she saith, cast off the Pope though they would. Can they not? What cannot the arme of a King bring to passe, being strengthened with the arme of God? from thence faith doth arise, from faith the magnanimity of kings, whereof that driues away blinde superstition, this base sluggishnesse and cowardice. That makes them to di∣scerne, this makes them to withstand all human hinde∣rances, so that they may cast off the Pope as easily as an old heauy gown. It is a reproch for the Popish Kings to say, that the mischiefe is greater then can be remedied, that as yet they cannot mend it? That they cannot cast out the Pope if they would. Could the Princes of
Germanie, could the Kings of Denmarke, Scotland and Sueuland, that I may not speake of a great part of France, Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, and Pannonia. The Kings of England could, the Father, the young Sonne and the Daughter, euen then when all their neighbours abroad were alienated from them, when at home they had a seditious cleargie, and a superstitious people, euen then did the holy courage of a Man, a Childe and a Woman breake thorow, and passe ouer all humane lets and impediments whatsoeuer. Let it be a shame for Popish Princes, both young men and an∣cient men, not to bee able to doe that which a Childe and a Woman were able to doe. But Syren perhaps will whisper, that it is not good stirring of Paul the fift, beeing full of Gregories, Alexanders, Bonifaces and Iulij. O what foolish feare is that, so to take heede that they feare a mischiefe, which when they are able to put it cleane away, they pull it and draw it vpon them? But some will not cast off the Pope if they could. They think it a necessary euill for Kings to bridle their sub∣iects, and for subiects to bridle their Kings, To whom Christ doth seeme more hard and rigorous, as hee that neuer dispenseth with sinne, and doth remit nothing, but to him that earnestly repents. They haue neede therefore of a gentle and a cockering Antichrist: who may dispense with adultery and incest, and may ap∣prooue and allow of marriages forbidden by the Law of God. As the fashion of the world is now adaies, li∣cēce is to be giuē to sinning; so sin doth make the Pope necessarie. Vnhappy necessity, which necessarily brings damnation to a man. He doth worthily loue his sinne, who while hee keepes that, loseth his soule. Hee rates his short life at too high a price, who that while he may liue a while after his owne lust, doth lose life eternall. In the meane time, while Antichrist doth constraine them with so extreame necessity, what a heauy burthen doth he lay vpon them? that he seemeth to bind them
with linckes of golde in this life, whom he hath appoin∣ted for the chaines of darknesse in the life to come. These you shall easily breake asunder, by the helpe of God and assistance of Protestant Princes. But the con∣trariety of their religion is suspected vnto vs. But this contrariety is your security: for if the Popes bee so sawcy to doe such things, when so many Princes haue forsaken the seat of pestilence, what would they attempt if none at all had departed from them? for if the Frede∣rickes, Henries and Charles did so easily punish the Gre∣gories, Alexanders and Clements, euen in the very mid∣night of popish darknesse; if Philip the Faire, and Lewis the 12. did handle the Bonifaces and Iulij after their de∣serts: how farre more easily may their posterity with the ayde of Protestant Princes in so cleere a light of the Gospell, tame and bring vnder Paul the fift? Especially seeing Philip the 2. the present king of Spaine, cannot forget that his father who alwaies was the Popes cham∣pion, was vnworthily and basely abused by the Pope, in keeping Sicilie and Naples from him. And let the French King remember, that not onely Henry the 3. but Henrie the 4. his father, was cruelly murthered by a villaine sent in for that purpose. Therefore the holy courage of Protestant Kings, should not mooue suspiti∣on in Popish Kings against the Kings their neighbours, but rather it should stir vp their anger against the Pope, that with ioyned forces they might breake the Idols head, shorten his armes, pare his nailes, open his belly, cut off those legs and feet, wherwith they may remem∣ber their ancestours crownes were so basely cast to the ground. You haue heard how euill Syren hath perswa∣ded them, now heare how farre worse Erinnis doth ad∣uise them: whose deadly musique, if you bee wise, you shall keepe farre off both from your mindes and eares, perswading you, that it is fit to raise warre in the defence of Antichrist, against your brethren and allies: for they purpose nothing else, but that their treasure being
spent on both sides, and their forces being weakened by mutuall warres, as it often hapned heeretofore, that they may build vp a chaire for the Priests, and by ca∣sting downe the thrones of Kings, to whom it is great pleasure to lift vp their shrubbe, which may set fire on the wood, and consume the Cedars of Libanon. Now I tell you before hand, that you take heed of that war, which these holy Erinnis will cry out, and tell you, must bee necessarily made against my Church: for you are like to haue Christ himselfe against you in the field. I know full well that lately at Rome, as often before; a cōuenticle of Priests haue bin gathered together by the Pope of Rome, and Sathans command to deface and diminish my glory. That they tooke counsell wherein the Popish Kings and Princes were in a league confede∣rated among themselues, against the Protestant Kings and Princes, chiefely against IAMES the King of Great Britanny, who concluded the Pope to be Anti∣christ, and as hee rightly inferred Popish Kings and Princes were the members of Antichrist: that the com∣mon cause were to be maintained by common forces: that he sent in his Priests who might prouoke his sons, as hee calles them, to wage warre against my seruants. The Kings therefore of the Reformed Religion, haue more neede imposed by Antichrist, to fulfill the pro∣phesie, and to fight Gods warre, and vnite their forces and powers against that double horned Beast the Pope. For I thinke that popish Kings haue learnt more wit at the last, then to put in execution the bloody and cruell counsell of the Beast. They know that the first Beast bore it not scot free, whose ten hornes were sayd to bee crowned, because it spilt the innocent blood of my ser∣uants. For the very same power of the Empire, which did condemne mee being borne into the world, the Prince of your saluation, and fasten mee vpon the crosse, the same did endeauour to ouerthrow the Pri∣mitiue Church with ten persecutions. How I did re∣uenge
the death of my Saints vpon the authors there∣of, how I did cut off some of the Emperors by mutuall fights, how did I comsume the people with continuall plagues, how I did deuoure the cities with floodes and earth-quakes, how I strucke and dispersed whole armies with thundrings and lightnings cast from heauen, their stories doe well declare. As many creatures as I had, so manie viols I had of my raging wrath, which I pow∣red out vpon mine and my seruants enemies. But some of you will saie, Those were Pagans that did kill, and Christians that were killed: wee are Catholikes which doe punish, they are heretickes which are puni∣shed They are as certainly hereticks as you are Catho∣liks. You Catholiks? I wold you were Christians, they be not words, but deeds must make this good. You carrie the name of Christ, I confesse: but you plaie the Pagans vnder the name of Christ. Are they heretickes? True as I am an hereticke, that call all things to the rule of the Word. But Antichrist doth alleadge Scripture al∣so: true, as the Diuell did alleadge them misvnderstood. Who as he enticed the Iewes to kill me, shadowed out and promised in the Propheticall Scriptures, to bee the Messias, so he hath moued manie Catholikes in name, in truth most hereticall heretickes, the bond slaues of Antichrist, to burne both my seruants and their books, and they blot out as much as lay in them, by their cun∣ning, and their power, the faith and the Church, whose quarrell I often reuenged with a high hand stretched from heauen. I will giue you one notable example After that the Counsell of Constance had condemned to the fire, those two my seruants, Hu and Hierome, the Pope sent two Erinnes into Germanie, the Cardinall of Winchester, and the Cardinall of Saint Angelo: who when they had called backe Sigismund the Emperour, from making warre against the Turkes, they incited him to beare armes against the Bohemians, the new professours of my Gospell, and brought into the field
three other great Germane Princes, with all their forces: will you heare the issue of their whole fight & passage? The Bohemians leuy an armie, come into the fielde, strike vp the alarum, they had scarce come to handy gripes, but the King, and the Princes being stroke with a causlesse suddaine feare, in their rage crying out to their souldiers to stand to it and fight did cowardly and beastly flie away: fiue times they made inrodes into Bo∣hemia, and fiue times they were discomfited. And so not long after three seuerall Popes the Authors of this tragedy, and those two diuilish Cardinalls not without great shame, and sorrow came to a fearefull end. In all which occurrences hee that doth not behold the hand of God, is blinde, he that doth not feare it is wic∣ked. I passe ouer that inuincible Spanish Armado, which being gathered together by the instigation of Priests, was dispersed by the windes, swallowed vp by the seas, and brought to confusion by the hand of God. What? do you thinke that Gods hand is shortened? or doe you thinke that God hath left off to defend his ser∣uants? Infinite be the examples of Gods power, which God hath shewed both in former ages, and often in this present age in the defence of the Church against her mightiest enemies. Let thinges to come be taught by things past. And if those former tyrants, or those that followed had gone vnpunished for their wickednesse, there had beene cause for Antichrist, with all his facti∣on to haue reioyced in their sinne: there had beene some reason, that the Kings of the earth had promised to themselues impunitie, who had bestowed all their might, in building vp and enlarging the Kingdome of the two horned beast. Now that I haue first crackt and broken to peeces the ten crowned and bloody hornes, and after haue scattered both by land and sea the smo∣kie slaues of the second beast, what at last shall become of Antichrist is declared in the sixt seale. But what in the mean time may Antichrists souldiers hope for, who
being set on fire by these fire brandes did turne all their forces to do mischiefe? I doe aduise you therefore, yee popish Kings and Princes, that ye depart out of Baby∣lon, as fast as you can, then that being conuerted to me, you make warre with vnited forces in the quarrell of the Church against Antichrist, at least that you giue no eare to these Syrenes or Erinnes which will bring destru∣ction, both to your soules and bodies. On my word the Byshoppe of Rome, and the great Antichrist are termes conuertible. The decree of God standes fast for euer, that the Byshoppe shall be consumed by those Kings, by whom he was adored. You cannot serue mee and the Pope, with whom peace being made by you, see if it be not to be called peace rather then a compact of slauerie. From whence if I cannot drawe the popish Kings and Princes, I will for all that warne you yee Kings and Princes Protestants, that you preferre a holy warre before a wicked league with the Pope, and think those armes to be holy, when there is no hope left but in armes. And take heede that being deceiued with an opinion of a false peace you bee not on a suddaine brought to ruine. I wish you may bee at peace with neighbour Kings, and neighbour Kings with you, but at no hand haue peace with the Romane Antichrist. Why so? it is wicked; it is dangerous, it cannot hold. It is wicked; what peace, what consent, what agreement can be with the holy scriptures and mans traditions, with free will and Gods grace, with inherent iustice, and imputed righteousnesse, with mans satisfactions and my blood procuring their saluation? what holy society and vnity can there bee with the inuocation of dead Saints, and the prayers to the liuing God, with the po∣pish Masse and the Lords supper, with Christian faith and Antichristian distrust? You see it is wicked, now marke how dangerous. Sweete is the name of peace & the opinion of vnitie is delightsome. But what true Christian doth doubt, that that bond of peace is most
sure, which is knit together with the truth and vnitie of the Spirit. Whence it followeth that sweete destructi∣on is included in that peace which is made with false∣hood. I adde that there cannot possibly bee peace be∣tween the seede of the woman and the seede of the ser∣pent: betweene the lambe and Antichrist: betweene those where God hath set euerlasting hatreds. Fire and water will better agree then Christ and Antichrist: wherefore I aduise Protestant Kings and Princes, that they make perfect that reformation of the Church by my helpe, which by my helpe they haue begunne. First that they compose all home differences chiefly in the Articles of the doctrine of the Gospell with quiet and Christian conference: for it is to bee feared that inward dissention will bring backe againe the outward enemy. Secondly, that they resist the common Aduersarie with common helpe and counsell, for there is danger that if euery one resist not, all will be surprised. Thirdly, that they may the better defend their Christ, let them at once set vpon Antichrist: for hee hath more courage that doth inuade, then he that doth defend. Lastly if they cānot in all points fulfil the prophecy, yet let them banish the beast out of their Dominions. For it is im∣possible that Christ and Antichrist should dwell toge∣ther. In the end I aduise both sides that in the delibe∣ration of this great businesse they preferre not worldly wisedome, before heauenly wisedome, secondly that the euill custome of men, bee not preiudiciall to the e∣ternall truth of God. Thirdly, that sluggish doubtful∣nesse do not put of, and procrastinate this so noble and so worthy an enterprise. Lastly that the deceitfull con∣dition of peace with Antichrist, doe not crosse the de∣sire of recouering libertie. So that euery one of you being content with his own kingdome and territories, shall not busie himselfe about inuading others, but will cast about how he may preuaile and ouerthrow the De∣uill, and his eldest sonne the Romane Antichrist, i. not
one wicked man, but all the Kingdome of vnrighteous∣nesse. Euery one of you haue a iust cause of his owne, and now you haue a faire offer made you. The truce made betweene Caesar and the Turke, offers a fit occasi∣on to represse the insolencie of this Bishoppe after you will more easily repell the Turke. And seeing you haue both a iust quarrell, and fit oportunitie against the beast, let there not be wanting a will in you. If Christ the Sauiour, ô ye renowmed Kings and Princes do speake thus secretly vnto you, and inwardly warne you, shall he not perswade you, though he were not of power to punish you? The rather seeing he hath shewed, that the Pope is a Capitall enemie to Gods te∣stament, and kingly gouernment. The Pope hath cast such proiects, and Rome takes such counsells that king∣ly Maiestie, and popelike Maiestie cannot long stand together. Our sinnes makes the Bishoppe great, who if he rise to that greatnesse which hee aimeth at in his minde, Kings of necessitie must fall to the ground. My Dialogue shall make it plaine, if it please you to vouchsafe to read it, wherein pragmaticall Antichrist first enters the stage. Glory to God.
PRAGMATI∣CALL ANTICHRIST, OR HJLDEBRAND BROVGHT TO LIFE: OR The first Dialogue of Christian obedience due to Kings against Antichristian rebellion couered vnder the shew of Catholike RELIGION. The Speakers be sixe. 1. MICHAEL CALANDER. 2. William Argentine two noble Romane Catholikes, Laickes as they be termed, one more gentle, the other more fierce. 3. George Velbacel an old Priest, Calanders Confessor. 4. Robert Saturnine a Iesuite Argentines Guest: one more milde and moderate, the other more violent and bitter. 5. Antonius Patriotta a Professor of the reformed Diuinitie. 6. Carolus Regius a common Lawyer, either of them a Maintainer of our Religion, Countrie, and King. AFter that Paule the fift had sent two bulles into England wherein hee  had forbidden his Catholike sons as he stiles them, to take the Oath of Allegeance and obedience: I remember there was speech after the end of Easter Tearm that two Lay noble Romane-Catholickes Michael Calander, and William Argentine, went aside out of the city into their country-house to aduise a∣bout
their affaires. It was said that old George Velbacell the Archpriest, whom age and custome had made more milde and gentle went, with them together with his keeper, that he might ease the trouble of his long im∣prisonment with some country delight. There follow∣ed not long after a wandring Iesuite younger in yeares, a man of a fiery spirit, his name was Robert Saturnine. He, that he might conceale his Priesthood, couered his bald pate with a Gregorian, or periwigge, and seemed by his attire to be a Courtier, There happened at that time to arriue to Calander a man full of curtesie and hospitalitie Antonius Patriotta and Charolus Regius one of them a Doctor in Diuinity, the other a great Coun∣cellour at Law, both of them an aduersarie to Poperie, yet so that they could finde in their hearts to loue the person of a Papist, if they thought him an honest man, and a faithfull subiect to their King and Countrey. They came of purpose to perswade Calander their olde acquaintance, to take the Oath of supremacie, if it might be: if not, at least the oath of Allegeance: lest if he did refuse it, hee might giue iust occasion to our worthy King to be alienated in minde from him, and so might bring some trouble to that Noble and auntient Familie. Here Calander vpon a scruple of conscience which the Popes two bulles did seeme to inflict to the super∣stitious old man, Patriotta said, that hee tooke a pause for a while, and to haue answered at the last with teares in his eyes: Let vs lay aside for a time these sad dis∣courses Antonie and Charles, and let me lead you being weary of your iournie into your chamber where you may repose and refresh your selues before supper. And that you may not be ignorant, what guests you are like to finde in my house, I dare be bold to tell you, whom euer I haue found my trusty and faithful friends, to haue beene earnest Disputants, not dangerous infor∣mers, and to haue gauled the Papists not with your ac∣cusations,
but your arguments: my old familiar friend Argentine, shall be with you at Supper, and Velbace my Confessor, who hath taken the oath of Allegeance him∣selfe, and went about to perswade others to do the same. And he had almost preuailed with me, but that the most Holy Father did interpose his greater authoritie. A third guest, Argentines shadow, I will conceale by your leaues, vnlesse you will assure me that you will procure him no harme, which cannot well be without my dan∣ger. It is his part to dispute against the obedience of subiects, which in his minde hereticall Kings doe vn∣iustly exact of them, and to obiect the strongest reasons he can, for the authoritie of the Pope in deposing such Kings, and releasing their subiects from the oath of Allegeance. And if you can wipe away, and weaken his obiections, you shall easily perswade me, and my Argentine too, I thinke, to performe the oath of fealtie and obedience to our King. Then Patriotta truly, said he, so he attempt nothing  against the King and kingdome, and dispute as it were in the schoole to search out the truth, and not in an as∣sembly to moue sedition, I giue you my honest pro∣mise, I will not take on me the part of a spie, and leaue of to be a guest, nor cast off the dutie of a friend, while I reteyne the dutie of a subiect. Here Regius, as one that knew the danger of the law better, pausde a while, yet following his purpose, that I may gaine a lost sheep to the King, I will said he borrow so much of the law, that I may heare a Iesuite disputing. And vpon this condition, said Calander, smiling I will name you my third guest, in habite a Courtier, in pro∣fession a Iesuite, Father Robert Saturnine. And thus all the guests meeting together in the Par¦lor, Patriotta said, that after they had courteously salu∣ted one another, as the manner is, they sate downe to a costly supper; and that it might not be a dumbe feast, the Priests did wisely dissemble their inward griefe of
minde, with forced and pleasant discoursing. When supper was ended they were all brought into a gallerie, and there sometime walking, and sometime sitting, they continued their conference about the matters in question, till it was late in the night. Here Calander beginning, whereas your comming, said he, was euer welcome to me Velbacel and Saturnine, then neuer more welcome, then in this dangerous time, wherein there is a great, and a greeuous controuersie, not onely betweene Catholikes and Heretikes, but be∣tweene Catholikes and Catholikes, about the oath of Allegeance, and the Popes authoritie in deposing here∣ticall Kings, and the absoluing the subiects from their obedience due to them, as it is thought. As it falls out betweene you two, one of you disswades me, that I should not sweare, the other perswades me, that I should sweare. Thus we Laicke-Catholikes are torne asunder by you the Priests, and so distracted in this quarrell, be∣tweene the Bishop and the King, that we know not in the world what to doe. Wherefore when I was desi∣rous, that you should discusse your contrarie reasons in this matter of difference, and by the discourse, and ben∣ding of your wits, some sparkes of truth might appeare to the satisfaction of our consciences: see of a sodaine there are met two great learned men, Antonius Patri∣otta, and Carolus Regius, two shrewd Aduersaries, that I may say the truth, in the whole busines of Religion, but yet without malice: vnknowne happily to you, but very friendly to me, so that you need not feare, that your conference come abroad, so it be done freely, not licentiously. Then said Saturnine; your promise made to me Calāder doth make me feare no danger from these Gentlemen your friends. Therefore I lay aside that person and ha∣bit, which the necessitie of the time, not mine owne will and desire hath cast vpon me, and I take to me the per∣son of a Iesuite. Although I haue not forgot the last
Tearme of all, that an holy Priest condemned by the Queenes Law, was cruelly put to death. O Dracos Law, written with bloody letters. Good words I pray you, saith Patriotta, it was not  the Queenes law, but the Popes Bull that hanged that Priest. For when there were two Priests condemned for one offence, the King offered life to them both, if they would take the oath of Allegeance. The one of them tooke it; thother refused it. The one of them liues by the mercy of the King, the other died by the commandement of the Pope. Now tell me, whether it were the Queenes law, or the Popes Bull did hang him. O Hipponactean Bull, whose seuerall lines,Hipponax a Poet of Ephe∣sus, who being painted by Bu∣balus in such manner that he was laught at, made such bitter verses against the Painter, that fo shame he hung himselfe. The Iesuites deceiued the Pope with false alarmes. C: lib. 1. cap. 11. as seuerall lambickes brought the Priest to the gallowes. But in the forefront of it he wisheth health and aposto∣licall benediction to his sonnes the Roman Catholikes; but within it there is conteyned a curse, and destruction to you all. Belike your Pope did sweeten the edge of the cup, that the poyson within might go downe more merily. This bitter cup the Pope hath mingled for you Calander and Argentine, and the rest of the Lay-Papists. The Iesuite hath wisht it to you, who being the Popes intelligencer, signified that the power of the English Papists was greater then the Protestants, if hee would that outward forces were ioyned with them: as Comi∣naeus writes that the Burgundian spies being deceiued with the mist and darknesse of the night, deceiued the Duke of Burgundie, telling him that the forces of France, were greater and neerer, when as they tooke the longer bryars and brambles in the field, for iauelins & lances. So the false reports of the Iesuites, deceiued the Bishop, whereby he tooke rash and vntimely coun∣sell, to send his Bulls vnto you. Hence the Pope, as Pius the fift had done before him, compiled an horned argument, wherewith hee strooke his sonnes on both sides, and droue them to that exigent, that either they must runne vpon the point of the Queenes law, if they
obeyed not the King, or incurred the Popes curse, if they obeyed him. For he driues them (whose calami∣ties vndertaken for the Catholike faith, he doth mise∣rably deplore) either to hell, or the gallowes. For of necessitie they must either be damnde, or hangd, if you beleeue the Pope, damned vnlesse they obey the inhi∣bition, or hangd if they obey it. Is this the saluation of Paul the fift that he sendeth to his sonnes? is this his Apostolicall blessing? Doth the pitifull Father thus blesse his sonnes that haue hitherto endured so great afflictions for reteyning, as he writes, the Catholike faith? He hath well rewarded your holinesse, that hath sent his Papists in a bad cause with a false feare of hell, to certaine death vpon the gallowes. And the Roman-Catholikes, Saturnine, may not only thanke the false messages sent to the Pope,The Iesuites false doctrine hath troubled the Papists. but the pe∣stilent doctrine broached by you, for all the sorrowes they haue endured. For what else could haue extorted that Law from so mercifull a Queene, which you ere-while blamde as bloody? For your Iesuites after the sending in of Pius the fifts Bull, came swarming into England, as Campion, Parsons, and many others, and did mightily labour to put that Bull in execution, and did propound it as the thirteenth Article of their faith. That there was no more obedience to be shewed to a Queene excommunicated,The seditious doctrine of Ie∣suites ga that seuere law when it came to practise. and deposed; then present∣ly followed the rebellion in the North. It was there∣fore your seditious doctrine that begat so seuere a law. Your schoole hath made the Catholike doctrine of Rome a Catechisme of rebellion: Your Logicke first made a Papist, and a Traytor to be all one: your Socie∣tie was the first ouerthrow of the Roman-Catholikes estate. For your Papists behaued themselues quietly for the first eleuen yeeres, while Pius the fift, that old credulous dotard, was induced by the false whisperings of the English Catholikes, as they call them, shewing that their powers were so strong, that they could resist
the Queenes forces, had excommunicated the Queene by his Bull, and depriued Her of her kingdome, and had released her subiects from the Oath of their Alle∣geance, and being so released stirred them vp to take armes against Hir. But the old man quickly found his error, and corrected it with his dispensation, that the Papists to redeeme their troubles (so hee speaketh) should shew outward obedience to Queene Elizabeth, but restreyned with two conditions: one, things so stan∣ding: thother, while the publike execution of the Bull might be performed, that is to say, while they had so much power, as by force they might ouercome the Queene.Rebellion a∣mong Iesuites is an article of faith. Hence among the cases of conscience brought into England by you, sprang out the 55 Article. Where a Catholike being demanded, Doe you beleeue that the Pope can put the Queene from her authoritie? he is taught to answer, notwithstanding any feare of death, I do be∣leeue it. For this question doth appertaine to faith, and requires a confession of faith. Behold your Catholike faith, which this present oath is said, by the Pope, to crosse, it is the chiefe head of Iesuitisme, which we may call the marrow of Poperie. And are you now in a chafe Saturnine, that a few Iesuites are hangde vp for Traytors, who make treason an article of their faith? And doe you not thinke the King hath a iust cause to take away their heads,Alaus. who haue with such coniuring bewitched the consciences of subiects, that they thinke that warre, holy, iust, and honorable, which is raised against their Prince? But what if they were not only messengers and ma∣sters,  but authors and actors of rebellion?The Isuites and authors and actors of re∣bellion. and haue en∣tred into the most cruellest conspiracy, that euer was since the creation, not onely to depose the King, and absolue his subiects, but to rase out the King and King¦dome, and to blot out the English nation, and to root out the men out of the earth for euer (and that not the guilty onely, but the innocents also, according to that
olde tyrannicall practise,Cicero pro Dia∣tore. Let our friends perish so our e∣nemies perish also.) And they would haue the Catho∣likes with heretickes,The Martyr∣dome of the Kingdome of England. as wee seeme to you, the noble with the ignoble, and the fathers to bee Martyrs with their sonnes. For what else was that gun-powder trea∣son deuised by you: but the Martyrdome of the King and Kingdome? Then Saturnine you doe great wrong to the Iesuites (saith he) whom you faine to bee the Authors of Cates∣bies conspiracy, for that which they heard onely vnder the seale of confession, thought it was meet to bee con∣cealed about the martyrdome of the kingdome, as you call it (which God wote hurt no body) being only de∣uised, and not performed. Garnet therefore the chiefe Iesuite, did wrong to the Iesuites (saith Patriotta) who when himself had nourished that euill humor in Catesby whom hee would haue to bee the head and heart of the whole conspiracy, a right Cateline, and an apt scholler (who concluded by a very wicked consequence, out of the bull of Clement the eight, wherein the Pope had ex∣cluded the King being an hereticke, as hee writ, from entrance into the Kingdome, concluded, I say, that being entred, he was by all meanes possibly to bee ex∣pelled) out of that wicked proposition, which now is in question, hee suckt out that most pestilent poyson of that vnheard-of treachery. But when Garnet would haue him the cheife worke-man in this conspiracy, hee ioyned vnto him diuers other counsellers out of his owne tribe, nay out of his owne bosome. And lest that liuing messe of Iesuites being singular∣ly inspired with the spirit of the Pope of Rome,Garnet. Greenwell. Gerard. Parsons. should lay the whole fault vpon a Lay-traitor now dead, let it be vnderstood that it was confest by Garnet, being now ready to die, vnder his hand by a voluntarie confession. Hee writ that Greenwell with Catesby was heard of him,The Traytor betraies him∣selfe. not confessing, but consulting: That Greenwell with Gerard were not onely authors, but actors, who decla∣red
their guiltinesse of the fact by their flight: That Baldwine and Parsons were acquainted with it, whereof he set on Fauxe that Fire brand in Germany: The o∣ther made acquainted by him of the villanous treache∣ry, came flying against the day, out of Italie into Lyons in France, as it were on pilgrimage to S. Winefreds well, as a crow to carrion, that like another Nero, hee might with a detestable pleasure neerer behold the fire most furiously consuming each part of his country. But this Martyrdome of the King and Kingdome, as you call it, was not brought to effect. What then? As though we are ignorant that Antichrist doth deliuer many to death, and doth assigne many more. That hee doth thirst after more blood then he doth spill. We were all Martyrs in your intention, but not in execution. That the mischeefe was deuised, we attribute it to your ma∣lice, that it tooke no effect, to Gods mercy. Which mooued the neuer-suspecting heart of the King, the most mildest of all that are, haue beene. or shall be, that out of those letters whereof little reckoning was made, he smelt out the kind of danger, and, I may almost say, the verie gun-powder it selfe, and so was made an in∣strument of the publike safetie. Hence riseth a double bond, one that bindeth the King to God, the other that more neerely for euer bindeth vs to the King. There is no want either of counsell and care to the King and his prudent and faithfull Counsellers: but when nei∣ther care nor counsell can preuent such blinde and se∣cret conspiracie, both thankes are to be giuen to God for our deliuerance past, whereof I doubt wee are too forgetfull, and continuall praiers are to be powred out for the time to come, that hee may alwaie defend both the King and Kingdome of Britannnie against their secret and diuellish deuises. For Gods help beginnes there where mans helpe failes, as Philo saith. In the meane time let vs take heede, that when Gods prouidence is not wanting to vs, we be not wanting to Gods prouidence.
Let Saturnine goe shake his eares, that calles Queene ELIZABETHS Law cruell, which condemneth such Priests as haue beene the deuisers, teachers & ex∣ecutioners of treason. And let the Romane Catholikes themselues iudge, Calander and Argentine, whether in this waighty busines they ought to follow such guides, who doe not onely reach and offer to vs and you, but drinke to the Laity a large draft out of that cup, which being guilded ouer with a vaine title of religion, but in∣deede being full of most bitter poison, the Pope hath mingled and prepared; Very vntowardly I assure you. Wherein they deale as those doe, who meaning to make others drunke, vse to make themselues drunke first. For what drunkennesse of the minde is this, or madnesse rather, to make two things most neerely knit together by the commandement of God,Eccles. cap. 5. & cap. 8. v. 1. seuer and part asunder by the inhibition of man? And whereas Ecclesiastes doth draw from faith and obedience to God, as a necessarie effect out of a proper cause, faith & obedience toward the King, althogh he be euill: to put these two chiefe duties of a Christian so well agreeing, and so neerly vnited, into another ranck of such things as be cleane contrary and opposite? as if one being set downe,The cheefe head of the Popes bull. the other were taken away. As the Popes bull doth pretend concluding in bad Logicke, but in worse Diuinitie, that the Oath of Allegeance toward the king cannot be performed with faith reserued toward God. Another hor∣ned argu∣ment of the Popes.In the mean time the lay-people are at a maze, when they be enforced by you Saturnine, that if they haue not at all taken the Oath of obedience, that they should stoutly refuse it: if they haue taken it, that they speedi∣ly retract it. Hence it is, that they which refuse it bee guilty of secret treason, they that retract it haue their conscience troubled with manifest periury. I am not ignorant that it seemesDistinct. 19. q Siom. sacriledge to you to dispute of the Popes action.Extra. Io 22. cum inter non nullos. Heresie to doubt of his power,Causa 25 qu. 1. vilatores. ibid gloss. bla∣sphemar Blasphemie against the holy Ghost, either
to say or doe anie thing against the Popes canons and decrees:Distinct. 4. si Papa. although hee draw infinite numbers of peo∣ple by heapes into hell, as Boniface speaketh. Such an holy phrensie hath distracted mens minds, that whatso∣euer hath proceeded frō the Pope, althogh it be against the commandements of Christ, against the examples of the Primitiue Church, although it bee manifestly conuinced, to bee against Iustice and common sense, yet they thinke it must bee receiued as an Oracle from God. But make not ship-wracke of your estates or liues, Calander and Argentine, I aduise you: that laying aside all seruile preiudice, you earnestly consider what you haue to doe. Then Saturnine, the losse of a mans estate or life, is  lesse then the losse of his soule, which is made by the forsaking of Gods Law.Malac. 2.7. For the Law of God is forsa∣ken, when as the will of the chiefe Priest, whose lippes doe preserue knowledge, as Malachie witnesseth, is neglected. True, sayd Patriotta, so long as the lippes of the cheife Priest doe preserue the Law, so that the voice of the Law and the voice the Priest doe agree. But if the Law doe faile from the Priest, as Ieremy foretold might come to passe, that the Law may bidde one thing and the Priest another, then without doubt we are not now to obey the Apocryphall voice of the chiefe Priest,Sum Syluest. verbo obedien. num. 50. but the canonicall authority of the Law, as Syluester that Catholike Doctor gaue warning. If the Pope enioyne any thing vnder the paine of excommunication, which sauoureth of sinne, in the performance whereof it is presumed there will succeede a scandall of soules and bodies in the city, then the Pope is not to be obeyed. Then Calander being somewhat mooued, started vp from his seat, and said, that hee greatly wisht, that the chiefe Priest would resolue his owne Dilemma, and withall, did much commend the clemencie of the
King, who had vsed the Oath of Allegeance for distin∣ction sake, that hee might truely discerne the true Ca∣tholike subiects from the treacherous. And added fur∣ther, that it was newes to him, which hee heard from Patriotta about the Iesuites, whom, if it did appeare by Garnets voluntary confession to haue beene the princi∣pall authors of the gun-powder-treason, he would ne∣uer heereafter receiue any Iesuite into his house:The subiect of the whole Dialogue. but because, saith he, we are met together to know the rea∣sons of faithfull obedience to the Prince, of what sort soeuer he be: and of the power of the Bishop of Rome, in deposing hereticall Kings, and absoluing subiects from their faith and obedience, while these things bee argued by you, that bee learned on both sides, wee that bee vnlearned Laickes doe promise you our best attention. Two founda∣tions of Chri∣stian obedi∣ence due to any King. 1. The per∣petuall com∣mandement of Christ. 2. The pra∣ctise of the ancient Chri∣stians.Then Patriotta: First I will lay downe, saith he, two grounds or foundations of faithfull obedience, to bee performed of all subiects to kings, as well euill as good, Pagans as Christians, Hereticks as Catholikes. 1. On the perpetuall and immutable com∣mandement of Christ. 2. The other, the example of the first Chri∣stians, and chiefly of the Bishops of Rome, for 800 yeeres and more, after Christ. Let vs consider them both against the cheife head of the Popes bull, wherein he affirmeth, but prooueth not,The bull. that the oath of allegeance and obedience to King Iames, cannot be kept with reseruation of the Catholike faith, and saluation of your soules. Matth. 22.21.Why then did Christ say, Giue to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods? by which words what meant he else, then that Christi∣ans should giue ciuill obedience to the Emperour, and spirituall obedience to God. Why did hee make good this commandement with his owne example, when he sealed his obedience with payment of tribute for him∣selfe
and for Peter? Christ therefore gaue in charge, that Christians should faithfully obey Tyberius a Pagane, and a most cruell Emperor, and (that which is more) obeyed him himselfe, and shall the Pope forbidd the faithfull Papists to obey King Iames a Christian and a most mercifull Prince? and shall he dare to say that the Oath of obedience cannot be kept, their faith and salua∣tion reserued, which Christ the Authour of faith and saluation did both command and performe? I am not ignorant that both the Pope and Bellarmine doe take it for proued and granted that the King is an Hereticke. But if the King might argue both cases with them face to face, before learned and equall iudges, I durst paune my life, that the King in their presence would conuince more strongly, and more peremptorily that the Pope were Antichrist, then that the Pope with the helpe of his Champion should proue the King to be an Heritike. But grant to them for a time that which they miserably begge, would Christ thinke good that faithfull obedi∣ence should be giuen to an Infidell, i. to an Emperour that was altogether a stranger from the faith, and would he iudge the same to be denied to an Hereticke, i. to a King deceiued in the faith? hee would not, hee would not. If Christ then did right, then doth this supposed Vicare of Christ amisse. And if fealty and obedience cannot be performed to a King as you thinke with reseruation of the Catho∣like faith, why did Saint Peter when he had set downe Catholike faith in the 1. Chap: command obedience due to the King in the 2. Chapter.1. Pet. 2.13. Bee subiect to the King as to the most eminent, euen to Nero that mon∣ster of men? wherein he taught that the impietie of the person ordained of God to gouern, ought not to ouer throw the obedience of subiects, nor the authoritie of the Prince. If Peter speakes well, then Peters successor speakes ill. If Peter speake by the spirit of Christ, then Peters successour speaketh by the spirit of Antichrist.
But Peter did binde all, by a bond of a religious com∣mandement, both Clarkes and Laickes, when he pre∣sentlie added,1. Pet. 2.17. feare God, honour the King, As if he had said, they be cleane voide of Gods feare, whosoeuer de∣ny honour to the King. And therefore Salomon Pro∣uerbes 21. doth comprehend both duties vnder one word: My sonne feare God and the King. Here Saturnine. But auncient Ignatius, saith he, in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, speaketh after this manner,Forged Igna∣tius brought in to crosse Salo∣mon. worship God, next the Byshoppe, and last of all the King. This is a hard case, Saturnine, said Patriotta to make Ig∣natius Salomons corrector, as if hee had forgotten his dutie toward the chiefe Priest.Pro. 21. Salomon saith honor God, and the King: but I say, honour God first, the Byshop next, and the King last. Certainely true Ignatius would neuer haue spoken so saucily. Salomon saith, but I say, and so preferre a Priest before a Prince. But it is no hard mat∣ter for you to place the Byshop in the middle betwixt God and the King. For you do nothing more willing∣ly then make your Pope the controuler of all Kings, and to that purpose bring in a counterfet and a bastard∣ly Ignatius to patronize your ambition. But Peter saith Saturnine calleth the Prince a humane creature. True, answered Patriotta, in respect of his na∣ture: but in respect of his ordination, he is of as heauen∣ly a creation as a Priest. For kings rule by God, as priests preach by God. From man they haue their nature, from God their power. For there is no power but from God as the Apostle teacheth. As they are men they are imme∣diately from their Parents, as they are Princes from God. Therefore a Magistrate is called a Minister and or∣dination of God. Yea which is more, Kings are called Gods. They as Gods vicegerents vpon earth are vouch∣safed the honour of Gods name. Priests are called men of God, Angels of God, but kings are called Gods. There∣fore the King is not called a humane creature by Peter,
because he hath his beginning from man,A double o∣bedience due to kings actiue passiue in things lawfull vnlawfull. but because the gouernment is administred by man and for man. Be subiect to him saith Peter for the Lord, the text hath it sometime as to the Lord, i. as to Christs Vicare in his owne kingdome: as Eleutherius Pope of Rome called King Lucius, sometime in the Lord, i. in all things law∣full, although in things vnlawfull, there is a certain kind of obedience due: but an actiue obedience in things lawfull to do that which is commanded, a passiue in things vnlawfull to suffer that which is inflicted. But for the Lord saith Peter, that Kings although they bee tyrants, (as then Nero was,) bearing the rule and image of God vpon earth, though they bee Gods scourges, yet they must be honoured with the fealtie and obedi∣ence of all for Gods sake. As an heathen man could say, Good Emperors are to be desired of vs, but any are to be endured. The Apostle addeth, for the praise of the good, and the punishment of the wicked. Hence a certaine Master of the Presbyterie gathered a false & a dangerous con∣sequence cosen germane to yours:A leude colle∣ction of a Schismaticke. That because the king is a power ordained by God, to the praise of the good, and the punishment of the wicked, if he gouerne to punish the good, and praise the wicked, that hee is not a power ordained by God, and if hee bee not of God no more to be obeyed, but to be resisted. O wicked consequence vnknowne to Peter & Paul, who although they did see, and feele the tyran∣nie, and crueltie of the Lyon, as Paul calles Nero; that they thought not that the abuse of the power did take away the power it selfe, but did lay necessitie of obedi∣ence vpon all Christians, teaching that it would come to passe, that if they did resist Nero, they did resist God himselfe the Author and ordainer of so great power. With what face therefore can the Pope deny that the Oath of Allegeance and obedience is to be kept with a Christian moderate King, though an Hereticke, as you thinke, as a matter in it selfe vnlawfull, and contrarie to faith and saluation: whereas Peter commanded faith∣full
obedience as holy, and performed it as dutie, to Nero a Pagan and most bloody tyrant? And if fealtie and obedience cannot be performed of Catholickes to an Hereticall King retaining their Catholicke religion, why did Saint Paul, whenas for∣merly he had in plentifull maner deliuered the Catho∣like religion of Rome, in his 13. Chapter drawe from thence this precept,Rom. 13.1. that euery soule should submit himselfe to the higher power? he that speakes of all excludes none as Chrysostome obserues. And Bernard to the Archbyshop of Sene, euery soule is subiect, therefore yours. Who hath exempted you from this generall commandement? The ex∣ception is a meere illusion. Subiection requireth these three. 1. Reuerence in their soules. 2. Honour in their wordes. 3. Obedience in their deedes. And marke that he requireth subiection of the soule in a subiect.Rom. 12. In the beginning of the 12. Chapter, spea∣king of the obedience due to God, he exacteth subiecti∣on of the body,Rom. 13. In the beginning of the 13. Chapter speaking of the obedience due to a Prince, he requireth the subiection of the soule.What obedi∣ence is due to Princes. Hath hee not likewise sub∣mitted the soule to God and the body to the Prince? yes verily. But to that end he hath distinguished these, because men doe for the most part thus excuse them∣selues, that they vowe their soule to God, when they prostitute their body to the Deuill: and yeeld their bo∣dy to the magistrate, when they deny him the reuerence of the soule. Therefore let the soule be subiect to the higher power saith the Apostle. Hence two other parts of sub∣iection doe necessarily follow; Paul the Apostle doth adde the reasons with a commandement, which Paul the Byshoppe doth not adde with his prohibition. For all power saith he is of God. He speaketh not so much of the Prince as of the gouernment, nor so much of the person as of the power. To shew that hee rather respec∣teth
the right of gouerning, then the qualitie of the go∣uernour. Againe if the power of a King be from God,Power from God not the Pope or peo∣ple. then it is not from the Pope, as diuers of the Popes flatterers would haue it. Neither is it from the people as diuers flatterers of the people doe at this day striue for it. I beleeue they leaue the power of destroying a gouernment to him, whom they dreame to haue a power giuen to build it vp. They that yeeld so much to the Pope, subiect a King vnder a sober tyrant, they that yeeld so much to the people, subiect him vnder a furious tyrant, and as the Poet said very wittily and truely, to a beast of many heads. And therefore the King is not bound to giue accompt either to Pope or people, but to God, from whom hee receiued all his power im∣mediately. Hence the Apostle presently inferreth these two conclusions: 1. He that resisteth Gods power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and draweth to him∣selfe damnation. The 2. that the King is Gods Mini∣ster, and beareth the sword, wherewith he doth defend the good, and punish the wicked, and that all must bee subiect, not for wroth, but for conscience. That no man may thinke that Peter and Paul, thought that obe∣dience was due for the times sake, and that they wanted force rather to resist Nero, then a minde. I will shut vp all in a word. The Catholicke faith of the auncient Romane Church, as it was deliuered by Paul the Apo¦stle, did inferre loyall subiection to a Pagan cruell King. The Catholicke faith of the vpstart Church of Rome, as it is deliuered by Paul the Byshop doth take away and ouerthrow Allegeance and all obedience as it were vnnaturall, from a Christian King, and such a King that euen by the confession of his Aduersaries is very mercifull. Whom then shall we beleeue? Paul the Apostle, or Paul the Byshop, an holy decree, or an vn∣holy prohibition? Neither were these commandements of Christ, Peter and Paul of ciuill obedience to be shew∣ed to Emperours, Kings, and ciuill Magistrates, muta∣ble
according to times, but are to be accounted perpe∣tuall and eternall. I haue laid the first foundation of our loyaltie, the ex∣presse and euerlasting commandement of Christ, the second followes which is the practise of Christians. Heere, Saturnine, before you go further saith he, I yeeld that subiection, reuerence, honour, fealty, obedience, is to be performed to a King,A King ex∣communica∣ted no King in poperie. so long as a King is a king, but if he leaue off to be a king, then it ought no longer to be performed. But he leaueth off to bee a King as∣soone as he is denounced to bee rightly excommunica∣ted by the Vicar of Christ, whereby he is presently ac∣counted by law to bee deposed of his Kingdome, and his subiects absolued from the Oath of obedience. And although you laie very heynous and greiuous crimes of treason vpon our most holy Father, and vpon many holy Priests, and chiefly vpon the Iesuits, yet if you would thinke of the matter a little better, all this smoak of words would vanish to nothing. For first I affimre that the Pope of right hath had, and now hath this power: then I affirme that assoone as he had it, hee did put it in practise. And yet it followeth not, that he that defendes this, as you conclude is a Traytor. Thomas Aqui∣nas obiected.Vnlesse perhaps you dare account Thomas Aquinas that most glorious Saint, and Angelicall Doctour to be a Traytor, who writeth thus. After that the Prince is denounced an Apostata, all inferiours and subiects are to bee absolued from the Oath they had taken, and from their obedi∣ence due vnto him. And you may if you please ioyne with him,Francis Toleta∣nus obiected. as a fellow in the like treason Francis Toletan a worthy Professor in our time, who doth thus com∣ment vpon Thomas: Note saith hee that there is the same reason of one that is excommunicated: because that assoone as one is denounced excommunicate all his subiects are freed from the fealtie:The Laterane Councell ob∣iected. and that most famous Oecomeni∣call Lateran Councell, held about 300. yeares since, of 70. Pattiarches and Archbyshops, and 400. and 12.
Bishops, and 800 other choice Prelates, because it de∣creed, that the Pope had the power we speake of, do you thinke it was a conuenticle of Traytors? Then Patriotta, what Thomas Aquinas saith he, what  Toletane, what Laterane Councell doe you speake of? Thomas Aquinas writ 1200 yeeres after Christ, was ouer∣taken with the error of his time, and was the Popes vas∣sall: neither did hee alledge any Prophet, Apostle, or Doctor, only he rested vpon the only example of Gre∣gorie the seuenth, who was the first that a 1000 yeeres after Christ did attempt by excommunication to cast Henry the 4. out of his Kingdom.Pope Hilde∣brand no fit example a∣gainst Kings. A very weighty au∣thoritie forsooth against a Kings sword, which Christ ordeyned, and to whom the Church of Christ, as it shall appeare afterward, obeyed for a 1000 yeeres, of an vpstart Canonist, dreaming in the darke night of Poperie, that the subiects might be absolued by the Pope, from the oath of obedience, wherewith God had bound them, and alleaging no other Author but Pope Hildebrand, a turbulent and furious monster, as he was accounted by his owne Cardinalls. And yet Aquinas was somewhat more reasonable then Toletane,Aquinas an∣swered. he thought that no mans subiects were to be absolued from their oath of obedience, but his, that was denounced an Apostata, that for euer had fal∣len from all christianitie. But Toletan forsooth,Toletane an∣swered. the worthy professor of our age, the Popes hireling, with lesse learning and greater boldnesse, as if he were some worshipfull Vmpire giues his sentence without all rea∣son: Note saith he, that the case is all one of a Prince ex∣communicated by the Pope vpon any cause whatsoeuer. Do you not thinke that these be notable demonstrations in a controuersie of this weight? which Antichrists hyred slaues, haue vttered as Oracles vpon their bare autho∣ritie, against the perpetuall and manifest commande∣ments of Christ, and practises of the Apostles? In the meane while the Apostles shall be silent, the Fathers
shall be mute, while Kings shall be censured by two of the Popes young and sworne Chapleynes professed and sworne enemies of Kings. But that famous Lateran Councell both for antiquitie and number must fight in the quarrell.The Laterane Councell an∣swered. We seeke not what euill associates, but what good authors you can alledge in this businesse, neither must you striue with number, but with reason. It was no hard matter at that time, for Innocent the third to call together 800 Co∣uent Priors, and their Vicars his creatures, the hungry Friers, and drousie pated Monkes, for whom it was not lawfull to sit in Councels, who might preuaile against 400 Bishops, not in weight of reason, but in number of voices, and coine any decree against Princes, at the becke of the Pope their great God and maker. But what if at that time nothing at all was decreed, but only propounded, and deliberaetd on, as Platina testifieth, that many things were offred to consultation, but that nothing could be determined, because the Pope suddenly departing, to quiet a sedition lately stir∣red vp, died in his iourney? And yet will you call the meeting of a number of hunger-starued Fryers, onely consulting, how the Pope might depose a King out of his kingdome, but concluding nothing, because the Popes sodaine death preuented it, will you call it the most famous generall Laterane Councell? And that power which Kings haue receiued from God, and that obedience which subiects are bound to performe, both by a charge from Christ, and rules from the Apostles, shall a few of the later proud Bishops 1000 yeeres after Christ, and mercenarie schoolemen, and begging Monkes, take the same power from Princes by the de∣crees of men? Shall God ordeyne Kings, and shall men ouerthrow them? Hath Gods word bound vs to obedience, and shall mans word release vs of the same? But that I may doe no wrong to Gods word, I will
oppose men to men, Catholikes to Catholikes, as they be called, and ancient to younger ones. Otho Frisingensis writes, after hee had read ouer and  ouer the acts of the Romane Kings and Emperors,Lib: 6. cap. 35. that he found none before Henry the 4th Emperor excom∣municated by the Bishop of Rome, or set beside his kingdom, which was first assayed by Gregorie the seuenth in the yeere after Christ 1066. I haue found out Ʋrsbergensis,Vrsbergens. in anno 1085. who speaking of the Sinode of Mentz (wherein the Popes Legates being present, the Bishops that had taken armes with Gregorie the seuenth against the Emperor were deposed, and cast out of their Bishoprickes) said, that there by common consent and counsell was setled the peace of God; whence he concludeth that Gregorie was the author of that di∣uelish garboyle against the Emperor. Sigebertus the Abbot speaketh playner,Sigibertus in anno 1088. and goeth further, if good men will giue me leaue to say so. This only noueltie, saith he, that I may not say heresie, did not as yet appeare in the world, that his Priests, who saith to a King, thou Apostata, and that causeth an hypocrite to beare rule for the sinnes of the people, should teach the people that they ought to shew no obedience to wicked Kings: and though they haue taken an oath of Allegeance, yet owe no fealtie, neither are to be called Periurs, if they haue such mindes against Kings, yea that hee is accounted for an excom∣municant, that doth obey the King: that hee doth against the King is freed from the fault of iniustice and periurie. This was counted noueltie, this was counted heresie of your Sigebert about 500 yeares since, which doctrine you thrust vpon vs, as catholike out of Aquinas, Tole∣tane, and the Laterane Councell. And because Baronius the Cardinall,Vincent. in Spec. hist: lib. 15. cap: 84. doth denie Si∣gebert the Abbot, a Schismatike, I adde Vincentius the Bishop aboue 300 and fiftie yeeres agoe, by whom this very heresie is condemned in the same words, where∣with they are taxed by Sigebert.
And if either Sigebert or your Vincentius haue lost their authoritie, because as Schismatikes, they were said to take part with Kings against the Pope, see that your credits be not crackt by these late writers, because the fauourers of this nouell heresie, as rebells flatter the Pope against Kings. For it is plaine that there were very excellent and sincere Catholikes, not a few, as they were accounted in those times, whom Gregories fact did mightily displease, and who did plainely denie, that the Apostolike See had any authoritie to depose Henry the 4. Emperor, as he did, and to absolue his subiects from their oath of fealtie: as the Bishop of Mentz, who was in great fauour with Gregorie the seuenth,Gregor 7. epist. 21. lib. 8. apud Suer. ad Conc. writ to him, and intreated him to furnish him with those reasons, where∣by he was moued to depose the Emperor, that hee might be the better prouided to answer them, that did gainesay him. And Gerochus, Gregories great champion was con∣streyned to say,Auent. lib. 5. fol. 563. as it is in Auentine, that the Romanes tooke diuine honor to themselues, neither would giue any ac∣compt of their doings, neither would endure that any should say to them, why doe you so? who answer as the Poet writes. So I will, so I command, my will stand for a reason. I did first vse heauenly weapons against you Saturnine, you made resistance with humane. Now I oppose hu∣mane against humane, yours against yours; and I will proue it with a necessarie argument, that it was a new heresie, which Sigebert so called. If that be taken for a good definition of heresie, which Robert Grosthead that holy and learned Bishop of Lincolne vnder King Hen∣ry the third, fetcht out of S. Austen. The definiti∣on of heresie.Heresie in Greeke, saith he, is an election or choice in Latine, wherein an opinion chosen by a humane sense contra∣rie to the holy Scripture, is openly taught, and obstinately maintayned. By which argument, as Matth: Parisiensis reports, he proued Innocent the Pope to be an Heretike, because he
thought it in his power to bestow a benefice vpon a childe. with the same argument shall Paul the fift be convicted, who thinkes it in his power to depriue a King of his Kingdome. For this opinion was first chosen by humane sense, by Hildebrand to get vaine-glory, and enlarge the boundes of the Churches dominion with all humane policies and powers. And it is against the holy Scrip∣tures, which hath submitted Bishops to Kings, not Kings to Bishops, as before I concluded. And it is o∣penly taught, being set out in two Bulles by Paul the fift. and it is obstinately defended by the Bishop, who forbids vnder the paine of excommunication, that the Catholikes shall not take the Oath of Allegeance, or else retract it being taken. And it is to be doubted, that to whom the definition of heresie doth agree, whether heresie the thing defined doth agree? That Grosthead being dead seemeth with his definition, as with his Crosier-staffe to strike the Pope vpon his brest. Then Saturnine. What Schismatikes, saith he, what  Sigebert, what Vincentius, what Grosthead with his Crosi∣ers staffe do you reckon vp? As if they were not all con¦demned by the Church, because they were at conten∣tion with the head of the Church. But that wee may not seeme rather to contend with the authorities of men, then of God, Paul the Apostle forbad to salute an Heretike, yea he warneth, that after the first or second admonition, we should auoide him. If it be not lawfull to salute an Heretike, is it lawfull to serue and obey an Heretike? Paul teacheth, that we sacrifice an heretike, as hatefull to God, as a great sacrifice to him, and tha we flie from him as from a gangrene. And shall it not be lawfull to cut of the gangrene and cast it away, lest it doe infect vs: when as we are bidden to cut off our owne flesh, if it be affected with a gangrene? Now saith Patriotta, you shew your selfe a right Ie∣suite,  when as Paul did forbid, that we should salute
an Heretike,How heretikes are to be delt withall. but auoide him after the first or second ad∣monition; in one word, he did forbid voluntarie so∣cietie, not necessarie dutie: familiar salutations, which curtesie affords, not reuerent obseruance which pietie imposeth; priuate acquaintance whereby soules are in∣fected, not publike obedience whereby gouernment is maintained. It is not lawfull to salute an Heretike; will you not therefore pay an Heretike the money that is owing him? yes that I would say you. I demand againe, whether the debt of obedience be not more iust, then the debt of money? which is of greater force, a debt contracted in your owne consent, or that which is imposed vpon you by the commandement of God? Here Saturnine. We owe nothing, saith he, to He∣retikes. Nothing said Patriotta? Doth not the seruant owe faithful seruice to his Master, being an Heretike? he oweth it you say to an Infidell, not to an Heretike. You trifle. If you owe it to an Infidell which doth op∣pugne the faith, doe you not owe it to an Heretike, who only doth erre in the faith? Doth not the wife owe faithfull obedience to her husband though he be an he∣retike? yes, when nothing may be the cause of diuorce, but adulterie, as Christ teacheth: no not infidelitie it selfe, as Paul saith. Lastly, children are bound to obey their Parents in the Lord, although they be Heretikes: Therefore shall not subiects much more obey the Prince, Lord of the familie, the husband of the com∣mon weale, the publike father of the country, although he be an heretike? for heresie doth not dissolue the bond of dutie, but breaketh of the knot of acquain∣tance. But heresie is a gangrene, as the Apostle faith. But although we are commanded to cut of all heresie, as a gangrene, yet are we not commanded to roote out euery heretike. It were wrong with the Papists if this your opinion were setled in our mens mindes. But we leaue these parts of cruell Surgeons to your selues, who presently betake your selues to lanching and fearing,
and alwaies vse the cutting knife and fire, and look not for easier and gentler remedies. But seeing in this quar∣rell you seeme to buckle with vs with weapons out of the Scripture, which you doe seldom handle, whereby you proue that Kings in right may be, and in fact haue been depriued, that subiects may by a word be absol¦ued, as by a word they were bound with an oath of o∣bedience. Goe to, let vs see before you come to the se∣cond foundation, the practise of Christians, what you can say against vs in the former. Then Saturnine, I will freely speake (saith he) what I  verily thinke. God had not securely prouided for his Church, if he had not sent some holy & stout Prophets and Preists, who might with their Church discipline correct and keep vnder such Kings as were wicked and tyrannous, when they grew desperate,Examples out of the old Testament. 1. Saul. and might re∣mooue them being the hatred of God and men, the shame to religion, and the burthen to the people. Therefore we read the first King ouer Gods people, because he seemed to take vpon him the spirituall fun∣ction, was excommunicated by Samuel at Gods com∣mandement, and put from the possession of his King∣dome, although after Dauids annointing, and his owne deposing, he held it by tyrannicall force many yeeres: and did often attempt to murther both Dauid the com∣petitour of the kingdome, and Samuel the executioner of Gods decree, as he had slaine foure-score and fiue of the holy Preists the Nobites. Who knoweth not that a speciall Prophet was sent  of God to Ieroboam King of Israel,2. Ieroboam. who did denounce the iudgement of God, against the King and the Kings race, because he had separated the people by a wicked schisme from the ancient and true worship of God, be∣gunne at Ierusalem, and had erected a new altar in Be∣thel (whereby the schisme and diuision from the Apo∣stolike See is properly prefigured) and ordained a new Cleargy, a hunger-starued, and contemptible out of
Aarons order, such an one as yours is. The sinne was afterward so seuerely punished according to the cen∣sure of the Prophet, that there was none left of the Kings stocke to make water against the wall. The King did very fondly lay hold vpon the man of God to kill him, because hee thought the denouncing of Gods iudgement was treason against the Kings crowne and dignity. 3. Ozia.We read likewise that Ozia the King of Iuda beeing puft vp with intolerable pride, not content with the ho∣nour of a King, did insolently presume to vsurpe the spirituall and Priestly office, being stoutly withstood by Azaria and 80. other Priests, and violently expelled out of the Temple: and that because he threatned and resisted the Priests, he was strucken with a filthy lepro∣sie: and therefore not onely cast out of the Temple, but by their authority separated from the company of men (which was a speciall figure of the Priestly autho∣rity vnder the new Law, which may excommunicate Kings as well as others for heresie, which is a spirituall leprosie) and committed the gouernment of the King∣dome to Iotham his sonne. An apparant example that it is lawfull for Priests to take armes, and by force to bring vnder the wickednesse of Kings, when as they deeme it is auailable for the preseruation of religion, and the honour of God. The zeale of the good Priests in the depriuing of that wicked Queen Athalia is worthily commended:4. Athalia. whom Iehoida the cheefe Priest with a power of the Priests and Commons did command to be put beside her throne, and put to death, and did annoynt and crowne the true heire. Who is ignorant how couragiously Elias answered, being designed to death by Achab and Iezabel,5. Ahab. who had cast downe the holy altars, and had slaine the true worshippers of God. That it was not hee and other men of God, but Achab and his house that had trou∣bled
Israel: and with what zeale hee slew Iezabels false Prophets, restored the holy altars, called for fire from heauen, wherewith he did destroy Ochozias captaines and messengers, and annointed Iehu king ouer Israel, and cast Achab with all his posterity out of the King∣dome, of whom it is sayd, That he put downe, and ouer∣threw Kings, and cast the mighty out of their seats:Eccles. 48. as God appointed Ieremy ouer kingdoms, that he should plant, and roote them vp, build them vp, and plucke them downe Which power of Christs Preisthood vnder the new Testament, doth appeare to bee farre larger and more ample, and is giuen to the chiefe Preist the Bi∣shop of Rome, that he may in the name of Christ break in peeces, and beat to powder with his iron rod, as if they were earthen vessels, such kings as lift vp them∣selues against Christ his Church, which is his spouse & his kingdome. For by those examples it is euident, that Kings an∣nointed and iustly created, may of right bee deposed: Secondly, for what causes they may in fact bee depri∣ued: Lastly, that in the inauguration and consecration of kings, as also in their depriuation God did vse the ministery of Priests and Prophets, either ordinarie or extraordinarie, to that purpose, that they might be, not onely Iudges, but correctours of kings. For whereas kings doe holde their dignity and supreame authority from God, and haue bound themselues with all their might to promote the true religion and worship of God, and the honour of their highest King and Lord, and to gouerne the people in the faith and fear of God, the Priests and Prophets (to whom the cheefe and principall care of religion and soules is committed, and who haue beene set aboue Princes in spirituall matters) did of right oppose themselues against them in those passages, which brought dishonour to God, ruine to the religion, and damnation to the soules of subiects: and did exercise iustice and iudgement against their
Princes, in the name of God, who abused their gouern∣ment to ouerthrow the true worship of God, & brought in and established idolatry, heresie and other abomi∣nations. For there was betweene God and the King a certaine compact, as it were, which had force euer after, either openly, or at lest secretly, that none should draw away their subiects, either by force, or by any other meanes from the faith of their Ancestours, and from the reli∣gion & holy ceremonies of God, deliuered & receiued by the hands of Preists: whereby God did insinuate, that if they did obserue these precepts and conditions, they should long raigne with their posterity: otherwise it should come to passe, as we taught before, that as the Prophets and Preists did annoint kings on that condi∣tion onely, that they should defend and maintaine the worship and honour of God: so likewise they should depose kings, when they broke the couenant of God, and fell to strange gods, and draue their people to A∣postasie. And thus it appeareth, it was vnder the olde Testament. And if God did furnish the Priests and Prophets of the olde Testament, with such power of excommunication, whereby they might depriue wic∣ked and tyrannous kings, cast out of their thrones, and driuen from the companie of men, not onely of life, if they could, and this common light, that they might bring no damage to the Synagogue: with how much greater authority hath he strengthned the high priest of the new testamēt, the vicar of Christ, that he might cast out & expell from the Communion of the Church, & beeing so cast out depose from their kingdomes such Kings, as are Infidels, Apostataes, Heretickes and Ty∣rants, and that not onely, but release their peoples oathes giuen to such kings, who haue broken their owne oath made to the Priest, in the name of God, at their coronation? vnlesse we thinke that God had lesse care of his Church, then of his Synagogue, or doth
more beare with Kings in these dayes, who be heads of Apostasie from God, then he did with Kings of former times. Both which bee it farre from Gods Iustice and prouidence. Truely he had left a miserable and a wret∣ched Church as desolate and forsaken, if he had expo∣sed it, being bereft of the helpe of holy Preists, to the lust of cruell Tyrants, that they might tosse and turne it at their pleasure, and alter the state of religion euery yeere. For whereas heeretofore Christian Bishops did not depose, Nero, Dioclesian, Iulian the Apostata, Ʋalens and the like: it was because Christians wanted tempo∣rall strength: for otherwise they might haue done it by right, I say by right, the Bishops might haue depri∣ued the Pagan-Emperours, Apostataes and Hereticks, if the Church had had that force to resist, as before and after getting force it did resist. Then Patriotta, while in your malice, Saturnine, you  suffer your selfe to bee thus carried against Kings, you belch out notable blasphemy against God: for what is blasphemy if this bee not? to accuse Gods prouidence against the Church, vnles he giue power to holy Preists to depose wicked Kings: you haue very vnaduisedly founded the depth of Gods counsell, with the plummet of your shallow iudgement, who hath neuer the lesse, I cannot tell whether much the more prouided for his Church, as well by trying her patience with aduersity, as seeking after thankfulnesse with prosperity: aswell when he consumed the sinnes of the Saints by the per∣secution of Princes, as when hee satisfied their desires with the mercy of pious Princes: aswell by spoiling his sonnes of earthly pleasures recompencing them with the rewards of the blessed, as continuing them hee de∣lighted them with the comforts of such as were misera∣ble. Which I doe not speake to that end, that I may excuse the cruelty of Tyrants, but that I may set foorth the mercy of God, because those things which they in∣tend to the Saints for their euill, God turneth to their good.
But you went about to daily with the expresse com∣mandements of Christ and the Apostles, with a few ex¦amples of the Priests and the Prophets ill vnderstood, and farre worse applyed to the Pope. How did that vnbeseeme a Diuine? let vs therefore, if you please, waigh them seuerally. Samuel, you say, did excommunicate Saul, and being excommunicate cast him out of his kingdome:Samuel did not excom∣municate or depose Saul. therefore the Pope hath power to cast a Prince out of his Kingdome. I de∣nie first the Antecedent. It was not the Prophet, but God himselfe that cast off Saul for his wickednesse: for it is Gods onely prerogatiue, to depose the mighty out of their thrones, & to raise vp those that are cast down: to deiect kings, lift vp kings, and to bestow a King∣dome vpon whom hee please. Hee sent Samuel onely to denounce it to Saul, and to annoynt Dauid in his roome. Samuel did annoint Dauid, when God did expressely command it, therefore the Pope may depose a Prince, although God did not expressely command it. I pray tell me, hath the Pope any reuelation from God to de∣priue a King? No, you will say, but hee hath a com∣mandement, as before him many other had: true, to denounce the iudgements of God, either temporall or eternall, not to execute them. God is the actour in ca∣sting downe of Saul, not Samuel. God inflicted the pu∣nishment as a Iudge, Samuel onely did publish it as a messenger, neither as he was a Prophet by his generall vocation, but as hee was a Prophet by speciall instinct, appointed to that purpose: not as Superiour to Saul, but as Gods messenger, who did precisely lay this chage on him, and named the successour with his own mouth. What is this to the Pope? vnlesse you thinke the prerogatiue proper to the mighty God, communi∣cable with a sinnefull man: which if hee take it on him without Gods speciall and expresse commandement, he doth not exercise it vnder God, but equall as God. And
whatsoeuer is done without God, is done against God. But Saul, as you say, is deposed by Samuel, by Gods comman∣dement, God set downe the censure, Samuel declared it. I adde also out of the text, hee did not declare the  person of Saul to bee cast out of the possession of the kingdome, as you say, but the off-spring of Saul from the succession of the kingdom: for Israel and Iuda, after Saul was reiected of God, and Dauid annointed, did for all that with Dauid obey him many yeers:1. Sam. 24.11. whom Dauid after his deposing, called his Lord, and the Lords annoyn∣ted. God keepe mee, saith hee, from laying my hands vpon him: for he is the annoynted of the Lord: he doth not say, he was, but he is the annoynted of the Lord. And he restrained himselfe in ot for feare, but for conscience, not for curtesie, but for duty, when he found him slee∣ping in the caue, and one of his captaines would haue killed him: Take heede (saith he) what you doe,1. Sam. 24.5. for who shall strike the Lords annoynted, and be guillesse? hee did not thinke it compassion, because hee spared him, but hee would haue thought it a sinne, if hee had layd his hand on him. Hence arose that scruple in his consci∣ence, because he had cut off the lappet of the Kings gar∣ment: hee trembled when hee cut off the skirt of the kings coat, these good fellowes blush not to offer vio∣lence to the kings person. Hee commanded the man to be thrust thorough, who had killed Saul the Lords annointed, these appoint earthly & heauenly rewards, for such as murther annointed Kings. And if all Israel did of right obey Saul, being reiected  by Gods command, if Dauid himselfe annointed the successour of the kingdome, did performe all loyall o∣bedience to him, if he reuerenced him as the Lords an∣noynted, and condemned it as a sinne in himselfe, if he had layd his hand vpon him, when hee might, and reuenged it vpon another that had committed it: how can the Pope absolue the subiects from the oath of o¦bedience, made to any king whatsouer, or make his act
meritorious who doth kill him, from whom the Pope without any authoritie hath taken the gouernment? you see therefore that there is neither truth in the An∣tecedent, of your enthymem, nor coherence in the consequence. After the same manner wee may answere you about Ieroboam,The example of Ieroboam answered. that which your selfe confesse by the way: that the Prophet was sent, who should denounce the punishment in word only, not violently inflict it him∣selfe: and did not vtter one word of the schisme, and deposing, but onely foretold what should follow, that Iosias should ouerturne that altar, and burne the Priests bones vpon it, as it fell out 300. yeares after Iero∣boam was dead. But whether it prefigured our falling from the Apo∣stolicall sea,Ieroboam and his Priests types of po∣perie. as you call it, or your backsliding from the Apostolicall truth, and whether Ieroboam with his altar doe represent your Pope, who hath corrupted the true and auncient worship of God with vnwritten traditi∣ons; or our Princes who haue reformed it, so corrup∣ted by the holy Scriptures, it is not to be argued at this time: onely I see a great likenesse betweene his calues, and your idoll vpon the altar. I appeale to your religi∣ous wisedome, what difference is there in the case of Idolatrie, whether a caluish or a crustie Godhead bee a∣dored? I know your answere, you doe not worshippe the bread, but Christ in the bread. And Ieroboams Priests might make the same answere, that they wor∣shipped not the calfe, but God in the calfe: whose Ido∣latrie for all that you hold to be condemned. But whe∣ther Ieroboams Priests be the types of our Ministers, or of your shaulings; and whether they be more abiect and hungerstaru'd, they who for conscience sake serue the liuing God, or your Priests who to fill their paunches serue the golden calfe; it belongs not to this question in hand. And all this example, proueth nothing else, but that a wicked King may rightly bee reprehended of a
Prophet, as a wicked Pope may of any Priest: yet you would not say that a Pope might iustly bee deposed of him, as neither the king by the Prophet, although hee were greiuously reprehended by him as hee well de∣serued. Neither leprous Ozias though hee were shut from the company of men according to the Law,Ozias the Le∣perous no type of ex∣communica∣tion. whom you make the figure of a spirituall Leper, and by that reason of one that is excommunicate, was at any time thrust from his kingdome, because the gouernment thereof was committed to his sonne.4. Reg. 15. For Ozias continued king to his dying day, as the Scripture calleth him in the 25. yeare of his raigne which was the last of his life. Iothan therefore was not as yet the King, but the Kings Vice∣gerent, while his father liued. Neither did any Leper by Gods law loose his priuate inheritance,Inheritance not lost for leprosie. much lesse a king the publicke inheritance of the crowne. Neither did heresie which you tearme a spirituall leprosie, driue any out of his kingdome, no more then couetousnesse or ambition, or the contempt of the word cast the Pope out off his Popedome, which the Fathers called the leprosie of the soule. And if le∣prosie shall remoue a king out of his throne, how shall the Popes hold their chaires? that you leprous conclu∣sion doth as well touch the Popes myter as the Kings crowne. This figure then is as pernitious to the Pope as to the King. For whereas you said it was the office of the Priest to separate those that were Lepers, there you erre greatly. It was their office to discerne the leprosie, the Magi∣strates to separate, lest they should faint others. That we may therefore vrge this figure against you: It is the duty of Princes to separate the leprous, that is hereticall Popes, rather then of Popes to separate hereticall Princes. But whereas you said the person of the King was stoutly assalted by Azaria and 80. other Priests, and
by violence cast out of the Temple, that is an error far more dangerous. For they did not violently cast him out, but as the text hath it, they caused him to make hast to go out of the temple, no force at all being attempted. For it fol∣loweth, because the Lord stroke him, he was forced of his owne accord to depart. And so the word signifies, and so your vulgar translation hath it, which you call Ieromes, he made hast to go foorth. 2. Chron. 26. The Iesuits violence tax∣ed.But this error hath brought forth that dangerous sin, Saturnine, by the helpe of your conclusion, as it were by the aide of a Midwife. For you conclude it is a ma∣nifest example, that it is lawfull for Priests by force of armes, and by violent meanes to represse the wicked∣nesse of Kings. Azarias I confesse and the other Priests did resist the King, but with words, not with weapons. And because he had broken the Law by burning of incense, they did as it was meete, sharpely reproue him: neither did they forceably rush vpon the Magistrate, or lay strong hand vpon him, to driue him out of the temple, much lesse out of the kingdome. But your men Saturnine go fur∣ther, and from admonition fly to rebellion, from re∣prehension to force, from reprofe to armes, being cou∣soned and deceiued by the false interpretation of this and the like places. Here I appeale to you Princes, neither to you only who haue departed from the Pope, but to you who cleaue vnto him.☜ How long will ye suffer these martiall and swaggering Priests to abuse your patience? how long shall this superstitious madnesse deceiue you?An Ap stroph to popish Kings. how long shall this wolish fearcenesse vnder sheepes cloa∣thing assaile you? how long shall they couer their de∣testable rebellion against kings vnder the cloake of re∣ligion? And as if they fetcht poyson from heauen as Hercules Aeteus in the tragedie, abusing the authoritie of holy Scriptures, and examples of holy Priests, ga∣ther force against your sacred persons, and opprobry to your Maiesties?
This is, said Saturnine, to chaffe with vs not to dispute  with vs. But marke the reason if you please, why Ozias the king was stroken with the leprosie, because he pre∣sumed to execute the spirituall and priestly function, whereof you haue ordained your Kings supreame Go∣uernours. I marke it well, said Patriotta, and when we maintain that it is lawfull for our Princes, to preach the Gospell, to baptise, to minister the supper of the Lord, to forgiue sinnes, then cast vs in the teeth with Ozias pride and plague. In the meane while learne, that it is not for priests, but kings to beare armes; and the kings of Iuda, who vsed the temporall sword, to restore the truth, and suppresse error, which Dauid, Iehosophat, Ezekias, Iosias were said to haue done, got great fauour with God, and great honour with men. But wee when wee are iustly displeased with you, whenas like seditious tribunes you stirre vp the commons against Kings, and call them to armes, wherewith they may vanquish the professours of the Gospell, as occasion is offered, then here I pittie you exceedingly, that from Azarias example, peeuish∣ly vnderstood and wretchedly drawn to your purpose, you draw from an idle figure so slender an argument of your out-rage, that there appeareth neither probabili∣tie in the Antecedent, or necessitie in the consequence. And whereas you said that Athalia was depriued of  her kingdome and put to death, by Iehoida, the priest, with the forces of the priests and people,Atha iustly deposed but not by the Priest. Ioash the right heyre, whom hee preserued in the temple, being pro∣claimed, annointed, and crowned king, you held that the Pope might likewise, rightly depriue a lawfull king for heresie both of his kingdome and life, it doth lay o∣pen apparantly the wretchednesse of your cause. For what can you say else then that a wicked wo∣man who flew all Ochasias the kings ofspring, one sonne only excepted, and did vniustly vsurpe the kingdome, was surprised and punished, by the vndoubted and law∣full
heire of the crowne the king being proclaimed, and annointed, and the crowne set on his head by the con∣sent of the whole kingdome as you your selfe haue confessed: But Iehoida the high priest commanded to put her to death not the king. True: but hee commanded it by the authoritie of the king not his own. But the king you say, was but a childe of seuen yeares of age; but hee was no lesse a king at seuen yeares, then if he had beene of seuentie yeares. For age cannot take away the right of a kingdome which bloud hath giuen him.Iehoida had Gods law & mans law to approue his action. But Iehoida when he commanded Athalia to be slaine, in the kings name did it, both by Gods law, and mans law. First, he preserued the young king in the Sanctu∣arie, being kept from the rage of Athalia, and nourisht him secretly in the Lords house. Againe, hee was the chiefe of his Tribe, as others were of theirs, that hee might arrogate so much to himselfe as others might, in the nonage of the king to pacifie the kingdome, and to take vengeance vpon the vsurping Queene for the cruell tyrannie against the kings progenie Besides that, his wife was the kings Ant, and he was his neerest kins∣man, and therefore was bound both by the law of na∣ture and nations to defend the kings right, his age and innocencie. Last of all whatsoeuer hee attempted was with the Kings authoritie, and with the common coun∣sell, and consent of all the nobility. For he conuented all the captaines and cheife Fathers of Israel vnto him into the house of God, and made a couenant with them, and exacted an Oath of them in the house of God, and shewed the kings sonne vnto them. And so being not only the high priest, but chiefe also of his Tribe, and neerest allie to the king, nor with his owne, but with the common counsell and consent of the Peeres, nor commanded with his owne, but with the kings autho∣ritie that wicked Athalia iniustly vsurping the king∣dome, the kings ofspring being first murthered, and
extinguished, to be cast from her kingdome, and of her life. What is this to the Pope to depose a lawfull king to be murthered by a rebellious people, being first by excammunication deposed from his kingdome? And whereas you bragge of Elias zeale, who did not  only answere king Ahab very stoutly, but slew 400.Elias killed not Baals Priests. of Iesabels false Prophets; you tell vs of the act, but you cunningly conceale the cause and manner of it. The famine of the kingdome and Elias miracle were the causes, that king Ahab yeelded vp by a compact, and publicke decree of the kingdome these false Prophets into Elias hands to be put to death according to Gods Law. But Elias you say kild them. What? with his owne hand? do you think the Prophet was a slaughter-man? you will say, no, though they were not slaine by Elias hand, yet by Elias authoritie. You should say by his ad∣uise, rather then authoritie. For Elias was a priuate man, not a Magistrate. But Ahab if Elias had not vrgd him, had not slaine them. I thinke so, Elias mooued the king to do it, but compeld him not. Ahab gaue his consent with all Israel that the Baalitish priests, who had seduced the king and kingdome should bee slaine being conuicted by Gods law. For whenas a greeuous famine grew vpon them, and that no raine could fall, but at the word of Elias, as hee had foretold Ahab before the drought; being accused to Ahab to be the procurer of the famine, and troubler of Israel, defendeth himselfe, and testifieth before the king, that God had sent that plague vpon all Israel, be∣cause he and his Fathers house had forsaken the commande∣ments of God, and worshipped strange Gods. And to make his word good, he offered before all Israel, vpon paine to loose his head, that the king and his people were se∣duced by Baals priests, and that he would make it plain by a miracle, that is with fire sent downe from heauen, which should make it appeare whose sacrifice God did
approue: promising that they should haue plenty of raine, after the conuersion of Israel to the true God, and that he was sent to that end at that time. The King accepts the condition, all the rest giue their consents, and when they plainly perceiued by the miracle of Elias, that the Baalites were conuicted to be the decei∣uers, and should haue cast downe themselues vpon their faces, and giuen glorie to God, as the people did, and should most humbly haue submitted them-selues to the truth of God: Elias did aduise them, to lay hands on the Baalites, and to punish them with death by Gods law, due to such seducers and deceiuers. So Elias perswaded Ahab and all Israel, to consent to the slaughter of the Baalites with a publike decree. There∣fore by the consent of the King, the decree of the king∣dome, in so extreame necessitie, by so notable a miracle wrought by the Prophet, not by Elias hand, but by his perswasion, the people did in publike place put to death those Baalitish impostors, according to the law of God publikely convicted. How can you draw this ex∣ample to your purpose? Will you reason after this man¦ner? False Prophets may rightly be put to death by Magistrates, therefore Princes may rightly be deposed by Priests? I will not send you to the schooles to learne better Logicke, but toAn Ile in Thessaly where Eleborus grow∣eth that pur∣geth Melan∣cholie. Anticyra to purge your foolish braine if you dispute after this manner. But you will say hee consumed Ochasias captaines and souldiers with fire calld downe from heauen.How Ochosias souldiers were destroyed, & by whom. Elias spake the word, God performed the deed. That fire from heauen was not in Elias power, but in Gods will: And if Elias had not receiued a speciall instinct of Gods spirit to that end, he durst neuer haue called for fire from heauen, for that had been plainly to haue tempted God; which Christ reproued in his Apostles, desirous to imitate Elias. As these were extraordinarie, so by no meanes you can thence draw a conclusion for disputation, or an ensample for imitation, no more
then you can allow of thest, because Israel by Gods command spoyled the Egyptian; or perswade that one kill himselfe, because Sampson killd himselfe; or teach that one may curse and kill vnhappy boyes, because Elizeus handled fortie two in that manner, that calld him bald pate in Bethell. But here I doe acknowledge you to be very peruerse followers of Elias,How the Pa∣pists differ from Elias in their fire-workes. in that you goe about to vse consuming fire: for Elias calld downe for fire from the height of heauen, but you haue fetcht it vp from the depth of hell; Elias by the instinct of God, you by the instigation of the Diuell. And yet Elias did not once touch the King, much lesse depose him; but you went about not only to depose the King, but vtterly to consume the King, with all his excellent progenie and kingdome. But Elias you say did by Gods appointment anoint  Iehu King ouer Israel, and cast off Ahabs sonne, and all his house for euer bearing rule in the kingdom. Elias did not annoint Iehu, but one of the sonnes of the Prophets, whom Elizeus sent, and chargde him in the name of God, not in Elizeus name (marke) but in the name of God, that Iehu should take sword in hand, and roote out Ahabs house. The King therefore was not cast off by the prophet, but slaine by Iehu, to whom God had giuen Ahabs kingdom, that he might destroy Ahab and all his house and posteritie. Now if you please let vs weigh your argument. God may rightly giue a Kingdome to whom he will, and by name stirre vp a subiect, to punish his masters sinne: therefore the Pope may rightly doe the same. What Catholike King can be safe from the conspiracies of his subiects, if once he begin to displease the Pope? With such arguments our English Iesuites haue gone about to bewitch ou men, that they may take away the liues of our most worthy Princes. Be they not the very slaues of Anti∣christ, and members of the Diuell, who do flatter the Pope with such argumēts, to the destruction of Kings?
But Elias did cast downe and destroy Kings, that is to say, did foretell they should be cast downe, if you beleeue Hugo the Cardinall.Hugo the Car∣dinal expoun∣ding Ieremie. And Ieremie was set ouer Kingdomes, to plant and roote out, to build vp and plucke downe Kingdomes; that is, as that learned Cardinall expounds it, I haue appointed you, saith God, to pull vp: that is, to threaten the Iewes that they shall be cast out of their owne countrey: and that you destroy: that is, that you prophesie that the Citie of Ierusalem shall be destroyed: and that you disperse, that is, that you foretell, that they shall be dispersed by the Chaldean Princes: and that yee scatter abroad, that is, foreshew, that the kingdome of the Iewes shall be scattered abroad after the captiuitie. And that the Iewes should not be cast into despaire, hee did not only foreshew their captiuitie, but their deliuerance also, ad∣ding that he should build vp, that is, shew that the Citie should be re-edified; and that you should plant, that is, tell the Iewes that they shall be planted in Iurie. This literall sense Hugo the Cardinall did giue, that I may omit the mysticall sense, whereby the Prophets do∣ctrine doth vnderstand, that the kingdome of sinne should be rooted out and destroyed, and the kingdome of vertue should bee planted and aduanced in the conscience. We haue examined your examples, whence you in∣ferre a conclusion that ill hangs together; first, that Kings rightly created and annointed, may rightly be put downe. I answer, that one of the Kings you na∣med was put downe, and that was Ahab, not by Elias, not by Elizeus, but by Iehu, whom God by his owne mouth raised vp by name. The deposing therefore of the King, was not effected by the Prophet, but by a Prince by name appointed to that purpose. What doth this helpe your cause? Saul was not deposed, it is ma∣nifest that his posteritie was cut of from the succession of the kingdome, and not his person from the present possession.
Ierobam was by the Prophet sharpely reproued, not violently expelled. Ozias, as a Leper was remoued from the gouernment, not the right of his kingdome. Athalia was neuer rightly created, and for the cruell murthering of the Kings of-spring was put to death, not by the Priests, but the Kings authoritie. The second conclusion is very idle, for what causes the Kings in fact are to be secluded. What shall you neede to enquire, for what causes they be deposed, when you doe not proue they should bee deposed? Athalia was taken away neither for apostacie, nor he∣resie, but because shee vsurpt the Crowne against the lawfull heyre apparant. God commended the acts of Ozias, but detested his pride. Ieroboam both an Apo∣stata, and an Idolater, and yet neuer set beside the cushion. Achab the Idolater was cast of with all his race, but by the Magistrate, not by the Priest. The cau∣ses therefore which you alledge helpe your cause no whit at all. The last conclusion which concernes the persons of  the deposers is very lame. You say, that God vsed the ministerie of the Prophets, and the Priests to that pur∣pose, either ordinarie or extraordinarie, as iudges and executors of Gods will. God did vse the tongues, as I said, of the Prophets and Priests to foretell and de∣nounce those plagues which God decreed to bring vp∣on those Kings: and sometimes hee vsed their hands to annoint those, whom by name he appointed to be the successors of the kingdome: but hee neuer vsed them, either ordinarie or extraordinarie, either iudges or executioners of his will in deposing them. He vsed them as messengers, who with their liuely voice did de∣liuer Gods decrees to Kings, either deposed or appoin∣ted by God: other execution or authoritie they had none, which is very farre from that power of the Pope, whom you challenge to be the ordinarie Iudge, Tutor, and Corrector of Kings. And doe you endure his
ferula, ô yee Kings, will you kisse the rodd, that hath so often paid you, and by this your patience make your Tutor more curst and whip you the more? But I come now to you Saturaine. You haue not, of my word you haue not one Priest or Prophet vnder the old Testament that deposed a King:Kings depo∣sed Priests. but I haue a King that deposed a Priest. Whom you will say?Abimilech. I speake not of Saul, who slew Abimelech for taking part with Dauid. I passe ouer Ioash the King who commanded Zachariah,Zacharia. Iehoidas sonne to be sto∣ned to death, forgetting his fathers virtue and dutie. What say you to Salomon who displaced Abiathar the high Priest from his primacie and dignitie,Abiathar. because he followed Adoniahs faction being the elder brother. When it would haue followed by your conclusion, that Salomon was rather to be deposed, because the High Priest thought Adoniahs right to the kingdome to be better then Salomons. But whereas you added that Princes hold their so∣ueraigne dignitie and authoritie receiued from God, because truth drew that speech from you, which falls out very seldom, I accept it willingly: and thence con∣clude that God alone hath the power of putting downe Kings, who alone set them vp: and that Kings are bound to giue accompt to God alone, from whom they receiued that honour. But whereas you make the end of supreme princely maiestie receiued of God, to be the promoting of the true worship, and honor of God, and the reteyning of the people in the faith and feare of the Lord: I maruell what it ment, that when alwaies you denie that a King should meddle with spirituall affaires and busines: now as if you were forgetfull of your owne minde,Alanus. you di∣rect the chiefe end and scope of the Kings dignitie, to set forward the worship of God, to stirre vp others to honor his high Lord, and to preserue the people in the faith and feare of God. We accept of your grant, but
that which you adde, that Priests and Prophets haue opposed them-selues against Kings in all those matters,How Priests ought to op∣pose Princes. which may bring either dishonor to God, or ouerthrow to religion, or damnation to soules; I am affraid vnlesse you expound your selfe more plainly, wee may not grant it vnto you. For if you say they opposed them∣selues as men of God, and did earnestly admonish them by word and counsell, or else did sharply reproue such Princes, we doe willingly acknowledge the freedome of their holy vocation; but to take vpon them to be Iudges ouer Kings by their rule and authoritie, and do either iudicially depriue them, or violently inuade them, we detest the pride of such a turbulent spirit. But betweene God and the King there is a certaine  couenant which alwaies is of force either openly or se∣cretly. Be it so.The couenant between God and the King. And what if the King do breake some article of the league, who shall accuse him? before what iudgement seate, before what Iudge shall hee be endighted? shall it be in the Court of the common people, who for fashion sake haue made choice, and ac∣cepted of the King? or in the consistorie of a Bishop, who hath annointed and consecrated him? I see what you meane to answer, a Bishop, who hath conditio∣nally annoynted him, if he breake the condition and couenant made with God, hath againe depriued him, and hath shewed iustice against him in the name of God, who hath abused his supreme authoritie. The Scripture recites nineteene Kings of Israel and  fourteene of Iuda,No bad King of 33 deposed by a Priest. who brake the couenant made with the Lord, and worshipped strange gods, and draue the people to apostasie, shew me any one of them to be de∣priued by a Priest or a Prophet, because they had bro∣ken their first couenant, and take the cause: if you can∣not, leaue of to tell an vntruth, and to crosse your own speech, whom wee euen now heard confessing, that Kings doe hold their supreme authoritie receiued from God, not then from a Priest, not from the people, and
that therefore they are not bound if they breake their couenant, to giue accompt either to a Priest, or to the people, but to God. For he holds his Crowne by the right of blood, and inheritance, not by the virtue of invnction or consecration, or of election and accepta∣tion, as you were wont to say, that you may giue some authoritie of deposing and depriuing to a Priest, whom you make to be the first mouer, and some to the peo∣ple whom you make the remouer. So you make Kings hypotheticall, and the people conditionall, but Priest absolute and categoricall, being herein very simple, be∣cause that power which you say they haue receiued of God to depose Kings, that was neuer brought into pra∣ctise vnder the whole old Testament. Your argument therefore from the stronger, falls to ground and comes to nothing, that if the priestly ex∣communication vnder the old Testament was of such force, of how greater and larger force is it vnder the new? But we haue euicted it, that there was none at all vnder the old. Popish blas∣phemie.At last you returne backe againe and repeat that former blasphemous argument of yours, that God was not prouident enough, but left the Church in a misera∣ble case, like a widdow cleane forsaken, if hee had not giuen the chiefe Priest to hir, either as a Tutor for∣sooth, or a Husband. That is like as if the father & hus∣band of the Church were not aliue, or tooke care of another daughter and wife, or else would appoint in his place such a one to be a Tutor for his daughter, whom he foretold to bee an aduersarie, or prouide such an husband for his daughter, who would proue an adul∣terer. Lastly, as if Peter and Paul had dissembled, and had commanded obedience to bee shewed to Nero, so long till Christians could make head: and other Christian Bishops had so many ages consented to the like dissi∣mulation, you doe not blush to affirme, that Bishops
could of right excommunicate their Princes, and de∣pose them being excommunicate, if the Church had then power to resist. True, sayd Saturnine: for Christ his Preistly prero∣gatiue,  wherewith he was able to breake in peeces, such kings, as earthen vessels, beeing granted by large and precise charter to the Bishop of Rome, the chiefe Preist (which reason brought by vs, you past by as a man vn∣knowen) gaue power to the first Bishops, and right to the thing it selfe, as the Lawyers speake, to depose Kings excommunicate, being infidels, apostataes, he∣retickes and tyrants: but the Church did neuer practise that authority, till she gathered strength in processe of time. For that commandement of Christ alleadged by you, Giue to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods, doth he not submit Caesar to be kept vnder by the Vicar of God, when hee denieth to God, those those things which belong to God? And whereas Christ did thce speake to Peter, Feede my Lambes feede my sheepe, feede my sheepe: did he not com∣mit all Christians, little and great, lambes and sheepe, subiects and princes, to be fed and ruled without excep∣tion to Peter and Peters successour? And when as he had committed the keyes of heauen to Peter and Peters successour to let in and shut out, doth he not shew that diuine and admirable power of excommunication, which you forfooth would haue so weake and feeble? for whereas you sayd, that Prelates and Bishops ought to be subiect and obedient to Kings,Heb. 13.17. I did much mar∣uell that you were so forgetfull of another commande∣ment no lesse Apostolicall, whereby hee bound Kings as well as subiects to obey their Prelates and their Pa∣stors, and to submit themselues, as to them by whom accompt is to be giuen to God for their soules: wherein what Christian Prince can exempt himselfe, if hee doe thinke that he haue a soule?
Then Patriotta, I past by that your reason, Saturuine, of the prerogatiue of Christ communicated with the Bishop,Christ ouer∣ruling Kings not as a preist but as a king. not as vnknowen, but as very idle. For that prerogatiue whereby Christ doth bruise and breake in peeces kings and kingdomes, the Prophet shewes not to bee his Preistly, but his Princely power. I haue set my king, saith God, not therefore as a Preist, but as a King, he hath broken and beat in peeces wicked Kings with his iron Scepter. As a Priest he beares the Crosse, as a King he bears the Scepter: as a Preist he offred vp himselfe vpon the crosse and suffered his blood to bee shed for the remission of sinnes: as a King hee vanqui∣shed his enemies, shed their blood, weakned and ouer∣came their power with the sight of this so great glorie that resides in him, so you went about to blind our eies, while you did closely subiect the scepter of a King to be trampled on by the Popes feet. For you say, that this prerogatiue of Christ is communi∣cated with the Pope. What else? And that with large and precise charter: where be those words? point at the place, shew the charter, where Christ imparted this his prero∣gatiue with the Bishop of Rome.Heb. 7. v. 23.24.25.26. For there bee many o∣thers appointed Preists (saith S. Paul) who by reason of death cannot continue, but this because hee abides for euer, hath an immutable Preisthood, whence he can perfectly saue those, who come vnto God by him, alwaies liuing to make in∣tercession for vs. For such a Preist was fit for vs, holy, inno∣cent, immaculate, separated from sinners, made higher then the heauens, who hath no neede euery day, as the Preists of Leui, to offer sacrifices, first for their owne sinnes, then for the sinnes of the people; for that he did once, when he offered vp himselfe, the onely sacrifice for sinne, that hee might obtaine for vs eternall redemption. The Bishop of Rome let him packe and bee gone, and let him bragge of Christs Preistly prerogatiues, granted to him by a large char∣ter, that all men may spit in the blasphemous face of this impure wretch.
But if hee haue not all, yet hee hath imparted with  him some of his prerogatiues at the least. Which I pray you? the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, to open & shut heauen, the power of binding and loosing, the power of feeding and ruling: by all which you doe more then insinuate, that the Bishop can rightly by the power of excommunication wrest from Caesar, his scep∣ter, his crowne, sword, subiects, kingdome and life. For these belong to Caesar. Therfore when Christ spake to Peter, feed my sheep, he meant this, depose Princes; I will giue you the keies of the Kingdome of heauen, that is, I will giue you the thrones of earthly kings, that you may let into the kingdome whom you will, and whom you will ex∣clude: that you may loose subiects whom you please, and whom you please binde: that you may punish whom you will, and may forgiue whom you will. We must, I thinke, learne not onely a new Diuinity, but a new Grammer and a Logicke also. To feede Christs sheepe,The popish strange diui∣nity. and to abandon Christian Princes, are Synonamaes or all one with the Papists. To binde Kings and to binde Scepters is all one. To exclude a King out of the Temple, and take from him his kingdome and life, be Synonomaes with you. O diuine and admirable power of excommunicati∣on, which brought in not onely a new Grammer, but a new Logicke also into Diuinity? All Princes ought to bee taught of the high Preist, therefore deposed. They may be shut out of the king∣dome of heauen, therefore out of their earthly domi∣mions. Princes ought to obey the wholesome doctrine aught by their Pastors: therefore if they refuse it, they may rightly bee cast off by them. The condition of Princes is very hard. But what shall they doe? excom∣munication can do thus much if we beleeue Saturnine. But you haue other Catholike Doctors, as I heare ho∣nester men a great deale, who weaken and take away
the edge of excommunication, for bringing foorth such monstrous effects. For that I may say nothing of Austin, who thought that excommunication was very sparingly to bee vsed against Princes,August. cont. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2. and when it were, it was not to roote them vp, but to correct them: that we may omit Ber∣nard,De consid. ad Eugen. lib. 2. who was not afraid to tell Pope Eugenius, Ther∣fore your power is ouer sinnes, not ouer possessions, because for them, not for these, you haue receiued the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen. Thomas Aquinas your Angelicall Doctor sayd, that excommunication is one thing, and rot∣ting out is another: which we finde written in an Epistle of Pope Ʋrbane, recorded in the canon Law, whereof hee alleadgeth a reason out of the Apostle, who sayth, that one excommunicate is to that end so dealt withall,Decret. 2. part. caus. 4 qu. 3. cap. 37. that his soule may be saued in the day of the Lord. It is vsed then for correction, not for destruction: for excommunicati∣on is discipline, saith Pope Vrbane, not a rooting vp. Either of them both a Canonist and a Preist, seemed to bor∣row the distinction out of Austin. So hee writeth, that excommunication is not the taking away anie mans priuate goods, which the transgressour of the Law did formerly pos∣sesse: but it was the taking away of the publike goods, which he was to receiue from the Church, and the receiuing of the Sacraments.The force of excommuni∣cation. Therefore excommunication is of force, if you may beleeue your owne men, to shut a King out of the Church, not out of his Kingdome: to depriue him of the Sacrament, not his Scepter; to seuer him from the Communion of the faithfull, not from the o∣bedience of his subiects: to saue his soule, not to destroy his body: to remooue him from the confines of the Kingdome of Heauen, till he repent, not to driue him out of his territories, or to loose the raines of obedience from subiects, or free them from their sworne fealty. As Ludonicus Richeomus hath it in his Apologeticke. These agree with the canon: Render, saith Christ, to Caesar, the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that
are Gods. Which bee Caesars? his scepter, crowne and sword: which be Gods? our faith, worship, inuocation, and all our spirituall obedience?Matth. 22. Christ therefore saith, render to Caesar his scepter, his crowne, his sword: what say you Saturnine? let him take away from Caesar, being excommunicate, his scep∣ter, his crowne, his sword, bee these your Synonimaes to render and to take away? Christ if he had pleased, could thus haue excommu∣cate Tiberius, and obtained of his father an army of An∣gels to haue cast him out of his throne. He would not: for he came to giue an heauenly crowne, not to take a∣way an earthly crowne. When a certaine man sayd to him,Luc. 12. Master command my brother to diuide the inheritance with me, the Lord answered, who hath made mee a Iudge betweene you? Christ thought that the power of diuiding a priuate inheritance, belonged not to his vocation, who therefore could appoint the Pope to be a Iudge & Distributer of kings crownes? Christ being demanded of Pilate, what kingdome he layd claime to, answered, my kingdome is not of this world: but you, Saturnine, with the turn of a key, which others receiued as well as Peter, haue deliuered all that belongs to Caesar, to the Vicar of Christs disposition, forsooth. Therefore what Christ could not doe, can the Vicar of Christ do? That which the Lord himselfe would not vndertake, shall a seruant take vpon him? Peter was a simple scholler to Christ belike, whom  you doe make to be your founder:What Peter did to Prin∣ces. for hee did not cast Nero out of his throne with a thunder bolt of excom∣munication: he did not forbid Christians from taking the Oath of Allegeance, or free them when they had taken it: he did not dispose of his kingdomes and do∣minions: hee did not arme the seruants against their master, or stirre vp other Princes against the Emperor. Hee taught that the glory of Martyrdome was to bee sought after by suffering, not the infamie of rebellion
by resisting: cheefely by Bishops, to whom hee hath committed the power of perswading, not enforcing; the duties of teaching, not of fighting: the vse of pray∣ers, not of weapons. Shall it bee lawfull for the Popes successour, which was not lawfull for his founder? did not Peter vnderstand what it was to feede sheepe? did he not learne what it was to binde and to loose? did he not know the power of the keyes? Belike hee had not met with your dictionary. He could with his word as well haue strucken Nero, as he strucke Ananias, but he following his masters steps, yeelded simple obedience to Nero, as he had yeelded to Tiberius. Whose successours they were so farre from resisting the Emperours,How Peters successorus vsed Princes. the seruants their masters, that for 300. yeers, euen to Syluester they did patiently submit them∣selues to Pagans, as Martyrs, and for 300. yeeres, to Boniface, they did humbly obey both Christian, Ca∣tholike and Hereticke Princes, as beads-men? and for 400. yeeres, to Gregorie the 7. they did obey them euen in their absence somewhat tolerably, as free-men. For the times of the Empire were diuers, as the times of the Church were, & as the qualities of Emperors were diuers, so of Bishops: while the Emperour was but one and present, the Bishop was of small reputation, but when hee was absent and diuided, hee grew great: the Imperiall spoiles being left in Italy, whereby the master being somewhat weakned and cast off, the seruant be∣gan to grow lustie and stout, and I wish he would leaue off to continue so still. Lest happily the King of birds doe come And take his feathers from this ietting Iay, Whereat the rest may doe naught else but laugh To see stolne feathers taken thus away. For surely it was not thus from the beginning that the staffe should resist the sword, the crosier the scepter, the myter the crowne. No maruell you say: for then the Christian Byshops wanted temporall forces. They
might wel haue excommunicated and deposed Princes,Ala: contexec Angli inst. pa 167. if the Church had had power enough to resist. As two great Masters, of not building vp, but of destroying di∣uinitie haue taught, Alan and Bellarmine.Bellar: de Rom. Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7. So I beleeue, the Apostle Paul when he saw the anti∣ent Christians to be few in number, and weak in power,  taught them then not to resist the power,How Paul v∣sed Princes. belike he ser∣ued the time not the truth, when he taught that subiects should be subiect to Nero for conscience sake. For when they were encreased in number and power, if wee be∣leeue these Cardinalls, they should no more suffer as patient Martyrs, but take vpon them like boasting soul∣diers For so they haue corrected the Apostles disci¦pline with their worthy interpretation, and put out the crowes eyes as the prouerbe is, and haue wisely altered the rules of the holy Ghost which ought to be perpetu∣all and immutable, to the practise of the Church as the case required. But one thing I doubt much they can∣not wipe away. It is damnation to resist the power saith the Apostle:Moses. what is it then to lay violent handes vpon him? Moses forbad, that the people should not speake euill of their Gouernour: would hee haue suffered,Salomon. if they could to resist him? Salomon forbad, that none should curse the king secretly in his conscience; did hee grant by force to cast him off if they had might to do it?Iudas. Iudas the Apostle did stile them fitly Dreamers, that spake ill of gouernment, and despise such as bee in au∣thoritie: would he take these Cardinalls for holy Doc∣tours, who perswade the people, to driue the king out of his kingdome if they can. Let vs beleeue it if it be possible, that Moses, Salomon,  and Iudas the Apostle, when they would haue the sub∣iects tongues to bee tied vp, they would leaue their hands to be loose. Ieremy the Prophet exhorted the exi∣led Iewes that they should offer vp their prayers for the life of the King of Babylon. Paul the Apostle did aduise the persecuted Christians to pray to God for the safety of Nero.
Is it eredible that the Prophet and the Apostle, for whom they would haue subiects praiers poured out, that they would haue their blood to bee poured out? vnlesse you thinke the Apostle was like to Charles the fift, who commanded that publike prayers should bee made for the deliuerance of Clement the 7. whenas his owne legions kept him captiue. I expect that the Cardinals doe thus expound the place of the Apostle, to haue commanded them to haue prayed for Nero, because they wanted force to re¦sist: which if they had got, they might iustly haue gone from praying to violence, and from orizons to wea∣pons. O warlike priests! In the meane while what wrong do they offer to Peter and Peters successors, who suffered death for Christ, whom they insinuate not to haue wanted courage but power to resist? And they make goodly Martyrs, if when they died for the truth, deliuered rebellious soules out of their afflicted bodies. Tertul. in Apo. legetAnd I wonder that two so learned Cardinals were so ignorant of the historie, to say, that Christians might lawfully haue resisted, if they had had strength, when Ter∣tullian doth alleage, that they had power, but might not lawfully resist. Which if it may bee truely said of the se∣cond age after Christ, how much more in the fourth, fift, and sixt age, whenas Christians being graced by Princes, and defended by lawes, might professe the  Catholike religion, openly and freely. It is an not able saying of Austen,August in Ps: 124. that the Christian souldiers did obey Iulian the Apostata their temporall Lord, not because as these men dreame they wanted power to resist,Christian souldiers o∣beyed Iulian. but for the Lord eternall. For the souldiers in their warre a∣gainst the Persians might easily haue surprised Iulian be¦ing farre from home,Scra. lib. 3. cap. 22. and succour. But they were, you will say, Pagane souldiers. Yea forsooth, as Socrates tells vs: the next day after Iulians death, when Iouinian was chosen Emperour by them, he refused that honor, because he suspected the greater part of the armie to be
heathenish, all of them cryed out with one voice that they were Christians. The Fathers writ against Iulian, they fight not, they vsed their pennes, not their armes; they strooke the Apostata with their arguments, not with their weapons, as they dealt afterward with Constantius and Valens hereticall Emperors. But your Cardinals, and Fathers do vndertake the  businesse against Princes, not with the penne, but with the sword, assoone as they bee denounced excommu∣nicate for heresie, and releasing their subiects from the Oath of allegeance, tell them they may beare armes a∣gainst them hauing beene sometimes their Princes, and doe obtrude this as a principall head of Catholicke Religion, making much for the saluation of their soules. Although I haue lighted vpon some who before the sentence denounced by the Church, hold that an here∣ticall Prince by right for the very act,Caietane. is to be remoued forcibly by the subiects. But Caietane denieth that the subiects may be absolued before the sentence bee publickely denounced. Very franckly: that he will allow somewhat to an hereticall Prince. But Alanus will haue all Heretickes not only after they be by name particularly denounced,Alanus. but by law and ipso facto as they say assoone as they beginne to ap∣peare hereticall, or be by law excommunicated, should be put from their kingdomes. For as Fame so Heresie. Gathers strength by going forward. Alanus is somewhat more earnest in the matter then Ca∣ietane, who pronounceth that warre to be holy, iust and honourable, which subiects vndertake against their he∣reticall Prince, and doth aduise the valiant Englishmen to take part with the enemie against the Queene. But after our Cardinall had deliuered his opinion as Apollo from his three footed stoole,Philop. 194. Philopater doth boldly affirme, that it is an opinion certaine, and of faith, and vndoubtedly held of all the learned, and agreeable to A∣postolicall
doctrine: that euery Christian Prince, if he flatly fall from the Catholicke religion, and call others from the same, to fall presently from all his power and dignitie, by the force of Gods law and mans law: and that before the sen∣tence of the supreame Pastor and Iudge be denounced against him, and that all manner of subiects are free from euery bond of Oath, which they should by obe∣dience haue performed to a lawfull Prince; and that they may and ought, if they haue power, cast out from the gouernment of Christians such a man as an Apo∣stata or Hereticke, and a Renegate from Christ the Lord, and an vtter enemie to the common weale. There is an other sprung vp, a man of a more fierie spirit,De iustae abdica Hen. 3. Gal. Re. William Rey∣nolds. and another Saturnine or Gracchus, William Rey∣nolds, who said, that Henry the third French King was ipso fact excommunicated, because hee fauoured Heretickes. Who after a long disputation concludes that hee was lawfully put to death before the excommunication published. For saith hee, publicke greife doth not attend for legale formes. And though in a hidden crime no man ought to be condem¦ned, his cause not being heard, or the partie not being cited: yet in publick and notorious crimes, the euident knowledge of the fact, is in stead of the sentence. What would this man doe to an Hereticke Prince, who thought a Catholicke not to be spared. Symancha proceedes farther, and he affirmes that by the law a secret Hereticke is to be ecommunicate,Symancha. and not he alone, but his sonne also: because Heresie is a leprosie, and that leprous sonnes are begotten by leprous Parents, and ther∣fore to be put from the succession of the kingdome. O dambd Rascall, that cuts vp the roote with the branches. Aquinas, Toletane, and Caietane were more tempe∣rate, these goe to the quicke, neither speake they so mildely and schollerlike, but they speake to the pur∣pose. I could name you some Priests that beare armes, and that you held, Saturnine, to be lawfull.
Very odious, said Saturnine, are these your calumni∣ations,  wherewith you load our Priests, as if they had carried armes, they vse spirituall not temporall swordes. But your spirituall sworde must command the tem∣porall if the Pope command, said Patriotta. And you perswade that other should take armes, as Alanus did.The practise of Papists. But what difference is there betweene the Author of a mischiefe and the Actor? Whether you counsell others to beare armes against the Prince, or beare them your selfe? you doe not arme the hand of a Subiect, but you enflame his minde. You doe not drawe forth the sword, but you whet on the spirit with absolutions, promises, praises, rewards not onely in this life, but in the life to come. Is this your Catholike faith? Doth this make for the saluation of soules? Christ and his Apostles did instruct both by their doctrine and example their dis∣ciples to humilitie, patience, faith, and obedience. You stirre vp your disciples, to insolencie, furie, trea∣cherie, and sedition. Good God, how farre doth your new Diuinitie differ from the ancient? You haue seene alreadie what Christ and his Apostles taught, now marke what they did. Christ for the redemption of the Church, suffered his blood to be shed. Christs Vicare as he is cold, for the enlarging of his Empire is euer shedding other mens blood. Peter and Paul for the con∣firmation of their faith, did with quiet mindes endure martyrdome inflicted by the Prince: And many Ro∣mane Byshoppes did afterward tread in the same steps. But you their degenerated and bastardly ofspring, for the sealing vp of your treacherie did go about with most bloody mindes, to bring the most barbarous mar∣tyrdome vpon our whole Nation, that euer was deuised since man was created. O vnworthy attempt. There¦fore the spirituall Father of Kings, as hee is stiled, shall he tread vnder foote the maiestie of a King? And the vniuersall Pastor of the flock feed himselfe fat not with
the milke, but with the blood of the flocke? And shall hee breake in peeces Scepters with his crosiars staffe? And stall he stirre vp the people being quiet, whom hee should haue quieted being stird vp? And shall he set to∣gether by the eares Princes being at peace, whom being at a iarre hee should haue appeased? And shall hee set forth with the holiest title of religion, those two wick∣ed policies the discord of Kings, and the rebellion of Subiects? As if when he fild all places with garboiles and murthers, he shall thinke hee hath deserued Gods fauour, by the bloody sacrificing of innocents. God hath hitherto disclosed the Popes deuises against the English Church and God hath taken vengeance on you, and that stone which you tost vp and downe, is (ô ye seditious Priests) rould down vpon your own heads. For what? Do you not thinke that your daily conspira∣cies are not as clearely apparant as the noone day? and all your deuises with many proiects made knowne and euident? that you as subtile Sinons lurke closely among vs, professing loue to your Catholickes worse then any hatred, perswading them to violate their faith sworne to the King, and hayle in that Troiane horse, full of deceit, pernitious aswell to them as to vs? That haue your Cursitors as Pegasus, who runne about hither and thither, quickly taking vp all reports, that may inueigle mens mindes, and watch for all occasions? That haue your boy-priests gadding vp and downe, who may in∣crease your number and forces, and, as Gracchus strip∣lings, may stir vp such as be offended already, and pro∣uoke them to an vprore? That set the olde and grea∣ter Foxes ouer these cubbes, who first open the schoole of deceites to them, and a shoppe of craftie deuises, tea∣ching that the Pope hath plenarie power to depose a King, and absolue their subiects from the Oath of fe∣altie: and that the King though hee bee not by name excommunicated, doth yet stand excommunicated by diuers buls, because he hath infringed the authoritie of
the Popes supremacie &c. and therefore that the sub∣iects may, if fit oportunitie be offred, attempt any mischiefe against his sacred person: perswading them in the meane while to dissemble their faith, and shew an outward obedience to the King, while they reserue their heart to the Pope? You cherish closely your Cate∣lines, who when the conspiracie waxeth ripe, may be your Captaines and standerd-bearers to execute your wicked deuises with actions and armes. Lay aside therefore that visard of religion, which you haue worne so long, cast away that habit of grauitie, plucke of that cloke of sanctitie: appeare such as you are, confesse your selues to be the trumpets of warre, not of the word: that you feed not soules, but seeke for blood: that the Magistrate may distinguish between a deuout and a quiet, and between a Machiuilian and a turbu∣lent Papist. But you Calander, and you the rest of English Pa∣pists,  that be Laickes, I beseech you by Iesus Christ, I doe exhort you by your owne saluation, that you repell these Sirens musicke, not onely vnprofitable but hurt∣full to the hearers, from your eares and your mindes, lest you bring a most iust reproch vpon the true Catho∣like Religion, an incurable wound to the conscience, a lamentable ruine to your familie, and an extreme plague to your country. This I had to say of the fe∣altie and obedience of subiects to bee performed to Kings and Magistrates, ordeyned by the perpetuall commandement of Christ and the Apostles against the inhibition of the Pope, and the sophismes of the Iesuites; it followeth that I pursue the second foundation of our obedience, the examples of ancient Christians, and chiefly of the Roman Bishops, vnlesse happily any o∣ther course seeme better to you. Then Calander I promise you, said he, that nothing  is more acceptable to vs, that I may make answer for Argentine my friend. I neuer doubted of ciuill obe∣dience
to be rightly performed to good Kings by Ca∣tholikes: I thought to confesse the truth, I was absol∣ued from the oath of obedience to Heretikes and Ty∣rants, after once they were denounced excommunica∣ted by the Pope, and now lawfully deposed from their kingdome. Now seeing I perceiue that Christ, Peter, and Paul, not only taught, but shewed ciuill obedience to Tiberij and Neroes, and to be so farre from taking from them with their diuine power, as they might, their scepter, sword and Crowne, that vnder them they laid downe their life to confirme their faith and obedience. You haue said that which makes me begin to doubt, of such force of excommunication, and such power of the Pope. For when I did diligently obserue euery passage of your disputation Patriotta, out of that perspicuous and short exposition, & as it were consisting of those three texts, I must needes confesse, that the sparkes of this vnknowne, and vnhard of truth, did first cast them selues into mine eyes, wherewith the authoritie of A∣quinas, Toletane, and Laterane Councell for their power of excommunication, and the authoritie of the Pope alleaged by Saturnine, presently brought a mvst ouer them. But light was brought out of the myst by Fristu∣gensis, Ʋrshergensis, Sigebert, and Vincentius, and all the ancient and sincere Catholikes, and graue witnesses of those times, as I heare my Velbacellus affirme, at what time Gregorie the 7. did first attempt to driue Henry the 4. Emperor by his excommunication out of his king∣dome. Here Saturnine being driuen from humane au∣thorities, betooke himselfe to diuine. But whatsoeuer he tooke, Patriotta straight-way caught it out of his hands; where hee said that the Apostle forbad wee should not salute an heretike, and commanded to auoide him after one or two admonitions; Patriotta made answer, that hee forbad voluntarie societie, not necessarie subiection, priuate familiaritie, not publike
obedience. And when he prest that a gangrene was to be cut of, he instantly replyed, that it was not an here∣tike, but heresie was compared to a gangrene, and with a religious kinde of charitie, (as it seemde) sparing the heretike, thought good the heresie should be rooted out. And from thence in my iudgement concluded not amisse, when no heretike was to loose his inheri∣tance or his life, that a King much lesse was to be depri∣ued either of his life or inheritance by reason of heresie. Here Saturnine bent all the force of his wit, and betaking himselfe into the fortifications of the old Testament, from euery place gathering the forces of examples, with arguments drawne from thence fought very valiantly, so that when I heard him alone, he made me consent al∣most vnto him. But this heretike Patriott, shrunke not a foote, but presently buckled hand to hand. He had said that Saul was deposed, Patriot as the truth was distinguished, that the person of Saul was not remoued from the possession of the kingdome, but his of-spring from the succession. But by whom? euen from GOD, not from Samuel, whom hee proued to be not a Iudge, but a messenger, nor to haue inflicted the punishment of deposing, but to haue published the decree, and that not by the right of his generall vocation, but by speciall instinct and reuelation from God, not as Prophet, but as a Prophet appointed to that end, to annoint Dauid for the succession of the kingdome, whom God had named with his owne mouth. So that nothing can accrue to the Pope from hence, vnlesse he can proue he haue receiued a reuelation to depose a Prince. When hee contended that Ieroboam was cast aside  by the Prophet, he againe denied it, confessing hee was greeuously reproued by the Prophet, not violently re∣moued. Saturnine assaults againe, that Ozias a Leper was by force driuen out of the Temple, by Azaria and 80. Priests, and that he was separated from the societie of
men, and the gouernment committed to Iothan his Sonne. Here Patriott, a better Text-man as it seemeth, deni∣ed that the King was put out of the Church forceably, but being strooke with a leprosie, was enforced by his owne accord to depart out of the Sanctuarie, not out of the kingdome; the right whereof hee reserued to himselfe to his dying day, and put ouer the gouern∣ment to his sonne as to his Vicegerent. And that a Le∣per neuer lost his priuate inheritance, much lesse his publike. And when as heresie is a leprosie, nor euer any was depriued of his kingdome for leprosie, and therefore for heresie none was to be depriued. Which reason must needs satisfie me in this businesse, vnlesse it can be proued that the leprous Iewes lost their inhe∣ritance. And when Saturnine affirmed that the lepers were separated from the company of men by the Priests, Pa∣triotta excepted against it, that it was their duty to di∣scerne the leprosie, but the Magistrates were to put them apart. So that the iudgement of the businesse be∣longed to the Preists, the parting of the person to the Magistrate. Whence he concluded and retorted it vp∣on Saturnine, who sayd that heresie was a spirituall le∣prosie, that it followed from this figure, that the King ought rather to separate an hereticall Pope, then the Pope an hereticall king. So that this figure was more hurtfull to the Pope then to the King. One thing there was which both Patriott did shrewd∣ly re-enforce against you Saturnine, and did likewise mightily offend vs all, when you concluded out of Azarias example, that it was lawfull for Preists to take armes to represse the wickednesse of Kings, for the Preist resisted the King not with arms, but with words: vnlesse perhaps you will take a greeuous admonition, reproofe and reprehension for armes. Azarias did not cast the king out of the temple, much lesse out of the
kingdome. And doe you thinke of corslets, swords, and lawnces, wherewith a warlike Preist may remooue a King from his throne? fie vpon this proud vanitie. A Bishop ought not to bee a striker, much lesse a war∣riour. It was not lawfull for Dauid to build vp Gods materiall Temple, because he was a man of bloud, and will you build vp Gods spirituall Temple with bloudy hands? But I referre you to the canons, and goe for∣ward. For where you sayd that Athalia was lawfully depo∣sed  by Iehoida the Preist, it was first answered, that shee was neuer rightly created and crowned. Againe, that she was deposed by Iehoida, not as hee was high Preist, but cheife Prince of his tribe, and next allie to the king, nor by himselfe alone, but ioyned with all the Nobles of the kingdome: not with the authority of the Preist, but by the authority of Ioash, being first annoynted and crowned by him: that whatsoeuer he did, he seemed to doe by the power of the king, with the common con∣sent of the Peeres and Nobles against the wicked vsur∣per of the Kingdome, which had murthered all the Kings Progeny. What is this to the Pope, that hee may depose a lawfull Prince with his Bishoply autho∣rity? And whereas you propounded Elias zeale to bee imitated by you, Patriott answered truely, that your zeale was too fiery, and would proue too preposterous, vnlesse you could prooue you had Elias speciall in∣stinct. And when you said that Achab was remooued from his Kingdome by Elias or Elizeus: it is partly true, partly false. It is true that you say, he was remooued, but by Iehu whom one of the sonnes of the Prophets did annoynt by Gods speciall commandement, which God gaue to Elizeus, that Iehu should roote out all the posterity of Achab. Hee was not therefore deposed by Elias or Elizeus, but by Iehu, whom God had raised vp
by name extraordinarily for that purpose. Neither did the sonne of the Prophet, when hee annoynted Iehu, beginne thus, thus sayth Elizeus, but thus saith the Lord. This doth no whit help the popes cause, that Patriott did somtime scatter abroad your arguments, as brooms that are not bound together: and enforced him as a cripple with a broken legge to halt now vpon one leg, now vpon both, both in his antecedent and conse∣quent: as if the antecedent retained neither truth in the matter, or Law in the forme, and the consequent had lost all the necessity of proofe. So that you neither did helpe the popes power, or satisfie our consciences. For it was to no purpose, as he rightly said, to seeke for causes at the last, why princes should in fact be de∣posed by preists and prophets, when you cannot proue that any was deposed. You therefore as it seemes, could not alleadge that any king was deposed by a priest, but Patriott did al∣leadge that a preist was deposed by a king, one especi∣ally, Abiathar by Salomon. This did not onely not help but hurt the popes cause. Heere when you did enforce the couenant between God and the King, your ready aduersary did demand, if the King breake any of the articles of agreement, who would enter suite against him? or in what court or con∣sistory were hee to bee accused? And out of your owne grant hee concluded, when you said that the king held his supreame authority taken from God, and therefore the king was to yeeld account to God alone in the hea∣uenly court for his gouernment. Two pillers of gouern∣ment ouer∣throwen.And where there are two pillers of gouernment, Authority in the King, and obedience in subiects, which for all our good we are to keep safe & sound, you seemed, Saturnin, to ouerthrow them both, when you made the king, as it were, an hypotheticall propositiō, and the subiects conditionales: but when you made
the Popes categoricall and absolute, although I reue∣rence them as most holy fathers, yet I will speake truly, you haue dealt herein as an vnskilfull Phisition, who gets a more greeuous disease to the body by curing one that is easier. Being repelled from the old Testament you fled in∣to  the strength of the new, and here I had great hope, that that your feede my sheepe, and I will giue you the keyes, had well strengthned the Popes authoritie, and sharp∣ned the edge of ecclesiasticall excommunication. But it fell out otherwise. For the aduersarie proued that by the first wordes diligence was enioyned the Byshoppe to feede the flocke, and by the second were committed the keyes of the heauenly, not the earthly kingdome. And he brought for proofe not onely Augustine and Bernard, as common witnesses: but Aquinas, Pope Ʋr∣bane, Dominicus à Soto, and Ludouicus Rycheomus, all of them being on our side, who thought the force of the keyes to be not in possessions, but in crimes, not in bin∣ding Scepters, but sinnes, and iudge it not to be a roo∣ting vp, but a meere discipline. What you! doe you thinke these to be Heretickes, as lately you tearmed Sigebert and Vincentius? what maruell is it if strangers accuse the Pope, when his owne condemne him? if his enemies set vpon him, when his friends forsake him? if the late Catholickes leaue him, when the ancient for∣sake him? The first foundation therefore of our obedi∣ence laid by Patriotta vpon the perpetuall and vn∣changeable commandement of Christ and his Apo∣stles standes firme and sure; vnlesse you thinke that it be lawfull for the Vicar of Christ, an holy man though a sinner to plucke downe the sacred tables of the Testa∣ment, to violate the heauenly lawes of Christ, and to abrogate the eternall decrees of God. Forwhereas in the end you say that the Apostles and their Successours might lawfully haue deposed Nero, Dioclesian, Iulian, Constantius, Valens and the rest, if the
Church had had power to resist: you would neuer haue said it, as your aduersarie rightly obiected, vnlesse you thinke the holy Apostles and fathers were dissem∣blers, who obeyed those euill Emperours for feare, not for dutie, for times sake, not for conscience sake: where∣in we heard that not the holy Scripture only, but the antient historie was directly against you. That we may greatly lament that Bellarmine and A∣lan so great wittes brought forth so wicked an vntruth. And that we may omit Symancha, Creswell, Reynoldes, Parsons and others of our side, who brought all their wit and eloquence to patronize so wicked a cause with Alan, trumpets, not of the word, but of warre: and we must needes confesse that they haue brought an ouer∣throw to many Catholicke families, and a plague to their Countrie; but also a torture to our consciences, and an euerlasting infamie to the Catholicke religion. Wherfore leaue off I pray you any more to solicite vs in this cause, Saturnine, vpon whose head wee see your first argument to be retorted by Patriotta, who confest that subiection, reuerence, honour, fealtie, and obedi∣ence is due to a King, while the King is a King. But the King is king, and we be subiects notwithstan∣ding any excommunication, or authoritie of the Pope whatsoeuer, as Patriotta hath proued against you (as it seemes to vs) not only with common, but with proper arguments of our owne Catholickes. It followeth therefore, by your owne confession that all subiection, reuerence, honour, fealtie, and obedi∣ence is to be performed of vs to our King. Then Saturnine, I am right heartily sorry, most ho∣nourable Calander, and am much vext with all, that you whom wee euer held a deuout sonne of the Romaine Church, now to finde a Renegate in the Heretickes tents, and not onely doubting of the supreame authori∣tie of the Byshoppe, but that which is farre worse, and more dangerous to your soule, oppugning it.
For not onely the excommunication of Princes, which to diuers seemes to be the soueraigne censure of the ecclesiasticall and spirituall power of the Pope, be∣longeth vnto him, but their ouerthrow also and rooting out, which proceedes not from the power of excom∣munication, but from the power of a certain supreame authoritie in the Pope; either as he is directly the Lord of the temporalties, or indirectly in the order to the spiritualties, as very learned and holy Catholicke fathers haue de∣liuered. I am not ignorant what was attempted lately by George Blackwell the Archpriest with certaine answeres of his to weaken and cut in sunder all the sinewes of ec∣clesiasticall excommunication. Neither that onely,Blackwell ac∣compted an Apostata. but hath broken and cut off as it were the ioyntes of the Popes two armes, not that of his supreame authoritie spirituall and ecclesiasticall, but of his ciuill and im∣periall power, which the Romane Byshop hath receiued from Christ, and hath exercised vpon the earth vnder Christ. But the timerous old man, and wretched A∣postata, did not so much hurt by his fact as by his exam∣ple, which gaue occasion of a very foule schisme to you the Catholicke laickes, whose constancie the Christi∣an world did much commend. Heere Calander you are too testie, said he, Saturnine,  who strait-way call me a Renegate, when I neuer fell from the Catholicke faith, onely because I refused and reiected certaine false Catholicke errors brought in by a companie of factious fellowes, certaine claubackes of the Pope. But because your heate hath carried you so farre, to accuse the reuerend old man George Blackwell, as a wretched Apostata, and a Captaine of schisme, I will intreat Velbacellus, that hee answere somewhat, not for mee only but much more for our Archpriest his an∣tient friend. Then Velbacellus: Truly said hee, when I am vnwil∣ling  at any time to dissent from my brethren, then ne¦uer
more vnwilling then at this time, when ill happe hath made our aduersaries beholders of our disorders. But because I thinke it not fit, Calander, to neglect your authoritie, and withall haue purposed to satisfie both your conscience, and mine, in this worthy businesse of religion: I will doe as you aduise me. Two popish meanes to o∣uerthrow Princes.These are as you say, Saturnine, the two ingines the Romane Byshoppes haue vsed to ouerthrow Princes, the one ecclesiasticall excommunication, the other ci∣uill and imperiall authoritie. What was the force and nature of excommunication, they were not Ignorant, they knew it was giuen to binde sinnes not scepters, as Patriotta did truely dispute out of our own men. Which first when Gregorie the 7. was Pope, as he did rightly ob∣serue out of Frisingensis, Sigebert, and Vincentius all ours, brought foorth those monstrous effectes, the deposing of Kings, the absoluing of subiectes, and the styrring of them vp to take armes against their Prince, with which this pre∣sent Oath of allegeance doth meete. Whose successours fearing that ecclesiasticall excom∣munication in processe of time, would loose not that natiue and inherent power, but that vnnaturall and borrowed in the opinion of men, they assumed that ciuill as you call it, and imperiall power giuen by the Canonists for the increase of their owne authoritie, as if it had beene bestowed by Christ himselfe. For the old Canonists did first make them Lords of all the temporalties, and sayd, that the supreame iurisdiction, not in spirituall things onely, but in temporall things also, did belong to Peters successours, whose worme eaten asserti∣ons, and such as long agoe were hist out by the more sober Papists, certaine men, not vnlearned, haue late∣ly renued, and haue set them out publikely in printed bookes, for found and Catholike doctrine, and haue very stoutly defended them. Whereof someFranci: Bozius de temp. eccles: monarch: lib. 1. cap. 3. fol. 98. as you say, defend the Bishop of Rome to bee directly Lord of things temporall, one and the same to bee the Ruler and
Monarch of the world. ThatBaron. annal. tom. 1. ann. 57. pag. 423. & 433. Christ as hee receiued all Iudiciall power from the Father, and vnited it with his Preist-hood, when he meant to settle a Kingly Preist-hood in the Church, put it ouer to Peter and his successours: and that as Christ was King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, so the Church ought to be Queene and Lady of all, and if the hus∣band must be Lord of all the temporalties, the spouse must be Ladie of all likewise: that all temporall Princely power did first reside in the soule of Christ: then in the Church the Queene of the world, and from thence it did flow to others, that were faithfull or vnfaithfull, as from a fountaine.Thom. Bozi. de iure statu. praefat. ad Al∣dobran. That this spouse of Christ, Queene of the world, as often as the or∣der of the vniuersall doth require it, can transferre the pro∣per right of one to another, as a secular Prince, for the ador∣ning of a city, may plucke downe priuate mens houses, and may doe it by Law, although hee haue not erred, by whom such rights were translated to others. So the Pope gaue the Indies to the Spaniards.Isodor. Mosco. de maiest. mili. Eccles: pag. 670 All dominion do hold of the Church and of the Pope the head of the Church. And that authori∣ty is to be considered in the Pope, power in Emperours and Kings: for power doth depend of authority: that true,Care de po∣test. Rom. Pont. pag. 9. Difference betweene power and authority. Idem pag. 111. iust and ordinate from God, and meere dominion as well in spiri∣tuall things as in temporall, is fetcht by Christ, and the same is committed to S. Peter and his successours: that Christ was Lord of all these inferiour things, not onely as hee was God, but also as he was man, hauing at that time dominion in the earth: and therefore as the dominion of the world, both di∣uine and humane, was then in Christ as man, so now it is in the Pope the Ʋicar of Christ. As God may be called by a se∣condary meanes, the temporall Gouernour and Monarch of the world, though in himselfe principally hee bee neither tem∣porall nor of the world:Idem pag. 112. so the Pope may bee sayd to bee the temporall Lord and Monarch, although his power be a cer∣taine spirituall thing. That Christ when hee had performed the mysterie of our redemption, as a King, gaue Peter the go∣uernment of his kingdome, and that holy Peter did vse that power against Ananias and Sapphira. That Christ,  as he is
directly the Lord of the world in temporall things, and there∣fore that the Pope Christs Vicar is the like: that hee set out an immutable truth, by the sole comming of Peter to Christ vpon the water,Pag. 151. and that the vniuersall gouernment, which is signified by the sea, was committed to Peter and his successors: that diuers powers and authorities were giuen of God, but that all did depend vpon the supreme authority of the Pope, and that they take their light from thence, as the starres doe from the Sunne. And as God is the supreme Monarch of the world produ∣ctiuely and gubernatiuely,Pag. 145. although of himselfe he be neither of the world nor temporall; so the Pope, although originally and from himselfe hee haue dominion ouer all things tempo∣rall, yet he hath it not by an immediate execution, and com∣mitteth that to the Emperour by an vniuersall iurisdiction. That the Romane Bishop is the cheefe father and man in the world: and that all hang on him, as on the cheife workeman (he should haue sayd foundation) otherwise if any should appoint an Emperour by himselfe (I thinke he should say a substantiue) in respect of his temporalties should make two principles, which heresie that he might auoyd, he makes the Emperour an adiectiue;Isodor. Mos. pa. 22. de maiest. mil. Eccles. As another saith, that the holie writer in the olde Law made the Priest-hood an adiectiue to the kingdome, but that S. Peter made the kingdome an adie∣ctiue to the Priesthood.Tho Boz. de iure sta. lib. 1. cap. 6. fol. 137. That kings are not immediately from God, but by the interposing of the Church, and the cheefe Preist thereof. That there is a warlike and compul∣siue power giuen to the Church aboue Kings and Princes: that Constantine gaue nothing that was his owne, but resto∣red what was vniustly and tyrannously taken from the Bi∣shops. That Christ committed to Peter the key-keeper of eternall life,Isido. Mos de maiest. pag. 27. the right of earthly and heauenly gouernment: and that in his place the Pope is the vniuersall Iudge, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: and therefore that hee is conse∣crated as a cheefe Bishop, and crowned as a King. Because hee hath each power: that hee vseth that power either abso∣lutely
or ordinarily: absolutely, when he doth abrogate such lawes, as he please: ordinarily when hee vseth lawes. When he will liue vnder lawes to vse the counsel of Cardinals; when he will not, to rule without counsell, because his power is from God, not from the Colledge of Cardinals.I thinke not onely Asses but Lyons also. That all the faith∣full and the vnfaithfull, and euery naturall creature, for so he speaketh, is subiect to the Popes gouernment, and that therefore the Pope doth all men to worship him, prostrate themselues before him, and kisse his feete: that the adorati∣on of Dulia seruice is giuen to him, as to Images and Saints, in respect of his kingdome hee hath a crowne, of his Preist∣hood a myter: That Emperours and Kings may bee compel∣led to obserue their oathes taken at their coronations and confirmations, because by the vertue of their oath they bee made the Popes vassals. That by the Law of God and na∣ture, the Presthood is more eminent then the Empire. That secular powers are not necessarie, but that Princes should performe that by the terrour of discipline,August. triump apud Carer. p. 130. & 132. which a Preist cannot doe by vertue of his doctrine. And if the Church could punish offenders, the Imperiall and Kingly gouernment should not be necessary, because potentially it is included in the Apostolicall gouernment.Celsus Mancin{us} ib 3. cap. 1. Et Care. p. 133. That it may bee auowed of Christs Vicar by a certaine similitude, which Plato in Time us spake of God: for being demanded what God was, answe∣red, he is not man, he is not heauen, nor good, but somewhat that is better: if a man shall demand, whether the cheefe Bi∣shop be a Duke, a King, or an Emperour,Isodor. Mosc. pag. 80. hee shall answer warily, if he shall affirme by denying, that the Pope is some∣thing more excellent, something more eminent. That all temporall Iurisdiction is to bee exercised,Fe vpon flattery. not at the Popes commandement, but at his becke. Princes will and com∣mand, God the Lord doth all things with his becke agreeable to that. He spake and with his becke made all Olympus quake. And that Christ had all plenarie iurisdiction aboue all the  world, and all creatures, and that therefore the Pope Christs Vicar hath it. To what end I pray you, to what end? As they
make Christ,Leli: Zeh: tract: Theol. pag. 81. Franc. Bozius lib. 2 cap. 14. so they make the Pope the absolute Lord of the world, out of those wordes, Behold two swordes, which signi∣fie the power spirituall and temporall, and from them I will giue you the keies. The keyes of heauen are giuen, therefore of the whole earth. And from those wordes, all power is gi∣uen to me in heauen and in earth, therefore the right, both of the heauenly, and earthly Empire is committed to the Pope, who is Christs Vice gerent vpon earth. To what end say I? But that Christian Kings, and Emperours should acknow¦ledge, that they hold their kingdomes and Empires of him, forsooth, and that as oft as they doe any great hurt to the Church, they may be depriued by the Pope, and the right of their kingdome may rightly be conueied ouer to others: or if they doe not acknowledge it, they may be constrained by armes either of their owne subiects, or of outward Catholicke Prin∣ces, if the Pope will haue it so, to part with their kingdome and life. Here Patriotta, I beleeue truly said hee, that your Doctours did striue among themselues, by aduancing the dignitie of the Popes, and suppressing Emperours and Kings whether of them with a more grosse, or with a more spruisse kinde of flatterie, might set foorth the pride of the Popes court. But the very naked reci∣tall of these toyes, seemes to bee a sound refutation of them. Then Velbacellus, I doe said hee, and haue much greiued, that the withered, and decayed opinion of the Canonists, disproued long since, and reiected of good Catholickes, should bee now taken vp againe, and brought in as a thing forlorne, by so many excellent wittes, the chiefe whereof both for place, and learning was Cardinall Baronius, who did very stubbornly and obstinately defend the direct, ordinarie, and inherent authoritie of the Pope, whereby as a Lord of the world in temporall matters hee may at his pleasure depose Emperours and Princes. Is it not necessarie to adde his many other reasons. They are extant in his bookes that
are in many mens hands, there they may fetch them, that will haue them. There is sprung vp on the other side Cardinall Bel∣larmine,  a man of no lesse credite with our men,Bellarmine. and as well deseruing of the Church, who did ouerthrow that ordinarie, direct, and inherent gouernment of the Pope in temporalties, as left by Christ, with so sound argu∣ments of scripture, that in my minde neither the aduer∣saries, nor himselfe afterward could with his most ex∣quisite skill of distinctions dissolue them. But that hee may seeme somewhat to gratifie the Pope, although saith he, he be not the Lord of all temporalties directly, nei∣ther hath inherent and ordinarie authoritie as hee is Pope to disthronize temporall Princes, yet bee is Lord of the tempo∣ralties indirectly, in order to the spiritualles, as hee vsually speaketh, and hath an extraordinarie and a borrowed au∣thoritie, as he is chiefe spirituall Prince, to alter kingdomes, to take them from one and giue them to another, if it be neces∣sarie to the saluation of soules, i. in order to the spirituals. Carerius a Doctour of Padua,Carerius a∣gainst Bellar∣mine. a sharpe witted and earnest fellow, hee is of a contrarie opinion, and doth not only striue with argument, but laies a curse vpon the aduersaries, sparing none, no not Bellarmine him∣selfe, whom he taking in hand of purpose to refell in a whole booke, written as the Preface importes, against the wicked Polititians, and Heretickes of our time, did a little too plainely touch the Cardinall: So farre are they from agreeing in the manner of diriuing so great authoritie to the Pope from Christ. Here Patriotta, your Doctours saith hee,  seeme prae∣posterously to wrangle among themselues, of the man∣ner to deriue such authoritie from Christ, when as yet it appeareth not that he hath any at all: and in vaine do they argue, whether the Pope receiued directly or in∣directly such gouernment, when it is doubtfull whe∣ther he receiued any or no. But I easily grant them by their dissenting about the manner to ouerthrow the
thing it selfe: that the confusion of tongues may a∣gaine seeme to happen in building their tower of Babel. Then Velbacellus, somewhat more gently I pray Pa∣triotta. Although that I ingenuously confesse, while they thus egerly striue among themselues about the manner, and ouerthrow their owne opinions with mu¦tuall contradictions, they seeme to leaue the Pope ve∣ry small or no authoritie at all in temporalties. For Ca∣rerius saith, the Pope hath either ordinarie and direct au∣thoritie to depose Kings as he is Pope, or he hath no authority at all. But he hath none direct and ordinarie, as he is Pope by Bellarmines assumption. Therefore hee hath none at all by Carerius conclusion. It were long, to set downe all the reasons drawne from Scripture, whereby Bellarmine hath vtterly ouerthrowne the direct and ordinarie au∣thoritie of the Byshoppe, neither were it necessarie, be∣cause they may bee had in his fift booke he set out, so that men may thinke hee spake one thing and thought another. Which when he might not touch openly for offending the Pope, he did with sleights and deuises im∣pugne, that he might by any meanes deliuer the truth. For he seemeth indirectly, that I may vse his owne aduerbe, to take away all power of the Pope of depri¦uing Princes. For if the Pope, as hee is Pope cannot directly, and ordinarily depose Princes, though the cause bee iust as Bellarmine saith, and yet as hee is the chiefe spirituall Prince, may dispose of kingdomes, tak∣ing them from one, and giuing them to another, if it be necessarie, for the sauing of soules, that is, indirect∣ly in order to spiritualls as hee affirmeth; what other thing did he closly insinuate, but that the Pope had no power at all to displace Princes? For Saint Peter, nei∣ther did, or could transfer any power but ordinarie. Besides it is plaine, that the Pope is no otherwise the chiefe spirituall Prince, but as he is Pope, so that what he cannot do as Pope, he cannot do as he is the chiefe spirituall Prince.
Which Carerius concludeth against Bellarmine, and doth vrge it with this grant, that the Pope is properly called Gods Vicar. Either he is not saith he, the Ʋicar of Christ, or else he deposeth inferiour powers as Pope. But he deposeth them not as Pope: by the witnesse of Bellarmine. He is not therefore the Vicar of Christ by the conclu∣sion of Carerius. So Bellarmine gaue Christs Vicar so greiuous a wound, if we beleeue Carerius, that he could neuer cure with all the remedies of his distinctions. And Carerius while he deckes him with strange fethers, spoiled him of those were his owne. Whom while hee ordeined Lord of the temporalties, hardly left him Lord of the spiritualties. In the mean time, when neither the direct, nor indirect power bee a matter of faith formally de∣termined by the publicke sentence of the Church, as A∣lanus and Couarruvias confesse, there was no reason why Saturnine should call my friend Blackwell wretched Apostata, who neuer swarued from the Catholick faith; vnlesse by inueighing so bitterly against Blackewell, he vaunt himselfe to be of the contrarie faction. Then Patriotta, I willingly behold Bellarmine and  Carerius, as Cadmeyes brethren, or the Madianites cut∣ting one anothers throate. But I could more willingly behold the Pope, as a iacke-daw dispoiled of his Egles and Doues feathers which he hath stolne, which is of all his regall and Byshoply ornaments, wherewith hee hath so long ietted so proudly and terribly vp & down: but I leaue this cause to God, to be mended by him at his due time. But truely Baronius and Carerius with all their facti∣on doe flatter the Pope more grosly, but Bellarmine with his cunning opposition flatters him more smoothly, being the more dangerous enemie to Kings, because the more cloase. But that I often obserued the witty
old fellow crossing of himselfe with his owne trickes, and coyning those distinctions, whereby hee vnweaued those things which he had weaued before. O Penelo∣pean skill of disputing. But while he doth touch kings crownes indirectly, and tels vs that it is all in the Pope, so that he thinkes it meete to belong to a spirituall end, he bewraieth lesse malice, but greater craft. Here Argentine who had kept silence from the begin∣ning, looking earnestly first on Saturnine, then on Vel∣bacellus, Saturnine, saith he, seemes to me, to bee more strickt in this matter, then is requisite, and Velbacel more loose and remisse: because he gaue too much authority, this none at all, to our most holy father, to suppresse Kings when neede requires. This great Doctour of the Church therefore Bellarmine tooke a middle course, who first ouerthrew that infinite power of ordinarie and inherent gouernment: then retained that extraordina∣rie and borrowed authority in the Pope, least Kings like vntamed coultes, as it were, not hauing bitte and bridle should waxe too lustie, whom the most holy Pope might bring againe into the circle of religion and iustice, if once they began to start out, first with his counsell, and after, if that were relected, with some o∣ther moderate chastisement. Which would be the most safe course for Kings, and very auaileable for sub∣iectes. Then Carolus Regius, this moderate chastisement of Kings, Argentine, as you call it, is their vtter ruine and rooting out if you vnderstand Bellarmine aright. For there lurkes vnder those Aduerbes certaine deceites, which subiectes haue found to be as damnable to them as Kings haue. For he bringeth in your Pope, whom one doth well tearme Satans Asse, with this his extraor∣dinarie and borrowed power which he bestowed vpon him, curbing of Kings with a bridle, when the raynes lay on his owne necke, turning and ouerturning king∣domes at his pleasure, taking them from one and gi∣uing
them to another,Meanes of the Popes great∣nesse. when he thinketh good that it is for the order tending to spirituall good. And by what counsells he alwaies vsed, to take from Kings both their kingdomes and their liues, all histories do shew them to haue beene, by the emulation of neighbour Princes, the faction of subiectes, the treason of the nobles, and the superstition of the people. And doe you call this a moderate chastisement? And safe for kings, and good for subiects? Wherein as there are many thinges very vniust and vnworthy, so those are most of all, that hee tearmeth these wicked treacheries holy counsells, and pretendes that they tend in order to a spirituall end. And doe in that manner sowe the scruples of consci∣ence, mingled with the seedes of treacherie in the harts of men, as if the graines of religion and rebellion had sprung out of one and the same blade. So it comes to passe, that the Romane faith at this day doth beget and nourish most dangerous faction both to Kings and sub∣iectes, which so long is very demure and humble, till as a wise man obserues, it hath found the keye of power and authoritie. For as all faction which springs out of the heate of desire, is dangerous, so that is most dange∣rous which riseth out of the scruple of conscience. For when it riseth from desire, it is like fire, that taketh hold of stubble, which though presently it rise vp into a great flame yet soone being consumed is extinguish∣ed. But when it ariseth from the conscience, it is like fire, that heates iron, which getting his strength but slowly, keepes it surely; as a very worthy and a wise Se∣nator left it in writing. Wherefore that which Bellarmine said of the Oath of  allegeance, that it was not therefore lawfull, because it was offered someway tempred, and qualified; that may more iustly be said of the Popes temporall dominion, as it is qualified and tempered by Bellarmine: knowe therefore Argentine, that such qualifications are no∣thing else, but Satans sleights and deceits, wherewith
the maiesty of Kings is either openly or closely assailed, which Christ hath fortified plainely with his comman∣dements. That these vaine pretences of Aduerbes are Sathans ginnes and stratagems, whereby vnder the co∣lour of religion, he bringeth vtter destruction both to your soules and bodies. But because you will not giue as good credite to vs, as to your owne men, and I think it not meete to take vpon mee Velbacellus part, I pray you Calander entreat your Confessour, that hee would lay open and vnfold the subtill and hurtfull fleights & deuises of this working braine. Yeelde so much, saith Calander, to the Catholikes your friends, Ʋelbacellus, yeelde it to the Catholike re∣ligion, which is necessary to bee discerned from these false Catholike opinions, as you call them, lest the consciences of Catholikes be corrupted. Then Ʋelbacell, I will doe, saith hee, as you require me, in respect of my duty to the King not vnwillingly, but against the Popes inhibition not so willingly, how∣soeuer it bee, I answer for the satisfying of the consci∣ence sincerely, and for the Catholike religion not vn∣fitly. The Oath of Allegeance and Supre∣macy con∣founded by Bellarmine.And I maruell much that Bellarmine, beeing a lear∣ned man, and of great wit, did confound the Oath of Allegeance with the Oath of Supremacy: but I am greeued at the heart, that the supremacy of the Pope, which he doth of right enioy in spirituall and ecclesia∣sticall causes, is so enfolded with the worldly gouern∣ment, which is in temporall and ciuill causes, that hee brings his lawfull authority in hazard to be lost. Adde thereto, that when he had ouerthrowen the direct do∣minion of the Pope in all temporall matters with sound reasons, hee did maintaine the indirect gouernment in order to the spirituall, as hee speaketh, with such slight & flaggy arguments, that with this his playing fast & loose, hee seemes to haue left him no authority at all. Although other thinke otherwise: and thinke that hee
doth aswell submit Kings crownes to the Popes feete, as Baronius doth. But let it bee as euery man takes it. Hee cannot directly take away the crownes from Kings. What then? but he can indirectly: hee cannot as Pope ordinarily depose Kings, but extraordinarily he can, as hee is the cheife spirituall Prince: Hee hath not inherent authority: but that is fetcht else where: much forsooth: what matter is it with what authoritie Kings be cast off, if they may be cast off by the Pope? But they be worse then mad, who subiect the crownes of Kings to schoole-distinctions. Heere Saturnine: But although, sayd hee, it please  you to scoffe at the distinctions of Catholike Doctors, yet I hope you will not deny that the Pope is Lord of all the temporaltyes, which doth belong to the Bi∣shopricke of Rome. But that England & Ireland are portions of Peters patrimony, and the Bishop of Romes temporalties, it is plaine by the articles of agreement betweene Alexan∣der the third, Pope of Rome, and Henry the second, King of England, agreed on in the yeere of the Lord 1171. who when he was absolued by the Pope, for the death of Thomas of Becket, did couenant that none should afterward accept that Crowne of right, or should be acknow∣ledged for King, till hee had his confirmation from the cheefe pastour of our soules. Which couenant was renew∣ed in the yeere 1210. by Iohn, King of England, who had confirmed the same by oath to Pandulphus, the Popes Legate, at the request of the Barons and Com∣mons, as a matter of great importance, to preserue the common-weale, to keepe it from the vniust vsurpation of Tyrants, and to auoyd other mischeefes, whereby before they had smarted, and to preuent that they fall not into the like againe, by the default of any wicked King thereafter. Wherefore if it bee honourable and pious for the Bishop to dispose of the kingdome, being made tributary, why may hee not likewise depose a re∣fractory
and a disobedient Prince? Then Velbacellus, you alleadge, saith hee, a worme eaten and ridiculous charter, whereby you make the King of England Tributarie to the Pope,England not tributarie to the Pope, neither can bee. which was neuer done: and if it were, it neither could, or ought binde the successours Kings of England. For Rome neither can, nor euer could at any time shew such a grāt, as Thomas Moore that great Catholike doth argue: and if it could, it was to no great purpose, for no King of England might at any time giue away England to the Pope, or make his kingdome tributary, though he were so disposed. Therefore let vs passe by that coun∣terfet compact, and that friuolous deuise, and let vs re∣turne to the matter in hand, The question is not Sa∣turnine, of the true temporalties of the patrimonie of Peter, but of the true temporalties of the patrimony of Kings, the soueraignty whereof either directly or indi∣rectly is giuen to the Pope, and it is giuen either by Law diuine or positiue: and therefore the temporalties of Kings doe no more belong to the Pope, then the temporalties of Peter belong to Kings. And euery King may as well depriue a Pope, as any Pope may de∣priue a King. And an Emperour may aswell he called Lord of all the spiritualties, as a Pope Lord of all the temporalties. But God hath distinguisht these, giuing the spirituall swords to Popes, and the temporall to Kings, as Bellarmine himselfe seemeth formerly to confesse: who if hee had beene still the same man, hee would neuer haue placed Popes to be Lords of tempo∣ralties indirectly, for order to the spirituals, and haue rooted and cast them out as Kings, and haue attempted any euill against them by their agents, either subiects or strangers, when place and occasion was offered, if they thought it auailable to spirituall good:So it is a spiri∣tuall action, but a diabo∣licall. as if he thought the murther of Kings to be a spirituall action, which af∣ter some sort may bee sayd with a distinction, that the spirit of God doth not direct and gouerne such bloudy
counsels, but the spirit of Sathan. Who if hee goe for∣ward as he beginnes, and vse the pen of such a man as Bellarmine is, it is to bee feared (I will speake plainely, what I thinke truely) it is, I say, to be feared that blood will ouertake blood: and that Kings will imitate Charles the fift, who when Clement the seuenth beganne to grow proud, belegred Rome with his armie,Bellar. de Rom. Pont. tit. lib. 5. cap. 6. and battered the castle of Saint Angelo, not with arguments, but with cannon-shot. But why, added the Cardinall to his aduerbe indi∣rectly,  other of the like force,Bellarmines dangerous ad uerbes. incidently and casually seene? as if he should say, although the Pope as hee is Pope, cannot ordinarily, no not vpon iust cause depose a Prince, yet as hee is Lord of the temporalties, inci∣dently and casually he may change kingdoms, and take them from one, and giue them to another, if not as the politicke Prince of the Church, yet as the cheefe spiri∣tuall Prince, whether I say hee doe not lay trappes for Kings, whereby they may more certainely of a sudden be surprized. Theeues haue not an ordinary power to breake vp houses well fenced, or to robbe trauellers by the high-way-side being well accompanied, but they haue power casually to do both: when they light vpon houses that be but sorrily defended, or trauellers that be ill appointed. So hee denieth that the Pope hath ordi∣nary power to depose Kings, and to cast them off, but grants that hee hath a power accidentary and casuall, whereby he may either with his owne, or others forces, or with the secret deuices of his part, by any meanes o∣uerthrow king, when they least suspect it, and finde them most weake and feeble, looking for no such mat∣ter. What is this else but to make the Pope Machiauils scholler, sometime playing the Lyon, sometime the Foxe, attempting the destruction of Kings with whom he is displeased, either by force or fraud, as hee can ca∣sually bring his purposes to passe, and swallow vp Kings, as it were, their prey? which without doubt is
farre from the holy fathers minde: but so it sometimes fals out, that wicked men being deceiued by such di∣stinctions do abuse the opinions of learned men against the Popes will to the ruine of Princes. Therefore Calander and Argentine if you will bee aduised by mee, put out of your mindes and conscien∣ces, this bewitching and ouerthrowing diuinity; you may doe better to goe the plaine, and the Kings high∣way, directed by Christ and his Apostles, and shewed vnto you erewhile by Patriott: and auoyd these by-pathes and dangerous downfals, that you may liue and die with the honor of your families, and safties of your consciences. Then Patriott, I wish it, I wish it, sayd hee, with all my heart Velbacell,The second foundation of obedience the practise of Christians, & chiefly of the Ro. Bishops. that you vnderstood all the mystery of iniquity aswell as you vnderstand this part in con∣trouersie, I will cleare your eye-sight with an oyntment, as olde Tobies was. And being warned by you, I will shew you the right way of obedience, prescribed by Christ, and trod foorth by the footsteps of the ancient Christians, and cheifely of the Bishops of Rome, that I may finish that I promised, that it may appeare what predecessours the Bishop of Rome had in the better ages, and what in the worse: who were so far off from hauing power in the tēporalties, that they had it not in the spirituals, & they who vaunt themselues, now to be Lords ouer kings, acknowledged thēselus to be their ser¦uants, as I will make it plain out of your own histories. And when I often thinke of the former times, it is doubtfull to mee whether the Bishop of Rome grew greater by the pietie and obedience of his ancestors,How the Pope grew great. or by their impietie and rebellion: or whether he attained greater power and wealth by the munificence of for∣mer Caesars, or by the ouermuch patience of such as succeeded: for when as the ancient noblenesse of that Imperiall citie, and the great estimation of the Aposto∣like See, and the inuincible holinesse of thirty Martyrs
had first made him famous: then the great fauour of Christian Emperours,Popes for their excel∣lency first had primacy of order. and the syncere faithfulnesse of the Bishops, and their dutifull obedience did so highly promote and aduance him, that hee did easily obtaine the primacy of order among all the other Bishops. And you might perceiue for the first sixe hundred yeeres, at the least, vertues in the Bishops contending with vertues, patience with obedience, and constancy with learning: and you could hardly know whether they were more famous for the glory of their zeale and mar∣tyrdom, or for the commendation of their knowledge and obedience. So great was the fauour of Emperors, so deadly the hatred of Pagans, so exceeding the loue of Christians was toward the Bishops, that you may well doubt whether their crueltie did more purge and refine the Bishops holinesse, or this ouer lauish bounty did infect and corrupt it. Whence came that notable speech of Tertullian, The bloud of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church, aswell as that of Augustines: Religion brought foorth riches, and the daughter eat vp the mother. Which I thinke was not spoken to that end, as though the subsequent peace had cleane extinguished that primatiue zeale, which persecution had raised vp, but rather cooled & abated it: for as the Bishops for 300. yeeres, to Syluester, performed passiue obedience to the Heathenish Emperours: so before and after Boni∣face, for 500. yeeres they performed actiue obedience to Christian Emperours. And when as either an He∣reticke, or an Apostata, or a Tyrant possest the seate of the Empire: yet by the doctrine of Christ, when they might not doe that the Emperour commanded, they would suffer that the Emperour inflicted. The histories are extant which shew that the Empe∣rors  were acknowledged supreme Lords,Popes subiect to Emperors. euen in things spirituall, by the Rom. Bishops, & that they were reue∣renced & obeyed, not with a constrained, but volunta∣rie obseruancie, not with a counterfet, but sincere hum∣blenesse
of minde. Did not Meltiades the Bishop of Rome acknowledge Constantine the great to be supreme head in things spirituall,Meltiades. Euseb. l. 1. cap. 5 August. lib. 1. con. Parmen. Epist. 162. & alibi Reticio. materno. Ma∣rino. and did he not humblie obey him, when as hee, as the Emperour commanded, to∣gether with others, did heare the cause of Cecilianus and Donatus, about the choice of a Bishop, committed by the Emperour, not to himselfe alone, but to other Colleagues? who when as Donatus first appealed from the sentence of Meltiades, hee committed the whole matter againe to bee discussed by the Councell Arala∣tense, called together by him, excluding Meltiades out of it: from which Councell when Donatus did the se∣cond time appeale, because Caecilianus had receiued his ordination from Foelix, hee referred Foelix businesse to Aelianus a ciuill Magistrate: to whose sentence when Donatus would not stand, the Emperour called the whole cause before himselfe and determined it. Melti∣ades was farre from the soueraigntie of all temporalties, when the Emperor committed an Ecclesiasticall cause, first to him and other Delegates, and after appointed second Iudges, and lastly called the whole cause before his Royall Maiestie, and by himselfe determined it Meltiades being excluded. Damasus, Siritius, Anastasius, did they not acknow∣ledge Theodosius the elder their supeme Lord,Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 23. Damasus, Siri∣tius, Anasta∣sius. and most humbly submitted themselues vnto him, when as Fla∣nianus was greeuously accused before the Emperours Maiestie, that hee had intended vpon the See of Anti∣och against the canons of the Church, was freed by the Emperour against their willes, and commanded to re∣turne to his countrey, and feede his flocke committed to his charge? Innocentius.I thinke Innocent did acknowledge Arcadius sonne to Theodosius his supreme Lord, when we was an hum∣ble suter to the Emperour, that hee would command a Councell to be assembled for the examination of Chry∣sostomes cause: whom for all that the Arrian Emperour
did reiect in a good cause,Nicephor. lib. 13. cap. 3. and sent away his messen∣gers with reproach, as perturbers of the Westerne Em∣pire, draue Chrysostome farther off into banishment, publisht a decree wherein he inflicted a penalty of de∣priuation vpon all Bishops, who fauoured either Inno∣cent or Chrysostome, and would not communicate with Atticus, Chrysostomes successour. Innocents cause was the better at that time, but Arcadius authority was the greater. It was then no new matter, that the Bishops of Rome were humble supplicants to Emperours: so farre was it that they had rule in ciuill causes. Leo the Bishop did humbly entreat Theodosius the  younger to command a Councell of Bishops to be cal∣led together in Italy, to represse Eutiches heresie,Leo Epist. 9. which place the Emperour would not heare off, but assembled the Councell at Ephesus: where when Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria had opprest the truth, and con∣firmed Eutiches heresie, and had cast out Orthodoxall Flauianus from his Bishopricke of Constantinople, Leo did the second time earnestly entreate the Emperour that he would command a generall Councell to be ga∣thered in Italy,Epist. 24. which for all that Theodosius would not grant to the good olde man. If at that time the Bishop could haue commanded the Emperour, what neede had hee to entreate him? if the power of assembling Councels had beene in Leo, why did he giue such deep sighes? why did he shed so many teares, wherewith he might mooue the Emperours gentlenesse in that busi∣nesse? which when hee saw was denied him in so great an hatred of the Christian faith, why did not the Lyon beginne to roare, and affright the Emperour with ex∣communication? why did hee not cast him out of his throne? why, if hee might haue done it lawfully, did hee not deale with him by threatnings, or by force of armes? but then the Bishops of Rome did attempt all things with prayers and teares, not with threats and weapons.
Epist. 43.When Theodosius was dead, he did as humbly and as earnestly entreat Martian, who had gathered together the Chalcedone Councell, that with his Imperiall de∣cree hee would disanull the Councell of Ephesus, and command the Chalcedone Councell that they should not swarue from the Nycene faith. Leo's piety, certainely, was great, farre greater then his authoritie: but his piety, at the last, obtained that it required. Wherein Leo was not superiour, but happier, in that the Imperiall authority was answerable to the Bishops holinesse. Gregorie the great did humbly tell Mauritius the Emperour,Gregor. Q. 2. Epist. 61. that the charge he enioyned him, as hee thought, was vniust, and yet being commanded, did publish the Emperours decree. I did (said hee) per∣forme my duty each way, who both gaue obedience to the Em∣perour, and for God deliuered my minde what I thought. Lib. 5. Epist. ad ora. de bal. fili tradendis.I thinke he did imitate Ambrose, whose answer to Valentinian the younger, being an Arrian Emperour, is very memorable, being commanded to allot one church in Millain to the Arrians, which though he con∣demned the thing, granted. I will (said hee) neuer wil¦lingly part with my right, and being compelled, I haue learnt not to resist. So keeping a sincere conscience to God, denied not obedience to the Emperour. Let the Bishop of Rome now goe and learne mode∣stie of those ancient Bishops, at lest of his owne preces∣sours, but especially of their great Gregorie: who ac∣knowledged Mauritius the Emperor, from whom Iohn of Constantinople had receiued the title of vniuersall Bishop, to be his most reuerend Lord, and himselfe his ser∣uant, as manie had done before him. But Gregorie the great did more lessen and abase himselfe, who am I that speake to my Lord, that am but dust and a worme? (how far off was this worme from deposing of Lyons) which he professed not with a fained, but sincere humblenesse of minde, and submitted himselfe to his Lord, not with a
shew of humility, but with a necessity of duty: vnlesse peraduenture you will imagine Gregorie to be a dissem∣bler, reuerencing the Emperour with fained, not true obedience, and submitting himselfe in iest rather then earnest. But after that Boniface, Gregories successour, had  from Phocas obtained the title of vniuersall Bishop, the Bishops perchance did denie their obedience to Em∣perours. No indeede: for Agatho when Constantine did call diuers learned and holy men out of the West, who should communicate with the Greekes in the sixt gene∣rall Councell, about the truth of religion, he writ back, that hee had sent his fellow-seruants to his most excellent Lord, according to the most holy decree of his Princely Ma∣iestly, and the duty be ought vnto him. Our submission hath obediently performed, which is by you enioyned, and in another Epistle, all the Bishops (saith he) both of the North and of the West, the Christian seruants of your Empire, doe giue thankes to God for your religious minde. Yea truely, two hundred yeeres after the vniuersall  title, when the Empire was translated out of Greece in∣to Germanie, when it did reside in the family of Charles the great, who had left the Pope great possessions in Italy,Caus: 2. quest. 7 cap. Sic nos. how dutifull and humble did the Pope shew him∣selfe to Ludouike his sonne, and Lotharius his nephew? The submission of Leo the fourth, Bishop, that wee may make short, is famous and notorious, which hee shewed to Ludouike and Lotharie: Wee, if wee haue done any thing (Leo the Bishop writing to Lodouike) and haue not dealt iustly with them, ouer whom we be placed, whatso∣euer is done amisse we will amend at the discretion of your Excellencie: beseeching your Maiestie, that you would bee pleased to send those, who in the feare of God may strictly ex∣amine, not onely those things whereof we are accused, but all other our dealings both great and small.
Heere we haue the Emperour the Popes correctour in great matters and small. But this was, you will say, no part of the Popes du∣ty,Ibi ca. Petr. but a dispensation of the Popes humility. Indeede Gratian doth speake so ridiculously, as if the Bishop had submitted himselfe in iest, for a mocke to the Emperor, and not in earnest and of bounden duty. Distinct. 10. de capi. Caro. Ludo & La. ha.Did he afterward in iest, or with voluntarie humility submit himselfe to Lotharius, and not rather in all duty & obseruancie, when he promised that he would inuio∣lably obserue all the Ecclesiasticall lawes of Charles, Lu∣douike and Lotharius, and did sweare not onely present obedience, but for euer after? The Bishop of Rome was then, as you see, the Em∣perours subiect and seruant. He did humbly supplicate the Emperour, as his Lord, hee did not proudly com∣mand him as his seruant. He did obey, hee did not re∣sist: and that not a Catholike onely, but an hereticke also, and that an Arrian. Hee gaue honour to his per∣son, he offered no wrong to his crowne. Hee kept his lawes, hee did not gaine-say them. And hee receiued Ecclesiasticall canons from him, himselfe set downe none. He did performe the Oath of obedience, he did not then free others from keeping it. The Emperours themselues were not onely, but their Lieutenants also, were the Bishops of Rome Iudges and Correctours, in all matters, both small and great. The Popes therefore were not then their Iudges and Controllers. They were not as yet Lords of the spiritualties, much lesse of the temporalties, as they are now tearmed by their Claw-backes. Popes grew greater by a∣bundance, & diuision of the Empire.At the last, being enriched and furnished with the temporalties of Bishops & Kings, by little & little they began to wax proud against their Lords & Patrones: & grew very great by the diuision of the Empire, the departure of the Emperour out of Italy, the dissention of Kings, and the rebellions of the people.
Gregorie the 7. was the first as Frisingensis testifieth,Gregorie the 7. the first that excommuni∣cated & curst Emperours. 1600. yeares after Christ, that curst Henry the 4. Em∣perour with excommunication, and assayed to set him beside his kingdome: and to that end loosed his sub∣iectes from their oath of obedience. Whose next suc∣cessors followed his franticke humour: Who as Hilde brand had stirred vp first Rodolphus, then Hermanuus, after that Ecbertus all seruants against their Soueraigne, and lastly Courad and Henry sonnes against their father, all of them being bound with an Oath of fealtie, and these besides with the bond of nature. But the Author of this tragedie Gregorie,Sigeb. in ann. 184. Vesserg. in an. 1089. Gregories fall. foure years after being forsaken by his owne people, with a ioynt consent of all was cast out of his Popedome. And be∣ing at the point of death, as Sigebert found it written of him, one of his twelue Cardinals whom he chiefly fa∣uoured being cald vnto him, hee confest to God, to S. Peter, and the whole Church, that hee had greiuouslie sinned in the administration of the pastorall charge committed vnto him,In the life of Greg. 7. and that by the instinct of the Deuill he had raised discordes and warres among men, as Benno the Cardinall writeth. I am not ignorant that the Italian writers of malice against the Emperor, did go about to hide and dissem¦ble the faults of their Pope with the greatest skill of lying that might be. Who can giue credit to Blondus, Fulgofius, Trithemius, and other writers of small ac∣compt, either of a later time, who were borne some hundred yeares after these things were done, that eithe for fauour, or hatred as Bloudus, or for ignorance as Ful¦gosius, and Trithemius the Abbot they might easily o∣uer-reach? who I say can credite these men as ribing false praise to Hildebrand, when as his owne Abbote and Cardinals, who were not onely earewitnesses, but eyewitnesses of the whole tragedie, who had a purpoe not to honour the faultes of men, but defend the ordi¦nance of God, branded him with deserued infamie?
and writ that the chief. Authour of rebellion and periurie was put besides his Popedome? and that hee troubled the world being moued by the instinct of the Deuill, as hee confest vpon his death bed? And may we not now maruell, that this Byshop who followeth his outrage, may not feare his ruine? Who hath stirde vp Tirone against King Iames a most mercifull Prince, as he stirred vp Rodolphe against Henry the Emperour. But Rodolphe the cheife Actour, when he beheld his right hand cut off in the skirmish,Rodulphus ruine and re∣pentance. Vrsbergene in ann. 1080. and ready to giue vp the Ghost, fetching deepe sighes, is said to speake thus to the Byshops that stood about him, as Vrspergensis re∣cordes: Behold this is that right hand, wherewith I sware fealty to Henry my soueraigne Lord, and now as you see shew∣ing the truncke of his arme I leaue both his Kingdome and this present life. Whose end I wish to Tirone that most treacherous Traytor, but I wish him his repentance also. In ann. 1080. Hildebrands reuelation.Sigebert writeth that Hildebrand by a reuelation from heauen, as he said, foretould the death of a false King that yeare wherein Rodolphe was slaine. He vnderstood him to be Henry. But Henry fighting with his Saxons returned Conquerour, and Rodolphe the false King died. If this were a true Reuelation, as Gregorie said; God as he foretould did thus punish Rodolphe the false King whom Gregorie had raised vp against his Lord: if it were not a diuine Reuelation, but some diuelish famili∣aritie with the spirits, what a holy Saint was this man whom you so commend, who had such acquaintance with the Deuill, who deceiued and betraied the fran∣ticke humor of this his hellish Scholler. That same treacherous head likewise of Hermannus being broken by a stone cast from a tower by a womans hand,Hermannus ruine. his braine being dasht in peeces and running a∣bout his eares, frighted and scattered the armie follow∣ing the ensignes of his treacherie. Ecbertus ruine.Eebertus flying out of his throne into a sincke-hole to saue his life, lost it.
Conradus the elder sonne being rightly disinherited of his fathers kingdome which hee had betrayed died miserably.Conradus ruine Henry the younger sonne being instructed by the Popes lesson, to breake his oath wherewith hee bound himselfe to his Father,Henries trea∣cherie against his father. first leuied an armie against his Father; And when by the intercession of diuers of the nobilitie, who regarded the sunne rising more then the sunne setting, the quarrell seemed to be ended between the Father and the Sonne: the sonne allured the Father with promises, teares and Oathes, to enter into a castle, whom he receiued as an Emperour, but detained as a prisoner, and made him this offer, that either he should resigne his crowne, or his head. O most periurde and vilanous parricide: O most wicked scholler of a wick∣ed master. That stone which Gregorie the 7. first moued against  Henry the 4. Emperour, with his ouerthrow as it ap∣peareth: the same other Popes afterward haue not left off to cast downe vpon other Emperours, and Kinges, sometime with no better successe, alwaies with no lesse disgrace to the Church. As Adrian the 4. and Alexander the third, against Fredericke the first, Honorius, and Gre∣gorie the 9. and Innocent the 4. against Fredericke the 2. two very wise, deuoute, and valiant Emperours that we name no others. For Adrian the 4.Adrian against Fredericke. an agreement being made with the Cardinalls and William King of Sicely, and other peeres and cities of Italy that they should expell Fredericke the first out of Italie, first cast out his bolt of excommuni∣cation. And when a flie shortly after had choakt Adri∣an as he was a drinking,Choakt with a flie. Alexander the third persecuted the Emperour in the same footsteppes, hee sent out his Cursitors out of his owne bosome, who should sollicite Crema, Placentia, Ʋrona, Mylaine, Brixia to rebelli∣on; he did more incense William the King of Sicely his aduersarie to assault Fredericke. He did corrupt Henry
Duke of Saxonie and made him forsake his soueraigne in the field; hee raised vp the French, the English, the Spanish and the Venetian to molest and vexe him: with these deuises, and engines he endeauored to strippe the Emperour of his kingdome and his life. But God did so blesse and assist his seruant Fredericke, that he tooke the cities of Italy, and ouerthrew them, droue the trea∣cherous Duke out of his dukedome, and the Pope from his Popedome, and made him flie to Saint Marke at Venice vnder the habite of a Cooke. Although hee af∣terward being mooued by naturall affection, to release his sonne out of captiuity, suffred himselfe to be there trod vpon by Alexanders feete.Alexander trod vpon the Emperours necke. Which base indignity was not so reproachfull for the Emperour to suffer as for the Pope to commit. It is not requisite to touch the causes why the Popes thought meete that Henry the 4.As Cardinall Wolsie delt with King Henrie the 8. Emperour and Frede∣ricke the first should bee deposed; whenas there was no lawfull power or iust reason for any Popes at any time to depose Emperours. Adrian the Pope that followed, was displeased with Fredericke the first, because the Em¦perour had set his name in his letters before the Popes name: because he forbad the Cardinalls vnder the co∣lour of visiting the Churches to robbe and to spoile them: i. because hee withstood the Byshops ambition and auarice. As Gregorie the seuenth set vpon Henry the fourth, that hee might transferre the donation of byshoprickes taken from the Emperour to himselfe, so Adrian to exempt the persons of Byshops, whereby neither in respect of their benefice, or duty they might adheare to Princes. Fredericke the second had good successe against the Pope. Pla. in Greg. 9The like causes did incense Honorius and Gregorie the 9. and Innocent the 4. against Fredericke the second his Nephew, whom God did assist being so vnworthily a∣bused, that hee handled the treacherous Cardinalls ac∣cording to their deserts, plagued the Popes and his Priests, shut vp Gregorie the ninth, and brought him to
that miserie that he died in great anguish of minde. Let the Pope take heede lest if hee Gregorize with Princes, Princes Henrize, and Frederize with Popes. Neither is Innocent the 4.Conuina. Theobaldus. Franciscus. Gulielm. de San. Seuerino. Pandulphus. therefore the more happy  man, that by the name of the Church, the power of the keyes, the discord of princes, the negligence of By∣shoppes, the superstition of the people, he droue Fre∣dericke the second out of his Empire and prouided two other to bee chosen in his roome. For if they had not preuailed more with conspiracies and poysonnings, then elections:Caspini. in Freder. 2. Fredericke murthered. they could neuer haue surprized Frede∣ricke that noble Prince. But at last hee was taken away by poyson as he returned into Apulia. Whereof when he seemed to haue recouered, hee was choaked with a pillow, by Manfred his bastard sonne, as hee lay in his bed. These bee the actes of Popes whereby they ruinate Princes, and so highly aduance their Popedome:The popish engines a∣gainst Princes Ex∣communications, wherewith as with hookes they catch after kingdomes, and as with whippes to scourge kings; open rebellion whereby they tosse Princes vp & down as balles with their feete; and secret conspiracies, wher∣by as with ginnes they lay for and entangle Princes, and take them vnawares, that they may more couertly take them out of the way by poyson. That there is a great doubt as I said, left whether the Byshoppe of Rome grew more by the vertue and obe∣dience of his predecessors, or by their treacherie and wickednes: whether by the beneficence of former Em∣perors, or patience of the later, he is come to that height and toppe of greatnesse that the world wonders at. I haue now laid the two foundations of obedience toward a King whatsoeuer he bee, and of the fealtie of their subiectes One in the perpetuall and vnchangea∣ble decree of Christ, the other in the perpetuall practise of the ancient Christians, and chiefly of the Byshops of Rome, for eight hundred yeares at the least till worldly
ambition had cleane put out all pietie and religion. Here Saturnine, that I may omit saith he, other things (least our disputation be ouerlonge) which you haue collected out of histories concerning the Byshoppes of Rome, that one I cannot passe ouer, that you said that Gregorie the 7. whom you defaced as much as you could, was the first Authour that excommunicated and deposed Kings. For both Leo the 3. Emperour was excommunica∣ted by Gregorie the 2. and plainely depriued of all his temporalties he held in Italy, and the Greeke Emperors were remoued from the Empire by Leo the third By∣shoppe of Rome, for defect in religion, and forsaking the defence of the Church, and the Empire translated to the Germaines.The defence of Popes. Causa: 15 qu. 6. alius Plat. in Zach. 1. Fsing. lib. 5. cap. 22. For who knoweth not that Childricke the French King was deposed by Pope Zecharie the first, as foolish and vnprofitable, and Pipine appointed in his place? as it is cleare in our law, and Platina writes that by his authoritie the kingdome of France was ad∣iudged to Pipine. And Frisingensis, which Author your selfe do follow, writes that Pipine was absolued by Pope Steuen from the Oath of fealtie, which hee had giuen to Childricke, and the other peeres of France likewise, and that the King being shauen and thrust into a Monaste∣rie, Pipine was annointed King. More then that, Gre∣gorie the great, whom erewhile you called a worme in respect of the Emperour, did bring the same into pra∣ctise whereof we now speake, foure ages before Gregorie the 7. for in the charter of a priuiledge granted to the monasterie of Saint Medard, he so decreeth; If any king, Prelate, Iudge or other secular person whatsoeuer do violate the decree of the Apostolicke authoritie and grant, of what degree or state soeuer hee bee, let him be depriued of his honour. Wherefore in that you depraue Gregorie the seuenth that most holy man being dead, because he was the first that offered to depose Henry the 4. Emperor, a man full
of dishonest lust,The Empe Henry the 4. slandered. Auenti. lib. 4. Anna. Bot. infamous for his adulteries & whore∣domes, which his verie freinds could not denie, as A∣uentine writeth: truelie it bewraies both great ignorance, and singular malice in heretickes. And, that I may not heape manie things together, wherwith the histories of those times haue set foorth the fame and glorie of Gre∣gorie; the forme of his election, as it is set downe by Platina, Sabellicus and other writers,Author. 3. con∣uer. Angli. par. 2 cap. 7. doth easily shew what kinde of man hee was. Wee haue chosen this day, being the 21. day of May, in the yeere of our Lord 1072. for the true Vicar of Christ,Gregories false praise. Hildebrand the Arch-deacon, a man of great learning, great holinesse, wisdome, iustice, constancie, religion. The commen∣dation of Lambert Schafnabergensis is extant, wherein he writeth, that those things which were vsually brought to passe by the prayers of Gregorie with signes and wonders, and most feruent zeale for God and the lawes of the Church, doe sufficiently defend him against the venemous tongues of all slanderers. And what other authors write, euen the Germanes themselues, of Gregories enemy, infamous for adultery,Marian. Sco. i chro. an. 1075 simonie and other trespasses, what shall need to speake? Marianus Scotus is witnes, that Gregorie the 7. moued with the iust outcries of Catholike men, who mightily spake against the sauagenes of Henries impietie, did for the same excommunicate the Emperour, but princi∣pally for his simonie, in buying and selling of Bishop∣rickes. And this act of the Pope, did greatly content Catholikes, but displease them who were ready to buy and sell benefices, and fauoured the Emperour. I might alleadge the same for Adrian the fourth, and  Alexander the third, against Fredericke the first, and for Honorius, and Gregorie the ninth, and Innocent the third against Fredericke the second, but that I remem¦ber, you gaue vs a caueat, that the question betweene vs was not about the quality of the person, but about the right of power. I might shew also if it were not ouer
long, that those verie Romane Bishops themselues, whose humility and obedience you commended, did performe the same, not with any preiudice of their right, but for want of power to resist the hereticall and tyrannous Emperours. I might alleadge likewise nationall Councells and Parliaments also, which did alwaies approoue the necessary and iust correcting and deposing of such Emperours and Kings, as you name, by the Popes censures. Then Carolus Regius, it is prettie, said he (which the Oratour obserues) to put ouer the businesse till another time, when you haue no more or better matter to al∣ledge though you would. But that I may breifly answer the obiections, that Leo the 3. Emperour, was depriued of all his temporalties by Gregorie the second,Leo the Em∣perour, how deposed by the Pope. which he held in Italie; certainely if we diligently search the hi∣storie, although the reuolt of the Italians from Leo the Emperour of Constantinople, may seeme to be the act of Gregorie the second,Zoner. an. Tom. 3. in impera. Leo. Isaar. as historians testifie, because it made much for the Bishop, to haue the Emperours wings clipt in Italy: yet it nothing belongs to the con∣trouersie in question: for the Pope did it not as the mi∣nister of excommunication, but as the head of rebelli∣on; neither as a Bishop without the rest, but as a Rebell with the rest, not with that vniuersall authority, which  he now claimeth, but with a popular sedition. Visprgin an. 718. Sigeert. in an. 731. Blond. dec. 2. l. 1 Sabll. Enne. 8. lib. 8. Auntin. Anna lib 4. fol. 344. & Sigebert. in an. 801. How the Em∣pie was tran∣slated to the Germanes.But the Empire was translated from the Greekes, by Pope Leo the third, to the Germanes. Not so. For the Empire was translated, not by the Popes keyes, but by the decree of the people of Rome, as your owne histo∣riographers testifie, neither for religions sake, but for respect of ciuill iustice: for the Romanes who had in purpose reuolted long since from the Emperour of Constantinople, who perceiued themselues to bee for∣saken of the Grecians, and exposed to the inrodes of the Lombards, taking that occasion, because a frantick woman, that is, Irene the mother to Constantine the sixt,
had put out her sonnes eies, and taken awaie his crown, all of them with one applause chose Charles for their King, crowne him by the hands of Leo the Pope, and salute him Caesar and Augustus. Neither did the Pope depose Childericke,Sabell. nne 8. lib. 8. the French  King, but gaue consent to the Peeres and people of the Kingdome, deposing him, who making much of Pe∣pines prowesse,Childericke not deposed by the Pope. and being weary of the Kings silly weak∣nesse, Zacharie the Pope being first consulted withall, and the title of a King taken from Childericke, that all hope of ruling might be taken from him, shaue him for a Preist, and chose Pepine for their King. He was ther∣fore set besides his Kingdome, not onely by the Popes consistorie, but the councell and consent of the Peeres and people, for that hee was vnprofitable for the king∣dome, as you obserued: how iustly I doe not dispute, onelie I shew, that not by the excommunication of the Pope, who could neuer haue brought so great a matter to passe, but by the ioynt-consent of the Nobles and people, he was put from his Kingdome, and Pepine and his posteritie substituted in his place. For whereas you said that Gregorie the great, brought  the deposing of a King into act: that is verie ridiculous: for I demand what King he deposed? you take excep∣tion, that he farre before is deposed by him, whosoeuer for time to come, doth breake the priuiledge of that house so long as the world endured. And thefore hee deposed Kings, not onely before they were crowned, but before they were borne. But the proposition that you defend, is as false, as the reason you alleadge is fri∣uolous. What King soeuer doth infringe the priuiledge of the monasterie of Medard, let him be depriued of his honour. Whether is this rather a depriuation of a King, or an imprecation? Adde which you omitted, and let him be damn'd in the lowest pit of hell with Iu∣das the traytour. If the Pope haue power out of this place to depose a King, he hath likewise power to damn
him. But he hath not power to damne him, therfore he hath not power to depose him. Are you well in your wits, who take a vow for a censure; and the forme of imprecation, for a sentence of depriuation, a former curse, for a reuenge following? And you neuer can sufficientlie adorne and set out Gregorie the seuenth, your sweet delight, and that wor∣thily, for that he shewed himselfe not onely a traytour, as you are your selues, and desire to make others like your selues; but also a captaine and ring-leader of all treason, to promote the glorie of Preists, with dimini∣shing the credit of the people. For those praises which you laie vpon Gregorie, and those reproaches you cast vpon Henrie, doe nothing ei∣ther helpe your cause, or hurt ours: but I wonder that this good Arch-deacon, as you call him, prooued so bad a Bishop,Gregorie con∣demned, and for what. that all the Germaine Bishops almost did condemne him in the Councell of Wormes, of mon∣strous periuries, strange mis-behauiours, and diuers out∣rages in his life. But the Italians did acquit him. Not so neither. For thirtie of them beeing assembled at Brixia, after they had receiued Ambassadours and let∣ter, from nineteene Bishops, who had consulted at Mentz, with the Nobles of Italy and Germanie, did publikely testifie, that Gregorie did most impudentlie inrude himselfe into the See Apostolike by deceit and briberie, did peruert all Church gouernment, did trou∣ble all gouernment in the Christian Empire, did at∣tempt the destruction both of bodie and soule of a Ca∣tholike and peaceable King, and maintained a periu∣red rebell against him. Nor being therewith content, at last adiudged Hildebrand a most shamelesse person, committing sacriledge and robberie, defending periu∣ries and murthers, calling into questiun the Catholicke and Apostolicke faith, about the body and bloud of Christ, being an ancient scholler of Berengarius the he∣reticke, an euident obseruer of dreames and diuinati∣ons.
And therefore to be canonically deposed for his backsliding from the true faith,Lambert in an. 1077. and to bee thrust out of his Popedome. But these factious fellowes fauoured the Emperour against the Pope. What? they that fa∣uoured the Pope against the Byshoppe? But Lambert Schafnaburgensis doth praise the man. But the same ve∣ry Lambert, whenas he was the Popes Legate, and had shewed that the Emperour had reconciled and submit∣ted himselfe at Canufium, yea by his owne report, all of them (the Italians) began to chafe, to hisse and clappe their handes, and to scoffe at his apostolicall Legacie with flowting outcries, and to cast out bitter and rai∣ling curses in their madde moode, that they nothing regarded his excommunication; whom all the Italian Byshoppes had excommunicated a goodwhile since vpon iust causes; him, who had climbd vp into the A∣postolicke seat with simonicall heresie, imbrued it with murthers, defiled it with adulteries and capitall enor∣mities: that the King had done otherwise then became him, and had much staind his honour, for submitting the maiesty of a King to an Hereticall Pope, most in∣famous for all villanies. For all this wee excuse not the faults of the Prince, but defend his right, neither do we accuse the life of the Pope, condemned by his own side, but we weigh his fact: we obserue this one thing, that a Simoniacall and an adulterous Emperour, as Marianus Scotus writeth, was ill remooued by a Simoniacall and adulterous Pope as the Germaines and Italians call him. I am not ignorant that Fredericke the first and second,  are after the same manner as bitterly traduced and dis∣graced by the Popes Flatterers as Henry the fourth was:Princes tradu∣ced by popist writers. as Luduicke the fourth Emperour by Iohn the 22. and Philippe the fourth surnamed the faire, the French King by Boniface the 8. and Henry the 2. King of England by Alexander the 3. and Iohn King of England by Innocent, all of them being once excommunicated, were by the
flattering stile of the Romane writers abused and slan∣dered. That it is no great matter to wonder at, that the Princes of our time being taken for Heretickes by you though falsly, Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Elizabeth, and Iames the first be so vnworthily dealt withall, who did euen then in the midst of popish darknesse so cruelly vexe their owne Princes. But that not only the English whose faithfulnesse to∣ward their Princes, certaine hyred vassales of the Pope haue endeauored to corrupt in their bookes set out in English; but that the Germaines, the French, the Spa∣niard, the Italian may see out of their owne monu¦ments the fidelitie of their ancesters toward their owne Emperours and Princes, euen then when the Popes did most terribly thunder against them: that they may ac∣knowledge it with me, and the rather imitate and ex¦presse it, in so cleare a light of the Gospell: hearken I pray you hearken, not what a few Lutheranes and Cal∣uenistes, but what the Catholickes of these nations al∣most without number, haue often decreed in their Si∣nodes and Parliaments for their Kings against the Popes tyrannie: which writers shall with authoritie ea∣sily ouercome the rest either old or new, being few in number and corrupted by bribes. You heard before what the Germanes & Italians both Byshoppes and Nobles did decree publickely, for their Emperour Henry the 4. against Gregorie the 7. Now heare what the Germanes did publickly first for Frede∣ricke the second against Innocent the 4. then for Lewes a∣gainst Iohn the 22. and after of the rest. The Pope re∣sisted by the popish clergy.The Germane Byshoppes first whenas they had re∣ceiued a charge from Albert Pope Innocents Legate, to publish the bull of excommunication against Frederick, all of them refused it. The Abbotes being comman¦ded, to curse the Byshoppes that refused, neglected it. The Clergie receiuing a new charge that they should choose new Byshoppes, and the Monkes other Ab∣botes,
being greatly agast at the nouelty of the example began to disdaine, and chafe: and detest the rashnesse of the Popes Legate, and greeuously to accuse euen the Pope himselfe, for vndertaking so strange and shamefull an action against all equitie and right, and filling all Germanie with troubles. How did they entertaine Raberius a French man be∣ing another Legate sent from Innocent in the same busi∣nesse, hauing his associate the Byshoppe of Rentzburge when he deliuered the bull against the prince? All of them scoft at the mans impudency, and disdainefully askt what that light headed and superstitious French man, what the Rome-pope himselfe did in Germanie, without the consent of the Germaine-byshops his col∣leagues. They disdaine that discordes should be sowne, that the libertie of Christians should bee opprest, that the flocke of Christ redeemed by his blood should bee brought into slauerie by false Teachers. And when the Legate would not giue ouer, the Germane Byshoppes did not onely dispise his commandements but denoun∣ced a curse against him in all their Churches, as an enemie to Christian peace, and an Arch hereticke, and pronounced him to be worse then any Turke, Saracene, Tartar, or Iew. They did publickly likewise accuse the Byshoppe of Rome, for attempting such matters among Christians, which were against reason and the law of nations, a∣gainst the doctrine of Christ, and which were not at any time done among the most sauage Tartars. And as the Byshops, so the nobles of Germanie did take in foule scorne so great a wrong offered by the  Pope to the Emperour their Master: & to repell it con∣uented all the States, wherein Eberhardus the Archby∣shoppe of Salisburge a godly olde man, when hee had knowne ten Romane-byshoppes, and had diligently markt their practizes and dispositions, vnder Fredericke the first, Henry the sixt his sonne, and Fredericke the second his Nephew for fifty yeares together, that the chiefe by∣shoppe
was wholy compounded of auarice, luxurie, contention, warres, discordes, and desire of rule and so did decipher him for a rauenous wolfe in each part vn∣der a Shepheards weede, and so liuely paint him out, that although in other matters he were not a Lutherane, in this one, you would haue said he had beene almost Luther himselfe The old Catholicke fathers Oration is extant in Auentine a Catholicke Writer,Auenti. annal. lib. 7. fol. 683. there you may haue it if you will read it. That which the Byshoppes and Nobles of Germanie with the whole commons did with common consent against Innocent the fourth in the quarrell of Fredericke the Emperour, the very same they did in the like quar∣rell of Lewes the fourth Emperour against Iohn the 22. that although they were released from the Oath of O∣bedience they did notwithstanding take the Oath of o∣bedience to be faithfull to Lewes though hee were re∣mooued, and that they did by the iudgement of all the Doctours in both lawes. Philip the faire the French King in a councell with full consent of the Nobles and Byshoppes, did not on∣ly set at nought, and despise the iniust sentence of the Popes depriuation sent out against him, but brought all the kingdome from the Popes obedience: and that hee might the better tame his pride, he laid hold of the Pope, kept him in durance, so that within sixe weekes after in great anguish of soule hee gaue vp the Ghost.Popes crossed by the French. The pragmaticall sanction is well knowne, which did of old infringe the Popes authoritie: and all the canons of the Church of France (that part which maintaineth the popish religion) and all the decrees of the Kings parliament do so disanull the Popes power in excom∣municating Kings and releasing their Subiectes from the Oath of obedience;Tract. inscript. le Franc. Dis∣cours an. 1600. that the very body of Sorbone, and the whole Vniuersitie of Paris doe condemne the doctrine of the Iesuites as schismaticall and perni¦cious.
Neither Henrie the 8. onely, Edward the 6. and  Queene Elizabeth,English pra∣ctise against Popes. whom you tearme Caluinists and Heretickes, did by their lawes expell this vsurped au∣thoritie of the Pope, and punished by death the Abet∣ters thereof: but other Kings of England, who raigned in the midst of poperie, thought good to contemne the Popes censures, and to suppresse the Actors there∣in by your Lawes. The law of Edward the 3.25 Edwar: 3. doth it not seeme to bee made by a Caluinist, which makes it treason, to attempt and go about the death of the King, to mooue warre in his Kingdome against the King, or to ioyne with the Kings enemies in his kingdome, or to giue them aide, and comfort, either within the Kingdome or with∣out? Doe you not see how that two hundred yeares before Queene Elizabeth was borne, the Priests treason, couer∣ed with the habite of religion by the Statute of Edward the third in euery branch of it, as it were with lime twigges, is met with and suppressed? If to attempt the death of the King be treason, there∣fore Greenway and other Iesuites, who tooke counsell to destroy the King and kingdome had beene Traytors by Edward the thirds Law although Queene Elizabeth had made no such law. If to raise warre against the King in his kingdome were then treason, the priests were Traytors, who stir∣red vp papists to take armes and to ioyne themselues with Catsby and Persie in the rebellion. If to ioyne with the Kings enemie in his kingdome were then treason, how can you then, ye Iesuits, auoide the sharpenesse of King Edwards law, who being the instruments of sedition, doe adheare to the Pope the Kings deadly enemie, vnder the colour of religion? If to aide and animae the Kings enemies either with∣in his kingdome or without was treason at that time; truly whosoeuer at this day vnder pretense of religion
whatsoeuer do either solicite foraine Kings, to inuade this Kingdome, as Garnet, Creswell, Baldwine, and o∣thers haue done; or perswade the people to take armes to depose their King, as Greenwell, Hall and others haue vndertaken, were Traytors although Elizabeth with her Caluinists, had neuer made any law against them. But King Edwardes law you will say doth not touch the people by name. True. But when the noble King remembred that the French King was stirred vp against Iohn King of England, who had contemned the Popes censures, that the Subiectes were incensed against their King, the Barons and Byshops fell from him, and were the Ministers of the Popes wrong; that thereby hee might the better confirme his subiects in their obedi∣ence, against the French, the Spanish and the Romane, and all others whatsoeuer, fro whom he foresaw dan∣ger might come to himselfe and his kingdome and that he might decline the enuy of naming the Pope particu∣larly, made a generall Statute with the consent of the Byshoppes, Baron, and Commons without any excep∣tion of person or cause whatsoeuer, wherein hee made him a Traytor, whosoeuer did adhere to the Kings e∣nemy in his kingdome, or did aide or animate any ei∣ther within his dominions or without, who should moue warre against the King; including by his gene∣rall word aswell the Pope, as the Popes factours, as if hee had expressely named them. But in the 26. of Richard the second, the Prelates, Dukes, Earle, Barons, and al the Commons of Eng¦land, the Clarkes and Lay people named the Pope, when they all ioyned in a couenant of association with the King against the Pope, that the would maintaine to the houre of death, against the papall citations, sus∣pensions, excommunications and censures, the crowne of England, which they held as alway free, subiect to no common-weale, but immediately subiect to God, and not subiect by name to the Byshoppe of Rome:
& that they would vnite thēseues to the King against the Pope, in all causes vndertaken by the Pope against the King, his crowne and dignitie, and woud liue and die with the King. This was the loue and the ancient faithfulnesse of the whole English people toward their King, namely, against the Pope: they were so far from suffering the King to be deposed by the Pope. Now the Spaniards, with what earnestnes they haue  detested the treacherie of subiects against their king, co∣uered with anie pretence or colour of religion whatsoe∣uer,Concil. Teleta. 4 Cano. 75. their manie Councels of Toled doe declare in that booke which is intitled the Apologie for the Oath of Allegeance,The practice of Spaniards against Popes. wherein they seeme to checke your equi∣uocation, which they obserued in many things, when as they made profession of their oath with their tongue, and retained in their minde perfidious treachery. Doe you not see how in the thicke darknesse of Po∣perie, these noble Nations, the Ilians, Germanes, French, English and Spanish did retaine this light and heat of obedience toward their Kings against the Popes? and that in this businesse, neither the Bishops dissented from the Nobles, nor the Nobles from the Bi∣shops: but the Laickes with the Clearkes, and the Clearkes with the Laickes, Councels with Parliaments did fully agree to maintaine the dignitie of the King, and the obedience and concord of subiects against the popish censures? what is becom of this ancient nobility, and this vertue of the people? where is that magnani∣mity of the Italians, French, Germanes and Spanish? when shall wee euer see a second Fredericke, or another Philip the faire, who will suppresse the Popes insolency in Germany and France? when will these noble King∣domes bring foorth such Catholike Bishops, which will keepe the Kings crownes and the peoples consci∣ences free from the Popes tyrannie? They haue Eng∣land, Scotland and other famous countries going be∣fore them in this businesse. But you call these schisma∣ticall,
the Italian, Germane, French, English and Spa∣nish, who with common consent resisted the Pope. But marke, if you beleeue Sigebert your Abbot, if it bee not a harder matter for you to wipe away the note of heresie from the Pope, who carries himselfe so proudly against Kings, then to take away the aspersion of schism from those Catholike people, who did maintaine their Kings against the popes. But from these things which we haue spoken, it doth sufficiently appeare, Saturnine, how that is very false which you alleadged erewhile, that the Councels and nationall Parliaments did euer approoue the deposing of Kings by Popish censures, when as they did pub∣likely condemne their insolencie, cruelty, treacherie toward their Kings, as you see. For so the matter stands, grace did neuer destroy nature, or diuinitie ciuility, faith did neuer ouerthrow ciuill iustice, but made it bet∣ter, nor euer took away the affection of man, but made it more humane: And when men ought to behaue themselues reuerently toward the parents of their bodies, much more reuerently ought they to carrie themselues toward their countrie, and the father there∣of? for this loue of our countrie, and reuerend respect of our Kings, is not taught vs by a master, but in bred and grafted by nature, which whosoeuer doth vn∣der pretence of religion, either weaken or blot out, he opposing himselfe to God the author of nature, is to bee accompted not a Pastour, but an impostor, not a holy father, but a cruell tormentour of soules and bo∣dies: But you, as if the Popish religion put all ciuill ho∣nestie out of the minde of men: and as if Popish zeale did blot out all naturall affection, you thinke that the glorie of your Pope must be builded vp with the blood of our Princes, and the greatnesse of your Kingdome, with the ruines and desolations of our Countrey. And if Catholike Kings did retaine those Princely spirits of their ancestours, proud Popes would not more boldly
desire to rule without the commandement of God, then they to forbid them, being armed with the sword of God. And by the exāple of most excellent Protestant Kings, they would not onely prune and cut off these hurtfull sprigges of this vniust and poisonfull power, but they would vtterly cut vp, and plucke vp that poi∣soned tree from the verie roots out of their Kingdoms. But the beginning of all this mischeife is the Popes spi∣rituall supremacie, whereby hee claimes to be the head of the visible Church, the Vicar of Christ, the Iudge and Father of Kings, the vniuersall Bishop of Bishops: to whom the originall of all spirituall iurisdiction doth forsooth immediately descend from Christ, to be deri∣ued mediately to others from him: which whether it be done with greater wrong to Kings or to Bishops, I cannot iustly set downe. But all this spirituall supre∣macie, from whence all the force and nature of that ex∣communication doth depend, whereof so many things haue beene spoken, and of the deposing of Kings, and of releasing of subiects from the oath of obedience: Patriott shall plucke it in peeces in the Creede, wherein first he shall flie at the head of Popery, after hee shall wound the bodie. Thus wee haue seene Prag∣maticall Antichrist vpon the stage, now wee shall heare him disputing out of his chaire.
DOGMATICAL ANTICHRIST, OR The Popes Creede, OR The Pastor raigning. The second booke of the Dialogue. AFter that the most renowned Iames  King of Great Bitaine, had made answer to the Popes two buls, & Bellarmines Epistle for the Oath of Allegeance: One Matthew Tortus, vnder whose visard Bellar∣mine lay hid, vttred both elswhere diuers articles blasphemous a∣gainst God, and those two reproachfull against Prin∣ces, full of insolencie and crueltie, one of the supreme dignitie, the other of the depriuing power of the Pope,
and set them out, being taken foorth of the Popes new creede, with all the skill hee could. This creede was composed of twelue new articles of the Romish-Ca∣tholike faith,The diuision of the Popes creede. taken in Councell of Trent, as it it pro∣pounded in the bull of Pius the fourth, about the oath of the profession of the Christian faith. It may bee di∣uided into two parts; one wherein the faith of Christi∣ans, the other wherein their faithfulnesse toward Prin∣ces is corrupted. From that spring out the articles of superstition and idolatrie, from this, of treason and se∣dition. By them they are made euill Christians, by these euill subiects, that it is hard to say, whether they haue more troubled the Church, or this the common∣wealth. Hence Lionell Sharpe an English Diuine tooke vpon him to lay open the popes whole creede, and to illustrate it in a Dialogue. For when as the most lear∣ned Bishop of Chichester, had plainely shewed against Tortus, or rather counterfet Bellarmine, that the Apo∣stles Creede was set foorth, whereto Iames the Apostle before his martyrdom had added the Article of Christ, before the departure of the Apostles from Ierusalem: and therefore before S. Peter came to Rome, by the te∣stimonie of Baronius himselfe,Anno 44. and had concluded ne∣cessarily from thence, that the Catholike faith was fully finished before the Apostolike See was begunne: hence it is said, there arose a doubt in that right honourable Calanders conscience, a Papist, but very moderate and honest, not onely of the supremacie of Peter, and of that depriuing power annexed to the supremacy, but of all the whole Romish Catholike faith, which he saw was contained in the popish, not Apostolicall, Nycene, or Constantinopolitane Creede. Therefore when those former learned men together with William Argentine, came againe to visite him: It is very well sayd Calander, that you are met againe to discusse before vs a verie difficult controuersie, of the popes new creede, which Pius the fouth had formerly
compiled, & Paul the 5. comanded it lately to be prin∣ted: my good freind Argentine hath lately recited it, and I hope by and by he will recite the same to you. This being prescribed by the Church; vtterly to reiect it, I doe as yet (to speake truely) make a conscience: and to admit it wholly, vnlesse it bee ratified by the te∣stimonies of the holy Scripture, I cannot admit with∣out scruple of conscience. For I haue lately learned to giue attendance to the holy Scripture, which holy S. Peter doth directly affirme to bee as a candle lightned in this life, to vs wandring in darknesse,2. Pet. 1. Which holy Paul doth likewise make the foundation of the Church,Ephes. 2.20. 1. Tim. 3.15. and yet I cannot depart rashly from the Catholike Church, whereto I haue beene accustomed, which the same S. Paul calles the piller and ground of truth, by which there is a creede of faith set out for me. So I hang doubtfull betweene the Scripture & the Church, which God hath giuen vnto vs, as the Sunne and Moone, the two great lights to giue vs light to life. Then Patriott: you say right Calander, said he, in the  generall, that as the Sunne and Moone, so the Scrip∣ture and the Church, as two lights, shew light vnto vs,The Scrip∣ture and Church com∣pared to the Sun & Moon. but that you erre in the speciall, as after it shall better appeare. But the holy Scripture hath light in it selfe as the Sunne, the Church is a light, but borrowed from the Scripture, as the Moone from the Sun; & these two, I confesse, are giuen vs of God to direct vs vnto eternall life. But the Scripture directs vs with masterly autho∣rity, the Church with her ministery: for the holy Scrip∣ture is the wisdome of God in Christ, inspired from a∣boue into holy men, for the eternall saluation and per∣fection of the Church, as the Apostle hath defined it. God hath commended the Scripture to the Church,The office of the Church. as an heauenly charge, that it may discerne, expound, keep and publish it to men: the Scripture is therefore mens master, but the Church is Gods minister. Therefore
the Apostle calles the truth the foundation of the Church, and the Church the piller of truth, as Salomon made his chariot to haue a golden axtree, and pillers of siluer, vnderstanding by the axetree, the sound doctrin of the Messias, by the pillers, the faithfull teachers of the same. It is a wicked thing therefore to detract from the ma∣iestie of the holy Scripture, and it is vniust to derogate from the ministery of the true Church: for the Scrip∣ture is the truth of God:The office of the Scripture. and the Church is the house of God: the truth is the golden foundation of this house: and this house is the siluer piller of this truth, that is, cut out of the truth, as out of the rocke, as Chry∣sostome obserueth. So if the Scripture be the base of the Church, then the Church is the piller of the word, as he spake very wittily. Now reason teacheth, that the foundation is not sustained by the house, but the house by the foundation. And religion concludes from thence, that truth makes the Church, not the Church the truth. For the approbation of the truth is the wor∣king cause of the Church. For before it do approue the written word of God, it is but a company of Infidels and Idolaters: after it hath approoued it, it beginneth to be the familie of the faithful worshippers of God, that is, a Church. Further, although the Church by the Spirit doe discerne the true Scripture from the false: yet the Scripture being once knowen and acknowledged, as before it made, so after it sheweth the Church. For what more certain note can there be of shewing a thing, then the working cause of the thing? Againe, what pri∣uiledge soeuer the Church doth rightly challenge to it selfe, it receiued from the Scripture, as that which cal¦leth the Church the piller of truth. Therefore the truth of the Scripture is more ancient in time, more perspicu∣ous for the light, and greater for authority then the Church; which when it once receiueth her essence, light and power from the Scripture, then at last, as a piller, it
vpholdeth with her ministery the truth in respect of men, and reueales it to the inhabitants of the earth: and it is that ground whereon men both may and ought to leane and rest.Lawes vpon pillers, so the Scriptures on the Church. Whereupon the Propheticall and A∣postolicall doctrine is said to bee the foundation of the Church, the Church is the strength of doctrine, not the foundation. It is euident therfore, that the Church is founded and sustained by the truth, and that the truth is sustained and reuealed by the Church once founded, as it were, a watch-tower for trauellers, to di∣rect them into heauen. The Heathens were wont to write their lawes in tables, and hang them vp vpon pil∣lers to bee read of the people. The Apostle describing the Church, compareth it to such a piller, the vse wherof was to shew the Law, when it selfe was not the Law. So the true, Orthodoxe and Catholike faith being written in the tables of the Scripture, is fastned to the Church, as it wereto a most beautifull piller, as a most strong prop, which resteth vpon it, not with its owne, but a borrowed strength. Wherefore the Apostle in the se∣cond to the Ephesians defines the Church, when in the second to Timothie, hee describes it. For there hee ar∣gueth from the causes, heere from the effects, in each place he vnderstandeth the Church of Ephesus, that is, a particular Church. In the first place he teacheth what made that, in the second what that did: nor so much, what it alway doth (for of necessitie the foundation be∣ing taken away, the Church must fall, as it happened first to the Church of Ephesus, and afterward to the Church of Rome) as what it ought to doe. For this is rather an admonition then a commendation, and with a praise giueth warning of duty. Wherefore you shall doe well, Calander, as S. Peter warnes you, if you al∣waies giue attention to the holy Scripture, as to the candle: to the Church, as to the candle-sticke, so long as it containeth and vpholdeth that candle, giuing light to all the house. For if it bee bereft of the light of her
sunne, and being blinde endeauours to make others blinde also, while it makes new Articles of the faith, and conceales the old: it doth retain the name of a Church, but it hath altogether lost the nature, that which may very truely be spoken of the Church of Rome. You doe very vnaduisedly traduce the Church of Rome, saith Saturnine, by whom you thinke that new Articles of the faith were made; for the Articles of the faith, which it propoundes are diuided into two sortes. One are of immediate Reuelation. Others are drawne and fetcht from thence. What articles of faith the Church mak∣eth.The Church doth not make new Articles of the faith of the first sort. But the Church maketh Articles of the second sort, which ought to bee beleeued with the Catholicke faith as the case requireth, if it thinke them necessary. Therefore Ʋincentius Lyrinensis thinketh that the life of propheticall and euangelicall doctrine, must be directed by the rule of Ecclesiasticall and Catholike sense, so that he doth in vaine brag of the text of scrip∣ture, who reiecteth the sense of the Church. Then Patriott, how absurdly is it said saith he, that the Church doth not make immediate reuelations of God? Vnlesse that be more absurd to thinke that to fetch and draw from, is the same which to make: for an Article must first be made, before a doctrine can be drawne or fetcht from the same. Therefore that is said to bee an Article of the faith, which is drawne from an Article Foolishly; Articles are principles, deductions are con∣clusions. An article is one thing, a conclusion drawne from the article is another: which often is so contrarie that it vtterly ouerthroweth the article. As it shall bee made cleare in the explication of your creede. For I confesse with Ʋincentius Lyrinensis, that the line of pro∣pheticall and Apostolicall doctrine is to be directed by the rule of the ecclesiasticall and catholicke sense. For the ecclesiasticall and catholicke sense must alway agree
with the Propheticall and apostolicall text. For where the text doth faile vs, the glosse cannot helpe vs. Whence I conclude that nothing can bee Catholicke and Ecclesiasticall, which is not Propheticall or Apo∣stolicall. Now because Ʋincentius doth restraine the propheticall and apostolicall line, to the cannon of the Scripture, which he confesseth to be more then suffici∣ent for faith; it followeth that nothing contrarie to the canonicall Scripture, can be Ca holicke though it bee so determined by the Church. Wherefore, Calander, if the Church of Rome haue cast any article of faith in∣to the Creede of the second sort, which is contrarie to an Article of the first sort; and haue added an ecclesiasti∣call glosse, disagreeing from the definition of canonicall Scripture, that Church shall sooner leaue off to be the Catholicke Church, then that Article shall beginne to be Catholicke: Let vs come therefore to the Creede, and let vs intreat Argentine if hee please, to open it vn∣to vs. Then Argentine, I will doe it and very willingly; and  I will so professe it, as it is propounded by the Bull of Pius the 4. to be a forme of an Oath, of the profession of the orthodoxall faith. 1 I William Argentine doe firmely admit and hold the Apostolicall and Ecclesiasticall traditions and other ordinances and constitutions of the Church of Rome.The Popes creede Tradi∣tions. Scriptures ac∣cording to the Romane sense 2 I doe firmely hold and admit the holy Scriptures according to that sense which the mother Church hath and doth hold, whose right it is to iudge of the true sense and interpretation of the Scripture, neither will I euer admit it or expound it, but according to the ioynt consent of the fathers. 3 I professe that there be seauen Sacraments truely and properly of the new Law,7 Sacraments. ordained by our Lord Iesus, necessarie for the saluation of mankind. Baptisme, Confirmation the Eucharist, Penance, Extream vncti∣on, Orders, Matrimony. I admit the receiued and ap∣prooued
rites of the Catholicke Church. Originall sin and iustifica∣tion.4 I admit and hold all and euery those points con∣cerning originall sinne and iustification which were de∣termined in the holy Councell of Trent. The Masse.5 I professe that there is offered vp in the Masse vn∣to God, a true proper propitiatorie sacrifice for the quicke and the dead. Transsubstan∣tiation.6 I beleeue that in the holy Eucharist the body and blood of Christ is truely and really, and substantially: and that there is made a change of the whole substance of bread into his body, and of the whole substance of wine into his blood: which change or conuersion the Catholicke Church calleth transsubstantiation. I con∣fesse also that vnder one kinde onely whole Christ is receiued, and a true sacrament. Purgatorie.7 I constantly hold that there is a purgatorie, and that the soules there deteined are holpe with the praiers of the faithfull. Adoration of Saints.8 I hold that the Saints raigning with Christ, are to be worshipped and to be called vpon: and that they of∣fer vp their prayers to God for vs, and that their re∣liques are to be worshipped. The worship∣ping of Ima∣ges.9 I firmely hold, that the Images of Christ, and the euer blessed Virgin, and of other Saintes are to bee had, and to be adored with due worshippe. Indulgences.10 That the power of indulgences was left by Christ, and that the vse of them is very auaileable for saluation. The suprema∣cie of the Pope.11 I acknowledge the Catholicke and Apostolicke Romaine Church to be the mother and mistris of all Churches, and I vowe and sweare true obedience to the Byshoppe of Rome, the successour of blessed Pe∣ter the Prince of the Apostles, and the Vicar of Iesus Christ. The authority of the Coun∣cell of Trent.12 I vndoubtedly likewise receiue all other thinges defined and determined by the holy Canons, and Oc∣cumenicall Councells, chiefly of the holy Councell of
Trent, and I reiect and accurse all things contrarie, and all heresies reiected by the Church. This true Catholicke faith without which none can  be saued, at this present I voluntarily professe, I will procure as farre as lyeth in me to be wholy, vncorrupt∣ly, and constantly kept and taught by Gods assistance to my liues end: I the same William promise, vow and sweare, so help me God, and these his holy Euangelist. And I stand in feare of that which the most holy Fa∣ther added. It shall not bee lawfull for any man to in∣fringe this authoritie of our ordination, inhibition, de∣rogation, will, statute, decree and commandement, or by any rash attempt to withstand it. If any shal presume to attempt any thing against these, let him know that he shall incurre the displeasure of al∣mightie God, and of blessed Peter and Paul his Apo∣stles. Giuen at Rome at Saint Peters in the yeare of the incarnation of our Lord 1564. in the Ides of No∣uember, and of our Byshopricke the first. You haue heard of mee Calander the 12. open and  knowne Articles of the Popes Creede.Secret Arti∣cles drawne from the for∣mer. Now if it please you take them which are drawne from them more hid∣den and vnknown. I hope my old friend Saturnine will giue me leaue to open vnto you seeing your time is not long, and are not farre from heauen, and doe daily ex∣pect the houre of your departure, to open I say to you the inward sense of the creede, and to furnish you as it werewith prouision in this your iorney, that when you depart hence Saint Peter the Porter of heauen may the sooner let you in being thus prouided. The Masters speake wisedome among those that bee perfect, they haue certaine hid mysteries, all which they doe not lay open to all, but some certaine to some, as these are thought best to agree with their capacities and desires. Neither will I poure out all, I will reserue the mysticall sense of euery Article to be found out by the practise. In the meane time by your fauour, Saturnine, the order
being somewhat inuerted, I will propound the prima∣cy, the eleuenth Article in order, the first in authoritie (whereon all the rest depend) which I desire you with some of your best reasons to defend, now rather then at any other time, wherein it is fiercely impugned by the assaltes of the Heretickes of our time. I beleeue therefore that Saint Peter was very certain∣ly appointed in the Scripture to be the primate,The primacy is the chiefe head of faith and the cheife foundation of the Catholike faith, as Bellar: in Torto. most plainly groun∣ded vpon the Scriptures. and Prince of the Apostles, and of the vniuersall Church; and that the Pope of Rome Peters successor is the heire of this primacy, and vniuersal principality in the whole: who being the key-keeper of eternall life, the Pastour of the vniuersall flocke, the head and foundation of the vniuersall Church, the infallible rule of faith, the cheife iudge of all causes and persons, hauing the same tribu∣nall with Christ, and the same consistorie: in steade of Christ, nay in steade of God, nay as God himselfe vpon earth, and therefore I hold him to bee reuerenced and worshipped. I beleeue the chiefe inward power annexed to the primacy is of 2 sorts Sacred. Temporall. The sacred whereby the Byshoppe of Rome, as the spirituall Lord can by excommunication driue away Kings and Princes, from the flocke of Christ not onely Heretickes in the faith as rauening wolues, but Catho∣lickes also, if they proue wicked as outragious rammes. and to depriue them of all gouernment and free their subiectes from the Oath of fealty and Obedience. The temporall whereby the Pope as Lord of the temporal∣ties in earth can dispose of all crownes, and them di∣rectly,Princes sauci∣ly resembled to Wolues & Rammes by Bellarmine. or indirectly in order to the spiritualls, as it set downe by you Saturnine in the former Dialogue, can take from one, and bestow vpon another, as hee shall thinke it to be auaileable to the spirituall end. And I vow and sweare spirituall obedience to the chiefe Prince my spirituall Byshoppe of Rome, according to those mysticall rules, which our Masters haue prescribed to
the cureent right of the present Church, and the preser∣uation of the same. Here Saturnine you seeme not halfe wary enough  Argentine said he, who not contenting your selfe with a publicke profession of the faith,Popish miste∣ries not to be reuealed. which Pius the 4. did prescribe, especially to the more learned sort, but haue published the hidden and secret Articles drawne from thence, i. Mysteries as wee call them and that in the presence of Heretickes: which before the creede was set out, ought to haue beene beleeued of you, but ought not to be reuealed. It seemes then, said Patriott, as Aristotle had some strange bookes which he writ to all; and other subtill bookes, which he writ for them of the wiser sort, which were said to be set out, and not set out; So the Pope hath some doctrine that is populare, and other that is mysti∣call, that many of the doctrines of your Church seem to be Proserpinaes mysteries. Yet you see sometime how they fall from men that bee not so euill disposed, and come abroad into the world. Then Argentine as much as euer I hated heresie so  much I loue the Catholicke faith, whereof I need not be ashamed, seeing Calander required it at my handes and you were present, who can stoutly maintaine the same against any cauelling Hereticke whatsoeuer. That was very necessarie said Calander, seeing other were here who could as stoutly make answere. Therefore let vs ignorant Lay-men learne, let the learned teach. It is your part to answere, mine to demaund. It is an olde song of the Papists, a learner must beleeue; but a truer, a learner must aske. You beleeue too many things Ar∣gentine, as there be many men who bee too incredulous in many thtngs, so I feare that in many things many be too credulous. When we beginne to beleeue that wee ought not wee will not beleeue that wee ought. How oft and that without cause may you heare it among vs, It is a matter of faith: which ranging out of the circuite
of holy Scripture, I suppose reacheth farther then it ought. These doctrines therefore of the Catholicke faith, as they are called, which are brought by our men into the forme of a creed, the state and drift of euery co∣trouersie being briefly and truly propounded, I could wish they were soundly disputed and discust by you. But chiefly that primarie Article of the supremacy whereof I desire not to know all, but the most chiefe pointes, as also of the rest, that the errors of the Church of Rome now doting for age, as they be well obserued by certaine honest Pontificians, may appeare vnto vs. Those certaine Pontificians, Saturnine said, must be very honest I warrant you that reproue our Father the Pope: and accuse our mother the Church of dotage. For whereas you desire to haue the Articles of the Ca∣tholicke faith discust, Calander; you are in a great error. For they are in all humilitie to be receiued, not curious∣ly to be discussed. For as Austen saith well, the simplicity of beleeuing, not the quicknesse of vnderstanding is required in a Christian man. That he may with reuerence beleeue what the Church teacheth, not wittily discusse it, and may humbly submit himselfe to the iudgement of the Church without any discourse. But said Calander if you confesse that our mother the Church hath no errors:The Pope of Rome doth erre by the Papists iudge∣ment. Peter de Aliaco a Cardinall. Adrianus Pope. The three Legates of the Trent councel. I wonder that Peter de A∣liaco a very learned Cardinall granted that there were many things not only in manners but in faith had neede of re∣formation. Why did Adrian the sixt, ill touching the fountaine it selfe, say that all mischiefe came from the cheife Byshoppe into the whole Church, and promised re∣formation of all things by his Legate Cheregatus to the Germaines. I wonder also why the three Legates in the Councell of Trent, did apply that Prophesie of Ieremy to themselues, and to the popish people: This people haue committed two great euills: They haue forsaken mee saith the Lord the fountaine of liuing water, and haue digged to themselues cisternes that can hold no water. And in the
Councell it selfe Cornelius the Byshoppe of Bitont, did openly acknowledge the Apostasie of the Church of Rome in the chiefe heades both of doctrine, and life. I would to God, saith he, that they had not falne wholy from religion to superstition, from faith to infidelitie, from Christ to Antichrist, from God to Epicurisme; saying out of a wicked heart, and with an impure mouth, There is no God. Neither did any Shepheard or Pope care for these things. For all of them sought their owne, and not one of them all sought for those things that belong to Iesus Christ.  I wonder also why after that Councell many not onely priuate Doctours did plucke in peeces the decrees of that Councell, as Sixtus Senensis, Canus,The councell of Trent reie∣cted by their owne side. Lindanus the Byshoppe, Catharinus, Pighius, Ouander, Ferus and ma∣ny more: but Pope Pius himselfe confest, that the wor¦shippe of the Church of Rome had much swarued by continu∣ance of time from the ancient institution. Therefore these reuerend Doctours, Cardinalls, and holy Byshoppes, doe giue mee both cause and leaue greatly to doubt. Neither doe I desire only that the chiefe Articles of im∣mediate Reuelation be discust, which I embrace with all faith and reuerence, but these articles of the second sort, which are supposed to be fetcht from the first, and in truth doe altogether ouerthrow them. For whereas by the aduice of Austen, the simplicitie of beleeuing no the quickenesse of vnderstanding is required; not an humble desire of learning things necessarie, but a cu∣rious desire to seeke after high mysteries is forbidden by him. For the simplicitie of beleife,Implicite faith, blinde Idoll. doth as well shut out brutish ignorance, as presumptuous knowledge. I can therefore no longer adore that blinde Idoll, impli∣cite faith, whereby we are taught to receiue with all re∣uerence, what the Church teacheth, and to beleeue as the Church beleeueth though wee doe not well know what the Church beleeueth.Bellarm: de iustific: lib. 1. cap. 7. Neither can I giue credit to Bellarmine saying that faith doth consist in the assent, not in knowledge, and may better be defined by igno∣rance,
then vnderstanding. Whence our learned ad∣uersaries do too truly conclude, that as Cleargy poperie was before nothing else but a catechisme of treason, so Laicke-popery was nothing else but meere idiotisme: and as they worthily laugh at the fox-like craft of our Doctors, so likewise the asse-headed ignorance of our schollers. Such faith which the colliar had, so commen∣ded by Staphilus. A certaine colliar being at the poynt of death,Apolg. Staphi. pars 1. pag. 53. was tempted by the Diuell, and demanded, what faith he held, the colliar answered, I beleeue and die in the faith of the Church of Christ.The Colliars faith. And beeing againe de∣manded, what was the faith of the Church, answered, as it  were in a circle, it is that faith that I holde: and so the Diuell being vanquished by this answer, fled away, if we may beleeue Staphilus. Therfore the faith of a Romish Catholike is the Colliars faith, that is, a circular faith I pray you, Saturnine, teach mee first before I giue my assent, and write to that reuerend Bellarmine, that hee will prouide that implicite faith, which is nothing else but blinde and affected ignorance, bee put out of the creede, wherewith the grauity and wisdome of the Ca∣tholike religion is greatly defaced. I haue learnt at last to distinguish between the fictions of mans braine, and the doctrines of Christian faith, the foundations wher∣of are not the opinions of men, but the oracles of God: and those which are committed to writing by the Pro∣phets and Apostles by inspiration of God, wherein all necessarie principles of faith, and precepts of life are plentifully contained: as I heare it affirmed by the fa∣thers. Let vs now come to the creed. Wherein first I demand, whether the supremacy of Peter with such things, as depend thereon, haue her foundation directly in the Scripture, as the Cardinall writeth in Tortus. For I hold no doctrin necessary to be beleeued, vnlesse it bee founded on the Scripture, as Pope Gregorie the first reacheth, I am a bad Text-man, and I reade the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles
but seldome, the reading whereof the Church hath for∣bidden to vs lay-men, fearing lest by reading we should fall into heresies. But I am both ashamed, and repent of that my ignorance and negligence. Yet I leaue not off to reuerence the fathers both olde and new, whose sonne I professe my felfe to bee, and not their seruant. I account them for schollers in the Scripture, not ma∣sters: witnesses and interpreters thereof, not arbitra∣tors and iudges. Neither am I so much mooued with their names, as with their reasons. I seeke not then what they bring out of themselues, but what they prooue out of the Scripture; in the cause of faith, I will henceforth admit of no definition of the Church, vnlesse it relie vpon a manifest testimonie of holy Scripture, or at the least a necessarie conclusion drawen from thence; I will not haue the matter ordered by bare authority, but let thing with thing, cause with cause, and reason striue with reason; neither am I led with the number of arguments but with the waight.Number doth oppresse the memory, waight doth beget know∣ledge. Neither am I delighted with circumstances, I desire breuity. And I will preferre one sound argument short∣ly and directly concluded out of the Scripture, before all the quirkes of men brought for pompe and shew. Neither will I suffer any of you to leape from this one poynt to another, before I see this bee fully sifted and discussed among you. Buckle vp your selfe therefore, Saturnine, to set the onset, and confirme the supremacy of Peter, and the succession of the Pope, and that pow∣er which you say is annext to the supremacie out of the holy Scripture: but that you may not swarue from the state of the question, remember that you are to prooue the primacy, not of order and distinction, which is granted to Peter, but the primacy of power and iurisdi∣ction, which is denied. For this is, as Bellarmine saith, the cheife point of the Catholike faith, and the cheife foundati∣on of all religion. Then Saturnine, you doe too much restraine, saith
he,Scripture a∣lone hurtfull to the Romish Church. Calander, the Catholike faith, if you keep it within the compasse of the Scripture. For if you admit of Scripture onely, it doth goe ill with the Catholike Church, as Paul the fift did wisely answer the Venetian Ambassadour. Yet I will doe as you will haue mee, and I will comprehend these three together, the primacy of Peter, the succession and power of the Pope For the Church could not long stand without a Pri∣mate and Prince, nor a Prince without a successour, nor a successour without a supreme power. I will giue you the keies. Matth. 16. Whatsoeuer you binde, or whatsoeuer you loose. Feede my sheepe, feede my Lambes. Ioh. 21. What they meant by Po∣pish keies. What by fee∣ding.When Christ therefore promised the keies of the Kingdome of heauen to Peter alone, that is, to the Church, hee promiseth the principallity. When hee committed the power of binding and loosing to Peter alone, hee committed the power of the keyes. When hee gaue the charge to Peter alone to feede the whole flocke, hee gaue him the principallity. Therefore the primacy was there promised, heere it was giuen. For as he that receiues the keies of a city, receiues the gouern∣ment of the city, so he that hath receiued the keyes of the Church, hath receiued the gouernment of the Church. And because to feede is the same, which to gouerne, and onely Peter is commanded to feede, not some, but all, therefore onely Peter receiued the pro∣mise first in those words, to gouerne the whole Church. Wherein there is ioyned to the threefold confession of his loue,What to loose & bind. a twofold confirmation of honour: but those words of Christ ioyned to the primacie, do prooue the power of excommunicating, which was directed to Peter alone, whatsoeuer you shall binde, and whatsoe∣uer you shall loose. And that twofold, one of binding Kings, the other of loosing subiects, not onely from sinnes, but from vowes, lawes and oathes. For in those words (whose sinnes ye remit) or the power of order is giuen to all,Io. 20. limited ouer sinne. But in those words, whatsoeuer you shall binde, and whatsoeuer you shall loose, there is a power not limited, and vniuersall giuen
to Peter alone, not restreyned to sinnes, not to persons; because he doth not say, whomsoeuer, but whatsoeuer. Whence it followeth that Iames the King of Great Bri∣tanie, doth either not belong at all to the sheepfold of Christ, or that he is subiect to Peter, and to his successor the Bishop of Rome, the chiefe Pastor, as well as the King of France and Spaine: & that as Kings catholike,Kings very sawcily resem∣bled to Rams and Wolues. but euill as vnruly Rammes, so hereticall Princes as rauening wolues, are iustly to be driuen by him out of the fould, & depriued of all gouernment, & the Lords being bound, that they rule no longer, the subiects are loose that they obey no longer. Here Patriot; An egge, saith he, is not so like an  egge, as Saturnine to Bellarmine: who as if he had dis∣trusted that the primacie and principalitie of Peter could be proued out of one place, huddled three toge∣ther, whereby he boasted in Tortus that it was most plainly founded. Here before I weigh Saturnines argument, I purpose to marke the popish Doctors wrangling among them∣selues, by what Text of Scripture the supremacie of Peter is said to be giuen vnto him. Cardinall Contarenus saith it was giuen,Contar: de Sa∣cra: Christ. leg. l. 3. p. 203. Bellar: de Rom. Pont. lib. 1. cap. 12. Cnterane and Bellarmine 2. Cardinals at a farre. when Christ said to Peter, I will giue thee the keyes. Cardinall Bel∣larmine contradicteth Contarene, and denieth that the keyes were then giuen, but promised, and that the gift of supremacie was graunted with the keyes, Ioh: 21. when Christ said to him, Feed my sheepe, as Saturnine obserued, more subtilly, than truly, saith Contarene. But there is no more promised to Peter, Matt: 16 than was giuen to all the Apostles, Ioh: 10, as Christ the best interpreter, expounded that his (whatsoeuer you shall loose) spoken to Peter, in those words, (whose sinnes soeuer you remit) speaking to all his Apostle. And taught that all this power of the keyes, was both common to all the Apostles, and directly restrained to sinnes, as Ambrose, Austin, Theophylact, and Bernard
thought. Therefore the supremacie of Peter was not founded vpon the keyes. But marke I pray you the singular subtlety of Bel∣larmine in this place, which Saturnine also vsed. In the first words is vnderstood the vnlimited power of iuris∣diction giuen to Peter alone, not restreyned to sinnes, or to persons, because he saith not, whomsoeuer; but whatsoeuer: in the second words, the power of order limited ouer sinne communicated to all. O admirable witty interpretation! The Bishop therefore may set open any prison, resolue any hard doubt, for that gene∣rall word, Whatsoeuer you shall loose, doth plainly conteyne all these things vnder it.The right in∣terpretation of the keies. Those things are knowne and common, which the Fathers both old and new, both the popish and our owne, haue left written in their Commentaries of the proper and true sense of the keyes: all of them did comprehend the right of the keyes, and the power of binding and loosing, with∣in the remitting and reteyning of sinnes: the key wherewith heauen is opened or shut, they make to be the interpretation of the Law, as Tertullian; the knowledge of the Scriptures, as Chrysostome; appointed for sinnes, not Seignories, as Bernard; giuen to all Ministers, that they may binde and loose, that they may reteyne or remit sinnes, as out of Christ Ambrose, Austin, Theophylact: that they might rightly out and diuide the word of wrath, and the word of grace, as St Paul, that to the obstinate, this to the pe∣nitent. The key of knowledge doth direct the key of power, .i. the force of doctrine, the execution of disci∣pline, whereby the obstinate are shut out, and the peni∣tent are reconciled.Two keyes of order and iu∣risdiction. This is the force, this is the vse of the keyes, whereof the Fathers made two, the one of Order, the other of Iurisdiction. The key of order, the power of the Ministerie, whereby they preach the Gospell, administer the Sa∣craments, and by the preaching of the Gospell remit or reteyne sinnes.
The key of Iurisdiction, the power of restreyning  sinners, by excommunication, that is, by expelling the obstinate out of the Church, and receiuing the peni∣tent,Concil: Colo: sub Herman: Sacra confess. Concil. Colon. sub Adulpho. as Gropper in his booke of the Councell of Coleyne vnder Hermannus and Adulphus, who said, that ech key did not belong to Peter alone, but was transferd to all the Apostles and their successors. And Cusanus long before that, Nothing said he, is spoken to Peter, that is not spoken to others: for as it is said to Peter,Cusan a Cardi∣nall against Bellarmine. whatsoeuer thou shalt binde, so it is said to others, whatsoeuer yee shall binde. Here you haue Cusan opposite to Bellarmine, a Cardinall to a Cardinall. One Peter you will say receiued the keyes, but he receiued them not as one man, but as the vnitie of the Church, as Pius the second said.Pius 2. a Pope against Bellar∣mine. Here you haue a Pope opposite to a Cardinall. Peter receiued them not as in his owne person, but as in the person of the Church. For if this be said to Peter only, I will giue thee the keyes, the Church hath them not. If the Church haue them, Peter when he tooke the keyes sig∣nified the whole Church, as Austin taught.Tract. 14. in Joh. Then Caie∣tane the Cardinall when he could not rid himselfe out of these straites, If we speake, saith he, formally and pro∣perly, the keyes promised to Peter are aboue the keyes of order and iurisdiction. But this saith Cardinall Bellarmine is not true; for it was neuer heard of in the Church that there were more keyes in the Church then two, which hee doth as well grant to all the Apostles as to Peter. Whence I thus argue against Bellarmine. Peter receiued no other power than that which was promised in the keyes, as Bellarmine saith. But the rest of the Apostles had all that power, as the Fathers, and the learneder Papists teach, and Bellarmine whether he will or no doth confes. Therefore Peter had no other power than the rest of the Apostles. Yet Bellarmine hath a tricke how to scape, hee saith,
that the keyes were giuen to Peter immediately, to the rest mediately by Peter. With hundred chaines binde fast the man, And yet this flye ladd Proteus Will still escape doe what you can. And yet he shall not escape: for if the keyes were gi∣uen mediately to the rest by Peter, they should open and shut, binde and loose, not in Christs name, but in Peters name. Then how can that be true which Paul writeth of himselfe, Paul the Apostle, neither from men, nor by man, but by Iesus Christ. For if we credit Bellar∣mine, he came mediately either from the man Peter, or by the man Peter. How doth Paul affirme that he was not inferiour to the chiefe Apostles, as who had recei∣ued both his doctrine and his vocation immediately with them from Christ? Will the Cardinall then father a lye vpon the Apostle, and labour to proue that Paul did mediately receiue the keyes from Peter? All the Apostles receiued the keyes from Christ, the spirit des∣cended vpon all the Apostles in fiery tongues.All the Apo∣stles receiued the keyes and fiery tongues from Christ. All the Apo∣stles are pil∣lars. All the Apostles are said to be the pillars of the Church, as the Fathers obserued out of the Scripture. What? Did Bellarmine read that to Peter was giuen a greater and a better key, than to the rest of the Apostles? Hath he heard that a larger and a more shining fiery tongue than the rest, sate vpon Paters head, as the prince, then vpon the other Apostles heads? Hath he learn'd, that of twelue pillars one was set more firme and surer than all the rest, that the house might be more supported by that, than by the rest? which if Bellarmine knew not, let him leaue of to play the foole, and to tell vs that the power was giuen to Peter immediatly from Christ, and to the rest mediately by Peter, as it were by assignment. Marke I beseech you, Calander, I cannot say whether more wicked, or more ridiculous consequences follow necessarily out of this place of the keyes.
The keyes are promised to Peter: Therefore to none but to Peter.Wicked and ridiculous cō∣clusions. Two keyes were giuen as badges of the ministerie, Therefore three Crownes as badges of the Empire. For when Christ gaue the keyes, he gaue principalitie, as Bellarmine saith. Peter receiued the keyes of the kingdom of heauen, Therefore of earthly kingdomes. Peter can exclude Kings hereticall out of heauen, Therefore out of their thrones. He can binde sinnes, Therefore Scepters. He can shew his power in offences, Therefore in possessions. He can release penitent men from their sinnes, Therefore trayterous subiects from their oathes. He hath a key wherewith he doth loose the sinnes of Kings, Therefore he hath a club wherewith he may breake their heads. So Bellarmine hath changed Peters key into Hercules club. He can loose and binde any thing, He can therefore as Oedipus, loose any riddle, he can binde Turkes and beares. These consequences proue that a King is not to be de∣priued of his kingdom for heresie, but that the Cardi∣nall is depriued of his wit for phrensie. Peters key is altogether the key of heauen, whereby by the prea∣ching of the eternall Gospell hee hath opened heauen to the faithfull and penitent, and shut it to the vnfaith∣full and impenitent, which the Pope the counterfet successor of Peter doth vse otherwise, as somtime an elegant Poet played vpon this princely porter. I should not maruaile muchDoctor Giles Fletcher. If that the Popes good grace, Did happily beare the key Of that darke stigian place.
For he enriched hath that place with many an elfe, And opened wide hell gate, And entred in himselfe. But sith that heauen and hell Are set so far asunder, That he should beare the key Of heauen it is a wonder. But now tis none at all, From heauen he all shuts out, And pes the gate of hell, And letteth in that rout. As the falling starre in the prophecie of Iohn he hath changed the key of heauen into the key of the bottom∣les pit. Bellarmine being driuen from the keyes, must needs betake himselfe to that his hold, Feede my sheepe. Why then good Sir, why do you vrge this place of the keyes any more for the supremacie, whereby no∣thing was promised more to Peter than was granted to all the Apostles, as the Fathers both old and new, both strangers and your owne do apprarantly proue? But in this place, because to feed is the same with to rule, and Peter alone is commanded to feed the sheep, not some, but all; therefore to Peter alone is giuen the principalitie ouer the whole Church, being armed with a double sword, with a double power, spirituall and temporall, which the old man saw, I beleeue, as lunatike Pentheus by fitts saw, Two seuerall Sunnes, two seuerall Moones appeare. which the Fathers both old and new, being of a more setled wit,Bellarmines pride in ma∣king a Cardi∣nall equall to a King. and sharper insight could neuer see. But Bellarmine thinketh so gaily of the pastorall vocation, that in respect thereof he preferreth a Bishop before a King, as a sheepheard before a sheepe: which perhaps he had well concluded, if Christ had said to Peter, Feed thy sheepe; he said it not, but feede my sheepe. But he
doth not only prefer a Bishop before a King, but makes a Cardinall equall with him very fondly. The Bishop of Ely, was somtime Cardinall of S. Pauls Church, as now Bellarmine is Cardinall of the Church of Rome. Yet notwithstanding being as well learned, hee would not compare himselfe for modestie sake with the Car∣dinall, when well he might. For though as he is Bishop of Ely, he is inferior to Bellarmine, yet as he was Car∣dinall of S. Pauls Church he was nothing inferior. And yet the Cardinall is so mad, as to compare himselfe to the King the Bishop of Elies Lord. But let vs returne to the argument. It is famous that which the Fathers all with one con∣sent  write vpon this place,To feede the same which to teach. that to feed is the same which to teach. which is not proper to Peter alone, but com∣mon to all Apostles and Ministers: that all the Apo∣stles were equally shepheards of the whole flocke, that Iames and Iohn were no more Peters sheepe, than Peter was Iames and Iohns sheepe; who are equally called pil∣lars, to feede and to rule are not synonimaes, but by Peter interpretation they be contrary. That Peter was thrice confirmed by name, because Peter denyed Christ thrise by name. Not therefore for honors sake, as you say, but for comfort: or if for honor, not that it was enlarged vpon Peter aboue the rest, but that it was restored to Peter: of whom Christ required a three∣fold confession of loue, that with his threefold confes∣sion he might blot out his threefold deniall. Excellently said Chrysostome; When Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheepe, it was Christ his purpose,Chrysost: l. 2. de sacerd. to teach Peter, and all the rest, how much he loued the Church, to that end that we with all our minds should take care for the same. and else-where in his 87 homilie, marke well the words said he, feed my lambes, .i. feed my faithfull people not yours: I haue demanded if you loued me, that loue which you professed towards me, shew toward them: feede them, not your selfe. Woe to the shepheards of Israel that feede
themselues,Ezec: 34. cap. Ezec: 34. not my flocke: woe to the shepheardes that scatter the sheepe of my flocke. Hearken Paul the fift: that feede themselues, who seeke their owne profit and glory, not the glory of God, not the saluation of the faithfull, ouer whom they haue charge. Neither did Austen speake lesse elegantly, when it was spoken to Peter saith he,Aust. de agon. cap. 3. it was spoken to all; Do you loue me? feede my sheepe. And elsewhere, as my sheepe, not as thy sheepe,Tract. in Ioh. 131. seeke my glorie in them, not thine owne, my gaine, not thine. Heare Paul the fift, you thinke that Kings are not Christ his sheepe, but your owne. You seeke not the glory of Christ in teaching them, but your owne in subduing them.How the Pope feedeth. You doe not endeauour to gaine sheep to Christ, but to seeke wooll for your selfe. Yea you doe not only clippe the flocke, but deuour the flocke, while you deliuer doctrine pernitious to the faith of subiectes, to the safty of Kings, to inward and outward peace. And do you loue Christ? you loue your owne selfe, Christ you doe not loue, no more truly then your Lord Apollyon whose vicegerent you are vpon the earth I might if I would ioyne other fathers to Chrysostome and Austen; I might alleadge out of your owne men, Marsilius Patauine, and Cusan, who appoint the feeding to be by word, and by example, by sound preaching, & good example; and make it common not onely to all A∣postles, but to all Ministers. Bellarmine farre otherwise. Bellar: lib. 1. de pant. cap. 16.He said to Peter. Feede. Therfore Peter alone must feed. He said once feede my sheepe; sheepe, i. Priests, Byshops, and Apostles, who haue bred Lambes, twise Lambes, first vnderstanding Iewes, and then Gentiles. Therefore he committed the vniuersall flocke to Peter, and because to feede is the same which to rule: therefore he gaue to Peter the vniuersall principality ouer the flocke. A cleare and euident place saith Stapleton, that by sheepe Pastors,Staepl: doctr: punc: con. 2. Byshoppes, and Apostles are signified: by lambes the rest of the faithfull. So happy is Bellar∣mine,
that he neuer coyned so ridiculous or idle a con∣ceit, but some or other would take it vp,Mald: in Ioh: 21. and commend it ouer to fooles. Marke saith Maldonatus, if this subtil∣ty cast-not learned men into a laughter. Lambes & sheep confounded, Ioh. 17. the name of the Lambe is a little more kinde, and carrieth a greater shew of loue,Feede is not to rule. but there is no difference in the thing but in the word. For whereas you say that to feede is all one with to rule, whence you seeme with Bellarmine to fetch the v∣niuersall Monarchy of Peter, it is not only a hungrie, but a swelling and proud interpretation. , is not to rule, but to feede, , are not Rectors but Pastors. And  and  are sino∣nonyma, the former word Christ vsed in the 3. place. . Now assume out of Iohn being rightly translated, and what will you then conclude? that it was giuen in charge to Peter, that he should feede the flocke, there∣fore to rule the flocke. But be it so, let feede, and rule be all one; to rule when it is enioyned to Byshoppes, is that which to di∣rect: that is to rule with wisedome and counsell, not with power and gouernment. But Bellarmine doth thus interpret Christ, feede Peter. i. rule and gouerne. Baronius goeth farther,Baronius mak∣eth feede to kill. in the excommunication of the Venetians, to Paul the 5. there is a double ministery of Peter, to feede and to kill, for the Lord said to him feede my sheepe, and hee heard a voice from heauen kill and eate. This killing is not crueltie saith he, but pietie and since∣ritie,  very well; Paul the 5.The Pope, doth kill in pietie. out of his loue and pietie forsooth doth kill men, which Seneca doth call cruell pietie. But he killeth them that he may hide them in his entrailes, saith he: I thinke so, hee will haue the Pope not onely to fleece the flocke, but swallow it vp at a bit. Baronius doth vse the words of charity, but the exam∣ples of crueltie. For hee propoundeth Gregorie these uenth, and Alexander the third, his Countrymen of
Sene to be imitated by Paul the 5. Christian Kings must be very secure I warrant you, whenas the Pope doth once beginne to play Gregories and Alexanders prankes. As Bellarmine doth stretch out his (to rule) to the head and throate, he doth it somewhat more wly, but with as little honesty. For when he had written in his letters to his friend Blackwell, that no Pope had euer com∣manded that the Prince should be killed: and the Au∣thour of the Apologie had excepted, that he comman∣ded warre to be raised, wherein hee might be slaine: he answeres in Tortus,How the Pa∣pists may kill a King, how not. that Bellarmine spake not of mur∣ther, which may happen in battaile, but of that mur∣ther which may be committed by a royster. A very ho∣nest distinction. As though hee bee not as well a mur∣therer, who at the command of the Pope doth kill the King by open force,Cardinall Co∣mensis incited Parry to kill Q. Elizabeth. as he that shall doe it by secret trea∣cherie. That this Cardinall threatning warres & armes is no honester then Cardinall Comensis, whose letters are extant, wherein he encouraged Parry, with promise of reward and pardon from the Pope, that hee should bring to good effect the purpose of his good spirit, those were his wordes, that is, that he should murther Queene Elizabeth with his dagger. Bellarmine proued no bet∣ter to our excellent King Iames, but somewhat the clo∣ser. Did Peter feede the Church after this manner? This is not foode but poyson. Did he so guide the flock of his Master, as if the chiefe belweather of the flocke went astray, he would take care, that he should either closly or openly be slaine? Giue a Shipheards crooke to a Shepheard. What hath a Shipheard to doe with a sword? Yes forsooth saith he, when Christ made Peter a Pastor, hee made him a Prince. For when hee com∣manded him to feed he commanded him to rule. And he gaue him not only a ministery but a magistracy. But, good Sir, the inward and spirituall gouernment is one thing which Peter exercised ouer soules, by the worde, the Sacraments, and the keies: the earthly and outward
gouernment is another thing, which Paul the 5 doth practise by fraude and force against crownes. I pray you tell mee Calander, what difference you make be∣tweene these two, and the Commentaries, of the Fa∣thers, and their owne popish writers? Marke the con∣sequencies depending on this interpretation partly foo∣lish, partly wicked. Peter is commanded to feede the flocke of Christ. Therefore none but Peter. Ʋpon Peter is laide the charge of feeding and teaching. Therefore the honour of ruling and reigning is bestowed on him. Peters dutie is to teach Kings. Therefore to depose Kings. To instruct Kings, therefore to destroy Kings. To Peter is granted a spirituall regiment, therefore an earthly gouernment. Whether doth hee that knits together such conse∣quences (and these are necessarily gathered out of Bel∣larmines interpretation) seeme to be sent to the schooles or to the Anticira for a purge. Charge is laid, Calander, vpon all true Pastors in Peter, to feede and rule the flocke of Christ committed to their charge, but so that they feede them with the spirituall foode of wholesome doctrine, and rule them with the staffe of wholesome discipline. But if Paul the 5. doe not feede the flocke but feede vpon it, and doe not order the steppes of his sheepe, but breake their legges and their heades, truly he doth giue food, and vse his shepheardes staffe other∣wise then Christ appointed. Wherefore I thinke King Iames would rather fast then bee fed by such a Shep∣heard, who feedeth to that end that hee may kill and eat. What other Kings doe let themselues looke to it; let them laugh in their sleeues as they please, when they read these foolish quiddities of Schollers, but let them take heede of such wicked baites of rebellion, which lurke in Bellarmines new Dictionarie. Wherein
To feede and to rule are . To teach a King and to depose a King all one. The excommunication of a King, and depriuation. The absoluing of sinners from se, is the absoluing subiects from their duty. Doe they not perceiue that this is the Grammer of that proud and bloody Antichrist? Therefore King Iames doth willingly forsake the popish flocke, that hee may betake himselfe to Gods flocke, which is knowne of Christ, and followeth him and flieth from a stran∣ger. For he doth not regard these carnall Cardinalls so leaden-pated in their arguing. Peter is the Porter of heauen: Therefore the Lord of the world. Peter is a Pastor, therefore a Prince. Peter is a Fisher of men, therefore of kingdomes. A net was giuen him wherewith he may take fishes as well great as little. Therefore he hath gouernment aswell ouer Kings as sub∣iects. Peter is charged to feede the sheepe, therefore he is char∣ged to feede the rest of the Apostles. He is twise charged to feede Lambes: therefore the Iewes and Gentiles, and by consequent all Christians. Do not these hange together as a sickmans dreames? Doth not Bellarmine seeme to expose the Scripture to mockery, when he reasoneth after this fashion, against Aquinas rule, who doth plainely deny that symbolicall di∣uinitie,Bellarmine buildeth his Church go∣uernment vp∣pon tropes. hath any force to argue? whereon for all that hee hath built the whole supremacy, and doth pronounce it to be a doctrine of the Catholicke faith, most plainly founded vpon the Scriptures. The Philosophers doe laugh at Epicure for making the world of moates. And will not Diuines hisse out Bellarmine that frameth the ecclesiasticall gouernment of tropes? For truely you shall assoone finde Moores Vtopia in the world, as Peters Monarchy in the text. Which Article notwithstanding,
is fained to bee the cheefe article of the Popes Creede, wherein are contained many articles, aswell of supersti∣tion and Idolatrie, as of conspiracie and rebellion. So that Poperie is nothing else but a plaine catechisme of false faith toward God and the King. For that double power ecclesiasticall and temporall,  which you faine to bee so inwardly ioyned to the supre∣macy, that it cannot be separated from it, you haue e∣rected as a double engine, to ouerthrow the truth of diuinity, and the Kings dignity. For you haue tran∣slated each of them, as it were, from Peter, to the Pope and the Popes successour, which you assume and proue not. Ecclesiasticall, whereby by excommunication he may binde Kings, and absolue subiects, not only from sinnes, but from vowes, lawes and oathes. So by ex∣communication the Pope stealeth away crownes from Kings, and soules from subiects, while he taketh away authority from the one, and obedience from the other. In both he breaketh Gods will, wherby the ciuill power of the Prince, though he be euill, and the obedience of the subiect is soundly established, as I haue fully and at large satisfied you in the former Dialogue: and I haue no lesse infringed the Popes temporall iurisdiction, where you alleadged it. In the meane while there was no reason this insolent Cardinall should tearme Kings Catholike in the faith, if once they began to bee wicked, vnruly rmmes:Bellarmines sawcinesse iustly reproo∣ued. and Protestant Kings and Princes rauenous wolues, himselfe being a goate and a foxe: he durst not, I say, call them so, but that hee thin∣keth Kings to be very patient. Who if they remembred themselues to bee Kings, would teach this sawcy and busie Cardinall to follow his holy studie, and not to trouble himselfe with Kings affaires. Neither would they at all suffer either the truth of Gods Testament to be so corrupted by such wicked Impostors, or the ma∣iestie of kingly gouernment to bee so defaced. For the dissolution of gouernment springeth out of the corrup∣tion
of Gods Testament. Wherefore if they would admit of wholesome counsail, they would iudge these deceitfull Iuglers, who make controuersies last for euer by the pernicious quirkes and trickes, were to bee sup∣prest by armes, not to be refuted by arte: for certainely these will neuer leaue off to offer dishonour to God, and wrong to Kings. Then Saturnine, you are too hot and earnest, sayd he, Patriott, against that most learned Cardinall, and light of our age. And you must leaue off (said he) to praise your Car∣dinall, and prooue the supremacie. For your Popish writers could neuer yet agree vpon a text, whereon the supremacie was plainely grounded. Then Saturnine, what is more plaine and euident, saith hee, then that Peter is called the head of the Apo∣stles,Ephes. 1. The Popish diuision of the head. and the rocke whereon Christ promised he would build his Church? Matth. 16. for although S. Paul do call Christ the principall and inuisible head of the Church, which giueth life to the whole bodie of the Church, yet it is euident that there is a ministeriall and a visible head appointed by Christ, that may outwardly gouerne the whole Church,Cor. 12. whereof hee maketh men∣tion, Corinth. 12. The head cannot say to the feete, I haue no neede of you, which cannot be vnderstood of Christ the principall head. For Christ the eternall word of God can say to vs,It followeth not but might haue beene aswell spoken to Iohn or Iames. I haue no neede of you, it followeth then, that it is to bee vnderstood of a ministeriall head, that is, Peter, and Peters successour, the Bishop of Rome. And although Paul doe affirme Christ to bee that one onely cheife foundation of the Church, 1 Cor. 3.1. yet when he saith in another place, that the Church is builded vpon the foundation of the Apostles, & ther∣fore vpon the person of Peter, the Prince of the Apo∣stles, as Christ did first call him the Rocke, and Esay when in the spirit of prophesie he spake in the person of God, Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation,A text peculi∣arly proper to Christ bla∣sphemously applied to Peter. as hee vnder∣standeth Christ the cheife foundation, whereof the A∣postle speaketh, Another foundation, 1. Cor. 3. so hee did foreshew Peter, whom Christ called the rocke, and the Pope that precious & corner stone, that surefoun¦dation, but a second foundation.Bellarm in prae∣fat. de Rom. Pont. cap. 1. As was likewise pro∣phesied of one head, which the sonnes of Iuda, and the sonnes of Israel being assembled, should appoint to themselues. Whereby it appeareth that there ought to be one vniuersall Bishop of the whole Church,Saunders of the visib. Monar. l. 4. c. 5 and that Christ and his Vicar make one head, one visible and ministeriall head, whereon all the Church should de∣pend, for the remedy of schisme: one rocke, one se∣condarie foundation, euen the person and chaire of Peter, whereon the Church might rest, for feare of slip∣ping and falling. Let vs aske after the fathers, the sincere interpreters of  the Scripture, Optatus, who thinketh that the word Cephas, as it signifieth a head, taken from the Greek word , & therefore calleth Peter the head of the Apostles. For the word stone in the Syriake signifieth head, in the Greeke,Ad Marcel. tom. Epist. 2. each prerogatiue of Peter is described by that word. Now that the person of Peter was both called, and laid the rocke of the Church by Christ, Ierome is a witnesse, who doth plainely affirme, that Peter was he vpon whom the the Lord founded the Church. And to Damasus tom. Epist. 2.August. in Psal. contra. part Donat. I am ioyned in communion with your blessednesse, that is, to the chaire of Peter, I know that the Church is builded vpon that rocke. And Austin when hee maketh mention of the seat of Peter, saith, that that is the rocke.Cypria. de vnica Ecces. Cathol. And Cyprian Whosoeuer doth forsake the chaire of Peter, whereon the Church is builded, doth hee trust to bee in the Church? It would bee too long to reckon vp all the fathers, who haue written that the person of Peter was called, and placed the rocke by Christ, whereon hee promised not only to build the Church at that time, but would build it after. And therefore I alleadged three, who called it
not the person of Peter only, but called the chaire the rocke, that I might note downe in the Bishop of Rome the perpetuall building of the Church, according to the words of Christ. Now bee packing Patriott, and deny if you can this cheife article of the Catholike faith, that the supremacie and principallity of Peter, is plain∣ly grounded vpon the Scriptures. Whence a diuers be∣ginning and excellency may bee gathered both of the Ecclesiasticall and secular gouernment: that the Pope, as spirituall Prince, as Peter hath deriued his power im∣mediately from Christ, to gouerne his subiects: But se∣cular Princes haue receiued their power mediately to gouerne their subiects, either by the means of election. as the Emperour, and King of Polonia, or of hereditary succession, as the Kings of Spaine, France & England, or of grant and donation, as the free Princes, or of iust warre and conquest, as Godfrey heeretofore and other Lords held the holy land. Therefore to the Pope, as to Peter, ordained the cheife spirituall Prince immedi∣ately from Christ in the Church, as to the head and rocke of the Church, spiritual obedience for conscience sake is to be giuen of all Christians: But to secular Kings ordained mediately by humane titles, onely secular o∣bedience for policies sake, to preserue good order and manners, is to bee performed, obedience to the higher power alway being preserued: which I would haue you know, I speake to that end, that I might call to your re∣membrance, Calander, that whereof you cannot bee ignorant that you doe so sweare fealty to the King, that you abiure not your fealty to the Vicar of Christ. The vse of which article I thought good shortly to set be∣fore all Catholikes in respect of their Princes. Then Patriots, you haue spoken much in few words, sayd he, Saturnine, and almost all, I am sure the cheifest points, which your men doe alleadge out of the Scrip∣ture for the supremacy, so that you seeme to haue pla∣ced them in the rereward, as your best soulders at the
push of the pike, whom if I shall by Gods grace ouer∣throw, I trust I shall more easily defeat the rest of your broken and scattered forces. And first wee must shortly see, in what sense Christ the eternal sonne of God, is said to be the head, the rock and foundation of the Church, and so it shall easily ap∣peare to Calander, what wrong is offred to Christ,Christ is the head, & how. Ephe. 1.22.23. when these are giuen to Peter. God hath put all things vnder the feete of Christ, saith the Apostle, and gaue him to bee the head ouer all things of the Church, which is his bodie the fulnesse of him that falleth all in all. Therefore Christ is the head of the vniuersall Church, not onely because hee giueth life to all the members thereof, and doth poure into them all the senses and motions of spirituall graces: but also because he doth rule and gouerne all things subiect vnto him with his spirit: and thus the Church is the body of Christ. There is therefore that reference betweene Christ and the Church, as that hee cannot be said to be the head, but in respect of this bo∣dy, nor the Church be a body, but in respect of this head. That it is no lesse absurd to imagine a Church with two heads, then to imagine Christ to haue two bodies. Therefore Paul when hee called Christ alone the head, he brought all the rest,Christ is head alone, all o∣thers be but members. both men and Angels into the ranke of members. Of the Angels it appeareth vers. 21. Of men chap. 4. and euen of those men, whom he purposed afterward to set ouer the Church militant, whereof hee hath appointed none to bee the head, but hath left them all parts in the body. For when as hee writ of the perpetuall gouernment of the Church, by way of comparison, and of set purpose,Ephes. 4. & had gathered many vnities to preserue the vnity of the spirit, in the bond of peace: One bodie, one spirit, one hope, one Lord,Among ma∣ny vnities one visible head omitted. one faith, one baptisme, one God, and one Father of vs all; hee omitted one visible head, when as hee should haue made mention in this place if any where at all. What? shall wee thinke that Paul was altogether forgetfull of
Peter, when as to euery of the Apostles was giuen grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ, by whom he ascended into heauen, there was not one A∣postle giuen, who should beare rule ouer all the rest: but many Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists, Pastors & Do∣ctors, whom before he called Bishops, to the gathering of the Saints,The gouern∣ment left by Christ not Monarchicall but Aristo∣craticall. the worke of the ministery, and the building vp of the body of Christ. So that Paul thought that the go∣uernment left by Christ vpon the earth, was not Monarchicall, by one which Bellarmine doth so greatly extoll, but Aristocraticall by many. And that hee thought was sufficient to preserue the vnity of the spi∣rit and of faith, to meete with them, who cry out that the Church is , if it bee without a visile head appointed forsooth for the remedy of schisme. And if Bellarmine had liued in those dayes, he would, I thinke, haue put Paul in minde not to haue slipt ouer Peter the head of the vniuersall Church. But now Bellarmine it is not safe for the Apostle to vse your councell: And hath left in writing that wee ought all of vs to worship and adore Christ himselfe, euer liuing and present with his spirit and maiestie, declared to be the onely head of the Church, and in this place called the onely Lord. But Christ, you say, is that one head by a principall meane, in that he giueth life to the bodie, but the Pope, by the right of Peter, is the ministeriall head, that hee may gouerne. But to appoint a double head of the Church, by reason of the difference of a double duty of the head, one principall that giueth life, another mini∣steriall that ruleth, this is not to diuide, but to plucke in sunder the functions of the head. For to direct both the inward and the outward functions of this whole bodie, it is the cheife and proper duty of that head, as Paul teacheth, which giueth life to the bodie. But you imagine that Paul hath spoken of the mini∣steriall head in another place. When as he said, the head cannot say to the feete, I haue no neede of you.
Which cannot be vnderstood of Christ as you say: for he is such a head, who may say to vs, I haue no neede of you: which that I may grant to be true as Christ is the eternall word and perfection it selfe (for so he hath no neede of men, for he filleth all places, and himselfe cannot be filled) but as he is the head of the Church, he hath need both of the head and members, that hee may be a head by the nature of relation or reference. For these are so knit together by that nature, that it can no more be a head without a bodie, than it can be a body without a head: whereby the Church is called the body of Christ, and the fulfilling of him that filleth all in all: which is not wrought by the worthinesse of his humane nature, but by the excellencie of his diuine nature. Of the corruption of that place to the Corinths, and of the friuolous and absurd consequencies of your argument, you shall heare by and by. In the meane time listen I pray in what sense Christ,  whome Peter confesseth to be the sonne of the liuing God, is called the rocke and foundation of the Church, 1 Cor: 3.11. Matth: 16. Another foundation none can lay, besides that which is laid already Iesus Christ. Christ therefore is that one foundation of the Church, that one rocke, whereon the whole Church ought to be founded. Which is to be taken in this sense,How Christ a Rocke. that he is borne for vs, that he died and rose againe for vs, that he was taken vp into heauen, made of God for vs, wisdom, iustice, sancti∣fication, redemption, satisfaction, purging, and to conclude saluation and glory: as Paul described him in the first chap: not that halfe and part of these good things, but that the full accomplishment and perfection is to be sought in Christ. Neither doth he say that Christ was giuen to vs for the increase and helpe to wisdome, holi∣nesse, and redemption, but doth attribute the sound effect of all to Christ alone,Coloss: 2. in whom he saith that we are perfected: in which place first hee taught in what
sense Christ is called the onely foundation, then hee placed the only foundation of the Church, that we may put our whole trust and confidence in Christ and him alone, being founded on him the eternall and im∣moueable foundation.Th'Apostles builders not foundations. And it is worth the marking, that Paul, Cephas, and other the Apostles are called builders, not foundations: who should build the whole Church vpon Christ alone, not the foundation where∣on it should be builded. But the Apostle saith that the Church was builded vpon the foundation of the Apo∣stles and Prophets. But the personall foundation is one, whereof is mention in this place; and the doctri∣nall is another, whereof is mention to the Ephesians: where he vnderstandeth not Peter only, but all the Apostles, as they be Doctors of the Church, are the doctrinall or instructing foundations, as it is in the Apocalypse. where the Apostles are accounted the 12 foundations of the house of God. Let Saturnine now come, and himselfe be iudge, whether he can call the person of Peter, the rocke and the foundation of the Church. If he affirme it still, (for I know his wrangling, and neuer yeelding wit) let him say likewise, that Peter was borne for vs, dyed for vs, rose againe for vs, and ascended into heauen for vs: that Peter was made of God for vs, wisdom, iustice, sanctification, redemption, satisfaction, purging, life & glory, that our faith and confidence is as well vpon Peter, as vpon a foundation, as vpon Christ. For Christ in this sense is both the rocke and foundation of the Church. Do you not see Calander these mens open blasphe∣mie,Popish blas∣phemie. who haue called Peter, and in him the Pope the second foundation of the Church? to me truly there can be no more deadly plague, than they who make a meere man the rocke of the Church. But they make a holy man, but a man; as Marie a blessed woman, but a woman: when as shee is said to breake the Serpents
head. as Peter a holy man, but a mortall man and a sinner. And then hardly a man, when fearing death, he denied life, as Gregorie saith: yet they call him the rocke, whom Christ afterward called Sathan. Who put such a weake and slender foundation of Christ his Church? what other thing do they offer to the world, than that which the Atheist may scoffe at, and the Iewes detest? Let them leaue of therefore any more to be madd with the disgrace and hurt of the Church: and let them confesse the only sonne of God to be the eternall foun∣dation of the eternall Church. But the names of King, Lord, Bishop, Pastor, and  the like, giuen to Christ, are giuen to Kings and Priests. We confesse and acknowledge, that such names as ex∣presse his ministerie giuen to Christ, may be giuen to Magistrates either ecclesiasticall or ciuill, after a cer∣taine manner: but that those names which do expresse the neerest coniunction of Christ and his Church,Certaine names giuen to Christ, not to be giuen to men. by the power whereof life and saluation is deriued vnto vs, as the names of Head, Rocke, Foundation, that those should be giuen to any mortall man whatsoeuer, in respect of the whole Church, that we deny againe and againe. But the Fathers call Peter the rocke wherevpon Christ hath founded his Church: as Ierome and diuers other Fathers affirme.Cusan. lib: 2. de cencord: eccles: cap. 13. But your Cardinall Cusan hath answered before out of Ierome, although Peter by the rocke is to be vnderstood the stone of the foundation, yet agreable to him the other Apostles were likewise the stones of the Church, as Apoc: 21. twelue stones:The rest rocks as well as Pe∣ter. therefore so many Apostles, so many foundations; which is spoken in respect of the Apostolicall doctrine, as Paul before expounded it. Other, and that more iustly, vpon this rocke I will build my Church, expound it of Christ, as Austin.August e verb: D m: secund: Mat Sm: 13. Thou therefore saith he, art Peter, and vpon this rocke, which thou hast confessed, vpon this rocke which thou hast acknow∣ledged,
saying,Christ the on∣ly rocke. Thou art the sonne of the liuing God, I will build my Church, that is, I will build my Church vpon my selfe the sonne of the liuing God, vpon my selfe I will build thee, not my selfe vpon thee. And Gregorie; Christ saith he, doth call himselfe the rocke. Other call the faith and confession of Peter the rocke,Chrysost: serm: de Pent: & Homil. 55. in Matth: Hilar. de Trin: lib: 2. as Chrysostome; Ʋpon this rocke, saith hee, not vpon this Peter, for hee buildeth not his house vpon a man, but vpon faith. And Hilarie; There is one immoueable foundation, there is one blessed rocke of faith, confessed by the mouth of Peter, Thou art the sonne of the liuing God, vpon this rock of confession, is the Church builded; this faith is the foun∣dation of the Church. Ambros: in Ephes: cap. 2.And Ambrose; The Lord said to Peter, vpon this rocke I will build my Church, .i. vpon this catholike confes∣sion of faith. Faith therefore is the foundation of the Church: for there is nothing said of the flesh of Peter, but of the faith of Peter: because the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. Out of whose most weighty witnesses, that I may reckon no more, I gather this argument not to be ex∣cepted against. That (according to Scripture and Fathers) which Peter confessed, that wherein he beleeued, was, and is the rocke. But Peter confessed Christ, not himselfe, Peter be∣leeued in Christ, not in himselfe. Therefore according to Scripture and Fathers, not Peter but Christ was and is the rocke. which argument may be gathered out of venerable Bede,Beda in cap: 21. Johan: who writeth that Christ was the rocke, vpon which foundation euen Peter himselfe was to be built. The ground whereof agreable to the Scripture, may be fetcht out of Peter de Alliaco,Pet: de Alliac recommen. scrip. pag. 269. a reuerend Cardinall of Rome, a very eager maintayner of the Popes supre∣macie, who notwithstanding being ouercome with the
light of that truth; By the rocke, saith he, Peter doth not seeme to be vnderstood but Christ. For who can ground the strength of the Church vpon Peters weaknes? whereof aske but the damosell that kept the dore, and she will answer you, that Peter being frighted at her word, as Gregorie saith, while he feared death denyed life. Wherefore seing Peter did stagger, and his Vicar hath no fast footing, and seing Bishops them-selues doe so greatly differ about the chiefe Priesthood of Peter, and Priests wrangle about their chiefe Priest, who dare presume to say, any man of what san∣ctitie or dignitie soeuer, whether he be Priest, or chiefe Bi∣shop, whether it be Peter, or Peters Vicar, or any other who∣soeuer but Christ himselfe, to be the foundation of the Chri∣stian Church? Christ therefore hath founded his Church vpon himselfe, as a most sure foundation, against the syna∣gogue of Satan: and vpon this rocke hath surely grounded Peter himselfe, of whom hee spake that former sentence, vpon this Rocke. These are the words of Peter de Alliaco. You would thinke that Luther or Caluin were spea∣king. And yet Cardinall Bellarmine was so saucie, as to  apply the prophecie of Esay of the chosen stone,Blasphemie subscribed to by the popish. pre∣tious corner stone, a sure foundation placed in Sion, to the Pope, sur reuerence: This hath that base slaue of Antichrist deliuered against the most manifest exposi∣tion of Peter, 1 Pet: 2. to whom Tho: Aquin. Cardinall Caictan, and Maldonat, and Fererius, Iesuites, and many other popish writers subscribe. That with a few others did Bellarmine attempt against the Scripture, which the boldnes of many popish writers more learned were afraid to attempt. And will you hearken to this fellow Calander, in a chiefe article of faith, as he calls it, so far dissenting from his owne side? or dare you securely ad∣mit of those, whom you see as the Madianites, mutu∣ally wounding them-selues in a cause of such impor∣tance? Saturnine, who seemeth to bee no other thing but
very Bellarmine himselfe proceedeth from Christ to Peter, from Peter to the Pope; from the Pope he fal∣leth to the Popes chaire, and hee proueth that the Church is to be founded vpon that rocke out of testi∣monies, borrowed and framed out of Ierome, Austin, and Cyprian. Cic: de erat:Cicero makes mention of a certaine mad fellow, who finding a small boate on the sea-shore, purposed to build a great ship of it.Papists like mad-men. These mens madnes is like, who finding Peters chaire in the Fathers, do dreame that the Church must be built vpon the chaire. Ierome to Damasus, I am vnited in communion, saith he, to your blessednes, that is to Peters chaire, I know that vpon that rock the Church is builded, that is vpō the chaire, as you relate it.Jerome misal∣leaged. But Ierom thus; I following after none chiefest but Christ,  vnited to your Blessednes &c. You passe by Christ in this sentence, as if he were a man vn∣knowne, and you curtall Ieromes words, wherein hee confesseth that he doth follow none chiefly but Christ. You make mention of Peters chaire; Ʋpon that rocks,  saith Ierome, I knowe that the Church is aide. Why should you not rather referre, That rocke to Christ that goeth before, then to Peter that followeth after in the sen∣tence? chiefly, when Ierome doth adde the word, I know, that the Church is builded vpon that rocke. Now that Christ is that rocke wheron the Church is builded, one at all doubteth: but that Peter is that rocke, many deny. And yet you are so mad that you will build the ship of the Church, vpon the chaire as it were vpon a small boate? You haue well Saturnine by rasing out the name of Christ, shauen away the sentence, as a beard, with Ie∣romes sharpe rasor. I shall maruaile much if Austin when he cannot en∣dure that Peter should bee the foundation of the Church, would suffer the Pope to be: and if when he did remoue the person of Peter from this honor, hee
would admit Peters chaire. But when he makes mention of Peters seat, that, said he, is the rocke. Is it so indeed? let vs adde the wordes following recken vp said he all the Priests from the very seat of Peter, and in that order of Fathers marke who suc∣ceeded one another, that is the rocke against which the proud gates of hell shall not preuaile. Then Saturnine, while you are handling another  matter, Patriot you doe confirme by Austens authority another article of the Catholicke faith of the Pope Pe∣ters successour. But, said he againe, to the confirmation of an article of the Catholicke faith, Austens authoritie without the testimonie of the Scripture cannot be sufficient, in the iudgement of Austen himselfe: who speaketh of the matter as he had heard, that the Byshop of Romes seat was the seat of Peter, and that in that seat some succee∣ded others: but hee makes it no article of the faith. Wherefore when he speaketh that is the rocke it cannot be referred, either to the seat or to the succession of By∣shoppes in the seat. For therein hee should contradict himselfe, who makes Christ the rocke of the Church,Apostles rockes in re∣spect of doc∣trine. vnlesse rather he referre it to Peter, so vnderstood as I said with the rest of the Apostles, who in respect of do∣ctrine, may in some sort be called rockes. But it is not said you will say, he is the rocke, but shee is the rocke, therfore the reference is not to the person in this place, but to the seat, i. to the chaire. As though by the deceit and carelessenesse of writers greater faultes then these had not crept into Austens workes, then she for he. Although what hinders why, shee is the rocke, may not aswell bee referred, to the person of Peter, as those wordes in the Gospell (vpon this rocke &c.) are referred to the person of Peter by the Rhemistes. But let that be granted you for a time which you shall neuer euict, that Peters chaire is ment in that place,
Austen saith not that is the rocke whereon the Church is builded, but that is the rocke which the gate of hell shall not vanquish. So he doth not promise that Rome shall alwaies withstand, but doth testifie that Rome did then resist the gates of hell, while it kept that faith vncorrupt that Peter left vnto them. For if hee should now liue, and make diligent search, hee should not finde Rome in the middest of Rome.This Rome not old Rome. Our Ro∣maines at this day are no Romaines, they are but the carcasses of those Romaines, who receiued their first faith from Paul and Peter, which these men haue brea∣thed out as their soules. And now let Cyprian make answer for himselfe, who affirmeth that the like power was giuen to all the Apostles by Christ:Lib. de vnitat. Eccles. and that the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was, being endowed with the same fellowshippe of honour and power. Let him make answere for himselfe, how he could lift vp Peters chaire aboue the chaires of the rest, and would not haue it forsaken for iust cause, which he did oppose in an vniust. But Cyprian as both Ierome and Austen and other fa∣thers haue iust cause to complaine,Contra Stepha. Corruption of Fathers af∣ter their death that so many ba∣stardly bookes are brought in the place of those that were right and true. And false sentences deceitfully foysted in, and true violently cast out, that now being dead they are constrained to speake and holde their peace according to other mens pleasures not their owne. Now Ierome at your command conceales that, which he vttered before.Cypr. de vnit. Eccles. Now Cyprian speaketh that which he neuer meant. He that forsaketh Peters chaire whereon the Church is built, doth he trust that he is in the Church? Cyprian writ thus a little before; Christ doth build his Church vpon Peter alone,How Peter the first stone in order not in power. meaning that Peter was the first stone that was placed vpon Christ the foundation, vpon whom the rest in their order were to bee builded. First therefore in order not in power: therefore he said
that equall authoritie was giuen by Christ to all the A∣postles, but that it tooke the beginning from vnitie, that the Church may be shewed to be one. The foun∣dation therefore of the building in Cyprian is nothing else, but a beginning. The rest of the Apostles were this which Peter was, being endowed with the fellow∣shippe of honour and power, but the beginning from one. This therefore is proper to the person of Peter, that he be the first stone set vpon the foundation, vpon which &c. How is it then deriued to Peters chaire, whereon the Church was to be builded? Let Peter bee changed into chaire, and the masculine gender into the feminine. Do you thinke that that Father had so weak and childish a memorie, that within the compasse of nine lines he would so apparantly contradict himselfe? that he would remoue the person of Peter out of his place, and place Peters chaire in the roome? to dis∣place the Predecessour out of the ranke to place the suc∣cessours? To cast out the first stone in the building, out of his order, to place those that followed? hee would neuer haue done it, he was neuer so madde. It was not therefore Cyprians ill memorie, but the falshood of cer∣taine scribes, who brought that new clause, of a quite other nature into Cyprians text. Many popish correctors in this age, and those very  learned,One copie of Cyprian allea∣ged against many. and many famous Printers haue taken great paines in setting forth and printing of Cyprian, they sought for all the antientest and sincerest manuscripts out of the best libraries of all Christendome, they could possibly get, they did very diligently compare them betweene themselues, and all of them agreed in this, that that clause could not be found in any of their written copies. Pamelius a Canon of Bryges onely ex∣cepted, who being an obscure man, and of small rec∣koning said hee found that clause lately written in an old coppy belonging to the Abby of Cambray, and brought it into the Anwerp editions printed by Stelsius:
when that notwithstanding he confesseth he had eight other written coppies in his handes fetcht out of diuers libraries, in all which he saith this clause could not be found, but only in the copie of Cambray. Now let vs giue credit if wee can, that one written coppy of the Abby of Cambray was vncorrupt, and that all the rest were corrupted. Let vs preferre one blinde copie, be∣fore so many excellent copies both printed and writ∣ten. And let vs preferre one Pamelius Cannon of Bri∣ges, before so many notable Romane writers, Remboltus, Cauchius, Coster, Erasmus, Grauius, Manutius, Morelius. Shall we think one to be of more credit then all the rest? Which we must needes doe, before wee must admit of such a bastardly and new deuised clause. Let Saturnine packe vp and be gone, let him brag, that Peters chaire is the rocke of the Catholicke Church. And let mee as my manner is a little consider the consequencies of this peeterly argument. Peter confessed Christ the sonne of the liuing God to bee the rocke and foundation of the Church, against whom the gates of hell shall not preuaile. Therefore Peter is the rock and foundation of the Church against whom they haue preuailed. Or thus, Peter in respect of doctrine is the foundation, as the rest of the Apostles. Therefore in respect of his person. Or thus, Peter the first stone in order set in the foundation is the rocke. Therefore the Pope Peters successour, as it is presumed, is the rocke. The person of Peter. Therefore the chaire of Peter. He is more dull then a stone that gathereth so. In one word Peter in this place holdeth the primacie of degree only and order.
Therefore it giueth the Pope of Rome the supremacie of iurisdiction and power. Is not this making of the supremacie out of the rock, like the making of a roape of sand? how foolishly are these argued? but that one thing how blasphemously of Bellarmine? who applieth the prophecie of Esay of Christ the chosen stone, pretious, cheife corner stone a sure foundation, to his Master the Pope. Christ is the cheife foundation, the Pope forsooth is a second. This argument is not fetcht from disparates, as Tortus plaies vpon vs, but from immediate contraries; for heauen is no farther distant from hell, then Christ from the Pope, that is from Antichrist. But my good Lordes the Popes doe alwaies lurke vnder Peters cloake, as the Dominicans are said to lurke vnder our Ladies frocke. Wittily said Erasmus as many things, What is charity, it is a Monkes cloake said he, for it couers the multitude of sinnes. In like manner I may call Peters vertue the Byshops cloake; for it couereth many a wicked man. They do willingly snatch at that speech of Optatus,Bellarm lib. 1. de Rom. Pont. cap. 17. Vall. decla. de dona. Constant. who thinking the name Cephas in Siriacke a stone, to signifie in greeke a head, is set vpon Peter by the Greeke word  as Bellarmine obserues, and therefore calleth Peter the head of the Apostles. Which learned Ʋalla doth won∣der could euer come into any mans minde:Comment. in Ioh. cap. 1. and Car∣dinall Catetane a notable writer among the Papists, re∣futes it out of the Gospell. For hee alleageth out of the Euangelist to meete with this error, that the word Ce¦phas is interpreted to be Peter, not a head.Ferus in hunc l c. Papists against Papists. And Ferus doth flatly say that that interpretation of this word is very foolish and ridiculous. The diriuation of this name is not so ridiculous as the proofe of that, which out of that  place of Paul (the head cannot say to the feete I haue no neede of you) Bellarmine being falsly collected,Bellarmine mistaketh S. Paul. doth vio∣lently vrge against the scope and minde of the Apostle.
who taketh the head by a metaphor for any excellent part which is endewed with great graces: the eyes, the eares,Chrysost. hom. viges. nou: in 1. Cor. Corinth 12. ex∣pounded. the hands, the feete for inferiour partes, which are furnished with meaner gifts, as Chrysostome ex∣poundes, saying they did excell in gifts some greater some lesse, cheifly in the knowledge of tongues. They which receiued the greater gifts, did contemne them who had receiued lesser giftes, and these againe greiued at it, and enuied their betters. This difference in the mysticall body, he went about to compound, by the example of agreement of the parts in the naturall body, where the head doth not say to the feete I haue no need of you &c. But all the members haue mutuall neede one of another. Out of this metaphore Bellarmine dreames that the visible and ministeriall head of the whole Church is appointed. Now marke the foolish consequences necessarily de∣pending vpon this interpretation. If one ministeriall head of the whole Church, bee taken out of this place, therefore because Paul maketh mention of eyes, eares, handes, feete, whereof there are two members, it is requisite that there bee two in the Church, that must haue two eyes, 2. that must haue two eares, 2. that may be resembled to two feete, then it will be a very beautifull Church that doth consist of nine members only. But how doe they vrge the likenesse of the head and the feete, I would faine know whom they vnderstand to be the feete of the Church? Some take them to bee Kings,Inquitie after the inferiour members. as Cardinall Poole, some for learned men as Tur∣riane, most of all the Iesuits of his owne order: Kinges who with their gouernment may sustaine this putrified head, Iesuites who may doe the like with their wittes, and may carrie it ouer among the Indies, to domineer in the new found world. To the which feete the Pope cannot truely say, I haue no neede of you: and there∣fore he giueth greater credit to the Iesuites, then to those
idle paunches the Monkes, who in their howerly prai∣ers spend their whole time in mumbling on their beads. That that also may agree with the argument of your head, which Paul hath in the same place, that the grea∣test honor is put vpon the dishonestest members, hence it may be other orders will conclude, that the Iesuites are more dishonest then all the rest of the Monkes. But I demand why there should not be many mini¦steriall heades when there be many ministeriall feete? where be the two eyes, wherby this metaphoricall head without braines may prye into the secrets of Kinges? where be the two eares, whereby they may listen after all reports? where be the two hands whereby they may rake and gather in all mens monies? if you answere that two are not necessarie for the head, when the head hath many more, we confesse that it is better for your head to encrease his treasure, then to make good the argu∣ment. For a duality of these members are more neces∣sarie to make the vnitie of the head, that a fit proportion may be reserued. But this so honorable a title, the head of the Church,  the head of faith, being proper to Christ, who liueth and raigneth in the heauens,To make the Pope head is blasphemie. so that hee bee present in earth with his Church, with his maiestie and spirit, yea that hee is within his Church to giue life and gouerne the same with his word, to haue this communicable with a mortall man and a sinner cannot bee done with∣out blasphemous contumelie. Some thinges in Bellar∣mine are blasphemous, some are friuolous, these are both blasphemous and friuolous, as this argument drawne from a metaphoricall head, whereon the supremacy the cheifest foundation of their catholike religion doth de∣pend. And here see I pray you what discreet men may suspect, who think the Cardinal to be learned, they yeld so much to his wit, that rather then they will thinke him to be a foolish disputer, they take him as it seemes to be a secret betrayer of the cause. He defends his head with
so withered forces and ridiculous arguments, that with∣out any resistance of the Aduersarie, hee will fall to the ground by his owne weaknesse. That which the Ora∣tour said to Mar. Callidius,Cicer. in Bruto. negligently and coldly de∣fending the cause of his owne head and life, Thou Mar. Callidius, vnlesse thou dissemblest, thou wouldst not thus plead? This may more rightly bee spoken to this wor∣thy patron of his head, Thou Bellarmine, if thou thoughtst as thou speakest, wouldst thou handle a case of such impor∣tance so lazily, so loosely? For whereas out of the premisses, Saturnine, you ga∣ther a different beginning with Bellarmine of Ecclesia∣sticall and secular gouernment, and from the diuers be∣ginning of each power, do draw a diuers nature of obe∣dience due to each power; and doe propound the two∣fold vse of this article to bee considered of all Catho∣likes: because all this discourse doth so neerely touch the Kings crown & dignity, I leaue it to be discussed by Regius our Counseller; wherefore Calander, you are to entreat him, that he would tell vs what he thinks in this matter, and ease me of the labor of farther disputing. Then Calander, truely, said hee, when I diligently marke all the parts of your answer, I perceiue little or nothing making for this our vniuersall Ecclesiasticall Prince to be in the text. For if Christ gaue the key not a scepter, as well to all the Apostles and Ministers, as to Peter, and gaue a Bishops staffe, not a sword; and or∣dained Peter not to bee the head, but a member: and not the foundation of the building, but a worke man; as not onely many ancient, but Popish interpreters of the Scripture doe teach with one consent; where I pray you shall I finde grounded plainely vpon the text, that vniuersall Church gouernment, as they call it? vnlesse peraduenture we may call Peter the Prince of the Apo∣stles, as we call Homer the Prince of Poets, Demosthenes the Prince of Oratours, and Plato the Prince of Philo∣sophers. Wherefore my good friend Charles, I entreat
thee, that as Patriott hath layd open the truth of God obscured by diuers sophismes: so you would free the dignity of Princes, being defaced by Popish vsurpati∣on, as it becommeth one that is of counsell with the King, which I euer held more deere to mee then my life, euen then when I was most nousled vp in popery. Then Regius, All power, said he, is from God, & it is Either Ordained, And that two fold: Ecclesiasti∣call. Secular.The diuision of power. Tolerated, The Ecclesiasticall, 1. If you respect Christ, it is Monarchicall or gouerned by one: for all power is giuen to him alone by the father, both in heauen and earth. 2. If you respect men, is is Ari∣stocraticall or gouerned by many, and those the cheifest, as Patriott confirmed out of Paul. Therefore this your spirituall Prince, Saturnine, cho∣sen a Monarch by himselfe, a King at his owne plea∣sure, a supposed Vicar of Christ, an vniuersall Bishop, ordained not by Christ the maintainer of Kings, but by Phocas the murtherer of kings, at that very time when as Mahomet that false Prophet his brother came into the world; successor not of Peter, but of Romulus, what power hee hath immediately to rule ouer Kings, when Peter himselfe had none at all, I vnderstand that it is but tolerated. As the Dragon hath, from whom the two horned beast tooke all his power, as Iohn testifieth in the Apocalyps. Therefore this power is not ordai∣ned but tolerated, not for the comfort of the world, but for the plague, not an holy ordinance, but to bee a scourge for the Saints. But there is a certaine spirituall power immediately from God. True: but that which
promotes the Kingdome of light: not that which pro∣motes the Kingdome of darknesse, which is immedi∣ately from the Diuell, such as the wofull experience of many ages hath proued you Popish power to be. Ther∣fore to your spirituall Prince, holding the seate of the Dragon, spirituall obedience is no more due to him then to the Dragon. But secular power, whether it consist in many, in few, or in one, although it be in Nero, yet it is immedi∣ately ordained of God, as Paul hath taught, and to that purpose is called by him the ordinance of God. But that,Secular pow∣er from God. will some say, may be sayd of the secular tyranni∣call power, as of Tyberius and Nero, which may be said of the Popish tyrannicall power, as of Gregorie the 7. or Paul the 5. true in respect of the abuse. But the ordi∣nation of the secular power is of God, the abuse of the Diuell. Therefore Pilates power which condemned Christ, is not sayd to bee tolerated from aboue, but gi∣uen from aboue. It was therefore a wicked power, not a vsurped power, as Austin thought: wicked in respect of tyranny, not vsurped in respect of the ordination: but the power of this Prelate, I may say this Pilate, as Bernard spake, it is not onely wicked but vsurped. I conclude therfore out of the Apostles principle, for the secular power against Bellarmine. All power ordained, is immediately from God: by the witnesse of Paul. All secular power, whether it bee by the people, by the Princes, or by the King, is a power or∣dained. For reason, which is a glimmering of the diuine light doth suggest, that all societies must be subiect to one of these, whether it bee simple or mixt, for the good of common safety. Therefore all secular power is immediatly from God. But the title of the power is not diuine but humane, therefore the secular Prince hath mediately power and
gouernment, to rule ouer these or those subiects,Bellarmine in his answer to a booke enti∣tuled, an an∣swer of a Do∣ctor of Diui∣ty, to an Epi∣stle written to him by a reue∣rend freind of the monition of the cen∣sures from the Pope, de∣nounced a∣gainst the Ve∣netians. either election comming betweene, as the Emperour: or suc∣cession, as the Kings of France, Spaine and England: or grant, as the free Princes, (as the Popes in their own Dominion, for so he might haue sayd) or by iust war, as Godfrey heretofore &c. Very ignorantly. He doth not distinguish between the title of the power and the pow∣er it selfe. The title is the condition, without the which the power is not obtained to this or that King, ouer those or these subiects. The power is that authority and iurisdiction which God doth giue immediately to a Prince, as Paul teacheth. The Cardinall therfore vnie∣suited, as I may so say, did abuse that most renowned French King, If any man (said he) should demand of the most Christian King, by what right hee holdeth France, or maketh Lawes, hee shall not answer by the Law of God, but by the title of hereditarie succession. Yea truely, the noble King might haue answered otherwise, according to that wit wherewith hee was endued: being demanded why he bare rule ouer his subiects, or made lawes: That hee did it not by the right of hereditarie succession, but by the or∣dinance of that power which hee receiued immediately from God. Inheritance doth not giue that power, but it is a property necessarie in that man, to whom God doth immediately giue that power. That subiects may giue reuerence to their Kings, not for blouds sake, but for Gods sake. Goe to, and what if one should demand of Paul the fift, by what right hee holdeth his Popedome, he will answer as he is taught, not by the title of mans election: but by the Law, forsooth, of God. Therfore the Popes power is by Gods Law, as it seemeth, al∣though his election bee by the Cardinals. Why then may not the Kings power be by the Law of God, thogh his succession be from his ancestours? for whose condi∣tion seemes to be like, why should their iurisdiction be dislike? The Cardinall therefore deales very vniustly, who denieth that to the King, which he granteth to the Pope.
But the malapert Cardinall did trie the patience of the most Christian King,The cruell dealing of the Iesuites with the French King. as another of his order a bloo∣dy nouist, strucke out his tooth, when he meant to cut his throat. But now the Iesuites doe blesse the King, but the King as oft as he cheweth his meate, its maruell he doe not curse the Iesuites: who while the controuer∣sie depended about the expulsion of the Iesuites, recei∣ued a wound from Iohn Chastile, and the bloud issued out of his mouth, spake pleasantly, as his vse was, Now at the last the Iesuites being conuicted by my mouth must bee cast out. That his friends may greeue that they were brought backe againe by that mouth, as innocent and cleered, who were the authours of so cruell a murther: whose scholler did thrust that valiant King to the heart. After the same manner,Tom. 11. Baronius, that testie olde man, did entertaine the Catholike King Philip the second, the Champion of their Church, for with-holding Sicilie and Naples from the Church. Whom will they spare if they spare not the Spaniard? What may the Defender of the Faith expect of these fellowes, who doe thus en∣tertaine the Christian and Catholike Kings? But although there be no truth, yet there is some e∣quitie in Bellarmine.Bellarmines lewde dealing with all Princes. Hee spareth no Princes, not those of his owne side. Hee holdeth that those who bee Ca∣tholike in faith, if they beginne to be wicked, are to be driuen by the cheife Pastour from the flocke, and de∣priued of their kingdome as well as heretickes. Those as giddie headed rammes that they hurt not with their hornes, these as rauenous wolues that they deuoure not the flocke. So scornfully doth this Braggadochian Cardinall terme the Excellencies and Maiesties of the Christian world. The world doth not maruel that Preists be so sawcy, but it wonders that Kings bee so patient, that they will suffer Princely crownes to be tumbled vp and down by them as foot-bals: and the prerogatiues of kingdomes to be so weakned & diminished by schoole distinctions.
For this Cardinall, like a bad archer, doth strike his confederate, next neighbour-kings, while he doth di∣rectly leuell and aime, but in vaine, against Iames the King of Great Britaine, whom God still defend from his treacherie. But to the argument. Hee denieth all secular Princes to haue any power immediately giuen from God, to rule ouer subiects. But it is well that hee doth affirme euen in the same  chapter, in as manie words, that secular Princes haue power immediately from God, to rule their subiects, as they are superiors, and he alleageth a good reason, be∣cause the commandement of obedience is immediately from God, and this is true. For he cannot bee superiour and aboue other if he doe not rule, neither can he be a sub∣iect that is not bound to obey. And yet againe in the end. If secular Princes (saith he) haue no power immedi∣ately from God ouer the Laity, much lesse ouer the Cleargie: therefore ouer none. Which hee granted before. Is it so indeede, will some say? yea truely, looke vpon the place,Hee is both vnconstant & vnlearned. you shall see Bellarmine affirming and denying the same predicate of the same subiect, and that in re∣spect of the same, and that in one and the same chapter. Let this great Logician be packing, who sends his ad∣uersaries to turne ouer Aristotles Analytickes: and after he hath read them himselfe, let him teach vs how two contradictions may be true at once. Secular Princes haue no power immediately from Christ to beare rule ouer subiects. And Secular Princes haue power immediatly from Christ to rule ouer subiects.A manifest contradiction Hee speaketh in both pla∣ces, not of the title but of the power. A mani∣fest contradiction. But how may Proteus fast be held, Who changeth shape at euerie turne, But the feeble old man doth often faile in memory, and contradict himselfe, as Father Paulus, and Fulgen∣tius, and Marsilius, and Chichester, haue taken the
man tardy, and held him to it shrewdly. As the mans great wit appeares in Tortus, all whose disputation doth hang vpon the begging the thing in question. For that he may proue that the Kings oath doth re∣quire not only ciuill obedience of Papists, but deniall of the catholike faith,Bellarmine continually beggeth the question. he taketh the thing in contro∣uersie for granted, to wit, that it is agreed among all Ca∣tholikes, that the chiefe Bishop may rightly depose hereticall Kings, and free their subiects from obedience. And hee affirmeth, that this is the catholike doctrine, but proues it not, which ought soundly to haue been proued, if he would disproue the oath. He addeth further, that when the Kings of the earth, haue admittance into the Church, with this condition that they submit their scepters to Christ, &c. if they re∣fuse it, it is lawfull for him, who hath the rule ouer all the Church vpon earth in Christ his steed, to remoue them from the communion of the faithfull, and to for∣bid their subiects to obey them. How falsly the Bishop of Chichester teacheth, now we obserue the mans wit, we are very sorry that Bellar∣mine doth openly begge, and that one thing twise, which is in the very question. For it is in question a∣mong vs, whether the Pope haue the power to de∣pose the Prince, and to free his subiects from their obe∣dience. Here Bellarmine, as if like Apollo Pythius he gaue his Oracle from his three-footed stoole, pronounceth ma∣lapertly enough, that hee, who is Christ his Vicege∣rent in gouerning the Church, hath that power. For he saith, that he hath power to excommunicate, therefore to depose. He proueth that excommunication is an inward thing fastned vpon the supremacie, when hee should proue, that this deposing is an inward thing belonging to excommunication: otherwise hee disputeth not to the point. So the state of the controuersie being either
turned aside, or altogether vnknowne, he goeth from the point, and fighteth with vs after the manner of the Andabata, who fought blind-fold. And because the power to depose Princes by excōmu∣nication  is denied the Pope, therfore he saith, the power of excommunicating is wholy denyed. It follow∣eth not, it is a fallacie from that which is in some sort, to that which is simply and absolutely. And when he had affirmed, and repeated it againe and againe, till a man might loath it, that Christs Vicar had so great power, he vsed no arguments or proofes to that purpose: he desireth to be credited vpon his bare word without reason, as if he were a Pope,Bellarmine & the Pope need not alledge reasōs of their actions who is not bound to bring arguments to refute the oath; for then saith he, he might be thought an vndiscreete Prince, if he thought he might not forbid a wicked action, except he added reasons to his inhibi∣tion, and write a large treatise after the fashion of the Phi∣losophers to that end. They do very cunningly, as they seeme, excuse that vnreasonable creature: who sets downe the articles of the catholike faith, as the Mathe¦matikes do their principles. You must not therefore, ô yee Kings, in a matter of such importance as concerns your right, so neerely looke for any reasons from Robert Bellarmine, more than you expect from Paul the 5. He speaketh as a Prince, not as a Philosopher. He setteth out not arguments but edicts. He disputes not, but de∣termines in the Pope cause against the King, and that against the opinion of infinite Papists both better lear∣ned and honester men than himselfe, as appeareth in the answer of the Bishop of Chichester. So that Bellar∣mine seemeth to many wise-men, to haue attayned an opinion of learning, rather than learning it selfe. Fo in that whole dsputation the begging sophisme of the thing in question,The ground of Bellarmines argument is the begging of the questiō is the foundation of all Bellarmines answer: so heauy headed and dull he seemes in Logick: and so vnskilfull in Grammar, as appeareth in that part, wherein Saturine disputeth of the spirituall and tem∣porall
obedience,Bellarmine the great lear∣ned man speakes false Latin. and alleageth Bellarmines owne words out of Tortus, luretur fidelitas, Let fealtie saith he, be sworne to the King, but so, ne abiuretur fidelitas, that faith be not forsworne to Christ his Ʋicar. He speaketh false Latin in disgrace of all Gramma∣rians. But that farre worse that hee thinketh so basely to the contempt of Kings and Emperors. For we doe not so much blame his grammar, as his diuinitie. And we obserue this by the way, he doth obiect incongrui∣tie of speech to others, when he himselfe is faultie in manifest barbarisme: and calls other mens stiles dyrty, when his owne is cast ouer with hell dust. That which Robert Bellarmines mouth doth clearely shew, the same doth Robert Saturnine: who when hee had abased the power of secular Princes, to aduance forsooth the power of that one spirituall Prince; hath also so tyed the spirituall obedience of Christians to the will of one Bishop, that by the pretence therof, he may take from Princes at his pleasure, the ciuill obedience of subiects. God the ob∣iect of spiri∣tuall obedi∣ence.But as he erred in the originall of either power, so he erreth in the obiect and end of either obedience. We make the true obiect of spirituall obedience to be God himselfe, the end Gods word: hee makes a contrary obiect, the Pope himselfe, and the end the Popes will. We make the true obiect of ciuill obedience, Gods ordination of the ciuill Prince; the end the spirituall obedience toward God: therefore Paul saith, we must obey him for conscience sake, not for the busines sake that is enioyned by the Prince, but for the authorities sake that is ordeyned by God. Hee placeth the Bishop in Gods place, enioyning spirituall obedience to vs, for very conscience of those things that are enioyned, and hee maketh ciuill obedience terminable at pleasure, by the obseruation of good order and manners. So that subiects obey the ciuill Magistrate, not for conscience sake, as Paul spea∣keth,
but for policies sake, as Bellarmine speaketh; and that Clergy men obey not for necssarie subiection, but at voluntarie discretion, and are held in,Clergie exem∣pted from o∣bedience. not by force of law, but by force of reason, as hee saith. So to vs the obseruing the spirituall dutie is the direction, and limi∣tation of the ciuill, to him the bond of the spirituall obedience, is the disioynting and loosing of the ciuill. Is not Bellarmines deceit euident enough, who vnder the pretence of spirituall obedience, hath taken the ci∣uill cleane away? So he playeth the iugler,Ciuill obedi∣ence taken away. to deceiue the Papists sight, and that with a twofold tricke: One whereby he perswadeth, that for the shew of ciuill obe∣dience they thinke the spirituall may bee abiured by them; the other, whereby vnder the shew of spirituall obedience, he cleane taketh away the ciuill. Hence ariseth those new and strange interpretations  of Bellarmine in the schoole of Diuinitie;Bellarmines new and strange inter∣pretations. Let not obe∣dience be shewed to man, contrary to the obedience of God, that is, let not obedience be shewed to the King contrary to the obedience of the Bishop. And we must rather obey God than men: that is, we must rather obey the Pope, than Kings. I appeale to your owne consciences ye Papists, whether you thinke this to be the Apostles commen∣tarie, that in respect of spirituall obedience, which con∣sisteth in faith, deuotion, loue and feare of God, a sin∣full mortall man should be aduanced into the seat of God? What if the Pope command, which God for∣biddeth, that wee take from Caesar the things that are Caesars, by Gods owne gift, his sword, scepter, crowne, subiects and life, is not this vnder the shew of spirituall obedience to forbid ciuill obedience? And to com∣mand, that obedience be giuen to the Pope comman∣ding vniust things, against Gods obedience, who hath enioyned your subiection to the King.Rom: 13. This ought not to appeare spirituall obedience to you, but spirituall cousenage, whereby vnder the cloake of spirituall obe∣dience, which the Pope hath gotten by the gift of men,
he loose the bond of ciuill dutie, which is due to the King by the gift of God. I beseech you, ô yee Christian Kings and Princes, whether you thinke it be for your good,A caue at for Kings. that such po∣sitions as these be setled into your subiects mindes? That such a catechisme as this not only lye close hid∣den in books, but be openly taught in your Vniuersities & Churches? There be none so dangerous trecheries to Princes, as those which are hid vnder the cloake of duty, and coloured with the name of catholike religion. Vnder the pretence whereof Bellarmine hath cherished rebellion in the subiects of the Venetian common∣weale, which professeth Popery, as hee hath done at this time in the subiects belonging to the most excel∣lent King of Great Britaine. A Troiane or a Tirian to him are all alike. Beware ô yee Kings, lest the mischiefe intended to one fall vpon all the rest. Saturnine is an ill egge of an euill bird, as in the proofe of the article of supremacie; he is a corrupter of Gods will, so in the practise of it, he is an enemy of princely gouernment. And as you had him ere while a manifest forger, so now you haue him an open traytor. Here Calander both your discourses said he, the one against the Pope, the other for the King, giue me iust occasion of two doubts: one, how the spirituall and ciuill obedience is distinguished in the word of God: the other, whether the former Councells did cast of this spirituall power which the Pope doth generally vsurpe. Which two points being briefely and plainly discust, will cleare the whole controuersie, and satisfie any man that is not contentious. Then Patriott; You do wisely, Calander, saith he, to call euery thing to her beginning, for euery thing as it is first, so it is true: and that which is right, sets out both lshood and it selfe. First therefore I answer about the distinction of the
double power, the Spirituall and Ciuill,Chrysost: de verbis Esa: Vidi Dm: hem: both which Christ ordayned. I call that Spirituall which concernes the soules, and that Ciuill which rules the bodies. That,4. Power distin∣guished. Christ committed to his Minister; this, to his Magi∣strate: somtime to more, somtime to few, often to one. That is called Episcopall gouernment, this Princely: or, that is spirituall, this ciuill. Each as I said is of God.To whom it is committed and how per∣formed. The Holy Ghost hath appointed Bishops to rule the Church of God, Act: 20. and Wisdome saith, By me Kings doe raigne, and Law-makers appoint iust things. Therefore Kings doe rule by God, as Bishops do feede. Gouernment belongs to them, Ministerie to these. But these you will say haue Gouernment also. I con∣fesse it.Bernard: de consid: ad Eug: But these haue an inward gouernment ouer mens soules, they haue an outward ouer mens bodies. Bishops haue the key of the word and sacraments to be exercised not in the name of the King,Matth: 16. but in the name of Christ: nor the key only of knowledge,The diffe∣rence of go∣uernment be∣tween Prin∣ces and Bi∣shops. Rom: 13. Chrysost. ex Paul. ibid. but of dis¦cipline, and that not after their owne pleasure, but after Gods will. Kings haue the sword, to be drawne in de∣fence of godlines and iustice, whereby they command those things that be true and good, forbid such as be false and euill, and punish the wicked of what calling soeuer, and defend the righteous. The weapons of Bi∣shops are spirituall, of Kings corporall. Therefore Bi∣shops ought to teach, to admonish, to reproue, to de∣priue of the seales of grace, and to driue from the com∣munion of the faithfull, those that grieuously and pub∣likely offend, till they repent:Chrysost: ibid. Kings ought to restreyne them according to the qualitie of the offence, either of libertie, or goods, with losse of limmes, or of life it selfe. Therefore the gouernment of Bishops is by per∣swasion, of Kings by compulsion: of a Bishop dire∣cting, of a King constreyning. A King rules men a∣against their will, a Bishop with their wills.Jerom. al He∣li: in Epitap: Npotiani. Hee doth gouerne by feare, this bringeth to libertie. He reserueth the bodies for death, this keepeth the soules for life.
Either of them doth punish not only theeues, murthe∣rers, adulterers, periured men, traytors, but also blasphe∣mers, Idolators, Heretickes, Schismatickes, whether they be of the Laity or Clergie, but he with the corpo∣rall sword, the byshoppe with the spirituall. Either of them haue equally a care of holinesse and honesty, the one that he may teach by precepts, the other that hee may ordaine by lawes. Either of them is practised a∣bout holy things but not vpon holy things. For they are not subiect either to the wil of the Pastor, or gouern∣ment of the King. The King is conuersant about holy and diuine things, not in the administration and execu∣tion thereof, as Vzias. but in appointing and ordering them as Ezechias. A byshoppe is conuersant about ho∣ly things in the doing and executing of them to preach the word, to Minister the sacraments, and vse the keies: Good lawes are made to settle truth by the counsell and faithfulnesse of the Byshoppe, and by the power and authoritie of the King. There are some who foolishly compare these two to∣gether, there are other who doe wickedly mingle them together, so that one doth destroy the other, which God hath most wisely ioyned together, that one should helpe the other. Now this spirituall power if you respect Christ,Ephes. 4. is monarchicall, vnder him alone; if men, it is aristocraticall vnder many: as wee shewed out of Paul. The ciuill is of three sorts. Either belonging to the People. Princes, or cheife. King. Which last when wee set foorth wee disgrace not the rest. The duty of a Byshoppe.It cannot be denied but that the byshoppe in his spi∣rituall perfection and comfort, doth excell the King; for God doth not appoint the King but the byshoppe to bee the seedsman of his word, the Messenger of his grace, the disposer of the mysteries of his kingdome.
But in the outward authoritie and power of compel∣ling, the King doth excell the byshoppe, while hee com∣mandes that which God alloweth. Neither do I so pre∣ferre the ciuill gouernment before the spirituall, but do affirme that the same God, who teacheth those that be simple, and draw such as be willing by the mouth of the minister, doth draw those that bee negligent, and con∣straine such as be retractory, by the sword of the magi∣strate, whom the spirit and God of the spirits hath or∣dained to that purpose. Yea truly they who set the ciuill gouernment behind the spirituall simply as the body behinde the soule, and the flesh behinde the spirit, do make a very fleshly com¦parison betweene Kings and Byshoppes; vnlesse they imagine Byshoppes to be without bodies, and Kinges without soules. And who so inferre thereupon that a godly king cannot inflict a punishment vpon a wicked Priest, doe deface holinesse in the King as a matter tem∣porall, and aduance wickednesse in a Priest as a matter spirituall. And who thence conclude, that a Christian King cannot promote holy rites by his lawes, as well as a minister can by his doctrine and censure, giue more without cause, to the shauing of a Priest then to the character of Baptisme: and do foolishly preferre priest¦ly annointing before the Princely. And they seeme not wel to vnderstand what those excellent lights of the world, Constantine, Iustinian, Theodosius, Valentinian, Gratian, Zeno, Charles the great, Lwes his sonne, and Lo∣thary his nephew, and many other Kings and Emperors did out of Gods word iustly commaund Byshoppes in causes ecclesiasticall, and wherein they did obey By∣shoppes, as was made manifest before. But the Byshoppe hath power from God to gouerne  the Church as is before said: therefore aboue the King in the gouernment of the Church; I distinguish of the gouernment,
One was Inward. Outward It is one thing to administer the inward another thing to order it. In the administration of the inward gouernment, a Byshoppe doth excell a King, in the or∣dering of it a King doth excell a Byshop. I confesse a Pastor is superiour in feeding, so Car∣penters in building and Mariners in sayling are aboue a Prince.A Priest not aboue a Prince. What then are they simply better? It is a fal∣lacy from that which is in part to that which is simply. But the actions of a Byshoppe are more excellent then the workes of a King, as the preaching of the word, the administration of the Sacraments, the remitting and retaining of sinnes. Therefore a Byshoppe doth excell a King. But the working and perfection of these things doth depend not vpon the arbitrement of the Byshop, but the commandement of God. August. cont. Cres. lib. 4. c. 6. Ambros.There is a double spiri∣tuall power, 1 Ministeriall of men. 2 Imperiall of God. Therefore the credit of these actions must serue the glory of God not the honour of the Priest. The spiri∣tuall worke is of God,A Byshoppe great not in respect of his person but doctrine. the bodily seruice is of the Mi∣nister. Men in the remission of sinnes doe not exercise the right of power, but doe exercise their Ministerie. They pray, God doth grant. The ministerie is from men, the gift from an heauenly power. The reason therefore drawne from the perfection of heauenly gra∣ces in the Church, to preferre the person of a Priest be∣fore the person of a Prince, is very weake, because the subiection due to the sword is annexed to the person of the Prince, the worthinesse and power due to the key is not annexed to the person of the Byshoppe, but to his doctrine. By Gods law obedience is due to each. For hee that saith keepe the commandement of the King, saith like∣wise, obey your Prelates, who watch ouer your soules.
But we are to hold this that here are not to be vnder∣stood by Prelates, Popes and Cardinalls, who ob∣trude their owne inuentions vpon vs, but holy and Christian Byshops and Pastors, who deliuer the word of God vnto vs, as the Apostle addeth, for wee are not tyed to the decrees of Doctours, but to the oracles of God. Therefore the obedience required is not the out∣ward subiection to the person of the Priest, but an in∣ward submission to the doctrin of Christ, and an allow∣ance and practise of the same. For in respect of the per∣son, Byshoppes are called seruantes, and their function is called a Ministery as I said. Therefore the greatest King is bound to beleeue and obey the least seruant of God deliuering his Lords will. And he oweth that subiection to the Lord, not to his Messenger, to his doctrine not to his person. For hee commeth not in his own, but in the Lords name, which may be as truely said of the meanest Minister as of the greatest Byshoppe.What a By∣shop may do. A Byshoppe therefore may teach a King that is ignorant, may reproue him being an He∣reticke as the Prophet did Ieroboam king of Iuda: may admonish him being of a bad life as Iohn did Herod: may correct him being a Tyrant as Elias did Ahab: may re∣prehend him being otherwise good if hee doe openly and greeuously trangresse, as Nathan did Dauid: and depriue him of the sacrament of grace, while he repent, as Ambrose did Theodosius. But whether he can remoue him from the companie of his faithfull subiects, by ex∣communication, it is a great question and diuersly dis∣cussed by the Fathers. They who hold it may be done by the Byshop, do denie for all that, that the King by him may bee put from the obedience of his subiectes, much lesse being excommunicated bee abandoned by his subiects, and killed either by open force, or secret treacherie as certaine of the popish sort doe hold. I say, certaine, for the honester sort decree otherwise, and commit the King to the Byshoppes cure, submit him
not to his Court. For the King is the Lords seruant, and the Byshoppes Lord: as I said before: subiect to the Byshoppes pulpit, not his consistorie; that he may be directed by him, not iudged by him. A Byshoppe is appointed to perswade, not compell; not to gape after crownes, but to watch ouer their soules; and when hee obeyeth the King, then hee prescribeth the doctrine of obedience to others, as Christ, Paul and Peter went be∣fore them both in precept and practise. Then Calander, you haue satisfied me abundantly, Patriot,Primacie of order onely due to Peter. in the distinction of these powers: now if you please, I desire the other about the largnes of that spiri∣tuall power which the Pope now vsurpes whether the former Councells did grant the same. Then Patriot, the Fathers saith he doe grant to Peter the primacie of order, and to the Byshoppe of Rome as to his successour, whom certaine doe call the Byshoppe of the first sea: but they deny vnto him the primacie of power, as I said either ouer Kings, or ouer their fellow Byshoppes. Ierusalem. Anioch. Alexandria. Constantinople. Rome.There were either foure or fiue Patriarches, among whom the gouernment of the whole Church was diui∣ded. That all the rest were equall to the Patriarch of Rome in all points of iurisdiction, whose power was bounded within certaine limits, out of which he might not passe, doth appeare by that notable Cannon the sixt,The Nicene Councell of 318. Byshops. of the Nycene Councell. Which was gathered to∣gether by the authoritie of Constantine the great in the yeare of Christ 325. wherein 318. Byshoppes met to∣gether, and set out 20. true Cannons only, as Ruffinus numbers them, the true copies whereof remained in all the patriarchall Churches, and are extant in many o∣thers at this day. The sixt Cannon of the Councell, doth make the gouernment of the Byshoppe of Rome the forme of gouernment of the Byshoppe of Alexandria, as it is said before. Where it doth appeare, that the gouern∣ment
of the byshoppe of Rome was shut within the compasse of his owne Prouince. For if it had reached into other Prouinces, it had not beene the forme of the gouernment of Alexandria,Rome no lar∣ger in iurisdic¦tion then A∣lexandria. which was contained in one Prouince. Againe it appeareth by the Cannon that the byshoppe of Rome had the same fashion. Ther∣fore the gouernment of Alexandria was like vnto Rome. How could there otherwise bee a likenesse. For there could be no likenesse betweene an vniuersall byshoppe and a prouinciall. The second generall Councell was the first Councell  of Constantinople assembled by Theodosius the elder in the yeare of Christ 381. wherein 150.Constantinople Councell the first of 150. Byshoppes. byshoppes met together, who confirmed the decree of the Nicene Councell. Then came the third generall Councell the first of Ephesus,The Councel of phesus of 200. Byshops. gathered together by Theodosius the younger in the yeare of Christ 41. it consisted of 200. byshoppes, in which two Councells the Prouinces of the Christian world were diuided, and euery Prouince assigned to his owne Patriarch, and the byshoppe of Constantinople by name made equall to the byshoppe of Rome without any difference of honour, but that the byshop of Con∣stantinople was next after the byshop of Rome in place, & had the second voice in all answers and subscriptions. The 4.The Councel of Chalcedne of 630. By∣shoppes. generall Councell of Chalcedon gathered by Ʋalentinian and Marcian in the yeare of Christ 451. which consisted of 630. byshoppes who decreed thus in the 28. Cannon, we euery way following the decrees of the holy Fathers, and acknowledging the Cannon of the 150. byshoppes, we also decree the very same, and ordaine the same about the priuiledges of the most ho∣ly Church of Constantinople, which is new Rome. For to the throne of old Rome, because that Citie bare rule ouer all; the Fathers by right giue the priuiledges,Constantinople equall with Rome. and the 150. Fathers being mooued with the same conside∣ration doe giue equall priuiledges to the most holy
throne of new Rome, rightly iudging that citie, which is honoured both with the Presence and Senate of the Empire, and doth enioy equall priuiledges with Rome that ancient Lady; should be aduanced in causes Eccle∣siasticall aswell as she, and be as much esteemed, being the next vnto her. But the fathers of the Councell of Chalcedone Acto 3. write thus to Leo the most holy and blessed vniuersall Archbishop and Patriarch of great Rome. Note, saith Binius, that in these bookes Leo is called the vniuersall Archbishop.Suri. tom. 2. Concil. pag. 111. & Bini tm 2. Concil. fol. 215. But note also that which Binius concea∣led, that it is added to Leo the Archbishop of the Ro∣manes. Note heere the authority of the Bishop of Rome, saith Surius: but it may be that these words slipt out of the margent into the text, though they bee most true, saith Binius. But we appeale from these two para∣rasites of the Romane Bishop to the very acts of the Councell themselues, which we before alleadged. But this canon is reiected, say they, by Leo the Bi∣shop of Rome, about the priuiledges and eminency of the Bishop of Constantinople, because he presupposeth that the Roman seat was made the head of the Church not by Gods Law, but by mans Law, as Binius saith, fol. 180. whom shall we beleeue? Leo, who out of his am∣bition reiected the canon; or Gregorie, who with all re∣uerence receiued the whole Councell, as it is in Gratian distinct. 15. cap. sicui. But the Councell, say they, in their Epistle writ Leo the head of the vniuersall Church. Because Leo so wri∣teth,Piniui anno in hanc. Synod. 188. lib. 3. epist. 3. to Eulogius the Bishop of Alexan∣dria, your holinesse knoweth, that by the holy Synode of Chalcedon, the name of vniuersality was giuen to the seat of the Bishop of Rome onely, wherein now by Gods prouidence my selfe doe serue. Why then is not the name of vniuersall prefixed be∣fore the Epistle of the fathers? It was prefixed, say they, but by the craft of some Scribe it was taken out, what a
iest is this? as if it were not more likely, that the Popes Epistle admitted a fraudulent addition,Whether one Leo or 600. Bishops are rather to bee beleeued. then the Epi∣stle of the generall Councell, a subtraction? But hee it so, let Leo haue written so. Whether is it more meete to giue credit to the Pope priuately in his owne cause, or to 600 Bishops in the cause of the Church, decree∣ing against it in a publike Councell? especially when as Gregorie the great doth plainely write, that none of his predecessours did euer vse the title of vniuersall Bi∣shoppe. Farther, the fift generall Councell, was the second of  Constantinople, assembled in the Empire of Iustinian,2. Constanti∣nople Coun∣cell of 280. Bishops. in the yeere of Christ 586. wherein were present 280. Bishops, who repeating word for word the former de∣cree of Chalcedon, renewed in the 36. canon. Whereby it is euident that Constantinople had no lesse authority in Ecclesiasticall causes, then Rome had: and that Rome had obtained the primacy of order, be∣cause it was the cheife seat of the Empire: which so ma∣ny fathers in fiue Synodes gathered together would neuer haue sayd, if they had iudged the primacie of Peter, had beene founded vpon the institution of Christ. What? can we imagine that so cheife an article of the Catholike faith was vnknowen to fathers, so many for number, so famous for holinesse, so excellent for lear∣ning, and that in fiue seuerall the most renowned gene∣rall Councels? If the supremacie was plainely grounded vpon the Scripture,Note. then did the Councels very ill to take away the supremacie. If the Councels did well in taking it a way, certainely the supremacie is not so plainely foun∣ded vpon the Scripture. If you shall lay enuie to their charge, whereby men of such iustice and integrity, would not behold a matter so manifest, we will wonder at it. If you obiect ignorance to them, that hauing eies in their heads they could not see, wee will laugh at it.
Neither can wee conceiue any other cause alleadged by you, but either blinde enuie, or enuious blindnesse. An irony. Concordan li. 2 cap. 13.O blind or enuious Cusan, who rested content in the decrees of these Councels, and whatsoeuer right belon∣geth to the Pope, doth thinke the same was giuen him by the Church.Dfens. part. 2. de cap. 18. O malicious and dull pated Marsilius Patauine, who thought he had no power, either aboue Bishops or other Churches, by any Law, either diuine or humane, but that onely which was giuen the Pope, either absolutely or for a time in the Nicene Councell. If all this power was giuen, first by the Scripture, not therefore by the Church: if by the Church, as Cusan and Marsilius say, not therefore by the Scripture. The sixt Councell was the Councell of Carthage, in the yeere of Christ 418.The Councel of Carthage of 217. Bi∣shops. wherein 217. Bishops were as∣sembled, among whom Austin was present. In which Councell, as in the rest, the power of all the Patriarches was made equall, the right of appealing to the Bishop of Rome, to such as were condemned by the Archbi∣shop of their owne Diocesse, was denied. Which Cardinall Bellarmine, notwithstanding doth auow to belong to all Bishops by the Law of God,Cap. 25. de pri∣mi Rom. sedis. yea, if any were condemned by a Synode of their own pro∣uince among the Antipodes, they might prouoke to the consistorie of the Bishop of Rome. Which Cardi∣nall, I thinke, liues not in our Horizon, but with the Antipodes, who is wont to tread contrarie steps, against so many men aliue, not only of ours, but against his own Doctors also. Vnlesse peraduenture he descended lower then the Antipodes, who dare be so bold to goe against so many holy fathers being dead. He doth admit with his followers, many fraudulent deuices, whereby he goeth about to weaken the autho∣ritie of this Councell. Boniface the second with one blot of a greeuous accusation, doth wipe out all the de∣crees of that Councell, and damnes them all. For hee saith, that Aurelius, sometime Bishop of the Church
of Carthage, with the rest of his Colleagues (among whom was S. Austin) began to waxe proud, at the in∣stigation of Satan, in the times of Boniface and Celestine his predecessours, against the Romane Church. It is a hard case to say, that Austin with his Colleagues, at the instigation of Sathan beganne to waxe proud against the Church, because they had resisted both by their de∣crees and letters, three proud Romane Bishops, Zozi∣mus, Boniface and Celestine, in a iust cause common to all Churches. Apiarius a wicked Preist, whom for his lewdnesse in  discharge of his ministerie,Apiarius. Vrbane the Bishop had iustly depriued, appealed to Zozimus Bishop of Rome: who sent three Legates, Faustine, Philip, and Asellus, to the Councell at Carthage, in fauour and aid of Apiari∣us: them he enioyned among other things, that they should lay claime, in his name, to the right of appeales to him and his seat: if anie Bishop accused or condem∣demned, did appeale to Rome, that the Bishop of Rome might commit that cause, by his letters, to bee determined by the next prouinces, or send Legates from his side, who might sit about the businesse in his turne, and with other Bishops might determine of the whole matter. To that purpose he deliuered to his Le∣gates, the title and instrument of his right written with his owne hand, the Canon of the Nycene Councell,Concil. Carthag. 6. cap. 3. whereby he affirmed that the right of appeales was be∣stowed vpon him: The fathers of the Carthaginian Councell assoone as they had heard the Legates, an∣swered, that they neuer had read anie such thing in the canons of the Councell of Neece, and withall, willed the Legates, that if they had that canon, they should giue it to Daniel the publike Notary,A false canon offered for a true. to reade it openly. They in stead of the canon of the Nicene Councel, offer the third chapter of the Councel of Sar∣dis, but mangled and gelded. For in the authenticke it is thus written.
Osius said, If any Bishop be condemned, for any cause, and thinketh that he haue no euill, but a good cause, that the iudgement may be againe renewed, doth it please you that for charitie we honor the memorie of Peter the Apostle, that it may be written of them, who haue examined the cause to Iulius the Bishop of Rome, and if he shall thinke that the iudgement is to be renewed, it be renewed, & appoint Iudges to that end? But if he proue the cause to be such, that those things be not repealed, which were already spred, those which he decreeth shall stand firme, if this please all? the Sinode answered, It pleaseth. Council: Sard: cap: 3. apud Surium Tom: 1. The Pope corrupteth the words of Osius.But the Bishop of Rome curtoling those words of Osius; Doth it please you, that for charitie we honor the memorie of Peter the Apostle, and by writ to Iu∣lius the Rom: Bishop, goeth on thus: Osius the Bi∣shop said, It pleaseth that if a Bishop be accused, and the Bishops of the same Country being assembled, shall iudge and depose him from his degree, if be that is cast of do ap∣peale, and flye to the Bishop of the Roman Church, & would haue himselfe heard, if he shall thinke it in t the iudgment be reuerst, or do vouchsafe to write the examination of the cause to those Bishops that be of the next Prouince, that they make diligent inquirie, and determine it according to the cre∣dit of the truth. And if any man will haue his businesse a∣gaine to be heard, and shall moue the Bishop of Rome with his petition to send his Legate, let it be in his power to do what he will in the businesse, and what he shall thinke best. The Popes deuise to co∣sen the Afri∣can Fathers.Here marke the notable tricke wherewith the Bishop of Rome went about to cosen the African Fathers. First he pretends a Canon of the Nicene Councell for the right of appealing. The Legates foyst in a Ca∣non  of the Councell of Sardis. Bellarm: lib. 2. de Rom Pont: cap: 25. But Sozius and Boniface, though these Canons were not expresly in the Nicene Councell, yet they called them the Nicene Canons, as Bellarmine saith, because the Councell of Neece, and the Councell of Sardis
were taken for all one. Is it euen so, for one? when as they diffred in time, place, and varietie of Canons? For as Baronius is a witnes, the Nicene Councell was assembled in the yeare 325. the Councell of Sardis 347. so that eigh∣teene yeares came betweene those councels; the Nicene Councell was in Asia, in a Citie of Bythinia, the Sardine Councell was in Thracia, the confines of Illiria, as the same Baronius saith.Concil: Tm. 1 Bellarmine and Baronius at a arre. How diuers the Canons of ech Councell were, Surius teacheth. Baronius doth excuse it otherwise, that Sozimus and Boniface did not alledge the Canon of the Councell of Sardis, but the Canon only of the Councell of Neece: yet there can be no suspition of deceit in this, but that either some of the Canons of the Nicene Councell re∣peated in the Councell of Sardis were lost out of the Councell of Neece, and reserued whole and sound in the Romane register; or that by some gatherer of the Canons, because the name of Sardis was infamous through the Arrians, they were recited in the name of the Nicene Councell. Two theeues by the contrariety of their answers will easily be descried. And do we not see these two old forgers by the difference of their answers to be taken tripping? It is a sport to see the Popes deceiued by his Scribe, as they call him, who for Sardis put in Neece, and when that by the words of the Legates was manifestly refu∣ted, who alledged in the Councell of Carthage the Councell of Sardis, I suspect, saith Bellarmine, that the words of the Legates, by the fault of the writer, crept out of the margent into the text. It is well, when theeues fall out, as the prouerbe is, true men come by their goods. Now the Legates when they alledge the Canons of the Councell of Sardis, for the Nicene, they cut of certaine words that were in the middle which they thought were not for their turne, which Osius deliuered, It
pleaseth you that for charitie we honor the memorie of Peter the Apostle, and it be writ to Iulius the Bishop of Rome? Wise-men saw, if the priuiledge of appealing should be∣long altogether to the Bishop of Rome, that some pa∣rasiticall Osius was not to be set downe, who might winne it by flattering intreatie, but might haue it by authoritie.Decret: 5. q. 4. Osius dixit. And therefore Gratian in his Decretals doth let passe the same words with the like craft; doth any man when he dealeth with other in his owne right say by intreaty, if it please you all? Now let vs goe forward to the rest. When as the Carthaginian Fathers euery one of them answered, that they neuer read that Canon among the Nycene Canons, and yet had among them the true copie, which Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, who was present himselfe in the Councell of Neece, brought from Neece to Carthage, they decreed by common consent that the true copies of the Nicene councell should be required of the Bishops of Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and the Bishop of Rome himselfe, if happily that Canon might be found among them. Neither for the space of fiue whole yeares, the matter being much sought after and debated, any thing at all could be found. In the meane time, the true copies came from Cyrill of Alex∣andria, and from Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, where∣in twenty Canons only, as Ruffinus counts them, were conteyned, agreable to the copie of Carthage, whereof, of so many diuers copies, so excellent, gathered from all the quarters of the world, Austin with his colleagues writeth to Boniface the Bishop of Rome after this man∣ner:Epist: Carth: Conc: ad Bonif: cap: 101. Who doubteth that the copies of the Nycene Councell are most true, which being brought out of so many places, and so worthy Churches of Greece, and compared, do so well agree together? Afric. Conc: cap: 92.Whereby the Carthaginian Fathers set out a decree presently, that Priests if they complained of the cen∣sures of their Diocesans, should be heard of the Bishops
next adioyning, and if they thought good to appeale from them, they should appeale only to the Councells of Africa, or to the primates of their owne Prouinces. And they that would needes appeale to places beyond the sea, should be receiued by none to the communion within Africa. Here they who before contrarie to the decree of the  Chalcedon Councell did by stealth bring in the affirma∣tion for the negation, added an exception cleane con∣trarie to the scope of the decree of the Carthage Coun∣cell. Vnlesse perhaps they appeale to the sea of Rome. The Councell of purpose did except against the Romaine sea, when it expresly concluded, that it was lawfull for none to appeale to the byshoppe of Rome. So that Bel∣larmine himselfe otherwise a notable forger, could not allowe that exception of Gratian the forger,Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 2. cap. 24. vnlesse perhaps they appeale to the sea of Rome. For this exception saith he doth not seeme to agree. For the Aphricans most of all for the Romane Church did decree, that it should not be lawfull to appeale beyond the sea. They ioyned letters to the decree, which they sent to Celestine the byshop of Rome, We entreat say they, that henceforth you would not easily admit to audience any that come from hence, nor would receiue any into your communi∣on that stand excommunicated by vs. For this also your bles∣sednesse shall easily finde determined in the Nicene Councell. And if this seeme to be obserued in the inferior Clarks, and Lay people, the Councell will haue much more obserued in the byshoppes. Let not them therefore who are suspended from the Communion in their own Prouince, be restored by your holinesse of set purpose against right and reason. Let your holinesse rather pu∣nish as it is meet, the impudent gaddings of Priests and other like Layikes. For no decree of the Fathers is for∣bidden by this of the church of Africa. And the decrees of the Nycene Councell, committed both the Clarkes of inferiour degrees, and byshopps themselues most
plainly to their owne Metropolitans. For they did wisely and iustly foresee, that what busines soeuer were begunne, should bee likewise ended in their owne pro∣per places. Neither did they thinke that the grace of the holy Ghost was wanting to any Prouince, whereby iustice might wisely be discerned, & firmely retained by the Priests, chiefely because it is granted to euery one, if he thinke good, to appeale from the sentence of the Iudges to the Synodes of their owne Prouince, or after that to the generall Synode: vnlesse there bee any who thinke, that God can infuse the righteousnesse of iudg∣ing into one man, whatsoeuer he be, and denie it to an infinite number of Priestes assembled in a Councell. How then shall this ouer-sea iudgement bee certaine,Reasons not to appeale be∣yond sea. whereto the persons of witnesses be necessarie, who ei∣ther for weaknesse of nature, or for age, or for some o∣ther lets and impediments cannot be present? For that which was sent by Faustinus, in the behalfe of the Nycene Synode, in the truer descriptions of the Nycene Coun∣cell we could finde no such matter. Therefore doe ye not suffer this, that wee may not seeme to bring in the smoakie pride of the world into the Church. These things did the Carthaginians publickely write to Cele∣stine byshoppe of Rome, wherein they did refute out of the true and authenticke copies the appeales to the Ro∣mane by shoppe which Sozumus laid claime to out of the false Cannons of the Nycene Councell. For the de∣crees of the Nycene Synode, doe commit either the Clarkes, or the byshoppes themselues directly to their owne Metropolitanes. They forbidde therefore, that they which were excommunicated by vs should bee re∣ceiued into the communion by the Romanes. As it is say they determined in the Councell of Neece. The A∣fricans reiected the Popes Legates as new creatures and vnknowne to the ancient Church: they called their gaddings to Rome impudent, and deemed the sending of his Legates the smoakie pride of the world. And they did propound
not the bare decree of the Synode, but enforced it with very weighty reasons. One is, that if so great authority were giuen to the  byshop of Rome, not only by the right discerning of  iudgement, but by the grace of the holy Ghost giuen to him alone, then it should seeme to bee denied to all o∣thers assembled in the Councell. The second, that when it is sufficient to appeale  twise, the Synode gaue leaue to such as would appeale from the sentence of his byshoppe, first to appeale to the prouinciall Synode, then from that to the vni∣uersall. The third, that seeing in the repealing of sentences  the presence of witnesses is requisite, the Romane by∣shoppes doe impose a very vnequall law vpon Christi∣ans to come necessarily from other kingdomes so farre distant by sea and land: especially being hindered by age, or sicknesse, or any other impediments which fall out to be very many. The fourth, because by this custome of appealing the  authority of all other byshoppes being diminished, and brought into one, the smoakie pride of the world would be brought into the Church. The Carthaginian Fathers vpon these reasons reiec∣ted that vniust request of the Romane byshoppe: and discouered the false and forged Cannons by the true and right copies sent from Cyrill and Atticus. So wise∣dome ouercame deceit, and modestie pride. For the Fathers did the second time condemne Apiarius, and in Apiarius Sozimus, Boniface, Celestine, that is in one wic∣ked runnagate, three very cunning forgers. Here Saturnine in a great chafe, These saith he, are  the maine points that your men out of the Carthagini∣an fathers, doe commonly obiect against ours. But the good fathers offended of ignorance,A meere Shif∣ter. yours of ma∣lice. The Fathers by a double ignorance, One because they beleeued there were but twenty Cannons onelie
of the Nicene Councell, whereas there were seuentie, whereof fiftie being burnt by the Arrians perished. Wherin, as many other things so that right of Appeales, which the Romane byshoppe did challenge was con∣tained.Sozm. lib. 3. cap. 10. The other because they did not distinguish be∣tweene the two Sinodes of Sardis,Popish rea∣sons to proue moe Canons of Neece then 20. Epist. of Egipt: to Marcus. For the coppie of the Nicene Councell Tom. Conc. 1. as it appeareth out of Sozemane, whereof one was Catholicke and generall of 300. byshoppes which Austin saw not. The other was hereticall of 86 byshoppes which Austin saw. Now beside those twentie Cannons, which Ruffinus reckons vp that there were other 50. more appeareth out of a certaine Epistle of Athanasius and the Egypti∣ans to Marcus the Romane Byshoppe, of whom they re∣quired the true copie of the 70. Cannons, after the Ar∣rians had burnt the authenticke copie, which Athana∣sius brought from Neece. There is extant a record of Iulius the Romane By∣shoppe against those of the east in the behalfe of Atha∣nasius, wherein beside those twentie Cannons, other twentie seuen are repeated: whereof sixe do more cleer∣ly set foorth the authoritie of the Romane byshoppe then that Cannon which Sozimus alleaged. Besides that there bee many more Cannons of the Councell of Neece besides those twentie which Ruffinus reckons vp. Euseb. in the life of Const. cap. 3. Ambros. Ep 82.One, wherein it decreed that Easter should be cele∣brated on the sabboth day, as appeareth by Constantines Epistle in Eusebius. A second, wherein it decreed that a man twise mar∣ried should not be admitted into the clergie. As Am∣brose telleth vs. Ierom. in pref. on Iudith. Austen. Epist. 110.A third, wherein the booke of Iudith is admitted a∣mong the canonicall bookes as Ierome witnesseth. A fourth, wherein it is forbidden that two byshops should sit together in one Church as Austin affirmes. A fift, wherein it decreed that it was not lawfull for them that were fasting to minister the Sacrament of
the supper. As the Africane Fathers testifie. Lastly the hereticall Doctours Luther, Caluine, and the writers of the centuries out of the first booke of So∣crates cap. 8. doe alleage a Cannon out of the Coun∣cell of Neece, wherein their Wiues are permitted to Priests. But none of these Cannons are found among those 20. which they only number. Therefore if Sozimus be said to be a corruptor and a Forger of the Cannons of Neece, because he recited one Cannon vnder the name of the Nycene Councell, which is not found among the 20. Cannons; by the same reason Constantine, Ambrose, Ierome, Austin, the African Fathers, the Centurie writers, Luther and Caluine are to bee tearmed corruptors and forgers: for all of them doe recite Cannons out of the Councell of Neece, which are not reckoned among those twenty Can∣nons. Last of all in the Councell of Florence Sess. twentie, one Iohn a great learned man affirmed, that hee could shew by many testimonies of the antient, that the Fa∣thers of the 6. Councell of Carthage, did at the last ac∣knowledge that very corrupt and false Cannon of the Nycene Councell were sent ouer to them out of Constan∣tinople and Alexandria. Then Patriot, hee that holdes you not worthy, Sa∣turnine,  saith he, of a Cardinalls hat, that can lye so pro∣foundly for the triple crowne, doth you great wrong You doe very shamelesly obiect ignorance to the Carthaginian Fathers among whom Austin was present,A popish slan∣der. out of Bellarmine; and malice to our men. When the Papists perceiued that their Sozimus wa taken tardie in a manifest lye, they deuised this tale of the 70. Cannons of the Nycene Councell. And to th purpose coyned an Epistle, as it had beene sent from A∣thanasius and other Egyptian Byshoppes, to byshoppe Marcus, wherein they doe complaine forsooth, that the true copies were burnt by the Arrians at Alexandria
and therefore required the true coppie of the seuentie Cannons.Athanasius E∣pistle forged. And as one lye commonly begets another, they counterfeit Marcus answere to Athanasius and the Egyptians, giuen the tenth before the Calendes Nouem∣ber, when Nepotian and Secundus were Consuls, which day was neere the end of the 13. yeare of the raigne of Constantine, as wee may see in Sozomen the first booke cap. 25. and 28. in which yeare he writeth that Athana∣sius was absent, out of Egypt in the Councell of Tyre, and returned not home, but fledde to Constantinople, and remained there till he was banished into France. How then could Athanasius send this Epistle to Mar∣cus out of Egypt, where hee was not when the Epistle was sent? Againe in Marcus Epistle is mention of the persecu∣tion of Egypt, which was not at all in Constantines time, but long after vnder Constantius when Marcus was dead. Tusc: 1.Cicero laughes heartily at a Fellow, who said hee re∣membred what was done before hee was borne, Who can choose but laugh at your Marcus remembring the persecution in Egypt, raised after his death. Sozom. lib. 1. ap. 17. Beda distinct. 16. Nicene canons burnt before they were made.Now Marcus went next before Iulius, Iulius was by∣shoppe of Rome when the Nycene Councell was gather∣ed, as Sozomen and Bede write. Therefore your Atha∣nasius, who is said to write to Marcus, writes that the Nycene Cannons were burnt before they were made. Besides whereas there were twentie Cannons after∣ward made, they were preserued vncorrupt in the pub∣licke  and authenticke recordes of Churches wherein the Creede of the Nycene faith was contained, and the Arrian heresie was confuted, the other 50. were said suddainely to haue perished through the malice of the Arrians. O foolish Arrians who blotted out 50. Cannons which touched no part of the Arrian heresie, and spa∣red the Nycene creed, and the Epistle sent to them of
Alexandria which condemned that whole heresie. The Orator doth make himselfe merry with certaine witnesses of Doris,Orat. pro Flac. who being produced against Flac¦cus, when they had lost nothing said they had lost the publicke tables; O Shepheardes said hee desirous of letters, for they tooke nothing from them but letters; if they had brought foorth those that had beene true, there had beene no fault, if false there had beene a pu∣nishment for corrupting the letters. They thought it best to say they were lost. These popish witnesses are not much vnlike,The Papists like foolish Shepheards. who faine that the Arrians stole 50. Cannons out of the Ny∣cene Councell, which hurt them nothing at all, and left twentie sound and vntoucht, whereby they were to be condemned. If the Papists bring foorth the true Can∣nons, they hurt their cause, if false they hurt their cre∣dit. They thinke it the safest course to say that 50. were burnt, and that by them, who could receiue no profit by this their dealing. But if the Arrians were so foolish, the Romanistes were wiser then to suffer 20. Canons to remaine among them which did restraine their supremacie, and suffer 50. to perish which did enlarge it. But we see so little likelihood in the tale,The former forgerie re∣iected by Bel∣larmine. that Bellar∣mine himselfe hist it out. For hee writeth that the bur∣nings of the bookes hapned in the time of Constantius the Emperour, whenas Athanasius being banished, one George an Arrian was ordained in his place, as Athana∣sius witnesseth in his Epistle to all the Orthodoxe.Marcus recei∣ued an Epistle after he was dead. But it appeareth, saith he, by Ieromes Chronologie that Mar∣cus the Pope was dead at that time. Therefore Marcus after he was dead receiued an Epistle from Athanasius. And therefore being dead made answere to Athanasius, if we giue credit to Bellarmine. It is good sport to see how these lying Papists doe couer this tale with their mutuall contradictions. But Iulius answer doth confirme Marcus Epistle,
wherein there is mention of seuen and twenty Nycene canons,A counterfet Iulius. besides those twenty which are reckoned vp by Ruffinus. Heere wee haue a counterfet Iulius, not onely lying for the supremacies sake, but also forswearing himselfe: though he that is a common lier, as it is sayd, is a com∣mon for-swearer. Hee doth not onely counterfet false canons, but ratifies them with an oath. That I sayd true, the God-head is my witnesse, as he saith in that coun∣terfet answer. But if the answer of the true Iulius, sent to the Councell of Antioch, in Athanasius quarrell, men∣tioned by Athanasius in his second Apology, if it bee compared with this, it will lay open all the circumstan∣ces of this vntruth and periury. I will not goe farre for proofe, this blinde and bastardly decretall doth plainly reprooue it selfe. It was giuen the first of Nouember, as it is written, when Felician and his Colleague were Consuls,Socrat. l. 1. c. 40 that ve∣ry yeere wherein Constantine died. Now the Councell of Antioch that deposed Atha∣nasius,Sozom. l. 3. c. 5. and to which Iulius writ, was gathered together by Constantius fiue yeeres after Constantines death. So this answer was sent to the Synode of Antioch, fiue yeeres before that Synode was assembled. Doe you not see with your eyes, and feele with your fingers how grosse this lie is? Beside, Iulius in his answer writeth, that Athanasius remained with him at Rome a yeere and a halfe, wai∣ting for the presence of the Antiochians, after hee had cited them with his first processe, whereto is ascribed the calends of October, as to the latter the calends of Nouember of the same yeere. So betweene the two daies of appearance were one and thirty daies, in which short time, to goe from Rome to Antioch,Pegasi, bee horses with wings. and returne againe, the Popes Pari∣tours had neede to bee Pegasi, who were not to gallop, but flie.
But if Iulius sixe canons did more cleerely set out the Popes prerogatiue, then that one canon of Sozimus, truely you make Sozimus to bee a very wise man, who chose one canon and the worst, when hee could haue alleadged sixe, and those farre better. For whereas you bring many other canons of the Nycene Councell, as you cal them, beside those twenty recited by great authors, let your Iesuites make you an answer, who distinguish the decrees of the Councell of Neece into two kindes. The first kinde they call , that is, constitutions, as they interpret them. The other they call , that is properly, canons, as they with vs confesse. They are ignorant, as they confesse, of the number  of the constitutions and acts: But of the canons pro∣perly so called, they grant that the number is rightly set downe by Ruffinus. To the first kinde, they refer those your canons improperly so called, whereof some they affirme are among the acts of the Nycene Councell, and denie them to be among the Canons: as Turrian plainely in his proeme vpon the canons of Neece, in Binius, part. 1. pag. 169. But of these constitutions which you vrge, there will bee another time when you shall haue a particular answer. Heere I rest, heere I dwell, heere I sticke fast against all the corruptions and falsifications, where Austin hath taught me to set fast footing, who doubteth, saith hee, that all the copies of the Nycene Councell are true, which are brought out of so many sundrie places, and from so noble Grecian Churches, being compared to¦gether, and do so well agree. I giue credit to Cyrill of Alexandria, so writing backe to the Carthaginian fa∣thers. I thought it necessarie to send ouer to your Charity,Sur tom. 1. re∣script. Cyril. Alexan p. 586 the faithfullest copies out of the authenticke in the Synode, held in Nice a a city of Bithinia.
Epist. Atti. episc. con. ibi∣dem. fol. 190.Me thinkes I heare Atticus Bishop of Constantino∣ple, thus writing backe: I haue sent vnto you the canons, all of them, as you commanded, as they were decreed in the citie Neece by the fathers. I ought not, I cannot, but must needes consent to 217. fa∣thers, assembled in the African Councell, whereto Austin did subscribe. Is anie man so mad to prefer the forged writings of a counterfet Mark, and a counterfet Iulius, fetcht I know not whence, written in the darke and in a corner, disa∣greeing betweene themselues, before the true and vn∣doubted canons reserued in the Registry, not onely of Carthage and Alexandria, but of Constantinople and Rome, exemplified in the light, openly and agreeing in all points among themselues? And will any man hearken to 3. suspected & conuicted witnesses in their owne cause, rather then to more then 200. witnesses assembled in a Councell in the common cause? and those bringing in the pride hurtfull to the Church with out all reason; these suppressing that pride with all for∣cible and holy reasons they could? But there is brought vpon the stage, by Bellarmine, the ridiculous person of one Iohn,Ridiculous Iohn brought vpon the stage. whom hee calleth a very learned man, who affirmeth in the Councell of Florence, forsooth, that he could shew many testimo∣nies of the Ancient. What doth this iolly Iohn affirme, that the fathers of Carthage did at the last acknowledge, that false and corrupt canons of the Nycene Councell, were sent them from Alexandria and Constantinople. Who af∣firmes it? One Iohn. Who tolde him so? No body. Onely hee saith on his bare word, that hee can shew many testimonies of the Ancient. Why then doth he not shew them? Therfore what a certaine ignorant ani∣mall saith he can shew, and doth not, shall we accept it for a lawfull testimonie of a recantation, made by so excellent and wise a Councell? And because a certaine Robert hath brought in an obscure Iohn in the fagge end
of all, and calles him a very learned man, therefore we must admit of him as a fit and sufficient witnesse against so many most reuerend fathers of Carthage? And when he dare obiect ignorance to all these, doth hee not see that in himselfe hee doth betray his owne arrogancy? he doth attribute learning to one Iohn, and ignorance to Austin, forsooth he thinkes he can fetch smoake out of lightning, and light out of smoake: Minerua's heire, who dreames that all knowledge is borne with him, and shall die with him. For otherwise hee would neuer haue obiected ignorance to Austin, and the rest of the Carthaginian fathers, as if they knew not to distin∣guish betweene the two Councels of Sardis, when him∣selfe betraied more ignorance in confounding the Councels of Neece and Sardis. But that we may returne thither, where wee went a∣side,  necessarily to pursue the aduersarie,Primacy of order granted to Rome, but of power de∣nied. and shortly to set downe to you the iudgement of the Primatiue Church, Calander, concerning the primacie, you see that the primacie of order and degree was granted to the Bishop of Rome, but the primacie of power and iu∣risdiction was denied by sixe Councels. I am not igno∣rant, Victor did affect before the Nycene Councell, what Leo did arrogantly seeke afterward: like the two sonnes of Zebede, one of them desirous to sit on the right hand of Christ, the other on the left. But the de∣sire of glorie doth not inferre an article of the faith. Therefore the fathers of the Primatiue Church, did prouide as farre as they might, that one should not ad∣uance himselfe aboue the rest. The fathers of Neece did assigne a prouince, aswell to the Romane Bishop, as to the Bishop of Alexandria, out of which hee might not depart. The Bishops of Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, did make the See of Constantinople equall to the See of Rome: The Carthaginians did denie the right of appealing from the African Synodes to Rome. It is not credible that so many learned and holy fathers
assembled in sixe Councels, would haue denied that iu∣risdiction to the Romane Bishop which the Scripture had yeelded him. But there are other started vp, who saw more, and vnderstood the Scripture better then 2000. fathers assembled in those sixe Councels. Now they can shew vs an heauenly charter in many places, wherein God gaue to Peter, and to Peters successour, as they presume, the Bishop of Rome, that vniuersall principality; I will giue thee the keyes, and whatsoeuer thou shalt binde &c. and feede my sheepe, and thou art Peter, and vpon that rocke, and diuers others of that kinde. But those fathers, though they searched vsually into all the mysteries of holy Scripture with peircing eyes,Peters key was no better, his tongue no more free then the rest. yet they could not perceiue a greater key, or a better giuen to Peter then to the rest of the Apostles, nor a larger or a more shining fiery tongue sitting on Peters head, as the cheife Prince, then on the rest: neither that one piller was set more sure and strong, then the o∣ther 12. pillers, but that they were al alike equal among themselues:Acts 15. Acts 8. Peter not e∣quall but infe∣riour to the rest. nor that Peter alone was appoynted the Pastour of all the Apostles, much lesse the Prince, lif∣ting vp himselfe aboue the rest of the Apostles, aboue the Emperor aboue the Councell. Therfore in the first Councell of Ierusalem, Peter was not President, but Iames. And Peter being sent by the rest of the Apostles with Iohn into Samaria obeied. Now the superior is not sent by the inferior, but contrary: It followes that Peter was not aboue the rest, but equal with the rest: yea, truly below the whole Councell: to the which for going to Cornelius the Centurian, being accused, hee gaue ac∣compt of his fact, wherein he confessed himselfe to bee inferiour to the Councell: which was kept, not by Pe∣ters command, but by the consent of all the Apostles. Therein there was a great discourse of the summe of Christianitie, of iustification, and of the saluation of the Elect by the grace of Christ: before Peter gaue his sentence, and that not sitting, but arising, and that ve∣ry
modestly and gently. Afterward, Iames did onely yeeld his opinion, but pronounced and set downe in writing the decree it selfe, which all the assembly of A∣postles and Preists did follow. It seemed good also, not to Peter alone, but to the Apostles and Preists, with the whole Church, to send certaine choice men to An∣tioch, with the Apostle Paul and Barnabas: and the Sy∣nodall Epistle did not beare the name of Peter, but of all the Apostles, Preists and Brethren. And if Peter had receiued the primacy of iurisdiction from Christ, the other Apostle had done him great wrong, that suf∣fered not Peter to bee President of the Councell, that they sent Peter as inferior into Samaria, that they took accompt of his doing, that they met not together by his appointment, that they suffered him not to sit aboue others, to propound the decree, to send Legates, and to seale vp the Synodall Epistle in his owne name. But the Apostles did no wrong to Peter. It followeth then that Peter receiued no primacy of iurisdiction from Christ, but was equall to the rest of the Apostles, and in∣feriour to the whole Councell. The Papists doe grant a double gouernment to Pe∣ter. Peters double pretended go∣uernment. Galat. 2. Paul, nothing inferiour to Peter. They make him Lord of the spirituals and tempo∣rals. Therefore the Apostle Paul did ill, bee it spoken with reuerence, who made himselfe equall to Peter, and gaue out, that he was inferiour in nothing vnto Peter, and which was more, reprehended him sharpely to his face, as his equall and fellow-seruant, and that publike∣ly, when hee tooke him in a fault. For the Gospell (saith he) was committed to me ouer the Gentiles, as it was to Peter ouer the Iewes. For hee that was powerfull through Peter in the Apostleship of the Iewes, the same was powerfull in mee ouer the Gentiles. And when as Iames, Cephas and Iohn, who seemed to bee pillers, knew that grace was giuen me, then they gaue the right hands of fellowship to me and Barnabas, See Cephas doth acknowledge Paul his fellow, hee had him not for a subiect: neither did hee
challenge to himselfe the highest top of gouernment, but gaue the right hand of fellowship: which was done by Peter not only in respect of humilitie of minde, but for equalitie of office. Farre be it from vs to thinke it was written by Paul for pride of minde, but for the truth of the matter. And if Christ had appointed Pe∣ter the vniuersall Bishop & Prince of his Church, how durst Peter and Paul, couenant betweene them-selues in the 18. yeare after Christ his passion, that Peter should exercise the Apostleship ouer the Iewes, and Paul ouer the Gentiles, not only, but chiefly? whereby Paul by the Antients, is called the Prince of the Apostles, as well as Peter. But the equall hath no gouernment ouer his equall. Peter would be are no rule ouer the cler∣gie. 1 Pet: 5.Neither could Peter himselfe beare rule ouer the Clergie, that he might not seem to permit that to other, which he would not take to himselfe, when hee called himselfe not a chiefe Priest, but a fellow Priest. Much lesse did he vse the sword, and ciuill gouernment, and iudge Caesar to be subiect vnto him; but admonished himselfe with all other Christians, to submit themselues to Caesar, as to the most excellent, and to other Magi∣strates as sent from him, neither did at any time exercise ciuill gouernment. He had it not therefore; for that is not a power which is neuer brought into act. There∣fore Peter was no more ouer Kings, than hee was ouer Apostles. Nay Christ himselfe as a man was not aboue the Em∣perour.Christ him∣selfe as man not aboue Emperors. As he is God, he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; as he was man he did not only submit him∣selfe to Tiberius, but to Pilate, Tiberius Deputie in Iurie. You had no power, said he, ouer me, if it were not giuen you from aboue. Againe he saith, that his kingdome was not of this world, when he was demanded of Pilate, what king∣dome he laid claime vnto. Whereby it appeareth that Christ was to haue not a temporall,August: in Psal: 47. but a spirituall kingdome, as Austin gathereth out of those words.
Harken to this ô yee Kings, and enuy not, Christ is a King after another fashion than you are, who said my kingdome is not of this world. Feare not therefore, if the kingdome of this world be taken from you, you shall haue another giuen vnto you, and that a heauenly one, whereof he is King. If Christ had not a temporall kingdome, was it for Peter to haue it? what is this else but to make the seruant aboue his master, and the em∣bassador aboue him that sent him? and if it did not be∣long neither to Christ, nor to Peter, do you thinke that not only the temporall kingdome, but the chiefe go∣uernmēt ouer all temporal kingdoms, was giuen to the Pope, Christs supposed Vicar, & Peters counterfeit suc∣cessor? fie vpon such foolish pride, fie vpon such loftie vanitie, which Christ did reprehend in many places in ye the Apostles, when he said, the Kings of the earth beare rule ouer them, but you not so. And as my father sent me, so I send you. And my kingdome is not of this world. And yet Bellarmine dares to write,Bellarmine contrary to Christ. that the supreme temporall power was giuen to the chiefe Bishop, which Christ himself by his owne confession did not exercise. Christ saith, the Kings of the earth beareth rule ouer them, but you not so: Bellarmine contrary, but you so. Christ, as my Father sendeth me so I send you: Bellarmine con∣trary, not as my Father sendeth me do I send you. The Father sent me in humilitie, and ignominie; I send you in pompe and maiestie; Christ, my kingdome is not of this world; Bellarmine contrary, yea it is of this world. and of all this world. So manifestly doth the Cardinall contradict Christ. But although Christ as man did not exercise tempo∣rall  power, he might if he had so liked, saith Bellarmine. Here the question is not what Christ could haue done, but what he did. Neither is the authoritie of Peter to be grounded vpon that which Christ could haue done, but vpon that which Christ did indeed. Christ could if he had pleased, haue made ye world in an instant, but he
would not: the Scripture witnesseth he would not, be∣cause it is said that hee tooke to him six daies to bring forth that worke. He could if he would haue redeemed the world with one drop of blood without death, but he would not: that hee would not the Scripture beareth witnes, wherein it is said, that he must die for vs. So he could if hee would as man, exercise the dominion of temporall things, but hee would not; that hee would not, truth it selfe doth witnes, which said, my kingdom is not of this world. From a possibilitie to a deed, the argument is not of force in Christ, much lesse in Peter. O pleasant madnes of Bellarmine, wherby he dreameth that the temporall power in possibilitie, as hanging in the ayre, is bestowed vpon his Bishop. But marke the mans reason: God hath appointed Christ to be heyre of all things.How the tem∣porall rule forsooth des∣cendeth vpon the Pope. Therfore if he would, he could haue cast Tiberius out of his throne, and Pilate out of his iudgement seate: for he was the heyre of all things. Peter could if hee would haue wrested Nero's scepter out of his hands, for he was heyre to Christ. And the Pope can if he will cast of the Crowne from the head of any King heretike or catholike, if he begin to go astray, for he is Peters heyre. For all comes to this at last, that the temporall dominion of the whole world, descends from Christ to Peter, from Peter to the Pope. That the Pope forsooth might haue and exercise power ouer Kings, which Christ had but vsed not, but might haue vsed, if hee had been so pleased. A vant with all these foolish quiddities which inferre such dangerous consequences.Austin and Maldonate against Bel∣larmine. But if hee had consulted not only with Austin, but also with Maldonat on of his owne side, hee should haue vnderstood, that that place was to be inter∣preted of the spirituall, not temporall inheritance of the world, granted to Christ by the Father. For what? he that refused the iudgement of diuiding a priuate in∣heritance, would he take to him the publike inheritance of the whole world? And he that willingly submitted
himselfe to the authoritie of Pilate giuen from aboue, euen to the death of the Crosse, did hee shew himselfe a temporall Lord both ouer Tiberius and the whole world? The power of Pilate, saith Bellarmine, was not ordey∣ned  but permitted. And this is the sense of the place, that Pilate could do nothing against Christ, if God had not per∣mitted it. As that place is also vnderstood, this is your houre and power of darknesse, Luc: 22. but because S. Thomas (saith he) vpon the 13 to the Romanes, vnderstandeth the place of the ordinarie power, we do not disagree: But that this power did extend it selfe to Christ, we thinke that to be done out of Pilates ignorance, who not knowing the worthines of Christ, iudged him as some priuate Citizen of the country. As if in our dayes a Clergie man were brought to the bar of a Secular Iudge vnder the name and habite of a Lay-man, hee may be condemned by that power wherewith a Laicke may, out of the ignorance of the Iudge; yet it doth not follow thereby that Clarkes by law are subiect to the iudgement of Lay-men, or that Christ was subiect to the iudgment of Pilate. Thus far Bellarmine. But Christ said that Pilates power was not permitted  but giuen from aboue. The permitted power was that power of darknes whereby God suffred that the Iewes should kill the Lord of Glory, wherein they sinned most greiuously. And therefore it is called the power of darknesse, not giuen from aboue as was Pilates the Iudge, which Austin called not an vsurped but an vn∣iust power. Which place (saith he) when I heard it to be expounded by S. Thomas of a lawfull power I do not withstand it.Bellarmine contradicteth himselfe. It is well that which before you did wic∣kedly affirme, being instructed by Thomas you hone∣stly deny. The man speakes out of a boate, now enclining to this side, now to that, neither doth he som∣time contradict others so much as himselfe. But marke how by turning himselfe into all parts, he hath found a starting hole to escape by. Whereas Pilate did stretch
out this power against Christ, it was out of Pilates ig∣norance, that knew not the worth of Christ. As if a Clerke vnder the habite of a Lay man should bee brought before a lay-Iudge, he might by the ignorance of the Iudge be condemned as a Lay-man, which not∣withstanding the Law doth not allow, &c. That which he imputes to the ignorance of Pilate, Austin imputes it to his feare, lest he should offend Cae∣sar in loosing of Christ. But this may be ascribed to his ignorance that he beggeth the question:Bellarmine begs the que∣stion. For he takes it as granted, which is in question, that a Clerke may not by law be condemned by a secular Iudge, though out of the Iudges ignorance he may, being attired like a Layman As if he should say that Alexander the 3. being in his pontificalibus might not rightly be iud∣ged by Fredericke the Emperor,Alexander 3. but being in his cookes apparell he might by ignorance: or that Bi∣shop who bare armes against Richard the first King of England,An English Bishop in K: Richard the first dayes. Odo brother to W. Con∣queror. could not be hanged in his Bishops at∣tire, but being found in a coat-armour, hee might by ignorance: Or that Odo the brother of William the first, a very wicked traytor, could not be committed to ward, as Bishop of Bayon, but as Earle of Kent: Or that some trayterous Iesuite, imagine some Garet or Oldcorne, could not bee hanged in his massing robes, but might by ignorance, being clad in a Cour∣tiers attire. I could wish rather that such Clerkes were vnknowne than knowne. But he doth very vntoward∣ly make Christ his innocencie, a cloake for a harmefull Clerke: that because Christ could not be rightly con∣demned by Pilate, therefore euery Clerke is exempted from the iudgement of a secular Iudge. It is as I said, a manifest begging of the thing in question. For I can better dispute after a contrary manner; There was no exempting of the person of Christ from the iudgement of Pilate, Therefore there is no exempting of Paul the fift
from the iudgment of the Emperor. For if Christ the chiefe Bishop was not exempted from the iudgment of the Emperor, whose power was from aboue, then certainely the Bishop of Rome, ought not to be exempted from the iudgement of the Emperors power. The actions of Christ are rules for the Pope, the actions of Popes are not rules for Christ. But whereas the Cardinall brings in his Clearke in  a Lay-mans weede, before a secular Iudge, hee doth very ill apply it to his purpose. For he hauing got this freedome or exemption, as is taught, he should not say to the Iudge, that hee hath power from heauen against him, but the contrary: you haue no power against me frō aboue, for I am a Clerke: but when Christ said not this, but the cleane contrary, (you haue power against me frō aboue) he allowed not the exēpting of a Clerke: vnles the prerogatiue of a Clerke be greater than the pre∣rogatiue of Christ. But you haue brought in a very dull-pated Clerke, who being endowed with a priui∣ledge as you call it, cannot vtter it that he may be safe from danger: being like to the Asse and her colt, whence they are wont to draw another argument for the temporall gouernment of Christ.An argument drawne from the Asse for the Popes power. Hee sent his dis∣ciples that they should bring him the Asse and her colt, whereon according to the prophecie, the humble King might sit, when hee entred into Ierusalem; and com∣manded them to tell the owners of the Asses, the Lord had neede of them: whence they conclude, that Christ was the temporall Lord of the whole world. very foolishly, for whereas hee borrowed the Asse, it sheweth Christs pouertie, and whereas hee rode on it, when he went into Ierusalem, it sheweth his humilitie and meeknes: as the Fathers expound it. Therefore they that gather from thence, the dignitie and excellen∣cie of a temporall Prince, the Lord hath neede of them, that I may not seeme to speake more sharply a∣gainst them.
And if the authoritie of a Prince might haue beene gathered out of this place, hee would not haue said the Lord had neede of them, but the Lord commandes that you send them. Whose humilite when Celestine the Byshoppe of Rome peruersly desiring to follow was caried through the Citie vpon an Asse,The Asse sate vpon the Pope not the Pope vpon the Asse. and enioyned his Cardinalles to doe the like, was laught at by them, who beleeued that the Asse rather sate vpon the Pope, then the Pope vpon the Asse: because when hee would resemble Christ his humilitie, hee should haue cast off the Popes statelinesse. And yet they are so blockish, that they thinke that Christ when he rid into Ierusalem after his manner in triumph, that hee exercised tempo∣rall power. Did they then thinke this manner to bee scarce papall in Celestine; doe they thinke it Regall in Christ? And that which they thought vilde in Christ, doe they thinke triumphant in him? And that which they thought a signe of weakenesse in him, doe they count it a shew of power in Christ? Christ assuredly is the King of heauen and earth, and he hath a kingdome both spirituall and eternall. But his kingdome is not of this world, though it be in this world, as hee profes∣sed before Pilate.How Christ stood before Pilate. He stood therefore before Pilate both the Emperors Lord and Subiect: afterward to iudge him, now to be iudged of him: God to be feared by his inuicible maiestie, man to bee pittied by his visible hu∣militie: in whose person the power of the spirit lay hid vnder the frailety of the flesh, that he might teach Peter, and in him the Pope, to reioyce at heauenly graces, not to waxe proude at earthly titles, and euer to beare in minde the glory of a Kingdome not outward, and de∣caying; but inward and eternall. But now let vs vrge the argument out of the scriptures aboue alleaged, and let vs enforce it more closly out of the interpretations of the antient Fathers. Christ had no kingdome of the world. Therefore Peter had none: vnlesse hee could giue that to
Peter he had not himselfe.The Pope de∣creaseth by the same de∣grees hee en∣creased. Christ is the Emperours subiect as he is man, how there∣fore can Peter be his Lord? vnlesse the Disciple may be aboue his Master. And if Peter be a subiect, how can the Pope be a Lord? Peter was not aboue the rest of the Apostles. Therefore the Pope is not aboue other Byshoppes. Peter was inferiour to the Councell. Therefore the Pope is inferiour to the Councell. By the same degrees that the Pope did increase, by the same if you please let him decrease. First he was aduanced aboue Byshoppes, as Boniface the third; afterward aboue Kings and Emperours, as Gregorie the seuenth: then hee tooke vpon him the im∣periall and pontificall dignitie, and that by the right of his Popedome: as Boniface the 8. Last of all hee was lifted aboue all Councells, that all the remedies for mis∣chiefe might be taken away, and that the Christian peo∣ple might happily lament their miseries, but not cure them. But Peter was not aboue the rest of the Apostles. Cy∣prian, That were saith he, the rest of the Apostles, that Peter was; endued with the same fellowship of honour and power. There was a paritie of power among all the Apostles, where was then the superiority of Peter? The Carthaginian Fathers therefore decreed in the Councell that the Byshoppe of the first sea should not be called Prince of Priests, or chiefe Priest,Chap. 42. or haue any such title, but onely the Byshoppe of the first sea: where is then the spirituall principality of the Pope, whereof Bellarmine dreameth? Afterward Gregorie the first did not onely detest the title of vniuersall Byshoppe in Iohn of Constantinople,Lib. 4. Epist. cap. 32. Gregorie the first did detest the title of the vniuersall By∣shoppe. but in himselfe and all others as new, wicked, a name of singularity, to be a generall plague of the Church, the cor∣ruption of faith, against the Cannons, against Peter the A∣postle, against the sense of the Gospell, against all Churches,
against God himselfe. That neuer any holy man vsed any such title,Lib. 4. Epist. 34 & Epist. 38 39. that none of his Predecessors did giue their consents it should be vsed, and that whosoeuer did vse it, hee was the Messenger and forerunner of Antichrist. This is a notable title, the vniuersall Byshoppe of the Church, proper to the Byshoppe of Rome as Bellarmine saith. Therefore new, prophane wicked &c. as Gregorie saith. Lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. cap. 31. Bellarmines obiection a∣gainst Pope Gregorie.But here Bellarmine doth distinguish, there is one sense of this title, that he who is called the vniuersall Byshop of all Christian cities, so that other be not Byshoppes, but onely his Ʋicars, and in this sense it is a prophane word as Gregorie speaketh. So that according to blessed Gregories minde, the vniuersall Byshoppe seemes to take authoritie from all other, that an vniuersall Byshoppe be one and an on∣ly Byshoppe, as Bellarmine doth expound in Tortus, as if Gregorie had iudged that all other Byshoppes had beene put out of office by Iohn of Constantinople, who would needes be stiled the vniuersall Byshop. Bellarmine doth crosse the historie.Wherein Bellarmine doth crosse the historie which sheweth that all the Greeke Byshoppes did consent to Iohn of Constantinople, that hee should take to him the title of vniuersall Byshoppe: which they would neuer haue done, if by the grant of that title, they had thought all Byshop like authoritie should haue been taken from them. And Platina sheweth that Boniface the 3. tooke to him that place of preheminency, which Iohn cha∣lenged. Bellarmine contradicteth himselfe.Besides that in the very said place he doth contradict himselfe, where he writeth that the Greeke Byshops would not onely preferre the Constantinopolitane sea before the sea of Alexandria and Antioch, but make it also equall to Rome, and vniuersall. Which how can it agree with that which he said before? for hee did not preferre himselfe before the sea of Alexandria and Antioch, but the sea of Constantinople tooke them both away: and did not equall himselfe to the Romane, but abolished the Ro∣mane: for he was the vniuersall and onely Byshoppe,
and made the other not his fellow but his Vicar. For other were not Byshoppes, but his Vicars onely as hee imagineth Gregorie to haue thought.Lib. 4. epist. 36. Lib. 4. ep. 34. For Gregorie thought by that title not to take away all Byshoppes but to diminish them, or that other Pa∣triarches had their honour abrogated, but derogated: nor that all other were put downe, but that hee was set vp aboue all other: neither did hee goe about that one thing, that he alone should be, but be alone in authori∣tie; or that other should be no Byshoppes at all, but that he should seeme a Byshoppe of better worth then the rest: and that hee should ioyne them as parts to himselfe, not cut them off: and should bee among By∣shoppes, as Lucifer among the Angells, who preferred himselfe before others, tooke not others away. So this vniuersall Byshoppe suffered other Byshoppes to bee, but to be in subiection, if wee beleeue Gregorie a better interpreter of his owne minde, then Bellarmine. And this did Boniface the third effect, when Boniface tooke nothing to him by the grant of Phocas, which Iohn did not claime by the grant of Mauritius. That which Boniface tooke to himselfe, Paul the 5. retaineth, and that much more. He doth retaine therefore a new, prophane, wicked,  blasphemous name &c. as Gregorie thought: while hee is called vniuersall Byshoppe. It is well said and truely, an euill head, is a head of euills. And euery euill as it is more generall is the worse. And therefore an vniuersall euill is the greatest euill, from whence all other euills are powred into the Church and Common-weale: into the Church, here∣sies; into the Common-weale, treasons: while it vtter∣ly lost the faith of Christ, and trod vnderfoote the ma∣iestie of the Emperour.Lib. 4. Ep. 39. Gregorie foretould each of them. For thus he said to Anianus: to consent to this wic∣ked name, what is it else but to loose the faith? And how much damage the faith hath sustained it shall appeare
by those Articles of the faith which follow. And to Mauritius he writ,Epist. 32. that who so delighteth in that name, doth thereby set himselfe aboue the honour of the Emperour. And how much damage the Empire hath sustained, the lamentable endes of many emperours doth declare. Regius our Councellor shall tell you who they were. Gregorie as I said was a true, alasse too true a Prophet. And our learned interpreter of Gregorie the Byshoppe of Chicester said well that the vniuersall Byshop is for the Empire Lucifer; for the Church Antichrist. Yet Gregorie himselfe (they say) though hee liked not the vniuersall title, he exercised the vniuersall iuris∣diction. Wherein they imagine Gregorie to be not tru∣ly holy, but prophanely politicke, like to Caesar, who refused the name of a King as odious, that hee might more cunningly exercise the authority of a King. Therefore they counterfet a certaine Epistle of Gre∣gorie, thus indorst to Iohn Byshoppe of Siracuse, To Iohn Byshoppe of Siracuse concerning the Byshoppe of Constanti∣nople accused of a foule fault. In the Epistle it selfe the Bizancen primate, is said to haue beene accused of a certaine fault,Gregor. lib. 7. Epist. 64. whom the most holy Emperour, would haue iudged by vs according to the cononical decrees. But the error of name Bizancene, or Biazene, deriued not from Bizantium the citie of Constantinople,Glosse in Grati. edita à Greg 13 but from Bizatium a Prouince of Africa, is amended in the glosse of the Cannon law, which saith that Anselme and Gratian were deceiued in the inscription of the Epistle of Saint Gregorie:An epistle sus∣pected to be forged. because Bizancene did not signifie the Patriarch of Constantinople, but the Primate of A∣frica. Which things giues vs iust cause to suspect that the Epistle is forged: as another wherein they bring in Gregorie affirming that the Constantinopolitane Church is subiect to the Apostolick-sea,Lib. 7. epi. 63. Lib. 2. de Rom. Pontific. c. 14. as Eusebius the Byshoppe of the same sea doth confesse. Which place Bellarmine citeth. But in Gregories time none did sit in the sea of Constantinople but Iohn and Siricius, who did vsurpe the
title of vniuersall Byshoppe, Nicephorus a witnesse in his tripartite historie. Whereby it appeareth that a counterfeit Eusebius is brought in as a witnesse of the Romane prerogatiue,A counterfet Eusebius. and a bastardly Epistle deuised by some scribe, who testified that Gregorie wrot that be∣ing dead, which while he liued, hee reprehended so ear∣nestly not only in another but in himselfe. When this deuise tooke no successe, they tried ano∣ther  way:Baronius. Bellarmine. That there were very many of Gregories Pre∣decessors, who did write themselues Byshoppes of the Catholicke Church, that is of the vniuersall.The vniuersall Byshoppe and Byshop of the vniuersall Church not all one. And that it is all one to be called the vniuersall Byshoppe of the Church, and Byshop of the vniuersall Church. Where∣in they haue not onely Costerus gaine-saying them in his Euchiridion: and Lindane in his Panoplie, in whose iudgement these differ, the vniuersall Byshoppe, and the Byshoppe of the vniuersall Church: or that all am∣biguitie may be taken away, they deny it to bee one to be called the Byshoppe of the Catholicke Church, that is, vniuersall, and Catholicke, that is vniuersall Byshop of the Church. And they will deny it. Is it all one to say Tortus is a learned diuine of the schoole of Papia, and a Diuine of the learned schoole of Papia? Nothing lesse. For in that proposition false praise is giuen to Tor∣tus, in this true to Papia. So the Pope is the Catholicke Byshoppe of the Church is one thing, and the Pope is the Byshoppe of the Catholike Church is another. For in that proposition a counterfet title of the Pope, in this the true name of the Church is expressed. But Catho¦licke and Vniuersall are all one. What then? But these propositions be not all one. The Pope of Rome is the Byshoppe of the catholicke Church, i. of the vniuer∣sall, therefore the Byshoppe is vniuersall: no more then these two propositions be all one: The King of Spaine is the Catholike King, therefore the vniuersall King. Or thus. The King of Spaine is the King of the Catho∣licke Church; therfore he is King of the whole Christi∣an
world. For the power ouer all Churches doth no no more belong to the Pope, who is called Catholike, then the power ouer all kingdomes belongeth to the King that is called Catholike. Although this vniuersall Bishop challenge the cheife gouernment, not onely ouer spirituall, but ouer tem∣porall causes also, so that the power ouer all things is in the Pope, the execution of that power is sayd to reside in Emperours and Kings, which he may take from one and giue to another, as to his vassals, at his owne will and pleasure, as Gregrrie the seuenth did. And if hee will to vnite each power, both the Bishoply and Impe∣riall in himselfe by the force and right of his Pope∣dome, as Boniface the eighth did. Whereof the diuine Apostle S. Peter did neither, but being poore and low∣ly, who thought that the care of feeding, not the power of ruling, was granted vnto him: and that not the go∣uernment, but the ministery was committed to him. As Bernard said to Pope Eugenius.Bern. de consid. ad Euge. lib. 2. Gouernment is forbid∣den the Apostles. Therefore darest thou vsurpe, either go∣uerning the Apostle-ship, or being an Apostle, the gouern∣ment? The Apostolike forme is this, gouernment is forbidden, the ministery is enioyned. What then will you say? did he denie, that Eugenius the Pope was the temporall Lord of his prouinces? Not so. But hee an∣swereth, be it that thou challenge them, it must bee by some other claime not by the right of an Apostle,Lib. 5. de Rom. Pont. cap. 20. For Peter could not giue that he had not. Which answer the Cardinall doth well allow. Whereby it appeareth that these two powers by the force and right of the Popedome, ei∣ther can or ought to be confounded in one person:Nich. pa. in epist ad Micha. Imp. As Nicholas the first himselfe taught: when wee come to the truth, speaking of Christ the Sauiour, neither did he of his owne accord, as Emperour take to him the right of the Bishopricke,Lib. 5. de Rom. Pont. cap. 5. or being Bishop, vsurped the name of the Emperour, which place Bellarmine taking vpon him to expound, Nicholas the first, saith hee, doth
directly teach that Christ did distinguish the acts, offices and dignities of the Bishop and the Emperour, lest the Emperour should presume to enter vpon the right of the Bishop, or the Bishop vpon the rights of the Emperour. And yet Bellar∣mine doth maintain that these two powers are confoun∣ded in the Bishop of Rome,Bellarmin con∣tradicteth Christ, the Pope and himselfe. by the power and right of his Bishopricke, which he confessed to be distinguished plainely by Christ and the Pope. What will you doe with this good-fellow, who contradicts both Christ, the Pope and himselfe at his pleasure? But I leaue Bellar∣mine in this point to be fully confuted and confounded by our Counseller Regius. Heere only I make it plaine, that the Pope doth vsurpe temporall dominion ouer the Emperour, which neither Peter nor Christ had,The Pope ac∣counted infe∣riour to the Councell. and either of them condemned in a Bishop. Peter also was inferior to the Councell of Ierusalem,  and the Pope for a long time was accounted,De elect. & ele∣cti potesta. cap. significasti. euen of his owne side, inferiour to the generall Councell. As Panormitane: In matters of faith, the Councell is aboue the Pope, so that hee cannot decree any thing against the deter∣mination of the Councell.Councels de∣posed Popes. Hence it is that the Councell may condemne the Pope for heresie, as the generall Councels of Pisa, Constance and Basill, did displace many Popes out of their Popedomes for heresie, wher∣in it was decreed, that the Councell was aboue the Pope.Concord. lib. 2. cap. 34. Hence Cusan shewing the custome of the Church, writ, that the generall Councell was of the cheifest power in all things, euen aboue the Pope himselfe. I might alleadge many other notable Papists to be of this minde, but I holde it not cessarie in this place: But now the Pope is lifted vp aboue the Councels, and imagineth that the supremacy is cheifely placed in himselfe, that Bishops being cast off, and Emperours cut downe,Is he Peters successor that is nothing like Peter? and Coun∣cels supprest, he may doe what hee please without con∣troulment. And may we thinke him to bee Peters suc∣cessor, that hath nothing in him like Peter? which not∣withstanding Bellarmine takes for granted, when no
thing is so much in controuersie. As hee doth likewise euery where affirme that he is Christ his Vicar, without proofe, when as nothing is so necessarie for the Romish Catholike faith, then that hee should confirme both these out of the Scriptures. The successour of Peter is read in the fathers, the Vicar of Christ is not read. It is not therefore to be beleeued by Catholike faith, but by historicall faith. Of the Vicar of Christ, I shall consider afterward, now in few words of the successour of Peter. Neither will I argue in this place those things which are much controuerted, whether Peter were at Rome: whether hee were euer Bishop, or whether Bishop of Rome: neither if he were, will I dispute the case whe∣ther the personall dignitie of Peter could passe into a successour, which is denied, when it was granted by Christ in respect of his confession which he deliuered, not of the seat which hee possessed. Neither if it were in respect of the seat, when it is reported that Peter had two seates, one at Antioch, the other at Rome, I will not now enquire, why Peters priuiledge should be tied to Rome, rather then to Antioch: Againe, I will not discusse that in this place, which shall be enquired after in more words, in the whole explication of the Popes Creede, whether the Pope haue succeeded Peter in the faith, onely heere I will briefely enquire, whether hee succeeded in the seat, and whether the succession of the Pope, whereon all Popery dependeth, bee a diuine or humane constitution. For if it be a humane constituti∣on, and confirmed only by humane testimonies, sure it cannot be an article of the Catholike faith, as Argen∣tine auerred out of his Doctors. If it be diuine, let them tell vs in what place of Scripture they finde it written, that the Bishop of Rome should succeede Peter; or where Peter ordained the Pope or any other to bee his successour. They answer for the most part, as much as they can, that Christ when hee said, Feede my sheepe,
did vnderstand Peters successour in that place, to whom together with Peter he gaue the cheife and perpetuall iurisdiction ouer the whole flocke. But neither the successour there, nor the Bishop of  Rome is named the successour. Grant that Peter the Apostle was superiour to the rest of the Apostles in this place, doe they thinke that the Bishop of Rome, suc∣cessour to Peter, being dead, was made superiour to all the Apostles being aliue? let them answer, and let the Papists vnloose this knot if they can for their liues. Baronius writeth that Peter died the yeere 69. and Iohn the yeere 101. so 32. yeeres came between the death of Peter and Iohn. Now I demand whether Linus or Clemens succeeded Peter being dead,If any should haue the su∣premacy, it was Iohn that suruiued Peter for thereof there is a great controuer∣sie among them, whether Linus was aboue Iohn, or Iohn aboue Linus? if they say that Linus was aboue Iohn, that is, a Bishop aboue an Apostle, wee will laugh at it: if they denie it, it followeth that either the supremacie died with Peter, or that it came not to Linus the Bishop, but to Iohn the Apostle, as suruiuor. Where is then the succession of the Pope? to resolue this doubt,Caietaen de di. in. instit. Pont. cap. 13. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 12 cer∣taine great Papists doe answer that the succession of the Pope, in so much as Peter was Bishop of Rome, tooke the beginning from the fact of Peter, not from the institution of Christ. Therefore this is matter of fact not of faith. Goe to! and what was Peters fact, they answer, that he appointed his seat Rome, and there ended his life. Caietane doth adde, that the death of Peter did not simply giue the succession of Rome, but that hee there died by the especiall appointment of Christ: which Caietan proued by a certain historie,Peters supre∣macy depends on a reuela∣tion. which shewes that Peter, thinking for feare of persecution to leaue Rome, and being now gone foorth part of the way, Christ met him, to whom Peter sayd, whither goest thou Lord? Christ made him answer, I goe to Rome, that I may be there cruci∣fied:
whereby Peter being admonished, returned, that hee might die at Rome. Therfore the Popes succession dependeth vpon Pe∣ters fact, and hath the beginning from thence, and out of this fact they take all this as granted, that Peter was at Rome, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, that Peter was put to death at Rome, and that by Christ his ap∣pointment. What certainty was in all these, vnles we giue credit to a few humane histories, which are subiect to many humane errours? such as that errour is cheifly, whence notwithstanding Caietane saith, the succession was granted to the Pope,Acta Petr. & Pan. Baron 69. about the returne of Peter by the occasion of the vision. The first founder of the tale was Linus, a foolish counnterfet writer,Loco. Theo. lib. 6. cap. 8. Linus a coun∣terfet writer. as it is obserued by Baronius him∣selfe. But be it a historie; it comes not from the reuela∣tion of the holy Ghost; but from tradition, as Canus telleth vs. Againe, how doth it appeare, that it was the purpose of Christ and Peter, so to confirme the successi∣on by this fact, so that the Church should bee alwayes bound vnder paine of damnation to be beleeue it? for when they say it is of the necessity of saluation to bee subiect to the Romane Bishop, as to Peters successour, and that by the power of that succession, they contend that in all points of faith and saluation hee is set ouer by God himselfe; it had beene meete that the succession of the Pope had beene more cleerely and euidently confirmed vnto vs, then by a blinde and vncertaine vision, the author whereof themselues condemne for a bastard and a foole. Francis, Vict. relect. 2. de po∣testa. Eccles.Besides that, the election of the Pope is an humane ordination: which were absurd, if Christ had appointed the succession proper to Rome, by Peters fact, to alter the forme of the election. Therefore none is bound to beleeue, that this or that pope (imagine Clement the eighth,De here. lib. 2. cap. 9. or Paul the fift) to be Peters true successour, as Alphonsus writeth. So that it is lawfull for any, and at
his pleasure, to cast off the pope, of whose canonicall e∣lection he doubteth. Wherefore seeing the succession of the pope is so vncertaine, he should doe better, if as the Emperour doth not write himselfe Caesars succes∣sour, but Caesar; so the pope would not name himselfe Peters successour, but Peter himselfe, as pope Stephen sometime called himselfe. For we will as easily beleeue that Paul the fift is Peter himselfe, as Peters true suc∣cessour. Now that I may gather all into a short summe, you see most noble Calander, in Saturnine, Bellarmine him∣selfe, polishing and refining certaine olde arguments of his owne side, whereby he doth vnderpropt the supre∣macie staggering, and falling almost to the ground: but in vaine doth the Cardinall hope that such silly sleights can deceiue a learned age, which cozened a rude and ignorant age. For first, he alleadged so many corrupt interpretati∣ons of certaine places, that they may be refuted, not of the ancient and our owne, but of the new, and such as be their owne Doctors. Out of whom, notwithstan∣ding, he bringeth forth certaine figuratiue arguments, which necessarily inferre such foolish and damnable consequences, that the wise seeme to laugh at, and the religious detest. Such an one was that interpretation and argumen∣tation  of Boniface the eighth, out of the first of Genesis. In the beginning, not in the beginnings,Bonif. 8. extra∣uag. Concil. tit. de maior. de chedi. God created heauen and earth, when Boniface vnderstood that the pope was vnderstood by the Beginning. Hence he doth thus argue;Foolish inter∣pretation and worse conse∣quence. The Sunne the Pope, the Moone the Emperour. He therefore that doth not submit himselfe to the Pope, doth deuise two prin∣ciples with the Manichees as Boniface deuised. Such another was that out of the same chapter; God made two great lights in the firmament, when therefore the Pope brought this sense into the text, that by the Sunne the Pope, by the Moone the Emperor was vnderstood;
thence he concludeth, that the Pope was so farre greater than the Emperor, as the Sunne was greater than the Moone. What Mathematicall Archimedes could bet∣ter describe the quantitie of the Sunne and the Moone? Such be the interpretations, and the arguments drawne from thence by Bellarmine. Hee beateth the keyes of the earth out of the keyes of heauen. Hee ga∣thereth the honour of ruling out of the labour of fee∣ding: he vnderstands Peter for the rocke, a metapho∣ricall head, for the visible head of the vniuersall church. And out of these allegoricall expositions,Arist: 1. Me∣taphys. he thinks he can make orderly syllogismes for Peters supremacie. Pythagoras was said so to instruct his schollers in the spe∣culatiue science of numbers, and to haue imprinted such deepe notions into their mindes, that after when they came to the consideration of naturall things, they thought that the works of nature consisted of the prin∣ciples of number: So this Pythagoras hath so deepely wouen his symbolicall diuinitie in the mindes of his auditors, that out of the metaphors of holy scripture, they beleeue that the height of ecclesiasticall Monar∣chie is erected. Whether is hee more craftie that so perswadeth, or he more simple that so beleeueth? nay more then that, this Rom: Aduocate doth endite him as guilty of heresie, that doth not beleeue so. It is well, the plaintife not prouing, as the Lawyers say, he that is ac∣cused is set free. You demand further Calander of the iudgement of the primitiue Church, whereof the most learned Fa∣thers assembled in the first six generall Councells, did not only not acknowledge this supremacie, but stroke it dead with their decrees.The popish levvd dealing. Here the Popes side haue brought in so many voluntarie corruptions, forgeries, impostures, wherewith they might foyste in false Ca∣nons and blot out true, that they who haue dealt so de∣ceitfully, are rightly deemed to haue a bad cause.
Lastly, wee brought into open view, not only the doctrine and practise of Christ and Peter, that the lite∣rall sense hath reproued this supremacie, which the al∣legoricall sense of the Scripture did not proue, and that literall sense is confirmed not only by the testimonie of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of our owne side, but by the testimonie of the very Papists themselues. So that this tower of Babylon being not only bereft of her rotten weake vpholders, but being also thrust at by our strongest engines, that is, by the decrees of the Church, and oracles of scripture, must needs be shaken in peeces and fall to the groud. Therefore the supremacie of Peter that in Bellarmines iudgement is a transcendent thing aboue all, by the censure of the Scripture is nothing at all: and the suc∣cession of the Pope, is not from the institution of Christ, as they say, but from the fact of Peter: and this fact is proued not by any certaine reuelation, but by an vncertaine vision. Behold why the primacie of Bellar∣mine in Tortus did vaunt that this article of the catho∣like faith had a sure ground in the Scriptures. And now marke, Calander, to what passe all Bellar∣mines deuises are brought. The deposing of a King hangeth on the excommunication of the Pope; the power of excommunication is vnited to the supre∣macie, the supremacie hath the beginning from a Primate, but the Primate though hee be narrowly fought for, yet cannot possibly be found in the text. Where is then the supremacie? where is the power of excommunicating Kings? where is the right of depo∣sing them? Truly your Primate hath either a bad title or a bad Patron. But the Patron is said to be very good: therefore the title is very bad. But the Papists will accept any thing at his hands as he hopeth, with whom if hee preuaile in this cause, it is more for the credulitie of the Readers, than the wisdome of the Writer.
Then Regius; The supremacie being ouer-turned, that double power which is so annexed to the supre∣macie must needs be ouer-turned, the spirituall and the temporall. The spirituall, whereby as a Bishop by ex∣communication hee thinks hee may driue from their kingdomes, Kings that are in opposition, whether He∣retikes or Roman-Catholikes: The temporall whe∣ther it be direct or indirect, whereby hee may as the chiefe spirituall Prince take the Crowne from one, and bestow it at his pleasure vpon another. But of the tem∣porall we shall see afterward.Excōmunica∣tion the mo∣ther of rebel∣lion. Now let vs consider of the spirituall. This great Sophister, when the Pope of Rome purposed to shoot his venemous arrow at the head of the Prince, he bent the Popes bowe with this double power, as it were with a double stringe, that if the tem∣porall did faile, the spirituall should hit him home. Which if I should not accompt holy as the desire of gold is holy, I should lye. For this tricke of popish ex∣communication, wherewith he bindeth Kings that they cannot raigne, or absolue subiects that they doe not obey, the world hath felt long since that it is but a di∣uelish arte, as Ʋrshergensis saith, which hath brought in treacherie and rebellion vnder the cloake of faith and religion, dreadfull to Kings, damnable to subiects, to whose bodies it hath brought destruction, and damna∣tion to their soules, as appeareth manifestly by the for∣mer Dialogue. Then Saturnine; We, saith he, for our parts do not greatly care what Heretikes say: what the Church or∣deynes, that we regard; neither are we bound to their conceits, but to hir decrees. And wee retayne the su∣premacie by a double right, by claime, and by posses∣sion. About the claime the Heretikes haue often moued many brawles: from the possession they shall neuer remoue vs. Then Regius you say that you regard the constituti∣ons of the Church, as you call them, I wish rather you
should regard the oracles of Scripture. You say that you hold the supremacie by a double right by clay∣ming and by possessing. The Pope is falne from the right of a great claymer, as Patriott hath plainly won. Now at the last you vrge another right, of a great pos∣sessor: which what is it else than the right of a strong theefe? For what other law belongs to theeues, than to brag that that which they possesse is their owne, how∣soeuer they haue got it? Now seing the supremacie is not grounded vpon Gods institution, but mans ambi∣tion, which you see to be clearely ouerthrowne by the oracles of the scripture, and decrees of the Councells: it followeth now that the serpents head being broken, we breake in peeces likewise the rest of his members. Then Calander, Saturnine seemes to bee driuen to straites, when as being beaten from the right of clay∣ming, he flyeth to possession. That therfore you may haue a breathing time, let vs put of the conference about the other Articles till another day: for now it is more than time that you refresh your minds being tyred with the labor of this discourse.
A Table of the principall matters con∣teyned in this Treatise. A. ABomination of desolation, what is ment thereby 82. 90 Absurdities. 78. 108. 133 An admonition to popish Princes, 156. Adrian against Fredericke choakt with a flye. 253. Agathus obedience to Constantine. 249 The oath of Allegeance and Suprema∣cie confounded. 240 Ambrose did obey Valentinian an Ar∣rian. 248 Alexander the 3. in a Cooks attyre. 374 Alexander and his foure Princes. 99 Alexander trod vpon the Emperors necke. 254 , whereof it is a note. 6. Antichrists type in Daniel, himselfe in Iohn. 2. The reasons. 98. Hee began to worke in Pauls time. 2. He must decay by the preaching of the word, and perish at Christs last comming 793. Epiphanes described in Daniel not An∣tichrist. 3. Hee shall worke wonders. 3. Hee is held for one single man. 5. The reasons. ib: but is a succession. 9. Antichrist hath two hornes like a lambe speaketh like a dragon. 5. 40. Antichrist is Christs Vicar in apparance in truth his aduersarie. 6. Antichrist not a beast of three yeares and a halfes continuance. 8. Heresies makes the great Antich: 8. 28. Antichrist is the Land beast. 9. As many Marij in one Caesar, so many Antichrists in one Antichrist. 11. He is that man of sinne and sonne of perdition. 11. Antichrist in many ages yet but one. 11 The popish description of Antich: 12 a bearer, 39 Antichrist a falling starre, an Apostata, a Renegate from the Lord. 13 He is not a Iew, but an Apostaticall Christian 15. He sitteth in the tem∣ple of God; or against the temple. 17 He doth not openly deny Christ. 19 Antichrist denieth Christs two natures, three offices, and the benefits therof. 20. 21. 26. 27 His kingdome darke and smoakie. 28 He teacheth implicite faith. 28 He taketh away the scriptures, giueth images for bookes. 29. He is the son of the earth. 40. He worketh in the sight of the Sea-beast. 41 The actions of Antichristian Popes. 41 Like to Domitian, Iulian, Dioclesian. 42. His double character. 50 What hindred the reuealing of Anti∣christ. 67. The degrees thereof. 71 All the notes of Antichrist agree to the Pope only, and to no other. 75. 13 Antichrist not borne of a Virgin, not a Diuell, not Nero, not a bastard, not of Dan. 76. He shall sit at Rome. 80 Antichrists temple without a roofe. 8
Antichrist shall fight with three Kings, and vanquish. 95. Hee shall worship the Diuell. 105. Three meanes wher∣by he shall be vanquished. 117 Antichrist increased Satan as well loose as bound. 122. He shall come a litle before the end of the world. 131 His sufferings. 134 How Christ and Antichrist agree. 149 He can neither helpe aliu or dead. 153 He is the eldest sonne of the Diuell. 163 An argument drawne from an Asse to proue the Popes power. 375 Antiochus and Antichrist disagree. 104 yet he is his figure. 105. if Antiochus and Antichrist be the same there fol∣low many absurdities. 84. 104. The Angels powre out their plagues, 134 135. 137. 138. The Angell and the Protestants preach alike. 135 Aquinas, Toletan, and the Laterane Councell answered. 183. 184 Apiatius a wicked Priest. 353 Apostles builders not foundations. 310 rocks in respect of doctrine. 315 An Apostrophe to Kings. 198 Apocalypse a booke full of hidden my∣steries. 3. The rest of the Apostles the same with Peter. 317 Arrius denied Christs diuinitie. 28 The Spanish Armado ouerthrowne 161 What Articles of the faith the Church of Rome maketh. 280 Athanasius Epistle forged. 362 The Assurance of saluation to the faith∣full, and whence. 35 Athalia how deposed. 199. 225 Austin and Maldonate against Bellar∣larmine. 372 B BAbylon, which by their owne con∣fession is Rome. 52 Reasons to shew popish Rome Babylon 53. 60. taken for Babylon in Luthers time. 73. hir behauiour and descrip∣tion. 58. 59. hir whorish qualities. 58 An English Bishop in his coate armour. 374. Baronius and Bellarmine at a iar. 355 Baronius saith Christ gaue all his power to Peter and his successors. 231. Baronius maketh to feed, to kill. 299 Blackwell accounted an Apostata. 229 237. Bellarmines pride in making a Cardinall equall to a King. 296. 168. 337. 373. 378. Bellarmines contradictions. 77. 80. 97. 106. 383. saith the Iewes shall bee converted by Enoch and Elias. 78 his absurdities. 129 Bellarmines sawcines reproued. 303. 336 Bellarmine and Iulian alike. 83. wiser then Christ. 130 Bellarmine and the Pope need not al∣ledge reasons. 339. Bellarmines six tokens of Antichrist cō∣ming; the first, 88. the second, 94. the third, 111. the fourth, 118. the fifth, 127. the sixt, 133. he begs the question, 374. Bellarmine a prophane iester. 132. 118. Bellarmine contrary to Christ. 371. compared to a foolish Poet 108. his dangerous aduerbs. 242. Bellar∣mine Antichrists orator. 103. speakes false Latine. 340. Bellarmine mista∣ken in the daily sacrifice, 126. hee contradicteth scripture, 116. woun∣deth the Popes power, 237. the Popes flatterer. 237 Bellarmine a lyon in a caue. 37. Bellarmine against Cusan. 293 Bellarmines moderate chastisement of Kings, 238 Bellarmines strange interpretation. 341 Bellarmines foolish distinction. 229. Bellarmine is well I thanke you in this world ib: placeth faith in the assent, 33 Bellarmine reiects twelue Fathers. 96 The number of the beast, 51
The second Beast mistaken for the first; 85. The Bohemians victories ouer the Papists fiue times. 161 Boniface got to bee vniuersall Bishop. 249 aboue all bishops 72 The Duke of Burgundie deceiued with bryers and brambles in steed of laun∣ces. 169 The duties of a Bishoppe. 344. not aboue a Prince, 346. great not in respect of his person but doctrine, 346. what he may do. 347 C. CAnons of Neece burnt before they were made. 362 Popish reasons to proue more Canons of Neece than twentie. 360 A Caueat for Kings. 342 A false Canon offred for a true, 353 The Canonists make Popes Lords of the temporalties, 230. Carerius against Bellarmine. 235. Charles 5. surprised Rome, 243. 119 Childerike not deposed by the Pope 259 Christs characters of two sorts. 49 Gue to Caesar the things that are Cae∣sars, 176. 213. Constantinople equll with Rome. 349 The Nicene Councell of 319 Bishops, and when, 346 Constantinople Councell of 150 Bi¦shops, and when. 349 Ephesus Councell of 200 Bishops, and when, ibid: The Chlcedon Councell of 630 Bi∣shops, and when. ibid: Constantinople Councell the second, of 280 Bishops, and when. 351 The Councell of Carthage of 217 Bi∣shops: when. 352. The Creator beng offended, the crea∣tures are offended. 138. foure effects of Christ his doctrine, 23. many types of Christ, 9. some of Christs names not communicable, 314. Christ made of God for man, wis∣dome, iustice, &c. 150. Christ ouer Kings not as Priest but as King. 210. 19. the difference between Christs preist¦ly and Christs ignominious and glo∣rious estate, 153. princely gouern∣ment, 210. Christ would not distri∣bute lands, and doth the Pope thinke he may distribute Crownes? 173 What places of Christendom the Pope hath lost. 63 False Christians receiue not the truth, 78. Christ the head, and how. 307 Christians did not resist, 216 but o∣beyed. A text of Christ blasphemously applied to the Pope. 305 The Clergie exempted from obedience 341. Two Couenants Legall and Euangelicall. 145 The Pope hath brought in a third coue∣nant, ibid. The Couenant between God and the King. 207. 192. Corinths the 14 expounded. 330 As Christ is the Lord of the Church, so the Church is the Lady of all. 231 Canterene and Bellarmine at a art. 291 The office of the Church. 277. Wicked & ridiculous conclusions. 295. 301. 318. 302. The Church compared to heauen. 14. 87. Paul to the Ephesians defines the Church, to Timothie describes it, 279. The enemies of Gods Church ouerthrowne. 161. One copie of Cyprian alleaged against many. 317 Cyuill obedience taken away. 341. D. DAniels litle horne, who it is. 99. What is meant by Daniels 2 feete and 10 toes. 99. 109. Daniels ten hornes, and their names. 3. 99. 106. Daniels prophesie conteyneth 70 yeares excepting Christs resurrection. 4.
The exposition of the 7 of Daniel. 97. Daniel mistaken, 133. The disagre¦ment of Bellarmine and Daniel. 102 Decretall Epistles among the Canoni∣call scriptures. 21 The Dominicans brought in a new Gospell. 23. 146. E. EBerhardus a popish Bishop against the Pope. 263 Ecbertus ruine after rebellion. 252 Ecclesiasticus corrupted. 113. 253. Edward the 3. and Richard the 2. made lawes against the Pope. 265. 266. Elias, Enoch, and Christ, three examples of Gods glory. 115 England not tributarie to the Pope, nei∣ther can be. 242 The fable of Enoch and Elias. 111 The Sea-beast resembles the Romane Empire. 40 The Empire tooke a deadly wound in Augustulus, 43. & new life in Charles the great, 44. It is now but titular, the power is in the Pope. 44. Emperor, protector of the Apostolicall See, 57. the Empire renewed in the West to vphold the Pope. 70. the Rom: Empire not dissolued but diui∣ded, 68. Two degrees of the Em∣pires fal, 71. how & when the Empire was translated from the Greekes to the Germaines. 258. An exhortation to Ministers, 136. to Princes, 152, to come out of Baby∣lon, 141 Excommunication the mother of rebel∣lion. 390 F COrruption of Fathers after their death. 316 To Feede and teach all one. 297. Not to rule. 299. The Colliars Faith. 288. Implicite Faith a blinde Idoll. 287. What ment by Feeding. 290. Saint Fcis ypicall Christ. 146, His conformities brought to light. 24 Fredricke the 2. had good successe a∣gainst the Pope. 254. after murthe¦red. 255. Forgiuenesse of sinnes is free, perfect▪ eternall. 148. How Fire came down from heauen, the three sorts thereof. 47. Forgery re∣iected. 363. A desir that France and Spaine would forsake the Pope. 63 G GArnet and three other Iesuites Au∣thours of the Gunpowder trea∣son. 172. 33. The Germaines condemne Hildebrand. 257. Gregorie the great obeyed Mauritius 248. Alleaged to depose Kings be¦fore they were borne. 259. Gregorie the 3. vaunted himselfe aboue the Emperour, Gregorie the 3. spoiled him. 72. Gregorie the 7. ouerthrew all. 73. stroke fire out of his bosome. 48. Cast out of his popedome, 251. First excom∣municated and cursed Emperors. 251. The name of GOD in Scripture giuen to Angells and Kings. 18. God the obiect of spirituall obedience 340. The enemie of God called Gog & Ma∣gog. 95. 139. Gods help beginnes whenas mans help doth faile. 137. Grosheads definition of heresie. 186. The Gospll hath been preached in all Lands. 88. 91. Hindered by Maho∣met in the East, Antichrist in the west. 93. The Gunpowder treason found out by a letter. 173. H TO make the Pope Head is blasphe∣mie. 321.
Three witnesses of happines. Henry the 4. French King compared to Caesar. 38. Henry the 3. and 4. French Kings mur∣thered. 33. Henry the 2. and King Iohn gaue not their kingdomes to the Pope. 241. Henries treachery against his father. 233 Henry the 4. Emperor slandered by po∣pish writers. 234. Hermannus ruine. 252. Paules not salute an Hereticke how ap∣plied. 187. How Heretickes are to be dealt withall. 188. Seruants and children ought to obey Heretickes. 188. Heretickes not to be saluted. 222. Hildebrands false prayses. 257. Hildebrand no fit example against kings his reuelation. 232. Three condemned and for what. 260. What is meant by the lambes 2. hornes. 6. What is meant by the last houre. 133. I IDolatrie to worship the image for the Creator with the Creator 22. com∣pared to fornication. 22. The Iesuits violence taxed. 198. The practise of Iesuits. 32. 220. 336. The Iesuits doctrine hath troubled the Papists. 170. Rebellion among Iesuites is an article of faith. 171. The false report of Iesuits made Pius the 5. excommunicate Q. Elizab. 169. Iesuits Authours and Actors of rebelli∣on. 171. Iehcida had Gods law and mans law to approue his action. 200. Iehu not the Prophet deposed Ahab. 225. 4. degrees of the Iewes deliuerance. 102. Ierusalem in the Apoc: alwaies taken for the holy ciy. 81 Ierusalem the figure of the Christian Church. 82. The destruction of Ierusalem taken for the end of the world. 88. Ieremy and Paul exhorted to pray for bad Princes. 216. Forged Ignatius brought to crosse Salo∣mon. 178. If any one had the supremacie it was Iohn that suruiued. 385. Ieroboam not deposed by the Priest. 196. His Priests types of poperie. 196. An image is an Idoll when it is worship∣ped. 22. Immortalitie not ouercome by death. 117. A great impossibility foolish interpreta∣tions and worse consequences. 387. Inheritance not loft for leprosie. 197. Ierome misalleaged. 314. A counterfeit Iulius. 364. K KIngs by Papists iudgements may be killed by force or craft. 32. Sau∣cily compared to rammes & wolues 32. 291. Discord of Kings haue encreased the Popes power. 155. Kings dutie. 156. Kingly maiestie and Popelike maiestie cannot agree. 164. The King an humane creature. 178 A King excommunicated no King with Papists. 182. Kings wherin heads of the Church. 199. Kings not immediately from God but from the Church say they. 233 A King not to be resisted with swordes but wordes. 224. A King may aswell depriue a Pope as a Pope a King. 242. No bad King of 33. deposed by a priest 207. Whence Kings haue their gouernment as Papists say Jbid. Kings deposed Priests. 306. What is meant by the keies by binding and loosing, 290. The right inter∣pretation
of the keies. 292. Peters key no greater then the rest. 368. Two keyes of order & iurisdiction. 292. All the Apostles receiued keyes. All fie∣ry tongues. 294. How the Papists may kill a King how not. 300. L the name of the beast. 51. Lambart and Rabirius 2. Popes Legates scoft at. 261. Leo the Pope obeyed the Emperours Theodosius and Martian. 247. Leo the 4. obedient to Kings. 249. Leo the Emperour how deposed by the Pope. 258. The legacies of the sonnes of God are in question. 147. A learner must beleeue and aske. 285. The parts forme and legacies of the new testament. 148. A Leper neuer lost his inheritance. 224. The thundering Legion of the Christi∣ans. 86. Licurgus deuise to make his common∣weale last. 117. The number, diuision, and power of Locusts. 34. The Locusts hurt and afflict men but kill not. 34. Resembled to Horses and why. 36. Their Craft, pride and crueltie. 36. Lombardes foolish interpretation of a place in Iob. 33. Luthar not that falling starre, nor Pro∣testants those Locusts. 37. A counterfeit Lynus. 386 M The Martyrdome of the King and king∣dome. 172. Marcion destroyed Christs humanitie 28. Marcus receiued an Epistle after he was dead. 362. Martials Ca liodore and t Iesuits e Canibas. 54. Martials Cobler. 38. The Masse confirmed by a blacke horse. 48. Gouernment left by Christ not Monar∣chicall but Aristocraticall. 308. Mathew the 24. expounded. The Monkes cloake resembled to cha∣ritie. 319. How Moses, Salomon and Iude vsed Princes. 215. Number doth oppresse the memory waite doth beget knowledge. 289. N Nostorius diuided Christ his natures. 28. O THe Priest to be Obeyed so long as he preserues knowledge. 175. Two foundations of Christian obedi∣ence. 176. A double obedience due to Kings actiue and passiue. 179. Odo brother to W. the Conqueror 174. Primacie of order granted to Rome, of power denied. 367. What 3 things obedience requireth. 180 What obedience is due to Princes. 180. Austius words corrupted. 354. Ozias leprosie no type of excommuni∣cation. 167. P PEter would beare no rule ouer the Clergie. 370. What Peter did to Princes. 213. How Peters next successors vsed Prin∣ces. 214. How Paul vsed Princes. 215. Priests haue bin deposed by Kings 226. How Priests ought to oppose princes 207. Peter infriour to the rest. 368. Peter commanded obedience to Kings, Peter of Rome now otherwise. 177. Paul nothing inferiour to Peter. 369. Councells deposed Popes. 383. Subiect to the Emperour and his Vice¦gerent 72. 242. 2. The Pope a persecutor 118. An hypo¦crite
114. Bisely accompted of. 135. Iniurious to God and man. 147. dan∣gerous to hold peace with. 162. His bull hanged the Iesuits. 169. He for∣biddeth that whih God cōmandeth 174. Power from God not from the Pope or people. 181. His power pretended greater then the former Priests to depose Princes. 192. In∣ferior to the Councell. 383. His practise toward Princes. 244. He had primacie of order. 245. The Popes power pretended from Christs priesthood. 209. His charge to feede sheepe, 209. How he feedeth. 298. His supremacie cause of much mis∣chiefe. 269. He can no way depose Princes. 236. The Popes Creede. 281. Spaine and France haue taken great wrong from Popes. 158. Two meanes how hee ouerthroweth Princes. 230. 253. Popish Writers traduce Princes. 261. Poperie begetteth dangerous effects to Kings and Subiects. 239. God vsed Prophets tongues to reproue Princes not their handes to depose them. 205. Phcas a murtherer, the vniuersall By∣shoppe, and Mahomet of one birth. 71. The difference of gouernment between Byshoppes and Princes. 343. How Christ stood before Pylate. 376. R. REasons not to appeale to Rome, 358. A Recapitulation of the former discourse, 74. 75. Rome spiritually Sodom & Egypt. 81. Two stages erected for crueltie, one at Constantinop: another at Rome 122. Old Rome doteth for age, 286. This Rome not ancient Rome. 316. The Popes of Rome do erre by the Pa∣pists iudgement. 286. How Christ a rocke, 339. How the tē∣porall rule descends vpon the Pope. 372. S. SAmuel did not excommunicate Saul. 194. Places of Scripture obscured by Popish interpretations. 31. No doctrine necessarie, but grounded on Scripture. 28 The office of the Scripture. 278 Scripture alone hurtfull to the Romane Church. 290 An admonition to popish Kings to be∣ware of Sirene and Erinnis. 156. T. Foure Popes acknowledged Theodo∣sius supreme Lord. 246 Tiberius at Rome killed Christ in Ieru∣salem. 80. Christ obeyed Tiberius a Pagan, the Papists will not obey King Iames a Christian. 177. The councell of Trent reiected by their owne side. 287. Bellarmine buildeth his church gouern∣ment vpon Tropes. 302 W. The two witnesses Apoc: 11. not agreed on. 85. The vncerteyne certaintie of the end of the world. 91. Z. ZAcharie supposed to depose Chil∣dericke but did not. 256. FJNIS.
