22820 99843030 7737
A DEFEN∣CE OF THE BLES∣sed masse, and the sacrifice therof, prouynge that it is auayleable both for the quycke and the dead. and that by Christes owne and his apostles ordynaunce, made & set forth by Rycharde smyth doc∣tour in diuinitie, and reader of ye kynges highnes lesson of di∣uinitie, in his maiesties v∣niuersitie of Oxforde. Wherin are dyuers doubtes ope¦ned, as it were by the waye, ouer and aboue the principall, and cheyfe matter. Multo melius est uera rustice, {quam} falsa diserte proferre. It is muche better to bryng forth true thynges rudely, then false thyn∣ges eloquently.Hiero. ad Damasum in exposi. primae uisionis Esaiae.
A DEFEN∣CE OF THE SACRI∣fice of the masse. Made and set furth by mayster Rycharde Smyth doctour in di∣uinite, and reader of the kynges hyghnes lesson of diuinite in his maiesties vni∣uersitie of Ox∣forde. Wherin are diuerse doubtes o∣pened, ouer and aboue the principall matter. Multo melius est uera rustice, {quam} falsa diserte pro∣ferre. Ibero, ad damasum. It is muche better to bring forth true thynges rudely, then false thinges eloquently. 1546
¶ To my mooste gratious soueraigne lorde Henry the eyghte, by the grace of god kynge of England, Fraūce, and Ireland, defēder of the faithe, and of the churche of England and also of Ire∣land, in erth supreme head nexte vnder christ, al helth and felicitie. MOst gracious soueraine lord, hauinge made of late .ii, trea∣tises, the one intituled The assertion, and defence of the sacramente
of the aulter, and the other the defense of the sacrifice of the masse, determynynge with my self accordynge to my moost bounden duetye, to dedycate them both vnto your moost excellent high∣nes, aswel for that your said hyghnes is the mooste wor∣thy defender of christes reli∣gion, as also for the conso∣naunce, and vicinitie of the matter and argument here∣in. I do nowe, according to the sayde determination ex∣hibite, present, and offer this treatise of the sacrifice of the masse vnto your royall ma∣iestie, semblably as already
I haue done the other of the assertion, and defence of the sacrament of thaulter, most humblye besechynge youre highnes gratiouselye to ac∣cepte this my poore doinge, and to fauour it. Youre graces mooste hum∣ble subiecte, chapleyne, be∣dysman, and seruaunt. Rycharde Smythe,
THEOPHILI AD AV∣tolycum, lib. 1. LIngua quidē diserta, & dictio tersa, delectationem & laudē afferunt, nec non plurimum con∣ducunt miseris mortalibus, quorū animus deprauatus est, ad uanam gloriam parandam. Caeterum ue∣ritatis studiosus non animum ad∣ijcit sermonibus corruptis, verum sedulo inquirit quaenam materia, siue quis effectus, aut quodnam o∣pus sit orationis. That is to saye, A wel spoken tongue, & eloquence, do brynge delectation and prayse, they also do moche profytte myse∣rable men (whose mynde is cor∣rupted) to gette vayneglorye. But he that loueth the truthe, set∣tethe not hys mynde to corrupte speaches, or sayenges, but he en∣quyrethe
dylygentlye, what the matter is, eyther what the effecte, or what is the worke of the oratoin. Eme, lege, iudica, Bye, reade, iudge
¶ The autours names out of the whiche this treatice is gathered, and the tyme whan they were that therby men may se that the masse is not set vp of late by the co∣ueteousnes of preistes as some say falsely it is. The greakes. Dionisius Ariopag, anno d. 47 Ignatius Anno. d. 104 Clemens anno. 142 Ireneus anno. 203 Origines, anno. 225 Gregory Nazian. anno. 369 Athanasius anno, 345 Eusebius anno 306 Cyrillus anno 369 Epiphanius anno. 369 Chrisostomus anno 412 Basilius. anno 369 Gregorius Emyss. anno 340 Theophilus, anno 360
Demascenus anno 440 Theodoretus anno 306 Theophilactus   Iulianus episcopus Toletanus 845 The Latyns. Anacletus anno 101 Euaristus anno 110 Alexander. anno 119 Tertulianus anno 203 Arnobius an. 305. Lactātius 305 Cyprianus anno 259 Hylarius anno 345 Ambrosius anno 429 Hieronimus anno 429 Augustinus anno 440 Fulgentius anno 497 Gregorius Magnus anno 609 Beda anno 683 D. Hugo Etherius anno 1160 Rupertus anno. 1123 Innocentius anno 1200 Isodorus anno 630
RICARDVS SMYTHAEVS Candido Lectori. S D. DESVDA Thie libellus, optime le¦ctor, aut solum pe¦nitus rudibus, & indoctis in christi∣ana philosophia, aut certe una cū ijs & illis, qui nō ita multū in illius studio promoue¦rint. Hos enim dūtaxat istac mea Inuenitur omnium pene¦malorum m∣ter esse igno∣rantia D. Cle∣ment. 4. re∣cog. & 5. qualicum{que} opella iuuare studio habui, ne quis horum ab ipsa pie∣tate, quod ad rem, de qua hîc con∣trouertitur, attinet, ignorantia, & inscitia veri aberret, vel male sanis hominum contionibus persuasus, vel librorum, qui haeresibus respar¦gūtur, lectione, vt sic ineptiat, de∣mentatus, et si quis ab huius rei re∣ligione iam desciuerit, is in pro∣cinctu at{que} parato habeat, quo su∣um
agnoscat errorem, agnitum ex osum habeat, respuat, & funem (ut est in paraemia) reducat, quo albo germane christianorum, à quo te∣mere, & impie nomen suum ex∣punxerit, denuo adcenseatur, alio∣qui tan{que} extrema (ut habet vetus dictum) faba disperiturus. Quam vero feliciter in hac re sim versa∣tus, & spartam, quam sum indep∣tus, dextre adornauerim, iudicent eruditi, qui candide & recte de re∣bus diuinis sentiunt, ut quos solos moror, & quorum iudicio, ac calcu¦lo stet velim, aut cadat haec, quam ieci alea. Quod si quis hîc quaerat Britannici sermonis laenocinia, & leporem, spe frustrabitur sua. Dū enim hanc appararem conflictati∣unculam, consultissimum mihi est illico visum, omnia planius, intelli¦gibilius, ac crassiore (ut aiunt) mi∣nerua hominum lectioni credere,
quo ad imperitam multitudinem, quam instituēdam suscepi, maior, vberior, ac luculētior, ex hoc meo labore danaret utilitas, nec esset quod illorū remoraret̄ progressū. Nihil certè pensi habebā, tam etsi viderim ex dictionis ipsius inue∣nustate quibusdam, quibus nihil ni¦si undi{que} tersum ad blandiatur, & arrideat, plurimū fastidij suboritu∣rū & hinc quosdā ab libelli lectiōe, vix iā vno & altero perfecto folio decessuros, meum{que} nomen apud illos, vel hoc nomine obscurius fo¦re, ac nonnihil eleuatum iri meam qualē cum{que} in literis aestimationē. Si quid ita{que}, Christiane lector tibi interim, dum hunc libellum perle∣gis, forte occurret, quod tuo displi¦ceat palato, siue quod id genuinū, & germanum non spiret nostratis eloquij nitorem, quem ipse non ita magni duco, ut ingenue fatear, si∣ue
quod sententia vna, vel altera, seu scripturarum enarratio, seu ar∣gumētorū profligatio, & depulsio, tuo limato excusso{que} iudicio alicu¦bi parum arrideat. Primum cogita¦me, data opera, anglici sermonis cōtempsisse lauticias, quo (ut iam antea commemorauerim) minori negocio a rudibus intelligerer, de inde me hominem esse, & proinde nihil humani (ut comicus ait) à me alienum, falli posse, decipi, & errare, nolle tamen in errore perti∣naciter edurare, sed erratorum à quo{que} commonefactum, incūctan¦ter, ac per{que} libenter consilium in melius commutaturū, & gratiam, vel multo maximam admonitori ex animo habiturum, tantum abest ut cum eo sim quic{que} expostulatu∣rus, seu illi succensurus. Consultū est illud Di. Gregorij Nazianze∣ni. Optabile est nā{que} mihi & prae∣clarum,
us{que} ad ultimam discere se nectutem, quoniam nulla aetas ad perdiscendum sufficere potest. o∣ratione .vii. Postremo hoc tibi, op∣time lector, in mentem subeat, quo¦ties tibi quippiam in hac elucubra¦tione displicet, me occupatissimiī esse, ac tantum non negociorū vn∣dis adobrutum, ut non iam integer (uti par fuit) sed aut prelegēdo, aut de rebus arduis disserendo, delas satus, & propemodum a studendo abhorrēs, nō integros dies, sed vix horas aliquot succisiuas, seu fur∣tiuas, (ut Hieroni. loquitur) vnius tantum mensishoc libello contex∣endo insumpserim. Nec sum om∣nia hic complexus, cādide lector, quae hac de re à uiris doctis prodi¦ta legerim, sed multa de industria, & ueluti destinato, transmisi silen∣tio, ne uolumen iusto maius esset, & ipsius prolixitas lectori, aut pau∣lo
occupatiori, aut nause abundo, cieret nauseam, & fastidium pare∣et. Porro, non sum nescius, lector pie, esse inter nostrates nō paucos uic proninciae obeundae longe magis idoneos, {quam} me esse citra frō is iacturā ipse queam agnoscere, si id oneris, aut subire non recusa∣rent, aut per negotia subire illis li∣ceret. Quod tamen cum a nemine, vel leuiter attactum, ne{que} attenta∣tum, hactenus viderim, malui equi¦dem meam qualem cun{que} in caele∣lestium literarum cognitione esti∣mationem nonnihil perielitari, dū nō ita dextre & feliciter instituto tam sancto coronis, aut manus su∣prema accesserit, quam pati meae¦gentis fidē, iā nōnihil cōcussam, & labefactatam, ullius imposturis, & praestigijs, pessum iri, ac interire, modo per me staret, ne id fieret, effectū dare, & ita quorūdā impij
conatibus obuāire, ne illis quātū libeat, liceat, neue uirus suum pro sua libidine, & improbo studio mortalibus afflent, & eos in suarū haereseon nassā, unde illis nunquā, nisi apprime aegrè, se postea extri∣care liceat, pro suo arbitratu per∣trahant. Hoc si contigisse videro, abūde cōpensatū hūc meū laborē, sat{que} feliciter eum mihi cefsisse ex istimauero, tametsi multorū inte∣rim dentes, plus{que} theoninos, me subinde morsicātes, senserim, quo¦rū uituperium mauelim, {qui} laudem, ut a quibus laudibus tolli, est planè uituperari: pios sane, & eruditos, admodum moror, quos nihil addu¦bito hūc meū conatū, ut sedulū qui¦dē, & a pio profectū aīo, candide Seimus deo de eptum esse quicquid sit {per}¦iribus. D. G. Ni. orat. 7. probaturos, quippe quos nō {pre}terit illud flacci. Est quodam prodire tenus, si nō datur vltra. Nec quod uidua euangelica, quae exile planè, & le¦t
leuidensae (ut est in {pro}uerbio) mu¦us contulerit in corbonam, à chri¦o cordis expensore, adeo non au¦ierit male, ut illo nomine praecla¦o fuerit ornata encomio. Age ta{que} lector, boni cōsulè, quod nūc uulgo. Si enim id feceris, facturū utem non diffido, calcar mihi ad des haud mediocre, ad plura hoc genus aggrediendum, concinnan¦dum, & inuulgandum, ut hinc pij lectores nonnihil referant com∣pendij, & commodi, cum ad alio∣ū, tū ad suā ipsorū constabiliē dā fidem, at{que} ad eos christianae reli∣gioni denuo asciscendos, qui illi ualefecerint, abs{que} ea desciuerint, non tam inconsulte, quam impie. Vale, lector pie, & aut his fruere mecum, (ut habet ille) aut meliora, Horatiu. quod hominis fuerit christiani, im¦parti. Oxoniae Anno ab orbe as∣serto. 1546. Mense Septembri.
¶ Note, good reader, this godly sayenge of saynt Basyll the greate. WHen saint Basyll (as the tri∣pertite riper. Histo. li. 7 Cap. 36. story telleth) was ad¦uertised & moued by a certen offi∣cer of the emperoure Valens, to followe the tyme, and not to suffre so many churches to be piteouslye vexed through a small subtiltie o doctrine, as then it was, and the sayde officer had promised to him the emperours fauour and amitie yf he wolde ceasse, speakynge a∣gaynst heresye then being {con}pronge vp and spred among the people, he made this godly & catholyke aun∣swere. Adolescentibus haec conue∣niunt uerba, illi & illorum similes talia respiciunt. Nā qui diuinis inu¦triti sunt eloquijs, corrūpi de diui∣nis doginatibus, ne unam quidem syllabam patiuntur, sed pro his (s
contingat) etiā omnes mortis spe¦cies amplectuntur. Amicitiam au∣tem imparatoris magnā quidē cū pietate iudico, sine qua pernitiem potius hanc appello. That is to saye in englysh. These wordes are mete for spryngoldes, or yonkers, they and lyke to them do regarde suche. For they, whiche are nouris∣shed vp with or in scripture, do suf¦fer, no not one syllable of goddes doctrines to be corrupted, but if it happē they embrace yea al kindes of deathe. But I do iudge the em∣perours amitie or frendshyppe ve¦rely great, beinge coupled or ioy∣ned with godlynes, withoute the whiche I do call it rather destruc∣tion, then amitee. This was vn∣doubtedly a very godly aunswer, and wonderous semely for a good and a holy bysshop, worthy not to be redde onely of all learned men,
and especially of bysshoppes, but to be also diligently noted, prin∣ted in memory, & folowed of them, that they beynge thereby instruc∣ted do not let for any mans frend∣shyppe or for any benefites offred to them, to stande stoutely, and manly in defense of the true doc∣tryne of Christe and his churche, the foundation and pyller of the truth not sufferinge one ote or sil¦lable thereof to be taken awaye, and abolyshed by the craftie, and deuellisshe persuasions of ill wry∣ters, or teachers, but continuallye by scriptures, the autoritie of chri¦stes churche and stronge reasons defendyng it. For s. Austen saith. Cōtra rationē nemo sobri{us}, cōtra scripturā nemo christianus, contra De rini. 4. ca. 6. ecclesiā nemo pacificus senserit. That is to saye. No sobre, or well aduysed man wyll iudge againste
reasō, no christē man against scrip¦ture, no quyet man againste the churche. Wolde god that all men, and women readyng, or hearynge this notable and catholique sen∣tence, pronounced by the auncient & great clerke saint Austen, wolde receyue it, and in al pointes of our religion folowe it. For then there shold not be among vs christē peo¦ple so many schysmes, and yll opi∣nions agaynst the faythe, as they nowe are, but they shoulde shorte∣ly ceasse, and the true doctryne of CHRIST, and his churche florisheth agayne, whiche is kno∣wen (as Vyncentius Lyrmensis wrytte a thousand yeares synce) by aunciente, generalytie and a∣greynge of the fathers in it I was moued (gentyll reader) to wryte thys catholyque, and godlye sentence of Saynte
Basyll, partely because there lac∣ked matter to fyll the shete of paper in printynge, and partely for that it was verye notable and worthy to be ob∣serued of all learned men. ¶ Hereafter foloweth the preface.
¶ The preface vnto the reader. THE holy prophet Dauyd, good chri¦sten reader, saithe that the truth of our lorde abideth for euer, and ther∣fore Psal. . albeit many and diuers men haue from tyme to tyme, euen frō the begynnynge of the churche, both spoken, & wrytten also bokes againste it, yet they coulde neuer preuayle, but lost their laboures, & got their confusion, and endlesse damnation. Wherfore though the {pro}phet Daniel doth say, Prosterne¦tur Danieis.  veritas in terra. The truth shal be troden vnder the feete on the earth, yet ye is not ment that al the people of god shulde treede it vn∣der their fete, & dispise it, but that
in the tyme of Antichriste, fygured by Antiochus, of whome the pro∣phet sawe a vyon, as in the eyght chapiter of Daniel it apereth: the continuall sacrifice, that is the sa∣crifice of the masse, as I wyll by gods grace hereafter proue, shold be abolished and put away, for the space of thre yeres and the halfe, (how longe Antichrist shal reigne) Daniell in the twelfte chaptre te∣stifienge the same. Of the whiche place, and other mo lyke, written Luther is an¦tichristes mes¦sanger, to make all re∣dye agaynste his cōminge which firste of all men spake agenst the sacrifice of the holye masse. except one Peter de¦bruis. by Daniel, we maye well gather, that Antichristes tyme approcheth and draweth very nie, for as much as Marten Luther, and his folo∣wers, do trauaile so earnestly (but yet all in vayne) to take awaye the holye sacrifice of the blessed masse, whiche all chrysten nations from the fyrst institution thereof, made by chryste oure sauioure at hys
laste supper, euen tyl our tyme, the space of a thousand and fiue hun∣dred yeres, was euer beleued, ac∣cepted, and receaued, for a sacrifice auayleable, and profitable bothe for the quicke and the dead, which thinge shall be openly, and plente∣ousely declared, god wyllyng, here after in this booke, not only by the scripture, but also by general coū¦celles, and the expositions of the el¦dest, and best learned doctours, de∣clarynge the said scripture, so that no man, which listeth not to winke at the lyght of the truth, nor is not maried to his one opinion, shall haue any excuse to laye for his er∣rour, throughe want, and lacke of knowlage of the truth. Therefore reade this booke without al affec∣tion diligētly, not regardyng who made it, nor againste whome it is made, but what matter it doth cō∣teyne,
be it neuer so rudely, & gros∣ly set fourth, for the easyer vnder∣standynge of it. Folowe the wyse mans counsaile, sayeng. Non con¦tradicas Eccle. 4. verbo veritatis. Say not against the worde of truth, for yf thou do, thou shalt laboure all in vaine, and gaine therby the wrath of god, and his indignation, with payne euer to endure, in hell, with the deuyll, which stode not in the truthe, as Christe dothe affirme. Ioā. 8. This saith Paule writyng to the Romaynes after this sort. Iis autē Rom. 2. qui sunt ex cōtentione, & qui non acquiescunt veritati, credunt au∣tem iniquitati, ira & indignatio. To them the wrath, and indigna∣tion of god shall come, whiche are geuen to contention, or strife, and do not quietly obeye the truth, but beleue the wronge or falsitie. Re∣member this our sauiour christes Math. 16
sayeng, What shal it auaile man, if he wynne the whole worlde and thereby lose his soule? What es∣chaunge Mat. 16. shall a man make for his soule? If thou hast therfore erred with Peter, receauynge false doc∣trine, defēding it, and persecuting the teachers, and mayntainers of the truth, be not ashamed to for∣sake thyne errour, and againe to embrace the truth. Paule persecu∣ted the truth, but he forsoke his er∣rour when god called him. Saint Austen erred, but he retourned a∣gayne to the truth, and vnfained∣ly recanted his errour. Thus ma∣ny other haue done, whiche hadde gone from the truth, whan it plea∣sed god of his greate mercy to call them, & to gyue them the spirite of truth, for the exilyng the spirite of errour. I maye well saye to them, that folow Martyn Luthers wic∣ked Luther.
errours, and damnable here∣sies, and namely that, which is a∣gainste the sacrifice of the holye masse (neuer improued before his daies) as saynt Paule saide to the Galathians, greatly wonderinge Gala. 3. at their blyndnes. Quis vos fasci∣nauit non obedire veritati? Who hathe bewytched you not to obeye the truth? As though he had sayd, ye haue had the truth so plainlye, and perfectly taught you, that ex∣cepte ye were witched, ye could not so erre, as ye now do, forsaking the same. If saynt Paule dyd iustlye iudge the Galathians witched, because they had forsakē the truth of the gospell, (which they learned not longe before) throughe the in∣ticement, prouocation, and persua¦sion of false teachers, that then did preache to them, howe moche more iustlye maye a man saye to them
whiche are shamefullye deceaued, and blynded by Martyn Luthers fond, folyshe, and deuellysshe doc∣tryne? Quis vos fascinauit verita∣ti non obedire? Who hath witched yow, not to obeye the truth? hath-Marten luther deceaued, and wit¦ched you? Hath he blynded you, that ye can not se the truth, which heretofore, sence Christes byrth, no man attēpted to do in this matter of the masse? Hath he deceaued you Excepte one Peter de br¦s which was in saynt Ber¦nades time. whiche is the autoure, maintenar, and defender of many, and sondry plaine heresies? Hath he witched you not to obeye the truth, concer∣nynge the sacrifice of the blessed masse, whiche so setteth forth, and auaunceth only fayth, that he stic∣keth Only fyth. not to saye, and defende, that only through faith god forgeueth mannes synnes, nothing helpyng therunto his penaunce, feare, cha∣rite,
praier, forgiuinge his neigh∣bors George Ioyes opi∣nion. trespaces, nor any like thing, yea that only fayth shuld saue mā, though he lyued neuer so yll? And because saint Iames in his epistle doth playnly condemne, & reproue that his deuyllysh opinion, and saynt Ihons Apocalypsis also dis¦proueth the same erroure, he was not ashamed to denye them both, affirmynge that these bookes are not scripture, nor wrytten by Ia∣mes, and Ihon the apostle. Is not this a blynde doctour? Is not he worthye to haue credence geuen to hym, in matters of our faithe, whiche doth not feare to deny the holye scripture, for the maynte∣naunce of a fonde, and a wicked heresye, against the scripture, the hole churche of christendome, and all wryters, that truly write vpon the scripture, euen from christes
tyme, to these our dayes? What man, or woman, is so madde, to be Luther deni∣eth mās fe wyll, whiche dyd Symon Magus (as S. Clement testifiethe) that was the fyist heretik after christe byrth. leue him which denieth the fre wyl of man, and ascribeth both synne and vertue onlye to necessitie, and othinge to man, as Luther doth, sayeng that we can not chose but synne when we do synne, nor chose but we must neades do well, when we do any good dede? Is not this a great blyndnes? What can be more against reason, and goddes holye worde? What doctryne can he more pestilent, and noysome to good lyuyng? For if this doctrine were true, as it is moost false, we shoulde neade no lawe of man, nor of god, no preachyng, no teaching, o good counsaile, nor any sembla¦le, or lyke helpe to lyue the better with all. Martyn Luther also de∣eth Luther say∣eth that god doth gyue no grace by the sacramētes. that god geueth any grace man thorow the blessed sacra∣mentes.
Is not this man worthy to be beleued of vs christē people He teachethe that a christen ma shuld not warre agaynst the Tur¦kes. Is not this holsome doctrine & godlye: yea is it not rather met for a Turke thus to write, then▪ christen man? Beware therefore good christen reader, of his pesti∣lent, and contagious doctrine. Reade not his bookes, nor none o Heresye bo∣kes shold not be redde. his disciples makynge. They a full of poyson, althoughe th seme neuer so good, and frutefull as commōly doth all heresy, at th firste taste and syght. The kynge maiesty, lyke a most christē princ hath put fourth a proclamation o late, straightly chargynge, and cō¦maundinge, that no man, or wo¦man do kepe after the last daye o August next insuinge any boke i Englysh, that conteyneth in it an
yll, and hurtefull doctrine. This godlye commaundemente ought to be obeyed of vs, not only for feare of temporall, and bodilye punishmente, but to eschewe also gods displeasure and wrath, whose ministre he is, and by whome he Prouer.  eygneth, as ye scripture affirmeth. If thou hast ben deceaued by Lu∣ther Ro. 13. this blynde teacher, retourne againe to the truth, with a peny∣tent hart. Folow this holy Tobi∣as Tobie. 14. counsaile. Serue the lorde in dread, and truth. Bye the truthe, & sell it not againe, as Salamon Prouer. 23. doth coūsaile the. Instauntly pray with the holy prophette Dauyd, Psal. 118. saienge. Ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis. Let not o lorde, the worde of the truthe, be taken from my mouth. Abyde in christe by loue and charite, and kepe his commaundemētes, and then thou
shalt knowe the truth (as our saui¦our saith) and the truth shall make Ioā. . the fre, from al errour, ignoraunce synne, and wretchednes, and bring the to the endles ioyes of heauen, the which Christ the truth, dyeng for the truthes sake, bought moste dearly, with the sheddynge of his precious bloude, for his faythfull seruauntes, to whome with his father, and the holy gooste, be glo∣ry and honour for euer. Amen. Take in good worthe this my laboure, gentle reader, thoughe in all poyntes the treatyce shall not lyke the, and no maruayle, for be∣cause it was made in haste within the space of a monethe, whan I myght steale an houre from my o∣ther busines of studye. At London, the yere of our lorde. M. D. xlvi. The xx. day of Iulye.
A certaine lesson, or an instruction to discerne, and to put diffe¦rence betwene a false doctrine and a true. TErtulian, good Tertulia∣nus. 203. reader, an aunci∣ent writer, for he was within .clxxx yeres of Christes byrth, in his boke made of the prescription agaynste heretiques, declaring how we may knowe without al dout what doc∣trine is true, and what is false, and heresie, thus writeth. Christe in a certaine parable sayeth that good Math. 13. seade of corne was firste sowed of the lorde, and afterwarde his ennemye the deuyll sowed cokle, and euyll seade. Ita ex ordine ipso manifestatur, id esse domini∣cum,
& verum, quod sit prius tradi¦tum, id vero extraneum, & falsum quod sit posterius immissum. That is thus muche in englishe. Luthers sede of doctrine a¦gainste the masse is co∣kle and erro∣neous doc∣trine bicause it was so∣wed after the good sede of the truth. It is playne by the ordre of the sowynge of good seade, of good and godlye doctryne, whiche Christe fyrste sowed in the field his churche, and the deuyls after sowynge of yll seade, of false and erroneus doctrine in the same, by heretiques his ministers, yt to be our lordes, and true, which is first taught, and that to be straunge, & false, that was after broughte in. This sentence (saythe Tertulian there) shall abyde and remayne, a∣gaynst other heresies, whiche shall hereafter ryse, to whome no man, that is constante in his faith, and of a good conscience, doth geue, or graunt any thynge to defend that they haue the truth on their syde.
Lo, good reader, here thou hast an euydent lesson, to perceyue, that Martyn Luthers doctryne, which Chrisosto. ho∣milia. 17, in Heb. he dothe mayntaine agaynste the blessed masse, and the holye sacri∣fice therof, the very selfe same of∣ferynge of our sauiours very flesh and bloud, whiche he him self once offered to his father on ye crosse, to pacify his wrath, is very straūge, false, and manifeste heresie, for as moche as it was sowed by the de∣uyll in the church of Christ longe and many yeres, forsoth no fewer than a thousand and fyue hūdred, after that oure sauioure at his maundye, and his holye apostels ad sowen the seade of that godlye doctrine, teachinge the masse to be  sacrifice, profitable both for the quycke and the deade, as I shall roue manifestly, in this boke fo∣owyng. Moreouer the same aun∣cient,
and great clarke Tertulian teacheth vs an other lesson to dis∣cerne n other tue to know he∣resie by from holsom & true doctryne. heresye from true doctrine, sayenge. That heresie by interpre∣tation, or exposition of the greake worde, is that doctrine, whiche a man of him selfe, or of his owne chosinge, doth institute, set forth, or take, and maiteine, being by an other mans choise afore inuented. And therfore the apostle Paule dyd saye that an heretique was cō¦demned euen by his owne iudge∣ment, and conscience, Quia & in quo damnatur, sibi elegit, because i. 3. he hath chosen to hym, that in the whiche he is condemned. This rule also doth sufficientlye proue that Martyn Luthers doc∣trine Luter wa by his owne iudgement and consci∣ence condem¦ned, as al he¦retickes be. againste the sacrifice of the masse, is yll, and yt he was cōdem∣ned euen by his owne iudgement, for as much as he chose this doc∣tryne
of his owne heade, hauynge neither scripture with him but a∣gaynste hym, nor any other good autorytie, to defende that his wic∣ked heresye, as hereafter it shall be opened at large, by goddes grace, to the vtter abolyshynge, and con∣futacion of this leude, fonde, and deuyllyshe opinion. But I wyl let this passe, and sette vpon myne en¦terprise, and purpose. Looke not good reader, to haue this matter garnished & paynted with stran̄ge termes of frenche, or of any other tōgue, wherby y• vnlearned might not vnderstād, wtout great labour & difficultie, where about I shuld goo, nor take but lytle profit by y• teadyng of this boke. The truth, Lactan. lib. 3. Cap. 1. de fal∣sa sapien. as Lactantius dyd writte, twelte hundreth yeres afore this tyme, god wold shuld be of this nature, that it being simple and bare shold
be more estemed and sett by. Quia satis ornata per se est, ideo{que} orna∣mentis extrinsecus additis fucata corrumpitur, because it is of it self garnyshed sufficiently, and there∣fore it is corrupted, being coloured or paynted wt ornamētes outward¦lye added. Also in an other place Lib. 5 de diui∣a iusticia, ca. 1 he saith. Eloquentia seculo seruit, populo se iactare, & in rebus ma∣lis placere gestit. Eloquence ser∣ueth the worlde, it desireth to boste it selfe to the people, and to please in euyll thinges. To be short, the scripture, was written without elo¦quence, and colours of Rhetorike, as Paule saith to the Corinthiās, 1. Cor. 2. lest the conuersion of the world to the faith, by the preachynge of the apostles, and their bookes, shulde be ascribed, and imputed vnto the eloquence of them, and their cleane termes to perswade, yf they had v∣sed
any suche, and therby the ver∣tue why the ri∣pture was writtē with∣out muche e∣loquence. and strenght of Christes holye crosse, and death shulde haue bene of none effecte, nor force, the people beleuyng yt men had ben broughte to Christes fayth throughe the elo¦quence of the prechers, and not by the great vertue, and strengthe of Christes death. Therfore I wolde not, yf I could neuer so wel, paint this my booke with many termes of Rhetoricke, or of anye other straunge speache, wherby the mat¦ter (as I haue saied before) myght be the more obscure, and darke to the reader, which is not of the best learned, especially seinge I ough as well to study for the edifienge of y• symple and the rude, as of the wyse and the cunnyng. But nowe I wyll beginne this matter, and Rom. . proue by good auctorite of ye olde, and newe testament, the doctours
of the churche, and of certayne ge∣neral councelles, that the masse is a sacrifice, auayleable not only for the preist, whiche saith it, but also for the lyuynge, and deade, fyrste declarynge the name of the masse, whereby it shal appere very plain∣ly, that it is a sacrifice, or els the a∣postles wolde not haue gyuen to it y• name, whiche in Hebrue dothe signifie a sacrifice, and an oblaciō. The name of the masse sheweth, that it is a sacrifice. THe masse, good reader, hathe that name, and is so called, by reason it is a sacrifice, for in the Hebrewe tongue missah is named that whiche the grekes do call li∣turgiam, the latins oblationem, & we ī englysh, a sacrifice. For where¦in the boke of Moses called Deu∣teronomium Doue. 1. the .xvi. chaptre we reade in the hebrew missach, & in
the latyn, oblatio, the english hath an oblation, or els a sacrifice, so yt euen therof we may wel se, and per¦ceaue, that the holye masse hathe that name, because it is a sacrifice, which vndoutedly the apostles of our sauyour Christe Iesu, dydde first so cal, vnderstandyng by these wordes, Hoc facite in meā cōme∣morationem, Luc. 22. Do ye this for my re¦mēbrance, that Christ gaue thē au¦torite to make sacrifice of his very true & naturall flesh and bloud at their masses, which thynge he hym self had thē before done, at his last supper, as it shall manyfestlye be proued, by goddes grace, hereaf∣ter in this booke. Peter the apo∣stle sayd the fyrst masse of al at An¦tiochia, whiche ordeyned a greatte part of the ceremonies nowe vsed in the masse, and also instituted the selfe same ordre of prayers, with
which the priest doth cōsecrate the ve¦ry flesh & bloud of christ at his masse, as we rede in diuers wel lerned mens Rmigius d officio . Hugo  sodo∣ lib. de ofics. Cap. 15. bokes. Ihon Wiclep he was therfore iustly cōdēned in the general coūcell, holden at Cōstātia, because he sayd yt the masse was not instituted, & ordei∣ned by Christ, but inuented onely by man: of y• which more largely hereaf∣ter I wyll entreat by ye helpe of god. But let vs se what is a sacrifice, and what y• scripture saith of ye sacrifice of ye masse. S. Austen, good reader, in ye x. boke de ciui. de, & the .vi. cha. thus describeth a sacrifice. A very sacrifice what is sacrifice. is euery worke, whiche is done, yt we myght cleaue vnto god wt a holy fe∣lowship, referred to ye ende of good∣nes, wherby we may be truly, happy, or blessed. Moreouer sacrificare in latin is to make sacrifice, & a priest in latin is called sacrificus, because he maketh sa¦crifice by his priesthod, & orders, whi∣che is his cheif, & principal office, as it appe∣reth
in s. Paules epistle y• .v. cha. to ye Heb. 5. Hebr. ye which I wyl declare also her∣after. Daniel ye {pro}phet made mentiō, good reder, in ye xii. chap. of this sa∣crifice saieng. Impie agēt impij, ne{que} intelligēt oēs impij, porro docti ītel∣ligēt, & a tēpore cū ablatū fuerit iuge Luther. Bully, bu¦cer Mesā Regiuo. &c. are of that nom∣ber. sacrificiū, & posita fuerit abominatio in desolationē dies mille, ducēti no∣naginta. Vngracious or vngodly mē shal do vngraciously, or vngodly, & the vngraciouse or vngodly shal not vnderstād, but ye lerned mē shal vnder¦stād, & frō the time, whē the cōtinual sacrifice is takē away, & abominatiō put in to desolation, yt is to wytte, An¦tichrist destroyed, a M. dayes .ii. C. & xc. The which do make .iii. yeres and ye halfe, by which space antichrist shal reigne, & persecute christē people, af∣ter he hath caused masses to ceasse, & taken away the sacrifice of them. Thus we se that the prophete dyd prophecy yt a cōtinuing or continuall
sacrifice should be destroyed or ta∣ken awaye, in the tyme of cursed antichriste, for of him the prophete dyd there speake, as the text it selfe doth shewe, whiche Chryst dyd al∣lege, entreatyng of Antichriste, as Matthewe writeth the xxiiii. chap∣ter, but this continual sacrifice cā be none other but the sacrifice of the masse. Fyrst bicause y• prophet speaketh of that one sacrifice, whi∣che shulde ceasse the space onlye of thre yeres, and the halfe, but the Iewes sacrifices were many, and This pro∣phise cā not be vnderstād of the sacri∣fice of pray∣er, geuinge thankes nor lyke other spir. sacryfy∣ces, for the godlye, shall vse those thē mooste of all beyng a time of persecutiō are abolished for euer. Secondlye because they haue ben taken away these M.cccc. yeres, and yet anty∣christ is not come, therfore by this continuall sacrifice was mente the sacrifice of the blessed masse, which antychrist, labouringe all that he can to destroye christes fayth, and his whole religion, shall abolisshe
and cause to ceasse for three yeres space, and the halfe, for so longe by Daniels, & saint Ihons sayenge, he shall reigne, wherfore Martyn Luther, and his scolers, endeuou∣rynge them selues to take awaye this holy sacrifice of the masse, are the messangers of Antichryst, ma∣kyng redy and preparyng against his commynge, that people may re¦ceyue, and honoure him for the ve∣rytue messyas, and sauyour of the worlde, Christe our sauyour reiec∣ted, and vtterly forsakē, as he him selfe dyd prophicye, sayenge to the Iewes. I came in the name of my Ioā. 5. father, and ye dyd not receaue me, an other shall come in his owne name, ye wyll receaue hym. But I wyll passe ouer this, and goo for∣ward vpon my purpose, to proue that the masse is a very sacrifice, and fyrst by fygures of the olde te¦stament.
We rede in the, xiiii. chap. of ye Gene. that Melchizedech, wh¦che was both a king & also a preist Of Melchi¦sedech. dyd offre in sacrifice breade and wine, when Abraham was retour∣ned frō the kyllyng of .iiii. kinges, for these be the wordes of y• letter. At vero Melchizedec rexsalē, pro¦ferēs panē & vinū (erat enim sacer¦dos Gene. 1. dei altissimi) benedixit ei. &c But verely Melchizedec kynge of Salē, bringinge forth or offering bread & wine (for he was a preist of god y• higheste) blessed Abraham. This text doth proue sufficiētly ye Melchizedec did offre to god bread & wine in sacrifice, to thanke hym for y• victory geuē to Abrahā, and therfore it must nedes thervpon fo¦low, yt christ did make sacrifice vn∣der y• forme of bread & wine, at his last supper, instituting ye masse, for as moch as Melchizedec was a fy¦gure
of him, & his preisthode like∣wise a figure of christes preisthode according to ye prophecy of Dauid n ye Psalme, which is. Tues sacer¦dos Psal. 109. in aeternū secūdū ordinē Mel¦chizedec, Thou art (said god ye fa¦ther to christ his son) a preist for e∣uer, after ye ordre of Melchizedec. No mā cā truely say, yt christ was a preest after this ordre of Melchiz, whē he offred vp him selfe on the crosse to his father for our sinnes, for thē he did not offre his body vn¦der ye forme of bread & wine, but vn¦der ye forme of flesh, & bloud, & ther¦fore he was that time, so offring sa¦critice, a priest after ye ordre of Aa∣rō, & not of Melchiz. so yt this fy∣gure of Melchiz. and the prophicy of the holy ghoste pronounced by Dauid, were fulfylled by christ at his mandy, & last supper, when he toke breade, gaue thankes to god, blessed y• bread, brake it, & gaue it
to his apostles saieng. Take, eate, this is my bodye, whiche shall be gyuen, to death for you, and ther∣fore Christ dyd then offer hys flesh and bloude in sacrifice to god his father, and the same also doeth the priest in the masse, hauyng autori∣te so to do, & cōmaunded of hym to do that same thynge, whych he dyd afore, when he said to his apostles Hoc faicte in mei commemorati∣onem. Luc. 22. Do ye this for my remem∣braunce, as Luke maketh mentiō in his gospell. But nowe let vs se what they saye, whiche are of the contrarye opinion, that the masse is no sacrifice, to proue that this autoritie of the Genesis, makethe not for vs, to perswade that Mel∣chiz. dyd at that tyme offre to god breade and wyne in sacrifice. Fyrst they say that the texte of the Gene∣sis An obiecti. hath not offerēs, vel sacrificās
panem & vinum, offerynge, or sa∣crifisynge breade and wyne, but proferens, bryngyng forth bread and wyne, and therfore this place proueth not that Melehiz. dydde make then sacryfyce to god. To that I aunswere that the texte in dede hath euen so, as they say, and yet it proueth right well, and suffi∣ciently that Melchiz. dyd then of∣fre sacrifice to god, with breade & wyne, or els why shoulde Moyses haue added a sentence declarynge that Melchiz, dyd that thynge as a prieste, and because he was a priest. For if he had not offred that bread and wine to god in sacrifice, there shulde haue ben no cause, to say. Erat enim sacerdos dei altissi∣mi, for he was a priest of the high∣est god, because he myghte haue done it then beynge no preest. For it is not the office of a prieste to
bryuge forth breadde and wyne to refresshe the hungrye people, but rather of a laye man, as no man can saye naye, and therfore syth Melchizedec dyd this as a preest, and exercising y• office of a preist, the whiche is cheifely to offre sacri¦fices for the synnes of the people, as Paule saith, it foloweth that  Melchizedech did make thē sacri∣fice, wyth bread and wyne. Moreo¦uer this argument is very weake and sclender, the texte of the Gene∣sis saith that Melchizedec dydde brynge forthe breade and wyne, therfore he dyd not offre them in sa¦crifice, for as these two, to brynge forth breade and wine, and to offre them are not cōtrary euen so Mel∣chizeder dyd bryng forth those thin¦ges not to feade Abrahā, and his souldiers, as anone it shal appere but to offre them vnto god in sa∣crifice,
to giue him thankes for the greate victorye by hym geuen to Abraham. Now where many men, folowing therein the Iewes, as it appereth in Lire vpon the Gene∣sis, do affyrme that Melchizedech Lir dyd not ofre bread and wine in sa¦crifice to god, but onlye broughte thē forth to refresh Abrahā, & his souldiers, they are very blīd so to say. For they neaded not his bread nor wine, hauing sufficiēt vittals brought wt thē there hence, where they got ye victory, as it appereth in y• letter. Also is it like yt Melch. had bread & wyne ynough in store, to refresh so many souldiers being in nūber aboue .iii. c.? Beside this who yt wise is wold say ye Abrahā, if he had had any such nede, wolde not haue gon rather to some other man for succoure, then to the priest of the hyghest god? Abrahā also
gaue to Melchyzedech tythes of y• spoyles gottē in warre, as Paul wytnesseth, whiche he wolde not Heb. 7. haue done yf he had wanted neces∣saries for him and his souldyers. Finally Abrahā brought with him all Lothes goodes besides the sub¦staunce of the foure kynges, whi∣che he had sleane before, and there∣fore he neaded not to begge breade and wyne of goddes preeste Mel∣chizedech. But ye wyll saye to me, the text An obiectiō hath not in Hebrewe a worde de∣claringe a cause, for the Hebrewe worde signifieth only in englyshe (and) and therfore that texte ma∣keth not sufficiently to proue that Melchy. dyd offre that breade and wyne in sacrifice. To that I make The āswer. aunswere, fyrst that saint Hierom, whiche was excellently learned in he Hebrue tonge, dydde so trans∣late
the Hebrewe worde, to whom more credence ought to be geuen, then to twenty Luthers, Bucers, Byllygers, or any like, which nei∣ther for learnynge nor holynes of lyuynge are worthy to be cōpared with hym, as all good Chrysten men wil graunt. Secondly I say that this latyn worde Et, whiche is in englysh (and) is many times vsed in scripture, for enim sygni∣fienge in englyshe (for) as in Esai Esai. 65. the prophette, sayenge. Lo thou art angrye with vs, and we haue synned, where (and) is put in stede Psal. 59. of this worde for. Also in the psal∣tre it is thus written. Lorde geue to vs helpe, and the health of mā is vaine. Here also, and, is put for this worde for. Lykewise in the newe testamente that worde is v∣sed as in Luke the fyrste chapter, where the most blessed, and hono∣rable
vyrgyn our lady, mother of christ, was thus sayd vnto, by Eli¦zabeth Zacharias wife. Benedicta¦tu in mulieribus, & benedictus fructus ventris tui. Thou art bles∣sed Luc. 1. among women, and blessed is the fruyt of thy wombe, where (&) is put for (enim) declaring y• cause why our lady was blessed, whiche was because she broughte forthe our sauyour most blessed of al, by whose death al the faythfull, ly∣uyng godly shuld be saued, & bles¦sed in heuen, accordyng to the pro¦mysse of God, made vnto Abrahā as the Genesis doth playnly tell. Manye other textes of scripture Gene. 15. 22. manyfestly do shewe that it is no seldome thing ye (&) shuld be vsed in stede of (enim) which I wyl not reherse at this tyme, least I shuld be tedious to the reader, especy∣allye syth these places alredy re∣cyted,
are sufficiente to proue my purpose, yt which is approued by many doctours expositiōs not on¦ly of Hebrues, but of the grekes & the Ltayns also: for amongest the Hebrew writers, one called Rabbi semuel expoundynge this texte of Rabbi semuel ye Genesis, entreatyng of Melchi. thus writeth. Hic Melchi. myste∣ria sacerdotij, tradidit. Erat enim ipse sacrificans panē & vinū deo sancto, & benedicto, that is to wit This Melch. taught, or deliuered misteries, or thinges secret in wor¦des & ceremonies, of preisthod. For he was doing sacrifice wt bread & wine to god holy, & blessed. Here we se yt this great clerke being an Hebr. writer, & an Hebr. borne did vnderstand this afore sayde texte of Melchizedeches oblatyon, or sacryfyce. Nowe oughte not more credence to be geuen vnto hym
in this poynt specially, than to a∣ny man of this our tyme laboring to teache an heresy by wrestynge of this place from his right sense? Also an other of the Hebrewe doc∣tours Rabbi pinhas called Rabbi Pinhas, con∣firmeth playnly this matter say∣enge, In the tyme of messias, or y• Gene. 14. Psal. 109. anoynted (meanyng our sauiour) all sacrifices shal seace, but the sa¦crifice of breade and wyne shall neuer cease. Forthwith he alegeth this texte of the Genesis and the verse of Dauydes Psalter, wher∣in mention is made of Christes presthode. This might be proued by the saienges of many other He¦brewe doctours, but I wyll lette them passe to be short, and reherse some of y• greke wryters to proue Eusebius lib. 5 cap. 3. De cuā¦ge. demonstra this my purpuse. Eusebius whi∣che was aboue twelfe hundred yeres passed, thus writeth of this
matter speakynge of the prophe∣tes saienge. Tues sacerdos. &c. Psal. 109. Thou art a preist after the order of Melchizedec, for euer. The end (sayth Eusebi.) of the prophesy is wonderfull to hym, whiche dothe beholde after what maner our sa∣uiour Iesus, whiche is the anoin∣ted of god, dothe accomplyshe by his ministers after the ordre of Melchizedec, those thinges, that appertayne, to the vsyng, or exer∣cysynge of priesthod among men. For lyke as he, which was a preist of the gentiles, doth appere in no place to haue vsed corporall sacri∣fices, as Aaron dyd with beastes, but only with breade and wyne, when he blessed Abraham, so true¦lye fyrst the sauyour and our lord, afterwarde the preistes whiche were instituted by hym, exercising the spirituall office of preisthode,
among all people after the lawes, or ordinaunces of the churche, do present, shew, or bryng in presence wyth bread and wyne the misteri∣es, or secrete thinges both of hys bodye, and also of his holsome bloude. The which mysteries ve∣rely Melchizedec so longe before dyd know through the holy gost, and dyd vse the ymagies, or figu∣res of thynges to come. Hetherto Eusebius, euydently saynge that Melchyzedech fygured Christe, and offered sacrifice with breade and wyne, for a fygure of Chri∣stes sacryfyce, whyche he shoulde offre vnder the fourme of breade and wyne, (& euen so he dydde) sa∣crifisynge to his father, hys ve∣ry fleshe and bloude, as the prei∣stes nowe do instituted, and made by hym, and his auctorytie. whō restes are ordeined by chryste. wyll not rather beleue this holye
father, and aunciente clerke, then Martyn Luther, whyche labou∣reth dylygentlye to abolyshe all holy and godly sacramentes▪ But nowe let Chrisostom speake hys Chrysostome. mynde in this controuersy, which for his aūcienty beyng before our tyme .xii. c. yeres, and for his lear∣nyng ought to be admitted amōg good christen men to the decysing In Hebr. Ca. 5 of cōtrouersyes risen in their reli∣giō, which thus wryteth. To whō was it said, yu art a preist for euer, after the ordre of Melchiz.? who is a preist after the order of Mel∣chizedec? None other but christ, for all other were vnder ye law, al dyd kepe ye sabboth dayes, al were cyr∣cūcised, ye Iewes could fynd none other but Christe, that shulde be a preiste after the ordre of Melchi∣zedech. But thou wylt say to me ye An obiectiō text hath not offerens offring, but
proferens bryngynge forth, It is very true, but yet the greke word, that the .lxxii. translatours, whi∣che turned the Hebrewe letter in to greake, do vse in this place,  a. proferre, pro offerre. whiche is prospherin signifiethe not only to brynge forth, but also to offer sacrifice, as it appereth in many places of the newe testamēt in greake, but specially the fyfthe Cap. 7. &. 9. of Matthewe. Si obtuleris. &c. The fifth of Paule to the Hebre. and in other certayne places of that epistle, and therfore this ob∣iection is of no force, nor strength but it maketh rather for my pur∣pose: Lib. 3. To: . Haeresi. 9. Epiphanius moreouer a greake doctoure beynge aboute twelfe hundred yeres passed, con∣fyrmeth this playnly, sayenge. Abraham iustus sacrificat deo, & Melchizedec sacerdos dei altissi∣mi, Abraham rightuous doth sa∣crifice
to god, and Melchizedech ye prest of ye highest god. Also thus he saith speakyng of the same mat¦ter. Melchizedec Abrahamo ob∣iam Lib. 2. To. 1. Haeresi. 55. venit, et proposuit ipsi panē & vinum, mysteriorum aenigmata praefigurans, & exemplaria, cum dominus noster dicat. Egosum pa¦nis viuus, & exēplar sanguinis ip∣sius, qui ex latere ipsius compun∣cto Io. 6. fluxit, ad purgationem inqui∣natorū, & respersionē, ac salutem animarum nostrarum. That is, Melchizedec met Abraham, and sette out, or shewed to hym breade and wine, before fyguryng darke thinge and samples of misteries or secrete thynges, forasmoche as our lorde sayeth. I am the quyck bread, and a sample of that bloud whiche dyd runne out of his syde pricked, to the purgynge of the de¦fyled, and sprinklyng, and health
of our soules here we se that after this aūcient writers mind, y• bread & wine which Melchiz. shewed to Abrahā, figured our sauiour chri∣stes flesh & blod, which ran out of his syde strykē, yt he offered to his father, vnder the fourme of bred & wine, at his last supper, & not v∣pon the crosse, for there he offered himself to his father vnder and in his owne propre forme, after ye or∣dre of Aaron onely. Damascene also a greke doctour, whiche was aboue a thousand yeres afore our time, confirmeth playnly this our Lib. 4▪ ca. 14. purpose, entreatynge of Melchi∣zedeches sacrifice offred to god in bread & wyne, when thus he sayth Haec mensa, hanc mysticam praefi¦guruit mensam, velut & sacerdos Gene. 14. ille christi veri sacerdotis figuram Psal. 10. praeseferebat, et imaginē. Tues enim (inquit) sacerdos in aeternū
secundum ordinem Melchizedec That is, This table of Melch. fi∣gured before this mistical table of Christe, like as this preiste Mel∣chyzedec dyd beare the figure and image of christ the very preist. For the holy goost saith by Dauyd y• prophet, rehersing god ye fathers wordes to christ his sonne. Thou art a preist for euer after the ordre of Melchize. Is not this plainly spoken of this old writer & great clarke? Is it not mete to beleue him rather thē Martin Luther, or any of his disciples, nothinge so well learned as he was, nor so ver¦tuouse in liuyng? But to be short, I wil allege now Theophilactus Theophila. wordes, whiche was also a greke doctour, & then go to y• rehersal of In Heb. 5. latin doctours. He saith after this maner. But whom can the Iewes bryng besyde christ, which may, or
shoulde be a byshoppe, or a preiste after the order of Melchizedec? were not all other preistes vnder the lawe? dyd not they all obserue the sabboth dayes, and offre sacri¦fices? Therfore it is most euident that it was spoken of Chryst, for he, and onlye he, dyd make sacry∣fice with bread and wine, after the maner of that Melchizedec. Anon after he asketh howe Christe is a preist for euer. To that he maketh this aunswere, that he is called a preist for euer, not only because he doth alway pray for vs to his fa∣ther, shewing to hym his bodye, whiche he offered vp for ye synnes of the world vnto his father vpō the crosse, to obteyne mercye for vs, sayenge, o father haue mercye on them, for whom I haue suffe∣red death, but he is also a preiste for euer because he is offered day∣lye,
or els because an oblation, or sacrifice is continuallye offered by goddes mynisters the preistes, which hath in it Christ our lorde, byshoppe, and sacrifice, that for our sake doth sanctifie, halowe, or make holy him selfe, breake, and geue: this he. Hitherto I haue al∣leged the Hebrewe & the Greake wryters to proue that Melchyze∣dec dyd offre breade and wyne in sacrifice to god, in fygure of oure sauiour christes sacrifice, whiche he sholde then offre, and now hath in dede offered to his father at his maundy, verely none other thing, then his owne naturall and lyue∣ly bodye, flesh and bloude vnder the fourme of breade and wyne. Nowe let vs see what the latyn Latyn au∣tours tou∣chynge this matter. doctours say in the same matter, but yet not al, whiche I haue red, entreatynge of it, but certayne of
the eldest & best lerned only, as S. Austen, Hierom, Ambrose, Lactāt. Arnobius, & the holy martir Cy∣priane, S. Austen. the yere of our lorde .cccc. Of ye which S. Austē thus sayth vpon the .xxxiii. Psalme of Dauyd. Melchize. was in Abra∣hās time. Of what other saith god ye father. Thou art a preist for e∣uer, Psal. 0. after the ordre of Melch. but of him, whose sacrifice ye knowe? The sacrafice of Aarō is taken a∣way, & a sacrifice after ye order of Melchi. is begon. Also in another place he saith, Melch. did know to To. 2. ePist. 95 figure ye eternal preisthod of oure lorde, wt a sacrament, or a holye signe of oure lordes table, shewed To. 5. de ciui dei. lib. 16: ca. 22. forth. Againe he saith speaking of Melchi. & his sacrifice. Ibi quippe primū apparuit sacrificiū, q nūc a christianis offertur deo toto or∣be terrarū, impletur{que} illud, quod lōge post hoc factū, per prophetā
dicitur ad christū qui fuerat ventu¦rus in carnē. Tues sacerdos secū∣dū ordinē Melch. inaeternū. Nō sci¦licet secūdū ordinē Aaron, qui or∣do fuerat auferēdus, illucescētib{us} rebus, quae illis vmbris praenotabā¦tur. That is to say in englyshe. Surely there fyrst did appere ye sa¦crifice, which now is offred of chri¦stē people to god through all the world, & ye is fulfilled, which longe after this dede of Melch. is saide by ye {pro}phet Dauid to christ ye shuld come to be made man. Thou art a preiste for euer after the ordre of Melch. As who saith, not after ye ordre of Aarō, which ordre shold be takē away, ye thinges being clere, or manifest, which were before no∣ted or figured wt those shadowes. Hitherto S. austen, which was a∣boue eleuen. C. yeres past, and of suche cunnynge, and learnynge
in holy scripture, beside manye o∣ther thinges, as neuer was anye sence the holy apostles tyme, ther¦fore syth he dothe so playnlye ap∣proue this matter of the sacrifice of the masse, as we haue alredye shewed, & wyll do hereafter more at large, god wyllynge, is not he a very madde man, that wyll ra∣ther beleue Martyn Luther than this auncient father, and godlye wryter? But now to go forwarde on this purpose, I wyll brynge in saynt Hieroms mynd in this mat¦ter, whiche thus sayeth therin. Melchizedec pane & vino, sim∣plici, Hierom ad ∣ugrium. puro{que} sacrificio, Christi de∣dicauit sacramentum. That is, Melchizedec with bread and wine a symple and a pure sacrifice, dyd dedicate christes sacramēt. Again vpō the sautre Quo modo Mel∣chize. rex salem obtulit panem &
vinum, sic et tu offeres corpus tu∣um & sanguinem, verum panem & vinum. ste Melchizedec, ista mysteria, quae habemus, nobis de∣dit. Ipse est qui dixit. Qui mandu cauerit ex hoc pane viuet in aeter∣num. Ioh. . Secundum ordinem Melchi¦zedec tradidit nobis sacramenū suum. In what maner Melchize∣dec kynge of Salem hath offered bread and wyne, euen so thou also shalt offre thy bodye, and bloude, very breade, and very wine. This Melchi. gaue to vs these misteri∣es, whych we haue. He it is, which Iohan . said. He ye shal eate of this bread, shal liue euer. He hath delyuered to vs his sacramēt, after the ordre of Melchyze. Are not these plaine wordes of this aūcient, & excellent clerke Hierom, & sufficient to stop all their mouthes, that bable, and barke agaynst the holye sacrifice
of ye masse, whych euer synce chri∣stes time was had in honoure tyll Marten Luther began to write a∣gainst it? But yet ons more let ho¦ly Hierom say his mynde, in this cōtrouersi, to ye vtter cōfutatiō, of Hierom in Mat. 26. ye masses (ye of christes, which dyd institute it) aduersaries. Thus he writeth, after he had rehersed oure sauiours wordes spokē at his last supper, when he did institute this blessed masse, & the sacrifice of it. After ye pasouer, which was a fy∣gure, was fulfilled, & christ had ea¦tē ye flesh of a lābe, wt his apostles, he taketh bread which comforteth mās hart, he passeth ouer to y• very sacramēt of easter, or y• pasouer, y• like as Melch. ye preist of ye highest god, in a figure afore of him had done, offring bread & wine, he also shold bring in presēce or lay before mē, the truth of his body & bloud.
Who cā desire more plaine words thā these are of s, Hierom, to proue yt Melch. offered bread & wine in sacrifice to god as a figure of chri¦stes sacrifice instituted of him vn¦der ye forme of bread & wine at his maūdy. S Ambrose in like maner Ambrosius lib 4. de sacram¦tis. cōfirmeth this veritie saieng. Oc∣currit Melch. sacerdos Abrahae, & obrulit ei panē & vinsi. Melchi. a preist met Abrahā & offred to hym bread and wine. Also in an other Lib, 1. de A∣braham patri∣arch. Ca. 3. place thus he saith intreatinge of Melch. Who is king of rightous∣nes ye priest of god? but he to whōe it is saide. Thou art a preist, for e∣uer after ye ordre of Melchi? Hoc est, dei filius, sacerdos patris  sui corporis sacrificio, patrē nr̄isre {pro}pi¦tiauit delictis? y• is, y• son̄e of god, y• preist of ye father, which wt y• sacri∣fice of his body hath appesed or made merciful y• father to our liūs These words do plainly declare ye
saynt Ambrose beleued that christ dyd offre his owne body to his fa¦ther, after the order of Melchize. to appease his wrath, whiche can not be vnderstand of the sacrifice made vpō the crosse, because there he was not a preist, or he dyd not offre sacrifice there, after ye ordre of Melchizedec vnder the kyndes of breade and wyne, but after the maner, & ordre of Aaron offeringe his bodye, and bloude vnder, or in his owne fourme visible. This also is approued by an olde doc∣tour Lactantius lib. 4. cap. 14 de uera sap. Psal. 109. named Arnobius, writynge vpon the sawtre, whiche sayethe. Hic per mysterium panis & vini sacerdos factus est in eternum se∣cundū ordinē Melchizedec, qui panem solus obtulit, & vinum in sacerdotibus. This (meanynge Christ of whom ye prophet spake) by reason of the mysterie of bread
and wyne, was made a preiste for∣euer after the ordre of Melchize. the whiche only amonge preistes offred bread and wyne. This was written aboue twelue hundred, & fortye yeres passed, manyfestlye affirmynge that christe by reason of the mystery or the secrete thing, that is the sacrament, of breade & wyne, was made a preist for euer, after the ordre of Melchizedec: whiche he coulde not be, except he had offered his owne bodye and bloude in sacrifice to his father at his maundye vnder fourme of breade and wyne, as I haue decla¦red alredy, therfore ye masse muste neades be a sacrifice, wherin he is continually sacrificed, by the prei∣stes, his ministers, after the ordre of Melchize. Fyue bis¦shops, whi∣che were Au¦relius, Alipi¦us, Augusti¦nus, & Pos∣sidonius, wrote an e∣pistle to In¦nocentius, in the whi∣che they said Melchizedec prolato sacra¦mento mensae dominicae, no¦uit aeternum eius sacerdo∣tiū figurare. That is Melchize∣dec dydde know to fi∣gure our lor¦des euerla∣stynge preist¦hode with a sacrament or a holy si∣gne of his ta¦ble shewed forth. The which thing is so euidently affirmed by the ho¦ly martyr S. Ciprian (which was
almost thirtene hundred yeres pas¦sed) that nothing cā be more plain¦ly sayde, for this he writeth. In sa∣cerdote Melchizedec sacramen∣tum dominici sacrificij praefigura¦tum videmus, We se (saith holye Cypriane) the sacrament of oure lordes sacrifice before fygured in the preist Melchizedec. Than he proueth that his saienge both by the wordes of the Genesis .xiiii. chaptre spoken of Melchizedec, and his sacrifice made with bread and wine, and by the wordes also of Dauyd spoken of god the fa∣ther to Chryste oure Sauyoure his sonne, whych are these. Thou arte a preiste for euer, after the ordre of Melchizedec. Anon after¦warde he layeth thus. The whi∣che ordre of Christe trulye is this commynge of that sacryfyce, and therof descendynge, that Melchi∣zedec
was a preiste of the higheste God, because he offered breade and wyne, and blessed Abraham. Nam quis magis sacerdos dei summi, {qui} dominus noster Iesus Christus, qui sacrificium deo pa∣tri obtulit. Et obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchizedech obtulerat, id est, panem & vinum, suum scili∣cet corpus & sanguinem. That is to say. For who is rather the preist of god the highest, than oure lord Iesus Christe, whiche dydde offre sacrifice vnto his father? And he offred the verye same ye Melchi∣zedec had offered, that is to witte, breade and wyne, surely his body and bloude. Moreouer Cipryane peaking of the sacrifice of Mel∣chizedech in breade and wyne, the whyche wente before as a fy∣gure of Chrystes sacryfyce that was to comme in breade and
wyne, sayth after this maner. Quam rem adimplēs dominus, & perficiens, panem & calicem mix¦tum Cyprianus. vino obtulit, & qui est pleni∣tudo, veritatem praefiguratae ima∣ginis adimpleuit. The whiche thynge (that is to wytte, the sacri∣fice of Melchizedec, that was a fi∣gure of christes sacrifice to come, vnder fourme of bread and wine) our lorde fulfyllynge, and accom∣plysshynge, hath offered breade, and a cuppe, or chalyce mengled with wine and water, and he, whi∣che is fulnesse, hathe fulfilled the truth of the image, or figure afore figured. Who could haue spoken more playnly, than this holy mar∣tyr here speaketh, that christes sa∣crifice in fourme of bread & wine, was fygured before by the sacry∣fice of Melchizeder? And to put a∣waye all doubte, anone after this
he sayth. Vnde apparet sanguinē Christi non offerri, si desit vinum calici, nec sacramentum dominicū legitima sanctione celebrari, nisi oblatio et sacrificiū nostrū passio∣ni respond erit. Whereby it appea¦reth that christes bloude can not be offred, yf there be no wyne in the chalyce, neyther our lordes sa∣crament celebrate, or made, after the laufull ordinaunce, except our oblation, offeringe, and sacrifice shall agree, or be lyke the passion. Hitherto this blessed martyr saint Cyprian, a man nere the apostles tyme, and of a very deape knowe∣lage in goddes holye worde, we ought therfore to geue credence rather vnto him in this presente controuersy of our religion, than to Martyn Luther, or els any o∣ther of that sort, whiche vpon no grounde, as it shall hereafter ap∣peare
manifestlye, deny the masse to be a sacrifice propitiatory, that is, appeasynge or pacifieng gods displeasure, and wrath, whiche all mē (sēce christe dyd firste institute it at his last supper, til now Mar∣tyn Luthers comynge) euer bele∣ued vndoutedly, & stedfastly, but I wil procede vpon this purpose, & make yet a further probation, to leaue no doubte in the matter, yf it may be by my small learninge. The twelue loues of bread spokē of in Leuitico, were a fygure of this blessed sacrifice made in the Leui. 24. masse vnder fourme of breade, as saint Dainascene dothe affirme sayeng. Hunc panē, panes figura∣bant Damas. lib. 4. Cap. 14. propositionis. The loues of shewe, dyd figure this bread. And therfore, where our texte in Latin hath, panes propositionis offert, He offereth breade of shewe, the
Hebrewe hath, as Galatinus te∣stifieth. Galatinus lib. 10. cap. 7. Quia carnem dei tui ipse est, vel erit sacrificans, that is, be∣cause he is or shall be sacrifisynge the flesshe of thy god. S. Origen Origines in Leui. 24. doth playnlye confirme the same saieng. If a man loke on ye bread, which descended downe from hea∣uen, and on that cōmemoration, or remembraūce, of the which ye lorde saith, Hoc facite in meam comme¦morationem, Luc. 22. Do ye this for re∣membraunce of me, and do remem¦ber also the misteries of ye churche more dylygently lokyng on them, In his, quae scribit lex, futurae ve∣ritatis inuenies imaginem prae∣formatam, He shall fynde in those thynges, whiche the lawe writeth, an Image, or a symyly∣tude of the trouthe afore four∣med. Thys sacryfyce also was fygured by the continual sacrifice
of the olde lawe mentioned in the boke of Moses called Exodus the xxix. chap. For lyke as the twelue Exodi. 29. loues were set out to shewe daily, and this sacrifice cōtinually done by the preistes of the olde lawe, e∣uen so in the masse the preist doth shewe daylye to the people our sa¦uiours blessed bodye vnder the fourme of bread, and continually offereth it in sacrifice to god for to appease his displeasure, and to make him mercyfull and fauoura¦ble vnto vs, that yet lyue, and to the deade also. Nowe the prophet Malachias shall come forthe to saye his mynde in this matter, whych this writeth. Non est mihi Mala. 1. . 3 voluntas in vobis, dicit dominus exercituum, & munus non susci∣piā de manu vestra. Ab ortu enim solis vs{que} ad occasum, magnū est nomen meum in gentibus, & in
omni loco facrificatur & offertur nomini meo oblatio munda, quia magnum est nomen meum in gen¦tibus. I haue no wyll or mynde to you, saith the lorde of hostes, & I wyll not receaue of your hand a gyft, or a sacrifice. For from the risinge of the sonne vnto the go∣ynge downe, my name is great a∣monge the people, and sacrifice is made, and a cleane oblation is of∣fred to my name, bicause my name is great amonge the people. Lo, good christen reader, here we se that god said by this his prophet, that he had no mind to the Iewes mening that he wold forsake thē, by reason of their infidelite, lacke of fayth, refusing his sonne christ at his commynge, and synne, and that he wolde no more receaue of them sacrifices made with beastes as he had done afore christ came
in the tyme of the old testamente, but that all suche sacrifices shuld be vtterlye abolysshed, and lefte cleane, as shadowes, and fygures of christes sacrifice the very thing shadowed, and figured by them, whiche shuld, and doth in dede, as moch excede, amoūt, & excel them, as the bodye dothe the shadowe, and the thynge fygured, the fy∣gure, or pycture representynge it. That this is mente, and spoken by the sacryfyce of the masse, dy∣uerse olde wryters, men so wel ler∣ned, as none are nowe these daies, do playnely testyfye, of the which I wyll brynge a fewe. Damas∣cene Dams. lib. 4. Ca. 14. aboue a thousand yeres sence thus wrote on this texte of the pro¦phete Malachias. Haec est pura scilicet hostia, & incruenta, quam ab ortu vs{que} ad occasum ipsi offer riper prophetam dominus loqui∣tur,
Christi videlicet corpus & sā∣guis, in stabilimentum animae no∣strae, & corporis, inconsūptū & in∣corruptū, non in secessū iens (absit enim) sed in nostrā substantiā, & conseruationem, omnimodi nocu¦menti reparatio, sordis omnis pur¦gatio. This is the englysshe ther∣of. This is the pure hooste, or sa∣crifice offered to atteyne victorie of our enemies, and vnblouddy, or offered without bloud sheding, the whiche our lord sayeth by his prophet shuld be offered to him frō the risinge of the sonne to the go∣yng downe, surely the bodye, and bloud of christ, to kepe stedfaste or stable our soule and bodye, or to be that thing, which doth stablish our soule and body, not cōsumed, ▪ incorrupted, not going into the draught (for god forbyd that) but into our substaūce, and conserua∣tion,
a repayringe of all maner of The masse is a sacry∣fice propiri∣atory for one sinnes. hurt, a purgation or purgynge of al vncleannes. Marke here good reader, that this olde wryter Da∣mascene affirmeth that oure lorde sayde by the prophet that a cleane hoost shoulde be offered to hym, without bloude sheddyng, verely the body and bloud of Christ, and none other sacrifice, than the sa∣crifice of the masse, though Luter Bucer, Bullyger, and lyke other do neuer so much say the cōtrary, without al good ground. Second¦ly note, that the same hoost, or sa∣crifice shuld be a stay, or a stablish¦ment bothe of our bodye and the soule also. Thyrdlye that it goeth not into the draught, as other bo∣dily meates do, but it is turned in to the spiritual sustinaunce of the soule, & cōseruatiō of it. Fourth∣ly note well, that he calleth this
holy sacrifice, a reparation of all harine (whiche came to the soule through synne) and a purgynge, or clensynge of all fylth of synne, a∣gaynst them, which denye that the masse is a sacrifice propitiatorye, that is, makyng god mercyfull to vs, and appeasynge his wrath to∣warde vs for our synnes. Some Dyuers ob¦iections are here soyled. men saye that this prophetment of a sacrifice, whiche the Iewes dyd make to god, but they are farre de∣ceyued. Fyrste bycause he prophe∣cyed of a sacrifice, which shuld suc∣cede, ye iewes sacrifices abolyshed. Secondly bycause he spake of a sacrifice whiche all people in euery place shuld offre to goddes name, therfore it can not be vnderstande of any sacrifice of the iewes, which they only in the temple of hierusa∣lem dyd offre, as it apereth by the law playnly. Moreouer, some vn∣derstande
this prophecy of the sa∣crifice, fulfylled by christe on the crosse, but as vntruly as the other, for that sacrifice was offered of christ only in one place, which was the mounte of caluarie, but the pro¦phet entreateth there of a sacrifice, that shuld be offered to god in all places, and therfore he spake not of christes sacrifice ones doone on the crosse. Agayne the prophete wrote of that sacrifice, which shuld be offered to god, when his name shuld be great and famous amōge the gentylles, whiche was not re∣noumed among them, before christ Mat .vi. Mar. 16 dyd suffre death, but after his re∣surection, whē he sent his apostles to preache the gospell through all the worlde to euery man. Thyrd∣ly As bucer bulliger & o¦ther of that sortt. they are lykewyse deceyued, that vnderstand by this sacrifice here mentioned, laudyng of god, than∣kes
gyuynge to him, confessynge of his name, contritiō of mannes harte, preachyng of ye gospel, mor∣tifyenge of the bodye, and carnall lustes, or desyres of the flesh, or any lyke, first bycause none of these suc¦ceded, or came in to the place of the Iewes sacrifices done away, anul¦led, and vndone for euer, for they all were in the tyme of the lawe of nature, before Moses lawe was put forth, and vnder Moses lawe, and after it was abolysshed, as no man can say nay, and therfore this prophecy can not be taken of them, or any one of them. Agayne the prophet spake of one sacrifice in the synguler nomber, and thee are many, wherfore he may not be vn∣derstande of these. Moreouer the prophet dyd speake of a pure, and a clene sacrifice, but our workes are not pure, and clene, because we
offend, sayeth saynt Iames, in ma∣ny Iacobi. 3. 1. Ioh. 1. thynges, And Iohn saith, yf we saye we haue no synne, we deceyue our selfes, and the trouth is not in vs: Therfore this prophecye must be vnderstande of Christes very bodye, and blotidde, a lambe with∣out spotte of all fylthe, and synne, as Peter saith, and sainte Paule 1 Peter. 2. 2. Cor. 5. also, which he offered vnder forme of bread & wyne at his last supper, and gaue autorite to his apostles and theyr successours, prestes and byshoppes, to do the same for his Luke. 22. 1 Cor. 1. remembraunce, tyll his commynge agayne at the last day. But I wyl brynge forthe Eusebius an olde Eusebius lib. Primo de euan¦gelica demon∣stra. greke writer, to conferme this my purpose, which thus writeth. Mo∣saicis sacrificiis reiectis, quod futu¦rum erat nostrum ipsarum institu∣tum, propheta diuinitus nūciat di∣cens, Quoniam ab ortusolis. &c.
That y• prophet sheweth of god, or by the inspiratiō of ye holy goost, yt which shuld be our own ordinaūce or institutiō, ye sacrifices of Moses reiected, sayng, bycause from ye ry∣syng of the son̄e, to ye goyng down, sacrifice is made, & a clene oblati∣on is offered to my name in euery place. Therfore we do sacrifice (saith Eusebius) to god ye highest a sacrifice of laude, we do sacrifice to god a full sacrifice, and bryng∣yng feare, Et sacrosāctum sacrifici¦um. A cōsecrated sacrifice halowed, and that whiche ought not to be touched but reuerentlye. We do offre in sacrifice to god, with a new maner after the new testament, an hoost clene. This can not be vnder¦stande of any other sacrifice, than of the sacrifice of the masse, for none other is offered to god nowe after a newe maner, accordynge to the newe testament, as euery lear∣ned
man may easely perceyue, and therfore it must neades be taken of that sacrifice only. Agayne he saith thus, after very many wordes spo¦ken of this matter, as concludyng Iaque Christus quasi mirabilem quādam victimam, sacrificiū quod eximium deo patri operatus, pro nostra omniū salute obtulit, eius∣què rei memoriam vt nosipsi ipsi deo pro sacrificio offerremus, in∣stituit. That is to witte. Therfore Christe after he had wrought, offe¦red to god the father for all our helth, or saluation, as who saith a certen wonderful, and an excellent sacrifice, and hath ordeyned that we our selfes shulde offre to the same god for a sacrifice, the remem¦braunce of the same thynge. If Marten Luther or his scolers had sene this holy fathers sainges, and not lyed to lyke, and esteme, theyr
owne iudgemnet more than his, they wolde not haue so rashely, & The sacri∣fice of the masse was ordined by Christe and not by man, as some mē saye. vngodly denyed the masse to be in¦stituted, & ordeyned a sacrifice of our sauiour Christe him selfe, as they do, ascribynge it, and the set∣tyng vp of it, vnto prestes auarice and couetousnes. Whose fonde, Ireneus. lib. 4 Ca. 32, 33, 4, leude, and vngodly opinyon Ire∣neus an other greke wryter, which was withī .clxxx. yeres, of Christes byrth, and sawe sainte Polycarpe saint Iohn the euangelystes disci∣ple, yea whose scholer he was (as some men say) doth thus euydently wryte in this matter, but Christe also geuyng counsayll to his disci∣ples to offre vnto god of his crea∣tures the first frutes, not as who saith nedynge, but yt they shuld be neyther vnfruitful, nor vnkynde, toke that breade whiche is of his creation, or his creature, and gaue
thankes, sayng. Hoc est corpus Christ at his laste supper taught his apostles a newe sacri∣fice, whiche is the holye masse. meum. This is my bodye. And he toke lykewyse the cuppe, and con∣fessed it his bloude, and he taught a newe sacrifice of the newe testa∣mente, whiche the churche recey∣uynge of, or from the apostles, offe¦reth to god throw al ye hole world. What can any wyse christen man desyre to be more playnly spoken of any man than this, in defence of ye sacrifice of ye masse? Maye not (I beseche the good reader) men be greatly ashamed either to deny the masse to be a sacrifice, or els to saye that it is nothyng but an ydoll, set vp by prestes couetousnes, for lu∣cre and gaynes? Ought not we ra¦ther to beleue this aunciēt father, whiche was instructed by them, that learned the trouth of Christes religion of the apostles scholars, then Marten Luther, or any of his Luther.
teachyng, and schole, which now af¦ter xv. hundred yeres, do laboure to brynge vp a new religion, and faith amonge christen people? Came not the holye goost to teache men the truth, which Christ promy¦sed Note reader Io. 14. 16▪ to sende to the apostles, tyll Marten Luther came, the foun∣tayne almost of all heresie? Hath Christe suffered his deare spouse the churche (for whiche h shed his most precious bloud) to erre in his religion and the faith▪ thus longe, the space of xv. hundred yeres? Dyd not he promyse his apostles Matt .vlt. Ioh. 14. to be with them, & the holy churche tyll the worldes ende, that he lea∣dyng them, whiche is the truth, as he him selfe saith, they could not be disceyued so foule in theyr belefe, to thynke the masse a sacrifice or∣deyned by Chrtste in the gospell, & it nothynge so? Truly euery wyse
man doth iudge moche other wise, but it is better to passe ouer this, and to retourne agayne to holye Ireneus, whiche after he hath ale∣ged the prophecie of Malachias, whiche I haue nowe in hande, to proue that Christ as his maundye dyd offre his bodye and bloude in sacrifice to his father, teachynge the apostles euen so to do, and they the hole churche, which offereth the same also through all the worlde, Anone after this he writeth, Quo∣niā ergo nomen filij propriū patris Caep. 33. est, et in deo omnipotente, per Ie∣sum Christum offert ecclesia, be∣ne ait secundum vtraque, et in omniloco incensum offertur no∣mini meo, et sacrificium purum. That is. Therfore because the son¦nes name is proper to the father, and in god almyghty, the churche offereth sacrifice by Iesu Christe,
the prophet Malachias saith well after both the thinges, both incse, or a swete perfume, is offered in euery place to my name, And also a pure sacrifice agayne. Igitur ec∣clesie Cap. 34. oblatio, quam dominus do cuit offerri in vniuerso mundo, purum sacrificium reputatum est apud deum, & acceptum est ei, nō quod ille indigeat a nobis sacri∣ficium, sed quoniam is, qui offert glorificatur ipse in eo, quod offert si acceptetur munus eius. That is thus moch in our speach. Therfore Mathe wel this reder. the sacrifice of the churche, whiche our lorde taught to be offered in the hole worlde, is rekened with god a clene sacrifice, and it is ac∣cepted of him, not because he nea∣deth our sacrifice, but because he whiche doth offre it, is glorified, or renoumed, by that, whiche he doth offre yf his gyfte, or sacrifice
be accepted of god. Lo, good rea∣der, here eftsoones, and agayne, this holy man playnly affyrmeth, that ye churche doth offre sacrifice, whiche our sauiour Christe dyd teach so to do, & not any couetous preist, or byshop, myndyng to gette vaūtage, & gaynes therby, though many through enuye, and malyce conceyued against the clergy, (whi¦che no heretike euer lacked) are not ashamed so shamefully, & falsly to say of thē. But now to S. Hierōe, S. Hierome pō Mala. 1 which writeth after this maner, vp¦on this prophet Malachie. Non in vna orbis prouincia Iudaea, nec in vna vrbe Iudaea Hierusalem, sed in omni loco offerri oblationem, nequa{que} immundā, vt a populo is∣rael, sed mundam vt in caeremonijs Christianorum. That is to witte. God spake to ye prestes of ye iewes by the prophet, the whiche do offre
the blynde, the lame, and faynt, to make sacrifice with, that therby they myght knowe that spirituall sacrifices shuld succede the carnal, and that not bulles and gootes bloude, but a swete perfume (that is ye saintes prayers) shuld be offe∣red to the lord, and that not in one prouynce of the worlde Iury, no∣ther in one citye of Iury, Hierusa∣lem, but in euery place shulde be offered a sacrifice, in no wyse vn∣clene, as by the people of Israell was offered once, but cleane, lyke as in the ceremonyes of christeās, or christen people is offered. Lo. Here good reader, saint Hierome vnderstandeth the prophet of one pure and cleane sacrifice, whiche should (as nowe daylye it is in the masse) be offered in christen mens ceremonyes, whiche muste nea∣des be spoken of the sacrifice
of the masse, wherin are many cere¦monyes vsed, with diuers holye prayers. And that the prophet mēt that sacrifice of the blessed masse, he himselfe declareth openly in the thyrde chapyter folowynge For Malachi. 3. there he doh prophecy of Christes commyng by his byrth, saynge, lo he cometh. Who canne attayne by thought the day of his commyng? Who shall stande to se him? For he lyke as fyre bloweth, lyke as one bloweth the fyre and as the herbe of fullers of clothe. And he He meaneth the apostles which christ clensed by makyng thē ryghteuos & good men, afore they should offre sacrifices to god his fa∣ther. shall sytte bloyng together or blo∣wyng lyke as one bloweth the fyre and makynge clene lyke as gold, and lyke as syluer, and he shall purge, or make clene the sonnes of Leui. Et colabit eos quasi aurum, et quasi argentum, et erunt domi∣no offerentes sacrificia in iusticia. And he shall strayne out theyr ly∣coure
lyke as gold and syluer, and they shall offre to our lorde sacrifi∣ces in ryghteousnes. S. Hierome vnderstandeth here the sonnes of Leui, all preistes of the new lawe, whiche onlye shoulde succede the prestes of the olde lawe, and these clensyd, and purged, as golde and syluer, should offre to our lorde sa∣crifices in rightuousnes. Et place∣bit domino sacrificium iuda et hie¦rusalem, sicut dies seculi anni anti¦qui. That is the sacrifice of Iude and Hierusalem shall please the lorde, lyke as the dayes of tyme, & the olde yeres. This letter is not so playne, and easye to be vnder∣stand, as men thynke the scripture is, which saint Hierome thus ex∣poundeth the sacrifice of the pre∣stes, which they do offre for Iuda and Hierusalem, that is for them, that do confesse our lorde, and se
his peace with the mynde, shall please the lorde, lyke as dayes of tyme, and as olde yeres, that is, as they pleased him at the begyn∣nynge, so after penaunce done for synne commytted, when they shall be clensed from the fylth of all syn∣nes, they shall begynne to please god with theyr sacrifices agayne. It is called also the sacrifice of Iuda, because Christ dyd institute it, whiche was borne of the tribe, and in bethelem Iuda, Also the masse is called of the prophet, the sacrifice of Hierusalem, because it was there first institute by christe. Therfore sith this was prophecied of christes cōmyng by byrth, which should make clene, and purge the prestes of the newe testament, that they myght (beyng so clensed) offre sacrifices to god for the people, whiche confesse Christe to be our
sauiour, and do se his peace with their mynde, euery man playnlye maye perceaue, that this prophe∣cye toucheth y• sacrifice of ye masse, for that onely doth appertayne to the preistes of the new testament, as no man can denye. Hytherto of the olde testament. Now to the newe, wherin are certayne places, and textes, euidently prouyng the masse to be a sacrifice, not of laude and thankes geuynge onlye, but also of appeasynge gods displea∣sure Textes of newe lawe, prouyng the masse to be a sacrifice. toward vs for synne, and ma∣kynge hym mercyfull both to the lyuynge, & the dead. Of the whi∣che the fyrst is this of Lukes gos∣pell. Hoc facite in meam comme∣morationē. Do ye this for my re∣membraunce. Luc. 2. That is to wytte. I geue you autoritie, power, and cō∣maūde you also to do, y• whiche I haue done euen nowe at thys my
maundye, that is, take ye breade, geue thankes to god for al his be¦nefites geuen to man, blesse it, con¦secrate it, turnyng the substaunce of it in to my fleshe, offre it to my father, not onelye to geue hym thankes for his benefytes besto∣wed on man, but to purchase his grace also for the people, & to ap∣pease his displeasure, conceaued & taken against man for his synne. Finally receaue it your selues say¦eng masse, and distribute the same to the people, for their housle, and all this do ye in remembraunce of Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. my death and passion, continuing so to do, till y• worldes ende. That Christe didde offre his blessed bo∣dye to his father a swete sacrifice for our synnes at his laste supper, & cōmaūded his apostles likewise to do, and all preystes, in and by
them, the aūcient and old fathers sentences do playnlye proue, of the which I wyl allege here some, that be most stronge and euydent. Ireneus a greke doctour beynge withī .clxxx. yeres of christ, expoū∣dynge Ireneus: lib. 4. cap. 32. these wordes of christ Hoc est corpus meum, & hîc est san∣guis meus, This is my body, and this is my bloude (whiche he pro∣nounced at his last supper, conse∣cratinge, and offeringe his bodye and bloude in sacrifice to his fa∣ther) thus writeth, as I haue ones afore rehersed. Oure lorde toke bread, and gaue thankes sayeng. This is my body. Also he toke the cuppe, and confessed it to be his bloude. Et nouam docuit noui te∣stamenti oblationē, quā ecclesiam ab apostolis recipiens, in vniuerso mūdo offert deo. And he taughte them a newe sacrifice of the newe
testamente, which the churche re∣ceauynge Christe dyd institute the sacrifice of the masse, & the apostels taught the church. of the apostles (he sayth not of the byshop of Rome nor of any other bishoppe, or preist) doth offre to god in all the hole worlde. These wordes are so playne, that no man can denye, but that this saint sayth, that Christ dyd offre his bodye and bloude in sacrifice to god at his maundye, and that Chrystes mynystres, the preistes of the newe lawe, do dayelye offre the same at masse, instructed that lesson of the apostles, which were taught it of their maister, our sa∣uiour christ. Shal it not therfore be moch more mete, & cōueniēt, yt we christen men, and women geue credence rather vnto this holye, and aunciente fathers teachynge in this matter, (especially beinge so agreable with goddes worde, yea beyng playnly set forth by it)
than to Martyn Luther, nyther lyke to hym in auncientie, nor ver¦tue, nor learninge? Meruayle not (reader) that I do here expounde this worde facere, to signifie as muche as to make sacrifice, partly because this holy martyr saynte Ireneus, saynt Cyprian, and ma∣ny other of the eldest, and best wri¦ters vpon the scripture, so do take it in this cōmaundement of christ geuen to his apostles, Hoc faci∣te. Facere to do, ī chri¦stes wordes is to make sacrifice. &c. Partely for asmuche as it is so vsed both in prophane wry∣ters, and also in the holye scrip∣ture. For Vergylle sayth. Cum fa∣ciam Vergilius: vitula pro frugibus ipse ve∣nito. When (sayth Dametas) I shall do sacrifice, or offre sacrifice, to Ceres the goddes of corne, with an heffar for the corne, come thou thy selfe. Also Theo∣critus Theocritus, a greke poete so vseth this
word sayeng: Quum facies agno, Nymphas veneratus agrestes. When thou shalte make sacrifice with a lambe, honouring the wild or rude maidēs of ye sea. Likewise baptista Mātuan{us} (a christē mā) Mantuanus, vsed this word, saieng of Abel the first shepeherd. Nunc oue, nunc pingui vitula faciebat, & agno. He made sacrifice sometyme with a shepe, sometyme with a fat hef∣fer, and a lambe. Now to the scrip¦ture, whiche in this signification often tymes doth vse this worde. For the thirde boke of the kynges ye eleuenth chapter, thus hath, Et fecit Salomon astartae abominatio ni Sydoniorum, That is. And Sa¦lomon Lege Ezech, 45: &, 46: et Iudicum. , dyd make sacrifice to the idol the abominatiō of the Sydo∣niōs: Is not here facere which is in englysh to do, vsed for sacrifica¦re, to make sacrifice? Many other
textes of the old testamēt do shew Leui. 23. Et fa¦cietis hyrcum pro peccato. playnly that this worde is often∣times vsed for to make sacrifice, which I passe ouer to be the shor∣ter, and brynge one place oute of the newe testamente, whiche is in Lukes gospell, the seconde chap∣ter after this fourme of wordes. Et cum inducerent puerum Iesum parentes eius, ut facerent secundū consuetudinē legis pro eo, Sim eō accepit eū in ulnas suas. &c. That is, And whan the father & mother of the childe Iesu brought him into the temple, that they mighte do for him after the cu∣stome of the lawe, Symeon toke hym into his armes. What els I besech the good reader is ment by (doyng) in this place, but making of sacrifice, or offeringe of sacrifi∣ces according to the law of Moi∣ses? The text a litle before in Luke
declareth this plainelye, whiche sheweth that our Lady Christes honourable, and most blessed mo∣ther, Marye our sauiours blessed mo∣ther. and his father Ioseph (at the lest whiche was iudged his father of the people) at the day of purifi∣cation, presented Christ in the tē∣ple of hierusalem, Vt darent ho∣stiam, secundum {quod} dictum est in lege domini, par turturum, aut du∣os Leui. 12: pullos columbarum, that is to saye. That they shulde geue an hoste, a paire of byrdes called tur∣telles, or two pygeons, accordyng to the commaundemēt of the lawe of our lord. Thus we se that chri∣stes Christes pa¦rentes did geue to the preiste these thinges not offryng in sacrifice (for that is the office of a preist but presentyng them to the preist, that he shuld of∣fre them in sacrifice as the law re∣quired. father and mother presented and brought in to the temple, ey∣ther a payre of turtelles or .ii. py∣geons, that the preist shulde offre them in sacrifice after the lawe, & so (facere) doth sygnifye in this place of Luke sacrificare to make
sacrifice in the whiche significati∣on both greke wryters, and latyn also do often vse that worde, and not onely the Hebrewe speache, as it appereth by the places aboue re¦cyted. Why therfore maye we not well vnderstande by these wordes of our sauyour Christ, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, Do ye this for my remembraūce, that he commaunded them to offre sa∣crifice for his remembraūce? espe∣cyally seynge the aunciente wry∣ters of Christes churche, and the whole churche hath euen so taken those wordes euer synce they were spoken, no man otherwyse expoun¦dynge them, tyll Martyn Luther came, lerna ferè omniū haereseō, in whom was almost all heresies? Homilia. 17. in Hebre. To be shorte, saynt Chrysostome vnderstode, that Christe dyd of∣fre his bodye and bloude in sacri∣fice
at his maundy, and gaue com¦maundemēt Read more of Chrisost. in the chap∣tre of the doctours sayenges. to his apostles to of∣fer it also, in remēbraunce of hys death, whose wordes are these, Pō¦tifex autē noster ille est, qui hostiā mūdantē nos obtulit, ipsam offeri∣mus, & nunc, quae tunc oblata qui∣dem consumi non potest. Hoc autem, quod nos facimus, in com∣memorationem quidem eius fit, quod factum est. Hoc enim facite Luc. 22. (inquit) in mei commemorationē. That is. Our byshop is he, which hath offered an hooste, or sacrifice Note this well reader gainst the enemies of the masse: makynge vs cleane, the same we offre also nowe, the whyche than offered, trulye can not be consu∣med, but this that we do, is done for a remembraunce of that thing whyche was done, for christ sayd, do ye this for remembraunce of me. Who is so blynde, that he can not see, that Chrysostom, a greake
autour, learned as excellentlye in the scripture, as euer anye was of the greakes synce the apostles tyme, and their scolers, doth saye playnelye, that we (meanynge preistes, of whom he was one him selfe) do offre the selfe same sacri∣fice, whyche Chryste ones for euer offered by deathe and bloudde shedynge on the crosse? but we do it for remembraunce of that hys passion, and blouddy sacrifice, not withoute autoritie, power, and cō¦maundemente, as the whyche all three we haue of him, saieng, Hoc facite in mei commemorationem, Luc. . do ye this for a remembraunce of me. Wolde to God chrysten men wolde looke well on these wor∣des, consyderynge bothe the aun∣cientie of the wryter, and also hys greatte learnynge, and
holynes, whiche may cause them rather to beleue his sayenges thā any other, nothynge lyke to hym in those qualities, but it is better to let this passe, and to here saynt Cypryan that holy martyr, which wrote aboue twelue hundred and lxxx. yeres past. He this wryteth af¦ter Cyprianus ii. , epist 3 many wordes spokē of the ho∣ly sacrifice of the masse. Qua in parte inuenimus calicem mixtum fuisse, quem obtulit, Vnde appa∣ret sanguinē Christi non offerri, si desit vinum calici, nec sacramen∣tum dominicum legitima sanctifi∣catione celebrari, nisi oblatio & sacrificium nostrum passioni re∣sponderit. That is. In the whiche parte we do fynde that the cuppe was mengled or medled (that is wyne & water were therein mixed together) whiche Christ dyd offre. Whereby it doth appere that chri∣stes
bloude is not offered yf there want wine in the cuppe or chalice: neither is our lordes sacramente celebrate with halowynge accor∣dynge to the lawe, excepte our of∣ferynge and sacrifice be lyke the passion. In these wordes note that he sayth we fynd y• the cup whiche christ offred, was mixed wt wine & water, whyche was at none other tyme, but onely at his last supper, for at the time of his death he had no cuppe so medled, nor then he offred not his bloud vnder forme of wyne, but onely vnder ye forme of bloude, therefore he offered his bloud in sacrifice at his maundy, after this holy martyrs mynde, & preistes do euen that same after his lawe and ordynaunce, as he sayth lykewyse here agayne, for thus he writeth. Quo modo autē de creatura vitis, nouū vinum cū
christo in regno patris bibemus, si in sacrificio dei patris, & christi, vi nū non offerimus, nec calicem dn̄i traditione dominica miscemus? That is to saye, Howe shall we drynke newe wyne wyth Christe of the creature of a vyne, in the kyngedome of the father, yf we Marke whose is the sacrifice of the masse offre not wyne in the sacryfyce of God the father, and of Chryste, or if we do not meddle or myxe the lordes cuppe, after the tea∣chyng, or cōmyssyon of our lorde? Lo, oure lorde taughte the prei∣stes at the masse to myxe in the chalyce wyne wyth water, and so to offre in sacryfyce hys precyous bloudde, whyche he dydde neuer but at his laste supper, as it is e∣uydente, and therefore he dydde there offre hys bodye, and bloude in sacryfyce, and gaue commyssy∣on to hys apostelles, and to all
preystes in, and by them, to do the same. Also in the same epystle he sayth agayne. Ab euāgelicis prae¦ceptis Cyprianus. Luc. 2. non est omnino receden∣dum, ea{que} quae magister docuit, & fecit, discipuli quo{que} obseruare, & facere debent. We oughte not to goo from the commaundementes of the gospell, and the dyscyples muste of duetye obserue, and doo also, those thynges, whyche the mayster taughte, and dydde. Lo, here Saynte Cypryane sayethe, that Chryste offered him selfe, and taughte hys scolers that same les∣son, and commaunded them also to offre sacryfyce, as he hadde Matt. 26. Luc. 2. doone afore, when he toke breade, and so forth, and thereby he bond them to kepe, and doo the selfe same thynge that he dydde. What woulde anye manne
desyre more? To proue all this he allegeth saint Paule the eleuenth chapter of the fyrste epistle to the 1: Cor. 11. Corinthians. This holye martyr sheweth wherfore christ dyd myxe wyne and water together in the cuppe, whiche he blessed, and con∣secrated at his maundye, sayenge that he so dyd because the water signifieth the people (as we reade in the Apocalypse of saint Iohn, Apoca 17. why water is mengld with wyne, in the chalice when the preist sayth masse. the .vii. chapter) so that lykewyse as the water in the chalice is med∣dled and myxed together with the wyne, and so meddled that the one cā not be separate from the other, euen soo by shedynge of christes bloude, the people, whiche beleue in hym, trust in goddes mercy pro¦mysed to thē for chrystes deathes sake, feare god, forsake their syn∣nes thorough perfytte penaunce, loue god and their neyghboure, &
finally do kepe gods commaun∣dementes, and abyde therein, no∣thing can separate or disseuer thē from goddes fauour, and loue, as Paule affirmeth the eight chap∣ter to ye Romaines. But yet marke by the waye (good reader) that Cy¦prian doth saye that Christe dyd myxe wyne and water together in the cuppe, which he dyd blesse, and consecrate at his laste supper, and dyd also teache, and commaunde preistes to kepe, and do that same, as we now in dede do at our mas∣ses, and yet there is no texte of all the scripture, that maketh anye mention of this dede, lesson, and commaundement of our sauyour Christ, therfore they are foule de∣ceaued A verytye not wryttē in scripture thorough ignoraunce: or rather malyce, which affirme, that we ought to beleue nothinge, ex∣cepte it be mencioned in scripture.
But I wyll retourne eftesones to holye Cypryan, and allege out of hym a fewe moo sentences for my purpose, of the whyche this is one, agaynste theym, that putte onelye water in the chalyce at masse. Quaerendum est enim, ipsi quem sunt secutinam si in sa∣crificio, quod Christus est, non ni∣si Christus sequendus est, vti id nos obaudire, & facere oportet, quod Christus fecit, & quod faci∣endum esse mandauit, non de∣bemus attendere, quid aliquis an∣te nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes est, Christus prior fecerit. For we muste aske (sayth Cyprian) whom they haue Cyprianus. folowed. For if in ye sacriice, whi∣che christe is, none, excepte Chryst, uste be folowed, truely it is ne∣cessary that we obeye, and do that whiche Chryst hath done, and that
the whyche he commaunded to be done, we ought not to marke what any man before vs thought to be done, but what Chryst which is a∣fore all men, fyrste hathe doone. Note dylygentlye (good reader) that this holye martyr saythe that Chryste is the sacryfyce offered of the preiste, and that he dyd make sacryfyce, in the cuppe beynge myxed wyne, and water together, and commaunded the apostles, & all preystes to folowe that same his maner, and fourme of sacra∣fice at theyr masses. These wordes hytherto rehersed (good Christen reader) are verye playne to per∣suade euerye man, not vtterly vn∣apte to be taughte for wante of faythe, to beleue the masse to be a sacryfyce, ordeyned not by anye man, but by oure Sauyoure CHRIST, at hys maundye,
but yet here more playne wordes of him (if it may be). Thus he saith (declaringe that gods ordinaunce oughte not to be chaūged by any mans tradition, the which shulde be, if wyne and water were not myxed together in the chalice at masse, according to Christes insti∣tution) Nam si Iesus Christus do∣minus & de{us} noster, ipse est sūmus Cyprianus▪ sacerdos dei patris, & sacrificium deo patri ipse primus obtulit, & hoc fieri in sui commemorationē, praecepit: vti{que} ille sacerdos vice Luce. 22. Christi vere fūgitur, qui id, quod Christus fecit, imitatur. Et sacrifi¦cium verum, & plenû tunc offert Marke this reader dily∣gently: in ecclesiam deo patri, si sic inc∣piat offerre, secundum {quod} ipsum Christum videat obtulisse. This is the englysh. For yf Iesus christ our lord and god, be the hygheste prepsie of God the father, and
he fyrste hathe offered a sacryfyce to God the father, and commaun∣ded that to be done for remem∣braunce 1. Cor. 11. of hym, verelye that preiste doth exercyse Christes of∣fice, or place truely, whiche folo∣weth that thinge, whiche Christe hath done. And then he offreth to god ye father in the churche, a true and a full sacrifice, yf he begynne so to offre, as he may se ye christ hī¦selfe hathe offered. Are not these wordes playne, and sufficient to proue the masse to be a sacrifice set vp by our sauiour Christe Iesu? The apo∣stles sayeng masse, did make sacri∣fice to god. We reade moreouer in the actes of the apostles the .xiii. that the a∣postels accordinge to the power, autoritie, and commaūdement ge¦uen them of their maister Christe at his maundy sayeng, do ye this for a remembraunce of me dydde make sacrifice to god, for there we
fynd these wordes after Erasmus translation, Quum autē sacrifica∣rent Act. 1. dn̄o, ieiunarēt{que} dixit illis spi¦ritus sāctus. Segregate mihi Pau∣lum & Bernabā in opus, ad quod assumpsi eos. That is. Whan the apostles dyd make sacrifice to our lorde, and fasted, the holye gooste sayde to them. Seuer, or separate for me Paule and Bernabe, to the worke, vnto the whyche, I haue taken them. Here we se that the a∣postles offered then sacrifice to god, and that in the greke tongue was wrytten by Luke the euange¦lyste, whyche vseth here the same greke verbe of ye which the masse in the greke speache is called , as in the hebrewe it is na∣med  Litourgia. (missah) and that name is v∣sed in latyn. Chrysostom wrytte a booke of the masse, whiche he cal∣leth in greake. , and E∣rasmus, Pelargus, with dyuers
other translatours of that booke in latyn, do turne that greke word by the hebrewe word (missa) which the latyn men commonlye do vse, and it can not be otherwise conue∣niently turned into ye latin tongue but by that same hebrewe worde (missah) whiche name the holye a∣postle Peter (that fyrst said masse) dyd belyke geue to that dyuyne, and holye office, whiche we cal the masse in englyssh. And that most blessed, and holy sacrifice, with the whole ordre and maner of godlye suffrages, prayers, petitions, and laudes commonly nowe vsed in the churche, from yt time of Christ and his apostles, vntill this oure time hath alwayes ben receyued, & taught by ye very selfe same name, wtout agayne saieng of any man, excepte one Peter Brusian, whi∣che denied sacrifice to be offred to
god. Thoughe the greake worde, . Luc. 1. Heb. 9. whiche Luke vseth there signifi∣eth many thynges, yet not onelye in that place, but also in other dy∣uers, it signifieth to offer sacrifice as a preist doth, and therefore the apostles dyd offre sacrifice to god instructed by their mayster Christ at his laste supper. Moreouer it maye thus be proued, that Chryst dyd offre him selfe in sacryfice at his last supper to god his father. It is writtē in the first chapter of Iohns gospel, and the fyfth chap∣tre of the fyrst epistle of Paule to Ioan. 1. 1. Cor. 5. ye Corynthians, yt Christ is ye very true Easter lambe, pascal lambe, & passeouer, in a fygure of whom ye Iewes by goddes cōmaundemēt dydde offre in sacrifice a lambe (as we fynde in the booke of Moyses called Exodus) vpon the whiche Exo. 12: I make this reasō for my purpose
The thynge fygured muste agree with the figure, and therefore as ye pascall, or passeouer lambe, was a fygure of Chryste, euen so muste neades the maner of offering, and eatynge of Chryst (the lambe figu¦red by the passeouer, or paschall lambe) be lyke the offrynge in sa∣crifice, and eatyng of that fygure, but that could not be except christ had offered his verye bodye and bloud at his maundye and after∣ward receaued it, (as S. Hierom Hedibi. sayth that he dyd in verye deede), for the Iewes dyd fyrste offre the pascall lambe in sacryfice, and af∣terward Exo. 12. eate him, as Moyses te∣stifieth, Therfore Christ dydde at hys laste supper offre hys bodye in sacrifice to his father, fyrst in a fygure offeryng the pascal lambe, and after that in very dede with∣out a fygure, eatynge it hymselfe,
and geuynge it to his apostles to eate also. The which is done day∣lye of the preiste by his autorite, power and commission, as I haue declared already, and wyl declare hereafter more at large, by gods helpe, and grace. Saynt Ambrose Li. 1.  Lucā dothe gather of Paules wordes, the first epistle, and ye fyfth chap∣ter to the Corynthians, that christ is sacrificed by the preist at masse, for thus he saieth. Non dubites as¦sistere angelum, quando Christus 1. Cor. 5. assistit, Christus immolatur. Ete∣nim pascha nostrū immolatus est Christus. That is. Doute not the aungell to be here, syns that christ is here, Christ is offered in sacry∣fyce. For our pascal, or our passeo∣uer lambe christe is offered in sa∣crifice. Paule doth opēly cōfirme this wryttyng to the Corynthiās the .x. chap. of y• first epistle, saieng
Vnus panis & vnum corpus mul¦ti sumus, oēs quidē de vno pane, & devno calice participamus. We be many one breade (saith Paule) & one body, sothely we take parte all of one bread & of one cup. The holy father & great clerke S. Au∣sten thus writeth, Huius corporis To. 2. epist. 57. Dardano. caput est Christus, huius corporis vnitas nostro sacrificio significat̄. Q bruit significauit apostol{us} di¦cēs. Vnus panis vnū corp{us} multi¦sum{us}. 1. Cor. 10. That is. Christ is the head of this body, (the church) ye vnitie of this body is signified by our sa¦crifice. The which thing ye apostle Paule hath breifly signified, say∣eng. We are many one bread, one body. Also in another place thus he saith, after he hath defined, and shewed what a sacrifice is. Hoc est To. 5. de ciui, dei lib. 10. Cap. . sacrificiū christianorū, multi vnū corp{us} sum{us} in christo. quod etiā sa¦cramēto altar{is} fide lib{us} noto frequē¦tat
ecclesia, vbi ei demonstratur, quod in ea oblatione, quam offert, ipsa offeratur. The englysshe is this. This is the sacrifice of chri∣sten people, we many be one body in Christe, the which also ye church accustomely vseth with the sacra∣mente of the aulter, knowen to the beleuynge people, where it is opē∣ly shewed to the churche, that in that sacrifice, which she doth offre she the same is offered. No man can desyre more playne wordes than these are, but yet I wyll pro∣cede vpon a further proufe of this matter. Paule the tenth chapter of the firste epistle to the Coryn∣thyans 1. Cor. 10. this writeth againe. Non potestis calicem domini bibere, et calicem daemoniorum. Non po∣testis mensae domini participes es∣se, & mensae daemoniorum. ye can not drynke of oure lordes cuppe,
and the deuils, or yll spirites to. Paule put∣tynge diffe∣rēce betwixt the eaters & drynkers of oure lordes table, & thē that eate & drinke thin¦ges offred ī sacrifice to the deuyls, doth meane that the bo¦dye & bloud of Chryst is fyrst offred in sacrifice, as the mea¦tes and drin¦kes were to the ydolles, and then af¦terward re¦ceaued of vs Chrystē people. Ye can not be partakers of oure lordes table, and the deuyls also, Here saint Paule reasoneth with the Corynthians to persuade thē, that they wold abstayne from the eatynge of meates offred in sacry∣fice to the ydolles, and that with two very good reasōs, of the whi∣che the fyrst is grounded vpon the wordes, whiche are here nexte be∣fore rehersed out of this same epi∣stle, and chapter, and it is this. Lyke as they, whiche haue mutu∣all participatiō in christe through the sacrifice of his flesshe & bloud, do entre into a certayne vnite wt him, Sēblaly they haue acertain vnite wt the idolles, by ye eatinge S. Paule comparing the bodye & bloudde of Chryste, to the meates of the gen∣tyles offe∣red in sacri∣fice. dothe playnely nō¦bre the body and bloude of Christe, amonge thī¦ges offered in sacrifice. The same is proued by that that he calleth the lordes table the aulter, for none o∣ther cause truely than he called the Iewes and gedtiles aul¦tare a table of those thinges, which are offered them in sacryfyce. Nowe for as muche as euerye Chrysten harte doth or shuld abhorre to haue any
vnitie with the deuyls or ydolles, it is mete that ye, whiche are chri∣stened people, do forbeare eatyng of meates, offered in sacrifice to i∣dolles. But that we are vnyted, or knytte to Christ, and haue with hym a certayne mutuall participa¦tion, thorough the sacrifice of hys flesshe and bloud, he sheweth by a similitude of the Iewes table vsed in the synagoge. For as the sacri∣fice, which the carnall Iewes dyd offre, made them partakers of the aulter, lykewise the sacrifice, whi∣che is offred either in the table of oure lorde, or elles of the deuyls, maketh the offerers partakers of christ, or of the diuels. Thoughe Paule dothe not call in this rea∣son the body and bloud of christ a sacrifice, yet his wordes do shewe that he so ment, because he setteth the table, and cuppe of our lorde
christe, agaynst ye table and cuppe of the dyuels, sayenge. Non pote∣stis calicem domini, &c. Ye can not drinke of the lordes cuppe, & so forth as is aboue rehersed. Therefore seyng the apostle doth calle that, whiche is offered in sa∣crifice to the deuyls, the table, and August T 6. lib. 1. Ca 19. contra adu¦sariū legis & proph. Paulus 1. Cor. 0. Di∣cendo Calix, &c. ostendit ad{que} sadrifi∣cium debeant pertiner. cuppe of the deuyls, it muste ther∣of folowe, that he mente by the cuppe, and table of our lorde, that thing which is offered in sacrifice vpō our lordes aulter, so yt this is y• sēse, ye cā not cate yt thing which is offred to god in sacrifice, & y• al∣so which is offred in sacrifice to de¦uels, because ye light hath no felow¦ship wt darknes (as he sayth in an other place) nor betwixt christ and ye deuil is any agreing. Wherfore it is manifest by saint Paule that 2. Cor. 6. the bodye and bloud of Christ is a sacrifice of the newe Testament,
or els, if they be not offred in sacri¦fice This decla¦reth that s. Paule dyd gather of Chrystes wordes pro¦nounced of hym at hys last supper, that he dyd offre his bo¦dye then in sacrifice. at the masse, and then after∣ward receyued of vs, howe shulde Paules comparison stande and take place, when he teacheth that the Corynthyans could not be to∣gether partakers of thinges of∣fred vp in sacrifice to god, and al∣so to deuyls? Truely Chrisostome expoundynge this chapter dothe shew that saint Paule ment this, whose wordes are these, Ita{que} si cu¦pis sanguinem, non imbue altare idolorum caede irrationalium, sed altare meum meo imbue sanguine That is, Therfore yf yu doest de∣sire to haue bloud, do not yu spryn∣cle the ydolles aulter with slaugh¦ter of vnreasonable beastes, but laye vpon my aultare my bloude, reade the chapter of the doctours sentences. Adde to this (good rea∣der) that whiche saynt Paule wri∣teth
the nexte chapter folowynge with these wordes, Quotienscū{que} enim ederitis, panem istum, & ca∣licem istum biberitis, mortem do∣mini annuciabitis, quoad vs{que} ve¦niat. For as ofte as ye shall eate this bread & drinke of this cuppe, ye shall declare the lordes deathe tyll he come. These wordes doo shewe that the masse is a sacrifice as saynt Cyprian doth construe, Cyprianus li▪ 2. epist. 3. and take them, whyche thus saith vpon them, Et quia passionis eius mentionem in sacrificijs omnibus facimus (passio est enim domini sa¦crificium {quod} offerimus) nihil aliud, {qui} quod ille fecit, facere debemus Scriptura enim dicit Quotienscū∣{que} panem istum, &c. And because we make mention, or we remem∣re christes death in all sacrifices or that whiche we do offre is the rdes death) we are bonde to do
no other thinge than that whiche he hath doone. For the scripture sayth, as ofte as ye shall eate this bread. &c. Lo Cypryan did vnder∣stande these Paules wordes spo∣ken of makynge remembraunce of christes death, so that he affyr∣meth, that we do make sacrifice in the masse, and therby is that remē¦braūce made of Christes passion & death. And that this holy martyr so dyd vnderstande saint Paules wordes, it doth playnly appere by his wordes streighte folowynge, which are these, Quotiēscū{que} ergo calicē in cōmemorationē dn̄i, & Cyprianus. passionis eius offerimus, id quod cōstar dn̄m fecisse, faciam{us}. That is in our englysshe speache, thus muche to saye. Therfore as often as we do offre the cuppe in remem¦braunce of our lorde, & of his pas∣sion, let vs do that, whiche it is e∣uydent,
that our lorde dyd. Doth not Cyprian here manifestlye af∣fyrine that by the offering in sacri¦fice of christes bloud cōteined at y• masse in y• chalice, a remembraūce is made of Christes death, accor∣dynge to his, & saint Paules com¦maūdement? but ye wil say to me, An obiectiō that S. Paule in this chapter ma¦keth mention of eatynge, and drin¦kyng the body and bloud of christ and of the remembrynge of christ. & his passion therby, which thing is indifferēt to lay men, & preistes, and therefore Cypryan doth not well gether of Paules wordes here, that Christes deathe is remē¦bred by doyng sacrifice of ye priest at masse. To that I saye, that the The solu∣tion. death, and passion of Christ, is re∣membred by euery laye mannes, and womans housle or receyuyng
of the blessed sacrament of thaul∣ter, but more chiefly, more lyuelye, and expressely, by offeringe of his verye bodye, and bloude, in sacri∣fice, whiche is done of the preist at his masse, than by that eatynge, lyke as the sacrificyng of the pas∣chal, or passeouer lambe, did moch more expressely figure the deathe and sacrifice of our sauyour christ on the crosse, then to come, thā did the eatynge of hym, as no lerned man doth, or can doute, and there∣fore although euery man, and wo∣man receauynge the blessed sacra∣mente of the aulter (whiche is the very bodye, and bloude of Christ, A booke made of the sacramente of thaulter. and not only a figure therof, as I haue declared in my boke made of that matter) dothe by that declare Christes death, and make a remē∣braunce of it, yet that notwithstā∣dynge, the preist in his masse, doth
princypally make remembraunce of that christes death, and so saint Paules mynd was, that the preist in the masse, offeringe Christes fleshe and bloude in sacrifice, doth thereby especially remembre hys deathe, though he doth that secon¦darely in receiuing his body, and bloude, and the laye people do al∣so the same. But ye wyll saye vnto me, that Christes institution, whē Math. . Luc. 2. he bade his disciples to take, cate and drynke, and to do that for his remēbraunce, doth playnely shew that we do only remembre christes death in eatynge, and drinkinge his flesshe and bloude, and not by An obiectiō offering it in sacrifice, and there∣fore saynt Paule mente no suche hynge. Also saynte Paule hym lfe sayeth, when ye shall eate is breade, and drynke of this ppe, ye shall shewe the lordes
death, speakynge not one word of makyng sacrifice, and therfore he oughte not to be wrested in this place to the sacrifice of the masse. To that I aunswer, that Christ, & his scholer saynt Paule, dyd com∣maund, The aun∣swere. that when we do eate hys bodye, and drinke his bloude, we shulde haue his passion in remem¦braūce, or take thē to the remem∣braūce of his death, but yet no mā ought, ne can if he wolde gether thereof, that to shewe the lordes death, is nothynge els but to eate, and drynke the Sacrament in re∣membraunce of christes passion. For if a man do wel and diligent∣ly considre, and pondre Chrystes wordes, when he saith. Hoc facite Luc. 2: 1. Cor. 11. in meam commemorationem, Do ye thys for my remembraunce, he shall see, that it is an other thinge to do that, whiche Chryste com∣maunded
the apostles to do, than onelye to make remembraunce of Chrystes death. For Chryst badde we shulde do that, whyche he dyd, to remembre his death. Now who knoweth not, that the thinge whi∣che is done, and that, wherefore it is done, are not both one thing? But what neade so many wordes at this time, syth Paule sayth no∣thinge agaynst the remēbrynge of christes death, by offring his body & bloude in sacrifice in the masse, but with it rather, as I haue de∣clared by S. Cyprians iudgemēt and sayenge, and I haue proued already by diuers autorities both of the scrypture, and the holy doc∣tours, that Chryste dyd offre his flesshe and bloude at his maundy to god his father in sacryfyce? Therefore I wyll recyte more of the scrypture, to proue that the
holy masse instituted by Chryste our sauiour, is a sacrifice, appea∣synge goddes displeasure, profita¦ble both to the quicke, & also to the deade people. Whereby men maye perceyue howe moch Martin Lu∣ter, Iohan Fryth, with dyuers o∣ther were deceaued in this matter and namely a yonge man of this Praenesis our countrey, in a boke sette forth in latyn, in the which he saith that the holye masse is set vp to the re∣proche or iniurye of Christe, and that Paule, Peter, and Iohan do teache vs the same. The apostle Paule to the Hebrewes the fyfthe Chapter thus wryteth, Omnis pōtifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur in ijs, quae sunt ad deum, vt offerat do∣na, & sacrificia pro peccatis. That is. Euery byshoppe or preist taken out of the nombre of men is ordey¦ned
for men in those thinges, whi∣che This texte proueth that eyther ī our tyme of the newe testa∣mente there is no preist∣hode, which no good chri¦sten bodye wyl affirme or that there is a sa¦crifice pro∣pre to it ad∣uered to be offered for sinne which none can of fre vp but a preiste, and syth there is nor can be anye other suche sacri∣fice but the masse, it must nedes folow that it is a sacri¦fice of the newe test∣ment. do appertaine to god, that he sholde offre gyftes, and sacrifices for synne. This texte is manifeste agaynst Martin Luthers heresy, whiche is, that all Christen people are preistes, and that among chri∣sten folke there is none rather a preiste than all other. For here Paule affirmeth, that a preist is e∣lected, and chosen out of the multi¦tude of the people, therfore some and certayne of the people are preistes, and not all the hole num∣ber of them. Also he sayeth that a preist is ordeined, or instituted, for the multitude of Christen people, to offre gyftes, and sacrifices for theyr synnes, and therfore that is the preistes propre and chiefe of∣fyce, so that it neyther dothe be∣longe to the layte to vse that of∣fice, nor the office of a preist is on∣lye
to preach, as some men vntru∣ly do saye. Moreouer this place declareth playnly, that amonge chrysten people there are preistes, whose office is to offre giftes, as prayer & such other & also sacrifi∣ces, as ye sacrifice of teaching y• ho¦ly word of god to the people, and chiefly the sacrifice of thaulter, the very body & bloud of our sauiour Christe Iesu, which offeryng, and sacrifice doth only appertaine to y• office of a preist, & to euery preiste indifferently, for amonge christen people there are certaine sacrifices belonging only to a preist, as prea¦ching & offering sacrifice at masse, not only of prayer, prayse, & than∣kes geuynge, but also, and princi∣pally of the body & bloud of christ This letter of Paule. omnis ponti∣fex. &c. can not be vnderstāde only of prei¦st after the ordre of Aa¦ron, accor∣dyng to the olde lawe, for Paule {pro}ueth there¦with, that christe whi∣che was no suche preist hath neade of a sacry∣fice moche more excel∣lente than was euer a∣ny other be¦fore hys tyme of the lawe there∣fore yf that place shuld be vnder∣stande only of preistes of Aarons ordre, it could make nothynge for Pau∣les purpose vnder fourme of bread and wyne, wherein consysteth Christes conti¦nuall priesthode after the ordre of
Melchizedec (as it is already de∣clared largely) and also in whiche euery preistes offyce dothe nowe stāde chiefely. Wherefore no man can well denye, but the masse is a sacrifice belongynge to preistes of christes ordre, and of the newe testamēt. This ment also s. Paule in the seuenth Chaptre of his epi∣stle sent to the hebrewes, sayeng yt y• preisthode of Aarō is abolished, & put cleane away, & christes preist¦hode set in his romth, & place whi∣che is after yt ordre not of Aarō, for after yt ordre Christ dyd ones for all offre him self a sacrifice to god his father, as Paule saith often to y• Heb. but after ye ordre of Melch. wherby sacrifice is offred vnder ye forme of bread & wine, in the sacra¦mēt of thaulter. For in this point as I haue afore proued, resteth christes {pro}petual & cōtinual preist∣hode,
& preistes office. Moreouer that the masse is a sacrifice, it may be proued by another text of saint Paule, in this same epistle to the Hebrues the .xiii. chapter, where he thus writeth. Habemus altare, de quo edere non habent potesta∣tem, qui tabernaculo deseruiunt. We christen people haue an aul∣ter, of the which they haue no po∣wer, or auctoritie to eate, that do serue the tabernacle, that is, they Math 5: Cū offers. &c▪ sit mentio al∣taris. &. 1. Cor. 9. whiche do put difference betwixte meate after Moyses law (anulled vtterly by Christes death) & kepe the ceremonies of that lawe, haue none auctoritie, nor power to eate of Christes breade, his very body Hebraeiocāt altare. Misp∣ach, &. 70.  ab oblatione. cōsecrated, and offered in sacrifice on the aulter, whiche we Christen folke haue sette vp in our temples For yf he had not ment thys, why shoulde he haue made any mentiō
of an aulter, which is made for sa∣crifice to be offred therupō to god? The masse therfore is a sacrifice, exercised on the aulter, for the con¦tinuall remembraunce of chrystes death, and blouddy sacrifice once offered vpon the crosse. The name which the greakes do geue thaul∣ter, declareth that it is made for sa¦crifice, for they calle it  thysiasterium a , &  Thy¦sia & Tireo hoc est, sacrificio, ho∣stia, seu victima, & seruo, vel ani∣maduerto, & perpendo, So that they name that an aulter where sa¦crifice is offred or kept, as amōge Christen people nowe is kepte al∣waye the very bodye of our sauy∣our in the boxe or pyxe hangynge vpon or ouer the aulter, and ther∣fore euen the name of an aulter gi¦uen to it by the greakes, whiche Paule dothe vse often, maye and
doth muche proue that the masse 1. Cor. 9. Heb. 13. wont to be sayde on the aulter is a sacrifice, the whiche beyng ones abolyshed, as Martyn Luther, and his scolers goeth about to do but al in vayne, for it hath conti∣nued synce chrystes maūdy (neuer spoken against til Martyn Luter came) and euer shall tyll the worl∣des ende, accordynge to our sauy∣ours Matt. vlt. Luc. 23. 1. Cor. 11: promise, though it shal cease almost wholly & amongest al nati¦ons, a fewe excepted, whan Anti∣christ shall reigne the space of .iii. yeres & the half, as saint Danyell Dan. 7. & 12 writeth. This I say sacrifice done awaye (as it shall neuer be cleane tyl the worldes ende) or yf ye masse were no sacrifice in dede, (as Lu∣ther and his adherentes falselye saye it is none) why shoulde than the aulter beare that hys name in the greake tungue? But nowe
let vs se what the generall coun∣cels, the presidēt, leader, and ruler wherf was y• holy goost y• spirite Math. 16. Math. 18. of truh, as I wyll anon proue by gods grace, & therfore they erred not in their iudgemētes, & senten∣ces, therein establyshed, inacted, & published by their auctoritie. But to y• matter, wherin I wil be short. The gene∣rall coun∣sayls. Our sauiour christ {pro}mised to his apostles, as we read y• .xviii. chap. of Matheus gospel, that he wold be in the myddes among thē, that being .ii. or .iii. were gathered toge¦ther in his name, how moch rather hath he ben presente, where two hundred hathe ben assembled in his name, as hathe ben in the mooste parte of all generall coun∣celles, and therefore they ney∣ther erred in any weyghtye mat∣ter belongynge to oure faythe, as this doth of the sacrifice of y• masse
nor yet could erre, Christ the truth it selfe beynge theyr guyde, & lea∣der. Also he promised to be wyth the churche euer tyll the worldes ende, as Matthew doth tell in the laste chapter, and to sende the ho∣ly Matt. 28 gooste, the spirite of truth, to teache the churche all truthe neces¦sary for christen people to knowe, Io. 16. and that the same shall alwaye, & for euer abyde wyth it, the whiche he hath vndoutedly perfourmed before Luthers byrth, and especy∣ally to the generall councels repre¦sentynge the whole churche, and congregation of christen people, so that they beynge lawfullye ga∣thered together, and assembled, dyd not erre in the faith of Christ, nor yet coulde erre therein. Ther∣fore yf it maye be proued that any suche counsayle hathe approued thys doctryne that the masse is a
sacrifice (as in deede manye hath done) it must neades be very true. Wherefore I wyll breifely shewe what some councels hath thought in this matter of the masse. The counsayle holden at the citie Ancy¦ra Ancyrane counsayle. aboue twelue hundred yeares passed, whiche was before the coū∣sayle of Nycene, hath these wordes folowynge. Presbyteros immolan∣tes videlicet idolis, & iterum lucta men adeuntes. &c. placuit honorē quidem sedis retinere, offerre au∣tem illis non liceat. That is, We ordeine that preistes, which do of∣fre sacrifice to ydols, & go againe to wresteling, shal retayne or kepe still, theyr dignitie, or promotion, but it maye not be lefull for them to offre. Lo this greate assemble of learned coūsaylers, dyd ordeine that preistes, whiche dyd make sa∣crifice to ydolles, shulde not offre
sacrifice to god, whiche must nea∣des be vnderstande of the sacrifice of the masse, for asmuche as none other sacrifice was than, nor now is, propre to preistes. Also the coū∣sayle kepte at Laodicea a citie in  counsayl holden at Laodicea Cap. 58. Assia about twelue hundred yeres before this our tyme, this dyd in∣acte. Non oportet oblationes in domibus ab episcopis, vel presby¦teris offerri. It behoueth not sa∣crifices to be offered of bysshops or preistes in houses. Who can denye, but this ordynaunce was made of the sacrificy of the masse? In lyke maner the counsell holdē Cap. 4. Affricane counsayle. in Affrica, at the which S. Austen was, doth declare by an ordynaū∣ce made of them therin assembled, that ye masse is a sacrifice, sayeng. In sacramētis corporis & sāguinis dn̄i nihil amplius offerat̄{que} quod ipse dn̄s tradidit, hoc est, panis, &
vinū aqua mixtū. That is to wyt. let nothinge more be offered in the sacramentes of our lordes bodye and bloud, thē that, which the lord hym selfe dyd teache, that is bread and wine, meddled wt water. Note Note thys reader. wel here, good reader, two thin∣ges, whiche this acte conteyneth, the fyrst that the masse is a sacri∣fice, because the bodye, and bloud of chryste is offered therein vnder the fourme of breadde and wyne myxed wyth water, the seconde, that oure lorde Christe Iesus dyd teache that nothynge elles, but breade and wyne, meddled with water shoulde be offered in sacri∣fyce in the sacramente of our lor∣des bodye and bloude, whyche doth well agree with Saynt Cy∣pryans sayenge afore rehersed, so that this sacryfyce of the holye
masse, & also what thinges shulde be offered therin, was instituted & ordeyned by christ. Furthermore marke, reader, that this counsell affirmeth, that wine is mixed with water in the chalice at masse, by christes teachynge, as dyd Cypry∣an before that tyme longe, and yet there is no commaundemente in the scrypture to meddle wine with water at the masse, nor yet any one A truth not expressed in scripture. sentence to teache vs that thynge, and therefore they are farre decea¦ued (as I sayde afore) whiche de∣fende that nothinge pleaseth god, whiche is not commaunded in the scripture to be done (as Martyn Luther sayth) and that there is no truth necessarye to be beleued of christen people, but that only, whi∣che is expressely conteyned in scrip¦ture, the whiche howe false it is, I will declare in my boke of traditi∣ons,
whiche god wyllynge, shall  booke of traditions. be shortely put forth. But nowe to the counsayle, whiche was holden at Nicea a citie in Bithinia the yere of our lorde. 327. whiche thus Canone. 18 sayth. Peruenit ad sanctum conci∣lium, {quod} in locis quibusdam, & ciui¦tatibus, ptesbyteris diaconi sacra∣menta porrigant. Hoc ne{que} regu∣la, ne{que} consuetudo tradidit, vt ij, qui offerendi sacrificij non habent potestatem, ijs, qui offerunt, corp{us} Christi porrigant. It came to the holy counsaile, that in certaine pla¦ces and cities, the deacōs do geue to the preistes the sacramentes, whiche neither rule, nor custome, taughte, that they whiche haue no power or auctoritie to offre sacry∣fyce, shulde gyue Christes bodye to them, whiche do offre. Doeste thou not heare (good reader) that this holy generall counsayle, whi∣che
is one of the foure, that saynte Gregorye sayde he estemed as the foure gospels, doth affyrme that the preistes do offre sacrifice, whi∣che the deacons haue none autori∣cie to do, because they are not prei∣stes, and therefore thys was spo∣ken of the sacrifice of the masse on¦lye, for all other sacrifices the dea∣cons maye offre? Who wyl not ra¦ther geue credence to this coūsaile & so many learned men therin assē∣bled, by the holy ghoost, as saynt Gregorie Nazianzene Ieromes maister saith oratiōe .xviii, affir∣mynge thus plainely the masse to be a sacrifice, rather then to Mar∣tyn Luther, with all the rablemēt, of that sorte, whyche hauinge no groūde to leaue to, but scrypture wrested from the ryght meanynge of it, into a wrōge sence, do affirme the contrarye? Also the same coun∣sayle
thus hathe agayne. Genera∣liter autem cuilibet in exitu po∣sito, & poscenti sibi communionis Cap. 13. gratiā tribui, episcopus probabili∣ter ex oblatione dare debebit. But y• Byshop wisely oughte to geue to euery mā at his departyng here hence, & desyrynge the grace of cō∣munyon to be giuen him, the sacri¦fice. But nowe to the fyrste coūsel of Ephesus, whereat saynte Cy∣ryll was, almoste twelue hun∣dred yeres passed, wyth two hun∣dred byshoppes assembled, whiche Iu epistola ad Nestorium. thus hath. Nos annuntiantes mor¦tē fili dei, id est Iesu Christi, & re∣surrectionē eius, & in coelos ascen¦sionem pariter confitentes incru∣entā celebramus in Ecclesiasticis sacrificijs seruitutem, sic etiam ad mysticas benedictiones ac∣cedimus, & sanctificamur parti∣cipes facti corporis, & praeciosi
sanguinis Christi, non vt commu¦nem carnem percipientes, {quod} ab∣sit, nec vt viri sancti facti, & ver¦bo coniūcti, sicut dignitatis vnita∣tem, aut sicut diuinam possidentes habitationem, sed vt vere viuifi∣catricem, & ipsius verbi propriam factam. That is. We declaringe the sonne of goddes death, Iesu Chryste, and confessinge his resur¦rection, and also his assension, in to the heauens, do celebrate a ser∣uyce, or an honouringe, vnbloud∣dye, or without bloude sheddynge in the sacrifices of the church. Al∣so we so come to the mysticall bles∣synges (the consecration) and are halowed, or made holye, or cleane, beynge made partakers of Chri∣stes bodye, and preciouse bloude, not receauyng it as common flesh (whiche god forbydde) nor as of a man made holy, and ioyned to the
worde, as a vnitie of dygnitie, or as possessyng a godly habitation, but as flessh verelye geuyng lyfe, and made propre to the word, that is the sonne of god. Doest thou not see here (good chrysten reader) that this greate counsayle of two hondred byshoppes, amonge the whyche saynt Cyrille was heade and chiefe, doth call ye seruice done of the preistes at masse, a seruyce Obserue this well reader. vnbloudye in the sacrifices of the churche? can that be otherwise ta∣ken, thā of the sacrifice of ye masse, wherein the preiste serueth and ho¦noureth god by offerynge to hym in sacryfice the verye bodye and bloude of his sonne Christe Iesu without bloud sheddynge, vnder the fourme of breade and wyne? Heb. 9. &. 1. Christe on the crosse ones offered him selfe a blouddye sacrifice to god for our synnes, and is not af∣ter
that forte by his bloude shed∣dyng offered in the masse, because he can dye no moore, as Paule saythe to the Ramaynes the syxte chapter, yet that notwythstan∣dynge, Christ ones offered vp∣pon the cros is day¦lye offered at masse. he is daylye offered in the masse withoute bloude sheddynge as thys holye counsayle sayethe, and al the wrytters vpon the scrip¦ture, bothe latins, and grekes spe∣cially. This counsayle moreouer affyrmeth in theyr epystle sente to Nestorius the heretique, that the worthy receauers of Christes bles¦sed The masse is a sacry∣fyce propiti¦atorye. bodye and bloude are made ho¦lye, or cleane thereby, and therfore the masse is a sacryfyce not of prayse onelye, but also of appea∣synge goddes wrath, and purcha∣synge to vs cleannes, or holynes. Fynallye it is to be noted diligent¦ly, that this great assemble of ler∣ned
byshoppes calleth Chrystes flesshe. Viuificatricem, that is, the gyuer of lyfe, and that whiche ge∣ueth lyfe to them, whiche lefullye and purelye do receaue it, the whiche declarethe, that Chryste sayenge, Caro non prodest quic∣quam, Io: 6. the flesh profiteth nothing, dydde not meane that hys flesshe worthelye receaued vnder fourme what christ ment saieng the flesshe profytethe nothynge. of breade in the holye Sacra∣mente dothe profytte nothynge, as the heretyques do expounde it, but that the Iewes carnall vnderstandynge hys wordes spo∣ken of the eatynge of his flessh, whereby they thoughte he mente they shoulde eate it rawe, bloud∣dy, or sodden, cutte out in peeces, as meate is wonte to be solde in the shambelles, shulde profit no∣thyng, as bothe Saynt Austen &
Cyryllus also doth expounde that wordes of Christ in Iohan, ye flesh {pro}fiteth nothyng, or els christ ment that his flesshe of it selfe withoute the spirite ioyned to it, and ye god∣hede, as the Iewes beleued it was not, but onely the flesshe of a pure man, & not of him which was very god & mā could profyt nothīg, but A booke of the sacra∣ment of the aulter. of this text I haue spokē at large in my boke of the sacrament of the aulter, therfore nowe I wyll passe¦ouer it whiche I haue touched by the waye, takynge an occasion of this holy counsailes wordes, affir¦mynge christes blessed flesshe, be∣ynge ioyned with the godhead, to gyue man lyfe, when it is worthe∣lye receaued of hym in the sacra∣mente of the aulter. Nowe to go forwarde, I wyll reherse the wor∣des of a counsell holden at Neo∣cēsaria, Cano .vli. whych are these, Presbyte¦ri
ruris in ecclesia Ciuitatis epis∣copo praesente, vel praesbyteris vr¦bis ipsius, offerre non possunt, nec panem sanctificatum dare, calicē∣{que} porrigere. That is. Preistes of the countrey, or that dwell out of the citie, may not offre in ye church nor geue the breade halowed, and the cuppe, the bysshoppe beynge present, or the preistes of the same citie. Here is euident mentiō made of the preistes offerynge sacrifice vnder the fourme of bread and al∣so of wyne conteined in the chalice This hathe in fewe wordes the counsaile kept at Laodicea, a citie The coun∣sel kepte at Laodice. in Asia, sayenge, Tunc Laici sibi tribuent, & ita sancta celebrabitur ob latio. that is to witte. Than the laye men shall geue to them selfe peace (by kyssyng the paxe), and so the holy offeringe, or sacrifice shal be celebrate. What man wyll, or
can, yf he wolde neuer so gladlye, denye that this was spoken of the sacrifice of the masse? Seing ther∣fore, good reader, that not onelye fygures of the olde testament, the holye prophetes, and dyuers tex∣tes of the newe testamente wyth the expositions of the eldeste, and greateste learned doctoures, but also these generall counsayles, and dyuers other, whiche were ledde, and guided with CHRI∣STES presence, and the ho∣lye ghostes alsoo, haue thus playnely, and strongelye sette vp, and establyshed the sacryfyce of the masse, ageynste the whyche no man dydde speake, or wryte by the space of .xv. hundred yeres, whan Martyn Luther began to barke agaynste it, as the dogges are wonte to barke at the lyghte of
the moone in the nyght, geue thou rather stedfaste credence vnto all those wytnesses approuynge, yea prouynge the masse to be a sacri∣fyce, than to Martyn Luther lu∣tynge out of tewne. Now though Luther In∣teth oute of tewne. this whyche is alreadye wrytten in thys booke were ynoughe, and sufficiente, too persuade euerye man, not wedded to his opinion, to beleue that the masse is a sacri∣fyce, appeasynge goddes wrathe towardes man, yet to stoppe all bablers mouthes, I wyll goo further in thys matter, and shewe what the holye apostelles haue doone, touchynge this thynge be∣fore whome CHRISTE made hys maundy, and to whom he gaue power, autoritye, and al∣so commaundemente, to offre hys bodye and bloudde in sacryfyce,
as he hadde done him selfe before, Luc. 2: 1. Cor. 11. sayenge to them. Hoc facite in me¦am cōmemorationem. Do ye this in remembraunce of me. These dis¦ciples of Christ did make certaine Canons, or rules for the instructi∣on of Christen people, the whyche saint Clement, the apostle Pau∣les company on in preachinge the gospell, dyd gather together, and put them in writinge, as Damas∣cene Lib. 4. ca. 18. saith, whiche dyd so greatly esteme, and regarde the same ru∣les, that he dyd numbre, and re∣herse them amonge the bookes of goddes holye worde, and therfore their wordes ought to be without al dout beleued. They thus write, Si quis episcopusvel presbyter {pre}∣ter Canone. 3. ordinationē domini, alià quedā in sacrificio offerat super altare, id est, aut mel, aut lac, aut pro vino siceram &c. contra cōstitutionem
domini faciēs, deponatur congruo tempore, If any bysshoppe, or prieste do offre vpon the aulter in Note rea∣der the holy apostles iud¦gementē in this matter sacrifice certen other thynges be∣syde ouer or aboue the lordes ordi¦naunce, that is to wyt, either hony or mylke, or in stede of wyne, drink made of corne or fruites, doynge against oure lordes ordynaunce, let him be deposed in a mete tyme. Lo the holye apostles of Christe, whiche learned the gospell of him, and reaceaued the holye ghost, the spirite of truth, teaching al trouth The masse is a sacry∣ficeinstitute by Chryst. to them, do playnely affirme, that the masse sayde of the preiste, is a sacrifice, of chrystes owne institu∣tion, and ordinaunce. Dydde not they knowe the truthe (supposest thou good reader) better thē Mar¦tyn Luther or any of his scoole? Heare what Tertulian wryt with in clxxx. yeares of chryste sayenge Tertul. de praescri.
Veritas illis adiudicanda est▪ qui in ea regula in cedunt, quam eccle∣siae ab apostolis, apostoli a Christo Christus a deo accepit. That is, the truth must be adiudged to thē whiche do walke in that rule, whi∣che the churches or congregatiōs of the faithfull, haue receaued of the apostles, the apostles of christ, Christe of God, but the churches dydde receaue this doctrine, cōcer¦nynge the sacrifice of the masse, of the apostelles, as Saynt Ire∣neus testyfyeth, whose wordes are Lib. 4. Ca. 32. rehersed before, and here the same doth also appeare playnelye by thys canon, or rule made of them, therefore the churches of Chryste, haue the truthe on theyr syde, whiche do go in this the apostles cannon, or rule sette forth for that verye same thynge. But yet ones
more lette vs se what the apostles haue sayde in this matter, which thus doth speake. Si quis episco∣pus, Canone. 2. aut presbyter, aut diaconus, aut quilibet ex sacer dotali cata∣logo, facta oblatione non commu¦nicauerit, aut dicat causam, vt si fu¦erit rationabilis ueniam consequa∣tur, aut si non dixerit communio¦ne priuetur, tanquam quipopulo causa laesionis extiterit, dans su∣spicionem de eo, qui sacrifica∣nerit, quod non recte obtulerit. That is in oure englysh tongue. If anye Bysshoppe, or preiste, or deacon, or who thou wylte of the numbre of preistes, or spiry∣tuall men, shall not receaue his housle, whan the sacryfyce is offered, eyther lette hym tell the cause thereof, that yf it be reasonable, he maye gette
pardon, or yf he do not shewe the cause wherfore he dyd not receaue his communion at masse, let hym not haue his housell lyke as he, which gaue an occasiō of harme or hurte to the people, geuyng to thē a suspicion of him, which dyd offre sacrifice yt he did not offre or make sacrifice well ynoughe, or after a ryght fasshyon. Hytherto the apo∣stles of our sauiour christ in theyr boke of canons, or rules, whose wordes are so playne, & clere vp∣pon oure syde, agaynst Marten Luther, and his scholers, that no∣thyng can be more plaine. Ther∣fore let Luther go wyth his fon∣de wycked, & dyuelly she heresye agaynst the sacrifice of the masse (good Christen reader) & folowe christes, and his holye apostles Doctryne, so clerely makynge for this truth. Moreouer. s. Audrew,
one of the apostels, dyd offre chri∣stes Saynt An∣drewe at masse offred sacrifice. bodye in sacrifice at his masse as he sayde hym selfe to Aegeas the tyraunt Philaletus testifieng that wrytting the apostles lyues, whose wordes are these. Ego om∣nipotenti deo omni die sacrifico, non thuris fumum, nec hircorum, aut tautorum sanguinem, sed im∣ma¦culatum agnum quotidie in al∣tari sacrifico. I do (sayth he) make sacrifice euery day to god almigh¦tye, not offering in sacrifice smoke of Frankynsence, nor the bloud of goates, or of bulles, but I offre in sacrifice daylye on the aultare the vndefyled lambe. Be not these ma¦nifest wordes, and inough to satis¦fye euery man, beynge not ouer moche geuen to the blynde errour of Luther? Saynt Clement, whi∣che S. Clemēt. was a companion of Paules in teachyng the gospell of Chryste
vsed this fourme (as Bassario te∣stifieth) when he dydde saye masse Rogamus ut mittas domme spiri∣tum Basssario libri de sacramen∣to altaris. sanctum tuum super hoc sacri¦ficiū, qui efficiat hunc panem cor¦pus Christi tui, & quod in calice, est, sanguinē filij tui. That is. We beseche the o lorde to sende thy ho∣ly spirite vpon this sacrifice, whi∣che maye make this breade the bo∣dye Saint Cle∣ment Pau∣les compa∣nyon ma∣keth menti¦on of th masse, as we reade in the .lxxiii. ca¦non & there∣fore it is no new thinge as Luther sayth it is. of thy christe, or annoynted, & that thynge which is in the cuppe or chalyce, the bloud of thy sonne. Here we se that saint Clemēt, whi∣che was instructed by the apo∣stels in Christes faith, & religion, toke the masse to be a sacrifice. Whether is he more of credence or Martyn Luther? Nowe t make ones an ende of the prouynge the truth, I wyll reherse the auncient doctours sayenges in this matter and that done, I wyll aunswere
to the scriptures wrested frō their true sense to the mayntenaunce of this heresy by Martyn Luther & his scholers. ¶ What the doctours haue said in the matter of the sacrifice of the masse, here it appeareth euident∣ly, Interroga ob¦secro genera∣tionem pristi∣nam & prae∣parate ad in∣uestigationē yatrumtuorū Iob. 8. and also that we ought to beleue them agre∣mge together in any thynge touchyng our faith, for because than they erre not. THe scripture is ve¦ry hard to be per∣ceiued, Ne transferas termins an∣tiquos, quos fecerunt pa∣tres. prou. 23 as s. Peter saith in his second epystle, though it seme or be iudged neuer so plaine and easye to some men, whiche in verye dede are not
learned therein, and therfore it is not conuement that euery man do vnderstande it, after his owne fan¦sie, for that hath bene, and yet is, the cause of many errours, but we The scrip∣ture is hard to be vnder¦stande, and the true sense of it must be lear¦ned of the holy doc∣tours. muste leaue, and cleaue to the aun¦ciente doctors expositions made, and publisshed therevpon. For as god chose them to be doctors, and teachers of his worde, and gaue to thē his holy spirite (which now these dayes many do arrogantly callenge but vntruely) euē so they dyd spende theyr tyme whollye in praier, and studieng the scripture, that thereby they myghte atteyne the true sense thereof. But ye will saye to me, as many fonde people are wont to say, may not god now giue to men the spirite of truth, as he dyd to the apostles, or els to the doctours of the church? Is he not nowe both as stronge, that he can
do it, and also as kynde and libe∣rall, that he wyll do it, as he was before our tyme? To that blynde reasons I aunswere that god can do it if he lyst, but he can do many and sundrye thynges, whiche he wyll neuer do. For he can make this man a kynge, reysynge hym (as Dauyd sayeth) a poore man, from the donge hill, and that man a byshoppe, whiche he wyll neuer do. The thinges whiche he doth are euer done in a semely ordre, as Paule affirmeth. Nowe an ordre Rom. 13. requireth, that in Christes church some shulde be teachers, and some learners, some maisters, and some scholers, as in mannes bodye, to the whiche Paule compared the 1. Cor. 12. churche, some membres haue one office, and workynge, and some an other, and not all one office. The eyes do se, the eares heare, so the
doctours seyng the truth do teach, and the learners doo heare theyr lessons. Therefore god made not Saint Ia∣mes the thirde chap¦ter exhorteth men not to couete the office of a teacher for the danger therof, Math. 15. all men indifferently doctours, as nowe men wolde be, foule decea∣uynge both themselues, and also many other, while they beynge blynde, do leade the blynde, and falle thereby bothe together in to the denne of erroure, and damna∣cion, but (as Paule saith) he gaue to the instructynge of hys people some apostelles, some prophettes, some euangelystes, some shepe∣herdes, and some doctours, and therefore our sauiour sayd to hys disciples: Vobis datū est nosse my¦steriū regni dei. It is geuē, not to Luc. 8. all men, but to you to knowe the mysteries or secretes of the scryp∣ture, the knoweledge of the whi∣che is the keye of heauen gates. Dydde not god appoynte Esdras
to teache the lawe to the people, as we reade in the scrypture, whi∣che sayth. Esdras interpretatus est eis verba legis. Esdras dydde ex∣pounde to them the wordes of the law. Paule wrotte his epystles to the bysshoppes, that they shoulde declare them to the people vnlear¦ned. All sortes of meates are not Vide Gregoir Nazianze. in apologetico. meete for all ages of folke. Milke is good for chylderne, stronger meates for yonge lustye men, moyster meates are beste for a∣ged men, whyche are drye of com∣plexion, 1. Cor. 3. in lyke maner all men are not apte and meete to seede on all the scripture indyfferentlye, but Heb. 5. those onelye, whiche haue good wyttes and haue spent theyr stu∣dye therin by gods callyng. Now it is true, the moore pitie, that Saynte Hierome. wrytte in an
epistle to his frende Paulyne, com¦playnynge lamentably of the vn∣reuerent handlynge of scrypture. Hierom epi∣stola. 8: Saynt Cle¦ment sayth the seconde boke to S. Iames, the law of god can not be vnderstand withoute a teachr. Note good reader the vnreuerent handlg of scriptu, Thus he sayth. The husband mē, morter makers, smythes, cutters of woode, woull men also, and ful∣lers, and other diuers craftes mē, abs{que} doctore esse nō possūt, quod cupiunt, without a teacher can not be that whiche they couette to be, that is, cunnynge in theyr craftes. Quod medicorum est, promittū medici, tractant fabrilia fabri. Sola scripturarum ar est, quam omnes passim vendicant, hanc garrula a∣nus, hanc delrus senex, hanc so∣phista verbosus, hanc vniuersi prae¦sumunt, lacerant, docent, ante{que} discunt. In englyshe. The phisiti∣ons do promyse that, whiche doth appertayne to them, the smythes or craftes men, whiche worke with the hande, do handle, or exercyse
thynges belongynge to hādycraf∣tes men or smythes. Onelye the craftes of scrypture is, whiche all men indifferently do clayme, this the bablynge olde wyfe, this the dotynge olde man, this the sophi∣ster full of wordes, this all men do arrogantlye take vpon them to know, they rent it in peces, or geue to it many woundes, they teache it afore they learned it. This wrote saint Ierom against men, & womē of his time, whiche dyd arrogant∣ly, and vnreuerently handle gods holy word, but what wold he now saye (thinkeste thou good reader) If he were lyuynge at this tyme, whan men and women are in this matter so fautye, as they neuer haue bene heretofore? wolde no he greatly lament, & bewaile this our wonderfull blyndnes, and de∣testable presumption, whereby we
neyther by shame, nor yet by feare do forbeare to clayme vnto vs the knowledge of the scriptures, whi¦che we neuer studied, or els but ve¦ry lytell, yea we stycke not to cal∣lenge to vs the holy goost, the spi∣rite of truth, cōparyng our selues therein with the apostles of christ, whiche anone became teachers of the gospell, beynge fyshers rude and vnlearned a litle before This Such flatte¦rynge prea∣chers whom Saint Gra¦gorye Nazi¦anzene Ie∣roms may∣ster calleth e¦uentriloquos that is spea¦kers of the belye, beca¦se in al thir words my prouide for the blye. is a straunge fondnes, and a mar∣ueilous presumption, our lorde a∣mende it. Some preachers haue not ben ashamed in their sermons to brynge the lay people into this fooles paradise, praysyng their cū¦nyng in the scriptures, which they neuer vnderstode them selues, but they studie to please theyr hearers and seinge their eares itche, they clawe them and with pleasaunte saienges they deceaue ye innocētes
hartes. But I will recyte a lytle more of saynt Ieroms wordes out of the saide epistle, which thus wri¦teth: Alij adducto supercilio gran∣dia verba trutinantes, inter mulier culas de sacris literis philosophan¦tur. Other wayenge, examinynge or iudgyng with a stately, or a lou¦rynge countenaunce greate wor∣des, doo reason lyke studentes of wysedome amonge women of the holy scripture. Was this at anye tyme truer (good reader) then it is euen nowe in our dayes? yet Ie∣rome goth on sayeng. Alij discūt (proh pudor) à faeminis quod doce ātviros, et ne parū hoc sit, qua dā fa¦cilitate borū immo audacia edis∣serūt women do teache men, and men o∣ther that, which they vnderstand not them sel¦ues. alijs, quod ipsi nō intelligūt. Other lerne (alas for shame fast∣nes) of women, yt which they shold teach mē, & lest that myght be a ly∣tle, they declare to other wt a certē easynes, or lightenes of wordes,
yea rather with boldenes, or tru∣stynge well in them selues, that thynge, whiche they them selues vnderstand not? Do not men euen so nowe amonge vs, whome wo∣men arrogantelye do teache, and men also that thynge whiche they do not perceaue them selues? Saynt Gregory Ieroms maister sayth, all suche men are touched in the common prouerbe, In dolio dis¦cere artem figuli, hoc est in pericu¦lo animarū doctrinam discere pie∣tatis. To lerne a potters crafte in a tunne, pype, butte, or a hogges heade, that is, in the daunger of soules to learne the doctryne of the knowledge of god. Hytherto that saynt, playnlye reprouynge As I of kēt many men of our tyme. Some wo¦men can say moche of the scripture without the boke, but they vnder∣stande almoost no worde therof.
They are not ashamed (suche is their shameles pride, and impudēt arrogācy) to boast that they haue ouercome, and confounded euen the doctours of diuinitie by reaso¦nynge in scripture, whan in deede they do but bable without lerning and all reason, yf they meete with any cunnynge man therin, whiche I my selfe haue often times pro∣ued true. Let thē beware of gods curse, whiche he threteneth to all suche by his prophet. sayenge. Esa. 5. Vae qui sapientes estis in oculis vestris, & corā vobismetipsis pru∣dentes. Cursed be you whiche are wyse in your owne sighte, and po∣lytike before youre owne selues. Doth not this gods curse touche them, whiche do thinke that their wittes. and learning doth farre ex¦cell As Lather oth, & hys scholers. the wittes, & lerning of al y• aū¦cient wryters, and do folowe their
owne fonde fantasie, and leude dreames in construynge, and vn∣derstandynge goddes holy worde rather thē the olde writers? Saint Basyle & saint Gregory Ieromes maister were not so proude, and arrogant as those nowe be. For they beynge very excellently well lerned in the tongues, in logicke, thetorike, philosophie, and diuers other sciences, sought the vnder∣standynge of the scripture oute of their elders bokes, as the historie Lib 1. cap. 9▪ of Eusebius doth reherse sayeng, They gaue their studye to holy scripture, not folowing their own Scripture must be lear¦ned of the doctours. presūptiō, but ye writinges of their aūcetours, & their autoritie to vn∣derstand ye same, which it was eui∣dent to haue reaceaued the rule to perceaue ye scripture of thapostels and their successours. Contrary to this men doo in these miserable
dayes, of their owne heades & wit¦tes, thinking to vnderstand gods word, as did the heretike Aetius, Triper. Histo. li. 5 Cap. 45. saienge yt god had opened to hym those thinges, whiche he hyd from his apostels, as the storie maketh mention. Doth not euen so at this our time Martin Luther, and his scholers, whiche deny the masse to be a sacrifice, whan the apostles taughte the cleane contrary, as I haue afore declared largely? S. Dioni lib. de caelesti hie∣rarchia. Ca. I, Dionise Paules scholer, teacheth vs an other lesson, how we shulde study scripture, & whom we shuld folow in ye vnderstādyng of it, his wordes are these. Ad sāctissimarū scripturarū intelligentias, prout il¦las a patribus accepimus, contu∣endas pro viribus pergamus. Lette vs procede to loke on the vnderstandynge of the moost ho∣ly scriptures, accordynge to oure
strengthe, or power, as we haue harde, or receaued of ye elders. Do we not here see, that this father, whiche was a greate philosopher, and verye well learned in dyuers knowledges afore he was conuer¦ted by saint Paule, & was taught the fayth by hym, wolde not pre∣sume to studye the scripture with∣out the doctours, and elders bo∣kes, whiche he studied to vnder∣stande it? Therefore if thou wilte study ye scripture to profyt therein reade saint Austens bokes, sainte Ieromes, Chrisostoms, Ambroses Cyprians, and suche other, whiche do sincerely, truely and catholyke¦ly expownde the scriptures to the auauncinge of the truth, and the thrustynge downe of errours, and heresie. Preistes of Cesarea cappa docie coulde not be persuaded to leaue the faith, Q eis suffecerint
ad vtilitatem sui antiquae patrum narrationes, & velut quaedam tur∣res murum fidei indeclinabilem Triper. Histo. li. 7 Cap. 6. seruauerunt, Bycause the aunciēt expositions of the fathers sufficed them to their proffitte, and dydde kepe, lyke as certaine towers, the wall of faith vpright. And where men saie yt god is as lyberall now as he was in the apostles tyme to them, and therefore he can geue euen nowe also the holye ghost to euery man, and woman, for the vn¦derstandynge of his worde ye scrip¦ture. I graunte that god is nowe as lyberall in dede as he was thā, but yet thervpon it foloweth not that he dothe nowe geue the spi∣rite of knoweledge in the holye scripture without all laboure and why god did geue to fys∣shers his ho¦ly spirite to vnderstand the scripture studye as he then dydde to his a∣postles, to confounde the greate clerkes, and lerned men by the sim¦ple,
and vnlearned fysshers, and by ther teachyng to conuert to the faith the hole world, that thereby his almighty power might be kno¦wen, his blessed name glorified, & the vertue of his sonnes deathe christ our sauiour estemed y• cause (as in dede it was) of that so great a myracle. This, I saye, was the cause whye at the begynnynge of christes religion and fayth, rude fysshers hadde geuen them suche knoweledge in the scripture with∣out all labour, and study geuen to it of their partes. God thē shewed hys greate lyberalytye, in feading fyue thousande men, besyde wo∣men and chyldren, with fiue barly Io. 6. loues, and two fysshes, as sainte Iohan testyfyeth, but shal we ther¦fore loke for anye lyke thinge now in oure dayes? Chryste at that
tyme dydde worke dyuers myra∣cles, whych he worketh not at this tyme, nor neuer wyll hereafter. He is therein lyke to one that plan∣tethe yonge trees, or setteth her∣bes, whyche while they be tendre, and yonge, not yet well rooted in the earthe, he often watereth, but after they are growen vp, and haue taken well rootes, than he ceassethe waterynge them, so christ A similitude oure sauyoure, when he planted the faythe at the fyrste, dydde wa∣ter it wyth sundrye, and dyuerse myracles, and whan he sawe it well, and surelye rooted in mens hartes, than he lefte waterynge it with myracles. Therefore let vs not looke to receaue the holye goost to teache vs the scryptures, and the vnderstandynge of them wythoute oure studye, and labour
as the apostles ones dydde by mi∣racle, for the cōuersion of ye worlde to the faith, but let vs learne it of the holy doctours, and of the prei∣stes, which are learned, and whose office it is to teache the vnlearned multitude, as witnesseth the holy prophet Malachias saieng. Labia Malach. 2. sacerdotis custodiunt scientiam, & legem requirent ex ore eius, quia angelus domini exercituum est. That is. The preistes lyppes do kepe cunnynge, and the laye people shall often seke, or demaūd of his mouth the lawe, for asmuch as he is the messanger of the lorde of hostes, that is of aungels, whi∣che are called the hoostes of hea∣uen. Aeto. 20. Heb. 13. He is sent by goddes assigne∣ment to teache the vnlearned, and doth take charge of theyr soules, as the scripture in manye places wytnesseth. Nowe I wyll shewe
the holy doctours myndes in this our cōtrouersye, sens we ought to folowe their iudgement in the vn¦derstandynge of the scriptures, as I haue nowe declared, that by thē we maye perceaue which doctrine is true, and catholique, and which is false, and hereticall. I wyll yet recite here but a certaine of ye most auncient, and eldest writers on the scripture, for the yongest almost The olde doctours sayeuges. of thē shal be about nyne hundred yeres olde, because men saye that the sacrifice of the masse was inuē¦ted of late, and set vp by preistes coueteousnes for lucre, that they maye se theyr folye, and forsake it in tyme, leaste it at the length (as it must neades) brynge them to vt¦ter confusion, in bodye, and soule. But to the rehersal of the olde wri¦ters in this matter, amonge the whiche Theophilactus shall occu¦py
the first place, sayeng: Quaere Theophilac. In Heb, 10 aliquis, num & ipsi sine sanguine immolamus? Ita quidem, sed Chri∣sti tunc reminiscimur obitus, & v∣na nobis est immolatio, nō multae, quandoquidem est & ille semel oblatus, eundem enim semper of∣ferimus, vnus est enim sanguis, & semel effusus. Vnum est corpus nō multa, {qui}uis fuerit pro multis obla∣tum, & item vna est, quae offertur, hostia. Hanc nam{que} semper ut prae¦sentem offerimus. That is. Some body wyl demaunde wether we do sacrifice without bloud or no? we do so surely, but then we remembre Christes death, and we haue one sacrifice, not manye, for as moche as Christe also hath bene ones of∣fered in sacryfyce, for we offre al∣waye the sam, the bloude is one, & shedde ones. The body is one, not many, thoughe it bathe bene
offered vp in sacryfyce for manye, and also the hoste is one, which is offred. For we alwaye offre that same as present, hitherto Theoph. No man can desire playner wor∣des than these are, of this greate clerke, to proue that the masse is a sacrifice. Rupert also confirmethe this, saieng. Quotidie in altari san¦cto Lib. 1. comēt. in Dani. ca. 14. oblationes eius, sacrū celebra∣mus mysteriū. We do daiely cele∣brate in the holy aulter the holye mystery or sacramēt, y• sacrifices of christ, Fulgentius whiche was a∣boue a M. yeres sence agreeth wt Fulgentius li. 2. ad Monimū this verity, saieng. Dicis te a non∣nullis īterrogatū de sacrificio cor∣poris & sāguinis χρι, quod pleri{que} soli patri existimāt immolari, cū ad patrē litātis destinatur intentio, sa∣crificij munus omni trinitati, vno eodē{que} offertur litātis officio. That is in our language. Thou sayeste, that yu was asked of some
men of the sacrifice of the bodye & bloude of christ, whiche manye do iudge to be offred in sacrifice only to the father, whan the intente of him, whiche pleaseth god with sa∣crifice, is appointed to the father, the gyfte of sacrifice is offered to the hole trinitie, with one, & the sa∣me office of him, which obtayneth his desire of god by sacrifice. Also he aunsweringe to the thirde que∣stion proposed to him by his frēde Monim{us}, sayth thus. Thou doest aske, yf the sacrifice be offered to y• whole trinitie, wherefore the sen∣dynge onelye of the holye goost is desyred to sacrifice, or consecrate y• gyfte of our sacrifice? As verelye (that I so may say) god the father hym selfe, from whome the holye goost procedeth, coulde not halow the sacrifice offred to hym, or the sonne hymselfe coulde not make
holye the sacrifice of his body, the whiche he offered to raunsom vs, or els that the holye goost shulde so be sente to consecrate the chur∣ches sacrifice, as the father and ye sonne were not presente, helpinge them, whiche do offre sacrifice. At the length he concluding this mat¦ter thus writeth. Quando aūt con¦gruentius ad consecrandum sacri∣ficium corporis Christi sācta eccle¦sia (quae est corpus eius) sancti spi∣ritus deposcat aduentum? Aedifi∣catio Marke this reader. spiritualis opportunius nun∣{que} petitur, {qui} cum ab ipso Christi corpore (quod est ecclesia) in sa∣cramento panis ac calicis ipsum Christi corpus & sanguis offertur. Calix enim, quem bibimus, com∣municatio 1. Cor. 10. sanguis Christi est, & panis, quem frangimns, participa∣io corporis domini est, vt ait apo∣stolus. That is. But whan maye
the holy church (which is Christes body) more conueniently aske the holy gostes cōming to consecrate the sacrifice of christes body? A spi¦rituall edifienge is neuer desired in duer time, than when the same Christes bodye and bloude is of∣fered in sacrifice, of that his bodye (whiche is the church) in the sacra¦mente of breade and wyne. For the cuppe of whiche we do drynke, is 1. Cor. 10. the communion of christes bloude and the breade, that we breake, is the partetakynge of oure lordes bodye. Hytherto this holye father Fulgentius, whole wordes are as manyfeste for the sacryfice of the masse, as they can be, therefore I wyll speake no more of them, but 1. Ambrose l0 1. offi. ca. 41: reherse saint Ambrose iudgement, that was aboue eleuen hundred yeres synce, whiche this hathe, re∣hersyng saint Laurences wordes
spoken to Syxtus the bysshoppe, whā he was ladde to suffre martir¦dome. Quo sacerdos sācte sine di∣acono {pro}peras? Nū{que} sacrificiū sine ministro offerre consueueras. Cui cōmisisti dn̄ici corporis consecra∣tionē, To. 2. li. 1. offi. cap. 41. cui cōsūmādorū cōsortiū sa¦cramētorū, huic cōsortiū tui sāgui nis negas. Whither goest yu hastly o holy preist wtout a deacō? Thou wast neuer wont to offre sacrifice wtout a ministre. To whom thou hast commited the consecratynge of our lordes body, and the felow∣shyp of sacramentes to be accōplis¦shed, to him thou deniest the felow¦ship of thy bloud. Again in a certē oration funeral of the death of va¦lentynyane the emperoure, thus he speaketh to Valentynyane, and To. 1: Gratian. Nulla vos nox non do∣natos Prayers & the masse do auayle the dead. aliqua praecum mearum Cōtextione transcurret, omnibus
frequentabo oblationibus. I wyl (saith Ambrose) praye for you eue¦rye nyghte, I wyll accustomelye offre sacryfyce for you. Also to one Faustine, ouer muche lamentyng his systers deathe, after manye Lib. 2. epist. 8. wordes spoken to comforte hym, thus he writeth, Ita{que} non tam de∣plorandam, {qui} frequentandam ora¦tionibus reor. Nec maesticandam lachrymis tuis, sed magis oblatio∣nibus animam eius deo commen∣dandam arbitror. Therefore I thinke that she ought not so moch to be lamented as to be praied for accustomedly. Neyther I thynke she shoulde be made heuye wyth thy teares in wepinge, but rather hir soule to be commended to god wt sacrifices. Are not these playne wordes to testifie the holye masse to be a sacrifice profitable for the Prayers & the masse do auayle the dead. deade, & that also prayers of thē
which do lyue here, be auayleable for them? besyde this he saith in an epistle to Theodosius the empe∣rour, Lib. 5. epist. 28 whom he had excommunica¦ted for the murder done in Thes∣salia at his commaundemente. Ego causam cōtumaciae nullā in te habeo, sed habeo timoris, offerre nō audeo sacrificiū, si volueris assi¦stere. I haue no cause in ye of diso∣bedience, or froward wyll, but I haue a cause of feare, for I dare not offre sacrifice, if thou wylte be present: was not this ment of the Excommu∣nicatiō once was regar∣ded. sacrifice of the masse, whiche saint Ambrose sayde he durste not offre yf Theodosius themperour were in the temple, because he was ex∣communicate? Thē excommuni∣catiō was feared of the highest e∣states, and the masse had in great honour, as it ought in dede to be, though both of them now are lyt∣tell
regarded, the more is the pite. Ambros. Mar. lib. 5. epist. 5. Missam sacere caepi, dum{que} offero, raprū cognouicastu lum. S. Austens sentences. lib, 2. retract, Ca. 21, But of sainte Ambrose ynoughe. Now saint Austen shall speake in this controuersie, whose learning farre amoūteth and excelleth any mans, yt hath ben synce y• apostles tyme, especially in the holy scrip∣ture. He was aboue eleuen hun∣dred yeres passed, which thus sai∣eth. Hylarius quidā laicus, nescio unde aduersus dei ministros, vt fie¦ri assolet, irritatus, morem, qui tūe apud carthaginem caeperat, vt hymni ad altare dicerentur de psal morum libro, siue ante oblationē, siue cum distribueretur populo, quod fuisset oblatum, maledica re¦prehensione lacerabat. That is. Hylarye a certayne laye man, ken¦dled wit wrath, as it is wont to be, against gods mynysters, wherby I knowe not, did breake wt cursed reprouynge the custome, whiche
than began at the citie carthage, yt hymnes shulde be sayde out of the boke of psalmes, at the aulter, ey∣ther before the offerynge of sacri∣fice, or whan that, which was offe∣red, shoulde be dystributed to the people. Imprynte, good reader, these wordes surely in thy mynde, for they do playnlye make for the defence of the sacrifice of ye masse. But yet heare hym againe, affyr∣mynge that same thynge more playnely, with these fewe wordes. Augustinus. To. 2. epist, 23. Marke rea¦der, howe Christ was ones ffred in sacrifice, & yet he is daily offred in the masse Nonne semel immolatus est chri∣stus in semeripso, & tamen in sa∣cramento non solum per omnes paschae solemnitates, sed omni die populis immolatur, nec vti{que} mentitur, qui responderit eum im∣molari. Is not CHRISTE ones offered vppe a sacryfyce in hym selfe, and that not wyth∣standynge he is offered in the
sacrament for the people, not only through all the feastes of easter, but also euery daye, nother truely he doth lye, whiche aunswerethe, that he is offred in sacrifice. Lo, good reader, this holy man, and excellent clerke, (with whom Mar¦tyn Luther in learnynge and ver∣tue can no better be compared, thā a snayle with a hare in swiftnes) doth playnely saye, that christe is dayly offred in sacrifice, in the sa∣crament, though he was but ones offered in his owne fourme vpon the crosse, and therefore Luthers & his scolers argument, gathered out of Paule to the Hebrewes, the nynth and the tenth chapter ma∣kynge mention that Christe was Note reder that chryste is offered in sacrifice twyse, a∣gainste Lu∣thers bablīg ones offered, is cleane wyppe a∣waye, and funde of no force, ne strength, as I wyl hereafter more largely declare, god wylling. But
saynt Austen dothe this agayne wrytte in this matter. Firmissime tene & nullatenus dubites vnige∣nitum To, 3. de fide ad petrn̄ca. 19 deum verbum carnē factū, se pro nobis obtulisse sacrificium & hostiam deo in odorem suauita¦tis, cui cum patre, & spiritu sancto à patriarchis, prophetis, & sacerdo tibus, tempore veteris testamenti animalia sacrificabātur, & cui nūc i. tempore noui testamenti, cum patre & spiritu sancto, cū quibus illi est vna diuinitas, sacrificium panis & vini in fide & charitate, sancta ecclesia catholica per v∣niuersum terrae orbem offerre nō cessat. That is to wytte. Holde thou moost surely, and in no wise doute, that the only begotten son̄e god, beinge made man offred hym selfe for vs a sacrifice, & an hoost of swete sauoure to god, to whome wyth y• father, and the holy goost,
beastes were offered in sacryfyce the tyme of the olde testamente, by the patriarches, prophetes, and preistes, and to whom nowe, that is, in the tyme of the newe testa∣mente, with the father, and the ho∣lye ghoste, wyth the whiche he hathe one godheede, a sacrifice of breade, and wyne the holye church catholyqe ceasseth not to offre in fayth and charitie, throughe the whole worlde. Also in another place he sayth. Huius sacrificij ca∣ro Lib. 20, ca: 21, Contra faustū Christe is dayly offred i sacrifice, thoughe he was ones offred for al on the cros & sanguis ante aduentum do∣mini, per victimas similitudinum promittebatur, in passione christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur, post ascensionem Christi per sa∣cramentum celebratur. The flesshe, and bloudde of thys sacri∣fice was promysed before the lor∣des commynge, by beastes kylled in sacryfyce of symylytudes,
or lykenesses, in y• passion of christ it was gyuen by y• truth it self, af∣ter christes ascēsion it is celebrate by or in the sacramente. Doth not saint Austen here affyrme that in the sacramente of the aulter the Christes ve∣ry flesh and bloude are in the masse offered in sa¦crifice, & not a fygure therof. flesshe and bloude of the sacrifice is euen that selfe same, which was fygured by the sacrifices of ye olde testamente before the commynge of Chryste, and offered vpon the crosse in the tyme of the passion, that lyke as in the time of the olde testamente, Chrystes flesshe and bloud were offered in sacryfice by symylytudes, so at the tyme of his death they were offered wythoute fygure, or lykelenesse in his owne fourme, and dayelye are in the Sacramente vnder the fourme of breade and wyne. More∣ouer the same Doctoure thus
writeth, Populus christianus reli∣giosa solemnitate memorias con∣celebrat martyrum, & ad excitan∣dam Lib. 20. ca. 21. Contra faustū imitationem, & vt meritis eo¦rum consocietur, at{que} orationibus adiuuetur, Ita tamen vt nulli mar∣tyrum, sed ipsi deo martyrum con¦stituamus altaria, {qui}uis in memori∣as martyrum. Quis enim antistitū in locis sanctorum corporum alta∣ri assistens, aliquando dixit, offeri∣mus tibi Petre, aut Paule, aut Cy∣priane? sed quod offertur, deo, qui martyres coronauit, offertur. This it is in englysh. Christē peo¦ple do celebrate the remembraun∣ces of martyrs, with a godly, or a deuout solemniti, both to stirre or The merits of martyrs and theyr prayers do profytte the worshipers of them. encourage men to folowe them, & also ye by their merites they might be made felowes wyth theym in heauen, and helped wyth their prayers, yet so that we do sette vp
aulters to none of y• martyrs, but Lege August: lib: 22. ca. 1, De Ciui dei to god hym selfe, although we do it for remembraunce of the mar∣tyrs. For whiche of the byshoppes beynge at the aulter in the places of the saintes bodyes, hath sayde at anye tyme. We doo offre sa∣crifice to the O Peter, or Paule, or Cypryane? But that whyche is offered in sacryfyce, is offered to GOD, that hathe crowned the martyres. No man coulde speake more playnelye agaynste three of Martyn Luthers here∣sies, then in these fewe wordes Saynte Austen hath done, allow∣ynge fyrste that saintes do praye Saintes do pray for vs Saintes me¦rites do pro¦fytte vs. for vs, and thereby we are helped Secondelye that their merytes do profytte vs, Thyrdely that the byshoppe at the aulter dothe of∣fre sacryfyce to god, the whyche in an other place of hys workes he
he affyrmeth to be done by good autoritie, that is of the gospel whi¦che telleth that Christ at his laste supper offered his bodye in sacri∣fice, for these are his wordes. Augustinus lib: , ca. 20: De trinitate. Infantes non nouerunt quod in al∣tari ponitur, & peracta pietatis ce∣lebratione, consumitur, vnde vel quo modo conficiatur, vnde in usū Consumed therfore the bread after the consecra¦tion remay∣neth not as Frith wold it shulde. religionis assumitur. Chyldrene, whyche can not yet speake, knowe not what thinge is put vpon the aulter, and is consumed whan the consecration is perfetlye doone, whense or howe it is made or con∣secrated, of what it is taken in to vse of relygyon. It folowethe in that place of saynte Augustyne. Et si nunquam discant experimen∣to suo, vel aliorum, & nunquam illam rerū speciē videant, nisi in∣ter cèlebrationes sacramentorum,
cum offertur, & datur, dicatur{que} illis autoritate grauissima, cuius Math. 26, corpus & sanguis sit, nihil aliud credent, nisi omnino in illa specie dominum apparuisse oculis mor∣talium, & de latere tali percusso. liquorem illum omnino fluxisse. Althoughe they neuer learne by theyr owne experience, or other mennes, and they neuer see that kynde of thynges, excepte it be a∣monge the celebratyons of Sa∣cramentes whan the sacryfyce is made, and gyuen, and sayde to them wyth greateste autorytye, whose bodye and bloud it should be, they wyll beleue nothynge elles, but that our lorde hath ap∣peared in that fourme to the eyes of men, and that lycoure to haue runne out of suche a syde streken. This saynt Augustyne. Agayne
in an othere booke this he writte. De ciui dei. li. 10. cap. 20. Christ doth offre hym selfe at the masse, and he is the sa∣crifice there∣in offred. Per hoc & sacerdos est offerens, & ipse oblatio. Cuius rei sacramentū quotidianum esse voluit ecclesiae sacrificium, cū ipsius corporis sit ipse caput, & ipsius ipsa sit. corp{us}, tam ipsa per ipsum, {qui} ipse per ipsā suetus offerri. That is thus much in englyshe. By that both he is a preist offerynge sacrifice, and he is the sacrifice. A sacramente of the whiche thinge, he wolde, shulde be the daylye sacrifice of the churche: For asmoche as he is the heade of that bodye the churche, and the churche is his bodye, as well the church by Christ, as Christ by the church is wont to be offred: This saint Austen: Now I beseche the, good reader, what doest thou call the dayly sacrifice of y• church, but ye sacrifice of christs body & bloud, accustomed dayelye in the masse,
to be offered of the priest? Wherin is Christe wont to be offered in sa¦crifice by the churche, excepte it be in the masse? What man, excepte he be very affectionate, and blynd will not rather gyue credence to this greate clerke sait Austen, thā to Luter, or any other taughte in his schole? But of this holye doc∣tours sentences writtē in this mat¦ter, the learned may reade muche more in his bokes, whiche I doo passe ouer, lest my booke shulde be S. Hierome ad¦uersus lucif¦riano. To. 2. to longe, and tedious, Therefore I wyll go to saynt Ierome, which cōfirmeth this truth, sainge, while he sheweth that a preist is the salte of the earth. Sacerdos quippe pro¦laico offert oblationē suā. For as moche as the prieste offere the his offerynge or sacrifice for the laye man. Doth not here saint Ierom affyrme that the preiste offereth at
the masse sacrifice for the lay mā? Estesones he sayeth. Nec moses dedit vobis panem verum, sed do¦minus Quaest , ad edibiam. Christ is ea∣ten in the sa∣cramente of the aulter, & hys bloudde drunken. Iesus, ipse conuiua & con∣niuium, ipse commedens & qui commeditur, illius bibimus san∣guinem, & sine eo potare non possumns, & quotidie in sacri∣ficijs eius de genimine vitis verae, & uineae sorec, quae interpretatur electa, rubentia musta calcamus, & nouum ex his vinum bibimus de regno patris. Moses hath not gyuen to you verye breade, but oure lorde Iesus, he is the gueste, and the feaste, he is that eatethe, and whych is eaten, we do drynke his bloude, and withoute hym we cannot drynke, and we day∣lye treade or presse downe in hys sacryfyces newe redde wyne of the true vynes, and the choosen vyneyardes generatyon, and
we drynke of these, newe wyne of the fathers kyngedome. Thys sentence of Saynte Hie∣rome manyfestely makethe bothe for the presence of CHRISTE hym selfe in the holye Sacra∣mente of the aultar, because it sayethe that CHRISTE hym selfe is the feaste, he that is eaten, and we drynke hys bloudde, and also for the sacryfyce of the masse, wherein the same CHRISTE is offered in sacryfyce. I lette passe manye other textes, of thys holye Doctoure, and go to the rehearsall of other men∣nes sayenges, amonge the whiche Damascene thus speakethe. Damas. lb. 4. ca. 14. Etsi quidam exemplaria corpo∣ris & sanguinis domini, panem & vinum vocauerunt, vt deifer vo∣cauit BASILIVS non tamen,
post sanctificationem dixit, sed pri us{que} sanctificaretur ipsa oblatio, ita vocabant. That is. Albeit certaine men haue called the breade and wyne samples of our lordes body, and bloude, as the godlye Basyll hath called them, yet he called thē not that after the halowynge, or consecration, but before the sacri∣fice was halowed, or consecrated, so they dydde call them. This Da¦mascene wrote aboue eleuen hun∣dred yeres passed afore this oure tyme. In the whiche belefe was al¦so Gregorius Na¦zian. in apolo∣getico. saīt Gregory Ieronis maister, whiche wrote this, almoste twelfe hūdred yeres synce Sciens quoniā nemo dignus est summi dei sacer∣dos esse, vel sacrificium offerre, qui non prius exhibuit se hostiam viuam, deo placentem &c. Knowynge that no man is meete, or apte to be a preiste of god the
hyghest, or to offer sacrifice, which hath not set abrode hym selfe (by vertuous lyuyng, and mortifieng his lustes) a quycke hoost, plea∣synge god, and so forth as Paule writeth to the Romaynes. Fur∣thermore writynge of preistes dig¦nitie Rom. 12. he thus saythe. O sacrificia mittentes incruenta sacerdotes. O anim arum custodes magnifici. O magnum figmnetum dei mani∣bus In uersibus: in vestris ferentes. O preistes (saith Gregory Nazianzene) sen∣dynge, or geuynge sacrifices vn∣blouddy. O the kepers of soules, whiche do greate thinges. O ye that beare in youre handes the greate workeman shyppe of God. What is to sende or geue sacrifi∣ces without bloude sheddynge in this sayenge, good reader, but to offer in sacrifice at the masse the very bodye, and bloude of Chryst,
discipulis suis offerendam, quam∣{que} modo conficiunt sacerdotes. Nihil habet ista, quam illa minus, quia hanc non sanctificant homi∣nes, sed Christus, qui illam sacraue¦rat. Vt enim verba, quae locutus est Christus, eadem sunt, quae nûc quo{que} socerdos pronuntiat, ita ea∣dem est, quae tune fuit, hostia. In englisshe. This holy sacrifice whe¦ther Peter doo offre it, or Paule, or els a preist of what meryte in ly¦uyng so euer he be, is ye same, that our lord gaue his dyscyples to be Luc. 22, offered, and that nowe the preistes do make or consecrate. This hath nothynge lesse than that, because men do not halow this but Christ, whiche had halowed that. For as the wordes, (which Christe spake at his laste supper) be ye same, whi∣che nowe the preist also doth pro∣nounce, lykewise the hoste or sacri¦fice
is the same, whiche was than. There was neuer mā, that set out better and more plainely the bles∣sed sacrifice of the masse, than this holye man Chrisostome hath done aboue eleuen hundred yeres pas∣sed. wolde god these his wordes were learned and kepte of al men, in a faste and sure remembraunce, withoute all doutyng in the very∣te of them. Note, good reader wel, what lessons here are geuen to vs of this auncient and excellent doc¦toure. Fyrst he saith, that the sacri¦fice, whiche Peter or Paule hathe offered, or nowe any preiste dothe offre, what so euer he be, good or yll in his lyfe, is none other but ye same, whiche Chryste gaue hys a∣postles to offer, vndoubtedlye at his laste supper, after he had tur∣ned bread and wine into his owne verye bodye and bloude, and offe∣red
them in sacrifice to his father For then he gaue them autorite to do that very same, whiche he had afore done sayenge, Hoc facite in mei commemorationem, Doo ye thys in remembraunce of Luc. 22. me. Secondly he saith that the sa¦crifice, which now prestes do offre at masse, is the same hoost (hauing nothinge lesse than that had) whi∣che Christ gaue hys apostels to of¦fer because men do not halowe, or consecrate it, but Christ, (that dyd consecrate that geuen to his discy¦ples to offre) and that by reasō the wordes whiche a preiste sayeth at masse, are the selfe same, whyche Chryste spake at his maundy, con¦secratinge and offeringe his bo∣dy and bloud. Thus it appeareth that the learnynge of the sacryfice of the masse is not new nor of late
inuented, thoughe one Vrbanus Regius in his vngodly boke (cal∣led the comparison betwene the olde learnynge, and the newe) doth impudently without learning (ey∣their olde or newe, that good is) af¦fyrme, Vrbanu Regi{us} boke translated out of Latī into english by wyllyam Turner is ful of heresy that it is, as herafter I wil by gods grace declare. But nowe ones againe to saint Chrisostome, lettynge passe this hereticall boke of Regius (sette forth in latine by hym, & translated into english by one wyllyam Turner) Papae (in∣quit Chriso. homi¦lia de enceniis Chrisost) mensa mysterijs in∣structa est, agnus dei pro te immo¦latur, sacerdos pro te angitur, se∣raphin astāt, omnes{que} incorporeae virtutes pro te cum sacerdote in∣tercedunt, sanguis in cratere in tuam purificationem, ex immacu∣lato latere haustus est, & non cru∣bescis ne{que} propitium tibi facis de um? That is to wytte. The
table is furnysshed with thinges secrete, or hyd in wordes, or cere∣monyes, The masse is a sacrifice propitiato∣rye, and pro¦fitable not onlye to the saer of it, but to other also. the lambe of god is offe∣red in sacrifice for the, the preist is in an anguish for the, the aungels called Seraphim are present, and all powers hauynge no bodyes, do pray, and make intercession for the with the prieste, the bloude in the cuppe is drawen out of the im¦maculate syde for thy purgynge, & art not thou ashamed, nor doeste make god mercyful to the? O lord howe manyfeste are these wordes, both to proue the very presence of Christ in the sacramente of thaul∣ter, and also the masse to be a sacri¦fice, The masse is a sacrifice propitiato∣rye. not of laude, and thankes ge∣uynge to god only, but also appea¦singe goddes wrath and dysplea∣sure conceaued againste vs for synne? The whiche he affirmethe in sundrye places of his workes,
of the whiche I wyll alledge yet some, because no man wrote so wel and playnely in this matter, as he dyde? This he saith ones againe. Cum astat pontifex, is preces diu∣turnas fundit, quo gratia in sacrifi∣cium influat. Whan the byshoppe is presente, he praieth longe conti∣nuynge, that grace maye runne in Chrisostom in missasua. to the sacrifice. To be shorte Chri∣sostome in his masse sayeth, recy∣tynge, the praier, whiche the preist than dyd vse to saye before he wēt in to the place, where he shoulde offre sacrifice, saieng masse. Domine deus noster emitte ma∣num tuā de sancto habitaculo tuo, & corrobora me ad propositum ministeriun tuum, vt citra condem¦nation em assistam metuendo alta∣ri tuo & immaculatum peragam sacrificium. Sacrifica domine ag∣num, Immolatur agnus dei, qui tol
lit peccata mundi, That is. Send o lorde our god thy hande (that is thy power) from thy holy mansiō, and make me stronge to this ser∣uyce sette forth, that I may be pre¦sente Marke rea∣der. at the dreadefull aulter with out damnation, make perfyt this cleane sacryfyce. O lorde sacryfice thou the lambe. The lambe of god Luc. 22. whiche taketh awaye the synnes of the worlde, is offred in sacrifice. Also he saith. Domine sacrificio∣rum ritum instituisti, ac solemnis huius, & immaculati sacrificij cele¦brationem nobis tradidisti, tan{que}, Christe dyd ordeyne the accustomed mauer of sa¦crifice doīg and not any preiste vpō couetousnes dominus omnium. Thou (o lord) hast begonne, taught, or ordeyned the approued custome of sacrifi∣ces, and haste deliuered to vs the celebration of this annual, or yere ly, and vndefiled sacrifice, as the lorde of all thynges: doth not this doctoure affirme that Christe dyd
institute, and ordeyne the vsage ap¦proued in makyng of sacrifices, & taught the apostles to offer him selfe a sacrifice pure withoute spotte of synne? It is therefore a greate blasphemye to god, and a reproche to CHRIST our sa∣uioure, to ascribe this his dede & ordinaunce to any mā, Ceasse ther¦fore that leude sayenge, whych tur¦neth to no lyttel derogatiō of god des honoure. Beleue this and o∣ther auncient writers, whiche do with one assente confesse that the sacryfyce of the masse is of oure sauyours settynge vppe and tea∣chynge. Whyche Eusebius thus Eusebius lib. . de euangel. de monst. ca. 10. confyrmethe, after manye wordes. spooken of this matter. Christus post omnia quasi mirabi∣lem quandam victimam, sacrificiū {qui} eximiū deo patri operatus, pro nostra omniū salute obtulit, eius{que}
rei memoriam, ut nos ipsi deo pro sacrificio offerremus, instituit. Christ after all thinges, whan he had wrought a certayne maruey∣lous hoost, and a verye greate, or excellent sacrifice, he offered it to god for all oure helthes, and he hathe ordeined, that we our selues shoulde offer to god for a sacrifice the remēbraunce of the samething Gregorius Emissenus, which was G. Emissenus. Anno. d. 00. aboue twelfe hundred yeres afore this tyme, after this sorte, writeth vpon this matter, Quia corpus as¦sumptum erat ablaturus ab oculis nostris, & syderibus illaturus, ne∣cessarium erat, ut nobis in hac die sacramentum corporis & sangui∣nis cōsecraret, ut coleretur iugitet per mysterium, quod semel offe∣rebatur in praecium, ut quia quo∣tidiana currebat, & in defessa pro hominū salute redemptio, perpe¦tua
etiam esset redemptionis obla¦tio, & perennis illa victima viueret in memoria, & semper praesens es¦set in gratia. That is to wytte. Be∣cause Christ wolde take away the bodye, whiche he toke to hym, frō Christ ones offred in sa∣crifice, on the crosse is dyly offred in the masse and worship¦ped. our sight, and brynge it in to hea∣uen, it was necessary that he shuld this tyme consecrate to vs the sa∣cramente of his bodye and bloude that the thynge, whiche was ones offred for the price of our raunsō, shulde be alwaye worshypped by a mysterie, or a sacrament, that be¦cause a daylye, and a continuall re¦demption for mannes helth dydde runne, a continuall also sacrifice of the raunsom shoulde be, & that euer endurynge sacrifice shoulde be had in memorye, and shulde be alway presente in grace and auto¦rytie, What maye be sayde more playnely for our purpose? This
saint Cyprian, of whome I haue moche spoken alreadye, (beynge within two hundred &, lix. yeres of Christes byrth) manifestly doth Cyprianus de caena do. confirme sayenge. Perpes est hoc sacrificium, & semper permanens holo caustum, nulla panem hunc multitudo consumit, nulla antiqui¦tate veterascit, This sacrifice is perpetuall, and euer abydyng, no multitude of people consume the this bread, it waxeth olde with no aūcientie. Origene also being .xxx Origenes li .i. in Iob. yeres before hym, (that is within twoo hundred, and, xxv. yeres of Christs byrth) doth opēly affirme the masse, to be a sacrifice sayeng. Probet seipsum Homo .i. munde seipsum, & ita de mundissimis do¦mini sacrificijs frueatur, vt aposto¦lus ait. Let a man (sayth Origen) proue hym selfe, that is to saye, let
hym make hym selfe cleane, and so lette hym vse with delectation, and profytte the moost cleane sa∣crifices of oure lorde, Lo this olde doctoure sayth, that the Sa∣crament of the aulter is a sacry∣fyce, whyche Paule exhorted the people to eate, after they hadde proued, and made cleane them sel∣ues, through penaunce from their synnes, soo that after hys iudge∣mente, Sainte Paule vnderstode Christes wordes spooken at his maundye (whiche he there to the Corinthyans the eleuenth chapter of the fyrst epistle, recytethe) to be spoken of his blessed bodyes sa∣crifice. Ireneus lykewyse wrytte thus vpon the same matter before Origen twenty yeres. Quomodo Ire. li. 4. ca. 4. autem dicūt carnē in corruptionē deuenire, & nō {per}cipere vitā, quae a
corpore domini, & sanguine ali∣tur? Ergo aut sententiam mutent, aut ab offerēdo abstineāt, quae prae We eate and drynke chri∣stes flesshe & bloud in the sacrament & they are of∣fered at masse in, sa∣crifice. dicta funt. Nostra autem conson ās est sententia eucharistiae, & eucha¦ristia rursus confirmat sententiam nostram. Whiche is thus moch in oure speache. But howe saye they that the fleshe goeth to corrupcion and receiueth not lyfe, whiche is fedde with the bodye and bloude of our lorde? Therefore lette them eyther chaunge their opinion, or forbeare offerynge in sacrifice the thinges, which are spokē of afore, the very bodye and bloude of our lord. Our iudgemente, or opinion is agreinge, with the sacramente of the aulter, and the sacramente againe doth confyrme our opiniō What man is he, except he be past shame, yea very blynde, or malici∣ous against the truth, that wyl or
can deny this olde and godly mar¦tyrs saienge, to be ynoughe for the establyshynge of the sacrifice of ye masse, for asmuche as he learned y• scripture of them whiche were the apostles scholers, as sainte Poly∣carpe Ihon the euangelystes dis∣ciple, and suche other? He goethe forth and saith thus. Offerimus ei quae sunt eius, congruenter com∣municationem, & vnitatem praedi¦cantes carnis & spiritus. Quem∣admodum enim qui est è terra pa∣nis, percipiens uocationē dei, iam non cōmunis panis est, sed eucha∣ristia, ex duabus constans rebus, terrena & caelesti: sic & corpora nostra percipientia eucharistiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectiouis habentia. We offer to hym in sacrifice those thinges, whiche are his, publysshynge, or openly declarynge accordynglye
the partakinge together, and vni∣te of the fleshe, and the spirite. For lyke as the breade, which is of the earth, perceauynge, or takinge the callynge of god, is not nowe com∣mune breade, but the sacramente or the bodye of Christe consistinge in two thinges, the one erthly, and the other heauenly, so also our bo∣dyes receyuinge the sacrament of the aulter, are not now apt to cor∣ruptiō, hauing hope of risinge a∣gaine. Hitherto S. Irene{us}. Tertu¦liane (which was about a C. & .lxxx Tertulian li, de exhorta ca¦stitatis. yeares after Christes passion) writ in this matter, for my purpose sai∣eng. Differentiam constituit, eccle¦siae autoritas inter plebem & ordi∣nem. Et sacerdos offert & tingit. The authoritie (he saithe) of the churche hathe ordeyned a differēce betwene the laye people, and them which hath taken ordres. And the
preiste offereth sacrifice, and bap∣tiseth. Loo here two offices of a preiste, to do sacrifice at masse, (for noone other sacrifice is propre to a preiste) and to deepe chyldren in the founte. Anacletus, which was Anacletus be epist. ecclesia▪ wt in .c. & .ii. yeres of christes byrth, doth confirme this marter saieng. Diaconi cōstituti sunt, utessent ab oculis episcoporum, quibus hoc praecipuum curae erat, ut sacris in∣duti vestibus, episcopum ad altare ducerent, & reducerent, eum{que} sa∣crificantem, velut ex cubitores ob seruarent, ne maleuolorum in cur∣sione sacra turbarentur. That is, Deacons are ordeyned, that they shulde be to the byshops as specta¦cles, or to se for thē, the which had this as chiefe charge, or whose la∣bour was chiefly, that they hauing on ye holy vestures shuld bringe ye byshop to thaulter, and from it a∣gaine, and alsoo as watche men,
take good hede on hym offerynge sacrifice, lest ye holy thynges (whi∣che are in the masse) shulde be trou¦bled by inuasion of malycyous, or yll wylled personnes. Wyth this accordeth Euaristus beyng with∣in Euaristus ad aphricanam ecclesiam. ten yeres after hym, saienge. Ea tantum matrimonia rata habean∣tur, quae teste populo solemni ritu¦peracta fuerint, & sacerdotis obla∣tione firmata. Let onelye those ma¦riages be counted stablyshed, the whiche were finisshed with a so∣lemne, or an accustomed maner, ye people bearyng witnesse, and were also assured with the preistes sacri¦fice. Is not this spoken of the sa∣crifice of the masse? Are not they The masse is a sacri∣fice not new¦lye inuented as heretikes say it is. shameles, whyche do saye that the masse was of late inuented by prei¦stes, for their owne lucre, and vaū¦tage, and sette vp by them for a sa¦crifice to get pence with? But I
wyll go forwarde to the martyr s. Alexanders sentēce, which is this (written aboue .xiiii. hūdred yeres Alexander sanctissimus. Martir uixit. no d. 119▪ afore our dayes) In sacramentorū oblationibus, quae inter missarum solemnia domino offeruntur, pas∣sio domini miscēda est, vt eius, cu¦ius corpus & sanguis conficitur, celebretur passio. Crimina enim at¦{que} peccata, oblatis his domino sa∣crificijs, delentur. Idcirco & passio eius in his commemorāda est, qua redempti sumus, & saepius recitan da, at{que} domino offerenda. Talib{us} hostijs delectabitur, at{que} placabitur dominus, & peccata dimittet ingē¦tia. Nihil enim in sacrificijs maius esse potest, {qui} corpus & sanguis christi. Neculla oblatio hac poior est, sed haec omnes praecellit, quae pura conscientia domino offeren∣da est, & pura mente sumenda, at∣{que} ab omnibus veneranda. Et sicut
potior est caeteris, ita potius exco∣li, at{que} uenerari debet. Hec ille. The englyshe may be this. In the oblations of the sacramentes, whi¦che are offered to our lorde among the solemnities of the masses, oure lordes passion muste be meddled, that his passion, (whose body, and bloude is made) maye be celebrate or had in remēbraunce. And there fore it was not so ones offered on the crosse that it cānot ne ought to be offered in the masse daylye, albe¦it Luther is of that opi∣on as his scholers be. For cry∣mes, and sinnes are putte awaye, throughe these sacrifices offred to our lorde. Therefore his passion also in these muste be remembred, with the whiche we are ransomed, or redemed, and it muste be often∣tymes rehersed. The mas is a sacrifice appeasinge gods wrath and purcha¦synge to vs remission of oure synnes and offered to our lorde. For he wyll be delyted, and appeased, or pacified wt suche sacrifices, and wyll forgeue greate synnes by thē. For in sacrifices no¦thinge can be greatter then the bo¦dy & bloud of christ. Neither there
is any sacrifice better th this, but this excelleth all, whiche muste be offered to our lorde with a cleane The blessed sacramente ought to be worshipped and honou¦red of chri∣sten people thoughe Lu¦ther & Frith denied it. consciēce, and receaued with a pure minde, and worshypped of all men and women. And as it is better thē other sacritices, so it oughte to be rather had in reuerence, and wor∣shipped. Hitherto that blessed mar¦tyr saint Alexander, whose saieng shulde the rather be beleued, be∣cause he was within a hundred, & twentye yeares of Christe, and a man of hygh perfection in his life, and notably lerned also. This say¦eng of this blessed aūciēt martyr, ought to be beleued of euery christē mā, without suspitiō of deceyt, & co¦louringe of this doctrine for lucre or gaines, Now, good reader, I haue almost fully declared by y• re¦hersall of the eldeste doctours of christes churche, from whense, and whom, this doctrine of the masse,
and the sacrifice therof, hath come to vs, that is to wytte, euen frome Christe him selfe at his last supper institutinge and orderinge them bothe, & that ye church was taught the same by his holye apostels & their successours, and obserued it Lterluteth out of tune against the masse cotinually no man again saieng it, tyll Martyn Luther beganne, vpon mere malyce, to lute against it with his stringes farre oute of Vbanus Regius tune, and therefore Vrbanus Re∣gius ought to be ashamed to call Ignatius saint Iohn the euange∣lystes disci∣ple spake of the masse & the sacrifice of it in hys epistle to the Smyrnen∣ses, and ther fore neyther of thē is late¦ly inuented thoughe Lu¦ther and his scholers say other wise. this the newe learnynge, beynge aboue .xv. hūdred yeres olde. But Ignatius (saint Iohn euangely∣stes scholer) doth after this maner wryte of thys sacryfyce. Nemo preter episcopum aliquid agat eorum, quae ad ecclesiam per¦tinēt. Firma eucharistia reputatur quae ab episcopo concessa fuerit, Christus est dispensator totius in∣telligibilis
naturae, propterea non li¦cet sine episcopo, ne{que} offerre, ne¦{que} sacrificium immolare, ne{que} mis¦sas celebrare. No man can do any of those thinges, whiche doo per∣teyne to the churche; againste the byshops mynde, or otherwise then he wyll it shulde be doone. Let the sacrament of the aulter be accomp¦ted of strength, or assured, whiche shal be graunted of the byshoppe, Christe is the stewarde, or dispen∣ser, of the hole nature, whiche may be vnderstande. Therfore it is not lefull to offer, nor to make sacri∣fice, nor to say masses withoute a byshoppe, that is, without the con¦sente, and authoritie of hym. Loo good christē reader, this holy mar¦tyr saint Iohns disciple doth thus manifestelye speake, bothe of the masse, and also of the sacrifice of it whiche he learned of his mayster
Ihon ye was taught, & instructed by our sauiour christe at his laste supper both ye masse, & the sacrifice of ye same. S. Clemēt saieng masse S. Clement the apostle Paules cō∣panyon in preachynge spaethe of the sacrifice of the masse it is therfore no new thīg inuented for lucre of prei¦stes. (as Bassario cardinall of Nicea saith writing vpō the sacramēt of y• aulter) was wōt to vse this forme of praieng. Rogamus dn̄e vt mit∣tas spūm sāctū tuū su{per} hoc sacrifi∣ciū qui efficiat hūc panē corp{us} χρι tui, & qd in calice est, sāguinē filij tui. That is to say in englysh. We besech ye, o lord, to sende thy holye ghost vpon this sacrifice, whiche shuld make this bread the body of thy christ, and also yt, which is in ye cuppe, ye bloud of thy son̄e. Againe in the thirde epistle to s. Iames, thus he saith. While we lyue here we must knowe where is the place to offre sacrifice. Qm̄ in alijs locis sacrificare, & missas celebrare nō licet, nisi in ijs, in quibus episcop{us}
proprius iusserit, aut ab episcopo regulariter ordinato, tenēte videli∣cet ciuitatē, cōsecratus fuerit. Ali∣ter enim nō sūt hc agēda, nec rite celebrāda docēte nos nouo, & ue¦teri restamēto, Haec apostoli a dn̄o acceperūt, & nobis tradiderūt, haec nos do cem{us}. That is, forasmuch as it is not leful to offre sacrifice, & say masses in other places, but in those, in which ye propre bishop hath, or shall commaūd, or in that, which hath ben or shalbe halowed of the byshop, ordered after ye rule, as who saith possessinge the citie. For these thinges ought not to be done otherwise, nor well (after the maner vsed) they are otherwise to be celebrate, ye new & the olde testa¦mēt teachīg vs. Thapostles hard or receaued these thinges of oure lord, & taught thē vs, or lefte thē to vs by traditiō, which we teache: &
commaunde to be doone of other men withoute reprofe, as it folo∣weth immediately, Lo good chri∣sten reader, this holy doctoure S. Paules companyon, in preaching doth playnlye make mention both of the masse, & also of the sacrifice of it, affirmyng that Christ taught his apostles, and they vs, that sa∣crifice shoulde be offered onelye in places assigned by the bys∣shop, or in a place consecrated by him whiche is propre byshoppe of the citie. This dothe euidentlye proue that Christe also taught his apostles the masse, & the sacrifice of it, & that they taught the church and congregation of the faithfull people the same lesson, whyche hathe euer since remayned, & shall alwaye tyll the worldes ende, a∣monge all true and catholyque na¦tions, although dyuers men doo
bable, and barke againste it neuer so muche, for the truth of oure lord abydeth for euer, as Dauyd saith, and Christe sente to the church the spirite of truth to abyde with it cō¦tinuallye, that it shoulde not erre in the faith, beware therefore rea∣der of Luthers pestilent doctrine whiche teacheth againste the pre∣mysses. But to be short, s. Dionise Dionistus De ecclesibierar. Ca, . the holye apostle Paules scholer conuerted by hym, (which was a∣fore Christes passiō, a famous phi¦losopher) doth call the sacramente of the aulter, hostiam hostiarum, the hoste of hostes, or the sacrifice of sacrifices, saienge moreouer Ferme non reperitur sacerdotalis muneris mysterium peragi, quod non compleatur in consummatio¦ne diuinissimae, eucharistiae, ad vnā perficiente sacrificio collectionē. The mysterye, or secrete of a prei∣stes
office is welnygh not founde to be made perfit or done through¦ly, whiche shulde not be finisshed in the perfourmynge of the sacra∣mant of the aulter mooste diuine, or perteynyng to god, while the sa¦crifice doth accomplysshe, or bring to a point, men to one gatherynge together. Doest thou not se, christē reader, that this holy man, sainte Paules disciple, calleth the bles∣sed sacramente of the aulter, most diuine, godlye or pertaynynge vn¦to god, and yet men of oure dayes are not ashamed to call it an ydol? Also this aunciente father calleth the masse a sacrifice, and that also which maketh ye people, for whom it is offered, and which do worthe¦ly receyue it, one together in christ through perfit charitie & concord. Wherefore euery good christē mā ought rather to geue credence to
this doctours iudgemente, and al ye other rehersed afore in this boke than to one Martyn Luther, and his secte, or folowers: But now I wyll shewe what the same writers (or at the leaste some of them) saye concerninge that pointe, which is nowe moost amonge men in con∣trouersie, that is, whether ye masse be a sacrifice propitiatorie, or ap∣peasynge goddes wrathe againste synnes, and makynge hym mercy∣full to vs, so that it be auayleable, and profitable, bothe for the quick & the dead, or no. That it is so, this chapter nexte here ensuynge shall proue sufficiently, to persuade all them (whiche are blynded wyth af¦fection, towarde the contrary opi∣nion) to beleue no lesse vn∣doubtedly, and stedfast∣lye.
¶ That the masse auayleth both the quyck and the deade, for the appeasynge of gods dyspleasure taken for synne, and the purcha∣synge of his mercy also. SAynt Austen ma∣keth mencion of a August, de ei∣ui. dei. lib. xx. cap. 8. wonderfull myra¦cle, whiche was done by a preistes praiers, & masse. Wherebye we maye perceaue, of what great force & strēgth ye masse is, & therfore I wyll recite his wor¦des breifly, whiche are euen these. Vir Tribunitius, qui apud nos est, habet in territorio Fussalēsi fundū
cubedi appellatnm, vbi cum affli∣ctione animalium, & seruorum su∣orum, domum suam spirituum ma¦lignorum vim noxiam perpeti cō∣perisset, rogauit nostros, me absen¦te, presbyteros, vt aliquis eorum illo pergeret, cuius orationibus ce¦derent, perrexit vnus, obtulit ibi sa¦crificium corporis christi, orans quantū potuit, vt cessaret illa vexa¦tio, deo protinus miserante cessa∣uit. That is to saye. A man bea∣rynge the tribunes office at Rome (whereby he had cheife iurisdicti∣on amenge the commons) whiche is with vs, hath in a territorie, or a countreye of fussalence, a soyls named cubedi, where, after he per∣ceyued by experience, throughe the tormentynge of his beastes, & seruauntes, that his house suffred violence hurtefull, of the yll spiri∣tes, he beseched oure preistes, whā
I was absente, that some of them A greate my¦racle wrought of god by the masse. wold go thither, by whose prayers they shulde departe thence. One wente, he offred there the sacrifice of Christes bodye, prayenge as muche as he coulde, that that vex∣ation shoulde ceasse, wythoute ta∣ryenge it ceassed god hauynge pi∣tie. Dothe not this place proue the masse to be a sacrifice propitiato∣rye, sythe by the offerynge of Chri∣stes bodye in sacryfyce at it, god∣des wrathe towarde thys man, To. Io. ser. 28 de uerbis d se¦cundii Lucam and hys seruauntes conceaued for their synnes (whereby the deuell hadde suche power on them) was pacified, and appeased? Agayne saynte Austen thus writeth, after many wordes spoken of the sacra∣ment of the aulter. Tu audis, {quod} quotienscum{que} offertur sacrifici∣um, mors domini, resurrectio, & e∣leuatio 1. Cor. 11. eius significētur, & remis∣sio
peccatorum, & panem istum vi¦tae nostrae quotidianum non assu∣mis? Qui vulnus habet, medicinā Note this reader. requirit. Vulnus est, quia sub pec∣cato sumus. Medicina est, caeleste et venerabile sacramentum. Hac∣tenus ille. In englyshe this it is. Thou doest heare, that as oftē as the sacryfyce is offered, our lordes deathe, resurrectyon, and lyftynge vp of him on ye crosse, are signified and represented, and also forgyue∣nes of sinnes, and doest not thou receaue this daylye breade of oure lyfe? He, whiche hathe a wounde, dothe seke often a medicine. The wounde is, for as moche as we be vnder synne, the honourable and Christes bo¦dy in the sa∣cramente is honourable against Lu∣ther & Ihon Fryth. heauenlye sacramente is the medi∣cine. Nothynge can be moore eui∣dentlye spooken for the sacryfyce of the holye masse, that it is a sacri¦fice propytyatory curyng mannes
woūdes, that is to say, his sinnes, and that also by the ordinaunce of Christe, commaundynge it to be done for a remembraunce of hys death, and rising againe. It folo∣weth in the same sermon of sainte Austens. Cum tractarem de sacra∣mentis, Sermone 8. de verbis d. secun. Lucum dixi vobis, {quod} ante verba Christi, quod offertur, panis dica∣tur, ubi Christi verba fuerint de∣prompta, iā non panis dicitur, sed corpus Christi appellatur. Whan I dyd entreate of the sacramentes (saieth Austen) I telled you, that afore Christes wordes pronoun∣ced of the preiste, that, the whiche is offered in sacrifice, is called bread, after Christes wordes be spoken, it is not now named bread but it is called christes body. This sainte Austen dothe set forth bothe the sacryfyce of the masse, and also that by ye strenght, & force of chri∣stes
wordes, which he spake at his laste supper institutynge the mas∣ses sacrifice, the breade is turned Transubstanti¦tion into Christes very bodye, and af∣ter loseth the name of breade. Moreouer sainte Austen thus wri¦teth De ciui. dei. li 20. cap. 25. in an other place of this mat∣ter, Omnes, qui offerunt, profecto in peccatis sunt, pro quibus dimit tendis offerunt, ut cum obtulerint, acceptum{que} deo fuerit, tunc dimit tantur, That is to saye in englysh All men whiche do offer sacrifice, forsoth they are in synne, for the whiche to be forgiuen they offre Note this dilygently reader. sacrifice, that whan they haue of∣fred sacrifice, and that is accepted of god, than their synnes shoulde be forgyuen them. These wordes are inoughe to stoppe all mennes mouthes, that they maye haue no∣thinge hereafter to speake against this holye sacryfyce of the masse,
but that it is a sacrifice obteyning of god remyssion of synne. This ment saint Poule the fifte chapter to the Hebrewes, sayenge, that a byshoppe, or a preiste is chosen, & ordeined to offre gyftes (as praier and lyke thinges) & sacrifices for the lynnes of the people. With the whych saynt Chrisostome agreeth Chrisostom in missa sua. saienge. Idoneos nos redde domi∣ne ad inferenda tibi dona, & sacrifi¦cia spiritualia, pro nostris peccatis & populi ignorantijs, & dignos nos fac, ut inueniamus gratiam in cōspectu tuo, vt acceptabile fiat sa¦crificiū nostrum. That is. Make vs, o lord, (saith the preist at masse This is plainly said of that no∣ble doctoure and holye saynte. amonge the greakes) meete to bringe into the, gyftes and spiri∣tuall sacryfyces for our synnes, & the peoples sinnes, cōmytted tho∣rough lacke of knoweledge, and make vs worthy to fynde grace in
thy syghte, that oure sacrifice may be acceptable. Againe in the same treatice of the masse he sayeth. Fac panem hunc praeciosum cor∣pus filij tui, in calice vero hoc, san∣guinem preciosum Christi tui, trās¦mutans ea spiritu tuo sancto. Vt fiat assumentibus in lotionem ani∣marum, in remissionem peccatorū in communionem sācti spiritus, in regni coelorum impletio nem, in fi¦duciam apud te, non in iudicium, non in condemnationem, haec ibi. Make o lord (saith the greke preist at masse) this breade the precious bodye of thy sonne, and that thing whiche is in this cuppe, the precy∣ous bloud of thy Christe The doc∣trine of Transubstā¦tiation is no newe thing, of whiche Chrisostom wrote nigh twelue hun∣dred yeares past. chaun∣gynge them from breade and wine in to flesshe and bloude by thy ho∣ly spirite. That it maye be to the receauers therof, for a wasshynge
or a clensynge of their soules, and remyssion of their synnes, and a cō¦munion, or a mutuall participati∣on together of the holye ghoste, & to the fulfyllynge of the heauenly kingdom, an affiaūce in the, not to their iudgemente, not to their con∣demnation. Epiphanius alsoo, a greake doctour (nygh twelfe hun∣dred yeares olde) confirmeth this Epipha. in cpi. ad Ioan hiero so uersa ab d. Hieroni. sayenge. Illud audiens admiratus sum, quod quidam te quo{que} turba∣uerunt, & dixerunt, {quod} in oratione, quando offerimus deo sacrificia, soleamus {pro} te dicere, Domine pre¦sta Ioanni, ut recte credat. That is I hearynge that dyd maruayle, that certayn men had troubled the also, and sayde that we are wonte in oure prayer, whan we doo offre sacrifices to god, to saye for the. Lorde graunte to Ihon, that he maye beleue truely. A lyke saieng
hath saint Gregory Ieroins mai∣ster, entreatynge of Iuliane the Grego. Nazi. oratio. 1. in Iulianum. emperours wickednes. Mox incru¦enti sacrificij oblationem manus commaculat, per quod nos christo unimur, nec non passionis, ac diui∣nitatis eius participes reddimur, Anone the handes do defile the ob¦lation of the sacrifice vnblouddye, or offered without bloud shedding by the whiche we are ioyned toge∣ther with Christe, and made parte Marke rea¦der. takers also of his passiō, and god∣head. What sacrifice I beseche the good reder, can ioyne vs together with Christe, and make vs parte∣nars of his death, and godheade, whiche mannes handes maye de∣file, except it be the masse, and it be also a sacrifice propitiatory, & pa∣cyfieng goddes wrath toward vs for oure offences? That sayethe sainte Cyprian, thus writinge, af∣ter Cyprianus de caena domini.
he had saide that Christe vpon the crosse dyd offer hym selfe a sa∣crifice, and that he the buttelar had giuen the same cuppe, Penitrat omnia tanti medicamenti virtus, quicquid esset intus ibi, dum effu¦garet, & renouaret, sanaret{que} quic quid morbi carni, vel spiritui, vete¦ris uitae adlinierat corruptela. That is. The vertue or strength of soo greate a medicine perceth al thin∣ges, while it dryueth awaye what so euer shulde be there within, and shoulde renewe, and heale what so euer disease the defylynge of the olde lyfe had brought to the fleshe or the spirite. Hytherto Cypryan. Origen doth also thus write of ye force and strength of the masse. Origenes ho: 13. in leui. Sirespicias ad illam commemora∣tionem, de qua dicit dominus, Hoc facite in meam commemorationē, inuenies {quod} ista est commemoratio Lu. 2:
sola, quae propitium facit hominib{us} deum. If a man loke to that remē¦braunce, of the whiche oure lorde saith, do ye this for my remēbraūce he shal fynde, that this is the only memorye, or remembraunce (of Christes death, and sacrifice done on the crosse) whiche causethe god to be contented or mercyful to men. Of this part this is sufficent to proue that ye masse is a sacrifice propitiatory, or appeasynge gods dyspleasure for synne. Now to the seconde part, which is that the masse is auayleable and profitable to thē whiche are depar∣ted from this lyfe.
¶ That the masse is profitable to the deade, lyke as other good deedes doone for them are. THegrekes good re¦der, dyd deny vtter¦ly yt there was any meane place be∣twene heauen, & hell, wherin mās soule shulde be deteined for a time tyll that it myght please god to de¦liuer it frō thence, to his glorious sighte. The whiche errour among diuers other, Iohan Wycleffe, Martin luther, & Ihon Frith, did maynteyne, and defende. Also one Aerius (as sainte Austen sheweth August. lib. de heres. heres. 55 in his booke of heresies) whan he coulde not obteyne a byshoprike,
for ye which he laboured, he taught Epiphani: lib. 3 many heresies, amonge the whiche he saied, that a christen man shuld not be bounde, to faste any certain daye, but to be suffered to fast whā he lyste, ageinst the which I haue made a boke in englisshe, and also A boke of fastynge. he saide that it shulde nothinge auaile the deade, yf the lyuynge shuld pray for them. And thought it were nowe greate nede to write fully of this matter, yet I wyll at this tyme onely bringe the aunciēt doctours sentences, to proue that the masse is a sacrifice profitable to them, whiche are departed, yf it be songe, or sayde for them, and shortely, god wyllynge, I wyll set forthe a hoole booke of that mat∣ter, againste Frithes booke com∣piled of the same. To begynne Innocen. li. de myst. miss. therfore, Innocentius thus wry∣teth. Istos, qui nondum perfecte
prorsus purgati sunt, commendat pia mater ecclesia intercessione sua in sacrosācto sacrificio, certissi¦me The same hath s. Bar∣narden ser∣mone. 66. Canti. ca. credens, {quod} sanguis ille praecio∣sus, qui pro multis effusus est in re¦missionem peccatorum, non solū valeat ad salutem viuentium, sed etiam ad releuationem defunctorū The godly or piteous mother the church, doth remembre them wtih her intercession in the halowed sa∣crifice, beleuynge moste assuredly that ye precious bloud, which was poured out for the remission of ma¦ny mēs sinnes, is not only of force or strength for the helth of the ly∣uynge, but also for the easyng of ye dead. Isodor{us} agreeth with this, Isodorus lib.  off. sayenge. Sacrificium pro defun∣ctorum requie offerre, quia per to tū orbē custoditur, credimus ab a∣postolis esse traditum. We do be∣leue that the apostles taught to of¦fer
sacrifice for the deades reste, be¦cause it is kepte throughe all the world. But I wyl passe ouer those S. Augu. lib. 9 confes. ca. 12. &. 1. later writers, and go to S. Austen which thus saith, (after he had re∣hersed his mothers petitiō, which was that y• preistes wolde pray for hir in their masses,) Cū ecce corp{us} elatū est, imus, & redimus, sine la∣chrymis. Nā ne{que} in eis praecibus, quas tibi fūdimus, cū offerretur {pro} ea sacrificiū precij nostri, fleuimus Lo whā ye body of my mother was brought forth to beburied, we go & come again wtout teares in wepīg For we dyd not wepe in those pray¦ers, Note that he saith the sacrifice of our price or redemption. whiche we poured oute to the, whā the sacrifice of oure price, or ransom, was offred for hir. Also s. Austen desired the preistes to remē¦bre his mother Monica, and hys ther Patricke, in their masses. Oughte I besech the good reder,
bablers, and bunglers in diuinite affirme, that the prayers of the quicke, and preistes masses can no¦thynge auayle the deade, sythe saint Austen the greateste learned man, that hath ben sence the apo∣stles tyme, dyd so instantlye desire preistes at their masses to remem∣ber his father, and mother? More ouer this he saith. of the same mat¦ter. Ne{que} negandū est defunctorū animas pietate suorum uiuentium releuari, cum pro illis sacrificium Angnst. q. 2. de octo questi. ad dulcitium. mediatoris offertur, uel eleemosy∣nae in ecclesia fiunt, sed eis haec profunt, qui cum uiuerent, vt haec sibi postea prodesse possent, me∣ruerūt. That is to say ī our tōgue It maye not be denied, that the deade mennes soules are releaued or eased with the pitie of their fren¦des, liuynge when the sacrifice of the medyatoure is offered, or al∣messe
ar done in ye church, but these thinges profit thē, which deserued whā they lyued, that these thinges Augustin en∣chy. ca. 109 & 110 myghte afterwarde auayle them. Cū ergo sacrificia siue altaris, siue quarūcū{que} eleemosynarū pro bap∣tisatis omnibus defūctis offerunt, pro valde bonis gratiarū actiones sūt. Pro valde malis, etsi nulla sint adiumenta mortuorum, qualescun¦{que} viuorum consolationes sunt. Quibus autem prosunt, aut ad hoc prosunt, ut sit plena remissio, aut certe tollerabilior fiat ipsa damna∣tio. Therfore whan sacrifices ey∣ther of the aulter, or of any almesse are offered for all christened peo∣ple deade, for those, whiche are ve∣ry good, they be geuynge of than∣kes. For those that are very muche yll, though they be no helpe to the deade, they are confortes (suche as they are) of the liuyng. But whom
they do profite, they profitte, to that, that the remyssion maye be full, or perfitte, or at the leste the damnation shulde be more tolle∣rable. lib. 20. deciui. de. cap. 9. et de cura pro mor∣tuis habenda. Hytherto saynte Austen, whiche saienges he hathe alsoo in many other of his bokes, which I now go ouer to ye rehersal of other writers saienges, among ye whiche Ambros. orati¦one funebride bitu fratris. one is S. Ambrose whiche sayeth, wryting vpon the death of his bro¦ther. Tibi nunc omnipotens deus innoxiā cōmēdo aiam, tibi hostiā meā offero, cape, ppiti{us} ac serenus, munus fraternū, sacerdotis sacrifi∣ciū. I commende to the o (god al∣mighty) a harmles soule, Ioffer to ye my host or sacrifice, take cōtēted, and pleased, & with a mery counte¦naūce, ye sacrifice of a preist, ye due∣ty S. Ambrose prayed and saide masse for his bro∣thers soule departed. of a brother. Lo here Ambrose doth praye at masse, & offer in it a sacrifice the very body, & bloud of
Christe, for his brothers soule de∣parted, & wilt thou not beleue him, that it is profitable to the dead so to do, rather than Martyn Luter, new scoryng an olde heresye of the greakes, Aerius, Ihon Wycleffe, And suche other? Epiphanius whi¦che was somwhat elder then saint Ierom, condēnynge Aerius of he∣risie, because he denied ye praiers, & Epiphani. li.  suffrages of ye quick shuld auayle the deade, thus writeth, Quae pro defūctis fiunt prosūt praeces illis, etiāsi totā culpā nō abscindūt, Ec∣clesia hoc necessario {per}ficit, traditi∣one a pr̄ibus accepta. The praiers which are said for ye dead do, {pro}fit thē, thoughe they cut not away al ye fault. The church doth yt thing necessarely by a tradition receiued of ye fathers. Gre. Nazi. s. Ieroms maister doth in diuers places con¦fyrme this godlye and catholyque doctrine, of the whiche to be breife
I wil allege but only one, which is in a certaine oration made at the buryall of his brother Cesarius, where he thus praieth for him to Greg. Nazian. Oratio. 7. god. O domine nunc quidem caesa¦riû suscipe, peregrinationis nostrae primitias, Take to the now, o lord, Cesary, the first fruites of our pil¦grymage. Chrisostome also doth wryte in Chrisost. ad po¦pu antioch. ho¦milia 69. this controuersye so playnelye, as fewe other hath done, either before his tyme, or els sence, for these are his wordes. Non temere ab apo∣stolis Chrisostome also the 41. sermon vpō the l. to the Corinthiās saith that the holy goost or¦deyned that in the masse the deade shuld be prai¦ed for. haec sancita fuerunt, ut in tre¦mendis mysterijs defunctorum a∣gatur cōmemoratio. Sciunt enim illis inde multum contingere lu∣crum, utilitatem multam. Cum eni constiterit populus extensis mani∣bus & sacerdotalis multitudo, & tremēdum proponatur sacrificiū, quomodo deū nō exorabimus pro
illis deprecantes? These thinges were ordeined of the apostles for a lawe not vnaduisedlye, nor with The sacri∣fice of the masse, and prayers said in it, do pro∣fyt the dead, and the apo∣stelles made that ordy∣naunce that masse shulde be said for them. out a cause, that in the dreadefull mysteries, or sacramente of thaul∣ter, a remembraunce of the deade sholde be made. For they knowe, that muche lucre, and moche pro∣fytte, doth come to them thereof: For whan the people shall stande holdynge vp their handes, and al¦so the multitude of preistes, and ye fearefull sacrifice is set forth, how or by what reason, shall not we ob∣teyne (grace or pardon) for them praienge? What is mente heare by that fearefull sacrifice, whiche is shewed forth, whan the lay people and the preistes are assembled to∣gether holdynge vp their handes? Is it not the very bodye of Christ, god moste dreadefull, whiche the preist offereth at masse for ye dead,
as this olde writer testifieth, whi∣che writte almost twelfe hundred yeares passed? This lawe to saye masse for the dead (saith this aūci∣ente doctour) was made by ye holy apostles of our sauiour christ, and therfore it must nedes be true, and godlye, and all doctrine against it false and vngodly. This holy fa∣ther also in many other places ma¦keth mention of this matter, the whiche I wyll passe ouer, excepte one in his masse, whiche is this. Memoriā dn̄e agimus omniū san∣ctorū tuorū, quorū supplicatiō ibus respice nos de{us}, & memēto omniū The grekes vsd in their masse to pray to sin¦tes, and for the dead:. qui dormierunt in spe resurrectio∣nis, & vitae aeternae, & requiescere eos facito, vbi videtur lumē vult{us} tui. We do saye a memorie (o lord) of all thy saintes, for whose hum∣ble requestes, or prayers sake, take pitie on vs, & remember all them,
which are dead in hope of rising a¦gaine, and of euerlasting life, and cause them to rest, where the light of thy countenaūce is sene. Hyther to this holy, and great clerke Chri¦sostom, wt whōe agreeth s. Damas¦cene Damascenu connone pro mortuis. sayeng. Apostoli discipuli sal¦uatoris, in tremendis vitalibus{que} sa¦cramētis, memoriā eorū qui fidelit obdormierūt, habendā edixerunt. The apostles oure sauiours disci∣ples, hath cōmaunded, ordeined or published, yt a remembraūce shuld be had of thē, in the feareful, & liue¦ly sacramentes, whiche haue died faithfully. Lo here, good reder, an¦other witnesse,  man of yeres, for he was .xi. c. yeres before Luter & Ihon Frithe were borne, & muche better learned then anye of them two, or any other of that fashyon. He affirmeth that the apostles did inacte and establysshe this lawe,
that preistes shulde praye at masse for the deade, and arte thou not a∣shamed to saye that the masse, and praiers of men lyuynge doth no∣thynge auayle the deade? These two auncient, and excellente cler∣kes saye, that in the masse by the ordinaunce of the apostles (which were instructed in the gospell of Christe) a remembraunce is made of the dead, and thou being shame lesse, doest saye that couetous prei∣stes haue of late brought it vp for lucre. Ceasse for shame, and say no more so. Saye with these fathers that the apostles taught ye churche this lsson, let neither malyce to∣warde preistes, nor sauynge of mo¦ney, whiche yu shuldest gyue for the dead (eyther by ye duetie of charite, or els by hys wyl, yt in his testamēt wylled the so to do, for his soules helth) cause the thus to say, Remē¦ber
our sauiours saieng, which is. Math. 16. What shal it auayle a man to wyn ye hole world, and loose hys soule? But of this ynoughe. I wyll pro∣cede on this matter, Athanasius, Athanasi. libr. quest. 34. whiche writte aboute twelfe hun∣dred yeares synce, doth sette forthe this thing very manifestly, saieng, Num sentiunt aliqua beneficia ani¦mae defūctorum, cum super illis fi∣unt cōuentus, & peractiones bono¦rum operum, & oblationum? Doth the soules of the deade feele any benefites, or pleasures, whan assembles are made for them of the people, and good workes, and sa∣crifices are also done for them? To ye questiō he thus aunswereth. Si non aliquo beneficio participa∣rent ex illo, non uti{que} in caena & in exequijs fieret eorum commemo∣ratio, Intelligimus animas pecca∣torum participare aliqua beneficia
ab exangui immolatione, et gratifi¦catione pro illis facta, sicut sol{us} or¦dinat, et praecipit deus, uiuorū & mortuorū potestatē gerit, That is If the soules of the deade shulde not take some benefitte thereof, truely a memorie, or a remēbraūce of them shulde not be made in the Note reder. supper (the masse he meaneth ther¦by) and in the dyryges, or funeral∣les doone at the buryall. We doo perceaue that synners soules do take parte of some benefytes of the sacryfyce offered wythoute bloude shedynge, and of a good tourne done for them, as god one∣lye God (saythe the auncient doctor) hath ordeined & commanded vs to offre sa¦crifices, and to do other good dedes for the dead. ordeyneth and commaundeth, whyche hathe power vppon the quycke, and the deade. These wor¦des are very playnly spokē for the defence of thys catholyque, and charitable doctryne, but Saynte Cypryan, beinge nyghe wythyn
two hundred yeares of Chrystes byrthe is euen as plaine therein, saieng in his, iii. boke of epistles. Celebrantur hic a nobis oblatiōes Cyprianus lib. 3 epist. 9. & sacrificia, ob cōmemorationē e∣orū scilicet mortuorum in carcere We here offer, and doo sacryfyces for the remembraunce of theym, whyche are deade in the pryson. Agayne Sacrificia semper pro ijs, meministis, offerimus, quotiens li. 4. epist. 5: martyrum passiones, & dies ani∣uersaria commemoratione cele∣bramus. We offer sacryfyces al∣way for them, as ye do remembre, as often as we do kepe the fea∣stes of the martyres, wyth an yere¦lye remembraunce. Moreouer he saythe thus in an other place. Quod episcopi antecessores no∣stri religiose considerantes & salu li. . epist. 9. briter prouidentes censuerunt, ne quis frater excedens ad tutelam
vel curam clericum nominaret, ac∣si quis hoc fecisset, non offerretur pro eo, nec sacrificium pro dormi∣tione eius celebraretur. Ne{que} enim ad altaremeretur nominari in sacer¦dotum prece, qui ab altari sacerdo¦tes & ministros suos leuitas auoca¦re uoluit, For as muche as the bys¦shoppes our predecessours deuout¦ly consyderynge and holesomelye prouydyng haue determyned, that Marke this reader. no brother, or christen man depar∣tynge shoulde name a clerke to a wardeshyppe, or custody of infan∣tes, or to the charge of worldely bu¦sines, and if any man had so done, there shoulde be no offeringe for hym, nother the sacrifice shulde be offered for his deathe. For he de∣serueth not to be named at the aul¦ter in the preistes prayers, whiche wolde call awaye the preistes, and his ministers the leuites, from the
aulter. This Cyprian rehersynge the determination of the byshops his predecessours, whiche forth wt sayth. Et ideo Victor, cum contra formam nuper in consilio a sacer∣dotibus datam, Geminium fastiuū presbyterum ausus sit actorem cō∣stituere, non est quo pro dormitio∣ne eius apud uos fiat oblatio aut deprecatio aliqua nomine eius in ecclesiam frequentetur, ut sacer∣dotum decretum, religiose & ne∣cessarie factum, seruetur a nobis. And therefore for as muche as victor against the fourme made of late by the preistes in the coūsayle, hath ben so bolde to ordeine one Gemyne faustine a preist his fac∣toure to take the charge of hys bu¦sines, there is not whye ye shoulde do sacrifice for his departyng, nor any prayer shulde be vsed for him in the churche, that the preistes de∣cree
godly, and necessarelye made, myghte be kepte of vs. But of s. Cyprian this is ynoughe. Tertu∣lian Tertulia de co¦rona milit.  also doth not dissent frō this doctryne, but holde wyth it in dy∣uerse places, of the whyche I wyll reherse two or three. He faith ma∣kynge mention of certayne tradi∣tions, whyche came from the apo∣stles to the churche, wythout wry∣tynge. Thapostles ordeined that sacrifice shuld be of∣fered for he deade, & not anye coue∣tous preiste as some say Oblationes pro defūctis an nua die facimus. We do offre sacri¦fices yearelye for the deade. Therefore y• apostles (as I haue recyted of Damascene, and Chry∣sostome) dydde make this ordy∣naunce to praye, and say masse for the deade, thoughe those thynges be not expresselye sette forthe in scrypture. But Tertulian shall speake once agayne wyth these Tertulia li. de exhorta ad ca∣stitatem wordes. Et iam repete ad deum {pro} cuius spiritu postules, pro qua ob¦lationes
annuas reddas. Stabis a∣pud deum cum tot vxoribus, quo illas oratione commemoras, & offeres pro duabus, & commemo∣rabis illis duas per sacerdotem. &c. And nowe remember, for whose soule thou mayest make pe∣tytyon to God, for whyche wyfe thou mayeste rendre yearelye sacri¦fyces. Thou shalte stande afore god wyth soo manye wyues, as thou doeste remember in thy pray¦er, and thou wylte offer for them bothe, and thou shalte remember them two by the preist, Fynally in Tertulian, de¦monog. an other boke. Enim vero pro ani∣ma prioris vxoris orat, & refrigeri¦um interim postulat, & in prima resurrectione consortiū, & offert ā nuis diebus dormitionis ei{us}. For soth the husbande dothe praye for
the soule of his first wyfe, and he desireth a recreation, refresshynge or a coolynge for hir in the meane season, and felowshippe in the first arising vp, and he offreth sacrifice Obites or yeres mīdes. yerely at her obite, or the tyme of her dyenge and decesse, lo good rea¦der, the custome, to haue dirige, & masse ones in the space of an yere A booke cal∣led epiome cronicon falsely saith that one Pe¦lagius a bys¦shoppe of Rome dydde ordeine that masse sholde be sayde for the dead for he was 52 yeres after Christes byrth. for the dead, is no newe inuention, nor of late sette vp by couetous preistes (as many couetous, and enuious persons saye) but a thing obserued alwaye euen from the ho¦ly apostles tyme tyll oure dayes, and therefore it muste neades be a good, and a godly custome, For as Tertulian saith, We maye pre∣scribe againste all heretikes hol∣dyng the contrary, agaynst whom iudgemente is giuen afore, Id esse uerum, {qui} cun{que} primum, id esse ad ulterum, quodcum{que} posterius,
That to be true, what so euer is first, that to be counterfait, or for∣ged, what so euer is that commeth Dionisius lib. de eccl. hierar ca. 7. after. Saint Dionise Paules sco∣ler thus writeth also of the pray∣enge at masse for the dead. Sancto¦rum preces, etiam in ista vita, & nō This came vp in the tra¦ditiō of the apostles, as s. Dionise testifieth. tantum post mortem prosunt ijs so lis, qui digni sunt, vt pro eis sanctae preces fiant (nempe fidelibus). That is, holy mens prayers, ye in this lyfe, and not only after death do profitte them onely, whiche are worthye, that holye prayers shuld be saide for them, sothelye for the faithfull, as Damascene recytyng these wordes doth expound them. Againe this sainte speakynge of Sermone de mortuis. the bysshops, or preistes prayenge for ye dead at dirige, & masse, saith after this maner. Inter praecandū igitur oratur diuina bonitas, ut cun¦cta defuncti peccata dimittat per
humanam infirmitatem admissa, Damas. eum{que} in luce collocet, & regione viuorum, in sinibus Abrahae, Isaac, & Iacob, in loco vnde aufugit do∣lor, tristicia, & gemit{us}. While the preiste doth praye for the dead, the goodnes of god is praied vnto, ye he wolde forgiue the deade all his synnes, commytted by mans infir∣mitie, and that he wolde sette hym in lyght and in the region of the li¦uynge persons, in the bosomes of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in a place frome whense is fleed heuy∣nes, That is in heauen. sadnes, and waylynge. Thou doest le (saith s. Damascen reciting these word{is}) o aduersary, by what meane Dionisius confirmeth prai¦ers to be very profitable for them, which are departed in a holy hope Damas. sermo¦ne pro defun∣ctis. This aunciente doctour Damas. reherseth s. Gre. (Ieroms masters) wordes, writtē in a certeine oratiō of the funerall exequies for hys
mother, whiche are these. Diuitias igitur, quae in nostra potestate fu∣erūt, partim dedim{us}, partim daturi sumus, anniuersarios illi honores, & memorias exhibituri. Therfore (sith by praiers and masses my mothers dolour may be eased, for that he saide afore) we haue parte∣ly geuen already, and partely wyl geue these goodes, which were in our power, I wil geue to her yt mē may behold yerely honours & me∣mories. Thou seest (saith Damas.) yt he cōfirmeth our opiniō allowīg sacrifices & yerely remēbraūces to be made for thē, which are depar∣ted in god, while he callethe them good, & holy. Moreouer s. Dama. doth alledge a very plaine sentēce of one Grego. Nyssene saint Ba∣syls brother, which is this, Nihil abs{que} vtilitate a predicatoribus, & discipulis Christi est traditum, & in omnibus ecclesijs predicatum.
Res autem modis omnibus est uti∣lis, Gregorius Nyssenus saithe that the apostles dyd preache and teache ī all churches that we shulde pray at masse for the dead, as Damascen, Chrisostom Tertulian, and diuers other do say they dydde. & deo in primisgrata, indiuinis praeclaris{que} operationibus eorum, qui in recta fide discesserunt, mani¦festam facere memoriam. That is in englysshe. There is nothinge taughte, or delyuered by tradition and preached in al churches, of the preachers and disciples of Christ, without profitte, but it is a thinge by alwayes profilable, and to god chiefly thankefull, or acceptable, to make a manifest memory of thē (that haue departed in a ryghte faith) in the diuine, and very noble workes. What els, good reader, I besech ye, ment this great clerke, and aunciente father, by these dy∣uyne and very noble workes, than dirige, masses, and other lyke pray¦ers, offred to god for them whiche dyed in a true faith? The apostles of Christ the truth, and to whome
ye holy goost, the spirite of ye truth, It is a tra∣ditiō of chri¦stes apostels to pray for the dead at masse as G. Nyssene saith, & Da∣mascene doth affirm that they ler¦ned it of Christe. dyd teache all truth, accordinge to christes promysse taughte this les∣son, and the same is preached in al churches. Thou doest beleue that infantes, or yonge children ought to be baptised, and that baptisme auaileth them thorough the fayth of the church, to the attainemente of remyssion of originall synne, grace and glorye, and yet that can not be proued by any scripture suf¦ficientlye, but it is a tradytyon of christes apostles, left to the church De eccle. hiera Origene ii. 6. in epist. Rom. without writing, as saint Dionise Paules scholer affirmeth, and O∣rigen with many other, Why ther∣fore doest thou not beleue, that the masse is a sacrifice propitiatorie, and profitable both to the quicke and the deade, for as muche as the holye apostles hathe taughte the church, aswel the one as the other?
They whiche denye that chyldren shulde be baptised because there is no plain scripture for it, are coū¦ted heretikes of the sect of the ana¦baptistes, only because the holy a∣postels taughte the churche that All catho∣lyke chur∣ches do bap¦tise infan∣tes, though that be not cōmaunded in scripture doctrine, and it hath ben obserued through al churches of the worlde euer since, therefore by that auto∣ritie, and reason they muste nedes runne into heresie, that denye the masse & prayers, with other good deades to be auaileable for the deade, because it is a tradition of the apostles to praye, to geue al∣mes, and saie masses for them, and it hath ben kepte accustomedly in all churches of Christe, from that time to this tyme, and shalbe till ye worldes ende (as Damas. saith) be¦cause it is a truth of our lord whi∣che Sermone pro defunctis, shal abide for euer as Dauyd ye {pro}phet saith. Moreouer Damas.
telleth, that one Palladius an old writer of histories writing of a ho¦ly mā called Macarius which had wrought manye greate miracles, thus saith of him. Quia faciebat {pro} consuetudine sua {pro} defūctis {pre}ces, scire{que} desiderabat nūq{pro} illis {pro}des¦set, et cōsolatio illis inde proueni∣ret, Deus amator animarū, uolens hoc suo seruo, pluribus et certis ar¦gumētis pate facere, cranio, {quod} exar¦uerat, verbū ueritatis inspirauit, {pro}∣rupit enim cranium in hec verba. Quādo pro mortuis offers preces, cōsolatiunculā sentimus. That is to wit. Whā yt holy man Macari{us} A myracle doone to shewe that praiers of the quycke do profytte the deade. dyd, after his custome, pray for the dead, and was desirous to knowe whether yt he did any {pro}fit to them or no, & whether they had any com¦forte thereof. God the louer of soules, wyllinge to disclose or de∣clare this thinge by many & certen reasōs makīg a profe to his seruāt
dyd inspire the foremoost parte of a skull (which was) dried with the worde of truth, For the foremoost parte of the skull brast out, saieng these wordes. Whan yu doest offer prayers for the deade, we feele cō∣forte in aduersite. Lo here a great miracle, to proue this matter, as there are written in olde bokes ma¦ny mo, whiche I wyll passe ouer, to be short and bring ones againe Damas. contio¦ne de defun∣ctis. Idē hrbet D Hugo Aethe∣rianorum lib. de regressu a∣nimarum ab inferis: saint Damascenes saienge, which is this, Nisi hoc in oculis dei mi∣sericordis rectum foret, nun{que} oc∣casionem dedisset habendae memo¦riae defunctorum in sacrificio illo incruento, & anniuersariorum, quae nunc inconcussa, & certiora (quam de quibus iudicandum sit) aposto∣lica, catholica{que} ecclesia, ac popu∣lus domino collectus, pietati{que} de∣ditus, abs{que} omni contradictione custodit. This is in oure speache.
Excepte to praie, and to offer sacri¦fice at the masse for the soules de∣parted shulde be in goddes merci∣full sighte, righte, he wolde neuer haue giuen an occasion of a memo¦rie to be had for the deade in that vnblouddye sacrifice, nor of anni∣uersaries God gaue an occasion of the sacri∣fice of the masse to be offered and yeares min∣des to be kept for the deade, as s. Damascene doth affirm retourninge euery yeare ones at one tyme, Thus moche I haue said of the olde doctours iud¦gementes in this matter, touching the sacrifice of the holy masse, and the offerynge of it to god, both for the quicke and the deade also, vpō the which doctrine they are al and whollye agreed, and therefore no wise, & godly christen man, or wo∣man wyll rather beleue Martyn Luther, Eucer, Bullynger, Me∣lancton, Iohn Frith, Bale, or any of that yll heare, then all these aun¦cient fathers, of the whiche some were taughte, and instructed by ye
apostles, & some by their disciples & scolers, & therfore no mā yt wise is or godly wil doubt, but they did know the truth much better, than any mā of a later time, not lerning it of thē and their bokes. All the doctours of christes church do af∣firme, yt the masse is a sacrifice a∣uaileable, both to ye quicke and the dead, Luther Ihon Frith, wt a ra∣blement of like rascalles denie it, whether party wilt yu good reader, beleue al these holy fathers, or these leude & vnlerned later writers? ve¦ry natural reasō & wyt, yf nothing els shuld persuade yt rather to be∣leue these aūciētes, thā these other which now write, like to thē nether in yeres, nor lerning. Valeri{us} Ma¦ximus An hystory of Valeri{us} Maximus. sheweth that the Romanes dyd in a matter, risen betwene two men, of the which the one was of muche honestie, and fidelitie, & the
other of very litle vertue & credēce gyue sētence vpon the honest mās part, for his truthe and honesties sake when his aduersary laide a∣gainst hym a certaine cryme. The story is this. Cū Marcus aemelius Scaurus vir clarissimus, ac explo∣ratae probitatis, a vario Succronē∣si, uiro parū syncero, apud populū accusaretur, at{que} accusator long a oratiōe perorasset, ille maximo cō¦pendio vsus est, eo {quod} sua & populi conscētiā fretus, non voluit oratio¦ne cōtēdere. Querites (inquit) Va¦ri{us} Succronēsis ait, Aemili{us} Scau∣r{us} negat. Vtri potius Credēdū cēse¦tis? quib{us} verbis applaudēte popu∣lo falsā sbi intētaālitē cōsopiui. That is. Whan Marke Aemyle Scaurus a man most honorable, or famous and of goodnes well knowen, was accused to the peo∣ple of Varius Succronēsis a mā of lyttle purenes, or symplycytie,
and ye accusar had reasoned to an ende with a longe oration, Marke Aemile vsed a very shorte fourme, for because he trusted vppon hys owne cōscience, & the peoples also, he wolde not striue with reaso∣nynge, but saide onely for his de∣fence againste his aduersarie. O Romaines, Varius Succronēsis affirmeth (that I am gylty in this faulte) Aemelius Scaurus deny∣eth it. To whiche of these two doo you iudge credence shuld be giuē? with the which wordes he ceassed, or sette at rest the action, falsely en¦tred against him, the people mo∣uing their handes, or feete for ioy. Lo good reader, amonge the Ro∣maines, which then were infidels, the famousenes, and surely knowē goodnes of the person, was a suffi¦ciente cause, to geue sentence with a signe of ioye vpon the famous,
and good mannes syde saieng one¦ly for his defēce that he was false∣lye accused, against his aduersary being yl & pleading his actiō with many wordes. The honourable and good Marke said to the peo∣ple, myne aduersarye saith that I am gyltye, I saye naye, whether thinke you ought to be beleued. The people mouing their handes or feete for ioy, ye good mā Marke was discharged of that actiō tho∣rough those his fewe wordes, for his goodnes, and fames sake. So in this presente controuersie of the sacrifice of ye masse, saint Dionise, saint Ignatius. S. Anaclet, saint Alexander, saint Clemente s. Cy∣prian, with all other catholycke doctours of all ages do saye that the masse is a sacrifice appeasinge goddes wrath, Martyn Luther Suynglius, Oecolampius, Bu¦cers
shoulde be praied for to our lorde. The thirde councel holden at Car¦thago hath a lyke decre and other diuers, whiche I wyll passe by at this tyme, and go to the soilyng of myne aduersaries argumentes, grounded vpon scripture, wrasted cleane from the true, and right vn¦derstandinge of it, as it shall anon openly be seene to them, that be not holly blynded neither with malice, nor affection to∣warde the contrary part, for whom as persons nygh vncurable, I haue not taken this labour. But to my purpose.
¶ An aunswere to all Martyn Luters, and his scolers reasons made againste the sacryfyce of the blessed masse, by the which it dothe playnelye appeare vppon howe weake, and sclender a grounde they haue builded theyr vn∣godlye doctryne in this controuersy, so that no wyse and cunnynge buyl∣der, wyl hereaf¦ter build with them on that foundation, lest ye hole house at the length fall downe on his heade, and so vtterly destroy hym.
NOwe, good reder, after I haue said inough for the de¦fence, and setting forth of the truth, I wyll by gods help take cleane away mine aduer¦saries weapons frō them wt which they haue warred, and yet do, but very vnmanly, against the truth, & no maruayle, syth they be so yll weaponed, and so sclenderly har∣nessed, as we se that they are. The fyrst argument of theirs good rea¦der, is gathered of ye holy prophet Osees wordes, which our sauiour Osee. 6. recyted to the Iewes, as we reade in Mattheus gospell the nynthe Matt. 9. chapter and they are these. The fyrste reason a∣gainst the sa¦crifice of the masse. Misericordiā volo, & nō sacri∣ficiū. I wyl haue mercy, & not sacri¦fice. Here we se (saith the aduersa∣ries of ye holy masse) that god wil
haue no sacrifice done to hym, and therfore the masse is not a sacrifice acceptable vnto god for the appea¦singe of hys wrath towarde vs for our sinnes. Who is so yll lerned, good rea∣der, The soluti∣on. among them, that haue anye knowledge in gods worde, that he doth not perceaue how weake this argument is? For god ment by his prophet Osee, and also oure sauy∣our recytyng the same words, that dedes, and workes of mercy, suche as are to teache yt ignoraunt, to cō¦uerte the sinners to god, to forgiue men theyr offences, and other like, were more acceptable to hym, then any sacryfyce of beastes sleane, af∣ter the maner of tholde testament, whyche maketh nothynge against the sacrifice of the masse. That this was gods meanyng, it dothe euydently appeare by the text folo¦wynge,
whiche is this. Sacrificium S. Clement in the firste booke to s. Iames vn∣derstandeth the {pro}phets wordes of Christes time whan the sacryfy∣ces of thod lawe shulde ceasse so that than god wolde haue no such sacry∣fice. Lib. 20. ca. 16 & scientiam dei magis {qui} holo cau∣sta. I wyl rather haue sacrifice & ye knowlege of god, thā sacrifices hol¦ly burned. Here we se that god dyd not vtterlye denye, yt he wolde ac∣cept sacrifice, but that he wold that we sholde offre rather to hym the sacrifice of pitie, or mercy, and the knowledge of him, then other car¦nall sacrifices. Sainte Austen a∣gainst one Faustus, and also wri∣tynge of gods cytie, doth approue this exposition saienge. Hoc dicto nihil aliud, {qui} sacrificium sacrificio praelatum oportet intelligi. By this saienge no other thynge oughte to be vnderstande, than a sacrifice to be preferred before a sacrifice, that is the sacrifice of almes, pity, com∣passion, with soch other to be more estemed of god, than the sacrifices offered to him after the custome of
the olde lawe. He that wyll reade the nynth, and the twelfte chapter of Mathewe, shall fynde that oure sauyoure thus vnderstode the pro¦phetes wordes nowe recyted. Moreouer Christe ment by those the prophetes wordes, that sacry∣fices done without faith, and wor∣kes of mercye were not pleasaunt, nor acceptable to god, as it dothe appeare by Esaye the prophet, in the firste chapter, and alsoo in dy∣uers other places of the prophets, but yet the same ioyned with faith loue, and almes, were acceptable to hym, or elles why shuld he haue commaunded them to be offred to hym? wherefore this argument is cleane put away. Nowe to the se∣conde reason made against the sa∣cryfyce of the masse, whyche is this. The holye apostle saint Paule The secōde argument.
(sayth Luther) writing to the He∣brewes ye seuenth chapter, sheweth that this difference is betwene a preiste of the olde testamente, and of the newe, that a preist of the old lawe, is not one, but dyuers, be∣cause they were mortall, (and soo one oughte to succede an other) and the preiste of the newe lawe, is but one onelye, for as moche as he is immortall (and neadeth none to succede hym, for the supplyenge of hys rome), and therefore it were a thynge verye inconueny∣ente to affyrme, that there is anye sacryfyce in the newe testamente, for the offerynge, of the whyche Chryste onelye shulde not be suffi∣cyente, But one preist muste suc∣cede an other frome tyme to tyme, tyll the worldes ende, as it muste neades folowe, yf the masse were
a sacryfyce, Therefore it is none, but a remembraunce onelye of the sacryfyce once for al, offered to god by Chryste on the crosse for oure synnes. Hytherto Luther and his scholers. To the whiche thus I aunswer The solutiō breiflye, that the verye same hoste, and sacrifice is offered in ye masse, which was ones offred vppon the crosse, but it was there offred with bloudesheddynge, and here in the masse it is offered wythoute bloud¦sheddyng, so that the maner of of∣ferynge is onelye dyuers, and not the sacryfyce it selfe, and therefore there is but one heade, and cheife preiste in the newe Testamente, Christ our sauyoure, whiche day∣lye offereth hym selfe a sacryfice in ye masse to his father for our sinnes & the preistes as ministers do offer in his name and person, saieng at
their masses. Hoc est corpus meū, & non, hoc est corpus christi. This is my body, & not, this is Christes bodye. Nowe it is no inconueny∣ence, nor againste Paules mynde, that one, and the same hoste, or sa∣crifice shulde be offered of onelye Christe, a preiste after the order of Melchisedech, and yet a multitude of preistes, as mynysters to be re∣quired, accordynge to Paules say, enge. 1. Cor. 4. Sic nos existimet homo ut ministros Christi & dispensatores mysteriorum dei. That is to saye. Let a man so esteme vs as the my∣nysters of Christe, and the dispen∣sers, or stewardes of goddes my∣steries, or secretes hidde in wordes or ceremonyes. Nowe thou seeste, good christen reader, that this rea¦son is of no strength, againste the sacryfyce of the masse, and therfore I wyll recyte the nexte, whiche is
of like force, & it is this in fourme, as here foloweth, collected and ga¦thered of sainte Paules wordes wrytynge to the Hebrewes, which thus sayeth. Sine sanguinis effusione nō fit The thyrde reason. remissio. Remissiō of synne is not without poutynge out of bloude, But at the masse there is no pou∣ring out, or sheding of bloud, ther∣fore the masse is no sacryfyce pro∣pitiatorye, obtaining forgiuenesse The soluti∣on. of synnes, and the fauoure of god. This reason is grounded vpō the wronge vnderstandynge of s. Paules sayenge. For we maye as well proue by this autoritie, that remyssion of our synnes commeth not by baptisme, penaunce, the hea¦ring Expende haec lector & iu∣dica. of goddes worde, faith, hope, nor any other lyke thynge, as that by the masse forgyuenesse of synne hapneth not to vs, because when
these thynges are receyued, there is no paurynge oute of bloude, as there is none in ye masse. Therfore let vs se what Paul ment by these his wordes, which is easely found out by ye wordes nexte afore in the letter pertainyng to the same sen∣tence, and they are these. Et oia pe∣nè in sanguine, secūdū legē mūdāt And all sinnes almost, after y• law, are made cleane in bloude. Lo he saith almost all, and not all, and therefore the other part of his sen∣tence, whiche is alleged aboue a∣gainste the sacrifice of the masse, ought to be thus takē, almost with out pouryng out of bloude remis∣sion Aduerte lect. of synne is not, for els he had spoken playnely against the lawe, which maketh mention of an obla¦tion Leui. 2. Heb. aliud Sa∣bach, aliud Nuncha, aliud Misath. vnblouddy, wont to be offred to god for remission of sinne, that was made ex simila, that is of fine
meale of corne. Also by the water, called aqua expiationis, that is the Num. 8. & 19 S. Paule sayeth, that the bloud of goates, and of bulles & the ashes of a heffer sprī¦cled, dydde make holye or pure the defyled, as touchynge the vnclean¦nes of the flessh and in the tenthe chapter he affyrmethe that it was impossyble that synnes shulde haue bene taken awaye by the bloud of bulles and goates. water of clensinge, or purgyng, of the whiche the booke of numbers speaketh, synnes were forgiuen, & not only vncleanes of the bodye was purged, and yet bloude was not alway shedde whan this was done, but ones before through sle∣ynge of a redde heffar to make that water, Thou mayst say, good reader, that although Paule ment that nothinges almooste, whiche were vncleane, in the olde lawe, were made cleane without bloude sheddynge, eyther euen than,  be¦fore, yet that saieng of his may be applied to the time of the new law, for asmuch as in this time there is no remyssion of synnes giuen with out bloud shedding, that is to wit, withoute the vertue of Christes
bloude once shedde on the crosse, & that the same is applyed to vs by the masse, as by the other sacramē∣tes. Without faith in the strenghe merite and vertue of this bloude sheddynge than to come, no sacry∣fyce of the olde testament dyd put awaye synne, finallye it maye ap∣peare by the letter of this chapter that Paule mente here by remyssi∣on, the purgynge of certaine irre∣gularites, and vncleanes of the bo¦dy, and flesshe, rather than forgiue¦nes of synne, the triall and iudge∣mente whereof, I referre to the ler¦ned, and wyll go forwarde to the rehersall of the nexte argumente, whiche is this, taken out of Pau∣les epystles to the Hebrewes, thus wrytynge. Christus semel oblatus est ad multorum The fourth reason. b. 9. semel. peccata exhaurienda. Christe is ones offered in sacrifice
to consume, or to take away many mennes synnes, vppon this that Paule affyrmeth, that Christ was ones offered vp in sacrifice for our synnes, they argue, and reasō that the masse is no sacrifice, for then Christe muste neades be offered, as often in sacrifice, as masse is sayde, the which is plaine against saint Paule, sayenge, that he was ones, and not often tymes offred for mennes synnes, and therefore it must neades folow that ye masse is not a sacrifice propitiatorye, or purchasynge to vs grace, and for∣gyuenesse of synnes. This reason though it be iud∣ged The soluti∣on. neuer so stronge, yet it is but very weake, and of lytle force. For (as s. Austē saith) Christ was ones offered for vs, and yet if we beleue and remember his comming to vs he is dayly offered for vs, so that
albeit he was ones offered on the Christ was offred by the preistes of tholde law in figures and heofie∣reth hym selfe at his laste supper whan he of fered the pas¦chall lambe crosse, where he shed his precious bloud, and died for all the worldes offences, and that beynge a preist, and exercysynge also a preistes of∣fice after the order of Aaron, yet he offered him self vnder the fourme of breade at his last supper (as I haue proued before sufficiently) & dayly dothe offer in the masse by ye ministery of the preiste, after thor∣der of Melchizedech, which made sacrifice to god with breade and wyne, as ye Genesis sheweth, wher Gene. 14. of I haue entreated afore at large S. Austen saith the .xxiii, epistle whiche he wrote to the byshoppe Boniface: was not Christ ones of fred in sacrifice in hym selfe, and yet he is offered in the sacramente not only on al the feastes of easter but euery day also for the people? That saint Paule ment onelye in
this place of the deathe of christ, and that his blouddye sacrifyce was ones done for al on the crosse, and nothing of the sacrifice vnder the fourme of breade and wine, whiche was fygured by Melchi∣zedeches sacrifice, it appearethe plainly by certaine wordes of that same chaptre, whiche are these. Ne{que} ut saepe offerat semetipsum, quē admodū pontifex intrat in san¦cta{per} sigulos annos in sāguine alie∣no, alioquin oportebat eū frequēt pati ab origine mūdi. Nūc aūt se∣mel in cōsūmatione seculorū, ad destitutionem peccati{per} hostiā suā apparuit. Not yt he shuld offer him selfe oftentimes, lyke as ye bishop entreth into the holy places, euery yeare with the bloude of an other, or els he muste neades haue suf∣fred death often from the begin∣ning of ye world. But now he hath
ones appeared by his hoste, or sacri¦fice in the ende of the worlde, to the putting away of syn̄e. Nothing cā be spoken more plainly, thā this is to declare that Paule ment of yt sa¦crifice, which is ioyned wt suffring of passion, and death, that ones is done, and offred for euer, and shall be neuer offered againe, because Christ dyed ones for our synnes (as Paule saith to the Romanes) and shall neuer suffre death again Rom. 6. that notwithstandynge, he is of∣fred dayly in the masse withoute passion, or paine, that we maye the better, and the souer be partakers of the grace, whiche he purchased for vs by his deathe. But of thys ynoughe, now to the nexte reason of Martyn Luther. Saint Paule saieth the nynth The fyfthe reason. to the Hebrewes, that yf Christe sholde oftentymes offre hym selfe
in sacrifice, that than he must nea∣des suffre death often, but he can not dye, nor suffer deathe oftenty∣mes, therfore he doth not offre him selfe often in the masse, as he nea∣des muste, yf the masse were a sa∣crifice, wherfore the masse is no sacrifice. The solutiō This reason is soyled alredy in the aunswerynge to the laste argumente, whan I sayde that Vrbanus Regius & his folo∣wers saye vntruelye that we de∣fendyng the masse to be a sacrifice, do crucyfye christ again as much as lyeth in vs. Paule wolde that, yf Christ shold sundry tymes offer him selfe in sa∣crifice in his owne fourme, by pou¦rynge out his bloude, as he dydde ones on ye crosse, that than he must nedes oftentimes suffre death, but so he doth not offre hym self at the masse but onelye vnder the forme of breade and wyne, withoute all payne, and sufferinge. Sainte Ihon saithe in the Apocalypse. Agnus occisus est ab origine mun¦di.
The lambe, (christ Ioh. i) was sleane from the beginninge of the worlde, not that christ thā suffered death (but many yeres after, whan Gala. 4. ye tyme appointed (as Paul saith) was come) but yt thā it was appoin¦ted by gods prouydence yt he shuld dye for mans offences, & that his death was fygured by the death of Abel, and other lyke, beynge at the begynnynge of the world, so christ is offered in sacrifice at the masse, not that he suffereth there ageyne, but that there he is offered for the remembraunce of his death ones suffered on ye crosse, wherfore this reason is cleane wiped away, & the next anone shalbe, which is this, cōpiled also of s. Paules wordes, y• x. to the Heb. where he thus saith. Lex per singulos annos eisdē The syxte reason. ipsis hostijs, quas offerūt indesinē∣ter, nun{que} potest accedentes per∣fectos
facere, alioquin cessassent offerri. &c. The law (saith Paule) neuer could make them perfytte, whiche came to it, by the same ho∣stes, or sacrifices, whyche the prei∣stes euery yere do offre wtout ceas∣syng, or elles they shuld haue ceas∣sed to be offered, for as moche as the haunters, or kepers of it, shuld not haue any lenger grudge, or cō¦science of sinne, vpon these wordes thus they reason. The sacrifices of tholde lawe were for yt cause often¦tymes (as Paule saith) offered, be∣cause they were weake, and not of strength to put awaye sinne, & to delyuer mēfrō grudge of synne in their cōsciences, for yf they coulde haue done this, they shuld haue ces¦sed to be offred, whā they had done it, but ye sacrifice of christes flesh, & bloud, ones offred vpō y• crosse, was strōge, & sufficiente inoughe
to take awaye the synnes of all the 1. Pet. 2. 1. Io. 2. Apo. 2. worlde, as the scrypture witnesseth in sundrye places, therefore by S. Paules reason, Christe oughte no more, after his death to be offered in sacrifice, as he shold necessarely yf the masse were a sacrifice, wher∣fore it is no sacrifice. This reason hath some appa∣raunce The soluti¦on. of truth, though it be very false in dede. For saint Paule mēt yt the sacrifices of ye olde lawe were of them selues vnperfit, weake, & not able to put away mans synne, and therfore it was nedefull that many, and dyuers hoostes, and sa∣crifices shuld one succede an other from tyme to tyme, durynge that lawe, now christ is not oftentimes offred in sacrifice at masse, because his sacrifice done ones on ye crosse, was not able, and sufficiēt to take away al mens synnes, but because
men do dayly synne, and they haue neade to haue the vertue of that sa¦crifice done on the crosse, ones for all, applied to them, which is done by the masse. Agayne in the olde law, there was not alway one, and the same sacrifice offered, but ma∣ny, and dyuers, for their feblenes, and insufficiēcy, but so it is not in the newe lawe, for there is continu¦ally one hooste, and the very same, is offered in the masse by the preist whiche Christe on good fryday of∣fred vpon the crosse for our sinnes although in the masse it is offred vnder the fourme of breade and wine, and was vpon the crosse vn∣der the forme of flesshe and bloud, so that the sacrifice is one, albeit the maner of offering it be not one, but dyuers, as the flesshe raw, and rosted is one thinge, thoughe it be altered in his qualities. This is
S. Chrisostoms mynd, as it shall appeare in the soylinge of ye nexte reasō, which is this, gathered also ho. 17. in. He. out of Paules epistle to ye Hebre. Vrbanus Regius ab¦useth thys autoritie a∣gainste the sacrifice of the masse, as Luther his mayster doth. the .x. chapter, where he thus saith Vna oblatione consummauit in sē¦piternū sanctificatos. Christe hath made perfecte for euer wt one obla¦tion thē that are halowed, or made holy, Vpon these wordes Luther & his scholers, make this argumēt. S. Paule doth affirme, that The seuēth reason christe hath made perfecte for euer with one sacrifice vpon the crosse, those which are sanctified, therfore we nede none other sacrifice beside that to make vs perfecte, before god, and thervpon it folowethe yt the masse is no sacrifice. To this I saie, that it is great The soluti¦on. meruaile, that Martyn Luther wyll take oute of thys epystle of Saynte Poule, anye wytnesse a∣gaynst
the sacryfyce of the blessed masse, For as muche as he denieth the autoritie of it, and sayeth that Marke Lu¦thers, vn∣shame ful∣nesse, it is not saynt Paules letter, But suche is hys maner, and others lyke to hym, that they are not a∣shamed to denye the autoritie of some bookes of scripture, the auc∣toritie of the churche, and the holy doctours, and yet whan they seme any thyng to make for the setting forth of their heresies, than they wyl vse thē, but let this go. Saint Paule this mente by his wordes aboue rehersed, that Christ our sa∣uiour, offring him selfe to his fa∣ther a sacrifice of swete sauoure, (as Paule saith in an other place) dyd make men beleuynge in hym, and doynge penaunce for their synnes, perfecte, and dydde take awaye their synnes accordynge to saynt Iohn baptistes sayenge.
Ecce agnus dei, ecce qui tollit pec¦cata mūdi. Lo the lambe of god, se hym that taketh awaye the sinnes Io. 1. of the worlde. This I saye Christ hath done for vs, ones offerynge hym selfe on the crosse, the whiche Moses lawe, and all the sacrifices of it, coulde neuer do (as s. Paule saith in this tenth chaptre) though they were neuer so oftentymes of∣fered, and for this cause Christes sacrifice done ones on the crosse is perfecte, and sufficient to doo a∣waye all the worldes offences, whi¦che is not offered againe at masse, vnder the fourme of breade and wine, for the vnperfectenes, and in sufficiency of it (as I haue afore often saide) but for the applyenge thereof to vs, for the remembraūce of Christes death, and the greate, and tender loue, which he shewed towarde vs in the tune of his pas∣sion,
that therbye we excited, and moued, sholde loue him tenderlye againe, and finally, for the attaine¦ment of that grace, whiche Chryst dyd merite, and purchase for vs, offerynge hym selfe on the crosse to appease his fathers wrath. Ma¦ny Note how many men are deceued in valuinge of the vertu of christes death. men are shamefullye deceyued in this matter, puttynge no diffe∣rence betwene the merite of remis∣sion of synne, and the applyeng of suche merite. The church of Christ neuer taught otherwise, than that Christ onely was a sacrifice deser∣uynge, or meritinge grace, and for giuenesse of synne for vs, the only 1. Cor. 6. 7 Ti. 2 1. P. 2. Apo. 1. 5, 14 pryce for the raunsom of the hole worlde, and the only redemption, whiche boughte vs with the pryce of his precious bloude, and yet the masse is a sacrifice representynge and aduertisinge vs of Christes blouddy sacrifice, and deth, by the
which, the grace (as I haue alrea∣dy sayde) and remission of synne, that christe through that his sacri¦fice dyd merite for vs, is applyed to vs, If thou wylt say that christ (as Paules mind was) did so take awaye al synne with that his one oblatiō, or sacrice done on ye crosse, that we neade nowe no sacrifices for the purgynge of synne, than what nede we the sacrifice of con∣fession made to god, of laude, than¦kes gyuynge, of a contryte harte, of mortifienge our affections and lustes, of alines, & semblable other whiche god commaundeth in scrip¦ture to be done? wherefore thinke not, good reader, that saint Paule mente, that christe had so satisfyed for oure synnes, with that his one oblation doone on the crosse, that thereby all other sacrifices are an¦nulled, abrogated, and abolyshed
cleane, as vnfrutefull, and vnne∣cessarye, but onely to declare of what, and how greatte efficacie, force, and strength that sacrifice was and is, for the takynge away of sinne, and makyng a man (be∣leuynge, and repenting for his vi∣ces committed) perfect before god, whiche al the sacrifices of the olde lawe, a thousande tymes and ofte∣ner offered, coulde neuer bryng to passe, and therefore they ought to be forsaken, and lefte of, Christes onelye sacrifice receiued, embraced and obserued. This was sainte Paules onelye mynde, as the let∣ter it selfe euydentelye shewethe. But yet ye wyll percase say to me, CHRISTE dydde sufficiently, An obiectiō & perfectly satisfye for our sinnes with this one oblation, and made the sanctyfyed, perfecte for euer (as saint Paule here affirmethe)
therfore there is no neade at all of the sacrifice of the masse, to satisfy for our sinnes, or to make vs per∣fecte afore god. This is a greate blyndnes of men. Dyd not chryst also sufficiently faste, wepe, & pray for vs, & yet we must fast, wepe, & praye for our sinnes forgiuenesse? dyd not he also pray, being in this world, sufficiently for our trespa∣ces, Heb. 5 and that notwithstandyng he cesseth not to praye for vs? There∣fore, Ro. 8. Heb. 9. Gene. . lyke as god dyd make al thin¦ges perfect within the space of .vi. dayes, and yet he worketh euen now (as christ sayd) in conseruing the same his creatures: so christ wt one oblation dyd sufficiently, and perfectly worke our saluation, me rytynge for vs grace, remyssion of synnes, and glorie, and yet he ceas∣seth not, nor will tyll the worldes ende, to worke oure health, and sal¦uation,
by the holye sacramentes, and diuers other meanes, wherby we are made partakers of that his moost sufficient and perfect oblati¦on, and sacrifice, or els we shoulde be damned for euer. Reade Chry∣sostome the .xvii. homilie on thys epystle, in whom thou shalt fynde that the preiste, at masse doth offre christ in sacrifice, notwithstādinge that Paule saith that Christe dyd make vs perfect with one oblatiō. Of this sufficient, now to the next reason; fet lykewise out of the same Paules epistle, where he thus sayeth. Vbi peccatorum remissio, iam The eyghte reason non est oblatio pro peccato. That is. Where or after there is remys∣sion of synne, forth with there is no oblation for synne, to these wordes they adde. But christ hath through his death, and oblation done vpō
the crosse, taken awaye the synnes of all the worlde (as manye textes of the scripture do wytnesse) there∣fore there remaineth no sacrifice, or oblation necessary for ye doyng away of synne, and so the masse is no sacrifice for synne. Saint Hilarye, good christen reader, sayd wel, that he is a good Lib. 4. de tri¦nitate: and a mete reader of the scripture whiche bringeth not wt hym in his fansy or heade the vnderstādyng of it, labouring to make it seme to signifie that thyng, which he hath afore conceaued, and fantisied, but taketh the vnderstandynge of it of the causes, why it was writtē, and the circumstaunce of the text. As Martyn Luther, and his scho¦lers do not, but cleane contrary. These wordes of Saynte Paule make as muche againste the sa∣crifice
of laude, thankesgyuyng to god for his benefites, of penaūce & such other, as against the sacri∣fice of the holy masse, as it is euy∣dente, & therefore let vs see, what Paule ment by them. Truelye his The solutiō mynde was to shewe vnto the Ie∣wes, which wold that the olde law and the sacrifices of it shoulde be kept with christes gospel, and that his death was not a sacrifice suffi¦ciente to put awaye mannes sinne but it was nedefull that the olde sacrifices shulde helpe thereunto, that Christe by offerynge hym selfe ones vpon the crosse dydde so perfectely, and sufficiently take awaye synne, that afterward there neaded none other sacrifice of Mo¦ses law (than abolyshed) no nor it was not necessarye that Chryste shoulde dye agayne to offer
eftesones sacrifice for synne, as thoughe that one sacrifice done on the crosse were not sufficient. This is nothinge againste the sacrifice of the masse, for as muche as that is not a sacrifice of Moses lawe, nor yet distincte from the sacrifice of the crosse, but the selfe same, thoughe the maner of offrynge be Chrisosto. ho. 17. im. Heb. dyuers. For on the crosse Christe was offered vnder the fourme of flesshe and bloude vysyblye, wyth shedynge of his precious bloude, but in the sacrament at masse he is offered vnder the fourme of bread and wyne inuisibly, and yet this dyuersitie of offring doth not make the sacrifice dyuers, but it remainethe euer one, lyke as the flesshe rawe and rosted, is one, and a man clothed, and naked. But yet some peraduenture wyl say, yf our synnes be forgyuen, & done clane
awaye by christes death, and sacri¦fice, An obiecti∣on commō∣ly moued of foles vn¦learned. why shuld we neade to haue the masse sayde, and christe therin offered in sacrifice for them? I say to that fonde question, that as wel they may aske why shuld baptisme penaunce, fastynge, almes, praier, The solutiō fayth, hope, feare, charite, and such other be neadfull, syth our synnes are forgyuē by christes passion? Maye it not be sayed to these men Matt. 22. as christe sayed to the iewes Erra∣tis nescientes scripturas, ye do erre or go out of the waye knowynge not the scriptures, because they thinke that christ hath by his deth so taken awaye synne, that there  grosse er¦rour of ma∣ny men. is none remaynynge amonge vs. For than wherefore shulde chryste teache vs to praye for remission of oure synnes? Why shuld penaūce Matt. 6. Luc. 24. be preached for remyssion of synne as christe sayde it ought? for what
cause dyd christe geue to his apo∣stels, after his death, and resurrec∣tion, autoritie, and power to remit the penitent persons synne, yf they Ioan, 20: eto, 2. dyd confesse them? Why dydde Peter commaunde the people to do penaunce, that they myghte be baptysed for to receaue remyssion of theyr synnes, yf Chryste hadde in dede and in effecte, so done a∣waye synne by hys deathe, that noone shulde afterward remaine? They whyche wolde gladlye lyue after the flesshe, and the leude lu∣stes thereof, do laye all on Chry∣stes backe, sayenge that he hathe doone suffycyent for vs, we neade to doo nothynge, but Saynte Paule euen in thys epistle the .v. chapter, teacheth vs an other lessō sayenge. Christus factus est omni∣bus obtēperātibus sibi, causa salu∣tis
aeternae. Chryste is made the cause of euerlastinge saluation, to all them which do obeye him. Loo we muste obeye Chryst, commaun¦dyng vs to beleue, to hope, to loue to feare god, to praye, and to kepe his commaundementes, or elles Chryst shal not be to vs a cause of euerlastynge saluation, although he hath dyed for vs, that we shuld be saued, but rather an occasion of our damnation, as Symeon said to oure Lady. Ecce hic positus est in ruinam multorum, Lo this thy sonne Christ is put to make many fall, or extremely to decaye. Ro. 8. Haeredes dei sumus, si tamē cōpati mur, ut cōglorificemur. 2. Tim. 2. si cōmortui fuerim{us}, et cōuiuem{us}, si sustinebim{us}, & cōregnabimus. We are gods heires (saiethe Paule) yf we suffre wyth Chryste, that we maye be gloryfyed wyth hym.
If we dye wyth Chryste, we shall liue with him, yf we suffre, we shal reigne wyth Christ. These condi∣tions, and manye other, are requi∣red by the scripture as necessarye for to attayne lyfe euerlastinge, thoughe George Ioye calleth thē the honourable fathers Steuen lorde bysshoppe of Winchester, as thinges of his muention. To be shorte, yf only christes passiō were sufficiente to saue vs, withoute a∣ny thinge done of oure parte, than all men shulde nedes be saued (for christe dyed for all the hole world, as Iohn testifieth) the whiche is 1. Io. 2. manifestly against the scriptures. Againe, If this were trewe take hell awaye cleane, as touchynge men at the leste, doest thou not see reader, that Lactantius sayd wel. Argumēta ex falso petita, ineptos, De. orig, . li. 2. ca. 6. et absurdos exitus sem{per} habent.
That is, argumentes fet, or gathe¦red of a false prīciple, haue alway tryflynge endes, vnapte to the pur¦pose, and folysshe. But I haue ta∣ryed ouer longe in the handlynge of this argumente, and therfore I wyll say therin no more. They yet reason farther, after this sort, vpō these saint Paules wordes, shame fully wrasted from their true sence Volūtarie peccantibus nobis, post The nynth reason. acceptam noticiam ueritatis, iam nō relinquitur pro peccatis hostia To vs, whiche do synne volunta∣rilye, after we haue receiued the knowledge of the truth, now there is lefte no hooste, or sacrifice for synne, yf there be lefte no sacrifice (sayth these men) for synne, it folo∣weth, that the masse is not a sacri∣fice propitiatorye. To this I aunswere, that the The soluti¦on. autours, and setters forth of this
argumente, doo not vnderstande Saynte Paules wordes, or elles they reason vppon them againste their owne conscience, seynge that they make nothynge for any suche purpose, as in dede they doo not. For Saint Paule ment, that men offendynge after they had ones re¦ceaued the faith, and the truth of the gospell, beynge Christened, shulde not trust to be againe raun¦somed, and reconcyled to god, by an other crosse, or by the deathe of Chryst agayne to be crucified, and offered to god in sacrifice, as in the olde lawe, the sacryfyces were of∣tentymes offered for synne, for yf they had that hope, they shulde be deceiued, because Christ died ones for oure synnes (as Peter sayethe) & shal neuer dye againe, as Paule 1. Petrt. 3. Rom. 6. wytnesseth, for he lyueth a lyfe im∣mortall, and euer shal. Thus saint
Chrisostome doth expounde Paul in thys place, sayeng. Hostia ultra non est, hoc est secunda. Crux ul∣tra nō est, hostiam quippe hanc uo¦cat. An hoost is no more, that is ye seconde crosse is no more, for he cal¦leth this a crosse. Vna nam{que} hostia perficit in perpetuum eos, qui san∣ctificantur, non sicut iudaica. Cau∣tos nos uult efficere, ne speremus ultra, secundū iudaicā legē aliam hostiam. That is to witte, For one hooste maketh them perfytte for e∣uer which are halowed, not as the Iewes hooste. He wolde make vs The iewes hostes often tymes offe∣red coulde neuer make men perfit in their con¦sciences, as Paul saith Heb. 9. ware, ye we shuld not trust to haue offered for vs an other hoost, after the Iewes lawe. Hytherto saynte Chrisostom. Some expounde this text, that saint Paule shuld meane that they, whyche do synne after they be baptised, and haue receiued ye fayth, & continue in synne, doing
no penaunce therefore, shuld take no profitte by christes deathe, but harme rather, because they shalbe more greuously punysshed (not ly∣uynge after their profession, and fayth) than yf they had neuer bene christened, as Christe and Peter do say. This toucheth them, which Matt. 11. 2. Petrt. 2. folowyng madde Martyn Luther do beleue that only faith, without good workes shulde be sufficiente to saue them. Finallye this texte maye be vnderstande of them, that synne of malyce, and do reioyce in their yll dedes, of whome Salo∣mon speaketh, sayeng. Laetantur Prouerb. 2. cū malefecerūt, & exultāt in rebus pessimis. They reioyce in their myndes (whiche they shewe also outwardely by sygnes) whan they haue done yll, and do bragge, or leape out with excedyng gladnes, in warst thinges. The sacrifice of
christe done on the crosse, can pro∣fytte these men nothynge excepte they amende and repente. For as muche as the meanynge of these wordes, do depende vpon them, whiche wente a lytle before, wher¦by Paule dydde exhorte the Heb. to styrre, and prouoke one another to loue, and good workes, that no man in tyme of persecution shulde forsake the churche, or congrega∣tion of ye faithful, I thinke Paule mente, that neither christes sacri∣fice ones done on the crosse coulde saue them, that dyd leaue the com¦pany of the christened, and forsake their faith in christe, nor any other whiche they shulde loke for. But yet I do not preferre this myne ex¦position before saint Chrisostoms whiche semeth to me verye ryght, and true. The nynth reason made againste the sacrifice of the masse,
is this. Sainte Paule saith, deus erat in christo mundum sibi reconcili∣ans, The tenthe reason. non reputans illis delicta ipso∣rum. God was in Christe, reconcy∣lynge to hym the worlde, that is al people of the world, not imputing their sinnes to them. Vpon these, & such other textes of scripture, whi∣che do testifie that god is pleased through christes death, and we set in his fauoure, they reason, and ar¦gue, that there is no nede vtterlye of any sacrifice, to appease goddes wrath, and displeasure, toward vs conceaued for oure sinnes, for as much as he is alredye pleased by christes death, and blouddy sacri∣fice, and therfore the masse is no sa¦crifice propitiatory. The aunswere to this argument The solutiō is sone made, for they take wronge the scripture, which saith that god Matt. 3.
is pacified, & appeased by chrystes sacrifice ones doone on the crosse, thinkynge that he is pacified indif¦ferently to all men, and that christ toke awaye in deede, and in effecte al ye worldes sin̄es, so that streight withe, after his deathe none dydde remaine, whiche is plaine false (as I haue declared before) for than the Turkes, the Iewes, the Sara¦sons, with all other not beleuynge in Christe, and those that beleuing in hym, dyeng yet impenitēt, shuld al come to heauen, & shuld none be damned. Therefore the truthe is, that albeit Chryste dyed for al in∣differently, yet those onely shal be saued by his deth, which do or shal beleue ī him perfitly, amēdīg their liues through penaunce, hopīg in gods mercy promised for his sake to vs, loue god & their neighbours as thē selfes, fear god, giue almes
to neadye, doo praye and obserue gods commaundementes. These only shalbe saued by christes deth (I speake not of infantes) & none other, the whiche christ ment, say∣enge. Hic est sanguis noui testamē¦ti, qui pro multis effunderur in re∣missionem peccatorum. This is Matt. 26. the bloude of the newe testamente, whiche shal be poured out for the remission of many mens synnes, he saith of many, not of al, because all men shuld not fulfill the aboue rehersed thinges, necessary for the attainemente of grace, and saluati¦on purchased by his deathe, in the whiche, and suche other is contay¦ned the cōditiō, that George Ioye G. Ioye. mockyngly, and vngodly, callethe Wynchesters condition, in his vn¦learned raylynge booke made a∣gainste that honourable prelate, but to his owne greate shame, yf
he be not shamelesse, as it shulde appeare by that his boke, that he is. The confutation of whose try∣flynge The honou¦rable lorde byshoppe of wichesters boke. and deuyllysh boke, he that lysteth to se well set forth in his co¦lours, let hym reade my lorde of Wynchesters aunswere made to hym, whiche is full, on euery syde, both of hygh wyt, and also of depe learnynge. But my lorde neadeth no more my commendation, than the sea water, or the son̄e the light of a candell, therfore I wil speake no more of his prayse, but go forth on my purpose, to the confutation of the next argument, which thus they make. That whiche is a signe, and a Th th reason. representation of a sacrifice is no sacrifice, But the masse is a signe, and a representation of christes sa∣crifice, ones offered by hym on the crosse for our synnes, Therefore it
is no sacrifice. This argu¦ment hathe Vrbanus Regius without a∣ny prouf of it as though it were i∣noughe for hym to saye it onely. They proue the seconde part of this argumente (whiche nedeth no proufe) by christes wordes saying, do ye this for my remembraunce, whiche Paule also recyteth to the Corinthians, but they proue not the first parte therof, which is ve∣ry false, folowyng therein certeine In proaemio de opificiodei philosophers, whiche (as Lactan∣tius testifieth) so dydde reason of all thinges, that were darke, and obscure, Vt ea, quae asserunt, pro∣bata, & cognita videri velint. That they wolde those thinges to seme proued, and knowen whi∣che they do affyrme, or approue. Where they saye that one thynge can not be a signe, a remembraūce, or a representation of a sacrifice, and a sacrifice also, that is false. For wherefore I beseche the good
reader, maye not the masse be a sa∣crifice, and yet a memorye, signe, & representation of Christes sacri∣fice offred ones vppon the crosse, as well as the paschall lambe, was a verye sacryfyce in dede, as the scripture wytnesseth, and that notwythstandynge, a sygne and re¦presentation Exo. 12. of Christes sacryfice to come. Chrisostome the se∣uententh sermon vpon the epistle of Saynt Paule to the Hebrewes plainelye saith that the masse is both a remembraunce of Christes death and sacrifice offered ones on the crosse, and also a sacryfyce not dystynete frome that, but the verye selfe same, as wherein is of∣fered the same bodye, which christe dydde offer on the crosse for vs. Truely we maye proue by that, that the masse is commaunded of CHRIST to be sayde for a
remembraunce of his death, that it is a sacrifice rather than the cōtra¦rye, after this sorte. That whiche is done in remēbraunce of a thing passed, oughte to represente it per∣fytlye, and especiallye the chiefe parte therof, but the masse was or∣deined of christe to be a memoriall of his deathe, whereat he dydde offer him selfe a sacrifice, and that was the cheife thing he than dyd, therefore the masse ought to repre¦sente and to put vs in remēbraūce of that sacrifice, whiche it can not do, excepte it be a sacrifice, where∣fore it is a sacrifice. Fynally christ saide not, do ye this onelye for the remembraūce of me, for than that texte shulde make muche more for myne aduersaries purpose, than nowe it doth, The nexte reason is this.
Christes oblation, and sacrifice The twelfe reason offered on the crosse was moost suf¦ficient, and puisaunt to take away cleane all the synnes of the world, for as moche as it was offred by hym whiche was bothe god and man also, defiled with no spotte of synne, therefore we haue no neade of the sacrifice of the masse to pur∣ge vs of sinne, and they whiche do ioine this sacrifice with christes sacrifice ones offered vppon the crosse, do seme to diminishe the myght, vertue, efficacy, & strength of Christes sacrifice, shewing ther by that it is not of it self sufficient to delyuer vs from synnes daun∣ger, but that it wanteth helpe of ye sacrifice of the masse. Many mē thinke this a strong The solutiō reason, whan in dede it is very fe∣ble, and weake. For as no learned man that is catholique, doth deny
that Christes sacrifice offred vp∣pon the crosse is sufficiente, and of vertue inoughe to do awaye all synne of the whole worlde, euen so no good Chrysten man, nor womā wyll saye nay, but that this chry∣stes death, and sacryfyce must nea¦des be (as I haue oftentimes said afore) applyed to vs by the sacra∣mentes, and other meanes prouy∣ded of god there vnto, amonge the whiche the sacrifice of the masse is one not of leste necessitie, as it ap∣peareth before in this booke suffi∣cientlye declared, and therefore I wyll let that passe, and go forward in this matter to the disprouynge of the nexte reason, whiche is thys set forth by one Vrbanus Regius in latyn, & translated into englysh by wyllyam Turner. wyllyam Turner Th .xiii: reason. If they worke (saith he wiselye lyke him selfe) with their dayly sa∣crifice
(as they cal it) remyssyon of Vrbanus Reginus reason synne, I pray you thē, what sinnes dyd the bloude of the newe and e∣uerlastynge testament take away? Dyd euer man heare, or reade, The solutiō so fonde, and foly she a question, as this is? who sayth that the masse, or the sacrifice therof, doth take a∣waye synnes withoute the vertue of the bloud, whiche Christ shedde for the establyshemente of the new testamente? Who doth not ascribe the forgyuenesse of all synnes vn∣to Chrystes deathe, and sacryfyce offered to god on the crosse, as the onelye meryte or merytoryous cause thereof? Agayne what man, excepte he wante fayth, wytte, or learnynge, wyll denye, but that the meryte, vertue and strēgth, of that CHRISTES bloud shedynge, muste neades be applyed to
vs by the sacramentes, and other necessarye meanes, that we maye thereby be made partakers there∣of, for the remyssion of our synnes obtaininge of grace, and saluatiō euerlasting? Now the masse (as I haue declared already sufficiētly) is an application of that Christes meryte, consystynge in the offring of hym self, a swete sacrifice to his father, for the pleasinge and paci¦fienge of his wrathe towarde vs for our synnes, and putteth awaye no synne, but throughe the vertue of christes deathe, and bloude, as al defēders of it do affirm, though Vrbanus Regius, and his scolers maliciouslye do laye the contrary to their charge. Further yet these men reason, sayenge. Christe by his death hath satis¦fied The xiiii. reason. sufficiētly for our synnes, and with his bloud wasshed thē away,
accordynge to the prophecye of E∣saye the .liii. chapter, he dyd beare our synnes, and was corne for our wickednes, of ye which it foloweth and is a good argument, that all the oblations, whiche are beside this, are vaine, and voyde, the whiche they pretende. Hytherto Vrbanus Regius, The soluti¦on. Naughtye bookes whose leude, and vngodly boke of the comparison betwene the newe and the olde learnynge, is among the people in english, to the poyso¦nīg of their soules, as many other The kynges ma¦iestie lyke a most Chri∣sten prince hath by hys proclamari∣on redressed this matter naughty bokes be, the more is the pitie yt it is so suffered. God wolde that men, and women, nowe hadde no lesse zele to the truth, nor loue to their owne soules, thā the Ephe¦sians (whiche were idolaters) had whan saint Paule preached to thē, that they wolde bringe forth their bokes of heresye and burne them,
as they dyd their yll bookes, but to the argumente of Regius, whi∣che hathe as lytle learnynge in it, as godlynes. For what learned, or godly man wold reason after this sorte, Christe hath by his oblation satisfied sufficiently for our sinnes Therefore all other sacrifices & ob¦lations be vayne & voyde? Doth not the scripture commaund vs to offer dyuers kyndes of oblatiōs & sacrifices, notwithstandynge the sufficiencye of Christes oblation, & sacrifice? Reade ye .vii. the .xiiii. the .xxxiiii. and xlv. chapter of the booke called Ecclesiasticus in la∣tyn, and in englysshe, the boke of ye sonne of Sirach, where mentiō is made of certen oblations, whiche Christes deth made not voyd, as y• oblatiō of almes, & other dyuers. Doth not christ him selfe speake of offeringe sacrifice, in the fyfte of
Matthew? doth not saynt Paule Rom. 12: cōmaunde vs to offer vp our bo∣dies a sacrifice to god? doth not saynt Peter make mention of offe¦rynge 1. Petri. 2. to god spirituall hoostes, and sacrifices? doth not s. Paule calle the conuersion of the people Rom. 15. to the fayth an oblation? doth not Dauyd saye, Tunc acceptabis sa∣crificium iusticiae, Than o lorde yu Psal. 50. shalte accept the sacrifice of righ∣tuousnes? Doth not he also com∣manude vs to do sacrifice saienge Sacrificate sacrificium iusticie, & Psal. 4. sperate in domino. Offer ye sacri∣fice of righteousnes, or verteous li¦uīg, & trust ye īour lord, as though he had sayd, excepte ye liue well, yf ye had all faythe (as Paule sayth) your truste in god is but vayne, & rather presumption, than verye hope, or trust, as theirs vndouted∣ly Iacobi. 2. is, which saye ye onelye fayth do
iustifie man, or is sufficient to saue hym withoute good workes, as s. Paule, and Iames both, do plain¦ly Rom. 2. witnesse. Moreouer Dauyd spe¦keth of the sacrifice of laude, the, c and syxte, and the hundred and .xv Gala. 5. psalme. Item, in the fyfty psalme mention is made of the sacrifice of a contrite harte. To be shorte, dothe not sainte Paule saye, that god is pleased, or appeased with the hostes of liberalitie, and al∣mes Heb. 12. geuynge? Who is therfore so mad to say, that christes death, & satisfieng for synne, hathe made al these oblatiōs vaine, voide, & of none effecte? Howe with christes sufficient satisfaction it doth agre, and stand, that the masse is a sacri¦fice (whereby we are made parta∣kers of the passiō of christ) I haue oftentimes shewed alreadye, and therefore I wyll nowe passe ouer
that thing, and reherse mo of their reasons. Vrbanus Regius againe thus saith (wyselye.) To rayse vp a new oblation is The .xv. rea¦son. to sette lytle by the firste. But they that defende the masse to be a sacri¦fice, do eayse vp a newe oblation. Therefore they set lytel by christes oblation, made on the crosse. He proueth not the second part of this argument, because he sawe that it was playne false, and that it farre passed his witte, and lear∣nynge to proue it. For no man set∣teth vp the masse, but Christ onely hym selfe (as I haue afore in sun∣drye places of this boke declared) and it is not a newe sacrifice, nor yet any other than that very selfe same, whiche christe dyd ones offer on the crosse, (as saint Chrisostom Homili. 17. in hebre: truely sayth) though the maner in offerynge, whiche Chryste vsed in
the tyme of his death, and now is vsed at masse is not one but dy∣uers, like as I haue opened before so that this reason is playn voide and of no strength. Moreouer the same Regius thus bableth verye fondly. Whan they say, that sinnes be releassed, and forgiuen in the sa¦crifice An obiectiō of the masse, it foloweth af∣ter their opinion, that that only sa¦crifice on the crosse did not satisfye for all synnes. This he sayth with out all proufe of his saienge, whi∣che The solutiō is very false. For it is true that sinnes are releassed, and forgiuen by the sacrifice of the masse, & yet Christe dyd sufficiently satisfye by hys sacrifice offered ones on the crosse for all sinnes, as Ihon sayth 1. Io. 2. in his first epistle the .ii. chapter. The masse, as a meane, and an ap∣plication of christes bloudy sacri∣fice offered on the crosse, doth put
awaye sinne, throughe the vertue of that sacrifice, so yt the releassing of sinne by it, is & ought to be ascri¦bed to christes death. We saye by baptisme, sinne is forgiuen, by pe∣naunce, faith, hope, prayer, almes dedes, wt suche other, & yet it were great foly, and blyndnes to argue thervpon that christes onely sacri¦fice dyd not satisfie for al sinne. Now to Luther againe who thus reasoneth vngodly. It is not lefull to set vp any sa¦crifice The xvi. reason to be a worshypping of god wtout expresse cōmaūdemēt of god or wtout manifest scripture ther∣fore, but there is neither expresse commaundement, nor plaine scrip¦ture, that the masse is a sacrifice, or yt the preist in it shuld offer anye sacrifice. Therfore it is no sacrifice The first part of this reasō is false The solutiō for Abel offred sacrifice which plea¦sed god, wtout cōmaundement or
scripture, as the fourth of the Ge∣nesis doth testify, and Iob also for his chylderne. Furthermore al the Iob. 1: catholyke doctours are cleane in this opinion, that Christe at hys laste supper dydde institute the sa¦crifice of the masse, and commaun¦ded his apostles to offer there at his blessed bodye, and bloude in sa¦crifice, saienge, Hoc facite in meā commemorationem, Do ye thys for my remembraunce. Luke .xxii. Finally we beleue many thinges not expressed, nor commaunded in Verities not written expressely in scripture. the scripture, as the continuall vir¦ginitie of the mooste blessed, and honorable virgin marye Christes mother, for the denial of the which Saint Ierome called Eluidius an heretike. Also the baptisme of infantes or babes, can not be pro¦ued by expresse scripture, but only by tradition of the apostelles, as
Origen, Sainte Austen, and Dio¦nise Li: 6. cō. ī Ro. Aduer. faustū lib. de. ecclesi. hierarch. Paules disciple do say. I passe by, diuers other thinges necessary to be beleued, althoughe scripture neither commaundeth them to be done, nor speaketh anye thinge of them, of the whiche I wyll putte forth shortely a boke, god willing. They yet reason thus against the masse. The .xvii. reason. That can not be a sacrifice, whi∣che the preiste doth eate, because a sacrifice is wholly offered to god, and no part of it is turned to mās vse, but the preist doth wholly eate the sacramente. Therfore it is not a sacrifice. O blyndnes of Luther, dydde The solutiō not the Iewes eate the paschal, or passeouer lambe, and yet that was a sacrifice, as it appearethe in the scripture playnely? And where he saith, that a sacrifice is wholly of∣fered
to god, and no peece of it tur¦ned to mans vse, that is true only of one kynde of sacrifice, called in greke holocaustum, that is al bur¦ned. For in the olde laue the iewes dyd leye beestes, wich hauynge theyr bowelles taken out were layed hole on the aulter, and bur∣ned, so that of these onelye no part was turned to mans vse, the whi∣che Martin Luther applieth false¦ly to all other sacrifices, therefore this his reason is not worth two peason, as this is not made by him The sacrament of thaulter is a The xviii. reason. gage, or a pledge of gods promyse made of the remission of sinne, and obtaininge of life euerlastynge, by the eatynge of it, as it appeare the in Iohans gospell, sayeng, he that eateth of this breade, shal lyue for Ioā 6 euer, therefore that thinge, whiche
is consecrate in the masse, can not be a sacrifice, for as muche as one thynge can not be a gage, and also a sacrifice. Hytherto leude Luther without all learnyng. To this I aunswere breifely, The soluti¦on. that the masse is both a pledge, as¦surynge vs of the perfourmynge of gods promysse touchynge remis¦sion of synne, and the lyfe euerla∣stynge, & also a sacrifice, in dyuers respectes. For it is a sacrifice, for as moch as it is offered of ye preist to god, after ye churches ordinaūce and a gage, or pledge, in as moch as it is geuen to vs of god, as a certificate, and an assuraunce of forgiuenes of synne, and glorie ce∣lestiall, at the lengthe to be of vs receaued, throughe the worthy eatynge of Christes bodye. Wherefore thys reason is soyled
cleane. Nowe whan Luther thus argueth. The sacramente is a gyfte, ge∣uen The .xx. rea¦son. to vs of god, as christe sayeth Accipite, take ye, this is my body but one thinge can not be a sacri∣fice, and a gyft, because the nature of a sacrifice is to be offred to god, and of a gyfte to be giuen of god, whiche are contrarye, and can not agre together in any one thinge. What ignoraunce is this of The solutiō this greate doctour, whome hys scholers are not ashamed to call Daniel, and the lanterne of the worlde, whiche brought the lyght into it? If (good christen reader) one thinge coulde not be bothe a gifte of god gyuen to man, and al¦so a sacrifice, than Abell dyd offer no sacrifice, for those thinges whi¦che he offered, were the gyftes of god, as the text sheweth, nor Abra¦ham,
nor Iob, nor the Iewes offe∣rynge of beastes, corne, and other thinges by the cōmaundement of god had ben any sacrifice, because al those thinges were goddes gif∣tes, as al creatures be, accordyng to the prophet Dauids sayenge. Domini est terra, & plenitudo ei{us} Psal. 23. The earth is our lordes, and the fulnes of it, are not the praysynge of god, geuynge thankes to hym, the confession of his name, geuing of almes, with many other thīges sacrifices, and yet they are al gods giftes, as Paul saith. Quid habes 1. Cor. 4. quod non accepisti? What hast yu (that good is) whiche thou haste not receaued? Therefore the pro∣phet 1 paral. 29. Dauyd sayde. Tua sunt om∣nia domine, & quae de tua manu ac¦cepimus, dedimus tibi. Lorde all thinges are thyne, and we haue gi¦uen to the, those thinges, whiche
we haue receaued of thy hande. This ye church confesseth in the ca∣non Nihil deo preter  sua damus. we gyue no thynge to god besyde his owne. G. Nazianze. oratione. 16. of the masse, sayenge. Offeri∣mus praeclarae tuae maiestati de tuis donis, ac datis, hostiam puram, ho∣stiam sanctam, hostiam immacula∣latam, panem sanctum vitae aeternae & calicem salutis perpetuae. We do offer to thy very excellent ma∣iestie of thy lyberal or fre gyftes, & thynges geuen to vs, a pure hoost a holye hooste, an vndefyled host, holye breade, of euerlastynge lyfe, and the cuppe of saluation perpe∣tuall. Lo here thou seeste, reader, that the church, christes spouse (the foū¦dation and pyllar of the truth, to whome christe promysed the holye ghost the spirite of truth, whiche shulde abyde with it for euer, that it shuld not holly erre in the faith)
doth confesse one, & the same thing Tua ex tuis tibi offerim{us} we offre to the saythe Chrisostom ī his masse▪ thine owne thynges, of thyne owne to be a gyfte of God, and a sacry∣fyce offered to hym. Ought not we rather to beleue this, than Mar∣tyn Luthers folysh bablyng, groū¦ded vppon no learnynge? but of this sufficiente. An other argumēt of his framynge is this, whyche I do reherse, that men maye se his great and exceadynge ignoraunce in scripture, and not for any lear∣nynge, or strength it hath. The xx. reason The sacramente of the aulter was called of Christe, whan he dydde institute it, the newe testamente in hys bloude, as it appereth the .xxii Lu. 22. 1. Cor. 11. of Luke, But nothing can be both a sacrifice, and a testamēt, because a testament is receaued by the ex∣ecutour of the maker of it, and a sa¦crifice is offered to god. Thys reason is easelye
soyled, partely for as muche, as on¦lye the bloude of Christe is called the newe testamente and not the flesshe, and that improperlye, be∣cause the newe testamente is con∣firmed, and establyshed, by shed∣dynge Heb. 9. Gro. 24. of it, as the olde was by the bloude of beastes. Also the sacra∣ment is called the newe testamente because it is a gyfte of the newe te¦stament, or a thing bequeathed of Christe therin, as peace is, whiche Christe bequethed to his disciples whan he shulde depart from them by death, as Iohn testifieth ye .xiiii Ioan. 14: chaptre. This notwithstandynge, it is a sacrifice, for as much as it is Testamentum est institutio percipiendae baereditatis morte testato¦ris obsignata Heb. 9. offered to god at masse, for ye quick and deade. A testament properlye, is an ordinaunce of a mans laste wyll, concernyng the distribution of his goodes, ratified and assu∣red wt his death, as Paule saieth,
and so the sacrament of the aulter is not called a testament, as it is e∣uident. Fynally the newe testamēt Testamentum dequo christ{us} l▪quitur, est ordinatio ui∣tae aeternae  gīam indis∣cendae, chri∣sti morte ob∣signata{quod} ide dicitur aeter∣num {quod} uitae aeterna est ab aeterno prepa¦rata electis. & {quod} illa est aeterna. Matt. 25. in an other significatiō, containeth the lawe of fayth, hope, charyte, the commaundementes, counsaylles, and the promisses of Chryste, after the whiche sorte the sacrament can¦not be called a testament, as euery learned man perceaueth, and ther∣fore it is called the newe testament for two the first causes aboue men¦tioned, with the whiche it standeth very wel, that it is also a sacrifice, but of this reason I haue spoken inoughe, wherefore let vs here the nexte, thus fashyoned out of fas∣shyon. The communyon or housle, of one laye man profyteth nothinge another, Therefore the preistes masse doth nothynge auayle the people, but onely hym selfe.
Dyd euer man heare, or reade he .xxi. reason. afore Martyn Luther came, anye so fonde and folysh an argument? The apostels of christe, receauing their housell of hym, dydde there∣wyth profytte vs nothynge, ther∣fore Christes consecration of the sacramente dydde profytte vs no∣thinge, Is this a good reason? Is it lyke of the laye mannes recea∣uynge his housle, and of the prei∣stes sayenge masse? who, but Mar¦tyn Luther is so ignoraunte, and blynde to affirme that? But the blynde leadeth the blynde, tyl both fall into the denne of heresye, and eternal damnation. Beware, good reader, of suche blynde leaders, leste thou repente, whan it is to late. Againe, thus Luther reaso∣neth, saienge. One mā can not be baptised, or christened for an other, nor marry
a wyfe, for an other, therefore one can not offer sacrifice for an other, This is a reason mete for such a teacher: Why dyd not he as well argue thus, one man can not be christened, nor marry a wife for an other, therefore one can not praye for an other, nor giue almes for an other? Doth not that folow as wel as the other vpon his first propo∣sition? Dyd not Iob offer sacrifi∣ces Iob. 1. for hys chyldrene? Dydde not the preistes of the olde lawe offer Leui, 9, sacrifices for the peoples synnes? Doth not sainte Paule saye that Heb: 5. euery preist, or byshoppe, is chosen to offer gyftes, and sacrifices, for mens synnes? beleue not therfore good reader, this doiynge igno∣raunt techer, which erreth so plain¦ly against gods holy worde, as ye seest in these argumentes alredye recited, that Luther did, & as thou
shalte se in the reasons now folo∣wynge, of whiche this is one. The laye people do not offer The xxii reason sacrifice, whan they receyue the sa¦crament, Therfore ye preistes like¦wyse do not offre sacrifice, when they do eate it, and so the masse is no sacrifice. This reason is so sclender, and The solutiō weake, that it is not worthye to be rehersed, much lesse to be confuted. The Iewes eatinge the paschall lambe, dyd not offer sacrifice, ney∣ther the layte, nor the preistes, and yet the preistes dydde offer hym in sacryfyce, before they dydde eate hym, as the scripture sheweth ma∣nifestlye, after lyke sorte, the prei∣stes of the newe lawe, thoughe in receauynge the mooste blessed sa∣crament, they do not offre sacrifice yet they do offer the body & bloude of our sauioure Christ to god, be∣fore
they take it, as the canon both of the greake, and also the latyne masse, playnelye declareth, where∣fore this argumente is of no pith, ne strength, as ye nexte is, fourmed after this maner. If the masse were a sacrifice, or The xxiiii. reason. deyned by Christe, (as ye say it is) than it shoulde folowe, that the a∣postles at their masses, had offred sacrifice, ensuinge therein Chryste their maisters sample, and com∣maundement, byddinge them doo that whiche he had done hym self. But they dyd not offer sacrifice in their masse. Therfore the masse is not a sacrifice. Martyn Luther thus trauai∣leth The soluti¦on. to proue the seconde parte of this reason, whiche is that the apo¦stles at their masse dyd not offer sa¦crifice, we reade (saith he) in thac∣tes of the apostels, that they dyd
breake breade about the howses, & so they receiued it (which is vnder¦stande of the sacrament) and made no sacrifice, because sacrifice was and is nowe euer offered in the temple, and not in anye pryuate house. The soluti¦on. To this I say that that breaking of breade was but a distribution, or a giuing of ye holy body of christ to the people which was before cō¦secrated, & offred vnto god a sacri¦fice: For that is oftentymes in scri¦pture, the signification of this worde frangere, to breake, as in the prophet Esaie the eyght and fyfty chaptre, where we read these wordes frange panem tuum esuri¦enti, breake thy bread to ye hungry that is, gyue it to hym Moreouer there were (belyke) some halowed places about those howses, in the wich the apostles sayed masse, and
made sacrifice to god, before the temples were buylded. Fynally a temple is not vtterly necessarie to offre sacrifice in, as now experiēce of the church declareth, and so by this aunswer, another of Luthers reasons is soyled, whiche is: that Another reason of Luthers is soyled by the waye. Christ at his maundye dydde not offer sacrifice, institutynge the masse, because he was not then in the temple, where sacrifyce should haue ben offered, but in the geste chaumber or a parler, where men dyd vse to souppe, for yf a temple hadde bene so necessarye to offer sacrifyce, that none coulde haue ben offered, excepte in it onelye, than CHRIST had not offered hym selfe in sacrifice at his death. whiche is agaynste the scrypture for than he was not in anye temple, but on the mounte of
caluary, as the gospels do playne∣lye tell. This reason therefore is cleane, and clerelye doone awaye. yet Luther goeth forth thus reaso¦nyng. If the masse were a sacrifice The .xxv. reason. we myghte therewith worshyppe, and honoure god. But we can not so do. Therefore it is no sacrifice. That we can not worshyp god with the masse, he goth about this to proue, by the wordes of Christe, written yt fourth of Iohns gospel. Io. 4. Oportet eos qui adorāt deū, in spi¦ritu, & veritate adorare, They that do worshyppe god, muste worshyp in spirite and truth, therefore the masse, which is an outward thing can not serue anye thinge for the worshyppynge of god, as it shuld do, yf it were a sacrifice, and for that cause it is none. This reason is grounded vpon The solutiō
the yll takynge of christes wordes whiche do not exclude al outward thinges from the honouringe of god (as Martyn Luther and his scholers suppose) but they shewe that in the time of the newe lawe, ye figures, and ceremonies of tholde lawe shulde ceasse, and be anulled clerelye, so that it shulde be lefull for men to worshyppe god not on¦ly in the temple of Hierusalem, as it was duringe the olde lawe, but they shulde honoure hym in euery place in spirite, & truth. Also christ ment by those wordes yt the errour of thē, which did worship god in ye hyll, or mountaine called Seir, as the Samaritanes dyd, shulde like¦wise be taken awaye, as the text it selfe playnlye declareth, that christ ment, and therefore this letter ma∣keth vtterly nothynge agaynst the sacrifice of the masse, whiche is no
ceremony of the Iewes law, nor er¦rour of the gentiles, but a sacrifice instituted by christ at his laste sup¦per, the whiche he that doth offer deuoutly to god, doth honour and worshyppe hym in spirite & truth, wherefore this argument is aun∣swered vnto sufficiently. Martyn Luther wold haue in the new law, no outward sacrifice, suche as the masse is, but only inwarde & spi∣rituall, as to offer to god our bo∣dyes in sacrifice thorowe mortify∣enge out affections, and carnal lu¦stes, Rom, 12, to offer laudes, and thankes to god for his benefites bestowed on vs, with suche other sacrifices, which euery christen man, & womā offreth to god, & is therby a preist, as Peter & Ihon in the Apocalips 1. , 2, Apo, 1, , 5, do witnes, and there is none other preist no sacrifice, nor preisthoode, but this only. Hitherto Luter, whi¦che
dyd not se, he was so blynded, or els he wold not se, such was his myscheuous malyce, that in the lawe of nature, men offered to god outward sacrifices, as Abel, Noe, Melch. and other dyuers, & were not content to honour god with in warde sacrifices onlye. Also in the tyme of Moses lawe the Iewes dyd likewise by goddes owne com¦maundemente, why therfore shuld not christen people after, sembla∣ble and lyke maner worshyppe god in the tyme of the newe lawe, sythe euery lawe hathe a sacrifice, or a sorte of sacrifices propre to it, as a kynde of preisthode also? Nor it is not to be marueiled at, whye The. . reason. saynt Paule so largely intreating of christes preisthode, and of the cō¦parison betwene hym, and Melch, made no mentyon of the sacry∣fice
of the masse, which is after the order of Melchizedech. For sainte Paule speketh there only of those Heb. 7. The soluti¦on. thinges, whiche myght make any thinge for the auauncynge, and settinge forthe of the excellency of Christes preisthoode, before the preisthood of Moyses lawe, to the entent, he myght cause the Iewes to leaue, and forsake that sacrifice of Moses, and cleane onely to chri¦stes, beinge farre more excellente, and of greater strēgth to saue mā, than the other, to the whiche pur∣pose, it shoulde nothynge haue hel¦ped, if he had entreated of christes sacrifice vnder fourme of breade & wyne, as it is euydente to all lear∣ned men, & therefore in that whole epistle to the Hebrewes, Paule ne∣uer spake of that sacrifice, but on∣lye of that, which Christe offered ones vppon the crosse, whereby he
made man perfitte in soule, which thing, al Moyses sacrifices could neuer bringe to passe, and for that cause christe, whiche offered that noble sacrifice, was and is a preist muche more excellente, than Moy¦ses preistes were. Nowe we se how lyttle it maketh against the sacri∣fice of the holye masse, that Paule spake not thereof in his epistle sēt to the Hebreus. Moreouer it folo∣weth not that the masse is no sacri¦fice because Paule to ye Hebrewes spake not of it, for many thynges are true, not ones touched there. Thirdely it was a matter to hard for the capacitie of the Iewes, to perceaue howe the masse shulde be a sacrifice auaileable for the quick and the deade, for they neded easye doctrine rather thā hard, as Paul saythe to them the fyfte chapter, & therefore he made no mention of
that matter to them. Nowe where Luther allegeth the twelfe of the Romaines, the seconde of saint Pe¦ters first epistle, & the Apocalipse, to proue al christen people prestes, he is deceiued shamefully, because those textes do proue as well yt all christē folke be kinges as preistes, & so they are ī dede spiritually, & in wardly, for asmuch as they do rule their affectiōs, & carnal desires wt the bridel of reason, which is a kin¦ges office, & they offre spiritual sa∣crifices to god, as praier, thākesgi∣uīg. &c. being therby spiritual prei¦stes, but not as we be yt haue taken preisthode of yt bishop. Hytherto I haue rehersed M. Luthers reasōs against the masse, & the disprouing of thē also, now let vs se, what one of his scolers, called Philip Melā¦ethon hath sayd against the same, first this he saith, beside & aboue y• which I haue already confuted, of
Luters his maisters forgyng. The scripture saith yt we are iusti¦fied, or made righteous by faythe, The. xvii. reason. whē we do beleue yt oure sinnes be forgiuen for christes sake, now if ye masse do take away the sinnes of ye quick, & the dead, through ye worke done, our iustificatiō shulde happē by the worke of the masse, and not of faith, which ye scripture suffreth not, it foloweth thervpon that the masse is no sacrifice, putting away the sinnes of the quicke, and dead. As touching ye first parte of this The solutiō reason, whiche is yt we be iustified through faith, whē we do beleue yt our sinnes are forgiuē vs for chri∣stes sake, I saye yt it is not sufficiēt for the attainemente of rightous∣nes, and remission of oure sinnes to beleue that they be remitted for Christes deathes sake, excepte we forsake also our synnes, and do diuers thinges ther vnto necessary
by the assignement of god in scrip∣ture, as I mynd to declare in my boke of iustification, whiche god willing I wyl shortlye put forth, therefore now I let that passe, and touch the seconde peece of this ar∣gument, whiche is, that yf by the worke of ye masse we shuld obteine remissiō of our sinnes, thā it shuld not come by faith. This propositi∣on declareth ye autours ignoraūce, or els his malice, cōceiued against the truth and the clergy, of whom he doth falselye reporte, that they saye, that the masse of it self, with∣out faith in christes death, shulde bringe to vs remyssion of our syn∣nes, where they affirme with saint Rom. 3. Heb. 11. Paul, that our righteousnes, doth come by faith, and that withoute fayth no mā can please god. These are all very true, remissiō of sinne commeth by the passion of Christe,
by the masse, by baptisme, by faith by penaūce, by hope, by feare, pray¦er, fastinge, almes dedes, and such other, as the scripture sheweth, but onely christes death is the merite of grace and remyssion of synnes, Therefore this argument is of no force ne pith, as in dede this is not The. xvii. reason. which he maketh after this sorte. It is an horrible thinge to at∣tribute, or ascribe, as muche, & as great vertue to the priestes worke which he doth saienge masse, as to christes death. But they ye affirme the masse to be a sacrifice, abolys∣shinge the synnes of the quicke, & the dead, do no lesse giue, & ascribe to the priestes worke, then to chry∣stes death, Therefore the masse is no suche sacrifice. He proueth not the second part The solutiō of this argument, whiche is verye false, but only saieth it, as though
his saieng shuld be sufficient with out all proufe, to verefy his deuel∣lysshe purpose. All catholyke peo∣ple do beleue that by the masse the synnes of the quicke, and dead, are forgiuē, as by an applyeng of chri¦stes death to vs, & by ye vertue ther of, and that not by the priestes worke chiefly, but by christes owne worke, offering him selfe in sacry∣fice to his father, by the ministery of the priest, saieng masse, & this is not to ascribe as to ye preistes ded or worke, which he doth in ye masse, as to christes death, which Melāc¦thon falsely sayth we do, yt defende the blessed masse to be a sacrifice, pacifieng gods wrath. Moreouer he sayth, that synne can not be van¦quysshed, and ouercome but by The .xxix. reason. fayth in Christe, as Paule sayeth the fifth to the Romaynes. We iustified throughe faith haue
peace, wherefore the payne, which the soules departed in grace (and are not yet in heauen) do suffre can¦not be ouercome by the applyenge of an other mannes worke, soch as the masse is, sayde by a preiste, and therefore the masse is no sacrifice profitable for the deade, to deliuer them frō the paine, which they do suffer, to make them cleane, that they maye entre into heauen. O wonderful blyndnes of this The solutiō man, whych sawe not, that iustifi∣cation bringeth remission of mor∣tall, and deadlye synnes, whyche they obteined, whyle they were here liuing, whom being dead the masse doth auayle, for the remissiō of venial sinnes, and the releasing of their temporall paines, whyche they suffre, because, whan they ly∣ued in this world, they did deserue and merite that not onely masses,
(as saint Austen affirmeth) but al¦so Ad dulcitiū questi.  ineucha. 109 prayers, and almes of the quick shuld profit thē, if they were apply¦ed to thē, therfore this Melancth∣thons reason is clerly of no value ne force. Vrbanus Regius dothe Vrbanus Regi{us} false ly reporteth of preistes as many o∣ther do, that they make mar∣chaundyse of the masse falselye, & spitefully saye, that the preistes, ydell fellowes, do make marchaundise of the masse, lefte to be a memoriall, and remem∣braunce of ye death which brought lyfe. For they do take moneye for sayenge masse as a stipende, and wages of their labours to liue by accordinge to their vocation, and maner of lyuing. Is it not lefull for them to take somwhat for that their seruice, for as muche as eue∣rye man maye lyue by the swete of his face, as god sayde to Adam, that he shulde? doth not Christ say Gene. 3. Mat 10. Rom. 1. 1. Cor. 9. that the workeman is worthye to
haue his wages for his laboure? Doth not also saynte Paule saye that they ought of duetie to geue Rom. 1. temporal sustinaunce, and goodes to them, of whom they had recey∣ued spiritual thinges? May not a prieste take money for his susty∣naunce, whan he prayeth, and sai∣eth masse for the people, as well as the preacher for his sermons, whi∣che maye lefully lyue by that hys labour, as Paule declarethe the ninth chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians? Therefore we preistes make no marchaundise of the masse, like as the preacher doth not of his preachinge, Nowe good peroratio. Christen reader, thou hast not one¦ly the truth of this matter set forth at large in this boke, but also a cō¦futation of al, that Martin Luter (which of al men first began to ba∣ble against ye blessed masse), could
write for the maintenaunce of his heresye, to the which I haue added some other of his scholers argu∣mentes, with a reprouynge also of them, so that no man can hereafter excuse him selfe, through want of knowledge of the truth, which wil reade ouer this boke withoute all affection diligently, more conside∣rynge what is therein sayde, than who sayde it, and set it forth to be redde of all men: Accepte in good worth, gentil reader, this my endeuour, and la∣bour, taken to profyt them, which eyther be cleane rude, and vnlear∣ned, or els haue but lytell knowe∣ledge, and vnderstanding in scryp¦ture, for learned men haue no nede of this my laboure, whereby the truth is declared after a grosse, and a rude fasshion, for the easier vnderstanding of the vnlearned,
for whom it is done. The grace of god be with the good reader, and kepe the from all heresye, or sone delyuer the from it, yf thou be alre¦dye therewith infected, and poyso∣ned, that thou stedfastely and vn∣doubtedly beleuinge all thinges pertaining to a christen mans be∣leefe, and obseruinge goddes com¦maundementes, mayest, at thende of thy lyfe, come to that ioy which god hath prepared for hys true louers, & christ our sauiour most dearly hath boughte for the same, with shed∣dyng of hys precious bloude, to whom be glorye, ho∣nour, and imperye for euer. Amen.
Faultes escaped in the printynge, Fol. pa. li. faut correctiō   2 12 perfecto: perlecto 39 1 12. after this word (name) lacketh these wordes in eue¦ry place. 42 2 21 ipsarū: ipsorū 43 1 1 reade That is. 43 2 7 quod: quoddā 44 1 8 reade Againste whose fonde. &c. 46 2 17 iudea: iudeae 48 2 2 the tribe: ye tribe 50 1 20 ecclesiā: ecclesia 58 8 18 ecclesiā: ecclesia 60 2 against ye first lyne in the margin, reade, , for . 70 2 in the margyn reade , 76. 1 9. reade of the sacrī¦fice (therby vnderstandyng the bo¦dy
of Christ offered at masse in sa∣crifice to god, whiche the counsaile commaundeth to be geuen to the sycke before he depart, if he aske it) 76 2 17 for the consecration reade the sacrament of the aulter. 77 2 4 Ramanes: romanes 78 1 21 porfyt: profyt 82 1 13 sacrificanerit: sa∣crificauerit. 83 1 22 Audrew: Andrewe 87 1 3 craftis: craft 92 2 19 heuen: heuon 95 2 19 sanguis: sanguinis 97 2 19 wyt: wyth 99 2 2 lacketh. (in) afore the first word. 103 2 5 conniuiū: conuiuiū 105 1 11 figmnetū: figmentū 106 2 8 socerdos: sacerdos 1011 2 4 funt: sunt 1042 1 1 cōscientiā: cōsciētia
¶ Prynted at London in Alders∣gate strete by Iohn̄ Herforde. 1546.
