23601 99853297 18670
A SHORT COMPEND OF THE HISTORIE OF THE FIRST TEN PERSECVTIONS MO∣VED AGAINST CHRISTI∣ANS, DIVIDED INTO III. CENTVRIES. WHEREVNTO ARE AD∣ded in the end of euery Centurie treatises a∣rising vpon occasion offered in the historie, clearely declaring the noveltie of Popish Religion, and that it neither flowed from the mouthes of Christs holy A∣postles, neither was it confirmed by the blood of the holy Martyrs who died in these ten persecutions. IEREM. 6. ver. 16. Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the wayes, and behold, and aske of the old way, which is the good way, and walke therein, and ye shall find rest vnto your soules: but they said, we will not walke therein. LVC. 10. ver. 42. Marie hath chosen the good part which shall not be taken away from her. EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Hart, and are to be solde at his shop on the North side of the high streete a litle beneath the Crosse, ANNO DOM. 16. 13.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, VER∣tuous and elect Ladie MARIE Countesse of Mar wish∣eth Grace, Mercie and eternall Felicitie. IT hath pleased God (most noble and elect Ladie) to prolong my life these yeeres bypast vnder many infirmities of a dayly decaying tabernacle, yet my good God hath not left me destitute of comfort, to the end I might fulfil my course with joy. One of my chiefe comforts vnder God was your La. reuerent hearing and faithfull practising of the worde of God. I delited to see that thing begun in earth which shal be perfited in heauen. The glorified Saintes in heauen they cast down their crownes at Apoc, 4. 10. the feete of the Lambe, who sits vpon the Throne. When noble persons in earth humblie kisses the feete of the Son of God, beares' his light burden, and submittes themselues vnto his easie yoke, then some resemblance of the heauen is found in the earth. The rarer this vertue is, the more I reverenced it in your La, person, and the oftener I com∣mended your noble houshold to God, and to the worde of his grace, which is able to build further, and to giue you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Acts 20. 32.
The Queene of Adiabene HELENE when she left her owne countrie and came to dwell at Ierusalem, she filled the bellies of the poore with the cornes of Egypt, and the Euseb. lib. 2. Cap. 12. loseph. anti∣quit lib. 20, cap. 2, fruits of Cyprus (forit was a yeere of vniuersal famine) and spared for no cost to doe good to the Saincts that were in Ierusalem: therefore her name is vntill this day in re∣uerent remembrance. And in our dayes, honorable La∣dies, who refreshes the barren soules of ignorant people in this land with examples of humilitie, modestie, godlinesse and all other Christian vertues, many generations after vs shall call them blessed. The Lord in mercie aug∣ment the number of honorable persons who rejoyce to goe vnto the house of the Lord. These are the toppes of the mountaines, which beeing once free and not couered with ouerflowing waters it is a comfortable presage that the great flood that drowned the world shall be abated. These Genes. 85 are the Minerals of gold and siluer, which are not easily found out, but after they are discouered, they replenish the land with infinit treasures of riches. The Prophet ZACHA∣RIE when he saw in that celestiall vision IEHOSHVA his Zach. 3. body honoured with change of apparell, wished also the Diademe to be set vpon his heade: but if he had seene the Diademe set vpon his head, and the body lapped vp with ragges of vile apparel, hee had wished the body also to be honoured with ornaments proportionallie agreeing to the heade. It hath pleased the wisedome of our God in this part of the countrie, whereinto I dwell, first to decke with glorious ornaments the head: the Lord in mercie cloth the body also with change of rayment, to the end that Satan that vigilant enemie who delighteth in the filthie ragges of our beggerly apparel may be grieued for our change from worse to better. I speake the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witnesse, that it is lawfull to
me, toreuerence the image of Christ, where euer I see it clearely shining, either in rich or in poore. And so much the more, because it was my lot to conferre with many per∣sons of a contrarie religion, whom I found to be like repro∣bat siluer, fra whō the drosse could not be separated. What is next? If they will harden their heartes against the truth of God, then let the dead burie their dead, but let the noble house of Mar follow Christ. Receiue from my hands Ma∣dam this short cōpend of the ten first & great persecutions, with certaine treatises added to the compend of the histo∣rie, and be not afraid to follow the religion, and faith of the Apostles and Euangelists: because their eares heard the words of the great shepheard of our soules, their eyes saw God manifested in the flesh, they were chosen to be faithful witnesses to the world of the doings, sufferings and do∣ctrine of Christ: the holy Ghost was sent to teach them in all trueth. Here we may rest vpon a sure foundation, a∣gainst the which the gates of hell cannot preuaile. Next to the Apostles, their true successours are to be had in reue∣rent regard, who sealed vp that faith, which they recei∣ued from the Apostles with riuers of blood for the space of three hundreth yeeres. To this antiquitie of Apostolicke doctrine, let vs firmely adhere. This is the clearest mirrour whereinto the precepts of wholesome doctrine are contained. After the holy Apostles had finished their course, the disciples of the Apostles were worthie men, yet not like vnto the Apostles who had bene both called & taught im∣mediatly by Christ. If any doūg was in their sacrifices, it was couered by the glory of their sufferings: the fire wherwith they were burnt, the water wherinto they were drouned, the aire wherinto their bodies were hanged vp, the mountaines & wildernes through which they wandered, the darke pri∣sons whereinto they were enclosed as people vnworthie of libertie, whom notwithstanding the Son of God had made
sree, and they were free indeede. Yea all the Ioan, 8. 36. verie elements, & the light of Heauen, where∣fra by most vnrighteous violence the righteous heires of heauen were excluded, all these (I say) were wit∣nesses of their glorious sufferings Vnder pretence of clim∣ming to this antiquitie, the Papists would cloacke the tur∣pitude of their new found doctrine: So did the Hagarenes boldly vsurpe the name of Saracenes, yet they were but the brood that sprans out of the bellie of HAGAR the hand∣maid of SARAH. And the Priests boy in the daies of ELI came vnto the Caldron while the flesh of the peace offering 1. Sam, 2. 14. was seithing, and thrust in his flesh-hooke, all that the flesh-hooke brought vp, the Priest tooke for himselfe. This thing was done by violence, but the Priest had not just right to euerie piece of the sacrifice that the flesh-hooke brought vp. The Romaine Church in our dayes hath borrowed the flesh-hooke of the Priestes boy, and violently arrogates vnto themselues the faithfull keeping of ancient Apostolike traditions. When we demand where is the charter contai∣ning their title and right, we see nothing but the flesh-hook with three teeth in their hand. The Church cannot erre. We are the true Church. And, Cursed be he who saith that in matters of faith our general Councils can erre. Madame accept vnder your La. fauourable protection these my tra∣uels, in weakenesse not vnlike to the writer, alwayes con∣taining a faithfull testimonie of my humble endeuoure to confirme the branches of your noble housholde in the true faith of Christ. Nowe the great Mediator of the couenant of God stablish all your heartes in the certaintie of his vndoubted trueth vnto the ende and in the ende. Amen, Your La. humble seruant P. SYMSON.
The Preface. THE estate of the Church of Christ, whereo we  to be counted feeling members, hath bene very troublous frō the beginning of the world, not like vnto the estate of Moab setled vpon her dregs, & not powred out from vessell to ves∣sel, Ierem: 48. 11. yet the more afflicted, the more beloued of God. Whose face watred with teares is faire, and whose mourning voyce is plea∣sant in the sight of God, Cantic. 2. 14. And like as doing of good willingly hath a great recompense of reward from God: eucn so patient suffering of euill for righteousnes sake is highly commended in Scrip∣ture, and richly rewarded in heauen. Yea the very Ethnicke Philo∣sopher PLATO (to whome the glorie of the sufferings for Christ was vnknowne) affirmeth that men who suffer scourging, binding, tor∣menting, boring out of eyes, and finally strangling of their breath for righteousnes sake, are exceeding happie, or (as the word  imports) thrise happie: PLATO in Repub. Howbeit the superla∣tiue degree of suffering that can bee found amongst the Ethnickes could neuer equall the glorie of the sufferings of Christian people. They who were initiated in the mysteries of MITHRA (this word in the Persian language signifieth the sunne) could not be admitted to that honour before they had bin tried by suffring of four score diuerse sorts of tormentes, such as long abstinence from meate and drinke, solitarie liuing in the wildernesse a long time, triall of suffering the feruent heate of fire, and the coldnesse of water, and many other tor∣ments vntill the number of four score had bene completely filled out, Nazian, in Iulianum. These voluntarie sufferings, like as in the be∣ginning they wanted the warrand of Gods calling, so likewise in ende they shall want the hope of Gods reward. But the mouth of God him∣selfe pronounceth Christians to be blessed who die in the Lord, for they rest from their laboures, and their workes follow them, Apoc. 14 13. The manifold persecutions of the Church, may bee diuided into three ranckes: some of them were fierce and bloody, some were craf∣tie, the third was and is both crull and craftie. The ten Ethnick Emperours, NERO, DOMITIAN, TRAIAN, &c. were so prodigall of the blood of the Lordes Saintes, that they powred it out like water vpon the ground. The Ar∣rian Emperours were subdolous and craftie, but the perse∣cution
of the Antichrist (which is the third) goeth beyond the rest both in crutltie and craft. The experience we haue had in our own dayes of the crueltie of the supposts of the Antichrist, and their craf∣tie conuey of their malicious interprisesintended against our Sove∣raigne Lord, his royall race and noble Counsellers doth cleary prooue that the malice and craft of the Antichrist goeth as farre beyond the malice & craft of all Emperours, as the flood of NOAH goeth beyond the inundation of Nilus. ONVPHRIVS confoundeth the first two ran of the persecuti∣ons by a secret preterition of the name AVREAN, and counteth DIOCLETIAN to be the ninth persecuting Emperour, and the AR∣RIAN persecution for the tenth; I can neither haue a good liking of his opinion nor of himselfe: His opinion smelleth of noultie: him∣selfe was an aduocat for heretiques, and all bad reprobat causes: he will pleade the cause of HONORIVS condemned as an herctique in a generall Councill, and the cause of GREGORIE the seuinth, and impudently dare denie that euer there was a Pope of the feminine sexe sitting in the chaire of Rome. True it is that all the Emperours who liued after the ascension of our Lord into heauen vntill the Hal∣cyon dayes of CONSTANTINE the great (onely some few except, such as NERVA and PHILIPPVS and few moe) might haue their names most iustly inrolled into the Catalogue of persecuting Empe∣rours, because they suffered the fire, that others had kindled, to burne on still, and quenched it not by the might of their authoritie. But these are chiefly counted persecutours, who either kindled the fire as NERO did, or else by nwe edicts and commandements set foorth in their names they added fwell to the fire, to the ende that the aug∣mented flame of the fornace might strike the greater terrour into the heartes of Christians. A short compend of the first ten great persecutions I haue collected out of sundrie authors, whereinto neces∣sitie driueth me to write of persecuting Emperours so far as apper∣taineth to the historie of the Church, and no further, and of persecu∣ted Christians, specially teachers, against whome the rage of per∣secuting Tyrants was most baefully bent. The names of the here∣tiques also behoued to be remembred, the most malignant vleer that euer bred in the Church of Christ. These are the wandering stars of whome the Apostle Iude speaketh, to whome is reserued the black∣nesse of darkenesse for euer, Epist. Iud. ver. 13. I haue made litle
mention of Councils, except of that famous Councill holden at Ieru∣salem by the Apostles, Acts 15. Prouinciall and nationall Coun∣cills during the space of the first three hndreth yeeres were few in number, by reason of the rage of persecuting Emperours, and some of them that were gathered were obscure, and the lsse regarded, in re∣spect of their contradiction one to another. There was a Council gathered at Rome, another in Caesarea Palestinae, another in France, the fourth in Pontus, and one in Asia, all these were ga∣thered for one and the selfe same purpose, to deliberate anent the kee∣ping of Pasch day, Euseb. lib. 5 cap. 23. In Rome VICTOR was in one opinion, POLYCRATES in Asia held another opinion, IRENAEVS in France was wiser then the rest, and was more carefull to keepe vnitie in the Church of Christ, then to dispute contentiously anent kee∣ping of dayes. The nationall Councill of Philadelphia in Arabia a∣gainst ARTEMON and BERYLLVS, wherein ORIGEN was present. Euseb. hist. eccl. lib, 6. cap. 37. A Councill holden at Rome by CORNELIVS, and another in some partes of Africke for the ti∣mous suppressing of the error of NOVATVS, Cyprian, epist. lib. 1. E∣pist. 2. A notable Councill holden at Antiochia against PAV∣IVS SAMOSATENVS a pernicious heretique, Euseb: lib. 5. cap, 29. All these were gathered for suppressing of heretiques. Some Coun∣cils were gathered by CYPRIAN B of Carthage for rebaptising of those who were baptized by heretiques. This weakenesse both in CYPRIAN and in other B shops of Africke was after corrected by the Church. In the treatises that I haue subjoyned after euery Centu∣rie, I had regard to discouer the fountaines of errours, that began to spring vp in the first three hundreth yeeres after our Lordes ascension to heauen. Howe ancient so cuer the small beginnings of errours doe seeme, yet are they posterior vnto that wholesome summe of true doctrine deliuered to the worlde by Christe and his Apostles. Who so listeth to vse the like order in all the rest of the Centuries vntill our owne dayes, no necessitie shall driue him to vse HERODOTES mo∣dest excuse in the description of the riuers of Nilus, and Boristhe∣nes, whose fountaines in his dayes were vnknown, and therefore his preterition of a thing vnknown was to be fauourably comported with by the reader: but the welspring of all the rest of popish errors accor∣ding to the order of time wherein they began to set foorth their head, may bee as easily pointed out by the finger as these whereof I make
mention in the first three hundreth-yeeeres. The Retoricall orna∣ments of NAZIANZENVS speaking to the deade, and bringing in a virgin crauing helpe at the blessed virgin, the mother of our Lord, inourageth LINDANVS to count invocation of Saintes to be an an∣cient Apostolicke tradition. Nazianzenus in laudem Cypr. ye could be not be ignorant that invocation of Saintes began not to take roote before the foure hundreth yeere of our Lord, and that in great weakenesse of doubtsome speaches, O anima Constantini , That is, O soule of CONSTANTINVS, if thou hast any sense or feeling, to wit, of things done amongst vs, Nazian. oratione . contraJulianum. Therefore the treatise of invocation of Saintes may more conveni∣ently he subjoyned to the fourth Centurie. The other cause where∣fore I haue compiled these treatises, is to declare how circumspectly we should beware of the small beginnings of defection from ancient veritie, because the beginning of errour is like vnto a soft vapour ri∣sing out of the sea, thickning in the aire, conuerting into a cloud, and in end sending downe mightie stormes and tempests vpon the earth. Who could haue once imagined that Natalitia Martyrum a thing in i selfe not vnlawfull, could haue turned to that horrible abuse that now is in Poperie, that all these holy. Martyrs are made media∣tors of our intercession? Or who could haue imagined that the reuerent keeping of the reliques of Saints could haue turned in end vnto ado∣ration and knceling before them with confidence to be the bet∣ter heard of God? The Lord grant we may beware in time of the beginnings of defections both in doctrine and in maners that haue crpt in of late dayes into this lande. Amen.
To the Reader. IT was admired of old, that APHRAATES who li∣ued in the cottages of the wildernesse al his time, yet once he was found in the streetes of Antiochia in the dayes of the Emperour VALENS, Theodor. hist. eccl. lib. 4. cap. 26. hee excufed the change of his for∣mer behauiour, by the similitude of a modest virgin lurking quietly in secret corners of her fathers house so long as it is in safetie, but if it bee set on fire, it is skaithfull modestie to lurke any longer, necessitie compelleth her to runne out to the streetes, to crie and giue warning of the peill ofher fathers house. This example of APHRAATES might sufficiently ex∣cuse mine vnaccustomed boldnesse to set foorth my head, that hath bene lapped vp so long in hurtfull si∣lence. But now the power of darknesse in creaseth, and as the Prophet saith, Woevnto vs, for the day declineth, and the shadowes of the euening are stretched out, Ierem. 6. 4. Yea the shadow of mount Athos reacheth to the Isle Lemnos, a sure fore-run∣ning token of the going downe of the Sunne. Now it is time to creepe out of our subterraneall caues, and to giue warning to sloken the fire in time be∣fore it spread further, and bring greater deso∣lation to the House of our GOD. Papists are waxed insolent of late dayes, like vnto Serpentes in Summer weather taking courage and biting the heeles of horses, that the riders may fall, not sparing both in worde and write to reproach our religion, as a thing not countenanced with antiquitie, and our Ministrie as altogether naked and voyde of the knowledge of ancient learning. Shall wee
nowe stand as idle men doe in market places one looking vpon another? Rather then wee should sustaine such apparent dammage and skaith, through vntimous silence, I had rather step foorth with the Lacedemonian souldier impotent of his legges, and neither meete to fight, nor able to flie, yet had he this comfort that possible he might blunt the edge of his enemies sworde, and make others a∣shamed who were meeter for fighting then he was. Take in good season my weake trauelles, Christian Reader, I haue many honest witnesses who knowe that I was neuer purposed to send foorth vnto the o∣pen view of the world any thing that came from me. Howe this compend came into the Printers hande I remit vnto his faithful testimonie. It was my purpose, in write to haue giuen warning vnto noble houses who had bene my ordinarie auditors to beware of the contagion of lying doctrine, that is nowesecretly spreading in our land: this being done, the ordinarie exercises of my calling would haue beene my chiefe imployment, if the Lord pleased. Therefore [gentle Reader] take in the better parte the Goates haire, & Rammes skinnes that I present to couer the Taber∣nacle of my God. I referre the ornaments of gold, siluer and precious stones for beautifying the inner parts of the Tabernacle to others vpon whome God hath vouchsafed greater gifts, Exod. 25. Farewell.
CENTVRIE I. Chap. 1. Augustus Caesar. OVR Lord Iesus the true Prince of peace, was borne in Bethlehē Iuda of a maid, in a very pea∣ceable time in the 42. yeere of the reigne of AVGVSTVS CAESAR. Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5 at what time the temple of IANVS was cloied & locked vp, Functii Chron. which in time of warres was continually patent and open. At the time of this blessed Nativitie the Angels of God rejoyced, Luc. 1. the deuils trembled. Some affirme that all the Oracles of IVPITER, APOLLO and HECATE were silent and gaue no responses: alwayes it is certaine that many yeeres before the Lordes blessed Nativitie the Lord permitted the world to be won∣derfully blinded with the delusions of the deuill. The top of IVPITERS oake in Dodona was shaken, the caldron was smitten with the rodde that was in the hand of IVPITERS i∣mage: The Prophetesses forewarned by these fore-running tokens of inspiration were readie to vtter IVPITERS ora∣cles, and the deceiued people were humblie kneiling and attending vpon the response that should be giuen, Nazianz in Iulianum. Annot. Nonni. the tripode in Delphis, the laurell and fountaine in Daphne, APOLLO his deceitfull ensignes, the ram-faced image of IVPITER AMMONIVS in Cyrenia with many moe places whereinto the sound of the deuils trumpet was heard, to these places (I say) did people
bewitched by Satan resort in frequent numbers to bee taught by the mouth of him who was a liar from the be∣ginning, and who remaineth a liar, albeit he speake at some time the trueth, because he speaketh it animo fallendi vpon a purpose to deceiue. It is very credible, that the blessed Seede, who came to breake the heade of the Serpent, did stoppe his mouth also in the time of his blessed Natiuitie. The countrie of Iude at this time was subject to the Ro∣manes, and payed tribut to CAESAR, Luc. 2. The deputies of AVGVSTVS in Iudea and Syria were CYRENIVS, COPONIVS, AMBIBVCHVS and ANNIVS RVFVS one succeeding to ano∣ther, Ioseph Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. HEROD the sonne of ANTI∣PATER by fauour of ANTONIVS obtained this honour to be gouernour of the nation of the Iewes, but the honou∣rable name of a King hee receiued from AVGVSTVS CAESAR: this was ratified for his further assurance by the Senat of Rome, Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 15. cap, 10. for which cause HEROD to testifie his thankfull minde toward ANTONIVS builded a Castle in Ierusalem very neere to the temple called Arx Antonia: And to the honour of AVGVSTVS he builded Caesa∣rea Palestinae sometime called the towre of STRATON. Now a forreiner and stranger, of his fathers side an Idume∣an, of his mothers side an Arabian, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 1. and an aliant both from the stocke of DAVID, and also from the Commonwelth of Israel was reigning in Iudea, and the scepter was sliding from Iuda, now I say was it time that SHI∣LOCH should come, according to IACOBS prophecie, to Christ Was borne when the scepter was appa∣rently sliding from Iuda. whome the people should be gathered, Gen. 49. 10. Now was it time that the promised MSSIAS should come and sit in the Throne of his father DAVID, and of his Kingdome there should be none end. And indeed how can the King∣dome of Christ haue an end, who acquireth a new title and right of gouernement by death, which is the last period of other Kings gouernements, and in death they leaue a va∣cant roome to a successour but Christ Iesus by dying, and rising againe hath a right to rule both ouer deade and Christs king∣dome is euer∣lasting, quicke, Rom, 14. 9. Yea in verie death it selfe he was practi∣sing his kingly office in most effectuall maner, and tram∣ping
Satan vnder feete, and vndoing the power of death, Hos. 13. 14. In AVGVSTVS time also IOSEPH was admonished in a dreame to take the babe and his mother, and to flee into Egypt, Mat. 2. 13. SOZOMEN not content with the certaintie of Scripture addeth a particular nomination of the towne Hermopolis in Thebaida whereinto Christ sojourned vntil the The vncer∣tainty of tra∣dition. death of HEROD the great. This he had by the vncertain∣tie of tradition. The miracle of the hudge and high tree Prestis, that bowed the top lowlie to the ground and wor∣shipped her maker Christ, and afterward had a medicinable vertue in fruit, leafe, and barke to cure diseases, rather de∣rogateth credit to that Egyptian tradition, then assureth vs of the veritie of that report, Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 21. HEROD before his departure from this life, had put to death three of his sonnes, ARISTOBVLVS, ALEXANDER, and ANTIPA∣TER, and by testamentall legacie had diuided his domini∣ons amongst his remanent sonnes, ARCHELAVS, HE∣ROD ANTIPAS and PHILIP: which testament being ratifi∣ed by AVGVSTVS, Iudea, Samaria and Idumea were alloted to ARCHELAVS, the Tetrarchie of Galile to ANTIPAS, and Itu∣rea and Trachonitis to PHILIP. Ioseph, Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 13. IOSEPH being returned from Egypt, when he heard that AR∣CHELAVS did reigne in Judea in stead of his father HEROD, feared to dwell in Iudea, but beeing warned of God in a dreame went to the partes of Galile, and dwelt in a citie cal∣led Nazaret, Mat. 2. ver, 22, 23. All this was done in the dayes of AVGVSTVS. After he had reigned 56. yeeres, or as Iosephus writeth, 57. yeeres, viz. with ANTONIVS 14. yeeres, and after he ouercame ANTONIVS and CLEOPATRA Queene of Egypt in sea-warfare ouer against Epirus, he had the imperiall soveranitie himselfe alone all his dayes, and died in the 77. yeere of his age, Ioseph, Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3.
Tiberius. AFter AVGVSTVS reigned TIBERIVS NERO 22. Romaine De∣puties in Iu∣dea. yeres 7 moneths, 7. dayes. Bucolc. Index. The Ro∣mane Deputies that were sent to Iudea in the time of his reigne were VALERIVS GRATVS, PONTIVS PILAT and VITELLIVS. VALERIVS GRATVS for loue of gaine remooued the Priests of the Iewes from their offices at his owne pleasure. ANANVS, ISMAEL, ELEAZARVS, SIMON the sonne of CAMITHVS, all these were denuded of their priestly dignitie, when as two of them, viz. ELEAZARVS and SIMON had continued scarse one yeere in office. In end IOSEPHVS CAIAPHAS is aduanced to the priesthood. This is the cause wherefore the Euangelist Iohn calleth CAIA∣PHAS the high Priest of that same yeere, Iohn 18. ver. 13. Matters of religion were now come to an horrible abuse, and were not ordered according to Gods holy ordinance, but according to the appetite of the Romaine Deputies Io∣seph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. After GRATVS, PONTIVS PILAT was sent to be Deputie in Iudea, a man vigilant and actiue in all civile adoes, as the blood of the Galileans mixed with their sacrifices clearely prooueth, Luc. 13. 1. but in the cause of Christ remisse, negligent and slacke. After the issue of ten yeeres VITELLIVS is appointed Deputie in Iudea and PONTIVS PILAT addresseth toward Rome. By gratifying of the Iewes in a matter of small im∣portance The priestly garments. he conquessed great fauour. The priestly gar∣ments were wont to be kept in the Castle called Antonia, but VITELLIVS gaue commandement to the Captaine of the Castle to let the high Priest haue the vse of them when he pleased, and to choose what place he liked best for the custody of the priestly garments. He disauthorized CAIA∣PHAS, following (as appeareth) the example of VALERIVS GRATVS, and gaue his office to IONATHAN the sonne of ANANVS sometime high Priest, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap, 6. In the 15. yeere of the reigne of TIBERIVS Christ our Lord and Sauiour was baptized by IOHN in Iordan, was led to the
wildernesse, fasted fourtie dayes, was tempted of the deuil, and began to preach, Euseb. hist. eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. Mat. 3. and 4. In the eighteenth yeere of TIBERIVS the Lord Iesus was Christ cruci∣fied in the 18 yeere of Ti∣berius. crucified, and offered a sacrifice for our sinnes, which hath a perpetuall vertue to saue such as beleeue, Heb. 7. He a∣rose againe the thirde day from death. The high Priestes and rulers of the people gaue money to the souldiers to ob∣scure the glory of his resurrection, yet it was sufficiently knowne, not onely to Christes disciples, by his frequent ap∣paritions to them, but also to PONTIVS PILAT the Romaine Deputie himselfe, who had giuen out a sentence of death, against Christ. PILAT by letters signified to TIBERIVS the miracles of Christ, his resurrection, and that he was suppo∣ned of many to bee God: but the Senat of Rome refused to The Senat of Rome refu∣seth to ac∣knowledge the diuinitie of Christ. acknowledge the divinitie of Christ, because hee was wor∣shipped as God, before his Godheade was approoued by the Senate of Rome, Euseb. eccles. hist lib, 2. cap. 2. The words of the Apostle PAVL had performance in the Romaine Senat  they became vaine in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkenesse, when they profes∣sed themselues to bee wise, they became fooles, Rom. 1. ver. 21. 22. The verie smoke that riseth from the fornace see∣meth to be somewhat at the first, but when it mounteth vp into the aire, the hier it ascendeth, the more it scattereth, & the sudden disparition of it declareth it is but a vaine thing. Such was the wisedome of the Romaine Senate, when they mounted vp so hie as to judge of diuine things far surpas∣sing the reach of the naturall vnderstanding of man, they proued starke fooles, and people destitut of true vnderstan∣ding: and PILAT himselfe ouerladen with many heauie ca∣lamities Pilat killeth himselfe. in the dayes of CAIVS put handes into himselfe, and so ended his wretched life, Euseb. lib, 2. cap. 7.
Caius Caligula. CAIVS CALIGVLA successour to TIBERIVS reigned three yeeres and nine months, Euseb. lib 2. cap. 8. He was a proud tyrant, enemie to all righteous∣nesse, the verie childe of the deuill. I insist only v∣pon Church matters. Hee was an hatefull enemie to the Iewes dwelling at Ierusalem, and at Alexandria. For one and Caius would be counted a god. the selfe-same cause were they both despised and hated of CAIVS, because they would not giue vnto him diuine ho∣nours by building Temples, and altars, and offering sacri∣fice to new IVPITER CAIVS, and swearing by his name. First concerning Ierusalem, he had sent PETRONIVS to be Deputie in Judea, with commandement to dedicat the Temple of Je∣rusalem to IVPITER CAIVS, and to set vp his image in the Temple, Euseb eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 6. Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 11. The Iewes were more willing to die, then to see the Temple of their God polluted. PETRONIVS aduerti∣sed the Emperour of the grevance of the Iewes, but before The Iewes abhorred the vpsetting of the image of Caius in their Tem∣ple. his letters came into the hands of CAIVS somewhat inter∣ueened that both disappointed the purpose of CAIVS, and also incensed his heart with furie and rage against his Depu∣tie PETRONIVS. At that time HEROD AGRIPPA was at Rome whome afterward the Angell of God smote at Casarea, so that he was consumed with wormes, Acts 12. he was excee∣dingly beloued of CAIVS, because in the daies of TIBERIVS he had bene cast in prison, and bound with bands for the loue he caried to CAIVS, in so farre that CAIVS inuited A∣GRIPPA vpon a certaine time to a banquet, and bade him The petition of Agrippa. aske what he pleased, and it should be granted. AGRIPPAES petition was this, that CAIVS would suffer the nation of the Iewes to liue according to their own law. CAIVS was moued somewhat with this vnexspected petition; yet part∣ly for his excessiue loue toward AGRIPPA: also, lest he should seeme to them which sate at table to be a promise-breaker the petition is granted. But the venome of his indignation against the Iewes he poured out against PETRONIVS, because
that by lingring in executing his commandement occa∣sion was offered to AGRIPPA to present this foresaide peti∣tion. The letter of CAIVS sent to his Deputie was cruel and bloodie, the like whereof was seldome heard: because hee The bloodie letter of Caius written to Petronius his Deputie. fulfilled not the Emperours desire, hee is commaunded to giue out a sentence of death against his owne life, and to be both judge & burrio to himselfe, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18 cap. 11 Such mercie was in this new IVPITER CAIVS. Before I writ anything of his crueltie against the Iewes that dwelt in A∣lexandria, it is a meete place to admonish the reader of the hypocrisie & counterfaitholines of HEROD AGRIPPA who seemed both in the dayes of CAIVS, and also in the dayes of the Emperour CLAVDIVS to be a paterne of godlinesse, preferring at the banquet of CAIVS the libertie of the peo∣ple of God & the inviolable obseruation of the law of God to all the riches that the liberalitie of an affectioned Empe∣rour could be able to afford. In CLAVDIVS dayes he sailed from Italie to Judea, he acknowledged God to be the author The hypocri∣sie of Agrip∣pa. of his deliuerance from prison & bands, & offered a chaine of gold to be hung vp in the Tēple of Ierusalē, in testimonie that he receiued that benefit with a thankfull minde out of Lords hands, Ioseph, antiq. lib 19. cap. 5. In outward things he was a builder of the wals of Ierusalem, vntill the emulous enuy of MARSVS, or enuyous emulation the hinderer of all good workes, compelled him to desist & to leaue the worke imperfited, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap 7. For all this outward shew of holines, the lessons of CAIVS whom he loued beyond all things, neuer left him till his last breath CAIVS desired to be counted a god so did AGRIPPA in Caesarea delite when his oration was called the voyce of God & not of man. Acts 12. CAIVS persecuted the Iewes without a cause, so did HEROD AGRIPPA the Christians, Acts 12. CAIVS the higher hee ad∣uanced himselfe, the greater was his fall, the like also hap∣pened to AGRIPPA. So pernicious a thing is vngodly com∣panie, Contention betweene the Iewes and Grecians who dwelt at Alexandria. burning their associats with their fire, or els blecking them with their smoke, and hurtfull euery maner of way. In the towne of Alexandria the Grecians contended against the Iewes, both parties sent ambassadours to Rome, the Grecians sent APPION, the Iewes sent PHILO
a very prudent and learned man. APPiON with flattering words insinuated himselfe in the fauour of the Emperour CAIVS, and accused the Iewes, that they neither builded temples, nor offered sacrifices to the honour of CAIVS, as the Grecians did. PHILO was readie to answere, but CAIVS ruled with affection rather then with reason caused PHILO to be thrust out of his palace, and would not hearken vn∣to him, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 10. Euseb. lib. 2. ecles. hist. cap 5. In these two mirrours we may see the cruell dispo∣sition of this Emperour, whose dependers were persecuters of Christians, like as hee himselfe was a persecuter of the Iewes. If any good turne fell into his hand, it was rather by accident then of purpose to glorifie God, or to punish sinne: hee banished HEROD ANTIPAS, who beheaded IOHN the Baptist, and his wife HERODIAS that incestuous harlot, who ended their lifes in penuritie and miserie in Lyons of France, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap 4. But all this was done for fauour of AGRIPPA, Ioseph. antiq: lib. 18. cap 9. but not for detestation of murther and incest. In ende CAIVS was slaine by his owne seruants, CHEREAS and LVPVS, whom the Emperour CLAVDIVS afterward punished vnto the death, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19, cap. 3. This new IVPITER I count him to haue bene in worse case then old IVPITER the sonne of SATVRN, albeit both of them died, yet the one after his New Iupiter in worse case then old Iu∣piter. death, was counted a god, but the other after his death was counted a deuill. Claudius, CLAVDIVS reigned thirteene yeeres, eight months, Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 19. Hee ratified the gift of the kingdome of Iudea, bestowed by his predecessour CAIVS vpon HEROD AGRIPPA, and added thereto all the dominions of HEROD ANTIPAS, whom CAIVS had banished, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap 4. This
HEROD AGRIPPA when hee returned from 'Italie to Judea builded the walles of Ierusalem, sparing for no cost, so high and strong, that if the worke had not beene hindered by the procurement of MARSVS gouernour of Syria hee had made them impregnable. Hee was not so carefull to build the walles of the spirituall Jerusalem, for he beheaded the ho∣ly Apostle S. IAMES the brother of IOHN, and did cast PETER into prison, whome the Lord miraculously deliuered, Acts 12. This HEROD and the Iewes made hauocke of the glo∣ry of God, and blood of his Saintes. For hee gratified them by shedding the blood of the Apostles of Christ, and a∣gaine they gratified him by giuing him the glorie that ap∣pertained to God alanerly. For which cause he was stricken by the Angel of God, and consumed with wormes, Acts 12. The famine foretold by Agabus. In this Emperour CLAVDIVS dayes, the famine foretolde by the Prophet AGABVS, Acts II. afflicted the world. One of the causes of this plague doubtlesse was the manifold a∣buses of the creatures of God, in the middes of the aboun∣dance of bread, the contempt of the poore, which faultes were so vniuersally ouerspread in the worlde, that some of the Emperours themselues were not free of the foule spot of intemperancie: as the scoffing speaches of the people did witnesse in stead of CLAVDIVS TIBERIVS NERO calling the Emperour CALDIVS BIBERIVS MERO, Funct. Chron. This is referred to the successour of AVGVSTVS. In the yeere of our Lord 48. and in the sixt yeere of the reigne of CLAVDIVS, as CHYTRAeVS reckoneth, was gathe∣red The Council of Jerusalem. ANNO 48. that famous Councill of Jerusalem described viuely by the Euangelist LVKE, Acts 15. whereat were present the A∣postles, PETER and PAVL and IAMES, and BARNABAS a reue∣rent man of God, in whome Apostolike giftes were not in∣lacking, with other worthie men, IVDAS surnamed BARSABAS and SILAS notable Prophets and fellow-labourers of the Apostles: likewise the Commissioners of Antiochia, and Elders of Jerusalem with many others who were beleeuers. What was concluded in this Councill, I remit to the faith∣full narration of the Euangelist LVKE, Acts 15. Alwayes if vots bee pondered rather then numbred, this is the
Councill of Councils more worthie to be called O Ecome∣nicke then the Councils of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and Chalcedon. In the Councill of Nice were worthy Bi∣shops, who came from all quarters of the world, but in this Councill were holy Apostles, who could not erre in mat∣ters of faith, O Ecomenicke Bishops indeede, and any one of the holy Apostles was illuminated with more aboundance of cleare light in things pertaining to the worship of God then all the 300. and 18. Bishops conveened at Nice in Bi∣thynia. Many Romaine Deputies were sent in the dayes of Romaine de∣puties: CLAVDIVS to keepe Syria and Iudea in subjection to the Ro∣maines, such as MARSVS, LONGINVS, CVSPIVS PHADVS, TI∣BERIVS ALEXANDER, CVMANVS and FELIX. I leaue MAR∣SVS and LONGINVS for desire to open vp in what Deputies time things mentioned in holy Scripture came to passe. When CVSPIVS PHADVS was deputie, there arose a deceitful man named THEVDAS, to whom resorted a number of men about 400. who were slaine, and all who followed him were scattered, Acts 5. ver. 36, IOSEPHVS writeth that PHA∣DVS sent foorth a troupe of horsemen, who suddenly char∣ged the people that followed THEVDAS, and slew them, and tooke THEVDAS aliue, and cutted off his head, and brought it to Ierusalem, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2, Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 11 After this man arose one IVDAS of Galile in the dayes of the tribute, and drew away much people after him: hee also pe∣rished, and all that obeyed him were scattered, Acts 5 37. If GAMALIEL in that narration keepe the order of time, as these words (After him) would import, of necessitie the words of the history of the Actes must be vnderstood of an∣other THEVDAS then that man of whome IOSEPHVS writeth in the place aboue mentioned. For IVDAS of Galite liued in the dayes of AVGVSTVS, and when CYRENIVS was Depu∣tie of Syria and Iudea, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2. and likewise antiq lib. 20. cap. 3. But I am not certaine whether or no the words  doe absolutely import that IVDAS of Galile was posterior in time to THEVDAS. When CVMANVS was Deputie, who succeded to TIBERIVS ALEXANDER the insolencie of one Romaine souldier was the destruction of
twen  innocent people, hee discouered the secret parts of his body vpon a solemne feast day, neere vn∣to the Temple, and in the sight of the Iewes, they counted this a contempt done to God in the porch of his owne house: CVMANVS drewe the Romaine souldiers to the Castle called Antonia verie neere the Temple, and set them in or∣der, and the people of the Iewes, fearing the inuasion of the souldiers, fled, and in the narrowe passages ouertro de one another, and a great multitude of people were slaine, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 20, cap. 4. After this the people of the Iewes came to Cesarea where CVMANVS was for the time, and complained of a Romaine souldier, who had casten a booke of holy Scripture into the fire, whom CVMANVS be∣headed, and so pacified the Iewes Ioseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 4. In end CVMANVS through his euill gouernement pro∣cured to himselfe the indignation of the Emperour CLAV∣DIVS, he fauoured the wicked cause of the Samaritanes, who had stopped the passages of the Galileans, and slaine a great number of them. They were accustomed yeerely to goe vp to Jerusalem to holy feastes, and their way was through the townes and villages of the Samaritanes. CVMANVS ra∣ther fauoured then punished this wicked fact of the Samari∣tanes, therfore he was remoued from his place, and FELIX was sent to be Deputie of Iudea, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5. Whether CLAVDIVS was impoisoned by AGRIPPINA his wife to prepare an easie passage to NERO her sonne to be Emperour or not, I leaue that to be read in au∣thors, who haue entreated the lifes of Em∣perours politickly. It contenteth me to write of the estate of the Church in their time.
Nero. DOMITIVS NERO succeeded to CLAVDIVS: hee reigned thirteene yeres and eight months, Euseb. lib 3. cap. 5. His mother AGRIPPINA after the death of CNEVS DOMITIVS AENOBARBVS was joy∣ned in mariage with the Emperour CLAVDIVS. In the first fiue yeeres of his gouernement he abandoned the insolen∣cie of his wicked disposition, so that it was a prouerbe in the mouthes of men, Neronis quinquennium, in regard of his good cariage for the space of fiue yeeres. But a fire long couered, in end breaketh out into a mightie flame, that no water can sloken it. His crueltie against his mother, his wifes OCTAVIA and POPPEA, his master SENECA, the Poet LVCAN, and the vile abuse of his body with persons of his neerest consanguinitie, I remit to the reading of learned authors, who haue written exactly the historie of the Ro∣maine Emperours, and I haste to that which is the princi∣pall purpose of this compend, howe wicked NERO kindled the first great Fornace of horrible persecution against the Christians. It cannot be denyed but in the dayes of TI∣BERIVS our Lord Christ Iesus was crucified: in the dayes of CALIGVLA and CLAVDIVS the hands of that cruell per∣secuter HEROD was mightily strengthened by the fauour, countenance and bountifulnesse of both these Emperours, so that hee layed handes vpon the pillars of the house of God: and so I deny not but the Church of God before the dayes of NERO was in the fornace of trouble, but nowe come the dayes whereinto the Romain Emperours like vnto NEBVCHADNEZAR werefull of rage, and the forme of their visage was changed against the Christians, and they com∣manded that the fornace should be hoate seuen times more then it was wont to be hoate, Daniel chap. 3. ver. 19. The ten per∣secuting Em∣perours wre∣stled against God, This historie hencefoorth conteineth on the one parte, the great wrestling of persecuting Emperours against God, not like to the wrestling of IACOB with God, Genes. 32. The place of IACOBS wrestling was Peniel where he sawe God,
the forme of wrestling was with many teares and strong supplications, Hos. 12. the ende was, that the Angel should not hastely depart from him leauing him comfortlesse, the successe was the obtaining of a blessing, which was the ar∣mour of God to saue him against the hatefull malice of ESAV: but by the contrare, NERO, DOMITIAN, TIAIAN, ANTONIVS, and the rest set their faces against the heauen, commanded the holy One of Israel to departe out of the worlde, endeuoured to quench the sauing light of his Gos∣pell, and by so doing, brought downe vpon themselues, in stead of a blessing, that wrath that is reueiled from heauen vpon all them who detaine the trueth of God into vnrigh∣teousnes, Rom. 1. ver. 18. On the other part is set downe the constant faith and patient suffering of the Saintes who hated not the burning bush, because it was set on fire, but they loued it, because in it they were refreshed with the com∣fortable presence of the great Angell of God, Exod. 3. who would not for gaining of their lifes once fashion themselues according to the similitude of Idolaters in outward and externall things. TERTVLLIAN in his booke de corona mili∣tis declareth that true Christian souldiers abhorred from setting a garland of flowres vpon their heades when they receiued wages for their painfull seruice in warfare, because it was the habite of Idolaters who sacrificed to IVPITER. O happie men of God, whose vertues the dead coloures of Painters cannot represent, and the feastered maners of this corrupt age cannot imitat! Oh when shall our shadowes de∣parte? when shall the fresh oyle of the grace of God bee powred into our lampes, that the light of our faith, pati∣ence, and constant perseuerance may shine clearely to the world as theirs did? The occasion of this first great persecution of NERO was his owne barbarous and cruell fact: he caused the towne of The first per∣secution. ANNO Chr. 65 Rome to bee set on fire, which wasted the buildings of the towne for the space of sixe daies, Bucol. Index chron. Funct. chron. Chytr. chron. & to eschew the vile infamy of this bar∣barous fact, he layde the blame vpon the Christians, & gaue foorth edicts and commandements to persecute them to
the death. NERO was so hatefull an aduersarie to all righ∣teousnes, that EVSEBIVS following the example and words of TERTVLLIAN, affirmeth that if the Gospel had not bene an excellent good thing it had not beene condemned by The martyr∣dome of Pe∣ter & Paul. NERO, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 25. It is supponed that PETER was crucified, and PAVL was beheaded at Rome in time of this persecution. And EVSEBIVS is in that opi∣nion, lib. 2. cap. 25, If this betrue, the very deade bones of PETER & PAVL are witnesses against the Romaine Church if they continue not in that same faith that PETER & PAVL sealed vp with their blood. The estate of the Iewes vnder NERO was very hard in respect of the oft change of the Ro∣maine Deputies. For in NEROES time continued FELIX for a space, whome the Emperour CLAVDIVS had sent to Romain De∣puties. Iudea, & after him FESTVS, ALBINVS, and FLORVS. This last Deputie was fashioned according to the similitude of the maners of NERO his master, & the Prouerb holdeth true in NERO & FLORVS, Such man such master. In the time that FELIX was Deputie, a certaine Egyptian man pretending to bee a Prophet, & promising great things, perswaded foure thou∣sand of the Iewes to follow after him, Acts 25. but FELIX sent foorth companies of horsemen and footmen, who slew foure hundreth of the people that followed the Egyptian, and tooke two hundreth of them aliue, the rest were scatte∣red, but the seducing Prophet escaped, and could not bee found, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 6. When FESTVS was De∣putie, King AGRIPPA hearde the Apologie of PAVL, and said that in a part PAVL perswaded him to be a Christian, Acts 25. This AGRIPPA (I say) the sonne of HEROD whome the Angell of God slewe, Acts 12. was aduanced to great honoures by the Emperour CLAVDIVS, as his father had beene before him by the fauour of CAIVS, and he pos∣sessed not only his fathers dominions, but also the Tetrar∣chie of Iturea and Trachonitis sometime belonging to PHI∣LIP the sonne of HEROD the great. His might and riches procured trouble to the nation of the Iewes. Hee had a pa∣lace situat vpon the West-side of the Temple of Ierusalem, & in regard it was builded vpon a mountaine he had a de∣lectable
profpect of the towne of Jerusalem: yet not content with this, he mounted vp the walles of the Palace by a new building, so high that they who were in the palace might haue seene the altar, and sacrifices of the Iewes offered in the inner court which at that time was called Atrium Iudeo∣rum. This doing grieued the harts of the Iewes. They on the other part to cut off the sight of those who dwelt in the pa∣lace, from beholding their sacrifices raysed vp the wall of the inner court on the West-side to such eminencie, that no man could behold the sacrifices of the Iewes from the pa∣lace Contention betweene A∣grippa and the Iewes. King AGRIPPA and FESTVS with authoritie cōmanded the Iewes to demolish their new builded wall. In end this matter was referred to the Emperour NERO, who being so∣listed by his wife POPPEA, gratified the Iewes in this point, & compelled them not to cast downe their wall, Ioseph. an∣tiq. lib. 20. cap. 7. FESTVS died in Iudea and ALBINVS was sent to bee Deputie in Iudea. ANANVS was the high Priest of the Iewes in these dayes, and finding opportunitie of time, to practise the malice of his heart against IAMES the sonne The martyr∣dom of Iames surnamed Iustus. of ALPHEVS surnamed IVSTVS, an holy Apostle & kinseman of our Lord Iesus. When ALBINVS was vpon his journey, & had not as yet arriued neither to the coastes of Egypt nor of Iudea, this ANANVS (I say) caused IAMES surnamed IVSTVS, & the brother of our Lord to be stoned to death, Ioseph. an∣tiq. lib. 20. cap. 8. EVSEBIVS writeth that he was thrown down frō the pinacle of the Temple, Euseb. eccl. histlib. 2. cap. 23. This crueltie of ANANVS albeit it displeased both king AGRIPPA, and ALBINVS the deputie of the Romaines, & the people of Ierusalem, yet wicked men are wiser in their owne generation then the children of light: & ANANVS sawe that if he had lingred vntill the Romaine Deputie had arriued, he could not haue procured the death of a man counted so just, and so welbeloued of the people, as the Apostle IAMES was It is to be marked that EVSEBIV in the forementioned place describeth the martyrdome of IAMES surnamed IVSTVS before the edict of the persecution of NERO, after which followed the martyrdome of PETER and PAVL in the 12. yeere of NERO his reigne, Epiphan. contrahares. neuerthelesse the Romaine Church had forged epistles
decretall whereinto CLEMENS Bishoppe of Rome writeth to IAMES surnamed IVSTVS after the death of PETER. What credite these decretall epistles deserue, it shall bee declared hereafter Godwilling. But FLORVS who succeeded to AL∣BINVS was an avaritious and cruell man: he exhausted the treasure that was in the Temple, and tooke out of it six∣teene talents of siluer. And when the lewes at Ierusalem mur∣mured against him, hee came to the towne in great wrath, and permitted the souldiers to slay and to spoyle the citi∣zens of Ierusalem at their pleasure. Likewise he afflicted with vnaccustomed crueltie men of noble birth, by scourging & crucifying them, Ioseph. de bello Iudaico lib. 2. cap 25. This was the ground of the warre betweene the Romanes and the Jewes, wherin Ierusalem came to that lamentable ruine fore∣told The ground of the warre betweene the Iewes and the Romanes. by our Sauiour Christ, Mat, 24. Nowe to returne to the Emperour himselfe, and forme of his death, After he had reigned 13. yeeres and eight monethes, the Senate of Rome proclaimed him to bee an enemie to mankinde, and condemned him to be whipped with wands to the death, & to be harled through the citie. For feare of which punish∣ment he was forced to flie, and by slaying of himselfe made an end of his most wretched life. Iustin. Uespasian. AFter NERO, OTTO, VITELLIVS, and GALBA con∣tended for the empire, and were all hastely cut off, and made out of the way, and FLAVIANVS VES∣PASIAN was chosen Emperour by the Romaine ar∣mie, he reigned 10. yeeres, Bucol. Index Chron. The na∣tion of the Iewes at this time for the most parte was giuen ouer into a reprobate minde, according as it was foretolde by the Prophet ZACHARIE: Then saide I, I will not feede you: that that dieth, let it die, and that that perisheth, let it perish, and let the remnant euery one eate the flesh of his neighbour, Zach. 11. 9.
Like as the intollerable crueltle of FLORVS had irritat the nation of the lewes: euen so on the other side the vnsup∣portable obstinacie of the Iewes had incensed the wrath of the Rom. unes against them. They were now become so head∣strong that they rejected the sacrifice that was wont to bee offered for CAESAR, Ioseph. de bello Iudsico lib. 2. cap. 30. The calamitie of the Iewes who dwelt in Alexandria and in Da∣mascus, was but the beginning of sorrowes: fiftie thousand Iewes were slaine in Alexandria, ten thousand in Damascus, Ioseph. debel. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 36 & 41. Besides this many signes & wonders both in heauen and earth, did proclaime their future desolation and destruction. A Comet was seene in heauen hanging ouer the towne of Ierusalem for the space Foreranning tkens of the destruction of Ierusalem, of a yeere, and hauing the similitude of a sword: in the Temple at the mid time of the night, a cleare light was sene shining round about the Altar, in brightnesse not vnlike vnto the light of the day: and the great brasen port of the Temple opened of the owne accord about the sixt houre of the night: chariots of fire were seene compassing townes, and a voyce was heard in the sanctuarie warning to flit and to transport, with many other feareful signes and wonders. Ioseph. de bello Iud. lib 6 cap. 31. But a people senslesse, whose eyes were dimme, whose eares were dull of hearing, whose heart was fatte and locked vp by Satan in infidelitie, they could take no warning of the wrath to come, because the Lord was minded to destroy them. FLA. VESPASIAN and his sonne TITVS VESPASIAN leading an armie of threscore thousand armed men from Ptolemaida besieged the townes of Galile and Trachonitis: so many as would not willingly be subject to the Romanes, the townes of Gadara, Tiberias, Io∣topata, Tarithea, Gamala, all these were brought vnder the re∣nerence of VESPASIAN, and IOSEPHVS, who had beene lurk∣ing in a caue (after the towne of Iotopata was conquessed) was taken aliue, and kept in bands by the Romanes: he fore∣tolde that VESPASIAN should bee Emperour, and saluted him CAESAR, and  while NERO was yet aliue. de bllo Iud. lib. 3. cap. 27. When this prophecie came to passe in∣deede, and hee was chosen to bee Emperour, hee sent for
IOSEPHVS and commanded that hee should be loosed from bands, but TITVS his sonne thought more expedient that his bands should be cut off from him, rather then loosed, to the end he might be counted a worthy man who neuer de∣seuned captiuitie nor bands, de bello Iud. lib. 4. cap. 39. FLA∣VIVS VESPASIAN returned to Rome, and left behind him his sonne TITVS to sub due the Iewes, & to besiedge the towne of Ieruslem. but the Christians who dwelt at Ierusalem were warned by God to depart out of the towne of Ierusalem, so they left it, and dwelt beyond Iordan in a towne of Decapolis called Pella, Euseb eccles. hist lib. 3. cap. 5. Separation of the corne from the chaffe goeth before the vnquenchable fire wherewith the chaffe shall be burnt. TITVS began to be∣siege Ierusalem in the first yeere of the reigne of his father, at the time when the people were gathered to celebrate the The destru∣ction of Ierusalem. ANNO Chr. 71. feast of the Passeouer, Euseb. lib. 3. cap 7. The terrour of the sworde of the Romaines without, the feare of mercilesse brigands within in the bowels of the towne preuailing, the flewere of the dead (wanting the honour of burial) infecting the aire, and devouring the liuing with contagious sicke∣nesse, theviolent plague offamine breaking asunder the bands of Nature, and constraining women to eate the birth of their owne bellies, Ioseph. de bello Iud. lib. 6. cap. 21. AH these calamities seased vpon them at once in the just judge∣ment of God. They despised the father of eternitie, and the Prince of peace, & saide to PILAT. We haue no King but CAESAR, Ioh 19. 15. now they find that the mercies of CAESAR were cruell, & his sonne TITVS who was commended in all mens mouths as meeke, merciful, liberal and eloquent, and was called amor & delitiae humani generis, that is, the loue and most daintie thing of all mankinde, yet God made him a terrible scourge to the nation of the Iewes, who forsooke the Lord Iesus, and preferred CAESAR vnto him. In Scripture we reade of many great vials of the wrath of God powred downe vpon vnrighteous men, but these are grea∣test that resemble by most viue representation the great condemnation of the wicked at the last daye, such as the flood of NOE, the ouerthrow of Sodom, and destruction
of Ierusalem. The flood of NOE was vniuersall and sudden, so shall be the condemnation of vngodly men at the last day, Mat. 24 37. 38. 39. The ouerthrow of Sodome and Gomorrha, was a destruction vnsupportable, and the more meete to be an example of the vengeance of eternall fire. epist. Iud. ver. 7. The destruction of Ierusalē, & the forerunning tokens ther∣of are so mixed with the tokens preceeding the condem∣nation The flood of Noe, the o∣uerthrow of Sodome and destruction of Ierusalem types of the great iudge∣ment to come of the great day, that it may be clearly perceiued that God hath appointed the one to be a type and figure of the other, Mat 24. So ost as wee call to remembrance the flood of NOE, the ouerthrowe of Sodom and the destruction of Ie∣rusalem, let vs feare and stand in awe to fall into the con∣demnation of vngodly men, because all the terrors of these judgements concurre and are massed together in the judge∣mēt of the last day. What are the deep Weeles of water, what are the shoures of fire and brimstone, what is famine, pest and sworde, both intestine and forraine, in comparison of that worme that neuer dieth, and that fire that shall ne∣uer be quenched, & the blacknesle of darknesse, with wee∣ping and gnashing of teeth, &c.? It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God. Concerning the number ofthem that were slaine in Galile, Trachonitis, Samaria & Iu∣dea, chiefly in the Metropolitane towne Ierusalem, ouer and beside those that were sold to be siaues, and those that were deuoured by wild beastes, in the triumph of FLA. and TITVS at Rome, reade Ioseph. d bello Iud. lib. 6 cap. 45. Titus. AFter FLAVIVS reigned TITVS VESPASIAN his sonne two yeeres, two months, twentie dayes, Bucolc. index Chron. The nation of the Iewes be∣ing nowe subdued, there was great peace in all parts of the Romaine dominions, both by sea and land, and the temple of IANUS in Rome was closed and locked vp a∣gaine, Bucolc.
Domitian. FLAVIVS DOMITI AN was associat to his brother TI∣TVS The second persecution. AN. Chr. 96. in gouernement during his lifetime, and after his death was his successor: hee reigned 15. yeeres, Chytr. chron. He was proud like NERO, & persecuted innocēt Christians as he did, so prone & bent is our corrupt nature to sin, & to follow euill examples. Now againe the Church of Christ militant vpon the earth must learne obe∣dicnce by suffering, & must giue a proofe before the world, that the Couenant of God is written in the tables of her heart, and so deepely ingraued by the finger of God, that no tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakednesse, nor death it selfe can separate her from the loue of Christ. The members of the Church were the good marchants, of whom Christ speaketh, Mat. 13. who hauing found a pearle of vnspeakable value, were content to sell all that they had for loue of gaining it: they had tasted of the Well of water springing vp into eternall life, and thirsted not againe for the water that cannot satisfie the heart of man with full cōtentment, Ioh. 4. 14. In this second great persecution the belooued disciple of Christ the Apostle IOHN was banished The banish∣ment of the Apostle John to the Isle of Patmos for the worde of God Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 18. FLAVIA DOMICILLA, a woman of noble birth in Rome was banished to Pontia an Isle lying ouer a∣gainst Caieta in Italie, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 19. PROT A'SI∣VS and GERV ASIVS were martyred at Millain, Chytr. Chron. concerning the miracle wrought at their sepulchres, God∣willing, wee shall speake in the thirde Centurie, and in the treatise of reliques. CHYTRAEVS writeth that the Euange∣list TIMOTHIE was stoned to death at Ephesus by the wor∣shippers of DIANA, and that DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA was slaine by the sword at Pareis. DOMITIAN had heard Domitian a∣fraide by ru∣mors of the Kingdome of Christ. some rumours of the Kingdome of Christ, and was afraid as HEROD the great had beene, after the Natiuitie of our Lord: but when two of Christs kinsemen, according to the flesh, the Nephewes of the Apostle IYDE were presented be∣fore
him, and hee perceiued them to bee poore men, who gained their liuing by handie labour, and when hee had heard of them that Christes Kingdome was not of this world, but it was spirituall, and that he would come at the latter day to judge the quicke and the dead, hee despised them as simple and contemptible persones, and did them no harme, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 20. In ende as the life of DOMITIAN was like vnto the life of NERO, so was he not vnlike vnto him in his death: for his owne wife and friends conspired against him, and slew him: his body was caried to the graue by porters, and buried without honour. The Senat of Rome also decreed that his name should be ra∣sed, and all his actes should bee rescinded, Sueton. in Domit. Ierom. catal. script. eccles. Nerva. COCCIVS NERVA after DOMITIAN reigned 1. yeere, 4. months, Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 21. Bucolc. And hitherto all the Emperours that ruled, were borne in Italie: from this foorth strangers doe rule: for TRAIAN the ad∣optiue sonne of NERVA his successor was borne in Spaine. NERVA redressed many things that were done a∣misse by DOMITIAN, and in his time the A∣postle IOHN was relieued from banish∣ment, and returned againe to E∣phesus where hee died. Euseb. cccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 21.
CENT I. Chap. 2. AFter the Lordes resurrection, his twelue Apostles were indued with grace from aboue, and sent Apostles. foorth to conqusse all people to the obedience of Christ: whose trauailes the Lord so wonderful∣ly blessed, that within a short time many thousands of all nations & languages, whom God had appointed to eternal life were conuerted to the faith of Christ. This conquest that Christ made by the ministerie of 12. poore and contempti∣ble men is more worthy to be called a conquest, then all the valiant exploites of CYRVS, ALEXANDER, CAESAR, and other conquerours. For he made this conquest by a small handfull of poore and infirme disciples: also he conquessed not only the bodies of men, but also their hearts to his o∣bedience, & finally hee made this conquest not by shedding of peoples blood, but by preaching of his owne death and blood shed for the redemption of many. Neither con∣quessed hee free men to make them slaues, as other conque∣rours had done but they who were slaues indeede to Satan, vnto thē he gaue the libertie of the sons of God. Now these 12. Apostles the more faithfully they laboured in the worke of their ministery, the worse were they intreated by the vn∣thankfull world, according as Christ had forctold, Iohn 16. The most part of them were put to death, the rest were not free of many painfull sufferings & rebukes which they wil∣linglysustained for the Name of Christ. PETER & PAVL are supponed to haue beene martyred at Rome, ANDRO to haue beene crucified in Achaia, MATTHEW beheaded in Ethiopta, IAMES the brother of IOHN was beheaded by HEROD in Iudea, Acts 12. IAMES the sonne of AIPHEVS called IVSTVS was throwne downe headlong from the pinacle of the Temple of Jerusalem, SIMON of Canaan was crucified in the dayes of TRAIANVS, for he was an hundreth and twentie yeeres old, when he suffered martyrdome, Euseb, eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32
Ierom. catalog. script. eccles. BARTHOLOMEW is said till haue bene martyred in Armenia, and SIMON ZELOTES, to haue bene crucified in Brittaine IOHN died at Ephesus, PHILIP in Hierapolis. FVNCTIVS calleth the towne Hierosopolis, Iudas LEBBEVS at Edessa, THOMAS in India, and MATTHIAS in Ethi∣opia, Ierom. catal. script. ecccles. As concerning the Euangelists they were fellow-labourers Euangelists. with the Apostles in the worke of Christ, and were also partakers with them of Christs sufferings. The Euange∣list MARKE died in Alexandria, Funct. chronol. LVKE in Buhynia, others say in Constantinople, Ierom. PHILIP, who first was a Deacon, and afterward an Euangelist, died in Cesarea, BARNABAS in: the Isle of Cyprus. Where TIMOTHIE and TITVS did compleete their dayes it is not certainly knowne. CHYTRAEVS opinion anent TIMOTHIE I haue al∣readie declared. IEROM supponeth that TITVS died in Can∣die. The successours of the Apostles & Euangelists are not to bee reckoned as the successours of Emperours: because hee who next obtaineth the Emperiall diademe and place of The true successours of the Apo∣stles. gouernement, is counted the successour of the defunct Emperour. But he who obtaineth a faithfull Pastors chaire, and teacheth a doctrine contrarie to that which a faithfull Pastor hath taught, is to be counted a grieuous Wolfe step∣ped vp into his roome, Acts 20. And NAZIANZENVS cal∣leth such a man an aduersarie standing vp into the place of a faithfull Pastor, darkenesse succeeding to light, a tempest succeeding to calme weather, & madnesse obteining place where right reason was wont to bee, Nazian. in orat. in laudem Athanasu. And therefore those Bishops and do∣ctours following, who keepe inviolably that forme of wholesome doctrine which they receiued from the Apo∣stles, these, I say, alanerly are to be counted true successours of the Apostles. Of this number was LINVS Bishop of Rome, who after the martyrdomes of PETER and PAVL go∣uerned Bishops of Rome. Linus. that Church 10. yeeres, 3. months, 12. daies. EUSEBI∣VS thinketh this is that same LINVS of whō the Apostle PAVL writeth in the last chap. of his 2. epist. to TIMOTHIE, Eubulus & Pudens & Linus, & Claudia salute thee. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 2.
After him succeded ANACLETVS, and gouerned 9. yeeres 3 months, 10. dayes, and after him CLEMENS, ruled 11. yeeres, EVSEBIVS also thinketh this is that CLEMENS of whom the Apostle PAVL writeth to the Philip. cap. 4, ver. 3. Yea I be∣seech thee faithfull yoke-fellow helpe those women which laboured with me in the Gospell, with Clement also and with other my fellow-labourers, whose names are in the booke of life. IGNATIVS Bi∣shop Ignatius. of Antioch had his heart so inflammed with the loue of Christ, that when his dissolution was neere approaching, he saide to the Romaines: nowe doe I begin to be the disciple of Christ, I couet for no thing that can be seene with bodi∣ly eyes, to the ende that I may enjoy Iesus Christ: let the fire, the crosse, the beasts, the breaking of bones, convulsi∣on of members, and bruising of the whole body, and the torments of the deuill sease vpon me, prouiding I may bee partaker of Iesus Christ. He was deuoured with beasts in the dayes of TRAIANVS, and so patiently indured death for the Name of Iesus, that he allured the deuouring beasts to approach neere vnto his body, that it beeing ground with the teeth of beastes, he might be found as fine flowre in the house of his father, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 36. About the same time also flourished PAPIAS Bishop of Hierapolis, Papias. who was a man of great authoritie, because of his neerenes to the Apostles dayes, yet leaning more to the report of the doctrine of the Apostles, then to the certaintie of their own writings, he fell into the errour of the Chiliastes, who imagi∣ned that Christ should raise the godly first, & liue with them a thousand yeeres in this earth in all kinde of delicat plea∣sures, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. CENT. I. Cap. 3. BEcause it is the accustomed dealing of Satan to Heretiques. peruert men from the simplicitie of Gods trueth, also it standeth well with the justice of God to giue ouer men to strong delusions who
will not beleeue the trueth of God. Therefore in the third head wee are to speake of the Heretiques that sprang vp in this age. Heresie I count to be an opinion repugnant to the grounds of our Christian faith, obstinately maintained by those that professe the Name of Christ. As touching them who leade an euill life, yea and in effect denie the Son of God by a prophane conuersation, but maintaine not an opinion that it is lawfull so to doe, they may be counted A∣theists and not Heretiques. Iewes and Turkes also who denie the diuinitie of Christ, because they doe not professe the Name of Christ, wee call them infidels but not Here∣tiques. And the Corinthians who erred in some foundamen∣tall points of the Christian faith, yet seeing they maintai∣ned not their errour with obstinate mindes, but yeelded to the wholesome doctrine of PAVL, no man doth count the Corinthians Heretiques, but infirme and weake Christians. And the Apostle himselfe writing to them calleth them Gods building, and Gods husbandrie, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 9. But when these three things concurre together, that men pro∣fesse the Name of Christ, and yet they maintaine opinions repugnant to the very grounds of true faith, and will not receiue instruction, but obstinatly perseuere in their errour, they are to be counted Heretiques. Of this number was SIMON MAGVS the father of Heretiques, who being con∣founded Simon Ma∣gus. in Samaria by the great power of God which ap∣peared in the ministerie of PHILIP and of PETER, Acts 8. he fled from the East to the West, and came to Rome, where he preuailed so far in short time that he was counted a god, and an image was set vp for him with this superscription, Simoni deo sancto, that is, to SIMON an holy god. Thus the Romaines who in the dayes of TIBERIVS refused to acknow∣ledge the diuinitie of Christ, in the dayes of CLAVDIVS they honoured a sorcerer, and a seducing Heretique with diuine honours. He taught them who followed him to fal downe before pictures and images, and in speciall to wor∣ship his owne image, and the image of HELENA a certaine woman, who accompanied him in his journey from Asia to Rome, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 13 & 14.
After SIMON sprang vp another suppost of Satan called MENANDER like to his master SIMON in many things, for he was both a Samaritane, and a sorcerer, but in absurditie of monstrous opinions hee was far beyond SIMON: for hee Menander. said that the world was created by Angels, and that he him∣selfe was sent from aboue to saue the worlde, and by vertue of his Baptisme men should bee made immortall, euen in this world, in such sort, that they should neither waxe olde, nor taste of death, Euseb, eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 26. This he∣resie EPIPHANIVS compareth to Aspido-gorgon in Egypt a great serpent inclosed into a vessel of lame with many other serpents, after he hath deuoured all the rest of the serpents, he beginneth to gnaw his owne taile for hunger, and to de∣stroye himselfe, Epiph. contrahareses: so did this heresie vn∣doe it selfe by promising great things, which MENANDER could not performe, neither in himselfe nor in others. In this age also sprang vp EBION who denied the diui∣nitie Ebion. of Christ, and saide hee was onely a man begotten be∣tweene IOSEPH and MARIE, and that the obseruation of MOSES Law was necessarie to eternall life: his followers were called Ebionites either by the name of their master E∣BION, or else, as EVSEBIVS thinketh, for their poore & beg∣gerly opinion they had of Christ, supponing him onely to be a man: for EBION in the Hebrewe language signifieth one that is poore, Euseb. eccles. hist lib. 3 cap. 27. These Ebionites damne all the epistles of PAVL, and count him an Apostat from the law, and they admit no part of the Newe Testament for canonicke Scripture, except the Gospell of MATTHEW. CERINTHVS about the same time was the author of Cerinthus. strange reuelations which he said he had receiued from An∣gels, that after the resurrection from the dead Christ should haue an earthly kingdome in this world, and that the sub∣jectes of Christes Kingdome should eate, and drinke, and marie, and keepe holy dayes, and offer sacrifices, for hee himselfe was a man giuen to fleshly lustes, and he imagined that the pleasures of Christs Kingdome shuld consistin fulfilling the concupiscence of the flesh, Euseb. ec∣cles.
hist, lib. 3. cap. 18. Likewise in this age sprang vp the errour of the Nicolai∣tanes vpon this occasion, as CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS doth write, Strom. 3. One of the Deacons chosen by the Nicolaitans Apostles to haue the ouersight of the poore, Acts 6. had a beautifull woman to his wife, & was accused of ouer great jealousie. To purge himselfe of all suspition of that fault, hee brought his wife into the mids of his brethren, and said he was content that any man should marrie her. Of which wordes many tooke occasion to liue promiscuously like beastes, no man hauing his owne proper wife, but making them common. Howbeit NICOLAVS is said to haue liued himselfe in matrimoniall chastitie, contenting himselfe with his own wife alanerly, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 29. Noght the lesse his foolish and vnaduised speaches were the occasi∣on of a most wicked & damnable errour of the Nicolaitanes, whereof the Lord speaketh in the Reuelation of IOHN that he hated it, Apoc. 2. This is that heresie which GREGORIE the seuenth imputed to all married priestes: but with what equitie marriage ordeined by God, and honorable among all men can be called an heresie hated of the Lord, let the Christian reader judge. Of Antiquitie. TO the historie I haue adjoyned certaine Treatises containing contrauerted questions in our time, for A Treatise of antiqui∣tie. decision whereof it is necessarie to haue recourse to the writings of the Apostles, & the custome of the Primitiue Church, adhering to the Apostolicke doctrine firmely euen vnto the death. Our first treatise Godwilling shall be of Antquitie. Now this doctrine is to be spread out into foure branches. First we shall speake Godwilling of Antiquitie of veritie, next of Antiquitie of errour, thirdly Antiquitie of veritie. of Antiquitie of custome, and fourthly what is the best way to discerne betweene the ancient veritie and the olde lie. Antiquitie of veritie is the way of saluation pointed out by the finger of God from the beginning of the world, & of this way speaketh IEREMIE cap. 6. ver. 16 Seeke out the anci∣ent wayes, and walke in them, & ye shall find rest vnto your soul
Antiquitie of errour, is an adding, pairing, altering, or Antiquitie of errour. contradictiō to the ancient way pointed out into this word of God, and of this Christ speaketh in the Gospell of Mat∣thew. Ye haue heard it said of old, Thou shalt not slay, &c. but I say vnto you, he who is angrie with his brother without a cause is wor∣thy of iudgement. Mat. 5. ver. 21. and 22. Whereby Christ declareth that the false interpretation of the law, whereby the spirituall lawe was drawen to a corporall and a grosse sense and meaning, yet was this errour ancient, and was heard of old time: but the verie description of antiquitie of errour declareth that it is not so ancient as the trueth, for∣somuch as it is a depravation & marring of the afore-exi∣stent trueth, either one way or other. The third sort of anti∣quitie Antiquitie of custome. is antiquitie of custome, that is, certaine customes that crept in into the Church of God, partly in the dayes of the Apostles, partly soone after their dayes, such as was , that is feastes of loue epist. lude. ver. 12. and after the Apostles dayes, , that is, three dippings in water in the sacrament of Baptisme. These customes were neither authorized by Apostolicke precept and commande∣ment, neither abrogated by Apostolicke prohibition, but tolerated into the Church vntill the time they were abu∣sed Where veri∣tie is to be ound. as we see clearely 1. Cor. 11. ver. 20. 21, 22. Now as con∣cerning antiquitie of veritie, first we shall declare where it should be sought: secondly, when it is found▪ what is the vertue and power of it: thirdly how it ought to be reueren∣ced, loued and followed of vs. And first, antiquitie of ve∣ritie is to be sought, as the Apostle S. IOHN and beloued disciple of Christ sought it, to wit, out of the mouth of him who was from the beginning,  that thing which was from the beginning, Iohn. 1. ver. 1. as if hee would say, I present vnto you no newe doctrine, but that which I recei∣ued from the mouth of Christ himselfe, who was existent (albeit not manifested in the flesh) euen from the begin∣ning of the world. In the beginning was the word, &c Iohn 1. ver 1. If this way we seeke antiquitie, wee assuredly finde the ancient way of God▪ whereinto wee should walke, and get rest vnto our soules, Ierem, 6. ver. 16. Antiquitie is not to
be sought as PSAMMETICHVS King of Egypt sought it from new wained babes keeping them in in secret custodie with∣out hearing any articulate voyce, or intelligible speech, whereby he might discerne what people and language was most ancient, HERODOT. EVTERP. this was a follish seeking out of antiquitie from them that were not ancient. Next when we haue found out the ancient trueth, consi∣der The power of the veritie, the vertue and power of it. It is strong and mightie in operation like vnto Christ the author of it, whose hnmi∣litie and apparent weaknesse bruiseth and dasheth in pieces all the glorious, strong and stately things of the world that are lifted vp against him: for the litle stone hewed out of the rocke without hands it dashed in pieces, and bruised in∣to powder the golde, siluer, brasse and Iron of the hudge and terrible image set against it, Daniel 2. euen so the veri∣tie wherof Christ is the author, is like vnto himselfe, in out∣ward appearance weake, but in operation strong and migh∣tie, defacing and abolishing all the apparent pompe, glory and power of the lie, To this well agreeth the ruine and ignominious fall of DAGON to the very breaking of his necke and palmes of his hands, 1. Sam, 5. In the third roome consider what reuerence, loue and The reue, rence that should be c∣ried to the veritie honour we ought to carie to this ancient veritie, after it be manifested vnto vs. Bee not like the babes of Alexandria in the dayes of PTOLEMEVS PHILOPATER, when the maine huge and great ancre of the ship Thalmegos was laide out v∣pon the shore, the children did ride on the stalke, and crept through the ring of the ancre as it had beene made for the pastime of children, but wise ship-men knewe it was ap∣pointed for a better vse, namely to stable and make sure that great vessel in time of great and tempestuous stormes: euen so when wee haue found the ancient veritic of God, let vs carie a great reuerence to it, as vnto the holy and sacred an∣cre fashioned by God to stablish our soules, that no tempest of false doctrine or cruell perfecution make vs to shrinke from that ancient veritie of the Almightie. Moreouer con∣sider what commandement is giuen from God, euen con∣cerning hoare headed men, Leuit. 19. ver. 32. to whome we
are commanded to rise and to honour their countenance, but greater reuerence is to be caried toward the hoare-hea∣ded veritie: for the commandement giuen concerning an∣cient men sustaineth some exceptions. The soueraigne King of a nation and his honourable counsellers for the eminen∣cie of their places will not arise to honour ancient men, but ancient men rather arise to honour them, as IACOB arose & sat in the bed, because his infirmitie could not permit him to rise and stand on his feete to doe honour vnto IOSEPH, Gen. 48. ver. 2, But as concerning the ancient veritie of God it should be honoured of al men without exception. EGLON King of Moab arose out of his chaire when EHVD said vn∣to him, that he had a message vnto him from God, Iudg. 3. ver. 20. and BALAAM vttering his propheticall reuelation saith, Rise Balak and heare, and take heede vnto me thou sonne of Zippor. Numb. 23. ver. 22. With reuerence should be joyned an ardent loue, and The more the veritie is despised in the world, the more ar∣dently it should be lo∣ued. constant following of the ancient trueth vnto the end, fol∣lowing the worthy example of godly IOSIAS, who despised not the holy booke of the Couenant of God, because it had beene long misregarded, despised, vnreade, and far lesse ex∣pounded vnto the people in the dayes of his father AMON, and of his goodsire MANASSE: for the booke of the Lordes Couenant all this while lay in an obscure corner of the Temple, neglected and couered with dust, yet when it was drawen out of the dust, and presented vnto the King, hee receiued it reuerently, hee loued it ardently and followed this holy Couenant euen vnto the daye of his death: so ought wee to loue the ancient veritie of God at all times, but specially when it is despised and misregar∣ded by men, as IOSIAS did, 2. King. 22. The loue of the na∣tural mother when she pleaded before SALOMON for the li∣uing child, was not abated, but rather inflammed, & increa∣sed by the apparent danger of her child, 1. King. 22. And that which is more admirable, the loue that IEZABEL caried to∣ward the idolatrous seruice of BAAL was not quenched by all these dashes that BAALS seruice got from heauen aboue and in the earth beneath The fire that came miraculously
from heauen witnessed the falsh oode of the worship of BA∣AL, and the couenant made betweene HELIAS and the priestes of BAAL with aduise of the King and whole body of the people, whereinto the priestes of BAAL with shame, skaith, and vnspeakable disgrace succumbed, 1. King. 18. Yet all this I say quenched not the fond loue that IE∣ZABEL caried to that idolatrous worship as appea∣reth, 1. King. 19. where shee bindeth her selfe with an oath to pursue HELIAS to the death. Should we not then be ashamed to carie lesse loue to the veritie of God, which bringeth rest vnto our soules, then this woman did to a false worship, which led her soule headlong to perdition? As touching Antiquitie of errour it is to be marked that whatsoeuer honour antiquitie addeth vnto the veritie, the Antiquitie is no honoar to errour. like dishonour, rebuke and shame it heapeth vpon the er∣rour. For Satan himselfe, who is the author of all errours when he is called metaphorically a serpent, hee is thereby rebuked, but when hee is called an olde serpent, Apocal. 12. ver. 9: hee is more mightily rebuked, euen so when anti∣quitie is joyned with errour, then errour is not graced but utterly disgraced, as who would say, this woman is an olde harlot, or this man is an olde foole, or this canker or rot∣tennesse in the flesh is an old feaster: all these are reproch∣ful speeches pointing out the maladie of an vnsupportable euil. So the paines that are taken in our daies to proue error to be an old thing is al takē in vaine, for by so doing they on∣ly discouer the turpitude & shame of the error. The Grecians bragged much of antiquity, so do the Papists. But the Chal∣deans & Egyptians, & Phenicians to whō antiquitie was better known said no lesse confidently then truely of the Grecians. . Plat in Timeo. Theodo serns 1. de fide. The like I say of the Papists, who brag of antiquitie more then of any other thing, that in such heads of doctrin wherin they differ from vs they are not so much as counte∣nanced by antiquitie. As touching their foolish questions demanding of vs where was our Church 600, yeeres before our time, I answere by two other questions. First, Where was their church 1600 yeres ago: that is, Whē the Apostles
called by Christ immediatly were dispensators of the Gos∣pell to the world, where was there a Church saying Masses, worshipping images, beleeuing Purgatorie? They will an∣swere that the Apostle PAVL himselfe said Masse at Rome. In testimonie whereof they keepe vntil this day amongst their reliques that table or altar whereupon the Apostle PAVL said Masse at Rome. But I will replye that Poperie is a king∣dome of lies. For the Apostle in his epistle to the Hebwes setteth down these two things as flat opposit the one to the other, a sacrifice propitiatorie and vnbloodie: saying, With∣out shedding of blood there is noremission, Heb. 9. ver. 22. But the Papists will confidently affirme that the Masse that PAVL said at Rome was propitiatorium sacrificium, and incruenta hostia, that is to say, a propitiatorie & vnbloodie sacrifice, which is vnpossible and repugnant vnto his owne doctrine. Se∣condly I demand of them another question anent the wo∣man described 12. Apocal. she was clothed with the sunne, and had the Moone vnder her feete: she had a diademe of twelue starres vpon her heade, which vndoubtedly was the celestial light of Apostolicke doctrine she trauailed in birth to bring foorth children to God: she was persecuted by the Dragon: to her was furnished wings of an Eagle, and shee fled vnto the wildernesse, where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feede her there a thousand two hun∣dreth and threescore dayes. Now (I say) I demand of the Papistes what wildernesse was this, whereinto the woman lurked so long time? for no man dare deny but this woman representeth the true Church of Christ the mother of vs all. Lurked she in the wildernesse of Nitria or Schethis? Or lur∣ked she in the wildernesse of Arabia or Lybia? Or lurked she in the wildernesse of Persia, where IVLIAN the Apostat con∣cluded his wretched life? Or in what other wildernes of the world did she lurke? When they haue giuen me an answere to this second question, let them thinke in their own mind that they haue answered the question proponed against vs. If they can giue no answere to this question, neither doe I tell them where our Church was sixe hundreth yeeres ago: but let them demand this question at him who furnished
Eagle wings to her, and prepared a place for her in the wil∣dernesse. Alwayes it is an article of our faith. I beleeue the holy caholicke Church, albeit she was lurking, yet she was not dead nor gone out of the world. And like as the blood of Christ was not shed in vaine: euen so there is in all ages a number of men and women washen in the fountaine of that preci∣ous blood, and prepared for heauen, albeit wee can not at all times point them out by the finger. Now errour in religion consisting in adding or pairing or altering, or contradicting the trueth contained in the Errour in re∣ligion an ex∣ecrable thing word of God. It is euident, I say, that errour in religion is a cursed and execrable thing. To him that addeth vnto the Lordes worde shall be added all the plagues written in the booke of God, and if any man take away from the wordes of Gods booke, God shall take away his parte out of the booke of life, Apoc. 22. ver. 18. 19. The like condemnation no doubt abideth them who dare presume to alter the truth and change the right sense or meaning of it, or to make a flat opposition and contradiction thereto. And truely all these curses which God commanded to bee pronounced out of mount Ebal, Deut. 27 euery Christian is commanded to say Amen vnto them, a part whereof may justly be apply∣ed against maintainers and forgers of errour in religion. First, Cursed be the man that shal make any carued or molten image which is an abomination to the Lord, and all the people shal answere, Amen. ver. 15. In the 17. verse he who remoueth his neigh∣bours marke is accursed, how much more hee who remoo∣ueth the marches of Gods most holy Lawe and couenant. In the 18 verse. Cused he bee that maketh the blind goe out of the way. But a thousand times more cursed is he who peruer∣teth the mindes of ignorant people from the simplicitie of the trueth ofGod. Vnto all these curses openly pronounced we are bound by the commandement to say Amen. And like as errour in religion is a thing accursed of God, so in like maner it is in itselfe an absurd thing, and full of Errour re∣pugneth to it∣selfe. horrible confusion, not onely repugning vnto the trueth, but also to it selfe, much like vnto IONAS gourd, which had into it a worme that smote it, so that it withered, Ionas 4. 7
euen so there lurketh into the bowels ofancient errours a worme consuming them vntill they vtterly wither and eva∣nish. The errour of EVTYCHES may serue for example, He thought that the immensitie of the diuine nature of Christ did so swallow vp his humane nature, that in Christ there is no more two natures, but one alanerly, namely his diuine nature. Nowe if so be, howe are we saued by the death of Christ? Can the diuinitie die? Which absurditie of EVTY∣CHES errour was well marked by ALAMVNDARVS prince of Saracens, as writeth THEODORVS lector. lib. 2. More ouer the ancient errours which sprang vp euen in the Apostles owne dayes, and immediatly after, had some portrate and shape of that absurditie that should continue in all errours that were to spring vp afterward, euer pairing the glorie that was due vnto the most High, and aduancing creatures out of measure. EBION and CERINTHVS denied Christes diuinitie, and on the other parte MENANDER thought that the world was created by Angels. Here we see Christs ho∣nour impaired, but the honour of Angels infinitly augmen∣ted. Both ancient and late er∣rours magni∣fie creatures With the di∣minution of the glory of the Creator. In like maner afterwarde ARRIVS denied that the Sonne of God was consubstantiall with the Father, dimini∣shing and pairing the honour due to Christ. But PFLAGIVS another Heretique magnified the power of mans corrupt nature, as if in it there were an abilitie to performe all the commandements of God. Thus we see that the very shape and similitude after the which Satan fashioned the errour of EBION, CERINTHS and MENANDER continueth in ARRIVS and PELAGIVS. And in our dayes, the Papistes will not goe out of the byas of old Heretiques: for Christ must not be the onely Mediator both of redemption and intercessi∣on, but some thing must bee paired from the honour of Christ, to the ende that the Sainctes may be enriched with the spoyle of Christ, and be made vp mediators of interces∣sion. The trueth is not to be judged by outward ap∣pearance. Here I leaue off to speake any further of the absurditie of ancient and execrable errours. But now it may be deman∣ded, how commeth it to passe that absurd errours haue so many followers? To this question let the Prophet IEREMIE
answere, who speaking of the people of his owne dayes vt∣terly addicted to olde idolatrie, and to the worshipping of the hoste of heauen, hee declareth also the reason mouing them to be so bent to old errours. O (say they) When we srued the host of heauen, then had we plentie of all things, but since we left off to doe so, wee are consumed wth the pest, the famine and the sword, Ier. 44. ver. 17. 18. Heere we see that the multitude judgeth that religion to bee best, the professours whereof injoyes greatest ease, wealth, and worldly prosperitie. But in the booke of the Psalmes, we receiue a better instruction to judge of the trueth of God, and professours thereof ac∣cording to the hearing of faith, and not according to out∣ward things: There are glorious things spoken of thee ô citie of our God. Psal 87. ver. 3. And these who judge according to outwarde appearance, they erre in two things: first, they know not the right cause of the prosperitie of Idolaters, se∣condly they knowe not the right cause of the penuritie of those who apparently haue forsaken idolatrie. The Apo∣stle saith that God ouerlooked the time of ignorance, Acts 17. ver. 30. but in time oflight when the candle of the Go∣spell clearely shineth, and pointeth out vnto vs the way of ancient veritie, the Lord will not spare them who haue hy∣pocritically professed his veritie, but in their heart they loue the deceit of errour and lies, as the people in IEREMIAS dayes did. This is the condemnation (saith theEuangelist IOHN) that light is come into the worlde, and men loued darkenesse rather then light. Iohn 3. ver. 19. Antiquitie of custome dif∣fereth from antiquitie of commande∣ment. Antiquitie of custome which we haue before described, lacketh many things that areto bee found in antiquitie of veritie. For it is not authorized by any Apostolicke cōman∣dement, wherupon 3. things do follow. First there is no ne∣cessitie vrging vs to keep things that are not cōmanded by Apostolick precept in matters cōcerning religiō. Secondly, where there is no necessity of doing, there is no feare or ter∣ror of cōscience in leauing the same vndone. Thirdly, where it is gone out of custome or vse, there is no necessity to re∣duce it again, as the feasts called  in the Apostlesown time, & the 3. dippings in Baptisme after the Apostles time.
Of these ancient customes we may boldly say foure things. 1. That the Apostles gaue no commandement to obserue them, 2. that there is no necessitie to keepe & obserue these customes. 3. there was no just cause of feare to the consci∣ence, where these customes were pretermitted or neglected. 4. experience declareth that since vse and custome which brought in these exercises hath also obliterat and worne them away, the Church in our time hath taken no regard of renewing these ancient customes againe. Now anent the examples which I haue alreadie brought foorth there are many who will make no contradiction, but as touching o∣ther ancient customes obserued of old in the Church, with∣out any written commandement, if those bee touched, and the like be saide of them also, more sturre and greater adoe will be made. Yet if I proue by ancient writers that the observation of Pasche day, and the obseruation of Lent were rites introduced in the Church without warrand of any A∣postolicke commandement, it will followe that there is neither necessitie in keeping, nor leauing these things vn∣keeped: wherefore consider what SOCRATES saith in his ec∣clesiastical history, lib. 5. cap. 22. Nusquam igitur Apostolus, nec ipsa Evangelia jugum ser vitutis illis imponunt, qui ad praedicatio∣nem accedunt: sed Paschatis festum, & alios dies festos ipsi homines suis quique locis propter remissionem laborum & memoriam salutife∣rae passionis, sicuti voluerunt, ex consuetudine quadam celebrârunt, neque Servator hoc, aut Apostoli nobis lege aliqua observandum esse mandârunt. Neque poenam nobis aut supplicium Evangelia vel A∣postoli, sicut Iudaeis Lex Mosi, comminantur, sed historico tan∣tùm modo ad reprehensionem Iudaeorum, quòd homicidium diebus festis exercuerint, & quòd Christus tempore Azymorum passus sit, conscriptum est in Evangeliis. That is, Therfore no where doth the Apostle or the Euangell lay vpon them the yoke of bon∣dage, who come to the preached worde, but the feast of Pasche day, & other festiuall dayes men euery one in their owne places, for intermission of labour, & for the remem∣brance of the salutiferous passion they kept as liked them∣selues best, these said feastes by a certaine custome. Neither did our Sauiour or his Apostles by any law command vs to
doe this thing, neither did the Apostles or Gospel threaten a punishment against vs (to wit if we leaue these things vn∣done) according as the Lawe of MOSES doth against the Iewes, but the historie onely for reprehension of the Iewes in the Gospell setteth downe in write, that the Iewes vpon festiuall dayes practised murther, and that Christ suffered in the dayes of vnleauened bread. Here all that I haue spoken, is clearely declared concerning the obseruation of the feast of Pasche day. 1. no precept or commandement proceeding from Christ & his Apostles to keepe it. 2. no threatning pro∣nounced against thē who kept it not. 3. that it was brought in into the Church by custome, but not by cōmandement. 4. that when men endeuoure to authorize by cōmandements such ancient customes, then they bring a yoke & bondage vpon the consciences of men. The like & more also is writ∣ten in that same chapter by SOCRATES concerning the ob∣seruation of Lent before the feast of Pasche day, that it was obserued with such diuersitie of customes, both in number of dayes, and also in diuersitie of meates, from which men abstained in Lent as easily declared that the Apostles inter∣poned no commandement in such matters, but left such customes free & indifferent to the discretion of Christians. In the head of antiquitie of customes, because I like not to be contentious in my judgement, two extremities would be eschewed. I. that we should not equall ancient customes to ancient commandements, for the causes aboue-written, which caueat SOZOMEN an ecclesiasticall writer not obser∣uing, did affirme all these who are not thrise dipped in wa∣ter to haue departed this life without the sacrament of Bap∣tisme, Sozom lib. 6, cap. 26. In which opinion he equalled an ancient custome to an olde commandement. And yet this same SOZOMEN, who is so precise in obseruation of an ancient custome of 3. dippings in Baptisme, is not so pre∣cise in another ancient custome of abstaining from eating of flesh in Lent, but commendeth SPIRIDION who gaue vnto a wearie stranger in time of Lent swines flesh to eate, & eated himself of it also, affirming that to the cleane al things were cleane, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 1 1. Tit. cap. 1. ver. 15. Thus we seee
howe SOZOMEN confuteth himselfe at sometimes remem∣bring that ancient customes are not equall to ancient com∣mandements (as abstinence from flesh in Lent) and in other things forgetting himselfe, & making the ancient custome of thrise dipping in Baptisme absolutly necessarie. 2. ancint customes not directly repugnant to the worde, if they be kept free of commandement, necessitie and feare (as is a∣boue specified) should not be so hatefully impugned, as an∣cient errours are impugned, but if abuses fall into them, these abuses should be timously reprehended as the Apostle PAVL reprooueth the abuses ofthe feastes ofloue in the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 11. But aboue all things beware that we rent not for matters of no great moment the vnitie of the Church of God, as VICTOR Bishop of Rome was pur∣posed to haue done, if he had not bene timously stayed by the prudent aduise of IRENEVS Bishop of Lions Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Now to conclude this short treatise of antiquitie of custome, if a wise man would send a tongue to it to speake for it selfe, it would be so far from matching and equalling itselfe with the ancient commandements, that it would speake modestly and humbly to them, as ELIZABETH the mother of IOHN Baptist spake to the blessed virgine the mother of our Lord. Andwhence commeth this to me (saith she) that the mother of my Lord should come vnto me? Luc 1, ver. 43. So might old customes speake to olde commandements. Whéce cōmeth this to me that cōmandement my mistresse & Lady wil tolerat me to be within the doores of the house of God, wherein she hath such soueraignitie and swey? How ancient truth may be discerned from ancient lies. In the fourth heade we are to intreate by what meanes ancient errours may be distinguished from ancient veritie. And first, veritie is not in all pointes like vnto an olde man whose strength is dayly abated by debilitie and weaknesse, till at length the old man die, & goe to the graue: yea rather veritie the older it be, the vertue, strength, and vigour of it is the better knowne: but errours when they waxe old they become weake, they die and euanish, and are vile as a filthy and stinking carion, so as if any man in our dayes should open the graue of ARRIVS, and renue his vngodly opinion,
he should see all Christians shake their heades, & stop their eares, and grip after a maner their noses with their handes, that the abominable flewer of that filthie carion should not be felt: but by the contrarie, the sweete smell of the ancient Veritie of Christ is like a precious oyntment powred out, filling the house of God with no lesse delite now then it did of old when it was first preached by the Apostles in Ierusale, Acts 2. And as the house of DAVID dayly waxed stronger, & the house of ISHBOSHETH dayly waxed weaker, 2. Sam. 3. 1. such like is the estate of the Veritie and the lie. Secondly, veritie and errour are best distinguished when they are riped vp into the very ground, and frivolous & su∣perficiall trialls are laide aside, As NEHEMIA did when hee tried after the captiuitie who had a right of Priesthood to stand at the altar, & to offer sacrifices, he commanded them to produce their writes and genealogies, and make good their lineal descent from the loynes of AARON, which right ey who could not find out were put from the Priesthood, Nehem. 7. ver. 64 Euen so they who pretend veritie of anci∣ent doctrine, let them verifie clearely by the written word, that this their doctrine came from the mouth of Christ & his holy Apostles: For as the procreation of AARON gaue a right to stand at the altar, so also the doctrine that came frō the mouth of Christ and his Apostles, hath an vndoubted right to be sounded in the Church of God. Remember now that wise NEHEMIAH was not superficiall in his triall. The sons of HABAIAH, the sons of HAKKOZ, the sons of BAR∣ZILLAI could haue shewed in write that they were come of the descent of LEVI, and of the familie of COAH, but that which was of greatest moment of all, that they were descen∣ded from that branche of the familie of COAH which was separated to the scruice of the altar, to wit, from AARON, Numb. 16. ver. 40. that they could not proue. So the Pa∣pistes of our time can prooue that their doctrine hath had place sixe, seuen, or eight hundreth yeeres, and more also before our dayes, but that which is of greatest weight, to wit, that their doctrine came from the mouth of Christ and his holy Apostles, in that probation they succumbe. Thirdly, let vs trie and discerne the lie from the veritie
as AVGVSTVS CAESAR discerned him who falsly called him∣selfe ALEXANDER the sonne of HEROD, and the sonne in law of ARCHELAVS King of Cappadocia, and husband of GLA∣PHYRA, Ioseph. antiq lib. 17. cap, 14. This ALEXANDER son of HEROD the great with his brother ARISTOBVLVS were both executed to the death, by the commandement of their father. But after the death of ALEXANDER, an artificer bearing that same name, and in stature, beauty, lineaments, and all agreeing proportion, so neerely resembled the very similitude of ALEXANDER the sonne of HEROD, that they who best knew HERODS son, did most confidently affirme, that this same artificer was he indeede, and he himselfe af∣firmed that he was HERODS sonne, and had escaped death by the fauour of the executioner: Alwayes when he was brought to Rome to the Emperour, AVGVSTVS would not be deceiued with the liklyhood of his face, but groped his hand, and found it to be hard like to the hand of an artifi∣cer, and discerned him to be a deceiuing fellow and puni∣shed him. This I grant may be applyed more properly to Christ then to vs. For albeit we be easily deceiued & seduced with lies, yet the great King of heauen Christ Iesus cannot be deceiued, hee will not regard the brasen face of the lie calling it selfe trueth, but he will wisely grope the hand of the lie, & examine what operations it hath wrought among the people, it hath blinded mens vnderstanding it hath har dened their heartes, it hath learned them to be proud ob∣stinat, & contemners of the trueth of God, & finally it hath learned thē to honour creatures with impairing of the glory of the Creator. Then wil the great King say, O full of al de∣ceit thy hand and thy operations that thou hast wrought a∣mongst men testifieth that thou art not of God. Neuerthe∣lesse the members of Christ also, in some meane measure, may be groping the hand of the lie, & finding it to be hard & dric, & voyde of all sap & moysture of spirituall grace, we may say in our harts, O doctrine of lies, barren & withered within thy selfe, and communicating no grace vnto thy hea∣rers, the Lord separat vs from thee, & thee from vs, that we may adhere firmly vnto our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus vnto the end.
Finally, when wee haue done all that we can doe to dis∣cerne the lie from the veritie, yet let vs not liue in securitie as though wee could neuer be deceiued. IOSVA that holy man of God was deceiued with old garments, old bottels of wine, old bread and shoes, because he consulted not with the mouth of God, Ios. 9. ver. 14. Then aboue all things we should seeke counsell at the mouth of God by earnest pray∣er, diligent reading of the written word, attentiue hearing of godly sermons, and if we seeke, we shall finde, and if wee knocke, it shall be opened vnto vs. And the Lorde direct vs both in seeking and finding with the gratious conduct of his holy Spirit. Heere I purposed to haue finished my treatise of antiqui∣tie, but when I remember with whome I haue to doe, and Foure coun∣terfaite masks of an∣tiquitie in Poperie. that they will say, I haue purposely passed by the principall demonstration of antiquitie in the Romaine Church, there∣fore I haue subjoyned the foure forged, fained and coun∣terfaite maskes of antiquitie in Poperie, which will neuer proue them to be an ancient church: The false interpreta∣tion of Scriptures: the booke of the Canons of the Apo∣stles: the decretall epistles falsly ascribed to the fathers of the first three hundreth yeeres of our Lord, and the booke of DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA. Anent the false interpreta∣tion of Scriptures Godwilling I shall speake in the treatise of heresie. Anent the booke of the Canons of the Apostles if there were no more but onely the last Canon containing a rehearsal of the bookes of holy Canonicke Scripture, it de∣clareth the book to be supposititious, wherein the 3. bookes of Maccabees are comprehended as bookes of the old Testa∣ment: And againe among the bookes of the new Testament  (note the preeminent dignitie) it rec∣koneth the two epistles of CLEMENT, and his precepts gi∣uen to Bishops comprehended into 8. bookes which were not to be published to all men, in respect they contained some secret mysteries, Canon Apost. cap. 84. Is then the e∣pistles of CLEMENT, the 8. bookes of his precepts written to Bishops, the actes of the Apostles written by him Cano∣nicke Scripture, books of the new Testament, equall to
the writings of the Apostles, & yet dited for the most part as secret mysteries to Bshops, to be concealed and hid from the people. when as the Apostle PAVL by the contrarie writing to TIMOTHIE and TITVS writeth vnto them whol∣some precepts to be communicat to the people. And the Apostle IOHN writeth to the Angels of the seuen Churches of Asia nothing but wholesome precepts to be imparted and communicat to the 7. Churches, Apoc. 2. & 3. such a candle that shall be hid vnder a bushel, and not set vpon a candlesticke to giue light vnto the houshold of God? I dare not imagine that either the holy Apostles, or yet CLEMENT one of the Apostles faithfull successours did euer light such a candle. The allowance which these Canons of the Apo∣stles got in the sixt generall Councill Anno 681. whereof GREGORIVS HOLOANDER the conuerter of them out of Greeke into Latin, glorieth so much, was vpon an occasion whereof the Romaine Church hath cause to blush and to be ashamed rather then to glorie much. First, because in that generall Councill HONORIVS 1. sometime Bishop of Rome was condemned of heresie. Secondly, because in that Coun∣cil the Bishop of Constantinople was ordained to be in equall authoritie with the Bishop of Rome. And thirdly because the constitutions of the Latin Church forbidding men who were in ecclesiasticall offices to marie, these constitutions (I say) were vtterly disallowed, and the 5. chapter of the Canons of the Apostles gote better allowance, because in it, it was statute and ordained that the Bishop, Elder or Deacon, who repudiateth his own wife vnder pretence of religion, shall be excommunicat, and if he continue so do∣ing he should be deposed. Now this generall Councill ma∣king in so many principall points against them, and onely gracing the supposititious booke of the Canons of the A∣postles of purpose to disgrace the constitutions of the Ro∣maine Church, if HOLOANDER had remembred what he had bene doing, he had bene more sparing in alledging the au∣thoritie therof. The shortnes of the treatise wil not permit me to make plaine to the reader how the Council gathered by CONSTANTINVS POGONATVS, and the fa∣thers
of that same Councill gathered againe by IVSTINIAVNS 2. to perfite the worke, they had immediatly afore begun, both constitute but one gene∣rall Councill. Alwayes if any thing seeme to be made vp a∣gainst vs by the alledgance of a testimonie out of the booke of the Canons of the Apostles, remember in what time this testimonie is alledged, namely, in the 68 1 yeere of our Lord. If IVSTINVS MARTYR, or IRENEVS, or any ancient father neere vnto the Apostles dayes had cited a testimonie out of this supposititious booke, it had bene more likly that the Apostles had giuen command to CLEMENT Bishop of Rome to write that booke. As touching the third maske of an∣tiquitie, to wit, the decretall epistles in the first Tome of Councils, and the distinctions of GRATIAN falsly ascribed to the ancient Bishops of Rome, I hope in the mercy of God to remember a few of them, specially in the 3. Centurie, but not to the honour of impudent and vnlearned fellowes, who haue forged these decretall epistles, as if the world in all ages could produce no broods of better spirits, then the asses compositours of these decretall epistles. As con∣cerning the accurate speculations of DIONYSIVS AREOPA∣GITA, who was neuer rauished vp vnto the third heauen as PAVL was, neither sawe things that were  that is things that cannot be spoken, and which are not possible for any man to vtter, as PAVL did, 2. Cor. 12. ver. 4. I say of him onely two things. First, if he had beene so ancient a writer as Papistes speake, and the disciple whom PAVL con∣uerted by his preaching in Mars street, Acts 17 then ancient writers had made mention of him, such as IVSTINVS & IRE∣NEVS, and CYPRIAN, and such others: but of his wri∣tings no mention is made in the greatest antiquitie, Secondly, I say with that reuerent Doctour of our own nation Mr THOMAS SMETON that the books giuen out vnder the name of old DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA sunt prorsus , they are altogether feck∣lesse, impertinent & frivolous books.
Of Heresie. EPIPHANIVS Bishop of Cyprus, when hee writeth a∣gainst Heretiques, he intituleth his booke Panarium that is a medicinable boxe or shrine whereinto are contained sauing medicaments against the venome oflying doctrine: albeit heresie be a poysonable and hurt∣full thing yet treatises of heresie haue bene compiled not to hurt any man, but to giue warning to eschewe the pernici∣ous snares of the deuil. Like as learned men who haue writ∣ten of the nature of herbes, haue not onely written of such herbes as are meete for food, and of such as haue a medici∣nable vertue to cure diseases, but of those also that are vene∣mous and poysonable, to the end that men beeing warned of the perill, that is in eating of them, they may escape danger, and be kept in safetie. In all ages wicked men haue bene like vnto IVDAS when hee entred into the garden of Gethsemane where Christ was praying, and sweating bloodie teares for the saluation of mankinde: he stepped in into the garden only of purpose to betray his master: so doe wicked Wicked men reade holy Scripture of intention to gainesay the trueth of God. men in our daies read the holy Scriptures diligently walking as it were in the middes of the garden of God, but onely of intention to betray Christ Iesus, and to gainsay his euerla∣sting trueth. On the other side it becommeth vs well when we are driuen either by necessity, or by some honest occasiō to be in places where Satan hath set vp his throne, & to be walking as it were through the garden, that Satan hath planted, then let vs mark diligently the abominatiōs of the deuill, the multitude of serpents and vipers that are lurking there, and giue warning to poore soules, who are intangled with error, to leaue that habitation of Dragons, & to come forth out of that comfortlesse den, to the end their soules may be refreshed with the delectable flowres of the garden of God I hope in the mercy of God so to speake of heresy, as I shal moue no man to be an Heretique. And as concerning the rayling words of the aduersaries of the truth, who haue with opē mouth proclaimed vnto the world that we are He∣retiques, I am the lesse moued with their speaches, because
it is the custome of lamed & creeple men to be mounted vp on horsebacke, & an euil cause supporteth the own infirmi∣tie by the loude trumpet of rayling wordes: yet haue they not cleared to the world, that wee maintaine obstinatly any point of doctrine repugnant vnto the articles of true faith, and vnto the principall grounds of Christian religion prea∣ched by Christ, and committed to write by the holy Apo∣stles. Let them be as prodigall in their curses as they please, crying out against vs , I answere with sim∣plicitie of a humble mind Or . : this word written with , and not with , signifieth a thing hanged vp in the Lordes Temple, and dedicat to God. Haue we not seene with our owne eyes deepe woundes made in the flesh of man, that haue beene needled by skilfull Chirurgians, and in end cu∣red and healed, and the skinne of man cutted in twaine by the sword, vnited againe by the needle & medicinable pla∣sters? That doctrine which endenoureth to needle the wounded world, and to vnite it againe vnto that holy do∣ctrine taught by the Apostles and Euangelistes, and pro∣fessed in the first hundreth yeere of our Lord, shall we call it hereticall? Shall we be so babish, that wee cannot discerne the sword from the needle, conjunction from separation, healing from hurting, welfare from woe? If we knew Christ Iesus, and the power of God working by his word, we had not so rashly condemned the trueth of God. The Iewes spake as confidently against Christ, as euer the Councill of Trent hath spokē against vs: We hue a law & according to our Confident speaking without a sure ground is not to be regarded. lawe hee ought to de, because hee made himselfe the Sonne of God, Ioh. 19. ver. 7 Vnder pretence of zealous keeping of the Law made against blasphemers, Leuit, 24. 15. they condemned the holy One of God as a blasphemer. But his father by loo∣sing the sorowes of death, & receiuing him into heauen, & placing him at his owne right hand annulled ipso facto that rash sentence giuen out in earth against the innocent Lamb of God. Euen so the Lord in his owne appointed time by receiuing our soules into those celestiall mansions prepared for his owne Saintes shall vndoe the rash decreetes that are giuen out against vs in the earth. In all ages this matter
hath bene contrauerted, and Heretiques haue obstinatly maintained their bad and reprobat opinions, and as obsti∣natly refused the odious and vile name of Heretiques: and this question in our dayes is like to a flame of fire which no aboundance of water can sloken. The definition of an he∣resie we haue alreadie set downe in the 3 chap, resteth nowe in this treatise to ponder the name it selfe, to consider the ground of heresie, the propagation and preuailing power of it at sometimes, & the greater and more preuailing pow∣er of the curse of God, making heresie in end to wither as the figge tree did that was cursed by Christ: And finally to declare what should be the cariage both of Pastours, magi∣strats and people toward Heretiques.  is a word of the Greeke language, and very ample in signification, for it What the word heresie doth signifie. signifieth a choosing. Now it is certaine, that it is no fault to a man to take a choise when God doth offer it vnto him: as when it was offered to SALOMON to aske what hee liked best, he choosed rather to craue wisdome then riches from God, 1. Reg. 3. and when DAVID choosed rather to fall in∣to the hands of God then of man, 2. Sam. 24 ver. 14. DA∣VID in choosing the pest rather then the sworde or famine, tooke a choice which was offered vnto him by God. And the pondering of the generalitie of the worde may declare, that in things indifferent wherinto God hath granted vnto men a libertie & free choice, such as eating of flesh, or absti∣nence from it, marying or not marying, a man may take his choice in these things at such times as he findeth it granted by God as well as DAVID and SALOMON, and a man is not to be called an Heretique because he marieth, because God hath giuen him libertie to marie, or not to marie as a man listeth best, prouiding alwayes he seeke counsell of God, to dispose him in such indifferent things that way, whereby he shall be most meete and able to glorifie God. For true it is that the Euangelist writeth No man hath seene God at any time, the onely begotten Sonne of God, who is in the bosome of his Father, he hath reueiled him, Ioh. 1, which words plainly doe te∣stifie, that in matters of faith God hath not giuen vnto a man a free choice to embrace what opinion he pleaseth, but
God hath tied & bound vs in matters of faith to the mouth of his deare Sonne, to the ende we should thinke no other thing of God then Iesus Christ hath reueiled vnto vs. The groun of heresie. Now anent the ground of heresie, I followe the opinion of AVGVSTINE in his booke of exposition of some places of the epistie to the Galathian, wherein hee compareth Here∣tiques to the sonnes of KETVRA whome ABRAHAM maried after the death of SARA, Gen. 25. These children were pro∣created of an old father, and of a yong mother, euen so He∣retiques pretending antiquitie of Scripture, but forging vn∣to them a new & yong sense whereinto Scripture was not written they become defenders of a false opinion. The words of S. AVGVSTINE are these: Ex occasione antiquaeveri∣tats in novitio temporalique nati sunt mendacio, that is, through occasion of antiquitie of the trueth they are borne into the noveltie of a temporall lie: so that AVGVSTINE his judge∣ment soundeth to this that Heretiques pretend antiquitie of scripture for their father, but they are more like to KETV∣RA then ABRAHAM, following rather the noueltie of error, Similitude. then the antiquitie of veritie. In this maner IRENEVS thin∣kèth that heresies do spring vp of a false vnderstanding of holy Scriptures; vsing the comparison of men who breake the golden image of the king, & after it is molten, againe fashion it according to the similitude of a Foxe, now it can not be called the kings image any longer, albeit it be com∣posed of that selfe same golde whereof the kings image was made, euen so, when wordes of Scripture are drawen to a new, false & hereticall sense, count that new sense heresie & not Scripture. Iren adversus Ualent. lib. 1. cap. 1. Now these o∣pinions of IRENEVS and AVGVSTINE concerning the origi∣nall ground of heresie do well agree with the word of Christ himselfe written in holy Scripture, Are ye not therefore decei∣ued, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God. Marc 12. 24. The Sadduces knew wel eneugh the wordes of scripture, but not the right sense and meaning of them. And therfore it is great wisdome to mixe our reading with pray∣er, to the ende that the Lorde who guided the pen of Pro∣phets in writing, may guide also our hearts in reading.
With this ignorance of the meaning and true sense of holy Scripture is joyned an vnspeakable and deuilish pride, for they make no account of any body vnder heauen, but Pride ac∣companying ignorance. of themselues alanerly, and hypocrites haue their owne o∣pinions in so wonderfull admiration, that they stop their eares from hearing all wholesome admonition, which per∣tinacie and pride, is the cause wherefore the Apostle PAVL calleth them , that is, condemned of them∣selues, Titus 3. For like as there are some persons so bent to destroy their owne bodies, that it is not possible to the vigilant attendance of friendes to keepe them from mis∣chiefe and harme, the experience whereof kythed in POR∣CIA the daughter of CATO and wife of BRVTVS: euen so there are a number of men caried so headlong to hell, that no wholesome doctrine or admonition can be heard, be∣cause like to the Gadarenes swine, the swift pace of their race cannot be stayed, vntill they be drowned in the lake. Of this cause of heresie NAZIANZEN writeth ad Cledonium that the heretique APOLLINARIS counted of his owne songs as we count of the olde and newe Testament, euen so his associates counted his songs and rhymes to be the third testament. In like maner the heretique MARCION was a patterne of incorrigible pride, who came to Rome after the death of HYGINVS, and when he heard that he was not ad∣mitted to an ecclesiasticall office, hee demanded of the preaching Elders there, what was the meaning of Christes words, when hee saide, That no man pieceth an olde garment with a piece of new clothe: for that, that should fill it vp, taketh away from the garment, and the breach is worse, Mat. cap. 9. ver. 16. 17. In their answere they declared the true meaning of Christes words. But the proud stomacke of an head-strong Here∣tique applyed the parable to himselfe, and auouched that he should make a remedilesse breach among them, because they had refused to receiue him into their fellowship. Epi∣phan, contra hareses which thing he endeuoured to performe vntill his last breath. The propa∣gation of he∣rsie, Heresie was propagated and increased rather in the Hal∣cyon dayes of CONSTANTINE, VALENTINIAN, THEODO∣STVS
and MARTIANVS, then in the wofull dayes of NERO, DOMITIAN, TRAIAN, ANTONINVS, SEVERVS, MAXI∣MINVS, DECIVS, VALERIAN, AVRELIAN, DIOCLETIAN, through the wise prouidence and wisdome of God, who would not at one time ouercharge his Church with vnsup∣portable burthens, neither would he suffer his Saints to be tempted aboue their strength. For if heresies had bene in number as many, and in power as strong before the daies of CONSTANTINE as they wer after his dayes, it had bene hard till haue borne foorth so many mightie assaultes: but our mercifull Lord would haue the faith and patience of his Saints to be tried by persecuting tyrants in some ages, and againe the knowledge of the Church to be tried mightily by Heretiques in other ages. So that wee shall finde moe heresies springing vp in the 4. Centurie, then in all the pre∣ceeding 3. Centuries, yea if it had pleased that godly father AVGVSTINE to haue abridged his abridgement of heresies written ad Quod vultdeum, the number of heresies in the first 300. yeeres should not be found great. But AVGVSTINE diuiding these Heretiques who were called Gnostici in three bandes, to wit, in Saturniniani, Carpocratiani and Basilidiani, who all were but one rancke of Herctiques, he maketh the number to seeme greater then it was. And in like maner diding the Motanists in Pepuziani, Cataphyges, Prisllia∣ni, and Montanistae, maketh also the number to seeme great, how beit all these foure are but one heresie, receiuing some∣times a name from the author MONTANVS, sometime frō the countrie of Phrygia whereinto this heresie was bred, sotime frō the town of Phrygia called Pepuzum where they dwelt, & sometimes from the false prophetesse PRISCILLA, who propagated the error of MONTANVS. In like manerthere were many obscure heresies who could finde few or no fol∣lowers, because it seemeth that the heresie died as soone as the Heretique, such as Helcsaitae, Caiani, Schiani. And there is no great necessitie to discourse of such abortiue birthes as incontinent died before they came to any kinde of ripe∣nesse: EVSEBIVS saith haeresis helce saitarum simul etiam at que coepit, extincta est. That is, the heresie of Helcesaitae mmedi∣atly after it was begun it was quenched, Euseb, lib. 6. cap. 38.
And finaily AVGSTINE reckoneth among Heretiques of the first 300 yeeres Tessaresaidecataitae in the Latin Quaterdeci∣mani who maintained no opinion repugnant to the grounds of faith, but onely kept Easter vpon another day then the Romaine Church did obserue it. But albeit heresies sprang vp in the dayes of good Em∣perours, Heresie strengthened by the arme of manala∣nerly. yet were they not fostered and nourished by them, but by all possible meanes were abandoned, but God pu∣nishing the contempt of the truth, and the loue of false and lying doctrine, suffered an euill Emperour to rise after a good, such as CONSTANTIVS after CONSTANTINE, and ANASTASIVS after MARTIANVS, and these euill Emperours by their own profession, countenance & authoritie streng∣thened the heresies of ARRIVS and EVTYCHES which were bred in the dayes of the good Emperours forenamed: so that the strength of an heresie was borne out by the arme of man allanerly, and it was not a plantation that our heauen∣ly father had planted, and therefore in end behooued to be rooted out. Then marke the power of the wrath of God against He∣retiques, heresies, and sometimes against the very places of The curse of God vpon Heretiques, heresies, and places of their mee∣tings. their meetings. It is knowne that ARRIVS brast asunder, as IVDAS did, and that his bowels gushed out, a just recom∣pense of his troubling of the intestine peace and bowels of the Church of God. MONTANVS and his two mad pro∣phetesses PRISCILLA and MAXIMILLA hanged themselues as IEROM doth write, citing APOLLONIVS for his authour, Ierom. catal script. PAVLVS SAMOSATENVS, a man leper both in soule and body, was excommunicat in all Churches pro∣fessing Christ in the whole world, and by the authoritie of the Emperour (as shall be declared Godwilling) with shame and ignominie was driuen from his vsurped chaire in Antiochia. MANES was excoriat by the king of Persia. The bad fortune of the priests of BAAL contending against HE∣LIAS, and slaine at the brooke Kshon, 1. Reg. 18. ver. 40. The most infortunate condition of AMAZIA the priest of Bethel, whose wife became an harlot in the citie, and his sonnes and daughters fell by the sword, and his lande was diuided
by line, and himselfe died in a polluted land, Amos 7. ver. 17 All these examples (I say) declare that terrible is the wrath that the Lorde will powre out against false prophets and false teachers. In like manet the heresie of ARRIVS when it was at the very height, beganne to shed it selfe into three contrarie opinions as a kingdome diuided in it selfe, and could no longer stand some were still called Ar∣rianes, and vtterly denied that the Sonne of God was , that is, consubstantiall with the father, yet they graunted that hee was , that is of like sub∣stance with the Father. But AETIVS, ACATIVS and EVNOMIVS another race of ARRIANS, thought that the Sonne was neither , nor yet  to his Father, and for this cause they were called Anomoe. The thirde faction of Arianes were MACEDONIVS and his adherents, who were inconstant and wauering minded in their opinions concerning the Sonne of God, sometime leaning to the Homoosians, sometime to Homoi∣ousians, and sometime to Anomoei, according as any occa∣sion of griefe was presented to them by any one partie, they leapt to the opinion of another partie: but these wan∣dering starres and wauering fooles, obstinately spake a∣gainst the diuinitie of the holy Ghost. This diuision a∣mongst themselues was the first forerunning token of the decay of this heresie. What desolation also came v∣pon Nicomedia the principall towne of Bithynia appointed by the Emperour CONSTANTIVS for the meeting of Arrian Bishoppes the historie doth record. The Lorde shooke the towne of Nicomedia with an earthquake, and disappointed the meeting of the Arrians, Socrat. ec∣clef. hist. lib. 2. cap. 39. THEODORETVS differeth from SOCRATES annt the place appointed for the conventi∣on of Arian Bishops, alwayes he granteth that it was sha∣ken with earthquake, and ouerthrowne, Theodoret. lib. 2 How Here∣tiques should be dealt with by the Pa∣stours, cap. 26. In the last roome, let vs consider after what ma∣ner of way should Heretiques bee dealt with by Pa∣stours, magistrates, and people. As concerning the
Pastour, because he should be a man of knowledge, and able to convict those that gainsay the trueth, Tit. 1. the Pastour should conferre with the Heretique, & admonish him once or twise to returne to the soundnesse of faith, Tit. 3. Wher∣in it is to be noted, that the worde in the Greeke language betokening admonition is  which word pointth out the end and purpose of the preachers trauailes, rather then his painfull trauailes, for the end should be to put a right minde into him, or to bring him to his right wittes a∣gaine, for an Heretique is a mad fellow indeede, and out of his right wit, as NAZIANZEN spake of AOLLINARIS who denied that Christ had a soule as we haue, but his diuine nature joyned with his body supplied the roome of his soule. NAZIANZEN writeth of him that when he spake of the minde of Christ, he was mad, and by his minde . And it is a very hard matter to reduce a mad man to his right wit againe: therefore let a preacher take it to hart that to conuert a Heretique is a difficill worke, for he is dealing with a man possessed with a strong deuill, who can∣not be cast out by Christs disciples, except Christ himselfe put hand to the worke, Mat. 17. This the Apostle writeth, not to make Pastours to despaire and giue ouer the care of conquessing of Heretiques, but to doe this worke circum∣spectly and warily, with humilitie and reuerent feare, cra∣uing that our Lord and master Christ Iesus would kyth his strength in our weakenesse, otherwise this turne can not be done. Yet lest any faithfull preacher should be vtterly dis∣maide in regarde of th difficultie of the worke, two things are to be considered: first, the Apostolicke commandement warning vs to admonish him once or twise, which warning, seing it is not giuen in vaine, it should be obeyed Secondly, God hath blessed the trauailes of some of his seruants, & by them some Heretiques haue bene reclaimed to the right faith: as namely BERYLLVS Bishop in Bostra in Arabia, who denied that Christ was existent before he tooke flesh of the virgine, yet by the painfull trauailes of ORIGEN hee was conuerted to the true faith againe, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 33. And this is the cause wherfore I separat BERYLLVS
from ARTEMON in the subsequent historie. In like maner God blessed the trauailes of DIONYSIVS Bishop of Alexan∣dria, by whome in a place of Egypt called Arsenois, Coracione was conuerted, who had bene before infected with the er∣rour of NEPOS an Egyptian Bishop, and father of the Chilia∣stes, Euseb. eccl, hist. lib, 7. cap. 24. And therefore let not the faithful Pastours despaire, because the worke is difficil, but obey Gods commandement, and commit the issue to God himselfe. Concerning Magistrats, like as they prescribe to all men their duties, so in like maner, God who is their onely supe∣riour, HAV the magistrate should deale with Here∣tiques. prescribes their dutie to them in all things, and in this mater also: for the Lord commanded the false prophet, who allured the people to follow other gods, to be slaine, Deut. 13. ver. 5. What rewarde then belongeth vnto He∣retiques, their successouts, for it is all one to worshippe a false god, and to worship the true God falsly, and if the false prophets who entsed the people to worshippe a false god should die, what other sentence can be giuen out by the magistrates against an hereticall teacher, who entiseth peo∣ple to worship the true God falsly, but onely that he should be slaine. Hee is worse then a murtherer who killeth a mans body, for there may bee some valuation of the harme and skaith that a murtherer hath done, but who can value and ponder the harme that an Heretique doeth, who by false doctrine murthereth the soules of infinite numbers of people, hee is worse then an infidell, forasmuch as hee hath obtained a more abominable name then an infidell. For an infidell as S. AVGVSTINE speaketh cannot be called desertor fidei & oppugnator ius, that is, a forsaker and impugner of the faith, because hee neuer embraced it, but an Heretike is a backslider from the faith which sometime he professed, and an hatefull impugner of the same. Finally he is more per∣nicious then a Schismatike who laboureth to cut the band of loue wherwith we are coupled with our brethren, but an Heretike endeuoureth to cut the very throate of faith, wherewith we are coupled with our God. Also a schisme hath many times beene found without an heresie, but an
heresie was neuer founde without a Schisme. Then this question may be conceiued in these tearmes. What shall be done with a man who is worse then a murthe∣rer, worse then an infidell, worse then CORE, DA∣THAN and ABIRAM, who by a pernicious schisme, rent the vnitie of the holy people? yea, what shall be done with them who like vnto Foxes sucke out the blood of Christ out of the soules of the poore sheepe of Christ? Now let God answere from his Sanctuarie. Let such a false prophet be slaine. Deut 13. True it is indeede that the doubtsome judgements of ancient and learned fathers haue made this question more debatable then otherwise it needed to haue beene. For S. AVGVSTINE in the booke of his Epistles is found till haue altered his opinion anent the punishment of Heretiques twise or thrise. In the Epistle written to DONATVS Deputie of Afke he would haue He∣retiques to bee dantoned, but not to bee slaine, writ∣ting to him in these wordes. Sic igitur corum peccata compesce, ut sint quos poeniteat peccasse, that is to say, Therefore so subdue their faultes, that they may be afore hand to repent that they haue faulted, Epist. 127. But in another Epistle written to GLORIVS and ELEVSIVS he thinketh that Schismatikes and Heretiques (such as the Donatists were) deserued greater punishment then I∣dolaters themselues, for hee saith, Qui fecerunt idolum, usi∣tata gladii morte perempti sunt, qui verò shisma facere voluerunt. hiatu terrae principes devorati, & turba consentiensigne consumpta est. that is, These who made an idole, were staine with the accustomed death of the sword but these who endeuoured to make a schisme their princes were deuoured by the gap of the earth, and the people that consented to them were consumed by fire, Epist. 162. In these two foresaide Epi∣stles AVGVSTINE in the one is very gentle, in the other very rigorous. Nowe heare the thirde opinion of. AV∣GVSTINE in these wordes. Non solùm mansuete, verùm uiam utiliser, salubritérque plectantur, habent enim quod corpore in∣columes vivunt, hubent unde vivunt, habent unde male rivunt,
duo prima salva sint, ut quos poeniteat sint, hoc optamus, hoc quantum in nobis est impensa opera instamus. Tertium vero si Dominus vo∣luerit, tanquam putre noxiúmquc resecare, valde misericorditer puniet. that is, Let them be punished not onely meeke∣ly, but also profitably and wholsomely, they haue where∣upon their bodies are healthfully intertained, & they haue whereupon they liue, they haue also whereupon they liue wickedly, Let these two former partes safely remaine vn∣to them, that penitent men may be to the fore: this we wish and wee earnestly endeuoure so farre as in vs lyeth, that it may be brought to passe, but the third part as rotten and hurtfull, if it were cutted away, they were very gently puni∣shed, Epist. 254 this epistle is written to NECTARIVS. Wher∣in it is euident that AVGVSTINE himselfe was not setled in one constant opinion howe Heretiques should be punished by magistrats. But what shall we say? When Nilus and Danube haue wandred long, in end they powre their waters Similitude. into the sea, and when AVGVSTINE hath beene sometimes in one opinion, and sometimes in another, in ende hee is compelled to say Amen to that which God hath said in his worde, that is, that a false prophet should be slaine, Deut. 13. I speake of deceiuing teachers, but not of deceiued people. As touching the people, the weaker they are, the wiser they should bee, not exponing their weakenesse to the hazard of strong tentations, but following the coun∣sell How the peo∣ple should deale with Heretiques. of the Apostle writing to the elect Lady, ver. 10. 11. If there come any vnto you, and bring not this doctrine, re∣ceiue him not to house, neither bidde him God speede: for he that biddeth him, God speede, is partaker of his euill deedes. But seeing a blinde man may bee shoueled out of the way, and poore simple people may bee soone bewitched, Galat. 3. therefore it is expedient for the people to acquaint themselues well with the 12. Articles of their faith, and so firmly to adhere to them that in no case they sufferthem selues to be miscaried from that short summe of Christian faith. For EPIPHANIVS when he had written a Catalogue of heresies that sprang vp before his own time, he thought it expedient also to write another booke called Anchoratus,
which booke containeth a declaration of the true and right faith according to the writings of holy Scripture, which faith if it bee firmely kept, it shall bee like vnto an ancre that stablisheth a ship, that it bee not drow∣ned in the tempest of the raging sea: euen so the fast gripping to the heades of our faith, and right vnder∣standing of them saueth vs, that wee bee not miscaried with the tempest of hereticall doctrine. Also the counsell of AVGVSTINE is not to be mis∣regarded. In reading of Scripture if wee can not take vp the very genuine sense and meaning of the place, at least let vs not expone that place of Scripture in a sense repug∣ning to the analogie of faith. So shall we be like to a man who hath aberred from the direct way, yet he wandereth in the fieldes leading to the towne whereat he would be, Au∣gustin de doctrina Christiana. lib. 1. cap. 37. Aboue all things let not the people hearken to those teachers who would inforce the wordes of Scripture, and wrest them to a sense flatly repugnant to the principall purpose intreated in that passage of Scripture: for wordes are inuented for to expresse the purpose, but the purpose is not deuised for the wordes. A cleare example we haue in the sixt of IOHN his Gospell. Our master Christ is spea∣king in that Chapter to a carnall & fleshly hearted people, who were offended at his doctrine: for remedie wherof our Lorde teacheth them, that his doctrine was spirituall, and consequently was not to be receiued with fleshly eares and heartes saying vnto them, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flsh profiteth nothing, the wordes that I speake vnto you, are sprit and life. Ioh. 6. ver. 63. That is, as S. AVGVSTINE writing v∣pon this place doeth expound, my words should be spiritu∣ally vnderstood. Nowe therefore whosoeuer will expone the words of Christ spoken in the sixt of IOHN (except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, yo haue no life in you) ver. 53. into a corporall and carnall sense I say people ought to beware of such a teacher, because he wrests Christs wordes to a sense flat repugnant to the purpose that Christ hath in hand at that time.
And the counsell giuen by the Apostle to TITVS, although it be giuen to Bishoppes yet it is necessarie also for people in these words Holding fast the faithfull word ac∣cording to doctrine, Tit. 1. ver. 9. Marke well the word , which signifieth not onely an adherence, but also a firme adherence. The word  is so generall that we are tolera∣ted to haue many things, but in such way as wee had them not, 1. Cor. 7. but the compound words  &  that is to possesse & firmly to keep, are to be restrained only to Christ, who is our portion, and to his faithfull word wher vnto we ought so firmly to adhere that we will rather be se∣parated from our liues then from that faithfull word. And to this faithfull worde ALAMANDARVS Prince of Saracens vnseparably adhering deluded the Eutychian Bishops sent from SEVERVS Anno 512. So I conclude that there is no∣thing so expedient for Gods people as clearely to know the summe of their faith, and firmly to adhere vnto the same. Of the foundation of the Church. SEeing that the Church is counted the Lordes citie builded vpon his holy mountaine, Psal. 87. ver. 1. And that house that is builded on a rock so firmly, that the stormie tempests of windes, floods and raine cannot procure the fall of it, Mat. 7. This house I say is vndoubtedly the building ofGod. Let vs therfore seek out the true foun∣dation of it, which beeing found out, let euery one of vs endeuour to be a liuing stone adhering by faith to the true foundation. The worde foundation is sometime properly taken, sometime vnproperly. Properly, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 11. in these words: For another foundation can no man lay, then that is laide The word foundation taken proper∣ly  o∣ly to Christ. which is Christ. Vnproperly the doctrin of the Prophets and Apostles is called a foundation, because it leadeth to Christ the very true foundation. Ephes. 2. yer. 20. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. In like maner faith
that coupleth vs to the true foundation, figuratiuely bea∣reth this name, Epist Iud. Build your selfe in your most holy faith, ver. 20. These figuratiue speaches should offend no man no more then if a man dwelling in Rhegium or Syracuse were demanded where is Icrusalem, and hee should point out his finger toward the East, and say there it is, his meaning is, there is the way leading to Jerusalem: euen so when wee say that the Apostles doctrine is the foundation of the Church, our meaning is, that Apostolicke doctrine is a lanterne lea∣ding to Christ the true foundation. The Prophet ISAI speaking of Christ in a proper sense writeth. Therefore thus saith the Lord. Behold I will lay in Si∣on a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, and he that beleeueth shall not make haste. Isa. 28. ver. 16. Many Metaphores are here I grant, and if any man list to be con∣tentious, he may affirme that in the very worde foundation there is not inlacking a piece of figuratiue speach. Yet this standeth certaine, that nothing is properly called the foun∣dation of the house of God, except Christ Iesus alaner∣ly. In this description of the true foundation of the Church we haue two great comforts, and one wholesome admoniti∣on. The first comfort is this, that he who knoweth all our infirmities, and by what remedies they may be best suppor∣ted, he hath sent his owne Sonne in our nature to beare our burthens as a foundation beareth the weight of the whole house. He commanded MOSES to make a brasen serpent in the wildernesse, by the sight whereof the people bitten with fierie serpents were cured, Numb. 21. 8. And the Lord knewe best to what foundation his poore Church leaning, might finde surest safetie and sweetest refreshment. There∣fore O people stinged with serpents be not afraid to looke vp vnto the brasen serpent, because it is the remedie prepa∣red by God himselfe to support your wounded bodies. And O weake, afflicted and persecuted Church take bold∣nesse to adhere to Christ the precious and sure foundation appointed by God himselfe for the support of your distres∣sed estate.
And the Prophet to mooue the Church to serious and diligent attendance vseth the word Behold. As if the Lord Take heede to the de∣monstrations of God, and beware of Satans de∣monstrations were pointing out a comfort with his owne finger to wea∣rie sinners, and saying, O sinner that art wearie with that burthen that hangeth on thy backe so fast, & presseth thee downe so sore, come I will shewe thee a resting place, euen the stone that I haue laid in Sion, goe to it, beholde, I haue laide it there my selfe, and that stone will beare all thy bur∣thens, & refresh thee in al thy tentations. On the other part marke that Satan that great deceiuer, when he would most subtilly deceiue people, hee will needes counterfaite God, and point out his finger also, and make demonstrations and say. Beholde, Christ is in the dsert: or beholde, Christ is in the secret place. Mat. 24. ver. 26, beleeue it not saith Christ. When God saith beholde, wee will take diligent attendance what is it that the Lorde hath pointed out vnto vs. But when Satan putteth out his finger also, and saith, behold, Christ is euen here presently, really, corporally in the boxe caried by the Priest, then beware of the deuils demonstrations, for he is an olde subtle serpent, and hath deceiued many. The Papistes taking aduantage of demonstratiue wordes  thou seest,  thou shalt see,  looke throughly into it, they take the boldenesse to affirme that the body of Christ is cor∣porally present in the holy Sacrament: which body wee not onely see, but also wee touch, and wee not onely touch, but also wee eate it, and not one∣ly doe wee eate it, but also wee carie it home vnto our houses. Vpon this place of CHRYSOSTOME they haue grounded such vndoubted assurance that Christe is corporallie present in the Sacrament, that the Papistes in the Northerne partes of Scotland snt a letter to Sterling to M. P. S. to resolue the Marquesse of Huntley in the matter of the Sacrament, because CHRYSOSTOME apparently condescendeth to corpo∣rall presence ofChrists body in the Sacrament. When I read the letter, I said, and as yet doe say, that they needed not to haue taken so much paines to seeke for resolution of
that question either for them, or for others, but reade for∣ward the words of CHRYSOSTOME that follow, where hee maketh his owne meaning plaine, saying, . that is to lay. Therefore clenge thy soule, and pre∣pare thy minde for the receiuing of these mysteries. Can there be a more cuident declaration of his meaning then this? First where he saith , thou seest him not in the crib, but vpon the altar. But I pray you with what cye see we Christ vpon the altar, or ta∣ble? (for both are one thing as the learned know)  saith CHRYSOSTOME, that is, with the eye of our soule and minde. Againe he saith that wee touch that blessed body of Iesus. But with what finger? , with the finger of our soule & minde. Againe he saith that we eat that blessed body, but with what mouth? , with the mouth of our soule & our mindc: & lastly he saith that we carie him home, but in what stomacke?  in the stomack of our soul & mind. For this cause he exhorteth vs to clense & prepare our soule & mind for the participation of diuine mysteries, Prepare the eye of our mind to see Christ, the finger of faith to touch him, the mouth of faith to eatc him, and the stomacke of our soule to keepe the Lorde Icsus, Chrysost. in 1. Cor cap. 10. Homil. 24. Is there in these words one syllable that soundeth to corporall and carnal manducation of the flesh of Christ? I hauc cast in this short digression to let our Northerne Pa∣pists vnderstand that the arguments which they supponed to be inuincible, may be easily answered. The comparison of Christ to a stone is so frequently vsed in Scripture that the very prophecie of Christs natiuitie, death and latter comming to judge the world are illustrate The similt∣tude of a stone frequently v∣sedin Scrip∣ture. by this similitude. In like maner to represent the plenitude of his wisdome, the vnspeakable goodnesse and vnresistable power of Christ, this similitude is brought in. Hee is a stone cut out of a rocke without hands, Dan. 2. ver. 34. Here is his natiuitie represented. His sufferings by the similitude of a carued stone, Zach. 3. ver. 9. His latter judgement by the
similitude of a stone, that falleth vpon a man and grindeth him to powder, the fulnesse of wisdome and vnderstanding in Christ, by a stone full of eyes, Zach. 3. ver 9. His power by a stone smiting the feet of the great image, and destroy∣ing all the glory of it. And finally his vnspeakable goodnesse by the similitude of a corner stone, and of a stone that is a sure foundation. The secon comfort. The second comfort contained in this description is this, that Christ is a precious stone, a corner stone & a sure foundation. Wherefore Christ is called an elect or tried stone, we shall heare Godwilling hereafter in the descripti∣on that the Apostle PETER maketh of this same stone. Now Christ is not like vnto the stones of other buildings more different one from another in place then in nature: for the stone in the foundation is but a senslesse stone as wel as the stone of the wall that is builded vpon it. And it is possible that if the house & building be casten downe, that some of the stones that were in the wall, be laide in the foundation, and some againe that were in the foundation be laide in the wall, whereupon ariseth this vicissitude, that the stone sometime sustained, nowe sustaineth, and by the contrarie. the stone now sustaining sometime was sustained. But Christ Iesus is a precious stone sustaining vs at al times, and neuer sustained by vs, partaker of our nature, but not of our sinnes, in many things like, but in infinit things vn∣like vnto vs: holy, blamelesse, vndefiled, separat from sinners, and made higher then the heauens. Heb. 7. And in this also that he is a corner stone, hee hath a prerogatiue aboue all other corner stones for other corner stones joyne wals together, that are not far distant one from another, such as the side∣wall and the gauell of an house: but Christ hath joyned Iewes and Gentiles together so infinitly separate one from another, that none could vnite them but Christ alanerly. For who could cast downe the partition wall, and abolish the lawe of ceremonies, which made infinite alienation of the mindes of the Iewes from the Gentiles, but onely Christ? Ephes. 2. 14, The Prophet vnto the two comforts addeth an whole∣some An wholsom admonition admonition, that hee who beleeueth in him shall no
make haste: this speach is borrowed from men that make haste to flie from their townes and holes, for feare of the force and power of the preuailing enemie, as the people of the tribe of ISSACHAR did, when SAVL & IONATHAN were slaine by the Philistims vpon the mountaines of Gilboa, they left their townes for feare, and the Philistims dwelt in them,  Sam. 31. But they who haue once betaken themselues to the holy mountaine of God, and rocke of their saluation Christ Iesus, they haue no neede to make haste and to flie, because in him they finde assured protection and defence. The people of the Iewes in the daies of ISAIAH sent down to Egypt and had confidence in the horses of PHARAOH, but they fande the strength of PHARAOH to be their shame, Isa. 30. ver. 3 And the Iewes in the dayes of IEREMIE, who would not leane vpon the suretieof Gods promises, and tarie in Ie∣rusalem, but they would needes flie to Egypt, in Egypt they died by the sword, Ier. 43. ver. 16. But hee who leaneth with constant faith to this sure foundation, shall not make haste, or as the Apostle PETER expoundeth it, Hee shall not be asha∣med, 1. Pet. 2. ver. 6. The doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is called a In what sense the doctrine of the Pro∣phets, &c. is called the foundation. foundation, as said is, because it leadeth to Christ. Wher∣fore we haue to learne how firmly we ought to adhere vnto the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles as a lanterne lea∣ding to Christ: for this cause let no man mixe light with darknesse, nor obscure the bright shining light of Aposto∣like doctrine with the traditions of men: for this doctrine is like vnto pure gold, Psal. 19. ver. 10. And like as fine gold is marred with mixture, because there is no other mettall imilitude in finenesse comparable vnto it: euen so propheticall doctrine is vtterly spoyled when it is mixed with the tradi∣tions and doctrines of men. For that is a mixing of drosse with golde, and of rotten waters with pure and cleare wa∣ters. After this vnhappie forme of dealing CAROLVS 5. Emperour presumed to mixe together the dregs of Poperie with the wholesome Apostolicke doctrine by the mercy of God professed in many nations as appeareth in the booke called Interim set forth at his commandement Anno 1548.
which booke neither pleased the Romaine Church, neither those of the true reformed religion, but within the space of foure yeeres it wallowed and euanished as an abortiue birth. Now it is to be remarked in this point what diffe∣rence is betweene the persons of the Prophets and their doctrine. The Prophets continued not long aliue Zach. 1. ver. 5. but their doctrine continued, because it was after a maner a foundation. The like may be saide of the Apo∣stles. In like maner faith in some sense may be called a founda∣tion, Epist. Iud. ver. 20. because it is the meane whereby wee Faith is cal∣led afounda∣tion. are coupled to Iesus Christe, Ioh. 3. ver. 16. And the Apostle IVDE calleth it our most holy faith no doubt opponing faith to infidelitie: for infidelitie vtterly polluteth the soule, and maketh it prophaneHeb, 3 ver. 12. And in another place. Let there be no fornicatour or prophane person like Esau, who for one mease of meat sold his birthright, Heb 12. 16, Thus wee see if infidelitie once take roote in the heart it will make it so prophane, that the Couenant of God, the land of Canaan, the blessing, yea and heauen it selfe will be set at light a∣uaile. But on the other parte, when the heart is coupled by faith to Christ, then is faith like vnto a whippe in Christs hande scourging out infinite abuses out of our soules, Iohn 2. Now seeing that Christ is the onely true foundation by The offices of Christ de∣clare that he is a true foundation, the determined counsell of God appointed to sustaine the weight of the whole house. Let vs consider how meete a foundation Christe is in respect of all his offices, for the Church is weake, and Christ is an almightie King able to sau. Isa, 63. The Church militant is subject vnto sinne, & Christ is an high Priest, whose sacrifice once offered, hath a perpetuall vertue to saue those that beleeue, seeing he euer liueth to make intercession for them, Heb, 7. ver. 25. Fi∣nally, the Church is naturally ignorant, and Christ is the great Angel of the counsels of God, who hath reueiled vn∣to vs all things needfull to be knowne, Iohn 4. ver. 25. Ther∣fore on this sure rocke and holy mountaine let vs repose with assured confidence of faith.
Now I come to the wordes of the Apostle PETER a faith∣full Christ is a liuing fun∣dation. interpreter of the words of the Prophet ISAIAH. He calleth Christ A liuing stone refused of men, but chosen of God and precious 1. Pet. 2. ver. 4. Hee is a liuing foundation, not so much in respect of our naturall life, where of also he is the author, For in him We liue, we mooue and we haue our beeing, Acts 17. ver. 28, as in respect of our spirituall life, where of also he is the author, and where of the Euangelist IOHN speaketh. In him was life, and the life was the light of the world, Ioh. 1, ver. 4 Christ is the authour of that life that consisteth in the true knowledge of God. And this is life euerlasting, that they know thee, and whome thou hast sent Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. ver. 3. What is the life of a man without the true knowledge of God re∣conciled to him in Christ but spirituall deadnes? yea dead∣nesse more miserable then the deadnesse of dogges killed in Similitude their mothers belly, miserable for this that they neuer sawe the light, and more miserable, because the light neuer saw them. And these who haue not seene by the eyes of faith God reconciled to them in Christ, they are double misera∣ble, neither haue they seene the true light, neither hath the true light euer looked vpon them but in anger and wrath. This liuing foundation (saith the Apostle) was disallowed of men, but chosen of God and precious. But I pray you The contempt of men can∣not impaire the glory of Christ. wherefore did men disallow him? Because hee appeared in the similitude of a servant: because he was like vnto a root in a dry ground: because he was a man ful of sorowes & had experience of infirmities: because hee was wounded for our transgressions, & broken for our iniquities, and because of his chastisments and his stripes, Ifa. 53. So miserably is our corrupt nature disposed, that not onely we erre anent per∣sons, despising them whome we ought to reuerence, but in despising them for the selfe-same cause, for the which they should most reuerently be regarded. Christ is to be regar∣ded of vs for many causes, chiefly for this that hee humbled himselfe to the end he might exalt vs, and hee was content to be wounded to the end we might be cured by his stripes, Ifa. 53. In the next wordes the A postle admonisheth vs, that all the attempts of men against the souerainitie of Christ, are
foolish and vaine, because he euer is, and shall be the ve∣ry elect and precious stone whereupon the house of God is builded. The gainsayings of men against Christ, are lie vnto the tempests of winde, that are mooued in the aire, Similitude. whereby men and beastes, and trees, and ships are mighti∣ly troubled and shaken: but the sunne, moone and stars are so highly eleuate aboue the aire, and the region of the winds, that they cannot perturbe nor trouble those csti∣all creatures. Euen so the contempt of men done against Christe cannot impaire one jote of his most excellent ho∣nour. He is chosen of God and a precious, and a worthie foundation, albeit all the whole world should grind their teeth, and speake in the contrarie. To this foundation so viuely described both by the Pro∣phet, Isa. 28. and by the Apostle PETER 1. Pet. 2. wee are ex∣horted We drawe nere to Christ by faith. to draw neere, to wit, by faith. For like as infideli∣tie separateth the heart from Christ, euen so faith coupleth the heart to Christ. The Apostle saith. Take heede lest at any time there bee in any of you an euill heart of vnbeliefe that de∣partet from the liuing God, Heb. 3. ver. 12. An vnbeleeuing heart departeth further from the Lord then the East is di∣stant from the West. For the vnbeleeuing heart in doub∣ting of the veritie of the promises of Christ would make Christ no Christ. If he who promiseth to saue vs, do not saue vs, then is hee no Sauiour indeede but in worde onely. But the faithfull and beleeuing heart draweth neere to Christ toucheth the hemme of his garment, draweth vertue out of him: yea Hee that  hath receiued the testimonie of God, and sealed up that God is true, Ioh. 3. ver. 33. Of all hand∣writes the hand write of the heart is the principall. God de∣liteth to Write his couenant in our hearts, Ier. 31, ver. 33. Euen so in like maner God deliteth to haue his Couenant sealed and subscribed with our heart blood, which no man can do, but he that beleeueth in Christ. To conclude this shorte treatise after that the ground of the house of God is so clearely knowne by the very demon∣stration of the finger of God to them who will not beleeue, that may justly be said which Christ spak to the vnbeleuing
Iewes Doe not thinke that I will accuse you to my Father, there is one that accuseth you, euen Moses in whome yee trust. For had yee belecued Moses, yee would haue beleeued mee for he Wrote of me. Iohn 5. ver. 45. 46. The like I say to the Papistes in our dayes, they shall not want an accuser, for the A∣postle PETER shall be their accuser: who sending vs from himselfe to Christ the elect, and precious & sure foundation of the Church. conuicteth all those who adhering to the person of the seruant, misregardeth the honor due to the Soueraigne Lord & Master. The Lord worke true faith in vs, that we cleauing fast to Christ haue neuer need to be ashamed Amen
CENTVRIE II Chap. 1. Traianus. TRAIAN the adoptiue sonne of NERVA was Of Empo∣rours. the first stranger who obtained that honour to be king of the Romaines. Hee reigned 19. yeeres 6. months, Euseb. eccl hist. lib. 4. cap. 3. A man so exceeding wel beloued of the Senat & people of Rome, that after his dayes when∣soeuer a new Emperour was elected, they wished vnto him the good successe of AVGVSTVS, and the vprightnesse of TRAIANVS. Notwithstanding of this, he was a cruell per∣secuter of Christians. And this third persecution is justly The thirde persecution. ANNO Chr. 108 counted greater then the two preceeding persecutions. To other afflictions now is added contempt and shame. It was no great dishonour to be hated of NERO and DOMITIAN, wicked men and haters of righteousnesse, but to bee hated and persecuted by TRAIAN, a man counted a patterne of vpright dealing, this was a great rebuke. Notwithstanding Christians looked to Iesus the Author and finisher of their faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hande of the throne of God, Heb. 12. ver. 2. Many haue more pa∣tiently endured paine in their flesh, then shame and con∣tempt in the world, but Christs true disciples must resolue to be a gazing stock to al the world & to be countedthe off∣scourings of the earth, as the holy mē ofGod did in the daies of the Emperour TRAIAN. These were citizens of heauen, li∣uing in earthly tabernacles, liuing vpō the earth, but not fa∣shioned according to the similitude of this world, Rom. 12.
In doing great things by faith, they surpassed mightie Mo∣narches: In patient suffering of cuil they ouerwent admired Philosophers. In this persecution SIMON the sonne of CLEOPAS an oly A postle suffered martyrdome being now The martyr∣dome of Si∣mon the son of Cleopas, an hundreth and twentie yeeres olde: he was first scourged, and then crucified: but all this rebuke hee most patiently suffered for the Name of Christ, Euseb. eccl hist lib. 3. cap. 32 Of IGNATIVS martyrdome wee haue spoken in the first Centurie, the time of his suffering was in the time of TRA∣IANVS. Plin. 2. Deputie in Bithynia breathing threatnings against innocent Christians persecuted great numbers of The letter of Plinie 2. written to Traian, them to the death. In ende he was commoued and trou∣bled in his owne minde, considering both the number and patient suffering of Christians that were put to death, hee wrote to the Emperour, declaring that Christians were men of good conuersation, and detested murther, adulterie and such other vngodlinesse: onely they had conuentions eare∣ly in the morning, and they sang Psalmes to the honour of Christ whom they worshipped as God, but they would not worship images (here make the portrait of the ancient A∣postolicke Church, & what conformitie the Romaine Church in our dayes hath with it the Lord knoweth) This letter of PLINIVS mitigated the Emperours wrath in a part yet gaue he no absolute commandement to stay the persecution, but only that the judges should not search them out narrowly, but if any happened to be presented before them, then let them be punished, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 33, What con∣fusion was in this edict it is well marked by TERTVLLIAN: the one part of it repugneth to the other. In forbidding to search them out narrowly, he declareth their innocencie, but in commanding to punish them, when they were pre∣sented, hee pronounceth them to be guiltie. Tcrtul. Apol. This is that Emperour for whose soule GREGORIE the first made supplications to God 400. yeeres after his death, and was heard of God as DAMASCEN writeth serm. de defunctis. Gregorie. prayed for the soule of Traian. This superstitious Monke of the descent of Saracens blood if hee supponed GREGORIE to be so full of charitie that hee prayed for the soule of one persecuting Emperour, why
would he not bring him in praying also for all the ten per∣secuting Emperours, to the ende that they being all deliue∣red from the condemnation of hel, heauen might be coun∣ted a mansion both for Christes true disciples, and also for Christs hatefull and impenitent enemies▪ Adrianus. AFter TRAIAN AELIVS ADRIANVS reigned 21. yeeres, Chytr. Chron. In his time ARISTIDES and QVADRATVS, the one a Bishop, the other an O∣rator at Athens wrote learned apologies in de∣fence of Christian Religion, and did so mitigate the Empe∣rors mind, that in his time no new commandement was set foorth to persecute Christians, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4 cap. 3. Ierom Catal. script. eccles. BARCOCHEBAS at this time per∣uerted the nation of the Jewes, and called himselfe the pro∣mised Barcoche∣bas a false prophet se∣duced the nation of the lewes. MESSIAS: whome the foolish Iewes followed to their owne ouerthrow and destruction. TYNIVS RVFVS Depu∣tie in Iadea besieged this man in Bethera a towne not farre distant from Jerusalem, and destroyed him with all his ad∣herents. Also the whole nation of the Iwes was banished from their natiue soyle: and the towne of Jerusalem was taken from the Jewes and deliuered to other nations to be inha∣bitants of it, and was called by the Emperours name Aelia Euseb. eccl. hist lib. 4. cap 6. Thus we see that the Iewes who would not receiue Christ, who came in his fathers name, yet they receiued another who came in his owne name, and like vnto babes who are easily deceiued with trifles, they were bewitched with the splendor of a glorious name: for BARCOCHEBAS signifieth the sonne of a starre: and he saide to the Iewes, that hee was sent as a light from heauen to suc∣cour their distressed estate: but he might haue beene called more justly BARCHOSBA the sonne of a lie. Here I giue war∣ning againe, that wee take heede to our selues lest we be cir∣cumveened with the deceitful snares of the deuill: for it is an easie thing to fall, but a difficill thing to rise againe. The Christians who liued in the dayes of ADRIAN were glad to
be refreshed with the crums of outward comfort, which are denied to no accused persō in the whol world. viz. that Chri∣stians shall not be condemned to death for the importunat clamors and cryes of a raging people accusing them, except it be proued that they haue transgressed the Law, and haue committed some fact worthie of death. Reade the epistle of ADRIAN written to MINVTIVS FVNDANVS Deputie in Asia, Euseb, eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 9. The good intention of ADRIAN in building a Church for the honour of Christ, voide of images (because such was the custome of Christi∣ans) was impeded and hindered by some of his familiar Adrianus his intention to builde a Church for the honour of Christ. friendes, who said, that if he so did, all men would for sake the temples of the gods of the Gentiles, and become Chri∣stians, Bucolc. citing the testimonie of LAMPRIDIVS writing the life of ALEXANDER SEVERVS. In this point good rea∣der marke what Church is like vnto the ancient primitiue and Apostolicke Church, whether the Church decked with images, or the Church voide of images. Antoninus Pius, TO ADRIAN succeeded ANTONINVS PIVS his a∣dopted sonne, & reigned 23. yeeres, Chytr. Chron. Hee was so carefull to preserue the liues of his sub∣jects, that he counted it greater honour to saue the life of one subject, then to destroy the liues of a thousand enemies, Carion lib. 3. Monarch. 4. In this Emperours time IVSTINVS MARTYR wrote notable bookes of Apolo∣gie for the Christians, which were presented and reade in the Senate of Rome, and mollified the Emperours minde toward Christians, as clearely appeareth by his edicts pro∣claimed at Ephesus in time of most solemne conuentions of all Asia, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 13,
Antoninus Philosophus, & L. Uerus. AFter ANTONINVS PIVS succeeded his sonne in law ANTONINVS Philosophus otherwise called MAR∣CVS AVRELIVS with his brother L. AVRELIVS VE∣RVS. This is the first time whereinto the Romaine empire was gouerned by two Augusti. Albeit TITVS had associated his brother DOMITIAN to be a fellow labourer with him in the worke of governement, yet was not DO∣MITIAN counted or called AVGVSTVS vntill the death of his brother TITVS. But nowe at one and the selfe same time two Emperours doe reigne. ANTONINVS Philosophus reigned. 19. yeeres, LVCIVS VERVS his brother 9. yeeres. And so after the death of VERVS the whole gouernement returned to ANTONINVS Philosophus alanerly, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 9. Bucolc. He was called a Philosopher not onely in regard of his knowledge, but also in respect of the practise of Philosophie. Hee was neither greatly puft vp by prosperitie, nor greatly casten downe by aduersitie: yet he was a cruell persecuter of innocent Christians. Now is the fuell added to the fornace the fourth time, and the flame is great, and the arme of wicked men who hated the The fourth persecution. ANN. Ch. 168. name of Christians is strengthened by the Emperours com∣mandement. The trumpets of the Monarches of the world sound the alarme against him who made them Kings and rulers on the earth. The poore innocent Lambes of the sheepfold of Christ appointed for the shambles strengthe∣ned their heartes in God, & in the power of his might, and chused rather to suffer aduersitie with their brethren, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season, Heb. 11. ver. 25. they were content to bee racked, and would not be de∣liuered, that they might be partakers of a better resur∣rection, Heb. 11. ver. 35. whose bodies lacerat with stripes
vntill their very inward bowels were patent to the outward sight, witnessed the vnrent firmnesse and stabilitie of their faith. They were so supported with the power of that grace that commeth from aboue, that they were not terrified with the multiplied numbers of cruell torments newly ex∣cogitate for dashing that inuincible courage of faith which was seene in Christians. Yea further then this. When the persecuting enemies were compelled to change the high tuned accent of their menassing speeches, and to craue but a litle conformitie to the Emperours desire in swearing by his fortune, the holy men of God would not once seem to fall away from their profession, by answering with ti∣morous and doubtsome wordes: but glorified God with a cleare and constant confession of their Christian faith. PO∣LYCARPVS B. of Smyrna, and IVSTINVS MARTYR a man of The mar∣tyrdome of Polycarpus and Iusti∣nus. singular erudition were both martyred in the feruent heate of this persecution. But aboue all other places, the consu∣ming flame of the fornace brast out most vehemently in France that happie nation, whereinto both of old and late time so many were found worthie to giue their blood for the Name of Christ. VETIVS EPAGATHVS MATVRVS, PRO∣THENVS, ATTALVS, SANCTVS, and PHOTINVS B. of Lions, all suffered for the testimonie of Christ in France. And BLAN∣DINA a worthie woman suffered many torments, and re∣nued her spirituall courage by continuall iteration of these wordes, Christianasum, that is, I am a Christian, Euseb. eccl, hist. lib, 5. cap 1. Bucolc. Index. In like maner Christians were Slanderous speeches a∣gainst Chri∣stians. persecuted with the slāderous speches of Pagans, objecting vnto them the bankets of THYESTES, & the chambering of OEDIPVS, that is, the eating of mens flesh & incestuous copulations, Euseb. ibid. But men who are giuen to the mo-mentaneal delites of sin are not willing to die, because that by death they are separat from all bodily pleasures. The Christians by patient and willing suffering of death for Christs sake clearely witnessed vnto the world, that they were not addicted to the deceitfull pleasures of sinne, Iustin. Martyr. Apol, Neuerthelesse these slan∣derous speeches were credited by the Pagans. and tooke
such deepe root in their heartes, that these who seemed be∣fore to be more meeke and moderat then others, now they became full of madnesse and rage against Christians: and that which was foretolde by our master Christ, it was ful∣filled at this time, to wit, The time shall come, that whosoeuer killeth you, shall thinke hee doth God seruice, Iohn 16. 2. the huge number of martyrs that were slaine in the furie of this persecution are both accuratly and at great length set downe by that holy man of God who lately wrote the booke of the martyrs: I onely point out shortly the estate of the Church at this time. In this Emperours time good men were not inlacking, who admonished him to appease his wrath against Christians: such as CLAVDIVS APOLLINARIS B. of Herapolis, and MELITO B, of Sardis. But nothing could asswage his cruell heart, vntill hee was casten int the fornace of grieuous troubles himselfe: for his arm that fought against the Germanes and Sarmatians fell into great distresse for want of water, but was supported by the prayers of the Christian legion that was in his armie. For The Romain armie sup∣ported by the prayers of the Christians. they bowed their knees to Christ, and prayed for helpe, and the Lorde Iesus sent raine in aboundance to refresh the ar∣mie of the Romanes, and dashed the Barbarians with thunder and fire. In remembrance whereof the Christian legion was after that time called  or Fulmnatrix, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5. After this victorie he asswaged his anger, and wrote to the Senat of Rome to deale gently with Christians, by whose prayers hee acknowledged both himselfe and his armie to haue receiued deliuerance from God. Commodus. COMMODVS the sonne of ANTONINVS reigned 13. yeeres, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5 Cap. 27. Many of the Roman's not without a cause called him INCOM∣MODVS. He presumed to doe great things, and to change the names of months, and would haue the month
of December to be called Cmmodus like as the two names of two months Quntilis & Sextils had bene changed in time bypast, and called Iulins and Augustus for honour of these two welbeloued Emperours. But hee was not so well fa∣uoured of the people, that this ordinance could haue place any longer, then during his owne lifetime. The Churel in his dayes was not altogether free of persecution: for APOL∣LONIVS a man of noble birth in Rome and a man of great e∣rudition fuffered death, because hee would not forsake the Christian religion. His accuser also was punished to the death, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 21. Such aduantages Iudges might Contrarie lwes. easily haue taken, finding so many discrepant lawes, some made in fauour, and some conceiued in disliking of Chri∣stians. Pertinax and Julianus. AELIVS PERTINAX Imp. 6. months. DIDIVS IV∣LIANVS 21 months. Chytr. Chron. EVSEBIVS maketh no mention of D. IVLIANVS but of PERTINAX alanerly, to whome succeeded SE∣VERVS, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 27. Chap. 2 IN this second Centurie the Bishops of Rome for the most Bishops of Rome. part prooued faithfull and worthy seruants of Christ. A great number of them were baptized with the Bap∣tisme of Christ, & dranke of the cup that Christ drank of, and were drenched with their owne blood, and they wa∣tred the Church of Rome with the streames of their blood, as Egypt is watred and made fruitfull with the inundation of Nilus. Men of blessed remembrance. DAMASVS wri∣teth, that from S. PETER to TELESPHORYS all the Bishops
of Rome were martyrs. Others added, that vntill the dayes of SYLVESTER who liued in the time of the reigne of CON∣STANTINE all the Bishops of Rome had the honour of mar∣tyrdome. But in these hyperbolicke speeches, neither hath the distinction betweene a Martyr, and a Consessour beene rightly considered, (albeit well marked by Eusb. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 2.) neither hath the historie of the reigne of AN∣TONINVS PIVS bene rightly pondered, in whose dayes HY∣GINVS and PIVS liued, and were not slaine for the testimo∣ny of Christ. Alwayes it is a maleuolous minde that hol∣deth backe from worthie men their due praise and com∣mendation both in doing of good and patient suffering of euill for Christes sake. In rehearsing the names of the Ro∣maine Bishops, I thought meete to follow IRENEVS and EV∣SEBIVS rather then PLATINA. In the first Centurie after the martyrdome of PETER and PAVL, LINVS, ANACLETVS and CLEMENS were teachers of the Romaine Church, In the second Centurie followe EVARISTVS, ALEXANDER 1. XISTVS 1. TELESPHORVS, HYGINVS, PIVS 1. ANICETVS, SOTER, ELEVTHERIVS, and VICTOR. This VICTOR must needes bee called the 13. Bishop of Rome, if ELEVTHERIVS be the 12. according to the computation of IRENEVS lib. 3. cap. 3. ONVPHRIVS according to his own custome giueth more credite to olde parchments, that he hath found in the Vatican bibliotheke, then to any ancient father. He begin∣neth earely to distinguish CLETVS from ANACLETVS, that by taking libertie to thrust in one moe in the first Centurie he may haue the greater boldenesse to thrust out another of the feminine sexe in another Centurie. For it grieueth him to the heart to heare this thing so vniuersally affirmed, and to see the penne of PLATINA blushing, when hee writeth of IOANNES the eight, hee maketh litle contradiction to that settled and receiued opinion of the feminine Pope. But I leaue ONVPHRIVS sporting with his owne conceits as a Pleasant doth with his owne fingers when no other body will keepe purpose with him. EVARISTVS finished the course of his ministration in 8. yeres. ALEXANDER who is in expresse words called the fist B. of Martyre.
Rome after the death of PETER and PAVL, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1. gouerned 10. yeeres, and suffered martyrdome in the dayes of ADRIAN, as PLATINA writeth. After him XISTVS 1. continued 10 yeeres, Euseb. lib. 4 cap 5 and died a Mtyre. Matyre martyr, Platin. TELESPHORVS the 7 Bishop of Rome after the daies of the Apostles liued in that ministration 11. yeeres and was honoured with martyrdome, Euseb. lib. 4. cap 10. HYGINVS An. 4. And PIVS the 1. ministred 11. yeeres. These two suffered not martyrdom, because their lot was to liue in the calme dayes of a meeke Emperour ANTONINVS PIVS. ANICETVS ministred in that office 11. yeeres, with whome Martyre. POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna conferred at Rome anent the ob∣seruation of the festiuitie of Easter day. He concluded his life with the glorious crowne of martyrdome, Euseb. eccl. hist, lib. 4. cap 14. To him succeeded SOTER An. 9. After him ELEVTHERIVS An. 15. In whose time LVCIVS King of the Britons desired that he and his people should be bap∣tized & receied into the fellowship of Christians to whom ELEVTHERIVS sent FVGATIVS and DAMIANVS, who satis∣fied the desire of the King, & his people, so they were bap∣tized and counted Christians, Platina de vita Eleutherii. Af∣ter him VICTOR An. 10. He intended to haue excommunicat all the Churches of the East because they kept not the festi The rashnes of Victor. uitic of Pasche day conforme to the custome of the Church of Rome, but rather vpon the day wherinto the Iwes were ac∣customed to eat their Paschal lamb. But this rashnes of VI∣CTOR was somewhat abated by the graue & prudent coun∣sell of IRENEVS B. of Lions, who admonished VICTOR, that there was no lesse discrepance of customes anent keeping of Lent then was anent the keeping of Easter day, yet was not the vnitie of the Church violated nor rent asunder for this discrepance. And when POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna came to Rome, in his conference with ANICETVS neither of them could persuade the other to change the custome of keeping of daves which they had receiued by tradition of their pre∣decessours. Notwithstanding they kept fast the bande of Christian fellowshippe, and ANICETVS admitted POLYCAR∣PVS to the communion of the Romaine Church, and they
departed in peace one from another, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib 5. cap. 26. QVADRATVS B. of Athens liued in the dayes of ADRIAN. This Emperour vpon a certaine time wintered in Athns, & Of other Do∣ctours and Preach. went to Eleusina, and was ▪ that is to say, initiat into all the mysteries of Grecia. This fact of the Emperour gaue encouragement to those who hatd Christians without al∣lowance of the Emperoures commandement to vexe the Christians. Concerning his apologie for Christians giuen in to the Emperour together with the apologie of ARISTI∣DES a learned Philosopher and eloquent Orator in Athens, we haue spoken already in the description of the life of A∣DRIAN, Ierom. Catal script ecl. AGRIPPAS CASTOR a very learned man answered to the Agrippas Castor. bookes of the Heretique BASILIDES, who with the nouel∣tie of barbarous and vncouth wordes troubled the hearts of rude and ignorant people, talking of a god whome hee called ARBRAXAS, and of his prophets BARCAB and BAR∣COB, words inuented by himselfe to terrifie simple people, Euseb. lib 4 cap. 7. Such delusions of Satan Quintists in our dayes an ignorant race of braine-sicke fellowes haue vsed. And so the blind led the blind, and both fell into the ditch. In this age HEGESIPPVS of the nation of the Iwes was connerted vnto the faith of Christ, and came to Rome in Hegesip∣pus. the dayes of ANICETVS, and continued vntill the dayes of ELEVTHERIVS, Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 11. But for what cause he came to Rome, or in what part of the world hee bestow∣ed the trauels of his ministrie no mention is made, neither by EVSEBIVS, nor by any other ancient writer, no not by IEROM himselfe, a man most accurate explorator of all anti∣quities. MELITO B. of Sardis a famous towne in Lydia wrote an apologie for the Christians to the Emperour ANTONINVS Melito. Philosophus, whome EVSEBIVS calleth MARCVS AVRELIVS VERVS, Euseb lib. 4. cap. 13. His apologie was written with Christian freedome and courage: for he is not afraid to de∣clare to the Emperour what good successe AVGVSTVS CE∣SAR had in whose dayes Christe was borne, and what
vnprosperous successe, NERO and DOMITIAN had, who persecuted the Christians, hist. Magdeburg. EVSEBIVS calleth him an Eunuch. lib. 5. cap. 24. In the fourth persecution died IVSTINVS MARTYR, accu∣sed and delated by CRESCENS. He was conuerted to Christs Iustinus Martyr. religion by the trauels of an olde man, whome he supponed for his grauitie to haue beene a Philosopher, but hee was a Christian. This ancient man counselled IVSTINVS to be a diligent reader of the doctrine of the Prophets & Apostles, who spake by diuine inspiration, who knew the veritie, and were not couetous of vaine glory, neither were they dashed with feare, whose doctrine also was confirmed with mira∣culous works, which God wrought by their handes. Aboue all things willed him to make earnest prayers to God to o∣pen vnto him the portes of true light, because the trueth cannot be comprehended, except the father of light, & his sonne Christ Iesus giue vnto vs an vnderstanding heart, Iustin. dialog cum Troph. Hee wrote two bookes of apologie for Christians to the Emperour ANTONINVS PIVS, and to his sonnes, and the Senat of Rome. In the second booke of his apologie he declareth that Christians were put to death not for any crime they had committed, but onely for their pro∣fession. In witnesse whereof, if any of them would denie his Christian profession, straightway hee was absolued, be∣cause there was no other thing wherewith he was charged, Iustin. apol 2. In this same persecution also suffered the holy martyre of Polycarpus Christ, POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna. He was willing to haue remained in the towne of Smyrna, but by the earnest suppli∣cations of friendes was mooued to leaue the towne & lurke secretly in the countrie. Three dayes before hee was ap∣prehended by his persecuters, he dreamed that his bed was set on fire and hastely consumed, which hee tooke for a di∣uine aduertisement that hee behooued to glorifie God by suffering the torment of fire. His conference with the Ro∣mane Deputie, and how he refused to deny Christ whom he had serued 80. yeres, and euer found him a gratious Master: also how he refused to sweare by the fortune of CAESAR, and how patiently he suffered death for the Name of Christ, this
historie is set downe at length by Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 15. 16. IRENEVS B. of Lions in France, and successor to PHOTINVS Ireneus. a martyr & disciple of POLYCARPVS in his youth, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5. flourished in the dayes of the Emperour GOMMO∣DVS, whose meeke conuersation & peaceable cariage answe∣ring to his name  that is peaceable, made his name to be in great account amongst Christians. How he pacified the furie of VICTOR B. of Rome, and the pernicious schisme springing vp in the Church of God vpon very small occasiō it hath bene alreadie declared. He lacked not his own infir∣mities & errours, euen in doctrine. He was intangled with the errour of the Chiliasts, lib. 5. contra Valentin. He supponed that as Christ being 30. yeere old, was baptized, so likewise he began to teach when he was 40. yeere olde, and suffered when he was 50. because he came to saue all, & therefore he wold taste of al the ages of mankind, Iren. lib. 2. cap. 34. Yet is this opiniō repugnāt to the narratiō of the 4. Euangelists. CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS liued in the dayes of the Em∣perour COMMODVS. He was the disciple of PANTENVS. These Clemens Alexandri∣nus. two seeme to be the authors of Vniuersities and Colledges: For they taught the grounds of religion, not by sermons & Homilies to the people, but by catechetical doctrine to the learned in the schooles, Bucolc, Chron. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 11. This CLEMENS esteemed too much of tradition, like as PA∣PIAS did, of whome we spake in the former Centurie, wher∣by it came to passe that he fell into many strange & absurde opinions directly repugnant to the written word of God, af∣firming that after our calling to the knowledge of the truth, possibly God may grant to them that haue sinned, , but if we sin ofter then once or twise, there is no more renuing by repentance or pardon for sinne, but a fearful expectation of judgmēt, Strom. li. 2. And in his 4. book of Strom. as it were forgetting his owne rigorous sentence a∣gainst these who sin ofter then once or twise after their illu∣minatiō with the light of God he saith, , that is to say, whe∣ther here or else where (viz. creatures doe repent) for no place is void or the mercy of God. In which words he wold in sinuat that these who repēt either in this world or else where
(that is in the world to come) may possibly obtaine fauour at Gods hande, nothing can bee written more repugnant both to the word of God, and also to his owne fore-menti∣oned opinion. Many other worthy preachers and learned men flouri∣shed in this Centurie, whose names of purpose are preter∣mitted. In Athens PVBLIVS and ATHENAGORAS: In Corinth PRIMVS, DIONYSIVS and BACCHILVS: In the Isle of Candie PHILIPPVS and PINYTVS: In Anticchia HIERON, THEO∣PHILVS, MAXIMVS, SERAPION. hist Mgdeburg. In Jeru∣salem before the dayes of the Emperour HADRIAN the Bi∣shoppes of Jerusalem were of the nation of the Iewes. But after the dayes of HADRIAN who banished the Iewes from their natiue soile, Christian preachers of other nations were bishops in Jerusalem, such as MARCVS, CASSIANVS, PVBLIVS, MAXIMVSIVLIANVS, CAPITO, VALENS, DOLICHIANVS, NARCISSVS, Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 12. the most part of all these liued in this Centurie, but NARCISSVS with some others, are knowne to haue liued in the dayes of SEVERVS the fift persecuter, and some space after him, Euseb lib. 6. cap. 9. But to write of all other worthy preachers and doctours in par∣ticular, it were an infinite labour, and far surmounting the habilitie of these ecclesiasticke writers who wrote in ancient times, and much more our habilitie who liue in a posterior age. Chap. 3. IN this second Centurie Satan inuying the propagation of the Gospel, sent foorth a pernicious swarme of He∣tiques, Of Here∣tiques. such as SATVRNINVS of Antiochia, and BASILI∣DES of Alexandria, the one of them through Syria, and the other through Egypt dispersed the venome of their he∣reticall doctrine. To whome EVSBIVS addeth CARPOCRA∣TES most properly counted the father of the Heretiques, cal∣ld Gnostici, Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 7. They receiued this name, Gnostici. because they profesled a knowledge of darke & hid myste∣ries. The golden age of the Apostles and Euangelists was
now spent, and false teachers tooke the greater incourage∣ment to teach a doctrine of deuils, disallowing mariage, & commanding fornication, and practizing abominable and filthie things, which mine heart abhorreth to thinke vpon. What necessitie drone EPPHANIVS in particular to mani∣fest to the worlde the detestable and execrable mysteries of those Heretiques I cannot tel. One thing I know, that it shuld not be comely in my person to offend the chaste eares of Christians by renuing the memorial of that beastly vnclean∣nes wherof EPIPHANIVS expresly writeth. Epiph contra haers. They were justly called Borboritae or Caenosi, because they were filthily polluted in the mire of vncleannesse, August. index hares. Ad Quodvultdeum The followers of CARPOCRA∣TES had in secrete places images of golde and siluer, which they called the images of Iesus, and therewithal the images of PITHAGORAS, PLATO, and ARISTOTLE, and they worship∣ped them all, Epiph. contrahaeres. So that the worshipping of images and the adoration of the image of Iesus himselfe is not a custome borrowed from the ancient fathers of the first three hundreth yeeres, but rather a custome borrowed from olde Heretiques, such as CARPOCRATES and his fol∣lower MARCELLINA. By their vnhonest and filthie conuer∣sation it came to passe, that the true professours of the Go∣spell were vilely slandered by persecuting Pagans objecting to Christians the bankets of THYESTES, & the chamberiug of OEDIPVS, Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 7. This superlatiue degree of excessiue vncleannesse could not endure long, because e∣uery one of these Heretiques. SATVRNINVS, BASILIDES and CARPOCRATES. with augmentations of new inuented absur∣dities, changed the fashion and countenance of their error, and so in ende it euanished. But the beautie of the true Church of Christ, euer like vnto it selfe in gravitie. sinceritie, libertie temperancie and holinesse of vnreprouable conuer∣sation brightly shined among the Gecians and Barbarians, Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 7. The countrie of VALENTINVS was vnknown to EPIPHA∣NIVS. Hee was brought vp in learning in the schooles of Valentinu Alexandria. In his foolish opinions of the pluralitie of gods
as well masculine as feminine, the multitude of heauens, & ages or eternities, which he calleth  thirtie in number deepenesse and silence beeing the beginning of all the rest, August index haeres. In this his opinion (I say) EPIPHA∣NIVS conjectureth that he hath followed HESIODVS in his Theogonia, yet the man beeing ambitious, by permutation of names, hee would seeme to haue beene the author and finder out of these mysteries. Against whom IRENEVS hath written fiue bookes wherein. hee both discouereth and also refuteth the vanitie of his errour. MARCVS one of his dis∣ciples a notable sorcerer inuented a new forme of Baptisme, Marcus. to baptize in the name of the vnknowne father of al things, and in the name of the veritie the mother of all things and in the name of him who descended vpon Iesus, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 11. All the disciples of the schoole of VA∣LENTINVS are called Gnostics with the forenamed Here∣tiques, SATVRNINVS, BASILIDES and CARPOCRATES, they all denied the resurrection of the body, and supponed that saluation did belong onely to the soule of man. VALEN∣TINVS and his disciple MARCVS with COLORBASVS and HERACLEON, all their opinions were so intricate and ob∣scure, that men of meane vnderstanding could not conceiue them, and men of deepe judgement would not conceiue them, because they had not spitted out their braines (as E∣PIPHANIVS speaketh) that is, their head was not so voide of wisdome as to hearken to the new inuented to yes of brain∣sicke men. CERDON and MARCION were authours of the opinion Cerdon. Marcion. of two gods, or two beginnings, the one they called the authour of all good things, the other the author of all e∣uil things. They denied the veritie of Christs humane nature and the veritie of his suffering, whereupon of necessitie fol∣loweth this conclusion, that we are not saued indeede, but onely (to vse MARCIONS own words) putative, that is in fan∣tasie or supposition. The death of Christ is the true ground of our saluation, if he only seemed to die, & died not indeed then we seeme to be saued but are not saued indeede. They denyed also the resurrection of the body, August. index haeres.
MARCION was justly called by POLYCARPVS Primogtnits daboli, that is, The first borne of the deuill, Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 14. This heresie by the worke of that olde serpent was dis∣persed in Italie, Egypt, Palestina, Arabia, Syrta, Cyprus, Thebai∣da, Persia, and in many other places. This is the cause where∣fore TERTVLLIAN, & after him, EPIPHANIVS inveighes so sharply against this pestilent Heretique MARCION. Hee was the inuenter of a strange & new custome in Baptisme, that after a man hath bene once baptized, he may be baptized a∣gaine the second time, and the third time also. This hee did to wash away and put in obliuion the foule fault of whore∣dom committed by him His father was a preacher of Gods word in Pontus, & he himselfe had vowed chastitie, & after∣ward polluted himselfe with whoredome, & was cast out of the Church by his owne father, & when he came to Rome at the time when HYGINVS (the ninth Bishop after the mar∣tyrdome of the two great Apostles) was lately departed this life, he was not admitted to the fellowship of the Church of Rome: therefor he joyned himselfe to the fellowship of CER∣DON, and augmented his errour. To the two beginnings of CERDON he added the third in this maner. First he saide there was one supreme and vniuersall God, and him hee cal∣led the good God, who created nothing that is in this world. Secondly there was a visible God who was Crea∣tor and maker of all things, and thirdly there was the de∣uill as a midthing betweene the visible and inuisible God, Epiph contra haeres. No heresie sprang vp in this Centurie that was so vniuersally ouerspred in many nations & coun∣tries, as the heresie of MARCION was. So bent is the cor∣rupt nature of man to followe a doctrine of lies, when it is coloured with a shewe and pretence of reuerence to∣warde God. For they feared to attribute the making of any thing that is euill to God, who is infinite in goodnesse. But this was a needlesse feare, because cre∣atures which nowe are uill, they haue not this wicked disposition by the creation of God, but by their owne voluntarie defection from the firste estate where∣into God created them. LVCIANVS and APEPS
were the disciples of MARCION whome many did followe, in so much that Marcionists were called Lucianistae and A∣peiletani. Neuerthelesse APELLES could not agree with his master MARCION in all things: for hee graunted that Iesus Christ the sonne of the good God had a true body, yet not made of the substance of the Virgin MARIE, but of the foure elements, and that he died and rose againe, not putative as MARCION said, but truely & in very deede, yet he thought that this true body of Christ like as it was composed of the foure elements, so likewise after his resurrection he dissolued it into the foure elements, and afterwarde returned to hea∣uen from whence he came. This errour EPIPHANIVS ab∣horreth for many great absurdities. First (saith he) did Christ build vp againe that Tabernacle which men destroyed to the end that he himselfe in continent after the building of it should destroy it againe by a dissolution of it into the ele∣ments? Secondly if Christ dissolued his owne body, why would he not let his disciples see at least the reliques of his body resolued into elements, to the ende they might haue honoured the reliques of his dissolued body, as the women came to the sepulchre with precious oyntments to haue ho∣noured his dead body. Thirdly (saith he) APELLES speaketh of Christes body after his resurrection that which neither Christ, nor his Apostles euer spake of that blessed body. This is the right way to vndoe heresies, to bring them to the right balance of the mouth of Christ, and writings of his holy Apostles, and then heresies cannot consist and stand. In the dayes of ANTONINVS and L. VERVS the authors of the 4. persecution. TATIANVS a Syrian came to Rome and was conuerted to the true faith by IVSTINVS MARTYR, du∣ring Tatianus. whose lifetime hee maintained no errour openly: but after the death of IVSTINVS hee became the authour of the sect Encratitae, who were so called, because they abstained from wine and eating of flesh and creatures quicke∣ned Encratitae with a sensitiue life. They damned mariage and blasphemed the Epistles of PAVL, Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 28. This they did no doubt, because PAVL in his
Epistles calleth the prohibition of mariage, and the prohi∣bition of meates appointed by God for the vse of men with thankesgiuing to be a doctrine of deuils, 1. Tim 4. MONTANVS a man of Phrygia seduced two women, PRIS∣CILLA and MAXIMILLA to leaue the companie of their Montanus Cataphry∣ges. husbands, and to be his prophetesses. He called himselfe the holy Spirit whom Christ sent to instruct his disciples in al trueth, Ioh. 14. He instituted lawes concerning fasting, and damned the second mariage, and affirmed that PAVI. gaue libertie to widowes to marie, because hee knewe the will of God, but onely in a part, August. Index heres. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 14 & 16. I purposely passe ouer that rable of obscure Heretiques, whome I compared in the treatise of heresies to abortiue births, such as Opbitae, Caiani, Sethiani and such like: of whom notwithstanding EPIPHANIVS vouchsafeth to writ at lēgth, no doubt to manifest! the corruption of mans nature, stouping sometimes so basely, that not onely they hearken to the counsel of the old serpent the deuil, but also they wor ship the very instrument of the Deuil, viz. the serpent, as these Ophitae did. Againe, some Heretiques magnified CAIN and called him their father. And others gaue to SETH the ho∣nour due to Christ. So it commeth to passe, that men de∣stitute of the grace of God, that commeth from aboue, are like vnto drunkards staggering on the right hande, and on the left hande, and falling on their faces, and beating out their owne braines. Sometimes they extoll wicked men like vnto CAIN, and fall at the left hande: at other times they praise good men like vnto SETH with excessiue prayses, & with derogation of the glory of Christ, and fall at the right hand And at sometimes are so benummed, that they spare not to set the very deuill and his instruments in the chaire of God, and fall like drunken fooles on their faces, and knocke out their owne braines. Let no man maruell wherefore the names of AQVILA a Aquila and Theodosi∣on rathr Apostatstben Heretiques. man of Pontus and THEODOSION of Ephesus are not reckened in the rolle of Heretiques in this age. True it is that they once professed the faith of Christ, & made defection againe
but this defection made not a diuision into the Church which is the body of Christe, because they joyned them∣selues to the vnbeleeuing Iewes who vtterly denied the di∣uinitie of Christ, and therefore of Christians became infi∣dels rather then Heretiques. Like as no man calleth the Emperour IVLIAN an Heretique, but an apostate: so A∣QVILA and THEODOSION were notable apostats from the faith of Christ. Howe they laboured to peruert by sini∣strous translations of places of Scripture giuing cleare te∣stimonie to Christ who was borne of a virgin, EVSEBIVS declareth lib. 5. cap. 8. The translation of the Septuagints , that is, Behold a virgin shall con∣ceiue, Isa. 7. was translated by them, , be∣hold a young woman shall conceiue But this bad translation of Apostat christians and Proselites of the Iewes so well liked of the Iewish nation could neuer take place in the Church of Christ: because the Prophet ISAIAH in that chapter is speaking of a miraculous signe which God will giue vnto his people to confirme their faith, such as is the birth of a maide, which indeede is a mitaculous worke, but the birth of a young woman clad with an husband is no miracle. Of Scripture and Tradition. IN the first Centurie PAPIAS deceiued by tradition sell into the errour of the Chiliasts: In the second Centurie CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS stumbling at the same stone fell into diuerse errours, as hath bene alreadie spoken. This presenteth vnto vs manifest occasion to speake of the certaintie of Scripture, and the vncertaintie of tradition. Scripture dited by diuine inspiration (as the Apostle spea∣keth of it, 2. Tim 3.) is such a sacred and holy thing, that to doubt of the perfection, puritie, vtilitie and operatiue ver∣tue of it is notable blasphemie, and a manifest contradicti∣on to the spirit of God speaking by his seruant DAVID, Ps. 19. from the 7. verse to the 11. verse. So that these barking dogges, who speake vnreuerently of the Scripture, are more
worthy of a whip wherewith dogs are driuen out of Chur∣ches then of an answere. This is the incorruptible seede wherby we are begotten to be Gods children, 1, Pet. 1. & the sincere milke whereby we are nourished in Gods house, 1 Sacred scrip∣ture cannot be sufficient∣ly commen∣ded. Pet. 2. this is the wine and milke that God hath giuen vs without money, Isa. 55. ver 1 wine fine and purified, Isa. 25. ver. 6. This is a mirrour wherein we see the glorious image of Christ, into the which we should be transformed, 2, Cor. 3. ver. 18. This is a lanterne to our feet, a light to our pathes. Psal. 119. ver. 105. and a very diademe to the heade of the woman that trauaileth in birth to bring forth children to God, Apoc. 12. The holy Scriptures are like vnto the au∣thour of holy Scriptures, of whome MOSES saith, that God is fearefull in praises, Exod 15. ver 11 When wee prayse a mortall man, it is to be feared lest wee giue too much honour vnto him: but when wee praise the im∣mortall God it is to bee feared lest wee holde backe a part of his due honour. And truely the worde of God in this point is like vnto God himselfe. When a man entreth into a commendation of the Scriptures of God, he hath no∣thing to feare but this one thing, that he speake not so re∣uerently of it as becommeth him to doe. It is the witnesse Similitude. of Christ, Iohn 5. It is the candle of God shining in a darke place, 2. Pet, 1. It is the sword that the spirit furnisheth vs to fight against spiritual wickednesse, Ephes. 6. ver. 17. In a word let vs be wise like men who finde precious stones, they goe to the Lapidars to trie the value & vertue of the stones that are found, for euery man hath not skill to judge of such precious things: so let vs consider diligently what the Pro∣phets and Apostles, the very pen-men of the holy Ghoste haue spoken anent the written Worde of God and wee shall finde it a pearle of infinite value, Matt. It is peril∣lous to sepa∣rat the booke of the worde from the booke of the workes. 13. This volume of the booke of the Worde is one of the two principall bookes wherein wee learne to knowe God, as the Prophet declareth, Psal. 19. In the booke of the workes we know the power & diuinitie of God, Rom. 1. but in the booke of the written worde of God we know the will
of God and his fauour toward vs in Christ lesus: and ther∣fore the Prophet saith, that the statutes of the Lord rejoyce the heart, Psal. 19 ver: 8. Satan knowing what profitc com∣meth to men by joyning these two volumes together, hath laboured to separat them, to the ende, that men seeing the beautie of the creature, should worship it in stead of the Cre∣ator. And like as a ship that is spoiled of a prudent Pilot or Similitude. shipmaster, it is drowned in the sea: euen so the worde of God, when it directeth not the knowledge that men haue by the looking vpon the creature, then men mal e ship∣wracke of their saluation, and worshippe the creature in place of God the Creator of all things. Another artifice of Satan is to separat the word and the Spirit which God hath joyned together as two vnseparable meanes to set vp the Kingdome of God in our hearts, as the The spirit & the word are not to be sepa∣rated. Prophet ISAIAS saith. And I will make this my couenant With you saith the Lord, my Spirit which is vpon thee, and my wordes which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seede, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for euer, Isa. 59. ver. 21, But the Anabaptists in our dayes brag of the reuelations of the spirit, which reuelations notwith∣standing agree not with the written word of God and ther∣fore it is certaine that their reuelations are but fantasies and toyes of brain-sicke men. This written word of God is to be read in the bookes of MOSES and the Prophets, of whome Christ said, Search the The Word of God is to bee found in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Scriptures, for they beare testimonie of me, Ioh. 5. And in the bookes written by the Apostles and Euangelists, whome Christ commanded to tarie at Jerusalem vntill they were en∣dued with power from aboue, Actes 1. ver. 8. This power wherewith they were endued from aboue was double: First a power to knowe the sense and meaning of the Scrip∣tures of God. Secondly power to vtter boldly and cou∣ragiously in all languages and to all nations the trueth which they knewe. This  distinguisheth the wri∣tings of the Prophets and Apostles from all other wri∣tings, as THEODORETVS prudently hath noted de principio. Serm. 2. The will of God saith hee, is not
to be sought in the bookes of PLATO, who like as he knewe litle in matters concerning God, so likewise hee was timo∣rous, and durst not vtter vnto the worlde boldly that litle sponke of knowledge which he had. Hee knew there was onely one God, but in his letters written to DIONYSIVS if they were serious,  was the beginning of the letter, tht is, oe God: but if the letter was not serious, nor dited frō the ound of his heart, then the beginning of the letter was , that is pluralitie of gods. Who can giue vndoub∣ted credite, in maters pertaining to God, to such men as know but a litle, and the litle thing that they know, they dare not presume to tell it to others? But the Apostles were indued with strength from aboue, they were taught by the Spirit of Christ in al trueth, Iohn 16. & they were not dashed with feare of the countenances of men, Acts 4. but coura∣giously preached the truth of God to the great admiration of their hatefull aduersaries. The word of God written by MOSES was so perfitly writ∣ten, The Pro∣phets and A∣postls added nothing to Moses. that it was not lawfull to adde any thing vnto it, nor to paire any thing from it, Deut. 4. 12. Neither did the Prophets or Apostles adde any thing vnto the writings of MOSES, but they were faithfull interpreters of MOSES bookes, and vtte∣red that same thing more clearely, which was somewhat darkly shadowed into the ceremonies of the Law. For like Similitude. as a marchant man who hath fine cloth rolled vp in his shop if he shall lay it out in breadth and length vpon a table, it remaineth the selfe same cloth it was before, but it is bet∣ter seene and knowne then it was before: euen so the Apo∣stles haue vttered the mysteries of the Kingdome of God more clearely then MOSES did, but they haue said no more anent the saluation of man then MOSES saide before them. This pure and perfite word of God should not be mix∣ed Three intu∣ries done to the Written Word by re∣ueiencing of traditions. with humane traditions, for by this mixture three inju∣ries are done to the written worde of God. First by this meane the reuerence due vnto the written worde of God is impared and diminished. Secondly, traditions by time are equalled vnto the written worde of God, and thirdly, tra∣ditions are preferred vnto the written word of God. And
this beeing the last period whereunto the reuerence of hu∣maine traditions tendeth to make the writn commande∣mentes of God of none effect by their traditions, as Christ clearely testifieth, Mat. 15 ver. 6. humane traditions are the lesse to bee regarded of all true hearted Christians, to the end the written word of God may haue the owne due ho∣nour and reuerence. Many false imputations against sacred Scriptures are for∣ged False accu∣sations of ho∣ly Scripture. by Papistes to transport the hearts of people from the perfite reuerence of scripture, calling it imperfite & vnsuffi∣cient, and that it is obscure, and that it is perillous to La∣icke people to reade it, lest they fall into errour. The first accusation of Scripture is the vnsufficiencie of it. The Bishop of Enereux that blasphemous man was bold to write Vnsufficien∣cie. a booke of the vnsufficiencie of Scripture, and the greatest argument hee vseth if it were granted, yet prooueth it not his purpose: for he thinketh that wee haue not sufficiently by Scripture conuicted the Anabaptists, who deny that children should be baptized till they be of perfite yeeres to giue a confession of their owne faith. Wee suppone that all this were true yet it prooueth not vnsufficiencie in scrip∣ture, but rather insufficiencie in vs to whome the mysteries of the booke of God are not sufficiently knowne. There is a place of Scripture, Exod 3. I am the God of Abraham, Isa∣ac and Jacob. In this place (I say) is an argument secretly la∣tent and prooning the resurrection, as Christ clearely de∣clareth, disputing against the Sadduces, Mat. 22, ver. 31. 32. yet no man before the manifestation of Christ himselfe e∣uer perceiued that this argument was lurking in these words: shall it be saide, this argument was not in scripture, because it was not perceiued by weake men to bee in scrip∣ture? Truely it were good for this Bishop to follow the ex∣ample of the Iudges that are in this Isle of Britaine, when an act of Parliament is made and ratified, the Iudges of our countrie decerne all causes according to the Acts, but giue not out rash sentence against the Actes: but when the Couenant of God is made and ratified by the bloode of Christe, it were better to judge according
to it, then to giue out rash sentence against it. Let vs consider what is written of the three bookes that shall be opened at the day of Iudgement, and where∣by the worlde shall be judged. One of the three bookes is expresly nominat, to wit, the booke of life, Apo∣cal chap. 20. ver. 10 the other two no man can denie to bee the Booke of the Lawe, and the booke of the conscience, because the Booke of the Lawe de∣clareth all that wee should haue done, and the booke of the conscience beeing opened, manifesteth all that wee haue done: whereupon the righteous Iudge of the worlde groundeth a just sentence of condemna∣tion against vngodly men in this maner. The booke of the Lawe manifesteth what yee should haue done, the booke of your owne conscience manifesteth that yee haue done the contrarie, and moreouer also your names are not found written in the Booke of life. Therefore departe from mee into the fire prepared for the De∣uill and his angels. Nowe I demaund of Papistes con∣cerning these three bookes that shall bee opened, is a∣ny of them imperfite? Is there any elect person whose name is not written in the booke of life? Is there any euill that wee haue done that is not writ∣ten with a penne of Yron, and with the point of a Diamond in the booke of the conscience, Ierem. 17. ver. I? These two bookes are perfite. Ho, but the thirde booke of the Lawe and written Worde of God is not perfite. In the day of the Lordes blessed ap∣pearance wee shall finde it perfite, containing all that wee should haue either done or beleeued. Secondly, they say that the Scriptures are difficill to be vnderstand, and therefore should not bee reade by common people. And indeede the Apostle PETER granteth that some places of the Epistles of PAVL Difficultie. are hard to bee vnderstood, 2. Pet. 3. but hee bid∣deth no man for this abstaine from the reading of PAVLS Epistles. To ouercome difficulties there are bet∣ter remedies.
The blessed virgine the mother of our Lord, when she vnder∣stood not Christes wordes, she kept and pondered them in her heart, Luc. 2. IVSTINVS MARTYR was admonished by an ancient and reuerent Christian to joyne prayer with rea∣ding, that God would please to open the ports of light and vnderstanding, that he might conceiue the true sense & mea∣ning of that he read. Iustin, dialog Tryphen, CHRYSOSTOM in his preface vpon the Epist. to the Romanes declareth, that if a man would acquaint himself familiarly with the scriptur by con∣tinuall exercise of reading, he should the more easily vnder∣stand Scripture as he who is familiarly acquainted with his friend, wil know by his nod or becken what is his meaning. AVGVSTINE likewise saith, that as there is difficill places in Scripture, to exercise the vnderstanding of the strong: so likewise there is plaine and easie passages of Scripture, as pleasant medowes whereinto babes may securely walke. August. Aboue all the rest our master Christ Iesus hath taught vs by his owne example to confer Scripture with Scripture, Math. 4. to the end we be not deceiued by Satans false glosses and commentaries vpon Scripture. This is better then vpon occasion of difficultie to reject and cast a∣way from vs a thing so necessarie. Thirdly they say that the reading of Scriptures is dan∣gerous to simple people, because they may easily fall into Perill. an errour for fault of vnderstanding the right meaning of that which is reade. I might answere compendiously, that by this argument no man should reade sacred scripture, neither learned nor vnlearned men. For many learned men by reading Scripture, and not vnderstanding it aright haue beene patrons of heresie, such as ARRIVS, MACEDONIVS, NESTORIVS, EVTHICHES and diuers others. Also the very Monkes, whose solitarie life and continuall exercise in rea∣ding and praying might seeme to exeeme them more then others from errour and heresie, yet by mistaking the places of Scripture that spake of the eyes, the nostrels, the face of God, the breath of God, the arme of God, they supponed God to bee fashioned according to the likenesse of a man. And so both learned and vnlearned, Priestes and people,
men liuing in townes, and lurking in cottages of the wil∣dernes haue erred through misvnderstanding of Scriptures, Yet Scriptures must be reade by all true Christians, and our meditation night and day must be vpon the Lawe of God. Psal. 1. ver. 2. Let vs here consider that some things are not necessarie vnto eternall life, and when they are abused, it is not amisse Things ne∣cessarte are to be kept al-beit they be abused. that they bee remooued, and put out of the way: such as the brasen serpent which HEZEKIAS brake in pieces, and called it Nebustan, 2 Reg. cap. 18. ver. 4. But other things are so necessarie vnto eternall life, that albeit they were a thousand times abused, yet they cannot be forsaken, such as is that foode that feedeth our soules vnto eternall life, Ioh: 6. for the which we are commanded continually to la∣bour. And like as when many thousands are poysoned in Similitude, meate or drinke, as it fell out in the armie of CONRADVS 3. yet necessitie compelleth men to cate and drinke: cuen so we must reade and meditate vpon the written worde, albeit infinit numbers of people haue beene miscatied by not ta∣king vp the right sense and meaning of Scripture. Now the cause wherefore so many accusations are forged Why Here∣tiques doe hate the Scripture. Similitude, against Scripture is this, because it is the powerfull instru∣ment of God, whereby teachers of lying doctrine are con∣uicted and confounded. Places of holy Scripture are like vnto the smooth stones that DAVID tooke out of the brooke, and fastened one of them into the head of GOLI∣AH, 1 Sam. 17. ver. 49. Euen so Heretiques are so confounded by the testimonies of Scripture, that aboue all things they hate Scripture. This IRENEVS toucheth shortly spealing of Heretiques in these words: Cùm ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, lib. 3. cap. 2. that is, When they (to wit. Heretiques) are argued by Scriptures they turne themselues to the accusation of Scrip tures. Thieues do hate the light, and traitours the face of a ludge and Heretiques hate Scripture, the very axe that is laid to the root of their tree, that it may be hewed down, cast into the fire, and vtterly abolished. Notwithstanding of all these false accusations, let vs fast
adhere to the written Word. The fathers that liued in the The care of Christians of olde to keepe the scripture from bur∣ning. time of these ten persecutions counted the volume of holy Scripture so precious a treasure, that they could willingly offer their bodies to bee burned with fire for the faith of Christ, but they would not giue one page of the holy Scrip∣ture to be burned: and if any man did it, he was called pro∣ditor, that is, a betrayer, and was counted a companion to the traitour IVDAS who betrayed his master, which custome was the ground of that great and long-lasting controuersie betwene CECILIANVS B. of Carthage, & the Donatists. For the Donatists alledged that he had admitted to an ecclesiasti cke office a man, who in time of persecution had bene proditor, & had deliuered a volume of holy Scripture to be burned. If we will not followe the zeale of ancient Christians, I will set downe a more familiar example of an ancient and A remarka∣ble speech of an old hono∣rable Lady. honourable Lady of blessed memorie. My eares heard her call the Scripture the charter of our heauenly inheritance, because we haue no right to heauen but only by the promi∣ses contained in the Scriptures of God. No man wil be con∣tent to haue their charter rest out of their hande. If any dif∣ficil question arise by reading of it, they will send for a wise Lawier, and seeke resolution at him, but they will assuredly keepe and reade their owne charter. Euen so (saith the foresaid nobleLady) Gods people should not haue bene de∣barred from reading the holy Scriptures of God, the very true charter of their heauenly inheritance. This written word is the shepherds staffe of Christ, wher∣by we are comforted in our life & vpholden euen when wee Scriptures belong to the sheepe of Christ as their proper treasure. walke through the shadowe of death, Psal. 23. ver. 4. Which staffe Christe holdeth in his hande, not for his owne sake as other shepherdes doe, to rest vpon it, and to relieue their owne infirmitie, but onely for our sake who are sheepe of the sheepfold of Christe to guide vs by it, to correct our wande∣ring wayes, and to holde vs in decent order. Therefore of all things in the worlde, let vs count Scripture a thing most pertinent to vs, according to the saying of MOSES, the secret thinges belong vnto the Lorde our God, but the things re∣ueiled belong to vs and our children for euer, that wee may doe all the wordes of this Lawe, Deut. 29. ver. 29. to wit, the
Lawe written, as is clearely declared, Deut. 27. ver, 2: and 3. When thou shalt passe ouer Iorden into the lande which the Lord thy God giueth thee, thou shtli set up great stones and plaster them with plaster, and Shelt witte upon them all the wordes of this Lawe. &c. Now if the writtē word be that very portion that belonged properly to our fathers, to vs, & to our children, we should sticke as fast to it as euer NABOTH did to his vineyarde, re∣mēbring euer these words of MOSES. Things that are reuei led (to wit in writ) pertaine to vs, & to our children for euer. According to the patterne of this written word were al re∣formations Reformation of religion made accor∣ding to the Written word of religion made, & not according to the vncer∣taine report of traditions. IOSIAS made reformation ac∣cording to the booke of the couenant that was founde in the house of the Lord, 2. Reg. cap. 23. ver. 2. And therefore this worde of God ought diligently to be kept as the very patterne of all true reformation in religion, if any abuse fall out at any time. In our natiue countrie men are not so care∣ful by diligent custodie to keep other measures as the mea∣sure whereby all other measures in the lande are measured, one towne hath the weightes, another hath the jug, the third hath the furlot, another hath the el-wand: these are diligently kept, because that bythem all faulty measures are corrected and reformed: so aboue all things in this worlde, the holy Scriptures should be most diligently kept. Now before I speake of humane traditions the very end wherefore the Apostles committed to write the summe of The cause wherfore the Apostles put in write the summe of their doctrin. their wholesome doctrine is a sore prejudice to tradition. For some persons who hearde the Apostles preach went from Ierusalem to Antiochia, and troubled the hearts of the Gentiles, saying, that they behooued to be circumcised, and keepe the Law of MOSES, to whome the Apostles gaue no such commandement, Actes 15. Therefore the Apostles tooke occasion to put in write the summe of their doctrine Nowe if tradition was not a faithfull keeper of the Aposto∣licke doctrine in the very dayes of the Apostles and in the Be not de∣ceiued with the generali∣tie of the word traditi∣on. mouthes of them who heard the Apostles preach with their owne eares, howe shall wee leane vnto the vncertaintie of traditions after the issue of sixteene hundreth yeeres. The generalitie of the worde tradition is an occasion of
errour to many: for so soone as this word soundeth in their eares, incontinent they thinke that all things necessarie vnto eternall life is not contained in Scripture, but the want of Scripture must be supplied by traditions, yet the Apostle calleth the very articles of our faith traditions, namely that Christ died for our sinnes, that he was buried and that he rose the third day againe, 1. Cor. 15 ver. 3. The Papistes take good heede to the word , and say, here mention is made of tradition, but they obserue not so diligently the subsequent wordes (albeit they be twise repeated by the A∣postle) , that is, according to Scriptures. If they will needs obtrude vnto vs traditions, at the least let them be agreable vnto Scriptures, and then the controuer∣sie will cease. For I may boldly speake of Popish traditions Similitude. that which CLEMENS speaketh of the Philosophie of the Grecians, comparing it vnto a nut, , that is, all the nut is not meet to be caten, the kirnell is for eating, but the hard shels whereinto the kirnell is enclosed, are not nourishing food, euen so saith CLEMENS not all the Grecian Philosophie is to bee embraced and credited. The like I say of Romaine traditions, that we must not glut ouer their traditions shels and kirnell altogether, but those that are a∣greable to Scriptures we receiue, but traditions repugnant to Scripture, such as worshipping of images (which DAMAS∣CENE granteth to be an vnwritten tradition) we vtterly de∣test and abhorre. The place of PAVLS Epistles that seemeth to fauour vn∣written tradition, is this, Therefore brethren, stand sast, & keep The true meaning of the words of Paul, 2. Thess. 2. 15. the instruction, which yee haue beene taught either by worde, or by our epistle, 2. Thess 2, ver. 15. Heere I affirme that like as they who rehearsed Christs wordes, and wrested the true sense and meaning of them, they are called false wit∣nesses against Christ, Math. 26. ver. 61. Christ spake these words indeede, Destroy this Temple, and within three dayes I wll build it vp againe, but not in that sense that the false witnesses reported. Euen so they who cite a testimonie out of the E∣pistles of PAVL in another sense then PAVL writeth it, they are false witnesses against PAVL: for PAVLS tongue in prea∣ching
was guided by the holy Ghost, and PAVLS hand and pen in writting was guided by the holyGhost & that same selfe trueth he preached, that same selfe trueth he commit∣ted to write, to the ende that the faith of the Thessaloni∣ans might be the better confirmed and strengthened. If they will obstinatly contend that the particle  is disjunctiue, I will constantly affirme with the most learned ANTONIVS SADEEL that in this place it is copulatiue in this sense Keepe that instruction which yee haue receiued both by word and epistle, And in the same sense  is taken, 1. Cor. 13. ver. 8. Whether prophecying shall be abolished, or tongues shall cease, that is, both prophecying shall be abolished, and tongues shall cease, Stand fast and keepe the instruction, 2. Thess. 2. ver. 15 It is not the purpose of the Apostle in these wordes to exhort Constancie differeth frō wilfulnesse. any man to wilfulnes and obstinacie, but vnto constant ad∣herence vnto the veritie of God. For the Apostle PETER describing the qualities of false teachers calleth them , that, is, men presumptuous & standingon their own conceits, 2. Pet. 2. ver. 10. Wherfore a difference is to be noted betwene obstinat men & constāt men. It is ob∣stinacie when a man walketh in his own wayes & will not be corrected by the wisdome of God: but it is constancie when a man walketh in the wayes of God, and will not de∣part out of them for the fauour or feare of men. CAIN was obstinat, Gen 4. PETER and IOHN were constant. Also to keepe fast the doctrine whereby they were taught both by word and Epistle, is not onely to keepe it in memorie, and to keepe the volume wherein scriptures are written, but to keepe it indeede by the obedience of faith. For men are thrise miserable to keepe in their bosomes the testimo∣nies of their owne condemnation as the Jewes did, who kept the bookes of MOSES and of the Prophets which beare te∣stimonie of Christ, Ioh. 5. yet they beleeued not in Christ, & they kept them indeede to our great profite, but to their own just condemnation: because they neither beleeued the promises of the worde, neither were terrified with the threatnings of that same booke, which they kept. I pray God we may be better keepers of holy writings then the
reprobate Jewes were. In this controuersie to defend vnwritten traditions, the bookes of ancient fathers are sifted and raked, and infinite paines are taken to holde vp this maine, and yet dayly de∣caying The testimo∣me of Irene∣us abused. pillar of their kingdome. It is not my purpose neither to defend nor to excuse euery thing that fathers haue written. Onely I say in good conscience that great injurie is done to some of them by the Papistes, namely to the most ancient father IRENEVS B. of Lions. Hee striueth against VALENTINVS an Heretique, and conuicteth him by tradition of the Churches which were thought in his time to be Apostolicke: but the heades that he proueth by tra∣dition are the principall articles of our faith. That there is one God maker of heauen and earth, and that Christ was borne of a virgin, and suffered under Pontius Pslate, and rose againe, and was receiued into the brightnesse of glory, and that hee shall come againe to saue such as are to be saued, and to judge such as are to be judged, &c, And such sort of traditions as are altogether, agreable to holy Scriptures, we contrauert not vpon Se∣condly IRENEVS had a conflict with Heretiques who re∣garded not scripture, but saide they were ambiguous and doubtsome, & had no authority, & that tradition was more ancient then scripture, and therefore necessitie compelled IRENEVS to fight against him with his owne weapons, as PAVL did against the Athenians with testimonies of Poets, Acts 17. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 2. & cap. 3. Yet was it not IRENEVS purpose to prooue any thing repugnant to scripture. The traditions which they reade of in other fathers, if a∣ny be bound to keepe them, it is they themselues who Papists will not binde themselues in all points to old traditi∣ons. leane vnto them as a necessarie supplement of the want that is in scripture, but they themselues will not be bound to the obseruation of them all, but haue let many of them goe out of vse, such as praying betweene Easter and Whitsonday not vpon their knees, but standing on their feete to put them in remembrance of Christes resurrection: such like, three dippings in water, whereof wee spake in the heade of anti∣quitie. And after Baptisme the taste of a temper of milke and honie, to signifie their spirituall infancie, and many o∣ther
traditions they haue suffcred to euanish and go out of vse, so that we are the lesse bound to them. To drawe vnto an ende of this treatise. It may be de∣manded, Was not tradition at some time in honourable regard in the house of God and how it commeth to passe, that now in the last age of the world we wil bring al traditi∣ons vnto the balance of the written word counting light all these traditions that are not agreable to the Scriptures? For answere vnto this question, we shall distinguish the worlde into three ages, and speake of the force of tradition in e∣uery age Godwilling. In the first age of the world from ADAM to the flood of NOE tradition had the greater place, because the Worde' of God was not as yet written, but God spake by Oracles to ADAM, and that which the Lorde spake to him hee deliuered it by faithfull tradition to his postēritie. Nowe in this first age, it cannot be denied but tradition had great place, and to the ende the faith of the The value of tradition in the f age. posteritie should not leane vpon the naked report of their fathers, as vpon an vncertaine ground it pleasedGod to be∣stow vpō these fathers of the first age two great priuiledges. First they were indued with the spirite of prophecie, for A∣DAM prophecied of secret things that were done when hee was sleeping, Gen. 2 ver. 23 And HENOCH the seuinth from ADAM prophecied in the first age of the world of things that are to be done in the last age of the world, Epist. Iud ver. 14. 15. And LAMECH prophecied of his sonne NOAH, Gen. 5. Beside this, God bestowed vpon these fathers long life, so that ADAM liued vntill he deliuered the Oracle of God spo∣ken vnto him to HENOCH, and HENOCH liued till he deliue∣red the same to LAMECH, and LAMECH to NOE, so that NOE needed not to bee in doubte whether the reporte of his fathers concerning the Oracle spoken to ADAM was true or not, because it was conueied to him by the handes of faithfull witnesses of vnsuspect credite, yea, holie Prophets deliuered the holie Oracle of GOD to NOE and holie Prophct of GOD also as they were. In the Second age, In the second age of the world, it pleased God to register
his blessed will in write in the dayes of MOSES, and then tradition was nothing else but a page and handmaide to the written worde of God. For true it is that God com∣manded fathers to tell their posteritie the wonderful works of God in slaying the first borne of Egypt and sparing the first borne of the I ewes, Exod. 13. ver. 8. yet this tradition of fathers to their children was agreable to the word of God written by MOSES, in so far that the posteritie beleeued not the writings of MOSES, because they were agreable to the report of their fathers, but rather the reporte of their fa∣thers, because it was agreable to the worde of God written by MOSES: and so tradition in this age was a page and handmaide to the written worde of God, neither doe wee reade after the worde was written that God commanded fathers to tell anything to their children that was not ex∣presly contained in the written word of God. In the last age of the world we should be more attentiue∣ly In the last age. addicted to the written worde, and lesse to tradition, in regard the Apostles were moued to put the summe of their most wholesome doctrine in write, because their doctrine was not rightly reported, euen by those who heard the A∣postles teach as said is. And if the writing of the summe of their wholesome doctrine was a remedie deuised by the A∣postles themselues against false traditions & wrong reports of Apostolicke doctrine, what injurie doe we to the Romaine Church when we examine al their traditions by the rule of the writtē word, & that which is not agreable to the written word, wee reject it, as a doctrine neither catholicke nor A∣postolicke, because that it is found light when it is weighed in the just balance of the written word of God. Now con∣sider howe damnable an inclination is in this our corrupt nature. When God reueiled his blessed will by tradition men were not attentiue to it, but preferred their lust vnto the will of God reueiled by tradition: for the sonnes of God saw the daughters of men that they were faire, and tooke wiues vnto themselues whome they liked, Gen 6. ver 2. And on the other parte when God will needes reueile his blessed will by the written word, then will wee flie to vn
writtē traditions, euen to such as be repugnāt to the writtē word. And so men become like to a shadow: whē the sun shi∣neth in the East, the shadow goeth toward the West, & when the sunne goeth down in the West, the shadow inclineth to the East, so do men obstinatly repine against the wil ofGod. Beside this, wee are to consider what great detriment hath ensued vpon those who leauing the certaintie of the written worde, leaned vpon the vncertaintie of Apostolicke traditi∣ons. Beside PAPIAS B. of Hicrapolis who fell into the errour of the Chiliasts, CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS trauailed through many nations, but tooke better heed to tradition then to the written word of God, whereby it came to passe, that he filled his bookes called  with most vngodly and foolish opinions, as hath bene declared in the historie of his life. When we haue said all that we can say, that place of the second epistle to the The ssalonians, cap. 2. ver. 15. ringeth so lowd in their eares, that they can heare nothing that soun∣deth The word therefore to be considered 2. Thess. 2. ver. 15. to the contraric: wherefore we are to consider the illa∣tiue words , that is, therefore, which coupleth this verse with the preceeding text, wherinto the Apostle admo∣nished the Thessalonians of the comming of the Antichrist, whose comming is after the working of Satan in all power, and signes and lying wonders, ver. 9. And his comming shall be so strengthened by the hand of the deuil, that he cannot be borne downe but by the breath of the mouth of God, and brightnesse of his comming. Now to the ende that the poore handful of the sheepe of Christ may be saued from the deceite of the Antichrist, hee exhorteth them to adhere fast vnto the Apostolicke doctrine which they had receiued both by word and write. Scripture is abused when it is wre∣sted to another sense different frō the meaning of the writer: but it is more abused when it is drawen to the cleane con∣trarie sense. This place is set downe to teach vs to beware of the deceit of the Antichrist by fast adhering to the Apostolick doctrine, but the Papists abuse it to make vs beleeue that their traditions repugnant to the word of God should haue alike authoritie with the writren word of God, which is the ready way to fall into the snare of the Antichrist, and not to
be fred from his deceits. Christ doth great honour to the Scrip∣tures. To conclude, like as DAVID did great honour to ABI∣SHAI when as in great matters of weight & importance hee tooke him to be his follower to viewe the host of SAVL, 1. Sam. 26. ver. 7. euen so God doth great honour to his holy scriptures, when he vseth them as an instrument to doe his great works by them, Christ reigneth as a King, and he hath made his word to be the scepter of his kingdome, Psal. 110. Christ is the shepheard of our soules, & the word is his shep∣heards staffe, Ps. 23. Christ is the builder of his fathers house, & the word is the measuring line of the building: Christ is our Sauiour, and the word of God is the power of God to saluation toeuery one that beleeueth, Rom. 1. ver. 16. Seeing Christ hath done so great honour to the scriptures, what are we that we should regard any thing spoken in the contrary? God graunt wee may conforme our selues to the will of Christ, Amen Of the doctrine of Deuils, THe Heretiques called Gnostici disallowed mariage, & allowed fornication, and the Heretiques called En∣cratite damned the eating of flesh and drinking of wine as a sinne, and abhorred the Epistles of PAVL, (as hath beene declared in the historie) and the Romanists themselues acknowledge that Gnostici and Encratitae were Heretiques, and taught a doctrine of deuils, as likewise the Manicheis (of whome we shall speake in the next Centu∣rie Godwilling,) but the doctrine of the Romaine church concerning prohibition of mariage and meates is different from the doctrine of Gnostici, Encratitae and Manichaei. True it is, there is some difference concerning persons, times, & some other circumstances. For the Heretiques called Gnosti∣ci damned mariage in all persons: the Romaine church dam∣neth it only in the person of Priests, & men hauing church orders. Likewise Eucratitae damned at all times the eating of flesh & drinking of wine: but the church of Rime only pro∣hibits the eating of flesh at certaine seasons, and vpon cer∣taine
dayes, such as in Lent, and vpon Fryday &c, and that without prohition of drinking of wine moderatly. Third∣ly the Manicheis counted the good creatures of God flsh and wine to be in themselues polluted and vncleane, but the Romaine church thinketh not so, but for memorie of the Lordes suffering, for mortification of the flesh, for prepa∣ration to receiue the sacraments, and for testimonie of obe∣dience to the vicar of Christ, & successor of PETER. it is ne∣cessary to abstaine in maner abouewritten. This difference is cast in to exeeme the Romaine church from the imputa∣tion of the doctrine of deuils, yet is not the difference very great for the Romaine church forbiddeth mariage, & meats to some men at all times, and to all men at sometimes: but consider againe, that differences of magis and minus, that is, of more and lesse, doe declare a communion rather then a contrarietie, as IRENEVS speaketh, Plu. & minus non de his dicitur, quae inverse communionem non habent, & sunt contrariae naturae, & pugnant aduersus se: sed de his quae sunt ejusdem sub∣stantiae, & communicant secum, solum autem altitudine & mag∣nitudine differunt, lib. 4. cap. 22. As a litle water, and a litle fire differeth from a great water and a great fire, not in sub∣stance but in quantitie: euen so the Papistes differ from the Manicheis, not in substance, but in the discrepance of Plus and Minus, The wordes of the Apostle are the ground whereupon all this treatise is founded. Nowe the Spirite speaketh e∣uidntly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giuing beede vnto spirits of errour, and doctrines of deuils, speaking lies in hypocrisie, hauing their conscience seared with an hote yrone, forbidding to marrie, and commanding to ab∣staine from meates which God hath created to be receiud with Defection in the visible Chuch no new thing. thankesgiuing of them which beleeue and kow the trueth: for euery creature of God is good, and nothing to bee refusd, if it be receiued with thanksgiuing, 1. Tim. 1. 2. 3 4. In these words the Popish church will grant that the Mam. hets and other forenamed Heretiques are damned, but they denie that these predictions of the holy. Apostle doe damne the doctrine of the Romaine church anent forbidding of mariage to some persons, and meates at some
times as a doctrine of deuils: crying out that it is not to be credited that God hath suffered the world to goe astray in such wayes so long time, and so many yeeres. What is this, but as a wette sacke wherewith a naked man is couered? (as a learned Pastor said) it is so farre from arming him against the cold, that it encreaseth his shuddering and grwing, e∣uen so this excuse vtterly vndoeth their cause: they say God would not haue suffered his visible Church to haue erred so many yeeres, but the Apostle PAVL saith otherwise, that the Spirit speak th euidently that in the latter times some shal depart frō the faith: so that it is not a wonderfull thing to see apostasie fall out in the bowels of the visible Church, and the golden calfe to be worshipped by carnal israclites, Exod. 32. But it is a wonderful thing indeede to see sinceritie of doctrine and puritie of maners to continue long among the very watch∣men of the Church: so prone and bent is the world to de∣fection, that sometime the ordinarie watchmen cannot de∣clare where Christ is, whom the soule of the Church loueth, Cant. 3. ver. 3. Secondly consider that the doctrine of prohibition of meates and mariage is called a defection from the faith & a doctrine of deuils. When these odious stiles are applied to Gnostici, T atiani, Or Encratitae, Montanistae and Manichai and others: all this is heard patiently without sturre and ex∣cesse of choler: and why? because the ancient fathers exa∣mining all these opinions according to the rule of the word of God, haue found thē heretical opinions But whē we come neerer to say, that the prohibition of mariage in some per∣sons, and the prohibition of meates at some times, is also a doctrine of deuils, and a defection from the faith, O then it is cast in as a wal of brasse, that the anciēt fathers who dam∣ned all the forenamed heresies, yet liked very well of sup∣plications & prayers to be made to God euery Fryday, and consequently of abstinencie from delicat meats for the fur∣therance of prayers in remembrance of the Lords suffering, Sozomen lib. 1. cap. 8. And like wise that Priests should bee chaste and continent, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 9. And to damne these opinions also, is all on as if we should damne all
antiquitie and imagine that the trueth was euer buried Differences betweene the ancient fa∣thers and Papists of our time con cerningmeats and mariage. The Council of Ancyra. since the Apostles dayes vntill our time. To this I answere that the fathers are not to be balanced with the Papistes of our dayes in the opinion of meates and mariage: for many causes: first, because the fathers of the first 300. yeeres made no lawes and constitutions to astrict the consciences of men in matters of meate and mariage as the Papists of late dayes haue done. The Councill of Ancyra (which is a towne in Galatia) clearely manifesteth vnto vs what was the custom of the ancient Church, in admitting men to ecclesiasticke offices, namely this. If a man in time of his ordination did protest that he had not the gift of continencie, but that hee was purposed to marrie, and after his ordination, hee maried a wife, hee remained still in his ministetie. But so many as in time of imposition of handes did professe con∣tinencie & abstinence from mariage, if afterward they ma∣ried they were debarred from their ministrie, Tom. 1. Con∣cil. Here euidently appeareth, that in the primitiue Church there was no lawe made anent prohibition of mariage to men in spirituall offices. In like maner we reade vnder DE∣CIVS the seuinth persecuting tyrant (of whome mention will be made in the third Centurie) that DIONYSIVS B. of Dionysius Bishop of A∣lexandria a maried man. Alexandria was a maried man, and had children, and that by the great prouidence of God both hee and his children escaped the hands of the cruell enemie who was laid in wait for him to take him. Yea and after the Nicene Councill, the assembly gathered at Gangra a towne in Paphlagonia detested the opinion of EVSTATIVS who admiring the monasticke life, as a conuersation angelicall began to damne mariage, The Council of Gangra. and to perswade maried women to separate from the com∣panie of their husbands, and to perswade the people not to receiue the holy sacraments from the handes of maried preachers. But when the fathers conueened in the Coun∣cill of Gangra pondered the opinion of EVSTATIVS in a just balance, they found it to be cursed and execrable, not only in the question of mariage, but also anent his doctrine in prohibition of meates: for he thought that a religious man who eated flesh, by so doing was cut off from the hope of
better pleasures which God hath laid vp for saintes in hea∣ucn But let vs heare a fewe of the Canons of the Councill of Gangra, Tom. 1. Concil. CANON 1. If any person vituperat mariage, and will detest a faithfull woman, because the sleepeth with her husband, and coun∣teth her to be culpable, and that shee cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen, Let him be accursed. CANON 2. If any man condemne him who in faith, and religion eateth flesh (that is neither mixed with blood nor sacrificed to idoles) as if by such participation of slesh, hee wanted hope, Let him be accursed. CANON 4. If any man make difference, and will not receiue the oblation from a preachers hand when he ministreth it, be∣cause he hath a wife, Let him be accursed. CANON 10. If any person keeping virginitie for the Lords sake, ex∣toll himselfe aboue those that are maried. Let him be ac∣cursed. In all these constitutions of the councill of Gangr, there is no vsurpation of authoritie ouer the conscience in matters of mariage and meates. Secondly, because euen at that time, when custome without a ratified lawe had brought in an vse in the Church of God, that vnmaried men should be admitted vnto Bishoprickes and spirituall offices rather then others. Yet when such continent men could not be had, GRATIANVS himselfe witnesseth that a maried man was admitted by PELAGIVS I. Ann. 556. to be Bishop of Syracuse, Distinct. 28. Thirdly the fathers of ancient time spake reuerently of mariage: but the Papistes of late dayes haue called it a worke of the flesh, and the errour of the Nicolaitanes. The probibi∣tion of meats and mariage is an aposta∣sie from the faub. These two doctrines of the prohibition of meates and mariage are called an apostasie from the faith, and endited by the spirit of errour. Here it may be objected that the Apostle PAVL himselfe who writeth this, in another place saith, that the Kingdome of God is neither meate nor drinke, but
righteousnesse, peace and joy in the holy Spirit, Rom. 14. ver. 17. How then is that thing to be counted an apostasie from the faith wherein no matter is touched that pertaineth to the Kingdome of God? To this I answere, that there is a great difference betweene abstinence from meates, and prohibi∣tion of meates: for these whose conscience is weake will abstaine from many meates, and content themselues with hearbes, Rom. 14 ver. 2. as it were contenting themselues with the foode of the beastes rather then that their mouth should eat that thing that should perturbe their conscience: but such men as take vpon them authoritie to forbid to eate meates that are created by God to the vse of men, they vsurpe authoritie ouer the conscience of men, binding where God hath loosed, & loosing where God hath bound, and mixing heauen and earth through other, as if men on earth should haue such absolute soueraignitie ouer the con∣science, euen as the God ofheauen hath. This is called an apostasie from the faith, not because all defection is fini∣shed in this, but because all defection is grounded in this one point, to set a mortal man in the chaire of God, & to at∣tribut vnto him such absolut souerainitie ouer ourcōscience as God had ouer the conscience of ADAM, Gen. 3. as mise∣rable experience hath clearely manifested in the Popedom. Doth not the Apostle PAVL craue that the seruice that we of∣fer to God should be , that is, a reasonable ser∣uice, Rom. 12. ver. 1, But when we are led away either with the conceits of our owne hearts, or yet when we cast off the Our seruice to God should be a reasona∣ble seruice. yocke of God, and stoupe downe the necke of our consci∣ence vnder the lawes of mortall men in (matters of religion what equitie of reason is kept in such doing to match and equall our selues or others to God. Moreouer the A post. PAVL foretelleth that these backsliders The Popish church speak lies in hypo∣crisie rather then old He∣retiques. frō the faith should speake lies in hypocrisie, hauing their conscience seared with an hot yron, 1. Tim. 4 ver. 2. These words cannot be properly applyed to the old Heretiques of whō we haue spo∣ken, who ascribed the institution of matrimonie to Satan, & the creatiō & procreatiō of mankindvnto the deuil, because they spak not falshood in hypocrisy but in opē blasphemy: & therfore they might haue bene easily discerned & auoided
yea, in other heades of their doctrine concerning the nati∣uitie and death of Christ, they were so blasphemous that in the worde putativé natus, mamfestatus, mortuus, they were the very aduocats of the deuill, lren. lib 3. advérsus Valent. cap. 20. & 39. But in the Popish church the lawes forbidding mariage to some men, and meates at sometimes are so co∣loured with appearance of holynes, that the forgers of such lawes in hypocrisie had neede to be pointed out by the fin∣ger of God in his worde, to the ende that no maske nor visard put vpon vngodlinesse should peruert the vnderstan∣ding of men. But the more subtle hypocrisie that should be vsed, the more vigilant and wakrife should the Lordes forewarned people be, that they were not deceiued by lies spoken in hypocrisie. Likewise the Apostle foretelleth that these deceiuers should haue their 'consuence seared or cut off with an hote yron. In What is meant by a consence seared with an hote yron. which wordes the Apostle alludeth to members of a body, first feastered, next senslesse, and thirdly cut off with an hot yrone. So are the conscience of those deceiuers, fst can∣kered with errour, next past feeling, (albeit wholesome ad∣monitions be vsed for reclaiming them from errour) & last of all, their conscience is a rotten thing, and vtterly cut off. Wherein it is to be marked that feeling of all senses is most necessarie, & a most vnseparable companion of the life, begunne when the sensitiue life beginneth, and ending when it endeth: so that to be past feeling is all one as to be vtterly dead in body or conscience. But let vs see to whom this can be justly applyed. If we call to mind the obstinacie of the old Heretiques, true it is that they were senssse men, of whom IRENEVS justly said that they counted themselues not ouercome by the power of the trueth so long as they adhered fast vnto their errour. As if an impudent fel∣low who wrestleth and is ouerthrowne, and is lying on his backe on the ground, yet hee would denie that he is ouer∣throwne, because hee sticketh fast by the grip of his aduer∣saries garments, Iren. lib. 5. adversus Valent. But apply this to the Papists of our dayes, and we shall finde them tenfold more senslesse & obstinat then the old Heretiques were: for
they haue found out meanes to harden their harts in error, that when they are a thousand times conuicted by the clear shining light of the Gospell, then the authoritie of their Church, and opinion that it cannot erre, doth locke them vp so fast in the bands of the deuill, that all the trauell ta∣ken vpon them is spent in vaine, they remaine senslesse, ha∣uing their conscience seared with the hote yron of Satan, as the Apostle speaketh. In particular the Apostle pointeth out two heades of do∣ctrine, Forbidding and biddng wordes of au∣thoritie. that deceiuing teachers should maintaine, to wit, they should forbid mariage, and they should command to abstaine from meates. Marke these two words , that is, forbidding and commanding. The word commanding is not in the Greeke text: but EPIPHA∣NIVS thinketh this ellipsis must be supplyed by the worde , that is, commanding to abstaine from meates: both these wordes are imperious, and pointing out men in authoritie, and practising their soueraignitie in all things, wherinto the eminent power of a Soueraigne is manifested, hee biddeth, forbiddeth, hee maketh lawes and constituti∣ons, the disobedience whereof bringeth the contraueeners vnder feare of great punishment: euen so the deceiuers of whom the Apostle speaketh in matters of mariage & meats should not be content to tell their opinion, & to allure by persuasiue reasons others to embrace their opinion but be∣ing mounted vp in high authoritie, they should command to abstaine from meates and they should enterdite mariage to some persons with authoritie, adding paines to the com∣mandement, that the contraueeners should be deposed from their office, they should be counted Heretiques, they should be condemned to hell: beside all other ciuill pu∣nishments which magistrates addicted to their authoritie could inflict. These wordes , that is, forbidding and bidding cannot be applyed to Gnostici, En∣cratitae, nor yet to the Manicheans of the next Centurie, be∣cause they had no soueraignitie nor power to command. Yea MANES himselfe was excoriat and put to death by the king of Persia, as SOCRATES writeth lib. 1. cap. 22. and that
for a light cause, by reason hee could not cure his diseased sonne. But the words of the Apostle clearely declareth that hee speaketh of men furnished with authoritie to bid ab∣staine from meates, and to forbid mariage, and this agreeth well with the Romaine Antichrist and his vsurped authoritie. Notwithstanding of all these lawes made in the Romaine church and straite prohibition of mariage to the clergie, we ought to follow the example of Christs disciples, who after that they knew that celestiall voice that sounded from hea∣uen in time of Christs Baptisme, This is my welbeloued Sonne in whw̄ I am wel pleased, heare him, Mat. 3. They closed their eares, and locked vp their hearts from hearkning to any voyce in the earth that spake the contrarie, some said that he was E∣LI AS, other said that hee was IEREMIAS or some of the olde Prophets, but the disciples hearkning to the voyce that came downe from heauen, said that he was the Sonne of the liuing God, Mat. 16. Euen so, whatsoeuer the men in this world speake of mariage, the trumpet of God sounding in We ought to hearken vnto the voyce that com∣meth downe from heauen. his word alloweth mariage and pronounceth a blessing vn∣to it, Psal, 128. And the Apostle saith, Mariage is honoura∣ble in all persons, Heb. 13. ver. 4. but the honour that the Ro∣maine church giueth to mariage calling it an holy sacrament is like vnto the purple garment wherewith the souldiers clad Christ, and yet they spared not to buffet his blessed face: euen so the church of Rome in one worde will call ma∣riage an holy sacrament, in another they will call it a worke of the flesh, and a state vncompetent to dispensators of hea∣uenly Similitude. mysteries. But let them barke against mariage as the dogs barke against the moone vntill they be wearie of bar∣king, this, word standeth fast, Blessed are they that feare God and walke in his wayes, Psal. 128. And this is spoken of persons maried, yet from my hart I like the words of CHRYSOSTOM who inculcats in our eares the word of fearing God, & de∣clareth, that albe it all that came to the altar without a law∣full calling, had an euill successe, as CORAH & his retinue, yet not all that came to the altar with a lawful calling had a good successe: euen so euery one that goeth in vnto an har∣lot, is accursed of God, but euery one that goeth in vnto his
owne wife is not blessed of God, but onely he who feareth God, Chrysost in epist Heb. cap. 11. homil. 33. Followeth nowe in the wordes of the Apostle that men should be bold to forbid meats which God hath created to Great arro∣gancie in pro∣hibition of meates. be receiued with thankesgiuing. No doubt but the Apostle here setteth downe as two opposit things God & man, God creating, blessing & permitting the vse of created & blessed creatures to man with thanksgiuing. And on the other part arrogant fellowes starting vp & correcting the wisdome of God, & saying, albeit God hath giuen liberty to eate of such & such meates with thanksgiuing, yet for many causes such libertie must be restrained, & eating of flesh on Fryday must be as great a sin as the eating of the forbidden tree. What it this but a plaine spitting in the face of God? As if he who hath taught vs the way to eternall life, could not also in his blessed word reach vs how to eat & drinke. Truely the whip is meet for the back of the foole, & he who will needs be wi∣ser then God in any thing, if it were but in the precepts of eating & drinking he is more worthy to be scourged out of the Temple of God then the buyers, sellers & money chan∣gers, Ioh. 2. For the buyers & sellers albeit they made mar∣chandise into a place appointed for another vse: yet no vn∣clean beast nor fowle was brought in into the temple to be bought or sold: but these miserable wretches wil make the very cleane creatures of God vncleane at their pleasure, which is no lesse fault, then to fetch in an vncleane beast in∣to the Temple of God. Next it is to be marked in the wordes of the Apostle to Arrogancie mixed with foolishnesse. whom belongeth the vse of the creatures of God namely to the belceuers only. Here the Apostle declareth that there is foolishnes as well as arrogancie in the questiō of meats. It is arrogancy (as we haue already spoken) to be wiser thē Gods word in this mater of meates, & it is as great foolishnes to feare that wee shall be polluted with moderate eating of the creatures of God. It is not eating of flesh that will defile vs, but rather fleshly affections of an heart that is not renued by faith, that defileth a man, as our master Christ speaketh. That thing that entreth into the mouth defileth not the man, but that which commeth out of the heart. Marke 7. ver. 18.
As if a corpulent foole sweating and blowing into an hote sommer day should take vp his staffe, and beate his owne Similitude. shadow, yet is not his shadow the cause of his grieuance, but the fatnesse of his owne belly: euen so foolish men are afraid to be polluted with meates, but indeede it is the foolishnes of an vnbeleeuing heart that polluteth a man. It is a cu∣stome Similitude. among men, when they would handle a fine & white linnen cloth, they looke to their hands, lest their foule and filthie fingers defile the cleannesse of the cloth: euen so when wee meddle with the creatures of God, take heede to our conscience, lest it beeing polluted with infidelitie it make Gods creatures vncleane vnto vs, as the Apostle speaketh, Vnto the pure all things be pure, but vnto them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing is nothing pure, but euen the minde and conscience of them is defiled, Tit. 1. ver. 15. Now consider whether or not the spirit hath spoken eui∣dently and giuen a cleare warning to the last age to beware The last age of the worlde more senslesse then the first. of false teachers: yet is the last age more senslesse then the first age of the world that was drowned with a flood of waters. God spake not in secret but openly to NOE the righ∣teous preacher, Gen. 6. and God spake not onely by word, but also in deede by the building of the Arke, Heb. 11. ver. 7. yet would not the first age take warning, but liued in deepe securitie, and was drowned with waters. But the last age of the world is more benummed then the first age was. In the last age the spirit speaketh euidently, but men will not heare: the spirit ordaineth this prediction to be written, but men will not reade nor ponder, nor vnderstand the fore∣warning of the spirit: the spirit pointeth out by the finger of his word who are the deceiuers of whome we should be∣ware, to wit, men who teach a doctrine of deuils, forbid∣ding mariage and meates which God hath created for the vse of man with thanksgiuing. For all this threefold war∣ning, in worde, in write, and in particular demonstration, yet the last age cannot hearken to the warnings of God, be∣cause God hath determined to destroy the most part of them, as he did the vncorrigible sonnes of ELI, who would not hearken to the counsell of their father, 1. Sam. 2. ver. 25.
The men of this age are like vnto a deafe, ignorant and foo∣lish Similitude, fellow: one commeth to him and cryeth loude, but hee heareth nothing at all, then he beginneth to set his minde in write, but that also profiteth nothing, because he cannot reade: In end he beginneth to signe with his finger, but he taketh no notice that way, because hee is a foole, and the last age of the world in not receiuing so euident & so cleare a warning hath kythed deafnesse, dulnesse, ignorance and foolishnesse. It may nowe bee objected, hath the Apostle PAVL sore∣tolde onely the hypocrisie of the Romaine Antichrist in the Both blas∣phemie and hypocrisie in the matter of mariage and meats is condemned by the A∣postle. matter of mariage and meates? and is there nothing fore∣told anent these ancient Heretiques, specially Encratitae & Manichaei, who vttered and dispersed in the world a doctrine of deuils, that it was a sinne to eate flesh, that wine was the gall of the Prince of darkenesse, that mariage was an euill thing, and a meane to bring in captiuitie a parte of the sub∣stance of the good God, namely the soule, within the bands of the substance of the prince of darkenesse, that is, within the body, hath the Spirit of God (I say) foretolde nothing of these vile heresies in this prediction? I answere, That the Spirit hath both foretolde the hypocrisie of some, and the open blasphemie of others. And this is insinuated in these wordes: For euey creature of God is good, and nothing to be refu∣sed, if it be receiued with thakesgiuing. Truely in these words the Apostle would turne our harts both from blaspheming Manicheis, and from hypocrite Papists. The Manicheis say, that it is neuer lawfull to eate flesh, and that the doing of it aduanceth the kingdome of the prince of darknesse. The Papists againe say, that the eating of flesh on Eryday is a grie∣uous sinne: but what saith the Apostle guided by the Spirit? Euery creature is good, and nothing to be refused, so that both the Manicheis speake blasphemously, and the Papistes hypo∣critically: both willing to abridge Christian libertie, the Manicheis by their opinion, the Papistes both by their o∣pinion and authoritie. The Manicheis will needes haue some creatures of God vncleane at all times, the Papists wil needes haue men polluted by eating of flesh at sometimes,
both these opinions are cut off in this word, Euery creature of God is good. Marke that in this diuersitie of opinions of Manicheis and Papists, both of them shoot at one marke, to wit that Christ Iesus shall not be the onely Lawgiuer in his Church, but something shall be abridged of that libertie that Christ hath giuen to his Church. Now the aiming and shooting at one marke is more forcible to proue the vnitie of Manicheis and Papistes, then the diuersitie of opinions whereby either of them laboureth to attaine to their inten∣ded purpose can proue their diuersitie, and therefore let the reader the lesse offend with this fellowship of Manicheis and Papists. These two diuerse opinions shooting at one marke (as said The Papistes more subtle en the Ma∣nicheis were. is) are both to bee damned, but chiefly that opinion that with greatest subtiltie and craft would thrust God out of his chaire, and spoile him of his glory, not to bee counted the only Lawgiuer in his Church. And I do confidently com∣pare Manicheis and Papistes as AVGVSTINE compareh A∣POLLO and HECATE lib. 19. de civit. Det, cap. 23. disapproo∣uing both of them, because both shot at one marke, to hinder people from Christianitie, but HECATE more then APOLLO, because in praising of Christ as a just man, whom APOLLO dispraised as an vnrighteous man, & justly cōdem∣ned to death by the Iewes, yet she called him onely a man, & not God, hindering people after a more subtle maner from adhering to Christianitie then APOLLO did. And truly the Manich is by damning flesh at all times, as a creature in it selfe vncleane. did not so great hurt to the Kingdome of God as the Papists, who grant that both flesh and wine are the good creatures of God, and yet they dare be bold to set out lawes commanding men vnder the paine of cursing and condemnation, that they taste not flesh at some times. If these times were times of a publicke calamitie, whereinto God by a secret voyce latent in the trouble did cali vs to fa∣sting & mourning, & abstinence frō fish flesh & wine, Isa. 22. ver. 13. then no new or vncouth yocke should be presented 10 mens consciences, but Christs owne yocke which we are commanded to beare, Mat. 11-but to appoint certaine daies
of fasting and abstinence from this meate, and not from anothe meace is a noueltie vnder the Gospell, and not the yocke of Christ, but of the Antichrist. Whereas mention is made of thankesgiuing, the Apostle will not haue vs to set our hearts vpon the creature & vpon The grace of thanksgiuing witnesseth that we en∣joy both the gift and the giuer. the gift, but vpon the Creator & the giuer. Whatsoeuer de∣lite we haue in the creature, there is infinitly greater delite in the face of the reconciled Creator: and therefore lift vp our harts, & let our tongues be loosed to praise his blessed name from whose hands we haue receiued the vse of his creatures. This if wee doe, we haue both the gift & the giuer, and the presence of the giuer shall not onely sanctifie the gift to our vse, but also shall turne our water into wine, Iohn 2. when as by the contrarie, if wee deuoure and glut vp the benefites of God without thanksgiuing, we haue the gift without the fauour of the giuer, eating of Gods creatures as the carnall Iwes eated Quailes in the wildernesse, Numb. 11. ver. 33. and the wrath of God was kindled against them: and assuredly those who haue the gift without the giuer, some day their wine shall be turned into water. But there is not great con∣trouersie in this point, and therefore I passe it ouer in fewer words. In end the Apostle leadeth vs vnto a sure ground that may quiet our consciences, so that we shall not be troubled with We ougt  be ruled by Gods word i all things both corporat & spirisuali,. the commandements of men, for bidding vs to eat of meats which God hath created for our vse, namely this, thatGod hath sanctified his creatures to vs by his word, Gen. 9. ver. 3. And incase we joyne with this sanctification of them, pray∣ers proceeding from faith, that we also may be sanctified, & receiueGods creatures with a good conscience, there is not great peril whether we eat this or that meat moderatly. Here marke that the Apost. in the very matter of meat & drinke & corruptible food will haue vs to depend vponGods word, & to think that we haue not liberty to put one morsel of meat in our mouthes, but so farre as God giueth vs allowance in his word, how much more in matters pertaining vnto eter∣nall life, we are to depend absolutely vpon the vndoubted assurance of Gods written worde. In all this discourse it may seeme that we loose the raines
to licentious liuing, to eating & drinking. & marying, and The consci∣ence is sub∣ject to the yocke of God. liuing wantonly as the original worlde did, when they were drouned with waters, but it is not so indeed. Only in maters of religion we would haue the yocke of the cōmandements of men taken off mens cōsciences, to the end that the yock of Gods commandements only may ly vpon the conscience according as Christ speaketh, Take vp my yock vpon you, Mat. 11. ver. 29. Yea in the very mater of meats & mariage, there is a time wherinto God calleth vs to mourning, lamentation, bald∣nesse and sackcloth, Isa. 22. ver. 12. and to abstinence from ea∣ting of flesh and drinking of wine. Yea the very bridegrome must come out of his chalmer, & fast, and lay aside his costly apparell, to the end hee may mourne with the humbled so∣cietie of Gods people, loel 2. ver. 16. And this commeth to passe whensoeuer the heauie hande of God is laide vpon a familie, vpon a towne, or vpon a countrie, in the very ca∣lamitie hinging ouer their heades, there is a secret voyce of God calling them to humiliation and repentance with fa∣sting and abstinence from all lawfull pleasures: & when the Priest bloweth the trumpet in Sion, and sanctifieth a fast vn∣to the Lord, he layeth not the yocke of mens commande∣ments vpon the consciences of men, but the yocke of God's commandements. For the Prophet bringeth in the Lord saying, that he calleth them to mourning, lamentation and to abstinence. The Lord is our Soueraigne, commander and Lawgiuer, hauing power to bid & to forbid at his bles∣sed pleasure. Vnder this yocke will we gladly stoupe: but the yocke of bondage that men would lay vpon our con∣sciences the Apostle PAVL expresly forbiddeth vs to admit, but to stand to our libertie, Galat. 5. ver. 1. And so I con∣clude this treatise misliking & disaprouing the loose raines of fleshly wantonnesse, but wishing from my heart that the bit of the Lord may bee cast in our jawes, to turne vs from the delite of earthly pleasures to the delite of that celestiall citie that hath a foundation, and whose builder is God. Amen.
Of Succession. IT hath bene the custome of godly men in all ages, who were descended from the loynes of godly fathers, not to brag of their parentage, but to be so much the more ashamed of sinne, that the vnreproouable liues of their predecessors were a great testimony cóuicting them of some piece of defection. Therefore the Prophet ISAIAH bringeth in the Lordes penitent people, in humble maner acknow∣ledging, that they were not worthy that ABRAHAM and IS∣RAEL should once knowe them to be their posteritie: but they entreat the Lord by a free forgiuenesse of sinnes to be∣come their father, Isa. 63.. 16. But on the other part a wicked generation descended from godly parents could boast of their parentage,' and say to Christ himselfe, ABRAHAM is our father, Iohn 8. ver. 39. and againe. We are not borne of for∣nication, wee haue one father, which is God, ibid. ver. 41. Notwithstanding of all this confident bragging of their parents, the Lorde Iesus who judgeth righteously, saith to carnall Iewes. Yee are of your father the deuill, and the lusts of your father ye will doe. He hath bene a murtherer from the beginning & abode not in the trueth, because there is no trueth in him When he speaketh a lie, then speaketh hee of his owne: for hee is a lyar, and the father thereof, Iohn 8. ver. 44. This place of scripture will clearely prooue that God will nothing regard the vaine o∣stentation and vaunting speeches of men who brag of their descent from godly parents, and their succession to godly preachers: yet the dissimilitude of their faith and maners from the faith and maners of their predecessours declareth that they are the very children of the deuill. In this age I find succession whereof the Romanes bragge so much to be in some reuerent regard. For IRENEVS Bishop of Lions in France reasoning against VALENTINVS & MAR∣CION, whose errours haue beene before declared, to con∣fute these Heretiques, hee bringeth in the succession of the Romaine Bishops. After PETER (saith he) were LINVS and ANACLETVS, and CLEMENS, and EVARISTVS, and ALEX∣ANDER, and SIXTVS, and TELESPHORVS, and HYGINVS, & PIVS, and ANICETVS, and ELEVTHERIVS the twelfth from the Apostles. Now, saith IRENEVS, these receiued the whole∣some
doctrine from the Apostles, and deliuered it faithful∣ly to others, yea & some of them also sealed it vp withtheir blood. Yet none of them spake such things concerning God the father & his sonne Christ Iesus, as VALENTINVS, MAR∣CION and BASILIDES haue spoken. Therefore he condem∣neth their doctrine to be false and hereticall, Iren lib. 3. cap. 3. contra Valent. Now the followers of the Romaine church demand why we do not as reuerently esteeme of the succession of Romane Bishops now, as IRENEVS did of old, & why do we not count them to be Heretiques who bring in a new doctrine not a∣greeing with the doctrine of the B. of Rome as IRENEVS counted VALENTINVS, MARCION, and BASILIDES Here∣tiques, because they vttered a strange doctrine which the B. of Rome had not receiued from the handes of the Apostles? To this I answere, that we count reuerently of al the Bishops of Rome who kept faithfully that forme of wholesome do∣ctrine which they receiued from the Apostles. Yea and we count them Heretiques also who departe from that veritie which LINVS, ANACLETVS, CLEMENS, and the rest receiued from the Apostles. But the question standeth in this, whether these holy fathers, of whom JRENEVS maketh such reuerent record, receiued from the mouthes of the Apostles, & prea∣ched to the world such heades of doctrine, as are now soun∣ded in the Romaine church, that is, inuocation of Saints, worshipping of images, pluralitie of mediators, of inter∣cession, purgatorie and infinite other things. As concerning the Apostles, the summe of their doctrine is contained in their writings, & they taught not LINVS, ANACLETVS, CLE∣MENS, otherwise then they taught the rest of the Romaines, the Corinthtans, Galatians, Ephesians, the inhabitants of Pontus, Cappadocia. Asia, Bithynia, 1, Pet. 1. And in all their writings The cause wherefore the successi∣on of Romam Bishops was magnified of old. there is no mention of inuocation of Saintes, worshipping of images, &c. The cause wherefore godly fathers rejoyced in the suc∣cession of the Bishops of Rome was this, because they were nearest to the danger of persecuting tyrants, and kept the faith of Christ most inviolablie. Many of them were martyres: such as ALEXANDER, SIXTVS, TE∣LESPHORVS,
and ANICETVS. Others were Confes∣sours, who suffered prisonment, pouertie, and diuerse o∣ther rebukes, albeit they were not put to death for the Name of Christ. And what marucll was it, that these who loued Christe had their hearts inflamed with a loue of this holy succession, whose commendation was puritie of wholesome doctrine receiued from the Apostles, whose glory was sufferings, and whose preeminence was exam∣ples of constant continuance in the true faith. And like as the dayes of MOSES and IOSVA were happie dayes: they had among them the Tabernacle of God, and therewith also the Arke and propitiatorie, which was the glorious or∣nament of the Tabernacle: so were the dayes of these holy fathers happie dayes, hauing personall succession from the Apostles, and therewith succession of true doctrine, the glorious ornament of personall succession. As concer∣ning the decretall Epistles falsly ascribed to them, wee shall speake hereafter in the heade of suprema∣cie Godwilling. But when all these things are in∣lacking for which the succession of the Romaine Bishoppes was regarded in this Centurie, and men erring in the true faith of a long time possessed the chaire of Rome, what auai∣leth it to glorie of that olde commended succession, when the glory of true doctrine, patient suffering, constant per∣seuerance in the Apostolicke doctrine is vtterly lost among them? so that the succession whereof the Romaine Church now glorieth, is not vnlike their transubstantiation, where∣in are accidents without a subject: & in their succession are persons of men succeeding one to another without puritie of doctrine. In Scripture we finde succession to be counted of accor∣ding to the greatnes of the promises annexed to the succes∣sion, The successi∣on of Da∣uid. as namely the succession of DAVID, of whom God said His seede also will I make to endure for euer, & his throne as the dayes of heauen, Psal. 89.. 29 & againe ver. 35. 36. I haue sworne once by my holynesse that I will not faile Dauid, saying, his seede shal endure for euer, and his throne shall be as the Sunne before me. Here are ample promises to DAVID & his succession confirmed
by the Lordes oath, & by the Sun & Moone as faithfull wit∣nesses in heauen. And that which was more then all the rest, this succession of DAVID was a line leading to the great King Christ Iesus, who should sit in the throne of his father DAVID, & of his kingdome there should be none end, Luc. 1. for all these causes the succession of DAVID was greatly regarded. Yet it is to be marked that all the promises, othes, testimonies, & honors did not carie with them a necessity, that euery successour of DAVID should be in faith and reli∣gion like vnto DAVID, but rather God foreseeing the con∣trarie, faith, If his chldren forsake my Law, and walke not in my Judgements: if they breake my statutes and keepe not my ordinances, then wll I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquitte with strokes, ibid ver. 30. 31. 32. I suppone that no successi∣on euer had more glorious and ample promises then the succession of DAVID, yet these promises inferred no neces∣sitie that euery king sitting on the throne of DAVID should bee heire also of the religion and faith of DAVID as well as of his kingdome. And therfore to inferre vpon this ground, that ample promises are made to the Apostles & their suc∣cessours, that euery one who succeedeth to the Apostolick chaire, shall keepe the true faith of the Apostles, it is but a foolish and impertinent conclusion. If any man shall replie that this was a succession of ciuill gouernours, but the que∣stion now contrauerted is anent succession of Bishops and men in a spirituall calling. True it is that DAVIDS successors succeeded to a ciuill gouernment, yet seeing this succession was ratified by the oath of God, and led also to Christ who is soueraine Lorde both of soule and body, whatsoeuer pri∣uiledge of standing in a good estate can be alledged in any succession, the patterne of it is to be found in the successi∣on of DAVID. But this priuiledge that the successors of DAVID cannot erre in the true faith is not found no not in the great succession of DAVID. Now to come to ecclesiasticall succession. The priesthood of AARON was institute by God, Numb. 17. ver. 5. It was confirmed The successi∣on of Aaron by the miracle of the budding rodde, ibid. ver, 23. The vsarpers of AARONS office without a calling
were also miraculously destroyed by fire that came downe from heauen, Numb. 16. Others were debarred from it euen in the dayes of NEHEMIAH, Nehem. 7. ver. 64. This succession of AARON was personall, the son succeeding to the father in the Priesthood, except some mutilation of a member or impotencie did hinder, or any such like cause. After AARON ELEAZAR and his son PHINEAS & ABISHVA PHINEAS son, and BVKKI, & HVZZI, ZERACHIA, MERAIOTH, AMARIA, ACHITVB, ZADOK, AHIMAAZ, 1. Chron. 6. ver. 50. 51. 52. 53. Many others after them were Priests of the stock of AARON, yet did not all keepe fast the faith and religion of AARON: yea, some Priestes of AARONS stocke were notable Idolaters & men-pleasers, such as VRIAH in the dayes of AHAZ king of Juda, who set vp an altar at the kings commandement, ac∣cording to the similitude of the altar of Damascus, and offe∣red sacrifices thereon, 2. Reg. 16. Anent the succession of the Prophets, euen when one good man succeeded to another good man, the historie of The succes∣sion of the Prophets. scripture clearely declareth, that men pointed out by God himselfe successours to an office, yet by this are they not made succssours to their giftes: for ELIZEVS was pointed out by God as successor to ELIAS in his prophetical office, 1. Reg. 19. ver. 16. yet by this was he not successor to his gifts as ELIZEVS petition of a double measure of the spirit of E∣LIAS clearely declareth 2. Reg. 2 ver 9, If the gift did ne∣cessarly accompany the succession, what needed ELIZEVS to be carefull of the gift, seeing he was sure of the succession? The holy Apostles of Christ haue had a successiō, & shal haue vnto the end of the world, to whō belōgeth the promise of Christ, Behold I am with you vnto the end of the world Mat. 28. 20 But who are to be called true successors of the Apostles, we The succes∣sion of the A∣postles. haue declared already in the 1. Centurie, taking our groūd out of scripture, Act. 20, 29. And out of Nazian. in laudem Athanasii, that darknes succeeding to light is not counted the true successor of lignt for the dissimilitude that is betweene darknes & light. But heere the question ariseth, whether or not al Churches keeping the holy Apostolicke doctrine are bound to shew in write their succession from the Apostles as the Priestes of the stocke of AARON after the captiuitie
produced in write their lineal descent from AARON, Nehem. 7. To this Tertul answereth, lib. de presript. adversus baret. that Churches truely keeping the Apostolicke doctrine, albeit they could not shew in write their succession from the Apo∣stles, yet are they to be counted Apostolicke Churches prop∣ter consang uinitatem doctrinae, that is for their consanguinitie of doctrine. But to come neerer, and to examine whether the Romaine church hath kept Apostolicke doctrine in their succession, The alledged succession of the Romaine Church spot∣ted with he∣resie, schisme and idolatry. without all spot of heresie (as they affirme) or not. And first the chaire of Rome was not free of the heresie of EVTYCHES, as clearly appeareth by the sixt generall Councill which was the third of those Councils which were gathered at Constan∣tinople in the 12. yeere of the empire of CONSTANTINVS, PO∣GONATVS. Ann. 681. Buco. In this Councill MACARIVS Patriarch of Antiochia, and STEPHANVS his disciple stood vp & pertinaciously defended the error of EVTYCHES, & were ex∣communicate by the Councill: yet they had defended their opinion by the Synodicke letter of HONORIVS sometime B. of Rome written to SERGIVS B. of Constantinople. Wherein it was clearely knowne that HONORIVS was infected with the errour of EVTYCHES: for the which cause HONORIVS B. of Rome after his death in the sixt generall Councill was also excommunicat as an Heretique, Tom Concil hist. Magdeb. This is not vnknown to some writers, who notwithstanding defend this opinion that the Bishop of Rome cannot erre in maters of aith. ONVPHRIVS saith that the Acts of the sixt generall Councill containing a condemnatory sentence a∣gainst HONORIVS Bishop of Rome were corrupted by the Grecians, and that the Canons of this Councill as they are set foorth are supposititious and false. Forsooth O∣NVPHRIVS is a worthy aduocate to pleade such a bad and reprobat cause. The faith of the Romanists leaning vpon two maine and principall grounds, vpon the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, and vpon the authoritie of generall Coun∣cils, ONVPHRIVS to vphold the one, vndoeth the other, and to cleare HONORIVS of all suspition of heresie, he bringeth the generall Councill vnder a suspition of falsification. Then
let ONVPHRIVS either produce the true and vncorrupt acts of the sixt generall Councill, which he will neuer be able to doe, or else for all his fectlesse apologie HONORIVS name is spotted with the blame of heresie. And of late dayes the Romaine chaire hath not onely renued, but also doubled the heresie of the Collyridians damned in the dayes of EPIPHA∣NIVS. For the Collyridians gaue onely some piece of diuine The heresie of the Collyri∣dians renued & increased by the chaire of Rome. honour to the blessed virgin the mother of our Lorde: but the Romaine Bishops in suffering by their toleration, conni∣uence or rather allowance, the Psalter of our Lady (as they call it) to be printed, diuulgat and vsed by Christian people, wherein all the honour due to Christ, not excepting the sit∣ting at the right hand of the Father, Psal. 110. is all attribu∣ted vnto the virgine MARIE. In so doing, I say, they haue not onely renued, but also doubled the heresie of the Colly∣ridians. In the Councill of Basil gathered Ann. 1431. EVGENIVS 4 Eugenius 4. B. of Rome a notable schismatick. then B. of Rome was deposed by the general Councill of Ba∣sil as a notable schismaticke and perturber of the peace of Christes Church. Yet his name is in the roll of the succession of Romaine Bishops, and all these who haue sitten in the chaire of Rome since the dayes of EVGENIVS 4. are suc∣cessors to a perjured schismaticke justly deposed by the ge∣nerall Councill of Basil with consent of the Emperour SI∣GISMVND. Now let Romanists advise whether they will blame the generall Councill or the Bishop of Rome EVGENIVS 4. If they blame the general Councill, then the generall Coun∣cill may erre, euen in great & fundamentall points of their owne faith, for it leaneth vpon the authoritie of the B. of Rome & Councils. And if they wil blame EVGENIVS 4. as a schismaticke & worthy of deposition, then is their successi∣on whereof they glorie so much, vtterly cut off since the dayes of EVGENIVS the fourth. As touching idolatrie, I dare boldly set the Romaine chaire in higher degree then the idolarrous Jewes of old, of whom The chaire of Rome de∣filed with i∣dolatrie. IEREMIE speaketh, that according to the number of their cities was the number of their gods, Ier. 2. ver. 28, Nowe there are not so many cities in Juda, as there are Angels, Apostles, mar∣tyres
and Saints in heauen, to whom the Romaine chaire gi∣ueth the glory of Christ, & maketh them mediators of inter∣cestion. Therefore it is an impudent presumption to brag of Apostolicke succession, when as by heresie, schisme and idolatrie they haue so oft fallen, and yet continue in falling away from the footsteps of the Apostles. Now because commonly like errours haue like grounds, let vs consider what was the ground of the error of the suc∣cession Lkeerrours haue like grounds. of AARON, and thereby may easily be discerned the ground of the error of the alledged Apostolicke succession. The posteritie of AARON beeing reprooued by IEREMIE the Prophet, tooke the reproofe in a very euill part, supponing that they were exeemed from errour in maters of religion, because of the promises of God made to the tribe of LEVI: & therfore they say, Come and let vs imagine some deuise against Jeremiah: for the Lw shll not perish from the Priest, nor counsell from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. Cone and let v smite him for his tongue, and let vs not tak heede to his words, Ier. 18. ver 18. The promises made to the tribe of LEVI are contained Deut. 33 ver. 8. 9 10. 11. And after the captiuitie of Babylon, MALACHI making an ample declaration of the promises made to LEVI saith, My couenant was with him of life & peace: & Igaue him feare, & he feared me, & was afraid before my name. The Lawe of trueth wa in his mouth, and there was none iniquitie found in his l ps: he walked with me in peace and equitie. & did turne many away from iniquitie. For the Priests lips should preserue knowledge, and they should secke the Law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Mal. 2. ver. 5. 6. 7. Of this promise of God spoken by MOSES, and long after amplified by the Prophet MALACHI, many did collect that the successors of AARON & LEVI could not erre in religion: but how erro∣neous & false this conclusion was, the wordes of the Pro∣phet MALACHI immediatly after following do declare. But ye are gone out of the way, ye haue caused many to fall by the Lawe, ye haue broken the couenant of Leui, saith the Lord of Hostes, Mal. 2. ver 8. If we had no further to alledge but these two testi∣monies, that IEREMIE & MALACHI did reprooue the succes∣sors of LEVI & AARON of great errours & defection, not∣withstanding of the promises made to them & their poste∣ritie,
yet these two witnesses being Prophets of God doe a∣boundantly prooue, that promises made to LEVI and AARON do not exeeme their succession from error in religion. But marke another circumstance in the ground of this errour of AARONS succession, which was this. God made a promise conditionall, which they supposing to be absolute, tooke libertie to doe what they lifted. The conditions are The Romain church like to the successours of Aa∣ron, clearely set downe by the Prophet MALACHI, cap. 2. If they feared God & conuerted others from their wicked waies, & kept the key of knowledge, then they should be counted the Ambassadours of the Lord of hostes, but these conditions being broken, & they hauing gone out of the way, & hauing caused many to fall by the law, & hauing broken the coue∣nant of LEVI, they were so far from being counted the Am∣bassadours of God, that God made them vile before al the people, ver. 9 Yea & the Lord cursed them, & cast doung v∣pon their faces, euen the doung of their solemne feastes, & made them like vnto it, ibid. ver. 3. This was the tragicall e∣uent of AARONS successours, who opened one of their eares to heare the promise of God, but closed the other eare from hearing and marking the conditions that were required of them to whom the promise was made. The Romaine Church not vnlike to the successors of AA∣RON, haue their eare opened to heare the promise of God made to the Apostles & their successors in these words, Be∣hold I am with you vnto the end of the world. Mat, 28, ver. 20. but they close their eares from hearing the condition required of the Apostles & their successours contained in the same verse in these words, teaching them to obserue all things whatso∣euer I command you. Although they teach a doctrine repug∣nant to Christs commandement, yea and a doctrine of de∣uils as PAVL speaketh, 1. Tim. 4. yet must they be counted the Apostles successors, and that Christ is with them, & that What incon∣uenients fol∣low if the pro∣mise made to the Aposles successors be absolute. they do not erre. But God wil cast their doung in their faces and make them like to it, that is, vile and filthie, as hee did vnto the Priests of the succession of AARON. If any man wil obstinatly contend that the promise made to the Apostles and their successours was absolute and not conditionall, consider the inconuenients that will follow.
Seeing this promise was not made to PETER onely, but also to all the rest of the Apostles and their successours, then as none of the Romaine Bishops can erre in religion, because they are the successours of PETER as they alledge: so in like maner the Bishops of Ierusalem, Alexandria, Antiochia, Ephe∣sus, Philippi, Thessalonica, Corinth, & diuerse other places are all exeemed from errour, because the Apostles and Euangelists preached and constitute Churches in all-these places, & they are successours to the Apostles in that same sense that the Bishops of Rome are successours to PETER. And if none of all these can erre, what priuiledge hath the church of Rome aboue all other Churches? Or how can that be performed which was foretolde by the Apostle concerning apostasie that should fall out, & the reuelation of the man of sinne. & childe of perdition, 2. Thess. 2? For all the successours of the Apostles beeing exeemed from error, what place could be giuen to the Antichrist, or what doore could haue bene o∣pened to MAHOMET, by whose delusions the Orientall Church hath bene so miserably abused? But seeing the Apostles had some extraordinarie things, The Apostles had calling, ges & pre∣rogatiues ex∣traordinarie. such as calling, gifts and prerogatiues: They were called im∣mediatly by Christ, and were taught immediatly by his Spi∣rit and mouth, Gal. 1. They receiued from heauen the gift of tongues and languages to vtter this celestiall knowledge to all tongues & nations, Act. 2. They had power by imposition of hands to conferre to others the gift of the holy Spirit, Act, 8 With these extraordinarie giftes they had also extraordi∣narie prerogatiues, that in teaching the doctrine receiued from Christ, they should not erre. Now these who cal them∣selues successors to the Apostles, they dare not clame to the Apostles immediat calling, nor yet to their extraordinarie gifts, but that which of all the rest was most extraordinarie to the Apostles, viz. to be exeemed from errour in teaching and writing, that is so fast adhered vnto, that it is one of the principal grounds of the Romaine faith in our dayes, that the Bishop of Rome cannot erre in faith and religion. Yea so in∣fortunate are the Bishoppes of Rome of late dayes, that they would climme vp to the highest top and preeminence of A∣postolicke dignitie to be exeemed from errour, when as in
things of lesse importance they cannot attaine (as we speak) to the Apostles garters. This proud conceit of Apostolick succession with power of binding and loosing, & exemption from errour, made some of the Bishops of Rome so high minded, so vaine and ridiculous, that learned fathers conueened together in Councils, thought their pride more worthie to be receiued with scoffing wordes, then with prolixe refutations. Ex∣ample whereof wee haue in a Councill gathered at Rome in the time of the Emperour OTTO the first, about the yeere of our Lord 956. In which Councill IOHN 13. Others write Pope IOHN the 12. hee fled for feare of the Emperour OTTO. Many grieuous accusations were giuen in against him, such as incest, murther, saeriledge, playing at dice, and drinking to the deuill, admitting of boyes to be Bishops for money, with many other villanous things, our and beside his per∣fidie in assisting BERENGARIVS and his sonne ALBERTVS a∣gainst the Emperour OTTO, contrarie to his promise, and oath made before to the Emperour. Libertie being granted to Pope IOHN to compeare without feare, & to answere to the accusations objected against him, he beeing conuict in conscience would not compeare, but he sent a short letter to the Council, bearing that he was PETERS successor, and had power of binding & loosing, & by vertue of this power hee band them vnder paine of cursing that they should not pro∣ceede to his deposition. To this proud letter the Councill gathered at Rome returned this answere, that Christ gaue power of binding & loosing to all his disciples as well as to PETER: but one of them, to wit, IVDAS, by abusing his pow∣er, lost his power: only he retained some power of binding, to wit, he had libertie to binde his owne necke to the gal∣lous. In which wordes they call him IVDAS, and biddes this vile beast goe and hang himselfe if he lift, Hist. Mag∣deb urg Cent. 10. cap. 9. PLATINA callth IOHN 13. homo sceleratissinus, a most wicked man. ONVPHRIVS the aduocate of all wicked causes blusheth, and dare not stand at the barre to pleade the cause of IOHN 12. the predecessour of LEO the eight, for both are one man, he whom PLATINA calleth 13. and he whome ONVPHRIVS
counteth - 12. The Bishops of Rome might haue bene admo∣nished by this one example (if there were no mo) not to be high minded, & not to cum to the supreame top of Aposto∣licke preeminence. In a worde the Bishops of Rome of late yeeres are moe like to the successours of CAIAPHAS (who would needes haue Christe to stand before his judgement seat, & judge of Christ, his doctrine & disciples, Ioh. 18 ver. 19.) then they are like to the successours of PETER: for I can see no inexcusable boldnes in CAIAPHAS damning Christs doctrine, but I grope the like in the Romaine church, that v∣surpeth authoritie ouer the written word, ouer Councils, and consequently ouer Christ himselfe. To conclude this treatise, I will compare succession, wher∣of the Romaine church braggeth so much, to the way that lay betweene Samaria and Jerusalem: this way led the peo∣ple of Ephraim, Manasse, Jssachar, Zabulon, Nephthali and A∣ser to Jerusalem, when they set their face Southward, & when they went vpward, but the same way againe led them from Jerusalem when they turned their faces Northward, & when they went downward. Euen so if a man set his face toward heauenly Ierusalem, he shal finde a number of holy successors of the Apostles in puritie of doctrine, honestie of conuersa∣tion, & patience in suffering that shall leade him to Christ, & to heauenly Ierusalem: but againe, it is as certaine if a man will set his face Northward to defection, to backsliding and to preferre the traditions of men to the ordinances of God, there shall not inlacke a number of guiders in the roll of personall successours (as they call it) to the Apostles, who shall lead him from Jerusalem to Samaria, & from the moun∣taine of God to the valley of Benhinnon. Therefore while we are in the way take heed what way our faces are set, whe∣ther to Ierusalem or to Samaria, and if they be set to Ierusa∣lem, let vs followe these sure guides who were true succes∣sours to the Apostles, and they shall indeede leade vs to Christ, to heauenly Ierusalem, and to the glory which in heart and minde we waite for, whereunto God lead vs for his Christs sake, Amen.
CENTVRIE III. Chap. 1. Seuerus. AFter PERTINAX and IVLIAN SEVERVS gouer∣ned The fist per∣secution, ANN. Ch. 205. 17, yeeres, 8. months, EVSEBIVS recko∣neth onely 12. yeeres, lib. 6. cap. 12. He stir∣red vp the fift persecution against the Chri∣stians. The crimes objected against the Chri∣stians beside those that were objected in the former perse∣cution were these: Rebellion against the Emperour, sacri∣ledge, murthering of infants, worshipping of the sunne, and worshipping the heade of an Asse: which last calumnie was forged against them by the malice of the Jewes. This per∣secution raged most seuerely in the townes of Alexandria and Carthage, like as the former persecution had done in Li∣ons and Vienne in France, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 1. LEONIDES the Leonides the father of Origen. father of ORIGEN was beheaded his sonne, being but yong in yeeres, exhorted his father to perseuere in the faith of Christ constantly vnto the death. POTAMIEA a yong beau∣tiful virgin in Alexandria was by the judge condemned to death, and deliuered to a Captaine called BASILIDES, who stayed the insolencie of the people that followed her to the place of execution with outrage of slanderous and rayling worde crying out against her: for this cause shee prayed to God for the conuersion of BASILIDES to the true faith, and was heard of God, in so much, that he was not onely con∣uerted to the faith of Christ, but also sealed it vp with his blood and had the honour of martyrdome, Euseb. lib. 6. cap 5. ALEXANDER who was fellow-labourer with NAR∣CISSVS Alexander fellow labou∣re with Na∣cislus, in Ierusalem, escaped many dangers, yet was he marty∣red in the dayes of DECIVS the 7. great persecuter, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 39. Of this Emperour the Senat of Rome said, Aut
non nasci, aut non mori debuisse, that is, Either hee should neuer haue beene borne or els should neuer haue tasted of death. So it pleased the Lorde by his wise dispensation to suffer the dayes of TRAIAN, ANTONINVS Philosophus, & SEVERVS, Emperours renoumed in the world to be more cruell against his owne people then the dayes of NERO, DOMITIAN, CALIGVLA or COMMODVS, to the ende the poore Church might learne to be content to be spoyled of all outward comfort, and to leane vpon the staffe of the consolations of God alanerly. Many that were brought Rhais a mar tyre hrunt before she was bapti∣zed. vp in the schooles of ORIGEN suffered martyrdome, such as PLVTARCHVS, SERENVS, HERACLIDES, HERON, and ano∣ther hauing the name of SERENVS also, Euseb. lib, 6. cap. 4. Among women RHAIS was burned with fire for Christs sake before she was baptized with water in Christs Name, Euseb. ibid. Innumerable moe martyrs were slaine for the faith of Christ, whose names in particular no ecclesiasticall writer euer was able to comprehend, therfore it shall suffice to heare the names of a few. The rest whose names are not expressed, enjoy the crownes of incorruptible glory, as wel as those doe whose names are in all mens mouths. It is the comfort of our hearts to remember that the Apostles and Euangelists sealed vp with their blood the doctrine which they taught, and committed to writ, and no other doctrine, and the holy martyres immediatly after the Apostles dayes sealed vp with the glorious testimonie of their blood that same faith, which we now professe, & which they receiued frō the hands of the Apostles, but they were not so prodigall of their liues to giue their blood for the doctrine of worship∣ping of images, inuocation of Saints, plurality of mediators, of intercession, the sacrifice of the Masse both propitiatory and vnbloody, expresly against the wordes of the Apostle, Heb. 9. ver. 22. and such other heades of doctrine vnknown to antiquitie. The Romaine Church in our daies is a perse∣cuting and not a persecuted Church, more fruitfull in mur∣thers then martyrdomes, glorying of antiquitie, and follow ing the forgerie of new inuented religion. This Emperour SEVERVS was slaine at Yoke by the Northerne men & Scots.
Bassianus & Geta. SEVERVS who was slaine at Yorke left behind him two sonnes, BASSIANVS and GETA. BASSIANVS slewe his brother, & reigned himselfe alone 6. yeres, so that the whole time of his gouernment both with his brother and alone was 7. yeeres, 6. months, Euseb. lib: 6. cap, 21. He put to death also PAPINIANVS a worthie lawyer, because he would not pleade his cause anent the slaughter of his bro∣ther before the people, but saide that sinne might be more easily committed then it could be defended. Bucolc. Hee tooke to wife his own mother in law IVLIA, a woman more beautifull then chaste. In all his time (as he confessed with his owne mouth) hee neuer learned to doe good, and was slaine by MACRINVS. Macrinus with his son Diadumenus. MACRINVS and his sonne reigned one yeere alaner∣ly. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 21. Antoninus Heliogabalus. ANTONINVS HELIOGABALVS reigned after MACRI∣NVS 4. yeeres, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 21. He was a pro∣digious belly-god, a libidinous beast, an enemie to all honestie and good order, Func. Chron. So ma∣ny villanous things are written of him, that scarcely if the Reader can giue credite to the historie, that euer such
a monster was fashioned in the belly of a woman. At his remouing in his progresse oftimes followed him 600. cha∣riots laden onely with baudes and common harlots. His gluttonie, filthinesse, & excessiue riotousnes are in al mens mouthes. Hee was slaine of the souldiers, drawen through the citie, and cast into Tiber. Alexander Seuerus. ALEXANDER SEVERVS the adopted sonne of HELI∣OGABALVS reigned 13. yeeres, Euseb lib. 6. cap. 28. Chron. Func. He delited to haue about him wise and learned counsellers, such as FABIVS, SABINVS DOMITIVS, VLPIANVS, &c. This renowmed Lawyer VL∣PIANVS was not a friend to Christians but by collecting to∣gether a number of lawes made against Christians in times Vlpianus an enemie to Christians. bypast, he animated the harts of judges against them. And this is a piece of the rebuke of Christ, that Christians haue borne continually to be hated of the wise men of the world. hist. Magdeburg. Cent. 3. Hereof it came to passe that in this Emperours time, albeit hee was not so bloodie as many o∣thers had bene before him (and therefore his Empire was called  that is, vnbloodie) yet not a few suffered martyredome euen in the dayes of ALEXANDER, such as A∣GAPETVS a young man of 15. yeere old at Praeneste a towne of Italie, Hee was assaied with many torments, and finally with the sword he was beheaded. The judge who gaue out a sentence of death against him, fell out of his judiciall seat and suddenly died. The martyredome of CECILIA, if by her trauailes VALERIAN her espoused husband, and TIBVR∣TIVS his brother, & 400. moe had bene conuerted to Christ & secretly baptized by VRBANVS B. of Rome immediatly be∣fore her death, I maruel that no mention should be made by EVSEBIVS of such a rare & miraculous worke. Senatours and noble men at Rome, such as PAMMACHIVS, SIMPLICIVS, and QVIRITIVS, with their wiues and children died for the
faith of Christ with many others, Hist. Mag. Cent. 3. The fauour that this Emperour shewed to Christians against whom the very sloobering cookes did contend challenging vnto themselues the right of a place whereinto Christians were accustomed to conueene for exercise of diuine seruice, this fauour, I say, seemeth to haue proceeded from the coun sell of MAMMEA his Christian mother, rather then from the counseli of VLPIANVS that renowmed lawyer an hatefull aduersarie to Christians. But MAMMEA his mother hea∣ring the report of the learning of ORIGEN sent for him and Mammea the Emperors mother is in∣structed by Origen in the faith. by him was instructed in the groundes of Christian faith. The learned doctour who wrote the booke of the martyrs, very judiciously obserueth the iniquitie of this time, where∣into no Christian Churches were erected, when as yet (not∣withstanding of the fauour of the Emperour at some times) no publicke house could quietly be obtained for the Chri∣stians: so that by reason hereof may appeare the decretall epistle of Pope HYGINVS concerning the dedication of Churches is forged & fained, because the reigne of ALEX∣ANDER is a long time posterior to the dayes of HYGINVS (who liued vnder the reigne of ANTONINVS PIVS) and in the reigne of ALEXANDER as yet there was great difficultie to obteine a place whereinto Christians might assemble to∣gether. The just deserued punishment of TVRINVS, whome the Emperour caused to bee fastened to a stake in the open Turinus killed with smoke. market place, and there to be killed with smoke, the Herald standing by and crying to the people, Smoke he sold and with smoke he is punished, This punishment I say declareth that this Emperour counted flatterers worthy of great punish∣ment. ALEXANDER and his mother MAMMEA were both slaine by his owne souldiers, Bucolc: Index Chron.
Maximinus. AFter ALEXANDER SEVERVS MAXIMINVS was Em∣perour and reigned 3. yeeres, Euseb lib 6 cap. 28. A man of base parentage, of an huge stature, pro∣moted to honours by ALEXANDER, who nou∣nished a serpent in his owne bosome (as the prouerbe spea∣keth) when he aduanced MAXIMINVS an ingrate foster to great dignities and honours. For by his meanes the ar∣mie killed ALEXANDER, and his mother MAMMEA, and sa∣luted him and his sonne Emperours without aduise of the Romaine Senat: a man hated of all good men, beloued of e∣uill men, more grieuous to the citizens of Rome then to their enemies, Bucolc. Index Chron. who for hatred of the house of ALEXANDER (as EVSEBIVS recordeth) raised vp the sixt persecution against Christians, specially against the teachers and leaders of the Church, thinking the soo∣ner to vanquish the rest if the Captaines and guiders of them were made out of the way, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib 6. cap. 28. ORIGEN at this time wrote a booke de martyrio, and dedi∣cated it to AMBROSIVS & PROTECTETVS a preaching elder of the Church of Casarea: because these two vnder this per∣secution Origen wrote a booke de marty∣rio. had susteined great afflictions, and constantly per∣seuered in the true faith, Eusebilib 6. cap. 28. No persecu∣tion was more violent, no persecution endured shorter time. In no persecution are the names of suffering mar∣tyrs so obscured and couered with silence possibly because the booke of Origen de martyrio through injurie of time is not to be found, therefore some learned men do referre the martyrdome of such as wee haue spoken of in the dayes of ALEXANDER to this time, or to the persecution of DECIVS. I will not dispute of such doubtsome things. Three other things that are more necessarie to the edification of the Church I will touch. First the malice of the deuill, who ha∣teth
the welfare of the sheepfolde of Christ, and laboureth The malice of Satan a∣gainst true 'Pastors. either to spoyle it of true Pastours, or to send in among the poore sheepe hyrelings, and men not regarding the well of the flocke, but their owne gaine: or clse, if they haue true pastours, to mooue the flocke to be disobedient to faithfull and vigilant Pastors. The flocke that can eschew all these three snares of the deuill, and all these three wofull calami∣ties so oft seasing vpon the poore sheepesolde, they are in good estate. Reade CHRYSOSTOME writing vpon the 13. chap Heb. ver. 17. Another thing is worthie to be marked, that in three great persecutions, in the fift, sixt and seuenth, ORIGEN a man more renowmed in his lifetime then after his death, God vouchsafed vpon him two great honours, but not the third, whereof he was most of all desirous. He encouraged his father LEONIDES, and his disciples, PLVTAR∣CHVS, two SERENI, HERON & HERACLIDES patiently to fuf∣fer martyrdome in the dayes of SEVERVS. Next he wrote a booke de martyrio in the daies of MAXIMINVS the sixt perse∣cuter, whereby doubtlesse many were incouraged patienly Origen got not the honor of martyr∣dome. to suffer euill for Christs sake. What remaineth now but the third & principal honour of martyrdom it selfe, whereun∣to he had a bent desire in the daies of DECIVS the 7 perse∣ter, but then he fainted, as shall be declared hereafter God∣willing? When we call to minde this weaknes of ORIGEN, let all the cogitations of our heartes stoupe, and thinke that wee are not meete for great things, but if the Lorde call vs to suffer great things for his Names sake, the Lorde perfite his strength in our infirmitie and weakenesse. Third∣ly let vs marke the great difference that is betweene the vo∣lume of the booke of holy canonicke & sacred Scripture, & all other bookes whatsoeuer. In Scripture the ouerpassing of maters of great importance and moment is not for ig∣norance, misknowledge or doubting of those things that are ouerslidden, but for mysterie and representation of things Difference betwixt holy scripture and other bookes. more necessarie to be knowne, as namely when MOSES a most accurat writer of the life, death & genealogies of ho∣ly Patriarches, yet hee ouerpasseth the description of the genealogie, death & beginning of the life MELCHISEDECK this was done of purpose to bring in MELCHISEDECK:
as a type and figure of the true king of peace Christ Icsus, as the Apostle declareth, Heb. 7. but among ecclesiasticall wri∣ters I finde a preterition of the names of these worthy Pa∣stours who were martyred for the cause of Christ in the sixt persecution, and this ouerpassing with silence so weightie a matter, is a secret confession of ignorance in this part of the historie, together with a doubting, whether VRBANVS the first, VALERIANVS, TIBVRTIVS, CECILIA, and MAR∣TINA suffered vnder ALEXANDER, or vnder MAXIMINVS, or vnder DECIVS. Yea PLATINA writeth it was the opi∣nion of some men that VRBANVS 1. was martyred in the persecution of DIOCLETIAN. I haue insisted at greater length in this purpose to the end that euery man may giue vnto sacred scripture that reuerence that is due vnto it, but other writings let vs reade them with judgement, for assu∣redly there is palpable weakenes into them. In ende this wicked persecuter MAXIMINVS and his sonne were slaine by his owne souldiers at the siege of Aquileia, Func. Chron. Gordianus. THe tyrannie of MAXIMINVS enforced both the se∣nate of Rome and likewife their oppressed confede∣rates in Aficke to aduise by what meanes the di∣stressed estate of the Commonwell might be sup∣ported. And first GORDIANVS a man of noble birth in Rome, and at that time PROCONSVL in Africke, with his sonne bearing the name of GORDIANVS with his father, these two were declared to bee Emperours to resist the tyrannie of MAXIMINVS, but they were both cut off by CAPELLIANVS Captaine of the Mauritanians. Within a short time the senate of Rome chused MAXIMVS PVPIENVS and BALBINVS to be Emperours, and to resist the tyrannie of MAXIMINVS. But this election displeased the people of Rome, therefore they were compelled to associat GORDIANVS a young man
of 13. yeeres olde in conjunct authoritie with them. This GORDIANVS was the nephew of him who was Procnfull in Africke: and the souldiers made out of the way, MAX. PVPIENVS and BALBINVS. So GORDIANVS reigned him∣selfe alone without associats sixe yeeres. Chron Func. Philippus. PHILIPPVS a man borne in Arabia and his son reig∣ned fiue yeeres, Chron, Func. Bucolc. EVSEBIVS saith 7. yeeres. He was the first Emperour who became a Christian, and was baptized by FABIANVS B. of Rome Hee was content to stand among the number of the peni∣tents who made confession of their sinnes, for his life was reproouable in some things before his conuersion, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 34. especially in slaying of GORDIANVS an Em∣perour inclined to peace. DECIVS one of the Captaines, of his armie conspired against him, and slewe him and his sonne, and reigned in his stead. Decius. DECIVS and his sonne obteiued the empire 2. yeeres, Chron. Func. Whether for hatred of PHILIP his master, whome hee had slaine, or for detestation of The 7. perse∣cution. ANN. Ch. 250. Christians, or for couetous desire of the treasures of PHILIP left in the custodie of FABIAN B. of Rome, or for some other cause, it is not certaine. Alwayes he mooued a terrible persecution against the Christians. The martyrs who suffered death in the time of this persecution were innumerable. Alexander & Babylas both dicd in prison, Some few of the principall martyres I shall rehearse. ALEX∣ANDER Bishop' of Jerusalem died in prison at Casarea. BABY∣LAS B. of Antiochia died likewise in prison. FABIAN B. of Rome suffered martyrdome. DIONYSIVS ALEXANDRINVS by a wonderfull prouidence of God escaped the handes of persecuting enemies. CYPRIAN B. of Carthage was banished
and reserued to the honour of martyrdome vntill the dayes of VALERIAN the eight persecuter. ORIGEN who from his childhood was desirous of the honour of martyredome, in this persecution of DECIVS he fainted, and his heart was so oucrset with feare to haue his chaste body defiled with an vgly Ethiopian, that he choosed rather to offer incense to the Idole, then to be so filthily abused. For this cause hee was excommunicate by the Church of Alexardria, and for very shame fled to Judea, where hee was not onely gladly re∣ceiued, but also requested publickely to preach at Ierusalem. Origen at Jerusalem closeth the booke and wepeth. Neuerthelesse in stead of teaching hee watred his face with teares, when he reade these words of scripture. To the wak d man sath God, What hast thou to do to declare mine ordinancse, that thou shouldest take my couenant in thy month? Ps. 50. ver. 16. These words so deepely wounded his heart with griefe, that hee closed the booke and sate downe and wept, & all the con∣gregation wept with him, Hist Mag. Cent. 3. cap. 10. No pitie nor compassion was had neither of sexe or age. In this persecution, APOLLONIA, a virgine of good yeeres, after The teeth of the holy mar∣tyre Apollo∣nia. they had dashed her face with battons till all her teeth were stricken out of her jawes, they burned her quicke at the port of Alexandria. This is that holy martyre whose teeth the Romaine church in our dayes say that they haue them as ho∣ly monuments kept in the treasures of their reliques vntill this time. But the tryall that was taken of late dayes by HENRIE the eight king of England, seeking for the teeth of APOLLONIA as a remedy of the toothach clearly prooueth that many teeth are supponed to be the teeth of APOLLO∣NIA that were neuer fastened in her jaw bones, Chemnisius dereliquiis. The death of QVINTA, AMMONARION, MERCV∣RIA, DIONYSIA, clearly declareth what pitie was had of the weakenesses of women. IVLIANVS an olde and gowtie man burned with fire testifieth what regard was had to the gray haires of ancient men. DIOSCORVS a yong man not excee∣ding 15. yeres of age, albeit they were ashamed to condemne him to death, yet he escaped not many painfull torments, & was a glorious Confessour with patient expectation awai∣ting vntill the Lord should call him to the honour of mar∣tyrdome,
NEMESION was accused in Alexandria as a companion of brigants, and was punished with stripes and fire vnto the death with greater seueritie then any brigant, albeit his innocencie was sufficiently knowne. AMMON, ZENON, PTOLEMEVS, INGENVVS, THEOPHILVS warriours and knights standing by the tribunall seate beckened with their hands to a cer∣taine weake Christian, who for feare was readie to incline and fall, that hee should continue constant, and stepped to the bench, and professed themselues to be Christians. This dayly increasing courage of Christians, who were emboldened by the multitude of sufferings astonished and terrified the Iudges, Euseb, lib. 6. cap. 41. ISCHYRION was slaine by his owne master. The number of martyres in Alexandria and Egypt, of whome DIONYSIVS in his epistle written to FABIVS Bishop of Antiochia maketh mention, clearely testifieth that if the names of all those who suffered martyrdome in the townes of Rome, Carthage, Antiochia, Ephesus and Babylon, were particularly set down, ouer and beside others who suffered in other townes of Asia, Africke and Europe subject to the dominion of the Romaine Emperour, it were not possible in the volume of a litle booke to comprehend them all. For mine owne part I presume not to do it, but I reuerence the painfull trauelles of learned men who haue dipped deepely into such a fruit∣full subject, specially the writer of the booke of martyres. Onely I find somethings in this seuenth persecution, which the principall purpose wherefore I haue collected this compend will not permit mee to passe ouer with silence. Namely these: first, let no man thinke that the veritie is weake, and hath neede to bee strengthened by a The veritie hath no neede to be vnder∣propped with lies, lie, as NICEPHORVS is accustomed to doe. The seuen martyres of Ephesus, whose names were MAXI∣MIANVS, MALCHVS, MARTINIANVS, DIONYSIVS, IOAN∣NES, SERAPION, and CONSTANTINVS, were lurking in a caue, the entrie where of DECIVS commanded to be closed with great heapes of stones, to the end that the forenamed Christians might be killed with famine, which came to
passe indeede: Yet famine could not sparate these holy. Martyres from Christ. But NICEPHORVS the father of many other fables also saith, that they fell on sleepe, in which they continued till the time of THEODOSIVS, that is, from the 250 vntill the 379. yeere of our Lord, and then they did awake out of their sleepe saith NICEPHORVS, lib. 5. cap. 27. But he who will giue hastie credite to NICEPHORVS fables, writing of the 7. martyres, who lurked in a caue of mount Caelius and to EVAGRIVS description of BARSANVPHIVS an Egyptian monke, who enclosed himselfe in a cottage beside Gaza for the space of 50. yeeres, and vsed no kinde of bodi∣ly refreshment to sustaine his earthly tabernacle, he may be easily led to all kinde of errour. The second thing worthy to be marked, is, that many persecuted preachers had wiues and children, as the historie clearely recordeth. CHERE∣MON B. of a citie in Egypt called Nilus fled to the moun∣taines of Arabia, accompanied with his wife, and returned not againe to Egypt, neither was hee seene of those who sought him in the wildernesse, Euseb. lib. 6. cap, 42, DIO∣NYSIVS Maried Bishops. B. of Alexandria, who miraculously escaped the crueltie of persecuters, maketh expresse mention of his chil∣dren, Deo mthi ut migrarem praecipiente, viánque mirabiliter a∣periente, ego & liberi, & multi fratres egressi sumus, that is, af∣ter that God had commanded me to remooue, and had mi∣raculously opened a passage vnto mee, I and my children, and brethren went forth, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 40. If antiquitie be regarded, Bishops who doe marie, are not Nicolaitan He∣retiques, but rather such as forbid to marie teach a doctrine of deuils, 1, Tim cap. 4. ver. 3. Thirdly it is to bee marked, that in time of this vehement persecution; many fainted & fell backe from the open profession of Christian faith. O∣thers to prouide timous remedie against such defections, The rigour of Novatus. gaue out a rigorous sentence against such as had fallen of infirmitie, that they should not be receiued againe into the fellowship of the church. In this opinion was NOVATVS, & his complices. And by their example we should learne to beware of such men as vnder pretence of zeale pertur be the vnitie of the Church, & inuent remedies to cure the maladies of the diseased Church, that are worse then the sicknes it selfe,
as the Nicolaitanes did, Euseb, lib. 6 cap. 43. Weaknes at somo time is to bee pitied, but deuilish rigour pitying no man who falleth of infirmitie, is a lesson that hath no allowance in the booke of God, Gal. 6. ver. 1. This cruell tyrant, after he had reigned two yeeres, made warre against the Scythians (some call them the Gothes) by whom hee was vanquished in battell, and fearing to be ouertaken, and to come vnder the reuerence of barbarous people, hee cast himselfe into a deepe pit, where hee ended his life, and his body could not be found, Bucolc. Index Chron. Chron Func. The great de∣solations that were made in the worlde about this time by the plague of pestilence the Hethnickes imputed the cause of them to the Christians. But CYPRIAN, whose pen the Lord guided better, declared that the cause of all these ca∣lamities was the worshipping of Idoles, the contempt of Gods true seruice, and the persecuting of innocent Christi∣ans. Cypr. ad Demetrianum. Gallus & Volusian. AFter DECIVS, GALLVS & VOLVSIAN his sonne reigned 2 yeere. He walked in the footsteps of DE∣CIVS. Euseb. lib. 7 cap. 1. He was slaine by EMILI∣AN who presumed to reigne, but he was so hastely made out of the way that Euseb. and many other historiti∣ans misknow his name in the Catalogue of Emperours. Valerianus & Gallienus. VALERIANVS and GALLIENVS his sonne reigned 15. yeeres Euseb. viz GALLIENVS with his father in coniunct authoritie 7. yeeres, after his fathers cap∣tiuitie and death he reigned alone 8. yeeres, in the first three or foure yeres of the Empire of VALERIAN he was favourable and friendlie to Christians and great num∣bers of them were found in the Emperours court: But af∣terward
he was seduced by an Egyptian sorcerer, who hated Christians, because that by them he was hindered from pra∣ctising his magicall charmes. So the eight persecution be∣gan vnder VALERIAN. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 10. In this The 8. persecution. ANN. Ch. 259. persecution suffered three Bishops of Rome, LVCIVS, STE∣PHANVS, and SIXTVS 2. and a Deacon Laurence, who was laied vpon an hote boiling yron, and patientlie en∣dured the torment of fire. This is that Deacon who called the poore the treasure of the Churche: for then is the Church rich, when it is rich in good works, and feedeth, clo∣theth and visiteth Christ in his hungrie, naked and diseased members. DIONYSIVS Bishop of Alexandria was banished to Cephro, a place in the wildernesse of Lbya. Euseb. lib. 7 cap. xi. PRISCVS, MALCHVS, ALEXANDER were deuoured by beasts in Caesarea Palestinae. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 12 The martyr∣dome of Cy∣prian. CYPRIAN B. of Carthage was beheaded. Nazianz. in lau∣dem Cypriani. MARINVS a Romaine Captaine in Caesarea was invied for the dignity & honour he was advanced vnto, and he was accused to be a Christian, and consequently to be vncapable of great preferments & dignities: he was en∣couraged by THEOTECNVS B. of Caesarea patiently to suffer Theotec∣nus B of Cae∣sarea incou∣rageth Ma∣rinus. death for the cause of Christ by taking him in into a secret chalmer and laying before him a drawen sworde and the booke of the Gospell, and bidding him take his choice of one of these two which he liked best. MARINVS liked better of the booke of the Gospell then of the sworde, and was martyred for the faith contained in that sacred booke of holy Scripture. Euseb. lib. 7 cap. 15. ASTYRIVS a noble Se∣natour caried the body of this holy martyr MARINVS vpon his own shoulders and buried it honourably. Euseb. ibid. cap. 16. In end the Lord deliuered this persecuting Tyrant into the hande of SAPOR King of Persia, who not only detee∣ned him in strait captiuitie, but also abused him most filthe∣lie, and made his body a footestoole, & trampled vpon his necke at such times as hee was about to mount on horse∣backe. Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 7. cap. 13. Bucolc. Index chr. This fearful captiuity of VALERIAN had into it a notable testimony of the wrath of God against persecuters. For like as he trampled vnder his feet the Church of Christ: so
in like manner the Lord gaue his necke and backe to bee trampledvpon by the feete of his enemies. This example of Gods heauie indignation somewhat terrified GALLIENVS his son, and hee gaue out an edict, for the fafe returning of such as were banished, to their own dwelling p aces, and for staying the rage of persecution. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 13. DIO∣NYSIVS B. of Alexandria hauing liberty granted by the Em∣perours edict to returne from banishmēt, came backe again to Alexandria, wherein he found such terrible desolation by famine & pestilēce, that there remained not of men, women & children so many aliue as there were wont to be of anci∣ent hoare headed men, walking vpon their streets: the Lord was so highly displeased with the vnthankful world, that he Christians full of pitis was determined to cōsume thē who had cōsumed his people The good cariage of Christians at this time is worthie to be marked, who were full of charitie & loue, and visited the sicke, & did all offices of humanitie to those, who were dis∣eased or dead: whereas the Pagans by the contrarie forsooke their dearest friends, left them comfortlesse, and thrust out such as were halfe deade vnto the streetes, & left them there vuburied, & to be eaten with dogs. This is written in the let∣ter of DIONYSIVS insert in the historie of Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 21 & 22. so great difference is betweene Christians trained vp in the schoole of Christ, & others, who haue not bene fed with the sincere milke of the worde. Christians in time of sicknesse were more dutifull to their enemies then others were vnto their friends. If any man would defend worshipping of images, to be an ancient custome in the Church, by the two brasen images, The historie of Eusebius concerning the two ba∣sen images in Caesarea Philipi. which wer set vp in Caesarea Philippi, for a memorial of the mi∣racle that Christ wrought in curing of the woman who had the bloodie issue, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 18. the foresaide place of EVSEBIVS wil make nothing for him. For these images were not mde for adoratiō, neither were they set vp in tēples nor worshipping places, but in the very street before the doore of the womā who had ben cured. The places wherunto Chri∣stians were gathered together for diuine seruice at this time are called in the mandat of the Emperour GALLIENVS Coemi∣teria, Euseb. li. 7. cap. 13. In these places no man readeth that images were set vp. Beside this these images were grauen or
moiten by the handes of Pagans, and not of Christians: and this fact was done by imitation of the Gentiles, , that is, according to the custome of the Gentiles, he faith not , according to the custome of her owne kinred, but  as said is. Yet may we take warning by this place to beware of the small beginnings of errour. Images haue bene like vnto a base borne fellowe who at the first can haue no credite to set his head into the Kings palace, but afterward he getteth ingresse into the vt∣ter court, & in end, his credite dayly increasing by degrees, he getteth fauour to ly in the Kings bed chalmer: euen so in the first 300. yeere of our Lord images were not brought in into places of holy conuentions: afterward they were brought in into Churches, but not worshipped, as the E∣pistle of GREGORIVS the first, written to SEVERVS B. of Mar∣sil clearely testifieth. But in end adoration of images was in so frequent vse, as if it had beene the principall point of the worship of God. Claudius & Quintilius. CLAVDIVS after GALLIENVS reigned 2. yeeres, Euseb. lib 7, cap. 29. And his brother QVINTILIVS 17. dayes. He is not reckoned by EVSEBIVS in the rol of Emperours. Aurelianus. AFter QVINTILIVS AVRELIANVS possessed the crown, 6. yeeres, Euseb. lib. 7. cap 30. In the beginning of his reigne he was not a great disturber of Christi∣ans. Notwithstanding in continuance of time, The 9tperse∣cution. ANN. Ch. 278, his nature somewhat inclinable to seueritie, was altered to plaine tyrannic, which tyrannie first he shewed beginning with the murther of his own sisters sonne, as witnesseth EV∣TROPIVS. After that, he proceedeth to moue the ninth per∣secution against Christians: albeit the mercifull working of
God did soone ouerthrow all the wicked purpose of the Emperour. For as the edict and proclamation should haue bene denounced for the persecuting of Christians the migh∣tie hand of the Lord from aboue did suddenly stop his pur∣pose: clearely declaring to all men, that there is no power to worke any violence against the seruants of God, vnlesse his permission doe suffer them, and giue them lieue, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. Func. Chron. Here I see that D. I. FOXE writer of the booke of martyres taketh lieue of VINCENTIVS mar∣tyrologie. If others had done the like, they had not heaped vp so many martyres in the dayes of CLAVDIVS QVINTI∣LIVS, and AVRELIAN as they haue done. For EVSEBIVS had assuredly made mention of it, if the number had beene so great as VINCENTIVS recordeth. Before the Empe∣rours minde was altered and inclined to tyranme against Christians, hee assisted with his authoritie the Bishops con∣ueened at Antiochia for the deposition and excommunicati∣on Aurelian with ctutle authoritie assisteth the Church a∣gainst Sa∣mosatenus. of the Heretique SAMOSATENVS. And so the Emperours authoritie beeing interponed, this proud Heretique was compelled to stoop and to giue place, and with great ig∣nominie was driuen from the towne of Antiochia, Euseb. lib. 7, cap. 30. In his place DOMNVS was elected to be Bi∣shop of Antiochia, a man endued with good graces, the sonne of DEMETRIAN, who immediatly before SAMOSATE∣NVS gouerned the Church of Antiochia. And heere againe it is to be marked that the Bishops at this time (albeit it was a time of persecution) yet did they not abhorre from ma∣riage: for DEMETRIANVS Bishop of Antiochia was a maried man and had children, and DOMNVS was his sonne, so that the prohibition of mariage to men in spirituall offices is not an ancient doctrine. Annius Tacitus & Florianus. AFter AVRELIAN was flaine betweene Bizans and Heraclea the imperial chaire was vacant 6. months The Senat of Rome elected ANNIVS TACITVS to be
Emperour. He continued but 6. months in his gouernment, EVSEBIVS oue rpasseth his name with silnce, as likwise the name of his brother FLORIANVS who aspired to the impe∣riall dignitie, Func. Chron. Aurelius Probus. AVRELIVS PROBVS a gentle and peaceable Empe∣rour reigned 6. yeeres 3. months, Euseb. Func. chron. He was inuied by his captaines & souldiers, because hee appointed them to plant vineyardes and saide there was no great neede of souldiers where no enemie was to be feared. Hee was slaine by his souldiers, Func. Chron. Bucolc. Carus, Carinus, Numerianus. CARVS with his two sonnes, CARINVS and NVMERI∣ANVS reigned after PROBVS. All these three conti∣nued not aboue the space of 3. yeeres, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. And NVMERIANVS was slaine by his owne father in law called APER, Func. Chron. CARVS was slaine by thunder: and CARINVS was ouercome in battell and slaine by DI∣OCLETIAN, whome the Romaine armie had declared to be Emperor while CARINVS was yet aliue, Bucolc. Index chro. Diocletianus & Maximianus. Like as DIOCLETIAN ouercame CARINVS the sonne of CARVS in battell, euen so likewise he slew APER the father in lawe of NVMERIANVS with his owne hands, Func. Chron. Whether this was done for detestation
of sin, or for desire of gouernment it is vncertaine. Alwayes some affirme that his concubine DRVAS had said vnto him that he should kill a wilde Boare before he should be Empe∣rour. And after the killing of APER (which name by in∣terpretation signifieth a wilde Boare) hee became Empe∣rour. In the beginning of his reigne he chused for his col∣lege MAXIMIANVS surnamed HERCVLEVS, father to MAX∣ENTIVS. And these two chused other two, viz. GALERIVS & CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS the father of CONSTANTINE, whō they called Casars: but the honourable title of AVGVSTVS DIOCLETIAN & MAXIMIAN retained to themselues. These two A A. reigned 20 yeers. CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS CAESAR. continued 15. yeeres. GALERIVS CAESAR 21. yeeres. DIO∣CLETIAN and MAXIMIANVS HERCVLEVS abstained from persecuting of Christians vntill the 19 yeere of their reigne. Before I touch the historie of the tenth persecution three things are to be premitted. First, that after the persecution of VALERIAN the 8. persecuter, the Church enjoyed great peace, which albeit it was like to be cut off by the altered minde of AVRELIAN, yet the wise dispensation of the wis∣dome of God prouided that all his cruell enterprises were disappointed. The righteous Lord cutted the cords of the wicked, Psal. 129. ver. 4. Secondly Christians were in great fauour and credite with Emperours, and to them was committed the gouernement of Prouinces and nations, as clearely appea∣red in the preferment of DOROTHEVS and GORGONIVS. Thirdly they had libertie to builde oratories and temples, large and ample in euery citie, Euseb eccl. hist. lib. 8. cap. Temples  built by Chstians after the death of Va∣lerian. 1. All this came to passe in the fourtie yeeres peace that interueened betweene the reigning of VALERIAN, and the nineteenth yeere of the reigne of DIOCLETIAN. Yet the Church of Christ in this shorte time beganne to be fea∣stered with the corrupt maners of carnall and fleshly peo∣ple, so that contentions abounded, but charitie waxed cold in the Church of God. Euseb. ibid. What wonder was it then that the Lorde permitted this tenth and most horrible persecution of DIOCLETIAN to stirre and to wa∣ken drowsie Christians who were beginning to be fashio∣ned'according to the likenesse of the world?
In the 19. yeere of his imperiall authoritie, and in the month of March this horrible periccution beganne to arise, The 10 per∣secution. ANN. Ch. 308. DIOCLETIAN in the East, and MAXIMIANVS in the West bending all their forces to root out the profession of Chri∣stians out of the world. DIOCLETIAN was puft vp in pride for his manifolde victories and triumphes, and would bee counted a God, & adorned his shoes with gold & precious stones, & commanded the people to kisse his feet. This per∣secution continued 10 yeeres, euen vntill the seuenth yeere of the reigne of CONSTANTINE the great. So that what∣soeuer crueltie was practised by MAXIMIANVS, MAXIMI∣NVS, MAXENTIVS, and LICINIVS algoeth vnder the name of DIOCLETIAN the authour of this tenth persecution. Crnell edicts and proclamations were set foorth in the be∣ginning of this persecution, commanding to ouerthrow & cast to the ground the temples of Christians, to burne the bookes of holy scripture, to displace all such as were magi∣strats and were in office, and to cast Christian Bishops into prison, and to compell them with sundrie kinds of punish∣ments, to offer vnto Idoles. Also common people, who would not renounce the profession of Christianitie to bee spoyled of their libertie, Euseb. lib. 8 cap 3. These edicts were hastely put in execution. Many Christians were scour∣ged, racked, & cruciated with intollerable torments. Some were violently drawne to impure sacrifice, and as though they had sacrificed, when indeede they did not, were let go: some were cast downe vpon the ground, and drawne by the legges a great space, and the people was made to beleeue, that they had sacrificed: some stoutly withstood them, and denied with a loude voice that they had bene, or euer would be partakers of idolatrie. Notwithstanding, of the weake sort many for feare and infirmitie gaue ouer euen at the first brunt, Euseb lib 8. cap. 3. When the foresaid edicts were John a no∣ble man borne, rent in pieces the Emperours proclamati∣on. proclaimed, both the Emperours hapned to be in the town of Nicomedia: notwithstanding a certaine Christian beeing a noble man borne, whose name was IOHN, ran and tooke downe the proclamation, and openly tare and rent it in pieces. For which fact hee was put to a most bitter death, which he patiently indured vntill his last gaspe. Euseb. lib. 8.
cap. 5. The generall captaine of the armie of DIOCLETI∣AN gaue choice to the souldiers, whether they would obey the Emperours commandement in offering sacrifices, and keepe still their offices, or else lay away their armour, and be depriued of their offices: but the Christian souldiers were not onely content to lay away their armour, but also to offer themselues vnto the death, ather then to obey such vnlawfull commandements, Euseb. lib. 8 cap. 4. In Nicomedia the Emperour refrained not from the slaugh∣ter and death of the children of Emperours, neither yet from the slaughter of the chiefest princes of his court, such as PETER, whose body beeing beaten with whips and torne that a man might see the bare bones, and after they had mingled vineger and salt, they powred it vpon the most tender partes of his body, and lastly rosted him at a soft fire as a man would rost flesh to eate, and so this victorious martyre ended his life. DOROTHEVS and GORGO∣NIVS The mar∣tyrdome of Peter, Do∣rotheus and Gorgoni∣us. beeing in great authoritie and office vnder the Em∣perour after diuerse torments were strangled with an hal∣ter. The torments that PETER suffered, encouraged them to giue a worthy confession that they were of that same faith and religion that PETER was of, Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 6. This persecution raged most vehemently in Nicome∣dia, where the Emperours palace through some occasion beeing set on fire, the Christians were blamed as authors of that fact: Therefore so many as could bee found out, were burned with fire, or drowned in water, or beheaded with the sword, amongst whome was ANTHIMVS Bishop of Antiochia, who was beheaded. The bodies of the sonnes of Emperours that were buried, thy digged out of their graues, and sent them in boates to be buried into the bottome of the sea, lest Christians should haue wor∣shipped them as gods, if their sepulchres had bene knowne. Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 6. such opinion they had of Christians. The number of twentie thousand burned in one temple of Nicomedia by MAXIMIANVS smelleth of the libertie that NICEPHORVS taketh in adding many things to the veritie of the historie. The martyrdome of SERE∣NA the Emperour DIOCLETIANS wife is rejected
by learned men as a fable, albeit recorded by HERMAN∣NVS GIGAS. The number of Christians cast into pri∣son and appointed for death was so great, that scarcely if a voide place could be found in a prison to thrust in a mur∣therer, or an opener of graues, such heapes of Christians were inclosed in darke prisons, Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 6. The martyrs of Palestina, of Tyrus in Phenicia, of Tarsus, of An∣tiocha, of Alexandia, of Mletina in Armenia, and of Pontus, Cappadocia and Arabia they could not easily bee numbred. In Thebaida horrible and vnnaturall crueltie was Horrible crueltie a∣gainst Chri∣stian women. vsed against Christian women, whome they hanged vpon gibbetts with their heades down-ward toward the ground, and fastened one of their legges allanerly to the gibbet, the other beeing free: thus their naked bodies hanging vpon trees in maner foresaid presented to the beholders a specta∣cle of most vile and horrible inhumanitie, Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 9. In like maner the branches of trees were artificially bowed downe to the earth, and the feete and legges of Christians tied to them, so that by their hastie returning againe vnto their naturall places the bodies of Christians were rent in pieces. This was not a crueltie finished in a short space of time, but of long continuance, some dayes 20. some 30. some dayes 60. and at some times an hundreth were with sundrie kindes of torments excruciated vnto the death. And these torments they suffered with joy and glad∣nesse, and singing of Psalmes vntill the last breath, Euseb. ibid. In Phrygia a towne was set on fire by the Emperours commandement (the name where of EVSEBIVS passeth o∣uer A towne in Phrygiaset on fire, and al the inhbi∣tants bunt with fire. with silence) and the whole inhabitants beeing Chri∣stians, men women and children were burned with fire, Eu∣seb lib. 8. cap. 11. TIRANNION Bishop of Tyrus, ZE∣NOBIVS Presbyter of Sidon, SILVANVS Bishop of Ga∣za, and PAMPHILVS a worthy Presbyter in Casarea, whose life and death EVSEBIVS hath described in a se∣uerall treatise, all these (I say) were crowned with martyr∣dome, Euseb lib. 8. cap. 13. MAXIMIANVS Emperour of the West, whose persecution EVSEBIVS describeth not at such length as the persecution of DIOCLETIAN in the East, hee was like vnto a wilde Boare trampling vnder
his feete the vine-yarde of God. Hee slewe MAVRITI∣VS a noble Captaine with a legion of Christian and Thebane Mauritius with a whole legion of Christian souldiers martyred. souldiers, because they would not consent to offer sacrifice vnto idoles. This was done beside the riuer of Rhonne, hist. Magd. Cent. 4. The martyres of France, Italic and Germanie, specially at Colen and Triers, where the blood of Christians was shed in such aboundance, that it ranne like small brookes, and it coloured great and maine riuers, the multitude (I say) of these holy martyres, and the diuersitie of tormentes dayly excogitate against them, what memorie is able to comprehend, or what tongue is able sufficiently to expresse? In ende, when these two Emperours were drunken with the blood of the Saintes of God, and sawe that the numbers of Christi∣ans dayly increased, they beganne to relent their forie and madnesse a litle, beeing at last content that the pu∣nishment of Christians should bee the thrusting out of their right eyes, and the maiming of their left legges with condemning them to the mines of Mettalles, Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 12. The mercies of the wicked are cruell, saith SA∣LOMON Prou. 12. ver. 10. Before two yeeres were fully compleete after the beginning of this tenth persecution, these two furious persecuters (for what cause God know∣eth) gaue ouer their imperiall function, and remained not Emperours any more, but as priuate persons, Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 13, DIOCLETIAN after he had denuded himselfe Diocletian and Maxi∣mian giue ouer their imperiall function. of the imperiall dignitie, liued almost 9. yeeres. MAXI∣MIAN within foure yeeres after, was slaine by the com∣mandement of CONSTANTINE, Bucolc. The impe∣riall dominion then remained with CONSTANTIVS CHLO∣RVS and GALERIVS MAXIMINVS. These two diuided the whole monarchie betweene them. CONSTANTIVS con∣tented himselfe with France, Spaine and Brittaine: GALE∣RIVS MAXIMINVS had the rest. CONSTANTIVS tooke CONSTANTINVS his sonne to bee CAESAR vnder him, and GALERIVS MAXIMINVS chused his two sonnes, MAXIMI∣NVS & SEVERVS to be CAESARS vnder him. The Romaine soul∣diers also set vp MAXENTIVS the son of MAXIMIANVS HER∣CVLEVS to be their Emperour: against whom GALERIVS sent
his sonne SEVERVS, who beeing slaine, he chused LICINI∣VS in his stead. Of these fiue, who reigned all at one time (the like whereof came not to passe at any time before) two Emperours and three Caesars, three of them viz. GALERIVS and MAXIMINVS his sonne, and LICINIVS prosecuted the persecution, begun by DIOCLETIAN, neere the space of 7. or 8. yeeres, which was to the yeere of our Lord 318. The other two, CONSTANTIVS and his sonne CONSTANTINE, were fauourable to Christians. Constantius & Galerius Maximinus. CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS reigned as Emperour 13. yeeres. Others say 16 some say 11 yeeres. Hee ended his life in peace at Yorke, Hist. Magd. Hee was not onely friendly to Christians, but also hee counted them the only faithful subjects to Emperours. And such as hee perceiued that for loue of honour, gaine or any Constanti∣us tried his captames whether they wre Christi∣ans or not. worldly commoditie would make shipwracke of a good conscience and sacrifice to idoles (albeit they had allow∣ance by his owne fained commandement, giuen out for ex∣ploration of the religion of his Captaines and souldiers, ra∣ther then seriously and from his heart, allowing the worship∣ping of idoles) these (I say) who made no conscience to worship idoles for conquessing fauour at the Emperours hands, he disauthorized them, remoued them from offices and counted them men who were false to God, and would neuer be true to him, Euseb. de vita Constantini: lib. 1. MAXIMINVS elder & yonger in the East parts of the world were cruell persecuters. Because ecclesiastical writers do not clearly distinguish the crueltie of the father from the crueltie of the son, I shal comprise al vnder the name of GALERIVS MAXIMINVS the father of the other MAXIMINVS. He was not vnlike vnto PHARAO, for when the correcting hand of God was vpon him, then he relented his furie: but when the plague ceased, hee returned againe to his wonted malice.
First God smote him with a wonderfull vncouth disease, so that his flesh began to putrifie & innumerable multitude of vermine swarmed out of his inward parts, then hee com∣manded that the persecution should cease, and that Chri∣stians should pray for him, & he published edicts of peace in their fauours throughout all his dominions. But scarce continued he in this good resolution 6. months, when as he sent out contrarie edicts, and caused them to be engraued in brasse (which thing was not done at any time before) & to be set vp in euery citie, Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 7. whereupon en∣sued grieuous persecution. SILVANVS B. of Emisa. LVCIA∣NVS B. of Antiuchia, who suffered martyrdome at Nicomedia after hee had giuen in his apologie to the Emperour, and PETER B. of Alexandria, Euseb. lib 9. cap. 6. The martyrdome of king ANTHEAS and 37. thousand moe martyrs with him 1 passe by as a thing vncertaine: because EVSEBIVS could not haue ouerpassed with silence such a rare and wonderful crueltie committed in his owne time, if it had bene of veri∣tie done, as some alledge. Other thirtie thousand are said till haue beene martyred in sundrie places, and this is very probable, because the martyres who suffered in this tenth persecution were innumerable. QVIRINVS B. of Scesca∣nia a towne of vpper Pannonia was throwne into the flood hauing an hand mill hanged about his necke, and so was drowned. I leaue a recitall of the names of all the rest of the martyres, of whom I reade to haue suffered martyrdom at this time, like as I haue done in all the preceeding perse∣cutions. Now to speake somewhat of the cruell edict of this Em∣perour ingraued in brasse, and hanged vp in all principall Edicts a∣gainst Chri∣stians ingra∣ued in brasse. cities, specially in Tyrus. In it he gloried, that peace, wealth, prosperitie and plentie of all good things were in his time: and he attributed the glory of all this aboundance to the deuote worshipping of the heathen gods. At this time (saith EVSEBIVS) was that fulfilled which the Lord Iesus foretold that the tribulation of those dayes should be so great, that except those dayes had bene shortened, no flesh could haue bene saued: but for the Electes sake those dayes should be shortened: yea and if it were possible the very Elect should
be deceiued, Mat. 24. ver. 22. & ver. 24. But the Lord pi∣tying A sudden change of the prosperitie of Pagans into adusuie. the infirmitie of his Saintes, and to stop the blasphe∣mous mouthes of heathen people, turned suddenly al their joy into mourning and lamentation, with famine, pesti∣lence, warfare and vncouth diseases, whereby the eyes of men and women were blinded, the Lord dantoned the in∣solent pride of this bloodie Tyrant. It is to be noted that in time of this publicke calamitie, Christians and no others but they onely, were found to be fraughted with loue and full of charitie euen toward their hatefull enemies, Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 8. The second time whereinto MAXIMI∣NVS seemed to change his minde toward Christians was after the victorie obtained by CONSTANTINE and LI∣CINIVS against MAXENTIVS. The said two Empe∣rours set foorth edictes in fauour of the Christians: and MAXIMINVS rather fearing CONSTANTINE then louing God, began in his bounds also to stay the rage of cruell persecution, as the letter written to his Deputie SABINVS clearely declareth, Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 9. But incontinent after hee altered his minde and set foorth Maximinus was ouercome in battel by Licinius. newe commandements to persecute the Christians. Yet the Lord pitying the grieuous afflictions of his persecuted Church, brought this Tyrant to an ende. For hee made warre against LICINIVS beeing counselled thereto by his sorcerers and charmers, who promised vnto him good successe in his battell against LICINIVS: but the con∣trarie fell out: for hee was discomfited, and cast off his im∣periall ornaments, and fledde feeble and naked, and mixed himselfe with the effeminat multitude, wandering through townes, and lurking in villages, hardly escaped the handes of his enemies. After this he killed and put to death those enchanters and deceiuers who had bewitched him all his dayes, and had put him in esperance of victorie in his bat∣tell foughten against LICINIVS, and shortly after op∣pressed with a certaine disease, glorified the God of the Christians, and made a most absolute lawe for the safetie and preseruation of them. And so the Tyrant of Tyrants by the vehemencie of his sicknesse ended his life, Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 9. cap. 10.
After wee haue spoken a litle of MAXENTIVS who was chosen Emperour by the Praetorian souldiers, resteth nothing but to conclude this short summe of the histo∣rie of the ten persecutions with the ende and death of that notable hypocrite LICINIVS. MAXENTIVS was so villanous in his behauiour, that hee abstained not from abusing of the wiues of noble senatours, whome hee reft violently from their husbands, and contumeliously abused them, and sent them backe againe, Euseb, lib. 8. cap. 14. The like villanie also hee intended till haue done to a certaine Christian gentlewoman at Rome, called SOPHRONIA, Sophronia chused rather to kilher selfe then to be abused by Maxentius. whose husband neither could nor durst make resistance to the vile appetite of the proud Emperour, but this noble woman desiring libertie to goe to her chalmer to adorne and decke her selfe a shorte while, and after shee would goe with the messingers to the Emperour, shee chused rather to put her selfe to death in her chalmer then to be abused by him, Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 15. Which lamentable fact be∣ing reported to him, hee was nothing mooued therewith, neither abstained hee any white from his wonted sinnes. The people of Rome beeing wearie of his villanie sent to CONSTANTINE for aide, who gathered an armie in France and Brittaine to represse this Tyrant: to whome when hee approched, hee feared MAXENTIVS charmes (wherewith hee was supponed to haue vanquished SE∣VERVS, whome GALERIVS MAXIMINVS had sent against him before) and stood in doubt what to Constan∣tine seeth the similitud of a bright crosse inhea∣uen. doe: and as hee was doubting hee cast his eyes oftimes to heauen, and sawe about the going downe of the sunne a brightnesse in the heauen in the similitude of a Crosse, with certaine starres of equall bignesse giuing this inscripti∣on like Latin letters, In hoc vince, that is in this ouercome, Euseb. lib. 1. de vita Constantini. After this vision his banner was made in the similitude of a Crosse, and caried before him in his warres. MAXENTIVS was compelled to issue out Maxentius ouer come in battell by Constan∣tine. of the towne against CONSTANTINE, whose force when hee was not able to sustaine, he fled, and retired in hope to get the citie, but was ouerthrowne off his horse about the bridge called Pons Milvius and drowned in the flood.
DIOCLETIAN hearing tell of the prosperous successe of CONSTANTINE, and what edicts hee had set foorth for the peace of Christians, for very griefe hee died. Others al∣ledge that he poysoned himselfe. Ann. 317. LICINIVS was made CAESAR by MAXIMINVS, as said is. He was very familiar with CONSTANTINE and was his col∣leg in the gouernement 7. yeeres, and maried CONSTANTIA the ser of CONSTANTINE, Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 8. Likewise he concurred with him to subdue the tyrant MAXENTIVS. Also he ouercame MAXIMINVS in battell. He purposed likewise to haue circumueened and slaine the good Emperour CON∣STANTINE to whome he was many wayes greatly addebted but the Lord disappointed his counsells, & preserued CON∣STANTINE to the great benefite and well of his Church. But LICINIVS failing of his purpose conuerted his rage against the Christians, notwithstanding he had set out edicts before to procure their peace. Hee pretended this quarrell against them, that they prayed for the welfare of CONSTANTINE and not for his welfare. Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constantini. He Three cruell edicts of Li∣cinius a∣gainst Chri∣stians. set foorth against the Christians three cruell edicts. 1. Inhi∣biting assemblies and conuentions of Bishops to consult in matters belonging to their religion 2. He discharged wo∣men to resort to the assemblies where men were to pray or to be instructed in matters pertaining to religion. 3. Hee commanded that no man should visite imprisoned Christi∣ans or succour them with any reliefe, threatning against the contraueeners such punishment as the imprisoned persons were to suffer, Euseb. li. 10. ca. 8. After these edicts the moun∣taines, woods & wildernesses began to be the habitation of the Lords saints, Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 8. The Bishops about Libya and Egypt were taken, cut in pieces, and their flesh cast into the sea to be baite to the fish. And this was done by the flatterers of LICINIVS, supponing to gratifie him by the cruell handling of the Lords seruants. In his time were put to death these 40. martyres of whome BASILIVS wri∣teth, who were set in a pond of water all night lying open to the blasts of the cold Northerne winds, and in the mor∣ning they beeing frozen and almost senslesse with the ex∣tremitie of the colde, yet were caried vpon carts to be bur∣ned
with fire, to the ende their poore carkeises might feele by experience whether the extremitie of cold or heate were the greater torment Of these 40. noble souldiers of Christ one beeing stronger then the rest indured the vehemencie Fortie mar∣tyrs tormen∣ted first with cold and next wth heate. of the cold better, to whome his mother came, not to desire him to embrace this present life by a filthie denial of Christ, nor to weepe for the paines of the tormented body of her sonne, but rather to exhorther sonne to perseuere constant∣ly in the faith of Christ to the ende: for shee craued licence to lift vp her sonne with her owne handes into the cart, ad∣monishing him to accomplish that happie journey he had begunne. But whether these were the 40. martyres who suf∣fered the like punishment in Sebastia a towne of Armenia, or not, Sozom. lib. 9. cap. 2. it is not certaine, in respect that some circumstances set downe by BASIL. doe not agree to those of Sebastia, Basil. Magn. in 40 martyres. Likewise in this persecution suffered BARLAN a noble man mentioned in a sermon of BASILIVS, who after many tor∣ments was in end laid vpon the altar, whereupon they vsed to offer sacrifice to idols, & while there was yet some strēgth in his hande, they put franckincense into his right hande, thinking that he would haue scattered the incense vpon the altar, and sacrificed but he endured the torment patiently, saying the words of the Psalme 145. Blessed be the Lord who teacheth mine hands to fight. In end LICINIVS made warre a∣gainst CONSTANTINE and being diuerse times ouer∣come both by sea and land, he yeelded himselfe at length, and was sent to Thessalia to liue a priuate life, where he was slaine by the souldiers. SO CONSTANTINE obtained the whole empire alone. Here ende the ten persecutions.
CENT. III. Cap. 2. TO VICTOR succeeded ZEPHYRINVS the 14. Bishop of Rome, who liued in that charge 8. yeres, 7. months Bishops of Rome. Zephyrinus 10. dayes, Platin. EVSEBIVS attributeth vnto him 18. yeeres, Euseb. lib 6 cap. 21. so vncertaine is the computation of the yeeres of the gouernement of the Bi∣shops of Rome. EVSEBIVS writeth nothing of his decretall epistles, and these that are forged by late writers are foolish and ridiculous. Consecration of the holy cuppe in a vessel of glasse alanerly. A Bishop to bee accused before honest Iudges, twelue in number, whome the Bishop himselfe shall chuse if neede bee: honest and vnspotted witnesses to bee heard in his cause no fewer then 72. conforme and aboue the number of these 70. disciples whome Christ adjoyned as fellow-labourers in preaching with his Apostles. And fi∣nally that no definitiue sentence should bee pronounced a∣gainst a Bishop vntill the time his cause were heard of the Patriarch of Rome. This is but a mocking of the Church of God, to attribut such swelling pride, such vnaccustomed formes of judicatorie, such defensiue armour, fencing and gwarding vnrighteous men against just deserued punish∣ment vnto the simplicitie of an ancient Church, humbled vnder the crosse, and sighing vnder the yocke of heauie and long-lasting afflictions. These false and forged decretall epistles altogether vnknowne to the fathers, who liued be∣fore the dayes of CONSTANTINE, will procure one day a decreete and sentence of wrath against these, who haue giuen out new inuented lies vnder the names of anci∣ent and holy fathers. The canons of the Apostles (albeita booke falsly at∣tributed to the Apostles) doe agree better with scrip∣ture then the constitution of ZEPHYRINVS. For the Scripture saith, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, euery worde shall bee confirmed, Matt. 18 ver. 16. The Canons of the Apostles say,
, that is, Let not an Heretique be admitted to beare witnesse against a Bishoppe, neither yet one witnesse alanerly, albeit hee bee faithfull: because that by the mouth of two or three witnesses euery worde shall be con∣firmed. Canon Apost. cap. 74. The writer of the Ca∣nons of the Apostles had some remembrance of the words of Scripture: but the forger of the decretall epistles of ZE∣PHYRINVS is like vnto a ship-man, who hath hoised vp his saile and auanced his ship so far into the sea, that hee hath tint the sight of lande and townes, as the Poet spea∣keth Provehimur Pelago, terraeque vbesque recedunt. Surely this lying fellowe, who euer hee hath bene, that hath written this supposititious decretall epistle of ZEPHYRINVS, hee hath hoised vp his saile, and is so bent to lie, that he hath tint both sight and remembrance of the words of holy scripture. CALLISTVS the 15. Bishop of Rome continued in his Callistus. charge 5. yeeres, Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 21. PLATI∣NA saith 6 yeeres, 10. months, 10. dayes. The fable of Pope DAMASVS, who affirmeth that CALLISTVS builed a Church to the honour of the virgine MARIE beyond Ty∣ber is rejected by PLATINA himselfe, because the historie of the time clearely prooueth that in the daies of SEVERVS and his sonnes, the conuentions of the Christians could not haue bene in magnificke temples, but rather in obscure chappels or subterraneall places, so that the multiplied number of lies written of the Bishops of Rome who liued in this age, and the decretall epistles falsly attributed vnto them plainely proue, that the garment of antiquitie, vnder the lap whereof Papistes would so faine lurke, is altogether inlacking to them. VRBANVS 1. was the 16. Bishoppe of Rome. He con∣tinued in his office eight yeeres saith Euseb. lib. 6. cap. Vrbanus. 22. PLATINA foure yeeres, ten months, twelue dayes, Of his martyrdome EVS EBIVS maketh no mention. O∣thers who record his martyrdome are not certaine in what Emperours dayes hee was martyred. Iproceede to
his successour PONTIANVS the 17. B. of Rome. He continu∣ed Pontianus. in his charge 9. yeeres, 5. months, 2. dayes, Platin, Euseb. saith 6. yeeres. He was banished to the Isle Sardinia where he died. Of the two decretall epistles ascribed vnto him, the second is generall written to al men who feare and loue God & the very first words of it prooue it to be false & for∣ged, Pontianus sanctae & uniuersalis Ecclesiae Episcopus, &c. that is, PONTIANVS Bshop of the holy vniuersall Church, to all them who feare & loue God, wisheth welfare, Tom. 1. Con∣cil. Such magnificke stiles as these were not as yet in vse, and when they crept in into the Church afterward, they were giuen by persons who admired the vertues of some singulare and rare men, such as CYPRIAN and ATHANASIVS and EVSEBIVS: but no man did vsurpe such proud and arro∣gant titles of dignitie in his owne writings direct to other Christians, and therefore the learned reject this epistle as composed by some late vnlearned and flattering fellowe. After PONTIANVS succeeded ANTERVS the 18 B. of Rome, to whome EVSEBIVS assigneth but one mouth of continu∣ance Anterus. in his ministrie, lib. 6. cap. 29. DAMASVS assigneth to him 12. yeeres, PLATINA 11. yeeres, 1 month, 12. dayes, and this diuersitie of counting cannot be reconciled. Next to ANTERVS succeeded FABIANVS the 19. Bishop of Rome vpon whose head a doue lighted when the people were cōsulting Fabianus. anent the election of a Bishop, therfore with full consent of the wholeCongregation he was declared to be theirBishop. The people at this time were so far from beeing secluded frō giuing their consent to the electiō of him who should be or∣dained their Pastour, that the consent of the people had the principall swey in the election of Pastours, Func. Chron, & Commentar. He suffered martyrdome vnder the reigne of DECIVS the 7 great persecuter, after hee had continued in his office 14. yeeres, 11. months, 11. dayes, Platin de vit. Ma∣ny constitutions made by him are cited by GRATIANVS & insert Tom 1. Concil. One of them I cannot psse by. We constitute that vpon euery Lordes day the oblation of the altar shall be made by euery man and Woman both of bread and wine to the end that by these oblations they may be deliuerea from the heapes of their sinnes. First marke in this constitution that the bread and
wine which the people brought with them vpon the Lords day for the ministration of the holy communion is called the oblation of the altar. the table whereupon the bread and wine were laide, was called the altar: the bread and the wine are called the offering or the sacrifice, because part of it was distributed in the holy communion to keepe a me∣moriall of the Lordes death, and the rest was giuen to the sustentation of the poore, and in that respect also it was cal∣led a sacrifice as the scripture speaketh, To do good & to distri∣bute forget not, fo, with such sacrifices God is pleasd, Heb. 13. ver. 16. The last part of the decreet is blasphemous and falsly at∣tributed to FABIAN: because the sinnes of men and women, who beleeue and repent, are forgiuen onely for the mrite of that bloodie sacrifice which the Lord Iesus offered vpon the crosse for our sinnes. But our furnishing of elements to the communion and sustentation of the poore cannot merite forgiuenesse of sinnes. The successour of FABIANVS was CORNELIVS the 20. Bi∣shop Cornelius A council at Rome a∣gainst No∣vatus. of Rome. He had a great strife against NOVATVS & his complices. He assembled a Councill at Rome of 60. Bishops, besides Elders and Deacons, by whome the heresie of NO∣VATVS was condemned, and the Novatians were separated from the fellowship of the Church, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. CORNELIVS was banished from Rome by the Emperour DECIVS and sent to a towne in Hetruria called Centumcellae where he had great comfort by the mutuall letters that passed be∣tweene him and CYPRIAN Bishop of Carthage. When the Emperour gote knowledge of this, he sent for CORNELIVS, & accused him as a man who not onely despised the wor∣shipping of the gods, & was disobedient to the Emperours commandement, but also that hee was a trafficker against the estate of the empire by receiuing & sending letters be∣yond sea. CORNELIVS answered that he wrote os matters pertaining to Christ & the saluation of mens soules, & not of matters belonging to the estate of the empire. Notwith∣standing the Emperour DECIVS commanded that he shuld be scourged with plumbats (this was a sort of grieuous whip) and afterward that hee should be led to the temple of MARS with commandement to put him to death, incase
he refused to worship the image of MARS. Thus was COR∣NELIVS beheaded for the name of Christ, after hee had go∣uerned 2. yeeres, 3. dayes, Platin de vit. Oras EVSEBIVS wri∣teth, 3. yeeres, lib. 7. cap. 2. LVCIVS the 21. Bishop of Rome was successour to CORNE∣LIVS, and continued in the gouernement of the Church of Lucius. Rome 3. yeeres. 3 months, 3. dayes, Platin. Euseb. onely 8. months, lib. 7. cap. 2. One decretall epistle is asligned vn∣to him, written vnto the Bishoppes of Fance and Spaine, whereinto hee braggeth that the Bishops of Rome cannot erre in matters of faith, Tom 1. Concil. but the ineptitude of a barbarous Latine stile whereinto the Epistle is dited, de∣clareth it hath bene written by an vnlearned Asse, and not by LVCIVS Bishop of Rome. STEPHANVS 22. Bishop of Rome ruled that Church 2. yeres Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 7. cap. 5. Platin. 7. yeeres, 5. months, 2. Stephanus. dayes. He was greatly commoued against CYPRIAN B. of Carthage, because▪ that by his opinion of rebaptizing those who were baptized by Heretiques, the vnitie of the Church of Christ was perturbed and rent. PLATINA writeth that CYPRIAN before his martyrdome forsooke his opinion of rebaptizing and was content by imposition of handes ac∣cording to the custome of the Romaine Church to receiue such as had bene baptized by Heretiques, Platin. in vit. Lucii. The constitution anent consecrated garments that men in spiritual offices should weare in the Church, & no else where, lest they incurre the like punishment with BALTASAR, who abused the holy vessels of the house of God, Dan. 5. in my opinion is not judiciously attributed by PLATINA vnto this Bishop STEPHANVS: because the ordinance smelleth rather of Iudaisme then of Christian religion, and the reason sub∣joyned to the constitution is altogether impertinent. It was sacriledge indeede and a proude contempt of God in the person of BALTASAR to drinke common wine with his har∣lots in the vessels of gold dedicated to the holy seruice of God, but an holy preacher to walke in that same apparell in the streete whereinto hee preached and ministred the communion in the Church, this is no sinne nor a thing for∣bidden by any Apostolicke precept. But PLATINA is drea∣ming
when hee ascribeth such friuolous constitutions to a Bishop, preparing himselfe for death, for PLATINA suppo∣neth that hee was martyred in the dayes of GALLIENVS. Let the reader marke vpon what sandie ground of fiuolous constitutions (and falsly alledged) Popish faith is grounded. The decree of STEPHANVS anent mariage, bearing that the Priestes, Deacons and Subdeacons of the Orientall Church were coupled in matrimonie, but in the Romaine Church no person in a spirituall office frō the Bishop to the Subdeacon had libertie to marrie, Tom, 1. Concil. x Gratiano. if it were true, as it is assuredly false, the Oriental Church hath a great commendation, because they would not be wiser then God, and they would not lay the yocke of the ordinances of men vpon the consciences of their Church-men but prohibition of mariage (which I haue prooued to be a doctrine of de∣uils) cannot be referred to so ancient a beginning. The Romaine church desirous to be masked with a shewe of antiquitie, they haue attributed Canons to the Apostles which are not found in their writings. Yet it is a shame to the forgers of these canons to be found the principall im∣pugners and transgressers of them, cap. 5 , that is to say, A Bshop, elder or Deacon, who vnder pretence of religion repudiateth his owne wife, if he cast her off, let him be ex∣communicated: and if hee perseuere in so doing, let him be deposed. How can this constitution of STEPHANVS agree with the Ca∣nons of the Apostles? Heere I appeale the consciences of honest and vpright men if they finde not that the lie i not onely repugnant vnto the veritie, but also vnto it selfe. The supposititious Canons of the Apostles, & the sup∣posititious constitutions of STEPHANVS cannot both con∣sist. I know what they answere, viz. that the Canons of the Apostles speake of those Bishops, Elders & Deacons, who had wiues when they were admitted to ecclesiastical offices, these should not repudiat their wiues vnder pretence of re∣ligion: but anent others who were vnmaried in the time of their admission the 25. Canon declareth otherwise. , that is, to vnmaried men who are
promoted to the clergie, we command that if they please, they shall marie, but onely readers and singers, to wit, shall haue this priuiledge. It is an vnsufferable thing to heare such leuitie and inconstancie imputed to the holy Apostles, that they debarred no man from the office of a Bishop, El∣der or Deacon, because he was a maried man. O but if any man enter vnmaried to be a Bishop Elder or Deacon, then he must not marie. If mariage had bene an vncleane thing it might haue debarred men from entering into holy offi∣ces, but if it be a cleane thing it cannot exclude them after they haue entered. The other decreet alledged out of Gratian, dist 79. Opor∣tebat ut haec, &c. that by the constitution of PETER and his successours it was ordained, that one of the Cardinall Elders or Deacons should be consecrated to be Bishop of Rome, & no other. Such stiles of preeminence are vnknowne to scripture, and to the antiquitie of this time. XISTVS or Xistus. 2 SIXTVS the 2. of that name, and in number the 23. Bishop of Rome succeeded to STEPHANVS, and gouerned 2. yeeres, 10 months, 23. dayes, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 27. And Func. Chron 11. yeeres, such vncertaintie is in counting the yeeres of their administration. The chaire of Rome through the vehemen∣cie of persecution was vacant without a successour one yere 11 months, 15. dayes, as DAMASVS granteth, and ONVPHRI∣VS the corrector of PLATINA cannot denie. If the Bishop of Rome be the head of the Church, then was the Church head∣lesse almost for the space of two yeeres. To XISTVS 2. succeeded DIONYSIVS the 24 Bishop of Dionysius. Rome, and continued in his ministration 9. yeere, according to the computation of EVSEBIVS. DAMASVS assigneth vnto him 6. yeeres & 2. months, MARIANVS 6. yeeres & 5. months such certaintie is in the maine and principall ground of the Romaine faith, anent the succession of the Romaine Bi∣shops, that scarse two writers doe agree in one minde a∣nent the time of their succession. To DIONYSIVS succeeded FELIX 1. the 25. Bishop of Felix. 1. Rome, & gouerned 5. yeeres, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 32. Hee liued in the dayes of AVRELIAN the 9. persecuter, and obtained the honour of martyrdome, Platin. In the three supposititious
decretall epistles assigned to him, the second epistle written to the Bishops of the Prouinces of France, very sollicitously careth for Bishops that they be not accused by secular men, but with so many caueats, as in effect exeemeth them from all accusation. The language whereinto the epistle is dited, cannot agree with the ornat stile of the Latin tongue in this age, he being a Romaine borne as PLATINA writeth. Pustquam ipse ab its charitativè conventus fuerit. Adsummos primates causa ejus canonicè deferatar. Concilium regularter convocare debbunt, &c. The Galilean language manifested not more euidently that PETER was a man of Galile, Mat. 26. ver. 73. then the first of these three phrases manifesteth that the foresaide epistle was compiled into a time of great barbaritie. EVTYCHIANVS the 26. B. of Rome followed after FELIX Eutychianus 1. He continued scarce ten months in his ministrie, Euseb, lib. 7. cap. 32. CAIVS the 27. B. of Rome succeeded to EVTYCHIANVS & continued 15. yeeres, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 32. Func. Chron He li∣ued Caius. in the dayes of the persecution of DIOCLETIAN, & lur∣ked for a time in subterraneall places. In end he was found out by the persecuters, and put to death, and with him his brother GABINIVS & his brothers daughter SVSANNA suffe∣red martyrdome, Platin de vit. Here it is to be marked that many martyres died before the edict of horrible persecuti∣on was set forth in the 19. yeere of DIOCLETIANS reigne. For MARCELLINVS succeeded to CAIVS, Ann, 298. Func. but the cruel edicts of the persecutiō of DIOCLETIAN were not set forth before the 308. yere of our Lord. Wherby it ap∣peareth euidently, that many Christians were put to death before the edicts of horrible persecution were renued by the Emperour DIOCLETIAN. So hard was the outward estate of Christians, that they were put to death vpon the warrant of the edicts of VALEPIAN & AVRELIAN, before the edicts of DIOCLETIAN & MAXIMIAN came forth. To CAIVS is attri∣buted the constitutiō of ecclesiasticall orders & degrees by which men must mount vp to the dignitie of a Bishop. First he must be Ostiarius, next Lector, 3. Exorcista, 4. Acoluthus, 5. Subdiaconus, 6. Diaconus, 7. Presbyter, & last of all Episcopus, Pla∣tin. decret. Caii, ex lib. Pontif. Damasi.
This order of ascending by degrees to the dignitie of a Bishop is confidently referred to the constitution of the A∣postles: but I say, Beatus quinon credi, that is, happie is he who beleeneth it not. Like as within scripture there is no lie, so likewise without scripture there is no trueth in mat∣ters of faith, ordering of maners, & appointing of ecclesia∣stical offices, al that is necessarie is contained in the written Word of God. But nowe to performe a part of that which I promised in the end of my treatise of Antiquitie, and to let euery man see what vnlearned Asses they haue bene who haue set foorth the fained decretall epistles of the fathers of this age. In the epistle written by CAIVS to the Bishop FE∣LIX aboue-mentioned he saith, If any man, of what dignitie so. euer he be, delate such persons (viz. Bishops, Elders, Deacons) for faultes that cannot bee prooued, let him vnderstand that by the authoritie of this constitution he shall be counted infamous. This constitution hath three partes: First: that no ecclesiasticall person should be accused before a secular Iudge. Secondly if any accusation be intended against Bishop, Elder of Deacon it should be qualified by sufficient probation. Thirdly if the accuser succumbe in probation, he should be counted infa∣mous how eminent so euer his dignitie and estate shall be. The compiler of this supposititious decretall epistle had no consideration of the time whereinto CAIVS liued. It was a time of persecution, Christian Bishops were continually drawne before seculare Iudges, & accused of odious crimes wherof they were most innocent: & CAIVS himself was compelled to lurke a long time in a subterraneal caue. At this time to bring in CAIVS, as it were sitting in a throne, cōman∣ding that no B should be accused before a secular Iudge, &c. what is this else but profusion of words without judgement and vnderstanding? If this decretall epistle had beene attri∣buted to BONIFACIVS 8. GREGORIVS 7. ALEXANDER 3. it had bene a more competent time, and the constitution had seemed more probable to the reader. Moreouer the lan∣guage is like vnto the matter it selfe. Intelligat jactur am infa∣miae se sustinere in place of jacturam famae. MARCELLINVS the 28. B. of Rome succeeded to CAIVS & Marcelli∣nus. ruled 9. yeeres, Platin, Func, Chron, he fainted in time of the
persecution of DIOCLETIAN, and sacrificed to idoles, but afterward he repented as PETER did, & gaue his life for the testimonie of Christ. He who accuseth himselfe, closeth all other mens mouths from accusation of him: hee who truly repenteth, by his repentance is restored to all the dignities of the children of God which were lost by sinne: hee who suffered martyrdome for Christ, and he whose body lacked the honour of buriall for the space of 30. dayes, for the cause of Christ alanerly, this man (I say) his name should be kept in reuerent remembrance as if he had not fallen. Marcellus. After MARCELLINVS succeeded MARCELLVS the 29. B. of Rome who continued in that ministration 5. yeres 6, months, 21 dayes. He liued in the dayes of MAXENTIVS, by whom he was enclosed into a filthie stable, to the end that lacking the salubritie of wholsome aire, he might be destroyed with the filth & stinke of the dung of beasts: which thing also came to passe indeede, for he died in the stable. This holy martyr, so long as he liued, he made the stable like vnto a sanctuarie: for hee neuer intermitted the holy exercises of prayer, & fa∣sting, and the Church when peace was granted to them by the mercie of God, they builded a temple in that same place where the stable had beene, whereinto MARCELLVS died, Platin. de vitis. The name of MARCELLVS is pretermit∣ted by EVSEBIVS. After MARCELLVS succeeded EVSEBIVS the 30. B. of Rome Eusebius. and continued 6. yeeres, 1, month. 3. dayes, In his time PLA∣TINA writeth that HELENA the mother of CONSTANTINE found the crosse of Christ. But ONVPHRIVS himself is com∣pelled to grant that both DAMASVS and PLATINA erred in that narration, because CONSTANTINE at this time had no dominion in Syria, neither was hee as yet conuerted to the faith of Christ. But the tyrant MAXIMINVS with great cruel∣tie oppressed the Church of Christ in the boundes of Syria and Iudea. And therefore such as read the historie of the pri∣mitiue Church, let them read with judgement: because it is an easie thing to erre, if any man giue such vndoubted cre∣dit Of other preachers & doctours. Tertullian, to ecclesiasticall writers as he giueth to sacred scripture. TERTVLLIAN a learned preacher of the African prouince, & of the citie of Carthage, a man of a quicke wit & pregnant
ingine, flourished vnder the reigne of SEVERVS the 5 perse∣cuter. When he came to Rome, he vas not free of the en∣uy and reproches of the clergie of the Romaine church, and mooued with anger, he declined to the opinion of the He∣retique MONTANVS, & wrote books against the true Church such as the volumes following, De pudicitia, De pecutione, De jejuns, De monogamia, De exstasi, lib. 6. & his 7. booke against APOLLONIVS. This lamentable defection of TERTVLLIAN may be an example to all men of great vnderstanding and excellent learning, not to be puft vp, nor to be high min∣ded, lest they fall into the snare of the deuill. For TERTVL∣LIAN wrote learned apologies for the Christians, and migh∣tily confuted the errour of MARCION: notwithstanding of al this, he was high minded, & joyned himself to the opiniō of MONTANVS, Ierom. Catal. script. eccl. if he had kept himself free of this foule spot, he was worthy for his giftes to haue ben counted amōg the most famous doctors of the Church after the dayes of the Apostles, Hist. Magd. Cent. 3. cap. 10. ORIGEN the sonne of LEONIDES an Egyptian was a yong Origen. man of 17. yeeres of age, when his father was martyred in the persecution of SEVERVS, Ierom, Catal. script. eccles. His ingine was so pregnant in his youth and so capable of all kinde of instruction, that his father would oftimes vncouer his brest when he was on sleepe, and kisse it, giuing thanks to God who had made him father of so happie a sonne, hist. Magd, Cent. 3. cap. 10. After his fathers death, he sustained himselfe, his mother & sixe brethren by keeping a schoole, for all his fathers goods were confiscate for his confession of Christ. When ORIGEN had spent his young age, the de∣scription of his life in Greeke saith. , that is, when he was in his mid age, the Churches of Achaia vexed with Heretiques sent for him: & as he was vpon his journey to Athens he went through Palestina & was ordained to be a preaching Elder by ALEXANDER B of Ierusalem, & THEOCTI∣STVS B. of Caesarea. This fact offended DEMETRIVS B. of A∣lexandria so highly, that he was full of rage against ORIGEN: and wherefore? because he beeing a man of Alexandria re∣ceiued ordination to an ecclesiasticall office from the Bi∣shops of Ierusalem and Caesarea.
When Bishops become serious in trifling matters, and haue a greater regarde to their owne gloy then to the aduancement of the kingdome of God, then that may bee spoken of them which IEROM writeth of DEMETRIVS, Qui tanta in eum debacchatus est insania, ut per totum mundum super ejus nomine seriberet, that is, He was so ful of rage against him that he replenished the world with writings mentioning the name of ORIGEN. But consider, what fault was in ORIGEN, who was crauing no ordination: And what fault was in ALEXANDER and THEOCTISTVS, men whose names shall be had in euerlasting remembrance. They did nothing of in∣tention to grieue the heart of DEMETRIVS B. of Alexandria, but onely beeing carefull of the aduancement of the kingdome of God, they endeuoured to strengthen the hands of ORIGEN, against the Heretiques of Achaia, by con∣ferring vnto him the calling of a Presbyter. No man can justly offend against me, if I cast in this sentence, as a com∣mon admonition to all preachers , Let vs not be ouer serious in ridiculous matters. The name of ORIGEN was so famous, that not onely the Bishops of Achaia sollicited him to come to their bounds for stop∣ping the mouthes of Heretiques, but also he was sent for at two diuerse times to bee present at the Councils conuce∣ned in Arabia against Heretiques. Some Heretiques af∣firmed that the soules of men perish with their bodies, and are raised vp againe in the day of the resurrection with the bodies, whom ORIGEN mightily refuted, Comment. Func. in Chron. lib. 6. Likewise he was present at the Councill in Arabia gathered against BERYLLVS B. of Bostra, who de∣nied that Christ was existent before his manifestation in the flesh, and by the trauelles of ORIGEN BERYLLVS was reclai∣med and reduced to the true faith: therefore I reckone him not into the roll of Heretiques, Euseb lib. 6. cap. 33. FIRMI∣LIANVS B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia inuited ORIGEN to come to Cappadocia where he deteined him a long time. Likewise MAMMEA, the mother of ALEXANDER the Emperour, sent for him to come to Antiochia, and had him in reuerent regarde. Likewise hee wrote to the Emperour PHI∣LIP, and to his mother who was the first Emperour that
professed the Name of Christ, Ierom. catal. script. eccl. He stu∣died to be acquainted with the Hebrew language, farre con∣trarie to the custome of his own nation: & he conferred the Hebrewe text with the Greeke translations, not onely the Septuagints, but also the translations of AQVILA, THEOLO∣SION and SYMMACHVS, and hee found out the fift, sixt and seuenth editions, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 17. Ierom catal. scrip. eccles. Notwithstanding of all these excellent gifts and renoumed fame of ORIGEN, he wanted not his owne grosse errours & foolish facts. In expoūding of scripturs he became a curious searcher out of allegories. Yet this father of allegories ORI∣GEN took the words of Christ spoken of Eunuches, There be some chaste, which haue made thmselues chaste for the kingdome of heauen, Mat. 19. ver. 12. these words, I say, spoken in an allego∣ricall sense, he tooke in a simple and vnfigurat meaning, and gelded himselfe, to the ende he might liue without all suspi∣tion of vncleannesse, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 8. No learned man hath commended this fact of ORIGEN so far as my reading can extend, for if a man might lawfully dismember his own body, to the end that he might liue chastly, why might not a man in like maner cut off his owne hand, to the ende hee should not in hastie motion of anger kil his neighbour? But the obedience of the commandements of God is seated in the heart, and more commended for voluntarie subjection, then for necessity of abstinence of committing euil, because there is not an instrument in the body able to commit transgression. Finally by seeking of diuinitie without the bounds of the holy scriptures of God, in stead of true diui∣nitie he was intangled with foolish errours, anent the crea∣tion of many worlds, one succeeding to another, anent the paines of deuils and wicked men after long torments to be finished, and anent the possibilitie of mans nature to keepe the whole law of God. For which opinions long after his death he was excommunicat in the 5, generall Council hol∣den Ann 551. Concerning his weaknesse in offering to idols rather then to suffer his chaste body to be abused, I haue spoken in the history of the 7. persecution. He liued vntil the dayes of GALLVS & VOLVSIANVS, & died in the 69. yeere of his age in the towne of Tyrus where he was also buried.
CYPRIAN was an African, borne in Carthage, in his youth al∣together Cyprian. giuen to the study & practise of Magical artes. His cōuersion was by the means ofCECILIVS a preacher, whose name after hee bare, and through occasion of hearing the historie of the Prophet IONAH, Ierom catal script. eccles. & Ierom. comment in Ionam. After his conuersion he distributed all his substance to the poore, Ierom. ibid. and became first a preaching elder, and afterward Bishop of Carthage. He was banished in the persecution of DECIVS, and martyred vn∣der VALERIAN, Nazianz, in laudem Cypriani. The worthy D. I. FOXE thinketh that NAZIANZEN commendeth another Bi∣shop of that same name, borne in Antiochia and Bishop in Antiochia, who suffered martyrdome in the dayes of DIO∣CLETIAN. This CYPRIAN B. of Carthage was a man full of loue, a great comforter of CORNELIVS B. of Rome. He suffe∣red martyrdome as IEROM writeth, that same day, albeit not in that same yeere, that CORNELIVS concluded his life by glorious martyrdome, Ierom, Catal. script. eccles. He had great strife against two contrarie sectes, viz. against NO∣VATVS, who was excessiue rigorous against those who had fallen in time of persecution: and against NOVATIANVS & FELICISSIMVS, who by the contrarie would haue had both Heretiques and Apostats receiued without all forme of ec∣clesiasticall discipline, Hist. Magd Cent, 3. cap. 10. He estee∣med much of those who suffered rebuke for the Name of Christ: & he said of the mettall mines, and those that were condemned for Christs sake to worke in them, that where∣as they were wont to deliuer golde and siluer and precious things vnto the world, no we by the contrarie the mines re∣ceiued golde and siluer and the most precious things in the world, counting the Confessours and martyrs of Christ the rich treasures of the earth, of whom the world was not wor∣thy. His opinion anent rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretiques, albeit it was erroneous, yet his modestie in not damning thē rashly, who were of a contrary opinion, is great ly praised by S. AVSTEN, who saith that the modestie of CY∣PRIAN in his error was moe to be regarded then a sound & right opiniō anent baptisme without humility & modesty
August de Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 17. He was a faith∣full builder of the house of God, not by word onely, but al∣so by write, and his bookes remaine vntill this day as a pre∣cious treasure in the Church of Christ. The booke de Re∣velatione capitis Ioannis Baptista is supposititious, because in it mention is made of the reuerence that PIPINVS king of France did to the heade of IOHN Baptist, when it was trans∣ported from Constantinople to France, and it is knowne that PIPINVS was not borne three hundreth yeeres after the martyrdome of CYPRIAN: how then could CYPRIAN write of a fact done so long time after his death? The Church of Christ was multiplied vnder the persecu∣tions of SEVERVS, MAXIMINVS, DECIVS, VALERIAN, AV∣RELIAN & DIOCLETIAN. All these sixe persecutions are comprehended in the third Centurie. In Ierusalem was NAR∣CISSVS, against whome wicked men banded themselues to∣gether, with forged accusations and false testimonies sealed vp with othes and imprecations to grieue the heart of NAR∣CISSVS, in so much that he left his calling, and fledde to the wildernesse where he Iurked a long time. But the false wit∣nesses who bare testimony against him escaped not the pu∣nishment of God: One of them and his whole familie and substance was burned with sudden fire: another of them was stricken with an heauie disease, such as hee himselfe in his imprecation had wished vnto himselfe: the third was ter∣rified with the sight of the judgements of God that lighted vpon the other two, and hee repented and powred out the griefe of his dolorous heart in such aboundance of teares that hee became blinde. All these false witnesses were pu∣nished, Euseb. lib 6. cap 9. and hee who was penitent, albeit the Lorde pardoned his sinne, yet hee chastised him with temporal punishments. The Bishops of the next adjacent Churches, because they knewe not what was become of NARCISSVS, they admitted another called DIOS, who con∣tinued but a shorte time. To him succeeded GERMANION and after GERMANION GORDIVS, in whose time NARCIS∣SVS manifested himselfe againe to the Church of Ierusalem, who requested him to vndertake his office againe: for they reuerenced him as a man raised from death to life againe
and the punishment of God inflicted vpon his accusers in∣creassed their reuerence toward him. He was old and not able to discharge the weightie office of a Bishop theresore ALEXANDER a worthie man was joyned as fellow-labou∣rer with him. EVSEBIVS writeth that hee was admonished, by a celestiall vision of the will of God, that hee should be Bishop of Jerusalem with NARCISSVS (for hee had beene Bishoppe of another parochin before in Cappadocia:) by the like celestiall vision NARCISSVS and others of the clergie were admonished, that the day next following a Bishoppe should enter into Jerusalem whome God had appointed to be an helper to NARCISSVS, Ierom Catal. scrip. eccl. He de∣fended ORIGEN against the furie and madnesse of DEME∣TRIVS B. of Alexandria, who set both himselfe and others to great businesse for a matter of no importance as said is, Ie∣rom ibid. In the persecution of DECIVS he was caried to Casarea, closed into a darke prison, and died a martyre as hath beene declared. ALEXANDER is supponed till haue beene the 35. Bishop of Jerusalem. MAZABANES, HYMENEVS, LEBDAS, THERMON, all these followed ALEXANDER, Euseb lib 7. cap. 14 Func, chronol. In Alexandria to PHILETVS and DEMETRIVS succeeded Bishops of Alexandria. HERACLAS the 12 Bishop of that towne. He was the dis∣ciple of ORIGEN and a fellow-labourer with him in gouer∣ning the schoole of Alexandria, in ende he was chosen to be Bishop of Alexandria: whose successour was DIONYSIVS 13. Bishop, whom God deliuered miraculously from the hands of persecuters, in the dayes of DECIVS, by the sudden onset of a number of people who had beene at a mariage feast. When they heard that DIONYSIVS was taken by souldiers and led away to Taposiris, they arose from table and follow∣ed with a speedie pace, and with a tumultuarie voyce, so that the souldiers who had DIONYSIVS in keeping, were afraid and fled: and so DIONYSIVS by the great prouidence of God was deliuered out of the hands of his enemies, Eu∣seb. lib, 6. cap. 40. After him MAXIMVS, THEONAS, PETRVS, a martyre vnder DIOCLETIAN and ACHILLAS were Bi∣shops of Alexandria, Func. Chron. Bishops of Antiochia After SERAPION succeeded
of Antiochia, of whome ALEXANDER B. of Ierusalem, (beeing the prisoner of Christ in Casarea) wrote vnto the people of Antiochia, that it was a comfort to him, and it made his imprisonment and bandes the more easie, that hee heard it reported that ASCLEPIADES, a man well exercised in the true faith, by the prouidence of God was made Bishop of Antiochia, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 11. PHILETVS was the 10 ZEBE∣NVS the 11. and BABYLAS was the 12. Bishop of Antiochia, of whom EVSEBIVS recordeth that he died in prison, like as A∣LEXANDER B. of Jerusalem ended his life in prison, both the one and the other suffered such kind of martyrdome vnder the persecution of DECIVS, Euseb. lib. 6 cap. 39. In the cata∣logue of Emperours, catholick Bishops and Heretiques sub∣joyned to the eccesiasticall historie of THEODORETVS. wee reade that BABYLAS B. of Antiochia would not suffer DE∣CIVS to enter into the Temple whereinto Christians were conueened, and that before hee was beheaded, he gaue di∣rection to burie into the sepulchre with his deade body the chaine also, wherewith his body had bene bound, as a fune∣rall ornament of his buried body. But EVSEBI VS deserueth best credite, who affirmeth that he died in prison, and ma∣keth no mention of his beheading. Some imagine that he who died in prison, and he who was beheaded were both Bishops of Antiochia, but liuing in different ages: yet seeing the catalogue foresaid speaketh of this suffering vnder the Emperour DECIVS, it is more probable that there is some ouersight in the writer of the catalogue. To BABYLAS suc∣ceeded FABIVS. He was entangled with the errour of NO∣VATVS, but was reclaimed againe by the vigilant trauels of DIONYSIVS B. of Alexandia, Euseb. lib. 6 cap. 44. DEME∣TRIANVS a maried man was successour to FABIVS. PAVLVS SAMOSATENVS a pestilent Heretique was the 15. Bishop of Antiochia. DOMNVS the sonne of DEMETRIAN the 16. TI∣MEVS the 17. CYRILLVS the 18. and TYRANNVS the 19. Bi∣shop of Antiochia. The names of the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria and Anti∣ochia were the more accuratly obserued and registrat after the Councill of Nice (albeit I recite them before) because it hapned in that generall Councill that for timous suppres∣sing
of heresies the Bishops of these places were called Pa∣triarches, and had power to convocat Councils within their owne boundes for suppressing of Heretiques. Alwayes it fell out far contrarie to the expectation of holy fathers: for the Patriarches were the chiefe protectours of heresie, as the historie of the subsequent Centuries euidently decla∣reth. Neuerthelesse in this Centurie beside those men of God aboue mentioned (nothing inferiour in spirituall graces to the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, Antiochia and Ie∣rusalem) there were many worthy men in other places such as FIRMILIANVS B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, a man familiar∣ly acquainted with ORIGEN. GREGORIVS and ATHENO∣DORVS, brethren and Pastours in Pontus. HELENVS in Tar∣sus, and NICOMAS in Iconium. THEOTECT VS in Caesarea Pa∣lestinae. MAXIMVS in Bostra, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 28. EVSE∣BIVS and ANATHOLIVS Bishops of Laodicea. QVIRINVS B. of Scesiana, or as others call it, Scescania, a worthy mar∣tyr, about whose necke a milstone was hanged, as hath bene before declared, Func. Chron. I make an end of this second head with the greater glad∣nesse, that I perceiue the litle stone hewed out of the mountaine without handes to be waxing and growing to the bignesse of a great moun∣taine, replenishing the whole earth, euen in the time of most horri∣ble persecutions, Dan. 2.
CENT. III. Cap. 3. Of Heretiques. IVstly did EPIPHANIVS compare an Heretique to a modiwart, a beast in quantitie litle, lurking in subter∣raneall holes, and yet working great harme to well la∣boured ground: Neuerthelesse when it hapneth that this noysome and blinde beast creepeth out of her hole, and runneth vpon the superfice of the earth, she is a ridiculous, wandering and feeble beast, shee cannot see the hole out of which she hath crept forth, & she is easily taken and slaine: Euen so Heretiques, so long as they lurke in secret, they per∣uert the heartes of many simple and ignorant people: but when they set out their heades, and their-doctrine is exami∣ned by the light of Gods euerlasting word, they are found to be ridiculous and feeble beastes. In the former Centu∣ries by way of preterition I passed by many obscure here∣sies. The like order I intend God willing to keepe in this Centurie also. The Heretiques called Artotyritae who ad∣ded Artotyritae. vnto the administration of their sacrament cheese vn∣to the bread. Alogi who rejected the writings of the ho∣ly Alogi. Apostle IOHN, and said they were written by CERINTHVS. Albeit the Euangelist IOHN of purpose wrote the historie of his Euangell against EBION and CERINTHVS. Adamiani who Adamiani. had their conuenticles in subterraneall places called Hypo∣causta, because that vnder the place of their meetings, a fornace of fire was kindled to warme the place of their con∣uentions: for they vnclothed themselues when they ente∣red into it, and stood naked both men and women accor∣ding to the similitude of ADAM and EVA before their fall. Theodotiani who denied the diuinitie of Christ, taking the name of their sect from a miserable man in Constantinople cal∣led. Theodotiani. THEODOTVS, who in time of persecution, for loue of temporall life, denied the King of glory Iesus Christ, and when this filthie deniall was objected to him as a reproche
of a cowardly heart, hee answered that he denied not God, but man, by this answere signifying that Christ was man onely and not God manifested in our nature. Melchisedeci∣ani magnified MELCHISEDECK aboue Christ. Bardesianisiae Mde∣ciani. Bardesiani∣stae. Ualesii. were but a branch of the heresie of the Ualentinians and Gno∣stici, who denied the resurrection as is already declared in the second Centurie. Valesii, who gelded themselues. An∣gelici, whose name was better knowne to EPIPHANIVS then the originall of their sect. Apostolici, who would haue no possessions, but rejoyced in voluntarie pouertie, & detested Apostolici. mariage, giuing out a sentence against themselues, that they were vncleane, because they were procreated by mariage. Origeniani, & Turpes. These were vile and filthie beastes, not Origeniani abhorring from whoredome, but from procreation of chil∣dren, to the end they might seeme to be chaste. They were like to ONAN the sonne of IVDAH whome the Lord destroy∣ed, Gen. 38. ver. 9. 10. All these heresies mentioned by E∣piphan. contra haereses, lib. 2. I passe by almost with silence, be∣cause they were like vnto abortiue birthes, and continued not long to perturbe the peace of the Church. Now concerning other Heretiques, by whose venemous doctrine the Church of Christ had greater strife and pertur∣bation. Artemon. ARTEMON and BERYLLVS B. of Bostra in Arabia denied the diuinitie of Christ, and affirmed that he was not existent before hee tooke flesh of the Virgine. With BE∣RYLLVS ORIGEN conferred, & reduced him backe againe to the true faith, and therefore I set not his name in the Ca∣talogue of Heretiques, because he added not vnto the fault of his bad opinion an obstinate defending of the same, Eu∣seb eccl. hist, lib. 6 cap. 33. The heresie of Helcesaitae otherwise called Sampsei, be∣cause Helcesaitae. of the shorte continuance of it is scarce worthy to bee reckoned, as I haue declared in the treatise of heresie. They mixed the religion of the Iewes, Gentiles and Christians together, but were more addicted to the superstition of the Iewes then to any one of the other two. Epiphan contra hae∣reses lib. 2. They rejected the writings of the Apostle PAVL and affirmed that a man who denied the Lorde with his mouth in the time of persecution, if so be he adhered to the
faith in his hart, he had committed no sinne. They caried a∣bout with them a singulare book which they said was sent downe from heauen, and they promised remission of sinnes to euery man who would hearken to the wordes of that booke. Comment. Func. in Chronol. NOVATVS a Presbyter at Rome was a man of a contenti∣ous spirit, and men that are humorous, high minded and contentious, they are wise to doe euill, but they can do no good. Such a man was NOVATVS, who disquieted with schisme, and heresie two of the most notable Churches in the world at that time, viz Carthage and Rome by giuing out a rigorous sentence against those who in time of persecuti∣on had fallen, albeit they had repented after their fall, and all outward tokens of vnfained repentance had beene seene in them. yet his opinion was that they should not be admit∣ted againe to the fellowship of the Church. This opinion was not onely repugnant to the wordes of ISA 1. Ezech. 18. Mat. 11. & to innumerable moe places of sacred scripture, but also it was a foolish opinion aduancing the kingdome of the deuill and not the kingdome of God. For the two great wheeles of the cart of the deuill, whereby hee carieth men headlong to hell are presumption and desperation: & mercilesse NOVATVS taching a doctrine that strengthened not the knees of the weake, he did what in him lay to moue sinners to despare. Therefore CYPRIAN B. of Carthage who excommunicated him, and CORNELIVS B. of Rome who did the like with aduise of a graue and worthy Councill gathe∣red at Rome, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. are to be counted wise men, because they endeuoured timonsly to suppresse those errors that weakened the harts of the children of God. I reade of no heresie preceeding the heresie of ARRIVS and EVTYCHES that continued longer time in the Church of God then the here∣sie of NOVATVS, partly because it crept in vnder pretence of zeale to the glory of God, and vnder pretence of a dete∣station of sin: partly also, because the Novatian Heretiques in the question concerning the diuinitie of Christ were comformable to the opinion of the true Church, Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12. Thirdly, because in time of the Arrian persecu∣tion the Novatians were banished and troubled with no
Iesse hatefull malice and despite then the members of the true Church were: yea and the true Catholickes and Novatianes beeing companions of one and the selfe-same suffering were content also to giue their liues one for another, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 38. And the foresaide authour saith, Parúmque abfuit quin coadunarentur, Socrat, ibid. that is, They were neere by vnited and agreed toge∣ther, to wit, the true Catholickes and Novatians. But what was the impediment that hindered their vni∣on? Reade the historie, and it shall not bee found in the true Catholickes, but in the obstinacie and wilfulnesse of the Novatians. And so it falleth out at all times that men who are authours of heresies and schismes, are al∣so the principall hinderers of the redintegration of the vni∣tie of the Church. The razing and demolishing of the Tem∣ple of the Novatians in Cyzicum a famous towne of Bithynia together with the calamitie of the people of Mantinium a towne of Paphlagonia, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 38, clearely proueth that the Novatian heresie continued vntill the dayes of CON∣STANTIVS the sonne of CONSTANTINE an Arrian Empe∣rour and persecuter of the true faith. The fauour that they obtained in the dayes of IVLIAN I passe ouer with silence. But in the dayes of the reigne of THEODO∣SIVS, the Novatians by the Emperours edict were permit∣ted to haue publicke conuentions in Constantinople, to en∣joy such priuiledges as other Christians had, & to possesse the oratories and temples whereinto they were accustomed to serue God. All this toleration and libertie was granted to them by the good Emperour THEODOSIVS, because in the heade of doctrine anent the diuinitie of Christ they damned the Acrians, & agreed with the Homousians, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 10. The Magdeburg historie saith that this heresie continued in Constantinople vntill the time that it was conquessed by the Turkes, Cent. 3. cap. 5. I haue written of this heresie at greater length to admonish all true Christians that it is not enough to adhere to some pointes of the true faith, and to suffer persecution for righteousnesse at some times, and to loue brotherly fellowshippe at some times, so that we are content
life for our brethren: all these things did the Novatians, and were fauoured by the Emperour THEODOSIVS, as said is, yet were they both sehismatickes and Heretiques, because they would be wiser then God, and debarred them from the bo∣some of Christs compassions whom Christ inviteth to come vnto him, saying, Come vnto me all ye that are wearie and laden, and I will ease you, Mat. 11. ver. 28, Let the example of the Novatians admonish men, who studie to singularitie, and to bring in newe customes or opinions into the Church of God, to take heede that their opinions be not repugnant vnto the written word: lest, after they haue continued a long time, in ende they be rejected as opinions, foolish, vaine, hereticall, and not agreeing with the scriptures of God. His followers were called  or puritans, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. Hist. Magd. cent. 3. cap. 5. Let this name rest in the bosome of Heretiques. And men who are not guiltie of the faultes, that were in the Novatians, if they be vndeseruedly charged with this name giuen of olde to Heretiques, let them say with humble heartes, that in one sense they are  be∣cause they are purged from sinne in the fountaine of the blood of Christ, I Iohn 1. ver. 7. But in no other sense & mea∣ning can true Christians be called , except onely in this, because their sinnes are freely forgiuen in Christ, and God hath begun the worke of sanctification in them, to be a testimonie that they are planted in the stocke of Christ. In this sense speaketh the Euangelist IOHN, , that is, Nowe are yee cleane through the word that I haue spoken vnto you, Ioh. 15. ver. 3. The heresie of SABELLIVS began to shew it selfe vnto the world, about the yeere of our Lord 257. vnder the reigne of Sabelliani. GALLVS. It was first fet foorth by NOETVS in Ptolemaida, afterward by HERMOGENES, and PRAZEAS, and last it was propagated by SABFLLIVS the disciple of NOETVS. Alwayes the heresie rather taketh the name from the disciple then from the master. They confessed that there was but one God alanerly, but they denied that there were three distinct persons in this one Godhead, viz. The Father, Sonne and ho∣ly Ghost. By this their opinion they confounded the two Greek words, , as if there wer no difference
betweene them. No man dare presume to say that in God there are three distinct substances, therefore SABELLIVS and his adherents saide that there were not three distinct subsi∣stences or persons in the Godhead, but the three names of Father, Sonne and holy Ghost were giuen to one person al∣lanerly, but pointed not out distinction of persons or sub∣sistences in the Godhead, Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 29. By this opinion they were compelled to grant that it was the Fa∣ther who clad himselfe with our nature, and died for our sinnes, and therefore they were called Patrispassiani because their opinion imported that the Father suffered. In the reigne of GALLIENVS, and about the yeere of our Lord 264, a certaine Bishop in Egypt called NEPOS be∣ganne Nepotiani. to affirme that at the latter day the godly should rise before the wicked, and should liue with Christ heere in the earth a thousand yeeres in aboundance of all kinde of delicate earthly pleasures. The ground of this errour was the misunderstanding of the wordes of the Reuelation of IOHN chap. 20. ver. 5. 6. In refuting of this heresie DIONYSI∣VS Bishoppe of Alexandria bestowed his trauels with good successe: for hee disputed against CORACION a man profes∣sing this errour in Arsenoitis a place of Egypt, whome hee refuted in presence of many brethren, who were auditours of that disputation, for the space of three dayes from mor∣ning till euening. So that in end CORACION yeelded, and promised that hee should not maintaine any such opinion in time to come, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 24. About that same time, that is, in the time of the reigne Samosate∣nus. of GALLIENVS, CLAVDIVS and AVRELIANVS. PAVLVS SAMOSATENVS Bishop of Antiochia, 'a pestilent fellowe, de∣nied the diuinitie of the Sonne of God, and affirmed that Christ obtained the name of the Sonne of God through his vertuous behauiour & patient suffering, but he was not na∣turally & truly the Son of God begotten of the substance of the father. His life correspondent to his doctrine was wicked and profane. Hee was accustomed to walke through the streetes of Antiochia accompanied with a number of flattering friendes and seruants, some going before him and others following after him, and hee himselse in the
mids, reading or meditating letters to his secretaries, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. Which forme of presumptuous and stately be∣hauiour was offensiue to the people, who thought that pompe and pride was not beseeming to Bishops, who were preachers of the humilitie, meekenesse and patient suffe∣rings of Christ. But if the men of Antiochia (saith PLATI∣NA) had beene in his dayes, and had seene the stately traine of the Bishop of Rome & his Cardinals, accompanied with so many seruants, clothed in silke and sumptuous apparell, and riding vpon gallant and lustie horses, richly deckt with gold & costly foot-mantles of diuerse collours, they would haue beene more offended, and would haue said, that such pride had nothing to doe with the simplicitie and humilitie of Christ. Platin. in vit. Sixt. 2. But to returne againe to PAV∣LVS SAMOSATENVS, he was so couetous of vaine glory, that he built vnto himselfe in the Church a glorious seate accor∣ding to the similitud of a princely throne, & frō this seat he spake vnto the people, whome he was accustomed to re∣proue with sharp words, if they had not receiued his words with cheerefull acclamations and shoutings, such as were wont to be vsed in stage places, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. The Psalmes also, that were sung in the Church to the praise of God, hee abrogated, and was not ashamed to hire women to sing his owne praises in the Congregation of the Lordes people. For this his damnable doctrine and lewd life he was most justly deposed by the Councill conueened at Antio∣chia, and excommunicated by all Christian Churches in the whole world, and was so detested by all good men that FIR∣MILIANVS Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and DIONYSI∣VS ALEXANDRINVS, who for his olde age might not tra∣uell and bee present at the Councill of Antiochia, yet they both damned the Heretique SAMOSATENVS by their letters sent to the Congregation of Antiochia, but not to the Bi∣shop thereof, because hee was not worthy that any man should salute him either by worde or write, Euseb. i∣bid. MANES a Persian, otherwise called MANICHE∣VS, a man furious and madde, answering well vnto his Manes & Manichei. name set foorth the venome of his heresie in the time of the
reigne of DIOCLETIAN, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 31. a man both in speech and maners rude and barbarous, in inclination de∣uihsh: yet he durst presume to cal himselfe the holy spirit, as MONTANVS had done before, and to represent Christes acti∣ons in chusing vnto him 12. disciples, whome he sent forth to propagat his errours into diuerse parts of the world, Eu∣feb. ibid. His heresie contained a masse or venemous com∣position of olde extinguished errours, which he renued and massed together, such as the errour of CERDON and MAR∣CION concerning two beginnings: The error of Encratitae in prohibition of meates which God hath appointed for the vse of man with thanksgiuing, specially flesh and wine: He vtterly rejected the olde Testament, as many other Here∣tiques had done before him. He ascribed not sinne to the free wil of man and his voluntarie defection from the estate of his first creation, but to necessitie, because mans body was made of the substance of the prince of darkenesse. This was that heresie wherewith AVGVSTINE was infected be∣fore his conuersion, but the Lord who brought foorth light out of darknes, & made PAVL, sometime a persecnter, to be a preacher of his Gospell, and CYPRIAN a sorcerer to bee a worthy preacher and martyre: this same gratious Lord (I say) in the multitude of his vnspeakable compassions drewe AVGVSTINE out of this filthie mire of abominable heresie, and made him like vnto a bright starre sending foorth the beames of light to the comfort of Gods house. The opinion of MANES anent the creation of the world, and the creation of man, the manifestation of Christ in our nature rather in shewe and appearance then in veritie, and the horrible abomination of their vile Eucharist, no man can be ignorant of these things who hath read but a litle of the bookes of AVGVSTINE written against the Manicheans. In ende like as MANES exceeded all the rest of the Heretiques in madnesse of foolish o∣pinions: euen so the Lorde pointed him out among all the rest to be a a spectacle of his wrath and vengeance. For the king of Persia hearing of the fame of MANES, sent for him to cure his sonne, who was deadly diseased: but when he sawe that his sonne died in his hands, he cast him into prison and
was purposed to put him to death: but hee escaped out of prison and fled to Mesopotamia. Neuerthelesse the king of Persia vnderstanding in what place MANES did lurke, sent men who pursued him, tooke him and excoriated his body, and stopped his skinne full of chaffe, and set it vp before the entrie of a certaine citie of Mesopotamia, Socrat. eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 22. If any man bee desirous to haue greater knowledge of this remarkable Heretique, both in respect of his life and death, he may reade the fore. mentioned chap∣ter of the ecclesiasticall historie of SOCRATES, and hee shall finde that the first man called MANICHEVS, who renued the errour of two beginnings was a man of Scythia. He had a disciple first called BVDDAS, afterward TEREBYNTHVS who dwelt in Babylon. This man TEREBYNTHVS was the compo∣ser of these bookes which MANES gaue out vnder his owne name. MANES was but a slauish boy bought with money by a woman of Babylon, in whose house TEREBYNTHVS had lod∣ged, and shee brought vp the boy at schoole: his name was CVRBICVS when he was bought, but when this woman di∣ed, she left in legacie to CVRBICVS the money and bookes of TEREBYNTHVS, and he went from Babylon to Persia, chan∣ged his name and called himselfe MANES, and set forth the bookes of TEREBYNTHVS as if they had beene composed by himselfe, so that hee added vnto the rest of his villanies this fault also, that he was from his very youth a dissembled and deceitfull fellow, Reade the historie of Socrat, lib. 1. cap. 22. After MANES sprang vp HIERAX, who spake of the Fa∣ther, Hieracitae. and the Sonne as of two lights different in substance. He damned mariage, denied the resurrection of the body, & excluded infants from the kingdome of God, Epiph. contrahaeres. Hist, Magd. Marke in this Catalogue of the heresies of the first three hundreth yeres how many of the deuils trum∣peters sounded the doctrine of the prohibition of mariage. The Nicolaitans, Gnostici, Encratitae, Montanistae, Apostolici, O∣rigeniani called Turpes, Manichei and Hieracitae. Satan hateth mariage to the end that his kingdome might be aduanced by fornication and all kinde of vncleannesse. CENT. 3. A Treatise of Purgatorie and prayer for the dead. IN this Centurie also the opinion of ORIGEN anent Purgatorie and worship∣ping of re∣liques, errors borrowed frō Pagans. purgatory paines before a man can enter into the king∣dome of heauen giueth me manifest occasion to speak of Purgatorie. In the beginning of this treatise I pro∣test, that I detest the worshipping of reliques, and the con∣ceit of Purgatorie fire as two heades of doctrine borrowed from Ethnickes and Pagans. The bones of THESEVS (saith PLVTARCH) being transported & placed in the middle part of the towne of Athens, they honoured his ashes as if hee himselfe had beene returned to the towne, and gaue vnto him all these diuine honours, calling him , that is, he who diuerteth euill from them: also they called him , that is, a patron & a hel∣per: & , that is, who receiueth the supplications of the humble. What was this else but to honour THESEVS with diuine honours? And the excessiue honours attributed to the reliques of saints in the Popish church, with confidence to be helped and better heard of God, because they were prostrate before the re∣liques of saints, what was it else but a counterfaiting of the superstition of the Pagans? In like maner the opinion of Purgatorie is but an Ethnicke inuention, & PLATO seemeth to be the first authour of it, (except any man of greater rea∣ding can reduce it to a more ancient beginning) for PLATO in his dialogue called Phedo, vel de anima hath three opini∣ons concerning the soules of men. First, hee thinketh that the soules of men who haue liued a very honest and vnreproouable life, when they depart out of their bodies, they goe to a place of vnspeakable happinesse. Secondly he thinketh that the soules of men who haue continued in∣to incorrigible wickednesse, they goe to a place called
Tartarus there to be punished with endlesse paines. These two foresaide opinions PLATO by his trauelling to Egypt (where the people of the Iewes had remained a long time) might haue learned, to wit, that the soules of good men goe to heauen, and the soules of euill men goe to hell. But PLATO thought by Philosophie to mend the want that was in ancient Theologie, and he deuised a third place wherein∣to soules should be both tried and purged, and after suffe∣ring of paines should be set at libertie, namely the soules of men who had heauily grieued their parents & afterward repented, or had committed filthie murthers, and afterward repented, these mens soules (I say) according to the opi∣nion of PLATO, behooued to goe through infernall floods, specially through Acheron, Cytus, and Phlegeton to be tried & purged, & in end to be set at libertie, prouiding they had fully satisfied the persons whom they had offended. These beginnings of PLATOES conceites had neuer hurt Christian religion, if CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS, and after him ORI∣GEN had not mingled prophane Philosophie with Theolo∣gie. But when the question is riped vp to the very ground, the defenders of Purgatorie fire & worshipping of reliques haue cause to be ashamed, as disciples of Pagans, and not of the holy Apostles, in these two points of doctrine. The foolishnes of CLEMENS and ORIGEN hath beene Foolish bor∣rowing. very pernicious to the Church of God, because they bor∣rowed not from PLATO siluer and golde, as the Iowes bor∣rowed from the Egyptians, by warrant of Gods commande∣ment Exod. 11. but they borrowed chaffe and doung, lies and fables, which some time spreading, sometime growing, sometime altering the first similitude fashioned in the combes of PLATO, in end became an article of Popish faith, and was so straitly vrged, that they who would not beleeue the fained fire of Purgatorie were burned as Heretiques with true flammes of tormenting fire. AMBROSE and HILARIVS as foolishly followed the opi∣nion of ORIGEN without examining it in the balance of Foolish fol∣lowing. holy scripture. Ambros. in Psal. 118. saith that all men must goe through the fire at the latter day, euen IOHN himselfe the belooued disciple of Christ, of whose death also some
doubted, yet no man can doubt of his passing through the fire. Thus AMBROSE suffered this opinion of ORIGEN to sincke into his heart, as though it had beene the vndoub∣ted Oracle of God, which no man should call in question. HILARIVS maketh no exception of the blessed Virgine the mother of our Lord in Psa. 118, but she must also go through this fire at the latter day. And this is a foolish thing to followe any man further then he doth follow Christ, & the warrant of the written word of God, 1. Cor. 11. And there∣fore the first generall Councill Ann. 551. (as wise behind the hand) was compelled to examine the bookes of ORIGEN & to excōmunicat himself (albeit dead long afore) & to damne his books and vaine opinions specially anent his Purgatorie. This Origenian errour before it was seriously impugned, it was changed to the worse, and grew neerer to the originall of PLATOES Phlegeton againe: for ORIGEN, AMBROSE and Error grow∣ing worse & worse. HILARIVS spake of a fire that should burne at the latter day which al men behooued to passe through before they could enter into the place of refreshment, but PLATO in his dia∣logue Phedo spake of a flood of fire whereinto men behoued to bee tried and purged immediatly after their soules were separated from their bodies, and what soules I pray you? Not the soules of the best men which went to heauen, nor the worst men, for they went to hell, but the soules of men that were not into a mid rancke, neither very good nor ve∣ry euill. This opinion, I say, somewhat neerer to the opini∣on of PLATO then to the opinion of ORIGEN, beganne to take place about the foure hundreth yeere of our Lord, as the distinctions of AVGVSTINE clearely witnesse. Valde bom, The error of Purgatorie fire misliked by Augu∣stine, but not fully impug∣ned. valde mali, non valde mali. Augustin enchiridion ad Laurent. Idem de octo Dulcitii quaest. Thus wandering errours once taking place, became like vnto a fretting canker euery day worse & worse. If any man think strange that so vile an error neither agreable to scripture, neither yet to it self, but changing the similitude of it, as the Chameleon doth his collour, it preuailed wonderfully and was so fastened into the peoples hearrts, that scarcely can it be rooted out of their mindes in our dayes. To this I answere, that besides the authoritie of the fathers aboue specified,
who were entangled with errour, euen they also who found out the opinion of Purgatorie fire to be erroneous and re∣pugnant to scripture, yet did they not fully and in all points impugne this false and lying doctrine, but onely in a parte. As namely AVGVSTINE refuteth that part of CLEMENS and ORIGENS opinion wherein they thought that the de∣uils and wicked men after suffering of long tormentes may possibly be forgiuen and finde mercy. By one place of scrip∣ture he vtterly vndoeth that opinion, Depart'vnto the cuerla∣sting fire prepared for Sathan and his angels, Mat. 25. ver 4 And in the booke of the Reuelation. And they shall bee tormen∣ted night and day for euer and euer, Apoc. 20, August. lib. 20. & 21. de civit. Dei. Yet the other parte of the errour, that tooke deepe root in his dayes, AVGVSTINE knewe it better then he impugned it, lest he should gain-say the receiued o∣pinion among all the people, who thought that the soules of many men after their death were tormented with fire for a while, vntill a full satisfaction were made for the faultes that men committed in their life-time. Against this opi∣nion AVGVTINE speaketh but softly. Non valde coarguo, for sitan verum est, that is, I doe not greatly reprooue it, possi∣bly it is true, August. De civit. Delib 21. cap. 26. This was also some strengthening of errour, that it was not fully in all points & clearely refuted by godly fathers, whose com∣porting with the weakenesse of the people in a parte CHEM∣NIICIVS himselfe calleth prudence and wisdome: but seri∣ous impugning of erroneous doctrine had beene more a∣greable to the will of God. Alwayes AVGVSTINE in his doubtsome speach giueth no ground to Papists to make vp a newe article of faith anent Purgatorie For like as Con∣stantinople was a great citie, yet when it was shaken with an earthquake three dayes and three nights, no man taried in that great towne to builde a new house during that time: e∣uen so AVGVSTINE is a great doctour, yet when hee taketh Simil. him to forsitan or peraps, this is not a sure ground to leane vpon. This vnhappie conceit of Purgatorie fire had many hand∣maids Many hand∣maids of Purgatorie. waiting vpon her, some going before, and others following after her. Before the conceit of Purgatorie goeth
an opinion of our owne satisfactions. For the faultes com∣mitted by vs after Baptisme, if we do not perfitly satisfie for them before our death, it resteth that in Purgatorie fire we should absolue the rest of our pennance that is vnfulsilled. How much this first handmaide derogateth from the glory of Christ, the Apostle witnesseth when he saith, The blood of Christ purgeth vs from all sinne, I. Ioh. I. making no exception ofsinnes after Baptisme committed. The other handmaide preceeding the conceit of Purgatorie, is praier for the dead albeit in all the old and new Testament there be not one ex∣ample of praying for the deade, or yet offering of sacrifice for the dead. Pardons followed (sometimes called indul∣gences in another sense then now they are) these pardons, I say, are the handmaids following Purgatorie, by which the B. of Rome (as absolut commander of Purgatorie) hath made vnto himselfe infinite gaine. Before I proceede any further, I exhort all true Christi∣ans, as they detest Paganisme, euen so to detest all Ethnick An exhor∣tation to de∣test the origi∣nall of Pur∣gatorie. Simil. errours, when they are creeping in into the sanctuarie of God, The golden Eagle of the Romanes was more abomi∣nable when it was set vp in the Temple of Ierusalem by HE∣ROD, Ioseph. de bello Iudaico, lib. 1. cap. 21. then when it was set vp in the Capitoll of Rome. And the image of CAIVS CA∣LIGVLA sent to PETRONIVS his Deputie to be set vp in the Temple of Ierusalem made all the Iewes agast, and they were more willing to die then to see their Temple so filthily abu∣sed with idolatrie, Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18, cap. 11. It is more seemely then that the golden Eagle and image of CAIVS re∣maine at Rome, where they were first fashioned, then to bee brought to the Temple of Ierusalem. And it is more seem∣ly also that the opiniō of Purgatory remaine in the schoole of PLATO at Athens, or in the schoole of CLEMENS at Alex andria, rather then to send it abroade through all Christian Congregations to bee beleeued. For Christians ought to be like to the forlorne sonne after he returned home againe Simil. to his father., Luc. 15. Hee was so well fed and clothed in his fathers house, that he would not eat any longer of husks and the food of Swine: euen so our heauenly father hath fed vs with that Manna that. came downe from heauen, and it is
no time nowe to vs to be fed with the huskes of PLATOES schoole any longer. The cause wherefore foolish people are so addicted to Purgatorie, albeit it be but an Ethnicke inuention, is this, Preposterous feare & cre∣dulity of peo∣ple pholde people. a carnall affection that men carie toward their defunct, pa∣rents or friendes: to whome they are so affectionat, that if any action done by liuing men could helpe them that are deade, they would doe it with all their heart: and of olde time it was a custome that when men were recently depar∣ted this life, their friends would thrust the sacrament in the mouth of the dead body, meaning thereby to procure some reliefe to the soule, which custome was damned in the third Councill of Carthage, Canon. 6. In respect Christ biddeth giue the sacrament with this commandement, Take, eat, but dead bodies can neither take nor eate. Alwayes it was carnall affection not ordered with knowledge that mooued friends so to doe. And in our dayes men that are in hea∣uinesse and full of affection toward their owne friendes are both timorous and credulous: so timorous, that they feare that their friendes after death should be pined in Purgato∣rie: so credulous that they beleeue that the prayers and al∣mes deades of the liuing, their saying of Masses or buying of pardons can helpe the dead, either to mitigat their paine, or to procure vnto them haistie reliefe out of paine. If these two grounds could be remoued, that simple people would not preposterously bee both timorous and credulous, the conceit of Purgatorie would cease. Papists themselues that are corrigible I would exhort be∣fore I answere to their arguments, that they would doe this An exhor∣tation to cor∣rigible Pa∣pists. honour to Iesus Christ, not to make his majestie like vnto ADONIIAH, 1. Reg. 1. This proud man called IOAB the Captaine of the hoste, and ABIATHAR the Priest, and the kings sonnes except SALOMON to banket, and by not inuiting to that banket SALOMON and BATHSHE∣BA his mother, and NATHAN the Prophet, and ZADOCK and BENAIAH, no doubt but hee was minded to bring innocent people vnder the guiltinesse of treason, as their speeches to DAVID clearely declare, that they forsawe this inconuenient, But Iesus Christ is not like vnto ADONIIAH
to seek e a quarrell against innocent people, whom he him∣selfe hath purged from all sinne in the precious fountaine of his blood, 1. Ioh. 1. Will the Lorde Iesus after hee hath purged vs from all spot of sin in the fountaine of his owne blood, send vs to Purgatorie when wee die, and not call vs to that celestiall banket of endlesse pleasure in heauen: see∣ing the not calling of vs to that banket importeth a disli∣king and casting off of vs, as ADONIIAH disliked SALOMON and his mother, and NATHAN the Prophet, & the rest whom he inuited not to his banket? Surely whomsoeuer the Lord hath loued so dearely, that hee hath purged them from all spot of sinne by his blood, he will not be vncouth to them, by sending them to Purgatorie when they should be inuited to his banket. Now in this disputation of Purgatory fire a solide ground The vse of temporall paines. is to be laide downe, that euery man may know of what sort of paines after this life we dispute. All paines are either temporall or eternall. Of eternall paines there is no dispu∣tation in this treatise. Temporall paines (say we) are infli∣cted vpon men onely in this life for their amendement, if they bee of the number of Gods elect, or else are forerun∣ning tokens of euerlasting wrath, if they be of the num∣ber of the reprobate. For this cause the Apostle saith, that there is no chastisement joyous for the present vntill it bring foorth the good fruite of righteousnesse, Heb. 12. ver 11. And heere hee declareth clearely that temporall chastisements are inflicted vpon the godly for their amen∣dement. On the other part the prophecie that was in the mouth of ZARESH the wife of HAMAN (albeit grounded onely vpon experience) yet it declareth that the downe-casting of wicked men is a forerunning token of a greater downe cast to followe after, Ester chap. 6. ver. 13. And this is a shorte summe of our opinion anent temporall punishments. But Papistes defend that euen after this life there is tempo∣rall punishments in Purgatorie, the suffering where of sa∣tisfieth God for offnces committed by men when they were aline, and purgeth them that their soules may be meet to goe to heauen.
This opinion of theirs is linked with another absurde opi∣nion, that when out sinnes are freely forgiuen, wee are not Fault and punishment there of both abolished in Christ. absolued both from guiltinesse and paine, but from guilti∣nesse only, but it remaineth still, that we should suffer paines yea such paines, whereby we satisfie for our sinnes commit∣ted after Baptisme, what is this else but to make vs our own sauiours in a part, and manifestly to contradict both scrip∣tures and fathers? for the scripture plainly saith. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, who walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Rom. 8. And AVGVSTINE saith, Culpa est quod injustus es, poena quod mortalis es, Christus suscipiendo pa∣nam & non culpam, & poenam debevit & culpam. August. de ver∣bis domini, serm. 37. that is, thy fault is this, that thou art vn∣righteous, thy punishment that thou art mortall, but Christ by taking vpon himselfe our punishment and not our fault, hath abolished both our fault and our punishment. Arguments brought in to prooue Popish Purgatorie are of three ranckes, First, some arguments taken out of the Plaeces of the old Testa∣ment abused for stablishing of Purgatorie wordes of Canonicke and Apocryph scripture. Secondly out of the writings of fathers. Thirdly out of visions, dreames and apparitions, where of some are put in write for a memorial to the posteritie. In the booke of the Psalms it is written. Wee passed through fire and water into thy rest, Psal. 65. ver. 12. alias Psal. 66. ver. 12. Here say they meńtion is made of Purgatorie fire. But AVGVSTINE writing vpon this Psalme doth expone it otherwise. The fire, saith hee, burneth, the water rotteth, both are to be feared, the bur∣ning of trouble, and rotting of water. When there are disasters and vnhappie things in this world, they are like vn∣to fire: when we are in prosperitie and al things plenteously abound, this is like water. This is the exposition of AV∣GVSTINE. In the prophecie of ZACHARIE it is written, Thou also shalt be saued through the blood of thy couenant, I haue loosed thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water. Is this also spoken of Purgatorie? There is in that chapter a prophecie of Christ of his office, humilitie, power, loue, and the operatiue ver∣tue of his blood, by which blood beeing his own blood, & the blood of the euerlasting couenant of God, we who were sinners and bond-men of Satan are set at libertie, and wee
who were heires of hell and condemnation, are fred from that terrible pit whereinto there is not one drop of conso∣lation, & soChrist hath found out to vs by his suffering fore∣said  as the Apostle saith, Heb. 9. ver. 12, that is, euerlasting redemption. This is the true sense of that place, for scripture conferred with scripture will find out the right meaning of scripture: but the wresting of scrip∣ture to the conceits of our minde is a perpetuall deteining of vs in blindnesse and ignorance. To this agreeth wel the exposition of August decivit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 35. and Theo∣doret. in Zach. cap. 9. In like maner in the prophecie of Malach. Behold I will send my messinger, and he shall prepare the way before mee: and the Lord whome yee seeke, shall speedely come to his temple: euen the messinger of the couenant whome ye desire: behold he shall come, saith the Lord of hostes. But who may abide the day of his comming? and who shall endure when he appeareth? for he is like a purging fire, and like fullers sope. And hee shall sit downe to trie & fine the siluer: he shall euen fine the sonnes of Leui, and purifie them as golde and situer, that they may bring offerings vnto the Lord in righteousnesse, Malac. 3. ver. 1. 2. 3. If we credite the holy E∣uangelists, this is spoken of Christs first comming, and of IOHN Baptist his forerunner, and of the effectuall ministrie of the Gospel in purging sinne, Mat 11. ver. 10. Marc. 1. ver. 2 Luc. 1. ver. 76. But Papistes not conferring scripture with scripture, whersoeuer they find fire or darknesse, or a deepe pit and dungeon, or a terrible tempest, there they thinke mention is made of Purgatorie, as I could easily prooue by many other places: but let these suffice for examples of the old Testament wrested and abused. In the new Testament it is said, And whosoeuer shall speake a wd against the Son of man, it shall be forgiuen him, but whosoeuer Places of the new Testa∣ment abused. shall speake against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiuen him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, Mat. 12. ver. 32. Ofthese words it is inferred that some faults shal be forgiuen in the world to come, albeit the finne against the holy Ghost shall neuer be forgiuen. The true sense and meaning of these words is set down by the Euangelist MARKE in these words, But he that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost shall neuer haue for∣giuenesse, but is culpable of eternall damnation, Marc. 3. ver. 29.
What needeth further requisition when the spirit of God hath interpreted his owne meaning? Againe it is is said in the new Testament. For other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Icsus Christ: And if any man build on this foundation golde, siluer, pretious stones, timber hay or stubble, Euery mans worke shall bee made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall bee reueiled by the fire: and the fire shall try euery mans worke of what sort it is. If any mans worke that he hath built upon, abide, he shall receiue wages. If any mans wokeburne, hee shall lose, but he shall be saued himselfe: neuerthelesse yet as it were by the fire, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. The last of these verses is brought foorth as a testimonie of scripture proouing Purgatorie fire: & so much the rather because S. AMBROSE doeth so expone the foresaide verse. Let vs therefore with AMBROSE agree vpon all the rest, and contra∣uert onely vpon the last verse. The foundation of Christ, the golde, siluer and precious stones is true and solide do∣ctrine, the timber, hay, and stubble is friuolous doctrine: the triall by day, and fire is a triall by the worde of God, full of light, as the day, and mightie in operation as the fire. In this triall hee whose doctrine is authorized and not ouerthrowne by the worde, hee hath double vantage: first his worke standeth, next himselfe shall be rewarded as a good builder. But if in the triall a mans doctrine be found friuolous, albeit not hereticall, hee shall sustaine double losse: First hee shall see his doctrine ouerthrowne by the light and fire, that is, by the worde of God, next, albe∣it himselfe shall be saued, because hee adhereth by faith to the foundation, yet because hee hath beene a slouthfull teacher in teaching friuolous things with a glorious shewe of eloquence of in steade of solide and necessarie things, hee shall bee saued by fire, that is, as wee say, hee shall be cast into the fornace of temporal troubles to learne repentance and amendement in this life, wherein onely is time and place of repentance. But the Papistes thinke that men after their death shall bee cast into the fire of Purgatorie, there to satisfie for their fault, and after satisfaction to be purged and saued Here first note, that the Apostle vtte∣ring by a continuated allegorie the estate of those who
build vpon the right foundation any kinde of doctrine either solide or friuolous, in the end he perfiteth his allego∣rie, comparing the chastisements of God sent for our amen∣dement vnto a fire. This agreeth better then to interpret all the rest allegorically, and the last words into a simple mea∣ning without any figure, & to father that opinion vpon PAVL whereof neither hee nor any other Apostle maketh men∣tion in their writings. Next consider that they would seeme to be followers of the interpretation of AMBROSE, when as their conscience (I meane of those that are learned a∣mongst them) knoweth the contrarie, that AMBROSE meaneth of that fire at the latter day, whereof ORIGEN writeth, but not of that Purgatorie fire immediatly after the issue of this life, whereof the Papistes speake, Indeed if Purgatorie fire should be set forth as an article of Christi∣an faith, it should bee grounded not vpon allegories or obscure places of scripture, but vpon cleare and plaine places, as all the ancient fathers in one voyce doe consent, but this place of scripture is an allegorie and an obscure place. ORIGEN and AMBROSE take it in one sense, the Papistes take it in another sense, we take it in the third sense, and some of their owne scholasticke doctors are so dashed with the varietie of diuerse interpretations, that they dare determine nothing certainely, but say that either with the fire of Purgatorie, or with the fire of tribulation, or with the fire that goeth before the face of the great Iudge men who haue committed ve∣niall sinnes shall be purged and saued. THOMAS A∣QVINAS in 1. Cor. 3. When their owne scholasticke Doctours are in such doubts, there was no time to step A place out of the booke of the Mac∣cabees for cnsi mation of sacrifice for the dead, and conse∣quently of Purgaterie forwarde, and to make it an article of their faith. The chiefe place cited out of Apocrypha bookes is Macab. 2. cha 12. frō the 40 ver. to the end of the cha, in these words. Now vnder the coates of euerte one that was sline, they found jewels that had bene consecrated to the idvles of the Famnites, which thing is forbidden the Jewes by the Law. Then euerie man saw that this was the cause wherefore they were slaine. And so eucrie man gaue thanks vnto the Lord, the righteous Judge, which had opened the things that were hid, And they gaue themselues to prayer, and be sought him
that they should not be destroyed for thefault committed. Besides that, noble Iudas exhorted the people to keepe themselues from sinne: for so much as they sawe before their eyes the things that came to passe by the sinne of those that were slaine. And hauing made a gathering through the companie sent to Ierusalem about two thou∣sand drachmes of siluer to offer for a sinne offering. Hitherto doth the author of that booke write the history of that fact, which was done by IVDAS MACCABEVS and his souldiers. First they were about to burie the dead bodies of their bre∣thren who were slaine in the battell fighting against GOR∣GIAS. Secondly they found secretly couered vnder their garments jewels consecrated to idoles. Thirdly they ac∣knowledged this to be a sinne, and to haue beene the cause of the destruction of their brethren. Fourthly they thanked God who discouered this secret: for the punishment of their slaine brethren was an admonition to them that were aliue to absteine frō the like fault. Fiftly they gaue themsel∣ues to praier, fearing lest the whole army should be plagued by God for the fault committed by a few number of the ar∣mie, as the fault of ACHAN troubled the whole hoste in the dayes of IOSHVA, Ios. 7. Sixtly to prayer is added an exhor∣tation of IVDAS to abstaine from the like faults. Seuenthly a collection is gathered to be sent vp to Ierusalm that a sin-offering might be offered, not for the deade, but for the li∣uing, who had not searched out the faultes of the host dili∣gently as became them: And therfore there was some guil∣tinesse also in them. The rest that followeth is the opinion of the author of that second booke in these words, Doing ve∣ry well and honestly that he thought of the resurrection: for if hee had not hoped that they which were slaine should rise againe, it had beene superfluous and vaine to pray for the dead. And therefore he perceiued that there was great fa∣uour laid vp for those that died godly. (It was an holy and a good thought) So he made a reconciliation for the dead, that they might be deliuered from sinne. When I read this opinion of the author of the second booke of the Maccabees I am nothing moued with it: first because it seemeth to be a lie that IVDAS MACCABEVS sent to Ierusalem to offer sacri∣fice for the dead, Hee knewe the law of God, and fought fo
the law of GOD wherein was no sacrifice for the deade, nor yet example in all the old Testament that any man did offer sacrifice for the dead: but this author bringeth in IV∣DAS fighting with his sworde for the lawe, and with his al∣ledged sacrifice against the lawe. And it is lesse inconueni∣ent to rub this foule spot vpon the vnwise writer then vpon that wise, valiant and godly man IVDAS MACCABEVS. And I am the bolder to rub this fault vpon the writer, rather then vpon the valiant Captaine of whome hee writeth, because in other places also he taketh boldnes to commend things forbdden in the Lawe of God, as namely the fact of RHA∣SIS in slaying of himselfe, 2. Macab. cap. 14. ver. 46. Likewise I am emboldened to do it, because I read this same historie in other authours more worthie then this man is, who im∣pute no such fault to IVDAS MACCABEVS, as namely Ioseph. antiq. lib. 12. cap. 12. If any man shal think me presumptuous in charging the writer of the booke rather then the worthy gouernour with a fault, let him vnderstand that the veritie of God is in nothing empared albeit there had bene a fault in both, that is, in IVDAS doing a thing repugnant to the Law, and in the authour praysing a thing done contrarie to Simil. the law. For like as there was no grace in DAVID, that could grace his adulterie▪ euen so therewas no gift in IVDAS MAC∣CABEVS that could excuse his offering of a sacrifice for the deade, which no man did before him in the old Testament, and no man is found to haue followed him in the new Testa∣ment, as saith CHEMNICIVS. In the next place arguments are brought out of ancient fathers to proue Purgatorie by their prayers for the deade. By the praiers made for the dead of old Purgatorie cannot be sufficiently confirmed. For after this maner they reason. If soules of men depar∣ting from their bodies went straight wayes either to hea∣uen or hell, what needed prayers for the deade? for they who are in heauen are in glorie and rest, and they who are in hell cannot be supported by prayers. But (say they) the ancient fathers praied for the dead, whereby it is cleare that they beleeued a third place, to wit, Purgatory, whereinto the soules of some men are tormented, and haue neede of the support of the liuing: but the consequence is very false: for they cannot be ignorant that in CYPRIANS daies the name
of holy martyres were mentioned in prayers atthe ministra∣tion of the holy sacrament, lib. 3. epist. 6: yet no man thought that the martyrs were pained in Purgatorie. In like maner AMBROSE affirmeth that hee will pray for the soule of Va∣LENTINIAN the second, of whome he said before, aternae vi∣tae fruitur voluptate, that is, he enjoyeth the pleasure of eter∣nal life, Ambros. de obitu Valentiniani. And NAZIANZEN pray∣eth for his brother CESARIVS, of whose rest with God hee had the like hope, Nazianz. rat. 7. All these prayed for the dead without any opinion of Purgatorie. And therefore LINDANVS for all his confident assertion that Purgatorie is fully prooued by the testimonies of AVGVSTINE and CHRY∣SOSTOME, who make mentiō of the praiers for the dead, the one calling it a custome vsed by the whole Church. August. serm. 32. de verbis Apostolt. the other calling it a traditiō of the Apostles, Chrysost. homil. 3. ad Philippenses, yet I say, neither of these two beleeued Purgatorie. AVGVSTINE doubted of it as said is, and CHRYSOSTOME knew it not, as shall be de∣clared Godwilling, Lindan. lib. 4. cap. 63. But now let vs examine these two places whereunto LIN∣DANVS leaneth as infallible grounds, and surer then that a∣ny The place of Augustine serm. 32. de verbis Apo∣sloli exami∣ned. exception can be taken against them, August. serm. 32. de verbis Apostolt. It is not to be doubted that the deade are helped by the prayers of the holyChurch & by the healthful sacrifice & almes deedes that are bestowed for their spirits, in such wayes, that God dealeth more gently with them then their sinnes haue dserued First, I doubt if this be a sermon of AVGVSVINE. It seemeth rather to be a sermon of BEDA, who liued long after AVGVSTINE, because al this sermon is found in BEDA writing vpō 1 Thess Next, like as AVGVSTINE doubted of Purgatorie, so likewise he doubted if it was lawful to pray for the dead, as his own words testifie, August, Confess. lib, 9. cap. 12. after that he had prayed for the soule of his mother MONICA he subjoyneth this: If any thinke I haue done wrong in praying in few words for her who prayed so ofi for me, let him not mockemee, but if he hath great charitie, let him weepe for my sins to the common father of l Christs brethren. If AVGVSTINE speake so doubtsomely of Purga∣torie, de civit. dei. lib. 21. cap. 26. and of prayer for the deade, Confess. 9, cap. 12. LINDANVS had no great ground to pro∣claime
the triumph of victorie for this alledged sermon of AVGVSTINE. The place cited out of CHRYSOSTOME writing vpon the first chapter of the Epistle of PAVL to the Philippians, homil 3, The place of Chryso∣stom homil 3 in epist. ad Phillip. examined. , that is, It was not in vaine that the Apostles constituted this as a law, that in the reuerent mysteries a remembrance should be made of those that are departed. For answere. First, I demande of LIN∣DANVS, if all these of his religion beleeue this that CHRY∣SOSTOME speaketh, that prayer for the deade in time of cele∣bration of the holy communion is an Apostolick tradition? IS GREGORIVS 1. in that opinion, who affirmeth that the A∣postles in ministring that holy sacramēt vsed no other pray∣er but only the Lords prayer? Gregor. in regist. lib. 7. epist. 63 IS PLTAINA in that opiniō, who writing the life of XISTVS 1. saith thus, Petrus enimubi consecr auerat oratione Pater noster u∣sus est? This being the opiniō of the most part of the Romaine Church that the Apostles vsed no other prayer but only the Lords praier before the ministration of the holy cōmunion, howe can they adhere to this place of CHRYSOSTOME, who calleth it an Apostolicke institution to make mention of the dead in these prayers? Secondly I demande of LINDANVS (if the passages in that same homilie be not excused by the fi∣gure hyperbole) howe doth CHRYSOSTOME agree with him∣selfe when hee speaketh of them that are departed this life without Baptisme, hee saith that they are , that is, They are without the palace with them who are ap∣pointed for paine, and with them who are condem∣ned. Which opinion, or rather hard and mercilesse sentence he would confirme by testimonie of scripture, Except a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the king∣dome of heauen. Iohn 3. ver. 5. and yet a litle after, for such hee biddeth distribute almes to the poore, and this distribution of almes saith he , that is it worketh some refreshment vnto them. What is this that CHRYSOSTOM speaketh, persons whō he calleth condemned & perpetually excluded from the kingdome of heauen may haue some refreshment by the almes deedes done by their
friends on earth? In this CHRYSOSTOME neither a∣greeth with scripture nor with him selfe: hee ageeth not with scripture, because it is plainely saide that not so much as a drop of colde water can be ministred to those that are condemned, Luc. 16. He agreeth not with himselfe, in one word counting them perpetually excluded from the king∣dome of heauen, and soone after speaking of some refresh∣ment, that they may get by actions done by the liuing. Are we more louing, kinde and mercifull then ABRAHAM, in whome loue and all true vertues are perfited: yet he sawe no refreshment to a condemned man? Thirdly I demand of LINDANVS and those that bee of his opinion if CHRYSOSTOME was as deepe in the opinion of Purgatorie as in the opinion of prayer for the dead? CHRY∣SOSTOME neuer knew what Popish Purgatorie meaned, be∣cause in his time men who died in the faith, albeit not alto∣gether faultlesse, yet they were conueyed to the burial places with torches and hymnes and spirituall songs. And where∣fore were these funerall rites vsed, saith CHRYSOSTOME. Do we not conuey them (saith he) as victorious warriours? Do we not praise God, because hee hath crowned with glory him who is departed? Chrysost. in cap. 2 epist ad Heb. ho∣mil. 4 The funeral Psalme that was vsually sung was the 116. Psalme (the 7. verse whereof is this) Returne my soule vnto thy rest: for the Lord hath bene beneficiall vnto thee: This was not to Purgatorie, but to endlesse rest. But to speake freely what I thinke of that ancient father CHRYSOSTOME in calling prayer for the dead an Apostolicke tradition, I think he hath spoken hyperbolically calling all these opinions, Apostolick traditions, which were deliuered to him by good men, who kept the chiefe heads of Apostolicke faith, and this amongst the rest (albeit no article of faith) yet beeing deliue∣red to him by Christians more ancient then himselfe, he calleth it by a figure an Apostolicke tradition. But the conceite of Popish Purgatorie neuer entred into the heartes of NAZIANZENVS, BASILIVS, ATHANA∣SIVS, (albeit DAMASCENE falsly alledgeth his testimonie) THEODORETVS, CHRYSOSTOMVS and the ancient learned fathers of the Greeke Church, as clearely appeareth by the
first protestation giuen in at the Councill of Florence by the Gecians there conueened Ann. 1439.. How socuer weake ren for hope of helpe from the West were feeble defenders of the truth, yet they clearly knew that the opiniō of Popish Purgatorywas vnknown to their ancient orthodoxe fathers. In end, Purgatorie finding no sure allowance in scripture, nor yet in the writings of ancient fathers began to creepe Fables of Damascene forstablishing of Purgatory vnder the skirts of apparitions of dead men & by dreames, fables, apparitions and foolish inuentions it was so streng∣thened, that the verity of the Gospel was not so much regar∣ded by a foolish bewitched people as the fables confirming Purgatorie. It were tedious to rehearse all the fables of DA∣MASCENE in his sermons de defunctis. Yet all are not to be past ouer with silence: He saith that THECLA one of the first feminine mattyrs prayed for FALCONILLA after her death, and obtained pardon to her, albeit shee was an Ethnicke i∣dolattesse, and died without the knowledge of Christ. This woman behooued to be deliuered out of hell, and not out of Purgatorie. But who should lend his eares once to hear∣ken to fables so repugnant to scripture, Luc. 16. In like ma∣ner he saith that holy MACARIVS prayed night and day for the dead, and in end he demanded at the dry pow or head of a deade man if hee felt any comfort by the prayers of the liuing, and the dry pow or braine pan answered that they found some litle refreshment. Likewise he bringeth in the fable of an ancient teacher (whose name he expresseth not, because fables delite to haue their head lapped vp in dark∣nesse of shadowes and silence) who had a disciple that liued licentiously in excesse and iot all his dayes, and so without repentance concluded his life: the teacher made prayers night and day for his disciple, and in end the Lord opened his eyes to see his disciple burning in flames of fire to the necke: after this hee increased the earnestnesse of his pray∣ers, & afterward he saw his disciple burning in fire vnto the middle part of his body. Finally by the feruencie of mul∣tiplied prayers he was fully deliuered. The fable of GRE∣GORIVS 1. cited also by DAMASCENE goeth beyond all the rest in absurditie, that he prayed for the soule of TRAIAN the third persecuting Emperour, and obtained pardon to
it as a voyce that came downe from heauen, witnessed, saying, I haue heard thy prayers and granted pardon to TRAIANVS, but in time to come make no prayers for wic∣ked men. All these fables are like vnto the gourd of IO∣NAS, that had a worme within it, which smote it, so that it withered incontinent, Ion. 4. euen so in al these fables there are circumstances declaring that God would not heare the prayers made for impenitent sinners after they had died in sinne. Heare I leaue Papists dreaming vpon Purgatory and con∣firming it with dreames, & yet vncertaine where it is. As for vs, we will leane alanerly vpon the blood of Christ, which True Chri∣stians leane vpon the pur∣ging blood of Christ. purgeth vs from all sinnes, 1. Loh. 1. and we know certainely that our high Priest the Lorde Iesus with his owne finger sprinkleth his owne blood vpon our soules, that we may be found a pure virgine to Christ, 2. Cor. 11. that being purged from all sinne, we may enter into that holy celestial Ierusalem whereinto no foule and vncleane thing getteth entresse, A∣pocal. 21. Now he who hath prepared this holy mansion for vs, prepare vs also for it, to whome be praise and glory for euer. Amen. CENT. 3. A Treatise of Reliques of Saints. SVch is the corruption of mans nature, that in nothing can we keepe the golden mediocritie commanded by God. Sometimes wee hate and persecute Gods ser∣uants, at other times wee giue vnto them the honour The corrup∣tion of mans nature. that is due to God alone. And in this great confusion and disorder howe can order bee kept? yea these idolaters themselues, who at sometimes honour the saintes with ex∣cessiue and vncompetent honour, they keepe not one and the selfe-same order. Sometime they begin at excessiue honour, and they end at excessiue contempt, as the men of Listra, first, they called PAVL & BARNABAS gods, and after∣ward
they stoned PAVL as an euill doer, Act. 14. At other times they begin at excessiue contempt, and they mount vp to excessiue honour as the people of the Isle of Malta first counted PAVL to be a murtherer, after to be a god, Act. 28. Many other examples may be giuen, specially in the person of MOSES vnder the Lawe, and of the Apostles vnder the Gospell. The carnal Iewes that came out of Egypt murmu∣red many times against MOSES, but their more carnall and vnhappy posteritie preferred MOSES to Christ, Ioh, 9. ver. 29. saying, We know that God spake to Moses, but this man know wee not from whence he is. This is the malice of Satan changing our prison, but not suffering vs to be set at libertie. For when a man is incarcerate in any vpper house, and then his prison is changed, and hee is prisoned in the lower prison, where there is lesse libertie of aire, and great stincke & filth, the estate of this man is not better but worse by his change: euen so when men haue misregarded in most contemptible Simil. maner the seruants of God, this is a snare of the deuill, but when they giue vnto them the honour that is due to God, this is a greater snare, for they who called PAVL a muthe∣rer (who was indeed the prisoner of Christ) at that time they lied, yet they attributed nothing to PAVL but that sin wher∣unto by nature hee was inclined, and also practised before his conuersion, Act. 9. but when they called him a god, they attributed vnto him that honour that was not competent to a mortall man, Act. 28. Albeit we be not able to comprehend the deepe and sub∣tle slights of Satan yet in the first entrie we may grope some The great slight of Sa∣tan. deceitfulnesse in Satans dealing, because hee dealeth one way with Gentiles and Pagans who knew not God, and an∣other way with Iewes and Christians who had some know∣ledge of the true God. He stirreth vp the Gentiles forth∣with to call men Gods, by whose hands the Lord wrought a miraculous worke, Act. 14. and Act. 28. but hee dea∣leth otherwise with the Iewes who had some knowledge of God, not incontinent to equall MOSES to God, but to preferre him vnto other teachers, and to Iesus whome they denied to be God. In like maner he moued the Iewes to deck and beautifie the sepulchres of the Prophets, Mat. 23, which
seemed to be no fault, but Satan was craftily vnder colour of honouring the seruants of God, leading them to perse∣cute the master himselfe, euen Christ Iesus the great prince of all Pastours. And therefore Christians should beware of the slights of the deuill, because vpon very small and not disalowable beginnings (as would appeare he laboureth to leade them in end to horrible idolatrie. Againe Satan is so craftie and deceitfull that he wil build Another craft of Sa∣tan. vpon another mans foundation. It was not Satan but the Lord himselfe that would haue the funerals of his Saintes reuerently handled. God saide vnto IACOB that IOSEPH should close his eyes, and that the Lord himselfe would re∣duce him backe againe to Canaan, that is. the Lord would attend vpon his funeral in his backe comming againe, Gen. 46. ver. 4. yet that craftie aduersarie Satan building as it were vpon the Lordes owne ground vnder pretence of ho∣nour to bee done to the bodies of the Saintes, as the tem∣ples whereinto the holy Ghost dwelt, he hath brought men so farre forwarde, that they haue opened the graues of the Saints, raised their bones, caried them in procession, and made their prayers before them with hope to be the better heard of God, because they bowe themselues before the re∣liques of Saintes, Also Satans craft appeareth in this, that as the Philistims did not send SAMPSON immediatly to grind in their mill vn∣till The third craft of Sa∣tan. they had first pulled out his eyes, Iudg. 16 21. euen so Sa∣tan mooued not men to bowe their knees and to say their prayers before dead mens bones at the first instance, vntill he had of along time blind-folded their eyes with a mistie cloud of ignorance, so that all things were welcome that pleased their blind guides to thrust into their hands. And so we shall see (Godwilling) that in the first 300. yeeres after the ascension of our Lord there was no adoratiō of reliques. We reade of graues ope∣ned for disho∣nouring but not for ho∣nouring. of bones. Now let the history speak for it self. In the old Testamēt we read that some mens bones were raised out of their graues to dishonor thē, as the bones of the priests of Bethel, which were burned vpon the altar of Bethel by IOSIAH, 2. Reg. cap. 23. 16. but in that same chapter it is expresly noted, that the bones of the true Prophet who came from Iudah and fore∣told
all these things, ibid. ver. 17. these bones, I say, were not raised to honour them as the bones of the idolatrous priestes were raised out of their graues to dishonour them. The body of MOSES buried in the plaine of Moab, Deut 34. ver. 6. whose sepulchre was vnknowne to man, but knowne to Satan, yet he who knew it had not libertie to open it, & to discouer the reliques of his body, left it should haue bene an occasion of idolatrie, because MICHAEL the Archangell of God stroue against him in this point, epist. ud. ver. 9. The graue of the Prophet ELIZEVS was opened not of purpose to raise his bones, and to honour them, but vpon a great suddentie to cast in another dead man: and albeit the Lord wrought a great miracle by touching of ELIZEVS bones, 2. Reg. 13. ver. 21. yet no man was so foolish as to raise them out of the graue, or to carie them into the Temple to be a∣dored and worshipped. The bones of IOSEPH that were in a chest, and transported out of Egypt by MOSES, Exod. 13 ver 19. yet in the wildernesse were not worshipped, no not by these carnall Iewes, who worshipped the golden calfe. And so the historie of the old Testament may be laide aside as an holy historie furnishing no fuel to hold in this fire of Popish superstition anent adorations of dead mens bones. In the new Testament like as the doctrine of resurrection No example in the nw Testament of rasing bones out of the graue to be worship∣ped. was clearely preached and beleeued amongst all Christian people: so likewise a great care was had that the bodies of the Saintes should be honourably buried as bodies appoin∣ted to an happie resurrection. This perswasion grounded in the heartes of Christians made them to count death a sleep, the graue a bed, & resurrection a wakening of men out of their sleepe, Ioh. 11. Act. 7. Now this sleepe differeth from other sleepes in this, that when a seruant conueyeth his ma∣sters sonne to bed to sleepe and rest, posbly this same ser∣uant will waken him againe in the morning that he may rise and walke: but when we are conueyed to the graue by the Lordes seruants, these seruants will not get that honour to raise vs vp againe out of our bed, but let vs sleepe on still vn∣till it shall please our Lord and master Christ Iesus to come againe, and raise vs vp out of our bed and sleepe. But foo∣lish seruants to be troubling the graues of the Saintes and
digging out their bones which they cannot cloth with flesh, sinewes and skin, neither can they breath a spirit in them, it is both foolish, superfluous, and vntimous diligence, whereof no example is to be found in the new Testament. In the ecclesiasticall historie it is to be noted that the fa∣thers who liued neerest vnto the dayes of the Apostles were also freest of this superstition of worshipping of bones and The fathers neerest to the Apostles dayes, freest of superstition other reliques. In the fourth persecution POLYCARPVS Bishop of Smyrna was martyred (as hath bene declared) at what time great care was taken both by Iewes and Paganes that the dead body of POLYCARPVS should not come into the handes of Christians: and to this purpose it was burned with fire. The Christians who waited on diligent∣ly to honour that blessed body, which had patiently suf∣fered rebuke for the cause of Christ, in end they got his bones, which albeit they counted to bee more pretious then gold and siluer, yet they worshipped them not, as EVSEBIVS clearely declareth, lib. 4. eccles. hist. cap. 16. but they buried them honourablie into a convenient place. Moreouer that day whereinto hee was burnt for the Name of Christ, was called by the fathers natalis, or natalitium POLYCARPI, that is, the birth-day of POLY∣CARPVS, because by his death he made it manifest that he was the true childe of GOD, begotten and borne of the vncorruptible seede of the Word. And in that place where his bones were buried, and vpon the very day of his martyrdome, Christians conveened to glorifie God for the constant suffring of the Martyr & to exhort others with constant perseuerance to be ready to do the like, Euseb. ibid. These things no man can justly vituperat in the anci∣ent Church, because their purpose was to glorifie GOD by meanes not vnlawfull, and to fster in the heartes Buriall of Christians hindered to quench the hope of resur∣rection. of the people, the assurance of the resurrection of the dead, by honourable buriall of such as died for Christ, And so much the more they were moued so to do, because the per∣secuting Pagans hindered the Christians from burying their dead, to the end they might quench the hope of the resurre∣ction in their hearts, as Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 1. clearely declareth speaking of the Martyrs in France, who suffered death in the
fourth persecution vnder ANTONINVS VERVS, whose bo∣dies were left vnburied for a tie, and afterward were burnt with fire, and resolued into ashes, and the ashes were cast in∣to the riuer of Rhodanus, ne ullam amplius resurrectionis spem ha∣beant, that is, to the end they should haue no more hope of the resurrection. And doubtlesse there is no Christian heart that liued in these dayes, but behoued to encrease their cair in burying the bodies of the Saints, because in want of buri∣all the Pagans wold haue quenched the hope of refurrectiō. The custome of transporting the bones of the holy men of God from one place to another more honourable place (as What time transporting' of the bones of the Saints began, and how long this custome con∣tinued with∣out adoration seemed to the transporters) it was not so ancient as it can be prooued by examples for the space of three hundreth yeeres after the ascension of our Lord, yet these bones were trans∣ported after a manner, as the bones of IOSEPH from Egypt to Canaan, to be buried in a more honourable place. Iosu. 24. vers. 22. without any kind of adoration, as the bones of BA∣BYLAS B. of Antiochia, in the dayes of IVLIAN the apostat. Theodoret. lib. 3. cap 3. 10. The bones of PAVL B. of Constanti∣nople, were transported and buried in the Church of Constan∣tinople, that was builded by his persecuter MACEDONIVS. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 10. This was done in the dayes of THEO∣DOSIVS the Emperour, and the wordes are to be marked. transtulis corpus ejus & in Ecclesia condidit quam MACEDONIVS persecutor ejus adificaverat, that is to say, he transferred his bo∣dy, and buried it into the Church which his persecuter MA∣CEDONIVS had builded. In the dayes of the Emperour AR∣CADIVS the reliques of SAMVEL were brought to Constanti∣nople. Theodor. lector collect. lib. 2. & in the daies of THEODOSIVS 2. his son, the bones of CHRYSOSTOM were transported to Cōstantinople. Al this time, bones & other reliques were trās∣ported & buried, but not set vp vpon altars nor worshipped. If it be objected that IEROME disputing against VIGI∣LANTIVS defendeth the custom of women, who in the ve∣ry day time went to the graues of the martyres with lighted An answe to an objecti∣on. torches of waxe to honour them by so doing. To this I answere that the wordes of IEROME make litle against our opinion. First, because his wordes im∣port that the bones of the saintes were lying in their graues
Secondly, the women who lighted these waxe torches IE∣ROM granteth that they had a zeale to God, but not accor∣ding to knowledge. Thirdly IEROM in cōpating these lighted torches to the pretious oyntment powred out by MARIE v∣pon Christs head, Ioh. 12. whereof Christ had no neede, and no more haue the martyres neede of waxe torches to bee lighted at the places of their sepulchres, with IEROMS fa∣uour (for honour of his learning) his comparisons are not good: for MARIES fact was done in zeale mixed with knowledge, & hath an approbation in Christs own mouth: but the sact of those women was done in zeale without knowledge, and hath but a slender approbation in IEROMS own mouth Hieron contra Vigilant.. Againe if it be objected that miracles were wrought at Answere to another ob∣jection. the graues of the Martyrs, as namelie in Millain, where AV∣GVSTINE was present, at the sepulchres of PROTASIVS and GERVASIVS a blinde man was restored to his sight, and AVGVSTINE himselfe beareth witnesse of this miracle, because he saw it done with his owne eyes. August lib. confess. 9. cap. 7 To this I answere that God wrought a miracle at the sepul∣chre of this holy Martyr PROTASIVS to confirme that true faith for which he suffred martyrdome. Like as God wroght a greater miracle at the sepulchre of ELISEVS in restoring a dead man to life againe. 2. Reg 13. to confirme the doctrine of ELISEVS that it was of God. But the end of these miracles was not to raise vp their bones out of the graue & to wor∣ship them, in regarde that such superstitious facts plainly re∣pugned to the summe of their faith and doctrine. Now by good reason the Papists are reduced to this strait, that either they must prooue that the adoration of dead mens bones was a point of ELISEVS doctrine, and PROTASIVS faith, or else these miracles were wroght to teach men to raise out of the graue, and to worship the dead bones of the Prophets & martyrs of God. And AVGVSTINE himselfe clearelie decla∣reth what was the issue of this miracle. First, men tooke oc∣casion by the sight of hat miracle to glorify God, but not to worship PROTASIVS & GERVASIVS bones. The other end of the working of that miracle was to stay the fury of IVSTINA the mother of VALENTINIAN the second in persecuting
of AMBROSE B. of Millain, albeit the fame and notoriousnes of this miracle did not convert her to the true faith, yet it a∣uailed to abate her furie and rage in persecuting the inno∣cent feruant of Christ. August ibid. confess. lib. 9. cap. 7. Againe, if it be objected that the dead bones of BABY∣LAS An answere to the thirde objetion. stopped the mouth of APOLLO, so that he could not vt∣ter his oracle, vntill BABYLAS bones were raised, and trans∣ported into an other place. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 19. and there∣fore there is vertue in the bones of the Saints to helpe the godly, and to confound the power of the deuill. For answere I say we should not hearken to the deceitfull speeches of Sa∣tan, who seeing Christians already inclined to transport the dead bones of the Saints, for al his simular and fained dum∣nesse, yet he could speake that whereby superstition after∣ward should be mightilie increased and augmented. Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 4. cap. de miraculis. But arguments drawen out of the fountaines of Scripture, if they were rightly infer∣red, should haue greater countenance, credite and regarde, No testimo∣nie in scrip∣ture to proe the Worship∣ping ofre∣liques. then the testimonies of all the fathers joyned together. Therefore they will not seeme to be destitute of this armour also. The shadow of PETER Acts. 5. 15. was helpfull to disea∣sed persons, and the napkins, and hand-kercheefes taken from the bodie of PAVL, helped diseases, and made vncleane spirits to depart from men. And therefore (say they) to at∣tribute vertue to reliques of Saints, is no derogation to the glorie of God, but rather a great confirmation of Gods trueth. To this I answere, that scripture hauing intention to glorifie God indeed doth in these miracles neither magnifie PETER nor PAVL, nor PETERS shadow, nor PAVLS napkins, wherin there was no sauing vertue, but the text clearlie saith that Godw ought miracles by the hands of PAVL Acts 19. ver. 11. Which verse is cast in of purpose to turne our hearts from PAVL the instrument, alanerly to God the author of these miracles. And if the holy Scripture will not suffer vs to re∣pose vpon PETER and PAVL, and other Apostles, as if by their owne power and vertue they had made any man whole, Acts 3. ver. 12. how much lesse can God be pleased with this, that power and vertue be attributed to PETERS shadowe, and PAVLS napkins? And albeit vertue had bene in these things,
yet PETERS shadow could not haue bene kept as a perma∣nent relique to the posteritie, nor yet PAVLS napkin, except miraculouslie, could haue continued so long. But this suffi∣ceth our purpose, that in al the scripture there is not a word of the worshipping of PETERS shadow, nor PAVLS napkin. If I were disputing vpon words, I would demand of those that recken PETERS shadow among reliques, by what reason they do it, seeing that it hath no remaining amongst vs, after that his body is taken from vs, and therefore, cannot be called a relique? But I leaue off to speake of the shadow of words as∣well, as of the shadow of bodies. Let vs remember this well, that GOD worketh great works by very contemptible meanes, to the end the glory may be attributed to GOD alone. Now seeing that GOD The sheep-heards staffe of Moses. wrought great workes by the sheep-heards staffe that was in the hand of MOSES, he dantoned the land of Egypt, divided the red sea, and by the stroke of the staffe broght forth wa∣ters out of the hard rocke: Seing (I say) that God wroght so great workes by so contemptible a meane, what became of this sheepheards staffe after the death of MOSES? Some of the learned say that God buried it with MOSES in the plain of Moab, lest it should haue bene an occasion of idolatry: How euer it be, the remembrance of it is buried in scriptures, and we cannot tell what became of it. But if it had bene in time of Poperie, it had bene laid vp and worshipped among their principall reliques. The coake of ELIAS where-with ELIZEVS divided the The cloake of Elias. waters of Iordan semeth to be a relique of ELIAS, hauing ver∣tue to worke miraculous works, but the text it selfe decla∣reth the contrary, that there was no power in the cloake, but in the GOD of ELIAS for when ELIZEVS came to the riuer side, he lifted vp his heart to GOD, saying, where is now the GOD of ELIAS? 2 Reg. 2. ver. 15. So that all scripture The Church of the lewes might haue had moe re∣liques then the Romane Church. both in old and new Testament with one consent sendeth vs from cloakes, staues, shadowes, hand-kerchiefes, and such like means, to the power of almighty GOD, working where, when, and by what meanes he pleaseth. Now if al things wherby or wherin God wroght miracles, should be kept as holy reliques, then the church of the Iewes
might haue surpassed the Romane church infinit degrees. For who can deny but God wrought miraculous workes in and by ail the coates, hose▪ shooes shirts, headcouerings, napkins, and such other garments that were among the people of the Iewes? Their garments waxed not old, and their feete swelled not all the space of fourtie yeeres that they were in the wildernesse. Dut. 8 ver. 4. If all these gar∣ments had bene laide vp in store after they entred into the land of Canaan, the Iewes might say that their Church was holier then all the Churches in our daies, if holines be estee∣med according to the multitude of reliques. Let vs now set forward and declare when this corruption of worshipping of reliques crept in into the Church of God. In the Apostles dayes no such thing. In time of the ten persecutions was bu∣rying of Martyrs and celebration of Natalitia Martyrum, as hath bene declared. From the three hundreth yeere of our Lord, till the foure hundreth, & almost till the fiue hundreth yere there was some transporting of holy mens bones to be buried in a more honorable place (as said is) but not wor∣shipping. There were torches and waxe candles caried to the sepulchres of the martyrs, which custome was disallowed by some, and excused by others: there was also banquetting at the sepulchres of the Martyrs, which custome hath not great allowance of AVGVSTINE, de moribus ecclesiae catholicae, cap. 34. for he thought that some of them who banquetted in such places, buried themselues aboue buried men. Yet all this time no worshipping of reliques, But after the fiue hundreth yeere of our Lord, in the daies of ANASTASIVS, IVSTINVS the elder, IVSTINIAN, IVSTINVS Worshipping of reliques af∣ter the 592. yeere of our Lord. the yonger, TIBERIVS, MAVRITIVS, PHOCAS &c. superstition began to abound and reliques were worshipped, and the ve∣ry pens of ecclesiasticall writers, who wrote the historie of that time such as EVAGRIVS, smell of superstition. We reade that the crosse of Christ was caried through Apamia, & wor∣shipped Euag. lib 4. cap. 26. The reliques of S. SEBASTIAN were caried out of Rome to Ticinum, & laid vpon an altar for stay∣ing of the deuouring plague. PAVLVS DIACONVS de gestis Lon∣gobard. lib. 6. cap, 2. SERGIOPOLIS is saide to bce pre∣serued from the furie of COSROES king of Persia by the vertue and holinesse of the reliques of the martyre SERGIVS.
gEuagr. lib. 4 cap. 28. Yea, the blind guides of this time were not content to fill the world with the reliques of the Saints, but also to ground this opinion in the peoples hearts, that these reliques ought to be worshipped, they found out a thousand lieing miracles, so that it was fulfilled that was spoken by the Apostle PAVL, that the comming of the Antichrist should be by the operation of Satan in all power, and siges and Won∣ders of lying. 2 Thess. 2. ver. 9 Surely at this time the fore-run∣ners of the Antichrist were ryding poste, and busilie prepa∣ring the way to that man of sin, and child of perdition, and therefore lying miracles were neuer more frequent then at this time. The miracle wrought at Apamia in the bearing about of the crosse by THOMAS Bishop of Apamia, is more regar∣ded Object. then many other miracles, because EVAGRIVS wit∣nesseth that he himselfe was present in the town, and that he saw the bearing about of the crosse. Likewise, that he saw a fire compassing the crosse, and the Bishop THOMAS whither∣soeuer he went: and that this sight was more miraculous, that this fire had a shining vertue to encrease light, but not a consuming power to offend the Bishop that bare the crosse. And the sight of this miracle so mooued the heart of EVA∣CRIVS, that he himselfe fell down & worshipped the crosse that was in the hands of THOMAS Bishop of Apamia. To this I giue these answers. First, that EVAGRIVS in de∣scribing The first an∣swere. the deliuerie of. Apamia from the expected siege of COSROES King of Persia, and the miraculous deliuerance of SERGIOPOLIS and EDESSA two townes besieged, indeed is so fabulous, that he deserueth no more credit in this narra∣tion, then in the description of the life of BARS ANVPHIVS an Egyptian monke of whom EVAGRIVS writeth, that he in∣closed himselfe within a shop beside Gaza fiftie yeeres, seene of no man, and vsing no kind of earthly thing, that is, neither meat, drinke, raiment, nor any other refreshment of earthly things. Euagr. lib. 4. cap. 33. He who can excuse this ouersight of EVAGRIVS, let him accuse me that I giue not credite to all that EVAGRIVS writeth. Secondly the authority of THOMAS Bishop of Apamia & The second answere. EVAGRIVS an ecclesiastical writer, are both nothing in com∣parisō
of the authoritie of AMBROSE, who was nerer vnto the Apostles dayes, & tooke better attendance to the scriptures of God then EVAGRIVS did: he writeth of HELENA the mo∣ther of CONSTANTINE who is saide to haue found out the crosse wheron Iesus suffered, yet he saith of her Regem adora∣vit non lignum, that is, sh worshipped the king & not the tree, for that had bene (saith he) the error of Ethnickes, & the va∣nitie of vngodly people, Ambros. de obitu Theodosu. Thirdly I affirme that in scripture is set downe two sortes of lying miracles, & both are to be misregarded alike. 1. false The third answere. miracles wherein the senses of men only are deluded, but nothing wroght neither contrarie to nature nor aboue na∣ture, such as were the miracles wrought by the sorcerers of Egypt, Exod. 7. 8 9. Other miracles are called lying miracles, not because the senses of men are deluded, but because they are brought forth by the operatiō of Satan to cōfirme a ly∣ing doctrine, Deut. 13. 1. 23, And in 2. Thess. cap. 2. 9. they are called , because they are both wrought and al∣ledged to confirme a doctrine of lies. In this rancke let vs eount the miracle cited by EVAGRIVS. Finally I say that if the cōfidence in the crosse was so pow∣erful as to stay COSROES king of Persia frō besieging Apamia, why was it not also as powerful (the people remaining no The fourth answere. lesse superstitious thē they were afore) to saue Apamia frō the siege of ADAARMANES the captain of the armie of COSROES who afterward tooke the towne of Apamia & set it on fire? Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 10. Notwithstanding of their confidence in the crosse this superstitiō was no defence vnto them, but ra∣ther fuell to augment the flame of the wrath and indigna∣tion of God against them. And thus I leaue EVAGRIVS spor∣ting himselfe with his own conceits, wherof what account I make, I haue already declared. In end, Satan counting the ignorance of mankinde to be his gaining, brought in false reliques into the world, which False re∣liques. were worshipped with no lesse reuerence and deuotion then the true reliques were. And Satan vsed the world as the Philistim vsed SAMSON, Iudg. 16. First they bound him, se∣condly they pulled out his eyes, thirdly they compelled him to grind in their mil: and last of all they made a play-soole
of him. But when they were at the hight of their contempt, Simil. then suddenly came their destruction. Euen so after that Sa∣tan had bound the world with the bands of idolatrie, and blindfolded them, and made them to serue in vile and filthy offices, in end with false and forged reliques, he would mak a playfoole of the world: but then in the mercie of God the kingdome of the deuill began to be shaken and ouerturned. The coat of Christ, his purple garment, his teares, the fore∣skin of his circumcision, the crowne of thornes, the speare, that pearced his side, the lots that were cast for his gar∣ments, the linnen clothes whereinto his blessed body was wrapped, all these reliques the Romaine Church bragge that they haue them, together with the very house of Beth∣leam wherein the Lord was borne, miraculously transpor∣ted from Iudea to Italie: so impudent are they in forging lies. But if all these things had bene left by Christ in testamental Legacie to the Church of Rome, they had not bene so care∣ful in keeping of thē, as the negligent keeping of the purity of the word & holy sacramēts clearly declareth: for they haue lost the key of knowledge. They haue added many things to Baptisme, and paired a substantiall part from the Supper of the Lord. And no doubt if the forenamed reliques had bene left in Testament also to the church of Rome (like vnto false executers) they had made hauocke of these in like maner. The false reliques attributed to the blessed Virgin the mo∣ther of our Lord, to MICHAEL the Archangel, and to the martyrs & saints, some of them haue such babish conceits in them, others such absurditie, as it were a shame to make re∣hearsall of them, if so be we had not to do with a shamelesse harlot, who hath dighted her mouth, & saith, I haue cōmit∣ted none iniquity, Prou, 30. ver. 20. The virgins haire in quan∣titie more then is beseeming to attribute to one person, her milke in qualitie better then is beseeming to attribut to any mortal creature: her combe wherwith she combed her haire, her girdle & many other reliques vnknowne to antiquitie. In the strife of MICHAEL the Archangell of God against the deuil for the body of MOSES, epist. Iud. ver. 9. the dagger and shield wherewith he fought, are among the number of Po∣pish reliques: as if Satan could be ouercome with the wea∣pons of corporal warfarc, whē as men themselues are taught
by the Apostle to fight against spirituall wickednesse with spirituall armour. Ephes. 6. The coales of S. LAVRENCE, the incorruptible finger of IOHN Baptist that pointed out Christ, the yron chaine that boūd PETER, the teeth of APOLLONIA, the body of S. DIO∣NISE cōplet aleged to be both in France & Germany, the mul∣tiplied body of S. SEBASTIAN & innumerable other forged reliques wherof they who haue inuēted thē haue cause to be ashamed. And what shal we say of the superlatiue degree of al absurditie in defending forged reliques? The arrowes that pearced S. SEBASTIAN, the stones that stoned S. STEPHAN, the 30. pieces of money which the traitor IVDAS receiued to be∣tray his master, shall all these also be consecrated & worship∣ped? SIMON MAGVS mony was cursed & execrable as wel as himself, Act, 8. 20. because he thoght that the gift of the holy spirit could be bought with money. Shall not the 30. pieces of money wherewith the blood of Christ was bought be al∣so cursed & execrable? Now we see in our time a filthie sta∣ble ful of forged reiiques & more filthy then euer the stable of AVGIAS king of Elis was, which couldby no other means be purged, but by the riuer of Alpheus, which beeing let in into the stable the great heape of 30 yeres dung was in few dayes washed away: Euen so the great heape of forged re∣liques, wherewith the world hath bene bewitched these ma∣ny hundreth yeres, can by no other means be abolished but by the spate of the authoritie of godly Princes, whose harts the Lord stir vp to purge the world from the filth & stincke of false reliques by false teachers so obstinatly defended. The best remedie to correct all abuses in the Church was euer this, to reduce all things vnto the first & originall puri∣ty which was this, to do as the men of God in the Apostles daies did. They followed the saints in so farre as the saintes followed Christ, 1. Cor. 11. If the saints departed this life, they buried them honestly, as deuote men did burie STE∣PHAN, Act. 8 2. with some lamentation, but not excessiué as they doe who are without hope, 1. Thess. 4. 13 After their death if they remembred any good they had done in their lifetime, they commended it, that others might follow their example, because Christ saith that the fact of MARIE should be told for a memoriall of her, & that in all places whersoe∣uer the Gospel should be taught, Mat. 26. ver. 13. If they had
patiently suffered any euill for Christs sake, they kept a me∣moriall of that also, as the godly fathers of the primitiue Church did in natalitus martyrum. Thus doing, we honour the saintes and follow them as they followed Christ, but we cloth them not with the royall apparell which is only due to Christ, to whom be euerlasting glory and honour. Amen. CENT. 3. A Treatise of the supremacie of the B. of Rome. ALbeit that the Bishop of Rome was not openly pro∣claimed to be the heade of all Bishops, vntill the yeere of our Lord 607. by the Emperour PHOCAS, yet is this supremacie coloured with forged lies & appearance of greater antiquitie, & for refutatiō of alledged antiquitie I cast in this treatise in the third Centurie. And first of all let vs consider the grounds of this alledged supre∣macie, next let vs consider the steps of this ladder (not like to the ladder of IACOB leading vp to heauen, but like to the manifestation of the man of sinne) wherby the B. of Rome, by litle & litle climmed vp vnto this soueraignitie, that in end he sat as a lawgiuer in the chaire of Christ. And thirdly God-willing we shal declare the tragical euent of this supremacie. Now first the principall ground whereupon Papistes doe ground the supremacie of the Pope, is the supremacie of PE∣TER Great busi∣nes to destroy Christ after he was borne as great bu∣sinesse to ad∣uance the Antichrist. aboue the rest of the Apostles, which if it were grantes they will inferre the superioritie of the Bishop of Rome, as his successour aboue all Bishops. In this argument I per∣ceiue great businesse to aduance the Antichrist, and to set him vp into an eminent chair, like as when Christ was borne there was great businesse to make him out of the way, Mat. 2. but all in vaine, the crueltie and craft of HEROD, cannot vn doe the counsell of God: so great businesse is to aduance the Roman Antichrist, and to make vs beleeue that Christ him∣selfe hath set him in his own chaire, & giuē vnto him a soue∣raine gouernment ouer al his sheep, but al this trauel is also taken in vain: for the roome of Christ must not be filled vn∣till it be vacant, & the breath of Christs mouth destroying the
man of sinne, will one day declare that Christ is liuing, sit∣ting in his owne chaire, and mightie in operation to make his enemies his footstoole, Psal. 110, Now to examine the parts of this argument, the first part is, PETER is the heade of the Apostles, and this they proue Christ insti∣tuted none of the Apostles to be supreme heade ouer the rest. by the words of Christ, I Will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, &c. Mat. 16. In the contrarie we affirme that ifin these wordes Christ had giuen any supremacie to PETER aboue the rest, then afterward when they stroue who should be greatest, Christ had not damned this fault in all his disciples, but he had only damned the eleuen disciples, for that they were not voluntarly subject to PETER whom he had alreadie made head of all the rest. But in so farre as stri∣uing for superioritie is damned in them all, Mat. 18. it is cer∣taine that Christ appointed none of the Apostles to be su∣preme head of all the rest. And CYPRI AN plainly affirmeth in his booke de simplicitate Praelatorum. Hoc erant utique  & cateri Apostoli quodfuit Petrus pari consortio praediti & honoris & potestatis. that is, Al the rest of the Apostles were that same thing that PETER was furnished with like fellowshippe and honour. The second part of the argument that the Bishop of Rome is the successour of PETER hath beene alreadie in∣treated in the head of succession. Another argument proouing the supremacie of the Ro∣maine The decretal epistles attri∣buted to the Bishops of Rome of old are forged & false. Bishops is taken out of the decretall epistles attribu∣ted to the Bishoppes of Rome who liued in the second Cen∣turie making mention of the superioritie of the Bishop of Rome aboue all other Bishoppes. To this I answere, that these epistles attributed vnto them are supposititious and false, as hist. Magdeburg. clearly prooueth by many rea∣sons, whereof I shall rehearse a fewe. First, the stile and 1. ditement of all these epistles declareth that one and the self∣same man hath endited them all. Secondly the ineptitude and barbaritie of language, no wise agreeing with the tightnesse of the Latin tongue vsed in 2. this age. Thirdly, these decretall epistles agree not with the estate of the Church at that time persecuted by Tyrants, troubled 3 by Heretiques, & slandered by the world. If these forenamed
Bishops had writtē epistles indeed they had cōtained exhor∣tatiōs to patiēt suffring, apologies against slādrous mouths, refutatiō of Hereticks: but seing they soūd for the most part to the establishing of their own supremacy the very circum∣stāce of time declareth that they are supposititious & forged. Fourthly the reasons whereby these epistles doe prooue the supremacie of the Romaine chaire, are foolish, ridiculous 4 & vnworthie to be attributed to so worthie men. As name∣ly, that PETER was called CEPHAS, that is an heade, for his supremacie. Likewise PETER and PAVL died at Rome, there∣fore the Romaine B. is head of all other Bishops. Also PAVL saide that hee had continuall remembrance of the Romans in his prayers. Rom. 1. therfore the Romaine Church must be head of all other Churches. Fiftly, these decretal epistles were vnknown to IVSTINVS martyr, IRENEVS, CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS who liued about 5. this time, as likewise to IEROME an accurat searcher of al an tiquities, for none of thē mak mētiō of these decretal epistles. Sixtly, when the question of appellation to the Romaine Bishop, and the question of supremacie was reasoned in the 6. sixt Councill of Carthage, if such decretall epistles had bene then exstant the ambassadours of the Bishop of Rome had alledged them for corroboration of their cause, but they were not as yet fashioned and shaped. Finally in these decretall epistles CLEMENS B. of Rome is broght in writing to IAMES surnamed IVSTVS after the death of PETER: & it is known by the history that IAMES surnamed IVSTVS was slain at the least 8. yeres before the martyrdome of PETER. For Iames was slaine before NERO entended his persecution, but PETER was martyred in the very furic of NE∣ROES persecutiō, Ioseph antiq. I. 20. c. 8 Euseb. I. 2. c 23 & 25. The 3. principall argument they vse is taken from the v∣tilitie of the Church of God whereinto vnitie is very requi∣sit, Ioh. 17. & for keeping of vnitie one ministeriall head vn∣der Christ is necessarie, like as in the Church of the Iewes one high Priest, to whom all the people were subject in matters of religion, was a band of vnitie amongst the Iewes: euen so say they, one ministeriall head (viz. the B. of Rome) is necessa∣ry for keeping vnitie: peace & concord amongst Christians-To this I answere, that all things happened to them in fi∣gures,
1. Cor. 10. and like as the nation of the Iewes had one high Priest as a band of vnitie, so likewise they had one al∣tar, & one citie of their conuentions, Isa. 33 & these also were bands of vnitie to keepe the nation of the Iewes into an holy fellowship: yet no man wil say that it is necessary to vs in our dayes to resort thrise in the yere to any one citie for keeping the vnitie of Christ No more is it necessary in our dayes for keeping of vnitie to haue one high Priest vpon whome we shall all depend, but rather this beeing a figure (as said is) teacheth vs to depend vpon Iesus Christ the great bshop of our soules, because we are all members of his body, we are quickned with his spirit, wee haue one hope of calling, we haue one faith & one Baptisme, Eph. 4. These are the bands of our cōjunctiō both with Christ our head & with his mē∣bers: but the Apostle PAVL in reckoning out the bands of our conjunction with Christ and amongst our selues spea∣keth nothing of one ministeriall head vnderChrist: neither is it possible that there can be on ministerial head in al the world, as there was one high Priest in one nation of the Iewes. The second head of this treatise is to consider the steps & degrees wherby the B. of Rome was moūted vp in the chair of Christ. 1. The honorable stiles attributed by other churches The first step. vnto the chair of Rome began to puft vp some of them into great cōceit of thēselues. The chaire of Rome was called the Apostolick chaire & the B. of Rome was called the vniuersal Bishop: such honourable stiles by hyperbolicall speaches gi∣uen vnto them should not haue puft them vp in pride to conceit supremacie ouer all other Bishops, because the like stiles of dignitie are attributed to other Bishops and other chaires who neuer vsurped superioitie ouer all Churches, Nazianz. in laudem Cypriani saith that he was counted in his time not only a gouern our of the Church of Carthage and of all Africke & of all the regions of the West, but also of al the East & South & North. The like is written of ATHANASIVS, Nazian in laudē Athanas. The like also the EmperorCONSTAN TINE spak of EVSEBIVS PAMPHILIB of Caesarea Palestinae whē he refused the bishoprick of Antiochia. In this (saith CONSTAN TINE to EVSEBIVS) thou art blessed that by the testimony of ye world thou art thoght worthy to be B. of the whol church Euseb. invita Cōstantn. l. 3. c. 59 yet for al this neitherCYPRIAN
nor ATHANASIVS nor EVSEBIVS were puft vp in pride to think more of themselues then became the humble dispen∣sators of the mysteries of God. Here is to be noted that si∣militude of BASILIVS, that a good Christian should be like Simil. vnto a straight line, that neither crooketh vpward nor downward: euē so a goodChristian should neither be dashed with infamy & trouble, nor puft vp with honor & prosperity. The second step of this vnhappie supremacie was the ap∣pellations The second step. of Heretiques, and men liuing inordinatly from the discipline of their own Bishops vnto the Bishops of Rome, whome they receiued vnder their shadowe, not so much for fauour to their vnhonest causes, as for desire of supremacie aboue all other Churches. For APIARIVS appealed to the B. of Rome, & EVTYCHES Abbot in Constantinople appealed frō his B. FLAVIANVS to LEO B. of Rome, to whose excommuni∣cation albeit in end LEO agreed in the Council of Chalcedon, yet it is certaine that the cause of the propagation of EVTY∣CHES error was the lingering of LEO B of Rome, who did not incontinent separat this pestilent Heretique frō his cōmu∣nion: albeit FLAVIANVS B. of Constantinople had most justly excōmmunicat him. Likewise BASILIDES and MARTIALIS Bishops of Asturica & Emerita in Spaine who had sacrificed to idoles, and defended their apostasie in writtē bookes, after they were both excommunicate & deposed by the Bishops of Spaine, they had recourse to STEPHANVS B of Rome: whose false apologies were so much the more fauourably heard, that they sought refuge vnder his wings. But CYPRIAN ga∣thered a Council in Africke, & absolutely damned these A∣postats, Hist Magd. cent. 3, Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 4. And albeit the African Councils laboured to remead this insolencie in time by ordaining these persons to be excōmunicate who should appeale frō their own Bishops to any other beyond sea, yet it was hard to correct by reason or authority of Councils that errour which the Romaine Bishop (beeing once admitted to be called primaesedis Episcopus) did receiue and embrace. Yea the filthie dash the Romaine Bishoppes gote in the sixt Councill of Carthage, wherein the act of the Council of Nice alledged by them to proue the B. of Rome to be supreme Iudge of all appellations was found to be supposititious
and false, this filthie dash (I say) did not correct their effrorr-Ited impudencie. And with that learned Moderne I. CALVIN I wonder what malice or ignorance moued GRATIANVS 2. Gratianus exception frō the councill of Carthage is foolish. quaest. 4. c. placuit. when he had mentioned the fore-said de∣crcet of the 6. Councill of Carthage, that these persons who should happen to appeale to bishops beyond sea should be excommunicat, he addeth this exception, vnlesse they ap∣peale to the chaire of Rome. What shalbe done (saith he) to those beasts who are so void of common sense, that they ex∣cept from the Law, that thing alanerlie for whose cause the Law was made and constitute, for it is euident that the fore∣said constitution in damning those that made appellations to Bishops beyond sea, was expreslie made to inhibit men of Africk from appealing to the B. of Rome. Also the defection and beastlie cowardlinesse of some Bi∣shops The third step dwelling in places where the pride of the Roman Bi∣shops had bene chieflie abandoned, their defection (I say) from the footsteps and good decrees of their antecessours, gaue encouragement to the Roman B. to set forward his v∣surped supremacie, as namely EVLALIVS B of Carthage, dam ned the decrees of the Councils of Carthage, and submitted himselfe to the chaire of Rome in the dayes of BONIFACIVS 2. promising to do all things according to his aduise and di∣rection. Of the which victorie BONIFACIVS 2. rejoyced, and gloried, and wrote to the Bishop of Alexandria, that this pro∣mise of subjection which EVLALIVS made to the chaire of Rome, should be divulgat and notified vnto other Churches. But the argument taken from the authoritie and example of EVLALIVS, is like vnto himselfe. If he being weyed in a just ballance, will be found foolish vnconstant, timorous, rash & naughtie, what can we say of the argument taken from his authoritie and example but the like? Beside this from the 6. Councill of Carthage, vntill the dayes of BONIFACIVS, B. of Rome, and EVLALIVS B. of Carthage interveened 100 yeeres All this time the godly and learned fathers that were in the sixt Councill of Carthage (not AVGVSTINE himselfe except) were vnder the sentence of CELESTINVS cursing and yet we hope in the mercie of GOD, that AVRELIVS B. of Carthage, AVGVSTINE B. of Hippo, and the rest of the fathers whom he
cursed, are reigning with Christ in heauen, notwithstanding of CELESTINVS foolish cursing & EVLALIVS more foolish repentance. This is wel noted by PHILIP MORNEY that Phoe nix of France. Lib. myster. iniquitatis. The Roman Bishops hunting foral occasions of prefer∣ment were like to a wild halke in the morning, hungrie, and The fourth steppe. swiftly soaring in the aire, if he cannot catch a Partridge, he will make a Lauerock his prey: euen so the Bishops of Rome, taking their vantage by euery light occasion, laboured to bring their brethren in subjection to their soueraignitie. In witnesse whereof ACACIVS B. of Constantinople, vsed the aduise and counsell of FELIX 3. B. of Rome, in disauthorizing and excommunicating PETRVS MOGGVS a fauourer of the Eu∣tychian heresie. This thing ACACIVS did by no necessitie, but of good will, and as a brother seeking the aduise and support of another brother. After this PETRVS MOGGVS be∣ing both disauthorized & excommunicat, he repented, for∣sooke his errour, and offered his supplicant bill to ACACIVS crauing relaxation from that fearful sentence of excommu∣nication. FELIX 3. on the other side, because his aduise was not craued in the relaxation aswell as in the excommunica∣tion, he cursed ACACIVS B. of Constantinople, and GELASIVS 1. his successor did the like. What meeting ACACIVS gaue to FELIX it is not needful to reherse, it is sufficiently known he was not behind with him. Here euery man may see that the Rom an bishops made vantage of these who soght their coun∣sell, as if it were necessarie that he who craueth our aduise in one thing should be bound to doe nothing without our aduise in any time to come. Moreouer, the hearts of the Roman bishops being exces∣siuely bent to preferment, could not abstain from flattering of Emperours & Princes, thereby gaining vantage & prefer The fist step. ment, but lossing the fauour of God, and falling vnder that heauie sentence of the curse of God, spoken by ISAIAH the Prophet. Woe vnto them which speak good of euill, and euill of good, which put darkenesse for light, and light for darknesse, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sowre. Isa. 5. ver. 20. It is not known to the world that BONIFACIVS 3. flattered PHOCAS emperour, who by treason & vnspeakable cruelty, put out of the way MAV∣RITIVS him master, his wife and children: And for this cause
he was aduanced to this honour to be called bishop of al bi∣shops. But marke well by whom, by PHOCAS a tyrant, a trai∣tor & a murtherer of his master MAVRITIVS. Yet the chair of Rome should had lesse rebuke, if this flatterie had begun at the person of BONIFACIVS 3. or yet ended in him, but before him GREGORIVS 1. of whom the Roman Church braggeth so much, he also in whose dayes that detestable fact was cō∣mitted, flattered the tyrant PHOCAS, abusing the celestial sōg of the Angels of God in the time of Christs nativity, Luc. 2. 13 14 This same holy song gloria in excelsis, GREGORIVS singeth rejoicing for the inauguratiō of this wicked emperor. Greg. lib. 2. epist. 36. And in epist, 48 anent the same purpose, Laeten∣tur coeli, & exultet terra, & de vestris benignis actibus universae rei∣publicae populus htlarscat, that is to say, Let the heauens & earth rejoice, & let the whole multitud of the cōmonwelth rejoice for the bountifulnes of your actions. O flattring GREGORIVS coūted the worst among the best & the best amōg the worst, but a flatterer indeed from whom the tongue of DEMOSTHENES & CICERO both cānot rub away this foul spot of flattery SABINIANVS the successour of GREGORIVS 1. a Halke of the right nest continued but few months in his gouernmēt, ther fore I will not opē his graue, but I let himly stil. BONIFACIVS 3. barked not without a bone. BALAAM loued the wages of iniquity, but got thē not BONIFACIVS loued thē & got them but not in mercie, but in the wrath of God. What ZACHARI∣AS B. of Rome did afterward more prosperously thē devoutly in fauor of PIPINVS anno 750. hee is very ignorant of historie that misknoweth. CHILDERICVS the lawful heir of the king∣dom at the commādemēt of ZACHARIAS was shauē, & thrust into a monasterie, & PIPINVS son of CAROLVS MARTELLVS, was made king. STEPHANVS 2. after ZACHARIAS walking on stil in the paths of flatterie, obtained from PIPINVS king of France, not only aid against AISTVLPHVS king of Lombar's but also the exarchat of Ravenna & Pentapolis. And to the end that this great territory pertaining justly to the emperour of Con∣stātinople, should not returne back againto the righteous ow∣ners of it, what order was takē by PAVLVS 1. STEPHANVS 3. & ADRIAN 1 the changing of the Empire from the East to the West, and setting vp CAROLVS MAGNVS clearely declareth.
So that the fift step of the Romane eminencie was falsehood and flatterie as hath bene declared. Now if there be any interstice or intervall betweene the fift & sixt step, marueill not at it, because it is a great point, The sixt step. and he who was a let to the man of sin behoued to be made out of the way 2. Thess. 2. that is (as CHRYSOSTOME exponeth it) the Emperours power behooued to be vtterly trode vn∣der foot before the man of sin could vsurpe absolute autho∣rity, & sit as God in the Lords Temple, Chrysost. in 2. Thess. 2. homil. 4. Therfore the next attempt was the investiment of Bi∣shops per baculum & annulū (as the custom then was) must be violētly extorted & wrung out of Emperors hands. This was hard to bring to passe in respect the Emperors had bin in so long possession of this right, but it was so necessarie a point that the absolut soueraignitie whereat they aimed of a long time, could no otherwise be obtained. Therfore the Bishops of Rome put on their armour, & batter at the authority of the Emperours with all their might, specially with the thunder∣bolts of their cursings, to haue the investiment of Bishops, per baculum & annulum giuen ouer into their hands. This bargaine began in the dayes of GREGORY the 7. and inthe dayes of HENRY 4. and lasted almost 200. yeeres, some call it bellum Pontificium. HENRY 4. was cursed by GREGORY 7. HENRY 5. by PASCHALIS. LOTHARIVS 2. was rather cōtent to giue ouer the investiment of Bishops, then to contend with INNOCENTIVS 2. and so escaped the sentence of cursing. CVNRADVS 3. was occupied in warrefare against the Saracens and was traiterously deceiued by EMANVEL Emperour of Constantinople: but if he had taried long at home, there was great appearance of a bargaine because hee receiued not his coronation from the B. of Rome. FRIDERICVS the first called BARBAROSSA was cursed by ALEXANDER the third, who al∣so in VENICE, and in the porch of the Church of S. MARKE trampled vpon his necke. HENRY 6. was cursed by CELESTI∣NVS, who also when he repented and was crowned Emperour by him, he put on the crowne vpon HENRYES head with his hand, and dang it off againe with his foot. PHILIP brother to HENRY 6 was cursed by INNOCENTIVS, OTTO 4. was cur∣sed by INNOCENTIVS 3. FRIDERICK 2, by HONORIVS 3
GREGORIVS 9. and INNOCENTIVS 4. CVNRADINVS the ne∣phew of FREDERICKE 2. in stead of cursing was beheaded by the speciall aduise of CLEMENS 4. such elemencie was in our holy fathers. This large historie I haue only touched in few words to let you vnderstand that the Bishops of Rome can be serious in maine points, whereinto the standing or falling of their supremacie doth cōsist. If the investiment of bishops be thrown out of the hands of the emperours, then will all bishops follow the bishop of Rome, and not their own soueraigne Lords, and therefore moe curses then euer were pronounced out of mount Eball. Deut. 27. were thundered out: but against whom I pray you? Against the anointed of the Lord, of whom it is said, Thou shalt not curse the Prince of thy people. Exod. 22. ver. 28. But wonder not good reader of the great difference betweene the curses pronounced out of mount Eball, and the curses pronounced out of mount Tarpeius. The curses from mount Eball were giuen out to bring the people vnder the obedience of God. but the cur∣ses pronounced out of mount Tarpeius, were set foorth to bring Princes vnder the soueraignitie of the Romane bishop. The seuinth steppe is nothing else but an appendicle of the sixt, to wit after that the Bishops of Rome had obtained The suinth steppe. the right of investmēt not by reason but by force & might, then the ancient order must be inverted. Of old no man could be made bishop of Rome without the aduise of the Em∣perour. Now by the contrarie, no man must be Emperour without the Popes coronation. What is this but like a naui∣gation Simil. to the East Ind? We lose the sight of the North pole, and find the degrees of the eleuation of the South pole. The authority of the Emperour is vtterly troden vnder foot, & what remaineth but to see that man of sinne and childe of perdition with absolut soueraignitie commanding al things at his pleasure? One thing is yet inlacking to perfit this mystery of iniquity. The B. of Rome, must haue power also to convocate generall The eigh steppe. coūcils: thēselues or else their substituts must be moderators in these Councils, and their determinations must haue equal authoritie with the written word of GOD. All these things were obtained, as it were, without stroke of sword, and with∣out
gainsaying & reluctation. For albeit Emperours were in continuall custome of appointing generall Councils, and the place of their meeting, and to point out the person, who should be moderator, yet after the investment of bishops was violently plucked out of the Emperours hands & the Empe∣rours must receiue their coronation from the B. of Rome, all the courage of Emperours vtterly failed, and the B. of Rome, will needs convocat generall Councils, & will guide al at his owne appetite & pleasure. It is known that CONSTANTINE convocated the Councill of Nice, THEODOSIVS the Council of Constantinople. THEODOSIVS 2. and VALENTINIAN the Councill of Ephesus, MARTIANVS the Councill of Chalcedon. IVSTINIAN the fift generall Councill, CONSTANTINVS PO∣GONATVS the sixt, CONSTANTINVS COPRONYMVS the seuinth BASILIVS emperour of Constantinople gathered the eight ge∣nerall Councill. Hitherto the Emperours kept their right of convocating O Ecumenick Councils, neither was their right so much as once controlled. The main question between the Emperors & the bishops of Rome was de investitura as said is. This being once setled in the persons of the Bishops of Rome the question anent gathering generall Councils slept, from the eight generall Councill, till the Councill of Lateran, that is, about 400 yeeres. And then INNOCENTIVS 3. at his owne hand no man making opposition in the contrarie steppeth to the rudder, gathered the generall Councill of Lateran in Rome anno 1215 and the bishops following him did the like, no man making opposition in the contrarie, except in such Councils as were to be gathered for impairing the Empe∣rours estate. And they gaue out to the world such lawes and ordinances as shall be declared hereafter Godwilling. GRE∣GORIE 10. gathered a generall Councill at Lions in France, ann. 1273. CLEMENS 5. gathered a generall Councill at Uien anno 1311. Pope IOHN 23. gathered the Councill of Constance ann. 1414. with aduise of SIGISMVND the Emperour, but wel∣come God against your will. There were three Popes at one time contending for the Popedome, IOHN, GREGORIE, and BENEDICT: and Pope IOHN to obtain fauour at the Empe∣sours hands, maketh him associat to himselfe in cōvocating the Councill of Constance, but sore against his heart vouch∣saueth
he vpon the Emperour a lap of his own garment. EV∣GENIVS 4, gathered the Councill of Basil an. 1431. as likewise the Councill of Florence, an. 1439. And finally the Councill of Trnt was gathered by PAVLVS 3. an. 1546. Now we haue con∣veyed by historicall narration the B, of Rome to the top of the mast, Prov. 23. ver. 34. where we leaue him fast asleep, and the world also bewitched with his enchantments sleeping into a dead sleep, vntill it please the Lord with his terrible tempest to giue them both a wakening. The last head of this treatise is to declare the tragicall e∣uent of this supremacie of the Roman B. not like to the su∣premacie of AARON & his successours, which was a band of vnity amongst the nation of the Iewes: but like vnto the su∣premacie of ABIMELECH, tending not onely to the murthe∣ring of his brethren, but also to the vtter vndoing of the Si∣chemits who by vnlawfull meanes advanced him to that ho∣nour. Acompari∣son between Christ, and the Anti∣christ. Iudg. 9. But in the beginning of the last head before I say any further, in few words I wil institut a comparison be∣tween Christ & the Antichrist, as a Preface to the last head. Christ Iesus after his humiliation ascended vnto heauen, led captivity captiue, & distributed good things to men, Eph. 4. ver. 8. Psal. 68. ver. 18. & the hier he ascended the greater bene∣fite redounded to mankinde: the Apostles receiued the gift of tongues Act 2. & strength promised from aboue Act I & a sanctified memory to remember all things that Christ had taught his disciples. Iohn 14. And more then this, seeing he ascended to the heauens to sit at the right hand of his father Psal. 1 10. and to be our Advocat. 1. Iohn 2. it is certaine that not only the Apostles, but also all Christians haue a great & vnspeakable benefit by the ascēsion of Christ on high. How∣beit this ascension of Christ, and sitting at the right hand of his Father is not a new dignity that Christ had not before, but this excellent glory was something obscured . Heb. 2. that is, through the suffering of death. But when he ascended to heauen, that mistie cloud was remoued, and the glory of Christ was clearely knowne. But when the Antichrist ascended on hie, not by the decreet of the mercy of God appointing him to sit at the right hand of the father, ps 11, but by such vnlawful means, as haue bin
declared before, and by the operation of Satan, 2. Thess. 2. ver 9 and by the decreet of the justice of God punishing the world for the contempt of his trueth ibid. ver. 12. Then I say, gifts were not distributed to men, but the great Vials of the wrath of God were powred vpon the earth, as shall clearely appeare by a particular declaration of the miseries that hap∣pened to the world by the aduancement of the B. of Rome to the supremacie foresaid. And aboue all other things when as he was not content to sit in the chaire of PETER, but also he would make himselfe a new law-giuer, not onely equall to Christ, but also  an aduersarie to Christ, and exalting himselfe aboue Christ. 2. Thess. 2. ver, 4. Then I say, the fountaines of the great deep were broken vp and the windowes ofheauen were opened Gen. 7. not to bring down raine, as in the dayes of NOAH, but to reueil the wrath of God from heauen against all vngodlinesse and vn∣righteoufnesse of men, who with-hold the truth into vnrigh∣teousnesse. Rom. 1. ver. 18 Now to keep some order in this great Ocean, whereinto I am embarked, the principall Tragedies following the Ro∣mane supremacie I divide them in three. First the warre alled bellam sacrum, that is the holy warre followed v∣pon the necke of this supremacie. Secondly, the warre called Pontificium. Thirdly, lawes and constitutions since the 1215. yeere of our Lord, so flatly repugnant to the ordinances of Christ, that no man can be Christs seruant, except he shake off this vnhappie yocke of the ordinances of the Anti∣christ. After GREGORIVS 7. and VICTOR 3, succeeded VRBANVS 2 The first Tragedie. This man gathered a Councill at Claremont in France, and in∣citat the Christian Princes to vndertake a most hazardous and dangerous warrefare for recouerie of Ierusalem, and the holy land out of the hands of the Turkes and Saracens, for both these people were massed together, as PLATINA gran∣teth in vita Vibani 2, This warfare was vndertaken in the yere of our Lord 1084. Bullinger de Conciliis saith 1096. Three hun dreth thousand men marched to this warfare vnder the con duct of GODFREY Duke of LORAINE, and BALDVINE, and EVSTACE his brethren. ROBERT Duke of Normandie, and
ROBERT earle of Flanders, HVGO brother to the king of France, BOEMIVS duke of Apulia, and TANCREDVS sonne to ROGERIVS BOEMVNDS brother. In the first entrie of this warfare at Atiochia and at Ierusalem, such aboundance of blood was shed, as BVLLINGER by the testimony of VSPER∣GENSIS citeth that the horse dipped their legges in blood vnto the knees. At Ascalon a cruell battell was foughten be∣twene the Christians & the Saracens, vnder the cōduct of the SVLTAN of Babylon, wherein an hundreth thousand men were slaine. Thus was Ierusalem recouered out of the hands of the Saracens with great effusion of blood, and GODFREY crowned king of Ierusalem. But it was so deare bought, and so soone lost againe (for this kingdome continued not 100. yeeres) that God gaue cleare testimonies to the world that he liked not that vnhappie Council of Claremont whereby the peace of the world was perturbed, and blood was shed aboundantly like water powred out vpon the ground, the mindes of the infidels so exasperat against Christians, that albeit they haue payed vs home againe with the conquest of Thracia, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Gracia, Ploponesus, and a great part of Hungaria, and illyricum, yet are not their hearts satis∣fied, but set on edge through remembrance of the armie that came to besiege Ierusalem. I leaue off to speake of the vnprosperous successe of CONRADVS 3. and howe his armie besieging Iconium, was impoysoned by the falshood of EMA∣NVEL Emperour of Constantinople: and the successe of LEWES king of France, and ROGERIVS duke of Sicil, to whome all things succeeded not to their contentment, as the siege of Damascus clearly declareth. No better successe had PHILIP king of France, and RICHARD king of England who enter∣prised likewise to recouer againe all that was lost but king RICHARDS shipwrack, captiuitie & ransome  that the voyages to the holy lande seldome had a good succsse. The calamitie of BARBAROSSA who seemed to prosper, but was pitifully drowned in the passage of a riuer: And finally the compelled returning of FRIDERICKE the 2. in the mids of his victories to saue his owne dominions from the out∣rage and oppression of the Pope: the bad successe, I say of all these expeditions and other moe declareth that God
gaue not his blessing to the Councill of Claremont. So that in very deede the aduancement of the Bishop of Rome ten∣deth to the calamitie of the whole world. The second tragedie that followed the high aduance∣ment ofthe B of Rome was bellum pontificium, others call it The second Tragedie. bellum Imperatorium, a cruell and hatefull warfare betweene the Emperours and Bishops of Rome, wherein no sort of vil∣lanie, falshood & barbarous crueltie was left vnpractised a∣gainst noble and worthy Emperours. GREGORIE 7 cau∣sed the Emperour HENRY 4. at Canusium in sharpe winter weather to stand barefooted, and to craue absolution from him. He vttered a false prophecie of the Emperours death within yeere and day: which when the issue declared to be a lying prophecie, he took him to his shifting mental mea∣ning, that he spake of the spirituall death of the Emperours soule, and not ofhis bodily deathPope. PASCALIS 2. stirred vp HENRY 5. against his owne naturall father HENRY 4. and caused raise the body of the noble Emperour HENRY 4 out of his sepulchre, so that it remained 5. yeeres vnburied. Pope ADRIAN 4. was offended because the Emperour BARBA∣ROSSA held his left stirrop in stead of the right stirrop when the Pope mounted vp vpon his horse. Pope ALEXANDER3. trampled vpon the same Emperours necke. Pope GREGORY 9. by his cursings compelled the Emperour FREDERICKE 2. to leade an armie to Asia against the Turkes and Saracens, and in his absence like vnto a deceitfull traitor inuaded the kingdome of Naples, and the rest of the dominions which in heritage belonged to the Emperour. Thus we see clear∣ly in this second tragedie that the B. of Rome was like vnto the melt in the body, when it waxeth great by swelling and Simil. hardnesse, all the rest of the noble parts are lessened and be∣come weake: euen so the excessiue preferment of the Bi∣shoppes of Rome was the vndoing of the Emperours and princes of the earth. The Bishops of Rome not contented with the two trage∣dies already mentioned, to wit, to haue filled the world The third Tragedte. with blood, and to haue trampled the Emperous & princes vnder foot, they added the third tragedie wost of all. They would be lawgiuers, sitting in the very chaire of Christ, and
making of none effect the ordinances of Christ, to the ende that place might be giuen to their constitutions. INNOCEN∣TIVS 3 in the Councill of Lateran confirmed the blasphe∣mous doctrine of transubstantiation Ann. 1215. In the ge∣nerall Councill holden by GREGORIE. 10. Ann. 1273. forgi∣uenes of sinnes was promised in most ample maner to those that would bee marked with the badge of the crosse, and would goe and fight against the Saracens. But Christ promi∣seth remission of sinnes to such onely as repent their sinnes beleeue in him, & in token of true repentance to these who beare the easie yocke & light burden of Christ, Mat. 11. ver. 28 29. & 30. In the generall Council gathered by CLEMENS 5. in Vienne Ann. 1311. it was ordained that the Pope should not be subject to the Emperour, but rather the Emperor to the Pope, & that the Emperor shal giue his oth of alledgance to the Pope expresse contrary to the written word of God. Let euery soule be subject vnto the hier powers, Ro. 13 ver. 1. Ioh 23. with aduise of SIGISMVND gathered a generall Councill at Constance, Ann. 1414. wherein the very testamental legacie of Christ was altered and impaired by sacrilegious prelats in taking from the people the vse of the holy cup in the sacra∣ment. And the clause, Non obstante set down in their act, made the whole people of Christendome to tremble that they durst not set their mouthes against the heauen and cor∣rect the ordinance of Christ, and that in such rude maner, that notwithstanding that Christ instituted this sacrament vnder formes both of bread & wine yet the church thought meete that the sacrament shal be giuen to laicke people vn∣der the forme of bread only. The late Councils of Basil & Florence are flat repugnant one to another in the head of su∣premacie. And last of all the Councill of Trent wherein some piece of reformation was expected made it knowne to the world, that the whore will neuer reforme the Bor∣thell, and the Antichrist will not be consumed with the breath of his own mouth, but with the breath of the mouth of Christ, which thing the Lord performe in his owne time. Amen. FINIS.
A SHORT COMPEND OF THE HISTORIE OF THE FIRST TEN PERSECVTIONS MO∣VED AGAINST CHRISTI∣ANS, DIVIDED INTO III. CENTVRIES. WHEREVNTO ARE AD∣ded in the end of euery Centurie treatises a∣rising vpon occasion offered in the historie, clearely declaring the noveltie of Popish Religion, and that is neither flowed from the mouthes of Christs holy A∣postles, neither was it confirmed by the blood of the holy Martyrs who died in these ten persecutions. IEREM. 6. ver. 16. Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the Wayes, and behold, and aske of the old Way, which is the good Way, and Walke therein, and ye shall find rest unto your soules: but they said, We will not walke therein. LVC. 10. ver. 42. Marie hath chosen the good part which shall not be taken a Way from her. EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Hart, and are to be solde at his shop on the North side of the high streete a litle beneath the Crosse, ANNO DOM. 1613.
A SHORT COMPEND, OF THE ARRIAN and EVTYCHIAN PERSECVTIONS, Comprised in the IIII. V. and VI. CENTVRIES. Whereunto is added, TREATISES, DECLARING THE noueltie of POPISH Religion. EDINBURGH, PRINTED BY ANDRO HART, Anno Dom. 1615.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, VERTVOVS, AND ELECT LADIE, MARIE, COVNTES OF MARRE, Wisheth grace, mercie, and eternall felicitie. THE prouident care of our GOD (most noble Ladie) hath appoin∣ted, that the vertues of his Saintes like vnto gold, should bee tried in the furnace, purged from drosse, & counted pretious. In the first 300. yeeres of our LORD, the faith & patience of Christians was tried with the yoke of tenne cruell persecutions. In the next 300. yeeres, the knowledge of the Church was tried by heretiques, who by the mistie cloudes of errour, ende∣uoured to blind-fold the eyes of men, and to lead them captiue from the simplicitie of the trueth of God: But in these ages also the power of the light of God was ma∣nifested,
euer dissipating darknesse, as the Sunne rising abolisheth the darknesse of the night. This is an incou∣ragement to vs, when wee see false Teachers dayly re∣newing their Fortes, to fight against the trueth, as the Philistimes did, who faught against Dauid in the valley of Rephaim, after they had bene oft ouercome by him. The last period of all their obstinate reluctation against the Anointed of the Lord, was losse and hurt vnto them selues, and dishonour to their gods, whom they were compelled to leaue behind them, and Dauid tooke them, and brunt them with fire, and the place was called Baal. perat-zim, that is, the rupture of Baal. The aduersaries 1. Chr. 14. verse 11. of the Gospell, in our land, by renewing their forces againe, are procuring a newe name vnto their idoles. They cannot bee content with the names of Baal-Por, Baal-Meon, Baal-Thamar, Baal-Chatsor, Baal-Gad: But they will spread out their banners in the valley of Re∣phaim, against our Soueraigne LORD, his Highnesse Statutes and Lawes, longing for the last name Baal-Pe∣ratzim. The grandour of the speeches of Scottish Pa∣pists, is not vnknowne to mee: but tumour and swelling in the flesh, is seldome joined with salubritie and health. It is time for mee to bee afraide of the din of emptie pit∣chers, when I finde them furnished within with holie Lampes, and to be backed with the sound of holy Trum∣pets, blowne by the Commandement of GOD: I meane such as were in the Armie of Gedion. Of this I am Iudg. 6. verse 16. fully perswaded, that the light of GOD, the trumpet of GOD, the sword of GOD, and Gedion shall haue the vpperhand in GODS appointed time. Some of them seeme to be deuout, and they lament for vs, as Iaakob la∣mented for his sonne Ioseph, whom he supposed to haue Gene. 37. verse 34. beenedead: But our lamentation for them, is grounded
on better knowledg, as the lamentation of Ioseph was, when he fell vpon his Fathers face, and wept vpon him, Gen. 50. verse 1. and kissed him. Alwayes (Madame) consider, that the sense of feeling, the chiefe of all senses, the most vnsepa∣rable companion of the spirituall life, is most inlaking in them, who striue against the Gospell of CHRIST preached in this land. They haue so many easie remedies at hand to vnladen their soules of the heauy burthen of sinne, such as sprinckling of holy water, auricular confes∣sions, and pennance, indulgences and pardons, that they neuer suffer men to enter into a deepe consideration of their own miserie, & of the superabundant compassions of GOD, freely pardoning sinne: but they are content with the superfice and scruif of new inuented remedies. In the meane time (Madame) receiue vnder the shadow of your Ladysh. fauourable protection, this Booke also, Of the Arrian and Eutychian persecution, wherein, as in a viue mirrour, is represented the falshood, deceite, and sub∣tilty of lying Teachers; and likewise their mercylesse in∣humanity and cruelty against GODS seruants, when they are assisted by the supporting strength of secular po∣wers. And let your La. and your noble house continually Epistle Iude, verse 11. beware of Teachers, whom yee find to bee deceitfull and bloody, for they walke in the way of Cain. Now the mercies of the LORD IESUS, the au∣thor and finisher of our faith, attend vpon my Lord your Husband, vpon your Ladiship and all your noble house, for now, and euer, AMEN. Your La. humble seruant, P. SIMSON.
TO THE READER. IN writing of COMPENDES, euery man, who hath presumed to doe such a worke, hath found difficulties: and it hath not beene an easie thing to any man, to satisfie either himselfe or others, beeing inuironed with many straites. If he be short in his Compend, hee seemeth obscure: if hee write at length, then his Compend seemeth to haue need of an other Compend, to abridge his prolixity. Yet in all these difficulties, it is better to set forward, to doe some good, both to our selues and others, then to spend our time in idlenes, lest our cogitations bee like vnto the vpper and lower Milne-stones, lacking good graine to grind vpon, they rub vio∣lently one vpon another, vntill both be broken: and incase our cogitations bee not well exercised, our thoughtes will bee spent vpon vaine things, which wil procure harme both to our soules and bodies. In my TREATISES I haue ouerpassed with silence the question anent Festuall dayes, lest I should seeme t one time to contend both against friends & foes, as some men haue done, who if they had more increased their charitie, and diminished the feruent heat of their contentious spirits, they had benefited the Church of Christ more then they haue done. Would GOD
LUCAS OSIANDER had walked in the foote-steps of Christian loue. Now I will begge this fauour at thee, Christian Reader, that my weake trauels may be taken in good part. The house of our GOD in this land is large and ample (praised bee his moste holy NAME therefore) it hath need of bright-shining tor∣ches, for the Halles, Parlours, and Chambers: and it hath need of smaller Lightes, for Sellers and office houses: let my pennie Candle giue light in the lowest Seller of the House of our GOD, and mine heart is fully content. Farewell.
CENTVRIE IIII. CHAP. I. OF EMPEROVRS. CONSTANTINE. THE CHURCH of CHRIST flourished in time of the ten perse∣cutions, as a Palme tree groweth vnder the burthen, and spreads out her branches by increasing growth toward Heauen. Sathan on the other part that pearcing and croo∣ked Isai. 27. verse, 1. serpent, who striues against the militant Church of GOD, both by might and slight: when his might faileth, it is time to trie his slight: which hee did by the Can∣ker-worme of hereticall doctrine. Now therefore, let vs intreat of the ARRIAN and EUTYCHIAN Persecutions in the three subsequent CENTURIES. Other Heretiques albeit they were fierce and cruell, such as the Donatists, yet their cruel∣tie was like vnto the stighling of a fish, when the water is eb∣bed, and she is not couered with the deepenesse of ouer flowing Similitude. water: the more stir she maketh, the nearer she is vnto her death.
But the Arrian and Eutychian Heretiques found Emperours fauourably inclined to the maintenāce of their errours, such as Constantius and Valens protectours of the Arrian heresie, and Anastatius and Heraclius fauourers of the Heresie of Euiyches. This support they had of supreame powers, strengthened the ame of Heretiques, and made them able to persecute the true CHURCH of CHRIST. Notwithstanding, betwixt the tenne great Persecutions, and the Arrian perscution, a short breathing time was granted by GOD vnto his CHURCH, who will not suffer the rodde of the wicked perpetually to lie vpon the righteous, lest they put out their hand vnto iniquitie. The dayes of the reigne of Con∣stantine, were the breathing dayes of the persecuted CHURCH: Men banished for the cause of CHRIST, by the Emperours edicts were returned from their banishment, restored to their offices, dignities, and possessions, which duely belonged vnto them. The heritage and goods, of such as had suffered death for the cause of CHRIST, were alloted to their neerest kins∣men, and incase none of these were founde aliue, then their goods were ordained to appertaine vnto the CHURCH. These beginnings of an admirable change of the estate of persecuted seb. de vita . lib. 2. men, wrought in the hearts of all people a wonderfull astonish∣ment, considering within themselues what could bee the euent of such suddaine and vnexpected alteration. The care that Constantine had to disburthen persecuted Chri∣stians of that heauie yoke of persecution, that pressed them downe so long, was not onely extended to the bounds of the Romane Empire, whereinto Constantine was soueraigne lorde, and absolute Commander: But he was carefull also to procure the peace of Christians, who liued vnder Sapores King of Persia, Sozom. lib. 2. Cap. 14. who vexed Christian people with sore & grieuous persecution: so that within his Dominions, more then sixteene thousande were founde, who had concluded their liues by martyrdome. Amongst whom Simeon Bishop of Selentia, & Ustazares the kings eldest eunuch, & his nurs-father in time of his minoritie, Pusices ruler of al the kings artificers, Azades the kings beloued eunuch, Idem lib. 2. cap. 8. 9. 10. & 13. & Acepcimas, a Bishop in Persia: all these were men of Note and Marke, who suffered martyrdome vnder Sapores king of Persia.
While the cogitations of Constantine were exercised with me∣ditation, Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 15. by what meanes the distressed estate of Christians in Persia might be supported: by the prouidence of GOD the Am∣bassadours of Sapores, king of Persia, came to the Emperour Con∣stantine: whose petitions when he had granted, he sent them back againe to their lord and maister: and he sent with them a letter of his owne, intreating Sapores to be friendly to Christians, in whose Religion nothing can be founde, that can justly bee bla∣med. His letter also bare the bad fortune of the Emperour Va∣lerian the VIII. persecuter of Christians, and how miserably hee ended his life: and on the other part, what good successe the LORD had giuen vnto himselfe in all his battels, because hee was a defender of Christians, and a procurer of their peace. What peace was procured to distressed Christians in Persia by this letter of Constantine, the Historie beares not: alwayes his in∣deuour was honest and Godly. In Constantines dayes the Gospell was propagated in East In∣dia, by Frumentius and Edesius, the brother sonnes of Meropius, a man of Tyrus. This Historie is written at length by Rffinus, Theo∣doretus, Ruffin lib. 1. cap. 9. Theodor. lib. 1 cap. 22. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 24. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 10. Socrat lib. 1. cap. 20. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 23. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 6. Sozomenus, and many others. Likewise it was propaga∣ted in Iberia, a country lying in the vttermost part of the Euxien sea eastward, by the meanes of a captiue Christian woman, by whose supplications, first a childe, deadly diseased, recouered health, and afterward the Queene of Iberia her selfe was relie∣ued from a perilous and dangerous disease, by her prayers made to CHRIST. The King of Iberia sent Ambassadours to Con∣stantine, crauing of him, that hee would send Preachers and Do∣ctors to the countrey of Iberia, who might instruct them in the true faith of CHRIST. Which desire also Constantine perfor∣med, with great gladnesse of heart. Now to returne and to speake of the Dominions subject to the Romane Empire, Constantine the sonne of Constantius Chlorus, begun to reigne in the yeere of our LORD 310. and he reigned 31. yeeres: he gaue commandement to reedifie the Temples of Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 4. the Christians, that were demolished in time of the persecution of Dioclesian. This commandement was obeyed with expe∣dition, and many more large and ample Churches were buil∣ded, meete for the conuentions of Christian people. Likewise,
the Temples of Idoles were locked vp: better they had beene demolished, and equalled with the ground: then had it beene a Theod. lib. 5. cap. 20. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 1. Idem, lib. 3. cap. 11. & lib. 3. cap. 18 worke of greater difficultie to Iulian the Apostate, to haue re∣stoed againe Heathen Idolatrie. Many horrible abuses, both in Religion and maners were reformed by the auzhoritie and commandement of the Emperour, such as cubitus mensuralis, cal∣led  in Aegypt, whereunto was attributed the vertue and cause of the inundation of Nilus by the Aegyptians: therefore by Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 30. the Emperours commandement this  was transported out of their Tēples. In Rome the bloody spectacle of Gladiatores, that is, of Fencing men, with swords killing one another in sight of Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18. the people was discharged. In Heliopolis a town of Phoenitia, the filthy maners of young women, accustomed without control∣ment, to prostitute themselues to the lust of strāgers, vntil they were maried: this filthy custome (I say) by the commandement of the Emperour Constantine was interdicted and forbidden. In Iudea, the Altar builded vnder the Oake of Mambre, where the Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8. Angels appeared to Abraham, and whereupon the Pagans offe∣red sacrifice in time of solemne Faires, for bying and selling of Genes. 18. Merchand waires in that place: This Altar (I say) was com∣manded to bee demolished, and a Temple to bee builded in the same place, for exercise of diuine seruice. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 4. The care this good Emperour had, to quench the schisme that began in Alexandria, shall bee declaed in the owne time, GOD willing. In somethinges Constantine was not vnlike to King Salomon, who finding his Kingdome to bee peaceably set∣led, hee gaue himselfe to the building of the Temple, of Pala∣ces, and of Townes, which he fortified & made strong. Euen so Constantine finding that no enemie durst enterprise any longer Sozom lib. 2 cap. 2. to molest the peaceable estate of his setled Kingdome he buil∣ded magnificke Temples in Bethlehem, the place of the LORDS Natiuitie, vpon Mount Oliuet, from whence CHRIST ascen∣ded to Heauen, vpon Mount Caluarie, where CHRISTS Se∣pulchre was. Hee builded also a Citie in Bithinia, and called it Helenopolis, for honour of his Mother Helena, and another in Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18. Palestina, and called it Constantia, by the name of his Sister. Al∣so he builded a glorious Temple into Antiochia, which his sonne Constantius perfected, and to the dedication of that Temple a
great number of Bishops were assembled, as shall bee declared hereafter if the LORD please. And finally, hee builded the Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Functii Chro∣nolog. great Citie of Constantinople in Thracia, and called it nova Roma, whereas before it was called Byzantium. This towne was buil∣ded, anno 336. In end the good Emperour intended to haue made warre against the Persians, and by the way hee was purposed to haue beene baptized in Iordane, where our Sauiour CHRIST was baptized by Iohn: but the LORD had disposed otherwise: for the Iohn, 3. good Em. fel sicke at Nicomedia, & was baptized in the suburbs of that principal towne of Bithynia, not in Rome, nor by ilvester, but in Nicomedia, and by Eusebius. Howe this Eusebius coo∣soned Euseb. do vi∣ta Constant. lib. 4. the Emperour, and obscured the wicked purpose of his Hereticall heart from him, and continued in good fauour and credite with the Emperour, vntill the last periode of his life, so that he had the honour to baptize the good Emperour it wil be declared hereafter, GOD willing. In his testamentall legacie, he left his Dominions to his sonnes, ended his life happily, and was buried in Constantinople. Constantius, Constans, and younger Constantinus. CONSTANTIUS gouerned the East parts of the Romane Em∣pire, and he reigned 25. yeeres. The other two brethren gouerned the West parts. Constantine the younger was slaine at Aquileia, after he had reigned with his brethren 3. yeeres. The Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 19. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 46. Idem, lib. 2. cap. 5. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 32. Emperour Constans reigned 13. yeeres, and was slaine in France by the Tyrant Magnentius: so after the death of Constans, the whole gouernement of the Empire turned to the hands of Constantius. He ouercame Magnentius in battell, who fled to Lions, and slew his mother, his own brother, and himselfe: And so the Tyrant Magnentius brought himselfe and his kindred to a mi∣serable ende. Constantius was infected with the Heresie of Arrius, by the meanes of an Arrian Priest, who had beene in Court with CONSTANTIA, the sister of the Emperour Constantine, and relict of Licinius. When shee was bounde to Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 11. bedde by infirmitie, and sickenesse, whereof shee died, Shee
recommended this Arrian presbyter to Constantine her bro∣ther, whereby it came to passe, that hee had fauour and credite The. li. 2 cap. 3. in the Emperours Court. He procured the returning of Arrius from banishment, and was the first reporter to Constantius of his fathers testamentall legacie: And finally, he peruerted Constantius from the true faith, which his father had professed. So perni∣cious a thing is it to haue deceitfull Heretiques lurking in the Courts of Princes. During the lifetime of his brother Constans, Arrianisme had no great vpperhande, because Constans the Emperour of the West protected Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, and Athanasiu Bishop of Alexandria, and the rest of the Bishops whom the Ar∣rians had most vnjustly accused, deposed, and persecuted. But after the slaughter of Constans, the Arrians were incouraged by the inconstancie of the Emperour, whose flexible and instable Theoder. li. 2 cap. 3. mind, like vnto a reede shaken with the wind, was inclined to followe the course, that the fore-mentioned Priest put in his head. This Priest informed the Emperour Constantius, that the word , that is, Consubstantiall, was not founde in holy Scripture, and that the inserting of this worde in the sowme of faith set downe by the Nicene Councell, was the occasion of many debates and contentions in the CHURCH of GOD and that the returning of Athanasius from banishment, was the Thd. ibid. ground of a terrible tempest, whereby not onely the estate of Aegypt was shaken, but also the estate of Palestina and Phae-nitia, and other places not far distant from Aegypt. Moreouer, he added, that Athanasius had beene the author of intestine dis∣sention betwixt the Emperour Constantius and his brother Con∣stans, so that Constans wrote minassing letters to his brother, either to repossesse Paulus & Athanasius into their places againe, els if he linguered in so doing (since their innocencie was clea∣red in the Councill of Sardica) hee threatned to leade an armie to the East, and to see them repossessed into their owne roomes againe. The Emperour Constantius was easily incited to wrath against Athanasius, and he sent Sebastianus, one of his captaines, accompanied with 5000 armed men, to slay Athanasius: but the Theod. lib. 2 cap. 13. LORD deliuered him miraculously out of their handes, when there seemed to be no way of escaping, because armed souldiers
were planted rounde about the Temple: yet hee went safely through the midst of them, and was not discearned, albeit ma∣nie Arrians were present of purpose to designe and point him out by the finger, as a sheepe ordained for the slaughter. Georgius, an Arrian Bishop, was seated in Alexandria, in the place of Athanasius, a wolfe in the chaire of a true Pastor, whose fury and madnesse was helped by sebastianus, who furnished vn∣to him armed souldiers, to accomplish all his wicked and diue∣lish deuises. A fire was kindled in the towne: Christian Virgins were stripped naked, and brought to the fire, and commanded to renounce their faith: but the terrour of the fire made them not once to shrinke. When the sight óf the fire coulde not ter∣rifie them, hee caused their faces to be so dashed with strokes, & misfashioned their countenances, that they could not be known by their familiar friendes: but they, like vnto victorious soul∣diours, patiently indured all kind of rebuke for the NAME of Theodoret. ibid. CHRIST. Thirty Bishops of Aegypt and Lybia were slaine in the furie of this Arrian Persecution. Fourteene Bishops (whose names are particularly mentioned by Theodoretus) were bani∣shed, of whom some died in the way when they were transpor∣ted, others died in the place of their banishment. Fourtie good Christians in Alexandria were scourged with wandes, because they would not communicate with the Arrian wolfe Georgius: and so pitiously demained, that some peeces of the wands were so deeply fixed in their flesh, that they could not be drawne out againe, and many through excessiue paine of their wounded bodies concluded their liues. Here is a viue portrat of the mer∣cies Prouer. 10 verse. 9. of the wicked, which are cruell. The like crueltie the Arrians practised in Constantinople. Paulus Bishop of Constantinople was banished to Cucusus, a little towne in Cappadocia, where he was strangled by the Arrians. Macedo∣nius was placed in his roome, a notable Heretique, who used no lesse crueltie, in compelling the Christians of Constantinople, Scrat. lib. 2, cap. 27. to communicate with him, then was used of olde, to compell Christians to sacrifice to the Idoles of the Gentiles. The exquisite diligence of the Arrians in procuring Coun∣cels to bee gathered for establishing of their errour, shall bee declared in the owne place, GOD willing. Now to returne to
the ciuill estate of Constantius. After that Magnentius had made an end of his owne life in most desperate maner, as said is, and his associate Britannio had humbly submitted himselfe to Con∣stantius, and obtained pardon: yet was not the Emperours estate quiet and free of trouble: for there arose another Tyrant, called Silvanus, whom the Captaines of Coastantius armie in France did hastily cut off, and make out of the way. Also the lewes of Dio∣caesaria, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 32. a towne of Palestina, rebelled against him, who were ouerthrowne by Gallas the Emperours coosen, and the Citie of Diocaesaria was leuelled with the grounde. This good successe Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 33. made Gallus somewhat insolent, and he slew Domitiaus, the Em∣perours great Treasurer in the East: therefore the Emperour gaue commandement to cut him off. Finally, the Germans, who had assisted him in his warres against Magnentius, they rebelled against him. And hee sent against them his coosen Iulian, the brother of Gallus, who subdewed the Germans, and hee likewise waxed insolent, and suffered the souldiours to salute him with the name of , that is, of an Emperour. This was not vnknowne to Constantius, who made haste to preuent all further usurpation. But by the way as he was leading his armie through Cilicia, hee concluded his life, sorowing for this, as Theodoretus writes, that he had changed the forme of the Nicene faith. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 32. Julianus. IN the yeere of our LORD 365. Iulian began to reigne, and he reigned 3. yeeres. Ruffinus assignes vnto him one yeere, 8. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21. monethes onely: he was Constantius neere kinsman, namely. his vncles sonne: But he dealt vnkindly with Constantius, who made him Caesar, and giue vnto him in mariage Helena his sister: Hee was brought vp in Christian Relig on, but was peruerted by Socrat. lib 3. cap. 1. Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher, whom Valentinian the Empe∣rour afterward punished vnto the death, as a practiser of Magi∣call Socrat. ibid. artes. In the beginning of his reigne he restored those Bis∣shops to their places againe, whom Constantius had banished, not for loue of Religion, but to impare the fame of Constantius▪ Socrat. ibid. yet immediately after, hee manifested his affection towarde
Heathnicke superstition, and opened the doores of the Temples of the gods of the Heathen, which Constantine had locked vp, Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4. and incouraged others by his owne example, to offer sacrifices to the gods of the Gentiles. Iulian absteined, for a time, from crueltie, and shedding of blood: not for pitie, and compassion of Christians: but ra∣ther for enuie: For he enuyed the glorie of Christian Martyrs, whose magnanimitie, courage, and constant perseuerance in the faith of CHRIST vnto the death, was commended in the Theod. lib. . cap. 8. mouthes of all men. But hee indeuoured by subtile and craf∣tie meanes to vndoe Christian Religion. Hee debarred the children of Christians from Schooles, and from the vse of Learning: Also hee debarred them from warre-fare, from offi∣ces of gouernement of Romane Prouinces, and from offices of Socra. lib. 13 & 14. Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 15. Collectorie of money: and burthened them with paiment of heauie taxations: which taxations also the auaritiousnes of the Deputies of Prouinces increased, & made them more grieuous and intollerable. Neuerthelesse, when Christians complained of the vnrighteous dealing of the Deputies, the Emperour moc∣ked them, and said, their happinesse was increassed, according to the speech of CHRIST their LORD and Maister, Blessed are they, who suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake. Matth. 5. Likewise, in the market places of Cities, hee set vp his owne Image, with the Effigies of the gods of the Heathen pictured rounde about it: to the ende, that whosoeuer should doe ciail reuerence to the Emperours Image, might also seeme Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16. to worshippe the gods of the Gentiles: And by the contrarie, they who woulde not bowe to the gods of the Gentiles, might seeme also to refuse all due reuerence to the Emperour. When hee distributed golde to his Captaines and Warriours (as the custome was) hee used a forme of distributing not accustomed before, to haue an altar neere vnto his Princely throne, and coales burning vpon it, and incense vpon a table neere vnto the altar: whereby it came to passe, that no man receiued golde, be∣fore Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 17. he cast incense vpon the coales of the altar: by this subtile artifice circumuenting many, who knew not, that it was Iulians purpose to intangle them with the rites of idolatrous seruice. In Antiochia, and in the Region round about, he dedicated all
the Fountaines to the Goddesses of the Gentiles, and caused all the victuall that was to be solde in market places, to be sprinc∣kled with Heathnicke holy water. Neurthelesse, Chistians, without scruple of conscience, dranke of the water that was in the Welles, and ate of the meat which they bought in the mar∣ket, beeing fully perswaded, that to the cleane all thinges are Titus 1. verse, 15. 1. Cor. 10. verse, 25. cleane: and againe, it is written, Whatsoeuer is solde in the hambles, eat ye, and aske no question for conscience sake. The libertie that Iu∣uentius and Maxentius, two worthie Warriours, used in repro∣uing the Emperour in his face, for his Heathnicke superstition, moued Iulian to such wrath, that hee punished them vnto the deah: And so by degrees the policie and wisedome of Iulian in end breakes foorth into the fruites of crueltie and shedding of Theod. lib. 3 cap. 15. blood. Albeit no publicke mandate of Iulian was set soorth, com∣manding to persecute Christians, yet by many euident testimo∣nies it was knowne to the people, that the Emperour hated them, and that no man woulde incur punishment, for outrage and violence used against them. Therefore in the towne of Se∣baste, the Sepulchre of Iohn the Baptist was opened, his bones Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 28. were brunt, and the ashes scattered abroad. Likewise the wic∣ked men of Gaza and Ascalon, killed Preachers and holy Vir∣gins, ripped their bellies, filled them with barlie, and cast their bodies to the swine to be eaten. Cyrillus also, a Deacon in Hie∣rapolis, a towne of Phoenicia, at the foot of Mount Libanus, who in time of the reigne of Constantine had broken in pieces the ima∣ges Theodor. li 3 cap. 6. of the Gentiles, was taken by them, his bellie was ript, his li∣uer was drawne out of his bodie, which with Barbarous inhu∣manitie they chawed with their teeth. But the LORD suffered not such vnkouth crueltie to escape vnpunished: for the teeth of those who committed this fact of vnnaturall inhumanitie, fell out of their jaw-bones, their tongues: otted within their Theodor. li. 3 cap. 7. mouthes, and their eyes were darkned and blinded: a just and deserued punishment of bruitish Sauages practised by men. Marcus Aethusius had his bodie ouerlaide with honie, and it was hung vp in hot summer weather, to be molested with wasps and flies. In Alexandria many Christians were slaine for disco∣uering the abominations of the Pagans, especially in sacrificing Theod. ibid.
to Mythra bloody sacrifices of reasonable creatures. Among others, Georgius the Arrian Bishop was bound vnto a Camell, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2. and both hee and the Camell were burned with fire: whom no man counts a martyr, because he kept not the true faith. In the countrey of Phrygia, and towne of Miso, Macedonius, Theodulus, and Tatianus, for breaking in pieces images, were broiled vpon Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 15. hot grattes of yron. The persecution of Athanasius, which with great hazard hee escaped, by a stratageme, of turning backe his shippe in the face of the persecuting enemie, was procured by Philosophers, Sorcerers, and Inchanters, who were about Iulian, and affirmed that all their trauailes would be spent in vaine, if Ruffiin. lib. 2 cap. 33. Athanasius, the onely barre, and obstacle of their doinges, were not made out of the way. The wrath of Iulian was highly kindled against the inhabi∣tants of Casarea in Cappadocia. This towne of old was calld Ma∣za, but the Emperour Claudius changed the name of it, and cal∣led it Casarea. The inhabitants of the Citie, for the most part, Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 4. were Christians, and they had of olde ouerthrowne the Temples of Iupiter and Apollo, and the Temple of Fortune (which onely re∣mained) they ouerthrew in Iulians owne time. For this cause Iulian rased the name of Caesarea, out of the roll of Cities and ex∣acted from them 300 pound weight of golde, compelled their Cleargie to serue in warrefare: And finally, he threatned to pu∣nish vnto the death all the inhabitants of Casarea; but the righ∣teous LORD cutted the cordes of the wicked, and hee had not power to performe all his bloody designes. He had intention to fight against the Persians, yet would hee doe nothing without consultation of his gods. Hee sent his most assured friendes to all the Oracles within the Romane Do∣minions, and he himselfe would inquire at the Oracle of Apollo in Daphne, what should be the successe of his enterprises. The Thodor. lib.  cap. 9, 10 Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 18. 19. answere of Apollo was, that hee was hindered by the dead, to giue his responses. Hereof it came to passe, that Iulian gaue li∣bertie to Christians, to transport the bones of the Martyr Ba∣bylas. About the same time fire came downe from heauen, and destroyed the Temple of Apollo in Daphne, and beate the image of Apollo in pieces, like vnto the lightest and smallest powder, Theodoret. ibid. or dust.
Moreouer, he gaue libertie to the Iewes, to returne to Hierusa∣lem, to build their Temple, & to offer sacrifices conforme to the Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 37. 38. 39. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 20. Theod lib. 3. cap. 20. Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 22. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21. law of Moses: not for loue he caried toward the Iewes, but for hatred of the Christians: therefore the worke prospered not, but was hindered by earthquake, fire & a mightie tempest of wind. Marke how euery thing this hatefull enemy of CHRIST enter∣prised, had an euill successe. Iulian arriued at Ctesiphon the Metra∣politane towne of Chaldea, after that Babylon was ruined. The king of Persia had his people in better preparation then the Emp. loo∣ked for: therefore he tooke deliberation to returne back againe to the bounds of the Romane dominions: but hee who was de∣ceitful al his dayes, was in end deceiued by an old Persian captiue, Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 1. 2. who led the Emp. into a barren wildernes, where he concluded his life, wounded with a darte: but it remaines vncertaine by whom hee was slaine. Jouinianus. AFTER the death of Iulian, Iouinian was chosen, by the Ro∣mane armie, to be Emperour, but liued not fully 8. months Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 1. in his Emperiall dignity. He accepted not the souerainty, vntill the time the whole army with uniforme consent acknowledged themselues to be Christians. He made a couenant of peace with the K. of Persia, such as the necessity of a distressed army compel∣led him to condiscend vnto: for Nisibs, a great Citie in Mesopo∣tamia, with some dominions in Syria, were resigned ouer to the Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21. 22. king of Persia. The blame of this scathfull capitulation, was im∣puted to the temerity of Iulian the apostate, who had brunt with fire the ships that should haue brought victualles to the armie, and gaue hasty credite to a Persian captiue. When he had redu∣ced the army to the bounds of the Romane dominions, hee bu∣ried the dead body of Iulian in Tarsus, a towne of Cilicia: and he reduced from banishmēt the worthy captain Valentinian, whom Theod. lib. 4, cap. 2. 3. Iulian had banished, together with the Bishops banished from their places, or compelled to lurke: & inspecial Athanasius, whose counsel he was resolued to follow in matters of Faith & Church Theod. lib. 4. cap. 4. gouernement. In end, he tooke purpose to goe to Constantinople:
but by the way, in the Confines of Galatia and Bithinia, hee con∣cluded Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 6. his life in a Village called Dadastana. Valentinianus and Valens. AFTER the death of Iouinian, the Romane armie choosed Va∣lentinian to be Emperour, who reigned 13. yeeres. In whom was accomplished which is promised in the Gospell, to render an hundreth-folde in this life, to them who suffer any losse for for CHRISTS sake, & in the world to come eternal life. Valentinian CHRISTES sake lost his office in Iulians Court, and hee receiued Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31. in this world a kingdome, and hath a greater recompence of re∣ward laid vp for him in heauē. The magnamimus courage of Va∣lentinian in beating on the face that heathē Priest, who sprinkled Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 2. holy water vpon his garments, whereby he thought his garmēts to be contaminate, & not his body sanctified. This couragious fact was the cause wherefore Iulian banished him to Miletina, a Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16. town in Armenia. He was relieued from banishment in the dayes of Iouinian, & was made Emp. after his death. He was borne in a Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 6. town of Panonia, called Cibale: he addressed himselfe immediatly after his acceptation of the Emperial souerainty, to Constantino∣ple, and within the space of 30. dayes he choosed his brother to be his associate in the gouernement: in such sort, that the Emp. Valentinian gouerned the West, and the Emp. Valens gouerned Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 1. the Easterne parts of the Romane Dominions. The Emp. Valens finding the Persians to be quiet, and dispo∣sed to keepe the couenant of peace bounde vp in the dayes of Iouinian, he vndertooke an vnsupportable warre-fare against the Homousians. The usurpation of the Tyrant Procopius, did some∣what slacken the readines and quicknes of his attempts: but af∣ter Procopius was deliuered into the handes of the Emp. Valens, by Agelon and Gomarius his Captaines, hee rent in pieces the bo∣dy of Procopius, by bowing downe to the ground the toppes of strong trees, whereunto he caused the legges of Procopius to be fastened. The bodies of Agelon and Gomarius, the two Captaines Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 5. who betrayed Procopius, were cutted in twaine with sawes of yron. In which fact the Emp. Valens had no regarde to the oath of GOD, which he made vnto them for their safetie.
Procopius being subdewed, hee bended all his might against the Homousians: He banished Miltius, Bishop of Antiochia, to Theodor. lib. 4 cap. 13. Armenia: Eusebius Bishop of Samosata to Thracia: Pelagius Bishop of Laodicea, to Arabia. The towne of Samosta was so affectioned to their owne Pastor Eusebius, that they would not communicae Theod. ibid. with Eunomius, whom the Arrians sent to fill his place, Valns was filled with wrath against the Fathers conueened in the Councill of Lampsacum (this is a towne neere vnto the straite Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 6. firth of Hellespontus) because they adhered fast vnto the Nicene faith. In Constantinople he not onely banished the Homousians, but also the Novatians, & their Bishop Agelius, because they would not consent with the Arrians in the matter of faith. In Edes∣sa, a towne of Mesopotamia, the Emperour gaue commandement to slay the Homousians, who were assembled together in the Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 5. Church: but the feruent zeale of one woman, that ran in haste through the rankes of souldiers, drawing with her, her young Theod. lib. 4. cap. 17. and tender child, together with her couragious answere to the Captaine, staied the rage of the Emperour wondefully: for she counted it a sweet fellowship, that she and her babe should bee found amongst the number of these, who were counted wor∣thie Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 18. to suffer death for the NAME of CHRIST. Neuerthe∣lesse the Emperour banished of men who dwelt in Edessa. espe∣cially of such as were in spiritual offices, to the number of four∣score, whom he commanded, by two and two, to bee dispersed through Thracia, Arabia, and Thebaida. The inuincible courage of Basilius, Bishop of Casarea in Cappadocia, the peaceable death of Athanasius, which hapned in the verie time of the Persecution of this Arrian Emperour Valens, together with the surie & mad∣nesse of the Arrian Bishop Lucius, intruded in Alexandria, All these thinges, GOD willing, shall bee touched in their owne places. Amongst all the facts of vnspeakeable cruelty committed by Valens, oe fact ouerwent all the rest. While the Emperour was at Nicomedia, fourescore Ambassadours were directed vnto him: Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 16. amongst whom Menedemus, Urbanus, and Theodorus, were the chiefe. These complained to the Emperour, of the manifolde injuries done to the Homousians. The Emperour gaue comman∣dement Theod. lib. 4. cap. 24. to Modestus, the Gouernour of his armie, to embarke
them into a ship, as if they were to bee banished vnto some re∣mote and far distant place: but secret direction was giuen vnto the ship-men, to set the ship on fire, & to retire themselues into a boat. So it came to passe, that these fourscore Martyrs circum∣uented Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 14. by the craft of Valens, glorified the NAME of CHRIST, by patient suffering of many deathes at one time, both tormen∣ted by fire, and drowned in water. Terentius and Traianus, two worthie Captaines, used some li∣bertie in admonishing the Emperour to absteine from persecu∣ting of innocent people, because his fighting against GOD pro∣cured Theo. lib. 4. cap. 34. good successe to the Barbarians: but the LORD was min∣ded to destroy him, therefore hee coulde receiue no wholsome admonition: for a number of the nation of the Gothes, whom he intertained as souldiers, meet to defend his Dominions against the inuasion of forrainers and strangers, they began to waste Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 13. the countrey of Thracia: and they faught against the Emperour Valens, and preuailed against him: so that he fled, and was ouer∣taken in a certaine Village, which the Gothes set on fire. So this Emperour died miserably, brunt with fire by his enemies, with∣out succession, and left his name in curse and execration to all ages, after he had reigned fifteene or sixteene yeeres, as Sozo∣menus Sozom. lib. 7. Cap. 40. reckoneth. Nowe to returne to the Emperour Valentinian: Hee was a defender of the true faith, and was so highly offended against his brother Valens, that hee would make him no support against the inuasion of the Gothes: for he said, it was an impious thing, Theo. lib. 4. cap. 12. to strengthen the hande of a man, who had spent his dayes in warrefare against GOD, and his CHURCH. In his dayes the Sarmatians inuaded the bounds of the Romane Dominions. Va∣lentinian prepared a mightie armie to fight against them: but they sent vnto him Ambassadours, to intreate for peace. When the Emperour sawe that they were but a naughtie people, hee Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31. was moued with excessiue anger, whereby he procured the rup∣tue of some arters, or vaines, whereupō followed great effusion of blood. And so he himselfe died, leauing behind him two sons, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 36. Gratianus, whose mother was Seuera, and Valentinian the second, whose mother was Iustina.
Gratianus, Valentinianus the second, and Theodosius. GRATIANUS, the sonne of Valentinian, after the death of Valens his fathers brother, had the gouernament both of Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 13. 14 West and East. His brother Valentinian the second, was his asso∣ciate in the gouernement of the West: But when hee perceiued, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 2. that the weightie affaires of the kingdome required the fellow∣ship of a man, who was ripe in yeeres, hee choosed Theodosius, a man of Noble parentage in Spaine, to whom hee committed the gouernement of the East, contenting himselfe and his brother Valentinian, with the gouernement of the West. Gratianus in the beginning of his reigne, reduced from banishment those Bis∣shops, whom the Arrian Persecuter Valens had banished. Hee was slaine by Andragathius, Captaine of the armie of Maximus, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 11. who usurped the Empire of the West. This Andragathius, not by valour and might, but by circumuention, falshood, and treason, ouerthrew the good Emp. Gratian: for he made a report to passe in Lions, where the Emp. Gratian had his remaining, that his wife Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 13. was comming to visite him: and he in simplicitie went foorth to meete his wife beyond the riuer of Rhonne: but Andragahius (who was couertly lurking in a chariot) stepped out, and slewe Gratianus, after he had reigned with his father, with his brother, and with Theodosius, 15. yeeres. His brother Valentinian, young in yeeres, was seduced by the intising speeches of his mother Iustina, after the death of her husband, in whose dayes she durst not presume to auow the Ar∣rian Heresie: yet after his death, she intised the flexible minde of her sonne, to persecute Ambrose, Bishop of Millane, because hee Theod. lib. 5 cap. 13. would not consent to the Arriane doctrine. The zeale of the people affectioned to their faithfull Pastor, hindered the cruell purposes of Iustina. Likewise the miracle wrought at the sepul∣chres Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 13. of Protasius and Geruasius, opened the mouthes of the peo∣ple to glorifie GOD, and to magnifie that Faith, which Protasius and Geruasius had sealed vp with their blood: these holie men of GOD were martyred in the second great Persecution moued August. lib. Confess. 9. Cap. 7. by the Emp. Domitian. The dolorous tithinges of the death of
Gratianus, and the neere approaching of the tyrant Maximus to Italie, compelled Iustina to leaue the persecuting of Ambrose, & to Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 16. Theo. lib. 5. cap. 14. fly to Illy, for safety of her own life, & her sons life. Theodosius being mindfull of the kindnes of Gratianus toward him, led an army against the tyrant Maximus. The captains of Maximus ar∣mie, terrified with the rumor of he might of Theodosius armie, Socrat lib. 5. cap. 14. deliuered him bound into the hāds of Theodosius, & he was justly punished vnto the death. Andragathius, who slew the Em. Gatian (as said is) seeing no way to escape, threw himselfe headlonges into a riuer, & so ended his wretched life. About the same time Iustina the mother of Valent. the II. she died, her son was peace∣ably possessed in his kingdome, & Theodosius returned to the east Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 17. againe. But within few dayes he was compelled to gather a new army & fight against the tyrant Eugenius, & his chiefe captaine A bogastus, who had conspired against Valent. the II. & strangled him while he was lying in his bed. This battel went hardly at the beginning, but Theodosius had his recourse to GOD by prayer: & the LORD sent a mighty tempest of winde, which blew so vehe∣mently Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 25. in the face of Eugenius army that their dartes were ram∣uesed and turned backe by the violence of the winde, in their owne faces. Of which miraculous support, sent from aboue, the Poë Claudian writes these Verses: O nimium dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris Claudian, d 3. consul . Eolus armatas hiemes, cui militat ather, Et conjurati veniunt ad classica vent The tyrant Eugenius fell downe at the feete of Theodosius, to beg pardon: but the souldiours pursued him so stratly, that they slew him at the Emp. feete. Arbogastus, the author of al this mis∣chiefe, hee fled, & being out of all hope of safetie, slew himselfe. Like as there was no sacrifice, wherein dung was not foūd, euē so the life & actions of this noble Emp. was spotted with some infirmities. Against the inhabitants of Thessalomca the Emp. was moued with excessiue anger so that 7000. innocent people were sin, inuited to the spectacle of Playes, called Ludi circenses, & in Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 18. the Grieke lāguage, . For this fault the good Em. was reproued by Ambrose Bish. of Millane, & confessed his fault in sight of the people with teares: and made a lawe, that the like Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 17. cōmandements anent the slaughter of people, should not hue
hastie execution, vntill the time that 30. dayes were ouerpassed: to the ende that space might bee left either to mercie, or to repentance. In like maner, he was angry out of meaure against the people of Antiochia, for ouerthrowing the brasen portrate of his beloued bedde-fellow Placilla. The Emp. denuded their Theod lib. 5. cap. 19. towne of the dignitie of a Metrapolitane Citie, conferring this eminent honour to their neighbour towne Laodicea. Moreouer he threatned to set the towne on fe, and to redact it vnto the base estate of a Vil age. But Flauiannus, Bishop of Antiochia, by his earnest trauailes with the Emperour, mitigated his wrath: (for the people repented their foolish fact, & were sore afraide) & the good Emp. moued with pitie, pardoned the fault of the Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 23. towne of Antiochia. His lenitie toward the Arrians, whom he permitted to keepe conuentions in principall Cities, was with great dexteritie & wisedome reproued by Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium: For hee came in vpon a time, and did reuerence to the Emperour, but not vnto Arcadius his sonne (albeit alreadie associated to his Father in gouernament, & declared Augustus) Theod. lib 5. cap. 16. whereat Theodosius being offended, Amphilochis very pertinent∣lie, and in due season, admonished the Emperour, that the GOD ofHeauen also would be offended with them, who tolerated the blasphemers of his onely begotten Sonne, the LORD IESUS CHRIST. Wherupon followed a lawe, discharging the con∣uentions of Heretiques in principall Cities. In all these infitmi∣ties, it is remarkeable that the good Emperour  gaue place to wholsome admonitions. The excessiue raines hee was com∣peled to vndertake in Ware-fare, hastened his death: for hee contracted sicknesse soone after his returning from the battell Theod lib. 5 cap. 26. faught against Eugnius. and died in the 60 yeere of his age, and in the 16. yeere of his reigne. He left behind him his two sons, Arcadius to guerne the East, and Honorius to gouerne the West.
CHAP. II. Of Pastors and Doctors. AFTER Eusebius, Miltiades gouerned the Romane Bishops of Rome. Church 4. yeeres, 7. moneths, and 8. dayes, as Plati∣na writeth. His ministration was in the dayes of the reigne of Constantine, to whom the Emperour remitted Miliader. the controuersie betwixt Cecilianus and the Donatistes, to bee judged by him and his Collegues Rheticus, Maternus, and Ma∣rinus. Euseb. lib. 1 cap. 5. The Donatistes would not acquiesce to the determination of Miltiades, and his Collegues. The good Emperour appoin∣ted this cause of new againe to be judged in Ales, by a number of Bishops of Spaine, Italie and France, because the Donatists would August. epi 68. not acquiesce to the determination of Miltiades and his Col∣legues. In the Councill of Ales, Cecilianus was likewise absol∣ued, and the Donatistcs againe succumbed in their probation. Notwitstanding they appealed to the Emp. Constantine: and when the Emp. heard the cause of Cecilianus pleaded before himselfe, August. epi 162. & 166. the Donatists could not proue, that either Cecilianus had beene admitted Bishop of Carthage by a man who was Proditor, or yet that hee had admitted any other man culpable of the like fault to an Ecclesiasticall office. If the Bishop of Rome had beene su∣preame Iudge in all Ecclesiasticall causes, Constantine had done him wrong, to appoint other Iudges to cognosce in this cause, after the Bishop of Rome, and his Collegues, had giuen out their definitiue sentence. His ordinance anent prohibition of fasting vpon the LORDS day, was expedient at that time to bee a di∣stinguishing note of true Christians, from Manichean heretiques, August Cau∣sulao epist. 86. whose custome was vpon the LORDES day to fast. The purple garment, the palace of Lateran, the superioritie of the towne of Rome, and gouernament of the West, which honours some al∣ledge were conferred by Constantine to Miltiades and Silvester is a fable, not worthie of refutation: all these honours the Empe∣rours of the West, successours of Constantine, possssed, and not the Bishop of Rome, for the space of many hundreth yeeres. To Miltiades succeeded Silvester, and ministred 23. yeeres, Silvelter. Platina. de vita Silvst. 10. monethes, & 11. dayes. In his time was the Heretique Ar∣rius
excommunicated by Alexander, without the fore-know∣ledge of the Bishop of Rome: It was enough, that after excom∣munication Socrat. lib 1. cap. 6. intimation was made to other bishops, which duety the Bishop of Alexandria neglected not Learned men should be Theod. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3. ashamed of fables, to say that Constantine was baptized by Silue∣ster, for Siluester was dead before Constantine was baptized. And Platina himselfe is compelled to grant that Marcus, the succes∣sor of Siluester, gouerned the Church of Rome in Constantines dayes. And Eusebius testifieth, that Constantine was baptized in Nicomedia, immediately before his death. Concerning the do∣nation Euseb. de vi∣ta Constant. lib. 4. of Costantine, wherein he conferreth the dominion of the West to the Bish. of Rome. it is like vnto a rotten egge, which is cast out of the basket, lest all the rest bee set at the lesse auaile. No ancient writter maketh mention of any such thing. Yea, Constantine, in his testamentall legacie, allotted the Dominion of the West to two of his sonnes, namely, to Constantinus youn∣ger, and to Constans. How then had hee, by an anteriour dis∣position, resigned these Dominions to the Bishop of Rome? If Papistes bee not better countenanced by Antiquitie in other thinges, then in this point, they haue no great cause to bragge of Antiquitie. To Siluester succeeded Marcus, and ministred 2. yeeres, 8. monethes, and 20. dayes. Marcus. Platin. de vita Mar. Iulius. Sozom lib. 4. cap. 8. After Marcus, Iulius gouerned the Romane Church, 15. yeeres. Sozomenus attributes to Iulius 25. yeeres. His ministration was in the dayes of the Emperour Constantius and his brethren. Hee was a defender of the true Faith, and a Citie of refuge to those who were persecuted by Arrians: as namely, to Athanasius Bis∣shop of Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, Marcellus Bishop of Aneyra, and Lucius Bis∣shop of Adrianopolis: All these were vnjustly deposed from their Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15. offices by the Arrians, and had recourse to Iulius. Hee was nei∣ther ashamed of the Gospell of CHRIST, nor of his afflicted seruantes. In the Councill of Sardica great honour was con∣ferred vnto him, to wit, that men vnjustly condemned by Ar∣rians shoulde haue refug to Iulius: to whom they gaue power of newe againe, to judge their cause. This was an Act of the Councill of Sardica, and not of the Nicene Councill (as was
confidently alledgd in the Councill of Carthage) and a per∣sonall honour conferred to one man alone, for respectiue cau∣ses: but not extended to his successours, as though all the Bishops of Rome at all times shoulde bee Iudges of appellation. The Arrians were sore grieued for this, that Iulius both in worde, and deede, and writ, assisted Athanasius and his com∣plices. The chafing letters, and mutuall expostulations, that passed betwixt Iulius and the Arrians conueened in the Coun∣cill of Antiochia, are to bee read in the Historie of Socrates. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15. Idem lib. 2 cap. 17. Platina, in the grandoure of his speeches, is inconsiderate, as if Iulius had damned the presumption of the Orientall Bis∣shops, who durst conuocate an assemblie without licence be∣fore obtained from the Bishop of Rome. Noe such thing is Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 10. contained in the letter of Iulius, but onely an expostulation, that they did not aduertise him of their Councill, to the ende hee might haue sent his Ambassadours, and giuen vnto them his best aduise. Iulius knewe the Constitutions of the Nicene Ruffin. lib. 1 cap. 6. Canon. 6. Councill, which gaue power to euery Patriarch within his owne boundes, to conuocate Councils. To IULIUS succeeded LIBERIUS, and continued sixe Liberius. Damas. Marian. Ierum. yeeres: some assigne vnto him eighteene yeeres, others nine∣tecne yeeres: so vncertaine is the computation of the yeeres of their gouernament. Hee gouerned the Church of Rome in the dayes of CONSTANTIUS, by whom also hee was banished to Thracia, because hee woulde not consent to the depositin of ATHANASIUS: which point was seriously vrged in the Councill of Millane. THEODORETUS giueh ample testi∣monie of his constancie and freedome of speaking to the m∣perour Theod. lib. 2 cap. 15. 16. 17. (not disagreeing with his name) before his banish∣ment. In his absence FOELIX the second was chosen to be Bishop of Rome: to whome THEODORETUS giueth this praise, that hee adhered firmely to the Nicene Councill: but blameth him for this that hee receaued his ordination from Arrians. Ntwithstanding hee was more hated by the Ar∣rians, Theod. ibid. then was LIBERIUS, and was put to death by them, after he had gouerned one yeere, foure monethes, & two dayes. Platina, de vita Foelie. After two yeeres banishment, LIBERIUS returned back again to Rome. THEODORETUS is silent in the matter of his praises after
his returning. Hilarius, Bishop of Poitiers affirmeth, that hee both consented to the deposition of Athanasius, and to the Hilar. in fra∣gmens. councell of Sirmium. There is nothing inlaking now to giue out a determinate sentence, whether or no the Bishop of Rome may erre in matters of Faith: but onely the compearance of the great Aduocate of all euill causes Onuphrius, who will needes find out some old partchment, or some vnknown manu-script, to free the chaire of Rome from all suspition of errour in mat∣ters of faith. But Bellarmine giues ouer his cause, and can finde Bellarm. de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. cap. 9. no sufficient Apologie for him, because his letters written to the Emp. Constantius after his returning from banishment, smels of Arrianisme. After the death of Librius, succeeded Damasus, and ruled 18. Damasus. yeeres, in time of the reigne of Iulian, of Iouinian, and of Valenti∣nian: his competitor Ursinus had many fauourers, in so much Socrat. lib. 7 cap. 9. Ruffiin. lib. 2 cap. 10. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 29. that the question who shoulde bee elected Bishop of Rome, was tried by the sword, rather then by reasons, suffrages, and votes: so that in the Church of Sisinum were slaine to the number of 137. persons. Damasus preuailed, and had the vpperhand. Hee was friendly to Peter Bishop of Alexandria, whom Lucius an Arrian Bishop imprisoned: but he escaped, and fled to Rome, as Athanasius had done before in the dayes of Iulius. Hee damned Theo. lib. 5. cap. 9. the Heresie of Apollinaris, in a Councill conucened at Rome. His Epistle written to the Oriental Bishops, whereinto he intimates vnto thē the condamnitour sentence pronounced against Apol∣linaris and his disciple Timotheus, is indied with the swelling pride of a lofty mind, breathing soueranity and preheminence Theod. ibid. aboue all other Churches, as if the Romane Church were that onely Apostolicke chaire, whereunto all other Churches aught homage and reuerence. So that Basilius, Bishop of Casarea in Cappadocia, complaines of the pride of the West, because they cared onely for their own preheminence, but not for the estate Basil. epist. 10. ad Euseb. mosat. of their persecuted brethren in the East, vnder the Arrian Em∣perour Valen, whose estate they knew not, neither sent they ms∣sengers to visite them, neither woulde they receiue true infor∣mation concerning the estate of their brethren. Yea, and Basi∣lius saieth, that hee purposed oft times, to haue written to the chiefe of them, that is, to Damasus, that hee shoulde not count
the splendor of pride to be true dignitie, & honour. Where it is to be marked, that whē he speakes of Damasus, he calleth him , that is, the principal of them, to wit of the Chr∣ches of the west: but not the supreame gouernor of the uniuer∣sal Church, neither the soueragn cōmander of the Churches of the East. It is ignorance of the Ecclesiastical historie, that makes men to imagine, that the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome is an ancient thing. When Damasus damned the Heresie of Apol∣bnaris, in the Council conueened at Rome, it was the yeere of our LORD 379. according to the computation of Ierum: and at this time the very aiming to supremacie is counted Splendor Supubiae, that is, the splendor of pride. Damasus wrote concerning the liues of the bishops of Rome preceeding his time: & was familiar∣ly acquainted with Ierom, as Ieroms writings clearly proports. To Damasus succeeded Siricius, and ministred 15. yee es: at Siricius. what time Gratianus and Valentinian obtained the Emperiall go∣uernamēt: he ordained, that maried men, who were admitted to Socrt lib. 7. cap 9. Hst Magd. Cent. 4. Cap 10. Malc 2. verse, 14. Ecclesiastical offices, after their ordination should absteine from the company of their wiues: as if it were great deuotion to a man to transgresse against the wife of his youth, the wife of his couenant, and his companion in all his wearisome labours His prohibition of the seconde mariage, smelleth of the Heresie of Montanus. In his time with pride of the  at Rome was Platin. de vita Pontis. joined vnsatiable auaritiousnes increasing daily by degrees, so that the Emperours Valentintan the II. and Theodous, were com∣pelled by a law, to inhibite widows vnder pretence of deuotion,  to leaue their houses, treasures, and house-holde-stuffe, to the Church, to the vtter impouerishing and vndoing the estate of their children. Bishops of Alexandria. IN the third CENTURIE wee rested at the name of  Bishop of Alexandria, whose successour was Alexander. His accurate disputation anent the unitie in the Tiinitie, made Alexander. Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria, to thinke that Alexander was intangled with the erour of Sabellius: Hereof arose contertious dispuations, new opinions, exulcer te minds & open schismes.
This intestine maladie was not vnknowne to the good Empe∣rour Constantine, who sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba, a man singu∣larly beloued of the Emperour, together with persuasiue letters from the Emperour, exhorting both Alexander and Arrius, to leaue accurate & profounde disputations, and keepe inuiolably the peace & unitie of the Church: But no meanes could auaile, vntill this question was desided by the determination of the ge∣nerall Councill of Nice. After the Councill of Nice had damned the opinion of Ar∣rius as Hereticall, Alexander continued not aboue 5. monethes Athanasius aliue: In the last period of his life hee called for Athanasius, but he was not present: Of whom Alexander said, Thou hast escaped, Theod. lib. 1 cap. 25. Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 17. but shalt not escape, fore-prophecying that Athanasius should vn∣dergo that wieghtie charge, which he, giuing place to nature, & to the calling of GOD, was leauing. Athanasius in his young yeeres and childish playes was counterfeiting diuine mysteries, & baptizing children: yet after such due forme of interrogato∣ries & answeres preceeding Baptisme that Alexander then Bish∣durst not presume to rebaptize those who apparently in chil∣dish Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 14. simplicitie had beene made partakers of diuine grace. Hee began no sooner to accept the weightie charge of the Church of Alexandria, anno 333. but the Arrians began to fret and of∣fend, Hist. magd. Cent. 4. ap. 10. knowing how diligently he attended vpon Alexander his predecessor, at the Councill of Nice, and how vigilantly & wisely hee had detected the lurking absurdities of the vilde  of Arrius: And they thought the preferment of Athanasius was the vtter vndoing of their opinion. Therefore they cōspired against him, and by a multiplied number of false accusations preuailed Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 35. somewhat against him, euen in the dayes of the good Emper. Constantine. But in the dayes of Constntius and Iulian, almost the whole world conspired against him: so that except he had bene vp-holden by that grace that commeth from aboue, it was not possible that hee coulde haue consisted and borne out such vn∣supportable hatred. Iustly did Nazianzene compare him in time of aduersitie to the Adamant, and in time of prosperitie to the Nazianzen. in laudem Atbanasii. Magnet In time of aduersitie no trouble ouercame him, in time of prosperitie, hee allured the heartes of men more intractable then yron, to embrace the trueth of GOD.
Now seeing Athanasius liued sixe and fourtie yeeres, gouer∣nour of the Church of Alexandria, his great troubles can not bee comprised in better order, then by declaring shortly what troubles hee susteined: first in Constantines dayes, next vnder the reigne of Constantius: thirdly, vnder the reigne of Iulian: and last to speake of his peaceable end vnder the reigne of the Empe∣rour Valens, albeit he was an Arrian Persecuter. In the dayes of Constantine first he was accused by an effronted harlot, whom the Arrians had suborned to beare false witnesse against him: but Athan. guided the matter with wisedome, & suffered Timotheus a worthie presbyter, to speake (whom hee had brought in with Theod. lib. 1 cap. 29. him to the Councill) but hee was silent himselfe. The impudent woman pointing out Timotheus by the finger (as if he had bene Athanasius) with clamours voide of all womanly modestie, af∣firmed that hee had abused her in whosedome, so that all who were present were ashamed of her impudencie. This was done in the Councill of Tyrus, to the perpetuall shame of the Arrians, who suborned an harlot to accuse the faithful seruāt of CHRIST without a cause. Secondly they accused him for this, that hee had cutted off the hand of Arsenius, some time his owne seruant: and for grea∣tr euidence, they produced in the Councill of Tyrus before the Iudges the hand of a man inclosed in a case, which hande they affirmed that Athanasius had cut off from Arsenius. This they spake the more confidently, because they supponed that Arse∣nius remained still secretly kept in their owne custodie: but by the prouidence of GOD hee escaped, came to Tyrus, and was presented before the Councill, hauing both his handes perfect, Theod. ibid. sounde, and vnmutilated, After this the Councill was full of confusion, for the Arrians cried, that ATHANASIUS by ma∣gicke artes deluded the sences of men: and they were purpo∣sed, by violence and force to lay handes vpon him, and to teare him in pieces: But he fled by a ship, and came to Constantinople, where the Emperour was, as shall bee declared, GOD willing, in the fourth CHAPTER. The rest of his accusations, and howe they dealt against him moste vnjustly and falsely, and gaue out a sentence of deposition against him in his absence I remit vnto the place foresaid.
Vnder the reigne of Constantius, Athanasius was compelled to flie at two diuers times. First, while the Emp. Constans was yet aliue who procured a Councill to be gathered in Sardica, where∣in the cause of Athanasius was tried, and he found innocent: and was sent backe againe and reored to his place: For Constantius feared the minang letters of his brother Constans, who threat∣ned Theod. lib. 2. cap. 8. to lead an armie to the Fast, and to posssse Athanasius in his place againe, incase his brother linguered in doing of it. After Idem. lib. 2. cap. 13. the death of Constans, Sabinianus was sent to kill Athanasius, but he escaped miraculously, as hath beene declared. Againe he was compelled first to fle, and afterward to lurke in the dayes of Iulian: He was restored againe by the good Emp. Iouinian: and he continued in his ministration vntill the dayes of Valentinian and Valens: And although Valens was a crue I perse∣cuter, Ruffin. lib. 1. Cap. 34. yet hee absteined from persecuting of Athanasius, for ho∣nour of his gray haires and for that he was reuerently regarded of all men. Thus Athanasius, full of dayes, died in peace, after he Sozom. lib. 6 Cap. 19. had gouerned the Church of Alexandria 46. yeeres. To worthie Athanasius succeeded Peter, whom the Emp. Valens caused to be imprisoned, and Lucius an Arrian bishop, to be sea∣ted Peter in his roome. Lucius was made bishop of Alexandria, against all kind of Ecclesiasticall order: neitheir did the people craue him, nor the Cleargie of Alexandria approue him, nor any Or∣thodox bishop giue him ordination. Peter escaped out of pri∣son, and fled to Damasus bishop of Rome. Lucius like vnto a raue∣nous Theod. lib. 4 cap. 22. wolfe, not onely banished the Homousians out of Alxandria and Aegypt, but also that which was more insolent, and neuer attempted before, he persecuted the Monkes who dwelt in so∣litarie places of the wildernesse, and banished them, who had l∣ready banished themselues from all the delicate pleasures of the world. But marke, To what place could men bee banished, who Theod. lib. 4. cap. 21. inhabited the desert places of barren wildernsses? Hee caused them (especially Macarius & Isidorus) to be transported vnto an Isle, whereinto no Christians were to be found, but only Pagans and worshippers of deuilles. When these prisoners of CHRIST approached neare vnto the Isle, the deuill left his olde habi∣tation, to wit the mouth of the image, from whence hee was ac∣customed to speake, and hee posessed the Priests daughte who
ranne vnto the shore, and cried words not vnlike to those which Actes, 16, verse, 17. were spoken to Paul and Silas in Philipp, by the maid who had the spirit of diuination: and after this the deuill left her, lying vpon the ground, as though she had bene dead: But the men of GOD, by their supplications to GOD, restored the young woman to health, and deliuered her to her father. The inha∣bitants of the Isle, who saw the wonderfull works of GOD, re∣ceiued the faith, and were baptized in the Name of CHRIST. LUCIUS was so dashed with the fame of this wonderfull worke, and with the out-crying of the people against him, that hee permitted the foresaid monkes to returne backe againe to their owne places. Afrer Peter succeeded Timotheus, for one cause worthie to bee blamed, because he fauoured the usurpation of Maximus Cy∣nicus, Timo∣theus. who presumed without a lawfull calling to bee Bishop of Constantino. And after him Theophilus succeeded, whose attempts against Chrysostome I remit to the next CENTURIE. Bishops of Antiochia. IN Antiochia, after Tyrannus, succeeded Vitalius, about the time that the rage of the tenth Persecution began to bee as∣swaged: Vitalius. therefore hee re-edified a Church in Antiochia, which had beene demolished in time of the Pesecution of Dioclesian, and his successour Philogonius, perfected the building. To whom Philogo∣nius. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 3. Eustatius, Theod. lib. 1. cap. 7. Socrat. lib. 1 cap. 24. succeeded Eustatius who was present at the Councill of Nice, & was Moderator and Mouth to all the rest. Eusebius, sometime bishop of Berytus, afterward bishop of Nicomedia, and last of al bishop of Constantinople, did insinuate himselfe in fauour with the Emperour Constantine, and obtained from him libertie to goe to Hierusalem, and to visite the Temples that Constantine had lately builded in Bethlehem. Hierusalem, & vpon Mount Oliuct. To him resorted a number of Arrian Bishops, who had al secretly con∣spired against Eustatius. and suborned a vilde woman to accuse him of whoredome. The Arrians vpon the simple deposition of a woman suborned by themselues, contrarie al kind of or∣der, depsed Eustatius, and perswaded the Emprour to banish him, as a man conuict both of adulterie, and of tyrannie. But Theodor. li. 5 cap. 21.
the LORD laide his correcting hand vpon the woman, whom the Arrians had suborned, so that she died, sore tormented with a grieuous sickenesse, and confessed that money was giuen vnto her, to accuse Eustatius, & that she had sworn deceitfully, because the child procreated with her, was begotten by Eustatius a smith of that name, but not by Eustatius bishop of Antiochia. The Arrians, in the dayes of Constantine, had no great vpper∣hand, except onely in the matter of Athanasius his banishment to Triere, and in the deposition and banishment of Eustatius to Illyricum. But in the dayes of Constantius they tooke boldenesse, and planted Arrian bishops in all principall places: so that in Antiochia (after Eustatius) Eulalius, Euphronius, Placitus, Leontius, Eudoxius, all these were Arrian bishops, and placed by them in Antiochia. In end Meletius was ordained bishop of Antiochia, Meletius. a man of great giftes, whom the Arrians transported our of Se∣bastia in Armenia, and placed him in Antiochia, supposing that by the meanes of his excellent learning, many should be allured to their opinion: But it fell out farre otherwise: for Meletius pro∣fessed the true faith. Onely the reproueable forme of his entrie, by receiuing ordination from Arrian bishops, was the grounde of remedilesse schismes in the Church of Antiochia. There had beene alreadie two factions in the towne, to wit, Arrians, and Eustatians: now the thirde faction is added of them, who were called Meletiani, with whom Eustatiani did not communicate, but abhorred them as they did the Arrians. This schisme indu∣red after the death of Meletius for the space of fourescore and Theodor. li. 3 cap. 4. fiue yeeres. Meletius was banished in the dayes of Constantius, and Euzoius an Arrian bishop placed in his roome. Hee was re∣stored Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 44. againe by Iulian, onely for desire hee had to vndoe things done by Constantius, and to bring his name to disgrace. Like∣wise vnder the reigne of the Emperour Valens, he was banished Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 1. the seconde time. Hee gouerned the Church of Antiochia fiue and twentie yeeres, and died in Constantinople, immediately after the second generall Councill and was caried to Antiochia, to be Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 7. buried there. The ordination of Paulinus to bee Bishop of Antiochia, Me∣letius Paulinus. beeing yet aliue, was the foolish fact of Lucifer bishop of Calaris, in the Isle of Sardinia. He was restored from banishment
in the dayes of Iulian. And tooke purpose, accompanied with Eusebius, bishop of Vercellis in Liguria, who was likewise restored at that same time, to visite the estate of their brethren. Eusbius addressed himselfe to Alexandria, and conferred with Athana∣sius: Socra. lib. 3 cap. 6. But Lucifer went to Antiochia, where hee found miserable distractions, euen amongst those, who professed one & the selfe same Faith. When exhortations to unitie could preuaile no∣thing, but the dissention daily increased, hee ordained Paulinus presbyter of Antiochia, and the chiefe of those who were called Eustatiani, to bee bishop of Antiochia. This fact of Lucifer was like vnto fewell added vnto the fire, and mightily augmented Theo. lib. 3. cap. 4. the schisme. Theodoretus blameth him for so doing, and Eusebius Vercellensis, when hee came backe from Alexandria, disliked also the fact of Lucifer. Wherefore Lucifer woulde not commu∣nicate any longer with Eusebius. These sorrowfull times of multiplied schismes, alienated the heartes of a great number Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 9. of people from the true CHURCH. Meletius was restored from his seconde banishment, in the dayes of the Emperour GRATIANUS. Paulinus woulde vpon no condition com∣municate Idem, lib. 5 cap. 5. with him, because hee had receiued ordination from the Arrians. When Meletius had ended his life, the people woulde not admit Paulinus to be their bishop, because they said, Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 23. it was not meete that hee should bee his successour, who dispi∣sed his fellowship and counsell in his life time. To MELETIUS succeeded FLAVIANUS, a worthie Flavianus. mn. Paulinus albeit hee appointed Euagrius to bee his suc∣cessor, yet such formes manifestly repugnant to the approued order of the Church could take no place. The bishops of Rome Theod. lib. 5. cap. 23. Damasus, Siricius, and Anastatius, were great aduersaries to him, and misinformed the good Emperour Theodosius against him: but when hee compeared before the Emperour, he spake before him both freely and wisely, wordes that liked the Em∣perour well, as they are reported by Theodoretus: O Emperour, if any man doe blame my Faith as peruerse, or my life as vnworthie, I am Theod, ibid. content to be judged by my very aduersaries: but if the disputation onely boe anent principalitie, and eusinent places, I will not contende with any man, but denude my selfe of all superioritie, and comit the chaire of ANTIOCHIA to whome yee like best. The Emperour
admired his courage and wisedome, and sent him backe againe to gouerne his owne flocke, and was slow to heare friuolous ac∣cusations in time to come against Flarianus. This was that wor∣thie Bishop, who associated  Chrysostome to be his fellow-la∣bourer Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 23. in Antiochia: and who mitigated the wrath of Theodo∣sius conceiued aganst the Citie of Antiochia, for misusing the imag of his wife Placilla. Bishops of Constantinople. CONSTANTINOPLE was builded by Constantine, anno Functii Chro∣nolog. 336. in a plae where Asia and Europe neerely confines, being separatd onely by a narrow firth, called of old Bopho∣rus Thracius. The cause wherefore this Emperiall Citie was buil∣ded in this place was not to resigne the towne of Rome, and the gouernament of the West to the bishop of Rome: but, as Sozo∣menus writes, that Constantinople, or new Rome, might be as a soue∣raigne Sozo. lib. 2 cap. 3. Lady to all those who in the East, West, North, or South, were obedient to the Romane Empire. Learned men in our dayes are ashamed to mainetaine all the foolish fables of the Romane Church, for they see clearely the cause of the building of this great Citie was to keepe firmely both the East and the West vn∣der the Souerainitie of Constantine, and his successours. Alexander bishop of Constantinople, proued a worthie man, in the dayes of the Emp. Constantine. The Arrians finding them∣selues Alexander. to be vtterly rejected by Athanasius, they addressed them∣selues to Constantinople, vnder the conduct of Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia: and threatned Alexander, that incase hee woulde not voluntarily receiue. Arrius into the fellowship of the Church, Teod. lib. 4. cap. 4. then they should bring him in authorized with the Emperours commande, to the grieuance of his heart. Alexander clothed himselfe with the armour of GOD, and all the night long prayed in this sence: LORD, if Arrius be to be receiued to morrow into the communione of thy CHURCH, then let thy seruant depart in peace, and destroy not the just with the wicked: but, LORD, if thou wilt spare thy CHURCH. whereunto I am assured. thou wilt be fauourable: then LORD, turne thine eyes toward the wordes of the Eusebians, and giue not thine inheritance to a desolation and reproach: and cut of Arrius, lest
while he entreth into the CHURCH, his heresie also seeme to enter with him, and so no difference seeme to bee betwixt Pietie and Jmpietie. The day next following the prayer of Alexander, Eusebius bis∣shop of Nicomedia, with his retinue came with great confidence Theot. ibid. & pompe, to performe all which they had threatned they would doe: But Arrius was compelled to goe to a secret place, where∣into his bowels gusihed out: and hee concluded his wretched life, with ignominie and shame. To Alexander succeeded Paulus: His lot was to gouerne this Church vnder the reigne of an Arrian Emperour Constantius, Paulus. who rejected him, and seated Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, in his place: But this great parrone of the Arrian Heresie, scarcely was placed in Constantinople, when he ended his life. The Homou∣sians receiued againe Paulus to bee their bishop: The Arrians choosed Macedonius. This was the cuse of great debate in Con∣stantinople, Saecrat. lib. 2. cap. 7. and the people diuided in factions, hatefully inuaded one another. The Emperour hearing of the tumult, sent Her∣mogenes, the generall commander of his hors-men, to remoue Paulus from Constantinople: Hermogenes was very ready to exe∣cute the Emperours commandement, but the people being af∣fectioned Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 7. toward their Pastor, arose vp with popre tumult, compassed the house of Hermogenes, set it on  slw himselfe, and fastned a corde to his legges, and trailed him along the streetes. For this cause the Emper. Constantius willing to punish the authors of this tumult, hastened to come to Constantinople. The people went foorth to meete him, and with reares confes∣sed their fault, and craued pardon. The Emperour absteined from punishing them vnto the death, but he cutted off the one halfe of the victuall which the liberalitie of his father had be∣stowed vpon Constantinople, to bee payed yeerely out of the tri∣butes Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 16. of Aegypt. He banished Paulus the second time and seated Macedoius in Costantinople, not without effusion of blood. Pau∣lus was againe restored by the meanes of the Emp. Constans: but Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 26. after the death of Constans, he was banishd to Cucusus, a towne of Armenia, where he was strangled by the bloody Arrians. The Church of Constantinople was miserably troubled with Nectarius. Arrianisne, vnder the reignes of Constantius & Valens. The reignes of Graiianus and Theodosius was a breathing time to the profes∣sors
of the true Faith. At this time Nazianzenus a constant de∣fender of the Faith, was chosen Bishop of Constantinople, who notwithstanding voluntarily left the great Citie, in regarde the Bishops assembled in the second generall Councill, gaue not a full and uniuersll consent to his admission: Yet gaue they all without hesitation their consent to Nectarius, a man of noble birth, of the countrey of Cilicia, at that time , and Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 21. who had receiued no ecclesiastical preferment before that time. This man (I say) they made Bishop of Constantinople, with full consnt and allowance, both of the Councill and people: ouer∣passing Nazianzenus: so fraile are the cogitations of men, euen in generall Councils, that they are oft times more ruled with affection then reason. Nectarius continued in that office vntill the third yeere of the reigne of Arcadius, that is, vntill the yeere Hist. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. of our LORD 401. In his time the confession of sinnes done in secrete, to presbyter poenitentiarius, was abrogated in the Church of Constantinople, vpon this occasion as Socrates writeth, A certaine noble woman was confessing in secret her sinnes to presbyter poenitentiarius, and shee confessed adultery, committed with one of the Church Deacons. Eudaemon (this was the name Socrat lib. 5. cap. 19. of the father confessor) gaue counsell to Nectarius, to abrogate this custome of auricular and secrete confession, because the Church was like to bee slandered, and euill spoken of by these meanes. Socrates can scarse giue allowance to this fact of Ne∣ctarius, in respect that by abrogation of this custome, the vn∣fruitfull works of darknesse were lesse coargued and reproued. But Socrates considered not, that CHRIST, when hee talked with the Samaritane woman at the Well, sent away his disciples to buy bread, to the ende the poore Samaritane sinner might more freely poure out her secrete sinnes in the bosome of Iohn, 4. CHRIST, who knew all thinges that were done in secrete. It is not my purpose to contend with Socrates, he is writing an hi∣storie, I am writing but a short Compend of an historie: hee ta∣keth libertie to declare his judgement concerning this fact of Nectarius, in abrogating confession of secrete sinnes to pres by∣ter poenitentiarius. No man can blame mee to write my judge∣ment concerning auricular confession. It is in our dayes not like vnto the mantle where with Sem and Iapheth couered the na∣kednesse Genes. 9. vese, 23.
of their Father Noe: but it is in very deed a lap of the mantle of the deuill, couering the nakednesse of his children, that is, the horrible treasons that are plotted in secrete by the children of the deuill, against Christian Magistrates. Nowe is auriculare consession for greater causes to bee abrogated, then of olde presbyter poenitentiarius was discharged by Nectarius. Bishops of Hierusalem. TO Thermon succeeded Macarius, anno 318. about the 7. Macarius. yeere of the reigne of Constantine: In his time it is thought, that Helena, the mother of Constantine, founde the Crosse of Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 8. Sacrat. lib. 1. cap. 17. Theod. lib. 1 cap. 18. Ambros. do obitu Theo∣dos. CHRIST: but Ambrose writes, that shee worshipped it not, for that, saith he, had beene Gentilis error, & vanitas impioram, that is, an errour of Pagans, and vanitie of vngodly people. But now to lay aside the inexcusable fault of adoration of the tree where∣vpon our LORD suffered, What necessity had Helena to bee so serious to seeke out this tree. and to commit it to the custodie. of all posterities? seeing that Ioseph of Arimathea, who sought the body of IESUS at the hands of Pilate, to the end he might burie Math. 27. verse, 58. it honourably, yet sought he not the tree whereon CHRIST was crucified, which with little adoe might haue bene obtained. Se∣condly, during the time that the Crosse was easie to bee found, and esie to haue bene discerned from other crosses, How could the blessed virgine the mother of the LORD, and holy Apostles, haue committed such an ouersight, in not keeping that precious treasure, if so be in the keeping of it there be so great deuotion, as the Romane Church now talks of? Thirdly, what is the cause, that the Romane Church brags so much of antiquity? when as the worshipping of the crosse, one of the maine points of their Reli∣gion was vnknowne to the first 300. yeeres of our LORD: & now in the 4 Cent. the crosse is found, but not worshipped yea, and the adoration of it is detested & abhorred, as an error of Pagans. To Macarius succeeded Maximus, who had be ne his fellow∣labourer, as of old Alexander was to Narcissus. Macarius gouerned Maximus. the Church of Hierusalem, in the peaceable dayes of Constan∣tine, but Maximus gouerned that same Church himselfe alone, in the dayes of Constantius. Hee was present at the Councill of
Tyrus: but Paphnutius a Bishop and confssor in Thebaida pitied the simplicitie of Maximus, whom the Arrians with deceit∣full Ruffin. lib. 1. Cap. 17. speeches had almost circumueened, and he stepped to him, and suffered him not to sit in the assembly of vngodly people: wherupon followed a bande of indissoluble conjunction, not onely with Paphnutius, but also with Athanasius, who was char∣ged with many false accusations in that wicked Councill of Ty∣rus. This warning made him circumspect and wise in time to Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 8. come: so that hee was no present at the Arriane Councill of Antiochia, gathered vnder pretence of dedication of the Temple which Constantine began to build, but his sonne Constantius per∣fected the building of it. To Maximus succeeded Cyrillus, a man greatly hated by the Arrians, in so much, that Acacius bishop of Casarea Palestine de∣posed Cyrillus. him (no doubt by some power granted to him by the Emp. Constantius, with aduise of Arrian Bishops) Notwithstan∣ding Theod. lib. 2. cap. 26. Silvanus Bishop of Tarsus receiued him, and hee taught in that Congegation with great liking and contentment of the people. The strife of Acacius against him in the Councill of Seleucia, I remit vnto the owne place. In time of famine hee had a great regard to poore indigent people and sold the pretious vessel and garments of the Church for their support. This was Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 25. a ground of his accusation aftrward, because a costly garment bestowed by the Emp. Constantine to the Church of Hierusalem, Cyrillus sold it to a merchant in time of famine, and againe, the merchant sld it vnto a lasciuious woman: and such friuolous thiges wre aggreaged by the Arrians, who hated the men of GOD. Of other Pastors and Doctors, in Asia, Africa, and Europe. BESIDES the Patriarchs of principall places, GOD raised vp in this CENTURI a great number of lear∣ned Preachers, who were like vnto the Ibides of Aegypt, a remedie prepared by GOD, against the multiplied number of venemous and flying Serpents. Euen so learned Fa∣thers of whom I am to speake, were instrumentes of GOD, to
vndoe the Heresies which abounded in this age, aboue al other ages. Did not Nazianzenus vndoe the Heresie of Apollinaris? Basilius the Heresie of Eunomius? Hilarius like vnto a sconde Deucalion saw the ouer-flowing speate of Arrianisme abated in FRANCE. Ambrosius, Epiphanius, and Ierom set their hearts against all Heresies, either in their time, or preceding their dayes. It were an infinite labour, to write of them all, who in this age, like vnto glistering starres with the shining light of celesticall doctrine illuminated the darknesse of the blind worlde: but the names of some principall Teachers (GOD willing) I shall re∣member. Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea in Palestina liued vnder Eusebus Pamphili. the Emp. Constantine, with whom he was familiarly acquainted. He was desired to supply the place of Eustatius bishop of Antio∣chia, whose deposition the Arrians without all forme of order had procured most vnrighteously: but he would not consent to accept that charge, so that the chair: of Antiochia vaked with∣out a Bishop eght yeeres. Some expecting the restitution of Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 24. Eustatius, others feeding themselues vpon vaine hopes, that Eu∣sebius woulde accept that place. The Emp. Constantine commen∣ded his modestie, and counted him worthie to be bishop of the whole world. Neuerthelesse hee was not altogether free of the Heresie of Arrius before the Nicene Councill, and hee was re∣misse and slacke in the cause of Athanasius. He was so familiar∣lie acquainted with Pamphilus, who suffered martyrdome in Cae∣sarea, Sozom lib. 3 cap. 2. that hee clothed himselfe with his name, and called him∣selfe Eusebius Pamphili. Hee died about the time that Athanasius first returned from banishment by the meanes of Constantine the Hst magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. youner, about the yeere of our LORD 342. Nazianzenus liued in the dayes of Constantius, Iulian, and Theo∣dosius. He was borne in a little towne of Cappadocia, called Na∣zianzum, Gregoriu Nazianze∣nus. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6. from which he receiued his name. Hee was trained vp in learning in Alexandria & in Athens: his familiarity with Basi∣lius Magnus began in Athens, and it was increased in the wil∣dernesse: hee preached in Sasima, but because it was a place vn∣meete Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 9. for studies, hee returned to Nazianzum, and was a hel∣per to his aged father. After his fathers death he went to Con∣stantinople, where he founde the towne in a moste desolate con∣dition,
in regard the Arrian & Macedonian Heresies had so migh∣tily preuailed, that all the principall Churches wre occupied by them. Nazianzenus only had liberty to preach in a little Church called Anastatia, because the trueth of GOD, which seemed to Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 5. haue bene buried, now by the preaching of Nazianzenus was re∣uiued againe. In the second generall Councill gathered by Theo∣dosius, because some Bishops of Macedonia and Aegypt murmu∣red against his admission, he counterfeited the fact of Ionas, and was content to bee cast out of his place, to procure peace and Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 9. concord amongst his brethren. He benefited the CHURCH of CHRIST in the dayes of Iulian, by writing bookes of Christian Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 8. Poesie, whereby the Christian Youth shoulde haue no harme by the interdiction of Iulian, prohibiting the children of Christians to bee brought vp in the schooles of learning. Hee detected the Heresie of Apollinaris, and the abominations of Heathen idola∣trie, whereunto Iulian had sold himselfe, more clearely then any other man had done. A man worthie for excellencie of giftes, to Sozom. lih. 6 cap. 27. bee caled THEOLOGUS. Basilius Magnus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, was so united in heart and mind with Nazianzenus, that the pen of Socrates will Basilius Magnus. net separate the treatises of their liues. His father Basilius, his mother Eumele, his nuise that fostered him, named Macrina, all Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26. were Christians. His father was martyred vnder the persecuting Emp. Maximus. Hee left behind him fiue sonnes: three of them were Bishops, namely, Basilius bishop of Caesarea, Peter bish. of Se∣basta and Gregorius B. of Nyssa. Hee was instructed in all kind of learning in Caesarea, in Constantinople, in Athens vnder Himerius and Proaeresius, in Antiochia vnder Libanius At his second returning to Athens, hee acquainted himselfe with Nazianzenus. They spent too much time in searching out the deepenesse of humane lear∣ning: and it repented Basilius, that he had spent so much time in searching out thinges that are not necessary to eternall life. Hee Basil. Eu statio, epist. 79. was ordained a Deacon by Meletius B. of Antiochia and a pres∣byter by Eusebius B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia. The good cariage of Basilius toward Eusebius is worthie of remembrance, albeit Euse∣bius conceiued indignation against him without a cause yet hee would not expostulate with his Bishop, but he departed to a so∣litarie place in Pontus, where he remained vntill the dayes of the
Emperour Valens. Then did the Arrian Heresie so mightily pre∣uaile, that necessitie compelled the Churches of Cappadocia to intreat Basilius to returne againe lest in his absence Arrianisme should get a full vpperhand. Basilius returned, not without the fore-knowledge & good aduise of Nazianzenus his deare friend, who counselled him to preueene Ensebius, & to ouercome him Nazian Ba∣silio, epist. 19 in courtesie & humanity: So was he reconciled to Euseb. & after his death was ordained B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, whom GOD so blessed, that the Arrians & Eunomians, who seemed to be excel∣lently learned, when they encountered with Nazianz. & Basilius, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26. they were like vnto men altogether destitute of learning. In the persecution of Valens hee was led to Antiochia, and presented before the deputy of Valens, who threatned him with banishmēt & death: but hee answered with inuincible courage, so that the deputy was astonished at his answeres. He was not afraid of ba∣nishment, because the earth is the LORDS: neither was hee afraid Socrat. ibid. of death, but wished to haue that honour, that the bandes of his earthly tabernacle might bee loosed for the testimonie of CHRIST. The Emp. sonne Galaces at this time was sick vnto the death, & the Empresse sent him word, that she had suffered ma∣nie things in her dreame for the B. Basilius, so he was dismissed, and suffered to returne to Caesarea. The prouident care of GOD ouer-ruling all humane cogitations, kept before-hande some sponkes that were not quenched in the feruent heat of this Per∣secution. The multiplied number of his letters sent to the Bis∣shops of the West, whereof he receiued no comfortable answere, gaue vnto Basilius just occasion to suspect affectation of supre∣macy in the West as his owne words do testify, which I cite out of the Latine version as most intelligible: Nihil nos fratres sepa∣rat, Basil trans∣marinis, epist. 77. nisi animi proposito, separationi causas robúrque demus: unus est Do∣minus, una Fides, Spes eadem. Sive caput universalis Ecclesiae vos ipsos esse reputatis, non potest pedibus dicere caput, non est mihi opus vo∣bis, &c. That is, There is nothing, brethren, that separates vs, except the purpose of our owne mindes furnish both cause and strength to separation, There is one GOD, one Faith, one Hope. Or if yee suppose your selues to bee head of the uni∣uersall CHURCH, yet the head cannot say vnto the feete, I haue no neede of you.
Nyssa is a Citie of Mysia, of olde called Pythopolis. The bro∣ther germane to Basilius Magnus, named Gregorius, was Bishop Gregorius Nyssenus. of this towne. In the second generall Council to him was com∣mitted the oer-sight of the Countrey of Cappadocia. Albeit the volume of his bookes be not extant, yet hee is renowned in the Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. mouthes of the Larned: and the fragments of his writings de∣clare that hee hath beene a man of Note and Marke. Anent sinne he said, that albeit the Serpentes that stinged vs, were not slaughtered, yet we haue sufficient consolation in this, that we are cured from their venemous bits and stinges. Anent pilgri∣mage to Hierusalem, Mount Olivet, and Bethlehem, he said, that a Numb. 21. verse, 6. pilgrimage from carnall lusts, to the righteousnesse of GOD, is acceptable to the LORD but not a journeying from Cappadocia to Palestina: and that GOD will giue a reward in the worlde to Hst. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. come, onely to thinges done in this worlde, by warrand of his owne Commandement. Epiphanius was borne in a little Village of Palestina, called Barsanduce in the fielde of Eleutheropolis. Hee was brought vp Epipha∣nius. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 32. amongst the Monkes of Palestina and Aegypt. In ende hee was ordained bishop of Salamina the Metrapoltane towne of the Isle of Cyprus. Hee refuted the Heresies preceeding his time in his booke called Panarium, and set downe a summe of the true faith in his booke called Anchoratus. He had a great regarde to the poore: in so much, that hee was called oeconomus pauperum. And like as Cyprus was naturally situated in a place neere ap∣proaching to Asia the lesse, and to Syria, and to Aegypt, and Pentapolis, and not farre distant from Europe: so it fell out, that Christians, who were disposed to support their indigent bre∣thren, they sent their collections to Epiphanius, and hee distribu∣ted them to the poore. With all these commendable vertues, Socrat. lib. 6 cap. 10. there was mixed a reproueable simplicitie in him: hee was cir∣cumueened by Theophilus Bishop of Alexendria, and tooke a dea∣ling against Ihon Chrysostome Bishop of Constantinople, because he would not be suddaine in damning the bookes of Origen. Also he taught in Constantinople, with indeuour to alienate the heartes of the people from their owne Pastour, and celebrated the com∣munion, & ordained a deacon in Constātinople, without the fore∣knowledge & consent of Chrysostome, & contrary to Church or∣der.
Chrysost. on the other part sent him aduertisement, that in∣case he receiued any disgrace or harme in the fuery of populare commotions, he should blame himselfe, who by his owne inor∣dinate doinges was procuring the same. After this Epiphanius ceased from such doings, and entered into a ship, of purpose to returne backe againe to Cyprus, but he died by the way. It is re∣ported of him, that when hee entered into the ship, hee said, he left three great thinges behinde him, to wit, a great towne, a Sozom. lib.  cap. 15. great palace, and great hypocrisie. It were a matter of infinite labour, and not agreeing with the nature of a COMPEND, to write of all the worthie men of GOD in the Easterne partes, who did fight a good Fight, runne a good race, and kept the faith. Asclepas in Gaza, Lucius in Adrianopolis, Basius presbyter in Ancyra, a mightie aduersa∣rie Sozom lib. 5 cap. 11. to the Arrians, vnder the reigne of Constantius, and to the Pa∣gans vnder the reigne of Iulian, in whose time he was martyred: Philogonius bishop of Antiochia, Hellanicus bishop of Tripolis, and Spyridion, who of a keeper of cattell, became bishop of Trimy∣thus, Theod. lib. 1. cap. 5. Hermogenes bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, who was present at the Councill of Nice, Iames bishop of Nisibis, in Misopotamia, in the dayes of Constantius, by whose prayers the armie of Sapores Theo. lib. 2. cap. 30. king of Persia was miraculously disapointed, Paulus bishop of Neocaesarea: this towne is situated vpon the bankes of Euphrates, and Paphnutius bishop in Thbaida, two notable Confessors, who were both present at the Councill of Nice, Eusebius Samosatenus, to whom many of Basilius Epistles are directed, and who refused to redeliuer vnto the Emperour Constantius the subscriptions of Thd. lib. 2. cap. 32. the Arrian Bishops, who consented to the admission of Mele∣tius to bee bishop of Antiochia, which subscriptions were put in his custodie. And albeit the messenger sent from the Emperour, thrtned to cut off his right hand, incase hee dliuered not the subscriptions foresaide, yet hee constantly refused to deliuer them: and the Emp. both admired and commended his con∣stancie: Theod. lib. 5 cap. 8. Barses bishop of Edessa in Mesopotamia, Eulogius and Pro∣togenes presbyters there, vnder the reigne of Valens were banished to Antinoe in Thebaida, whose trauailes GOD wonderfullie Idem, lib. 4. cap. 18. blssed, to the conuersion of many soules to the kingdome of GOD: Theodulus bishop of Trianopolis, Amphilochius bishop of
Iconium in Lycaonia, Pelagius Laodicenus, whose name is the more famous for his insolent fact: for he maried a young woman. & the first night after her mariage, hee perswaded her to preferre . lib. 4. cap. 13. Virginall chastitie, to matrimoniall copulation. Antiochus the brother sone of Eusebius Samosatenus could not abide the impo∣sition of the hands of an Arrian bishop. Leoius bishop of Mele∣tina in Arenia, who brunt the Monastrees, or rather as Theodore∣tus writes, the Dennes of theeues, whereinto the Heretiques Theod. lib. 4. cap. 11. called Massaliani had their abiding. Ephem Syrus a man borne in Nisibis, brought vp in the wildernesse, was counted a famous Writer in the Syriah language. The bookes shrowded vnder his name, are thought for the most part to be supposititious. Aeas, who liued in companie with Zenon Bishop of Maioma, neere vnto Gaza, is much reported of, because hee maried a young Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 27. woman, procreated three children with her, and in end left her, and entered into a Manastrie, forgetting his matrimoniall co∣uenant. Zebennius Bishop of Eleutheropolis in Phaenicia, to whom Sozomenus affirmeth, that by diuine reuelation the places were manifested, whereinto the bodies of the Prophets, Haback and Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 28. Micheas were buried: So superstitious are Ecclesiasticall Wri∣ters already become that the searching out of thinges nothing appertaining to eternall life are ascriued to diuine reuelations. The judicious reader will pardon mee that I write not in parti∣culare of the liues of al the fore-mentioned Bishops and Pa∣stors, because the nature of a short COMPEND cannot per∣mit it to bee done. Bishops and Doctors in Africke. IN Africke, ouer and besides the Bishops of Alexandria, was Didymus a Doctor of the schoole of Alexandria, who through Didymus. occasion of a dolour that fell into his eyes, became blind from Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 15. his very youth: Yet by continuall exercise of his minde, hee be∣came excellently learned in all Sciences: But aboue all thinges the exact knowledge of diuine SCRIPTURES made him a terrour to the Arrians. Manie doe write, that the verie last pe∣riod of time, whereinto Iulian the Apostate concluded his wret∣ched life, was reuealed to Didymus in a dreame, and that hee Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 2.
againe tolde it to Athanasius, who lurked secretly in Alexandria, during the time of the reigne of Iulian. Arnobius was an Oratour in Africke, afterward hee became a Christian, and craued to bee baptized. Christian Bishops lin∣guered Arnobius. to conferre the holy Sacrament to a man, who had bene a hater of Christian Religion of a long time. Yet hee freede himselfe from all suspition of Paganisme, by writing bookes wherein hee confuted the Idolatrie of the Pagans, and was ba∣ptized about the yeere of our LORD 330. Anent the suffe∣ring I, cn. of our LORD hee writes verie judiciously. That like as the beames of the Sunne, that shine vpon a tree, when the tree is cutted, the Sunne beames cannot bee cutted: Euen so, in Arb. i Psal. 129. the suffering of CHRIST, the diuine Nature suffered noe paine. Lactantius Firmianus, was the Disciple of Arnobius. In elo∣quence he was nothing inferior to his Maister: yet it is thought, Ierom a Paulinu. that hee impugned errours with greater dexteritie, then hee confirmed the Doctrine of the Trueth. Optatus Bishop of Meleuitanum in Africke, in the dayes of Valentinian and Valens, set his penne against the Donatistes, espe∣cially Optatus Meleuita∣nus. against Parmenianus, whose absurde assertion hee cleare∣lie refutes. First, whereas the Donatistes affirmed, that the CHURCH of CHRIST was onely to bee founde in a corner of Africke. Hee refutes it by Scripture, wherein it is written, Aske of mee, and I will giue thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and Psalme, 2. verse, 8. the endes of the world for thy possession: This place proues the CHURCH to bee Catholicke. Also whereas they saide, that Baptisme was not auaileable, except some of their sect had beene present at the administration thereof: hee answereth, That when GOD first created the Element of water, the pre∣sence of the Trinitie was powerfull in operation to create wa∣ter, albeit none of the Donatistes were then present: Euen so the Trinitie can worke effectually in Baptisme, albeit none of the Donatistes bee present: Yea, and that it was GOD (the au∣thor of Baptisme, and not the Minister) that did sanctifie, ac∣cording as it is written, Wash mee, and I shall bee whiter then the Psalme, 51 verse, 7 snowe, &c.
Bishops and Doctors of Europe. ACHOLIUS Bishop of Thessalonica, baptized the Empe∣rour Theodosius, after here returned from the slaughter of Acholius. Maximus. The Emp. fell sicke by the way, before hee came to Constantinople, and was desirous to be baptized: Neuerthelesse he would not suffer Acholius to baptize him, vntill he was assured Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6. that Acholius was not spotted with the Airian Heresie. After baptisme the Emperour recouered his health againe. Acholius Sozon. lib. 7 cap. 4. was brought vp in Monastries, like as Epiphanius, & many other worthie men were brought vp. Hilarius Bishop of Poitiers in FRANCE, liued vnder the Hilarius. reigne of Constantius: a man in Religion constant, in maners meeke and courteous. Hee was banished immediately after the Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 31. Councill of Millane, to Phrygia, as some suppose. Theodoretus writeth, that hee was banished to Thebaida: and relieued againe from banishment vnder Iulian. But it is more apparent, that hee Theod. lib. 3 cap. 4. remained in Phrygia, vntill the Councill of Seleucia: vnto which Councill he was brought from banishment, not by any speciall commandement from the Emp. but by a generall commande∣ment giuen to his deputie Leonas, to assemble together the Bi∣shops of the East. Vnder pretence of obeying this commande∣ment, Hilarius beeing banished in the East, was brought to the Hist magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. Councill of Seleucia: from Seleucia he went to Constantinople. The Emp. refused to heare him reason with the Arrians in the mat∣ters of Faith, but gaue him liberty to returne to his owne coun∣trey againe. Hee tooke great paines to purge the countrey of FRANCE from the poison of Arrian heresie: and he preuailed so farre, that Ierom compares him to Deucalion, who both sawe the flood of waters ouer-flowing Thessalia, and the abating of Ierom. in Chron. them also: Euen so Hilarius sawe both the growth and decay of Arrianisme in FRANCE. Hee liued sixe yeeres after his retur∣ning from banishment, and concluded his life vnder the reigne of Valentinian. Ambrose the sonne of Symmachus, was a man of noble pa∣rentage: Ambrosius vnder the Emp. Valentinian he was gouernour of Li∣guria. At this time Auxentius bishop of Millane (an Arrian) died.
Great sedition was in the towne, for the election of a newe bi∣shop, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 11. euery man contending to haue a bishop chosen of that faith which he himselfe best liked. Ambrose fearing the vndoing of the towne by this intestine contention, exhorted them to unitie and concord, with words and reasons so perswasiue, that the people with one consent cried out, they would be all of one mind, incase that Ambrose were appointed to bee their bishop. Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 30. The Emp. thought this inexpected consent of the people came from GOD, and he consented to the desire of the people. So was Ambrose ordained bishop of Millane. After the death of Va∣lentinian hee was grieuously troubled by Justina, the mother of Valentinian the second: for shee was infected with Arrianisme. Ambrose was sauoured by the people and would not betray the Theod. lib. 5 cap. 13. sheepe-folde of GOD to Wolues. The particulare description of the broile of Iustina may be read at length in the Epistle that Ambrose ad Marcellinam ep: fi. 33. August. Con. fess lib. 9. cap. 7. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 14. Ambrose writes to his sister Marcellina. The miracle wrought at the sepulchres of Protasius and Geruasius, mittigated somewhat the furie of Iustina. But the dolorous tidinges of the slaughter of Gratianus compelled Iustina to flie from Italie to Illyricum for safetie of her owne life, and her sonnes life. Hee sustained also great trouble vnder the two Tyrants Maximus and Eugenius: so that he was compelled in the time of Maximus, to flie to Aqui∣leia: Hst. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. and in the time of Eugenius to flie to Hetruria. He liued also vnder the reigne of Theodosius, whom hee sharpely reproued for the slaughter of the innocent people of Thessalonica: and died in Theodor. li. 5 cap. 18. the third yeere of the reigne of Honorius, after he had gouerned the Church of Millane 22. yeeres. Prudentius a man of Spaine, a Lawyer at some times, and a war∣riour Prudentius at other times in his young yeeres. In his old age he writ of diuine matters. Hee liued vnder the reigne of Valentinian the second, of Theodosius, and his sonnes. Hee set foorth his know∣ledge in bookes of Latine Poesie, albeit Greeke inscriptions be prefixed vnto them, such as , which intreateth of the Hist. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. fight betwixt the spirit & the flesh: , which intreateth of the workes to be done in the day time: , intreateth of Diuinitie and diuine thinges: , intreateth of Originall sinne, against Cerdon and Marcion, the Authors of two beginnings: , a booke conteining the praises of
victorious Martyres. In this booke is frequent inuocation of Saints expresse against holy Scripture: , conteining Psal. 50. veise, 58. Histories, both of old and new Testament. The verses, wherein hee argueth the Heresie of Manicheans, who attributed vnto CHRIST, not a true, but a phantasticall bodie made of aire, are verie judiciously conceiued: Restat ut aëriam pingas ab origine gentem. Aërios proceres, Leuim, udam, Simeonem, Aërium DAVID, magnorum corpora Regum Aëria, atque ipsam foecundae virginis alvum Aëre fallaci, nebulisque & nube tumentem. The Ecclesiasticall writers, whom I haue chiefely followed in this COMPEND, make no mention of him. Osius bishop of Coduba, was a Confessor, in the Persecution of Dioclesian and Maximianus. Hee was regarded by the Emp. Con∣stantine, Osius. for the markes of the rebuke of CHRIST. The Emp. employed him to stay the schisme in Aegypt, betwixt Alexander Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 7. and Arrius. Likewise hee sent him to the Bishops of the East, who differed in opinion from the Bishops of the West. Anent the keeping of Easter day, hee was present at the Councill of Nice, where hee damned the Heresie of Arrius: And at the Sozom. lib. 1 cap. 16. Councill of Sardica, hee absolued Athanasius, Paulus, &c. Nei∣ther was hee terrified with the minassing letters of Constantius, but answered couragiously, that Athanasius was an innocent man, and that the Emperour did not well to hearken to the ca∣lumnies of Ursatius and Valens, men who had by writ confessed to Julius bishop of Rome, that the accusations intended against Theod. lib. 2. cap. 19. Athanasius, were but forged calumnies. And this they did of their owne accord freely, and not compelled. In his decreaped yeeres (for hee liued an hundreth yeeres) some weakenesse was founde in him. At the Councill of Syrmium, hee was com∣pelled to bee present in that assemblie of Arrian Bishops, to whose wicked constitutions (fearing torture and banishment, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 31. from which hee was lately reduced) hee subscriued. Ierom was borne in a towne of Dalmatia, called Stridon, and Hierony∣mus. was instructed in the Rudimentes of Learning at Rome. From Rome hee went to FRANCE, of purpose to encrease his know∣ledge, and to diuerse other places, and hee returned againe to Ierom. epist. ad Gernt.
Rome, where hee acquainted himselfe with honourable women, such as Marcella, Sophronia, Principia, Paula, and Euftochium, to whom he expounded places of holy SCRIPTURE, for he was ad∣mitted presbyter: He was counted worthie to succeed to Dama∣sus B. of Rome: his giftes were enuied at Rome: therefore hee left Rome, and tooke his voiage towarde Palestina. By the way hee acquainted himselfe with Epiphanius b. of Cyprus, with Nazian. b. in Constantinople, with Didymus Doctor in the Schoole of Ale∣xandria, and sundrie other men of Note and Marke. In end he came to Iudea, and made choise of the place of the LORDES Natiuitie to bee the place of his death. At Bethlehem, Paula a Noble woman (who accompanied Ierom, and his brother Pau∣linianus, from Rome) vpon her owne charges builded foure Mo∣nastries. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. Cap. 10. Ierom guided one Monastrie, wherein were a number of Monkes. The other three, whereinto there was companies of holy Virgines, shee guided her selfe. Ierom was a man of sterne disposition, and more inclinable to a solitarie and Mon∣kish life, then to fellowship and societie. Neither Heliodorus in the Wildernesse, nor Ruffinus out of the Wildernesse, coulde August. epist. 17. keepe inuiolable friendship with him. The letters that passed betwixt August. and Ierom declare, that Ierom knewe not howe great a victorie it was in loue, in humilitie, and friendeship to ouer-come them, who seemed to contende against him. Ierom Ierom. Aug. epist. 13. 14. wanted not his owne grosse errours. Anent the creation hee thought, that Angels, Thrones, Dominations, were existant Ierom. anar. in tit. cap. 1. Ierom. lib. 18 Comment. in . Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. Cap. 10. before the worlde was created. In his bookes written against Iouinian, hee writeth not reuerently of Mariage, and hee dam∣neth the seconde Mariage. Hee ended his life about the twelfth yeere of the reigne of Honorius, in the yeere of his age 91. Ecclesiasticall Writers haue filled their Bookes with exces∣siue commendations of Heremites and Monkes: of whome (GOD willing) I shall write in a particulare TREATISE anent Monasticke life.
CHAP. III. Of Heretiques. OLDE Heresies before mentioned, such as the Heresies of the Novatians, Sabellians, and Manicheans, did more harme in this CENTURIE, then in the time where∣into they were first propagated, as appeareth by the bookes and Sermons of learned Fathers, seriously insisting to quench the flame of Hereticall doctrine, which was kindled be∣fore their time. In this CENTURIE the plurality of Heretiques did most mightily abound. Meletius a bishop in Thebaida, was deposed by Peter bishop of Alexandria, (who suffered martyrdome vn∣der Meletiani. Dioclesian) because hee was founde to haue sacrificed to Socrat. lib. 1 Cap. 6. Theodor. li. 1 cap. 8. August, de heres. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 9. idols. After his deposition, hee was seditious and factious, rai∣sing vp tumults in Thebaida, and practising tyrannie against the chaire of Alexandria: and his disciples were founde to haue communicated with the Arrians. The Councill of Nice suffered Meletius to enjoy the name of a bishop without power of or∣dination. In the yeere of our LORD 324. sprang vp Arrius, a presby∣ter Arriani. in Alexandria, who denied that the Sonne of GOD was be∣gotten of the substance of the FATHER, but that hee was a creature, and made of things not existant: and that there was a time, whereinto the Sonne was not. Alexander Bishop of Alexan∣dria, dealt with him, to reclaime him from his Hereticall opi∣nions: Theodor. lib. 1 cap. 4. but his trauell was spent in vaine. Therefore Alexander was compelled to use the last remedy, to depose and excommu∣nicate Arrius, with his complices, to wit, Achilles, Euzoivs, Aetha∣les, Lucius, Sarmata, Iulius, Menas, Arrius alter, & Helladius. This excommunication had allowance by the Bishops of Thebaida, Theod. ibid. Pentapolis, Lybia, Syria, Lycia, Pamphylia, Asia, Cappadocia, and ma∣nie other places. But Arrius, an head-strong Heretique, was in∣corrigible: Neither the letters of the good Emp. Constantine, nor the trauailes of Osius bishop of Corduba, coulde worke anie amendement in him. Hee laboured to fortifie himselfe in his Hereticall opinion, especially by the assistance of Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, a perilous and deceitfull man. Arrius was con∣demned
by the Councill of Nice, and was banished by the Em∣perour Constantine. Albeit hee was reduced againe from banish∣ment by the meanes of Constantia, the Emp. sister, and of an Ar∣rian presbyter, whom she commended to the Emp. her brother when she was concluding her life: Yet the LORD punished the Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 38. insolent pride of this Heretique, with a shamefull and vnquoth death, as hath beene already declared. This heresie was propa∣gated by Constantius, by Iustina, and her sonne Valentinian the se∣cond, by the Emp. Valens, and by the kings of Gothes & Vandalles. The principall defenders of this Heresie were Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, Menophantes, bishop of Ephesus, Theogonius bishop of Nice, Ursatius bishop of Sygdonia, and Valens bishop of Mursa, in vpper Panonia, Theonas b. in Marmarica, Secundus b. of Pto∣lemaida Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 18. in Aegypt, Maris b. of Chalcedon, Narcissus b. in Cilicia, Theodorus b. of Heraclea in Thracia, and Marcus b. of Irenopolis in Syria. In the number of most impudent Arrian bishops, was Ishyras, the chiefe accusr of Athanasius, to whom the Arrians gaue the wages of iniquity, and ordained him b. of Mareotis: The Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 25. ouer-throwing of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cuppe, the burning of the holy bookes, the slaughter of Arse∣nius, and many other accusations were all forged against Atha∣nasius by Ishyras, for hope of reward. Eulalius, Euphronius, Placi∣tus, Stephanus, Leontius, Spado, and Eudoxius, Bishops of Antiochia: all these were defenders of the Arrian Heresie, with manie others, of whom I will haue occasion to speake hereafter. Albeit Anomai were a branch of the stocke of the Arrians, Anomaei. yet they differed from other Arrians in this, that they abhorred from the word , which other Arrians embraced. The principall Authors of this Heresie were Acatius, Eunomius, and Aetius, whereof it came to passe, that some called them Actiani, others Eunomiani, and some Aetiani. Acatius in the Councill of Selucia manifested the Hypocrisie of his deceitfull speeches, because in his bookes he had called the Sonne of GOD , that is of like substance with the FATHER: he was demanded in what sence he had so written? he answered, that the Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 22. Sonne of GOD was like vnto the FATHER in will, but not in substance. Eunomius bishop of Cyzicus in Bithynia, was the first inuenter of this miserable Heresie of Anomaei, a man who
delited in multitude of wordes, as many Heretiques doe. Sozo∣men blames him for altering the custome of thrise dipping in Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 26. water in Baptisme. The people of Syzicus complained to the Emp. Constantius, of the bad and reprobate opinion of Eunomius. The Emp. was offended against Eudoxius bish. of Constantinople, who had placed him in Cyzicus. Herof it came to passe, that Eu∣doxius Theod. lb. 2. cap. 29. (who was of that same opinion himselfe, but durst not auow it) he sent secret aduertisement to Eunomius, to flie out of Cyzicus. Basilius Magnus in his fiue bookes written against Eu∣nomius, Basil. contr. Eunomium. Numb. 25. ver, 14. 15. as it were filled with the spirite of Phineas, who with one speare killed Ombri and Cosbi: euen so Basilius with one penne, confounded both Eunomius, & his Maister Aetius. This Aëtius was a Syrian, admitted to the office of a Deacon by Leontius Spado: he spake vnquoth thinges of the Trinitie, and was justlie called an Atheist. The Emp. Constantius, albeit hee loued other Arrians, yet hee disliked Anomei, and procured his deposition Theo. ib. 2. cap. 28. and excommunication, by the Bishops who came to Constanti∣nople from Ariminum and Seleucia. Eudoxius first Bishop of Ger∣manitia, in the confines of Cilicia, after Bishop of Antiochia, and last Bishop of Constantinople, a hunter for preheminence of pla∣ces. He was a fauourer of the sect of Arrians called Anomei, or : yet he had the heart of a beast, for neither would hee Theod. lib. 2 cap. 25. embrace the true Faith, neither durst hee defend the Iye where∣unto his heart was inclined. But in the Councill of Constantino∣ple, holden after the Councils of Ariminum & Seleucia, he trans∣ferred all the blame vpon Actius, whom the Emp. banished: so that it is a strange thing, that this errour shoulde haue had the name also from such a feeble patrone as Eudoxius was, to be cal∣led Theod. lib. 2. cap. 27. the errour of Eudoxiani. Macedonius, rather by the authoritie of the Emp. Constantius, Macedo∣niani, or . then by the consent of the people, was made bishop of Constan∣tinople. Paulus lawfull bishop of Constantinople, was banished to Cucusus, a towne of Armenia, and there hee was strangled by the Arrians, also 3150. of the people were slaine and troden vnder feete, at his violent entrie. This bloody Tyrant denyed the di∣uinitie of the holy Ghost. Hee was deposed by the Emperours procurement, because hee durst presume at his owne hande to transport the bones of the Emp. Constantine from one Church Srat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
to another. His followers were abhorred more then any other branch of the Arrian Heresie, for their inconstancie. They Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 12. sent Messengers to Liberius Bishop of Rome, and consented in al points to the Nicene Faith: but afterward, like vnto dogges, they returned to their vomite againe. Hee was damned, as a notable Heretique, by the seconde Generall Councill ga∣thered at Constantinople, by the Emperour Theodosius, anno 386. Hee died in a little Village neere to Constantinople, and Eudoxius obtained his place. Photinus Bishop of Sirmium in Illyria, was the Disciple of Mar∣cellus Photiniani. Bishop of Ancyra in Galatia: These two renewed both the Heresie of Sabellius and Samosatenus, and augmented the blasphe∣mous opinion of Samosatenus, with this addition, That the King∣dome of CHRIST was not euerlasting, but it had a beginning, Socrat lib. 2. cap. 19. when he was borne of the Virgine, and should haue an ende at the latter day. This Heresie hath the name from the disciple, & not from the maister, in regard that Marcellus continued not so obstinately in his errour, as did Phot. his disciple, but renoun∣ced his errour, & was receiued into the fellowship of the Church Hist. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 11. in the Councill of Sardica: but Photinus was deposed at the Council of Sirmium, and banished by the Em. Constantius. Neuer∣thelesse, after his deposition & banishment, he continued obsti∣nately in his errour, & wrote bookes both in Latine & Greeke, in defence of his Heresie: whereby his name became infamous, and he was counted the author of this Heresie. Audaus was a man of Syria, vnder the reigne of Valentinian, and his brother Valens: Hee published an errour, That GOD Audaei, or Anthopo∣morphitae. was like vnto the similitude of a mans bodie. This errour hee conceiued through wrong vnderstāding of the words of Scrip∣ture, wherein it is saide, Let vs make man in our owne Image, ac∣cording to our likenesse. With this errour many vnlearned Aegy∣ptian Genes. 1. verse, 21. Monkes were intangled. They pretended great innocen∣cie and chastitie in thier liues, and separated themselues from the societie of the Church, couering their impietie with this pretext, that they saw usurers and vncleane persons tolera∣ted Theod. com∣pend. heresium in the Church. About this time, saith Theodoretus, that is, in the dayes of Va∣lentinianus and Valens, sprang vp the Heresie of Messaliani. Al∣beit Messaliani.
this name bee vnquoth, yet the Greeke names giuen vnto this Heresie are more significatiue: they were called , be∣cuse they counted prayer the onely exercise necessary to the children of GOD, euen as if a man could talke with GOD by prayer, before he hath first heard GOD talking with him by the preaching of the Word. Likewise they were called , that is, men rauished in the spirite, after long continuance in prayer. When they were transported, and out of their wits, then they supposed, that the Theodor lib. 4 p. 11. holy spirit was sensibly infused into them, whereby their bodies were made free of all perturbations, and their soules were auer∣ted from all inclination to euill, in such sort, that they had no need of fasting to subdue their bodies, nor of Doctrine to re∣straine the disordered affections of their soules. This pestilent Heresie was ouerspred in many places: but it was mightily sup∣pressed by Letoius B. of Meletina, Amphilochius B. of Iconium in Lycaonia, and Flaviaenus B. of Antiochia, who with great dexteri∣tie drew out a Confession out of the mouth of Adelphius, an Theod. ibid. aged man, and a propagator of this Heresie in Edessa. This He∣resie, albeit it had many patrones, such as Dadoes, Sabas, Adl∣phius, Hermas, Simeones, yet from none of them it receiued the name, but rather from the actions and passions whereunto they inclined. Apollinaris bishop of Laodicea in Syria, gloried in the quicke∣nesse of his ingine, and delited to make contradiction to euery Appollina∣ristae, thing that any man coulde speake: and so it came to passe (as Ruffinus writeth) Heresim ex contentione generauit, that is to say, Through contention he procreated an Heresie: affirming that Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 20. in the dispensation of CHRISTES Incarnation, hee assumed the body of a man onely, but not the soule of a man, because his diuinitie supplied the place of his soule. And when hee was argued by euident places of SCRIPTURE, that CHRIST in his humane nature was a perfect man, hauing not onely a bo∣dy, but also the soule of a man: as when he said, His soule was hea∣uie vnto the death: lest he should haue seemed to bee vtterly con∣uinced Marke, 14 verse, 34. and ouercome: hee confessed that CHRISTES bodie was quickned with a natural life: but the diuinitie of CHRIST was in place of a reasonable soule. This Heresie was damned
in Councils conueened at Rome, Alexandria, and Constantinople. He augmented the schisme at Antiochia, where there had bene alreadie three factions, to wit, Eustatiani, Meletiani, and Paulinia∣ni. Now Apollinaris dwelling in Laodicea a towne of Syria, neere Theod. lib. 5. cap. 3. approaching to Antiochia: hee was the author of the fourth fa∣ction. In the dayes of Iulian he compiled histories of Scripture, in Greeke Poesie. In the dayes of Valentinian and Gratian, he de∣fended his Heresie. In the dayes of the Emp. Theodosius he con∣cluded Ierom. in Catal. Theod. lib. 5 cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 25. his life. His sonne in name, learning, and bad use of ex∣cellent gifts, was like vnto his father. Vitalius presbyter in Antio∣chia was a serious defender of the Heresie of Apollinaris, in so much, that the followers of Apollinaris were called Vitaliani. Donatus was a Bishop in Numidia, who contended with vn∣supportable hatred against Cecilianus B. of Carthage, challenging him, that hee had receiued ordination from Foelix Altungensis, August. epist. 152 who was proditor: that is, who in time of persecution had deli∣uered the booke of holy Scripture to bee brunt: or, as others say, because hee admitted to an Ecclesiasticall office, a Deacon, who had committed the like faule. The cause of Cecilianus was oftagitat before the Councill of Carthage, before Miltiades B, of Rome, before the Councill of Arles, and by the Emp. Coustantine: but the Donatistes at all times succumbed in probation. There∣fore they were enraged, because they coulde not accomplish their wicked designes against Cecilianus: and they fell from the unitie of the Church. Inucterate schismes oft times turne to Heresies. So the Donatistes in end were defenders of Hereticall opinions: namely, that the Catholicke Church was no where els to be found, but onely in that corner of Africke, whereinto they themselues dwelt: and that Baptisine was not effectuall, except it had beene ministred by one of their societie. Of all the branches of this Heresie, Circumcelliones was the most reprobate branch: a people cruell and sauage, not onely against others, but also against themselues, throwing themselues headlonges August. d hrres. ad qued vult D. ur. from high places, or casting themselues in fire and water: and this sort of death they countd Maryrdome. The diuersitie of names wherewith this Heresie was pointed out, clearely de∣clares. that the Donatistes wanted not a great number of fauou∣rers: for they were called Parmeniani, Rogatistae, Cirtenses, and
Maximianistae. Against this Heresie, and the Heresie of the Pe∣lagians, August. B. of Hippo contended with mightie grace, as likewise against the Heresie of the Manicheans, whereinto he had beene nursed himselfe. Collyridiani were a sort of superstitious people, who worship∣ped the Virgine Marie, the mother of our LORD, with diuine Collyri∣diani. adoration, and with baking little pasties (which in the Greeke language are called ) which they offered to the Virgine Marie, as to the Queene of Heauen. Epiphanius counts them Heretiques, because the Virgine Marie, albeit shee bee a blessed Epipban. con∣tra hereses. woman, yet is shee not GOD. Manie late Heresies are nothing els, but a renewing of old & decayed Heresies. Such was the Heresie of Priscillianus, a man Priscillia∣nistae. of Noble birth in Spaine, verie eloquent, rich, temperate, with great show of humilitie, who easilie insinuated himselfe in the fauour of the people. In his youth he was inclined to Magical Arts, and renewed the filthie Heresie of Gnostici, who disallowed Hist. magd. Cent. 4 cap. 11. Marriage, and commended fornication. Some bishops of Spaine were entangled with this Heresie: such as Iustantius, Salvianus, and Helpidius, whom Adygimus Bishop of Corduba damned in a Councill gathered at Caesar-augusta. This was done in the dayes of the Emp. Gratianus and Valentinian. The great Citie of refuge to Heretiques, was to addresse themselues to the B. of Rome, and to leane vnder his shadow: But Damasus, who was bishop of Rome at this time, would not admit these Heretiques to his pre∣sence: Neither would Ambrose B. of Millane, to whom they ad dressed next, in any wise accept of them: when al other meanes failed them, last of al with buddes and bribes they sollicited the Emp. cubiculers, & were sent backe againe to enjoy their owne places. Neuerthelesse, GOD suffered not Priscillianus to escape punishmēt, for he was conuict of sorcery, & was punished to the death, after the death of Valentinian the seconde, whether by Maximus an usurper of the Emperiall Soueranitie, or by Theodo∣sius, I am not certaine. Lucifer was bishop of Calaris in Sardinia. He was present at the Luciferiani Councill of Millan, and was banished by Constantius, because hee would not consent to the deposition of Athanasius. Hee was re∣duced from banishment by the Em. Iulian. He visited Antiochia, Sozom. lib 5. cap. 13.
a towne miferably distracted with Schismes, and by ordaining Paulinus B. of Antiochia, hee rather augmented then paired the scisme: he perceiued that this his fact was disproued by Euseb. b. of Vercellis, & many others, therefore he & his followers, did not cōmunicate with such as disproued the ordination of Paulinus. This seemes rather to be rekoned in the catalogue of schismes, then of heresies: & Theod. disprouing Lucifer, saith, that he made Theod. com∣pend. here∣sium. faith to be , but he saith not , that is, a weapon of contentions, but not a weapon of heresie. These who supposed, that after the Natiuitie of the LORD Antidico∣marianitae. the Virgine Marie companied with her husband Ioseph, and did beare childrē to him, were called Antidicomarianitae. In this opi∣nion was Helvidius, a man more curious then wise. The opinion August. d heres. of the Fathers of the Church, not repugnant to Scripture, was this, That like as no man did lie in the sepulchre wherein Christ was buried before him, Euen so in the wombe wherein hee was conceiued, no man was cōceiued after him: so the Fathers tooke the wordes of the Apostolicke symbole, , as i it had bene said, , that is, born of Mary a perpetual Virgine. In holy scriptures by the brethren of our LORD is meaned the kinsmen of the LORD according to the flesh, to which exposition the consent of Ancient & Neo∣tericke writers for the most part aggreeth. Augustine cites out of Philaster a sort of Heretiques, called Metangis. monitae. Metangismonitae, whose heresie sounded to this, That the SONNE is in the FATHER, according to the similitude of a little vessell comprehended within the compasse of a greater vessell:  in the Greeke Language signifieth a vessell, and  si∣gnifieth the entering of one vessel within another, which in our language cānot be expressed by one word, as it is in the Greeke. From Seleucus and Hermias this heresie had the name: where Seleuciani or Hermi∣ani. they dwelt, or in what Emperours dayes this Heresie was pro∣pagated, August. maketh no mention: their opinions were most abominable: namely, that the Masse, whereof GOD created the elements, was coeternall with him: and that the Angels, & not GOD, created the soules of men: that CHRIST in his ascension vnclothed himselfe of the flesh of man, and left it in the globe of the Sunne. They receiued not baptisme by water. They
denied the resurrection of the dead, supposing that by new ge∣nerations, one succeeding to another, that is performed which in Scripture is written concerning the resurrection. The rest of the Heresies of this age, were all obscure, and had few followers, such as Proclianitae, who denied that CHRIST was come in the flesh: Patriciani, who affirmed, that the bodie Proclianitae Patriciani. Ascitae. of man was formed by the Deuil, & not by GOD: Ascitae, who carried about with them newe vessels, to represent, that they were vessels filled with the new wine of the Gospell: Pataloryn∣chitae, Patalorin∣chitae, or . Aquarii. foolish men, who counted it religion, to stop their breath with their fingers, and to vtter no intelligible speach: Aquarii, who in stead of wine receiued water in the holy Sacrament. The beginning of this errour seemes to haue beene in the dayes of Cyprian. Coluthiani denied, that any euill, either of sinne or pu∣nishment, Coluthia∣ni. Flosiani. came of GOD. Floriani, who by the contrarie af∣firmed, that GOD created creatures in an euill estate. The 8. Heresies which Philaster commemorates without any name, either taken from the Author, or from the heresie it selfe, Augu∣stine scarcely will reacken them into the roll of Heresies. CHAP. IIII. Of Councils. COUNCILS may bee diuided in Generall, Nationall, or Prouinciall, and particulare Councils. Generall were called Oecomenik Councils ( in the Greeke language signifies the World) because from all quarters of the World whereinto CHRIST was preached commissioners were sent to these Councils, and they were ga∣thered by the authoritie of the Emperour. Nationall or pro∣vinciall Councils were such as were gathered by the authoritie of the Emperour in one nation with asfistance of other neere approaching nations for suppressing of Heresies, desyding of questions, pacifying of schismes, and appointing Canons and constitutions for decent order to be keeped in the Church. The
third sort of Councils were particular Councils, by Bullinger called , or . Such as the Councils of Gan∣gra, Neocaesaria, & many others, gathered vsuallie by Patriarchs, and Bishops in a corner of a countrie, but for the like causes as nationall Councils were assembled. Let no man expect a recital of particular Councils, except at such times as some matter of great moment enforceth me to speake of them. Ancyra is a towne of Galatia. In this towne were assembled The Coun cill of An∣cyra. Tom. 1. Concil. Bishops of diuerse prouinces about the yeere of our Lord 308. as is supposed. The principal cause of their meeting was to con∣stitute a forme of Ecclesiasticall discipline, according to which, they, who either willingly or vnwillingly had sacrificed to idols in time of persecution, should bee receiued into the bosome of the Church againe, when they were found penitent. There were many rankes of persons, who had defiled themselues with Heathnicke Idolatrie: such as Libellatici, Thurificati, Sacrificati, & Proditores. The Council of Anyra tooke order chiefely with those who were called Thurificati and Sacrificati, that is, with them, who either had casten vp incense vpon Idolatrous Altars, or els had eaten of meates sacrificed to Idoles: to whom it was injoyned to testifie the r repentance, a long time before they were receiued to the communion of GODS people, some one yeere, some two yeeres, others three or foure yeeres, some fiue or sixe yeeres, and aboue, according to the heauinesse of their transgression. In this Councill it was ordained, that Deacons, who in time of their ordination did protest, that they had not the gift of continencie, but were disposed to marry, if they mar∣ried, they shoulde remaine in their Ministrie: but they who in time of imposition of hands by their silence had professed con∣tinencie, if afterwarde they married, they shoulde bee remoued from their Ministrie. Also it was ordained, that Chorepiscopi (these were Countrey Bishops, in the Latine language called Vicarit-Episcoporum) These, I say, were commanded to absteine Canon. 13 from ordination of Elders and Deacons, and from usurping of domination ouer the preaching Elders, who were in Cities. Likewise it was ordained, that whosoeuer did absteine from Canon. 14 eating of flesh, as from a creature in itselfe vncleane, he should be depriued of his dignity. This Council was subscribed by 18. Bis∣shops. Tom. 1. Concil.
In the yeere of our LORD 330. and in the 20. yeere of the reigne of Constantine, as Eusbius reckoneth (others referre it to The gene∣rall coun∣cil of Nice. the 333. yeere of our LORD, for there is great diuersitie in this counting) The Councill of Nice in Bithynia was gathered not by Silvester, nor by Iulius, but by the authoritie of the Em∣perour. The name of the towne answered to the successe of the Eseb. de vita Con∣stt. lib. 3. Councill, for  in the Greeke language signifieth victory: and when the veritie encountered with the lie in this Councill, the veritie preuailed and got the victorie. The matter entreated in the Councill, was concerning the opinion of Arrius a presby∣ter in Alexandria, who denied that the SONNE of GOD was consubstantiall with the FATHER, but affirmed there was a time whereinto the SONNE was not, and that hee was crea∣ted of thinges not existant. This opinion was so vnquoth and abominable to the Fathers conueened in the Councill of Nice, that they vtterly damned and anathematized the opinion of Arrius. Onely 17. Bishops adhered to his blasphemous opi∣nion. The Emp. liked well the determination of the Councill, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 5. and threatned to punish them with banishment, who did refuse to subscribe the determination of the Councill: for they had concluded, that the SONNE of GOD was , that is, consubstantiall with the FATHER. Of the number of 17. who were fauourers of Arrius, onely two, to wit, Secundus a Bishop of Ptolemaida in Aegypt, and Theonas bishop of Marmarica, adhe∣red Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 16. to Arrius vntill the end of the Councill, with a fewe moe, whom the Fathers conueened at Nice, deliuered vnto Sathan, & Theod lib. 1. Cap. 7. the Emp. banished them: the rest for feare of punishment sub∣scribed to the deposition of Arrius with their handes, but not Socr lib. 1. cap. 14. with their hearts: such as Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, Theogonius of Nice, Menophantus of Ephesus, Patrophilus of Scythopolis, Narcissus of Neronias, otherwise called Irenopolis of Cilicia: These (I say) and some others, subscribed the summe of Faith set downe by the Nicene Councill, and the deposition of Arrius. Anent the controuersie of keeping the festiuitie of Easter day, a conclusion was taken, that it shoulde bee kept vpon the LORDES day, and not vpon the 14. day of the first moneth of Exod. 12. verse, 2. the Iewes called Nisan. And this was done for keeping of unitie and peace in the Church: for it was expedient, that that thing, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6.
which was uniuersally done, should also be uniformely done, for auoiding of schismes in the Church. Neuerthelesse Socrates granteth, that it is but an ancient custome, not authorized by any Apostolicke commandement. Socrt. lib. 5. cap. 22. Anent Mariage many were in the opinion, that Bishops, El∣ders, and Deacons, who were married before their ordination, shoulde in time to come absteine from the companie of their wiues. But Paphnutius a B. in a towne of Thebaida, a chaste man, who neuer companied with a woman, entreated the Councill, that they should absteine from making such an ordinance, be∣cause Socra. lib. 1. cap. 11. Marriage is honourable, and the cohabitation of a man with his married wife, is chastity. Likewise it was a difficil mat∣ter to be performed, and it opened a doore to vnchaste liuing. Yet Paphnutius inclined too much to this opinion, That Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who were vnmarried, should absteine from Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 31. Marriage. The Councill woulde make no constitution anent such matters, but remitted marriage as a thing indifferent to euery mans free arbitriment. The Canons of the Nicene Councill pertaining to matters of discipline, in number 22. (reade them in the history of Ruffin.) Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6. The appointing of three Patriarches, one in Rome, another in Alexandria, the thirde in Antiochia, with power to conuocate within their owne boundes particulare Councils, for timous suppressing of Heretiques: It was like vnto a faire morning, presenting vnto the worlde the countenance of a faire day, but at Euen, the face of the Heauen is couered with blacke cloudes, troubling the earth with the tempest of changed we∣ther. Euen so, these Patriarches, for the moste part, became in end the chiefe propagators of notable Heresies, as the historie following, GOD willing shall declare. The Nationall Councill of Tyrus was gathered by the com∣mandement of the Emp. Constantine, in the 30. yeere of his reigne. The coun∣cill of Ty∣rus. Euseb. lib. 4. de vita Con∣stant. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 23. Eusebius by ouer-passing with silence a due commemoration of the malice & falsehood of the Arrians against Athanasius, giueth occasion to Socrates to suspect, that Eusebius Pamphili was not a sounde follower of the Nicene Councill. To this Nationall Councill conueened threescore Bishops, from AEGYPT, LY∣RIA, ASIA, and EUROPE. The moste part of them were
Arrians, who had solde themselues to iniquity, of purpose, with faise accusations to oppresse the innocent seruant of CHRIST Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 27. Athanasius. The crims laide vnto his charge, were fornication, the slughter of Arsenius, and cutting off of his hand, the ouer∣throwing Theodor. lib. 1 cap. 29. of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cup, and the burning of the holy volumes. No assembly was so full of partialitic, confusion clamour, and vnrighteous dealing, as this assembly at Tyrus: in so much that Paphnutius a B. in Thebaida, arose, and left the Councill of vngodly men, and drew with him Maximus B. of Hierusalem, fearing lest his simplicitie shoulde haue beene circumueened by the subtiltie of deceitfull Arrians. How Athanasius fled to the Emp. and declared the vnrigh∣teous proceedings of the Councill of Tyrus, it hath beene decla∣red already. In this assembly Potamion B. of Heraclia, a man full of spirituall libertie finding Eusebius Pamphili sitting as a Iudge, and Athanasius standing, outbraided Eusebius, as a man who in the persecution of Dioclesian was enclosed in that same prison Hist. Magd. Cent 4. Cap. 10. with himselfe: but Eusebius escaped out of prison without the marks of the rebuke of CHRIST, which Potamian and other faithfull Confessors could not get done. In like maner, Atha∣nasius refused to compeare in Caesarea Palestinae, where Eusebius Theod lib. 1. cap. 27. was Bishop, as a place suspect for fauour carried to Arrians. All these things brought the name of Euseb. Pamphili in some disli∣king. The issue of the Councill of Tyrus was this: the Arrians in his absence deposed him, and amongst the rest Arsenius was one of them, who subscribed the deposition of Athanasius with that same hade that the Arrians had alleadged was cut off by Socrat. lib. 1 Cap. 32. Athanasius: so effronted are Heretiques, defenders of a false & lying doctrine. The Emp. Constantine commanded the bishops assembled at Tyrus, to addresse to Constantinople: but when they came thither, they durst make no mention of the fornication of Athanasius, of the hande of Arsenius, of the Table, Cuppe, and bookes aboue mentioned: but they forged newe accusations Theod. li. 1. cap. 30. Theod. lib. 1 cap. 35. against him, whereunto the Emp. gaue too hastie credite, and banished Athanasius to Triere. Immediately after the Councill of Tyrus many bishops were assembled at Hierusalem, for the de∣dication of the Temple, which the Emp. Constantine had builded Euse. lib. 4. de. vita Constant. at the place of the LORDS sepulchre.
Anent the Councill of Antiochia, wherein the Arrians depo∣sed Eustatius, and the Councill of Arles, wherein Cecilianus was absolued from the accusation of the Donatists, no further dis∣course is needefull then is conteined in the historie of the liues of these two Bishops. Gangra is a towne of Paphlagonia. In this towne were assem∣bled certaine Fathers, to the number of 16. about the yeere of The Coun cil of Gan∣gra. our LORD 324. The occasion of their meeting was the Here∣tique Eustatius, who admiring the Monasticke life, or (as others affirme) fauouring the Heresie of Encratitae, and the Manicheans, he spake against Marriage, against eating of flsh, & he damned the publicke Congregations of GODS people in Temples: and said, a man could not be saued, except he forsooke all his posss∣sions, Tom. . Concil. and renounced the wolde after the forme of monkish doing. These opinions were damned in the Councill of Gan∣gra. The subscriptions of the Fathers of this Councill after their Canons, are worthie to be remarked. These things (say they) haue we subscribed, not vituperating them, who according to Scripture chooseth vnto themselues an holy purpose of a continent life: but them onely, who abuseth the purpose of their minde to pride, extolling themselues against the simpler sort: Yea, and damne and cut off all those, who contrary to Scripture and Ecclsiasticall rules, bring in new Commandements. But we admire humble Virginity, and wee approue continencie that is vndertaken with chastity and Religion: And wee embrace the renounciation of seculare businesse, with humilitie: And we ho∣nour the chast band of Mariage: And we despise not riches joi∣ned with righteousnesse, and good workes: And we commend a simple and couse apparrell, used for couering the body with∣out Hypocrisie. Likewise wee reject loos and dissolute gr∣ments: And we honour the houses of GOD, and assemblies that are in them, as holy and profitable, Not debarring men from exercises of pietie in their owne priuate houses. But places builded in the name of the LORD, wee honour, and Conge∣gations assembled in the same places for the common utilitie we approue: And good workes, which are done to poore bre∣thren, euen aboue mens habilitie, according to the Ecclesiasti∣call traditions, we blesse them: And we wish all things to be ce∣lebrated
in the Church, according to holy Scriptures, and the ordinances of the Apostles. In the time of the reigne of Constantine in Eliberis, a towne of Spaine, were assembled 19. Bishops, and of preaching Elders 36. The coun∣cil of Eli∣beris. The ende of their meeting was to reforme horrible abuses, both in Religion and maners, which in time of the tenne Per∣secutions had preuailed in Spaine: And nowe in time of peace such enormities and festered maners colde hardly bee amen∣ded. Manie Ecclesiasticall Canons were made in this Synode, to the number of 81. Whereof wee shall rehearse but a fewe, and such as clearely pointeth out the principall ende of their meeting. They ordained, that Heathnicke sacrificing Priests (called Canon 4. of olde Flamines) if they were content to absteine from sacri∣ficing to Idoles, and to learne the groundes of Christian Rli∣gion, after three yeeres repentance, they shoulde bee admitted to baptisme. Likewise they ordained, that Christian Virgines shoulde not Canon 15. bee giuen in marriage to Pagans, lest in the floue of their youth they should bee entangled with spirituall whoredome. In like maner, that Bishops should receiue no rewarde from Canon 2. men that did not communicate with the Church. They ordained, that nothing that is worshipped, shoulde be Canon 36. pictured on the wall. And that in priuate houses no Idoles should be founde: And incase the maisters of houses were afraide of the violence of Canon 41. their sruantes, at least, they should keepe themselues pure and cleane: which if they did not, they shoulde bee counted stran∣gers from the fellowship of the Church. And that if any man happen to bee slaine, in the action of Canon 60. breaking downe images, his name shall not bee enrolled in the catalogue of Martyres, because it is not written in the history of the Gospell, that the Apostles used any such forme of refor∣mation: whereby they sigisie, that by wholsome doctrine ima∣ges should be castē out of the hearts of mē, rather then broken with popular violence & with the tumultuary attempts of pri∣uate men. Any judicious man may perceiue by these Canons both the time when, and the cause wherefore this Council was assembled.
They who count the first Councill of Carthage, to bee that Councill whereinto Cyprian, with aduise of many other bishops The first Councill of Car∣thage. Tom. 1. Concill. of Numidia, Lybia, and other partes of Africke, ordained men who were baptized by Heretiques, to bee rebaptized againe: they commit a great ouer-sight to recken the first Councill of Carthage to bee holden vnder the reigne of Constantine, where∣as it is certainely knowne, that Cyprian was martyred, in the dayes of Valeriane the eight persecuting Emperour. But the first Hi. magd. Cont. 4. cap. 9. Councill of Carthage, that was kept in CONSTANTINES dayes, was that Councill whereinto the Donatistes condemned Caecilanus Bishop of Carthage, whose innocencie afterwarde was tryed by manie Iudges. In it there was no matter of great importance concluded, and therefore I ouer-passe it with few wordes, as an assemblie of litle account. All these Coun∣cils aboue mentioned were assembled in the dayes of CON∣STANTINE the Great. Now followeth Councils gathe∣red in the dayes of his sonnes. The cause pretended for the gathering of the Councill of At ochi, in the dayes of Constantius the sonne of Constantine, The first Council of Antiochia holden by Arrians vn∣der the reigne of Constan∣tius Socra. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 5. Hist. Magd. Centur. 4. cap. 9. was the dedication of the Church of Antiochia: which albeit Cnstantine had builded, yet fiue yeeres after his death, and in the seuenteenth yeere after the foundation of this Temple was laide, CONSTANTIUS his sonne finished, and perfected the worke. And vnder pretence of dedication of this Tem∣ple (as saide is) this assemblie of Antiochia was gathered, ANNO 344. but indeede of purpose to supplant the true Faith. To this Assemblie resorted manie Bishops, to the num∣ber of 90. But Maximus Bishop of HIERUSALEM, and u∣lius Bishp of Rome, neither came they to the Councill, neither sent they any meenger in their name, fearing as the trueth was, that they were gathered for euill, and ot for good. At this time Placitus, the sccessour of Euphronius, gourned Antiochia. Now when they were met together, many accustions were heaped vp against Athanasius: First, that hee had accepted his place againe, without aduise of other Bishops: Secondlie, because at the time of his rturning backe againe to ALEX∣ANDRIA, there fell out great commotion amongst the people, and some were slaine, others were contumeliouslie
beaten, and violently drawne before justice seates. Mention also was made of the decrete of the Councill of Tyrus, against Athanasius. It was an easie matter for the Arrians to imprint into the vlcerate mind of Constantius, an hatred against Athana∣sius. In this Councill they set downe diuers summes of Faith: Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 5. first secretly couting the venome of their Heresi, but after∣ward, as it were repenting, they manifested themselues more clearly in their owne colours. After this Councill followed ter∣rible earth-quakes in the East, wherewith many townes were shaken, especially the towne of Antiochia, with continuall earth∣quakes was shaken for the space of a whole yeere. The princi∣pall Hst. mag. Cent. 4, cap. 9 designe of the Councill was to eject Athanasius out of his chaire, and to alter the summe of Faith set downe in the Nicen Councill: as euidently appeared, by sending of Syrianus to de∣stroy Athanasius, and to place Gregorius in his roome: but Atha∣nasius escaped the danger by the great prouidence of GOD, and fled to Iulius Bishop of Rome: and the Arrians displaced againe Gregorius, and appointed Georgius a man of Cappadocia, and moe fit for their purpose, to bee bishop of Alexandria. The fauour that Iulius bishop of Rome shewed to Athaasius Other two Councils holden in Antiochia by the Ar∣riaus. b. of Alexandria, Paulus b. of Constantinople, Asclepas b. of Gaz, and Lucius b. of Adrionopolis, was the cause mouing the Arri to haue so frequent meetings in Antiochia: Very sharpe ltters passed betwixt Iulius and the Orientall bishops: Iulius blamed them, because they had both rashly and vnrighteously deposed the fore-named bishops. They on the other part expostulated with Iulius, because he had receiued to his fllowship men depo∣sed Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15. by them, whereas none of the East Church had admitted Novatus to their communion, whom the bisop of Rome had ex∣communicated. After the issue of three yeere, another Councill was conuee∣ned in Antiochia, about the yeere of our LORD 348. whereinto Scrat lib. 2. cap. 19. the Arrians set foorth a newe summe of their Faith in very am∣ple and prolixe maner, and different from all other formes st downe before: the copie whereof they sent to the bishops of Hist. magd. Italie by Eudoxius b. of Germanicia, & Martyrius, and Macedo∣nius: but the bishops of Italie woulde not receiue it, contenting themselues with the summe of Faith set downe in the Nicen Councill.
In the yere of our LORD 351. by the commandement of Constantius, and his brother Constans, a great Nationall Coun∣cill The coun∣cil of Sar∣dica. was gathered in Sardica, a towne of Illyricum, of olde Dcia. Many Bishops of the West, to the number of three hundreth, resorted to this assemblie, but from the East onely 76. They who Socat. lib. 2. cap. 20. came from the Easterne parts, would not vouchsafe to bee pre∣sent in the Councill, except Protogenes b. of Saraica, and Osius b. of Corduba, had separated from their fellowship Paulus b. of Con∣stantinople, and Athanasius b. of Alexandria. But the cause of their absenting themselues from the Councill indeed, was this (as Theo. lib. 2. cap. 8. Theodoretus prudently recordeth) because the forgers of false accusations against the men of GOD, whose cause was appoin∣ted to be judged in this Councill, they durst not abide the trial of honest judges, and men of vnsuspect credite. The Councill finding that the Arrians conuicted in conscience, durst not com∣peare to accuse Paulus and Athanasius (whom notwithstanding they had deposed in the Councils of Tyrus and Antiochia) pro∣ceed to the triall of their cause: and findth all the accusations of the Arrians aginst Paulus, Athanasius, Asclepas, and the rest, to be but a masse of forged calumnies and lies: Arsenius was found to bee aliue, whom the Arrians alleadged Athanasius had slaine: As concerning the ouer-throwing of the holy Table, and brea∣king of the holy Cuppe, by Macarius (whome Athanasius had em∣ployed, and therefore the blame was laide vpon him) it was found to be a notable lie: because when Macarius entered into the Church of Mareota (where this fact was alledged to bee done)  were present in the Church And such kinde of persons were not permitted to be present at the celebration Theod. ibid. of diine mysteries. Ishyras also, who was the principall forger of all the fore-mentioned calumnies, was found to haue bene tyed to the bedde by infirmitie, at that time, when Macarius was al∣ledged to haue done these thinges. And finally, it was founde, that shyras had receiued a Bishopricke, as the wages of iniquity from the Arrans, before he had bene admitted presbyter in any Churh. Also the supplicant billes of Paulus, Asclepas, Marcel∣lus. &c were read tryed, and examined, and they were all found honest & vpright men, and they were all recommended by the letters of the Councill of ardica, to their owne flocke.
On the other part, the Bishops, whom the Arrians had intru∣ded in the places of the fore-mentioned brethren, they depo∣sed them, and abhorred their memorie: such as Gregorius in Ale∣xandria, Basilius in Ancyra, and Quintianus in Gaza: of whom they decearned, that they were not worthy of the name of common Christians, let be to be called bishops: commanding all people, to forsake their fellowship, and neither to send letters to them, . ibid. nor to receiue letters from them. The like sentence they pro∣nounced against Theodorus of Hraclea, Narcissus of Neronias, Aca∣cius of Caesarea Palestinae, Stephanus of Antiochia, Ursatius of Sigidun in Mysia, Valens of Myrsain Pannomia, Menophantus of Ephesus, and Georgius of Laodicea, principall patrons of the Arrian Heresie. The Arrians on the other part assembled themselues in Philip∣popolis, a towne of Thracia, and there they damned of new againe Paulus and Athanasius. Likewise they damned Iulius B. of Ro, Osius b. of Corduba, Protogenes b of Sardica, Maximinus b. of Trie, Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 11. & 12 and many others, whom they cursed also, because they had ad∣mitted to their fellowship those Bishops whom they had depo∣sed. Sozomens is in that opinion, that the Councill of Philippo∣polis preceeded the Councill of Sardica. From 35. Prouinces did Bishops resort vnto the Councill of Sardica. From this time forward, there was added diuersitie of affection, vnto diuersitie Athanas. pist. ad sli∣tar. vitam aentes. Thd. lib. 2 cap. 8. of opinion: and these who dwlt in the East, did not communi∣cate with them who dwelt in the West. Some Arrian Bishops dwelt in the West, such as Auxentius b. of Millan, and Ursatius & Valens: But by the vigilant trauels of the b. of Rome, and other godly Bishops of the West, it came to passe, that these Smina∣ries of errours did not preuaile much in the Wsterne partes. This is that Councill, whereinto Iulius B. of Rome, for his good carriage & good deseruings, was appointed to be Iudge of Ap∣pellations, when the like case fell out, that righteous men were Canon, 4. oppressed with the vnrighteous deling of Heretiques. But re∣member, that this is a constitution of the Councill of Sardica, and not of the Nicene Councill: And this was a priueledge both persona'l and temporall, for extraordinary causes conferred to Iulius: but not to bee extended to all his successors, nor yet to continue at all times. In the yeere of our LORD 356, and fiue yeeres after the The Coun cill of Sir∣mium.
Councill of Sardica, by the commandement of the Emp. Con∣stantius a Councill was gathered in Sirmium, a towne of Illyria, (Bullinger calleth it a towne of Pannoia) Photinus b of Sirmium had renewed the Heresies of Sabellius and Samosatenus. A dispu∣tation Bullinger de Ctiliis. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 29. was instituted bitwixt Basilius b. of Ancyra, an Arrian Heretique, and Photinus a Sabellian Heretique: in which dispu∣tation Photinus was thought to be ouercome, and was damned by the Councill as an Heretique, and banished by the Empe∣rour. In this Councill they set downe summes of Faith, one in Greeke, and two in Latine, whereinto albeit they absteined from the worde : neuerthelesse they gaue great glo∣rie Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 30. to the Sonne of GOD. But in ende they repented, and by the Emperours authoritie woulde haue recalled backe againe the coppies of the summes of Faith set foorth at Sirium: But the mandates of the Emperour commanding in moste rigo∣rous forme to deliuer backe againe the coppies that were pas abroade, coulde not bring to passe, that that thing which was once diulgated, should be againe suppressed. The weakenesse of Osius b. of Corduba kythed in this Councill, hath beene tou∣ched in the historie of his life. After that the Emperour Constans was slaine by Magnentius, the whole Souereignitie both of the East and West, was in the The Coun cill of Mil∣lan. handes of Constantius alone. The Arrians moued him to as∣semble a Councill at Millan, partly for ratification of the sen∣tence pronounced against Athanasius in Tyrus, and partly for subuersion of the Nicene Faith. The Occidentail Bishops to Theod. lib. 2. cap. 15. the number of 300. at the Emperours command assembled at Millan. But neither woulde they ratifie the deposition of Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 36 Athanasius, nor yet alter the summe of Faith. And some of them with libertie and freedome accused the Emperour of vn∣rghteous Sozom. lib. 4 cap. 9. dealing. For this cause manie worthie Bishops were banished, such as Liberius bishop of Rome, Paulinus bis∣shop of Triere, Dionysius biop of Alba, Lucifer bishop of Cala∣ in Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 20. Sardinia, Eusebius bishop of Vercollis in Liguria. If in this Councill Osius bishop of Corduba was banished, as Theodoretus recordeth, it woulde appeare that the Councill of Millan pre∣ceeded the Councill of Sirmium, because that Osius immediate∣lie after hee was reduced from banishment, was compelled to Sozom. lib. 4. Cap. 6.
addresse to the Councill of Sirmium. But I haue followed the order of Ecclesiasticall Writers. In the yeere of our LORD 363. and in the 22. yeere of the reigne of Constantiu, the Arrians hauing a great vantage of the The Coun∣cill of Ari∣minum. Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 39. Theo. lib. 2. cap. 26. flexible minde of Constantius, moued him to appoint a place wherein a generall Councill shoulde bee gathered, for confir∣mation of their Faith. Whether this place was the towne of Nicomedia, or Nice, alwayes it was shaken with earth-quake, and the GOD of Heauen hindered the purposes of their mindes. The next course was, that two Nationall Councils should be conueened, one at Ariminum in Italie, as a meete place for the Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37. Bishops of the West to conueene into, and another in Sele of Isauria, as a meete place for assembling of the Orientall Bis∣shops. To the Council of Ariminum more then 400. Bishops Soon. lib. 4 Cap. 17. did resort. In this Nationall Councill compeared Uratius and Valens, with Germanus, Auxentius, and Caius, and Demophilus, desi∣ring that the wordes  and , as wordes not found in Scripture, and grounds of vnsupportable contention in the Church, shoulde bee cancelled, and rased out of the summe of Faith: and that the Sonne of GOD should be called , that is, of like substance with his Father. The fathers conuecned at Ariminum, altogether disliked this proposition of Ursatius, Theodor. lib. 2 cap. 19. and Valens, and adhered for the most part of them closely to the Nicene Faith, & excluded from the fellowship of the Church Ursatius and Valens, with their complices aboue mentioned as om. lib. 4 cap. 18. the letter of the Councill, written to the Emperour, clearelie beares. With the letter the Council sent twenty Ambassadours, chosen and selected men, who shoulde giue further instruction to the Emperour anent the matter of Faith. But Ursatius and Valens preueened the Ambassadours of the Councill, and by si∣nistrous informations hindered them from accesse to the Em∣perour: onely their letter was read, whereunto the Emperour returned a differring answere, bearing, that for the present, he was busied with weighty affaires of his kingdom but when he Soom. lib. 4 Cap. 19. should find any braithing time, hee should hearken vnto them. The Councill sent the seconde time to the Emp. desiring they might haue liberty before the winter season to returne to their
owne flockes: And herewithall they assured the Emp. that in the matter of the Faith they woulde adhere to that which was comprehended in their former letter. To this second message no answere was returned. Therefore the Bishops wearied with long attendance, returned cuery man to his owne flocke: the Sozom. ibid. Emp. counted this dissolution of the Councill, without war∣rande of his authoritie, to be a contempt of his Soueranitie: Therefore hee gaue charge to Valens to publish the summe of of the Arrian Faith read in Ariminum, albeit it was both disap∣proued and rejected: with power also to Ursatius and Valens, to ject those bishops out of their places, who would not subscribe to the Arrian Faith, and to ordeine others in their rowmes. Ur∣satius and Valens beeing strengthened with the Emp. comman∣dement, not onely troubled the Churches of the West: but also went to Nica, a towne in Thracia, where they gathered a num∣ber Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37. of Bishops of their owne faction, and approued the summe of Faith read by Arrians in Ariminum (being first translated in∣to the Grieke language) and this they called the Niene Faith, deceauing themselues with vaine hopes, as if men had beene so senselesse, as to be altogether deceaued by the similitude of the wordes, Nica in Thracia, and Nice in Bithynia, Morouer Atha∣nasius was as yet aliue, who could haue discouered both the blas∣phemie of the Arrians at Sirmium, and the falsehood of the Ar∣rians at Nica: for at Sirmium in the first Session of the Councill it was written by the Clarke of the Councill, Presente Constantio Sozom. lib. 4. cap 17. semprno; & Magno Augusto, Consulibus Eusebio & Hypatio. Loe saith Athanasius, writing to his friendes, the Arrians will not call the Sonne of GOD euerlasting, but they say there was a time, whereinto he was not: but they call the Emp. Constantius, being a mortall man, euerlasting Emperour. Selencia is a towne of Isauria, or Cilicia, from whence Paul and Barnabas sailed to Cyprs. Isauria lyeth betwixt Lycaonia and Ci∣licia, The coun∣cill of Se∣leucia. Act. 13. verse. 4. Socrat lib. 2. cap. 39. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 22. and in an ample signification it comprehendeth Cilicia. In this towne conucened 160. Bishops of the East, in the moneth of December, of that same yeere of our LORD whereinto the Councill of Ariminum was assembled. Leonas one of the Prin∣ces of the Emp. cout, and Lucius, otherwise called Lauritius, Captaine of the bandes of souldiours in Isauria, were appinted
to attend the peace of the assemblie, and that all things should bee done decently, and in order. The Emperour gaue com∣mandement, that the matter of Faith shoulde bee first intrea∣ted: but afterwarde hee gaue commandement, that the liues Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 39. of them who were to bee accused, shoulde first bee examined: Whereupon arose contention in the assemblie: some urging the matter of Faith to bee first entreated: others crauing that the liues of such as were accused or deposed, shoulde bee first examined: and both parties grounded themselues vpon the warrande of the Emperours letters. The principall ring-lea∣ders of the one faction were Acacius bishop of Caesarea Palesti∣nae, Georgius bishop of Alexandria, Uranius of Tyrus, Eudoxius Socrat. ibid. of Antiochia, and their followers exceeded not the number of two and thirtie. On the other side were Georgius bishop of Lao∣dicea in Syria, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia, and Eleu∣sius of Cyzicus: and the greatest number of the Councill fol∣lowed the opinion of these Bishops. So it came to passe, that the moste parte thought it expedient, that the matter of Faith shoulde bee first entreated. After this the Councill was of newe againe diuided into three factions. Acacius, and his complices, thought meete, that the forme of Faith shoulde bee altered. The moste parte were in a contrarie opinion, that the summe of the Nicene Faith shoulde bee kept, onelie the worde  shoulde bee left out. Silvanus bishop of Tar∣sus was in the thirde opinion, that the summe of Faith compi∣led in ANTIOCHIA, at the dedication of the Temple, shoulde bee kept. Pluralitie of voyces preuailed, that the Sonne of GOD shoulde neither bee called , nor yet , but rather , that is, like vnto his Father, be∣cause in Scripture he is called the image of the inuisible GOD. And they consented to excommunicate all those, who called the Sonee of GOD , that is, vnlike vnto the Father. Nowe Acacius, and his complices, who were indeede Anomaei, woulde haue seemed to accorde with the rest of the Councill: But when it was demanded of them, in what sense they coun∣ted the SONNE alike vnto the FATHER? They answered, Socrat. lib. 2. ap. 4. that hee was like in will, but not in substance. After that much disputation and little aggreement had beene, Leonas a secrete
fauourer of Acacius dissolued the assemblie. Neuerthelesse, Sozom lib. 4. cap. 22. the Fathers of the Councill conueened, to judge the cause of Cyrillus Bishop of HIERUSALEM (whome the Acacians had deposed) and warned the Acacians to bee preent, but they woulde not compeare. Therefore the Councill proceeded to the deposition of Georgius bishop of Alexandria, Acacius bis∣shop of Caesarea, Uranius bishop of Tyrus, Patrophylus bishop of Schythopolis, and Eudoxius bishop of Antiochia, in whose place they substituted Avianus a presbyter in Antiochia, others call him Soz. ibid. Adrianus. The Acacians laide handes on Avianus, and deliue∣red him into the handes of Leonas and Lauritius, and they ba∣nished him. The Councill protested against Leonas & Lauritius, & the Acacians, that they had violated the Decrete of the Coun∣cill: and without further delay, they addresse to Constantino∣plc, to giue information to the Emperour. But the Acacians preuented the rest, and misinformed the Emperour, & accused the Councill, and perswaded him to reject the summe of Faith aggreed vpon in Selecia. The wrath of the Emperour against the Fathers of the Coun∣cill of Seleucia, made the rest to bee dispersed: onely the Aca∣cians A Council of the Acacians at Constan tinople. remained still in Constantinople, and they gathered together fiftie Bishops, out of Bithynia and other neere adjacent places. In this Synode they confirmed the summe of Faith read by Ursatius and Valens in Ariminum. It is judiciously obserued by Socrates, that after the Councill of Nice the Arrians in the mul∣tiplied Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 41. conceites of their wauering mindes, set foorth nine di∣uers summes of Faith, to wit, In the dedication of the Church of Antiochi two formes. The thirde by those who adhered to Narcissus, was exhibited to Constantine in FRANCE. The fourth was sent by Eudoxius to Italie. In Sirmium three formes were indited, whereof one was read in Ariminum, with no∣ting the names of the Consuls, in whose time it was written. The eight was the summe of Faith set foorth in the Councill of Seleucia. The ninth was the summe of Faith set downe in Constantinople, with this addition, that the wordes  shoulde bee silenced when Preachers spake of GOD. Thus we see, that there is no end of wandering, when men haue once forsaken the narrow path of the rueth of GOD.
The Emperour Constantius, and the rest of the Arrians, were like vnto a troubled sca, that cannot take rest: yet another The fourth Council of Antiochia, gathered by Con∣stantius. Councill must be gathered in Antiochia, for abjuring both the word , and the word , so that in time to come no man shall call the Sonne of GOD consubstantiall with the Father, nor yet of a different substance from the Father. The Bishops conueened thought expedient, before they intreated concerning the Faith, that the chaire of Antiochia, vacant at Theod. lib. 2. cap. 31. that time without a Bishop, should first bee prouided: Choise was made of Meletius, some time bishop of Sbastia, in Arm∣nia. He receaued ordination by Arrians, who subscribed also to his admission, and their hand-writs were deliuered into the cu∣stody of Eusebius Samosatenus. But when Meletius disappointed the expectation of the Arrians, they procured his banishment, and that Euzious shoulde bee placed in his stead. Likewise Euse∣bius Theod. lib. 2 cap. 32. Samosatenus for no minassings and threatnings of the Emp. would deliuer backe againe the subsriptions of the Arrians: so that the Emp. both commended and admired the magnani∣mous courage of Eusebius. This Councill was holden in the 25. yeere of the reigne of Constantius. In it the Arrians coulde not perfect their intended purpose anent a new summe of faith, which woulde haue made out the tenth forme of faith indited by them, because Constantius got knowledge of the seditious at∣tempts of Iulian, and he lest the Councill to preueene the inter∣prises of Julian, but he fell sicke by the way, and died at Cilicia. Vnder the reigne of Iulian & Iouinian some particulare Coun∣cils were assembled, such as a Council in Alexandria, gathered by Hist. magd. Athanasius & Eusebius Vercellensis, for damning olde Heresies, and confirming the Nicene Faith. Another in Palestina, for ordaining Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 3. a bishop in Maiuma. Another in Antiochia, by the Acacians, vn∣der the reigne of Iouinian. These wandering starres, accustomed to accommodate themselues to times, places, and persons, to Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 25. gaine sauour at the Emperours hands, they subscribed the Ni∣cene Faith. But I set forward to the rest. Laodicea is the Metrapolitane towne of Phygia, and one of the seuen Churches of Asia, to whom the Apostle Ihon, when he The coun∣cil of Lao∣dicea. Apocal. 3. was banished in Pathmos for the worde of GOD, did write his Epistles. This description I haue premitted, to distinguish Lao∣dicea
of Syria, a citie neere approaching to Antiochiae, and where∣of frequent mention is made in the Ecclesiastical History, from Laodicea of Asia. In this towne Laodicea of Asia a Synode was gathered, after the death of Iovinian, about the yeere of our LORD 368. Nothing was determined in this Councill concer∣ning Hist. Magd. matters of Faith: but onely constitutions concerning Ec∣clesiasticall policie were made in number 59. In this assemblie Gratian. distinct. 16 the worshipping of Angels is damned, as horrible idolatry, and a forsaking of CHRIST. And the bookes of holy Canonicke Scripture which are to be read in time of holy Conuocations of Canon 35. people, are particularly reckoned out, both of olde and new Te∣stament. And in this catalogue of Canonicke bookes, no men∣tion Canon 59. is made of the bookes of the Machabees, of Ecclesiasti∣cus, and other Apocreeph bookes. Vnder the reigne of the Emperours Valentinian & Valens, and about the yeere of our LORD 370. With aduice of both the A Councill in Illyri∣cum. Emperours a Councill was gathered in Illyricum, wherein the Nicene Faith had confirmation and allowance. The Emp. Va∣lens was not as yet infected with the poison of the Arrian he∣resie. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 8. 9. Lampsacum is a towne situated about the narrow passages of Hellespntus. The Macedonian Heretiques sought libertie from The coun∣cil of Lāp∣sacum. the Emp. Valens, to meete in this towne, who granted their pe∣tition the more willingly, because hee supposed, that they had accorded in opinion with Acacius and Eudoxius: but they rati∣fied Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 6. Sozom lib 6. cap. 7. the Councill set foorth at Seleucia, and damned the Councill holden at Constantinople by the Acacians. The Emp. Valens being dceiued of his expectation, commanded them to be banished, & their Churches to be giuē to the fauourers of the opinion of Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 11. & 12. Eudoxius. This dash constrained the Macedonians to take a newe course, and to aggree with Liberis b. of Rome. But these Cha∣meions, when they had changed many colours, they coulde neuer be white, that is, sincere and vpright in Religion. Vnder the Emp. Valentinian in the West, Damasus b. of Rome, The coun∣cil of Rome Theod. lib. 2. cap. 22. Sozom. lib 6. cap. 23. gathered a Councill in Rome, wherein he confirmed the Nicene Faith, and damned Auxentius b. of Millan, with Ursatius, Valens, and Caius. Likewise hee damned Apollinaris, and his disciple Timotheus.
In the yeere of our LORD 383. or as Bullinger reckoneth, 385. in the thirde yeere of the reigne of THEODOSIUS, a The second Generall Councill. Generall Councill was gathered at Constantinople, consisting of 150. Bishops, of whom 36. were entangled with the Heresie of Macedonius, who called the Holy Spirit a creature, a minister, Theod. lib. 5 ap. 8. and seruant, but not consubstantiall with the Father and the Sonne. In this Council the Macedonian Heretiques were louing∣lie admonished to forsake their errour, and to embrace the true Faith, & that so much the more, because they had once already sent messengers to Liberius, and professed the true Faith. But they continued obstinately in their errour, and departed from the Councill. The Heresie of Macedonius was damned, the Ni∣en Faith confirmed, with amplification of that part of the Symbole which concerned the Holy Spirit, in this manner; I beleeue in the Holie Spirit our LORD, giuer of lise, who proceedeth from the Father, and with the Father, and the Sonne, is to bee worship∣ped, and glorisied. They ordeined Nectarius b. of Constantinople, and that Constantinople shoulde haue the prerogatiue of honour next to Rome. Great care was had of Prouinces, that they shoulde Tod. ibid. not of new againe be infected with Heresies. For this cause the name of Patriarches in the Councill of Nice appropriated to a fewe, in this Generall Councill is communicated to manie. To Nectarius Megapolis and Thracia was alloted: ontus to Helle∣dius, Cappadocia to Gregorius Nyssenus, Meletina and Armenia to Tod. ibid. Otreius. Amphilochius attended vpon Iconium and Lycaonia, Opti∣mus vpon Aniochia and Pisidia, Timotheus vpon the Churches of Aegyt. Laodicea was recommended to Pelagius, Tarsus to Di∣dorus, and Antiochia to Meletius, who was present at the Coun∣cill, and ended his life in Constantinople. To other Bishops a care Sozom. lib. 7 p. 7. 8. 9. and sollicitude of their owne boundes was committed, with this caueat, that no man should inuade the bounds belonging to another, but if necessitie so required, Synodes should be as∣sembled, and euery one beeing desired, shoulde mutuallie assist his neighbour. The great affaires of the Church, and the care of their bre∣thren Another Council at Constan∣nople. Tod. li. 5. Cap. 9. in the West, compelled them to meete againe in Constan∣tinople, where they wrote a Synodicke letter to Damasus bishop of Rome, to Ambrose, Bitto, Valerianus, Acholius, Anemius, Basilius,
and to the rest of the Bishops conueened at Rome, Wherein they declare the manifolde troubles they had sustained by He∣retiques: and now albit in the mercie of GOD they were ejected out of the sheepe-folds, yet like vnto rauening wolues they were lurking in woods, seeking oportunitie to deour the sheepe of CHRIST. They excuse their absence, because the infirmitie of their Churches newly recouered from the handes of Heretiques, coulde not permit manie of their number to journey to Rome. Alwayes they sent their beloued brethren Cyriacus, Eusebius, and Priscianus, to countenance the assembly at Rome. In matters of Discipline they recommended vnto them the Canons of the Councill of Nice: namely, that Ec∣clesiasticall Theod. ibid. honoures shoulde bee conferred to persons wor∣thie, and that with the speciall aduice and consent of the Bis∣shops of that same Prouince, with assistance of their confining neighbours, if neede required. After this maner was Necta∣rius Bishop of CONSTANTINOPLE, Flavianus Bishop of ANTIOCHIA, and Cyrillus Bishop of HIERUSALEM, ordained. Heere marke, that the consent of the Bishop of Rome was not necessarie to the ordination of the Bishops of the East. And the usurped authoritie of the Bishop of Rome smelleth of Noueltie, and not of Antiquitie. This Synodicke letter sent from Constantinople, woulde seeme to import, that the Councill which Damasus gathered at Rome, was assembled in the dayes of Theodosius, or els that hee had gathered two assemblies in Rome at diuers times, and yet for one purpose. Godly Emperours and Kinge, such as Constantine, Theodo∣fius, and Dauid, were very carefull of the unitie of the Church, The thirde Councill, hoden at Constan∣tinople, vn∣der the reigne of Theodo∣sius. 2. Sam. 5 Psalm, 122 that it might bee like vnto a compact Citie, as Hierusalm was when the toure of Iebus was conquised, then the people wor∣shipped one GOD, were obedient to one Law, and subject only to one Soureigne. Theodosius in the fifth yeere of his reigne, c∣ring for the peace of the Church, conueened a great Nationall Councill at Constantinople, not only of Hmousians, but also of Ar∣rians, Eunomians, and Macedonians, hoping that by mutuall conference possibly they might in end accord. The good Emp.
consulted with Nectarius Bishop of CONSTANTINOPLE, Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 10. Nctarius with Agelius a Bishop of the Novatians, Agelius with Sisnius, an eloquent man, and a mightie Teacher, and a reader in his Church. This man considering, that by contentious disputations, schismes were increased, but not quenched, gaue Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12. this aduice to Nectarius, that hee shoulde counsell the Empe∣rour to demande of Heretiques, in what account they had the holie Fathers, who preceeded their time. The Heretiques at the first spake reuerently of the Fathers: but when they were demanded, if in matters of Faith they woulde giue credite to the testimonie of the Fathers, the Hertiques were diuided amongst themselues: Therefore the Emperour rent in pieces the summes of the Arrian, Eunomian, and Macdonian faith, and ordained the Homousian Faith onely to haue place. The seconde Councill of Carthage was assembled vnder the reigne of Theodosius, neere vnto the time of the Generall Coun∣cill The second Council of Carthage. holden in CONSTANTINOPLE. In it, first the summe of the Nicene Faith is confirmed. The continencie of Bishops, Elders, and Deacons is recommended, with abstinence euen Tom. 1. Concil. from matrimoniall societie: so earlie began men to bee wisr then GOD: But in the twelfth Canon of the thirde Council of Carthage, it may bee perceiued, that this constitution (as dsagreeable from GODS worde) was not regarded, because Bishops in AFRICKE married, and had sonnes and daugh∣ters: and these are inhibite to marrie with Infideles and Here∣tiques in the Canon fore-saide. The making of Chrisme, and conecrating of holie Virgines, is ordained onely to belong to Bishops. The Canons of this Councill, for the moste , tende to this, to aduance the authoritie of their owne Bishops, fore-smelling (as appeares) the usurpation of preheminence in the Bishops beyonde sea. The thirde Councill of Carthage was assembled in the yeere of our LORD 399. Aurelius Bishop of Cartage seemeth to The thirde Council of Carthage. haue beene Moderatour of the Councill. AUGUSTINE Bishop of Hippo was present. Manie good constitutions were
accorded vpon in this Councill: as namely, that the Sacra∣mentes Canon 6 shoulde not bee ministred to the dead. That the sonnes and daughters of Bishops, and others in spirituall offices, shoulde not bee giuen in marriage to Pagans, Canon 12 Heretiques, or Schismatiques. That men in spirituall offices shoulde not be intangled with seculate businesse, according to the precept of the Apostle, Canon 15 2. Tim. 2. verse, 4. That men of the Cleargie should practise no kind of usurie. Canon 16 That no man shall bee ordained Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, Canon 18 before hee haue brought all persons of his owne familie to the profession of Christian Religion. That Readers, who are come to perfect yeeres, shall either marrie, or els professe continencie. Canon 19 That in the ministration of the Sacrament, or Sacrifice, (to wit, Eucharisticke) nothing shoulde bee offered, except bread Canon 24 and wine mixed with water, of the fruites of the Cornes and Grapes. That the Bishop of Rome shoulde bee called the Bishop of the Canon 40 first seate, but not the high Priest, nor the Prince of Priestes. That nothing, except holy Canonicke Scripture, should bee read in the Churches, vnder the name of holy bookes. Canon 47 About the yeere of our LORD 401. vnder the reigne of Ho∣norius, The fourth Council of Carthage. was assembled againe a great nationall Councill in Car∣thage, of 214. Bishops. Augustine Bishop of Hippo was also pre∣sent at this Councill. Manie Canons were set downe in this Councill, almoste equall with the number of conueened Bis∣shops. That persons married, for reuerence of the blssing pro∣nounced to the marriage, shoulde not companie together the Canon 1 first night after their marriage. That the Bishop shoulde haue his dwelling place neere vnto the Church, his house-holde-stuffe shoulde bee vncostly, his Canon 14 and 15 fare shoulde be course, and vndelicate, and that he should con∣quiese authoritie vnto himselfe by fidelitie and vprightnesse of an holy conuersation.
That a Bishop should not spende time in reading the bookes Canon 16 of Pagans: the bookes of Heretiques if necessitie required hee might reade. That a Bishop entangle not himselfe deepely with household businesse, to the end hee may attend vpon reading, Prayer, and Canon 20 Preaching. That a Bishop admit no man vnto a spirituall office, without Canon 22 aduice of the Cleargie, and consent of the people. That a Bishop without aduice of his Cleargie, pronounce no sentence, els it shall haue no force, except they confirme it. Canon 23 That a Bishop sitting, shall not suffer a presbyter to stand. Canon 34 That an assemblie of Heretiques conueened together, shall Canon 71 not bee called Concilium, but Conciliabulum. That hee who communicateth with an Heretique, shall bee excommunicate, whether hee be of the number of the Laikes, Canon 73 or of the Cleargie. That such as refuse to giue vnto the Church, the oblations of defunct persons, shall bee excommunicate, as murtherers of Canon 95 the poore. Heere marke what is meaned by Oblationes Defan∣ctorum, not Soule-masses, said for the defunct, but the charitie, which they haue left in testamentall legacie to the poore. That no woman shall presume to baptize. Canō 100
TREATISES, BELONGING TO THE fourth CENTURIE. A TREATISE, Of Inuocation of Saintes. IT is more easie in this TREATISE to disapproue the doctrine of Inuo∣cation of Saintes, then accurately to point out the minute of time where∣into this abuse sprang vp: for the in∣uious man, who sowed tares in the husbandrie of GOD, hee did it while Matth. 13 men were asleepe. And no good Chri∣stian, how vigilant soeuer hee be, can bee at one, and the selfe same time both sleeping and waking. Neuerthelesse, albeit the sowing time bee vnknowne to vs, the time whereinto the blade sprin∣geth vp, and manifesteth it selfe vnto the sight of men, may be knowne: And therefore I haue referred this Treatise vnto the fourth CENTURIE. It is true, that Origene about the yeere of our LORD 240. like as he disputed curiously of all things with∣out any certainty of sacred Scripture, yea euen of plurality of worlds: so in like maner he disputed of the charity and affection that good Christians departed this life, might possibly beare to Origen. ho∣mil. 3. in cant. the members of the MILITANT CHURCH of CHRIST.
And hee thought it not inconuenient to suppose, tat they had a care of our saluation, and supported vs with their prayers, Neuerthelesse he spake doubsomely, Ego sic arbitrior, that is, I suppose it is so: but he durst not with ful assurance affirme any such thing. In the third CENTURIE also wee reade of a commemo∣ration of the names of holy Martyres, in time of ministration of the holy Sacrament, but neither of purpose to pray for them, who were already possessed into their rest, nor of purpose to request them to pray for vs: for such grosse errour was not yet admitted into the bosome of the Church: But rather of pur∣pose by such a commemoration,  animate the godly to fol∣low the foote-steps of those men in well-doing, whose names were thought worthie at solemne times to bee commemorated in the Church. The Rhethoricall libertie of Basilius Magnus and Nazia∣nus, brought inuocation of Saintes in the mouthes of all the asil. in 400 Martyr. people: for it is their custome, after they haue commended the patient suffering of Martyres, in end they desire to bee suppor∣ted by the prayers of the holy Martyres. These glorious Ora∣tours learned not this lesson in the bookes of holy Scripture: but rather in the schoole of Libanius, whose frequent incalling vpon  in his declamations, accustomed Basilis & Nazi∣zenus to call vpon the Martyrs, to the end that  and  of the Gentiles might bee forgotten, and the holy Martyres, by whose examples men might bee led into the foote-steps of ver∣tue and godlinesse, might be remembred. Alwayes seeing these learned Fathers had no warrand in Scripture for inuocation of Saintes, they are compelled to speake doubtsomely , NzianZ. in audem Gor∣gonie. Idem orat. in sunere patris. Idem orat. 1. in . that is, as I suppose. And againe , that is, if it bee not too much bolden esse so to speake. And againe, , that is, if there be any sense, to wit, in those that are dead. If they had followed the certaintie of Scripture, what needed such doubtsome and staggering speeches. When a tall Cedar falleth, many little trees are bruised by the fall of it: and Similitude. when worthie men doe fall into an errour, it is offensiue to ma∣nie. The dolorous examples of Iacob, Dauid, Salomon, and the plurality of their wiues, contrary to the first institution of GOD, Gene. 2.
proueth this to bee true. Helcana the father of Samuel was not 1. Sam. 1 free of this fault. And when the Apostle Paul writeth of the giftes that are requisite in a bishop, hee would haue him to bee 1. Tim. 3 verse, 2. the husband of one wife: which exhortation had beene vnne∣cessary, except the preposterous following of the faultes of ho∣lie Fathers had beene so uniuersally ouer-spread, that scarce the Pastors themselues were free of the contagion of this dis∣ease. But the GOD of Heauen hath permitted this to bee for our triall, euen to trie whether wee loue the LORD our GOD with all our heart, or no: for if wee loue the LORD with all our heart, wee will neuer prefer men to GOD, nor mens exam∣ples, to GODS Commandements, how holy and godly so euer they haue beene. But now to returne to these two learned Fathers, of whom I began to speake: Some excuse this weake∣nesse, by the libertie of Rhethoricall ornamentes. And indeede, incase a lap of this transparent-couering bee not spred ouer the speeches of Nazianzenus, who preferreth the paineull tra∣uls of Basilius, to the trauels of the Apostle Paul, who filled the Monodia in asil. v. world with the preaching of the Gospel, from Iudea to Ilyricum, If (I say) this forme of speaking bee not excused by Rhetho∣icall ornamentes, and namely the figure Hyperbole, no Chri∣stian man coulde gladly lende his eare to such speeches. But now to leaue the sandie ground of mens speaches, & to conuert our selues to the doctrine of diuine Scriptures, as to a sure foundation, wherevpon if wee leane, we shall not bee decei∣ued. The LORD saith in his word, Call vpon me in the day of thy Psal. 50 verse, 15. trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee. From this ground of holy Scripture let our Treatise arise, wherein, GOD willing first wee shall consider the purpose of the Prophet: next wee shall declare, that Prayer is a part of spirituall worship, on∣lie belonging to GOD: thirdly, that IESUS CHRIST is the only mediator of our intercession: and last, that prayers to Angels, to the blessed Virgine the mother of our LORD, and to the Saintes departed, hath no grounde in Scripture, and this custome was disliked by many of the ancient Fathers. Now the purpose of the Prophet in the fifty Psalme is ma∣nifest, namely this, to conuict Hypocrites, who contenting themselues with outward sacrifices, neglected the spiritual wor∣ship
of GOD, wherein GOD hath principall delight, as CHRIST saith, GOD is a Spirit, and they that worship him, oan; 4 verse, 24. must worship him in spirit and trueth. But Hypocrites will needes present vnto GOD chaffe in stead of Corne, & drosse in stead of Golde, and an outward scroofe of externall worship in stead of the very substance of his spirituall seruice. To draw them from this grosse imagination, he brings in GOD himselfe, speaking from his holy Sanctuarie, and declaring, that outward sacrifices haue bene oft times intermitted, without any reproofe of them who beeing compelled by necessitie, and not willingly, left off the offering of sacrifices. In Aegypt the Iewes coulde not offer such beasts, as the Aegyptians worshipped, els they would haue Exod. 8 verse, 26 stoned them to death. In Babylon they had not an Altar, whervpon they coulde offer sacrifices to GOD lawfully. And at some times, when both Alter and sacrifices were at hand, yet Dauid complaineth, that by violence he was debarred from the Plm, 42 and 84 Courtes of the LORD. All these times GOD did not re∣proue his people, for omitting of externall sacrifices, because they were constrained by necessitie to intermit such outward exercises. In the meane time they worshipped GOD in spirit and trueth, and it lay not in the power of their hatefull enemies to hinder them from worshipping GOD spiritually. Secondly, the Prophet brings in the LORD, declaring, that hee had no pleasure in bloody sacrifices, because hee neither eateth flesh, nor drinketh blood: and in case hee delited in such things, hee would not require them at mens handes, seeing that all the foules in the Mountaines, and all the beastes in the For∣rest are the LORDS, and hee may use them according to his owne will and blessed pleasure. But the LORD did institute such kind of sacrifices to last for a time, as shadowes of thinges Hebr. 10 verse, 1 to come, but they coulde neuer sanctifie the commers the reun∣to. Therefore if they bee separated from CHRIST, to whom they led the people, as Types and Figures of his euerlasting sa∣crifice, the LORD had no kind of regarde of them. True it is, that Sathan hath a delite in bloody sacrifices, euen in so far, as they are bloody, and a destruction of the creatures of GOD, as the sacrifices in the valley of Ben-hinnon doe testifie, and the sa∣crifices offered to Diaa in Taurica chersonesus, and the bloody
tribute paied by the Athenians to Minos King of Candie, by the expresse aduice and counsel of Apollo, as Chrysostome cleare∣lie Chsost.  pist, Pauli, d Tit. cap. . il. 5 affirmeth. And this declareth that the deuill, who was a murtherer from the beginning, hath a delite in bloody sacrifi∣ces. But God delited not in such sacrifices, except only in so far as they were types and figures, leading to the sacrifice of Christ. Yea, the sacrifices of the Law were like vnto the fire set vpon the top of the marble towre of Pharos, for the wellfare of ships, and to direct them vnto the right harboure of Alexandria: and Similitude. like vnto the fire set vp vpon the vttermoste wall of HIERU∣SALEM, on the North side, called by Cosmographers, Turris furnorum: This serued to direct the foote-steps of them, who in the night season were journeying to the holy Citie, that they shoulde not aberre from the right entrie of the gates of HIE∣RUSALEM. Notwithstanding children sate about these fires and warmed themselues, and knewe none other use, wherefore they were appointed, saue onely to warme those, who were acolde in winter nightes: euen so carnall Iewes reposed vpon sacrifices, but marked not the right ende wherefore they were appointed by God. But the Prophet leades a carnall people from externall sacri∣fices, vnto spirituall exercises: and namely, vnto prayer and thankesgiuing: and consequently to the obedience of faith, the very vndoubted grounde of prayer, and thankesgiuing: for in these exercises consist deeper pointes of the worship of God, then in outward sacrifices, whether we looke to God, or to our selues: when wee looke to God, hee is a spirit, and consequently hee deliteth in spirituall seruice: and when wee looke vnto our selues, wee haue an earthly bodie, and a spirituall soule, and if we present vnto God the seruice of the most base part of our per∣son, and not the best part, then wee fall vnder the curse threat∣ned by Malachie, who saieth, Cursed bee the deceiuer, which hath Malac. 1 verse, 14 in his flocke a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth vnto the LORD a corrupt thing. This grounde being first laide, that the principall purpose where t the Prophet aimeth, is not vnknowne, it is the more esie to step to to the wordes. The Prophet bringes in the Lord, saying, Call vpon mee, in the dry of thy trouble, &c, This presupponeth, that wee shall bee
exercised with manifolde troubles, as our maister CHRIST IESUS was crowned with thornes, before hee was crowned with glorie: yea, and that wee shall bee so dashed with the ve∣hement Matth. 27 verse, 29 tempest of troubles, that except wee bee well taught in the Schoole of GOD, wee shall not know what hand to turne vs vnto: as the ship-man did, who sailed with Jonas, euery man prayed to his owne GOD: onely Ionas, who was taught in the Ionas, 1 right Schoole, directed his prayers to the liuing GOD, who made the Heauen & the Earth, and was heard when he prayed out of the Whales bellie. Nowe seeing that GOD inuiteth vs Ionas, 2 to bee his Disciples, and hee will teach vs, to whom and in what maner wee should pray in time of our troubles: let vs lend our eare to our great School-maister, & not be ashamed to opē our ere and to bind vp our mouth with silence, when the LORD speaketh, and count all the speeches of Fathers, that repugne vnto this great Oracle of GOD, to be like vnto eares of corne withered, thinne, and blasted with the East wind, wherein there is no nourishing food. Similitud. In the second part of this Treatise, it is to bee proued, that Prayer is a spirituall sacrifice, onely to bee offered to GOD, and to none other, neither in Heauen, nor in earth, for three principall reasons. First, in Scripture wee are taught, to pray to him onely, in whom wee trust, and consequently to pray one∣lie to GOD. The Apostle Paul saith, But howe shall they call on Rom. 10 verse, 14. him, in whom they haue not beleued? Yea, and the Prophet Ieremie saith, Cursed bee hee that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arie, and with-dr weth his heart from the LORD. GOD is the just Ierem. 17 verse, 5 proprietare and owner of our soules: for hee hath bought and purchased them with his owne blood: and the LORD wil part Act. 20 verse, 28 stakes with no man, neither can hee admit a corriual in points of his honour: as the naturall mother coulde not abide to see her sonne diuided, because hee appertained totally and wholly 1. Reg. 3 verse, 26 Isai. 42 verse, 8 Act. 5 verse, 4 vnto her selfe: so can not GOD abide, that his glory be giuen vnto another, or yet that any part of that thing that is once dedicated to GOD should bee conuerted to another use. In holy Scripture wee reade of three moste abominable Al∣tars, to wit, of the Atar of Damascus, and the Altar of Bethel, and 2. Reg. 16 verse, 10 the Altar at Athens to the vnknowne GOD. The Altar of
Damascus was abominable, because it was builded to the wor∣ship of a false god. The Altar of Bethel was abominable, be∣cause on it the true GOD was worshipped in a forbidden ma∣ner. 2. Reg. 23. verse, 15 And the Altar of Athens to the vnknowne GOD was abo∣minable, because they neither knew whom they worshipped, Act. 17 verse, 23 nor yet the right maner of his worshipping. Therefore in the matter of the worshipping of GOD, let vs set our compasse right, lest a little aberration procure a great ship-wracke: and in the matter of Prayer let vs call vpon him onely, in whome wee trust, as wee are taught by the holy Apostle, And let vs offer 1. Pet. 2. verse, 5 spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to GOD through IESUS CHRIST. The seconde argument, whereby I proue, that our prayers should bee made onely to GOD, is this: Wee should pray only to him, who is Omnipotent, and can support vs in al our distres∣ses: ergo, wee ought to pray onely to GOD. The antecedent of this argument is euident, by the latter part of that short prayer indited by CHRIST to his Disciples, For thine is the Matth. 6 verse, 13 Kingdome, and the Power, and the Glory, for euer. In that short forme of perfect prayer the first words leadeth vs to a conside∣ration of the loue of GOD toward vs, who is content to be our Father in IESUS CHRIST. In the last wordes his power is described to bee infinite, such as becommeth him, who is King of Heauen and Earth: who like as hee hath made all thinges, so likewise hath hee an absolute Souereignitie ouer all thinges, both in Heauen and in Earth. Now that Omnipotencie is an attribute onely belonging to the diuine nature, the very Gen∣tiles could not denie it, who attributed the word  on∣lie to God. And it is certaine, that all the Angels of Heauen could not haue supported the disasterous estate of man after his Genes, 3 fall, if God himselfe had not put hande to worke, who onely knew the way howe his justice and mercy coulde kisse one ano∣ther, in the person of the Mediator. Therefore seeing God onely is Omnipotent, and none but hee, what fooles are wee to put our trust vnder the shadow of the bramble, as the Sichemites Iud. 9 verse, 15 did, and not to dwell in the secrete of the moste High, and abide in the shadow of the Almightie? I doe no wrong to the Angels in Heauen, when I compare them to brambles, in comparison Psal. 91 verse, 1 of the eternall God: their power is finite and bounded, thir
prouident care ouer vs hath a beginning, namely, the time of their employment, whereinto GOD appointed them to at∣tend vpon vs: but the power of GOD is infinite, & in his pro∣uident Psal. 34 verse, 7 care he appointed a kingdome for vs before the founda∣tion of the worlde was laide. Let vs therefore trust vnder this Math. 25 verse, 34 shadow of the Almighty, and call vpon him, in whom we trust. Thirdly, it may bee proued, that wee should pray to GOD onely, and to none other, because their is neither commande∣mēt, nor example, nor promise, to be heard in Scripture, except that prayers bee made to the Creator onely, and not vnto the creatures of GOD. And in this argument I find that some lear∣ned Papists giue ouer reasoning in the contrary, and they render reasons wherefore there is no example in the old or new Testa∣ment, of Inuocation of Saints: namely this, that in the old Te∣stament, the-Patriarchs and Prophets, who departed this life, went not presently to Heauen, and had not the fruition of the presence of GOD incontinent: but they went to Limbus patrum, where their soules remained vntill CHRIST died, and arose againe from death, and then hee carried their soules to Heauen. And this is the cause (say they) wherefore there is no example found in the old Testament of Inuocation of Saintes. Likewise, they say concerning the new Testament, that if the Apostles had set downe any precept concerning Inuocation of Saintes, it woulde haue seemed vnto the people, that they were desirous that this honour should bee done vnto themselues after their death. These are the foolish conjectures of Eccius. Neuertheles the places that Papists cite out of Scripture to proue inuocation of Saints, declare with what conscience a great number of them entreae this argument. In like maner the factes and wordes of ancient Fathers are miserably abused. When Papistes reade in the Epistles of Au∣gustine, that the Emperour went vnto the tombe of the Apostle Augu. epi. 42 Peter, sometime a fisher, and laide aside his Emperiall Diademe, and humbly bowed his knees, and prayed at the sepulchre of Pter, they clap their handes, and shout for joy, as if their cause were wonne. But such transparent visardes will blind no mans eyes, except onely the eyes of simple ignorant people, and the eyes of those who are wilfully blinded, because the praying
at the sepulchre of Peter, will not proue, that the Emperour prayed vnto Peter, but onely to GOD. And this custome was the more tolerable, because Christians, for the space of three hundreth yeeres, were accustomed to heare GODS worde preached, to receiue the Sacramentes, yea, and to pray in such places, whereinto Martyres had glorified GOD by patient suffering of death for CHRISTES sake. In all these actions they worshipped GOD, whose worde they hearde preached in that place, whose blessed Sacraments they receiued also in that place, and they bowed their knees, and prayed to GOD, and not to the Martyres in that place: yea, and when the perse∣cution ceased, and Temples were builded, there was a reue∣rent commemoration of the names of the Martyres, without Augu. d ciuttate Di, lib. 22. cp. 10 any inuocation and praying vnto them, as Augustine expresly declareth. Nowe let this grounde bee deepely setled and rooted in our heartes, that GOD is the onely Fountaine and giuer of all good giftes, who also knoweth all our miseries, and is Om∣nipotent, and can support them at such time as his Majestie knoweth to be expedient: For the vision of GOD (as saith the Haba. 2 verse, 3 Prophet) hath the owne appointed time, and at the last it shall speake, and not lie: though it tarie, Waite, for it shall surely come, and shall not stay. And so much the more let vs with patient expecta∣tion, awaite vpon the support, that commeth from the throne of the grace of GOD, because the LORD neuer commeth to vs with an emptie hande, and neuer visiteth vs out of sea∣son, as earthlie Phisitions doe oft times: but euen when hee findeth vs lying in our graues, and rotting in the stinke of a tabrnacle forsaken by the ghost, who was wont to dwell in∣to it, then can hee raise vs out of graues, as hee did LA∣ZARUS. Iohn, 11 vers. 43, 44 This grounde beeing deepely fixed in our heartes, I pro∣ceede to the nxt heade, to declare, that no man can ap∣proach neere to GOD without a MEDIATOR: and that CHRIST is the onely MEDIATOR, both of our Re∣demption, and also of our Intercession, and none other, except hee onelie. As concerning the first assertion, that wee haue neede of a MEDIATOR, there is no man so
voide of vnderstanding, who will denie it. Like as in the fa∣bricke of the worlde, fire and water are elementes of so discre∣pant qualities, that the Lord would not set them contiguouslie Similitude. together, lest the one should haue comsumed the other. There∣fore the Lord in his vnspeakeable wisedome, hath set an ele∣ment of a mid nature betwixt them, to wit, the Aire: In the vp∣permoste parte of it, not abhorring from the qualities of the fire, and in the lower region of it conforming to the qualities of the water: Euen so there can bee no fellowship betweene the holy God and sinnefull man, without a Mediator. And it was well said by Iosua, Yee cannot serue the Lord, for hee is an holy God, he will not pardon your iniquitie, nor your sins. Therefore necessitie dri∣ueth Iosu 2, 24 verse, 19 vs in the Treatise of Inuocation to speake of the Mediator. I will not paine my selfe to proue the thing that is not de∣nied: Papistes themselues grant two thinges: First, that Christ is the onely Mediator of our redemption: Secondly, that Christ is the onely Mediator of intercession betwixt God and vs. But herewithall they affirme that the Saints are mediators betwixt Christ & vs. Of that which is fully grāted, that Christ is the only Mediator of our redemption, I infer according to the grounds of holy Scripture, that Christ is also the onely Mediator of in∣tercession: For these two are vnseparably lincked together, and he who hath the one honour hath both. In the Epist. to the H∣brues it is said, that Christ is the onely Mediator of our redemp∣tion: and hereof it is inferred, that hee is the onely Mediator of our intercession: the wordes of the Apostle are these, speaking of Christ, But this man, because hee indureh for euer, hath an euerla∣sting Priesthood. In these wordes Christ is set downe as the onely Hebr, 7 verse, 24 Mediator of our redemption. Now marke that which followeth as a necessary consequence vpon the fore-mentioned grounde, Wherefore hee is able also perfectly to saue them, that come to GOD by ibid, ver. 25 him, seeing hee euer liueth to make intercession for them. Heere Christ is pronounced to bee the onely Mediator of our intercession: and this conclusion is gathered vpon this ground, because hee hath saued vs by his euerlasting sacrifice, which is as much as to say, because hee is the Mediator of our redemption. Againe ho∣lie Scripture will inuert this order, and set intercession in the first place, and vpon this ground, that Christ is the only Media∣tor
of our intercession, will conclude that Christ is also the on∣lie Mediator of our redemption. Marke the words of the holy Iohn, 1 cap. 2 verse, 1, 2 Apostle, My babes, these thinges write I vnto you, that yee sinne not: and if any man sinne, wee haue an Aduocate with the Father, IESUS CHRIST the Iust, and hee is the reconciliation for our sinnes: and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the Whole Worlde. In these wordes Christ is first called our Aduocate: and hereof is infer∣red, that hee is our propitiation, which is all one, as if hee had saide, CHRIST is the onely Mediator of our redemption. In the Law of Moses the high Priest was only but a type of the true Mediator of intercession: yet while hee was presenting the Levit. 16 verse, 17 blood of the sacrifice of propitiation into the most holy place, all the people stood without, and neither Priest nor people re∣mained within the court, where the Altar of brunt offering was, vntill the high Priest came foorth out of the moste holy place. Now seeing our Lord Iesus hath offered a sacrifice for our sins, nd hath caried the blood of the euer lasting Couenant vnto the moste holy place, that is, vnto Heauen, and is actually per∣forming the office of our great Aduocate, and making interces∣sion for vs let no man presume to step to the Altr, and to take vpon him to bee a Mediator of redemption or intercession: our high Priest is doing that worke in his owne person, tarie vntill hee come foorth out of the moste holy place, and then there shall bee no more disputation anent Mediators of intercssion. Augustine vtterly excludeth Peter and Paul from this honour, August. con∣tra Parm∣nianum, lib 2. Ephes. 6 verse, 19 to bee counted Mediators of our intercession, because like as they prayed for others, euen so in like maner they craued that others shoulde make supplications to God for them. But hee who is Mediator of intercession, he prayeth for vs, and hath no neede that any man should pray for him. In like maner, Chyso∣stome 1, Timo,  verse, 5 writing vppon these wordes of the Apostle, For there is one GOD, and one Mediator of GOD and man, the man CHRIST IESUS. plainely affirmeth that the Mediator of our interces∣sion must bee partaker both of the diuine and humane nature: And consequently there is no Mediator of intercession, except Chrysosom, i 1. Tim cap, 2 bomil. 7 Christ onely, who is both God and man. In like maner speaking of the Canantisb woman, hee saith, that shee went not to Peter, nor to Iames, nor to ohn, but shee went directly to Christ, brin∣ging
with her repentance as an aduocate: and beeing moued with vnspeakeable admiration of the goodnesse of Christ, hee saith, O admirandares! sursum tremor, & Deorsum fiducia, miserere Crysost. exvarii in Matth. lois il. 16 mei, non opus habeo mediatore: that is, O admirable thing! there is trembling aboue, and confidence belowe, haue mercie vpon mee, I haue no neede of a mediator, to wit, betwixt Christ and mee. Thus wee see, that when ancient Fathers spake of a me∣diator of intercession, they spake of a mediator betwixt God and vs, and not betwixt Christ and vs. But now let vs take vp out of groundes of holy Scripture a true description of the mediator of intercession: Out of two principal places of Scripture the description shal be grounded. In the Gospell of Matthew it is saide, This is my Well-beloued Sonne, in whom I am Well pleased. And in the Epistle of Peter we are Matth. 3 verse, 17 1. Pet. 2 verse, 5 warned, to offer up spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ. Of these two places of Scripture I gather a description of a mediator of intercession, in this maner: Hee for whose sake onely our persons are in fauour with God, and for whose me∣rites onely our prayers are acceptable to God, hee is the onelie mediator of our intercession: But so it is, that in Christ onelie God is pleased with our persons, and for his sake onelie God accepteth our prayers, ergo, Christ is the onely mediator of our intercession. The similitude that is vsed by Papistes in stead of an argu∣ment, is to bee discussed. Like as subjectes should not step rude∣lie to the King, but by mediate persons, who are in fauoure and credite, present their sutes vnto his Highnesse: Eun so (say they) wee shoulde not bee so bolde as to present our prayers to Christ at the first instant, without the intercession of Saints. To this similitude Origen himselfe (albeit the first inuenter of the seminarie of this error) hee answereth by another similitude: . . . That like as the shadow doeth follow the bodie in moste abso∣lute maner, so that if the bodie be moued, the shadow also mo∣ueth: and if the bodie rest, the shadow also resteth: Euen so, if 2 man can bee in fauour with the eternall God, then shall he also be in friendship with all the creatures of God. And this agreeth well with the wordes of holy Scripture. That the stones in the fielde shall bee in league with us, and the beastes of the fielde shall bee at peace Job, 5 verse, 23
with vs, to wit, when wee are reconciled to our GOD. To this same similitude both used of olde by some, and rejected by the learned, S. Ambrose giueth this answere, writing vpon the words of Pl, They serued the creature, forsaking the Creator, who is Rom. 1. verse 25 blessed for euer. Vpon these wordes hee writeth, that men who haue neglected praying to GOD, they defende themselues with a miserable excuse, saying, that by Saintes they may haue accesse to GOD, like as by noble Courteours accesse vnto the King is purchased: but go toe (saith hee) is any man so foolish, Ambros. i epis ad Ro∣man cap.  or so vnmindfull of his owne safetie, that he dare giue vnto the fore-saide noble Courteour that honour, which is due to the King: for if any man bee found trafficking about such businesse, hee will bee justly condemned of treason. Yet these men count them not guiltie, who giue the honour due to GOD, vto a creature, and forsaking GOD, they worship their owne fellow∣seruantes, as if there were anie greater seruice that coulde bee exhibited to GOD (to wit, then Inuocation of his blessed NAME) For this cause, saieth hee, men procure accesse to the King by Nobles and Tribunes, because the King is but a man, and knoweth not to whom hee shoulde concredite the affaires of the kingdome, but to purchase the fauour of GOD, to whom nothing is vnknowne (because hee knoweth the deseruinges of all men) there is no neede of suffragantes, but of a deuote Ambros. da Isaack. & anima. minde. And in his booke written of Isaac and the soule, he wri∣teth of CHRIST very holily, and according to Scripture. CHRIST is or mouth, by whom wee talke with the Father, hee is our eye, by whom wee see the Father, he is our right hand, by whom wee offer our selues vnto the Father, who if hee inter∣cide not for vs, neither wee nor the Saints haue any thing to do with GOD. Albeit it may bee sufficiently proud, that euen Ambrose himselfe was somewhat intangled with the errour uniuersally ouer-spred amongst the common people: for they were so fonde vpon Inuocation of Saintes, that learned Preachers yeelded somewhat to the madnesse of an uill dispo∣sed people, as Aaron did to the carnall Iwes, when they wor∣shipped Exod 32 the golden Calfe. Neuerthelesse, any man who readeth the fore-mentioned places of Ambrose, may perceiue, that in heart and mind hee disliked the Inuocation of Saints.
The more particularly that wee descend into this argument the trueth shall bee the more clearely manifested: Let vs there∣fore search out whether or no it was counted lawfull of olde to pray to the Angels, to worship the Virgine Marie, and to ino∣cate the Saintes. In holy Scripture wee find, that vnder colour of humilitie, some did worship the Angels, and pray vnto them. But the holie Apostle Paul, who was taught immediately by CHRIST, calleth this forme of deuotion rashnesse, and the Collos. 2 verse, 18 conceit of an heart puffed vp with a fleshly minde. There is no pride comparable to the pride of a foole, hee will speake of thinges hee neuer saw nor heard, and of thinges whereof he can render no reason. The Angell who reuealed great mysteries Apocal. 19 , 10 ibid, cap. 2 verse, 8. 9 to the Apostle Iohn, woulde not bee content to bee worshipped by him, but rebuked him at two diuerse times, for presuming to worship him & said at both times he should worship GOD. And the Council of Laodicea damned the worshipping of Angels, as Concil. Laodi. n. . 32 verse, 31 Philip. 2 verse, 10 Idolatrie, and a forsaking of CHRIST. The Angell who bles∣sed Iaakob was not one of the ministring Spirites, but the great Angell of the Couenant of GOD, euen CHRIST IESUS, to whom all knee should bee bowed. Concerning the adoration of the blessed Virgine the mother of our LORD, it is grounded vpon the fabulous narraton of her assumption written by Nicephorus, whereunto the lesse cre∣dite . lib. 15 . 14 is to be giuen, because in it the glory onely due to CHRIST is giuen to the Virgine Marie: namely, that her body saw no corruption. Alwayes shee died, and was buried in the valley of Pal. 16 verse, 10 Iosaphat, and shee did not beare the chastisement of our trans∣gressions, as her Sonne CHRIST IESUS did. Howe then Act. 2 verse, 29 30. 31 could shee die, if shee had beene free both of originall & actuall sinne, as Papistes affirme? uvenalis Bishop of rusalem, is saide to haue made narration of the assumption of the blesed Virgine to Pulcheria Empresse and wife of the Emperour Martianus, at that time when the Generall Councill of Chalcedon was assm∣bled. But there are so many circumstances, derogating credit to that alleadged history of the assumption of the Virgine Ma∣rie, that it is hard for a Christian to leane vpon such vncertaine and doubtsome groundes. First the writer of it is Nicephorus, the father of many fables. Secondly, the reporter of it was Iu∣venals,
Patriarch of Hierusalem, an Eutychian Heretique, vntill the feare of the authoritie of the Generall Councill compelled him to reuoke his errour. Thirdly, in what place and to whom made Iuvenalis this narration: namely, in the chamber secretely to Plcheria: not in the Generall Councill openly, where manie learned Fathers, well acquainted with holy Scriptures, were pre∣sent, who could haue controlled him, & declared, that amongst those who died, one onely, to wit, the holy One of GOD, hath that priuiledge not to see corruption. Epiphanius, for causes Epiphan. c∣tra herses. knowne to himselfe (for hee had heard this narration long be∣fore the dayes of Iuvenalis) standeth not vpon the refutation of the assumption of the blessed Virgine: but hee vtterly damneth the Collyridians as Heretiques, who worshipped the Virgine Ma∣rie. And in the matter of worshipping hee compareth her to the fruite of the forbidden tree: It was a faire fruite, but herewith a fruit forbidden to bee eaten: So was the mother of our LORD, a blessed woman aboue all women, yet was shee not GOD, and consequently not to bee worshipped. So that Epiphanius pas∣seth by the ground of the argument: giuing, and not granting that the tradition of her assumption were true, yet this conse∣quence can not followe, that shee shoulde bee adored and wor∣shipped. In like maner Ambrose saieth, that the Virgine Marie was the Temple of GOD, but not the GOD of the Temple. In Ambros de spirit. lib. 3 cap. 12 which wordes, like as hee alloweth the worshipping of the holie Ghost, so in like maner hee disalloweth the worshipping of the Virgine Marie. The Booke of August. De assumptione beatae Ma∣riae Vrginis, together with a Sermon of his In festo assumptonis beatae Mariae, are knowne to be supposititious: and Censura Lova∣ninsis in the frontispice of that booke, prefixeth this superscrip∣tion, NON EST AUGUSTINI. The honourable titles and stiles giuen vnto the Virgine Ma∣rie by Ecclesiasticall Writers, is another grounde wherevpon they doe leane, vvho vvorshippeth the mother of our LORD: shee is called : that is to say, The mother of GOD, our Ladie, vndefiled, complete holy, a perpetuall Virgine, vnspotted, Para∣dise, a liuing Altar, the mountaine ouer-shadowed by the holy
Spirit. All these honourable stiles (I say) were giuen vnto her in the writinges of ancient Fathers, not of purpose to Deifie the blessed Virgine, nor to bring in pluralitie of Gods, but to magnifie the worke of the LORDES Incarnation. Methodus is so prodigall in his stiles, that hee calleth her , that is, the bread of life, attributing to her the honour due to Iohn. 6. 35. CHRIST onely. It were better done to abstine from wordes of superlatiue honoures, belonging onely to CHRIST, then after they are vttered, to bee compelled by tolerable interpre∣tations to lenifie the absurditi of vncompetent speaches. The blssed Virgine while shee was conuersant with mortall men directed such as came to her selfe, to goe to hir Sonne, and to depend vpon his blessed will and plasure, saying vnto the ser∣uantes, Ionh, 2. 5. Whatsoeuer hee saieth vnto you, doe it: much more now when shee dwelleth in celestiall mansions, it is her will that we should depend vpon IESUS CHRIST her sonne, & her Sauiour, her sonne & her GOD, her sonne & the creator of her bodie, whereinto hee was content to bee conceiued by the Holy Ghost. As concerning the Inuocation of other Saintes, Papistes re∣joice in the multitude of Fathers, who inuocate Saintes, not onely Orators, such as Basilius and NaZianZenus: and Poets, such as Prudentius, who prayed vnto S. Laurence, Vincentius, the Vir∣gine Agnes, the Martyr Cassianus, S. Cyprian, S. Foelix, and the Martyrs called Calaguritani, Spanish Martyrs, and Vascones, as ap∣peareth, but also manie others were intangled with this error: of whom I may justly say that thing which our maister CHRIST spake of the Samaritanes, who worshipped GOD vpon mount Garizim, Yee worship that which yee know not: in which wordes Iohn, 4. 22 CHRIST declareth, that whatsoeuer worship is exhibited  GOD, without the warrand of his owne commande∣ment, it is naught: And in that point, the Fathers who prayed vnto Saintes, they also worshipped that which they knew not: For like as the Sunne when hee riseth, and spreadeth his Similitude. bemes throughout the worlde, then the light of the Starres giue place to the glorious light of the Sunne: euen so, all the writinges of Fathers must needes giue place vnto the written worde of GOD, whereinto wee are commanded to call onely vpon GOD in the day of our trouble: and there is neither Psa 50. 15.
commandement, promise, nor example in Scripture, to war∣rand the doctrine of Inuocation of Saints, as hath beene alrea∣dy declared. Now the authors of the doctrine of Inuocation of Saintes, if they would search out the first originall of it, they haue cause to bee ashamed: for it came not from the Apostles, but from the Gentiles. No man, who hath read the Dialogues of Pla∣to, can bee ignorant, that vpon consideration of the dissimili∣tude Plato dialog. Symposion. Idem de legib. lib. 4. that is betwixt mortall men, and the immortall GOD, he imagined some mid-creatures, whose endeuour was this, to ca∣rie the prayers and sacrifices of men to GOD: and againe, to carie the commandementes and oracles of GOD to men: these mediate persons hee calleth them  and , of whom hee saieth, that they are , that is, betwixt GOD and mortall man (to wit, mediators) No such doctrine is conteined in holy Scripture: Yea, and ancient Fathers, who attribute too much vnto Martyrs, in calling them , thas is, helpers, phisitions, GODS friendes and beloued seruantes, yet they abhorred from the wordes of Plato, to call them , and : for Theodoretus saieth, , that Theodore ad Graecos inside. les serm. 8. is, Let vs not bee so mad. Yet Papistes rush forward to this ex∣cesse of madnesse, not onely to call the Saintes departed Inter∣cessors, but also mediators of intercession, which is Plato his errour, viuely expressed in the words aboue mentioned. . To conclude the question of Inuocation of Saintes, it is not vnlike to the controuersie that was betwixt Iphtah and the king Iudg. 11. of Ammon, for the landes lying betwixt the Riuers Arnon, Ior∣dan, and Iabbok: by one apparent right the king of Ammon clai∣med that these lands should be restored vnto the Ammonites, to whom of old they did belong: but Iphtah refused to giue ouer the possession of these landes, wherein the Reubenites and Gaaites dwelt, and that for three great reasons: First, they receiued these landes out of the handes of their GOD, by whose ex∣presse commandement and warrant MOSES faught against Numb. 22. Sihon king of Hesbon: Secondly, since the dayes of MOSES vntill the dayes of the gouernament of IPHTAH, that is,
the space of three hundreth yeeres the people of Israel peacea∣blie possessed those landes. And thirdly, euen in the dayes of Moses these landes were taken out of the handes of the Amo∣rites, who were possessors of them at that time, and not from the Ammonites. For the like reasons (I say) we cannot agree to the doctrine of Inuocation of Saints. First, because wee haue recei∣ued a perfect forme of prayer out of our LORDS hands, where∣in we are taught to pray onely to our Heauenly Father, and not Mh. 6 to Saints. Secondly, because the Church for the space of three hundreth yeeres after the LORDS ascension, used no other forme of prayer then this, to pray to GOD alone through IE∣SUS CHRIST. Thirdly, if Papistes will needes make anie controuersie in this matter, let them controuert with CHRISTS Apostles, who haue left vnto their true successors this forme of prayer, which we now use: and such new & young school-mai∣sters as Papistes are, wee cannot admit. Against the seconde of the three preceeding reasons, if they object, that in the dayes of Cyprian the Christian Virgine, whom Cyprian before his conuer∣sion pursued, with Magicall arts labouring to circumueene her, Nazi. in udem Cypr. shee prayed for helpe to the Virgine Marie, as Nazianzenus wri∣teth. To this I answere, that this narration which Nazianzenus hath found in some Apocryph booke, is rejected by the learned as an vncertaine thing: whereof Ierom writing of the conuersion of Cyprian, maketh no mention. Secondly, this forme of prayer . . . that a weake and timorous Virgine used, was no liturgie nor forme of prayer used amongst Christian people in their holy as∣semblies: and that thing which any one person doth of infirmi∣tie and weakenesse, is not to bee counted an ancient doctrine in the Church. Seeing the Apostle warneth vs to absteine from all appea∣rance of euill, at least Papistes in their Inuocation of Saintes 1. Thess. 5 verse, 22 shoulde haue absteined from formes of speaking used in prayers made vnto the eternal GOD, lest they should seeme to giue the glory onely due to the Creator, to the creatures. But in the matter of Inuocation of Saintes, they haue set themselues forward with such impetuous speate, that they cannot absteine from the honourable stiles giuen to GOD, but these also must bee giuen to the Saintes. The Prophet Dauid calleth the LORD
his Rocke, his Fortresse, his Strength, his Shield, the Horne of his Sal∣uation, Psal. 18.  and his Refuge. And in another Psalme, GOD is our hope and helpe, & rength, in troubles readie to be found. Are not all these . 46.  honourable stiles, and many more attributed to the Saintes in the ordinary prayers of the Rane Church? Is not the Virgine Marie called the Queene of Heauen? the prouident gouernor of Heauenly and Earthly powers? the mother of mercie? ob∣teiner of pardon? mediatrix to GOD-ward? restorer of the Di 7. de .  . 3. grace to bee hoped for? the mother of the militant Church? the aduocate of the world? Such pretious ointment as this, is more meete to bee poured out vpon the feete of CHRIST, then vpon the head of the Virgine Marie: but a prodigall wa∣ster neither regardeth what hee giueth, nor to whom: they are but one steppe from calling the Virgine Marie directly eternall GOD, for they put the gouernement of Heauenly and Earthly Isai. 9. 6. things vpon her shoulder: they call her Queene of Heauen, and the prince of peace. What remaineth to bee said, but one word, that shee is almighty GOD, and this stile also will bee necessa∣rily inferred vpon the preceeding honourable titles attributed to her. The honourable stile of an Aduocate, Bellarmine is the bolder to attribute vnto the Virgine Marie, because that Ireneus wri∣teth, Et sicut ill seducta est ut effugeret DEVM, sic hc suasa est bedire DEO, uti Virginis Euae Virgo Maria fieret advocata: that is,  lib. 5 .  and like as she (to wit, Eva) was seduced to depart from GOD, euen so this woman (to wit, the Virgine Marie) was perswaded to obey GOD, to the end, that the Virgine Marie might be an aduocate for the Virgine Eva. I am certaine that Bellarmine vn∣derstood not the meaning of Ireneus better then hee vnderstood the sence and meaning of his owne words. In the words imme∣diately  ibid. preceeding Ireneus, declares, that like as sinne came in by disobedience in eating of the fruite of the forbidden tree, euen so righteousnesse came in by him who manifested his obedience in another tree, that is, in suffering death vpon the Crosse. What neede had Belarmine to wreast the wordes of Ireneus, after hee had set downe so cleare a commentarie of his owne words? for hee calleth the Vigine Marie an aduocate, in respect of her blessed birth, who by his obedience satisfied for the sinne that Rom. 5. 18
Adam brought in by his disobedience. Now it is true, that su∣perstitiō is like vnto the Feaur called Hectica, in the beginning hardly discerned, but easie to bee cured: and in end easily dis∣cerned, but not easily cured. Euen so it was hard to know what Similitude. would bee the issue of the disputation of Origen, when he dispu∣ted concerning the affection that Saintes departed carried to∣warde the members of the Militant CHURCH of GOD: but it was easie to stay the course of this errour, when hee who was the first author of it durst not auow it, but in secret disputations said that possibly such a thing might bee. But in our dayes the Feauer is growne to such an height, that it is easier to discerne the errour, then to find out a way to correct it. What is then to bee done at this time, where into errour hath preuailed so farre, and of so long time, that it is like vnto a Gangrene, dayly becomming worse and worse, so that it is ap∣parently a remedilesse euill? shall wee cease from damning su∣perstition, and let the people pray as they list? It is better to follow the example of the holy Prophet Helias, albeit Idolatrie 1. Reg. 18 was vniuersally ouer-spred in the kingdome of Israel, yet he re∣proued the people for halting betweene two opinions: and hee bowed his knees to GOD, and prayed, that the LORD would send fire from Heauen to burne the sacrifice, and to seale vp in the hearts of the people, that the GOD who made the Heauen and the Earth, was the onely true GOD, and onely to bee worshipped. Euen so, beside reprouing of superstitious Inuocation of Saints, which also I haue done, according to the measure of my knowledge, in this Treatise, I pray to the eter∣nall GOD, that hee would send from the Heauen, the diuine flame of his celestiall loue, to the ende that the fleshly conceits of mens hearts may bee brunt vp, and that they may bee fully perswaded, that the LORD, who made the Heauen and the Earth, is hee alone, to whom spirituall sacrifices are to bee of∣fered, and that through IESVS CHRIST, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, bee praise and glorie, now and euer, AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the authoritie of COUNCILS. IN the first three hundreth yeeres of our LORD, Councils were few in number, and ve∣rie obscure, and few of them had great authori∣tie, except the Councill holden in HIERUSA∣LEM, Act. 15 by the Apostles: yet was the first age af∣ter CHRIST the golden age, whether wee consider doctrine or maners: in doctrine more sincere, in maners more vnre∣proueable then any age after following, in so much, that all the accusations forged against their doctrine and conuersation, were but calumnies and lyes. The banquets of Thyestes, and the chambring of Oedipus, perpetually objected to the Chri∣stians of the primitiue Church, what were they but, cauilla∣tions, in thinges whereof they had no vnderstanding? They knew not what the spirituall eating of the flesh of CHRIST did meane, neither knew they how necessary it was for Chri∣stians to keepe holy assemblies in the night time, when they had not libertie to doe it in the day time. And they spake euill of things they could not, nor would not comprehende, as the Gracians and Romanes counted the Hebrues Barbarians, because they had no regard to vnderstand their language. But out of all question, the first age was the golden age of the worlde, after it was renewed by the comming of CHRIST: in doing of good more willing, in suffering of euill more patient then anie age that followed the first 300. yeeres of our LORD: And that thing where into the primitiue Church seemeth to be infe∣riour to posteriour times, to wit, in number and splendor of Councils, in that same point it hath a prerogatiue, such as Iuda, had ouer Israel: there were more altars in Israel then in Iuda, but that one altar in Hierusalem was better then all their altars. And the Councill holden in Hierusalem, by the Apostles, in the dayes of the Emperour Claudius, was better then all the Coun∣cils either Generall or Nationall, that euer were gathered since those dayes.
Now before I speake in particular of th necessitie of Coun∣cils, of their authoritie, of the abuse of Councils, and power to conuocate them, and who should haue vote in Councils, some∣what is to bee premitted concerning the name giuen vnto G∣nerall or Nationall assemblies. Gratianus busieth himselfe in ma∣nie Gratian di∣stct. 15 vnnecssarie thinges, and in this also, to secke out the Ety∣mologie of the Latine word Concilium: and hee deduceth it from the word Cilium, called in the Greeke language , that is, the eye lid, and the compound word Concilium signifieth the companie of men, who agree in one minde, as the eye liddes doe, when they couer the eyes, they couer both together, and when they open againe to giue place vnto the sight of the eyes, they open both at once. And so Gratianus thinketh, that Conci∣lium Concil. Car∣thag. 4. Canon 71 is Coelus consentientium, that is, a company of men, who agree in one mind. The fourth Councill of Garthage requireth, beside consent and agreement in one minde, a consent to the veritie and trueth of GOD: therefore they say, that the assemblie of Heretiques should not bee called Concilium, but Conciliabulum. But in acurate seeking out of Etymologies scarce can Plato him∣selfe in his Dialogue called Cratylus, escape the blame of cu∣riositie: Plato Dial. Cratyl. the Greeke word  is plainer, and is borrowed by the Latinists, who usually call a Councill Synodus, and it is used in this sence to betoken a meeting of men in spitituall of∣fices, for timous suppressing of corruptions, either in Doctrine or maners, springing vp into the Church. The necessitie of Councls may bee proued by these argu∣ments following: First, those ordinarie meanes which the Pro∣phets 1. and Apostles, who had their callin and gifts immediatly from GOD, did use for suppressing of false doctrine and cor∣rupt maners, should of necessitie continue in the Church: But so it is, that conuentions & assemblies was one of these ordinary meanes, ergo, they should continue in the Church. The seconde part of the argument is proued by the example of the great as∣semblie gathered at Silo in the dayes of Iosua, to suppresse the Iosua, 22 apparent defection of the Reubenites, Gadites, and halfe tribe of Manasses, from the true worship of GOD, as seemed vnto them. And this Assemblie had allowance of GOD, foras∣much as it was ordered with wisedome: the glory of GOD
was onely respected, and the ende of it was peace in IS∣RAEL. Next the great assemblie of the ten tribes at mount Carmell, procured by Helias the Prophet, but gathered by the comman∣dement of Achab the king of Israel, declareth, that assemblies 1. Reg. 18 of Church-men and others of chiefe authoritie, was an ordina∣rie meane to reforme abuses in Religion: albeit no reformation followed after this assemblie, yet the enemies of the true Reli∣gion were conuicted in their consciences, false teachers were dis∣graced and punished, and the zeale of Helias toward the glory of GOD had allowance by a miracle of fire from Heauen. In like maner Samuel by gathering a great assemblie of all Is∣rael 1. Sam. 7 at Mizpah, procured a reformation, both in Religion and maners amongst them: Dauid, in transporting the Arke to the 2. Sam. 6 citie of Dauid: Salomon, in the dedication of the Temple; both 1. Reg. 8 used the support of holie assemblies gathered to that effect. And in the new Testament the Apostles, Elders, and Deacons met together in an holie assemblie at Hierusalem, and timouslie Act. 15 suppressed the doctrine of false teachers, who affirmed, that the Gentiles could not bee saued by faith in CHRIST onely, except they had also beene circumcised, and kept the law of Moses. All these examples, and manie more, contained in holy Scripture, teach vs, that the meeting of holie assemblies, was an ordina∣rie meane to suppresse corruption in doctrine and maners, and to aduance the kingdome of GOD. Secondlie, that thing which godlie Emperours did for the suppressing of Heresies, following the examples of the Prophets 2. & Apostles (especiallie when no better meanes could be found out) is necessarilie to bee obserued. But so it is, that the godlie Emperours Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian the third, and Theo∣dosius the second the sonne of Arcadius, and Martianus conuo∣cated Councils for suppressing of the Heresies of Arrius, Ma∣cedonius, Nestorius, and Eutyches: and no better meanes could be found out, neither as yet can bee founde out, for suppressing of Heresies: Therefore the custome of conuocating Councils at times requisite, is necessarilie to bee obserued. Other arguments, albeit they haue not so necessarie a conse∣cution as the former, notwithstanding they proue, that lawfull 3.
Councils are a terrour to the kingdome of the Deuill, and that . lib. 5 . 8 the instrumentes of Sathan, such as Iulian the Apostate (who permitted no Councils to be assembled in time of his gouerne∣ment) are haters of free and lawfull conuocated assemblies. And incase good men fortuned to bee assembled together, by any occasion, as it happened in the Councils of Millan and Ari∣minum, in the dayes of the Emperour Constantius, the indeuours of the Emperour sometimes to circumueene, at other times to terrifie, or to wearie the honest mindes of vpright men, plainely testified, that hee was afraide of the sentence definitiue of a law∣full Councill. Therefore let vs thinke with our heart, and say with our mouth, that lawfull assemblies are necessary for the furtherance of the Kingdome of GOD. Concerning the authoritie of Councils (which is the princi∣pall subject of this Treatise) there are three diuerse opinions. Some with excessiue praises aduance Councils, and count them equall to holie Scripture: namelie, the foure first Generall Councils, The Councill of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Gratiaus, ditinct. 15 Chalcedon: and they compare them vnto the foure Euangels, and to the foure Riuers of Paradise. Others doe vilipende Councils, and striue against them, for euerie light cause, as the Grg. lib. 1 rest. epi. 24 Arrians did against the Councill of Nice, for that one worde , because it was not founde in Scripture. The third opinion is of those, who neither will vilipende Councils, nor equall them to sacred Scripture, because holie Scripture is absolutelie, and without all contradiction, to bee beleued: but Councils may bee corected one by another, as namelie, Nationall Councils, by Generall Councils, and anterior Ge∣nerall Councils, by posterior, at such times as thinges that were hidden from the vnderstanding of men before, are brought to a more manifest light and notorious knowledge. Augu. d Baptist. contr. Dona. lib. 2 ap.  And in this opinion is that holy Father AUGUSTINE, in his bookes written against the Donatists. Now they who were in the first opinion, to wit, that the first foure Generall Councils were equall vnto the writinges of the foure Euangelists, euery one of them leaned vpon an vnsure and deceitfull ground, and so it came to passe, that they were both deceiued themselues, and likewise they deceiued others: For
Gratianus was the bolder so to speake, because Pope Gregorie had spoken the ame before him: & Pope Gregorie spake so, because hee had a resolution in his owne minde, to bee obedient to the acts of the Councill of Nice. O, but after him there commeth in a succession of Popes, who will not bee content to bee ru∣led with the Canons of the Councill of Nice, albeit they spake as Gregorie spake, yet they did not as Gregorie did: for they usur∣ped Ruin. lib.  ap. 6 jurisdiction aboue all the rest of the Patriarches, expresse contrarie to the Canons of the Councill of Nice, wherein it is Canon 6. statuted and ordained, that the Bishop of Alexandria shoulde attende vpon the Churches of Aegypt, and the Bishop of Rome should attende vpon the towne of Rome, and the suburbicarie Churches, according to the custome oberued of old. What is this els, but a mocking of the world, in word to ay, that the 4. first Generall Councils are like vnto the 4. Euangelists, and in deed manifestly to transgresse the ordinances of the Councill of Nice? Are not the Bishops of Rome in this case like vnto Theophi∣lus B▪ of Alexandria, when a great number of Monks came from Socrat. lib.  cap. 7 the Wildernesse of Nitria to Alexandria, of purpose to slay him? Theophilus met them, and with pleasant wordes mitigated their wrath: for hee sid vnto them, Brethren, I see your faces, as the face of God. This he said, not because he had a good liking of them, but rather to bee free of their danger. So doeth Gelatius, and other Bishops of Rome, speake reuerenty of the Councill of Nice, to the end, that the sixt Canon foresaide, which they haue so manifestly transgressed, may bee ouer-passed with the more fauourable pardoning of the transgressours, because they speake good of the Councill. If this bee a good forme of dealing, let the wise Reade judge. The Hypocrites also will praise the Law∣giuer, to wit, the eternal GOD, but they wil not be obedient vn∣to his Lawe: yea, they will take his Holy Couenant in their mouthes, yet they hate to bee reformed. But the Romane Bis∣shops Psal. 50 ver. 16. 1 should doe well, either to bragge lesse of the Nicene Coun∣cill, or els to be more obedient vnto the acts thereof. Moreouer if the 4. first General Councils be like vnto the 4. bookes of the Euangl, then is it as great a sin to falsifie the acts of the Coun. of Nice, as to falsifie the Gospel of IESUS CHRIST, according to S. Mahew. But so it is, that the Bishops of Rome for desire
of preheminence, falsified the acts of the Councill of Nice, al∣leadging an act of that Councill whereby the Bishops of Rome were ordained to bee Iudges of appellation, whensoeuer anie man did appeale from his owne ordinarie Bishop, then shoulde his cause bee judgd by the Bishop of Rome. But when all the principall Registers were sighted by the Councill of Carthge, no such constitution was founde in the Canons of the Councill of Nice (for it was but an act of the Councill of Sardica, and that Concil. Sar∣die. both temporall and personall, as wee haue before declared.) Therefore the sixt Councill of Carthage ordained such persons Concil. Car∣thag. 6 to bee excommunicated, as should at anie time hereafter ap∣peale from their owne ordinarie Bishop, to anie Bishop beyond sea, meaning inspeciall of the Bishop of Rome, because the que∣stion agitat in the late Councils of Carthage was concerning his authoritie. The second opinion concerning the authority of Councils, is the opinion of Heretiques, who altogether vilipend the autho∣rtie of good Councils, albeit they haue weyed mens opinions in the just ballance of the holy Scripture only, and haue reje∣cted no doctrine, but that onely, which being weyed in that most perfect ballance, is found light, Concerning these men, it is superfluous to speake much, they are like vnto dogges, whose friendship goeth by acquaintance, and is not ordered by rea∣son, and therefore if a friend come to the house, hee barketh at Similitude. him, because hee hath not seene him before: but incase hee see a thiefe, and prodigall waster of all the substance of his maisters house, hee will not barke against him, if so bee hee bee familiar∣lie acquainted with him: euen so notable Heretiques, they raile against the trueth of GOD, euidently proued by Scriptue, and confirmed by authoritie of Councils, onelie because they are well acquainted with the lye, and they are strangers from the trueth of GOD. The third opinion is best of all the rest, forasmuch as by it neither are Councils vilipended, nor yet honoured out of mea∣sure: but they are regarded in so farre as they speake that thing which GOD hath spoken in his sacred Scriptures before them. No greater honour did the Councill of all Councils conuened at Hierusalem, desire, wherein the Apostles were presnt, who were Act. 15
taught in all trueth by the holy Spirit, yet did they not prtende Ioh. 14 6 the warand of the Spirit, without the warrand of the writtn word of GOD: and therefore their ordinances were worthie to bee obeyed, because the warrand of the Holy Spirit, and the warrand of the Holy Scripture and Apostolicke authoitie, all concurring together, gaue a full grace to the Councill of Hie∣ruslem. For this cause, in the famous Councill of Nice, all their constitutions haue not a like reuerence: the sentence pronoun∣ced against Arrius, was well confirmed by testimonies of hole Scripture: but in appointing Patriarches, in attributing vnto them jurisdiction, and power to conuocate Councils within thir owne bounds, for timous suppressing of Heresies, they bring no testimonie of Scripture, but in stead of Scripture they set downe , that is, Let ancient customes haue place. The Councill of Nice in this point did as Iosua did, who  a couenant with the Gibeonies, but consulted not Iosua, 9 wth thm  of the LORD: Euen so the Counill of Nice in  o geat preeminence to a few men, they consulted not with Holy Scripture, which warnth Pastors to feede the flocke of GOD, which ependeth vpon them. And the issue declared, that 1. . 5.  GD gaue not such a blessing to the constituting of Patriar∣chs, as hee gaue to the condemnatour sentence pronounced against Arius: For whereas they imagined, that these Patriar∣ches  great authoritie, shoulde timously gather Synodes, and suppresse Hreticall doctrine: it fell ou by the contrary, that the Patriarches were the chiefe Hereiques themselues, and chiefe defenders of Heresie, such as Macedonius and Nestorius, Patriarches of Constantinole, both damned for Heresie, the one in the Council of Constantinople, the other in the Council of Ephe∣sus: In like maner Honorius Patriarch of Rome, Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria, Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, with Sergius Pyr∣hu and Paulus, Pariarches of Constantinople, were al condemned of Heresie, in the sixt Generall Councill holden at Constantino∣le, ANNO 681. O this that I haue already spoken, it is euident, that the best way whereby Generall or Nationall Councils may maintaine teir authoritie, and bee reuerently regarded, is this, if in all teir determinations they set before them the bookes of Holie
Scripture, and conforme all their definitiue sentences to the wisedome which they haue learned out of the volume of those holy bookes, following the example of the Church of Antiochia, who remitted the decision of harde questions, wherewith they Act. 5 were troubled, to the mouthes of the Apostles of IESUS CHRIST. And seeing wee haue not the Prophets and Apostles personal∣lie present in our time, the next is to haue recourse vnto the writinges of the Prophets and Apostles, whereby the LORD speaketh nowe to vs, as hee spake of olde time by the personall presence of the Prophets and Apostles to our Fathers. And it is certaine, that these of Antiochia went vp vnto Hierusalem, not for any prerogatiue the towne had, but because the Apostles were in Hierusalem. And wheresoeuer wee see the Apostolicke doctrine vnuiolably obserued, in that place let vs seeke resolu∣tion of all our doubtes: and if the Apostolicke doctrine be de∣parted from Hierusalem it selfe, it is but a denne of theeues, as CHRIST saieth, Matth. 21. 13. and if it bee departed from Rome, then is Rome it selfe spirituall Babylon, it is an habitation of Deuils, and the Hold of all foule spirits, and a cage of euery vncleane & hatefull bird, and the constitutions that come from Rome are not Apoc. 18. 2 to bee regarded. Notwithstanding of this, the Councils that hath casten the Apostolicke doctrine behinde their backe, they haue guarded themselues with another kind of armour, and they indeuour to haue credite and reuerence by the multitude of Princes, people, and learned Doctors, assenting to the determinations of their Councils, & by the multitude of Anathemaes (more in number then those that were pronounced out of mount Eball) whereby they deliuer to the Deuill, and that in most prodigall forme, all Deut. 27 those that will not assent vnto their Decretes By these meanes (I say) & such like, they purchase authoritie, reuerence, and cre∣dite to their late Councils. Neuerthelesse there is one curse in Holy Scripture, more to bee feared then all the curses of the Councill of Trent, namely that which Paul pronounceth in these wordes, But though that wee, or an Angell from Heauen, preach Gal. 1. 8 vnto you otherwise then that which wee haue preached vnto you, let him be accursed. And like as Aarons rod deuoured the Serpents of the Sorcerers of Aegypt, albeit in number they were many, euen
so this one curse swalloweth vp all their curses pronounced against innocent people, because they will not depart in a jot Exod. 7. 1 from the rule of wholsome & Apostolicke doctrine. In like ma∣ner it is said by Moses, Cursed bee hee that confirmeth not all the words of this Lawe, to doe them. Consequently, blessed are they, who Deu. 27. verse, 26 firmely adhereth vnto the Law of GOD. And by no autho∣ritie of Princes, Nations, Councils, or Doctors, will bee with∣drawne from the Law of GOD. And this BULLINGER hath wisely obserued in these wordes, Tametsi caeat totus hic mun∣dus, minime tamen potest creatura ququam contra verbum creator is Buing.  Concil. statuere, neque decreta DEI aeterni abrogare. Neque valet hic eru∣ditio, aut multitudo, aut sanctitas, aut ulla denique authoritas, nam loquente DOMINO DEO universorum, merito conticescit omni caro. SAMUEL certe dicebat, loquere DOMINE, quoniam au∣dit servus tus: that is, albeit all the uniuersitie of this worlde shoulde bee assembled together, yet the creature can ordaine nothing against the worde of the Creator: neither can they abrogate the Decretes of the Eternall GOD, neither can learning, multitude, holynesse, or anie kinde of authoritie auaile in this matter: for when the GOD of all creatures speaketh, then justly all flesh shoulde keepe silence. SAMUEL indeede saide, Speake, LORD, for thy seruant heareth. Like∣wise 1. Sam. 3 verse, 10 hee bringeth in a worthie sentence, of PANORMI∣TANE, a famous Iurist, saying, that greater credite shoulde bee giuen to a Laike-man, speaking the trueth according to Holie Scripture, then to a whole Generall Councill, speaking a lye contrarie to Scripture. Moreouer, albeit there were worthie Assemblies holden in SILO, MISPAH, and CARMEL, in the dayes of the Prophets, yet the Prophets are verie sparing to use argumentes tken from the authoritie of these Assemblies: but the Pro∣phets leade the people continuallie to the Lawe of GOD, as to the right grounde and Fountaine of all lawfull Councils: so that their ordinarie speach is this: This saieth the LORD, and not, this saieth the Assemblie gathered at MISPAH, SI∣LO, or CARMEL: they were so farre from equalling Coun∣cils to the Lawe of GOD, that whensoeuer they did de∣sire reformation of the people, then they laide before them the
Law of GOD, but not the authority of Councils, whose autho∣rity is nothing els but borrowed from the Law of GOD: and therefore whosoeuer aduancth Cuncils so high, that they would equall Councils to Holy Scripture, in my opinion, they are not well acquainted with the Scriptures of GOD. In the new Testament mention is made how Paul and Silas, visiting the Churches where Paul and Barnabas had preached before, they deliuered them the Decrees to keepe, ordained of the Apostles and El∣ders, Act. 16. 4 which were at Hierusalem. Heere mention is made of the De∣crees of a most worthie Councill, but heerewith remember two thinges: First, the Decrees of such a Councill, whereinto many Apostles were present, who were taught in all trueth by the Ho∣lie Spirit, according to the prediction of CHRIST. Secondly, Paul and Silas were not now planting Churches in Asia the lesse, but they were waing and visiting the Churches already plan∣ted: and no man denieth, but the authoritie of good Councils is profitable to confirme men in the trueth of GOD. But it is the doctrine of the Holy Scripture of GOD, that begetteth Faith in the soules of men. Therefore let the Holy Scriptures of GOD haue the first and principall honour, and no man will be offended, that good Councils be regarded in their owne ranke. In the next head let vs speake of the abuses of Councils, they are manifold: But the first and principall abuse of Coun∣cils, I thinke to bee this, when the very end wherefore they were wont to bee gathered is inuerted. Of old Councils were gathe∣red to suppresse Heresies and Schismes: But when they are ga∣thered to maintaine Hereticall doctrine, or to strengthen the handes of Schismatiques, directly or indirectly, this is a great abuse of Councils. Like as the Councill of Ariminum was as∣sembled for confirmation of the Arrian Heresie, & the second Councill of Ephesus gaue allowance to the errour of Eutyches. The Councils of Tyrus & Millan indirectly in labouring to sup∣presse Athanasius, were in verie deede supplanting the true Faith which Athanasius professed. There is infinite difference betwixt Nimrod and Nehemiah, and betwixt Babel and Hierusalem. In Genes. 11 the re-edifying of Hierusalem there was a purpose to glorifie Nehem. 2 GOD: but in building Babell there was a farre contrarie in∣tention.
Secondly, Councils are abused, when they take libertie to statute and ordaine any thing repugnant to the Holy Scriptures of GOD, whether it be in forbidding to doe that thing which the Scripture licentiateth to bee done, or in allowing thinges disallowed in Holy Scripture. This abuse began very early, euen in the famous Councill of Nice, wherein they forbid men, who are conuerted to Christian Religion, and are baptized in the Name of CHRIST, to returne againe to the warre-fare, as if these two thinges were repugnant to be a warriour and a Chri∣stian. Did not Dauid, Iosaphat, and Iosias, fight the battels of the LORD? and in so doing, they made not defection from the Couenant of GOD. Was not Cornelius both a Centurion and Act. 10 a Christian? And Iohn Baptist, when hee was demanded of the Souldiours, what they should doe, did hee command them to forsake their calling? and not rather to use it aright, that is, to doe violence to no man, neither accuse any falsly, and to bee Luc. 3. 14 content with their wages. And was it lawfull to militate vnder the banner of Augustus and Tiberius? And shall it be found vn∣lawfull to fight vnder the banner of Constantine, a most Christian Emperour? In my judgement this was too much libertie, that the Councill of Nice tooke vnto themselues, to disallowe anie calling that in Holy Scripture is not disallowed, except onelie the abuse of it. And of olde the Iewes made no Conscience to fight vnder the banner of Alexander the Great, whome hee ho∣noured also with , that is, with equall honour and free∣dome of Burgeship with the Graecians, in the principall towne Iosephus, An∣tiqu. lib. 11 cap. 8 of Aegypt, called Alexandria, builded by himselfe. But this con∣stitution of the Councill of Nice might bee excused, because all thinges that are lawfull are not also expedient, & possibly they 1. Cor. 9 haue seene at that time great danger to Christian mens salua∣tion in warre-fare (vnknowne to vs) and therefore they tooke boldnesse to forbid Christians to goe to warrefare. But manie other Councils, both Nationall and (called by the Romane Church) generall, haue allowed thinges expressely forbiddn in the written word of GOD, such as adoration of Images, and the sapramacie of the Bishop of Rome, not only ouer all Pastors, but also a souereignitie in ciuill thinges, ouer the Emperour, and Princes of the earth, which is an vnsufferable disorder, to make
the taile the head, & the head the taile. In particular I speake of the Councils holden at Rome, by Gregorius the seconde, and Gregorius the thirde, and Stephanus the thirde: and the seconde Councill of Nice, holden in the seuenth yeere of the Empresse Irene, with the consent and procuration of Adrian Bishop of Rome, ANNO 790. The vnhappie Generall Councill of Vienne, assmbled by Clemens the fift, ANNO 1311. whereinto it is statu∣ted and ordained, that the Emperour shall giue his oath of al∣leadgeance to the Pope, to whom hee is no lesse inferiour, then the Moone is infinitely inferiour vnto the splendor of the Sun. Can any thing bee spoken more repugnant to the seconde pre∣cept of the first Table, and the first precept of the seconde Ta∣ble, then the Decretes of the Councils foresaid. Therefore let euerie Christian man thinke of Councils as they thinke of Riuers of water, which are verie profitable so long as they hold themselues within the compasse of their owne accustomed bankes: but if they swell and by vntimous inun∣dation Similitude. ouer-flowe their owne accustomed boundes, then are they verie hurtfull to the neere adjacent fieldes. Enen so Coun∣cils that take libertie to allowe any thing disallowed in Holie Scripture, are very pernicius and hurtfull. Thirdly, Councils are miserably abused, when they are bla∣med vnjustly and without a cause. The Arrians moste vnjustly blamed the Councill of Nice, for the worde , because this word is not found in Scripture: Neuerthelesse the matter it selfe expressed by this word is manifestly cōtained in Scripture: as namely, when the Apostie Iohn saith, There are three which bear recorde in Heauen, the FATHER, the WORD, and the Holie Ion. 5. 7 GHOST: and these three are one. but the Arrians who blamed the Coun. most wrongfully, said, there was a time wherein the Sonne was not existant: and that Deuilish opinion neither in word, nor in matter, is to bee found in Scripture. Moreouer, Councils are abused, when as their authoritie is impared not with solide reasons, taken out of the Scripures of GOD, but rather with the railing speaches of contentious men▪ like as a number of Heretiques called Acephali, with tumultua∣rie murmuring and crying out against the Councill of Chalce∣don, dispersed themselues heere and there, and left not off their
vngodly courses, vntill a new Heresie of the Monothelites, an vngracious budde of the rotten and cutted-downe stocke of the Heresie of Eutyches did arise. But no man aught to contende against Councils, with pride of a contentious minde, but ra∣ther with humilitie of a modest minde search out, whether their Ordinances bee agreeable to the booke of GOD, or not. Finally, Councils are abused, when they who are assembled together are transported with incertainetie of doubtfull opi∣nions, so that albeit they bee met together, to settle others in the certainetie of the true Faith, yet they themselues are so wa∣uering minded, that they can neuer bee at rest. Like as the Ar∣rians, not content with the summe of Faith set downe at Nice, assembled themselues many times, & set downe 9. diuers formes of Faith, as Socrates recordeth: yet coulde they neuer agree vp∣on Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 4 one certaine forme of Faith, which they woulde not alter. Likewse in the affaires of Discipline, so great discrepance of opinion was founde, that neither Councill agreede with Coun∣cill, nor Bishop with Bishop, nor yet Bishops with Councils. The Councill of Ancyra thought expedient for order ta∣king with those who had sacrificed vnto Idoles in time of per∣secution, Concil. A∣cyr. an 308 that vnto Bishops should bee adjoined Chorepiscopi, that is, Countrey Bishops, or Landward Bishops, to whom they gaue not power to ordaine Elders and Deacons, but onely Readers, and Subdeacons. Damasus Bishop of Rome coulde not agree to this subordinate order of Bishops called Chorepiscopi. The Coun∣cils Gratian. ∣stinct. 98 of Neocaesarea & Antiochia, liked of this forme of gouerna∣ment. Other Councils in not making mention of this name de∣clared their misliking: so that this abuse likewise of diuersity of Hist. Mag Cent. 4 Cap. 6 opinions (frequently altered) both in Doctrine and Discipline, impaired much the authoritie of Councils. Before I declare who hath power to conuocate Generall & Nationall Councils, something is to bee premitted concerning the assemblies vpon the LORDS holy Sabboths. These assemblies of all other were counted moste holy: in so much, that when the Princes of the people of Israel were to conueene with Moses, Numb. 10 verse, 3. 4 to consult concerning matters of ciuil gouernament, they were warned so to doe by the blowing of one of the siluer trumpets
onely: but when both the siluer trumpets did blowe, then the people were warned to conueene at the doore of the Taberna∣cle, for the exercise of diuine seruice, which as it was of all Con∣uentions most holy, so in like maner it was foresignisied in most solemne maner. These holy meetinges were warranded by the LORDES expresse commandement, Remember the Sabboth day, to keepe it holy, &c. And in the new Testament, Christians hauing Eo. 20. 9 receiued power to meete together in CHRISTES Name, with promise that CHRIST woulde bee amongst them, they con∣ueened secretely, to the hearing of the worde, and ministration of the Sacramentes, albeit they were most straitely inhibited so to doe, by the Edictes of persecuting Tyrantes: and these who were comprehended and put to death for their conuentions & profession, they died Holy Martyres, how soeuer the Pagans did put them to death as traitors, because they disobeyed the Em∣perours commandement, both in their conuentions and pro∣fession. Yet this ground beeing once laide, that they died Holy Martyrs, it wil follow that Christians haue power to conucene, to heare the worde preached (especially vpon the LORDES day) albeit all the Princes of the worlde woulde forbid them to meete. And this libertie granted by CHRIST, and sealed vp by the blood of innumerable martyrs, Confirmed also by the lawes of Christian Princes, euer since the reigne of Constantine, it will continue vnto the blessed appearance of the LORD IE∣SUS, to judge the world, albeit all the enemies of the Gospell of CHRIST shoulde grinde their teeth, and fret against this libertie. These fore-saide weekely conuentions are necessarie at all times, and in all ages, euen albeit there were no Hretique nor Scismatique in the worlde, to diuert people from the trueth of GOD, because euen the best of vs all is but like vnto a barren husbandrie, that hath neede continually to bee dressed, and la∣boured, and watered with the streames of the riuers of the San∣ctuarie Psal. 46. of our GOD, lest wee wither in the barrennesse of a cor∣rupt nature. But Councils Generall or Nationall are not ne∣cessarie at all times, but onely when the peace of the Church is troubled with Heresie and Schisme, or an uniuersall ouer-sprea∣ding scab of corrupt maners: and at such times it is meete that
Pastors acquaint the supreame Magistrate with the danger, who hath not neede at all times to conuocate a Councill, except the maladie that hee would remdie be vnsupportable. After this wise forme of dealing did Constantine send Osius Bishop of Cordu∣ba Socrat. lib. 1 cap. 7 to Aegypt, to see if by his trauels the Heresie and Schisme springing vp in Alexandria, could bee timously suppressed: but when the good Emperour sawe that this Gangrene dayly in∣creased, then there was no remedie, but to gather a Generall Councill for suppressing of Heresie, and for keeping of intestine peace into the Church of CHRIST. Now to proue that Nationall and Generall Councils ought to bee gathered by Monarches and Princes: In the olde Testa∣ment the great Conuentions at Carmell, Silo, and Mizpeh, were assembled by Princes: and the assembly conueened at Mizpeh 1. Sam. 10 verse, 17 by Samuel, hee gathered it, as a ciuill Gouernor of the land, and not in so farre as hee was a Prophet, for as yet Saul was not al∣lowed by the people to bee king. The Conuention appointed at Gilgal, was with the expresse consent and allowance of King 1. Sam. 12 verse, 3 Saul, who was also personally present at that Assemblie. In the new Testament the assembly of the Apostles at Hierusalem, albeit it was gathered without the knowledge and allowance of the Emperour Cluadius, in whose time it was assembled: Yet the Apostles had such extraordinary warrandes of the Spirite, such extraordinary giftes, and their painefull trauels fell in such an extraordinary time, when there was no Christian Magistrate fauouring the Gospel, that hee who furnished vnto them cou∣rage to preach without libertie granted vnto them by Princes, furnished also courage and grace vnto them to meete at Hieru∣salem, for the well of the Church, without the fore-knowledge Act. 15 and allowance of the Emperour Claudius. But thinges done ex∣traordinarily, leane vnto their owne extraordinary warrandes, and are no impediment to vs to proceede, and to speake of thinges that are ordinary. And it is to be noted, that euen during the time of the 10. Per∣secutions, Christians neglected not to seeke the support of Em∣perours against Heretiques, whē it could be obtained, as cleare∣lie appeareth by the ninth Persecuting Emperour Aurelian, who with his ciuil authority assisted the Synode of Antiochia, against Euseb. lib. 7 cap. 30
Samosatenus, as hath beene declared in the thirde CENTU∣RIE, and the Church had craued the support of the Empe∣rours authoritie to that effect. From the dayes of the Emperour Constantie, vntill the yeere of our LORD 1215. the Emperours were in use to conuo∣cate Councils. But Innocentius the thirde, to whose tuterie Fredericke the seconde was recommended, by his father Henrie the sixt, more like to the successour of Iudas, then the succes∣sour of Peter, made Otto Duke of Saxon Emperour in prejudice of Fredericke, vntill the spirit of dissention fell betwixt Otto and Pope Innocentius the thirde. Then was Otto excommunicated, and the Empire was giuen to Fredericke the seconde, to whom it rightly belonged. Notwithstanding Pope Innocentius tooke vp∣on him boldnes to conuocate the Generall Councill of Lateran wherein Popish Transsubstantiation did get allowance) the like whereof no Pope preceeding his time euer persumed to doe. Now I demande of these, who defende the Popish Religion, and herewithall continually bragge of Antiquitie, whether or no this bee an ancient custome, that the Bishops of Rome should conuocate Generall Councils? The Historie is so euident and cleare, that hee who is not altogether effronted, will grant, that it was not an ancient custome, that the Bishop of Rome shoulde conuocate Generall Councils, and no Pope did it before Inno∣centius the thirde. Gratianus according to his foolish and flatte∣ring . 17 forme of writing, bringeth in the testimonie of Iulius the first, affirming that no Councill is or shall bee firme and sure without the allowance of the chaire of Rome. What shall wee then say of the Councill of Herusalem, holden by the Apostles Act. 1  before there was any Bishop of Rome to giue allowance vnto it? Notwithstanding, euen Pope Iulius himselfe, when hee writeth to the Bishops gathered in the Councill of Antiochia, hee bla∣meth them with manie faultes, yet hee chargeth them not with this, that they had assembled themselues together without li∣cence obtained from him, but rather for this, that they had not required him, or his messengers, to be present at their assembly, Whereby it is euident, that it was not an ancient custome, that the Bishop of Rome shoulde conuocate all Generall and Natio∣nall  lib. 2 . 17 Councils.
With the like arrogancie the Bishops of Rome tooke vpon themselues to bee Moderators of Councils, from thee yeere of our LORD 1215. vntill our dayes. And this is another no∣ueltie, which the Romane Bishop coulde not bring in, vntill hee had troden the Emperours authoritie vnder foote. In the Councill of Nice Eustatius Bishop of Antiochia was Moderator. In the second Generall Councill holden at Constantinople, Grego∣rius Bishop of the great Towne at that time was President. In the third Coun. conueened at Ephesus, Cyrillus bishop of Alexan∣dria was Moderator. In the fourth conueened at Chalcedon in Bithinia, Lucentius, Pascasianus, and Bonifacius, messengers sent from Leo Bishop of Rome, had the presidencie. This is the first time whereinto the B. of Rome, either in his owne person, or by his Agent, moderated any Generall Councill: And at this time who can say that the Counc. of Chalcedon was assembled by the commandement of Leo B. of Rome? When as in the very fronte∣spice of the Councill it is written, Ex Decreto piissimorum & fide∣lissimorum Imperatorum Valentiniani & Martiani, &c. Moreouer Council. Chalcedon, act 1 it is euident by reading the Epistles of Leo, that hee intraited for this fauour at the Emperours hand, that the Generall Coun∣cill might haue beene conueened in Italie, which hee needed not to haue done if by his owne authority he had power to conuo∣cate Generall Councils. It is well obserued by that worthy and learned writer of France, Philip Morney that Baronius for excessiue desire hee hath to proue that Leo had power to assemble Gene∣rall Philip. Mor∣ney myst∣iniquis. Councils, he changeth the Orthographie of the Latine lan∣guage, and in stead of Consilium Synodi Generalis indiximus, hee ci∣teth Concisilium Synodi Generalis injuximus. It is true, that Leo B. of Rome gaue aduice and counsell both to Theodosius, and to Martianus, to gather a Generall Councill, but he had no power to appoint & command that it should bee kept. But this power belonged to the Emperour. Baronius will not proue his pur∣pose so easilie, as by stealing in the letter C, in place of the let∣ter S. The fit Generall Councill was assembled in Constanti∣nople, by the commandement of the Emperour Iustinian, and not by the commandement of Vigilius B. of Rome, neither was Vigilius Moderator in this Councill, but Eutychius B. of Constan∣tinople gouerned the Assemblie.
The sixt Generall Councill was assembled by the comman∣dement of the Emperour Constantinus Pogonatus, and was perfe∣cted by the commandement of Iustinianus the second his sonne. Sergius Bishop of Rome, did not appoint this Councill to be kee∣ped, neither woulde hee giue allowance to the determinations of this Councill, because in it the constitutions of the Romane Church concerning prohibition of Marriage, were disallowed: Notwithstanding his Agent, who was present in Constantinople, and compeared in his name, gaue consent, and subscribed the Acts of the sixt Generall Councill, but stolide (saieth Platina) that is, foolishly, writing with flattering stile pleasant things to Platin. de vit. Pontif. the Bishops of Rome. For dcision of the question concerning worshipping of Ima∣ges 3. great Councils were gathered, one by Constantinus Copro∣nymus, at Constantinople: another by the Empresse Irene, at Nice: the third by the Emperour Carolus Magnus, at Francfra: which of them soeuer shall bee founde the seuenrh Generall Council, alwayes none of these three was gathered by the commande∣ment of the Bishop of Rome, neither was hee Moderator in anie of them. The eight Generall Council was assembled by the comman∣dement of Basilius Emperour of Constantinople: but the Ambas∣sadours of the Bishop of Rome, Hadrian the seconde, had the go∣uernament of the assemblie: and they began early to manifest the portraict of their tyrannous gouernament. No man was admitted to giue vote in the Generall Councill, saue hee onely, who woulde consnt and subscribe to the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome. Adoration of Images did get full allowance in this Councill: and this was a fore-running messenger of the tyrannie that followed heereafter, from the 1215. yeere of our LORD, vntill our time. Now the Bishop of Rome conuocateth Generall Councils, gouerneth them by himselfe, or his substi∣tute, and maketh ordinances flatly repugnant to the written worde of GOD. No cause is so impious and vngodly, that euer wanted an aduocate: but this I repeat againe, that hee is verie impudent, who dare affirme, that the Bishop of Rome of olde time did conuocate Generall Councils, and was Mo∣derator in them.
By conference with persons of the Romane Religion, I vnder∣stand, that they will not giue full credite to any Assemblie, but to such a one, as is lawfully conuocated, holden, and lawfully ended. They count it lawfully conuocated, when the Bishop of ROME by his Edict hath gathered it: lawfully holden, when the Bishop of ROME, or els his substitute, is Moderator of the Assemblie: and lawfully ended, when hee, who is Moderator, continueth in his office vntill the ende of the assemblie. Such deepe instructions Papistes of our Nation haue receiued from their teachers: and alas, an ignorant person is soone shooueled out of the way, but cursed bee hee, that makeh the blinde to goe out Deut. 27 verse, 18 of the way: and all the people shall say, So bee it. Are not these Do∣ctors of lyes ashamed, at some times to commend the first foure Generall Councils, with excessiue praises, and againe to giue such instructions to their disciples, as shall make the fist foure Generall Councils to bee of no account, because none of them was conuocated by the Edict of the Bishop of ROME, but by the commandement of the Emperours, CONSTANTINE, THEO∣DOSIUS, VALENTINIAN, and MARTIANUS. Moreouer, in none of these foure was the Bishop of ROME, or yet his substi∣tute, Moderator, except onely in the Councill of CHALCEDON. Who can giue credite to such teachers, who in one word build, and in another worde destroy that same thing which they haue builded. The Apostle PAUL saieth : Gal. 2. 18 that is, For if I builde againe the thinges that I haue destroyed, I make my selfe a tres∣passer. And when they haue founde out newe distinctions, by these distinctions, the contradiction of their late Councils are the more inexcusable. The Councill of BASIL, gthered by EUGENIUS the fourth, ANNO 1431. wherein it is decearned, that the B. of ROME shall bee subject to the Generall Councill, as a child to his mother, And the Council of FLORENCE, gathe∣red by the selfe same Bis. ANNO 1439. wherein the contrarie is decearned, yet were both these Coun. according to their owne description lawfully conuocated, holden, & ended: and yet are they flatte contrary one to another, in a fundamentall point of Popish faith, for it leaneth not vpō scripture only, but also vpon the authority of Generall Councils, and of the B. of ROME.
Before I speake of the last head, it is to bee considered, that in gathering of Councils diuers respects haue beene had, some times to the people, some times to the Pastors, and at some times also regard hath beene had to good men, who haue bene vnjustly accused. Regarde was had to the people, when Coun∣cils were conueened in those selfe same places whereinto the pestilent venome of Hereticall doctrine was chiefely ouerspred: For Novatus was damned at Rome, Samosatenus at Amiochia, Artemon in Bostra of Arabia, Eustatius in Gangra of Paphlago∣nia, and Arrius at the first in a particular Synode holden at Alexandria. In al these Councils regard was had to the peo∣ple, that heresie might die as the grasse-hoppers die, to wit, in the fieldes whereinto they haue beene bread, and bee buried as the frogges of Aegypt were buried, to wit, in the riuer from Exod. 8. whence they came when they ouer-couered the lande. At other times great regarde was had to Pastours, especially in as∣sembling Generall Councils, that the place of meeting might bee commodious, whereinto the Preachers of Asia, Europe, and Lybia, either by sea or lande might moste conueniently re∣sort: and without all question this was the cause wherefore all the Generall Councils preceeding the woefull Councill of La∣teran were assembled, either in Bithynia, Ionia, or Thracia, pla∣ces whereinto Europe and Asia doeth moste neerely confine, and the Nauigation is moste easie to the Bishops of Aegypt, Pentapolis, Lybia, and Mauritania. Some times a regard was had to innocent men, that they might resort to such places whereinto their cause might haue beene tried, without partia∣litie, as Sardica a towne of Illyrium was appointed for the triall of Paulus, Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas: For it is no reason, that honest men shoulde bee journeyed to places where∣into the force of armour is more to bee feared, then the force of their aduersaris arguments. The last head had beene vnnecessarie to bee entreated, if that the ambition of the Bishops of the Romane Church had not compelled men to seeke out this question to the verie ground: for who can doubt but Bishops, Elders, Deacons, and wise and learned men, hauing commission from their owne Churches, should bee present at Councils, and vote according to the word
of GOD, in such thinges as shall happen to be proponed in the Councill. Neuerthelesse the ambition of Bishops, fearing lest by pluralitie of votes matters shoulde frame otherwise then liked themselues best, they began to make distinction betwixt consul∣tatiue and definitiue votes, minding thereby to appropriate vnto themselues onely definitiue votes, and the rest of the Councill, albeit Elders, Deacons, Doctors, and learned men, furnished with commission, their vote shoulde onely bee con∣sultatiue, and shoulde not bee numbered amongst the votes whereupon the definitiue sentence shoulde arise. This question was reasoned in the Generall Councill of Basil, ssembled AN∣NO 1431. And recourse was had to Scripture, as the true ground whereby controuerted questions shoulde bee decided, and there it was founde in the definitiue sentence of the Coun∣cill of Hierusalem, , &c. that is, Act. 15 verse, 28 For it seemed good to the Holie GHOST, and to vs. Now this de∣monstratiue worde  sendeth vs to the preface and super∣scription prefixed to the Epistle, wherein it is written, : Ibi. ver. 23 that is, The Apostles, and the Elders, and the Brethren, vnto the Brethren, who are of the Gentiles in Antiochia, and in Syria, and Cilicia, sende grec∣ting. In these wordes it is manifest, that the Elders and Bre∣thren, who came to HIERUSALEM, furnished with com∣mission, gaue such votes, whereupon the definitiue sentence of the Councill did arise. But seeing that the Bishops of the Romane Church haue pre∣sumed to set themselues so farre forward, as if they should bee the onely actors and dors of matters entreated in Councils, it were not amisse, if reason can afforde so much, euen to set them a soote abacke. Now therefore I affirme, that when any Coun∣cill, either Generall or Nationall is conueened, whereinto the question concerning the supremacie of the B. of Rome is dispu∣ted, In such a Councill (I say) no Popish B. should haue vote, nei∣ther definitiue nor consultatiue, because he commeth not to the Counc. as a free man, to vote according to the light of his con∣science, but hee commeth as a bond-slaue to the Bish. of Rome, anticipated and preoccupied in the very time of his admission
to his Bishopricke, and bounde by an oath to defende the su∣premacie of the Pope, together with the ordinances of the late Generall Councils. What to doe hath such a bonde-slaue to vote in a free Councill? except hee bee first loosed from the bandes of his oath, moste vnrighteouslie conceiued and mae: so that it is not possible for them to vote as free men in anie Councill, vntill that oath (made to the Anti-christ, and not to CHRIST) bee abjured, abrenounced, and vtterlie vn∣done. Nowe to conclude, It were a wise course in all thinges that wee presume to doe, at least to set such a patrone before our eyes, which without all contradiction is perfect: and let vs in∣deuour to approach so neere as possible is, to the similitude of that patron, to the ende that our doinges bee not altogether euill and reproueable. And if the men of our age woulde set before their eyes the perfect patrone of the Holie and Blessed Councill of HIERUSALEM, no doubt but the people of Act, 15 GOD shoulde receiue greater comfort of their meetinges, then hitherto they haue receiued: But let the LORD worke this in his owne time, To whom bee praise for euer, AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the Monasticke life. THE originall of the Monasticke life is re∣ferred by some men to Helias, by others to John Sozo▪ lib. 1 cap. 12 Act. 2. 44 Baptist: some referre it to those who were in companie with the Apostles, and had all things common: Others referre it to the Essenes, a sect of the Iewes, of whose customes Iosephus ac∣curately Ioseph. An∣tiquit. li. 18 cap. 2 writeth. And indeede the similitude of the maners of the Monkes and the Essenes conuerted to Christian Religion, agreeth in many points: for they had all things common, they laboured with their hands, & were men accustomed with long abstinence from meate and drinke. Eusebius reserreth the begin∣ning of the Monasticke forme of liuing, to the auditors of the Euangelist Marke in Alexandria: for a number of them incli∣ned Euseb. lib. 2 cap. 17 their minds to the contemplation of diuine mysteries, and separated themselues from the companie of the multitude who dwelt in townes, and they had their habitation in the wildernes, about the lake Maria, or Maris. This place was called the Wildernesse of Nitria. Eusebius confirmeth this opinion by the testimonie of Philo. Finally, some referre it to the time of the Philo de vie comtempla. tenne Persecutions, at what time many fled to the Mountaines, to the Wildernesse, and to solitary places, wherein they con∣tracted such a custome and habite of solitary liuing, that euen Sozom. lib. 1 cap. 12 in time of peace, and when Persecutions were ended, they con∣tinued still liuing in the Wildernesse. Whatsoeuer was the originall of the Monasticke life, it is cer∣taine, there was a greater show then substance of Religion in it: 1, Tim, 4. 8 for bodily exercises they profite little, & the not sparing the bo∣die, is counted by the Apostle , that is, a voluntary Colloss. 2 verse, 23 Religion, which men haue inuented to themselues, and GOD hath not commanded it. True it is, that men doe well if they subdue their bodies, as Paul did, to bring it in subjection, lest by any meanes, when he had preached to others, he himselfe should 1. Cor. 9 verse 27 be reproued. And as true it is on the other part, that incase men
repose vpon these outwarde exercises, as thinges in themselues meritorious, and referre them not vnto the right ende, as Paul did: yea, and if they joine not with abstinence from meate, an abstinence also from sinne, the LORD regardeth not the out∣warde affliction of the bodie, as the Prophet Isai clearely decla∣reth in these wordes, s it such a fasting that I haue chosen, that a man should afflict his soule for a day, and to bow downe his head, as a bul∣rush, and to lie downe in sacke-cloth and asshes? Wilt thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day to the LORD? In the very originall ground of the Monasticke life, I see this infirmitie, That men imagined by changing of place to bee free of the snares of the Deuill: But it is otherwise, Adam was temp∣ted in Paradise, & CHRIST was tempted in the Wildernesse, Genes. 3 Matth. 4 and Sathan is ready to spreade his nette both in the prison and in the palace, and by changing of place we cannot be free from his malice. In the Epistle written by Basilius Magnus to Gre∣gorius, this is illustrate by the fit similitude of a man who saileth Epist. Basil. ad Gregor. in a ship, and findeth himselfe to bee sicke, and secretely in his owne mind blameth the greatnesse of the vessell whereinto hee saileth: but when hee steppeth downe into the little bote, that accompanieth the ship, his sicknesse continueth, and is not aba∣ted, whereby hee is compelled to come to a consideration of the Similitude. right cause of his sicknesse, that it is neither the great vessell, nor the little vessell, that is the cause of his grieuance, but rather the corrupt humours that lurke within his owne bodie. Euen so the permutation of place will not make vs free of the tentations of the Deuill, as some men imagined. And like as the conso∣lations of GOD are not tyed to any certaine place, for Moses in Exod. 24 Arabia, and vpon Mount Horeb was delited with the sight of GOD, and in Pisga, with the long expected sight of Deut. 34 the promised land: and the Apostle Iohn in the Isle of Pathmos saw many comfortable reuclations: euen so the perilous snares Apocal. 1 of Sathan are spred out euery where, no lesse then the conso∣lations of GOD are. The Monkes of olde were not all of one ranke, for some of them were called Coenohitae, or Conventuales. Others were called Anchoritae. The conuentuall Monkes, albeit they were separa∣ted Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 23 from the fellowship of the common people, yet they had a
fellowship amongst themselues, and some of them dwelt in the Wildernesse: such as the Conuentuall Monkes of Aegypt dwelt in the Wildernesse of Nitria and Schethis: but the Conuentuall Monkes of Syria, Persia, Armenia, and other places, not so Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 34 neere approaching to the Equinoctiall line as those of Aegypt were, they dwelt in Townes and Villages, because the inclemen∣cie of alterable weather permitted them not to dwell in the Wildernesse, as the Monkes of Aegypt did. Notwithstanding, some of the Conuentuall Monkes of that part of Syria which is called Interamnis, or Mesopotamia, as it were striuing against nature, ouer-went the Monkes of Aegypt, in that which the Apostle calleth , that is, a not sparing of the Colloss.  bodie: for the Monkes of Aegypt dwelt in little Cottages, and ate some quantitie of bread, after long abstinence: but the Monkes fore-saide had their remaining vpon the Mountaines, and were couered with no roofe of any shop or lodge defending them against the injurie of the weather, except onely with the roofe of Heauen: and they ate no bread, but only refreshed their hungrie bodies with the rootes of hearbes, which they houcked out of the ground: and for this kinde of pasturing the people called them Greges. Of this ranke of conuentual monks about Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 33 Nisibis & Mount Sigeron were the monks following, famous and much renowned, to wit, Batthaeus, Eusebius, Barges, Abbos, and Lazarus (who afterward was ordained a Bishop) and Abdaleos, Zenon, and Hetrodorus an olde man, of whom Sozomen in the place Sozom. ibid. aboue specified maketh particular mention. To all these Con∣uentuall Monkes, wheresoeuer they dwelt, this was common, that they were diuided into Conuentes, and euery Conuent was gouerned by one Gouernour, whom they reuerenced, as chil∣dren reuerence their father. The Anachorites were Monks who dwelt in the Wildernes se∣uerally, & by themselues, not deliting in fellowship, as the Con∣uentual monks did. Ruffin. maketh the more reuerend record of the Anachorites, or Eremites of Aegypt, because he visited them, & Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 8 had the honour to be blessed by imposition of their hands, such as two Eremites bearing the name of Macarius, Isidorus, Pambus, Moses, Benjamin, Scyron, Helias, Paulus in Apeliote, Paulus in Focis, Poemen, & Ioseph in Pispiri, of whom there are large treatises in the
Ecclesisticall Historie. Some of the Anachorites were so rude Euagr. lib. 1. cap 21 and imane, that they bowed their faces to the ground, and ate  and hearbes, as beastes doe: and if they had seene an∣other mn, they fled from him, & hid themselues, as if they had no bne procreated of the race of mankind. The brethrē of , of whom Plutarch writeth, are to be set by, as Plutarch. in . Aton. vnworthie of any further remembrance: And the common people justly called them Armenta, that is, Cattell. There was yet another ranke of Eremites called Circulatores, who after long abstinence from all kinde of delicate pleasures, they left the wildrnesse, and came to townes, sate in tabernes, resorted to stoue-hoses, and yet were not intangled with any kind of de∣sire of earthly pleasures, as dead men to the world: but when Euagr lib. 1 cap. 21 occasion of prayer was offered vnto them, the ldest and wea∣kest of them did plucke vp his heart, and with vigore and cou∣rage did performe that Holy sruice. Euagrius commending these Circulatores, with excesiue praises, borroweth a similitude from Plato whereby hee would declare, that as a man who hath vnclothed himselfe of his vpper garmentes, and in ende hath Similitude. cast off his shirt also, this man is naked indeede: euen so these Circulatores, after they had forsaken all carnall delites, in ende they forsooke also , that is, vaine glorie, which is like vnto the shirt of a man, and the last of all garmentes casten off. The similitude is very good, if it had bene rightly applied, but I cannot see howe it can bee rightly applied to these Circulato∣res, who needed not to haue come to townes, as to stages and theaters, to make oftentation of their abstinence, if they had not beene couetous of vaine glorie. The orders of Monkes that sprang vp after the three hun∣dreth yeere of our LORD, were like vnto rootes planted in an Orchard, which spreade out in many branches, such as the Basi∣lidians, Ambrsians, the Augustine Monkes, Hieronymian, Grgo∣rians, and Benedictines. But the Augustines and Benedictines were beyond the rest. The order called Grandimontenses, the Orders of Premonstratenses, in the low countreys of Germanie, neere to Le∣dium, of Guilelmitae in Aquitania, Milites D. Jacobi, and Calatri∣nenses in Spaine: All these followed the rules of the Augustine Monkes. But the Orders of the Cluniacenses in France, of the
shadowed valley, who dwelt in Italie, and vpon the Apenneine of Cistertienses in Burgundie, of Bernardines, Coelestines, of Iusti∣nians, of Mount Oliue, of Humiliati, and diuers others: all these were branches of the order of S. Benedict. And this diuersitie of names was imposed to Monkes liuing vnder the rules of Au∣gustine and Benedict, partly to declare the places wherein, and partly the persons by whom the dissolute conuersation of the Monkes of these two orders was reduced to the strickt absti∣nence of their first institution. Many other Orders I haue of purpose ouer-passed with silence, because the number is excee∣ding great onely of the Charterous Monkes, of the Franciscans and Dominicans, and of the vnhappie order of the Layolites and a few more wee shall speake hereafter, GOD willing. Now to keepe some order in this Treatise, I shall fist declare (GOD willing) the meanes whereby the Monasticke forme of liuing was increased, magnified and admired, euen beyond all measure. Secondly, of the degrees of the decay of their fame, which insued soone after the excessiue commendation of that state. And thirdly, the vild and vnsufferable abuses of the Mo∣nsticke life of late dayes, whereby Monkes are become a hea∣uie and loath some burthen, ouer-charging the world, and like vnto the offensiue Locustes, who euen when they haue flowne away they leaue behind them such detriment and losse to parts whereinto they haue beene, that of a long time they cannot be forgotten againe. First, the Monastries of olde were called , or places of honestie, whereinto all lasciuiousnesse, wan∣tonnesse, and riote was abhorred, as it was wont to be detested i Selga, a towne of Pisidia, in so farre that the Apostle Paul him∣selfe Rom. 13 verse, 13 abhorreth not from the word , whereby hee beto∣keneth wantonnesse. Likewise they were called , for their solitarie liuing,  and , for their meditation and continuall holy exercises. In these places men were well brought vp, and were furnished with knowledge, & were meete to stop the mouthes of Heretiques, who in the fourth CEN∣TURIE did abound. In these places were continuall exerci∣ses of Prayer, Reading, Meditation, and abstinence from all kind of delicate pleasures. And men brought vp in Monasteries were meete to vndertake the weighty charge of Pastors and Bishops.
Epiphanius from his youth was brought vp in the Monastries both of Palestina and Aegypt. And Nazianzenus drew with him Sozom. lb. 6 cap. 3 2 Basilius Magnus to the Wildernesse, where they laide aside all the bookes of Gracian Philosophers, and searched out the my∣steries of the Kingdome of GOD, out of the bookes of Holie Ruffin. lib. 2 cap. 9 Scripture, and very diligently read the bookes of ancient Fa∣thers, who before their time had written Commentaries vpon diuine Scripture: so were they both well prepared for great em∣ploimentes, by thirteene yeeres continuall exercise of reading in the Wildernesse. Barses, Eulogius, Lazarus, Leo, and Prapidius of Monkes in Syria and Persia, were made Bishops. And this Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 34 was the first honour of Monastries, that in them, as it were in Colleges of Learning, men were well exercised, and prepared for the Pastorall office. Secondly, the great giftes of GOD that appeared in some of them, who professed the Monasticke life, brought this kind of liuing in wonderfull great admiration amongst the people, especially the gift of working of miraculous workes. In this point like as I am not altogether incredulous, to doubt of eue∣rie miracle which GOD wrought by the hands of Monkes, so likewise will I not bee so childish credulous, as to beleeue euery thing that Ecclesiasticall Writers doe record of them, as name∣lie, the thirtie yeeres silence of THEONAS, conjoined with a Propheticall gift. GOD suffered not ZACHARIAS the Sozom. lib. 6 p. 28 father of IOHN BAPTIST (albeit justly punished with dum∣nesse Luc. 1. 22 for his incrudelitie) to bee so long silent, seeing the ta∣lentes of GOD are giuen to bee occupied, and not to be hid∣den in the ground. The miracle of Apelles an Aegyptian Monke, who brunt the Deuill in the face with an hote yron, who appeared vnto him in the similitude of a beautifull woman, and tempted him to vn∣godly lust: is it not a childish fable, and repugnant also to Scri∣pture, wherein the weapons are described wherewith wee shoulde fight against spirituall wickednesse, and all are pieces of . 6 spirituall armour onely? The miraculous transporting of Ammus ouer a broocke, to the ende hee shoulde not drawe off his owne hose, and see his Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 23 owne naked legges, is not agreeable to the ende that GOD
hath in working of miracles: namely, to confirme the weake∣nesse of Faith, but not to foster vaine conceites in mens hearts. Was it a fault of CHRISTES Disciples to see their owne na∣ked Ioh. 13. 5 legges, when our LORD IESUS washed them? The superstition of the Monke Dorotheus, hating sleepe as hee hated the Deuill, when as our Maister IESUS CHRIST ab∣horred not from refreshing his owne bodie with naturall rest. The multiplied number of prayers which PAULUS in Pher∣ma Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 29 as a dayly taske offered to GOD, numbring his prayers by the like number of three hundreth stones put in his bosome, and after euery prayer casting out a stone, vntill his bosome was emptied of all the three hundreth little stones laide vp in his bosome. This deuotion is much praised by Sozomenus, and out of question it is the first grounde of Popish beades. The vowe Sozom. ibid. of P, when hee went to the Wildernesse of Aegypt, that hee shoulde neuer see anie of his owne kindred in the face againe, and his endeuour to performe his vowe by closing his eyes, and permitting his sister to satisfie her minde, which longed for a sight of him, but hee would not once open his eye liddes to see his sister, lest hee should breake his vow by so doing. All these thinges and many more are recorded by Ecclesiasticall Writers, and that not without a Note of high commendation: So that the report of their Miracles, of their extraordinary abstinence from lawfull refreshments, of their long continuance in prayer, brought the people to a wonderfull admiration of the Mona∣sticke life. The third meane whereby the fame & renowne of monks was mightily augmented, was their good carriage in their conuersa∣tion, for a long time: They were temperate, chaste, obedient to their superiours, full of charitie, giuen to Prayer, Reading, Me∣ditation, and hearing of godly Exhortations: With manuall la∣bours also they gained foode and raiment to themselues, and that which superabounded, was bestowed to the support of the poore their policie was commendable: the conuent was diuided by tens, & euery ten Monks had a Decanus to attēd vpon them, August. d morib. Eccl, Cathol so called because he attended vpon the company of ten Monks: from them hee receiued the worke they had wrought with their hāds, & sold it in the townes of Aegypt, & bought food & raimēt
to the Monkes, and the rest was bestowed on the poore, so that sometimes Ships were hired to transport to Christian people (whom they heard of to bee indigent) support from the Monks of Nuria and Schethis. Moreouer, the glorious name giuen of olde to Hethnicke Philosophers, nowe was transferred to the Monkes: for the Emperour Valens had slame all the Philoso∣phers in the East for their curiositie, in seeking out by the tri∣pode oZom. lib. 6 cap. 35 of Apollo the name of him who should succeede to the Em∣perour Valens: so that both the common people and Ecclesia∣sticall Writers, conferred the glorious name of Philosophers vnto the Monkes onely. The Monkes beeing thus aduanced by the wind of populare applause, & mounted vp vpon the benches of high estimation, their number also was dayly augmented: so that in the Wilder∣nesse of Nitria were found fiftie seuerall companies of Monks, and in euery company three thousand and aboue, who were all subject to one Gouernour, as many sonnes to one Father, August. de iorib. Eccl. Cathol. These companies make out the number of an hundreth and fiftie thousand Monkes, all dwelling in one Wildernesse of Ni∣tria, ouer and beside other Aegyptian Monkes, who had their re∣maining in the Wildernesse of Schethis, where the Conuents of Monkes subject to one common Father, consisted of the num∣ber of fiue hundreth Monkes. And like as in the Countrey of Arabia foelix at the noone-tide of the day innumerable flying Serpentes are found bizzing about the Aromaticke trees, not in respect of a delite they haue in the sappe of those trees, but in Similitude. respect of the delite they haue in the warmenesse of an hot day euen so the applause of the people encouraged many to em∣brace the Monasticke life, rather then a delie in the stickt ab∣stinence of a solitarie life. Finally, ancient Fathers commended the Monasticke life ou Auust. de morib. Eccl. Cathoi. of all mesure, Augustine calleth, Excellens fast gm sanct, that is, the exclent eminencie of : And Basilius. Ma∣gnus was earnest in building Monasteries in Pontus, and sedulous in writing bookes called Ascetica, containing Precepts of ce∣lie and manerly liuing, to be practised by Monks: leom inuer∣ted Biil. Asce∣tica. the ancient order, and of a presbyter became a Monke, in a Monastery builded at Bethlehem, when as before the Monasticke
life had beene a preparation to the Minisrie: Yea, and the Mo∣nasticke life was so highly praised and admired, through the great commendations, that learned Fathers gaue vnto it, that in ende it was a prouerbe in the mouthes of the people, Malus August. Au∣rel. Epist. LXXVI. Monachus, bonus Clericus, that is, an euill Monke, a good Clear∣gie man, where in the worst of the Coruent of Monks was equal∣led to the best of the Ministrie. Augustine was offended at this prouerbe: notwithstanding it was the Fathers themselues, such as Augustine, Epiphanius, Basilius, Ambrose, and Ierom, who rooted this opinion in the peoples heartes, that Monachatus was excellens fastigium sanctitatis, as hath beene declared. Now if comparison should bee made betwixt the Monks of the Conuent, and the principall members of the Cleargie, what shall wee say of Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, Basilius B. of Caesa∣rea in Cappadocia, Nazianzenus Bishop of Constantinople, Dioscorus Bishop of Hermopol, Acholius Bishop of Thessalonica, and innu∣merable more of the like ranke, who of Monkes became Bis∣shops? Were they more perfect when they lurcked in the Wil∣dernesse, and cared for their owne soules onely, or when they were made Bishops, and cared for the soules of many people, bought with the precious ransome of the blood of CHRIST; Dare any man say, that by vndertaking the office of a Bishop they abased themselues, & stepped downe to a lower degree of perfection, then the former, which they had during their re∣maining in the Wildernesse? Hath the prouerbe Ab Equis ad Asinos, that is, from Horses to Asses, any place in this exchange of their estate? Yea, what shall wee say of Narcissus Bishop of Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 9 Hierusalem, who left his Pastorall office, and fled to the Wilder∣nesse and in his olde age returned againe to Hierusalem? Doeth any .  Writer count his going to the Wildenesse a mounting to a degree of further fection? and not rather a piece of ibecillitic and weakenesse in him, who could not pa∣tiently indure when alse testimonie was borne against him? Concerning the place of Scripture, wherein it is said, If hou Mat. 9. 21 would bee perfect, goe, and sell all thou ha, and giue it vnto the poore, and th shalt haue treasure in Heauen: This was spoken to a rich man, and to an Hypocrite puffed vp with a conceit of his owne righ∣tecuses, and for discouery of his hypocrisie a particular com∣mandement
is giuen to him onely, and not generally apper∣taining to all Christians: Like as another commandement was giuen to ABRAHAM, in particulare, and not generally apper∣taining to all men, to offer vp his sonne ISAAC a sacrifice to Genes, 2 GOD: And CHRIST in that place, is not describing the perfection of a man, but hee is discouering the false conceit of an Hypocrites heart, glorying in the perfect righteousnesse of the Lawe. CHRIST will let the worlde see, that for all his bragging, yet he loued his riches better then he loued GOD, and consequently hee knew not so much as the Generall summe of the Law, which warneth men to loue GOD aboue all things. In the next head the decay of the fame and glory of the Mo∣nasticke life is to be declared, which ensued soone after the ex∣cessiue commēdation of it, & that through manifold defections Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 11 both in doctrine and maners, that fell out amongst Monkes: First they became both inuentors and propagators of Heresies: Audi, otherwise called Anthropomorpitae, who supposed GOD Theod. comp. . to be fashioned according to the similitude of a man, with head, armes, legges, feete, and other members, proportionallie Theoros. li. 4. cap. 10 agreeing to the similitude of a mans bodie. These Heretiques (I say) first sprang vp in the Wildernesse of Nitria. Eustachius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, albeit hee was not a Monke, yet hee was an admirer of the Monasticke life, and afterwarde was condemned as an obstinate Heretique, in the Councill of An∣cyra. Marathonius, who had beene a Thesaurer in the dayes of Concil. An∣cyr. the Emperour Constantius, and furnished money to the Empe∣rours Souldiours, in ende became rich, & by aduise of Eustachius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, hee builded a Monastrie in Con∣stantinople, Sozom. lib. 4 cap. 27 where hee propagated the Heresie of Macedonius, which had beene quenched in Constantinople if Maratbonius vnder Theod. lib. 4 cap. 11 pretence of Religion had not propagated it. Moreouer the He∣resie of Messaliani and Euchytae, did so ouer-spreade in Mona∣stries, that Letois Bishop of Meletina founde no better meane to suppresse this Heresie, then by driuing the Monkes out of their Cloisters, and setting the Monastries on fire. Likewise Amphi∣locius Bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia, and Flavianus Bishop of An∣tiochia, with great fightings and wressing hardly could get these Heretiques in their bounds discouered and subdued. And Eu∣tyches,
whose errour like a Canker-worme so long time mole∣sted the Church of GOD, was hee not an Abbot in Constanti∣nople Poly also a ridiculous Monke, obstinately defen∣ded the Heresie of the Monothtes in the fixt Generall Coun∣cill, Cocil. G∣neral. 6 and offered to confirme that doctrine with a miraculous worke: but with shame and confusion hee succumbed, and was cursd by the Councill. Moreouer Monkes were the chiefe de∣fenders of the adoration of Images. And in the second Council of Nue worshipping of Images is proued by a confabulation betwixt the Deuill & a Monke, and by another foolish dialogue Damascen. de Imaginibus. betwixt a Monke & his Abbot. This was the first great dash that the Monastice life got, that many of them were founde rather propagators of Heresie, then defenders of the trueth. Corruption of maners amongst the Monkes, began at diso∣bedience to their superiours. Of old the Conuent was very obe∣dient to their Gouernour (who some time was called Prepositus, afterward Archimandrita, and last Abbas) and the Gouernour was obedient to the Bishop, and the Bishop to the Emperour and his Deputies. Neuerthelesse vnder the reigne of the Empe∣rour Acadius, the Monkes of Aegypt went foorth out of their Socrat. lib. 6 cap. 7 Monastries, and came to Alexandria, of purpose to slay their Bishop Theophilus which thing also they had performed, if so be that by subtilty of flattring wordes hee had not mitigated their anger, as is aeadie declared. In like maner the Monks of Ni∣tria, to the number of 500. came out of the wildernesse to Alex∣andria not against their B. Cyrillus, but against Orestes the depu∣tie Socrat. lib. 7 cap. 14 of the Emper. Theodosius, whome they both outbraided and wounded: And the Monke Ammonius, who wounded the depu∣tie, was deseruedly punished to the death for his seditious at∣tempt: yet was hee commended by Cyrillus, and counted a mar∣tyr, but with the great disliking of good Christians, who hated seditious enterprises against lawfull Magistrates. Also the se∣ditious Monkes of CONSTANTINOPLE, whose insolen∣cie Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 9 Iohn Chrysostome  to correct, they slandered him as a senere angri, fice, and proude man, and opened the first doore to his trouble: so that his hatefull enemies both in Court and Church, were encouraged by their meanes to pro∣cure his deposition, banishment, and death. Likewise, the
Monkes of Nova Laura in HIERUSALEM, who for Hereti∣call opinions were driuen out of their Monastries by their owne Bishop Eustochius, they became very seditious, and stirred vp horrible contention, betwixt Theodorus Ascidas Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and Eustochius Bishop of HIERUSALEM. No contention ha beene more pernitious in the Church of CHRIST, then this (Thodorus beeing in great fauour with the Emperour Iustian) if the fift Generall Councill had not staide Euagr. lib. 4 cap. 38 all the attemptes of Theodorus, by comdemning the Hereticall opinions of Origin, which both the monkes of Nova Laura, and Theodorus Asdas did maintaine. Finally, the monks became so contentious & seditious, that not only they contended against their superiours, but also they contended amongst themselues with vnsupportable hatred, and euen in the wildernesse of tria, Socrat. lib, 6 cap. 7 where their great fame and commendation did spring vp, in that same place the fame and beautie of the Monasticke life did fade and wither. Beside Heresie and contention, other corruptions of maners stained and defaced the glorie of the Monasticke life: namelie, an inclination to idlenesse, abstinence from manuall labours, & heaping vp of riches, which they gathered of the sweate of other mens labours. And this appeareth clearely by the writinges of August. de opere Mona∣rum, cap. 23 Augustine, who not onely testifieth, that the monkes of his dayes so did, but also they defended, that it was lawfull to them to bee idle, because CHRIST Saieth in the Gospell, , the foules of Heauen, for they sow not, neither reape, neither carrie into Matth. 6 verse, 26 the barnes, yet your Heauenly Father feedeth them: Are yee not much better then they? Against whose idlensse Augustine most sharpely enueieth, saying, that by the example of the foules of Heauen they coulde learne idlensse, but they woulde not imitate the foules of Heauen in carrying nothing into the barnes, but they would lay vp in barnes and prouision houses those riches which other men with painefull trauels gained and brought vnto them. And hee is so stomached against them, that hee saieth, Quis fer at homines contumaces, ut gemina illeccbra corrumpantur, & dissolutalicētia vacationis, & falsonomine sanctitatis? that is, who can suffer contumacious men, intangled with double corruption, both with the dissolute liberty of vacance frōlabour, & with the false conceit also of holines?
From the six hundreth yeere of our LORD, vntill our dayes, Monastries began againe to bee in great account in the sight of the world not for the exercises of reading, praying, meditation, laborious working in a lawfull calling, and charitie, which were the ornamentes of the monkes of olde, but for the splendor of costly buildinges, like vnto the Palaces of Princes, magnificent Churches, pluralitie of Reliques, great reuenewes daily increa∣sed by the liberalitie of Princes: and this new beautie was like vnto the fairding of an olde woman, when naturall beautie is Similitude spen, then must shee bee decked with pictured colours, inuen∣ted by the art of man: and this kinde of beautie rauisheth the senses of such as are simple and ignorant. And it is a wonder∣full thing to consider how the heartes of men were transported with this new show of holinesse: in so farre, that some Kinges thought it to bee an holyer thing to enter into a Monastrie, than to sit in their Royall Thrones, and to gonerne in Iustice and Righteousnesse the affaires of their Kingdome. Bamba King of Gothes (which nation reigned in Spaine) resigned the title of his Royall authouritie to Euringus, and entred into a Monerie. Sbbus King of the Orientall Saxons, left his King∣dome, and entred into a Monasterie: & to the end that it might seeme that GOD gaue allowance vnto this superstition, false Beda lib. 4 cap. 11 miracles were inuented to grace this fact of sebbus: for the tombe whereinto his bodie was laide, beeing n length an hand br shorter then his corpes, was miraculously enlarged, and lengthened to the just proportion of his dead bodie: so that in the seuenth CENTURIE, and about the dayes of Pope Vi∣talias, it was a prouerbe in the mouthes of the people, that three adm rable thing s feil out in their age: First, innumera∣ble Abbacis were builded: Secondly, the heads of King were Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. Cap. 6 shauen, and they entred into Monastries: Thirdly, that whore∣dome wa canonized, that is, notable arlots were counted Saintes. So with the increasing number of Monasties, super∣stition, false miracles, and a lewde conuersation in like maner daily increased In the eight CENTURIE Rachis King of Lom-bardis Platina, da vita Ponti. entred into the Abbacie called Cassinerse in Italie, and his brother Aistulphus gouerned the affaires of the Kingdome, in the dayes of Pope Zachari, Caralomannus the elder brother of
Pipinus King of France, was first in the Monasterie builded vp∣on the Mount Sarapte, afterwarde in the Monasterie called Cas∣sinnse (whether voluntarily or against his will I dispute not) and Hist. Magd. Cent. 8 cap. 10 hee ended his life in the Monasterie of Vienne in France, beeing transported thither against his heart by the violence of his bro∣ther Pipinus. In the ninth and tenth CENTURIES, the Bil∣shops of Rome finding, that their estate was mightily aduanced by Abbacies and Nunneries, they also on the other part ende∣uoured to aduance the Monasticke life, in so farre that Kings & Princes were allured to profef themselues to be of the order of Monkes, with dispensation not the lesse to them from the Bis∣shop of Rome (vnder whose souereignity all high powers began Hist. Magd. Cent. 9 cap. 7 to stoupe) to gouerne their owne Kingdomes, prouiding al∣wayes, that with liberall giftes they had enriched the chaire of Rome: So it came to passe, that the world saw a rare and vnquoth Aruulphus, lib. 5 cap. 30 spectacle, to wit, Kingly Monks, and Monkes Kinges. Yea, and Kings were so bewitched with seducing speaches, that they who would not abase their Royall estate with partici∣pation of Monkish orders, yet they thought it was so holy and meritorious a turne to build Monasteries, that by so doing, they might merite forgiuenes of hainous sins, As Edgarus king of Eng∣land, a man contaminated with many vild spots of sinne, such as adultery, murther, tyranny, and an atender vpon three notable harlots: yet because hee was accustomed euery yeere to build an Abbacy, this holy fact abolished the remembrāce of all his faultes, and made him worthie afer his death to haue his name, togther with the name of Wfrida an holy Nunne (and yet the Kings whore) & the name of her daughter Edha, whom she did beare to the King, All their names (I say) were counted Balus, Cent. 2. script. Britan. worthie to bee enrolled in the Catalogue of Saintes, Caziminus King of Poll, beeing driuen from his Kingdome, entered into a Monasterie of France, in the dayes of Benedict the ninth: and the Poloian Ambassadours, who came to France, to entrait their king to returne againe to his Kingdome, & wre fore grieued at his Hist. Magd. Cent. 11 cap. 6 negatiue an were: Yet by the meanes of Pope Benedict the ninth (at whose handes all thinges might haue bene obtained for money) they obtained their King againe, with libertie to him to marrie, and to procreate children. If Monasticke vowes bee
lawfull, the loosing of the bandes of Monasticke vowes for money was not lawfull. This Benedctus the ninth is he of whom Platina writeth, that after his death his effigie appeared vnto a crtaine man, horrible and monstrous, more like the similitue Platina de vita Potif. of a Beast, then of a man, which betokened the beastly conuer∣sation of this vnhappie Pope in his lifetime. The examples of late dayes, that are recent in all mens memorie, of Lordes, Earles, Dukes, Ladies, yea, and of the Emperour Charles the fift in his olde dayes, who entered into Monastries and Nunne∣ries, whether to leade, or to conclude their lifetime, I passe ouer with silence. This was the glorie of Monkes, since the six hun∣dreth yeere of our LORD vntill our dayes, that Kinges, Mo∣narches, Popes, and mightie men in the world magnified their estate by repairing olde Monasteries, building new Abbacies, and bestowing great reuenewes and rents vpon them: and some times, as saide is, entering themselues into Monastries, either to leade, or to ende their liues. Monasteries also of late dayes became places of imprison∣ment, especiallie of Noble persons, dejected from their ante∣riour dignities: so that Pope Christophorus himselfe in the dayes of the Emperour LODOVICUS the thirde, beeing dejected from his Papall dignitie, was thrust into a Monasterie: Unicum  refugium, as saieth Platina, that is, the onely refuge Platina, de vita Pontif. of men who were in calamitie. Constantine the sonne of the Em∣perour Leo, thrust his brethren into a Monasterie, rendri gvn∣to them a just recompence of the like inhumanitie that they Hist. Magd. Cent. 10 Cap. 6 had practised against their owne father. Likewise Monastries became places whereinto men entered, to sorrowe for by-past offences, imagining that by the strickt obseruation of the rules of the Monasticke life, they might obtaine forgiuenesse of sins at the handes of GOD. Paulus Cyprius Bishop of CON∣STANTINOPLE before the seconde Councill of NICE, entered into a Monasterie, and lamented for that hee had con∣sented to the abolishing of Images, in the Councill assembled by CONSTANTINUS COPRONYMUS. This PAULUS CYPRIUS was a man of a base, timo∣rous, and feeble spirite, who neuer knewe what the Godlie sorrowe, described by the Apostle PAULE, did meane,
which causeth repentance to saluation, not to bee repented, for hee had great neede to haue repented: this his repentance and his sorrowe was not , whereof Paul speaketh, 2. Corint. 7. This bastard glorie aboue specified, whereof Monkes rejoi∣ced, when the firt ornamentes were lost, did rather belong to the Conuentuall Monkes, than to the Anachorites. Wee reade not of Kinges, who delited to exchange their Kingdomes with the solitarie liuing by themselues apart in the Wildernesse, ex∣cept Suatacopius King of Moravia, who beeing ouercome in Aeneas Silv. Hist. Bhem. cap. 13 battell by the Emperour Arnulphus, hee went to the Wilder∣nesse, wherin hee continued vntill the day of his death, eating hearbes, and drinking water with greater contentment of mind then hee liued before in the pleasures of his Kingdome. As concerning saphat King of India, of whom Damascene writeth, Damascen. Historia. that hee forsooke his Kingdome, and went to the Wildernesse, and exercised himselfe continually in reading and praying, for the space of fiue and thirtie yeeres, it is but a fabulous nar∣ration, and the writer of it cannot cite so much as one appro∣ued Author for confirmation of his alleadged Historie: But the purpose of Damascene is to confirme a lying narration with lying miracles, wrought at the sepulchres of Iosphat, some time King of India, and Barlaam an Eremite, whose bones hee al∣leadgeth were transported by King Baracbias out of the Wil∣dernesse, into the Countrey of India: but I leaue Damascene lying, and I proceede. Vnder the shadowe and coloure of all this counterfeit glorie aboue mentioned, from the sixe hundreth yeere of our LORD, vntill our owne time, horrible abominations hath beene hat∣ched, so farre surpassing the defections preceeding the sixe and seuenth hundreth yeere of our LORD as the darknes of the win∣ter night goeth beyonde the darkenesse of the summer night. Beside the doctrine of Images, where of Monkes were the prin∣cipall authors: yea, and Paulus Cyprius, before hee coulde pro∣cure the gathering of the second Councill of Nice entred into a Monastrie, as it were into the shop and office house of Sathan, and with his vntimous sorrowing moued the Empresse Jrene to gather the Councill fore-saide. But beside this (I say) Monks
were the first forgers of the doctrine of Transsubstantiation: for Damascene expreely writeth, : that is, the very Bread and Wine are changed into the Bodie and Blood of the LORD. And againe Damascen. d Orthohox. fid. b. 4. cap. 14 he saieth, : that is, the Bread and the Wine are not a figure of the Bodie and Blood of CHRIST, but the verie Dei-fied Bodie of our LORD. This errour was receiued, dispersed, and propagated, the more willingly in Monastries, because it was forged by the braine of a Monke. Likewise the doctrine of the merite of mens workes, cuen such workes as are superstitious, and not commanded in the Law of GOD: This doctrine (I say) as a banner displaide against the merites of the sufferings of CHRIST, it was chiefely spred out in Monastries, wherein the grand our of great and le∣gible letters made their opinion knowne to the worlde, OR∣DO SERVAT US DUCIT AD VIT AM, that is, The keeping of order (to wit, Monasticke rules) leadeth to life. Other points of erronious & corrapt doctrine, where of they are not the first inuenters, they are the principall propagators of them: as namely, prayer for the dead, and the opinion of pur∣gatorie: these errours inuented of old, had died out long agoe as the fires of Aetna and Vesuvius haue done, if that the fables of Monkes (dayly renewed) had not beene like vnto fewell, in∣tertaining the flame of foolish opinions. The vilde and vnchaste conuersation of the Monkes, from the sixe hundreth yeere of our LORD, vntill our time, he who vndertaketh to describe it, vndertaketh an nnecessarie worke, as they did who of olde commended Hrcules, whom no man did : euen so they, who presume to describe the vn∣chastitie of Monastries and Nunneries, they spend time in vaine to prou that thin, which no man can denie: yea, and their owne speaches contine a confession o the Guiltines, of vnchaste liuing. When any of their number is dprehended in whore∣doe and adurie, they do not aggre g th fault as a shame and dishonou done vnto their holy Order. but rather exte∣nue the horrour of sinne, saving, it is better to bee a secrete whore-monger, than an open Heretique. The commendation
that the Poet Nigellus giueth to the Nunnes of the Gilbertine or∣der, in our neighbour Countrey, is but slender: namely this, that when they were aged they left off bearing of children. This Order began in ENGLAND, ANNO 1140. The Monkes and Nunnes of our owne Countrey, where they were best knowne, they were worst liked: and hey might haue suffered a triall of anie persons, except of neighbours, and such as knew them well. In other Countreyes, albeit the turpitude of an vnchaste life was couered with lesse transparent vailes, al∣wayes GOD is like vnto himselfe, and hee hateth the workers Psal. 5. 6 of iniquitie. Let S. Adonei a Monke of Rowm bee an exampla∣rie type of the maners of manie others, when hee fell ouer the bridge in the night time, and drowned in the water of Seane, the good and euill Angels stroue for his soule, because it was to bee doubted, whether his foote-steps led to the Church, or to Hist. Magd. Cent. 10 cap. 6 his harlot: And in ende the decision of this controuersie, was referred to RICHARD Duke of Normandie. It appeareth by this fable, inuented by Normand Monkes, that their purpose was not only to excuse the villanie of Adonei, and to count him a Saint, but also to encourage themselues to lasciuiousnesse, be∣cause the good Angels woulde striue for the soule of a villane, who was cled with an holie Monkish habite, and at last the de∣cision of the controuersie must bee referred to some mortall man: not vnlike vnto Paris, who was more fauourabiie incli∣ned to Venus, then hee was either to Ino, or Minerva. Now it is time to speake of the multiplied number of the or∣ders of Monkes, not to make a perfect reherall of them, but to let the Reader vnderstand, that the woride groned vnder the charge of an importable burthen, which neither were they willing to shake off, nor able to beare it. Ouer and beside the multiplied number of the branches of the Augustine and Benedictine Orders, aboue specified, other Orders also sprang vp, such as the order of the Charterus Monkes, where of Br a man bo ne i Colne was the author, ANNO 1080. It is rumo∣red that a certaine man in Paris died, who was renowned for the honestie of an vnreproueable life: notwithstanding after his death, in audience of the people, who were assembled to per∣forme
the last funerall duetie to him, hee sate vp in the bire, and vttered terrible wordes, that hee was accused, and in the righteous judgement of GOD condemned. Bruno was pre∣sent, and heard these tragicall wordes, and saide vnto the peo∣ple, If so bee that this man bee condemned, it is not possible that any man can bee saued, except hee renounce the worlde: And so being accompanied with a few followers, he went into a Wildernesse, nere to Gratianopolis, and was the author of a new Order of the Charterus Monkes, whose continuall abstinence from flesh, vnmanerly silence, and purging with fire the foote∣steps of women, was in their opinion a renouncing of the world. If this bee true, the people of Aethiopia called , haue renounced the worlde, and are neerer to the Kingdome of GOD, then the Charterus Monkes. By the like Diabolicall inuention the Order of Catherina de Senis was found out, ANNO 1455. The marks of CHRISTS sufferinges, the spousing Ring shee receiued from CHRIST, with foure pretious Pearles of inestimable value, the emptying her body of her owne heart, to the ende the heart of CHRIST might bee thrust in place of it, What are all these forgeries, but as the filthie exhalation of a stirred mire of vncleanenesse? yet are these fables published to the worlde, in that booke la∣den with lies, called Chronica Chronicorum: yea, and this woman was canonized by Pope Pius the seconde, ANNO 1470. And the Order of S. Catherene was receiued amongst other holy orders. Hospitalarii, Templarii, Teutonici gladiatores, are reckoned amongst orders of Monkes, yet was their emploiment more in desen∣ding Christians from the injurie of Infidels, then in reading, praying, or any other spirituail exercises. What became of these Templarii, after they were dispersed throughout EUROPE, and whether they were justly or vnjustly cut off all at one time, by the ordinance of Clemens the fift, in the Councill of Vienne, I omit to speake: but whether they had beene guiltie or inno∣cent, it was but small clemencie in Pope Clem. to giue out a sen∣tence of death against so many, before they were warned, heard, and sufficiently conuicted of faults laide vnto their charge.
The Orders of Carmeles, who dwelt vpon Mount Carmell, 1. Reg. 18 42 where Helias prayed, and of Camaldinenses, Ioannites, the Order of white Monkes, of the holy Trinitie, of S. Clara, of Penitentiers and scourgers of themselues, of Crosse-bearers, and Starre∣bearers, of Minimes, and of Bonehomes, of Penitent sisters, of Saccit, of Bethlehemites, of the seruantes of Marie, of Georgians, and many more. This multiplication of Orders declareth, that there was greater care amongst late Monkes, to find out some dissimilitude of habite and ceremonies amongst themselues, then to conforme themselues to the similitude of CHRIST. The Orders of the Franciscans and Dominicans, ouerspred the worlde, about the 1200. yeere of our LORD: Their num∣ber in short time was mightilie increased: so that the Francis∣ans rejoyced, that there were founde of their Order in diuers Nations two thousande, one hundreth, fourescore and sixe Monasteries. And the Dominicans numbred foure thousande, one hundreth and fourtie sixe Monasteries in EUROPE, all professing their Order, as Creccelius, sometime an Augustine Monke, reckoneth. These were like vnto the Frogs of AEGYPT, whose number made them to bee fearefull: And like vnto the Exod. 8. 6 Grasse-hopprs of AEGYPT, which ate the residue that re∣mained, Ibid. 10. 5 and escaped from the Haile, These were like vnto Mothes in a garment, like Myce in a barne, like Caterpillers amongst corne, and roust in mettals, so offensiue vnto the world, that the people groned for the oppression of begging Friers, The Dominicans followed the rules of the Augustine Monks: & this is the cause wherefore Crecclius, of whom we spake before, reckoneth not the Dominicans as one of the principall stockes and rootes, from which other Orders as branches did proceed. Both these Orders of Franciscans and Dominicans, had their al∣lowance and confirmation from Innocentius the third, who drea∣med that the Church of Laterane was bowing and inclining to fall, and that saint Francis and saint Dominicke set to their shoul∣ders, to vphold the decaying Church of Laterane. What won∣der is it, that these Orders teach a doctrine of lyes & dreames, whose confirmation coulde not bee obtained, vntill Pope Inno∣centius
the third dreamed that these two did vphold the Church of Laterane. In the Sermones of the begging Friers saint Fran∣cis is extolled with excessiue praises, as if by long fasting, earnest prayers, and deepe meditations, he had beene counted worthie to see Celestiall visions, and to bee marked in handes, feete, and side, with the markes of the sufferinges of CHRIST. Not∣withstanding of all these Hyperbolicke praises, in the verie be∣ginning of his deuotion, hee beganne at theft, and stole mo∣ney from his father, and gaue it to a Priest, to helpe the repa∣ration of the Church of saint Damian. And for this cause his father tooke him, and did beate him with manie stripes. In so farre, that they who doe pleade saint Francis cause, deny Hist. Magd. Cent. 13 Cap. 10 not, that hee tooke away his fathers money, neither doe they deny, that for this cause hee was chastised by his father, but they call the foresaide chastilement persecution. The Monkes and Friers of the Order of Saint DOMI∣NICKE doe attribute vnto him, both in his life-time and af∣ter his death, the working of so manie and so great miracles, as if it were their purpose not onely to preferre him vnto saint FRANCIS, but also to equali him to CHRIST, and to his Apostles. Notwithstanding his greatest deuotion was in beating himselfe thrise uerie night with an yron chaine, part∣lie Hist. Magd. ibidem. for his owne sinnes, partlie for the sinnes of other men who were aliue, and partlie for the sinnes of those who were in pur∣gatorie. This fact (I saie) was as foolish and derogatorie to the honour due to CHRIST, and to the merites of his suf∣feringes, as anie thing that was done by that notable foole saint FRANCIS. The latest Orders, such as the Iacobines and Capuscings, are but branches of the Francisane and Dominicane Orders, and are fa∣mous, as Erostratus was, rather for euill, then for good. The lapuscings are fine Trumpetters, to proclaime warre-fare against the Citie of GOD: And the Iacobines are souldiours of Sathan, to put hande to worke, and to fight against the Heauen, in not sparing the Anointed of GOD, and him who was anointed
with that Celestiall oile that came from aboue, as they them∣selues and others of their Religion doe affirme. Concerning the Iesuites, who may more properlie bee cal∣led Layolites then Iesuites, because they walke rather in the foote-steps of Layola, the author of their sect, then in the foote∣steps of IESUS, who neuer taught any man to follow the way of Cain, as they doe: But Layola was a souldiour, and deli∣ted Epist. Iude in shedding of blood. Of them (I say) I am in doubt whe∣ther to call them an Order or not: for the old Aenigma is reui∣ued in them, Vir, non vir, percussit, non percussit, lapide, non lapide, avem, non avem, super arbore, non arbore. Euen so the Layolites may be called an order, and not an ordere, because they will not be bound vnto a certaine habite, as a distinguishing note, separa∣ting them from other Orders, lest by their habite they shoulde bee discouered, and made knowne to Princes, against whose estate they trafficke with most treasonable attemptes: neither will they conteine themselues within their owne boundes, as if they woulde counterfeit the Apostles, but with a preposterous counterfeiting called by the Gracians . The Apostles were the Ambassadours of CHRIST, the Iesuites are the am∣bassadours of the antichrist, the Apostles endeuoured to set vp the Throne of CHRIST, by preaching the death of CHRIST, the Iesuites endeuour to repaire the losse of the antichrist, with the slaughter of Christian Princes. O generation of Vipers the broode alreadie conceiued in their venomous breastes, will bee their destruction, as it is the destruction of the feminine Vipers: but I leaue a description of their bloodie attemptes to others, who haue better knowledge of the profundities of Sa∣than, more clearely manifested in them then it was of olde in the tenne persecuting Emperours. To all these fore-mentioned Orders, one thing is common, that they are all obliged & bound by vowes of chastity, pouerty & obedience, euery one to the attēdance of his owne order: the Layolites haue added the vow of temperancie, without which cu∣stody it is hard to keepe chastitie: the vow of chastitie is good,
prouiding that Matrimonial chastity be included vnder the ge∣nerality of the word Chastity, seeing that Marriage is honoura∣ble among all, and the bed vndefiled. But the vow of Virginall Hebr. 13. 4 chastitie, is the sacrifice of fooles, as if a man would vow to bee a Preacher, before hee were perswaded that GOD had vouch∣safed vpon him the gift of preaching: Euen so it is a foolish thing to any man to binde himselfe by a solemne vow to Vir∣ginall chastitie, before hee bee fully perswaded, that GOD hath vouchsafed vpon him that rare gift. Vnder pretence of the vow of pouertie, a number of Monks, especiallie Abbots, Channons, and Capitulare Monkes, as it were Bishops chiefe Counsellers, haue heaped vp infinite riches, and in pompe, wealth, ciuile preheminence and splen∣dor of worldly magnificence haue ouer-went Earles, Lordes, and Barons, in many Countreys: and in the meane time they were but a nest of idle bellies, keeping for a fashion seuen Ca∣nonicall houres, which they spent in reading & singing (oftener by their substitutes, then by themselues) as if they had beene caled Canonici, for keeping Canonicall houres, and not for stdying holy Canonicke Scripture, to the ende they might bee able to interprete it to the vtilitie of others. Concerning the vowe of obedience kept in all Orders, but more stricktly amongst the Layolites, then all the rest, The com∣mandement of GOD should haue beene obserued, whereinto Mumb. 30 verse, 4. 5 the authoritie of the father must bee regarded, in such sort, that if hee ratifie not the vowe of his young daughter, remaining as yet in his house, then her vowe is vndone, and cannot stande: Euen so the vowes that mortall men doe make in earth, if they bee not ratified by the allowance of our Heauenly Father, they are vndone, and cannot consist and stand. Notwithstan∣ding the commanders amongst the Layolites, will trie the obe∣dience of their disciples in maters vnhonest, vncomly, vngodly, and deuilish such as to walter themselues into a filthie mire, if so it please the commander to enjoine & to violate the comman∣dement of the Phision, in rubbing that thing outwardly vpon
the bodie which the Phisition commanded to bee eaten by the diseased person, and in drinking that liquor of oile wherewith the Phisition appointed the bodie to be anointed. Also in com∣manding heir disciples to kill Christian Princes. Hath GOD kept silence in his blessed word, and by his taciturnitie giuen a secrete allowance to such vngodly commandementes? Reade the Scriptures of GOD, whereinto hee forbiddeth to touch the Anointed of the LORD: but they haue touched the Anoin∣ted Psal. 105 verse, 15 of the LORD, euen betwixt the Porch and the Altar, not asha∣med to defile their holy sacrament of auricular confession, with treasonable consultations against the Anointed of the LORD. To conclude, The Orders of Monkes from appearance of commendable beginninges, haue degenerated so farre, that they who seemed to bee Starres fixed in Heauen, and shining with the splendor of Celestiall light, in end they are become busie-bodies, practisers of treasons, vnder colour of late inuented sacraments, whom the LORD in his owne time with the tempest of his wrath will scatter as dust, and no man shall bee able to gather them againe. FINIS.
CENTVRIE V. CHAP I OF EMPEROVRS. Arcadius, and Honorius. THE good Emperour Theodosius left behind him two sonnes, Arca∣dius to gouerne the East parts, and Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 23 Honorius the West. Arcadius reigned 14. yeeres: Hee was a meeke and godly Emperour, but not coura∣gious as his father had bene. His simplicitie was abused by Eudoxia his wife, Ruffinus his chiefe Coun∣seller, and Gania his chiefe Cap∣taine. Eudoxia was offended at the freedome that Chrysostome vsed in reprouing of sinne: And by the meanes of Theophilus B. of Alexandria procured his deposition. Theophilus had gathe∣red a Synode at the oake of Chalcedon: because Chrysostome bee∣ing warned, refused to compeare, they conuict him of contu∣macie, and deposed him: after deposition followed banish∣ment, from which the affectioned minds of the people toward their Pastor constrained the Emperour to reduce him againe: yet Eudoxia continued in her malice, and procured by the
meanes of Theophilus, his second deposition and banishment, with commandement to iourney his weake body with exces∣siue trauailes from place to place vntill he concluded his life. Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 28. Reffinus stirred vp Alaricus King of the Gothes to fight against Arcadius, secretly presuming to the kingdome, but his tre sonable interprises beeing espied, he was slaine, & his head and right hand were hung vp vpon the port of Constantinople. Gama of a simple souldier was made generall commander of Arcadius his armie: he waxed insolent and proud, affected the Kingdome, beeing in blood a stranger, of the Nation of the Gothes, in religion an Arrian. Hee craued a petition of the Emperour, that he might haue one of the Churches of Con∣stantinople whereinto hee might serue GOD according to his Thod lib. 5. cap. 32 owne forme: but this petition by the prudent aduise of Chry∣sostome giuen to the Emperour, was reiected, and the pride of Gaina for a time was something abated. Honorius reigned in the West, a'l the dayes of his brother Arcadius, and 15. yeere after his death. The whole time of his gouernment was very troublesome. Gildo his lieuetenant in Hist. Magd. cont. 5. cap. 3 Africke vsurped the dominion of Africke, and Maseelzer his brother, who at the first detested treasonable interprises in his brother, yet afterward followed his brothers footsteps, and re∣ceiued the iust deserued reward of his vnconstancie, for hee was slaine by his owne souldiers. In like maner Stilico the Emperours father in law (for Honorius maried his daughter) and the Em∣perours chiefe Counseller, presumed to drawe the King∣dome to Eucherius his sonne, and stirred vp the Uandales, Bur∣gundians, Almans, and diuerso others to inuade the Kingdome of France, to the end that Honorius beeing ouercharged with the multitude of vnsupportable businesses, might permit Stilics to set forward to the designes of his own heart. About this time Rhadagisus a Sythian accompanied with an armie of two hun∣dreth Funct. chron. thousand Gothes, came to Italie. And the helpe of Valdinus and Sarus captaines of the Hunnes and Gothes beeing obtained, Rhadagisus was suddenly surprised, himselfe was taken & stran∣gled, many were slaine, the most part were sold, whereupon followed incredible cheapnesse of seruants, so that flockes of seruants were sold for one piece of gold in Italie.
The next great trouble came by Alaricus King of the We∣sterne Gothes, who inuaded Italie, and camped about Ravenna, with whome Honorius entred into a capitulation, and promised to him and his retinue a dwelling place in France. The Gothes Compend. Td. cata∣log. Caesarum. matched toward their appointed dwelling place: But Stilico the Emperours father in law followed after them, and set vpon them at vnawares, when they suspected none euill, and slew a great number of them. By this the Emperour clearely perceiued the treason of Stilico, and caused him and his sonne to be slaine, but to his owne great hurt, he appointed no generall cōmander of the armie in his place. Alaricus and his armie were inraged, partly by their losse, and partly by remembrance of the coue∣nant made with them, and incontinent violated: Therefore they turned backe againe, & inuaded Italie with all their might, and besieged Rome two yeeres, and tooke it in the yeere of our LORD 410, or as some reckone 412. In the mids of burning, slay∣ing, Platin. in vita Zosimi 1 robbing & militare outrage, some fauour was showne by the expresse commandement of Alaricus to such as fled to Christian Zozom. lib. 9 cap. 9 Churches for safetie of their liues. Alaricus led his armie from Rome, and was purposed to saile to Africke, there to settle his abode, but beeing driuen backe with tempestuous windes, hee wintred in Consentia where hee ended his life. Alaricus in his lifetime had giuen in marriage Placidia the sister of Honorius to Ataulphus his neerest kinsman, and Ataulphus after the death of Functii chro∣nic. Alaricus reigned ouer the Gothes. The Gothes vnder the conduct of Ataulphus retarned backe againe to Rome. Placidia through her intercession purchased great well to the towne of Rome: the Gothes abstained from burning, and shedding of blood, and ad∣dressed themselues toward France and Spaine. Theodosius 2. and Valentinian 3. AFter Arcadius reigned his sonne Theodosius the second 42. yeeres. His vncle Honorius gouerned in the West: After whose death the whole gouernment perteined to Yheodosius, who associated vnto himselfe Valentinian the third, the sonne of Placidia his fathers sister. Theodosius in godlines was like vnto his grandfather, in collecting a great labrarie of good bookes, no∣thing inferiour to Ptolemaus Philadelphus. In collecting in one
short summe the lawes of kings & princes: he tread a path where∣into Iustinian walked, following Theodosius example, and benefi∣ted all men desirous of learning. His house was like vnto a san∣ctuarie for exercises of reading of holy Scripture, and deuote Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 22 Idem lib. 7. cap. 42. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3 prayers. He was of a meeke and tractable nature almost beyond measure: his facilitie in subscribing vnread letters was corrected by the prudent aduise of his sister Pulcheria. In these two Em∣perours time the estate was mightily crossed and troubled by strangers. By the procurement of Bonifacius deputie of Africke, the Vandales vnder the cōduct of Gensericus their King came into Africke, tooke the towne of Carthage, & other principall townes and settled their abode in that countrie. Valentinian 3. Empe∣rour of the West was compelled to bind vp a couenant with the Vandales, and to assigne vnto them a limited bounds in Africke for their dwelling place. The Vandales were partly Pagans and partly Arrians, where∣by it came to passe that the true Church in Africke was perse∣cuted with no lesse inhumanitie, and barbarous crueltie by Gensericus King of the Vandales, than it was in the dayes of the Emperour Dioclesiane. Attila King of the Hunnes encombred the Romane empire with greater troubles. Theodosius Emperour of the East bought peace with payment of a yeerely tribute of gold to Attila. Valentinian the third by the meanes of Aëtius his chiefe Counseller allured Theodoricus King of the Westerne Gothes to take his part. The parties fought in the fieldes called Catalaunici a great fight, whereinto a hundreth and fourescore thousand men were slaine. And Theodoricus King of the Gothes in this battell lost his life. Attila was compelled to flee. Thrasimun∣dus the sonne of Theodoricus was very willing to pursue Attila, for desire hee had to reuenge his fathers slaughter, but hee was stayed by Aëtius. This counsell seemes to bee the occasion of his death: for Valentinian commanded to cutt off Aëtius. Attila finding that the Romane armie was destitute of the conduct of so wise a gouernour, as Aëtius was, hee tooke courage againe, and in great rage set himselfe against Italie, tooke the townes of Aquileia, Ticinum and Millane, sacked and ruined them, and set himselfe directly against Rome, of intention to haue vsed the like crueltie also against it. But Leo bishop of Rome went
foorth, and with gentle words so mitigated his mind, that he left sieging of the towne of Rome. Soone after this Attila died, the terrour of the world, and the whip wherewith GOD scour∣ged many nations. Valentinian the thirde, after he had reigned in whole 30. yeeres, was cut off for the slaughter of Aetius. Maximus vsur∣ped the Kingdome, and violently tooke vnto himselfe Endoxia the relict of Valentinian: but she was relieued againe by Gensericus King of Vandales, who led an armie to Rome, and spoyled the towne, relieued Eudoxia, and caried her and her daughters to Africke, and gaue Honoricus his sonne in marriage vnto her el∣dest daughter. Maximus was cut in pieces by the people, and his body was cast into Tyber. From this time foorth the Empire vtterly decayed in the West, vntill the dayes of Carolus Mag∣nus, Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 16 so that Auitus, Richimex, Maioranus, Severus, Anthemius, Olybrius, Glycerius, Nepos, Orestes, and his sonne Augustulus, they continued so shorte time, and gouerned so vnprospe∣rously, that their names may bee left out of the rolle of Em∣perours. Nowe to returne againe to Theodosius Emperour in the East, a King beloued of GOD, in so much that by praier he obtained of GOD a wonderfull deliuerance to Ardaburius captaine of his armie. When his vncle had ended his life, Ardaburius was sent against a tyrant Iohn, who did vsurpe the Kingdome in the West. The ship whereinto Ardaburius sailed by tempest of weather was driuen to Rauenna, where the tyrant Iohn tooke him prisoner. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 23 Aspar the captaines sonne, beeing conducted by an Angell of GOD (as Socrates writtteth) entred into Rauenna, by the passage of the loch, which was neuer found dried vp before that time: the portes of the towne were patent, so that Aspar and his armie entred into the towne, slew the tyrant Iohn, and relieued Ardaburius his father. This miraculous deliuerance is thought to bee the fruite of the effectuall prayers of the godly Emperour. His death was procured by a fall from his horse, after which hee was diseased, and died: an Emperour worthie of euerlasting remembrance.
Martianus. MARTIANVS by the meanes of Pulcheria the sister of Theodosius was aduanced to the Kingdome, with whome Valentinian the thirde, of whome I haue already spoken, reigned 4. yeeres. Martianus, albeit he obtained the gouern∣ment Catalog. Cae∣sarum in a time most troublesome, when the Gothes, Vandales, Hunnes, and Herulis had disquieted the estate of the Romane em∣pire out of measure, yet by the prouidence of GOD the short time of his gouernment was peaceable, for he reigned not fully Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 8 7. yeere, and he left behind him great griefe in the hearts of the people, because a gouernement so good and godly endured so short time. Anent the councell of Chalcedon assembled by him, it is to be referred vnto the owne place. Leo. AFTER Martianus succeeded Leo, and gouerned 17. yeeres. He was godly and peaceable, not vnlike to Martia∣nus his predecessor. Hee interponed his authoritie to suppresse those who proudly despised the councell of Chalcedon, and ob∣stinatly maintained the heresie of Eutyches. Notwithstanding the madnes and rage of Eutychian heretiques began in his time, immediatly after the report of the death of Martianus. Proce∣rius B. of Alexandria was cruelly slaine by them in the Church, Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 8 harled through the streets, and with beastly cruelty they chewed the intrals of his body, hauing before ordained Timotheus to bee their bishop. The Emperour banished Timotheus beeing first foreseene, that not onely Leo bishop of Rome, but also all other bishops of chiefe account, damned the ordination of Timotheus. The terrible earthquake which destroyed a part of Idem cap. 12 & 13. Antiochia, and the more terrible fire which wasted a great part of Constantinople, were fore-running tokens of the great deso∣lation that should ensue by the detestable heresie of Eutyches.
Zeno. THE Emperour Leo left his Kingdome to his nephew the sonne of Zeno called Leo, but hee fell sicke and died, when he had scarce reigned 1. yeere. So his father Zeno had the empe∣riall soueraignitie 17 yeeres: he was of a bad religion, dissolute in manners, intemperate, effeminate, and hated of all men. Therefore Basiliscus conspired against him, and Zeno fled. Basi∣liscus Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 3. was a persecuter of the true faith, damned by his ency∣clicke letters the Councell of Chalcedon: restored Eutychian bi∣shops to their places againe: such as Timotheus Arideus to Alexandria, Petrus Cnapheus to Antiochia, Paulus to Ephesus: fiue hundreth preachers were found, who subscribed Basiliscus Idem lib. 3. cap. 5 letters, and cursed the councell of Chalcedon. So great a plague it is, either to haue ignorant Pastors, who know not the trueth of GOD, or cowardly teachers, who will suffer no rebuke for the knowne trueth of GOD. Zeno returned to his Kingdome againe within 2 yeres: he banished Basiliscus to Cappadocia, where Idem cap. 8 & 11 he was slaine with his wife and children. He abolished the en∣cyclicke letters of Basiliscus, and eiected Petrus Cnapheus out of Antiochia, and Paulus out of Ephesus. Timotheus of Alexandria was old, infirme, and neere to the last period of his life, els also he had bene eiected out of Alexandria: for Zeno, not for loue of the true faith, but for hatred of the name of Basiliscus endeuou∣red to vndoe all that he had done. Vnder the reigne of Zeno came Odoacer assisted with people of Pannonia called Rugi, Turcilingi, and Heruli, and inuaded Italie, and slew Orestes at Papia, and compelled his sonne Augu∣stulus, Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3 to denude himselfe of emperiall honours: so that the Ro∣mane empire, as it beganne in the person of Augustus Caesar, so likewise it ended in the person of Augustulus the sonne of Orestes. Odoacer would not vsurpe the glorious title of an Em∣perour, but called himselfe King of Italie, and reigned 14, yeeres. Zeno on the other part stirred vp Theodoricus King of Gothes to expell Odoacer out of Italie. Theodoricus encountred with him diuerse times, and preuailed. In end he besieged him in Ravenna, vntill a couenant of peace was bound vp betwixt them, but it lasted short time: for Theodoricus vnder pretence of
friendship, called Odoacer & his sons to a banket, & caused them cruelly to be slain. Afterward he reigned himselfe alone in Italic 33, yeres. he reedified the townes in Italie which by violence of warres had bene wasted & made desolate, & was well beloued of the people: & albeit in religion he was an Arrian, yet he ab∣stained from persecution of those who professed the true faith. The Eutychian persecution is alreadie begun, but the Arrian persecution is not as yet ended. Hunnericus sonne of Gensericus Hst. Magd. ibid. King of Vandales, was an Arrian persecuter so vnmercifull, that in Africke where his dominion was, he had neither compassion on sexe or age: he banished at one time fiue thousand professors of the true faith. And such as were infirme and weake, & could neither trauell by foot nor horse, he commanded cords to bee knit to their legges, and to traile them through the rough pla∣ces of the wildernes, and by such merciles dealing, the death of many innocent people was procured: but the LORD suffered not this crueltie to be vnpunished: for the LORD plagued the Vandales with famine, and pest, and Hunnericus was so long tor∣mented with venemous biles, that in end he was cōsumed with vermine, and in great miserie ended his most wretched life. In this Centurie studying to brevitie, I haue ouerpassed some remarkable thinges, such as the deceitfull practises of the wise men of Persia, to diuert the affection of their King Isdigedes from the loue he caried to Maruthas bishop in Mesopotamia, and Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 8. Embassadour of Theodosius 2. This historie is set downe at length by Socrates. In like maner the calamitie of the Iewes who dwelt in the Islle of Candie, and were piteously abused by a deceiuing fellow, who called himselfe Moses, and promised to lead them through the Mediterran sea, to their owne lande, as Moses ledde the people of Israel through the read sea: this calamitie read in the 7. booke of the ecclesiastical historie of Socrates. chap. 38. The Jewes were cōmanded to cast themselues into the sea, & to swim vnto a rocke: but they were drowned in the sea. & dashed vpon the hard rocke, and by the meanes of Christian fishers some . . few escaped. This historie is referred vnto the 434. yeere of our LORD: so that it sell foorth vnder the reigne of Theodosius 2. The miraculous conucrsion of the Burgundians to the faith of CHRIST about the same time I haue of purpose ouerpassed, willing to be short, & to giue a viewe of the historie to those who are desirous to read
CHAP. II. Of Pastors and Doctors. Patriarches of Rome. AFTER Siricius succeeded Anastatius, and go∣uerned the Church of Rome 3. yeeres. About the yeere of our LORD 401. he entred into his office, Anastatius. Socrar lib. 7. cap. 9. Platina d vitis pontif. Innocētius 1. Socrat lib. 7. cap. 9. vnder the reigne of Honorius. He made a constitu∣tion, that men should not sit, but stand when the gospell was read. After him succeeded Innocentius, and conti∣nued in his office 15. yeeres: hee was an aduersare to the Nova∣tians, and Pelagians, and was friendly to Iohn Chrysostome, whose deposition Eudoxia the Emperours wife had procured. Innocen∣tius sent to Honorius, and Arcadius 5. Bishops, and two Presbi∣ters, to procure the appointment of a generall councill, where∣into the cause of Chrysostome might be examined: for he coun∣ted the gathering of an aecumenicke Councill the only remedy Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 26 whereby the vehement tempest of so great commotions as fol∣lowed the deposition and banishment of Chrysostome, could be settled: but the aduersares of Chrysostome procured the messen∣gers Ibid. cap. 28. of Innocentius to be ignominiously entreated, & sent backe againe. Heere let the iudicious Reader marke that the power of conuocating generall Councills appertained to the Empe∣rour, and not vnto the bishop of Rome. In this mans time (ac∣cording to mine opinion) the Romane Church began to swell in pride, and to vsurpe iurisdiction ouer other Churches, hauing no better ground than a personall and temporall act of the Councill of Sardica. Zosimus the successor of Innocentius continued not aboue the Zosimus. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11. space of a yeere and 5. moneths in office, or 2. yeeres, as Socrates writteth. To him Platina ascribeth this constitution, that no seruant should bee assumed into the clergie, but he lamenteth, that not onely seruants, but also the sonnes of strange women, and flagitious persons, were admitted to spirituall offices to the great detriment of the Church. He sent Faustinus a B. to the Councill of Carthage, with 2. presbyters of the Romane Church
to craue that no matter of moment and importance should be Platin de it. Zosimi. done without aduise of the Romane Bishop. Hee pretended an act of the Councill of Nice alloting this great dignitie to the  Romane chaire: but after diligent search of the principall regi∣sters  Hist. Magd. cen. 5. cap. 10 no such act was found. I expected that Onuphrius now should haue compeared, & in so maine a point said some thing to the cause, which with tooth & naile he defendeth, but in his annotations I see nothing except a diuersitie of counting of yeres, for in his reakoning Zosimus cōtinued 3. yeres, 4. months. To Zosimus succeeded Bonifacius 1. and gouerned 3. yeeres. At his election there was a schisine in Rome. Some elected Bonifacius, Bonifa∣cius 1. others Eulalius to be their bishop. The Emperour Honorius bani∣shed them both from Rome, but after 7. moneths Bonifacius was Socra lib. 7 cap. 11 restored, and was B. of Rome: at this time they were bishoppes of Rome, to whom the Emperour gaue allowance, but they were not Emperours, to whom the B. of Rome gaue allowance. After Bonifacius, Coelestinus gouerned the Church of Rome, 8, yeeres, 10. months, 17. dayes. He was an aduersare to the Nova∣tians, Coelesti∣nus 1. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11 Pelagians, and to Nestorius & his adherents. Socrates taketh him vp right, that he was bitter against the Novatians, for desire of preheminence. In Constantinople they who professed the true faith, had libertie to conueene, albeit in matters of discipline their opinion was not sound: but Coelestinus silenced Rusticola the bishop of the Nouatians for desire to haue all bishops stou∣ping vnder his soueraignitie. Marke the words of Socrates in the Latine translation bearing these words: Romano Episcopatu Socrat. ibid. iam olim perinde at que Alexandrino ultra sacerdotii limites ad externum dominatum progresso: that is, the bishopricke of Rome, euen of old, hauing stepped beyond the limites of priest-hood to an externall domination, as the bishopricke of Alexandria had done before. Pelagius had propagated his heresie in the Isle of Britaine. But Coelestinus hindred the propagation of a wicked he∣resie, by sending Germanus to the Brittones, and Palladius to the Scots. Coelestinus more impudently than his predecessors, Innocen∣tius, Zosimus, and Bonifacius, vrged a submission of the Churches Hist. Magd. . 5 cap. 10 of Carthage vnto the Romane chaire, and that they should accept in fauour Appiarius whome they had excommunicated for his appellation from his owne bishop to the bishop of Rome: but
the fathers of the 6. Councill of Carthage would neither absolue Appiarius before his repentance were knowne, neither would they stoup vnder the iurisdiction of the Romane Church. To Coelestinus succeeded Sixtus 3, & cōtinued in office 8 yeeres, Xystus or Sixtus. 19. dayes. Hee was accused of the crime of Adulterieby Bassus: but Sixtus was found innocent, & Bassus was found a calumnia∣tor & a false accuser: therefore he was banished by the Empe∣rour Platina de vitis pontif. Valentinian 3. & his goods were appointed to goe to the vse of the Church. Bassus after his banishment desired to be re∣ceiued againe in fauour with Sixtus, but his petitiō was reiected as if hee had sinned against the holy Ghost. Notwithstanding the flatterers of the chaire of Rome writteth that Sixtus buried Hist. Magd. cen. 5. ca. 1 Bassus his accuser with his owne handes, which seemeth to bee repugnant to his vnmercifull forme of dealing in his life-time. After Sixtus Leo a deacon in Rome, & absent out of the town, Leo. was chosen to be bishop of Rome, & ruled 21. yeeres, 1. month, 13. daies: he stirred vp the Emp. Theodosius 2. to appoint a Coun∣cill Platina de vit. pontif. for suppressing the error of Eutyches, wherinto it was rather confirmed than suppressed by the craft of Dioscorus B. of Alexan∣dria, wherof I shal speake hereafter, GOD willing, & how Eutyches was cōdemned in the Councill of Chalcedon vnder the reigne of Martianus. His wisdome & eloquence in mitigating the furie of Attila hath bene handled in the preceeding historie. Amongst Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10 his constitutions none is more louable then his constitution against ambitious men, who presumeth continually to high places. Hee ordained that they should be depriued both of the higher, and the lower place: of the lower place for their pride, because they had proudly despised it: of the higher, because they had auaritiously suted it. In discipline nothing is better than to beare downe those place-mongers, whereby it com∣meth to passe, that prerogatiue of place is preferred to prero∣gatiue of gift, Followed Hilarius & cōtinued 7. yeere, 3. months, Hilarius 1. Simplicius. 10. dayes. To whom succeeded Simplicius, & cōtinued 15. yeeres 1, month. 7. dayes. Felix 3. was the successor of Simplicius, and Foelix. 3. continued 8. yeeres, 11. months, 17. dayes. He gouerned the Church of Rome in the time of the Emperour Zeno, and in the time, when Odoacer and Theodoricus contended for the supe∣rioritie of Italie: he was nothing inferiour to his antecessors in Platina de vit. Pentis.
zeale to aduance the supremacie of the Romane chaire: for hee excommunicated Acatius B. of Constantinople, because he craued not his aduise in receiuing Petrus Moggus in fauour, like as he had craued his aduise at the first when hee excommunicated him. This Petrus Moggus was an Eutychian heretique, and was iustly excommunicated by Acatius, who vsed the aduise of Foelix B. of Rome, in excommunicating him. But when Petrus Moggus testified his repentance by his supplicant bill, contai∣ning Hist. Magd. cent 5. cap. 10 the recantation of his error, Acatius absolued him. This grieued the proud stomacke of Foelix, because his aduise was not craued in all things. Therefore he excommunicated Acatius, as said is. Acatius little regarding the pride of the Romane bi∣shop, gaue to Foelix an hard meeting: for hee both excommuni∣cated Foelix, and razed his name out of the rolle of Bishops. Ambition was the first great cancker-worme that consumed and defaced the beautie of the Church of Rome. Gelasius the successor of Foelix, an Africane borne, ruled 4. Gelasius 1 yeeres, 8. moneths, 17. dayes. The estate of Italie was so trou∣bled by the incursions of barbarous people, that the maners of the people were altogether dissolute (for hee ministred in the last yeeres of Theodoricus King of Italie) therefore hee ende∣uoured to establish discipline in the Church: hee claimed supe∣rioritie ouer all Churches more manifestly than any of his Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 10 predecessors had done, for hee affirmed that the Church of Rome should iudge all Churches, and should bee iudged by no Church, and that the right of Apellation to the bishop of Rome from all partes in the world, was not a supposititious act of the Nicene Councill, as the 6. Councill of Carthage had determined, but that it was autentique, and a Right giuen by them in deede to the Romane Church: neither would hee be reconciled with the Orientall bishops in any cace, except they would first allow the excommunication of Acatius, and raze his name out of the rolle of Bishops Platina writteth that hee did excommuni∣cate Platin. de . Pontif. the Emperour Anastatius a fauourer of the Eutychian heresie, but this example once begun, was practised in most prodigall maner by the bishops of Rome against Emperours, who main∣tained no heresie.
Patriarches of Constantinople. IOHN CHRYSOSTOME succeeded to Nectarius in the Iohn Chryso∣stome. dayes of Arcadius, and Honorius: hee had bene an helper to Flavianus B. of Antiochia, from whence hee was transported by the authoritie of the Emperour Arcadius, and ordained bishop Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 27 of Constantinople, sore against the heartes of the people of An∣tiochia. In Oratrie hee had profited in the schoole of Libanius, in Philosophie in the schoole of Andragathius beyond his fel∣lowes. Zozom. lib. 8 cap. 2 His libertie in reproouing of sinne both in Court and Clergie, procured against him the hatred of Eudoxia the Em∣price, and the hatred of the Clergie, who could not suffer their corrupt maners to be reformed. Theophilus B. of Alexan∣dria was opposed to Chrysostome from the verie first time of his ordination: for hee endeuoured to haue Isidorus a Monke brought vp in the wildernes of Schethis, & afterward a Presby∣ter in Alexandria to bee seated in Constantinople: but when his plotted course failed, he became an enemie to Chrysostome, and gladly embraced all occasions, whereby hee might procure his deposition: how hee was vniustly deposed, banished, and iour∣neyed to death by the malice of Eudoxia, and Theophilus it hath beene sufficiently declared in the preceeding historie. Other things (Godwilling) shall be handled in the description of the life of Theophilus. Chrysostome gouerned the Church of Constanti∣nople 7. yeeres. Chytr. chron. After Chrysostome, Arsatius the brother of Nectarius an aged Arsatius. man (for he was fourscore yeere old) ministred in Constantino∣ple scarce 2. yeeres. Atticus the successor of Arsatius ministred 21. yeeres, Hee Atticus. was admitted to this office in time of the minoritie of Theodo∣sius 2. at what time Antbemius his counseller (a man in wisdome Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 1, 2. Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 27. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 34 Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 4. inferiour to none who liued in his time) gouerned the af∣faires of the Kingdome. Atticus was not vnlearned, he was god∣ly and prudent: he insert the name of Chrysostome into the rolle of Bishops, and in the publicke Liturgie made an honourable commemoration of his name, & perswaded Cyrillus B. of Alex∣andria to doe the like. Socrates affirmeth that GOD by his mini∣strie wrought miraculous workes, and that a lewe sicke of the
palsie was baptized by him in the Name of IESVS, and im∣mediatly after Baptisme was healed from his disease. In staying the progresse of superstition, whereinto people, euen at this time were enclined, hee kythed himselfe prudent: for some of the people of Constantinople resorted to the sepulchre of Sabba∣tius to pray, & to doe some worship to the defunct: but Atticus Hist. Magd cent 5. cap. 10 caused his body in the night season to be raised, & to be buried in another place vnknowne to the foresaid superstitious people, & so they left off their resorting to the sepulchre of Sabbatius. Sisinnius after Atticus ministred 2. yeeres. Nestorius followed him in office, but his name is to bee reade in the catalogue of Sisinnius. heretiques. Next to Nestorius was Maximianus, who continued not aboue 2. yeeres, and 5. months. To whom succeeded Proclus, Maximia∣nus. Proclus. and continued 12 yeeres. Flauianus after Proclus ministred in the dayes of Theodosius the second, a faithfull man in his calling, but scarcely did hee Flauianus. compleet 2. yeeres in his ministrie. He deposed and excommu∣nicated Eutyches an Abbot in Constantinople, the authour of a pernitious heresie. Hee was cruelly tramped vnder foot in the second Councill of Ephesus called , that is, a councill of brigandrie, Dioscorus B. of Alexandria, in that Councill fauoured the opinion of Eutyches, and by tumultuare dealing, so oppres∣sed Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 10 Flavianus, that he procured his death, They who attribute too much to the authoritie of Councills, let them fasten their eyes vpon this Councill, and learne, that pos ly Councils may erre, and that Patriarches, such as Dioscorus was, may erre euen in matters of faith. To Flauianus succeeded Anatolius, and gouerned 8. yeeres. And after him Gennadius 13. yeeres. Acatius the successor of Gen∣nadius Anatolius. ministred 17. yeeres vnder the Emperour Zeno. Hee gaue Gennadius Acatius. a good proofe of his constancie in the true faith, at that time when Basiliscus (who draue Zeno from his Kingdome) con∣demned the Councill of Chalcedon, and compelled bishops to subscribe to the errour of Eutyches. The great dissention that fell out betwixt him and the Romane bishops, for Petrus Mog∣gus B. of Alexandria, and Petrus Cnapheus B. of Antiochia, it was not for communicating with them before they renounced their error, as some learned men do affirme, but for plaine emulatiō,
such as was of old betwixt Pompeius & Caesar, the one could not Functii com∣ment. in chro∣nol. abide a cōpanion, the other could not abide a superior. The Ro∣mane Church manifestly cōtended for superiority: the Church of Constantinople on the other part perceiuing what aduantage the Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 1 Romane bishops took of this, that their counsel was craued, they left off the doing of it. And this moued the proud stomacke of Gelasius (after the death of Acatius) to brast out in these arrogant Glasius in epift. ad Dar∣dan. 11. words, that the Church of Rome had power to iudge of all other Churches, but no Church had power to iudge of the Church of Rome, yea, and Platina a late writer groundeth the supremacie of the bishop of Rome vpon this, that Acatius B. of Constantinople Platin. de vit. Simplicii wrote vnto him, to damne the heretical opinion of Petrus Mog∣gus B. of Alexandria: albeit the faith of PETER was grounded Matth. 16. vpon a sure rocke, yet the supremacie of the Romane bishops is grounded only vpon such sandie ground, as Platina and other flatterers of the Romane chaire doe cast out in their writings. After Acatius succeeded Phrauitas. otherwise called Flauitas Phrauitas. & continued scarse 4. month: some thinke that GOD in wrath shortned his dayes, because that by vnlawfull meanes hee attai∣ned Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10 to that dignitie to bee B. of Constantinople. The Synodicke letter of Petrus Moggus B. of Alexandria written to Flauitas, and pondered by his successor Euphemius, wherein Petrus Moggus accurseth the Councill of Chalcedon, it will clearely prooue in∣constancie in Petrus Moggus, but not a fault in Acatius: for ma∣ny Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 23. are like vnto dogs, who returne vnto their vomite againe, & this blame must rest in the bosome of fickle & vnconstant men, & not in the bosome of honest men who are deceaued by them. Euphemius succeeded to Flauitas, & ministred vnder the reigne Euphemius of Zeno and Anastatius, & would not compleet the ceremonies of the inauguratiōn of Anastatius vntill the time that by his oath Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10. and hand writ, hee promised to be a desender of the true faith & of the actes of the Councill of Chalcedon. This hand-writ Ana∣statius craued to be deliuered backe againe to him, which when he could not obtaine, Euphemius was compelled to flie for safe∣tie of his life. When he pondered the Synodicke letter of Petrus Moggus, hee abhorred his name, & inserted againe the name of Foelix B. of Rome into the catalogue of bishops, which was razed & cancelled by Acatius one of his predecessors.
Patriarches of Alexandria. THEOPHILVS ministred in Alexandria in the dayess of Theodosius, and of his sonnes Arcadius and Honorius, a man Theophi∣lus. both reproouable in his life, and inconstant in his faith. Hee sent Isidorus a Monke to Rome, there to lurke secretly, and to expect the euent of the battell that was to be foughten betwixt Theodosius and Maximus, and to congratulate the victor. When he returned from Rome hee endeuoured to promote him to the bishopricke of Constantinople: but Iohn Chrysostome was pre∣ferred to him. After this, he can not keepe friendship with Isido∣rus, whome hee intended once to haue preferred, but vpon a light occasion cast him off, and excommunicated him, because Isidorus would not deliuer to him the money left in testementall legacie to be distributed to the poore. This money which Theo∣plnlus sister had left to the vse foresaide, Theophilus craued that it might bee put in his handes, to bee employed to building and repairing of Churches: but Isidorus answered, that the money Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 12. put in his custodie should be bestowed according to the will of the defunct. And that it was a worke more acceptable to GOD to support the poore, who were the liuing temples of GOD, then to build olde and ruinous walles. Therefore Theophilus hated, and excommunicated Isidorus: for this cause Isidorus left Alexandria, and addressed himselfe to the wildernes of Schethis, where hee complained to Ammonius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, and Enthymius called Longifratres of the iniurie that Theophilus had Sozom. ibid. done vnto him, who intreated Theophilus to receiue Isidorus in fauour againe, and to admit him to his communion: but Theo∣philus gaue vnto them an euill reward for their trauailes, for hee hated them, and finding that there was diuers opinions amongst the Monkes of Nitria and Schethis, hee put fuell to the fire, to the ende that diuersitie of affection might bee added to diuersitie of Opinion: a man in all his courses malitious and deceatfull. Longi fratres fled to Constantinople to complaine to the Emperour Arcadius of the malitiousnes of Theophilus, and they were humanely and courteously receiued by Chrysostome, but not admitted to the participation of the holy mysteries, vntill their cause had beene first iudged. To the rest of the Monkes
who dwelt in Nitria & Schethis the malice of Theophilus was not vnknowne. And 500. of them (especially such as were Anthropo∣morphite) came from the wildernes of Nia, of intention to haue slaine Theophilus, but he met them, & with gentle and flattering Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 7. words lenified their anger, for hee said vnto them: Brethren, I see your faces as the face of GOD. They took his words in this sense, as if he had said, that GOD was fashioned according to the likensse of a mans body. Therefore they desird him to abiure the doctrine of Origen, which thing he willingly did, for he hated the bookes of Origen: and so hee escaped the danger. The next practse of his malice was against Iohn Chrysostome B. of Constantinople, whom he hated, because he had receiued & cour∣teously intreated Isidorus, & Longi fratres, who came to Constanti∣nople, of intention to accus him. In this matter he dealt deceit∣fully like vnto a crastie foxe lying in waite, vntill he found occa∣sion to set on. First, he reconciled himselfe to Epiphanius bishop of Salamin in Cyprus, and mooud him to gather a Councill in Cyprus for damning the bookes of Origen, and to wite to Iohn Chrysstome, that he should doe the like in his bouds: but Chry∣sostome tooke litle regard of the Councill of Epiphanius, other things were more necessare than to trouble the memoriall of a man that was dead long agoe. Theophilus was glad to haue this vantage, that Epiphanius a man of geat account was on his side, and so soone as hee found that Eudoxia the Emperour Acadius wife with courteours and some of the Clergie were incensed against Chrysostome, hee was in readines as a firebrand of Satan to execute all euill turnes. So the man of GOD (as hath beene declared) was deposed, banished, and vniustly put to death by Eudoxia and Theophtlus two chiefe procurers of it. yrillus the nephew of Theophtlus of his brothers side, suc∣ceeded Cyrillus. to Theophtlus, and ministred 32. yeeres: a man learned, zealou an lactiue: his ministration was vnder the reignes of Theodos 2, & Ualentinian 3. He was an aduerfare to hereques, in his dayes, especially to Nestorius B. of Constantinople. who de∣nied the personall vnion of the diuine and humane Nature in CHRIST, whose opinion as hereticall, was damned in the Councill of Ephesas. Cyrillus caried some greater pompe & maie∣stie than became the preachers of the humilitie of CHRISTS
crosse. For he reuenged the iniurie that the Lewes had done vn∣to Christians in the night time, by setting vpon their Syna∣gogues, slaying a great number of them, banishing others, & distributing their substance as a prey to the multitude that fol∣lowed . lib. 7: cap. 13. him. The Iewes had dwelt in Alexandria from the dayes of Alexander the great to that time, but now by furie of Cyrillus they were vttely vndone and scattered. Orestes the deputie of Theodosius 2. was in the towne, to whom Cyillus wold not com∣plaine of the iniurie done by the Iewes against Christians, but at his owne hand vsurping the office of the ciuill Magistate hee set vpon the Iewes, slew, scattered & spoyled them, as hath bene aboue mentioned. This was the ground of vnsupportable dis∣cord betwixt Orestes and Cyrillus, in so much, that 500. Monks of Nitria came out of the wildernes to Alexandria,, to support . lib. 7. cap. 14. Cyrillus their bishop: One of them called Ammonius wounded the gouernour Orestes, and when he was taken & punished vnto the death, Cyrillus called him a Martyre, buried him in the Church, changed his name, and called him , that is, admirable. The Romane bishops claimed to a superioritie ouer their brethrene, but Cyrillus B. of Alexandria plainly pretended to a superioritie ouer ciuill Magistrats. This moued Socrates wri∣ting of Coelesinus 1, to say, that the bishops of Rome and Alex∣andria had stepped beyond the limites of priesthood, to the af∣fectation of an externall domination. The bishops of Rome kept . lib. 7. . 1 1 their owne pride, and borrowed from Alexandria a proud usur∣pation of domination ouer ciuill Magistrats: but the wise pro∣uidence and prouident wisdome of our GOD would haue the mouthes of the bishops of Rome opned to condemne that ciuill domination which their successors afterward most proudly vsurped. Marke what Gelasius writeth, that before the comming . of CHRIST some persons, such as Melchisedeck, were both Kings and Priests. This (saith he) Sathan imitating in his mem∣bers wold haue Pagan Emperours to be called Pontisicesmaximi, & Imperatores: but when he came who was indeed both King & Priest, (to wit) CHRIST, neither did the King take vpon him the priestly dignitie, neither the priest the kingly authoritie. Dioscorus, who succeeded to Cyrillus, his name is to be read in the catalogue of heretickes, but Proterius was the true successor, Proteius.
in regard he kept the faith, but he was cruelly flaine by the Hest. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10 fauourers of Dioscorus, immediatly after the death of the Empe∣tour Martianus. Timotheus Salophaciolus ministred in Alexandria 23 yeeres, 6, Timo∣theus Salo∣phaciolus. Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 1 1 months, in the dayes of Zeno & Basihscus, Albeit Basihscus aduan∣ced another Timotheus, furnamed Aelurus to be B. of Alexandria, yet when Zeno was restored to his soueraignitie againe Salopha∣ciolus receiued his place againe. After Timotheus Salophaciolus followed Ioannes Tabennesiota whom the Emp. Zeno iustly hated for his periurie: for hee came Io annes Tabenne∣siotu. Hist. Magd. cen. 5. ca. 10 ambassadour to the Emperour & craued, that when their B. was dead, the Church of Alexandria might haue libertie to choose their own bishop: the Emp. suspected that he was ambitiously suting the place to himselfe, & therefore did bind him with an oath, that when the place should happen to vaike, hee should make no moyen to possesse himselfe into that rowme: but hee did the contrare & accepted the place: therefore the Emp. Zen banished him: he fled to Foelix B. of Rome, who being misinfor∣med by Ioannes Tabennesiota made him to thinke, that hee was persecuted for the true faith, as Athanasius was, who fled to Iulius bishop of Rome: but the Emperours letter assured him of the contrarie, that hee was banished for periurie. Petrus Moggus who followed, is to bee reckoned in an other catalogue. Patriarches of Antiochia. To Flavianus in Antiochia succeeded Porphyrius, whose or∣dination Porphyrius Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 9 was more secret than becomes the ordination of bishops to be, in absence of the people, when they were deliting themselues with the sight of stage playes in Daphue. He consen∣ted to the deposition of Iohn Chrysostome. No Man whom I haue read, maketh reuerent record of him, except Theodoretus, who possibly doth not examine him narrowly, but for the dignitie Theodorot. lib. 5. cap. 35 of his place letteth him passe with a note of commenda∣tion. After Porphyrius succeeded Alexander, a man much cōmen∣ded by Theod. for eloquence, but more for peace: for he was Alexandr
not onely an instrument to quiet the estate of his own Church of Antiochia, but also to quiet the estate of other Churches, and hee was the fist who inserted the name of Iohn Chrysostome into the catalogue of holy bishoppes, and peswaded others to doe the same. Theodotus was his successor 4. yeeres, of whom little is Theodo∣tus. Ioanes Gmma∣ticas. written. To Theodotus succeeded Ioannes Gramaticus & ministred 18. yeere. In his time the Councill of Ephesus was assembled by Theo∣dosius 2. and Valentinian 3. In it there was a pitifull distraction betwixt Iohn B of Antiochia and Cyrillus B. of Alexandria for a light cse. Not because John B. of Antiochia fauoured the he∣rsie of Nstorius: but in rspect hee thought Cyrillus too hastie in giuing out a definitiu. sentence before the full number of his brethren were assembled together. This dissention was af∣terward reconcild, and Ioannes sent to Cyrillus Paulus Emise∣nus, and craued his fiendship, and was reconciled with him. Domnus the successor of Iannes was an vnconstant man. Hee Domnus. consented to the deposition of Eutyches. and afterward in the Councill called  hee consented to th reposition of Euty∣hes. He receiued a iust recompence of his vnconstancie: for the second Councill of Ephesus deposed him, and ordained Maxi∣mus B. of Antiochia Maximns was admitted B. of Antiochia by the second Coun∣cill Maximu of Ephesus. He was present at the Councill of Chalcedon, whereinto albeit the second Councill of Ephesus was damned as hereticall, and all the actes of it were abrogated, yet they gaue allowance to the deposition of Domnus. and to the admis∣sion . lib. 2. cap ultim. of Maximus, which thing came to passe by this occasion, Leo B, of Rome had receiued Maximus to his communion before the Councill of Chalcedon (albeit hee had receiued ordination from an hereticall Councill) and the ambassadours of Leo were . Magd. . 5. ap. 10. prsidents in the Councill of Chalcedon: therefore they ouerpas∣sed lightly, and with allowance any fact that was done by the B. of Rome. But all the world was set in busines, when Acatius re∣ceiued in fauour Petrus Moggus, because it was done without foreknowledge of the Bishop of Rome. To Maximus succeeded Martyrius, who beeing absent at Martyrius. Constantmople for necessar affaires of his own Church, Petrus Gna∣pheus stale away the hearts of the people from him, so that at his
returning he was compelled to leaue Antiochia, with this good∣night, Theo  lib. 1. I forsake a disobedient Clergie, arebellious people, and a defiled Church, reseruing vnto my selfe the dignitie of Priesthood. Petrus Gnapheus for his desertes is worthy to bee reakoned in Petrus Gnapheus. the rolle of heretiques. First, he supplanted Martyrius by vn∣honst meanes in the dayes of the Emperour Leo. Secondly hee ordained a clause to bee added to that part of the Liturgie, which is called trisagios, sanctus Deus, sanctus fortis, sanctus im∣mortalis. To this (I say) he added, qui crucifius est pro nobis, which Hi. Mag. nt. 5. cap. 10 forme of speaking (albeit  may tollerate it to be spoken) was said by him in an hereticall sense, as if the diui∣nitie had suffered paine. Thirdly he attributed diuine honours vnto the Virgin MARIE, and ordained that her name should bee in called vpon in the publicke prayers' of the Church. Hee was banished by the Emperour Leo, and restored by Basiliscus: hee damned the Councill of Chaloedon, and was banished the se∣cond time by the Emperour Zeno, and excommunicate by F∣lix B. of Rome, & Acatius B. of Constantinople. Stephanus succeeded Stephanus. in his rowme, and was incontinent made out of the way by the faction of Gnapheus. Calandion succeeded to Stephanus, and hee Calandion likewise was banished by the Emperour Zeno. In end Petrus Gnapheus subscribed the henoticke letters of Zeno (these were letters containing a summe of the true faith, an approbation of godly Councils, and a protestation of vnitie with godly Bi∣shops)  in the greeke language signifieth vnitiue or con∣iunctiue, and henoticke letters were letters to procure peace and vnion in the Church. By these meanes Gnapheus obtained his place againe, and is reakoned in the Catalogue of Bishops only for the subscription of the Emperours henoticke letters. Patriarches of Jerusalem. To Cyrillus succeded Ioannes Nepos. After him Polythronius mi∣nistred in Ierusalem. Hee was oft accused, and oftentimes Ioannes Nepos. Polythro∣nius. absolued. His chiefe accusation was this, that he counted him∣slfe the supreme bishop of all bishops. Sixtus 3. B. of Rome was serious in this turne, because hee thought that the apple of his eye was touched when supremacie was spoken of. Therefore hee
sent 8. ambassadours to Jerusalem: a Conncill of 70. bishops was gathered, & Polythonius was found innocent. Notwithstanding he was conuict of some other faultes, namly that hee refused to consecrate a Church vntill 10. pounds of gold were payed vnto him: for this cause he was ordained to dwell without the town, a Vicar to supplie his roome, and a portion to bee allotted to him for his sustentation. This portion appointed for his susten∣tation, when hee sawe the people of Jerusalem pinched with fa∣mine, he sold it, and supported their necessitie, and was for his louing affection to his flocke, restored to his office againe. To him succeeded Iuvenalis, whose vnconstancie GOD iusily punished. He was present at the first Councill of Ephesus, & con∣sented Iuvenalis. to the excommunication of Nestorius. Hee was present likewise at the second Councill of Ephesus, and consented to the restitution of Eutyches. Hee was deposed in the Councill of . lib. . cap. 10. Chalcedon, & receiued in fauour againe after humble confession of his fault. This is that famous author, whome the Romane Church citeth for the fable of the Assumption of the Virgine MARIE. When hee returned to Ierusalem, a number of tur∣bulent Monks arose vp against him, and desired him to accurse the Councill of Chalcedon, which when hee refused to doe, they chused another bishop called Theodosius: but the Emperour Martianus commandement was strait to fetch Theodosius aliue vn∣to him: therefore he fled, and Juvenalis returned againe vnto his place. The names of Anastatius and Martyrius who followed Iuvenalis, for their assenting to Basiliscus, and to Petrus Gnapheus Anatatius. Mattyrius. are not worthie to be insert in this catalogue. Of other Pastors and Doctors. THeodoritus was B. of Cyrus a towne in Syria, whose builder seemes to haue beene Cyrus King of Persia, a man of excel∣lent learning, liued vnder the Emperours, Theodosius 2. Valenti∣nian Theodori∣tus. 3. and Martianus. Hee had the ouersight of eightie pa∣rishes lying within his ample diocie. He is bold to affirme in a cerraine Epistle written to Leo bishop of Rome, that by his trauailes a thousand soules within his bounds were reclaimed from the heresie of Marcion. Hee fell into many lamentable
troubles. The ground of all was the extraordinare loue hee ca∣ried toward his owne Patriarch Iohn B. of Antiochia. For like as he accompanied him to the Councill of Ephesus, so likewise hee concurred with him in the deposition of Cyrillus B. of Alexan∣dria, and Memnon B. of Ephesus: but the Councill gathered at Ephesus tooke triall in the cause of Cyrillus and Memnon, and ab∣solued them, and damned Iohn B. of Antiochia, & his complices, Theodoritus was one of the number. The second trouble followed vpon the necke of the first: for by instigation of his patriarch John he wrote against the 12 heades or 12. theses of Cyrillus writ∣ten against Nestorius, wherein he mistaketh the doctrine of Cy∣rillus, as if he had falne into the errour of Apollinaris: but after that Cyrillus wrote a declaration of his owne meaning, it was found that both Cyrillus and Theodoritus professed one faith, and they were reconciled. Neuerthelesse Theodoritus was damned in the second Councill of Ephesus for writting against Cyrillus, neither beeing cited, accused nor conuict of any fault. Theodo∣ritus complained to Leo B. of Rome, of the outrage of Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria, who had damned him in a Councill before hee was heard. Leo absolued him, and the Councill of Chalcedon, after hee had pronounced Anathema against the er∣rours of Nestorius and Eutyches, they in like maner absolued him. And finally after his death in the 5, generall Councill, his writings against the 12. heades of Cyrillus were damned. All these troubles proceeded from one and the selfesame ground, to wit, vpon the extraordinarie loue hee caried toward his pa∣triarch Iohn. This one thing laid aside, he was nothing inferiour to the most wise, acurate, and learned writers of the ancient time. In the first of his learned dialogues called , he prooueth that the Word became flesh with∣out Theod. dialogi 1. cap. 8. changing of the diuine Nature into the humane Nature, or the humane Nature into the diuine. Euen as in the Sacra∣ment of the Supper of the LORD the bread becomes the bo∣dy of the LORD, not by changing the substance of it, but by assuming by grace an other vse than it had, the very symbol ob∣taineth the name of the thing represented by the symbol. When Papists doe read the dialogues of Theodoritus, let them leaue off to brag of the antiquitie of the doctrine of Transsubstantiation,
and take them to the Monke Damascene the first author of their : he continued at least 30 yeeres in his ministrie, and ended his life as is supponed, vnder the reigne of Leo the first. Augustine in his young yeeres was infected with the errour of Augusti∣nus. the Manicheans. His mother Monica watered her face many times with teares, in her prayers begging at GOD his conuer∣sione to the trueth. GOD heard her prayers: hee was sent to Millan to be a teacher of Rhetoricke, by the preaching of Am∣brose B. of Millan, and the deuote behauiour of the people in singing Psalmes to the praise of GOD, the like whereof Augu∣stine had neuer seene in any place before: for men in earth prai∣sing GOD with ardent affection seemed to represent the Angels of heauen, who incessantly praise GOD with vnspakable delite, Also with the reading of the life of Antonius the heremite, he was wonderfully moued, & begn to dislike his former conuersatiō, which he had spent in worldly plesures, and went vnto a quiet garden, accompanied with Alipius: with many teares he bewaled the insolencie of his bypast conuersation, wishing the time to be now come, whereinto without farder delay his soule should be watred with the dew of the conuerting grace of GOD. And as he August.  lib. 8. cap. 12. was powring out the griefe of his wounded heart to GOD with a flood of teares, hee heard a voyce saying vnto him tolle & lege, and againe, tolle & lege, that is to say, take vp and read, take vp and read. At the first heating, he took it to haue bene the voyce of boyes or maides speaking in their play such wordes one to another: but when he looked about, and could see no body, he knew it to be a celestial admonition warning him to take vp the booke of holy Scriptue (which he had in the garden with him) and read. Now the first place that fel in his hands after the ope∣ning of the booke was this: Not in gluttonie, nor drunckennes, nor in chambering, nor wantonnesse, nor in strife or enuying: but put on the Rom. 13. ver. 13, 14 Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought of the flesh, to fulfill the lstes thereof. At the reading whereof he was so fully resolued to for∣sake the vanities of the world, & to become a Christian that im∣mediatly thereafter he was baptized by Ambrose B. of Millan, with his compenion Alipius, and his sonne Adeodatus. After this he returned to Africke, and was coadiutor to Valerius B of Hippe, as Chrysstome was to Flauianus in Antiochia: and fter
them also with extraordinarie giftes of knowledge: but the wri∣ters of this time, especially Evagrius who concludeth his historie with the death of Mauritius, bringeth in many famous men in this Centurie, gifted with power to worke miraculous workes, But when I consider the ende of these miraculous workes, they are brought in, either to confirme the sanctimonie of the monasticke life, the adoration of the Grosse, or some other grosse superstition. Zosymas a Monke is commended by him for his propheticall foreknowledge of the ruine of Antiochia, and for the miracle of the Lion, who slewe the Asse that caried his victualing to Caesarea, and likewise the Lion by his mandate was compelled to beare that same burden which the Asse had borne to the portes of Caesarea. No man is so senslesse, or ignorant, but may perceiue that this lying miracle is brought in, to the con∣firmation Evagr lib. 4. cap. 26. of the excellency of the monastick life The miracle of Thomas B of Apamea, tendeth to the adoration of the tree of the Crosse. The miracle of the fire that came out of Barsaunphius shop Idem lib. 4. cap. 33. at Gaza, & consumed the most part of them who were in com∣panie with Eustochius B of Jerusalem, is a notable lie, and tendeth onely to confirme superstitition. The miracle of the Image of the virgine MARIE, detesting Anatolius an hypocrite, an Idola∣ter, and a sorcerer, and yet insinuating himselfe in familiar ac∣quaintance with Gregorius B. of Antiochia in the dayes of the Em∣perour Tiberius, any man may perceiue that this miracle is for∣ged, Idem lib. 5. cap. 18. Idem lib. 6. cap. 22. not so much for detestation of hypocrisie, Idolatrie, and sorcerie, as for worshipping the Image of the Virgine with a deuote minde. The miracle of Simeones who in his youth mira∣culously tamed a Pard, and fastened his girdle about the necke thereof, and brought it like a catte into the Monasterie and afterward liued vpon the toppes of pillars, and mountaines, sed with branches of trees 68. yeeres: this fable whereunto it tendeth all men doe see. And finally the golden Crosse sent by Idem lib. 6. cap. 21. Cosroes to Sergiopolis tendeth not onely to the invocation of Saintes, but also to put our trust and confidence in them, as the last wordes of the Epistle of Cosroes, and his wife Sira, clear∣ly proporteth. No we let the iudicious Reader pardone mee in preermitting many things written by others, lest I should wea∣rie them by filling their eares with fables and lyes
CHAP. III. Of Heresies. IN this and the next Centurie, I finde that the error of Eu∣tyches is like vnto a root of bitternesse, which budding out with new branches, not seene before, but fostered with the venemous sappe of the old root that seemed to bee aboli∣shed, did mightily perturbe the Church. The errour of the Mono∣thelites was but a branch of the errour of Eutyches, but this be∣longeth to the seuenth Centurie. In this Centurie a great num∣ber of people, especially of Monkes, fauouring the heresie of Eutyches spake against the Councill of Chalcedone, these were called , because they had no principall heade vpon Acephali. whom they depended and they were anteiour to Anthimus, or Anthimius B. of Constantinople, and to Theodosius B. of Alexandria, and Severus B. of Antiochia: therefore they were not called An∣thimians, Theodosians, or Severues, but indeede they might haue beene called Eutychians: alwayes the vulgare name giuen vnto them was . Another branch, which sprang vp from the root of Eutyches . heresie was the errour of those who supponed that the flesh of CHRIST was voide of all kinde of humane infirmitie, expresly contradicting holy Scriptures, which attributeth to the body of CHRIST hunger and wearines, and other infirmities, which Matth. 4. Ioan. 4. he voluntarily accepted for our sakes. And where it is said, that the LORD IESVS did eate and drinke. To this they answered, that hee seemed to eate and drinke as hee did after his esurre∣ction, but hee had no necessitie of eating and drinking, but the veritie of his death stoppeth the mouthes of these here∣tiques: for CHRIST was content to taste of all our infirmities, death it selfe not except, that we might know he will be a mer∣cifull Heb. 5. vers, 2. high Priest, because he hath tasted of our infirmities, and can haue compassion of those who are in trouble. In this opi∣nion was the Emperour Iustinian in his olde dayes, whose vices did almost equall his vertues, especially in comporting so
much with Theodora the Empresse, to the great aduancement of the errour of Eutyches, and hinderance of the Gospell. In this Centurie the defenders of the bookes of Origenc, such Originist. as Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea Cappadocia, and the Monkes of Nova Laura, whom Eustochius B. of Jerusalem eiected out of their monasteries were counted heretiques, as wil be declared hereaf∣ter (Godwilling in the head of Councills. Finally, there were some heretiques, who durst derogate  perfection of knowledge to the Sonne of GOD in his diuine Nature: these were called Agnoitae, whome I leaue as buried in the dust, and according to their name, neuer worthy to haue beene knowne in the world. CHAP. IIII. Of Councills. THE schisme that fell out in the election of Symmachus The coun∣cill of R∣venna. was the cause of the gathering of the Councill of Ra∣uenna. Laurentius was his competitour. In this Councill it was found that Symmachus was first ordeined, and that the most part both of Clergie and people adherd to him: therefore he was declared to be bishop of Rome and Lanrentius was ordeined bishop of Nuceria. The multiplied number of Councills in Symmachus time, all Sixe Coun∣cils holden at Rome in Symmach time. conueened by the authoritie of Theodoricus King of Gothes, who reigned in Italie. All this number of Councills (I say) was as∣sembled for matters of litle importance, except the fourth and fifth Councill, whereinto a lible of accusations was giuen in against Symmachus, but he compeared not before the Councill to answere, yet was hee absolued by the most part of the Councill (beeing his owne fauourers) chiefly for this reason,
because they thought that the high Pricst should be iudged by no man, but his doings should bee examined onely before the Trihunall of GOD. Marke how this matter goeth: the bishoppes Hi Magd. nt 6. ap. 9 of Rome are lying vnder the feet of the Gothes, neither haue they libertie to assemble themselues together, except that licence be sought, and obteined from Theodorius King of Gothes. Not with∣standing supremacie that great Idole, whereat they aimed con∣tinually, runneth so high in their heades, that the flatterers of the bishop of Rome would absolue him, as a man whose actions came not vnder the iudicature of mortall men. His accusers protested in write, that if the successours of PETER should be iudged by no man, then with the est of the priui'edges of their chaire, they had also a piuiledge to sinne, and to doe what they pleased. The Councils of Spaine called Ilerdensc, and Valntinum, assem∣bled The coun∣cils in Spain alled Iler∣dense &  in Valentia are very obscure Councils. In the one ight bishoppes were present: in the other sixe bishoppes. Many new and superstitious Canons were made in these assemblies, and farder I see nothing. In the first called Ilerdense a prohibition of mariage in time of Lent, and three weekes before the sestiuitie of Iohn the Bapst, and betwixt the dayes of the Aduent of our LORD, and the dayes called Epiphania. In the other Councillit was appointed, that in the ordinarie seruice the Gospell should be read after the Epistle. partly in respect that all the people of GOD haue entresse to heare the wholesome precepts of their Sauiour, and partly, in respect that by such hearing, some were found to bee conuerted to the faith, where of it may bee percei∣ued, that the Gospell was read vnto the people into a knowe and intelligible language, els it could not worke faith in the heartes of the hearers. In the twentieth yeere of the reigne of the Emperour Ana∣slatius The coun∣cill of Sid a nationall Councill was assembled at Sidon of eightie bishops, by the procurement of Xenas B. of Hierapolis, for vn∣doing the Councill of Chalcedone. The Emperour had al eadie banished Euphemius, and Macedonius bishops of Constantinople, Yet he found that Flavianus B. of Antiochia, and Helias bishop of Ierusalem altogether disliked and reprooued his proceedings, neither could they admitte the lawe of oblinion, called in the
Greeke language , which the Emperour would haue brought in, to pacifie controuersies in the Church, as ciuile controuersies, at some times haue beene pacifid: for this cause the Emperour Aanastatius set himselfe directly against the trueth of GOD, and gathered this Councill, to vndoe the au∣thoritie of the Councill of Chalcedone. Flavianus, & Helias would not bee present at this vngodly Councill, whereinto they dam∣ned the Councill of Chalcedone, yet they abstained from dam∣ning Flavianus, and Helias, for a time. Neuerthelesse by conti∣nuall accusations of these two bishops, as if they had bene moc∣kers of all the Emperours doings, they procured their banish∣ment, as hath bene declared in the preceeding historie. In the 22. yeere of the reigne of Anastaus, and vnder the reigne of Clodoueus King of France, conueened 32. bishops in the The first Councill of Aurelia. towne of Aurlia, of purpose to settle some order in Ecclesiasti∣call discipline, which through iniurie of time, and irruption of barbarous people into the countrie of France, had beene brought to great dissolution and misorder. The Canons of this Councill are coincident for the most part, with the Canons of all other Councils. The two former Councils assembled in Spaine, namely Iler∣dense, The Co∣cill of Ge∣runda and Casaraugusta and Valentinum, were vnder the reigne of Theodoricus. Now these two Gerundense and Casaraugustanum are ceebrated vnder the same King, to wit, Theodous of the nation of the Gothes reigning in Spaine. In Gerunda seuen bishops conueened, made Ecclesiasticall constitutrons, chiefly anent Baptisme, that Cate∣chumeni should bee baptized on Pashe day, and at Pentecoste, when most slemne conuentions of people were gathered. They who were vnder infmitie and sicknesse, might bee baptized Canon 4. at any time, and the infant, which was likely to die, mightlee Canon, 5. baptized that same day where into it was borne. In Caesaraugusta elenen bishoppes seeme to haue beene conueened. They for∣bid Canon, 2. fasting vpon the LORDS day, for supersution, or for respect of times, or for perswasion. It would appeare that this Coun∣cill had a desire to abolish the rites and customes of the Ma∣tichean heretiques, who were accustmed to fast vpon the Lords day. In the dayes of Hormisda by the mandate of Theodoricus King The Coū∣cill of Rome
of Gothes reigning in Italie, a Councill was assembled at Rome vpon this occasion. It was thought meet by the Emperour Anastatius, Theodoricus King of Italie and many others, that a Councill should be conueened at Heraclea for deciding contro∣uersies in religion. Many bishops resorted to Heraclea aboue the number of 200, but Anastatius suffered no Councill to be hol∣den, thereby incurring the great blame of inconstancie, and carelessenesse in seeking out the trueth: for this cause Theodori∣cus willed Hormisda bishop of Rome to gather a Councill at Rome, whereinto the errour of Eutyches is damned of newe againe, and ambassad ours are ordeined to bee sent to Anastatius the Emperour, and to the bishop of Constantinople, to diuert them, if possible were from the errour of Eutyches, but howe in hu∣manely the ambassadours were intreated, it hath beene decla∣red in the description of the life of Hormisda. Vnder the reigne of the Emperour Iustinus a Synode was ga∣thered The Coū∣cil of Con∣stantinople Hist. Magd. cont. 6 cap. 9 in Constantinople by Ioannes Cappadox. Many grieuous ac∣cusations were giuen in against Severus B. of Antiochia, such as sacrilegious spoyling of Temples, vnder pretence of eschewing causes of Idolatrie, he tooke away the golden doues that hung aboue the fontes, and the altars, and he vttered many blasphemous speeches against the Councill of Chalcedone. Ioan∣nes Cappadox, albeit hee was of a bad religion himselfe, yet the authoritie of the Emperour, and consent of the Councill pro∣cured that Severus should be damned of heresie, whom the Em∣perour also banished, and (as some affirme) punished him also by commanding that his blasphemous tongue should bee cut out. In like maner the Monks of Apamea in a Council conueened The Sy∣node of Syriasecund▪ in Syriasecunda accused Severus of bloody cruelty, & oppression, in besieging of Monastries slaying the Monks, & spoyling their goods. The like accusation was giuen in against Peter B. of Apa∣mea, which accusations beeing sufficiently proued by vnsuspect witnesses this Council damned Severus, & Petrus B. of Apamea. In the fifth yeere of King Abnaricus was the second Councill of Toledo conueened, partly for renuing the ancient constitu∣tions The secōd Councill of Toledo. of the Church, and partly for making new constitutions belonging to Ecclesiasticall discipline. It was ordeined that children whome their parents had dedicated to the Church,
they should not be admitted to the office of a Subdeacon, vntil they were 18. yeeres of age, neither to the office of Deacon, before they were 25. yeeres old, and at the beginning of their admission to the office of a Subdeacon, namely when tey re full 18. yeeres olde (and not before that time) they should bee presented before the Clergie, and people to make an open de∣claration, whether they were of purpose to leade a continent life, or to marie, and these who protested they had not the gift Canon. 1. of continencie, are tolerated by the first Canon of the second Councill of Toledo to marrie. In the yeere of our LORD 551, and in the 24. yeere of the The 5. ge∣neral coun∣cill holden at Constanti∣nople. reigne of the Emperour Iustinian, was a generall Councill as∣sembled at Constantinople. The principall causes of this meeting are expresly set downe by Evagrius lib. 4. cap. 38. First in repect of the controuersie betwixt Eustochius B. of Ierusalem, and Theo∣dorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea Cappadocia. Eustochius cast out the Monkes of Nova Laura, who obstinately defended the errours of Origen. Theodorus Ascidas assisted them, and saide, that Eu∣stochius B. of Ierusalem had dealt cruelly, and inhumanely with his brethren, to pacifie this controuersie was this Councill con∣ueened: Also great disputation was in the Church anent the bookes of Origen, of Theodorus B. of Mopsuesta, and some wri∣tings of Theodoritus B. of Cyrus, and Ibas B. of Edessa: this was the second cause of this great conuention to put an ende vnto these contentious disputations. At this time MENAS was bishop of Constantinople, but hee ended his life in the very time of the generall Councill. The first question mooued in the Councill was this: Whether or no men who were deade, and had ended their course, might lawfully bee cursed and excommunicated. To this EVTYCHIVS (a man before this time of no great account) answered: That  as IOSIAS not onely punished Idolatrous Priestes who were 2. Reg 23. vers. 16. aliue, but also opened the graues of them who were dead, to dishonour them after their death, who had dishonoured GOD in their lifetime: euen so the memorialls of men might be ac∣cursed after their death, who had harmed Christes Church in their lifetime. This was thought by the Fathers of the Councill to be pertinently spoken, & when his answer came to the eares Evag. lib. 4. cap. 38.
of the Emperour Iustinian, hee appointed that hee should be or deined bishop of Constantinople, for Menas died suddenly in time of the Councill. Vigilius B. of Rome was in Constantinople in time of this Councill, but would not bee present at the Councill, lest the dignitie of the Romane chaire should bee impaired, if the Pa∣triarch of Constantinople had beene equalled with him in honour, for Eutychius after Menas, was moderator of the Councill. The generall conuention tooke thi effect, That the writings of Theodorus B. of Mopsuesta were vtterly condemned, and the re∣plyes of Theodoretus to the 12. heades of Cyrilus, together with the letter of Ibas written to Maris a Persian were damned. Finally the errours of Origen were damned, and Theodorus Ascidas, toge∣ther with the Monks of Nova Laura, who defended the errors of Origen, all were excommunicated, and the 4. preceeding ge∣nerall Councils were confirmed with full allowance. The Coun∣cill of Mopsuesta immediatly following, tended onely to this, to knowe when the name of Theodorus sometime B. of Mopsuesta a towne of Cilicia, was razed out of the rolle called sacra dipiycha. And the ancients both of Clergie & people, assured the Empe∣rour Iustinian that the name of Theodorus was razed out of the rolle of holy bishops before their time. Vnder the reigne of Childebertus King of France, were fre∣quent The secōd, thirde, fourth and fifth Coun∣cils of Au∣relia. meetings of Bishops in Aurelia a towne of France com∣monly called Orleans. Many superstitious constitutions were hatched amongst them, especially anent prohibition of mariage, for this doctrine of Deuils had now gotten great vpper hand in the West. The verse of Homer may bee written in the frontispice of these Councills : that is, It is a shame to tarie long, and to returne emptie. If they met so oft, some fruites worthie of their meeting should haue beene brought out to the world, but it is a wearisome thing to trauell a long time in the wildernesse of Arabia, albeit in it there bee large fieldes, yet it is a barren ground, and the paine of weari∣some trauelling is not recompensed with the delite of any re∣freshment that can bee had there. This I write, not to hinder any man from the reading of these Councils also: for some good things are to bee found in them, but to wish that the short time we haue to liue in this world should not be vnfruitfully spent.
In the second Councill simonie is damned, & the receiuing Canon, 4. of money for admitting a man to a spirituall office is vtterly detested. In the thirde Councill periurie is abhorred in a man Canon 8. hauing a spirituall calling, but softly punished by 2. yeeres ex∣cluding of him from the communion. In the fourth Councill, it is ordeined that in the offering of Canon, 4. the holy Calice, nothing shall be presented, except wine onely, vnmixed with water, because it is a sacrilegious thing to trans∣gresse the holy mandate and institution of our Sauiour CHRIST. In the fifth Councill it is condescended, that no man shall Canon 10. be ordained bishop, without consent of King, Clergie and peo∣ple, according to the ancient constitutions of the Church, and that no spirituall office shall be bought by money. The heape of constitutions anent the keeping of Pasche day and Lent, anent the prohibition of mariage betwixt Christians and vnconuerted Iewes, anent seruants not to bee admitted to Ecclesiastical orders, anent assemblies to be at the least yeerely conuocated by bishops, anent Ecclesiasticall rents not to be di∣lapidated. The nature of a short Compend cannot permit mee to insist in such things. Vnder the reigne of Theodobertus King of France, the Fathers who were present at the Councill, of Aurelia, conueened also The coun∣cil of . in the Council of  & ordeined that no man should pre∣sume to the office of a bishop by the fauour of mn , but by the merites of an honest and . That the dead body of a bishop in time of  not be couered with the pall, otherwise called Opertor  corporis which couered the Altar, lest the honour done to the body, should be a polluting of the Altar with many other con∣stitutions, which of purpose I ouerpasse with silence Vnder the reigne of Aribertus King of France, a Council was The coun∣cil of Tours. Canon 5. assembled at Tours. In this Councill it was ordeined, that the Clergie & people in euery Congregatiō should prouide support for their owne poore, & not permit them to wander to vncouth places: for indeed this custome of wandering hath brought in Atheisme amongst the poore, when they leaue their owne
Congregation, they leauealso their owne Pastor, who attended vpon their conuersation, and they fall into the snare of the de∣uil. It was also statute and ordeined, that a bishop should count Canon 13. his wife as his sister, and that he should no maner of way com∣panie with her, and for this cause hee should haue Presbyters, & Deacons so familiarly conuersant with him, that they might beare testimonie of his honest behauiour, to wit, that he neuer companied with his wife. The Romanists who count the prohi∣bition of marriage to bee the soule of their religion, could not ouerpasse this Canon without a censure Now let vs heare what Censura saith. Intellige hunc Canonem uixta usum Orientalis ecclesia, in qua coiugatus promovebatur adsacerdotium: that is, Vnderstand this Canon according to the custome of the Orientall Church, wherein a maried man was promoted to the Priesthood: well ex∣cused. The bishops of Rowen, Burges, Tours, &c. are conueened in the towne of Tours, to prescribe rules to the Orientall Church, or at least rules vnto their owne bishops to liue after the forme of the Orientall Church, which neuer came in their mind to doe, as may evidently be knowne by the sixt generall Councill, Moreouer, it was statute, and ordeined, that no Priest, or Monke should receiue in bed with him another Priest or Monke, Canon 15. to the ende they might bee so vnreproouable, that they would abstaine from all appearance of euill. In this Councill was set downe very strict prohibitions, that no man should oppresse the Church, and conuert vnto his own vse Canon, 25. any thing duely belonging to them, lest he incurrethema∣lediction of Iudas who was a thiefe, and kept the bag and con∣uerted to his owne vse a part of that money which belonged to the poore. In the Councill holden at Paris, order was taken concerning The council of Paris. admitting of bishops to their offices that no man should be ad∣mitted bishop, without the full consent of Clergie and people, and that no man should presume by fauour of Princes onely, without the consents foresaide, to become bishoppe in any place. Recaredus King of Spaine, and of the discent of the Gothes, who The third Councill of . were miserably insected with the Arrian heresie, assen bled 2
Councill of 62. bishops at Toledo, where he renounced the Ar∣ heresie, and embraced the true faith, and the whole nation of the West Gothes in Spaine did the like, about the yeeee of our LORD 585. Hist. Magd. . 6. cap. 9 A Council at Constan∣tinople. Vnder the reigne of Mauritius a Councill was assembled at Constantinople, for trying of the cause of Gregorius B of Antiochia, whom Asterius Deputie in the East had accused of incest: but Gregorius was declared to bee innocent, & his accuser was scour∣ged with roddes, and was banished. In this Councill the name of Oecumenick bishop was attributed to Iohn Patriarch of Con∣stantinople. The first Councill of Matiscon was assembled about the time Three Councils at Matis. Canon. 8. of Pelagius 2, as the second Tome of Councills recordeth. In it commandement was giuen, that no man of the Clergie should cite another man hauing a spirituall office before a seculare iudge. And that a bishop or Presbyter should not intangle himselfe Canon 11. with carnall lust, after hee is promoted to so high dignitie, but the woman who before was his wife, nowe let her bee his sister, and let the husband bee changed into a brother. Marke how subtilly Sathan vnder pretence of lothing matrimoniall chasti∣tie, is bringing in, all kinde of vncleannesse into the Church. The second Councill of Matiscon was conueened in the 24. yere of the reigne of Gunthrannus king of France. In it complaint was made, that Baptisme was ministred vsually vpon ry ho∣ly day, insomuch, that vpon Pasche day, scarce were two or Canon 3. three found to be presented to Baptisme This they ordeined to bee amended, and that no man (except vpon occasion of infir∣mitie) presume to present his child to Baptisme, but to attend vpon the festiuall dayes prescribed of olde, that is, Pasche and Whitsonday. Also it was statute and ordeined, that the Sacrament of the altar should be ministred before any communicant person had Canon 6. tasted of meat or drinke. That no person who fleeth to the Church as to a citie of re∣fuge, be drawne backe againe by violence, from the bosome of Canon 8. the Chuch, or be harmed into that holy place. That a bishop must not bee attached before a secular iudge. Canon 9.
That the houses of bishops shall be kept holy with exercises Canon 13. of prayers and singing of Psalmes, and shall not bee defiled with the barking of dogges, and muting of hankes. That seculare men shall doe reucrence to those who are of Canon 15. the Clergie, euen vnto the lowest degree of them, in such sort that if the secular man doe meete any of the Clergie walking on foot, he shall honour him by vncouering his head: but if the se∣culare man be riding on horsebacke, and the Clergie man on foote, then the secular man shall light downe from his horse, and shall doe reuerence to the Church man: this age smelleth of Antichristian pride. In the third Council at Matiscon there is nothing to be read but a contentious disputation betwixt two bishops, Palladius & Bertramus, & foolish questions scarse worthy to bee disputed in Grāmer schooles, Whether or no a woman may be called homo. A Coun∣cil at Rome. In the yeere of our Lord 595, & in the 13. yeere of the reigne of the Emp. Mauritius, Gregorius 1. bishop of Rome assembled a Council at Rome of 24. bishops, 34. presbyters, whereinto first of all he confirmed the first foure generall Councills. He ordeined that at the celebration of the Masse there should be lesse singing & more reading of Psalmes and Gospel, because weake people transported with the delite of a sweet & delicate voyce, marked not how men of a lewd life drew neere vnto the Altar of GOD. He ordeined also that laicke boyes should not be cubiculars to the bishops of Rome, but that Presbyters, Deacons, or Monks should be witnesses of the honestie of their secret conuersation And that the beare whereinto the body of the B. of Rome is brought forth to bee buried shall not bee oue. spred with any coueing aboue the beare. That for ordination of men in spirituall offices, no reward shall be craued. For like as the bishop should not sell the imposi∣tion of his hands, euen so the minister or notare should not sell his voyce and pen. If hee who is ordeined, voluntarlly giueth any thing as a testimonie of his thankfulnesse, this is not forbid∣den to be receiued. Gregorius standing before the place where the body of S. PE∣TER is buried, pronounced many Anathems, whereinto the
rest of the assemblie with vniforme consent, saide, Amen. Amongst the rest, the Presbyter or Deacon, who marrieth a wise is deliuered to the deuill, and a man who marieth his owne spirtuall sister (whome in our language, we call his gossope) hee is likewise deliuered to an euill Heard to bee kept. Albeit Gregorius bee not counted the worst amongst the bishoppes of Rome, yet when hee followeth not the certaine rule of the writ∣ten worde of GOD, hee is wandering in the mist as boldly as others did before him. The Councills which I haue ouerpassed with silence, such as Gradense, Bracearense, Lateranense, Lugdunense, Pictaviense, Metense: lest I should ouer charge a litle booke with an vnnecessarie bur∣then, or trouble the reader with reading of superstitious rites, damning of old heresies, and of euery contentious disputation, more duely belonging to ciuile iudges than to spirituall con∣uentions, I reserre mine excuse in this to the wisdome of the iudicious Reader.
TREATISES BELONGING TO THE sixt CENTVRIE. A TREATISE Of the worshipping of Images. IN the first 300. yeere of our LORD, Images were not admitted into pla∣ces of adoration. In the fourth, fifth, and sixt Centurie, they are admitted into temples, yet for the most part without opinion, that they should be worshipped, as the letter of Gregorius the first written to Serenus bishop of Marseill cleaely declareth. Nowe it is time to contend against Images, when they are come in such credite, that they are set vp in tem∣ples and places of adoration. And first (Godwilling) I shall intreat of the wordes of  and , what difference is betwuixt them, and the wordes , and  what differences are betwixt these three wordes, lest Idolaters should bee left lurking vnder the sconses of words: when they are denuded of all other ouerlap∣ping couerings, then will they lurke vnder the shadow of an ambiguous word, as a Foxe straitly persued, will lurke vnder the shadow of a fairne. In the second roome, I intend to speake of the Images of the Gentils. In the third roome, of the Images
of the Iewes, and last of all, of the Images of them who beare the name of Christians. First, concerning the names of , and . I affirme that the principall defenders of worshipping of Images of old, put no difference betwixt these two wordes: for Damascene, comparing Images to musicke instruments, he sayeth, That like Damas. oration 3. pro Ima. as the captiue Iewes had instruments of musicke to praise GOD, so in like maner the Babylonians had instruments of musicke to praise their gods. In like maner, saith he, the Pagans had , whereby they honoured their gods, and Christians also haue  whereby they doe honour to the true God, and his Saints: and to bring in a more ancient testimo∣nie, Clemens Alexandrinus taketh , and  for one and the selfe-same thing. Strom. lib. 6. Concerning the words  & . First vnder∣stand that the word perdulia inuented for the adoration to be done to the virgine MARIE is not a word vsed by any approued Author, who writeth in the Greek language the scholastick Do∣ctors, who had already lost the puritie of the Latine language, when they speake vncouth Greeke, they expone themselues to the derision of all learned men. They who are acquainted with scripture language knowe there is no difference betwixt the words , and . In one verse the seruice of GOD, and the seruice of an Idole, are both called  Lue. 16. vers. 13. Gal. 4. vers. 8.. In like maner the worship done to the Gentile gods is called  in these wordes, : that is, Ye serued them. who indeed were not gods. The generalitie of the word  extended both to the seruice of God & man, no man is ignorā of it who is acquainted with the Greeke language yea & a seruile girle may in proper language be called . The Councill of Frankford, I grant, putteth a difference betwixt Idoles & Images, yet in such wise that they forbid adoration of Images, and they count Images worship∣ped to be Idoles. The Gntiles liked Idolatrie the better, be∣cause it was a bood inuented by the imaginations of their own herts, according as the Apostle speaketh, They became vain in Rom. 1. 21 their owne cogittions. The Images of the Gentiles are damned by the Prophet
HABACCVK in these words: What profiteth the Image? for the ma∣ker Habac. 2 vers. 18. of it hath made it an Image. and a teacher of lies, though hee that made it trust thers, when he maketh dumbe Idoles. The Prophet damneth the Images of the Gentiles for many causes. First, be∣cause they are profitable for nothing, they cannot benefite their friend, neither can they noy their enemies, yea, and they can∣not helpe themselues, when they are hewed downe with Persian Isai. 46 axes, and the massie lumpes of their golde, is laide vpon the backes of Camells, groaning vnder the heauie burthen, be∣cause they can make no support to themselues. The Gentiles contended with no lesse obstinacie of incorri∣gible mindes, than the Papistes in our dayes doe, that their images were profitable for some good vse, albeit there was no diuinitie in them, because they led them to a rememberance of their gods: but Augustine affirmeth the contrarie, that Images lead not people vnto their gods, but rather from their gods. In August. psal. 113 others realon 115. witnesse whereof, when the Image of the Sunne was placed in the temple, albeit the Sunne it selfe did shine clearly at the win∣dow, yet the Pagans turned their backes to the Sunne, and their faces toward the Image of the Sunne: so were they not led to the worshipping of their gods, but rather from their worship∣ping by Images. The substance of their Images was gold, siluer, wood, stone, or some other corruptible matter, the forme was fashiomed ac∣cording to the pleasure of the craftesman, who made them. For the most part the gods of the Gentiles had the similitude of men, and for this cause the portrature of Iupiter fashioned by an artificer in Lybia, was as farre different from the portrature of Iupiter formed by an European craftesman, as the men of Lybia in colour, haire, grandure of lippes, and amplenesse of breathing partes they are different from the men of Europe: so were the gods of Lybia blacke in colour, with curling haire, & the gods in Europe had the colour, haire, & proportion of European men. Better it had bene to haue renued men according to the likenes of GOD, than to haue fashioned their gods according to the likenesse of men, yea & greater vanity than this was in forming their gods, at sometime the similitude of a man was mixed with the similitue of a beast, to furnish out the effigie of their
gods. Iupiter Amminius was formed with the body of a man, but with the head of a Ramme. Dagon whome the Philistims wor∣shipped, had the similitude of a man in the vppermost partes, but the similitude of a fish in the lower partes of his body. And Pan the god of shepheards was pictured with hornes in his head, with the seete of goates, and rough in all i body, as if he had beene ouerlapped with the skinne of an vnshorne Ram. They became vaine in their imaginations and their foolish heart Rom. 1. vers. 21. was full of darkenesse. Yea, as the Prophet speaketh, the ma∣kers of them were like vnto them: that is, senslesse, blinde and dead hearted, and so were the worshippers of them. Psal. 115. Against the Gentiles who were Idolaers, a woe is pronoun∣ced Hba.  vers. 11. by the Prophet, in these words, Woe be to him that saith to the wood, awake, and to the dumbe stone, arise vp, &c. Let vs take diligent attendance to these words, because GOD hath spoken them by the mouth of his Prophet. The Gentiles excused their Idolatrie, so did the Iewes theirs, and the Papistes will seeme to honour GOD and his Saints in their Images, but le all fl sh be dumbe and silent, & heare what the LORD speaketh from his Sanctuary, Woe be to him, that saith to wood, awake. The Pagans, Iewes and Pa∣pists are like vno Adoniiah, Ioab, and Abiathar. These were all banqueting together, & euery one of them strengthened ano∣ther in their foolish course and they all said with one consnt, God saue King Adonniah. But there was another kind of confe∣rence 1. Rg. 1. in the chamber of King DAVID, which did vndoe all their conferences aud appointed that SALOMON should reigne: n so notwithstanding of all the fool sh excuses wherewith Gentiles Iewes and Papistes excuse their Idolatrie, GOD is like vno hielfe, and he  a we against it. Te stes thinke  fully stisfied both GOD and good men, when they grant there is no diinitie in the Image, and in substance it is a corruptible thing, and the por∣trature of it is fashioned by the hand of the Craftsmen. Did not the Genles as much? Did not Plato count the Images of most precious substance, most vnprofitable to the people? Did not Fabius Maximus despis the Idoles of Tarentum as angrie Images against their owne people, who depended vpon them? Did not the Poet grant, that it lay in the artificers hand, either to make
a bench, or a god of the wild fig tree, that came into his hands, the verses are vulgarly knowne, and in all mens mouthes. Olim truncus eram ficulinus inutile lignum: Cùm faber incertus scamnum, facerétne Priapum Maluit esse Deum.— Yea & Marcus Varro, whose testimonie August. citeth lib. 4. de Ci∣vitate Dei, hee saide, Qui primi civitatibus simulachr a invexerunt, & metum dempserant, & errorem addiderunt: that is to say, The first in bringers of images into cities, they emptied cities of the feare of GOD, and filled them with errour. If a short descrip∣tion of some vanitie of images could exonere men from the blame of Idolatrie, then might the Gentiles also be freed from the vile imputation of Idolatrie. The Idolatrie of the Jewes fraughted not onely with vanitie, but also with vnthankfulnesse, and a contempt of the lawe of GOD proclaimed from mount Sinai, doth leade vs vnto a deeper consideration of the vilenesse of Idolatrie. The golden Calfe, which they worshipped in the wildernesse, and the staire of Remphan, declare, that the nature of man is so prone and bent to Idolatrie, that we are bent to follow the sinnes of those people, who hath beene most hatefull enemies vnto vs. The Exod. 32. Acts 7. vers. 43. Aegyptians were grieuous oppressors of GODS people, neuer∣thelesse the Iewes followed their Idolatrie, in worshipping the Calfe. On the other part the Moabites and Ammanites hired Ba∣laam Numb. 32. vers. 24. M c. 6. vers 5. Amos 5. vers. 25. to curse them. Notwithstanding of all this, they tooke vp in the wilnernesse the tabernacle of Moloch, and the starre of Rempham, figures which they made to worship them. It is an vnsupportable mischiefe, and a remeadilesse maladie lurking in our corrupt nature, when we are bent to follow the sinnes of people who hate vs, and wishes all kinde of harme to vs both in soule and body, so that learned men vpon great considera∣tions had called Idolatrie , or the madde bentnesse vpon Idoles. When the Apostle PAVL is making a particulare enumera∣tion 1. Cor. 10 vers. 7, 8, 9, 10. of the sinnes which the Iewes committed in the wildernesse, namely, Idolatrie, fornication, tempting of Christ, and mur∣muring, remember that Idolatrie is set in the first place, as the very fountaine of all apostacie and defection from GOD. For
like as in a matrimoniall contract betwixt man and woman, when the principall heade of the contract is broken, and a woman hath giuen her affection and body to anotherman, all the rest of the points of the contract which are subordinate to this, will easily be dissolued: euen so, if Idolatrie once take place in our heartes, so that wee giue the glory of God to creatures, all other defection will easily ensue and follow. Therefore in the dayes of Iosua, when the people were zealous for the glory Iosu. 22. of God, they could not abide any kinde of appearance of de∣fection from the true worship of God: but alas it fareth with zeale, as it doth with a teare that is soone dried vp, so doth the zeale to the glory of God hastely euanish from amongst the children of men. Moreouer it is diligently to be marked, that the Lord is ve∣ry strict and precise in the matter of his worshipping, not onely forbidding to worship the gods of the Canaanites, but also for∣bidding to worship the true God after the forme of the bad Deut. 12. vers. 4. worshipping, but only according to the rule of his own blessed Commandement. And for this cause the ten Tribes of Israel, because they worshipped not God in Ierusalem, but offered sa∣crifices vpon the altars of Bethel Gilgal, and Bsheba, they are counted of God as prophane Aethiopians, & people who were Amos 9. vers. 7. strangers from the couenant of God. Therefore in the matter of diuine worship, let these two rules continually be set before our eyes. First to worshippe God alanerly, and not his creatures, secondly, to worshippe him according to the rle of his owne Commandement alanerly. Finally, amongst the rest of the vnhappie manners of the na∣tion of the Jewes, it is to be noted, that when outward Idolatrie seemed to bee forsaken amongst them, so that they were con∣tent rather to sacrifice their liues, than to suffer the Images of the Romane Emperours to bee set vp in their Temple, At this Iosph. de bel. Iuduc. lib. 2. same time (I say) they were defiled with inward Idolatrie, which is moste abominable of all other Idolatries. For the Idole of all Idoles is this, when a man maketh an Idole of him∣selfe, preferring himselfe to God. & his own will to the Cōman∣dement of God, & his owne wisdome to the misdome of God manisested to the world by his owne deare Sonne Iesus Christ,
but so it is, that the nation of the Iewes, at that same time when they fo sooke the worshipping of Idoles made with mens handes, they forsooke also the Shepheard of their soules euen the true MESSIAS, & preferred a murtherer to him. VVhereof this conlusion may be iustly inferred, that Idolatrie is not rightly fortaken, except all idoles both outward and inward be laid aside. Many wrnings the people of the Iewes gote, to beware of Idolatie, yea the LORD threatned them, that incace they would prouoke the LORD to anger by thinges that were not Deut. 32. vers. 21. Gods,  LORD also would prouoke them to ange by a peo∣ple that was not a people. But when no warning could auaile, the LORD cast them off into a reprobate minde, and receiued the Gntiles to be his peculiar people. But at our very first entrie we haue this warning to be humble and obedient, lest hee who spared not the naturall branches, how much lesse will hee spare Rom. 11. vers. 21. vs, if we make defection. In the last head, I haue to intreat concerning the Images of the Romane Church, which in the sixt Centurie were receiued in∣to places of adoration, yea, and a litle after were adored, and worshipped & finally, the adoration of Images gote allowance in generall Councills. Now seeing I am not intreating of Ima∣ges made for ornament, or for memorie of ciuile actions, but onely of adoration, and the in-bringing of them into places of adoration. Let vs remember that the Apostles were faithfull dis∣pensators of those things, which they receiued from CHRIST, whether it was for the feeding of the bodies, or of the soules of CHRISTS people, when they receiued barlie loaues blessed by Ioan. 6. CHRISTS mouth, and miraculously multiplied, they distributed vnto the people that same bread, and none other, which they receiued out of Christs hands. In like maner they were faithfull dispensatos of that spirituall food, which they receiued from CHRIST to feed the soules of his people vnto eternall life. Now we neuer read, that CHRIST taught his Apostles by pictures & images in the knowledge of his eternall trueth, neither that the Apostles taught any others to know GOD, and to follow the vertuous footsteps of the Saintes, by presenting dum be images vnto their sight: therefore this forme of teaching smelleth of
noueltie, and came not from CHRIST and his Apostles: for the Apostles receiued commandement from CHRIST to preach his Matt. 28. worde, and to minister his Scramentes, but not to present dumbe images to the sight of the people, iustly called by the Prophet HABACCVK doctors of lies. Habac. 2 vers. 18. Secondly, places of holy Scripture, both in the Olde and New Testament, doe so manisestly damne adoration of images, that the moste obstinate desenders of worshipping of Images were compelled to leaue Scripture, and take them to the autho∣ritie of vnwritten traditions, and Damascene expresly calleth the Damas. orat. 2. pro Imagini. worshipping of images , hee forgetteth not to remember the brasen Serpent, and the Cherubims, as the Pa∣pists of our dayes doe continually, yet his conscience compel∣led him to acknowledge, that these similitudes were made for signification, and not for imitation or adoration, els how could he flie from Scripture to the naked warrant of vnwritten tradi∣tion. I knowe the lie is no lesse repugnant to it selfe, than it is vnto the trueth, and all the shifting businesse of Damascene, to shroud the adoration of images, vnder some testimonies of Scripture are vndone by that plaine confession, that it is an vnwritten tradition, els hee would haue saide, it was , that is, both a written and vnwritten tradition. The fables of Damascene, whereby hee would prooue the adora∣tion of images are in absurditie beyond the fabils of Poets, euen in their metamorphosis. For who can abide to read the hunting of Placidas, and the speaking of the beast that was hunted with a crosse betwixt his hornes, shining in brightnesse Damascen, orat. 3 pro Imagini. farre beyond the splendor of the Sunne, with such vanities and lies must the infirmitie of a false doctrine be supported. But Iohn Patriarch of Ierusalem, who writteth Damascenes life, hee writeth that Damascens hande was cut off by the Prince of the Saracens, and was miraculony restored & healed againe by inuocation of the image of the Virgine MARIE. It is not likely, that Damas∣cene who writeth the miracle of Placidas hunting, for confirma∣tion of worshipping of images, that hee could haue pretermit∣ted so great a miracle wrought for the restitution of a member of his owne body, obteined by worshipping of an image, if it had beene a miracle wrought indeed.
But now to leaue Damascene, & the Patriarch of Ierusalem, the writer of the historie of Damascenes life, who hath added vnto the multiplied number of Damascenes lies, an heape laid aboue, to the ende that his 3. orations pro Imaginbus may be like vnto a measure full, & ouerrunning And to conuert me to Councils, wherein as in victuall houses and in barnes, all store of Argu∣ments are laide vp that can serue for the apparent allowance of Images. I superside at this time to speake much of the Coun∣cil gathered by Constantius Copronymus at Constantinople An. 755. whereinto 338. bishoppes vtterly damned the adoration of Images, and the setting of them vp in places where GOD was worshipped, and that for three principall causes. First, be∣cause the making and bowing downe to Images is expresly forbiden in Scripture, & namely in the 2. Commandement of the Decalogue. Secondly, because the picturing of CHRIST (who is both God and man) and representing of him by a similitude is a diuiding of his two natures (so farre as in vs lseth) because his diuine nature cannot be pictured, and his humane nature should not be separated from his diuine nature. Thirdly, because the writings of holy and ancient farhers, damned the worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius, Nazianzenus, c∣hrysostomus, Athanasius, Amphilochius, Theodorus bishop of Ancyra, and Eusebius Pamphili, whose graue sentences all damning adoration of Images, are most worthie to be read. In the rest of this Treatise, I shall set downe (Godwilling) two opposite Councills, the one allowing the adoration of Images, the other disallowing it. The second Councill of Nice vnder the Empresse Irene ann. 789. gaue full allowance to the adoration of Images, out of Asia, and Gracia, and some other parts: with the ambassadours of Adrian bishop of Rome, were assembled 350. bishoppes. On the other part, vnder the reigne of Carolus Magnus Emperour of the VVest, ann. 794. a great Councill was assembled at Francford de maine, wherein the adoration of Images was vtterly disallowed, and the argu∣ments alleadged in the second Councill of Nice for adoration of Images, are clearely refuted in presence of Charles King of France and Emperour of the VVest, and Theophilactus and Stephanus ambassadours of the bishoppe of Rome. In these two
opposite Councills, let the iudicious Reader marke the great prouidence of GOD, who hath appointed, that there should bee contradiction to the lying doctrine, so that they who loue the trueth of GOD haue no neede to follow a false doctrine, in regarde there is no man that dare gainesay it. For I dare say, to the commendation of the Councill of Franc∣sord, that the Ibides of Aegypt were neuer more readie to de∣uoue the flying Serpents of Arabia, so that they would not suffer them to light in the coastes of Aegypt, than the Coun∣cill of Francford was readie to vndoc all the foolish arguments of the second Councill of Nice, proouing the adoration of Images. Before I set these Councills in opposite tearmes of contra∣diction, the one to the other, the preludie of the Councill is worthie to bee marked. Adrian bishop of Rome sent a letter to the second Councill of Nice fraughted with lies, and affir∣ming that the Emperour Constantine was a leper, that hee ende∣uoured to cure his disease by shedding of innocent babes blood, that PETER and PAVL appeared to him in a vision by night, and bade him goe, and bee baptized by SILVESTER, Huseb de vi Constant. lib. 4. and his disease should bee healed, and that in remembrance of this benefite CONSTANTINE builded Churches in Rome, and adorned them with the Images of PETER and PAVL. The groundes of this letter conteineth a masse of impudent lies. CONSTANTINE was not a leper, but a man gifted in soule, beautifull in body, and furnished with great giftes both of soule and body, and meete for great workes, as EVSEBIVS witneeth, who liued in CONSTANTINES time, and was familiarly acquainted with him. Neither was hee baptized by SILVESTER in Rome, but by EVSEBIVS in Nicomedia. For SILVESTER and MARCVS his suc∣cessour were both deade, before that CONSTANTINE was baptized. The rest of his letter is like vnto the sandie ground and fabulous narration whereupon it is groun∣ded. The arguments of the second Councill of Nice prouing ado∣ration of Images may be distributed into foure rancks. Some are taken out of Scripture, others out of Fathers, the third
rancke from common reason, the fourth from miracles. If I propound their arguments into an intelligible order, and like∣wise the answeres to them, I doe a benefite to the Reader. The Cherubims, and the brasen Serpent were made by Gods commandement, and the Cherubimes were seated in the place 1 Argument. of adoration: ergo Images may bee brought into the places of adoration. There is a threefolde difference betwixt Images set vp in 1. Answere. Churches to bee worshipped, and the Cherubimes in the Tem∣ple. First, the Cherubimes are made by the expresse comman∣dement of GOD, but the images set vp in Temples, are made expresse contrare to the Commandement of GOD Secondly, the Cherubimes and brasen Serpent were represntations of diuine mysteries. Thirdly, neither the Cherubimes nor brasen Serpent were made for adoration as images are, that are set vp in Temples. If any man bee not fully resolued with these an∣sweres, let him vnderstand that the Law-giuer hath absolute authoritie, to make exceptions from his owne Lawe, but it is not lawfull to others, without warrant of GODS commande∣ment to doe the like. Example in ABRAHAM who had a warrant to kill his owne sone. The people of Israel had a warrant to borrow from the Aegyptians vessels of siluer & gold. and costly Gen. 22. vers. 2. Exod. 12. vers 35, 36 Exod. 31. vers. 7. rayment, and Moses had a warrant to make Cherubimes and a brasen Serpent: but those thinges are not lawfull to others, who want the like warrant. The next Argument borrowed from Scripture is this. IACOB 2. Argument worshipped the top of IOSEPHS staffe, therefore it is lawfull to worship Images. The Councill of Francford answereth to this Argument. that like as there is no such wordes in the Hebrew text  the 2. Answere. words of the Apost. in the Epistle to the  cap  vers 21, conteineth no such thing, where it is said, , that is, hee worshipped leaningaboue . . in genes. 162. the top of his scepter, but he worshipped not his Scepter. And Augustine in his questions vpon Genesis affirmeth, that he wor∣shipped GOD, and not the staffe of IOSEPH. The third Argument taken out of Scripture is out of the booke of the Psalmes: O Lord, I haue loued the beautie of thy house. 3. Argument.
Of this they concluded, that images should be loued & worship∣ped, seeing they are the beautie and ornament of GODS house. To this argument it is answered by the Councill of Francford, that this argument is grounded vpon a wrong interpretation of 3. Answere. Scipture, for by the house of GOD, is not meant a materiall Temple, and the ornament of GODS house, is not Images, but spirituall vertues. Many other places of Scripture are filthily abused, but I will haue some regarde to the Reade, that he be not weared in reading an heape of friuolous arguments. Many arguments are taken out of the writings of Fathers to 1 Argument out of Fa∣thers. proue the adoration of Images but these following are the chiefe and principall. First they say, that Basilius Mag us affir∣meth that the honour done to the Image, redoundeth to him whose image it is. This he peaketh of Christ, who is the Image of the inuisible 1. Answere. God, Coloss. 1. vers. 5. And who is the brightnesse of his glory, and the ingrauen forme of his person. Heb. 1. vers 3. buth e is not speaking of Images formed by the hands of men. The testimonie of Gregorius Nyssnus is cited, who writeth that 2. Argument. when he passed by the image of Abraham viuely pictured, with the knife drawne, readie to kill his sonne, he could not abstaine from shedding of teares. This argument is counted friuolous: albeir Gregorius Nysserus 2. Answere. wept, ye he bowed not his knee to worship the imge of Ab a∣an. Moreouer the Councill of Franckford alleadged that the bookes of Gregorius Nyssenus were not extant. Amongst argumentes taken from naturall reason, to prooue 1. Argument ta: en rom common reason. adoration of Images this is the chiefe. The Emperours Image is honoured, therefore the Image of Christ should be honoured. To this argument the Council of Francford;  this an∣swere, 1. Answere. that GOD is not like vnto a morteli King locally circum∣scribed, so that whē he is in one place, he cannot be at that same selfe time in another place. Therefore to intertaine a  rence in the peoples hearts towards their Prince, this Custome of ho∣nouring the Kings image was found out. But God who is euery where present, & whom no place can conteine, he is not to bee sought in Images, neither was that forme of worshipping, ei∣ther commanded or allowed by GOD.
The argument inuented of later dayes, to prooue adoration 2. Argument, of Images, is sophisticall: the dishonour done to the Image of CHRIST, redoundeth to himslfe:  the honour done to the Image of Christ, redoundeth also to Christ, & is an honou∣ring of Christ himselfe. The antecedent is prooued by the fact of Iulian the apostate, in breaking in pieces the Image of Christ in Caesarea Philippi, Sozom. lib. 5 ap. 21. To this it may bee answered, that the breaking downe of the 2. Answere. brasen Image in Casarea Philippi, was not a dishonouring of Christ in respect of the fact, that Iulian did, but in respect of the intention of the doer: but when this is proued, the consequent will not follow. For albeit an euill intention be eneugh to bring a man within the compasse of such as dishonour Christ, yet a good intention is not eneugh to proue, that we are honourers of Christ, but our actions also must bee ruled according to the commandements of Christ: and therefore they who haue only an intention to honour Christ, but in the meane time violateth his commandements, by worshipping him into an Image, shall neuer be counted honourers of Christ. The fourth rancke of argumentes is taken from miracles An argu∣ment from miracles. Answere. wrought by Images. This argument is weake and faultie in all sides. The antecedent is false, as shall be declared hereafter. But suppone that miracles had beene wrought in Images, or by images, it followeth not that they should be worshipped. In the wildernesse God cured his people miraculously, by looking to the brasen Serpent, yet it was not lawfull to worship the brasen Serpent, and when the people worshipped it, HEZEKIAS brake it in pieces, and called it Nhustan. In like maner, GOD wrought a notable miracle by the ministrie of PAVL and BARNABAS at Acts 14. Lystra, yet would they not suffer the people to worship them, and the comming of the Antichrist is foretold to be mighty by lying wonders, yet is not the Antichrist to bee worshipped. Therefore this argument is of no force, albeit it were true that miracles had beene wrought by Images. But let vs examine the antecedent of this argument, they say, that miracles haue beene wrought by Images: For confir∣mation of this, they bring in the viue similitude of Christes face printed into a cloth, and by Christ his application of the cloth
to his blessed face with his owne handes, which portrature of his face he deliuered to the painter of King Agbarus to bee ca∣ried to him, because the painter dazled with the splendore of CHRISTES face could not paint his similitude. Now (say they) the very effigie of CHRISTS face miraculously by touching only stamped in the clothe, declareth that GOD worketh miracles both in Images, and by Images. I answere this fable of Ag∣barus painter was not heard before the 700. yeere of our LORD Damascen de orthodox side, lib. 4. Euseb. lib. 1. cap. 13. that Damascene maketh mention of it. The Apostles and Euan∣gelists make no mention of any such thing, neither yet Eusebius who had conuenient time to write of this miracle of the Pain∣ter, (if any such thing had beene true) when hee writeth of the letter of King Agbarus sent to CHRIST, and CHRISTS answere returned againe to him. The miracle of the Image of CHRIST crucified by the Iewes in Berythus a towne of Syria, out of the pierced side whereof, flowed blood and water in great abundance, and this blood mixed with water had a medicinall vertue to cure all diseases. The writing of this miracle is ascribed to Athanasius, but the very stile, ditement and phrase of writing declareth, that it is a booke supposicitious, and not belonging to Athanasius. Like as many other bookes giuen out vnder the name of Athanasius are supposititious and false, and Erasmus that learned man who was neuer satisfied with reading, yet hee wearied in reading the supposititious works of Athanasius, making an end of rea∣ding of them with this proucrbe , that is to say, enough of accornes, meaning, that hee might spend the time better than in reading vprofitable and vnnecessarie bookes. The miracle of the Image of the Virgine MARIE, and the candle set before her Image by an Heremite, who went in pil∣grimage a farre iourney, and when hee returned againe, after the issue of three moneths, (others say sixe moneths) the can∣dle was still burning, and not consumed in all this time. This miracle hath the right shape of a fable: for all cir∣cumstances of time, place, and persons are obscured, neither is it declared in what yeere of the LORD this miracle was wrought, nor in what place of the world the Image was, nei∣ther is the name of the Heremite expressed, nor the name
of the place whereinto hee iourncyed. Onely the writer of this miracle is said to be Dionysuis Ascaonita presbyter, some obscure fellow doubtless, or the faied name of some author, for his name is vnknowne to the learned. The second Councill of Nice, which gaue such full allowance to adoation of Images, it began euill, and it ended worse: for it began at the fables conteined in Adrians letter, but it ended at a dialogue betwixt the deuill, and a certaine monke, whome Sathan sorbade to woship the image of our Ladie: but his foo∣lish Abbot Theodorus saide vnto him, that it was a lesse sinne to haunt all the baudie houses in the towne euery day, than to leaue off worshipping of the Image of our Lady one day. The Apostle PAVL neuer vsed the testimonie of the deuill, to proue himselfe to be the seruant of GOD, albeit the woman possessed with a spirite of diuination cried after PAVL and SILAS that they wee the seruants of the most high GOD: and in my opi∣nion Ats 16. vers. 17. the arguments taken from the testimony of Sathan should be eschewed, for GOD hath not appointed him to be our tea∣cher. Now let vs consider the multiplied honours of images hat∣ched in the second Councill of Nice vnder this one worde ado∣ration of Images. This adoration standeth in decking of them, kneling vnto them, saying of prayers before them, censing, lighting of candles, vowes, offerings, sestuall dayes, salutations, building of Churches, and altars. All these honours were done both to the image, and to te Sainct represented by the image. The decking of images is damned by the Prophet HOSEA, and it is indeede a spoyling of the poore, who haue neede of such Hos. 2. support as is bestowed in vaine vpon images, who haue no need of ornaments and clothing. Vnder the bowing of the knee, all Idolatrie is comprehended. Prayer should be conceiued with∣out 1. Reg. 19. vers. 18. wrath and doubting: but so it is, he who prayeth before an image cannot be free of doubting, because he hath no promise to be heard. Cersing was a part of the ceremoniall law verie . Tim. 2 badly transferred fom the liuing GOD to senslesse images. Can∣dles Exod. 30. vers. 19. Exod. 29. vers. 29. lighted before images declare that the Saints represented by those imges were the lights of the world, but it is a vaine thing to forsake the light of their wholesome doctrines and to
honour them by lighting candles before their images. Saluta∣tions of images are no lesse ridiculous than the salutations wherewith S. Francis saluted the knee, as his sisters, for humili∣ties sake. As concerning vowes, building of Temples, setting vp of altars, and festuall dayes, to the honour of images, it is too great honour done vnto them, with some slippe of memorie in them who doe it: for in one word, they say, there is no diuinitie in images, & immediatly after they do such honour vnto them, . Reg. 11. as SALOMON when he stood, did to GOD, and when he fell, did to Astaroth, Chemosse and Moloch. Before I make an ende of this Treatise, it may be demanded, Howe could the worshipping of images get place at that time when Emperours and Councils with all their might contended in the contrarie, that images should not bee worshipped. The Emperours Philippicus, Leo Isaurus, Constantinus, Copronymus, and Leo his sonne, were all seriously bent to suppresse the worship∣ping of images, and in the VVest, Carolus Magnus King of France and Emperour, was present in the Councill of Francford, where the worshipping of images was damned To this I answere, that the authoritie of the bishop of Rome was at this time so increa∣sed, that they durst encounter with the Emperours of the East, who were farre distant from them. Constantine B. of Rome razed out of Charters, the name of the Emperour Philippicus. Grego∣rius 2. did excommunicate Leo Isaurus, and forbade to pay tri∣bute vnto him. Gregorius 3. in contempt of Leo gathered a Coun∣cill, and ordained the worshipping of images. As concerning Carolus Magnus who was proclaimed Emperour by the speciall mandate of the chaire of Rome, the question is greater, Howe could the bishops of Rome tolerate, that worshipping of images should bee damned by a Councill gathere by this new Empe∣rour whom they had authorized by their owe trauls. To this Ianswere, that the bishops of Rome did as the ancient Romanes August. de . . 5. cap. 12 did, of whome Augustine writeth, Multas cupiditats  ingen∣ cupiditate presserunt, that is to say, Many desires they Pred downe for the excessiue desire they had of one thing, to wit, of soucraignitie and domination: euen so, the great desie the Romae bishoppes had firmely to keepe in thei  that great territorie of land in Italie, called Exerchatus Ravnnae, which
Pipinus King of France reft from the Emperour of the East, and gaue it to the chaire of Rome, for the excessiue desire (I say) which they had to keepe this rich prey, they would not con∣tend with Carolus Magnus, but after his death, they could not suffer his posteritie to take such a doing against the worshipping of Images, as Carolus Magnus had done. Insomuch, that in the dayes of the reigne of Ludouicus Pius, it was hard to the Em∣perour to protect Claudius Taurinensis against the chaufing ma∣lice of the bishops of Italie who hated him, because hee cast out Images out of his Church in Turin, yea, and Claudius Taurinensis directly impugned the adoration of Images by a booke writ∣ten by him vpon that subiect, whereunto none answere was gi∣uen during his lifetime, but after his death many were found like barking dogges railing against his blessed memoriall, and that so much the more, because in his booke he rubbed quick∣ly vpon the surfeiting pleasures of the Romane Church, who were better content to worshippe the Crosse of Christ, because that was easie to bee done, than to beare the Crosse of Christ, because that was a laborious worke, and painefull to the flesh, yet did Christ command vs to beare his Crosse, but not to wor∣ship it. Finally, it is to be noted, that the defection of some men of great account, was a stumbling blocke to many others. Paulus Cyprius B. of Constantinople, left his charge, entred into a Mona∣strie, and lamented that he had consented to the abolishing of Images. Gregorius B of Neocesarea, one of the chiefe disallowers of Images in the Councill holden at Constantinople, gaue in his supplicant bill in the second Councill of Nice, confessed his er∣ror, and subscribed to the decreet of that vnhappie Councill, by whose example the bishops of Nice, Hierapolis, of the Isles of Rhodes, and Carpathus were mooued to doe the like. Let this bee a warning to them who are in eminent places, that they fall not from the trueth of GOD, lest by their fall they procure a great ruining and desolation to the house of GOD. The LORD keepe vs from defection, to whome bee praise, and glory for euer. AMEN.
A TREATISE Of Satisfaction and Indulgences. SATISFACTION of olde, was publicke repentance made for grieuous faultes, such as, murther, adul∣terie, apostasie. And this publicke humiliation made in sight of the people with fasting, teares, basenesse of apparrell and such other tokens of an humbled minde, with a sense of sorrow for by-past offences, it was called satisfactio, as Augustine writeth quia satisfiebat Eccle∣si, that is, because the Church was satisfied, yea and the slan∣der August. En∣chirid. 65. was remooued. This humiliation foresaide in the Greeke Church was called , or a punishment, because it was in∣flicted Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 16. as a punishment in Church discipline, to terrifie others from committing the like offences. Now seeing this Ecclesiasti∣call discipline was very rigorous, and indured many yeeres, as Concil. Ni∣cen. canon 12 the Canons of Councils clearely declare, It pleased the Church vpon weightie considerations to relent somewhat of the severi∣tie of the first prescribed discipline, yea and the people of times intreated the Pastor by earnest requests, that the time of pub∣licke repentance might be shortned, because they saw great to∣kes of vnfained repentance in the offender. This dispensation with the rigour of olde discipline was called indulgentia, but in Poperie, which was beginning in this Centurie to haue great vpper hand, the abuse of these two words, hath vtterly vndone the ancient puritie of religion and discipline. The word satisfaction, which of old was referred to the peo∣ple, now in Poperie is referred to God in this maner. They teach the people that the sinnes committed before Baptisme are abo∣lished in Baptisme, but sinnes committed after Baptisme, wee must obteine pardon for them by our own satisfactions, name∣ly by fasting, praying, almesdeedes, pilgrimages, and such other workes done by our selues, And to mae this doctrine the more plausible vnto the people, they bring in the similitude of a man sailing in a ship, if he fall out of it into the sea, the ship (say they) goeth away without recouerie, and incace he find not another
vessell to support his distressed estate, and to bring him to land, he must needes perish and drowne: euen so (say they) if after baptisme we commit any transgression, we must either be sup∣ported by our owne satisfactions, els wee must perish in our sinnes. No similitude can be more repugnant to Scripture than this. For albeit there bee many vessels, whereinto mens bodies may bee preserued from the danger of drowning yet is there not many vessels whereinto our soules can bee saued from damnation, but ee are saued onely by our spirituall Bap∣tisme, whereby the filth of our soules is washen away in the 1. Pet. 3. vers. 21. blood of Christ. And like as God commanded not NOE to make two arkes, but one alanerly for the safetie of a fewe: so hath GOD appointed only one way for safetie of our soales, so that if wee sinne after Baptisme wee must haue refuge to the sweete promises of remissiion of sinnes made to vs in Baptisme. In what sense indulgentia was taken of old, I haue already de∣clared In the Romane Church Indulgences and Pardones, are a dispensation of the merites of Christ and his Saintes, to the vtilitie of sinners. This presupponeth that the merites of Christ and his Saintes are put in the custodie of the bishop of Rome, and that his treasures can keepe them Concerning the merites of CHRIST, they say, that there was such precious vertue in his blood, that one droppe of it was sufficient to redeme all the world, now (say they) what shall become of all the rest of his blood which he shed in great abundance? shall all this precious blood be lost? and where can it be better kept than in the trea∣sures of CHRISTS Vicar, to be dispensated to the vtilitie of sin∣ners when need requireth. To this vaine assertion of Papistes I answere, that the LORD neuer dealt sparingly, neither with our bodies nor soules. The LORD hath prouided greater abundance of aire for the refreshment of our bodies, than all the breathing senses of men and beasts is able to draw in. The LORD rained downe MANNA from heauen in greater plentie, than might haue sufficed the people of the Iewes in the wildernesse: euen so when the LORD is content to shed great abundance of his pre∣cious blood, he hath done it to set foorth the great riches of his mercie toward our soules, but not to make a mortall man a dispensator of one drop of his blessed blood.
Nothing is more repugnant to holy Scripture, conteined in the old and new Testament, than this, that the dispensation and application of Christs blood should be committed vnto a mor∣tall man. In the old Testament the high Priest who entred once in the yeere into the moste holy place, sprinckled the blood of the Leuit. 16. vers. 14. sacrifice with his own fingers vpon the Arke euen so, the blood of the euerlasting Couenant, which Christ caried vp to heauen, is sprinckled on the Saints of God on the earth, but by whom only by the fingers of our high Priest the Lord Iesus. In the new Testament wee see, that albeit many things were commit∣ted to the dispensation of the holy Apostles, yet some things were reserued to the Lords owne dispensation allanerly. Christ gaue power to his disciples to wish peace to euery house which receiued them, but the dispensation, and application of this peace Christ reserued vnto himselfe, because hee alone, and Matt. 10. not his disciples knew who was the true Childe of peace. In like manner, power of preaching the Gospel was committed to the Apostles, but the conferring of the gift of faith, which is wrought by hearing, belongeth onely to CHRISTS, euen so, the preaching of saluation by the merites of CHRISTES Ephes. 2. blood is committed to many, but the application of that pre∣cious blood to the safetie of our soules, is onely proper to Christ himselfe, who shed that blessed blood for our salua∣tion. The merites of the Saintes also, that is, the workes of super∣erogation are thought to enter into the Popes treasurie, and to be at his dispensation. Of this we haue spoken somewhat al∣readie. But what presumption is this, that they dare mixe toge∣ther the blood of the Saints, and Christs blood, and the merits of Saintes with the merite of Christ, and cast all in ore heape, and treasure. The verses of Praxilla, a Poetesse of Scycion were abhorred by the Gentiles, because in her verses shee brought in Adonis matching Cucumbers and Aples with the sunne, yet is it a more tolerable thing, to match an earthly creature, with a heauenly creature, than to match creatures with the Creator, who is blessed for euer. After that this opinion of Indulgences and Pardons in a
newe and Romane sense once tooke place, it is a wonderfull thing to heare what progresse it made from euill to worse. Some thought that by Pardones might bee obtained a reliefe from temporall punishments, or at least a permutation of eternall punishments into temporall: but others running as it were to the supelatiue excesse of all spirituall madnesse, affirmed that by vertue of Popes  men were absolued both from fault and punishment, a  Pardones were cal∣led Plenissima Indulgentiae. Of this sort was the Pardone that BONIFACIVS the eight proclaimed to such as would come to Rome in time of his appointed Iubile, and visite the Church of Lateran, ann. 1399. Of this, which I haue alreadie spoken, it is euident, that the Papistes in the wordes of Satisfaction and Indulgences de∣ceiue both themselues, and others: for what auaileth it to keepe the ancient wordes vsed in the primitiue Church, and to vse them into a newe sense vnknowne to Fathers, who spake of Satisfaction and Indulgences. Did not the Athenians of olde weare the badge of the golden Grashopper, in token they were not extraneers, but they were inhabitants in that lande whereinto both their predecessors and themselues were borne, but when they were conquessed by the Romanes, and their golden libertie was lost, what auailed the badge of the golden Grashopper? Euen so when substance of ancient words is lost, what auaileth it to talke of Satisfaction and Indulgences, as ancient things. In the rest of this Treatise (God willing) I shall declare the absurditie of Popish Satisfactions and Indulgences. The Coun∣cill of Trent in the 12. Canon deoperibus Satisfactionis they write. If any man says that the whole punishment, and fault is continuallie remitted by GOD, and that the Satisfaction of penitent persons, is no other thing but faith, whereby they apprehend that CHRIST hath satisfied for them, let him bee accursed. This Concil. Tri∣dent. de satisfact. necessit. Canon 12. Act of the Councill of Trent in all the parts of it, is flatly re∣pugant to the Scriptures of God. There we are taught that in Satisfaction two thinges are principally required. First a perfect obedience to the Lawe of GOD. Secondly a perfect
sacrifice for the sinne committed by man: both these things are to bee found in CHRIST alone, who by his obedience hath abolished the sinnewhich came in by the disobedience Rom. . vers. 18. Heb. 10. vers. 14. of ADAM, and by one oblation hath consecrated for euer them who are sanctified. Nowe to pronounce a curse against all them who leanes vnto the obedience and sacrifice of CHRIST as vnto their onely Satisfaction to the Iustice of GOD, is all one as if they would pronounce a curse against all the true disciples of CHRIST, who beleeues according as they are taught in the holy Scriptures of GOD. If at any time ancient Fathers speake roundly in this matter, it is ourparte to doe that fauour to them, which is done to all men, to wit, to giue them libertie to interprete the meaning of their owne wordes. So when AMBROSE writteth that Ambros. in Luc. 22. ser. 46. teares washes away sinnes, hee declareth in what sense hee spake this, to wit, not to count the teares of PETER to bee a satisfaction for his threefolde deniall, but rather, that his teares was a testimonie that hee was one of the Elect, for whose sinnes CHRIST had satisfied. The wordes of S. AMBROSE are these: Legi quidem Petri lachrymas, sed satis∣factionem non lego: that is to say, I haue reade of the teares of PETER, but of his satisfaction I reade not. The Romanists in our dayes are like vnto men, who haue benetrauelled vpon the Sea, and in end they arriue to the har∣berie, and when they set their foot on shore, they thinke that the ground is running about them in a circulare reuolu∣tion, This is nothing els but the conceates of their troubled braines: euen so, when Papistes reades in holy Scripture many exhortations to Fasting, Prayer, Almesdeedes: they imagine that Scripture is speaking of Satisfactions for sinne. But holy Scripture is like vnto the solide globe of the earth, which is not vnder a continuall agitation, but is euer like vnto it selfe, and sendes vs continuallie in the matter of Satisfaction, to Heb. 10. vers. 14. that one oblation, which hath consecrated for euer them who are sanctified. Yea, the false teachers of our dayes are like vnto the Edomites, who were more cruell than the Baby∣lonians, who contented themselues with slaying of some
and carying of others captiues, and setting the towne on fire, Psal. 137. vers. 7. but the children of Edm cied out, that the very foundations of the citie should be razed, to the end it should neuer be a ci∣tie againe: euen so, they who sends vs to our owne satisfactions, they would vndoe our sluation from the very ground, as if Christ had beene manifested in our nature in vaine, to make sa∣tisfaction for our sinnes, for which wee must make satisfaction in our owne persons, and by our owne workes our selues. The principall argument, whereby they endeuoure to prooue humane satisfactions by Scripture is in the wordes of the counsell of DANIEL giuen to NABVCHADNESER. Wherefore, O King, let my counsell be acceptable unto thee, and breake off thy sinnes by righteousnesse, and thine iniquities by mercie toward Daniel. 4. vers. 24. the poore: Loe, let there be an healing of thine errour. What is contei∣ned in this most wholesome counsell of DANIEL but an ex∣hortation to leaue off the course of doing euill, and to doe good, to the ende, that the change of his conuersation might be a testimonie that GOD had forgiuen him his sinnes, and ac∣cepted him in fauour? The like wholesome counsell the Apost. PAVL giueth to them who had sometimes bene theeues Let him that stole, steale no more: but let him rather labour, and worke Ephes. 4. vers. 28. with his handes, the thing which is good, that hee may haue to giue vnto him that needeth: Is there anything heere but an exhortation to desist from wonted vngodlinesse, and to leade a newe and holy conuersation? but the Apostle is speaking nothing of humane satisfactions, yea, that the holy Spirit, who filled his mind with celestiall knowledge, sanctified also his memorie, that hee should speake nothing repugnant vnto that hee writeth vnto the Hebrewes.  that is, By one oblation hee hath consecrated for euer them who are sanctified. And the Apostle IOHN writing to 1. Ioan. 2. vers. 1. to them who were already baptized, and counted the children of GOD, he sayeth, My babes, these things I write vnto you, that yee sinne not: and if any man sinne, wee haue an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the Iust. So that this new Theologie of our owne satisfactions for faultes committed after Baptisme came not from CHRIST, and his Apostles, but it is an inucntion of the braine of man.
Likewise Christ in holy Scripture is called the Lambe of God Ioan. 1. vers. 36. who taketh away the sinnes of the world. It is great obliuion in men to magnifie the finger which pointed out Christ so much, as to count it incorruptible, that the fire hath no pow∣er to burne it, and it is an holy relique in the Romane Church, and on the other part, to bee so forgetfull of the golden sen∣tence which hee vttered at the pointing foorth of his finger, namely, that CHRIST was the Lambe of GOD, that is, the onely propitiatorie sacrifice for our sinnes, for that Lambe which was offered in the morning and the euening, in the olde TESTAMENT did not represent our satisfactions, but only the propitiatorie sacrifice, which CHRIST offered vpon the Crosse for our sinnes. The doctrine of Augustine agreeing with Scripture was this. That CHRIST taketh away our sinnes three maner of wayes, First, by forgiuing the sinnes wee haue committed. Secondly, by supporting vs with his grace, that wee should not commit the like in time to come, and thirdly, by bringing vs vnto eternall life, where wee shall be free from committing of sinne. Finally, the writings of the Prophets and Apostles anent the doctrine of Satisfaction pointeth out CHRIST alanerly, by whome wee obteine forgiuenesse of our sinnes, as the Apostle PETER speaketh to CORNELIVS in these words. To him also giue all the Prophets witnesse, that through his Acts 10. vers. 43. Name all that beleene in him shall receiue remission of sinnes. If this bee the summe of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apo∣es, they who contend so seriously to prooue mens satisfa∣ctions for faultes committed after Baptisme, they striue against the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. As concerning the worde Indulgentia what it did signifie of olde in the primitiue Church, I haue already declared: to wit, a mitigation of the strict discipline vsed against great offenders: but this matter will bee better vnderstood, if it bee deduced frō the very first ground. In time of the ten great persecutions many were found weake, who fell away from the open pro∣fession of the trueth, and sacrificed to Idoles. The dayly increasing number of back-sliders from the trueth, compelle the Church to enter into a deepe consideration howe this
defection might bee stayed. Novatus was in this opinion, that they who made defection in the time of the ten persecutions, should not bee admitted againe to the fellowship of the Church albeit they did repent. This opinion was too rigorous and re∣pugnant to Scripture. Others thought it more expedient to in∣stitute Sermos to bee preached at solemne times, such as Na∣talitia Martyrū, whereby the great cōmendation of the constant Faith & sufferings of the Martyres euen vnto the death might make these timorous backsliders ashamed of their defection: & on the other part, if any of them craued to bee receiued againe into the bosome of the Church, that they should testifie their repentance by publicke Satisfaction so many yeeres as was pre∣scribed vnto them by Church discipline, the mitigation of the rigour of this discipline was called Indulgentia. In our dayes it is taken in another sense, for an absolution from fault and pu∣nishment, at the least from one of them, and a dispensation of the merites of CHRIST, and his Sainctes, to offenders. This abuse of ancient wordes to the noueltie of a new fact vnknown to Fathers makes Popish Religion iustly suspect to such as con∣sidereth their aberration from antiquitie, albeit they bragge of it continually: in so much that it may bee saide of them which Philip King of Maccdone spake of a Iudge, who dyed his haire, that he who was false in a matter of haire, would ncuer bee true in a matter of Iudgement: so the miserable abuse of the worde Indulgentia prognosticateth horrible abuse in the matter it selfe. If any man demand howe doth this Treatise of Indulgences belong vnto this Centurie, seeing that Indulgences, and Par∣dones against which I write, were not as yet in vse in the Ro∣mane Church, yea we read not of Plenissimae Indulgentiae à poena & à culpa before the 1200. yeere of our Lord. To this I answere, that in this Centurie they were opening a passage to that which after followed. As Iulian the Apostate, when hee cutted a par∣cell sozom. lib. 6 cap. 1. of ground, hee opened a passage to Euphrates to runne in∣to Tigris, and so procured that his shippes should arriue at Ctesiphon a towne situated vpon Tigris, and not vpon Euphrates: euen so in this Centurie the bishoppes of Rome were inlarging the power of their keyes, which power they extended so
amplie, that they durst excommunicate Emperours at their pleasure, and the posteritie following them, finding the power to bee ample, they tooke vpon them authoritie to ab∣solue in earth from fault and paine persons whome GOD promised not to absolue in heauen, because they were not pe∣nitent. The two greatest absurdities in late Pardones are these: First an absolution from fault & punishment vnder another condi∣tion than is contained in the written worde of GOD. For there it is expresly written: When the wicked turneth away from Ezekiel chap. 18. ver. 17. his wickednesse, that hee hath committed, and doth that which is lawfull and right, hee shall saue his soule aliue. But the Par∣done of Pope BONIFACIVS the eight containeth a full absolution from fault and punishment, vpon condition that men trauell to Rome in time of Iubile, and visite the Church of Lateran. If an Officer to whom the Kings letters are concre∣dite, did proclame his Highnes letters, another way than they were first conceiued, and stamped with the Kings signet, hee would be counted a false messenger, and would bee remooued from his office, but hee who dare presume to alter the message of the great King, & to promise forgiuenesse to him, to whom GOD hath not promised it in his owne written worde, hee is a false teacher, Promising liberue to others, when as himselfe is a 2. Pet. 2. vers. 19. seruant of corruption, as the Apostle speakes. Before this great sinne was amended, another greater sinne was added vnto it, and Pardones were solde for mo∣ney, by which doing the bishoppes of Rome ceased from beeing the successours of SIMON PETER, and became successours of SIMON MAGVS. The Apostle com∣mendeth Acts 8. vers. 20. in the Corinthians (before they absolued the in∣cestuous Adulterer) godly sorrowe, care, a clearing of them∣selues, 2. Cor. 7. vers. 11. holie indignation, feare, zeale and punishment. amongst other thinges hee commendeth in them an earnest desire, to wit, of the conuersion of him who had fallen into an hainous transgression. The worde  vsed by the Apostle is not , that is to say, an earnest desire of money, but rather an carnest desire of the repentance of him who had offended.
The horrible abuse of Pardones, solde for money were knowne to all Nations in Europe, especially to the Countrie of Germanie, to whome Pardones were sent both for sinnes by∣past, and for sinnes to come, with Ticelius an eloquent Orator, but Pardones at that time were come to the height, and could consist no longer, and since that time they giue no price. I am the shorter in this Treatise, lest I should hinder any man from reading the learned writings of Chcmnicius de Indulgentiis, who hath accurately written the beginning, progresse and ripenesse of this filthie errour of Popish Pardones.
A TREATISE Of a great heape of Errours which kithed in the sixt Centurie. SEING the time was now at hande, whereinto the Antichrist should exalt himselfe against all that is 2. Thess. 2. vers. 4. called God, or that is worshipped, and that he should sit as God in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe that hee is God. The LORD punishing the contempt of his euerlasting Trueth, suffered a departing from many pointes of Faith to fall out, as Tapestrie of errours hung vp in the Temple to welcome the Antichrist. The signe of the Crosse is nowe filthily abused. In the first Of Cros∣sing. 300. yeere of our LORD, and a litle after, the Pagans so abhorred the doctrine of the Crosse, and that Saluation should be offered to all men in the suffering of one man, that they persecuted this doctrine with vnspeakable crueltie. The Christians on the other part, in word, deede and gesture adhered so fast vnto the doctrine of saluation, which commeth by the sufferings of CHRIST, that by crossing of themselues, they would avow be∣sore the Worlde that they were Christians: this was of olde a piece of externall profession, but they attributed no vertue to the signe of the Crosse to saue them from enill: insomuch that S. Augustine in a certaine place speaking of theeues, who would goe out by night to steale, they would garde themselues by the signe of the Crosse, which signe, banished not the power of the Deuill from them, but rather sealed vp the power of Sathan within them: but in this Centurie Crossing was in vse, with opi∣nion that by vertue of that signe made in the are, euill was ba∣nished from men, and good things were procured to them. The superstition of Pilgrimages began in the dayes of Con∣stantine, O Pilgri∣mages. and Gregorius Nyssenus damned the conceates of men, who imagined that GOD would giue a rewarde in the Worlde to come to workes which he hath not commanded to bee done in this Worlde: but in this Centurie this superstition mightily increased, in so far, that men trauelled to the sepulchers of the
Sainctes with intention to obtaine health both of soule and Hi. Magd. , 6, cap, 6 body in those places. This resorting vnto the sepulchers of the Sainctes fostred not onely inuocaion of Sainctes, but also a confidence in them, that they could support all troubles both of soule and bodie, whereinto any person had fallen, insomuch that in the fist Centurie, and before the time of the fulnesse of all corruption, Atticus bishop of Constantinople was compelled to raise the bodie of Sabbatius out of his graue by night, and to burie him into a secret place vnknowne vnto the people to slay their superstition of inuocating Sainctes, and confidence in them who were departed. Hi. Magd. . 5. cap. 10. Of Litur∣gies in strange languages. 1. Cor. 14. vers. 18, 19 The doctrine of the Apostle PAVL wishing all chinges to bee done vnto edification, and his owne example, who albeit hee was furnished with moe languages than all the Corinthians, yet hee had rather speake fiue wordes with vnderstanding, that he might instruct others, than ten thousand into a strange tongue This doctrine (I say) and example of PAVL banished from the Church a long time Liturgies into a strange language, albeit the Latine Church borrowed from the Hebrewe Litur∣gie Allell. iah, and from the Greeke Liturgie Kyrie eleison, yet the Liturgie, and seruice of the Church continued into an in∣telligible language amongst Gods people. The vaine asser∣tion of the Romanc Church is, that the Liturgie was conceiued in Latine language in Numidia about the foure hundreth of our Lord. It is easily answered, that at this time the Afri∣cans were vnder the dominion of the Romanes, and learned their language, in such sort, that they were not more familiar∣ly acquainted with the Africane speach, than they were with the Latine tongue. To this Augustine beareth witnesse, that with difficultie he learned the Greeke language, but with great facilitie hee learned the Latine language, Inter blandimenta nu∣tricum, & ioca arridentium, & latitias alludentium, that is to say, Amongst the flattering speeche; of Nourses, and amongst . lib. 1 cap. 14. the sportes of them who arsided one to another, and amongst the solaces of them who were deliting one another: so that in Augustines time, if the Latine Liturgie had place, it was was all one, as if the Africane Liturgie had beene in vse,
because that both were alike intelligible, Nowe these who by such places would prooue that seruice may bee said into an vncouth language, not onely they flatly gainesay the do∣ctrine of PAVL, but also they abuse the testimonies of an∣cient times in most miserable maner. After the time that one man was made vniuersall Bishoppe of all the Church, then comes in that deuilish imagination, that for setling vnitie into the Church, the Liturgie must bee onely in the Latine language in Europe. In the Councill called Valentinum (because it was assem∣bled in Valentia, a towne of Spaie) it was ordained that the Gospell should bee read after the Epistle, in respect that by such reading some were found to bee conuerted to the faith. This behooued to bee reading of the Gospell in a knowne tongue: so that the custome of reading Liturgies into an vn∣knowne tongue did not hastily take place. Oblationes defunctorum of olde were legacies left by de∣funct persons for sustentation of the poore, these oblaions they who did not thankfully pay, were counted murtheers of the poore, and were separated from the fellowship of the Church, but nowe all things tending to a lamentabe de∣cay in steade of Oblationes defunctorum, oblationes pro defunctis, creepes in into the Church. Grgorius the first learned not this doctrine in holy Scripture, but from the narration of Foelix bishoppe of Centumcellae in Hetrruia, as I haue alreadie written in the Historie of his life. It is a wearisomething to read the Hist. Magd. cnt. 6. cap. 5 foolish fables of miraculous workes, confirming this head of Popish doctrine. At this time also, as Gregorius the first witnesseth in his Ho∣milies Visitations of the sicke vpon the Gospell, when men of vnreproouable life were sicke, many came to visite them, not so much to helpe them in their agonie, to fight a good fight, and happily to con∣clude their course, as to recommend their owne soules to the castodie of them, whome they supponed to haue led an honest life. This is a great noueltie vnknowne to sacred Scripture, Ecclesiastes cap. 12. veis. 7. to recommend our soules to the custodie of any person
whatsumeuer, except onely to GOD the Father of Spirits. Reliques of Sainctes were excessiuelie honoured, insomuch Reliques of Saincts. that Giegorius the first sendeth pieces of the chaine wherewith S. PETER was bound in time of his martyredome to dierse persons, with promise that this piece of his chaine beeing hung about their neckes by the intercession of PETER should pur∣chase vnto them absolution from their sinnes. Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap 6 Of Neces∣sitie of Baptisme. Iohn 3. vers. 5. The wrong vnderstanding of the words of Christ: Verely, vcrely I say vnto thee, except that a man be borne of Water & the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, was the occasion that both August, in the 4. Centurie, and Chrysostome in the 5. Centurie thought that they who died without Baptisme were in the estate of those who are condemned, howbeit the want of Circumcision 40. yeeres in the wildernesse, not vpon contempt, but onely vpon necessitie, because they knewe not what time the cloud would remooue, was not preiudiciall vnto the soules of the Infants all this time: yea and if they had circumcised their children, and had not permitted them to rest after the wound, their children had died in the Wildernes. Many faults are laid to their charge, such as Idolatrie, Fornication, murmuring, &c. Why is not this . Cor. 10 fault also laide to their charge, that they circumcised not their children in the Wildernesse? Doubtlesse the Apostle in this point hath seene them to be faultlesse & that they despised not the Sacrament of the Couenant of GOD, but they were hindred by the necessitie of their iourneying to circumcise their chil∣dren. Iosua 5. vers. 2. This intermission of the Sacrament was helped at Gilgal, and the Campe remooued not vntill the time they who were circumcised were whole. This historie might haue taught both Augustine and Chrysostome, to vnderstand that the Couenant of GOD is not annulled when the holy Sacrament is neither ne∣glected nor contemned, but children are preueened by death, before they can be presented to the holie Sacrament, Notwith∣standing these same Fathers were compelled to make excep∣tions from their owne rigorous sentence: for they who gaue their liues for the testimonie of CHRIST, before they were baptized in CHRISTS Name, the forementioned Fathers were compelled to say, that their Martyrdome supplied the want of Baptisme, and that they were baptized in their owne blood.
Moreouer Ambrose who was more ancient, than either Au∣gustine or Chrysostome, writing of Valentinian the second, who was slaine before hee was baptized, he sayes of him, that as Lazarus rested in the bosome of ABRAHAM, euen so the Emperour Va∣lentnian . de obitu Valent. Imperateris. rested in the bosome of IACOB. But now to leaue spea∣king of ancient Fathers, who were compelled both to correct other mens opinions, and to make exceptions from their own opinions. In this Centurie whatsoeuer was incommodiouslie spoken by ancient Fathers, it is not amended, but made worse by their suffrage and vote, all bypast sini es are said to bee par∣doned Exod. 14. Gregor. lib. 9. induct. 4. epist. 39. in Baptisme, as Pharao was drowned in the red Sea, but no word of comfort to them, who beeing hindered by necessi∣tie are preueened by death before they be baptized. The simple forme of baptizing in water, in the Name of the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost was long age perueted, and men added oyle vnto the institution of CHRIST, wherewith diuese parts of the bodie of him who was baptized was annointed: but in this Centurie none amendement of preceeding errours, but a con∣tinuall progresse to further superstition. Albeit it came to passe by the prouidence of GOD, that the holy Supper continued ministred vnto the people in both Abuse of the Saca∣ment of the Supper formes, and the holy Cup was not withdrawne from the peo∣ple by no Ecclesiasticall ordinance before the Councill of Con∣siance, ann. 1414. Notwithstanding the holy Supper was abu∣sed, in making it both a Sacrament distributed to the liuing and likewise a sacrifice offered for the quicke and the dead, especially for those who were alledged to betomen∣ted in Purgatorie, Surely this was a beginning of the dishaun∣ting of the Lordes holy Sacrament: for the people beeing once informed that there was as great berefite redounding to their soules, by seeing the sacifice celebrated, and farre lsse hazard and danger, than to communicate of the Sacament of CHRIST his bodie and blood the ignorant people were gladly conent to bee oft present at the sacrifice, but they lothed the frequent  of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Communion. Finallie in this Centurie, good thinges were abused, euill ma'ades were increased, desection from the Faith was mighti∣ly aduanced, all thinges tended vnto a lamentable decay, and I
conclude this second booke of the Arrian, and Eutychian perse∣cution, with this exhortation, to beware of the beginnings of Apostacie: for albeit the shadowes of the Euening doe not vt∣terly spoyle vs of light, yet within a shorte time after our eyes are so dimmed with multiplied and thickned shadowes, that we stagger and we know not where we are walking. The Lord of his vnspeakable fauour, continue with vs and our posteritie the light of his euerlasting trueth. AMEN. FINIS. Faultes escaped. In the 4. Centurie in the treatise of Concills. PAG. 126. LIN. 10. patrone read patterne.. In the 5. Centurie, Chap. 1. PAG. 5. LIN. 15.  read Rithimer. In the Inscriptions of the Treatises. PAG. 38. LIN. 3. Fourth read Fifth. Ibidem in the treatise of mans Free-will. PAG. 43. LIN. 28. . read . In the treatise of Originall sinne. PAG. 52. LIN. 4.  read Ibidem, Cent. 5. PAG. 56. LIN. 1 than read no Cent. 6. In the treatise of the worshipping of Images. PAG. 42. LIN. 3.  read . PAG. 53. LIN. 3. knee read kine. Ibidem in the treatise of Satisfaction, PAG. 57. LIN. 20. Christs read Christ. Ibidem. PAG. 60. LIN. 29.  read .
CENTVRIE VI. CHAP I. OF EMPEROVRS. Anastatius. AFTER ZENO succeded ANASTA∣TIVS, and gouerned 27. yeeres. Hee was a patrone of the heresie of Euty∣ches. He banished Euphemius B. of Con∣stantinople, because hee would not re∣deliuer vnto him that letter which he had subscribed before his Corona∣tion, wherein he was bound to at∣tempt nothing against the true faith, & naely against the Council of Chalccdone. In like maner hee banished Macedonius the successour of Euphemius for the same cause (for he had the custodie of the hand-write of Ana∣statius) and the Emperour gaue secret Commandement to make him out of the way at Gangra the place of his banishment. Xenoeas B. of Hierapolis, a firebrand of Sathan stirred vp the Evagr. lib. 3. ap. 3. Emperours minde to great rage, partly by gathering a Coun∣cill at Sidon, wherein they damned the actes of the Councill of
Chalcedon, & partly by stirring vp the Emperor to wrath against good men, such as were principall defenders of the true faith: mely Flavianus B. of Antiochia & Helias B of Ierusalem. The peo∣ple of Achia were very friendly to their Pastor, & finding that a great number of Monkes fauouring Eutyches errour, had as∣sembld in the towne of Antiochia to compell Flavianus their bishop to accurse and abiure the Councill of Chalcedon: they set vpon the Monkes, and slwe a number of them, others leaped into the riuer of Orontes, where they found a meet bu∣riall for seditious Monkes. On the other part a great number of the Monkes of Syria Caua, came to support the troubled estate of Flavianus. For these things, as if he had bene a conten∣tious Eagr. lib. 3. cap. 32. man, he was banished, & Seuerus a notable Eutychian here∣tique was placed in his roome: this is he, of whom I haue men∣tioned diuers times that Alamundarus prince of Saracens delu∣ded his messengers, and sent them backe ashamed and con∣founded. The next attempt was against Helias B. of Ierusalem, against whom this quarrell was forged, that he would not sub∣scribe the Synodicke letters of Seuerus, and damne the Council of Chalcedone, and by the Emperours commandement Olympius his captaine came to Ierusalem, expelled Helias, and placed Iohn a familiar friend of Seuerus in his roome. This Iohn by the per∣swasion of Sabas a Monke of Palestina forsooke the fellowship of Severus, & was cast into prison by Anastatius the Emperours cap∣taine: but when he was brought foorth out of prison againe, he disappointed the expectation of Anastatius the captaine: for hee openly auouched the foure generall Councills, and anathema∣tised the followers of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius and Eutyches. In doing whereof he was mightily assisted both by the people, and the Monks: so that Anastatius the Emperours captaine fearing popular commotion, fled and returned againe to the Emperour, but Severus B. of Antiochia moued with wrath against Hist. Magd. . 6 cap. 3. the Monks of Syria, set vpon them, & slew 300. of them, & gaue their carcases to the foules of the heauen, and the beastes of the earth, such mercie was, and is to bee found in headstrong heretiques. In all this desolation the courage of Cosmas B. of Epiphania, and Severianus Bishop of Arethusa is to be admired, who wrote a booke conteining a sentence of deposition of
Severus B. of Antiochia, which booke Aurelianus a deacon of Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 34. Epiphania clad in a womans apparrell deliuered vnto him in An∣tiochia, and afterward conueyed himselfe away secretly. The Emperour was highly offended against Cosmas, and Severianus, and he wrote to Asiaticus gouernour of Phoenitia, that he should eiect them out of their places: but when answere was returned to the Emperour, that it could not be done without blood, the Emperour left off further pursuing of them. Many counted Anastatius a peaceable Emperour, because he would haue setled controuersies in the Church, as ciuile controuersies at some times are settled, namely by a lawe of obliuion, but there is no capitulation betwixt darknes & light, but darknes must yeelde vnto the light of GOD. In Africke moe than 900. were crowned with martyrdome vnder the reigne of Anastatius as the Magd. historie recordeth out of the first booke of Regino, de Anasta∣tio. Platina writteth that he was slaine with thunder. Platin. de vit. Hermisd Justinus the elder. AFTER Anastatius succeeded Iustinus a godly Empe∣rour, and gouerned nine yeeres, 3. dayes Hee restored the Bishoppes whome Anastatius had banished. Hee bani∣shed also Arrian bishoppes, who were found within his domi∣nions. Severus bishop of Antiochia a vilde Eutychian here∣tique, and a bloody Foxe, hee displaced, and caused him to be punished by cutting out his tongue, as some affirme. Theo∣doricus Evagr. lib. 4 cap. 4. King of Gothes obtaining dominion in Italie, persecuted true Christians with great hostilitie, and sent ambassadours to the Emperour Justinus to restore the Arrian bishoppes whome hee had banished: else hee would persue the bishoppes who were in Itale with all kinde of rigour. And because the am∣bassadours returned not backe againe with such expedition as he expected, hee put hand to worke, and slewe two noble Se∣natours, Symmachus, and Botius. Likewise when the ambas∣sadours were returned, he cast in prison Ivannes Tuscus Bishop of Rome, and his companions, whom he had before imployed Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 3.
to goe in message to the Emperour Iustinus. The bishop of Rome died in prison for lacke of sustentation, but the LORD suf∣fered not this barbarous cruelty of Theodoricus to be long vnpu∣nished: for the LORD strake him with madnesse of minde, so that when he was sitting at table, and the head of a great fish was set before him, he imagined it was the head of Symmachus, whome hee had slaine, and was so stupified with feare, that in∣continent after he died. In the dayes of this Emperour Iustinus, was a terrible earthquake, the like whereof hath not bene heard Euag. lib. 4. cap. 5. at any time before, wherewith the towne of Antiochia was shaken & vtterly ruined. With the earthquake, fire was mixed, consu∣ming & resoluing into ashes the remnant of the towne, which the earthquake had not cast downe. In this calamitie Euphrasius B. of Antiochia perished. The good Emperour mourned for the desolation of Atiochia, & put on sackcloth on his body, & was in great heauinesse, whereof it is supponed that hee contracted that disease whereof he died. When hee found his disease dayly Chron. Funct. increasing, he made choose of Iustinian his sisters sonne to bee his collegue, who gouerned foure moneth in coniunct autho∣ritie with his vncle, and then Iuslinus ended his course. Justinianus. AFTER the death of Iustinus, Iustinianus his sisters sonne gouerned 38. yeeres. He would suffer no faith to be open∣ly prosessed, except the faith alowed in the foure general Coun∣cills. Notwithstanding the Emprice Theodora his wife was a fa∣uourer Evagr. lib. 4. ap. 10. of Eutyches heresie. This Emperour was bent to recouer all that was lost by his predecessours in Asia, Africke & Europe, & he had a good successe through the vertue & valour of his cap∣taines, especially Belisarius & Narses Belisarius first sought against the Persians who had ouercome not onely Mesopotamia, but also many parts of Syria, Antrochena & Caua. He ouercame them in battell, & compelled them to go backe beyond Euphrates. Next he was employed to fight against the Uandales in Africke, who possessed a great boundes of the Romane dominion, euer since
the dayes of Gensericus King of Vandales. And it is to be mar∣ked that the time is now come, whereinto the LORD will de∣clare that the blood of his Sainctes is precious in his eyes. For since the daies of Dioclesian, that bloody persecuting Emperour, no race of people persecuted GODS Saincts with so barbarous crueltie as the Vandales did, for zeale they had to the Arrian he∣resie, wherewith they were infected. After Gensericus, Hunericus, and Amalaricus, and Trasimundus, who closed the doores of the Temples of Christians, and banished their bishops to Sardinia. Childericus would haue shewed some fauour to Christians, & re∣duced their bishops from banishment: for this cause the Van∣dales did slay him, & gaue his Kingdome to Gillimer. Now the LORD remembred the grones of his own prisoners, & wold not suffer the rod of the wicked perpetually to lye vpon the lot of the righteous. Belisarius fought against the Vandales prosperous∣ly, recouered Carthage, & al the bounds pertaining to the Romane Empire possessed by the Vandales. Also he tooke Gillimer their King, & caried him captiue to Constantinople. It is worthy of re∣membrance, that Iustinian would not receiue into his treasure the vessels of golde, which the Emp. Titus (when hee burnt the Temple of Ierusalem) transported to Rome. These same vessels Gensericus King of Vandales when hee spoyled Rome transported Evagr. lib. 4, cap. 17. to Carthage, & Belisarius after he had conquessed Carthage againe he brought them to Constantinople, but Iustinian sent them to Ie∣rusalem to be disponed vpon according to the wisdome of Chri∣stian bishops in those bounds. The third warfare against the Gothes, for recouering Italie out of their handes was greatest of all the rest, and indured longest time, to wit, 18. yeeres, where∣into Belisarius and Mundus, and after them Narses all valiant captaines were imployed. It was brought on vpon this occasiō, Idem lib. 4. cap. 19. as Evagrius following Procopius (in whose time this warfare was intended) doth record. Amalasunta the daughter of Theodori∣cus Platin. de vit. Ioan. 1. had the gouernement of Italie. Astalarichus her sonne before he came to perfect age, died. Theodatus a kinseman of Theodori∣cus had the gouernment by the mariage of Amalasunta, but he Funct. chron. rendered vnto her euill for good and thrust her into prison, & slew her. In Theodatus time came Belisarius to Italie to fight against the Gothes, but seeing Theodatus was more meet for
philosophie than for warfare, hee gaue place to Vitiges to haue the gouernment Belisarius recouered the Isle of Sicile, hee came to Rome, and the ports were opened to him, and he was glad∣ly Evgr. lib. 4. cap. 21. receiued: hee tooke Vitiges King of the Gothes, and caried him captiue to Canstantinople. Mundus another captaine ouercame the Gothes in Dalmatia, recouered the countrie to the Romanes: but in the mids of his victorie he was slaine through too hastie & furious persuing of his enemies, who had slaine his sonne. In absence of Belisarius (for the Emperour had sent for him to fight against the Persians) the Gothes choosed Theudebaldus, and after him Attaricus, who continued but short time. Finally, To∣tilas was chosen to bee their King, who recouered againe the towne of Rome, & the most part of all the principall townes of Italie. Belisarius, albeit he was sent backe againe to Italie, & reco∣uered Rome the second time, yet the Persian warre continually was the cause of reducing him backe againe from Italie. In end, Narses a valiant man was sent to Italie, who ouercame the Gothes, draue them out of Italie, & brought it again vnder the soueraig∣nity of the Romans. What good recompense for great seruice was rendered to Belisarius, & Narses, many writers haue recorded, I passe it ouer with silence. Narses mooued with indignation against the Emprice Sophia the wise of Iustinus the younger, the successor of Iustinian, hee sent for the Longobards. who came out of Pannonia, and possessed themselues in that part of Italie, which is vnto this day called Lombardie. It is one of Iustinians chiefe praises, that he caused the great Ocean sea of the Romane lawes to bee abridged into a short com∣pend, & to bee comprised within the compasse of 50. books, vul∣garly called Pandectis or digestis, hauing short titles prefixed vnto Tom. 2. Con∣il. them, rather than prolixe and tedious commentaries subioyned vnto them. Also he gathered a generall Councill in Constantino∣ple about the 14. yeere of his reigne, to pacifie if possible were, the contentious disputations that were moued anent the wri∣tings of Origen, Teodorus and Ibas, but this I referre to the owne place.
Iustinus the younger. IVSTINVS was nephew to Iustinian. He gouerned 16. yeeres. He gouerned himselfe alone 12. yeres, and with Tiberius, whom Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 23. he associated 3. yeeres, 11. months. All things succeeded vnpros∣perously in his time. Alboinus King of the Longobards possessed himselfe and his people in Italie. Cosroes King of Persia with his captaine Adaarmanes tooke the towne of Apamia, and burnt it Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 10. with fire, & the towne of Circesium, and put garisons into it, and miserably wasted the bounds of the Romane dominions. When these things were reported to Iustinus, hee who would credite no true information before, now he is stricken with madnes & astonishment of mind, being grieued for this, that the estate of the Romane Empire should haue decayed in his time, & through Idem lib. 5. cap. 11, 12. his default. For remedie whereof Tiberius a wise & valiant man, by the aduise of Sophia was associate to Iustinus, to gouerne the affaires of the Kingdome, Evagrius describeth at length the ora∣tion of Iustinus to Tiberius, when hee clothed him with all Em∣periall ornaments, & how hee exhorted him not to bewitched with the splendore of those garments, as he had bene, but with vigilancy & wisdome, to gouerne the estate of the Kingdome. This hee spake after he was recouered of his disease, & in pre∣sence Evag. lib. 5. cap. 13. of all the noble men of his Court so that they were com∣pelled to shed aboundance of teares, when they heard at one time so cleare a confession of his owne miscariage, and so pru∣dent a counsell giuen to his associate. Tiberius. TIBERIVS reigned 3. yeeres, 11. moneths in coniunct authoritie with IVSTINVS, and after his death hee reigned foure yeeres himselfe alone: so all the time of his go∣uernment was seuen yeere, eleuen moneths. In his time COSROES King of Persia, was puft vp with such insolen∣cie, in regarde of his former victories, that he would not ad∣mit the ambassadours of TIBERIVS to his presence, but commanded them to followe him to Caesarea of Cappadocia,
there to receaue their answere, for he had taken Daras a towne of Mesopotamia in the borders of the Romane Empire, builded by the Emperour Anastatius, and called Daras, because about this place Darius had his last ouerthrow by Alexander of Mace∣donia. Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 37. After the taking of Daras, hee marched toward Armenia in the Summer time, and from thence intended to addresse toward Caesarea Cappadocie, expecting none encounter or resi∣stance of the Romane armie. But Tiberius had prepared a well ap∣pointed armie, consisting of moe than an hundreth and fiftie thousand men to resist Cosroes, whose forces when Cosroes could Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 14, 15. not match, hee fled: and for very heart griefe hee died, and gaue aduise to the Persians, not to make warre against the Ro∣mane Empire in any time to come. The estate of the Church was the more peaceable vnder his reigne, because the Vandales in Africke, and the Gothes in Italie were alreadie vtterly subdued. The Longobards, whom Narses brought out of Ponnonia to Italie, were the more insolent to afflict Christians, because Tiberius was occupied in the Persian warfare against Cosroes. The nation of the Gothes had as yet full swey in Spaine, & they were misera∣bly Hist. Magd. cen. 6 cap. 3. addicted to the Arrian heresie, insomuch that Lemugildus King of Gothes, caused his own naturall sonne Elmingildus to be slaine, because he forsooke the Arrian faith. Also their number Matin. de vit. Gregor. 1 was augmented by returning of many Vandales to Spaine, who had escaped the hands of Belisarius. Mauritius. MAVRITIVS was captaine of the armie of TIBERIVS, to whome Tiberius gaue his daughter in marriage, with his kingdome: for he found himselfe sicke vnto the death. He reigned 20. yeeres, hee fought against the Persians, & prospered . lib. 5 cap. 22. in that warfare: and after that peace was bound vp amongst them. Chaianus King of Auares, Hunnes, and Slauonians fought against him, and caried away many captiues and prisoners. In redeeming of the captiues, Mauritius was too niggard, wher∣by it came to passe, that Chaianus slew 12. thousand prisoners, which might haue bene ransomed for a small summe of money.
This ouersight of the Emperour not onely stained other his no∣ble vertues, but also purchased the hatred of the souldiers against him, whereby it came to passe, that they set vp Phocas to be Emperour in his steade. Of this calamitie it is thought that: Mauritius was foreseene in his dreame, & that he choo∣sed . Funct. lib. 8. rather to be punished in this world for his faults, than in the world to come. Alwayes hee was brought in bands to Phocas, his wife, and fiue children were cruelly slaine in his owne pre∣sence, and finally, bloodie Phocas slew himselfe, of whome it is reported, that when he saw his wife and children put to death, he gaue glorie to GOD in his greatest calamitie, and said, Iust art thou, O LORD, and righteous in all thy Iudgements. CHAP. II. Of Pastors and Doctors. Patriarches of Rome. TO GELASIVS succeeded ANASTATIVS 2. and gouer∣ned 1. yeere, 2. moneths, 24 dayes. Hee ministred in the Anastatius. dayes of the Emperour Anastatius: he was hated of the Clergie, because he admitted to his fowship Photinus a deacon, whom Foelix and Gelasius had excommunicated as a friend to Acatius B. of Constantinople. Platina writeth of him that he ended his life, as Arrius did, and that his bowels gush∣ed Platina de vitis pontif. out, when he was doing his secret busines. The very flatte∣rers of the bishops of Rome are compelled to say, that some of them were fauourers of heretiques, and for that cause punished by God with extraordinare iudgements: but I ground no thing vpon the words of Platina, but so much as maketh against them, whom he intendeth to flatter. To Anastatius succeeded Symmachus in the dayes of the Em∣perour Anastatius, and when Theodoricus King of Gothes reigned Symmachus in Italie great sedition was amongst the people at his election,
the one part of the Clergie & people choosing Symmachus, the other Laurentius to be B. of Rome, but with cōmon consent a Sy∣nod was appointed at Ravenna & there the electiō of Symmachus was ratified. He cōtinued in office 15. yeres, 6. months, 22 daies. Platin. de vit. Pontif. Hormisda. Hormisda the successour of Symmachus ministred 9 yeeres, 18. dayes, who by commandement of Theodoricus king of Gothes, and reigning in Italie gathered a Councill at Rome, and damned the errour of Eutyhes of new againe. Likewise ambassadours were sent to the Emp. , & to Iohn B. of Constantinople to exhort them to forsake the wicked errour of Eutyches, and to acknowledge two natures in CHRIST, to wit, the diuine & hu∣mane nature, but Anastatius answered with proud words, Nosim∣perare volumus, nobis imperari nolumus: that is. We will command, but we will not be commanded Likewise the bishop of Constan∣tinople puft vp in pride by the assistance of the Emprour despi∣sed the Councill of Hormisda. Moreouer against the law of na∣tions they dealt inhumanely with the ambassadours of Hormis∣da, and thrust them into an old and lecking shippe, with straite Platin. de it. Pontif. commandement that they should not arriue at any harberie in Graecia, but keepe a direct course toward Italie. Notwithstanding by the prouidence of GOD, the snip arriued safely at the coastes of Italie. The errour of the Mamcheans begannne againe to be ouerspred in Rome, but Hormisda tooke their bookes, & burnt them in the porch of the Church called Constantiana. Iohn 1. gouerned the Church of Rome in the dayes of Iustinus the elder, to whome also he was sent ambassdour by Theodo∣ricus, Ioan 1. to craue that the Arrian bishops, whome he had banished out of his dominions might be restored to their places againe, els the Catholicke bishops of Italie should expect all kinde of rigour at his hands. The bishop Iohn with many reares perswa∣ded the Emp. Iustinus to condescend vnto the petition of The∣doricus. Neuerthelesse when hee returned backe againe to Italie, hee was cast in prison, where hee ended his life, after he gouer∣ned the Church of Rome 2. yeeres, 8. moneths. Foelix 4. the succssor of Iohn 1. continued in office 4. yeeres, Foelix 4. 2. moneths, 13. dayes. He excommunicated Athanass Patriarch of Constantinople for heresie, as Platina recordeth. Hee ordained that Christians before their departure out of this life should
be annointed with oyle. This custome is now kept in the Ro∣mane Cot. Funct. lib. 7. Church, and is called the Sacrament of extreme vnction. To Foelix 4. succeeded Bonifacius 2, whom the Graecians called Bonifacius. 2. Agathon, but both names soundeth to one and the selfe same thing. The schisme that was among the people at his election ceased, by the death of his competitor Discorus: he ministred 2 yeeres, 2. dayes. In his time Eulalius B. of Carthage, submitted himselfe vnto the chaire of Rome: whereupon Bonifacius took oc∣casion of insolent insulting, in so far, that hee is not ashamed to writ of Aurelius B. of Carthage, Augustine B. of Hippo, & of the rest of the fathers, who were present at the 6. Councill of Carthage, that through the instigation of the deuill they swelled in pride against the Roman Church, & aginst his predecessors Bonifacius 1 & Coelestinus whom his predecessors most iustly had excommu∣nicated: but now (saith he) Eulalius hath confessed the fault of Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap 10. Aurelius, & of the Councill of Carthage, & submitted himselfe in humble maner to the chaire of Rome: therfore he & the Church of Carthage are receiued againe vnto the peace & cōmunion of the Romane Church. Marke here how they who would impaire a iot of that supremacie whereat the Church of Rome aimed, were forthwith deliuered to the deuil, how holy, modest, & learned so euer they had bene & a vaine, timorous & beastly body Eula∣lius is preferred to Aurelius B. of Carthage, to Augustine B. of Hip∣po, & to a graue Councill of mo than 200, Fathers, only for this, that he submitted himself to the chair of Rome. The time is now approaching, whereinto it will be clearely manifested, that su∣premacie was the very aple of their eye, & touch that once, there is nothing but curses to bee thundred out of mount Tarpeius, euen against Augustine himslf, & against reuerent Councills. Iohn 2. was successor to Bonifacius: he ministred in the time of Ioannes 2. the Emperour Iustinian, 2. yeeres, 4. moneths: he was called for his eloquance Mercurius, or ntius Iovis. Agapetus the successor of Iohn 2. vnder the reigne of Iustinian, had scarcely libertie to attend vpon his owne stocke: for im∣mediatly Agapetus. after hee was ordained B of Rome, he was sent to the Emperour Iustinian by Theodatus King of the Gothes, to pacifie his wrath: for the Emperour intended to make warre against him, for the cruell slaughter of AMALASVNTA
his wife: this was an vnhonest cause and an vnseemely message to the B. of Rome to vndertake. It is affirmed by Historiogra∣phers, that Iustinian secretly sollicited Agapetus to the errour of Eutyches, and that Agapctus answered vnto him couragiously, that hee supponed hee was sent to a most Christian Emperour, but he found him to bee Dioclesian. This libertie is thought to Platina de vit. pontif. haue done good to Iustinian, and that hee embraced the true faith more seriously than before, and deposed Anthemius B. of Constantinople, an Eutychian heretique, and placed Menas a bi∣shop professing the true faith in his roome. Alwayes Agapetus died at Constantinople, after hee had beene chosen B. of Rome 11. moneths, 21. dayes, and his body was put into a chest of lead and transported to Rome. Siluerius the sonne of Hormisda, sometime B. of Rome, was successor to Agapetus. Theodatus King of Gothes compelled the Siluerius. Clergie to subscribe to his election: he gouerned the Church of Rome at that time when Iustinian sent Belisarius to fight against Vitiges. Theodora the Emperour Iustinians wife, sent to Si∣luerius, desiring him, that hee would condescend to the restitu∣tion of Anthemius an Eutychian heretique, and to the deposition of Menas B. of Constantinople. Siluersus refused to obey such im∣pious commandements. Therefore Theodora sendeth a comman∣dement to Belisarius to banish Siluerius, and to appoint Vigilius B. of Rome, who had promised to fulfill her desires. Thus was Si∣luerius banished to the Isle of Pontia, after hee had ruled the Church of Rome one yeere, 5. moneths. Vigilius succeeded to Siluerius, and ruled 17. yeeres, 26. dayes. His entrie to this office is inexcusable: for by open force, se∣cret Vigilius. bribes, and promises to performe the impious desires of the Emprice, he obtained the chaire of Rome: so that Onuphrius cannot finde out an excuse for his vnlawfull entrie. Theodora the Emprice vrged him to performe his promise, & to restore Anthemius. But Vigilius, as appeared, repenting of his great te∣meritie and rashnes, answered, that euill promises were not to be keeped: for this cause he was led away violently to Constan∣tinople, and a cord was fastned about his necke, & he was drawne through the streetes, and cast into prison: hee indured all this contempt the more patiently, because hee confessed, that for
his srnes he had deserued greater punishment at the hands of GOD than this was. In end he was deliuered out of prison by the earnest request of Narses captaine of Iustinians armie in Halie,  de is . but he died by the way: and he whom so many cares could not destroy, the sicknes of the grauell destroyed him at Sicile, & his body was transported to Rome, and buried there. But now let vs consider the ineptitude of Baronius, who keepeth no measure in his historie, but as the Poet speaketh of a ship tossed with a ve∣hement tempest. Tollimur in coelum sublato gurgite, & idem. Subducta admanes imos descendimus unda. When Baronius speaketh of the entrie of Vigilius, he calleth him athiefe, a brigand, a man who entred not by the doore of the . . 7. . 538 sheepe-fold, a false bishop, an Antichrist: yet soone after he cal∣leth him the Vicar of Christ as though by the crueltie whereby he draue his predecessor Siluerius to death hee was incontinent worthy of the name of the Vicar of Christ. Albeit hee restored not Anthemius, according to his impious paction with Theodora, yet hee wrote vnto the heretiques, Anthemius, Theodosius and Severus, and confirmed their errour by his secret missiue let∣ters, as Morneus in his booke called Misterium iniquitatis, Pro∣ueth. His cariage in the fift generall Councill, he beeing pre∣sent in the towne of Constantinople, shall be declared, God wil∣ling in the owne place, the cord that was lapped about his necke, and drewe him through the streetes of Constantinople, could not draw out of his proud stomacke the conceate of su∣premacie: for he sent his opinion in write to the Councill, but would not be present to sit in a lower place than Eutychius B. of Constantinople and moderator of the Council. AFTER Vigilius succeeded Pelagius 1: hee ruled the Church of Rome 11. yeeres, 10 moneths, 28. dayes. In a very perilous time Pelagins. 1 this charge was committed to him, namely when the nation of the Gothes had chosen Totilas to be their King, who was a fierce and cruell man, and was called for his fiercenes Flagellum Dei, that is, the scourge of GOD: he led a great armie from Tarui∣sium through Italie, destroying and wasting the countrie whi∣thersoeuer he went, but he set his face chiefly against Campania. By the way hee addressed himselfe in the habite of a simple
souldier to mount Cassinates where was S. Benedict the father of Monkes, not because he inuented the Monasticke life, but be∣cause the most part of Monkes adhered to the forme inuented by him: he was but lately sprung vp in the dayes of the Empe∣rour Iustinus the elder, and of Pope Iohn the first, yet was his name in great account, so that Totilas in a disguised habite went Platin. de vit. Ioan. 1. vnto him, and conferred with him. Platina writeth that S. Bene∣dict knew him, notwithstanding of his deepe dissimulation, and with terrifying words disswaded him from vsing cruelty against Christians. The Counsell was good, but Totilas was not obe∣dient vnto it. He was slaine in battell by Nases neere to Brixel∣lum: and Teias whome the Gothes choosed in his rocme was slaine in battell at Nuceria: so the Kingdome of the Gothes in Italic was vtterly vndone by the valour of Narses. After the first comming of Theodoricus into Italie, they reigned in Italie 72. yeeres. Now their name, dominion, and all their might is vtterly quenched. Pelagius depended much vpon the friendship of Nar∣ses. And when Macedomus B. of Aquileia died, Honoratus B. of Millan ordained Paulinus to be his successour. Pelagius B. of Rome grieued at this. Neuerthelesse hee complineth not to Narses that Paulinus was made bishop of Aquileia without his consent, but rather, because this was done without the fore∣knowledge of the most noble Emperour Iustinian, who like as he had deliuered Istria and Venice from the grieuous bondage of Pelag. 1. Epist. 3. Totilas, so likewise it became them to expect the Emperours answere, before they had appointed a bishop in Aquileia. Mark the hypocrisy of the bishops of Rome vnder colour of obe∣dience to the ciuile Magistrate secretly creeping to their owne soueraignity, the chiefe marke whereat they continually aimed. Iohn 3. succeeded to Pelagius, & gouerned 12. yeres, 11 months 26. dayes. In the dayes of Iustinus the younger, who was successor Ioannes 3. to the Emp. Iustinian, did he minister in the Romane Church, & at that time when Alboinus King of Longobards came into Italie with a great armie, with their wiues & children, & setled their abode in that part of Italie which lieth about the riuer Padus. The Em∣price Sophia had irritate Narses that valiant captaine with contu∣melious Platina de vit. Ponf. wordes, and he gaue both to her & to the estate of the Empire this hard meeting, that hee possessed the Longobards in
Italie, weauing a web vnto her (according as he promised) which she ws not able all her time to vndoe againe. The Deputie of the Emp. of Constantinople, kept a part of Italie which was not conquessed by te Lombards, & this was called Exarchatus Ra∣venna, & the B of Rome with assistance of the countrie kept Rome free from the dominion of the Lombards for a short ime. At this time did Iohn 3. gouerne the Church of Rome. He brought n newe constitutions in the Church, that Chorepiscopi, otherwise called Vicar Episcoporum should haue no power at all of impo∣sition Hst. Mad. cnt 6. cap. 10 of hands, which constitution he confirmed with a foolsh reason, because none of the 70. disciples whom Christ adioyned as helpers to the Apostles, had power by imposition of hands, to cōfer the gift of the holy Spirit. Now the time is come, whē euery man endeuoureth with some nouelty, and new toy, which hath not bene heard before to goe beyond his predecessors Benedictus 1. Benedict 1. continued in his charge, 4. yeres 1. months 28 dayes. Hee had great griefe in his time, because the preuailing power of the Lombards oppressed the countrie of Italie, & the town of Rome was sore pinched with famine. The heart griefe he concei∣ued for the calamitie of the country is thought to haue hastned his death. Neuerthelesse he had this comfort, that the Emp. Ti∣brius 2. in whose time hee ministred, sent shippes loadned with cornes frō Aegypt to support the distressed estate of the Romans. Tiberius was indued with many good qualities & princely gifts, he was valiant, godly and liberall, and the more bountifull hee was to the poore, his riches so much the more abounded: for Platina de vit. Pontif. beside the treasures of Narses that were brought to him from Italie, when Narses died, he found also in his owne palace vnder a crosse of marble (which he commanded to be raised and not to be tread vnder feet any longer, but to be set in a more hono∣rable place) there I say, he found an infinite treasure of siluer & gold Finally when he ouercame the Persians, such quantitie of gold, siluer & precious things were atchieued, as none of his predecessors had obtained the like: so that the prouerbe, hee who soweth largely, shall reape largely, had viue performance in the person of the noble Emperour Tiberius. After Benedict succeeded Pelagius 2. and ministred vnder the Pelagius . reignes of Tiberius & Mauritius 10. yeeres, 12. months 10. dayes.
Hee was elected without the foreknowledge of the Emperour, contrare to the custome obserued in those dayes, but he excu∣sed himselfe to the Emperour Mauritius, by sending Gregorius ambassadour vnto him, and declaring that the towne of Rome was besiged by Lombardis, so that no messenger could bee sent from Rome to Constantinople, to acquaint the Emperour with his election. The forme of the siege of Rome was this: The Empe∣rour Mauritius had hired Sigibertus King of France to make warre against the Lombards, and to driue them out of Italie, but his armie was ouerthrowne by Eucharis King of Lombards: with this victorie the Lombards were puft vp, and they besieged the towne of Rome, they had also taken it, if they had not bene hin∣dered by great inundation of waters. The inundation of Tiber was extraordinarie, it ouerflowed the walles of the towne of Rome, and brought with it a multitude of Serpents, which after∣ward putrifying, corrupted the aire, whereof arose a vehement pest in Rome, and Pelagius 2. in this contagious sicknes ended his life. Gregorius 1. called Magnus succeeded to Pelagius 2, and mi∣nistred Gregor. 1. 13. yeeres, 6. moneths, 10 dayes. He was chosen with consent of the Clergie, and people, but he was vnwilling to ac∣cept the office. And hee wrote to the Emperour Mauritius, that he should not assent neither to the desire of Clergie nor people, but his letters were intercepted by the gouernour of the towne Platina de vit. Ponus. of Rome, and rent in pieces. And other letters were written vnto the Emperour, requesting him to condescend, that Gregorius might haue the office, whom both Clergie and people had ele∣cted. The Emperour agreed willingly to his election, for he had beene acquainted with him in Constantinople, when he came am∣bassadour from Pelagius 2. to excuse his ouersight in accepting the office of the bishop of Rome before the Emperour was fore∣seene of that purpose. He brought into the Romane Church the forme of the Greeke Letanies, and ordained that in their pray∣ers  should bee nine times repeated. This prayer is thought to haue beene vttered by multiplied repetitions in the dayes of the Emperour Iustinus, when Antiochia was terribly shaken with a vehement earthquake, the few number that were aliue, saide, LORD haue mercie, LORD haue mercie, which in
Greeke Kyrie Eleison, hee borrowed also from the Liturgie of the Iewes Allelu-iah, and added these wordes vnto the Latine seruice, Diesque nostros in pace disponas, that is, in peace dispone our dayes. He was the first that deuised the stile of Seruus servo∣ram Dei, that is, the seruant of the seruants of GOD: taking oc∣casion (as appeareth) so to doe, by the arrogant attempt of Iohn Patriarch of Constantinople called , or iciunator, who had vsurped the stile of Oecumenick, or vniuersall bishop to whom Pelagius 2. and Gregorius 1. mightily opponed themselues, and called him the forerunner of the Antichrist, who durst vsurpe Lib. 6. P∣dies. 16. Epist. 30. such an arrogant stile. But marke now, I pray you, how farre ambition preuailed both in the chaire of Constantinople, and in the chaire of Rome. The humilitie of Christ was now laide aside, notwithstanding of their humble stiles, servus servorum Dei, and the first occasion that was presented vnto them of vsurpation of the stile of vniuersall bishop, it was greedily embraced. First Iohn called Ieiunator, Patriarch of Constantinople saw that the Em∣periall seate was in Constantinople, and that the towne of Rome was besieged by the Lombards. Now he thought it was time to stirre and to aduance his owne chaire aboue all chaires. And incontinent after Bonifacius 3. finding himselfe in fauour with the Emp. Phocas, gladly accepted that same preheminence in his owne person, which his predecessors had damned in the person of Ioannes Ieiunator: so they were all for the most part a nest of ambitious Prelats, preaching the humilitie of CHRIST, but hunting for the supremacie foretold of the Antichrist Read the Epistles which Gregorius writeth to Mauritius detesting, and abhorring this supremacie whereat the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople aimed. Amongst other things, he saith, Exclamare Gregor. lib. 4 Epist. 32. compellor, ac dicere, O tempora ô mores: ecce cuncta in Europae partibus, barbarorum iurisunt tradita. Destructae urbes, euersa castra, depopulatae prouinciae, nullus terram cultor inhabitat, & tamen sacerdotes, qui in pavimento, & cinere flentes tacere debuerunt, vanitatis sibi nomina expe∣tunt, & novis ac prophanis vocabulis gloriantar: that is to say, I am compelled to cry out, O times, O maners: beholde, in all the parts of Europe, all things lye vnder the reuerence of barbarous people: townes are destroyed, castles are ouerthrowne, pro∣vinces are spoyled, no labourer inhabiteth the lande.
Notwithstanding the Priests, who should lye in ashes vpon the ground weeping, they are seeking vnto themselues nns of vanitie, and they glory in prophane stiles. Nowe apply these wordes of Gregorius 1. to Bonifacius 3. and it shall be found, that hee embraced the name of vanitie, and the glory of prophane stiles, at that same time, when it became him better to be lying in sackecloth and ashes, and to be mourning for the preuailing power of barbarous people, and for the barbarous butcherie of Phocas the Emperour who conferred vnto him that eminent stile to bee called bishop of bishops. Gregorius flattering epistle written to Phocas, after hee had traiterously murthered his master Mauritius, his wife and children, will bee a perpetuail blot to the name of Gregorius: but of this I haue spoken in the treatise of supremacie. The constitution he made anent pro∣hibition Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10 of mariage, to men in spirituall offices, he was com∣pelled in his owne time to abrogate againe, because it was not only the occasion of vncleannes, but also of secret murthers of innocent babes, & whereas the Apost. PAVL said, It was better to marie than to burne, Gregorie was compelled to say, It was better to marrie than tomurder. The sending of the Monks, Augustine, Melito, and Ioannes to Britanne, was not so much to conquesse them to Christian religion, which they had embraced in the dayes of Lucius King of Brittons, and of Eleutherius bishoppe of Rome, as hath beene declared in the second CENTVRIE cap. 2. as to conquesse them vnto the ceremonies and rites of the Ro∣mane seruice. Gregorius was the first, of whome we read, that writeth of sa∣crifices to be offered for relieuing of soules tormented in Pur∣gatorie, and hee leaneth vpon such ridiculous fables, which hee heard of one Foelix B. of Centumcellae, as it is a shame to rehearse them, but seeing they are not ashamed of lyes, let the dung of Hist. Magd. con. 6. cap. 10. Greg lib. 4. al. cap. 55. thir owne inuentions be cast into their owne faces: he writeth that a Presbyter of Centumcellae went to the bath house to wash himselfe, where he found a man vncouth & vnknowne to him, but very humble and seruiable, and after hee had serued him sundrie dayes, the Presbyter to requite his kindnesse, brought vnto him two consecrated hostes as a blessing and a reward to him who had serued him so duetifully, but the man with sad
countenance, answered, This bread is holy, and I am not wor∣thie to eat it. I was sometime master and proprietare of this house, but nowe for my sinnes I am appointed to this seruile occupation: if thou would doe a benefite to me, offer them to the Almighty GOD, as a sacrifice for my sinnes, & thinke that ye are heard of GOD, when yee cannot finde me in this place any longer. Surely Popish Purgatorie, and soule Masses are first grounded vpon foolish fables, and afterward confirmed by dreames of foolish Monkes. Patriarches of Constantinople. EVPHEMIVS before he would annoint Anastatius to be Em∣perour, Euphemius (who came to that honour, by Ariadne the wife of the Emperour Zeno, whom he maried) hee craued a confession of his faith, with a promise sealed by his hand-write that hee should make no nouation in religion during his time. The Theod lector. lib. 2. Emperour craued his hand-write againe, which seeing that Euphemius refused to render backe againe, the Emperour pro∣cured his deposition, and banished him, and placed Macedo∣nius in his roome. To Euphemius succeeded Macedonius, to whose custodie the hand-write foresaid was committed by Euphemius: which when Macedo∣nius. Hist Magd. cent. 6. cap. 10. Timo∣theus. hee would not render, the Emperour banished him also, and commanded to slay him at Gangra the place of his banishment. To Macedonius succeeded Timotheus an vnconstant man, and justly compared to the narrow Firth that runneth betwixt Baeotra and Calchis, which floweth and ebbeth seuen times in 24. houres, so was this bishop wauering minded, and more bent to please men, than to bee approoued of GOD. In witnesse where of I haue set downe one example. The Abbot of the mo∣nasterie called Studitum, refused to bee ordained by imposition of his handes: for hee saide, the handes of that man, who hath damned the Councill of Chalcedone, shall not be laide vpon me: whereunto Timotheus answered, whosoeuer accuseth, or dam∣neth the Council of Chalcedone, let him be accursed, & when this was reported to the Emperour Anastatius, to eschew his indig∣nation, he said the contrare, whosoeuer accepteth the Council of Chalcedone, and alloweth of it, let him be accursed.
Iohn of Cappadocia is not worthy that his name should be in∣sert in this Catalogue, a proud, avaritious, and ambitious he∣retique, Ioaannes Cappadox who could neuer behaue himselfe duetifully, neither in a ciuile, nor in a spirituall calling. He was first the Emperour Anastatius his Deputie, and was deposed, for aspiring to an higher place. Next, hee became Patriarch of Constantinople, and aspired to the dignitie of Oecumenicke and vniuersall bishop. It is true, that Ioannes  vsurped the title of prehemi∣nence, therefore this Ioannes Cappadox was laid aside as an Euty∣chian heretique, and the great inuectiues against this vsurped authoritie are chiefly set against Ioannes Jeiunator. But marke how Pelagius 2. ere Gregorius tramped vpon this pride, with a proud mind, as Diogenes did vpon the couering of Plato his bed, he is not content to damne the decreet of the Councill of Constanti∣nople, but also hee affirmed that it was not lawfull to him to as∣semble T. 2. Con∣cil. a Councill without libertie first obtained from the bi∣shop of Rome, which thing no man spake before him: so Sathan wrought mightily in them both, as he doth in the children of pride, and disobedience. After him succeeded Iohn called Scholasticus, and continued not aboue one yeere. Evagrius calleth him Ioannes Sirmiensis, lib. 4. Ioannes Scholasti∣cus. Epiphae∣ius. cap. 39. To Iohn succeeded Epiphaenius, in the dayes of Iustinian, who blessed his armie which went to fight against the Vandales vn∣der the conduct of Belisarius: he ministred 16. yeeres, as Chytreus writeth. The name of Anthimus is worthy of the rolle of obstinate Anthimus. heretiques. He was bishop of Trapezus, but by the meanes of Theodora the Emperour Instinians wife, hee was promoted to be bishop of Constantinople. Theodora was too busie in Church affaires, and Sophia the wife of Iustinus 2. was too busie in civile affaires. The estate both of Church, and Kingdome had beene in better plight, if both of them had bene lesse busie. Anthimus beeing deposed and banished for herefie, succee∣ded Menas. Menas, who kept the true faith, and gouerned the Church of Constantinople 16. yeere. Evagrius reckoneth Basilides in the rolle of bishops of Constantinople, and Anthimus to be bishop of Lib. 4. . 9. Alexandria.
To Menas suceeded Eutychius, of whome occasion will be Eutycius. offered to speake in the fift generall Councill, wherein he dispu∣ted iuditiously in the question, whether or not it was lawfull to excommunicate heretiques after their death. His opinion anent the bodies of the Saintes after their resurrection, that they should be subtle, like vnto the aire and winde, and not solide and palpable, was refuted by Gregorius I. who proued by the example of CHRIST his body after his resurrection, that the bodies of the Saintes should not be like vnto the aire, and the winde: for CHRIST saith, Handle me, and see: for a spirit hath not Luc. 24. vers. 39. flesh and bones, as ye see me haue. After Eutychius followed Iohn called , or Ieiunator: this Ioannes Ieiunator. name he obtained by the sobrietie, and temperancie of his life. Notwithstanding when his stomacke was emptie of meat, his heart was full of pride, and he followed the footsteps of Joannes Cappadox, and would bee called vniuersall bishoppe, against whome Gregorius 1. contended mightily, euen as Lactantius of olde contended against the Pagans, impugning the error more Gregor. 16. 4 Epist. 32. usque ad epist. 40. Cyriacus. mightily, than solidly confirming the trueth. It is supponed that he ministred 13. yeeres, vnder the Emperour Mauritius. To whom succeeded Cyriacus. Patriarches of Alexandria. AFTER Iohn called Tabennesiota, succeeded another Iohn, who kept the true faith, and was banished by Anastatius, be∣cause Ioannes. he would not damne the Councill of Chalcedone. To John succeeded Theodosius an obstinate defender of the er∣rour Theodo∣sius. of Eutyches. He was familiarly acquainted with Severus of Antiochia, and Anthimus of Constantinople, whereby the miserie of these dayes may bee easily espied, whereinto three notable heretiques gouerned principall townes, such as Constantinople, Alexandria and Antiochia. He was so obstinate in his errour, that he was rather content to be banished vnder the reigne of Iusti∣nian, than to renounce his errour. After him succeeded Zoilus, and after him Appollinarius, who Zoilus. Apollina∣rius.
was present at the fift generall Councill. To whome succeeded Eulogius, and after him Petrus, who ministred vnder the reigne Eulogius, Petrus. of Mauritius. Patriarches of Antiochia. AFTER Palladius succeeded Flavianus, who suffered great troubles for the true faith, namely by the cruell persecu∣tion Flavianus. of the Emperour Anastatius, and the calumnies of Xenaeas B. of Hierapois (a stranger indeed from the couenant of GOD, as his name importeth) for hee blamed Flavianus most vniustly of the heresie of Nestorius, but when Flavianus both by worde and write had cleared himselfe of that calumnie, the malice of Xenaeas ceased not: for he brought with him to Antiochia a great number of Monkes to compell Flavianus to abiure the Councill of Chalcedone. The towne supported their bishop against a ras∣kall number of seditious and hereticall Monkes. Notwithstan∣ding the Emperour Anastatius infected with the heresie of Euy∣ches, counted Flavianus, who was most vniustly persecuted, to be the author of this tumult, and banished him, and placed Se∣verus in his roome. The Emperour Iustinus the elder displaced Severus, and pu∣nished him, and appointed Paulus to be bishop of Antiochia. Paulus. To Paulus succeeded Euphrasius, who died in that feareful cala∣mitie Euphrasius of the towne of Antiochia, when it was shaken and ouer∣throwne with earthquake, as Evagrius witnesseth. Lib. 4. cap. 5 Euphraimius was a ciuile gouernour in the East parts, who Euphrai∣mius. pitied the decayed estate of the towne of Antiochia, & furnished all necessarie things for the repairing of the towne of Antiochia: for which cause the people was so affectioned to him that they would haue him to bee their bishop. So Euphraimius becomes bishoppe of Antiochia, or Theopolis, for at this time it had both thse names. Evagrius writeth, that hee vndertooke the charge of the Apostolicke chaire, in which wordes, it is manifest, that Lib. 4. cap. 6 not onely the chaire of Rome, but also the chaire of Antiochia was called the Apostolicke chaire. The towne of Antiochia at
this time was taken by Cosroes King of Persia, set on fire, and many of th people were cruelly slaine. Euphraus their bishop Evag. lib. 4. cap. 24. at this time left the towne, a perilous example, except the people had beene in safetie, and he onely persecuted, yet he left behinde him so much as might redeeme all the Church goods. AFTER Ephraimius followed Domnius. And after him Ana∣statius. He ministred vnder the Emperour Iustinian, at what time the mperour fell into the errour of them, who saide, that our Domnius. Anastatius. LORD IESVS in his very conception adioyned vnto his diuine nate an immortal body, which was subiect to no humane in∣fimities. Anastatius opponed himselfe to the Emperours opi∣nion, & the bishops followed Anastatius, & not the Emperour: for this cause Iustinian was purposed to haue banished him, but he escaped this trouble, by the Emperours death. Neuerthelesse he was banished by Iustinus the younger, for some alleadged cause of dilapidation of Church-gooods, and Gregorius was placed in his roome. Gregorius ministred in Antiochia 23. yeeres vnder Justinus 2. Tiberius and Mauritius: hee was in great account with Mauri∣tius, Gregorins. to whome he foretolde that he would be promoted to the Imperiall dignitie. And Mauritius imployed him in great and weightie businesse, such as in pacifying the tumult of his armie, which made insurrection against Germanus their captaine. Also hee sent him ambassadour to Cosroes King of Persia, who was Evag. lib. 6. cap. 18. astonied at the grace that was in his speaches. Notwithstanding he was accused by Asterius a Deputie of the East, of the filthie sinne of incest: but he cleared his owne innocencie so euident∣ly, that his accuser was with ignominie scourged and banished. Hee died of the gowtes infirmitie & after his death, Anasiatius, whome Iustinus banished for dilapidation of Church-goods, Euphemius beeing yet aliue, was restored to his owne place againe. To whom succeeded Euphemius. Patriarches of Jerusalem. AFTER MARTYRIVS succeeded HELIAS a fer∣uent Helias. defender of the true faith. Neither would hee condescend to the banishment of EVPHEMIVS
bishop of Constantinople, nor to the admission of Severus to be bi∣shop of Antiochia: therefore the Emperour Anastatius banished him. To him succeeded Iohn, of whose politicke dealing in cir∣cumueening Ioannes. Anastatius the Emperours captaine, I haue suffi∣ciently declared in the preceeding historie. To John succeeded Peter, & after him Macarius, & after Macarius Petrus. Macarius. Eustochius Eustochius, who impugned the bookes of Origen & draue out of his bounds the Monks of Nova Laura, defenders of the opinions of Origen. Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, tooke this in an euill part. The Emperour Iustinian caused a generall Coun∣cill to bee gathered at Constantinople, whereinto not only the bookes of Origen were damned, but also Theodorus himselfe the defender of them. This displeased the Emperour Iustinian, be∣cause hee loued Theodorus dearely: therefore hee procured that Eustochius B. of Ierusalem should be remooued, and Macarius restored againe. After whome succeeded Ioannes, Neamus and Isieius. Ioannes. Neamus. Isiius. In this Centurie, whereas I pretermit the names of other Pastors and Doctors in the Church, I haue done it vpon this consideration. I find in this Centurie, that by the irruption of barbarous people, such as the Gothes, Uandales, Hunnes, Auares, Schythians, Lombards, youth was hindred from studies, many memorable bookes were burnt, ancient languages were vtterly spoyled, learning was greatly diminished, flatterie of preuailing powers increased, ambition in the West, heresie in the East turned the estate of the Church vpside downe, so that scarcely could men of good giftes, and keeping integritie of faith, be furnished vnto the principall Apostolick chaires. Now after a maner the sunne is going downe, the shadowes waxe great, the darknes approacheth, the Antichrist is at the doore, worthy to bee welcomed with darknesse, and decay of know∣ledge. What shall I now write of other Pastors and Doctors? shall I followe the foolish conceates of Historiographers, in whose opinion the gift of miracles increased, when the gift of knowledge decayed: but the contrae is knowne by Scripture, Act. 2. that the holy Apostles, whome CHRIST induced with extraordi∣narie giftes of working miraculous workes, hee indued them
the departure of Valerius: he was B. of Hippo: his vncessant tra∣uels in teaching GODS people, and in stopping the mouthes of Heretiques and gainsayers of the trueth of GOD, specially Donatists, Pelagians and Manichean Heretiques, his learned writings doe testifie. When hee had liued 76. yeeres, he rested from his labours, before the Vandales had taken the towne of Hippo, which in time of Augustines sicknesse they had besieged. In this Centurie flourished worthie preachers in France, such Bishops of France. as Eutherius B. of Lions. Saluianus B. of Marseill, who liued at that time when the nation of the Gothes oppressed France, and many beganne to doubt of the prouidence of GOD, in respect that wicked men had so great vpper-hand. Salvianus in his god∣ly and learned bookes doeth declare that it is a iust thing with GOD to punish men, who knowes their dutie best with greatest punishments, in respect that oft times they are most negligent doers of it. Claudianus Mammertus B. of Vienne is praised by Si∣donius with excessiue cōmendations, as if all the graces of Ierom, Augustine, Basilius, Nazianzenus, and many other fathers had beene in corporated into his person. Hilarius first bishop of Arls, and afterward (as appeareth) of Vienne, opponed him∣selfe directly to Leo B. of Rome, and would acknowledge no iu∣risdiction, nor domination of the B. of Rome ouer the Churches Leo ad Gal. Episcop. epist. 77. & epist. 89. of France: for this cause Leo accused him as an vsurper of su∣premacie, onely because hee would not stoupe vnder his feete: but Hlarius came to Rome, nothing regarding the anathems and cursings of the Romane bishop, and in his face affirmed, that neither did CHRIST appoint Peter to bee had of the rest of the Apostles, neither had the B. of Rome a soueraignitie ouer the Churches of France. All the grandure of Leo his speaches, who doth talke of those few words: Tues Petrus; & super hac pe∣tra, &c. that is, thou art PETER, and vpon this rocke &c. as if Matth. 16. CHRIST had breathed vpon him, and had bidden him receiue the holy Spirit, so confidently did hee affirme that in these wordes was allotted a supremacie to the bishops of Rome the successors of PETER. But this grandure (I say) of his proud conceats, & vaine interpretation of Scripture made not men of vnderstanding incontinently to stoup vndr the feet of a proud Prelat. Vincentius Lirinensis a mighty impugner of hersies.
PROSPER AQVITANICVS. SIDONIVS Bishop in some part of Ouerme. MARTINVS TVRONENSIS is commended for the Hist. Magd. cot.  cap. 10 gift of many miraculous workes that were wrought by his hands. He compared virginitie, marriage, and fornication to a medow, a part where of was eaten by the pastoring of beastes, another part was holled by the rudenes of wourting swine, and the third part was vntouched, but flourishing in the perfect growth of grasse neere to mowing time. Fornication hee com∣pared to the part of the medow that was holled, and misfassio∣ned with swine. Mariage to that part of the medow that was pstored, so that the herbes had their rootes, but wanted the beautie of their flowres: but virginitie is like vnto that part of the medow that is vntouched, flourishing with roote, blade, flowre, and all kinde of perfection. In counting mariage good, but virginitie better, hee followeth the doctrine of the holy Apostle PAVL. Reon gius B. of Rhemes, by whom Clodoueus the 1. Cor. 7 first Christian king of France was baptized, & the whole coun∣trie of France was purged from Paganisme and Arrianisme, whereby it was miserably polluted by the Gothes, and Vandales, was a man of great account. Concerning Aurelius and the bishops of Carthage, Memnon, and the bishops of Ephesus, some occasion will bee offered to speake of them in the head of Councils, neither will the nature of a Compend and breuitie whereunto I studie, permit me to write of euery worthie man of whom I read in this Centurie. CHAP III. Of Heretiques. PELAGIV, BRITO and his followers, IVLIANVS and Coelestius maintained damnable heresies in the dayes of Arcadius and Honorius: their pernicious heresies may be easily knowne by the learned writings of Augustine, who directly impugneth the Pelagians, & by the Councils of Arausio in France, & Milevitanum in Numidia, which damned the error of the Pelagians. They affirmed that men by nature were able to fulfill the whole Law of GOD, howbeit more easily & better if they were supported by the grace of GOD. They denied Ori∣ginall
sinne, and said, the posteritie of ADAM were sinners by imitation of ADAMS sinne, but had not receiued sinne by carnal propagation. They said moreouer, that children had not need to be baptized for remission of sinnes, and that godly fathers in Scripture, when they confessed their sinnes, they did it rather for example of humilitie, than for necessitie and guiltinesse of sinne. This pestilent heresie was spread abroad in many places, but chiefly in the Isle of Britaine, because Pelagius being driuen from Rome came to the Isle foresaid, and infected it with his er∣rour, but by the diligent trauelles of Germanus Altisidorensis and Palladius sent from Coelestinus B. of Rome, both England and Scot∣land were freed from that errour. Nestorius. Nestorius B. of Constantinople liued in the dayes of Theodosius 2. He was an eloquent man, but his head lacked braines when he spake against the personall vnion of the divine and humane Na∣ture in CHRIST. He denied that the Virgine MARIE could 6 Euagr. 1. 1. cap. 7 becalled , or Deipara, that is, the mother of GOD, but only , that is, the mother of CHRIST He was damned as an hereticke in the Councill of Ephesus, and banished by the Emp. Theodosius, to the wildernes of Thebaida, & was plagued by GOD with extraordinare iudgements, as other heretiques had bene before: for his blasphemous tongue was consumed with Euagr. ibid. wormes, & rotted in his mouth, and so he ended his wretched life most miserablie. Eutychiani Eutyches was an abbot in Constantinople: he fell into an errour farre different from the heresie of Nestorius: for Nestorius would not grant the personall vnion of two natures in Christ, but Eu∣tyches confounded the natures, and would haue the humane nature so swallowed vp by the immensitie of the diuine nature Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 8. in CHRIST, that there was not two natures in CHRIST, but one alanerly, to wit, the diuine nature. Hee was damned in the Council of Chalcedon, as wil be decla ed hereafter (Godwilling) This heresie much perturbed and troubled the Church in re∣spect of the fautors, and fauourers thereof, both in policie and Church. Chrysapbius a principal ruler in the Court of Theodsius 2. Basiliscus and Anastatius Emperours, were fauourers of this heresie, and of bishops not a few, such as Dscorus B of Alex∣andria, Timotheus Aelurus who entered into the chaire of Alex∣andria
like vnto a Wolfe with shedding the blood of Proterius the true shepheard, and Petrus Moggus B. of Alexandria, and Petrus Gnapheus B. of Antiochia: all these maintained the heresie of Eutyches a long time. And now appeareth the fruit of humane wisdome, who chused Patriarches to sppresse heresies and yet they are the principal maintainers of it. Like wise a multitude of wicked men, specially Monks cried out against the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon (which was assembled by the authori∣tie of the Emp. Martianus) these were called , because they had no principall head vpon whom they depended: all these countenanced the heresie of Eutyches, whereby it became the more pernicious to the Church. It is to be vnderstood that old heresies, such as the heresie of the Manicheans, and the heresie of the Donatists sprung vp of lat∣ter time, were in vigour and strength as yet, whereby it came to to passe that Augustine is compelled to write in his time against many Manicheans, such as Faustus, Fortunatus, Felix, Scundinus, & against Donatists, such as Gandentius, Parmenianus, Emeritus, Ti∣conius: so that it is euident that the Church in this Centurie, & in the former was chiefly perturbed with the multitude and diuersitie of heresies. CHAP. IIII. Of Councils. COncerning Councils gathered in the dayes of Arcadius and Honorius by Epiphanius in Cyprus, and Theophilus in Councils at Constanti∣ople against Iohn Chryso∣ome. Alexandria, vnder pretence of damning the bookes of Origen, and in Constantinople first & last by the malice of Eudoxia the Emperour Arcadius wife, to procure the deposition of Iohn Chrysostome B. of Constantinople, I hope I haue not need to make a new declaration of things which are amply declared in the preceeding historie. About the yeere of our Lord 419. a great number of bishops were assembled in the towne of Cthage, whose names are par∣ticularly The 5. Counl of age. expressed in their Synodicke letter sent to Innocentins I
B. of Rome. In this assembly they damned the opinions of Pela∣gius & Coelestius (which hath bene aboue rehearled) as hereticall. August. epi∣stol. 90. & 91. The answere that Innocentius returned to the Councill is inter∣mixed with words of swelling pride, as if no decreet could bee firme, vntill it had allowance of the Romane chaire: yet the fift Councill of Carthage had pronounced Anathema against the opinions of Pelagius and Coelestius before they sent their letter to Innocentius. Amongst the canons of this Councill the two last are to bee remarked: namely the 14. and 15. canon. The one declareth that no Church was consecrated without the reliques of the Martyres: the other declareth that adoration of reliques at this Canon, 14. Canon, 15 time was the custome of Ethnickes: supplication is appointed to be made to the Emperours, that reliques which are found in Images, groues or trees, or such other places should be aboli∣shed. The first Councill of Toledo in Spaine was assembled vnder the The first Councill of Toledo. reignes of Arcadius and Honorius: the yeere of our LORD where∣in this Councill was gathered is much contrauerted: therefore I ouerpasse it, contenting my selfe with some notice of the time of the Emperour in whose time the Councill was gathered. It seemeth to haue bene assembled for confirmation of the Nicene Councill, and refutation of some errours. The canons anent prohibition of marriage to some persons are foolish and the Canon 17 admitting of a man to the communion, who wanteth a wife, and contenteth himselfe with one concubine allanerly, is foo∣lisher: so perilous a thing it is, in a iot to depart from the cer∣taine rule of the written word of GOD. Mileuitum is a towne of Numidia: in it many bishops were The Coun∣cil called Mileuitanum assembled vnder the reigne of Arcadius, whose names are par∣ticularly expressed in the letter sent from the Councill to Inno∣centius B. of Rome, which letter is insert in the Epistles of Au∣gustine, Epist. 92. & 93. together with the answere of Innocentius I. Two princi∣pall causes mooued them to assemble together. First, to finish the worke they had begunne in the fift Councill of Carthage in condemning the heresies of Pelagius and Coelestius, by whome as yet many were deceiued and peruerted from the true faith. Augustine B. of Hippo was not onely present, but also president.
The opinions of Pelagius and Coelcstius anent the power of mans nature not supported by the grace of GOD, and the free will of man to doe good of it selfe, is so solidly refuted, and that by arguments taken out of holy Scripture alanerly, that it is to bee wished that other Councils had followed the example of this Council whereinto Augustine was president. The other cause of the meeting of this Councill was to constitute canons anent ecclesiasticall discipline, specially that no man should make ap∣pellation from his owne bishop to bishops beyond sea, but in∣cace his own bishop did him wrong, then he should appeale vn∣to Canon 22, an assembly of African bishops, but he who wold needes ap∣peale to bishops beyond sea (meaning chiefly of the B. of Rome) let him bee secluded from the cōmunion of all African bishops. The cause of Apiarius, & his B. Vrbanus Siccensis seemeth already to be wakned, & the fathers of this Council foresmelled that he was to appeale to the B. of Rome, like as hee did indeed to Zosy∣mus the successor of Innocentius: & therefore likewise men in due time they made this constitution. Innocentius receiued the Coun∣cils letter frō a brother named Iulius, & approued the condem∣natorie sentence pronounced against Pelagius & Coelestius: but marke the words of Innocentius letter, Frater, & Coëpiscopus noster Iulius dilectionis vestrae literas, quas ex Milevitano cura fidei propen∣siore misistis, mihi inopinanter suggessit. that is to say, Our brother and fellow bishop Iulius brought vnto mee vnawares your bro∣therly letters, which yee sent vnto me from the Councill Mi∣leuitanum, with a care very bent for the faith. The word inopinan∣ter declareth that hee receiued their letter before hee knew that any such Councill was gathered, for the bishops of Rome as yet tooke not vpon them that authoritie to be the only appointers of generall and nationall Councills. Plagius after this Coun∣cill compeared before a Councill in Palestina, and seemed to renounce his errours, but hee spake deceatfully as heretiques are accustomed to doe: but he set foorth nothing in writ to de∣stroy the errour hee had builded, and to procure the safetie of them whome hee had intanled with the snares of deceatfull August. Opist. 95. errours, as the Epistle of Aurelius, Alipius, Augustinus, Euo∣dius and Posstdius written to Innocentius doth declare. Obscure Councils I haue both ouerpassed with silence, & do mind God∣willing, to keepe the like order in time to come.
In the yeere of our LORD 420, and vnder the reignes of Ho∣norius The sixt Councill of Cartage Hist. Magd. . 5. cap.  and Theodosius 2. a great nationall Councill was assembled in Carthage: two hundreth and seuenteene bishops were present at this Councill, and it continued for the space of sixe yeeres. Aurelius bishop of Carthage was moderator. Three bishops of Rome, to wit, Zsymus, Bonifaecius 1. & Coelestinus endeuoured with all their might to perswade the Africane bishops that they were vnder the soueraignitie and iurisdiction of the bishops of Rome: but all in vaine as the issue of this Councill will proue. The ground of the great controuersie betwixt the bishops of Rome, & the 6 Councill of Carthage, was Apiarius Presbyter Sicensis, a wicked man, and iustly excommunicate not onely by his owne bishop Vrbanus, but also by a Synode of other neere approa∣ching bishops. Hee appealed to Zsymus bishop of Rome, a citie of refuge to all villanous men, as appeared by the insolent forme of his cariage toward his brethren in Africke: for before he had heard the causes wherefore they had excommunicated this wicked man Apiarius, he absolued him, and admitted him to his communion. Moreouer vnderstanding that a Councill was to be conueened in Carthage, he sent thither ambassadours to plead the cause of Apiarius, to procure the excommunicatiō of Vrbanus, & incace this suceeded not, to desire that this que∣stion might be remitted to the determination of the Romane bi∣shop as vndoubted iudge of appellations, according to an act of the Councill of Nice. The Fathers of the Councill of Carthage answered with great modestie that they remembred no such act to haue beene made in the Councill of Nice. Alwayes time is granted to the B. of Rome to proue that such right belonged to him by an act of the Councill of Nice. Zosymus the first alleadger of this false act continued short time in office: for he ended his course within the space of one yeere, and few months. Bonifacius . lib. 7 cap. 11 the successour of Zosymus serioysly vrging the same prerogatiue to be iudges in all causes of appellation, according to the act of the Councill of Nice. When all the actes were read both in the Latine & Greke exemplares, & no such act was found, the am∣basadours of Bonifacius returned to him with this answere, that the principall registers beoued to be sighted, which were to be found in Constantinople, Alexandria and Antiochia, and in the
meane time no man should be challenged for appealing to the bishoppe of Rome vntill this question had an end by sighting of the authenticke registers. Cyrillus B of Alexandria, and Atticus B. of Constantinople sent to the Councill of Carthage, the iust co∣pies of the actes of the Councill of Nice: but no such act was found, as was alleadged by Zosymus and Bonifacius: and by this time Bonifacius also ended his life: for hee ministred not aboue Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11. three yeeres. The Epistle sent from the 6. Councill of Carthage, declaring that they found the act foresaid alleadged by the am∣bassadours of the B. of Rome to be supposititio us and false, this Epistle (I say) was directed to Bonifacius: but seeing heehad ended his life, it came in the hands of Coelestinus the successorof Bonifacius, who insisted by the same ambassadours who were employed before, to wit, Faustinus a bishop, and Philippus, and Asellus two presbyters, to haue Apiarius receiued in fauour, and the Africane bishops to be subiect to the bishoppe of Rome: but their trauelles were bestowed in vaine. The last period of this controuersie was this, that Apiarius despairing of helpe from the bishops of Rome, confessed his faultes, and humbly submit∣ted himselfe to the Councill of Carthage. And the Ambassa∣dours of Coelestinus returned with this answere, that the B. of Rome had none authoritie ouer the bishops of Africke, but hee Hist. Magd. . 5. cap. 9 who thought himselfe to bee wronged, let him complaine to a nationall Councill, and if the nationall Councill also did him wrong, then let him complaine to the generall Councill, but none appellation to bee made in time to come from Africke to the bishops of Rome. Vnder the reignes of Arcadius & Honorius, & about the yeere of our LORD 400. The Donatists assembled thēselues in a town of The coun∣cil called . Africk called Bagaia in frequent nūbet: for they are counted 310 who were present at this Council. The principal purpose of their meeting was for deposition of Maximianus B. of Bagaia, who fell from their societie, and drew many others from their here∣sie: him they deposed and accursed. I haue made mention of this vnhappie Councill for two causes: first to declare the vn∣cessant diligence of heretiques in aduancing a doctrine of lies, for it was a strange thing, that for the deposition of one man, so many should assemble themselues in one towne: sel∣dome
were so many present at aecumenicke Councils, as were at this conuention. Secondly to declare the effronted peartnes of heretiques, when they are met together, all that they doe is ascribed to the holy Spirit: for in their definitiue sentence against Maximianus, they borrow the words of the holy Apo∣stles, Act 15. Placuit Spiritui sancto qui in nobis est. that is, it hath pleased the holy Spirit, who is in vs. Yet were they guided by Sathan and not by the holy Spirit in all the actions of this Coun∣cill. In the 8. yeere of the reigne of Theodosius 2. was a generall The first Councill of Ephesus generall. Councill assembled in Ephesus against the heretique Nestorius bishop of Constantinople, of whom Socrates writteth that the first ground of his heresie was the speaches of a Presbytr in his Church called Anastatius, whome he had in reuerent accompt. This Anastatius vpon a time teaching in the Church, said, let no Socrat. lib. 7 cap. 32 man call the vigine MARIE the mother of GOD, whereupon ensued great trouble in the Church, for they wre assured of the diuinitie of CHRIST. And Nestorius not willing that the man should be disesteemed whom he so much regarded: he chopped oftin his Sermons vpon the word , not willing to giue vnto the blessed Virgine so great an honour. When the Council of Ephesus was assembled, cōsisting of the number of 200. bishops & aboue, & Cyrillus B. of Alexandria was appointed Moderator by the ordinance of the Emperours, who cōmanded the Coun∣cill to be gathered, Cyrillus began to embarke, and to agitate the question, ere Iohn Patriarch of Atiochia, and his com∣panie could be present at the Councill At the first meeting Ne∣storius being present in the towne of Ephesus vtterly spoyled his cause, and added to his former opinion borrowed from Ana∣statius, that hee thought it an indignitie done to the onely be∣gotten Sonne of GOD, to speake of  and , and the wordes , were all re∣proachfull Acta Synode Ephes. wordes to be spoken of the Sonne of GOD, that is, that hee was nourished vpon milke, that hee was borne of a maide, that hee was two moneths, or three moneths olde all these words he counted to be reproachfull words to be spoken of the Sonne of GOD. The Fathers of the Councill were all highly offended at these words, & warned him to be personally
present at the Councill, but he refused to compeare, vntill the time that John Patriarch of Antiochia, should be present at the Councill. Cyrillus B. of Alexandria, was a man prompt, & sord∣ward in all causes both good and bad, & hee would not linger vntill the comming of ohn Patriarch of Antiochia, and his companie, but foorthwith hee caused his bookes and writings to bee examined, wherein it was clearely sound, that hee sae the Son of the Virgine MARIE was not God but only that God was with him so hee denied the personal vnion of the diuine & humane Nature The Fathers of the Council vpon this ground damned Neslorius as an hereticque, and Nestorius on the other Soat. lib. 7. cap.  2. part gathered the bishoppes of his owne faction, and damned Cyrillus B. of Alexandria, and Memnon B of Ehesus. After this Iohn Patriarch of Antiochia came to Ehesus, whose comming rather increased than diminished the schisme: for hee was to angrie against the precipitation and hastines of Cyrillus, that he would not adioyne himselfe to the Councill: hereupon fol∣lowed mutuall excommunications: Iohn Patriarch of Antiochia excommunicated Cyrillus, and Memnon: and they on the other part excommunicated him, and his retinue who came not to the Council: yet in the mercie of GOD this schisme that fell out last amongst good men was cured, & they were recon∣ciled, & the heretique Nestorius was banished to Oasis. Before Theodosius 2. had ended his life, Flavianus bishop. of Constantinople had gathered a particulare Councill, and damned The 2. Council of Ephesus. Eutyches an abbot of Constantinople, because he affirmed that in CHRIST after the vnton of the diuine and humane natures, there was no longer two natures, but one allanerly composed of both the natures. This absurd Opinion Flavianus dam∣ned as hereticall. Notwithstanding Chrysaphius the chiefe go∣uernour of the Emperours palace was a friend to Eutyches, and a fauourer of his heresie. And hee procured at the Empecuts hands, that Eutyches cause should be iudged in a more frequent assemblie to be gathered at Ephesus, and wherein Dioscorus B. of Evagr. lib. 1. p. 9, 10 Alexandria should be moderator. In this assembly Dioseorus dealt imperiously, like vnto an head-strong heretice He called vpon Eutyches, & required a consession of his faith, which when hee had giuen, not expecting the votes of others, who were
present, with clamour and outcrying he gaue allowance vnto it, as if no more were requisit in a Councill, except onely the suf∣frage and vote of the moderator. Likewise hee suffered not the letters of Leo B. of Rome sent to the Councill to be read. Thirdly Hist. Magd. . 5. cap. 9 he absolued Eutyches, and 300. Monkes all intangled with this heresie, whom Flavianus had iustly excommunicated: & last of all, he excommunicated Flavianus, & caused him by the tumult of his factioners to be so rudely and vncourteously intreated, that he was trode vnder soot, and was so wounded, that within three dayes after he ended his life: for this cause this Councill was called a Councill of brigandrie. The Councill of Berytus in Phoenicia, whereinto the cause of Ibas B. of Edessa (whom Dioscorus had deposed) was wakned and The coun∣cil of ery∣tus. he was iustified and absolued, I purposely passe by, because the controuersie against Ibas will be discussed in a greater assembly. And the Councill called Agathense in France, wherein albeit The Coun∣cil called Agathen. there be a great number of Constitutions, yet nothing is more remarkable in it than this, that they grant they had libertie to meete together by commandement of Alaricus King of Gothes, who at that time had soueraignitie in that parte of France called Gallia Narbonensis where the Councill was gathered: so that in all Countries, Councils both generall and nationall were con∣ueened by the authoritie of Princes. In the yeere of our LORD 454 & in the 3. yeere of the reigne of the Emp. Martianus a general Councill was assembled at Chal∣cedon The gene∣rall Coun∣cill of . Funst. chro a towne of Bythinia lying directly ouer against Constan∣tinople. Martianus the Emperour was in person present at the Councill, and of Bishoppes, and reuerend Fathers from all partes of the world sixe hundreth and thirtie. The like whereof hapned not in any generall Councill preceeding this Euagr. lib. 2. cap 4 time. The Patriarches were all present at this Councill either in proper person, or by their ambassadours. Anatoli. B. of Con∣stantinople, Dioscorus B of Alexandria, Maximus B. of Antiochia,  B. of Ierusalem: and in stead of Leo B. of Rome his ambas∣sadours Pascasianus a bishop, Lucentius, Bonfacius, and Basilius Presbyters, with a Christian brother ulianus. Martianus entreated all the Fathers of the Councill to thinke that he gaue his presence to the convention, not for ostentation
of his power or vertue, but only for desire that the true faith should be confirmed and established, and that by his authority all tumults of men disobedient to the Councill, might be e∣pressed. Aboue all crauing of them, or rather charging and commanding them, that they should decerne nothing repag∣nant to the actes of the Councill of Nice. The ambassadours of Leo B. of Rome craued that Dioscorus B. of Alexandria should not sit in the Councill as a udge, but that he should stand and answere to things that were to be obected Evagr. lib. 2. cap. 4. vnto him. Which petition beeing granted, Esebius B. of Dori∣leum stood vp and accused him of three things. First, that hee had beene an aduersarie to the true faith in absoluing Euyches a notable here ique in the second Councill of Ephesus: Second∣ly that he was a murderer of Flavianus B. of Constantinople a con∣stant defender of the true faith: and thirdly that hee had done himselfe wrong in deposing him without a cause, and herewith he desired his letter to be read. The Councill not only read his letter accusatorie, but also read all the acts of the 2. Councill of Ephesus & heard the reports of bishops, who were present at that Councill of Brigandrie, and had consented against their hearts to the deposition of Flavianus, because Dioscorus had bands of souldiers sent by Chrysaphius in name of the Emp. Theodosius 2. to compell simple men to obey all his desires. All this beeing considered, together with his vnmanerly rudenes. who would not suffer the letter of Leo B. of Rome to be read in the Councill foresaid, and finally that hee had most vniustly and vnaduisedly excommunicate Leo B. of Rome. The Councill of Chalcon cited Dioscorus, the ground of this controuersie, but he compeared not: therefore he was damned as an heretique, together with Eutyches and Juvenalis B. of Jeru∣salem,  and it was ordained that men should beleeue that the na∣tures of CHRIST, albeit they were vnited, yet were they not con∣founded, as Eutyches heretically had affirmed. Likewise all the actes of the second Councill of Ephesus were abrogated and re∣scinded, except the doposition of Domnus B. of Antiochia, and substitution of Maximus in his place. Moreoer Thodoretus B. of Cyns, and Ibas B. of Edessa, who had bene vniustly deposed in the second Councill of Ephesus, were both restored to their
places, after they had clearely damned the heresies of Nestorius, and Eutyches. In the cause of Bassianus and Stephanus, who con∣tended both for the bishopricke of Ephsus, it was ordained that both of them should bee remooued from that dignitie, as men who by vnlawfull meanes had aspired to ecclesiasticke offices, and a third person should haue the office. Finally, it was statute and ordained in this Councill, that Anatolius B. of Con∣stantinople, and his successours should haue the chiefe dignitie next vnto the chaire of Rome. It is to bee marked that Protrius B. of Alexandria, to whom the place of old belonged. albeit he was present in the Councill, yet hee made none obstacle vnto this ordinance: but the ambassadours of Leo B. of Rome spake against it, fearing lest the increasing magnificence of such an Emperiall towne should in ende bring Constantinople to the pre∣heminence of the first seat. Supremacie was long agoe the very aple of their eye, and they could not abide that afarre off a diminution of this should be once pointed a. Neuerthelesse this ordinance had alowance of the Councill notwithstanding of the contradiction of the Romane ambassadours. In codice Ro∣mano Myster imquitatis. saith learned Morneus, all this action is lest out. In the sixt Session of this Councill the Emperour Martianus with Pulcheria the Emprice, were both present, and craued of the Councill, that ordinances should bee made for restraining the filthie Iucre, and ambition of Monks and Clergie men who intangled themselues with seculare businesse for desire of gaine Canon 6. and riches: whereupon followed this constitution, that men who haue addicted themselues either to the Monasticke life, or the Clergie, they should not bee promoted to other dignities, meaning, ciuile offices, because that is a distraction of them from their calling.
TREATISES BELONGING TO THE fourth CENTVRIE. A TREATISE Of mans Free-will. SVCH is the corruption of mans nature, that wee seeke without our selues the fountaine of all euill, and within our selus the fountaine of all good, whereas good reason requireth that we should transferre the cause of all iniquitie and infirmitie vpon our selues, as the forlorne sonne did, who blamed no person of his pouertie, na∣kednes, and contemptible estate ex∣cept himselfe, who had in most prodigall maner wasted his fa∣thers goods: and on the other part, we should seeke the foun∣taine of all good things in GOD. For like as all waters haue their beginning from the Occan Sea, and they powre their wa∣ters into the same: Euen so all good gifts come from the Father of ligh, and they should bee vsed to the aduancement of his glory. No heresie in the fift Centurie aduanced the freedome of mans free-will with so excessiue commendations, as the hersie of the Pelagians did, attributing vnto it power to fulfl all the Commandments of GOD, albert more easily and bettr, being supported by the grace of God, than otherwise: but in so doing,
as Augstine writeth, They did nothing els but hindered the worke of their owne saluation: for nature beeing wounded so∣red, vexed, and the habilitie of it lost, it hath more neede of a true confession, than of a false defence. But to the end that we August. de  & gratia, cap. 53. may be truely reconciled to our GOD, let vs fixe our eyes vpon two things: First vpon our owne indigence, and miserie, and next, vpon the abundance of the Lords mercies & compasons: for the ense of miserie only reduced not the forlorne son vnto Luc. 15. his fathers house, but with it was ioyned a consideration of the goodnes of his father. In this treatise when I endeuoure to proue the imbecillitie of mans nature to doe good, I wish no man to open one of the eyes of his minde, and to close the other: for the sight of our owne miserie without a consideration of the LORDS mercie can worke nothing in vs but desperation. In this question if Philosophie were laid aside, and our eares were patent to the instruction contained in GODS holy Scrip∣tures, doubtlesse wee should knowe GOD and our selues better than we doe. But when both the teacher, and likewise the audi∣tours are accurate Philosophers, I can finde few of the Craecian bishops who can abstaine from the word , which Signi∣fieth free-will: for desire they haue to conquesse Philosophers to the Kingdome of GOD, they giue too much to nature, but holy Scripture is the true measuring line of the house of GOD, whereunto if we firmly adhere, and comprehend the right mea∣ning of it, we shall not be deceaued. Now to keepe some order in this Treatise, three things (God∣lling, shall be entreated, first what was the estate of mans will before his fall, secondly what is the estate of mans will after his ll thirdly, what is the estate of mans will after his regenera∣to. As cōcerning the estate of mans free-wil before his fall, no man maketh question but ADAM had a free & bent inclination to good: which inclination to good, notwithstanding it was wel set, & bently to good, yet it differeth frō the free-will whereun∣to we shall be restored at the blessed appearance of our Lord Ie∣sus Christan this respect, because the free-will of man was in the custodie of nature at the first creation, but at the second appea∣rance of CHRIT, yea, and after our regeneration also it
is into a surer custodie, to wit, in the custodie of grace: there∣fore it commeth to passe, that albeit a man fall from the first estate of his creation, yet at the latter day hee cannot fall, be∣cause his free will is in a better custodie than it was into before. Yea and after our regeneration, albeit wee haue an inclination to fall, and to wander, and to depart from our GOD, yet the mightie assistance of CHRIST, in whose hands the custodie of our free-will is committed may suffer vs to be moued, but not to bee remooued from his eternall trueth, and from our sure foundation. Now before we leaue speaking of the estate of our first crea∣tion, let vs remember, that remarkable sentence of AUGUSTINE, August. de natura & gratia, cap. 34. Sed quia nos creavit, it a simus grati, ut non simus, quia sanat, ingrat that is, because hee hath created vs, let vs be so thankfull, that we bee not vnthankfull, because he hath healed vs. The good estate whereinto GOD first created vs, should not impaire the goodnes of GOD in our regeneration, but rather amplifie and increase the same. Like as when GOD builded vp the Taberna∣cle of DAVID that was fallen, and made it large and ample by Act. 15. vers. 16. the calling of the Gentiles, no man had iust occasion to extenuat the glory of the second worke in respect of the glory of the first worke: euen so let vs so talke of the estate of mans first creation, that wee bee not found vnkinde to CHRIST for the worke of our regeneration. The estate of a mans free-will after his fall, is not to bee doubted of, if so be our eares bee not locked vp from harkning to the voyce of GOD, speaking to vs from his holy Sanctuarie: for it is said in the booke of the Psalmes, that The Lord looked downe from heauen vpon the children of men, to see if there were any that Psal. 14. vers. 2, 3. would vnderstand and secke God: and in the next verse he saith, All are gone out of the way: all are corrupt, there is not one that doth good, no not one. In these two verses the corruption of mans nature af∣ter the fall, is vtterly damned, in so much that in our vnderstan∣ding there is nothing but horrible darknes, and in our will and affections nothing but an inclination to euill. Who dare now stand vp & be a procutour for a sinfull nature, corrupt in all the faculties thereof, according to a definitiue sentence pronoun∣ced by the mouth of GOD from heauen? but what shall we say:
gods. Inpiter Amminius was formed with the body of a man, but with the head of a Ramme. Dagon whome the Philistims wor∣shipped, had the similitude of a man in the vppermost partes, but the similitude of a fish in the lower partes of his body. And Pan the god of shepheards was pictured with hornes in his head, with the feete of goates, and rough in all his body, as if he had beene ouerlapped with the skinne of an vnshorne Ram. They became vaine in their imaginations and their foolish heart Rom. 1. vers. 21. was full of darkenesse. Ya, as the Prophet speaketh, the ma∣kers of them were like vnto them: that is, senslesse, blinde and dead hearted, and so were the worshippers of them. Pal. 115. Against the Gentiles who were Idolaters, a woe is pronoun∣ced Haba. 2 vers. 11. by the Prophet, in these words, Woe be to hun that saith to the wood, awak, and to the dumbe stone, arise vp, &c. Let vs take diligent atendance to these words, because GOD hath spoken tem by the mouth of his Prophet. The Gentiles excused their Idolatrie, so did the Iewes theirs, and the Ppistes will seeme to honour GOD and his Saints in their Images, but le all flsh be dumbe and sient & heare what the LORD speaketh from his Snctuary, We be to him, that saith to wood, awak. The Pagans, Iewes and Pa∣pists ae like vno Adoniah, loab, and . Thse were all banqueting together, & euery one of them streng hened ano∣ther in their foolish couse, and they all said with one consnt, God saue King Adonah. But there was another kind of confe∣rence 1. Reg. 1. in the chamber of King DAVID, which did vndoe all their conferences, and appointed that SALOMON should reine: een so, notwithstanding of all the foolsh excuses wherewith Gentiles Iewes and Papistes excuse their Idolatrie, GOD is like vnto himselfe, and he pronounceth a we against it. The Papistes thinke that they hau fully stisfied both GOD and good men, when they grant there is no diinite in the Image, and in substance i is a corruptible thing, and the por∣trature of it is fashioned by the hand of the craftesmen. Did not the Gentiles as much? Did not Plato count the Images of most precious substance, most vnprofitable to the people? Did not Fabius Mximus despise the Idoles of Tarentum as angrie Images aginst their owne people, who depended vpon them? Did not the Poet grant, that i lay in the artificers hand, either to make
a bench or a god of the wild fig tree, that came into his hands, the verses are vulgarly knowne, and in all mens mouthes. Olim truncus eram ficulinus inutile lignum: Cùm faber incertus scamnum, facerétne Priapum Maluit esse Deum.— Yea & Marcus Varro, whose testimonie August. citeth lib. 4. de Ci∣vitate Dei, hee saide, Qui primi civitatibus simulachra invexerunt, & metum dempserunt, & errorem addiderunt: that is to say, The first in bringers of images into cities, they emptied cities of the feare of GOD, and filled them with errour. If a short descrip∣tion of some vanitie of images could exonere men from the blame of Idolatrie, then might the Gentiles also be freed from the vile imputation of Idolatrie. The Idolatrie of the Iewes fraughted not onely with vanitie, but also with vnthankfulnesse, and a contempt of the lawe of GOD proclaimed from mount Sinai, doth leade vs vnto a deeper consideration of the vilenesse of Idolatrie. The golden Calfe, which they worshipped in the wildernesse, and the starre of Remphan, declare, that the nature of man is so prone and bent to Idolatrie, that we are bent to follow the sinnes of those people, who hath beene most hatefull enemies vnto vs. The Exod. 32. Acts 7. vers. 43. Aegyptians were grieuous oppressors of GODS people, neuer∣thelesse the Iewes followed their Idolatrie, in worshipping the Calfe. On the other part the Moabites and Ammonites hired Ba∣laam Numb 2. vers. 24. M. c. 6. vers. 5. Amos 5. vers. 25. to curse them. Notwithstanding of all this, they tooke vp in the wilnernesse the tabernacle of Moloch, and the starre of Rempham, figures which they made to worship them. It is an vnsupportable mischiefe, and a remeadilesse maladie lurking in our corrupt nature, when we are bent to follow the sinnes of people who hate vs, and wishes all kinde of harme to vs both in soule and body, so that learned men vpon great considera∣tions had called Idolatrie , or the madde bentnesse vpon Idoles. When the Apostle PAVL is making a particulare enumera∣tion 1. Cor. 10 vers. 7, 8, 9, 10. of the sinnes which the Iewes committed in the wildernesse, namely, Idolatrie, fornication, tempting of Christ, and mur∣muring, remember that Idolatrie is set in the first place, as the very fountaine of all apostacie and defection from GOD. For
like as in a matrimoniall contract betwixt man and woman, when the principall heade of the contract is broken, and a woman hath giuen her affection and body to another man, all the rest of the points of the contract which are subordinate to this, will easily be dissolued: euen so, if Idolatrie once take place in our heartes, so that wee giue the glory of God to creatures, all other defection will easily ensue and follow. Therefore in the dayes of Iosuae, when the people were zealous for the glory Iosu. 2. of God, they could not abide any kinde of appearance of de∣fection from the true worship of God: but alas it fareth with zeale, as it doth with a teare that is soone dried vp, so doth the zeale to the glory of God hastely euanish from amongst the children of men. Moreouer it is diligently to be marked, that the Lord is ve∣ry strict and precise in the matter of his worshipping, not onely forbidding to worship the gods of the Canaamtes, but also for∣bidding to worship the true God after the forme of their bad Deut. 12. vers. 4. worshipping, but only according to the rule of his own blessed Commndement. And for this cause the ten Tribes of Israel, because they worshipped not God in Ierusalem, but offered sa∣crifices vpon the altars of Bethel Gilgal, and Besheba, they are counted of God as prophane Aethiopians, & people who were Amos 9. vers. 7. strangers from the couenant of God. Therefore in the matter of diuine worship, let these two rules continually be set before our eyes. First to worshippe God alanerly, and not his creatures, secondly, to worshippe him according to the rule of his owne Commandement alanerly. Finally, amongst the rest of the vnhappie manners of the na∣tion of the Iewes, it is to be noted, that when outward Idolatrie seemed to bee forsaken amongst them, so that they were con∣tent rather to sacrifice their liues, than to suffer the Images of the Romane Emperours to bee set vp in their Temple, At this Ioseph. de bel. Iudaic. lib. 2. same time (I say) they were defiled with inward Idolatrie, which is moste abominable of all other Idolatries. For the Idole of all Idoles is this, when a man maketh an Idole of him∣selfe, preferring himselfe to God & his own will to the Cōman∣dement of God, & his owne wisdome to the misdome of God manifested to the world by his owne deare Sonne Iesus Christ,
but so it is, that the nation of the Iewes, at that same time when they forsooke the worshipping of Idoles made with mens handes, they forsooke also the Shepheard of their soules, euen the true MESSIAS, & prferred a murtherer to him. VVhereof this conclusion may be iustly inferted, that Idolatrie is not rightly forsaken, except all idoles both outward and inward be laid aside. Many wrnings the people of the Iewes gote, to beware of Idolat ie, yea, the LORD threatned them, that incace they would prouoe the LORD to anger by thinges that were not Deut. 32. vers. 21. Gods, the LORD also would prouoke them to anger by a peo∣ple that was not a people. But when no warning could auaile, the LORD cast them off into a reprobate minde, and receiued the Gentiles to be his peculiar people. But at our very first entrie we haue this warning to be humble and obedient, lest hee who spared not the naturall branches, how much lesse will hee spare Rom. 11. vers. 21. vs, if we make defection. In the last head, I haue to intreat concerning the Images of the Romane Church, which in the sixt Centurie were receiued in∣to places of adoration, yea, and a litle after were adored, and worshipped: & finally, the adoration of Images gote allowance in generall Councills. Now seeing I am not intreating of Ima∣ges made for ornament, or for memorie of ciuile actions, but onely of adoration, and the in-bringing of them into places of adoration. Let vs remember that the Apostles were faithfull dis∣pensators of those things, which they receiued from CHRIST, whether it was for the feeding of the bodies, or of the soules of CHRISTS people, when they receiued barlie loaues blessed by Ioan. 6. CHRISTS mouth, and miraculously multiplied, they distributed vnto the people that same bread, and none other, which they receiued out of Christs hands. In like maner they were faithfull dispensatos of that spirituall food, which they receiued from CHRIST to feed the soules of his people vnto eternall life. Now we neuer read, that CHRIST taught his Apostles by pictures & images in the knowledge of his eternall trueth, neither that the Apostles taught any others to know GOD, and to follow the vertuous footsteps of the Saintes, by presenting dum be images vnto their sight: therefore this forme of teaching smelleh of
noueltie, and came not from CHRIST and his Apostles: for the Apostles receiued commandement from CHRIST to preach his Matt. 28. worde, and to minister his Sacramentes, but not to present dumbe images to the sight of the people, iustly called by the Prophet HABACCVK doctors of lies. Habae.  ver. 18. Secondly, places of holy Scripture, both in the Olde and New Testament, doe so manifestly damne adoration of images, that the moste obstinate defenders of worshipping of Images were compelled to leaue Scripture, and take them to the autho∣ritie of vnwritten traditions, and Damascene expresly calleth the Damasc. orat. 2. pro Imaginbus. worshipping of images , hee forgetteth not to remember the brasen Serpent, and the Cherubims, as the Pa∣pists of our dayes doe continually, yet his conscience compel∣led him to acknowledge, that these similitudes were made for signification, and not for imitation or adoration, els how could he flie from Scripture to the naked warrant of vnwritten tradi∣tion. I knowe the lie is no lesse repugnant to it selfe, than it is vnto the trueth, and all the shifting businesse of Damascene, to shroud the adoration of images, vnder some testimonies of Scripture are vndone by that plaine confession, that it is an vnwritten tradition, els hee would haue saide, it was  that is, both a written and vnwritten tradition. The fables of Damascene, wheeby he would prooue the adora∣tion of images are in absurditie beyond the fabils of Poets, euen in their metamorphosis. For who can abide to read the hunting of Placidas, and the speaking of the beast that was hunted with a crosse betwixt his hornes, shining in brightnesse Damascen. orat. 3 pro Imaginius. farre beyond the splendor of the Sunne, with such vanities and lies must the infirmitie of a false doctrine be supported But Iohn Patriarch of Irusalem, who writteth Damascenes life, hee writth that Damascens hande was cut off by the Prince of the Saracens, and was miracusly restored & healed againe by inuocation of the image of the Virgine MARIE. It is not likely, that Damas∣cene who writeth the miracle of Placidas hunting, for confirma∣tion of worshipping of imges, that hee could haue pretermit∣ted so great a miracle wrought for the restitution of a member of his owne body, obteed by worshipping of an image, if it had beene a miracle wrought indeed.
But now to leaue Damascene, & the Patriarch of Ierusalem, the writer of the historie of Damascenes life, who hath added vnto the multiplied number of Damascenes lies, an heape laid aboue, to the ende that his 3. orations pro Imaginibus may be like vnto a measure full, & ouerrunning. And to conuert me to councils, wherein as in victuall houses and in barnes, all store of Argu∣ments are laide vp that can serue for the apparent allowance of Images. I superside at this time to speake much of the Coun∣cil gathered by Constantius Copronymus at Constantinople An. 755. whereinto 338. bishoppes vtterly damned the adoration of Images, and the setting of them vp in places where GOD was worshipped, and that for three principall causes. First, be∣cause the making and bowing downe to Images is expresly forbiden in Scripture, & namely in the 2. Commandement of the Decalogue. Secondly, because the picturing of CHRIST (who is both God and man) and representing of him by a similitude is a diuiding of his two natures (so farre as in vs lieth) because his diuine nature cannot be pictured, and his humane narure should not be separated from his diuine nature. Thirdly, because the writings of holy and ancient farhers, damned the worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius, Nazianzenus, Chry∣sostomus, Athanasius, Amphilochius, Theodorus bishop of Ancyra, and Eusebius Pamphili, whose graue sentences all damning adoration of Images, are most worthie to be read. In the rest of this Treatise, I shall set downe (Godwilling) two opposite Councills, the one allowing the adoration of Images, the other disallowing it. The second Councill of Nice vnder the Empresse Irene ann. 789. gaue full allowance to the adoration of Images, out of Asia, and Graecia, and some other parts: with the ambassadours of Adrian bishop of Rome, were assembled 350. bishoppes. On the other part, vnder the reigne of Carolus Magnus Emperour of the VVest, ann. 794. a great Councill was assembled at Francford de maine, wherein the adoration of Images was vtterly disallowed, and the argu∣ments alleadged in the second Councill of Nice for adoration of Images, are clearely refuted in presence of Charles King of France and Emperour of the VVest, and Theophilactus and Stephanus ambassadours of the bishoppe of Rome. In these two
opposite Councills, let the iudicious Reader marke the great prouidence of GOD, who hath appointed, that there should bee contradiction to the lying doctrine, so that they who loue the trueth of GOD haue no neede to follow a false doctrine, in regarde there is no man that dare gainesay it. For I dare say, to the commendation of the Councill of Franc∣ford, that the Ibides of Aegypt were neuer more readie to de∣uoure the flying Serpents of Arabia, so that they would not suffer them to light in the coastes of Aegypt, than the Coun∣cill of Francford was readie to vndoe all the foolish arguments of the second Councill of Nice, proouing the adoration of Images. Before I set these Councills in opposite tearmes of contra∣diction, the one to the other, the preludie of the Councill is worthie to bee marked. Adrian bishop of Rome sent a letter to the second Councill of Nice fraughted with lies, and affir∣ming that the Emperour Constantine was a leper, that hee ende∣uourd to cure his disease by shedding of innocent babes blood, that PETER and PAVL appeared to him in a vision by night, and bade him goe, and bee baptized by SILVESTER, Huseb devi Constant. lib. 4. and his disease should bee healed, and that in remembrance of this benefite CONSTANTINE builded Churches in Rome, and adorned them with the Images of PETER and PAVL. The groundes of this letter conteineth a masse of impudent lies. CONSTANTINE was not a leper, but a man gifted in soule, beautifull in body, and furnished with great giftes both of soule and body, and meete for great workes, as EVSEBIVS witneseth, who liued in CONSTANTINES time, and was familiarly acquainted with him. Neither was hee baptized by SILVESTER in Rome, but by EVSEBIVS in Nicomedia. For SILVESTER and MARCVS his suc∣cessour were both deade, before that CONSTANTINE was baptized. The rest of his letter is like vnto the sandie ground and fabulous narration whereupon it is groun∣ded. The arguments of the second Councill of Nice prouing ado∣ration of Images, may be distributed into foure rancks. Some are taken out of Scripture, others out of Fathers, the third
rancke from common reason, the fourth from miracles. If I propound their arguments into an intelligible order, and like∣wise the nsweres to them, I doe a benefite to the Reader. The Cherubims, and the brasen Serpent were made by Gods commandement, and the Cherubimes were seated in the place 1 Argument. of adoration: ergo Images may bee brought into the places of adoration. There is a threefolde difference betwixt Images set vp in Churches to bee worshipped, and the Cherubimes in the Tem∣ple. 1. Answere. First, the Cherubimes are made by the expresse comman∣dement of GOD, but the images set vp in Temples, are made expresse contrare to the Commandement of GOD. Secondly, the Cherubimes and brasen Serpent were represntations of diuine mysteries. Thirdly, neither the Cherubimes nor brasen Serpent were made for adoration as images are, that are set vp in Temples. If any man bee not fully resolued with these an∣sweres, let him vnderstand that the Law-giuer hath absolute authoritie, to make exceptions from his owne Lawe, but it is not lawfull to others, without warrant of GODS commande∣ment to doe the like. Example in ABRAHAM who had a warrant to kill his owne sonne The people of Israel had a warrant to borrow from the Aegyptians vessels of siluer & gold, and costly Gen. 22. vers. 2. Exod. 12. vers 35, 36 Exod. 31. vers. 7. 2. Argument rayment, and Moses had a warrant to make Cheubimes and a brasen Serpent: but those thinges are not lawfull to others, who want the like warrant. The next Argument borrowed from Scripture is this, IACO worshipped the top of IOSEPHS staffe, therefoe it is lwfull to worship Images. The Councill of Francford answereth to this Argument, that like as there is no such wordes in the Hbrew text, euen so the 2. Answere. words of the Apost. in the Epistle to the Hbrewes cap 11 vers 21, conteineth no such thing, where it is said, , that is hee worshipped leaning aboue August. quast. in genes. 162. the top of hi scepter, but he worshipped not his Scepter. And Augustine in his questions vpon Genesis affirmeth, that he wor∣shipped GOD, and not the staffe of IOSEPH. The third Argument taken out of Scripture is out of the booke of the Psalmes: O Lord, I haue loued the beautie of thy house. 3. Argument.
Of this they concluded, that images should be loued & worship∣ped, seeing they are the beautie and ornament of GODS house. To this argument it is answered by the Councill of Francford, that this argument is grounded vpon a wrong interpretation of 3. Answere. Scripture, for by the house of GOD, is not meant a materiall Temple, and the ornament of GODS house, is not Images, but spirituall vertues. Many other places of Scripture are filthily abused, but I will haue some regarde to the Reader, that he be not wearied in reading an heape of friuolous arguments. Many arguments are taken out of the writings of Fathers, to proue the adoration of Images. but these following are the 1 Argument out of Fa∣thers. chiefe and principall First they say, that Bsilius Magus affir∣meth that the honour done to the Image, redoundeh to him whose image it is. This he peaketh of Christ, who is the Imge of the inuisible 1. Answere. God, Coloss. 1. vers. 5. And who is the brightnesse of his glory, and the ingrauen forme of his person, Heb. 1. vers 3. but he is not speaking of Images formed by the hands of men. The testimonie of Gregorius Nyssenus is cited, who writeth that when he passed by the image of Abraham viuely pictured, with 2. Argument. the knife drawne, readie to kill his sonne, he could not abstaine from shedding of teares. This argument is counted friuolous: albeit Gregorius Nyssenus 2. Answere. wept, yet he bowed not his knee to worship the image of Abra∣ham. Moreouer the Councill of Franckford alleadged that the bookes of Gregorius Nyssenus were not extant. Amongst argumenes taken from naturall reason, to prooue adoration of Images this is the chiefe. The Emperours Image is 1. Argument taken rom common reason. 1. Answere. honoured, therefore the Image of Christ should be honoured. To this argument the Council of Francford  this an∣swere, that GOD is not like vnto a mortall King locally circum∣scribed so that whē he is in one place, he cannot be at that same selfe time in another place. Therefore to intertaine a reurence in the peoples hearts towards their Prince, this custome of ho∣nouring the Kings image was found out. But God who is euery where present, & whom no place can conteine, he is not to bee sought in Images, nether was that forme of worshipping, ei∣ther commanded or allowed by GOD.
The argument inuented of later dayes, to prooue adoration 2. Argument, of Images, is sophisticall: the dishonour done to the Image of CHRIST, redoundeth to himselfe: go the honour done to the Image of Christ, redoundeth also to Christ, & is an honou∣ring of Christ himselfe. The antecedent is prooued by the fact of Julian the apostate, in breaking in pieces the Image of Christ in Caesarea Philippi. Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 21. 2. Answere. To this it may bee answered, that the breaking downe of the brasen Image in Caesarea Philipps, was not a dishonouring of Christ in respect of the fact, that Iulian did, but in respect of the intention of the doer: but when this is proued, the consequent will not follow. For albeit an euill intention be eneugh to bring a man within the compasse of such as dishonour Christ, yet a good intention is not eneugh to proue, that we are honourers of Christ, but our actions also must bee ruled according to the commandements of Christ: and therefore they who haue only an intention to honour Christ, but in the meane time violateth his commandements, by worshipping him into an Image, shall neuer be counted honourers of Christ. The fourth rancke of argumentes is taken from miracles wrought by Images. This argument is weake and faultie in all An argu∣ment from miracles. Answere. sides. The antecedent is false, as shall be declared hereafter. But suppone that miracles had beene wrought in Images, or by images, it followeth not that they should be worshipped. In the wildernesse God cured his people miraculously, by looking to the brasen Serpent, yet it was not lawfull to worship the brasen Serpent, and when the people worshipped it, HEZEKIAS brake it in pieces, and called it Nebustan. In like maner, GOD wrought a notable miracle by the ministrie of PAVL and BARNABAS at Acts 14. Lystra, yet would they not suffer the people to worship them, and the comming of the Antichrist is foretold to be mighty by lying wonders, yet is not the Antichrist to bee worshipped. Therefore this argument is of no force, albeit it were true that miracles had beene wrought by Images. But let vs examine the antecedent of this argument, they say, that miracles haue beene wrought by Image; For confir∣mation of this, they bring in the viue similitude of Christes face printed into a cloth, and by Christ his application of the cloth
to his blessed face with his owne handes, which portrature of his face he deliuered to the painter of King Agbarus to bee ca∣ried to him, because the painter dazled with the splendore of CHRISTES face could not paint his similitude. Now (say they) the very effigie of CHRISTS face miraculously by touching only stamped in the clothe, declareth that GOD worketh miracles both in Images, and by Images. I answere this fable of Ag∣barus painter was not heard before the 700, yeere of our LORD Damasce. d  fide, lib. 4. Euseb. lib. 1. cap. 13. that Damascene maketh mention of it. The Apostles and Euan∣gelists make no mention of any such thing, neither yet Eusebius who had conuenient time to write of this miracle of the Pain∣ter, (if any such thing had beene true) when hee writeth of the letter of King Agbarus sent to CHRIST, and CHRISTS answere returned againe to him. The miracle of the Image of CHRIST crucified by the Iewes in Berythus a towne of Syria, out of the pierced side whereof, flowed blood and water in great abundance, and this blood mixed with water had a medicinall vertue to cure all diseases. The writing of this miracle is ascribed to Athanasius, but the very stile, ditement and phrase of writing declareth, that it is a booke supposicitious, and not belonging to Athanasius. Like as many other bookes giuen out vnder the name of Athanasius are supposititious and false, and Erasmus that learned man who was neuer satisfied with reading, yet hee wearied in reading the supposititious works of Athanasius, making an end of rea∣ding of them with this prouerbe , that is to say, enough of accornes, meaning, that hee might spend the time better than in reading vnprofitable and vnnecessarie bookes. The miracle of the Image of the Virgine MARIE, and the candle set before her Image by an Heremite, who went in pil∣grimage a farre iourney, and when hee returned againe, after the issue of three moneths, (others say sixe moneths) the can∣dle was still burning, and not consumed in all this time. This miracle hath the right shape of a sable: for all cir∣cumstances of time, place, and persons are obscured, neither is it declared in what yeere of the LORD this miracle was wrought, nor in what place of the world the Image was, nei∣ther is the name of the Heremite expressed, nor the name
of the place whereinto hee iourneyed. Onely the writer of this miracle is said to be Dionysius Ascalonita pres byter, some obscure fellow doubelesse, or the fained name of some author, for his name is voknowne to the learned. The second Councill of Nice, which gaue such full allowance to adoration of Images, it began euill, and it ended worse: for it began at the fables conteined in Adrians letter, but it ended at a dialogue betwixt the deuill, and a certaine monke, whome Sthan forbade to woship the image of our Ladie: but his foo∣lish Abbot Theodorus saide vnto him, that it was a lesse sinne to haunt all the baudie houses in the towne euery day, than to leaue off worshipping of the Image of our Lady one day. The Apostle PAVL neuer vsed the testimonie of the deuill, to proue himselfe to be the seruant of GOD, albeit the woman possessed with a spirite of diuination cried after PAVL and SILAS that they were the seruants of the most high GOD: and in my opi∣nion the arguments taken from the testimony of Sathan should Acts 16. vers. 17. be eschewed, for GOD hath not appointed him to be our tea∣cher. Now let vs consider the multiplied honours of images hat∣ched in the second Councill Of Nice vnder this one worde ado∣ration of Images. This adoration standeth in decking of them, kneeling vnto them, saying of prayers before them, censing, lighting of candles, vowes, offerings, festuall dayes, salutations, building of Churches, and altars. All these honours were done both to the image, and to the Sainct represented by the image. The decking of images is damned by the Prophet HOSEA, and it is indeede a spoyling of the poore, who haue neede of such Hos. 2. support as is bestowed in vaine vpon images, who haue no need of ornaments and clothing. Vnder the bowing of the knee, all Idolatrie is comprehended. Prayer should be conceiued with∣out 1. Reg. 19. vers. 18. wrath and doubting: but so it is, he who prayeth before an image cannot be free of doubting, because he hath no promise to be heard. Censing was a part of the ceremoniall law, verie 1. Tim. 2 badly transferred from the liuing GOD to senslesse images. Can∣dles Exod. 30. vers. 19. Exod. 25. vers. 29. lighted before images declare that the Saints represented by those images were the lights of the world, but it is a vaine thing to forsake the light of their wholesome doctrines, and to
honour them by lighting candles before their images. Saluta∣tions of images are no lesse ridiculous than the salutations wherewith S. Francis saluted the knee, as his sisters, for humili∣ties sake. As concerning vowes, building of Temples, setting vp of , and festuall dayes, to the honour of images, it is too great honour donevnto them, with some slippe of memorie in them who doe it: for in one word, they say, there is no diuinitie in images, & immediatly after they do such honour vnto them, 1. Reg. 11. as SALOMON when he stood, did to GOD, and when he fell, did to. Astaroth, Chemosse and Moloch. Before I make an ende of this Treatise, it may be demanded, Howe could the worshipping of images get place at that time when Emperours and Councils with all their might contended in the contrarie, that images should not bee worshipped. The Emperours Philippicus, Leo lsaurus, Constantinus, Copronymus, and Leo his sonne, were all seriously bent to suppresse the worship∣ping of images, and in the VVest, Carolus Magnus King of France and Emperour, was present in the Councill of Francsord, where the worshipping of images was damned To this I answere, that the anthoritie of the bishop of Rome was at this time so increa∣sed, that they durst encounter with the Emperours of the East, who were farre distant from them. Constantine B. of Rome razed out of Charters, the name of the Emperour Philippicus, Grego∣rius 2. did excommunicate Leo Isaurus, and forbade to pay tri∣bute vnto him. Gregorius 3. in conternpt of Leo gathered a Coun∣cill, and ordained the worshipping of images. As concerning Carolus Magnas who was proclaimed Emperour by the speciall mandate of the chaire of Rome, the question is greater, Howe could the bishops of Rome tolerate, that worshipping of images should bee damned by a Councill gathered by this new Empe∣rour whom they had authorized by their owne trauels. To this Ianswere, that the bishops of Rome did as the ancient Romanes August. de ciwit. Dei∣lib. 5. cap. 12 did, of whome Augustine writeth, Mulcas cupiditates unius ingen∣ti cupiditate presserunt, that is to say, Many desires they pressed downe for the excessiue desire they had of one thing, to wit, of soueraignitie and domination: euen so, the great desire the Romane bishoppes had firmely to keepe in their possession that great territorie of land in Italie, called Exerchatus Ravinna, which
Pipinus King of France reft from the Emperour of the East, and gaue it to the chaire of Rome, for the excessiue desire (I say) which they had to keepe this rich prey, they would not con∣tend with Carolus Magnus, but after his death, they could not suffer his posteritie to take such a doing against the worshipping of Images, as Carolus Magnus had done. In so much, that in the dayes of the reigne of Ludouicus Pius, it was hard to the Em∣perour to protect Claudius Taurinensis against the chaufing ma∣lice of the bishops of Italie who hated him, because hee cast out Images out of his Church in Turin, yea, and Claudius Taurinensis directly impugned the adoration of Images by a booke writ∣ten by him vpon that subiect, whereunto none answere was gi∣uen during his lifetime, but after his death many were found like barking dogges railing against his blessed memoriall, and that so much the more, because in his booke he rubbed quick∣ly vpon the surfeiting pleasures of the Romane Church, who were better content to worshippe the Crosse of Christ, because that was easie to bee done, than to beare the Crosse of Christ, because that was a laborious worke, and painefull to the flsh, yet did Christ command vs to beare his Crosse, but not to wor∣ship it. Finally, it is to be noted, that the defection of some men of great account, was a stumbling blocke to many others. Paulus Cyprius B. of Constantinople, left his charge, entred into a Mona∣strie, and lamented that he had consented to the abolishing of Images. Gregorius B. of Neocesarea, one of the chiefe disallowers of Images in the Councill holden at Constantinople, gaue in his supplicant bill in the second Councill of Nice, confessed his er∣ror, and subscribed to the decreet of that vnhappie Councill, by whose example the bishops of Nice, Hierapolis, of the Isles of Rhodes, and Carpathus were mooued to doe the like. Let this bee a warning to them who are in eminent places, that they fall not from the trueth of GOD, lest by their fall they procure a great ruining and desolation to the house of GOD. The LORD keepe vs from defection, to whome bee praise, and glory for euer. AMEN.
A TREATISE Of Satisfaction and Indulgences. SATISFACTION of olde, was publicke repentance made for grieuous faultes, such as, murther, adul∣terie, apostasie. And this publicke humiliation made in sight of the people with fasting, teares, basenesse of apparrell and such other tokens of an humbled minde, with a sense of sorrow for by-past offences, it was called satisfactio, as Augustine writeth, quia satisfiebat Eccle∣siae, that is, because the Church was satisfied, yea and the slan∣der August. En∣chirid. 65. was remooued. This humiliation foresaide in the Greeke Church was called , or a punishment, because it was in∣fcted Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 16. as a punishment in Church discipline, to terrifie others from committing the like offences. Now seeing this Ecclesiasti∣call discipline was very rigorous, and indured many yeeres, as Concil. Ni∣cen. canon 12 the Canons of Councils clearely declare, It pleased the Church vpon weightie considerations to relent somewhat of the severi∣tie of the first prescribed discipline, yea and the people of times intreated the Pastor by earnest requests, that the time of pub∣licke repentance might be shortned, because they saw great to∣kens of vnfained repentance in the offender. This dispensation with the rigour of olde discipline was called indulgentia, but in Poperie, which was beginning in this Centurie to haue great vpper hand, the abuse of these two words, hath vtterly vndone the ancient puritie of religion and discipline. The word satisfaction, which of old was referred to the peo∣ple, now in Poperie is referred to God in this maner. They teach the people that the sinnes committed before Baptisme are abo∣lished in Baptisme, but sinnes committed after Baptisme, wee must obteine pardon for them by our own satisfactions, name∣ly by fasting, praying, almesdeedes, pilgrimages, and such other workes done by our selues. And to make this doctrine the more plausible vnto the people, they bring in the similitude of a man sailing in a ship, if he fall out of it into the sea, the ship (say they) goeth away without recouerie, and incace he find not another
vessell to support his distressed estate, and to bring him to land, he must needes perish and drowne: euen so (say they) if after baptisme we commit any transgression, we must either be sup∣ported by our owne satisfactions, els wee must perish in our sinnes. No similitude can be more repugnant to Scripture tha this. For albeit there bee many vessels, whereinto mens bodies may bee preserued from the danger of drowning yet is there not many vessels whereinto our soules can bee saued from damnation, but ee are saued onely by our spirituall Bap∣tisme, whereby the filth of our soules is washen away in the 1. Pet. 3. vers. 21. blood of Christ. And like as God commanded not NOE to make two arkes, but one alanerly for the safetie of a fewe: so hath GOD appointed only one way for safetie of our soules, so that if wee sinne after Baptisme wee must haue refuge to the sweete promises of remission of sinnes made to vs in Baptisme. In what sense indulgentia was taken of old, I haue already de∣clared In the Romane Church Indulgences and Pardones, are a dispensation of the merites of Christ and his Saintes, to the vtilitie of sinnrs. This presupponeth that the merites of Christ and his Saintes are put in the custodie of the bishop of Rome, and that his treasures can keepe them. Concerning the merites of CHRIST, they say, that there was such precious vertue in his blood, that one droppe of it was sufficient to redeeme all the world, now (say they) what shall become of all the rest of his blood which he shd in great abundance? shall all this precious blood be lost? and where can it be better kept than in the trea∣sures of CHRISTS Vicar, to be dispensated to the vtilitie of sin∣ners when need requireth. To this vaine assertion of Papistes I answere, that the LORD nuer dealt sparingly, neither with our bodies nor soules. The LORD hath prouided greater abundance of aire for the refreshment of our bodies, than all the breathing senses of men and beasts is able to draw in. The LORD rained downe MANNA from heauen in greater plentie, than might haue sufficed the people of the Iewe in the wildernesse: euen so when the LORD is content to shed grat abundance of his pre∣cious blood, he hath done it to set foorth the great riches of his mercie toward our soules, but not to make a mortall man a dispensator of one drop of his blessed blood.
The chiefe questions betwixt vs & the Romane Church anent Originall sinne are two: First, whether or no concupiscence, which remaineth in the godly after their baptisme be in a pro∣per acception called sinne or not: for the Romane Church saith, that it is called sinne by the Apostle, because it came of sinne, Rom. 7. and it tendeth to sinne, but not because it is sinne, is a proper acception. And the Council of Trent pronounceth an anathema against them, who thinke otherwise than they haue determi∣ned. Concil Tri∣dent.  5 The second controuersie is, whether or no the naturall con∣cupiscence mouing vs to euill, can be called a sinne before wee giue the consent of our mind to it. The Romane Church thinketh it no sinne vntill we yeeld the consent of our hearts vnto it. The third question anent sinnes cōmitted before & after baptisme, what way they are remitted, because this question pertaineth more properly to another treatise I shal ouepasse it at this time. Now anent the first question, I affirme that the Apostle Paul Rom. 7. vers. 7. when he calleth concupiscence sin, hee calleth it sin in a proper acception of the word sin. Many names are giuen to sin in Scrip∣ture, which expresseth what it is properly, but especially these 3. names,  or . Concupiscence is , that is, a transgression of the Law as the Apostle ma∣nifestlly witnesseth when he sayeth: I had not knowne lust, except the Law had saide, Thou shalt not lust: therefore concupiscence is sinne in a proper acception. In like manner concupiscence or originall sinne is called , that is, an aberration, to wit, from the Lawe and Commandement of GOD: and in Rom. 5. vers. 12. exprsse wordes, the Apostle speaking of Originall sinne sayeth Wherefore as by one man sinne entered into the worlde, and death by sinne: and so death went ouer all men, forasmuch as all men haue sinned, &c. In this place concupiscence is called , that is, an aberration from the Commandement of GOD, and consequently a sinne in a proper acception of the worde sinne. Remember also that the Apostle is speaking of all men, yea and of himselfe also in the estate whereinto hee was presently, when he wrote this epistle, that is, after he was baptized. Then let vs marke the third word , which signifieth a snap∣pering and a falling, to wit, from the Lawe and Commande∣ment of GOD, and this word also is attributed vnto Originall
sinne in these wordes, , that is, through the offence of one man many bee dead: Rom. 5. vers. 15. so that all these three wordes concurring in one, doe declare that concupiscence euen after baptisme in a proper sense is sin, because it is a breaking of the Lawe, an aberration from the Lawe, and a falling from the Lawe. Nowe the curses of the Councill of Trent, which they cast out so prodigally against vs, are not worthie one figge, because they are not grounded in reason, but are expresly repugnant to the written worde of GOD. The second question is this, whether or no is concupiscence a sinne before we yeeld the consent of our heart vnto it. To this I answere, that if they vnderstood by concupiscence a bad in∣clination, it is sinne euen in infants, who doe not knowe what it is to consent either to good or euill: but if they meane of the first motion or cogitation of sinne presented vnto the soule, apparently this question belongeth rather to actuall than to originall sinne: but whether it belongeth to the root of sinne, or to the branches of sinne, I shall produce three reasons wher∣fore the first motion of sinne is sinne, euen before we yeeld vn∣to it the consent of our heart. First, because a consent is an in∣different thing, called good or euill, according to the nature of that thing whereunto we giue our consent, and consequent∣ly, the consent is euill, because that motion of sinne whereunto wee consented was euill, and if it had not beene euill in it selfe, the consent of our heart giuen vnto it, had neuer beene called euill. Secondly, Fathers from whome Papistes haue learned this Theologie, that in them who are regenerated, concupiscence August. de  & concupiscen∣tia, lib. 1. cap. 23 is not to bee counted a sinne, vntill a man giue the consent of his heart vnto it: these same Fathers (I say) after they had pierced deeper into this question, they corrected themselues, as clearely appeareth by the wordes of Augustine against Iulanus Idem contra Iulian. lib. 4. cap. 2. a Pelagian, saying, Desiderium mali malum est, etiamsi ci non consen∣tiatur, donec co perveniamus, ubi nec habeatur: that is, the desire of euill is euill, albeit consent be not giuen vnto it, vntill wee at∣taine vnto that estate, whereinto we shall be free of it Thirdly, Epist. . cap. 1. ver. 15. the Apostle IAMES when he damneth actuall sin, he agreageth
it by three circumstances, to wit, by the conception of it, the birth of it, and the punishment of it: the conception of it is by concupiscence, and this the Apostle setteth downe as the first circumstance of the amplification of sinne, and not as a thing indifferent, vntill wee giue consent vnto it, how beit it is true that actuall sinne is not committed, vntill consent be giuen to concupiscence, yet in it selfe it is a sinne, and the conception and root of sinne, as the Apostle speaketh. It is no point of wisdome to extenuate or to obscure and hide our sinnes: for GOD can set them all in order before our Psal. 50. vers. 21 face, as the psalmist speaketh, and if this bee all the gaine and aduantage wee haue by denying and obscuring a part of our sinnes, it were better to lay all open before the great Phisitian of our soules, to the end that in due time we may be cured by his medicinall plasters. Augustine maketh rehearsall of three me∣dicinall cures, against concupiscence in these wordes. In corpore Contra , lib. 5. cap. 6 mortis castiganda, in morte corporis resolvenda, in corporis resurrectione & morte mortis sananda: that is, in the body of death it is to bee chastised, in the death of the body it is to bee resolued, and in the resurrection and in the death of death it is to be healed. Therefore let vs not despare, because wee are heauily loadned with sinne both originall and actuall, bulet vs haue esperance of healing, because wee haue a gratious and a louing Phisitian. Hee restored PETER with a fauourable looke: hee saued one of the crucified theeues, with a mercifull remembrance: he cured the woman that was diseased with a bloodie issue with one touching the Centurions seruant with speaking one worde. Now he who is mightie to saue, loose vs in his owne appointed time from all the bands of our manifold sinnes, to whome bee praise, and glory for euer. AMEN.
A TREATISE Of Justification by faith only. THE defenders of mans free-will in all ages, haue beene also enemies to the doctrine of grace: and therefore this treatise doth adhere to the formr with a pertinent coherence. The order I mind to follow by the Lords assistance, in this question, Whether we be iustified only by faith, or partly by faith, and partly by workes, is this. First shortly to intreat a place of Scripture, whereinto this question is clearely discussed. Next, to speake of the difference of Iustification, and Sanctification, and of the Law, and the Gospell. And thirdly, to declare that wee can not bee saued, neither by our owne merites, nor by the merites of other men, but only by the merites of the suffering of Christ. The place of Scripture which I shall lay downe for a ground is this. Beholde hee that lifeth up himselfe, his minde is not upright in Mabac. 2. vers. 4. him, but the inst shall liue by faith. The purpose of the Prophet in this verse is to comfort GODS people who were to be transpor∣ted captiues and prisoners to Babylon. The Prophet would ex∣hort them with patient expectation to waite vpon their pro∣mised deliuerance, whereby it should come to passe, that they should bee in better estate, than the Babylonians their enemies: for the Babylonians reioyced in their owne strength, sacrificed vnto their owne net, & leaned vpon a staffe that could not hold them vp: but GODS people, albeit afflicted for a time, if by faith they should take hold of the promise of GOD, they should see in GODS appointed time a comfortableissue of all their troubles. The Prophet in the worde Beholde, would reduce them to a consideration of thinges they had seene with their eyes, and heard with their eares, to wit, that their fathers who trusted more in the horses of Aegypt, than in the quiet rest of the pro∣mises Esay 30. vers. 3. of GOD, they found the helpe of Aegypt to be their con∣fufion.
This one example which they saw with their owne eyes, might haue taught them to leane at all times vpon the staffe of GOD, and to forsake all vaine confidence, either in themselues or others. In the next wordes, he who is puf vp in himselfe. The Prophet expresly pointeth out the persons of whom he is spea∣king, namely, of them who leanes not vnto their own strength Psal. 4. or wisdome. Truely GODS people should bee like vnto mount Sion, faire in situation, and the glory of the whole earth, yet not reioycing in it selfe, but in the goodnes of GOD, who plea∣sed to dwell in the palaces thereof, who laid the foundations of it in the holy mountaines, and who loued the gates of Sion more Psal. 87. vers. 1, 2 than all the habitations of IACOB. Let Caucasus, Olympus Par∣nassus and Atlas reioyce in their bignesse and height, but Sion reioyceth in this, that it is the mountaine which GOD hath cho∣sen to bee the place whereupon his holy Sanctuary should bee builded. So do the Elect of God reioyce in the Lords goodnes, but others are lift vp in themselues, as the Prophet speaketh. In the wordes following, his heart is not vpright in him, the Prophet declareth the inconuenience that followeth vpon the leaning to our owne strength, to wit, wee are vtterly disapoin∣ted of our expectation, and whereas we looked for rest & tran∣quillitie to our consciences, the contrare falleth out, that wee are like vnto men out of their right wits, wauering minded, & so tossed with doubting, that they knowe not whar course to take, because their minde is not solidly settled, nor vpright within them. This is the iust Iudgement of GOD, punishing the contempt of that quiet and peaceable harbery that is to bee found in the bosome of the compassions of GOD in his Sonne CHRIST IESVS: they who despise this sure harbery, are worthy to be tossed with mighty stormes, and to bee in hazard and ieopardie of their lifes, as the Centurion was, who despised Acts 27. the wholsome counsell of PAVL at Candie. Followeth in the wordes of the Prophet, but the iust man shall liue by faith, Like as they who leane vpon their own strength can find no tranquillitie and rest vnto their consciences: euen so on the other part these who by constant faith leane vpon the promises of GOD, they shall finde rest to their soules: but the Prophet chooseth rather to say, that the iust man shall
liue by faith, to declare, that by leaning to the sweete pro∣mises of GOD: worde, wee snall not onely finde rest vnto our soules, but also spirituall life, which is the fountaine of true rest and tranquillite: so are we in this cace not vnlike vn∣to Ephes. 2. vers. 1. 1. Sa. 9. SAVL, who in seeking his fathers asses found a kingdome, and we in seeking of rest we haue found life the true fountaine of our rest. The last wordes of the verse. by his oene faith, are to be con∣sidered: for by them wee perceiue, that the promises of GOD must bee particularly applied to our soules, and that wee must not bee wauering, and doubtsome in our faith, but firme and stable, forasmuch as thinges necessarie to the maintenance of this present life, haue also neede to bee particularly applied, such as food, rayment and medicine: Euen so in things neces∣sarie vnto eternall life, our soules haue great neede of parti∣cular application of comfort: wee must haue the blood of the Lambe sprinckled vpon the posts of our owne houses, else can Exod. 12 wee not bee saued from the sworde of the destroying Angell, wee must also receiue the Angels of GOD vnder our owne roofe with LOT, else can wee not bee saued from the flame of fire which destroyeth vngodly cities. And finally wee must Gen. 19. bee like vnto the vessels of the LORDES tabernacle, which were all particularly anointed with holy oyle, in time of the dedication of the Tabernacle, else we shall not be counted ho∣ly Exod. 40. vessels in the house of our GOD. But because the Apostle BAVL citeth this place of Scripture to confirme, that wee are iustified onely by faith, consider howe firme and sute this argument standeth, Galat. 3. vers. 11. Wee are iustified by that same thing, whereby our soules doe liue: but so it is, that our soules doe onely liue by faith: therefore we are iustified by faith onely. The Apostle wisely considered, that no man could liue spiritually, except hee had a fellowshippe with GOD. Againe, there is no fel∣lowshippe that mortall and sinfull men can haue with GOD, without remission of sinnes. Neither is there any remis∣sion of sinnes without  Mediatour and Aduocate. And 1. Ioan. 1. 1. Ioan. 2. Ioan. 3. wee can take no holde of this Mediatour, except onely by
faith: so that by faith wee liue, and by faith we are made iust in the sight of GOD. Then this place of Scripture teacheth vs, that it is faith onely that leadeth vs vnto CHRIST, in whome wee finde righteousnesse and life, but by a due and competent order, to wit, by stripping vs naked of all conceate of our owne strength and righteousnesse, to the ende wee may haue the greater delite in the saluation that is offe∣red to vs in CHRIST. Faith is not like vnto a robber who strippeth a mannaked without any purpose to clothe him with a better garment. But faith doth to vs as the father of the forlorue sonne did to him, and as the Angell Lue. 15. Zach. 3. of GOD did to IEHOSVA the high Priest. Both these were vnclothed of their beggerly rayments, but onely of purpose to clothe them with better apparell: so doth faith strippe vs naked of all vaine conceate of our owne righte∣ousnesse, to the ende it may leade vs to the wardrope of GOD, there to bee cladde with the garment of the righ∣teousnesse of CHRIST, which is able to couer our naked∣nesse, and to present vs holy, blamelesse and vndefiled before his father. Before I leaue the wordes of the Prophet HABACCVK, let vs yet againe ponder the Emphaticke worde Behold, for by seeing and hearing some good lessons may bee learned, Beholde men who haue leaned vpon the staffe of GOD in our owne time, how peaceably haue they concluded their dayes, Luc. 2 with SIMEON reioycing that they had scene the saluation of GOD. And on the other side men who haue leaned to their own righteousnesse (albeit only in a part) what agonie, & trouble of conscience haue they found in their last battell, vntill they haue forsaken all confidence in their owne merits, and leaned onely vnto the merites of the passion of our sweet LORD and Sauiour IESVS CHRIST. The Papistes in our COVNTRIE for the most part haue beene like vnto the fishes called Amphbia which can liue both in the Sea and on the Land: but when any man ap∣proaches neere to doe them harme, they trust more to the sca than to the land: euen so when the terrors of death beginnes to
shake our countrey people, then they leaue confidence in their owne merites, and betake themselues vnto the deepe Ocean, sea of the mercies of GOD in IESVS CHRIST. In the second heade I promised to speake of the difference betwixt Iustification & Sanctification, & betwixt the righteous∣nes Rom. 4. Psl. 32. of the Law, and the Gospell. Our Iustification is a free for∣giuenes of our sinnes for CHRISTS sake, and a free imputation of his righteousnesse to vs. Our Sanctification is an inherent Rom. 8. holinesse begunne in vs by the operation of GODS Spirit, to bee a testimonie that wee are in CHRIST. The not ob∣seruing of the difference betwixt these two hath beene, and as yet is the ground of great errours. True it is, that these two gifts are freely bestowed vpon vs at one and the selfe-same time, yet are they distinct in order of causes, because Iustifica∣tion is the ground, from whence Sanctification as an effect doth flow, And like as the starres called Pleiades or Vergiliae, they doe arise and manifest themselues vnto the worlde all at one time: yet are they distinct starres, and Electra is not Alcinoe, nor Alcinoe Celeno, nor Celeno Mia, And the like may bee spoken of the other tree, whose apparition, and disparition, albeit it bee inseparable, yet are they distinct starres: Euen so Iustification and Sanctification are inseparably linked together, yet are they two distinct giftes of GOD. I will vse yet another similitude for declaration of the same purpose. If a sword be laide into the fire, vntill the met∣tall thereof be firie coloured, this sworde at one time hath two powers, one to cut, and another to burne, yet is not cutting burning, nor burning cutting, but these two distinct powers are at one time inseparably in one subiect: Euen so are wee at one and the selfe same time both iustified and sanctified, yet are they still two different giftes of GOD. Nowe the doctrine of Iustification rightly taught is our cihefe incouragement to Sanctification, and on the other parte the doctrine of Sanctification rightly taught, giueth vnto vs the greatest assurance of our Iustification. A man who is assu∣red, that his sinnes are freely forgiuen, that hee is beloued of GOD in CHRIST, yea and that hee hath put on CHRIST, as the Rom. 13. Apostle speaketh, he may with courage, and gladnesse addresse
himselse to lead an holy life, being fully perswaded, that GOD will accept of his willing obedience, albeit it can not be perfect in all points, so long as wee dwell into this sinsull tabernacle. And on the other side, when the spirit of sanctification worketh in our members, it is a token that we are incorporated into the stocke of CHRIST by true faith. For like as the spirit of man quickneth no member that is cut off from his bodie, euen so the spirit of CHRIST worketh not true sanctification in any per∣son who is not made a member of Christes body by true iusti∣fying faith. For this cause the Romane Church blames vs vn∣deseruedly, as though by teaching that we are iustified only by faith, we had impaired the zeale of the people in doing of good workes. To this I answere, that more credite is to be giuen to the holy Apost. PAVL, who was taught in all trueth immediat∣ly by Christ himselfe, nor to the calumnies of the aduersaries of the doctrine of grace: for the Apostle exhorting the Romanes to agodly conuersation, he saith, I beseech you, brethren sor the mer∣cies Rom. 12. vers. 1 of God, that yee offer vp your bodies an holy, liuely and acceptable sacrifice to God: and what mercies are those, I pray you, where∣of the Apostle speaketh, but the mercies whereof hee hath in∣treated in the former parte of that Epistle, to wit, GOD hath freely elected vs, he hath freely instified vs, he hath freely san∣ctified vs, and hee shall freely in his appointed time glorifie vs. Nowe in regard of all these mercies, let vs endeuoure to leade a holy conuersation, as it becommeth them who are parta∣kers of so great mercies. This holy exhortation could not haue beene drawne from a more pithie, more persuasiue and mouing ground. Therefore wee will walke in the footsteps of the holy Apostles, and continue still exhorting the people to leade an holy conuersation in regarde of the rich mer∣cies of GOD in CHRIST, who hath freely elected them to eternall life, and freely iustified them by faith in CHRIST alanerly. Whereas they obiect that experience it selfe testifieth, that people are not nowe so bent and readie to doe good, as when the Romane doctrine was sounded in their cares, that we are iu∣stified partly by faith, and partly by workes. If by good workes theymeane workes of superstition, such as leaning
in their legacies rents to sacrificing Priestes for saying of soule Masses, wee are glad that by the preaching of the Gospell su∣perstition is somewhat abated, like as the great dluge of wa∣ters beganne by degrees to bee diminished in the dayes of NOE, Gen. 8. and that by meanes of the winde, which the LORD sent foorth to blow vpon the waters. But if they meane by good workes, such workes as GOD hath commanded in his holy law, then I answere, that the faults of some people are not to be imputed to the doctrine of the Gospell, but to the corruption of mans nature, continually repining against the knowne trueth of GOD. Like as when RACHEL left her fathers house, and fol∣lowed Gen. 1. IACOB her husband, and the caling of GOD, and in the meane time shee stale her fathers Idoles, & with them polluted the house of IACOB. Nowe who shall beare the blame of this fault? whether the holy calling of GOD, or IACOB the prea∣cher of the LORDS calling to his wiues, or RACHEL, who fol∣lowed not the calling of GOD aright? Here I know euery man will lay the blame vpon RACHEL, because shee left in out∣ward appearance her fathers house, yet she left not the corrupt maners of her fathers house. In like maner in our dayes, the feastred maners of the people, are not to bee imputed to the Gospell, neither to the true preachers of it: but to the corrupt nature of man taking occasion by the Lawe to worke all kind of ini∣quitie. Rom. 7. vers. 8. And in like maner taking occasion by the Gospell to bee more bent to euill doing than euer it was before: but let true Christians marke, that albeit the doctrine of Iustification by faith only, were a thousand wayes abused, yet because it is the holy Apostolicke doctrine, and necessare vnto eternall life, it must needes be preached, and beleeued of all the true disciples of CHRIST. The Law and the Gospell goe not so in handes together, as Iustification and Sanctification does: but rather by the great prouidence of GOD the one standeth ouer against the other, and either of them pointeth out the finger to the other. The Law is a paedagogue to CHRIST, and pointeth out the finger to alat. 3. the Gospell, that in it wee may finde CHRIST, and in CHRIST Saluation. The Gospell on the other parte pointeth out the finger to the Law, not to find in keeping of it saluation (which
we haue already found in CHRIST) but to testifie our thankful∣nes to GOD, who hath freely forgiuen vs in CHRIST his sonne: for what better testimonie of thankfulnesse can wee render to GOD, than a voluntare obedience to his holy Commande∣ments, according as CHRIST saith, If any man loue mee, hee will I. 14 vers. 23. keepe my Commandements, and my Father will loue him, and wee will come and dwell with him. It may be demanded, Can not the righteousnes of the Law, & the Gospell be mixed together in the matter of our Iustifica∣tion? the Apostle PAVL giueth a negatiue answere vnto this question, that like as one woman cannot lawfully haue two Rom. . husbands at one time, but when the first husband is dead, shee may be lawfully coupled to another, who is liuing: Euen so we cannot adhere to the righteousnes of faith in CHRIST, vntill we giue ouer the righteousnes of the Law, because in the matter of Iustification the Law is vnto vs like a dead husband, of whome we can receiue no comfort: so dead is our nature, that the Lawe cannot quicken it, but we must be coupled to CHRIST as vnto a liuing husband, who by the righteousnes of faith shall bestowe vpon vs that comfort, which the Law could not afford vnto vs. And in this Allegorie, let vs consider, that the Law is called the first husband, not because it was anterior to the Gospel (for the Apostle PAVL prooueth the contrare in his Epistle to the Gala∣tians) but because a man naturally seeketh first helpe in his own Galat. 3. vers. 17. workes, and seeketh not helpe in CHRIST, vntill the time hee be vtterly denuded of all hope of the righteousnes of the Lawe, that is, of the righteousnes of his owne workes. Surely ignorance is the mother of many errours, and they who seeke righteousnes in the Law, they are ignorant in many things. First, they knowe not the right end, wherefore the Lawe Galat. 3. vers. 19. Rom. 7. vers. 14. Levit. 18. vers. 5. was giuen, to wit, for transgression, that is, to manifest it, but not to wipe it away. Secondly, they know not the nature of the Law, that it is spirituall, to the perfection whereof carnall men cannot attaine. Thirdly, they are ignorant of the strict condi∣tion of the legall Couenant, which binds vs vnto a full obe∣dience of all things commanded in the Law. Fourthly, they are ignorant of the perill that insueth vpon the seeking of the righ∣teousnesss of the Lawe, that they cannot submit themselues to Rom. 10. vers. 3.
the righteousnesse of GOD. When all these inconueniences doe follow vpō secking iustification by the Law, or by works, it were a wise course to seeke righteousnes where it may be found, that is to say, in faith, which coupleth vs to CHRIST, whome the fa∣ther 1. Cor. 1. vers. 30. hath giuen vnto vs to be our wisdome, our iustification, our sanctification, and our redemption: and let it not be said, that the fishers of Busphorus Tracius in seeking fish, are wiser than we in seekig the saluation of our soules. For they spread not out their nets in the shallow coast of Chalcedone, where no fish can bee found, but in the deepe coast of Byzantium, where abundance of fih are to bee found: Euen so, if wee bee wise, let vs seeke saluation where it may be found. In the thirde heade it is to be declared, that neither in our owne workes, neither in other mens works (CHRITTS workes only excepted) can a sauing power be found to worke our sal∣uation. Our workes are considered two maner of wayes. First, as they are before our regeneration altogether sinfull, and no man doth affirme that such workes can saue vs, either in whole or in part, Secondly, as they are after our regenera∣tion, and of these workes much is spoken, namely, that Christs death is so meritorious, that by vertue of it he hath purchased a power to our workes after regeneration, that they might merite good things at the hands of GOD. To this I will returne such an answere as Alamundarus prince of Sara∣cens returned to the Eutychian Heretiques sent by Seuerus to perswade him to their opinion. To whome hee replied, that strange tythings were lately come vnto his eares, namely, that GABRIEL the Angell of GOD was dead. When they answered, that was impossible, and repugnant to reasoun, that an Angel should die. Then the Prince subioyned, that like as they would not rceaue his information, because it was repugnant to reason: euen so hee would not receiue their instructions, because they neither agreed with Scripture, nor yet with good reason. In like maner I say to Papistes, that their na∣ked assertions not confirmed by testimonies of holy Scrip∣ture, are nothing to vs, but wee may lay them aside with as great libertie, as they are prodigall in allcadging them.
Wee will answere to such arguments as seeme to be counte∣nanced with some appearance of Scripture. Now they say that the worde  frequently vsed in Scripture importeth the merite of our good workes, because GOD vouchsafeth vpon them a rewarde. To this I answere, that if Scripture be con∣serred with Scripture, that same thing, which in one place is called , that is a reward, in another place it is called  that is, an heritage, in these wordes, Come yee blessed Matth. 25. vers. 34. of my father, inherite the Kingdome prepared for you, from the foun∣dations of the world. When that thing, which properly is an inheritance is called a reward, it is spoken metaphorically, in respect it is giuen in the end of the world, as an hire is giuen to a feruant in the end of the day. The second argument proouing the merite of mens works, and consequently Iustification by workes in a part, is this, that some men in Scripture are called worthie, as when it is saide to the Angell of the Church of Sardis, Thou hast a few names yet in Sardis, which haue not defiled their garments, and they shall walke Apoe. 3. vers. 4. with me in white, for they are worthie. To this I answere the godly are called worthie, not in themselues, but in Christ, who hath made them Kings, and Priestes vnto GOD. In Apoe. 4. vers. 12. themselues they are called vnworthie, as when it is said, No man was found wortbie to open and to read the booke. And in another place it is saide, that the afflictions of this present Aooc. 5. vers. 4 time are not Wortlne of the glorie that it to be shewed vnto vs. Nowe it is knowne, that patient suffering of euill for Christes Rom. 8. vers. 18. sake, is a degree of greater obedience, than willing doing of good, and if the suffering of the Sainctes be not worthie of the glory that is to be reueiled, how much lesse can our doings bee worthie of that glorious inheritance. The third argument is taken from the nature of a conditio∣nall couenant bound vp betwixt two parties, which doe im∣port that condition should bee keeped: but so it is, that GOD hath couenanted with such as liue a godly life, that they shall dwell in the holy mountaine of God: therefore by vertue of this Couenant men who ieades a good life, are worthie to dwel Psal. 25. in heauen. To this I answere, that this couenant foresaid, is either Legal
or Euangelicall: if it be Legall, we cannot fulfill the condition thereof, because the Law requireth a perfect obedience, which we cannot attaine vnto. If it bee an Euangelicall couenant, the Mediator of the newe couenant IESVS Christ is present at the couenant making: for whose sake I grant, that GOD promiseth vnto vs a dwelling place in heauen, and for his sake also he per∣formeth his promise, & giueth vnto vs a resting place in his ho∣ly Mountaine, and in all this haue we no cause to reioyce in our selues, but in the mercies of our GOD. Concerning our satisfa∣ctions, whereby the Romane Church saith, That sinnes commit∣ted after baptisme should be pardoned. This belongeth to an∣other Treatise of Indulgences, and satisfactions, for the pre∣sent I ouerpasse this point of mens merites with silence. The Romane Church that Mistresse of errour hath not onely learned vs to leane vpon our owne merites, but also to leane vpon the merites of other men, such as holy Prophets, Apo∣stes, and Martyres, because some of them haue not onely ful∣filled the Commandements of GOD, but also haue done more than the Law of GOD commanded. For example, the Lawe of GOD forbiddeth to commit adulterie, fornication, and all kind of vncleannesse: but many of the Apostles, Prophets & Mar∣tyres, Exod. 20. not only abstained from all kind of whordome, but also from mariage, & such workes are called in the Romane Church, workes of supererogation: these doe come into the treasure of the Bishop of Rome as the Vicar of Christ, and he is a dispensa∣tor of them, to such as haue need. O deepenesse of errours forged by Sathan, & repugnant vnto it selfe. If abstinence from mariage bee a worke of supererogation, then either must ma∣riage, euen in men hauing a spirituall calling, bee counted a thing lawfull and agreable to GODS holy Law, or else the absti∣nence from it cannot bee called a worke of supererogation. I grant that some fathers counted abstinence from mariage a worke of Evangelicall perfection, like as the selling of all their possessions, and distributing them to the poore, but it entred not in their hearts to call such workes of Evangelicall perfe∣ction, workes of supererogation, to bee sent to the treasure of the bishop of Rome, that he might bee a dispensator of them to such as had neede.
But nowe suppone that any such workes had beene in the Sainctes of GOD, howe can they bee imperted, and com∣municated to others? Can the oyle of the wise Virgines bee Matth. 25. distributed to the foolish Virgines? It cannot be, because it cannot suffice them both. Likewise when wee compeare Rom. 3. vers. 14. before the iudge of the worlde, wee must compeare clad with the innocencie of CHRIST, and not with the merites of his Sainctes: for the Apostle saith, Put on the Lord Iesus, but hee saith not, Put on the merites of the Sainctes. Moreo∣uer, wee must bee acceptable as the holy Prophets, Apo∣stles, and Martyres were acceptable, but so it is, that they 1 Ioan. 2. vers. 1. were acceptable to GOD onely in Christ, as the Apostle saith, If any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the iust. Here none exception is made of Prophets, Apostles, Mar∣tyres, Apos. 14. but all must be acceptable to GOD for Christs sake alla∣nerly. Finally, the holymen of God when they die, they rest from their labours, and their workes follow them. If the soules of the holy fathers doe goe to heauen, to the bosome of ABRA∣HAM, to the paradise of GOD, howe can wee thinke that their workes doe goe to the treasure of the bishop of Rome, except they would say, that the soules of all the holy fathers are gone to the treasure of the bishop of Rome also, and their works and merites following them, are altogether lighted in his treasure. But lest I should anticipate the treatise of Indulgences, I referre all farder discourse vnto the owne place. Intreating the Lord Ie∣sus of his vnspeakable fauour, to remooue the mistie cloud of ignorance from our soules, that our heartes bee not transpor∣ted from the loue of the Creator, to the loue of the creatures: but that we may seeke saluation in Christ, in whom only it may be found: to whom be praise for euer. AMEN. FINIS.
A SHORT COMPEND, of the grouth of the ROMANE ANTICHRIST, Comprised in the VII. VIII. and IX. CENTURIES. WHEREVNTO ARE ADDED TREATISES, CLEARLY declaring the noueltie of POPISH RELIGION. EDINBVRGH, PRINTED BY ANDRO HART, ANNO 1616.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, VERTVOVS, AND ELECT LADIE, LADIE MARIE, COVNTESSE OF MARRE: P. S. wisheth grace, mercie, and eternall felicitie. WHatsoeuer thing I haue hitherto written (Most noble Ladie) con∣cerning controuersies of Reli∣gion, it is of that nature, that in∣case no further were added, it would bee the more easilie com∣ported with: for manie of the Ro∣mane Church, condiscende vnto this, that worshipping of Images is not necessarily required, nor an essential point of Chri∣stian Religion: Neither can they find one example in all the Booke of God of Inuocation of Saincts: Purgatorie is an opinion, whereinto they themselues much differ: and they talke of it sometimes with derision and mocking
words. Reade the History of Thuanus, what was thought Histor. Thuan. li. 3 of the soule of Francis the first, P. Castellanus was in one opinion, the Doctors of Sorbone in another, Mendosa as a courtesant in the third opinion, assuring himselfe, that if king Francis soule went to Purgatory, it stayed not long there, because it was neuer his custome in his life time to stay long in one place. But now (Madam) the course of the History hath led me so far forward, that I must touch the very apple of their eye, and enter into their most holy place, and declare, that their seruice, which they count most holy, is but vile abomination in the sight of GOD: And their doctrine concerning the Vicar of Christ, the successour of Peter, and the holinesse of the Masse, and the plurality of their Sacraments added to Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper, is but like wind: And wee are warned by the Apostle Paul, that wee should no more bee children, waue∣ring and carrie about with euery winde of doctrine: for false Ephes. 4. 14 doctrine is justly compared to winde in the baddest qua∣lity of it: Sometimes it is easterne, cold, stormy, & withe∣ring, so that the eares of corne (blasted with the easterne wind) are counted thinne, and empty eares: Euen so, false doctrine exicateth & dryeth vp that appearance of sap & Genes. 41 grace that seemed to be amongst people. The Romane Church in our dayes bring vp their dis∣ciples, as the harlots of Heliopolis in Phaenitia brought vp their children before the dayes of the good Emperour Constantine. These children afore-saide knewe not their Fathers, for they were strangers: and the Harlots of Helio∣polis had liberty to prostitute themselues to the lust of strangers: so it came to passe, if children had bene procrea∣ted in this libidinus copulation, the stranger was gone, and the procreated child depended onely vpon the mother, for hee knewe not his father: Euen so, in the subsequent
Centuries, the Romane Church disacquaint their children with the voyce of God, sounding in Holy Scripture. It is now enough to beleeue as the Romane Church (the mo∣ther of all Churches) beleeueth: and the chaire of Rome, in matters of Faith, it cannot erre. But wee must depende vpon the voyce of God our Heauenly Father, who hath begotten vs by the vncorruptible seede of His word, who 1. Pet. 1. & 2 hath also fostered vs with the sincere & reasonable milke of His word, who hath anointed vs with the Balme of Gi∣lead, Ierem. 8. 22 who maketh glad His owne citie, euen with the wa∣ters of His own Sanctuarie. The lowde sounding trum∣pet Psalm. 46. 5 of vaine and railing wordes, wee leaue to the aduersa∣ries of the trueth: for that is their armour, wherewith they fight against the Gospell of Christ. Yet let them vn∣derstand, that God hath hanged vp a thousand shields in the towre of Dauid, euē all the targats of the strong men. Cant. 4. 4 Thus leaning vpon the strength of the armour of God, I set forward to the Historie and Treatises, beseeching the Lord of His vnspekeable fauour and grace to blesse your Ladiship, and all your Noble house for euer, Amen. Your Lad. humble seruant PAT. SIMSON.
A CATALOGUE OF ALL THE TREATISES contained in the nine CENTVRIES. CENTVRIE I. Of Antiquitie. Heresie. The foundation of the Church. CENT. II. Of Scripture and Tradition. The doctrine of Deuils. Succession. CENT. III. Of Purgatorie and prayer for the dead. The reliquikes of Saincts. The supremacie of the Bishop of Rome. CENT. IIII. Of Inuocation of Saincts. The authoritie of Councels. The Monasticke Life. CENT. V. Of Mans free will. Originall sinne. Iustification onely by faith. CENTVRIE VI. Of Worshipping of Images. Pardons and indulgences. Diuers errours that crept in in this Centurie. CENT. VII. Of The vniuersall Bishop. The Antichrist. The Sacrifice of the Masse. CENT. VIII. Of Trans-substantiation. The Sacrament of Pennance. The Sacrament of Confir∣mation. CENT. IX. Of The Sacrament of ex∣treamevnction. The Sacrament of or∣ders. The Sacrament of Ma∣trimonie.
TO THE READER. LIke as in the Tabernacle of GOD all things were holy, and that thing that was within the vaile, and hidden from the eyes of the people, was moste holy. In the Court there was an Altar of brasse: in the San∣ctuary there was an altar of gold: but in the most holy place, there was an holy Oracle, sounding the blessed will of God from aboue the propitiatorie: To the which Oracle nei∣ther the brasen Altar nor the golden Al∣tar could bee compared: yea, both heauen and earth is not worthie to bee compared vnto the Oracle, and word of the Lord. Euen so (good Christian Reader) vnderstand, that when the history leadeth you to a consideration of the mystery of iniquity: then you shall see a beginning, and a progresse of vngodlinesse, vntill in end the Antichrist is permitted to sit in the temple of God, and to extoll himselfe against all that is called God, or is worship∣ped. 2. Thes. 2. 4 And when ye reade this horrible defection of the visible Church, let not your heart bee troubled: this was fore-spoken by the Apostle, and this beued to come to passe. So that thou mayest see the great power of the wrath of God, punishing the contempt of His trueth, & His holy Couenant. Albeit we be filthy beasts, nothing regarding that precious treasure of the Les Couenant: yet the Lord is vnchangeable, and like vnto Himselfe, and Hee counteth more of the worthinesse of His holie Couenant, than of the pompe and glorie of all the kingdomes of the world: Whom like as He destroyed in the dayes of Noah with a flood of waters, because they pre∣firred Genes, 6 the concupiscence of their flesh to the religion of God: Euen so, in the last age of the world, Hee suffered the hearts of men to bee ouer-whelmed with the floods of horrible ignorance, because they reuerenced not as be∣came them the holie Couenant of the Almightie God. Let vs learne to re∣uerence
our God, euen when Hee is clothed with His red garments, & when He casteth all Nations like grapes into the Wine-presse of His wrath. The ai. 63. Lord vouchsafe vpon vs such measure of grace out of His rich treasure, as may teach vs to reuerence not onelie the workes of His mercie, but also the workes of His justice, at the Angels did, who cryed, Holie, holie, holie, Lord God of Hostes, euen at that time when a sentence of induration and reprobation was going foorth from the Tribunall of God, against the vnthankefull Iewes. God teach vs our duetie in all thinges, AMEN. P. S.
CENTVRIE VII. CHAP. I. OF EMPEROURS. PHOCAS. THE Heresie of EVTYCHES conti∣nued in this CENTVRIE from the be∣ginning to the ende thereof: counte∣nanced by the Emperours, such as Heraclius and Constans. Neuerthlesse I haue cut off the Eutychtan Perse∣cution at the end of the VI. Centurie be∣cause Heraclius, albeit he fauoured the errour of the Monothelites (a branch of Eutyches hercsy) notwithstāding he was so employed with warres against the Auares in the West, and the Persians and Saracenes in the East, that hee had not a vacant time to persecute them who professed another faith. And Constans began to persecute, but was incontinentinterrupted by new occasion of sea-warre-fare against the Saracenes, wherein also he was ouer-come. For this cause I haue referred the Eutychian persecution rather to the for∣mer Centurie than to this. Moreouer, in this Cētury the vniuct sall Bish. & ye Antichrist beginneth to spring vp: so that all ye rest of the
Historie must bee spent in three heads: First, in declaring The grouth of the Antichrist, in the VII. VIII. and IX. Centuries: Se∣condlie, in declaring his tyrannie, and preuailing power ouer the Romane Emperours, and Monarches of the worlde, in the X. XI. and XII. Centuries: And finallie, in declaring his discouerie, and his battell against the Sainctes, especiallie against those who discouered hm: and this shall bee done (God willing) from the XIII. Centurie vntill our owne time. In the Historie I am com∣pelled to bee short, because it may bee read in manie Authors, Chronol gies, and Compendes: and place must be giuen to Treatises to be lengthened, when the Historie by a briefe cōmemoration may be susficientlie knowne. Phocas, aftr the cruell slaughter of his master Mauritius, was proclaimed to bee Emperour by the Romane souldiours, in the yeere of our Lord 604: and he reigned eight yeeres: in cruel∣tie, drunkennesse, lecherie, he surpassed beyond all men, & justlie was called The calamitie of the Romane Empire: nothing succceded prosperouslie with this parricide: Cosroes on the East side. the Auares on the West, the Slauonians on the North side, inuading Dalmatia, and Aglulphus king of Lumbardis in Italie, adding vnto his dominion Mantua, Cremona, and Vulturnia: all these at one time weakened the Romane Empire, so farre that it could ne∣uer attaine again to the former strength & splendor that it was wont to haue. Great strise had bene betwixt ye chaires of Rome & . for supremacy. The Patriarch of Constāno. thought it due to him, because  was the seat of the Empire. Platina in vita Bonif. 3 The Patriarch of Rome on the other part, saide, that Constantinole was but a Colonie of Rome, and tha the Grecians themselues in thei Leters called the Emperour . To this controuersie Phocas put an ende & ordained Bonifacius the third to be called Universall : and the Church of Rome to be head of all other Churches. This dignitie the Romane Church begged (as Platina granteth) and not without great contention; obtai∣ned  the handes of Phocas. This is that stile, which Gregorius the fist counted Antichristian in the person of Ioannes , Patriarch of Constantinople. In end Priscus his owne sonne in law, Heraclianus, the faher of Heaclius the Emperour, and Phocius, whose wife Phocas had vnhonestlie abused, conspired against
him, and ouer-came him, and brought him to Heraclius, who commanded his head, feete, and secrete members to bee cut off, and the stumpe of his bodie was giuen to the souldiers to bee burnt with fire. HERACLIUS. AFter Phocas reigned Heraclius thirtie yeeres. Cosroes king of Persia had mightilie preuailed, and had conquered Syria, Paulus dia∣conus, li. 18. rerum Ro∣man. Phenicta, and Palestina, and had taken Hierusalem, and Zacharias the Bishop thereof, and the Holie Crosse and had giuen manie thousands of Christians to the lewes to be slaine. Neither would hee accept anie conditions of peace with Heraclius, except hee would condiscend to forsake the worshipping of Christ, & wor∣ship the Sunne as the Persians did. For this cause Heraclius was compelled to make peace with the Aares on his West side, and to leade his Armie to Asia against the Persians, which indured the space of six yeeres, wherein he preuailed against Cosroes, and recouered all the Prouinces which Cosroes had taken from the Romane Empire. Finallie, Cosroes was taken, cast in prison, and Hist. Magd Cent. 7. . 3 cruellie slaine by his owne sonne Siroes, because he had preferred Medarses his younger sonne to Siroes his elder brother. This Si∣roes made a couenant of peace with Heraclius, and deliuered vn∣to him Zacharias Bishop of Hierusalem, with the Holie Crosse and the prisoners whom his father had carried captiue. And so Hera∣clius in the seuenth yeere returned backe againe to Constantinople with great triumph. After this the Emperour beeing circumue∣ned by Pyrrhus Bishop of Constantinople, & Cyrus Bishop of Alex∣dria fell into the Heresie of the Monothelites: And to this fault he added other faults, such as incest, for he married his owne sisters daughter: and hee was giuen to curious Artes, and to seeke out the euent of thinges by judiciall Astrologie: and was admo∣nished by the Astrologians to beware of ye circumcised people. Heraclus onlie deemed, that the lowes should trouble him but it was the Saracenes, in whom this prophesie had performance: for in his time beganne the Monarchie of the Saracenes, and the blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet. The Saracenes were people dwelling in Arabia, the posteritie of Hagar, and not of Sara:
These faught vnder ye banner of Heraclius in his 6. yeeres warre∣fare Platina in vita Seue∣rini 1. against ye Persians: whē they craued the wages of their seruice, in stad of money they receiued cōtumelious words & were cal∣led  by ye Em. treasurer. This cōtumely did so irritate them, that they choosed Mahomet to be their captaine anno 623, inuaded Damascs & took it & within few yeeres cōquered Sy∣ria, Phenicta, Palestina, & Aegypt: And not content with this, they inuaded ye kingome of the Persians, & subdued it & cut off the kings seed. The blasphemous Alcarō & alsurca of Mahomet, which he said he receiued frō heauē, was a doctrine of lies cōtaining a mixture of ye reigiō of ye Jewes, Pagās & Christiās: to ye making wher∣of cōcurred Sergius a Nestorian herke & Ioh of Antiochia, an Arriā , & some Iwes. Mahomet also ordained. yt all people whom ye Saracenes could conquere, should be cōpelled by fire & sword, & all kind of violence, to receiue the doctrine contaied in these bookes. Heraclius perceiuing ye sudden & great increase of ye do∣minion of the Saracnes gathered a gr at army, & faught against them but he was our-come in battell & lost 150. thousand mē of his army. And whē he renewed his forces again to fight against the Saracnes he found that 52. thousand of his army died in one night suddenly as those did who were slain by ye Angell of God in the army of Senacheb. Heraclius was so discouraged with the calamitie of his amie, that he contracted sicknesse and died. Isai. 37. 36 CONSTANTINUS and HERACLEONAS. AFer the death of Heraclius reigned his son Constantine, 4. moneths, & was made out of the way, by poison giuē vnto him by Martina his fathers second wife, to ye end that Heracleonas her son might regn. But God suffered not this wickednes to be vnpuished: for Martina & Heraclconas were taken by ye Senators of Constantinople & her tongue was cut out. & his nose cut off, lest either her flaering speaches, or his beauty & comlines should haue moued ye people to compassiō: & they were both banished. About this time the Saracenes had taken Caesarea in Palestina af∣ter they had besieged it seuen yeeres: and they slew in it seuen thousand Christians.
CONSTANS. AFter the banishment of Martina, & Heraclonas her son, reig∣ned Constans ye son of Constārine, 27. yeeres: in religion he fol∣lowed the footsteps of Heraclius, & was infected with the heresie of the Monothlites, & persecuted Martinus 1. bish. of Rome, because he had gathered a Synode in Rome, & damned ye heresie of ye Mo∣nothelues: whom also he caused to be brought in bands to Consian∣tinople, cut out his tongue, & cut off his right hād, & banished him Hist. Magd. C. 7. c. 3 to Chersonsus in Pontus, where hee ended his life. Hee faught also against ye Saracenes in sea-warre-fare, & was ouer-come by them, like as interpreters of dreames had fore-tol le him: for he drea∣med, that he was dwelling in Thessalonica, & the interpreters said it portended no good, but that others should ouer-come him as if the word Thessalonica did import , that is, render victory to another. Constans was saine by one of his owne seruants as he was washing himselfe in the bathe-houses of Siracuse. CONSTANTINUS POGONATUS. Constans being sline in Sicile, ye army in those pats appoin∣ted. Mezentius, a man of incomparable beauty, to be Emp. but Constantinus, the eldest son of Constans, sailed to Sicile with a great nauie, slew Mezentius & the murtherers of his father, and recouered his fathers dominion to himselfe. Hee was called Po∣gonatus, because his face was not bare & voide of haie when hee returned from Sicile, as it was whē he sailed thithr from Byzans, but his face was rough & couered with haire. He had 2. brethrē, whome the people reuerenced with equall honour as they did him: therfore he disfigurated their faces by cutting off their no∣se, & regned himself alone 17. yeeres. In religiō he was not like vnto his predicessors, who had bin fauourers of heretiques, but he assembled a generall Coūcell at Constantinople, vulgarly called, the Chron. Funct. sixt Ocumenick Councell, whereinto the heresie of the Monothelites was vtterly damned, as in the owne place shall be declared God willing. Likewise, the estate of the Emp. was more peaceab'e than it had bene in time of his predicssors for the Saracens were compelled to seeke conditions of peace from him, and to offer yeeely paimen of 3000. pound weight of gold vnto him, with Hist, Magd. Cent. 7. ca. 3 other tribtes of horse, serunts, and prisoners.
IUSTINIANUS the second, LEO NTIUS, and ABSIMARUS. AFter the death of Constantine, reigned his sonne Iustinian the second, sixteene yeeres, to wit, tenne yeeres before his banishment, and sixe yeeres after his banishment: His go∣uernement was cruell and bloodie, by perswasion of Stephanus, and Theodous, whose counsell hee followed, euen till the pur∣pose of exstirpation of all the Citizens of Constantinole. But Leon∣tius, a man of noble birth, pitying the Citie, tooke Iustinian the Emperour, cut off his nose and banished him to Chersonesus pon∣ti, where hee remained in great miserie tenne yeeres. Stehanus, and Theodorus his bad counsellrs receiued a condigne punish∣ment, for they were burnt quicke in the bellie of an hot bra∣sen bull. After this banishment of Iustinian the second, Leontius reig∣ned three yeeres. The flxible mindes of vnconstant people, and soulders, choosed Absimarus to bee their Emperour, who dealt with Leontius as hee had dealt with Iustinian, and cut off his nose, and thrust him into a Monasterie, where hee remai∣ned seuen yeeres, to wit, all the time of Absimarus gouerne∣ment. In ende, Iustinian, after tenne yeeres banishment, recouered his Emperall dignitie againe, by the helpe of Terbellis Prince of Bulgaria. Hee caused Leontius, and Absimarus to bee brought vnto him, whome hee tramped vnder his feete and after com∣manded that they should bee beheaded. The crueltie tha hee vsed against the Citizens of Constantinople, and against the ha∣bitants of Chesonesus Ponti, is almost vnspeakeable. He was ha∣ted of all men. Philippicus conspired against him, and hee was slaine by one named Elias, his owne .
CHAP. II. OF POPES, BISHOPS, PASTORS, AND DOCTORS. AFTER Sabinianus succeeded Bonifacius the third, and continued onelie nine moneth in his Bonifacius the third. Popedome: finding oportunitie of time, by the disliking that the Emperour Phocas had of the Patriarch of Constantinople, Bonifacius insinuated himselfe in the fauour of the Emperour, and obtained at his hands, that the Church of Rome should bee called the supreme head of all other Churches. To him succeeded Bonifacius the fourth, and gouerned sixe yeeres, eight monethes, and thirteene dayes: He obtained from Bonifacius the fourth. Platina in vita Bon. 4. Phocas a Temple (of olde builded to the honour of all the gods of the Gentiles, called Pantheon) this he purged from the abomi∣nations of Heathen people, and dedicated it to the Virgine Marie, and the Saincts. Likewise, he instituted a Festiuall day, to be kept in honour of all the Saincts, in which day the Bishop of Rome himselfe should say Masse. Thus wee see at what time the Bishop of Rome vsurped gouernement ouer all Churches. At this same time the chaire of Rome fell awaye from the worship∣ping ☞ of the liuing God, to the worshipping of dead creatures. He esteemed much of the Monastike life, and gaue vnto the Funct. com∣ment. in chron. lib. 8 ☞ Monkes equall honour with the Cleargie, in priueledge of praching, ministring the Sacraments, binding and loosing &c. so were the Monks associated into the tribe of the Prists. After him succeeded Theodatus, otherwayes called Deus dedit, Theodatus and gouerned three yeeres, and three dayes: He made an ordi∣nance, that no man should marrie the woman, to whome, or ☞ with whom he had beene witnesse in Baptisme, because this was counted Spirituall consanguinitie. This was an vndoubted note of the Antichrist, to make lawes in the matter of marriage not Luit. 18 agreable to the law of God. Manie doe write, that hee cured a leprous man with a kisse: But from this time forward let vs be∣ware
to giue hastie credite to miracles, which are brought in for none other cause, but onie to confirme a lying doctrine: and in holy Scripture they are called , that is, miracles of lyes. 2. Thes. 2. 9 To him succeeded Bnifacius the fift, and ruled fiue yeeres and ten monethes: he made a constitution, that no man who ranne Bonifacius the fift. ☞ for safee to a religious place, should be drawne out of it by vio∣lence, how grieuous soeuer his offence had beene: A lawe Anti∣christian indeede, and much impairing the authoritie of the ci∣uill Magistrate. Honorius the fist succeeded to Bonifacius the fift, and ruled 12. yeeres, 11. monethes, and 17. dayes: he was insected with the Honorius the first. ☞ heresie of the Monothelites, and was damned in the sixt generall Councell assembled in the dayes of the Emperour Constantinus Pogenatus, and hath bene touched in the Treatise of succession. To him succeeded Seuerinus the first, and continued 1. yeere, 9. monethes, and 11. dayes: He was confirmed in his Popedome Seuerinus the first. by Isacius Exarche of Italie: for at that time, the election of the Clergie, and consent of the people, was not much set by. Isacius also spoiled the treasures of the Church of Laterane, being offen∣ded with this that the Church treasures were so rich, and that Platina in vita Seuerini they bestowed nothing to the support of Souldiers who were in great necesitie. After him followed Pope Iohn the fourth, who exceeded not the space of one yeere, one moneth, and nineteene dayes in his Iohn the fourth. gouernement. Theodoretus the successor of Iohn the fourth, was the sonne of Theodorus Bishop of Ierusalem. If the Romane Church so much Theodore∣tus. ☞ detested Marriage in the persons of men in a spirituall calling, how came it to passe that they admitted Theodoretus to be Pope, who was the sonne of a married Bishop? He uled 6. yeers, 5. monethes, and 18. dayes. He excommunicated Pyrrhus Pa∣triarch of Constantinople for the heresie of the Monothlites: but after the death of the Emperour Heraclius, Pyrrhus returned from Afrike, where he had remained a space in banishment, he came to Rome, recanted his errour, and was absolued from excommu∣nication: but like vnto a dogge hee returned againe to his vo∣mite, and was excommunicate of new againe by Theodoretus: but Pyrhus was slaine by the Senators of Constantinople before hee
was possessed into his former dignitie, as partaker of the vile Platina in vit. Theod. treason intended by Martina and Heracleonas her sonne against Constantine the sonne of the Emperour Heraclius. After him succeeded Pope Martinus, and gouerned 6. yeeres, Marti∣nus. 1. moneth, & 26. dayes: he sent Ambassadours to Paulus Patriarch of Constantinople, exhorting him to forsake the errour of ye Mono∣thelites: but he misused the messengers the more confidentlie, be∣cause he saw ye Emp. Constans altogether addicted vnto the here∣sie of ye Monothelites. Martinus on ye other part, assembled a Coun∣cell at Rome of 150. bishops, wherin he renewed the excommuni∣cation of Syrus B. of Alexandria, Sergius & Pyrrhus bishops of Con∣stantinople: likewise, he excommunicated Paulus bishop of Con∣stantinople, for ye errour of ye Monothelites. The Emp. Conslans highly offended against Martinus, sent first Olympius the Exarche of Italie, either to take Pope Martinus prisoner, or else to kill him: but his attempts were frustrate not without a miraculous work of God, as Platina recordeth. And afterward hee snt Theodorus Calliopas, who vnder pretence of friendship came to salute the Pope, & cast him in bands, and sent him to Constantinople, where Constans the Emp. caused his tongue to be cut out, and his rght hand cut off and banished him to Chesouesus Poti. The chaire of Rome was vacant for the space of fourteene monethes, be∣cause they had no certaintie of the time of the death of Pope Hist. Magd. . 7. cap. 10. Eugenius the first. ☞ Comm. in Func. chro. lib 8. Martinus. Next vnto him, Eugenius the first was chosen Pope, and go∣uerned two yeeres, and nine monethes: Hee was the first that made an ordinance, that bishops shoulde haue prison-houses for correcting the enormitie and contumacie of the Clergie: so that by degrees bishops are encrouching vpon the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate. After him succeeded Vitalianus the 1. he continued 14. yeeres, Vitalianus the first. ☞ and 6. moneths in the Popedome: to ye singing of Psalmes in the Church by viue voyce, he added Organes. This was not an aun∣cient custome in the Christian Church, but a noueltie inuented by Vitalianus. Next after Vitalianus followed Adeodatus, and ruled foure yeeres, two moneths and fiue dayes: of a Monke he was made Adeoda∣tus. Pope. In his time there was terrible apparitions in Heauen: a
great Comete continuing for the space of three monethes, ter∣rible thunders, the like whereof had not beene heard in anie preceding time: great abundance of raine, fastning the cornes to the ground, so that they grew againe, and in some places of Italie came to maturitie and ripenesse: Great incursions of Turks and Saracenes, who spoyled the Isle of Sicile. In all these calami∣ties (saieth Platina) Adeodatus multiplied supplications for the preuenting the fore-signified wrath to come. If repentance and abolishing of horrible Idolatrie, which had nowe taken deepe roote, had bene joyned with prayers, the Lord might haue bene the more easilie entreated. Donus or Domnus, his successor, ruled fiue yeeres, & ten dayes: he reduced the Church of Rauenna, after long reluctation, to the Donus. Platina in vit. Doni. 1. obedience of the chaire of Rome. It is to bee noted, that all the time they were not subject to the Bishop of Rome, they were cal∣led by the Romanes , so bent were they to vindicate all declining from their authoritie with opprobrious names of ☞ Heresies imposed to the decliners thereof. Agho, successor to Donus, ruled 2. yeeres, 6. monethes, and Agatho. 15. dayes: of whom Platina writeth, that he cured a leprous man with a kisse, as Pope Deus dedit had done before. In his time Con∣stantinus Pogonatus Emperour, gathered the sixt generall Coun∣cell at Constantinople, wherein the heresie of the Monothelites was condemned, and Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, for his ob∣stinate perseuering in that errour, was excommunicate: and Theophanius, some time an Abbot, was placed in his rowne. But this I remit vnto the owne place. The epistle of Agatho written to the 6. generall Councell, is full of Antichristian pride, where∣in hee affmeth, that the chaire of Rome neuer erred, and that it cannot erre: that euerie soule, that is to bee saued, must professe the Romane traditions, and all the constitutions of the Romane ☞ Church are to be receiued as if they had bene deliuered by the diuine voyce of Peter. Likewise, he damned the marriage of men Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10. ☞ in spirituall calling: he commendeth the Masse impudentlie al∣ledging a writing of Chrysostome concerning the Masse, whereas in all the writinges of Chrysostome this word of the Masse is not to bee found.
After Agatho, succeeded Leo the second, who continued one∣lie tenne monethes, and seuenteene dayes: Hee was the first au∣thor Leo the second. of the kissing of the Pax. To him succeeded Benedictus the second, and ruled 10. mo∣nethes, and 12. dayes onelie. In his dayes Constantinus Pogonatus Benedictus the second. Emperour, ordained, that in time to come, the consent of the Emperour, and Exarche of Italie, should not be expected, but he whom the Clergie and people did elect, should foorthwith bee counted the Vicare of Christ. In so doing the Emp. very vnad∣uisedlie put an hurtfull weapon into the Popes hand. whereby the estate of the Empire was encombered, and hurt afterward. Ioannes the fift, his successor, continued not aboue one yeere Iohn the fift. Conon the first. and nine dayes. And Conon the first, the successor of Iohn the fift, ended his course after the issue of eleuen monethes, and three dayes. After the death of Conon the election of the Pope was like to be decided by weapons, rather than by suffrages & votes: some fauoured Theodorus, others promoued Paschalis: and neither of the parties would yeeld to the other. In end, the people thought expedient to reject them both, and to choose some third person Sergius the first. to the Popedome: So they elected Sergius the first, and carried him vpon their shoulders to the Church of Laterane. In his time Iustinian the second gathered a Councell at Constantinople, to perfect and finish the worke which his father had begunne. Ser∣gius refused to subscribe the Acts of the sixt generall Councell, albeit his Ambassadour, who was present at the Councell, had Platina de vita Sergii. ☞ subscribed them. Of the consecrated Hostie, hee ordained one part to be put into the Chalice, to represent the bodie of Christ, which was risen from death: another part to be eaten, to repre∣sent the bodie of Christ walking vpon the earth: the third part, to bee laide vpon the Altar vntill the ende of the Masse, to re∣present the bodie of Christ lying in the Sepulchre. He gour∣ned thirteene yeeres, eight monethes, and 24. dayes. COncerning the Patriarches of Constantinople, in this Centurie Patriar∣ches of Cō∣stantinop. Alexādria Antiochia & Ierusalē little mention is made of them, because for the most part, they kept not the right Faith, but were intangled with heresie. After Cyriacus, Thomas, and Ioannes, and constantinus, succeeded,
whose faith (as vnspotted with anie blame of heresie) hath an honest testimonie in Church rolles, called Sacra diptytha. Ser∣gius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, were miserablie infected with the heresie of the Monothelites. Pyrrhus once recanted his heresie, and was absolued from excommunication by pope Theodorus: but hee re∣turned incontinent againe as a dog to his vomite. Pope Theo∣dorus whē he excōmunicated him the second time, vsed a new & insolent forme of doing, the like wherof was neuer heard at any time before: for he infused some drops of ye consecrated cup into Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. c. 9 ☞ inke, & writ a sentence of cursing against Pyrrhus. Paulus also ob∣tained at the hands of the Em. Constans, edicts to be affixed in di∣uerse places, whereby all men should be compelled to subscribe the errour of ye Monothelites. After them Petrus & Theodorus, albeit they maintained not ye fore-mentioned heresie with so high and proude attempts as others had done, yet they were addicted vn∣to it. Georgius, successor to Thcodorus, in the 6. generall Councell, had defended ye errour of ye Monoth but when he was clearly re∣futed by testimonies of Scripture, & by places cited out of ye Fa∣thers, he yeelded, & embraced the true faith. Callynius ministred vnder ye reigne of Iustinian 2. who demolished a Church neare ap∣proching to his palace, & builded an house of presence, wherein ye people might cherish ye Em. Callinycus was compelled to conse∣crate the house by prayer: but in regard he was enforced against his heart to pray, he made his prayer short, in this maner, Giorie be to God, who patiently comporteth with vs, both now, & for euer, Amn. For this cause Iustinian hated Callynichus, & whē he returned back again from his 10. yeeres banishment, he caused ye eyes of Callyn. to be put out, & sēt him to Rome, there to remain in banishmēt. IN Alexandria, before the Saracenes (vnder the conduct of Ma∣homet) conquered ye countrey of Aegypt, few of note & marke were to be found in that chaire. After Eulogius Ioannes scribo con∣tinued in office only 2. yeeres. After him Ioannes Eleemosynarius is highly commended for his liberalitie toward the poore. Cyrus his successour was an hertique, following the errour of the Mo∣nothelues. He payed tribute to the Saracenes but when the Em. He∣raclius wearied of the payment of tribute, then all the countrey Paulus Dia∣onus, ti. 18 rerum Rom. of Aegypt was possessed by the Saracenes: which incursion of the
Mahumetans, albeit it cutted not off the personall succession of the patriarches of Alexandria, yet it obscureth the cleare notice of their succession vnto vs, who are farre distant from them. IN Antiochia Anastasius Sinaita is found to haue beene bishop of Antiochia, in the dayes of the Emperour Phocas: Hee ob∣tained this name to bee called Sinaita because hee had macera∣ted himselfe with long fasting, and with hard exercises of an he∣remiticall life vpon mount Sina, anno 610. hee was slaine in a se∣ditious ☞ commotion, stirred vp by the Iewes, who dwelt at Antio∣chia, who slewe manie other Christians: but they vttered great crueltie, joyned with vile inhumanitie, against Anastasius, in whose mouth they cast the verie excrements of his owne bodie, as the MAGDEBVRG historie recordeth, citing the testimonie of Nicephotus lib. 18. cap. 44. & 45 Nicephorus. After him another of that same name called likewise Anastatius, succeeded, & was B. of Antiochia: he was a Syrian, a man of a subtile spirit, who circumuened ye Em. Heraclius: for at ye Em. command he subscribed the decrees of ye Councell of Chalcedon, only simulately, & for desire of preferment: but after he had sub∣scribed, that two natures personally vnited were to be acknow∣ledged in Christ, he demanded of ye Em. what he thought of the will & operation of Christ, whether was two willes & operations in Christ, or one will, and one operation only? The Em. troubled with ye noulty of the question, consulted with Sergius B. of Con∣stantinople, who returned this answere to the Em. that one will & one operation was to be acknowledged in Christ. The Em. Hera∣clius being circumuened by false & deceitfull teachers, was asha∣med to forsake that opinion, which hee had once condiscended vnto. So this heresie of the Monothelites tooke deepe roote in the East, vntill ye time that God punishing ye contempt of his truth, suffered ye Saracenes, with their blasphemous Mahometon doctrine to be vniuersally ouer-spred in the East. To Anastatius succeeded Macarius, a most obstinate defender of the heresie of ye Monothe∣lites: for the which cause he was both excommunicated and de∣posed in the sixt generall Councell, and Theophanius, an Abbor in Sicile, was made bishop of Antiochia. After him are reckoned Petrus, Thomas, and Ioannes, without anie further discourse, ex∣cept a bare commemoration of their names.
THE Church of Ierusalem in this age was pitifullie defaced, as lying nearest to the incursions of strong enemies, both Persians and Sacenes. Zacharias Bishop of Ierusalem was car∣ried captiue by Cosroes king of Persia, and remained a prisoner for the space of fourteene yeeres. In ende he was restored to his for∣mer dignitie, at that time when the Emperour Heraclius ouer∣came Cosroes in warre-fare, and recouered the Crosse of Christ againe, which the Persians had spoyled, and taken out of Ierusa∣lem. This came to passe in the yeere of our Lord 624. To Zacharias succeeded Sophronius, of a Monke: He was made Patriarch of erusalem: Hee lacked not his owne commendation in the sixt generall Councel, as one who kept the true Faith in∣uiolablie NOTA.: Hee was present in Ierusalem when Haumar Prince of Saracenes entered into the Towne and Temple: and he was a be∣holder of the last desolation of the Church in that Towne. OF OTHER PASTORS AND DOCTORS. IN this CENTVRIE there is great scarsitie of learned men, yet that which was inlacking in larning it must bee supplied one way or other: Some were politique, others (in the opinion of ignorant people) were so deuote and holie, that miracles were wrought by their handes, and at their se∣pulchres: namelie, lying miracles, aduancing the kingdome of the Antichrist. The most remarkeable Bishops of Rauenna in this CENTVRIE were Theodorus, Reparatus, and Foelix, all of contrarie dispositions, & so flat opposite one to another as possible could be. Theodorus was terible, and couetous: and when hee sawe that hee was despised by the people and Clergie, being  of reuenge, hee betrayed the libertie of the Churh of Rauenna, Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10. in the dayes of Pope Donus. Reparatus being ignorant of that which eodorus had done, and finding te Church of Rauenna subjected to the chaire of Rome, for vrie heart griefe inconti∣nent hee ended his life. Foelx refused to paye vnto Pope Con∣stantine the summe of money which he demanded as a testimo∣nie of subjection. For this cause Pope Constante desired support from the Emperour Iustinian the second, for subduing the Bish.
of Rauenna. Foelix on the other part, hearing, that the Empe∣rours armie was approching to Rauenna for the cause aforesaid, he instigated the people to fight for the liberty of their Church: Both the armies faught with martiall courage: In ende, the Em∣perours armie preuailed, the Towne of Rauenna was taken, ma∣nie were slaine, others were carried captiue to Constantinople, the eyes of Foelix were put out, the rest were banished to Bithynia, What can bee found in this historie, but pride on the one part, ambiciouslie seeking superioritie: and on the other part policie, sometimes yeelding sometimes despairing, and sometimes with bellicous hardinesse presuming to pleade a spirituall cause with weapons of a corporall warre-fare. In this CENTVRIE manie miracles are attributed to persons whome the people counted to be deuote. Ioannes, Bishop of Bergomum in Lombardie, was a man of so great reuerent account, that Princes were wont, by rising out of their Thrones, to doe honour vnto him. It happened vpon Platina in vita Ioan. 5 a time, that hee reprooued Ivnipertvs king of LOMBARDIS freelie and sharpelie, in time of a banquet. IVNIPERTVS wil∣ling to bee reuenged of him, prouided, that hee should bee sent home vpon a strong, fierce, and loftie horse, which was accu∣stomed to cast the ryders, and to teare and lacerate them: But when the bishop of BERGOMVM was mounted vpon him, hee left his fiercenesse, and carried him peaceablie and calmelie vn∣to his owne house. IOANNES AGNVS, bishop of WTRECHT, in whose hand a piece of drie timber budded and flourished, yet was hee NOTA. an idiote and an vnlearned man. REMACLVS bishop of the same Towne, and borne in Bour∣ of FRANCE, left his Episcopall office, and went to the Wldernesse, where hee ledde an Heremiticall life, defending his insolent fact by the example of MOSES, ABRAHAM, HELIAS, HELISEVS, and CHRIST himslse, who were all found to haue beene in the Wildernesse. But if he had beene a man of depe vnderstanding, hee might haue alledged more pertinentlie the example of NARCISSVS bishop of IERVSALEM, who in going to the Wildernesse, fo sooke his
Episcopall office for a time, than the example of CHRIST, who went vnto the Wildernesse to enter into the holie office of Preaching, after preparation of fasting, praying, and fighting with spirituall armour against the prince of Darknesse. Not∣withstanding, Matthew 4 hee is thought both in his life time, and also af∣ter his leath, to haue wrought miracles. Platina in vita Ioan. 4 In AVSTVME a Towne of FRANCE, called in La∣tine Augustodunum, LEODEGARIVS is thought to haue re∣teined his voyce, and the benefite of distinct speaking after that his tongue was cut out, and that manie miraculous works were NOTA. wrought after his death, if credite can bee giuen to VIN∣CENTIVS. The miracles of ANDOENVS bishop of ROWEN, who also writ a booke of the miraculous deliuerance of the soule of DAGOBERTVS King of FRANCE, and an infinite number of other lying miracles, all confirming superstition, of purpose I leaue them as fables superaboundant in the writings of VIN∣CENTIVS. Concerning ISIDORVS HISPALENSIS, occasion will bee offered to speake of him in the sixt Councell of To∣lido. The vaine disputation concerning the diuersitie of the kee∣ping of EASTER daye in SCOTLAND and ENG∣LAND, betwixt COLMANNVS and WVILFRIDVS, it is as vnnecessary to be written, as it was vnnecessary with heat and contention to haue bene disputed.
CHAP. III. OF HERESIES. IN this age, partlie through the malice of Sa∣than, and partlie through the power of the wrath of GOD, punishing the contempt of his trueth, Heresies did mightilie abound: for the heresie of Arrius beganne to reuiue againe, and manie of the Kinges of Lombardis were addicted vnto it: in speciall, Tlatina in vita Ioan. 4. Rhotaris, the sonne of Arioaldus, who appointed, that in euerie Towne of Lombardie there should be two Bishops, hauing equall authoritie, the one a Catholique bishop, the other an Arrian. In Scotland and England the heresie of Pelagius was renewed, as Bed testifieth. The Monkes of Syria propagated the heresie of Nestorius, as Platina recordeth in the life of Donus the first. The heresies of Seueritae, Aphartodotitae, Momphysitae, Acephali, Theo∣pafcitae, Iacobitae, Armenii, all were Eutychian heretiques, diffe∣ring one from another in some ceremonies, in absurditie of speaches, in authors whome they principally admired and fol∣lowed, in places where the heresie chiefelie increased, & in their carriage, Likewise Staurolatrae were Eutychian heretiques: but the worshipping of the Crosse was a note distinguishing them from other heretiques of their owne opinion. Priscillianistae were here∣tiques who borrowed absurd opinions from Samosatenus and Photinus, from Cerdon and Marcion, and from the Manicheans: but all these auncient erroures were sufficientlie refuted in aun∣cient times. The heresie of the Monothelites, was a branch of the heresie of Mono∣thelitae. tyches, by a secret and craftie connoye, insinuating it selfe in credite againe after it was condemned in the Councell of Chal∣cedon. The authors of this heresie were Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Pau∣lus, Patriarches of Constantinople, and Macarius Patriarch of Antio∣chia, Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria, Petrus bishop of Nicomedia, with manie others They denied not directlie the two natures of
CHRIST personallie vnited: but onlie they affirmed, that after the vnion of the two natures, there was onlie one will and one opetion in CHRIST: Whereas the holie Scriptures attribute vnto CHRIST, as Hee is man. the action of slee∣ping: and to CHRIST, in respect of His diuine nature, the action of compescing and calming the rage and stormie tempest of blowing windes, and swelling Seas. This heresie was dam∣ned in the sixt generall Councell, as wee shall heare (God wil∣ling) in the owne place. CHAP. IIII. OF COVNCELS. IN the yeere of our LORD 607. and vnder the reigne of the Emprour Phocas, a Councell was assembled at Rome, of suentie and two Bishops, thirtie Presbyters, and three Decons. In this A Coun∣cell hol∣den at Rome by Bomfacius the third. Platina in vit. Bonif. 3. Councell the priuiedge of supremacie giuen by Phoca to the Romane Church, was published. Likewise, it was ordained, vnder paine of cursing, That during the life-time of a Bishop no man should talke of the election of another, That no man by largition of money should purchase vnto himselfe a spi∣rituall office, and, That no man should consult concerning the election of another Bishop or Pope before three dayes were ex∣pired, after the death of the detunct: & that the Bish. should be elected by  Clergy & people, & their election should be ratified by the Magistrate of the citie, and the Pope: by these wordes, voluus & jubmus, that is, Wee will, and wee command: other∣wise the election shall bee voyde, and of none effect. Another Assembly holden at Rome, by Bonifacius the 4. NOTA. Bonifacius the fourth gathered another Assembly in the eight (that is, in the last) yeere of the reigre of Phocas: wherein hee gaue power to Monkes to preach, to minister the Sacramentes, to heare confessions, to bind and loose: and asociated them in equall authoritie with the Clergie.
Bracara or Braecara, vulgarlie called Braga, is a towne in ortu∣gall. In the yeere of our Lord 610. and vnder the reigne of Gun∣demarus, The first Councell of Baca∣ra coūted the secōd by Caran∣za. Canon 1. king of Gothes, reigning at that time in the countrey of Spaine, assembled some Bishops of Gallicia, Lusitania, and of the Prouince called Lucensis of olde. It was ordained, That euerie Bishop shoulde visit the Churches of his Diosie, and see that Baptisme was duelie ministred, and that Catechumeni twentie dayes before their baptisme shoulde resort to the purifications of Exotcismes, and shoulde bee instructed in the knowledge of the Apostolicke Symbole, and that the people shoulde bee ex∣horted to beware of Idolatrie, Adulterie, Murther, Pejurie, and all other deadlie sinnes. That Bishops should not lift vp the third part of  oblations of the people, but that it should remaine in  paroche Church, Canon . for furnishing light and for repairing the fabrike of the Church: and that the Bishop shoulde compell none of the Clergie to at∣tende vpon him in seruile workes. That bishops, for ordination of the Clergie, shoulde receiue no rewardes. Canon 3. That neither a little balme, nor yet the price thereof, should bee exacted from the people for their baptisme, in any time to Canon 4 come, lest they should seeme (with Simon Magus) to sell the gift of God for money. That bishops, before the dedication of Churches, shall see a Canon 5. charter containing a sufficient maintenance for them who shall serue in the Church, and for a substantiall furniture of lightes thereunto. A Church builded for gaine, & contribution of the people, Canon 6. redounding to the vantage of the builder, shall not bee conse∣crated. Parents, who are poore & present their children to baptisme, if they offer anie thing voluntarilie, it shall bee accepted: but Canon 7. they shall not bee compelled to pay anie thing, neither shall a pledge bee required from them, lest poore people fearing this, with-holde their children from baptisme. If anie of th Clergie bee accused of fornication, let the ac∣cuser proue his accusation by 2. or 3. witnesses, according to the Canon 8. precept of the Apostle, cls let the accuser be excommunicate.
That Mtrapolitane Bishops shall signifie to others of the Canon 9. Clergie the time of theobseruation of Easter, or Pashe day: and the Clergie, after the reading of the Gospell, shall in like man∣ner intimae the day vnto the people. That whosoeuer tasteth meate or drinke before hee conse∣crate the oblation of the Altar, shall bee deposed from his of∣fice. Canon 10. In the yeere of our Lord 613. assembled in a Towne of France called Altissidorum, otherwise, Antissidorum, vulgarlie, The Coū∣cell of Altissido∣rum. Auxerre, a number of Abbots and Presbyters, with one bishop, and three deacons. In this Councell they damned sorcerie, and the seeking of consultation at sorcerers, in the first, third, fourth and fift Canons: Whereby it appeareth, that sorcerie hath bene in frequent vse in France. Manie superstitious constitutions were set downe in this Synode, concerning the number of Masses, prohibition of tasting meate before Masse, concerning buriall, prohibition of baptisme before the festiuitie of Easter daye, ex∣cept vpon necessity, and feare of approching death, prohibition of Matrimoniall copulation with their own wiues, to presbyters and deacons after their blessing and consecration, with prohi∣bition of marriage also to the widowes of the defunct presby∣ters, deacons, or sub-deacons: this was a yoke of Antichristian ☞ subjection indeed. Brother and sisters children are forbidden to marrie. Canon 31 It is not lawfull for a presbyter to sit in judgement when any man is condemned to death. Canon 34 It is not lawfull for a Clergy man to cite another of the Cler∣gie before a secular Iudge. Canon 35 It is not lawfull for a woman with a naked hand to touch the Canon 36 holie Eucharist. It is not lawfull to take refreshment of meate with an excom∣municate person. Canon 38 If any of the Clergy receiue an excommunicate man, without the knowledge of him who hath excommunicated him, he shall Canon 39 receiue the like sentence, that is, he shall likewise be excommu∣nicated. It is not lawfull for a presbyter in banqueting time to sing or dance. Canon 40
Manie Canons, to the number of 45. were concluded in this Councell: but I haue determined not to ouer-lade a little booke with commemoration of an heape of vnprofitable, vn∣necessarie, and superstitious Canons. In the yeere of our Lord 364. and in the 24. yeere of the reigne of the Emp. Heraclius, a Councell was gathered in Hispalis The coū∣cell of Hispalis, vnder Si∣sebutus. a towne of Spaine, vulgarly called Ciuill la grand. It was gathered by Isidorus B. of Hispalis, at the command of king Sisebutus, who was both present and President in this Councell. For two prin∣cipall causes was this Synode conueened: namelie, for suppres∣sing the heresie of , which was a branch of the heresie of Eutyches: secondly, for decision of questions which arose amongst bishops concerning the marches and boundes of their diocesis, with some other Ecclesiasticall causes. They had 13. Sessions or meetinges, as is declared, 2. Tom. Concill. In the first action Theodulphus bishop of Malaca, complained, that by injurie of warres, an ancient paroch Church was separa∣ted 1. from his towne, and possessed by others. It was concluded, that he should be repossessed again into his ancient priueledges, & that prescriptiō of time should haue no place, if it were known that hostilitie and warre-fare had hurt a man in his rights. In the second Session, the controuersie betwixt Fulgentius, bishop of Astigita, and Honorius, bishop of Corduba, concer∣ning 2. the marches of their dioceses, was debated: and men were chosen to visite the boundes, and to decide the contro∣uersie. In the third Session compeared Cambra, bishop of Italica, a Towne of the prouince of Spaine, of olde called Baetica: hee com∣plained 3. against one of his Clergie, named Passandus, yt he being brought vp from his infancie in ye Church of Italica, yet had fled without anie just cause to Corduba. It was ordained, that who∣soeuer fled from his owne Church vnto another, should be sent backe againe, and should be thrust into a Monasterie, and should bee deuested of his honour for a time, to the end, that ye sharpe∣nesse of Discipline might correct the licencious libertie of va∣ging and wandering. In the 4. Session, it was complained, yt some were consecrated to be Leuites in ye Church of Astigita, who had maried widowes: 4.
This ordination was annulled: and it was ordained, that none of these Leuites shoulde bee promoted to the honour of a Deacon. In the fift Session, a Deacon of the Church of Agabra, com∣plained of the ordination of three persons in that Church: one 5. was ordained to bee Presbyter, and two to bee euites. The bishop, beeing blinde, laide his handes vpon them, but one of the Presbyters pronounced the blessing: Nowe the Presbyter who had pronounced the blessing, was dead before the Coun∣cell of Hispalis, therefore they remitted him to his owne judge: ☞ but the three persons afore-saide admitted to Church-offices, they deposed them from their offices, as persons vnlawfullie admitted. In the sixt Session, it was found, that Fragitanus, a presbyter 6. of the Church of Corduba, was moste vnjustlie both deposed and banished by his bishop. For remedie, that the like mis-order shoulde haue no place in time to come, it was statuted and or∣dained, That a bishop, without aduise of his Synode, shoulde ☞ not presume to depose a presbyter. In the seuenth Session, Chore-episcopi and Presbyters are 7. debarred from the high priueledges of the Episcopall office: namelie, from the consecration of presbyters, of holie Vir∣gines, Churches and Altrs from laying hand vpon men con∣uerted from heresie, and conferring vnto them the holie Spirit, from making of Chrisme, and signating with it the fore-heads of them who are baptized, from absoluing publikelie in time of Masse anie penitent person, and sending testimonials to fo∣raine partes, called Formatae epistolae: and finallie, from bapti∣zing, consecrating the Sacrament, blessing the people, and teaching them, receiuing penitentes when the bishop was pre∣sent. Now the ground of all these prohibitions is not brought out of holie Scripture, but from the authoritie of the Aposto∣licke ☞ chaire. Earlie beganne the Antichist to establish an Hie∣rarchie in the Church, which neither Christ, nor His Apostles, had commanded. The eight Session intreated concerning Helisens, a seruant, whome the bishop of Agabra had set at libertie, and hee on the 8. other part abused his libertie, so farre, that hee prsumed by
Magicall Artes to cut off the bishop, who had beene so benefi∣ciall vnto him: hee was ordained to bee redacted againe to his former seruile estate, that hee might learne obedience to his su∣periours by the heauie yoke of seruile subjection. In the ninth Session, it is forbidden, that bishops shoulde haue Leke-men to bee masters of their house, but oneli some 9. of their owne Clergie shoulde bee dispensators of their house∣holde affaires, because it is written, Thou shalt not plowe with an Oxe and an Asse together. By the way marke, that nothing was so Deut. 22. 10 ☞ miserablie abused at this time as testimonies of holie Scripture. In the tenth Session, the Monasteries latelie builded in the Btike prouince were allowed, and confirmed. 10. In the eleunth Session, the Monasteries of Virgines are re∣commēded to the ouer-sight of the Abbot gouerning the Mo∣nasterie 11. of Monkes, with caueates, that all appearance of euill should bee prouidentlie eschewed. In the twelfth Session, one professing the heresie of Acephali 12. compeared, who denied the distinction of two natures in Christ, and affirmed, that the diuinitie of Christ did suffer vpon the Crosse: but hee was seriouslie dealt withall, and conuicted by testimonies of holie Scripture and Fathers, so that hee renoun∣ced his hereticall opinion, and embraced the true Faith, and the whole Councell gaue praise and thankes vnto God for his conuersion. I the thirteenth Session, there is a prolixe refutation of the opinion of those who supponed, that the two natures of Christ 13. were confounded, and that the diuinitie suffered. Isidorus see∣meth to bee the compiler of this Treatise, against Acphali, gi∣uen in to the Councll of Hispalis: and manie doe thinke, that he collected into one volume the Councels that preceeded his Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10. time: for hee was a man more learned than his fellowes in his dayes. IN the yeere of our Lord 639. and vnder the reigne of Sisenan∣, The 4. Councell of Toledo. king of , by the kinges commandement, moe than 70. bishops and pesbyters were conuened in the towne of  vpon occasion of diuersitie of Ceremonies and Discipline in the countrey of Spaine.
First they set downe a short confession of the true Faith, which they ordained to be embraced and kept. Canon 1. Secondly, that there should be an vniforme order of praying, singing of Psalmes, solemnities of Masses, Euen-song-seruice, Canon 2. throughout all Spaine and Gallicia, like as they all professed one Faith, and dwelt in one kingdome, lest diuersitie of ceremonies and rites should offende ignorant people, and make them to thinke that there was a schisme in the Church. It was statuted and ordained, That at least once in the yeere, prouinciall Councels should be assembled: and incase anie con∣trouersie Canon 3. should fall out in matters of Faith, a generall Coun∣cell of all the prouinces of Spaine should be assembled. Here let the judicious Reader marke, that in processe of time almoste all thinges are subject to alteration and Councels, of olde called Nationall, now abusiuelie beginne to be called Generall. The or∣der ☞ of incomming of bishops to the Councell, and sitting in the first place, and of the presbyters after them, and sitting in a place behinde the bishops: and of deacons, who should stand in presence of bishops and presbyters, is described at length in the third canon. That the festiuitie of Easter, or Pashe daye, should bee kept Canon 4. vpon the day of Christes resurrection. Concerning the diuersitie of rites vsed in baptisme, some Canon 5. vsing the ceremonie of thrise dipping in water, others one dip∣ping onelie, It was thought most expedient to be content with one dipping, because the Trinitie is so viuely represented in the names of the Father, Sonne, and holie Ghost, that there is no necessitie by three dippinges in water to represent the Trinitie: and for eschewing all appearance of schisme, and lest Christians ☞ should seeme to assent vnto heretiques who diuide the Trinitie: For all these causes it was expedient to keepe vniformitie in the ceremonies of Baptisme. It was statuted and ordained, That vpon fryday immediately preceeding Easter day, the doctrine of the suffering of Christ, of Canon 6. repentance, & remission of sinnes, should be clearly taught vnto the people, to ye end, that they being purged by remission of sins, might ye more worthily celebrate ye feast of ye Lords resurrection, and receiue the holie Sacrament of the Lords bodie and blood.
The custome of putting an ende vnto the fasting of Lent, vpon fryday at nine a clocke, is damned, because in the daye of Canon 7 the Lordes suffering the Sunne was couered with darknesse, and the elementes were troubled: and for honour of the Lords suffering that daye should bee spent in fasting, mourning, and abstinence: and hee who spendeth anie part of that day in ban∣queting, let him bee debarred from the Sacrament of Christes bodie and blood on Pashe day. That the Tapers and Torches, which shined in the Church in the night preceeding the daye of the resurrection shoulde bee Canon 8 solemnly blessed, to ye end, that the mystery of ye holy resurrectiō might be expected with cōsecrated lights. Such voluntary seruice inuented by the braine of man, had great sway at this time. ☞ That in the daylie Church-seruice the Lordes prayer (vul∣garly Canon 9 called Pater noster) should be rehearsed, because it is vsually called Oratio quotidiana, that is, a daylie prayer. That Alleluiah bee not sung in time of Lent, because it is a Canon 10 time of mourning, and humiliation, vntill the dayes of resurre∣ction be celebrated, which is a time of joye and gladnesse. ☞ That after the Epistle a part of the Gospell shoulde bee Canon 11 read. That Hymnes and spirituall songes, not contained in holie Canon 12 Scripture, may be sung in the Church. The song of the three children shall be sung in all the Chur∣ches of Spaine and Gallicia. Canon 13 In the ende of Spirituall songes it shall not bee simplie saide, Glorie to the Father, & to the Son, &c. but, Glorie and honour Canon 14 to the Father, and to the Son, & to the H. Spirit to the end, that hymnes sung in earth. may bee correspondent to the song of ☞ Elders in Heauen, , Apocal. 4. 11. In Responsories, if it be a matter of gladnesse, the ende shall Canon 15 be, Gloria, &c. and if it bee a matter of sadnesse, the ende shall be, Principium, &c. The booke of the APOCALYPS of Sainct Iohn, is declared to bee a booke of Canonicke Scripture, and to bee preached Canon 16 in open audience of the CHVRCH betwixt EASTER and WHITSONDAY.
It is forbidden, that the holy Communion should be celebra∣ted immediately after the saying of the Lordes Prayer: but let Canon 17 the blessing bee first giuen, and then let the Priestes and Leuites communicate before the Altar, the Clergie within the Quiere, and the people without the Quiere. No man shall bee promoted to the honour of Priesthood, who is infamous, who hath bene baptized in heresie, who hath Canon 18 gelded himselfe, who hath married the second wife, or a widow, who hath had concubines, who is in a seruile condition, who is vnknowne, Neophycus, or a Laike, who is giuen to warre-fare, or an attender in Court, who is vnlearned, or hath not attained to the age of thirtie yeeres, who hath not proceeded to honour by ascending degrees, who by ambition, or bribes, hath presu∣med to honour, who hath beene elected by his predicessor, who hath not beene elected by the Clergie and people of his owne citie: He who is approued, shall bee consecrated on the Lordes day, by all the comprouinciall bishops, at least by three of them. Let Leuites bee of the age of 25. yeeres before their admis∣sion, and presbyters of 30. Canon 19 Let bishops bee vnreproueable, according to the precept of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. Canon 20 Let bishops not onely haue the testimonie of a good con∣science in the sight of God, but also the testimonie of an vnre∣proueable Canon 21 conuersation amongst men. Presbyters and Leuites, whom infirmitie of olde age permit∣teth not to abide in their secrete chambers: yet let them haue Canon 22 witnesses of their honest conuersation in their shoppes, and re∣maining places. Youthhood is prone and bent to euill: therefore let them who are young, be all brought vp in one conclaue, vnder the in∣struction Canon 23 and gouernement of some well approued Senior. But they who shall be found lasciuious and incorigible, let them be thrust into a Monasterie, to the end, that stricter discipline may correct the proud minds of insolent youthes. Seeing that ignorance is the mother of all errours, it becom∣meth presbyters, who haue vndertaken the office of teaching, Canon 24 continually to meditate vpon holy Scripture, according to the wordes of the Apostle, Tke hede to reading, exhortation, and do∣ctrine,
1. Tim. 4. for by meditation of holy Scripture, and the Canons of the Church, men are made able to instruct others in knowledge, and in precepts of good maners. Presbyters shall receiue from their owne bishops an officiall booke, to the ende, that through ignorance they doe nothing Canon 25 amisse, neither in celebration of the Sacramentes, nor in their Letanies, nor in their forme of comming to Councels. When presbyters and deacons are admitted to their offices, they must vowe chastitie, and binde themselues to their bishops, Canon 26 to leade a continent life: and after such profession, let them re∣taine the discipline of an holy life. A bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who shall happen to bee vn∣justly deposed if they be found innocent by the triall of the Sy∣node, Canon 27 let them bee restored to their former dignities before the Altar, by the hands of bishops in this manner, If he be a bishop, let him be restored to his Orarium, with Staffe and Ring: If hee be a presbyter, to his Orarium and Planeta: If he be a deacon, to his Orarium and Alba: If hee bee a sub-deacon, to his Plate and Chalice: and other orders let them receiue in their restitution that which was giuen vnto them in their ordination. If anie of the Clergie be found to haue consulted with diui∣ners Canon 28 and sorcerers, let him be deposed from his dignitie, and be thrust into a Monasterie, to make continuall pennance for his sacrildge. Church-men, who dwell in the borders cōfining to a nation Canon 29 that is vnder hostilitie with their owne countrey, let them nei∣ther receiue from the enemies of the countrey, nor direct anie secret message vnto the enemies. If anie Church-man sit in judgement, or bee judge in a sen∣tence Canon 30 of blood, let him be depriued of his dignitie in ye Church. Let bishops haue a care of such as are oppressed, to reprooue Canon 31 the mightie men who oppresse them: and if the word of whole∣some reproofe profite nothing, let them complaine to the king, to the ende, that by regall authoritie impietie may be subdued. Seeing auarice is the roote of all euill, let bishops so gouerne their dioceses, that they spoyle them not of their rightes: but according to the determination of anteriour Councels, let Canon 32 them haue the thirde part of Oblations, Tithes, Tributes and
Cornes: the rest let it remaine vnto the Paroches free, and vn∣touched. That thing which one bishop possesseth, without interpel∣lation, for the space of thirtie yeeres, let no man in that same Canon 33 Prouince be heard in an action of repetition: But as concerning them who dwell in diucrse Prouinces, the case standeth other∣wise, lest while Dioceses are defended, the boundes of Pro∣uinces be confounded. A Church newlie builded, shall appertaine vnto that bis∣shop, in whose diosie it is knowne that spirituall conuentions Canon 34 haue beene kept. A Bishop shall visit yeerelie all the paroches of his diosie: and incase hee been impeded by infirmitie, or by weightie businesse, Canon 35 hee shall appoint faithfull Presbyters and Deacons, to take inspection of the fabricke of the Churches, and of their rentes. Whatsoeuer rewarde a Prelate promiseth to a man who vn∣der-taketh anie worke tending to the vtilitie of the Church, let Canon 36 him faithfully performe his promise. Seeing that a part of Church-rentes is bestowed vpon sus∣tentation of strangers, and of poore and indigent people, if Canon 37 it shall happen at anie time, those persons, or their children, to bee indigent, who haue doted anierent to the Church, let them render a just deserued retribution to their bene-factors, in sus∣taining them, to whose beneuolence they are addoted. The Deacons are decerned to be inferiour to Presbyters. Canon 38 Let the Leuites bee content to bee cloathed with their ORA∣RIVM onelie vpon their left shoulder, and not vpon their right Canon 39 shoulder: and let it neiher bee beautified with coloures, nor with golde: PLATINA in the life of ZOSINVS, calleth it LINOSTIMA. Let Clergie-men haue the vpper-moste part of their heads bare and shauen, and the lower-part rounded, not following Canon 40 the example of the Readers of GALLICIA, who did shaue onehe a little of the vpper-moste-part of the haire of their head: conforming themselues, in so doing, to the custome of NOTA. some Heretiques, which dishonour is to bee remoued from the Churches of Spaine.
No strange women shall cohabite with Church-men, onelie Canon 41 their mother, or sister, or her daughter, or fathers sister, maye dwell with them, amongst which persons the bandes of nature permitteth not to suspect anie sinne, according to the consti∣tutions of auncient Fathers. Some of the Clergie, who are not married, are intangled with the forbidden lust of strange women, let the bishop separate Canon 42 them, sell the women, and redact the men infected with their lust, for a space, vnto pennance. If a man of the Clergy marrie a wife, or a widow, or a deuor∣ced Canon 43 woman, or an harlot, without aduise of his bishop, let the bishop separate them againe. Clergie-men, who haue cloathed themselues with armour Canon 44 voluntarilie, and haue gone to warre-fare, let them bee deposed from their office, and bee thrust into a Monasterie, there to re∣maine all the dayes of their life. Church-men, who are found spoyling the sepulchres of per∣sons Canon 45 departed, let them bee deposed, and be subject vnto three yeeres pennance. By the cōmandement of king Sisenandus, Churchmen are exi∣med from all publike indictiōs & labours, to ye end with greater Canon 46 libertie they may attende vpon spirituall seruice. Let bishops haue some of their owne Clergie to bè rulers of their house-holde-affaires, according as the Councell of Chal∣cedon Canon 47 hath ordained. A man is made a monke either by his parents deuotion, or by his own profession: but whether he be embarked into the Mo∣nastike Canon 48 NOTA. life, the one way or the other, there is no regresse againe vnto a seculare estate. Persons of the Clergie, who are desirous to enter into a Mo∣nasteri, and to lead a comtemplatiue life, let not their bishops Canon 49 hinder the purpose of their minde because they haue intention NOTA. to enter into a better trade of liuing. Bishops haue power to constitute Abbots, to gouerne Mo∣nasteries, Canon 50 and to correct enormities that shall happen to fall out amongst them, but not to redact them to seruile offices, nor to conuert the rents of the Abacie to their owne vse, as a pos∣session duelie belonging to themselues.
The Monkes who leaue their Monasterie, returne againe to a secular life, and marrie wiues, let them be brought backe againe Canon 51 to their owne Monasterie, there to doe pennance, and to la∣ment for their by-past sinnes. Religious men, who wander vp and downe in a nation, and are neither members of the Clergie, nor Monkes of anie Mona∣sterie, Canon 52 let the bishop restraine their licentious libertie, and ap∣point them either to serue in the Clergie, or in a Monasterie, except such as through infirmitie or age, haue gotten an ex∣emption. They who haue confessed the committing of anie deadlie Canon 53 sinne, cannot be promoted to Ecclesiasticall honours. Secular men, who in receiuing their pennance haue beene Canon 54 content to bee shauen, and to put on a religious habite, if they reuolt againe, and will needes become Laikes and bee incorri∣gible, then let them be counted apostates, and excommunicate from the fellowship of the Church. Widowes, who haue put on a religious habite, and vowed chastitie, if they marrie, they haue damnation, according to the Canon 55 wordes of the Apostle, 1. Tim. . 12. Iewes are not to be compelled to receiue the Christian faith: but these who alreadie by constraint haue receiued it in the Canon 56 dayes of the noble king Sisebutus, seeing they haue beene alrea∣die partakers of our Sacramentes, let them bee compelled to perseuere, lest the Name of the Lord Iesus be blasphemed, and ☞ the faith, which they haue embraced, be counted vile and con∣temptible. They who receiue bribes and rewardes from the Iewes, to cloake their vngodlinesse, and to foster them in their infidelitie, Canon 57 let them bee accursed, and counted strangers from the Church of Christ. Iewes, after their conuersion to the Christian faith if they bee found to haue circumcised their sonnes or seruantes: by the commandement of the moste religious king Ssenandus it is or∣dained, Canon 58 and 59 That the circumcised children of the Iewes, shall bee se∣parated from the fellowship of their parentes, and the sruants shall bee set at libertie, for the injurie done vnto their bodie by circumcision.
Iewes, who are punished to the death for any contempt done Canon 60 by them against CHRIST after their baptisme this punishment shall not prejudge their children from right to enjoye their goods, if they bee faithfull, because it is written, The sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of the father, Ezech. 18. 20. Let not Iewes, after their conuersion, haunt the companie of other superstitious Iewes, as yet addicted to the abolished lawe Canon 61 of ceremonies, lest they be perucrted: if they transgresse this or∣dinance, such of them as haue professed Christianitie, shall bee giuen in seruice to Christians, others shall bee appointed to bee publikely scourged. Iewes, who haue maried Christian women, if they will not em∣brace Christian religion, let them be separated from their wiues Canon 62 companie, and let the children bee brought vp in the faith of their Christian mothers. Iewes, who haue once professed Christian faith, and haue sliden backe againe from it, shall not bee admitted witnesses before a Canon 63 Iudge, albeit they professe themselues to bee Christians, because like as their faith is suspected, so in like manner their humane testimonie is to be doubted of. Let no Iew bee preferred to any publike office. Canon 64 Let no Iew presume to buy a Christian seruant, which if hee doe, the seruant shall bee taken from him, and shall bee set at Canon 65 libertie. Bishops, who haue not benefited the Church by any pro∣per donation of their owne goods, they should not empouerish Canon 66 their Church, by setting at liberty Church seruantes, which thing if hee presume to doe, his successour shall reduce those seruants againe to the possession of the Church, whom iniqui∣tie, without any just right hath absolued. A Bishop, who setteth a seruant at libertie, hauing first by Canon 67 permutation set another of the like worth, and merite in his place, shall denie libertie to the fore-saide seruant, either to ac∣cuse, or to beare witnesse against the Church whereinto he was a seruant, else hee shall forfeit his libertie, and bee reduced to his former seruile condition in that same Church, which hee would haue harmed, and in the meane time the permutation afore-saide shall stand firme and stable.
Hee who hath augmented Church-rentes, either by confer∣ring, or acquiring some augmentation vnto it, hath some liber∣tie Canon 68 to set Church-seruantes at libertie, prouiding alwayes, they abide vnder the patrocinie of the Church. Because the patronage of the Church neuer dieth, let those seruants, whom the Church hath set at libertie, and their poste∣ritie, Canon 69 and 70. and 71. be obedient vnto the Church, and depende vpon their pa∣trocinie. If they be vnthankfull, let their libertie be forfeite, and let the Church defende them from all insolencie and wrong. Seruants, who are set at so full libertie, that their patrones haue kept no band of subjection ouer their heads, if they be vn∣spotted, Canon 72 and 73 and vnreproueable, they may be promoted to Ecclesia∣sticall offices. But it is vnseemelie, that anie man shall bee recei∣ued into a spirituall office, who is bound vnto the seruile subje∣ction of an earthly master. In ende, earnest supplications are ordained to bee made to Canon 74 God, for preseruation of king Sisenandus, and the nation of the Gothes: and many Anathems are pronounced against them who shall presume to violate the othe of alledgeance made to the king. In ende the Actes of this Councell are subscribed by Isi∣dorus, bishop of Hispal, and other seuentie bishops. IN the first yeere of Chintilla, king of the Gothes, and about the time of the reigne of the Emperour Heracleon, conueened The fift Councell of Toledo. with Eugenius, bishop of Toledo, other twentie bishops. In this Councell nothing was entreated, except a mandate was giuen concerning the yeerely Letanies that shoulde bee made three dayes immediately following the Ides of December, and if the Lords day interueened, then these 3. dayes Letanies should bee differred, vntill the beginning of ye next weeke. In these 3. dayes pardon for sins should be humbly begged at the hands of God with teares. The rest of the ordinances of this Councell appoint supplications to bee made to God for preseruation of the king and his children: and that they shall bee accursed, who dare presume to suite the kinglie authoritie, without the consent of the whole countrey of SPAINE, and the Nobilitie of the nation of the GOTHES: and that no man shall raile vpon the king, or lie in waite for his life,
IN the yeere of our Lord 652. or as others reckon 650. Pope Martinus gathered a Councell at Rome, of moe than 100. The coū∣cell of Rome in the dayes of Pope Martine. Bishops. The errour of the Monothelites, obstinately defended by Paulus, bishop of Constātinople, was the occasion of this Coun∣cell, together with the impious edict of the Emperour Constans, set out in fauours of the heresie of the Monothelites. In this Councell, ouer and besides an ample confession of faith, manie decrees and constitutions were made, all tending to damne those who denied either the Trinitie, or the diuine vnitie in the diuine nature, or the manifestation of the second person of the Trinitie, and his suffering in the flesh, or the perpetuall virgini∣tie of the Lordes mother, or the two natiuities of Christ, one before all times, and another in time by the operation of the holie Spirite, or the conformitie of Christ to vs in all thinges, sinne excepted, or the distinction of the two natures after the ineffable vnitie, or the distinction of willes, and operations in Christ. In like manner, all were damned who made opposition to the fiue preceeding generall Councels. In particular, Theodo∣rus of Pharatrita, Cyrus of Alexandria, Sergius Pyrrhus, and Pau∣lus bishops of Constantinople, were damned, as patrones and ob∣stinate defenders of the heresie of the Monothelites. There is more frquent mention of Fathers, than of Scriptures in this Councll, a perilous example to the posteritie. IN the yeere of our Lord 653. and in the third yeere of Chin∣till, King of Gothes in Spaine, the 6. Councell of Toledo was as∣sembled, The 6. Councll of Toledo. of 52. bishops, Eugenius b. of Toledo being president. The occasion seemeth to haue bene the renouation of old heresies, & contradiction to preceeding Councels. After a confession of the Faith, Letanies are ordained to be said, as was appointed yeere∣lie Canon 2 for preseruation of the King. It was ordained, by the aduis of the Councell, with consent of the King & his Nobles, That no man should be tolerated to Canon 3 dwell in ye kingdom of Spaine, who did not professe ye true Catho∣licke faith & yt kings in al time to come before they were placed in their royall seat, should be boūd by ye obligation of a solemne ☞ oath, to interpone their authority yt this act might bee obeyed:
Otherwise, let the King, refusing to put this act in execution, be counted accursed, and bee a faggot of the flames of euerlasting fire. What Fedinandus, king of Spaine, did, in driuing out of his dominions, the Iewes, and the Saracenes, some alleadge, that it was done vpon the ground of this act: but nowe it is not a fit time to examine that question. No man shall presume, by Simonie, or largition of money, to atteine to Ecclesiasticall offices. Canon 4 If any of the Clergie obtaine a pension, out of the Church rentes, let him possesse it vnder the title of Praecaria, lest by long Canon 5 possession the Church rents be diminished. If any person be cloathed with a religious habite, which hee hath voluntarily accepted, if afterward he forsake it, let him bee Canon 6 excommunicated, if he returne not againe vnto his order. The seuenth Canon is a renewing of the 54. Canon of the 4. Councell of Toledo. Canon 7 A married man, who voweth chastitie in time of sicknesse, if he recouer health, and haue not the gift of continencie, let him Canon 8 cohabite againe with his wife: but if shee die, hee is debarred from the second marriage, which notwithstanding is permitted to the wife if shee haue not vowed. This Canon is not set downe ☞ by precept and commandement, but permissiuely through in∣dulgence, and a consideration of humane infirmitie. Seruants, whome the Church hath set at libertie, when one Prelate dieth, and another succeedeth, they are bound to renew Canon 9 the charters of their land which they possesse, else their charters shall be voyde, and of none effect, if they be not renewed within the space of a yeere next after the election of the new Prelate. The children of them whom the Church hath set at libertie, if their parents bring them vp in learning they shall be brought Canon 10 vp in that same Church from which their libertie did arise, and shall serue the Bishop of that Church, alwayes without preju∣dice of their libertie. Let no man, vpon occasion of an accusation, bee punished, vnlesse his accuser bee presented: and incase hee bee a vile and Canon 11 infamous person, let no sentence be giuen out vpon the ground of such accusation, except into an action of treason against the life of the King.
He who hath committed hainous offences, and fearing pu∣nishment, fleeth to the enemies of his countrey for refuge, let Canon 12 him be excommunicated. Let young men honour them who are in great credite and Canon 13 fauour with Princes: And let Seniors louingly cherish the youn∣ger sort, and present vnto them profitable examples of a good conuersation. The 14. and 15. Can. intreate of the reward due to them who are found faithfull seruants to the King, in whatsoeuer estate, Canon 14 and 15 especially in the Church: and that rentes and landes bestowed vpon the Church, shall abide firmely in their possession without reuocation. In the 16. 17. 18. and 19. Canons, there is a commemoration of the bountifull kindnesse of king Chintilla toward the Church, Canon 16 17. 18. and 19. aprouision, that no Church-man should bee allured by no de∣ceitfull perswasion, to take a course against the King: A prote∣station before God, his Angels, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and whole Church, That no man shoulde enterprise any attempt against the King and his Noble estate: And they who shall pre∣sume to doe in the contrarie, are appointed to eternall damna∣tion. In ende, prayers are made to God to giue a good successe to their meeting: and thankes are giuen to the King, by whose authoritie they were assembled. So it is manifest, that by the authoritie of Princes Nationall Assemblies were conueened at this time. IN the yeere of our Lord 662. as Functius reckoneth, and in The 7. Councell of Toledo. the 6. yeere of Chindasuvindus, king of Spaine, the 7. Councell of Toledo was assembled, consisting of 4. Arch-bishops, 30. bis∣shops, and a great number of presbyters, and me engers from them who could not bee present. The occasion of this meeting was Theodisclus bishop of Hispals, a Graecian borne: Hee had cor∣rupted the bookes of Isidorus, and dispersed many errours in his Church: and hee contended for supremacie with the bishop of Toledo. In this Councell Theodisclus was remooued from his of∣fice. The prioritie of dignitie was conferred to the bishop of To∣ledo. In the second Tom of Councels, 6. Canons are referred to this meeting: First Laikes, and men also in spirituall office, are for∣bid Canon 1
den to attempt anie thing against the estate of their coun∣trey, either by sedition or treason. Secondlie, it is statuted and ordained, That incase anie man, Canon 2 ministring the Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper, be hindred by any superuenient sicknesse, that another shall be readie to fi∣nish the worke which he hath begunne. Thirdly, That the presbyters, and the whole Clergie, shall be present at the funerall of a bishop. Canon 3 Fourthly, it is forbiddē, that bishops in their visitation should extorse or oppresse the Churches which they visite. Canon 4 Fiftly, That men inclosed into a Monasterie, should first re∣ceiue Canon 5 instruction in their Monasteries, before they presume to teach others. Sixtly, a commandement is giuen, That the bishops in neare adjacent places, shoulde bee obedient to the bishop of Toledo, Canon 6 and at his commaundement they shoulde compeare into the towne of Toledo. CAbillonum, vulgarlie called Chalon, is a towne in Burgunnie, not farre distant from Matiscone. In this towne, by the The coū∣cell of Cabillo∣num. commandement of Clodoucus king of France, conueened 44 bis∣shops. Gandericus bishop of Lions was President, and Landilenus bishop of Vienne. Theodorus bishop of Arls, because hee refused to compeare before the Councell, was suspended from his of∣fice, vntill the next Councell. In this Synode the Canons of the Councell of Nice had great allowance. It was forbidden, that two bishops shoulde bee or∣dained in one towne: That no man shoulde sell a Christian ser∣uant to a Iew: And, that two Abbots shoulde not bee chosen to gouerne one Monasterie: That no labouring of the ground, or other secular worke, should bee done on the Lordes day: with manie other canons, coincident with ye Canons of other Councels. IN the dayes of the Emperour Constantinus Pogonatus, and vn∣der the Popedome of Agatho, a Councell was gathered at A Coun∣cell at Rome. Rome, about the question of the willes and operations of Christ: wherein it was decerned, by the suffrages of 125. Bis∣shops of Italie, France, Lombardie, of the nation of the Gothes, of Britanes, and Sclauonians, That two willes and two operations
were to bee acknowledged in Christ: And the opinions of Theo∣dorus, Cyrus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, defenders of the here∣sie of the Monothelites was damned. The vaunting wordes of the letter of Agatho, written to the sixt generall Councell, wherein hee braggeth, that the bishops of Rome neuer erred in matters of Faith, I lay them aside at this time, for they are false, and vntrue, as I haue alreadie prooued, and shall prooue here∣after, ☞ if it please the Lord. IN the yeere of our Lord 671. and in the fift yeere of Rece∣suvindus King of Gothes, the eight Councell of Toledo was The 8. Councell of Toledo. conuened. To this Assemblic resorted two and fiftie bishops: Great disputation was in this Councell, concerning perjurie. In ende, it was resolued, That no necessitie bindeth a man to performe an vnlawfull oath: For Herod and Iphtah sinned in making vn∣lawfull oathes, but they sinned more grieuouslie in performing vnlawfull oathes. Marriage is vtterlie forbidden to Bishops: and places of Canon 4. 5 6. and 7 ☞. SCRIPTVRE are miserablie abused to confirme this inter∣diction of marriage. Bee yee holie, as I am holie, 1. Pet. 1. 16. And in another place, Mortifie your members which are on the earth, Coloss. 3. 5. Miserable ignorance in this age counteth marriage to bee , that is, vncleanenesse, a member of the bo∣die of sinne, which the Apostle commaundeth to mortifie. Yea, and the sub-deacons, who pleaded for retaining of their wiues, in regarde that in their admission no such condition was re∣quired of them, are in moste seuere manner interdited from the companie of their wiues, or else to bee thrust into a Monaste∣rie, to suffr pennance vntill the last period of their liues. Vnlearned men are not to bee admitted to the celebration Canon 8 of diuine mysteries, especially such as are not well acquainted with the Psalter. Eating of flesh is forbidden in Lent, for three principall causes: First, Because the fourtie dayes of Lent are the tithes Canon 9. of all the dayes of the yeere, and the tithes shoulde bee con∣secrted to GOD: Secondlie, because that CHRIST, by fasting fourtie dayes, expiated the sinnes of mankinde:
Thirdly, because it is conuenient, that a man, made of the 4. ele∣mentes, for breaking the ten precepts of the decalogue, should afflict his bodie foure times ten dayes. Beholde the firme argu∣mentes whereupon the doctrine of deuils in prohibition of meates doe leane, 1. Tim. 4. ☞ In the 10. Canon, the vertues wherewith the king shall be in∣dewed, who shall be chosen to reigne in Spaine, are rehearsed. Canon 10 In the last Canon, the ordinances of preceeding Councels are to bee obeyed: and the Iewes are to bee dealt with according to Canon 11 and 12. the actes of the 4. Councell of Toledo. Can. 56. 57. 58. 59. and 60. &c. IN the yeere of our Lord 673. and in the 7. yeere of the reigne of Rocesuindus king of the Gothes, by the commandement of The 9. Councell of Toledo. the King, 16 bishops conueened in Toledo, and made these or∣dinances following: First, That founders of Churches, and bestowers of rentes Canon 1 vpon the Church, and their posteritie should haue a sollicitous care, that Church rents be not abused, which misorder if it shall happen to fall out, let complaint be made to the bishop, to the Metropolitane, or to the king of the countrey. Founders of Churches, during their life-time, haue power to appoint men who shall attend vpon the fabricke of the Church Canon 2 or Monasterie which is builded, that it decay not. If any Church-man bestowe any part of Church-rent, vnder the colour of prestation, let the cause bee clearely contained in Canon 3 an euidence, or else it shall be voyde. Let the goods of the defunct administrator of the Church af∣faires, be equally diuided betwixt his heires and the Church. Canon 4 If a bishop build a Monasterie, let him not bestow abcue the Canon 5 fiftie part of the rent of his prelacie in the charges of building: and incase he build a paroche Church, for honour of his buriall place, let him not bestowe aboue the hundreth part of his rent for charges of building. To the bishop belongeth the third part of rent of euery pa∣roch Church in his diosie, and whether he leaue that thirde part Canon 6 to the Church it selfe, out of which it is vp-lifted, or to anie other Church, his gift shall stand firme without reuocation.
Let no man, vnder pretence of propinquitie, and because hee Canon 7 is heire intromet with the goods of the defunct bishop, without the fore-knowledge and consent of the Metropolitane, and in∣case the Metropolitane depart this life, let no intromission with his goods bee made, without the fore-knowledge of his succes∣sor, lest by fraude and deceit the Church be damnified. If any man, ministring in a Church-office, alienate a part of Church rentes, the supputation of time shall begin to bee rec∣koned Canon 8 from the houre of his death, & not from the time where∣in the charter was subscribed: and so after his death let the pre∣scription run on. The ninth Canon measureth the commoditie which a bishop shall receiue, who hath taken paines to burie another bishop. Canon 9 Children, procreated by bishops, presbyters, deacons, &c. shall not only be depriued of the heritage sometime belonging Canon 10 to their parents: but also they shall be mancipated to perpetuall seruice of those Churches whereinto their fathers serued. Let the Reader marke, that there is greater businesse in Councels to procure obedience to one antichristian precept, cōcerning pro∣hibition ☞ of marriage, than to all the ten Commandementes of Gods holy law. Let not a seruant be accepted to serue in the Ministerie of the Church, before he be first set at libertie. Canon 11 When seruants are set at libertie, let the supputation of time Canon 12 beginne at the death of him, who set them at libertie, and not at the time when the charter was made. Seruants, set at libertie, shall neither marrie a woman of the Canon 13 14. 15. and 16 ☞ Romane, nor of the Gothes blood: and they shall be subject to the Church that set them at libertie: and if necessitie compell them to sell landes, let the land bee first offered for a competent price to one who ministreth in that Church, from which their liber∣tie did arise. Iwes, who are baptized, shall in time of solemne feastes at∣tende vpon the bishop of the parts where their dwelling is, to Canon 17 the ende, that he may beare testimonie of the integritie of their faith. If this commandement be transgressed, the bishop shall ordaine the Iewe either to bee scourged, or to be subject to such bstinence as he thinketh most fit.
In ende thankes beeing rendered to God for their meeting, and for the vnitie of their judgementes: and supplications beeing made to God for the weale of the King Recesuvindus, in soule and bodie, the Councell was dissolued. IN the eight yeere of the reigne of Recesuvindus king of Gothes assembled in Toledo 21. bishops: They decerned concerning The 10. Councell of Toledo. the Feastes of the Natiuitie of our Lord, and of the Lordes mo∣ther, at what times they should bee kept. Punishmentes are ap∣pointed for men of the Clergie, and Monkes, who are not found loyall and duetifull to the King, and the countrey: That men vnmeete for spirituall offices, should not bee intruded into the Church, neither for propinquitie of blood, nor for hope of lucre and gaine: That widowes, professing a religious order, shall receiue an habite conuenient for that order: And that women, who depart again from their professed order, shall be punished: That parents shall not render their children to religious orders before they bee eighteene yeeres of age. Finally, Protamius bis∣shop of Bracara, beeing conuict of adulterie, was remoued from his office, and Fructuosus was placed in his rowme. IN the 7. yeere of the reigne of Bamba King of Gothes, 19. bishops, and 7. Abbots were assembled in Toledo, by the The 11. Councell of Toledo. Kinges commandement, Quiricus bishop of Toledo beeing Pre∣sident. In the beginning, after a protestation of a decent or∣der to be kept in their Assembly, that no tumult nor contentious disputation, nor indecent laughter should disturbe the comely modestie of their assembly. They set downe a prolixe confssion of Faith, and Canons belonging to Ecclesiasticall discipline in the forme following: 1. That bishops should be well acquainted with Scriptures, and apt to teach. 2. That Metropolitane bishops should rie how the Pastors of their diosie increase in knowledge. 3. That the forme of singing vsed in the Metropolitane Church, shall be like wise vsed in other inferiour Churches. 4. That persons who haue discorded, shall not stand at the Altar, vntill the time they bee reconciled againe. 5. That Church-men shall not judge in actions of blood. 6. That bishops shoulde not giue sen∣tence before a sufficient triall of the cause. 7. Bishops, who
commit adulterie or murther, shall be deposed, and excommu∣nicated, beside the punishment to bee inflicted by the secular Iudge. 8. No rewarde shall bee taken for ministration of the Sacramentes. 9. Bishops, before their ordination, shall giue their oath that they haue not acquired that dignitie by rewards, either giuen, or to be giuen, 10. He who is to be preferred to any Ecclesiasticall office, let him first sweare that he shall conti∣nue constantly in the true Catholicke faith, and that he shall be obedient to Eccl siasticall Canons. 11. Let no man refuse to receiue the Sacrament of the Supper when it is offered by him who hath a lwfull calling to ministrate it. 12. Absolution should bee pronounced when perill of death impendeth albeit complete satisfaction be not made. 13. The holy Sacrifice shall not bee ministred by persons possessed with deuils, or transpor∣ted with passions of madnesse. 14. He who ministreth at the Altar shall haue others concurring with him, to the end, that if he be suddenly oppressed with any infirmitie, the other asstant brother maye supply his place. 15. Councels are ordained yeerely to be kept. IF order of time be not precisely kept in commemoration of the Councels of Bracara and Toledo let no man mauell some regard must be had to the memorie of the Reader: and it is not The 2. Councell of Brac. meete that the Councels of Toledo, being many in number, and so frequently conueened one following vpon the necke of ano∣ther (except the 11. Councell conuened 12. yeeres after the 10.) should be miserably disioyned: if such things be not comported with, by the fauourable Reader, it will bee hard to abridge this head of Councels to the contentment of a learned Reader. This Councell of Bracara, by Caranza is called the first Coun∣cell of Bracara: In it manie olde opinions of the Priscllianistes, and Manicheans, concerning prohibition of Marriage & meats, are damned, together with the heresies of Samosatenus, Photinus, Cerdon, and Marcion. Canons set foorth in this Councell are so coincident with the Canons of other Councels, that there is no necessitie to make rehearsall of them. In the 30. can. of this Councell it is ordained, That no poesie shall bee sung in the Church except the psalter of the olde Te∣stament. ☞
IN the 4. yeere of Bambas, king of Gothes, 8. bishops were as∣sembled in Braga. In the beginning of the Councell, for con∣fession The 3. Councell of Brac. of their faith, they made a new rehearsall of ye summe of the Nicene faith. After this, they set down 8. ordinances in man∣ner following: 1. That all superstitious opinions beeing re∣jected, bread and wine mixed with water, onelie should be offe∣red in the Sacrifice, and not the liquor of milke, nor pure vn∣mixed wine, nor bread dipped in wine. Here marke, that the giuing of vnmixed wine to the people in the Sacrament or Sa∣crifice, ☞ is called superstition: such bitter fruites doe ensue vpon magnifying the traditions of men, that Christes owne insti∣tution is called superstition. 2. That vessels, dedicated to God, bee not abused, and employed to seculare and humane vses. 3. A Presbyter, when hee saieth Masse, let him bee clo∣thed with his Orarium on both his shoulders, and bee signated on his brest with the signe of the Crosse. 4. Let no person of the Clergie cohabite with women, no not with their owne si∣sters, without witnesses of their conuersation. 5. Vpon Fe∣stiuall dayes, reliques enclosed in an arke, shall bee borne vpon the shoulders of the Leuites, as the Arke of GOD in the olde Testament was accustomed to bee borne, 1. Chron. 15. 15. and not about the necke of a bishop: and incase ye bishop will needes carry them himselfe, then shall he walke on foote with the rest of the people, & not be carried in a coach by his deacons. Here marke how mens traditions are equalled to the commandemēt ☞ of God. 6. Presbyters, Abbots, and Leuites, for the dignity of their calling, shall not be punished with stripes by the bishop, lest in dispersoning the principall members of his owne body, hee bring himselfe into contempt of his subjectes. 7. Let no ho∣nour bee solde for promise of rewards. 8. Let gouernours of Churches haue a greater regarde to the weale of ye Church, than to their own particular affaires. In end, thanks is giuē to God & to ye king, for their meeting, & they subscribe the fore-named ordinances. Here marke, that in the countrey of Spaine the king still keepeth in his owne hand power of conuocating Councels. ☞ The 6. ge∣nerall coū∣cell holden at Con∣stantinople IN the yeere of our Lord 681. & in the 12. yeere of the reigne of Constantinus Pogonatus, a generall Councell was assembled at Constantinople, by the authority of the Emperour, and not by the
commandement of Pope Donus, nor Agatho his successor, nor of Leo 2. the successour of Agatho, as the Diuall letter of Constantine, directed to Pope Donus, and receiued, and obeyed by Pope Aga∣tho, clearly testifies. As for the number of bishops cōuened, there is an infinite discrepance betwixt ye authors, who make rehearsal of their number: the least number reckoned is 150. The question discussed in this Assemblie, was about the willes and actions of Christ. Macarius, patriarch of Antiochia, & Stephanus his disciple, partinaciously defended the errour of the Monothlites: confir∣ming also their opinion by the testimony of Honorius, sometime bishop of Rome, whose letters written to Sergius, sometime bishop of Constantinople, being read in the opē audience of the Councell, made it clearly known, that he also was infected with the errour of the Monothelites. For this cause, Honorius b. of Rome, Sergius, Pyr∣rhus, and Paulus bishops of Constantinople, Cyrus b. of Alexandria, and Macarius b. of Antiochia, were all excommunicated: like∣wise Polychronius, a ridiculous Monke, and his complices, were excommunicated, and with great shame and ignominy rejected from the fellowship of the Church: For he offered to proue the opinion of the Monothelites to bee the trueth of God, by writing the summe of that opinion in a paper, and ouer-spreading it vpon a beere wherein a dead man was laide, hee put the Coun∣cell in hope, that hee shoulde raise the dead man to life againe: but after triall, hee was founde to bee a lying and a deceitfull fellowe, and hee likewise was excommunicated. This Councell made no Canons and Constitutions concer∣ning Church discipline, as other Councels had done before: For this cause Iustinian the second, the sonne of Pogonatus, gathered these same Fathers who had bene in the preceeding Councll, to perfect the worke which they had begun. They made manie Constitutions, but two in speciall, which displeased the Romane Church: First, they annulled the doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning prohibition of Marriage to men in spirituall offices: Secondly, they ordained the Patriarch of Constantinople, to bee in equall authoritie with the Pope of Rome. These Constitutions and Canons Pope Sergius refused to subscribe, albeit his ambassadoures in his name had subscri∣bed them in Constantinople.
BAmbas, King of Gothes, resigned the title of his Royall autho∣ritie to Euringius, and he was content to bee shauen and en∣ter The 12. Councell of Toledo. ☞ into a Monasterie. In the first yeere of the reigne of Euringius 33. bishops, with some abbots, & 13. noble men of Court, con∣uecned at Toledo. The King, amongst many other things, prote∣sted, that hee was content, that whatsoeuer thing in his lawes seemed repagnant to reason, it should be corrected by the pru∣dent ☞ aduise of this Councell. The Fathers of this Councell, for confession of faith, adhered vnto the Councell of Nice. After this, the hand-writinges and seales of Bambas, and the nobles of his Court, and the testimonie of Ilianus, Arch-bishop of Toledo, are presented: whereby it was knowne, that Bambas had resigned his gouernement in fauour of Euringius, willing them to choose him to bee his successour. So it came to passe, that Euringius was solemnly proclaimed to bee King, and the people were assoyled from the oath of alleadgeance made to Bambas, and were astri∣cted to the obedience of King Euringius. In this Councell it was forbidden, that newe bishoprickes should be erected in villages: and the bishop of Emerita begged pardon for this, that he had ordained a bishop in a certaine vil∣lage, being complled so to doe by the cōmandement of King Bambas. They who stand at the Altar, and sacrificeth, are com∣manded to eate of the sacrifice as often as they offer it. The ☞ actes, made in preceeding Councels, against the Iewes, were re∣newed and amplified in this Councell: and thankes was giuen to God, and the King, for their meeting. Other Councels of Toledo, vnder the reignes of Euringius, and Egita, seeing of them there is little written worthie of comme∣moration, I ouer-passe with silence.
TREATISES, Belonging to the seuenth CENTVRIE. A TREATISE, Of the Uniuersall Bishop. AMBITION is a reproueable fault in all men especially in men who are Preachers of the humilitie of Christ: Yea, and the time wherein ambition got the greatest vpper-hande in the Church, was the time wherein the Antichrist sate in the Temple of God, extolling himselfe against all thing that is called God. When I reade the confession of Augustine, I finde no fault that hee damneth in himself (before his conuersion) more vehemently, than the fault Augustin. Confess. Lib. 6. cap. 6 of ambition, and desire of vaine glory: comparing his owne estate with the estate of a begger whome he saw at Millane ouer∣come with wine. In some things hee was like vnto that begger, in other things he was vnlikethee was like in this, that the beg∣ger was both miserable and he rejoyced in his miserie: the like Augustine saith of himselfe, that hee likewise was miserable. and delited in his miserie: but the difference stood in three thinges: The begger was drunken with wine, but Augustine was drun∣ken
with a desire of vaine glory: Secondly, the money wherewith the begger had bought the wine wherewith he was ouer-come, hee had gotten it by begging: but the vaine glorie wherewith Augustine was ouer-come, he had gained it by flatterie and lies: Thirdly, the drunken begger, when he had slept a short time, his drunkennesse departed from him: but the desire of vaine glorie was daylie augmented in Augustine, vntill the time came that God would renewe him according to his owne likenesse, When this vile sinne defiled the chaire of Constantinople, and the chaire of Rome, greater desolation followed than was vnder the reigne of Honorius, when the towne of Rome was set on fire: or vnder the reigne of Arcadius, when Constantinole was shaken with earth-quake. The short Treatise which I set foorth cōcerning the supremacie of the B. of Rome, in the 3. Centurie, was to declare, that the foresaid supremacie was not countenanced with such antiquitie as the Re∣mane Church do brag of: but now is the due time, & proper place, to speake more largely of the magnifick stile of ye Uniuersall bishop. In this Treatise, God willing, I shall declare, that the honou∣rable title of Uniuersall Bishop is only due to Christ: Secondly, that the bishops of Rome sought this preferment vnhonestly: and when they had obtained it, they fsed it more vnhonestile & ty∣rannously: and thirdly, that he who vsurpeth this honour due to Christ only, may justly bee called the Antichrist: Not that I haue intention to confound these two Treatises of the Uniuersall bishop, and of the Antichrist, but onely to make the one a prerparation to the other. Nowe the Great and Uniuersall Bisoph of our foules, as holie Scripture describeth him, is hee onely who hath broken downe the partition wall, and who hath made both Iewe & Gemile one House-holde and familie of God, and hee who hath made them both Ephes. 2. 14 both one Sheep-folde, like as there is but one great Shepheard, Ioan. 10. 26 & he who giueth his life for his Sheep, & who knoweth them all by their names, and who giueth vnto them all eternall life. This Ibid. vers. 3 11. & 28 descriptiō pointeth out vnto vs no man except Iesus Christ, the Son of God only. The B. of Rome is so far from conferring eter∣nall life vnto all the Sheepe of God, that he knoweth not them all by their names: yea, further than this, no bishop of Rome euer
knew all the Sheep of God in the town of Rome by thir names: how much lesse could they know all the Sheep of God dispersed vpon the face of the whole world? It may bee objected, that like as Christ conferreth his owne names vnto his seruants, whom he hath appointed to gathr his Sheepe to his Sheepe-folde: so in like manner, without sacri∣ledge and robberie they may accept the names of Christ: as Matth. 5. 14 namely Christ, hee calleth his disciples the Lights of the world, yet it is perfectly knowne, that Christ only is the true Light, who Ioan. 1. 9 lightneth euery man, who commeth into the worlde. To this I answere, That it is the labour of curious & idle men, to dispute vpon names, whē as in substance & matter there is no disagree∣ment. No man doth offend when the Apostles are called lights, because they are neither equalled nor matched with Christ, but only the liberality of Christ is commended, who out of ye pleni∣tude of his light bestoweth a portion vpon his seruants, to con∣serue light in the house of God. But when the B. of Rome is called Uniuersall Bishop, so many other prerogatiues are linked with this title, that he is equalled with Christ: as namely, That he is a law∣giuer, he cānot erre in matters of faith, he may dispense with the law of God, he may correct ye very testamentall legacy of Christ, & ordaine the holy Sacrament of ye Supper to be otherwise ad∣ministred than the institution of Christ beareth. Nowe is ye que∣stion not of words only, (which oft times being lenified & mol∣lified by ye dulcenesse of tolerable interpretations, are ouer-pas∣sed for the peace of the Church) but the question betwixt vs and the Romane Church is of matter & substance, and of the very ho∣nour only belōging to Christ. If it had bene ye purpose of Christ to make mortall man on earth his Vicare he had done to yt per∣son as Pharo did to Ioseph, that is, he had plucked ye ring from his own finger, & put it vpon ye finger of his Vicare, so that ye sight of Gen. 41. 42 Christs ring (that is, of power to cōfer eternall life to all Christs Sheepe) had beene an vndoubted token, that Christ had indeed constituted him his Vicare on earth. As touching the Apostle Peter, to whom the feeding of Christs Sheepe was recommended, it is to bee considered, that Peter in thse words, Feede my Sheepe, was not preferred to the rest of the Ioan. 21. Apostles: yea, rather, it was a great benefit to Peter to be restored
to the dignitie of his Apostleship, from which he had fallen by his three-folde deniall of Christ, and to be made equall againe with the rest of his brethren. But the Romane Church can neuer heare a word of Christ spoken to Peter, but it soundeth in their eares, as if Christ were breathing the superioritie of Peter ouer the rest of the Apostles. So did Pope Leo, the first with the gran∣dour of his speaches, so oft iterate that one sentence, Tu es Pe∣trus, & super hac petra, &c. that is, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke Matth. 16 I will build my Church: as if the whole world should haue stowped at the roaring of him who was a Lion only by name. Neuerthe∣lesse, whatsoeuer Leo speaketh in the loftinesse of his partiall conceits, the opinions of the ancient Fathers haue ouer-swayed the conceits of Leo: And wee are fully perswaded, that Christ re∣commended the feeding of his sheepe to all his Apostles, as well as he did to Peter. Then let the name of the high Bishop, and great Sheepheard of our soules, only remaine with Christ, who is only worthie of such high dignitie: For like as many comforters came out of Hierusalem, to comfort the two sisters, Martha and Marie, who lamented for the death of their brother Lazarus, yet there was but onely one great comforter, to wit, Iesus Christ, who could raise Lazarus out of the graue, & restore him to life again: Ian. 11 Euen so, there are many bishops, but there is only one great and vniuersall Bishop, who can conferre eternall life to all that be∣leeue in him. Let this royall garment bee laide vp in the Kinges wardrope, and let none other man honour his owne bodie with it: Let this oyle of consecration be kept in the Lords Sanctuary, and let not the flesh of a stranger be annointed with it: Let this inaccessible dignitie remaine as a fixed starre in heauen, where∣vnto Exo. 30. 33 no mortall man can reach his hand: Let the death, resur∣rection, ascension, and glorious sitting of Christ in heauen, at the right hand of his Father, budding foorth better fruite than the rodde of Aaron did, testifie, that this honour of the great Bi∣shop of our soules belongeth only to Christ: And finally, Let him who onely is called the King of kinges, the Lord of lordes, the Prince of Prophets, bee counted also the Bishop of all bishops, who is worthie to be glorified for euer, AMEN.
Vpon the necke of this Treatise, if the next Treatise, cōcerning the Antichrist, be subjoyned, let no man maruell: For in my opi∣nion, when the Popes hyrelinges cast themselues downe at his feete, they testifie, that they will bee subject vnto him, as to the only Vicare of Christ vpon earth, as to the Uniuersall bishop of the Church, as to him that cannot erre in the Decrees of Doctrine concerning Faith, and finallie, as to whome onely it is lawfull, as he listeth himselfe, to determine of Religion, and Christian Dis∣cipline: So that these outwarde submissions of the bodie, doe then appertaine to Idolatry, when they are testimonies, that the minde attributeth more vnto a creature than is meete: But the miserie of all miseries is this, that as it were by hereditarie suc∣cession, euerie man, who is seated in the chaire of Rome, shall also haue right to gouerne the affaires of the whole Church how beit they bee not good common Christians, let bee good Bishops: and by the testimonie of their owne writers they be ambitious, auaritious, contentious, and libidinous monsters. Surelie, before wee should conferre the glorie of CHRIST to such vile persons, it were better that men should sacrifice their life for the honour of CHRIST: For euen the LACE∣DEMONIANS, when they were commanded to render their children, answered to the MACEDONIANS, Si grauiora morte imperatis, mori volumus: that is, If yee commaunde thinges more grieuous than death, wee will choose rather to die, to wit, than to obey such commaundementes: And the verie Asse of Balaam is set downe vnto vs as an example of striuing against the vnlaw∣full Numb. 22 commaundementes of vnlawfull prelates, because the sword of the Angell of GOD is more terrible than the staffe of Ba∣laam: And albeit with Balaams Asse wee were thrise beaten with the staffe, yet it is better to remember the by-past euilles which wee haue suffered, than with the rich glutton to bee tormen∣ted not onelie with the sense of present paine, but also with the Luke 16 remembrance of by∣past pleasures, which wee haue moste vn∣righteously abused. The Romane Church, after the six hundreth yeere of our Lord, had the wisedome of dogs, who are wiser in senting than in bar∣king: for they knew that ambition was ambition, and that verie fewe climbed vp to the papale dignitie by vertue, but rather
by procuration, friendship, bribes, and other vnlawfull meanes, but fewe durst barke against their doinges, as dogges will not barke against men with whome they are familarly acquainted: yea and men, whome neceslitie of the extraordinary lewde con∣uersatiō of Ppes, compelled at some times to barke. Onuphrius the Aduocate of all cuill causes, is ready with snurling words to reproue the reprehenders of them, and by impudent deniall of the veritie of the historie, to blind-folde the eyes of the simple and ignorant Reader. Nowe is the way of righteousnesse made rough and difficill, and the broad way is smoothe and easie, and many walke there∣in: But whensoeuer it pleaseth God, to exercise the faith of his Saincts with difficill times, it is not to mooue them to forsake a good course, but rather to be well shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Indeede incase the course of vngodlinesse Ephes. 6 be made rough and difficill, then the Lord hath set thorny hed∣ges in our way, to the ende that wee may repnt, and returne to our owne husband againe, from whom we haue wandered. And Hose. 2 happie is he, who can discerne the way, and the cause wherefore the Lord hath made it either rough or smoothe. Now is the time come, wherein Church-men are become like vnto carnall Iewes, who loathed MANNA, and the waters of the spirituall Rocke, and the cloude of God, and the holy Taber∣nacle: yea, and the flesh-pots of Aegypt are laide in ballance with all the treasures of the goodnesse of God, bestowed vpon a car∣nall people: Euen so, Church-men at Rome, after the sixe hun∣dreth yeere of our Lord, began to loathe the humilitie of Christ, the patient suffering of the Apostles, the riches of faith, and other spirituall treasures, which were the glorious ornamentes of the Primitiue Church, whereunto are preferred the riches and ho∣nours Nazian. orat 38. in Chr∣sti natiuita. of this world, justly called by Nazianzenus, , that is, Precious dungue. IN the second head of this TREATISE, it followeth to be de∣clared, that the bishops of Rome sought this dignitie of Papal supremacie vnhonestly, and vsed it tyrannously and impiouslie, after they had obtained it. Concerning the seeking of it, Philip Morney, that Phoenix of FRANCE (from whom I am not a shamed Lb myster. iniquitats. to borrow many things in this TREATISE) hee prooueth, by the
testimonies of Paulus Diaconus, Freculfus, Regino, Anastatius, Her∣mannus Contractus, Marianus Scotus, Sabellicus, Blondus, Pomponius Laetus, Platina, Author compilationis Chronologicae, and Otho Episcopus Frisingensis, that Bonifacius the third begged at the handes of the Emperour Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be called the head of all other Churches. Hee who sought this supremacie was a flatterer: hee at whose handes it was sought, was a traitor, a parricide, and the vile excrement of all gouernours: and the time wherein he sought it, was at that time wherein the wordes of Gregorie the first, vttered against Ioannes , bishop of Con∣stantinople, were in recent remembrance, to wit, That whosoeuer did vsurpe such a magnificke stile to be called Uniuersall Bishop, hee was the fore-runner of the Antichrist. But seeing the time was nowe come wherein the purpurate Harlot was to sit vpon the Citie of seuen Mountaines; in her first entrie she laieth aside all shamefastnesse and modestie, she wipeth her mouth, and saith, shee hath committed none iniquitie: ambition so blindeth her eyes, that vnconstancie is counted no fault, and taking deepe roote in her heart, hideth from the eyes of her mind the sight of heauen, and all heauenly vertues, such as humilitie, modestie, constancie, and vprightnesse of a siable and vnwauering heart. The preheminence that God licenciateth to bee sought ouer brethren, is like to the preheminence of Moses ouer the Elders: he ascended higher vpon the mountaine of God than they did: and when he came downe againe from the mountaine of God, his face shined with greater splendor of celestiall glorie, than Exo. 34. 29 the faces of others did. Would God Pastors could striue to at∣taine to such preheminence: for the striuing for prerogatiue of places, hath bred many vnnecessary and vnfruitfull contentions Naz. orat. 13 post reditū. in the Church, as an ancient Father hath well marked. This supremacie aforesaid so vnhonestly sought, was vsed ty∣rannously & vnrighteously. Pope Bonifacius the fourth dedicated the Temple called Pantheon, wherein all the Gentile gods were worshipped: this Temple, I say, he dedicated to the Virgine Ma∣rie, and to all the Martyrs, rather changing, than correcting, the vile abomination of Idolatrie. Honorius the first, in the sixt ge∣nerall Councell, was found to haue bene an Eutychian heretique, The Popes, Martinus the first, and Eugenius the first, Vitalianus,
and Adeodatus, were so puft vp in pride, that they counted the Bishops of Ruenna heretiques, onely for this, because they recei∣ued not their ordination from the Bishops of Rome, & were not subject to their authoritie: And this heresie they called . Pope Sergius 1. obstinately refused to subscribe the de∣crees of the sixt generall Councell, partlie because in it the do∣ctrine and lawes of prohibition of marriage to men in spirituall functions, was damned, and partlie also, because the Bishop of Constantinople was equalled in honour with the bishop of Rome. Constantinus the first, and Gregorius the second, were the first open, and auowed traitors against the Emperours: the one of them rased the name of the Emperour Philippics out of charters: the other assoyled the subjects of Italie from the oath of all edgeance to the Emperour Leo Isaurus, because these two Emperours dte∣sted the worshipping of Images. What villanie was in Pope Ste∣phanus the thirde, who perswaded CAROLVS MAGNVS, king of FRANCE, to repudiate his wife BERTHA, the daughter of DE∣SIDERIVS king of LOMBARDIS? abusing in moste impudent manner the wordes of holie Scripture, What fellowship hath righ∣teousnesse with vnrighteousnesse? and what communion hath light with darknesse? 2. Corit. chap. 6. vers. 14. In that place the Apostle is giuing counsell to Christians, who are disposed to marrie, not to couple themselues in matrimoniall band with infideles: but the counsell of the Apostle, to them who are alreadie married, euen with infideles, is this, If any brother haue a wife, that beleeueth not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not for sake her, 1. Cor. 7. 12. So that albeit Bertha, the daughter of Desiderius, had bene an in∣fidell, shee beeing willing to cohabite with her husband, there was no reason to repudiate her. But now the bishops of Rome are become wiser than the Apostles of Christ and they bid repudiat the wife, with whome the Apostle Paul in expresse wordes bid∣deth a Christian man cohabite. It is more intolerable that Su∣phanus the third calleth Bertha an infidell: was she not baptised in the name of Christe was not her father Desiderius, & before him Aistulphus, partakers of the Lordes holie Sacramentes? was not Rachis, the brother of Aislulphus, so deuout, according to the superstitious forme at that time, commended in the Romane Church, that hee forsooke his kingdome, and entered into a
Monasterie, there to leade his life? But the bishops of Rome are become so prodigall of their reproachfull speaches, that all persons are counted Infideles, who followe not absolutely all the conceites of their changeable mindes. Pope Adrian the first, with aduise of a great Councell, ordained, that no man should bee consecrated bishop of Rome, before hee had receiued invest∣ment by staffe and ring, by the Emperour: but Gregorius 7. by the contrarie, cursed them who receiued inuestment from the Em∣perour, anno 1073. These two popes speak contradictory things, yet they must be counted holy Fathers, who cannot erre. Pope Leo the third, tooke vpon him boldnesse to change the Empire, and to proclaime Charles the Great, king of FRANCE, to be Empe∣rour in the West. And Baronius, the moste inpt expounder of Scriptures, of anie learned men of late dayes, defendeth this doing of Lo, by a place of Scripture, The moste High beareth rule Baron. tom. 9. ann. 800. art. 6. 7. 8. ouer the kingdome of men, and giueth it to whome hee will, Dan. 4. 22. Daniel in that place speaketh of the Eternall GOD, who in∣deede is moste high, and giueth the kingdomes of the worlde to whome hee pleaseth: but Baronius applieth this to the bishop of Rome, as if hee were moste high, and had the kingdomes of the worlde at his owne dispensation, to giue them to whome he pleased: So saide the Deuill of himselfe, (Luke 4. 6.) but hee lied, for hee had no such power: and Baronius, attributing this power vnto the Pope, lieth as impudentlie as the Deuill did. sergius the second, with his brother Benedictus, for gaining van∣ta e vnto themselues, were not ashamed to sell bishoprickes, and to preferre men to spirituall offices: not for the worthinesse of their giftes, but for the weight of their numbered money: and so the chaire of ROME was filthilie spotted with simonic. Yea, it came to passe, that the prid, and simonicall auarice of the bishops of ROME brangled their late vsurped authoritie: so that AVGVIBERTVS bishop of MILLANE, with allowance of many bishops of ITALIE disclaimed the authority of the bishop Anastat. in Serg. 2. Morneus myst. iniqu. of ROME, and with great difficultie after the issue of two hundreth yeeres, was the chaire of MILLANE reduced againe to the obedience of the bishop of ROME, in the dayes of Pope Stephanus the ninth. It grieued the bishops of ROME, that they were bound by the
constitution of Adrian the first, to haue the allowance of the Emperour to their election: and therefore by degrees they en∣deuoured to shake off that yoke of bondage. Stephanus ye fourth was elected without the fore-knowledge of Ludovicus 'Pius: but he pacified the Emperours wrath by his comming to FRANCE. Pascalis the first, in like manner, was chosen bishop of Rome, without the foreknowledge of the Emperour. Neuerthelesse, by his letters sent to the Emperour Ludouicus, he excused himselfe, and ratified the constitution of Adrian. In like manner, Leo the fourth, following the example of his predecessors, was admitted without the fore-knowledge of Lotharius: hee likewise excused himselfe to the Emperours sonne Ludouicus, pretending that the sudden incursion of the Saracenes was ye cause mouing the people to precipitate his election, and hindering himselfe to make due aduertisement to the Emperour Lotharius, in whose time he was elected. But the issue after following declared, that all these ex∣cuses were nothing else, but a seeking of occasions how to shake off the yoke of the Emperours subjection. Was not the chaire of Rome abused, the worlde mocked, and the Christianitie expo∣ned to the derision of Heathen people, when Pope Ihonne the eight, of the feminine sexe sate in the Apostolicke chaire, taking the greater libertie to play the Harlot, because shee had an vn∣controlled preheminence? Onuphrius, in counting this to bee a fable, rather than a true Historie, is not vnlike to ye Philosopher, who denied, that the Heauen was vnder a continuall motion, and turned about by a circulare reuolution: So doeth Onuphrius take libertie to brangle the credite of all ancient Histories. Phi∣lip Morney notably discouereth the falsehood, and shifting ex∣cuses of Onuphrius, who alleadgeth, that this fable of a feminine Pope sprang vp by occasion of a libidinous Pope, called Ioannes, the twelft, who had three notable Harlots attending his lust, namely, Ioanna, Raineria, & Stephania: Now (saith Onuph.) all things being ordered according to ye pleasure of Ioāna, as if she had bin Pope, of this proceeded ye rumor of a feminine pope. But Philip Mor. citing ye testimony of Lintprandus, proueth, that ye cōcubines of Joānes 12. were Raineria & Stephania, but no mētion is made of Ioanna, as one of ye Popes concubines, but only of one named An∣na, ye Popes nice, not his concubine: so that Onuphrius, in prouing
the Historie of the feminine Pope to bee a fable, hee is founde himselfe to bee fabulous, and an inuenter of lies. Nicolaus the first, suffered Lodouik the second, the sonne of Lotharius, to goe on foote, and to leade his bridle while as the Pope was riding on horse-backe: which proude fact, Platina can∣not excuse better, than to count Nicolaus so venerable a man, that he was accounted of all men as a god. In like manner, hee compelled Lotharius, prince of Loraine, and brother to Lewes 2. to forsake his newe married wife, Valdrada, and to adhere againe vnto his first wife named Thiethberga, vnder paine of cursing. This is the first time wherein the bishop of Rome durst take bolde∣nesse to threaten the princes of FRANCE with his cursinges. So the bishop of Rome, who fished in all muddy waters, partly by the intestine discord of the posteritie of Charles the Great, and partly by their faults, he increased his owne estate mightily: so that hee became like vnto a mightie Hunter, who goeth to the Forrest of intention to pursue one beast onely, neuerthelesse his dogges doe no sooner barke, but all the beasts in the Forrest are agaste, and with feare and trembling looke when they shall be pursued. This is that Pope whome ye Romane Church hath honoured with the reuerende name of the third Helias: but he was vnlike vnto the first Helias, and more vnlike vnto the seconde Helias, to wit, vnto John Baptist: The first Helias girded vp his loynes, and ranne before Achab, vntill he came to Jzreel: But Pope Nicolaus suffered 1. Reg. 18. 46 the Emp. to goe on foote, and to leade his horse by the bridle: The seconde Helias came to prepare the waye of the Lord: but pope Nicolaus, whome they call the third Helias, prepared a way to his successours, and to the standing of the popedome, because hee was like vnto a Citie of refuge vnto all men, who appealed from their owne ordinarie Iudges, willing once fullie to possesse the chaire of Rome into that priueledge to bee Iudges of all ap∣pellations. Adrian the second, by those same meanes, increased his pa∣pal authoritie, by which Bonifacius the third had first grounded the popedome, namely by flattering of a notable parricide Ba∣silius Emperour of the East, who had traitorously slaine the Em∣perour Michael, who had made him associate with himselfe in gouernement. This Emp. Basilius so highly aduanced Adrian,
that in the eight generall Councell, assembled in Constantinople, for deposition of Photius, and restitution of Ignatius, no man was permitted to haue ingresse to the Councell, except hee who first subscribed to the supremacie of the bishop of Rome. More∣cuer, the Emperour Basilius procured, that the Bulgarians should be subject to the Pope of Rome, and not to the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople. How beit this ordinance, violentlie extorted, contrarie both to equitie and custome, could not continue long. After Adrian succeeded pope shonne the ninth, who restored Photius, at the desire of Basilius Emperour of the East. This in∣constancie of pope Ihonne the ninth, who restored Photius, whom his predecessor, Adrian the second, had deposed, furnisheth oc∣casion to Baronius, to affirme, that this is the pope, who was sup∣posed to haue beene of the foeminine sexe, in respect of the in∣constancie of his flexible and effeminate minde: and so much the more, because that pope Ihonne the ninth not onely restored Photius to his place againe, but also ramuersing his affection againe, he cursed Photius, because hee had gathered a Councell at Constantinople of 380. bishops, wherein hee annulled the de∣crees of the preceeding Councell, vulgarlie called the eight Ge∣nerall Councell. Moreouer, it was ordained in this Councell conueened by Photius, that the pope of Rome shoulde accept no man into his fellowship, whome the patriarch of Constantinople had excōmunicated: by this decree cutting off all appellations from Constantinople to Rome. This fact so grieued the pope, that hee cursed Photius, whome before hee had restored to his office againe. Heere I leaue Baronius and Onuphrius, reckoning one against another concerning the feminine pope: Baronius saith, it was pope Ihonne the ninth, whose inconstancie gaue occasion to the rumoured opinion of the feminine pope: Onuphrius saieth, it was the inconstancie of a libidinous pope Ihonne the twelft, fol∣lowing all the desires of an harlot: but if either of them had written truelie, it had beene more competent in such a sense to haue saide, that there had beene manie femenine popes, rather than one onelie. The barbarous crueltie of Stephanus the sixt (other reckon Ste∣phanus the seuenth) against Formosus, Whose dead bodie he raised Platin. in ita Steph. 6 out of his sepulchre, and cut off his consecrating fingers, and
cast them into Tiber: Is there any fact of vnnaturall inhumani∣tie practised amongst the Indianes and Aethiopians, comparable to this? Onuphrius counteth this Historie also to bee a fable, as if his impudent deniall of euerie vnhonest fact, done by the bis∣shops of Rome, were able to derogat credit to all auncient Hi∣stories. But what shall bee thought of the opposite decrees of Councels gathered by Formosus & Stephanus, no lesse repugnant one vnto another, than light is vnto darknesse? Shall it bee thought that these opposite Councels were indited by the ho∣lie Spirit, as if the holie Spirit coulde bee repugnant vnto him∣selfe? From the 900. yeere of our Lord, vntill the 1000. yeere, the bishops of Rome were so farre degenerate from the manners of their ancient predecessors, that whereas the auncient bishops of Rome, attending the holie exercises of prayer and exhortation, contemned dignities offered vnto them: now by ambition and bribes they striue for the Popedome: and when they haue got∣ten it, as cruell tyrants, they contende, with hatefull malice, eue∣rie one against the fame of another: and laying aside diuine worship, they follow the lusts of their owne hearts, the more se∣curelie, because their is no man to restraine their inordinate de∣sires. This Platina writeth of them in the life of Sergius the third. Plati. in vit. Sergii 3. The moste part of them were like vnto Monsters, whose natiui∣tie, like as it breedeth sorow in the harts of their verie parents: so in like manner it is some mitigation of their heartes griefe, when the Monster hastily dieth. This second comfort God gue vnto the world. Few of these ambitious, auaritious, and libidi∣nous Monsters continued long in the popedome. I will not an∣ticipate the Historie, but shortly I hope thus farre hath beene declared, that the Romane Church sought this preheminence vn∣honestly, and abused it vilely by simonie, idolatrie, heres trea∣son, tyrannie, schisme, and all kinde of inhumanitie, which one of them could practise against another: And that they haue ca∣sten behinde their backe that holie forme of preparation for entering into spirituall functions vsed of olde, to wit, that their spirituall senses were well exercised with seeing of Heauenlie sightes, with hearing of Angelicall hymnes, with feeling the ope∣tatiue vertue of the coale taking from the Altar of God, and Isai. 6.
touching their lippes, and so being well prepared and furnished with celestiall grace, they entered into spirituall callings, assisted with the grace of God, that commeth from aboue. But now the preparation is turned to riches and money, where with if a man be well surnished, albeit he were like vnto Ioannes the thirteenth, that is, a man who is perjure, the verie childe of the duill, the brother of Iudas, and a man whose name will remaine in per∣petual execration: yet such a man furnished, as said is, with riches and money, may bee promoted to the popedome. Now is leuen eaten in time of the passeouer and hee who calleth himselfe the Vicare of Christ, hee climbeth to that office by the leuen of sin. And truely, like as the types and figures of good thinges, can∣not equall in goodnesse the thinges that are figurated by them: euen so, the figures of euill things were not so much to bee ab∣horred as the euill things themselues represented by types & fi∣gures. He who commanded to purge the olde leuen, to the end, that wee might bee an holie lumpe, hath vtterly forbidden vs 1. Cot. 5. 7 to enter into holy callings by vile and vnhonest meanes. NOw followeth the third head of this TREATISE, as a pre∣paration to the TREATISE following, to prooue that the chaire wherein the Uniuersall Bishop sitteth, is the chaire of the Antichrist, which I prooue by this argument, The chaire that ex∣tolleth it selfe aboue Christ, is the chaire of the Antichrist: but so it is, that the chaire wherein the Uniuersall Bishop sitteth, ex∣tolleth it selfe aboue Christ, Ergo, it is the chaire of the Antichrist. The first part of the argument is proued by the wordes of the 2. Thes. 2. 4 Apostle, writing to the Thessalonians: The second part of the ar∣gument I prooue by this reason, That chaire which taketh vpon it power to dispense against the lawe of God, extolleth it selfe aboue Christ: but so it is, the chaire of the Uniuersall Bishop arro∣gateth power to dispense against the lawe of God: as namely, in the matter of Marriage, licentiating a man to marrie his bro∣thers wife, and others to marrie women of their nearest consan∣guinitie: Ergo, the chaire of the Uniuersall Bishop is the chaire of the Antichrist. Heere let vs remember, that no lawe can bee dispensed withall, but either by the same authoritie, by which it is made, or by a greater: But the lawe of God is manifestly an∣nulled
in many points, corrected, and dispensations giuē against it by the chaire of ROME, as shall bee declared heereafter, GOD willing: what can bee saide of it then, but that it is be∣come the seate of the Antichrist? Concerning the stile of the Antichrist, which I minde to attri∣bute to the bishop of Rome, especially since the yeere of our Lord 666. I admonish the Reader, that hee bee not deceiued with the generalitie of the worde Antichrist: which albeit it may be attributed to Infideles, Heretiques, and to all them who ob∣stinately 1. Ioan. 2. 18 and 22. 1. Ioan. 4. 3 contende against the doctrine of the person or office of Christ: yet doeth this name most properly belong to the prin∣cipall ring-leaders and authors of that great defection from the faith, fore-tolde by the Apostle Paul, 1. Tim. 4. For like as Dent. 18. 13 Apocal. 2. and . Malac. 3. 1 when Moses in Holy Scripture is called a Prophet, and faithfull Pastors are called Angels, this hindereth not Christ from being called the Great Prophet, & the Angell of the Couenant: Euen so, when Heretiques, who gainsay the diuinitie of Christ, or ve∣ritie of His humane nature, are called Antichrists, this hindereth not, but the chaire which hath chiefely blinded the world with errours, and hath poysoned kings and people with the cuppe of Nazianz. Cygnea Carmin. her fornications, to bee called the seate of the Antichrist. Na∣zianzenus in a generall sense, counteth Arrius, whom hee poin∣teth out by the stile of a recent Apostate, and Nestorius, by whose opinion the natures of Christ were diuided, to be Anti∣christs. But Chrysostome, in a proper sense, supposeth him to bee Antichrist, who should treade vnder foote the Romane Empire: like as the Romanes had subdued the kingdome of the Macedo∣nians, Chrysost. 2. Epist. Thess. 2. Homil. 4. and he Macedonians had subdued the kingdome of the Persians, and the Persians had vndone the kingdome of the Ba∣bylonians: Euen so (saith Chrysostome) the Antichrist shall vndoe the dominion of the Romanes: and in ende, the Antichrist shall bee 2. Thes. 2. 8 consumed by the Spirit of Christs mouth, and shall be abolished with the brightnesse of His comming. Many thinges are written of the Antichrist, who deceaueth people in errour, so that they misknowe the Antichrist when hee is come, no lesse than the nation of the lewes misknew CHRIST Iren. cont. Valent. li. 5. when He was manifested in the flesh. They write, that he should
bee of the Tribe of DAN, that hee shoulde bee borne in BA∣BYLON, and hee shoulde bee brought vp in CORASIM and BETHSAIDA, that SATHAN shoulde ouer-shaddowe his mother, and posssse her, that hee should re-edifie the Temple of HIERVSALEM and that the people of the IEWES should adher vnto him. But all these opinions are grounded partlie vpon a wrong interprtation of Scripture, and manie of them are showded alselie vnder the name of AVGVSTINE, Bis∣shop of HIPPO: but it is knowne that RABANVS, Arch∣bishop of MENTZ, was the compiler of that foolishe TREA∣TISE, De Antichristo, whereinto the fore-mentioned opinions are contained, and not AVGVSTINE. More-ouer, they Censura Lovan. say, that the Antichrist shoulde bee one particulare man, oppo∣site to Christ, whose continuance in fighting against the Saincts shoulde not exceede the space of three yeeres and an halfe. But what madnesse is it to referre the secrete beginning, the open tyrannie, the reuelation and destruction of the An∣tichrist to the person of one singulare man, which is a worke working from the dayes of the Apostles, vntill the second com∣ming of Christ: The argument whereby some Papistes woulde make it to seme probable, that the Antichrist is one singulare man onelie, is taken from the force of the prepositiue article, . A childish argument indeede, as who woulde saye, that it were not lawfull to praye in anie chamber, except in one onlie, in respect of the prepositiue article set before , in these wordes, : that is, Enter into thy Matth. 6. 6 chamber. The time of the continuance of the Antichristes perse∣cution, three yeeres and an halfe, is borrowed from Augustine, who supposeth, that the horne which shall speake words against August. de ciuitate Dei lib. 20. ca, 22 Danie. 7. 25 the moste High, and who shall chaunge times and lawes, as thinges giuen vnto his handes, vntilla time and times, and the diuiding of a time: by this horne, I saye, Augustine supposeth the Antichrist to be presented: how beit others more judiciously haue referred this prophesie to Antiochus Epiphanes, who blas∣phemed God, chaunged Sabbohs and Festiuall dayes, yea, and by his impious lawes, presumed to abrogate the law of the Al∣mightie God: and immediatelie after such presumptuous at∣tempts, 1. Mach. 1. cap. 6. vers. 6.
God shortened his dayes, for within the space of three yeeres, and some fewe dayes, hee ended his life in moste mise∣rable manner. They haue no better grounde to affirme that the Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of Dan, than this, Because the Tribe of Dan is not reckoned amongst the rest of the Tribes, Apocal. 7. yet this was not done to exclude this Tribe from the sauing marke of Christ, but to giue place to the Tribe of Leui, and not to exceede the number of twelue Tribes: for Holie Scripture, which commendeth the faith of Barak of the Tribe of Nephtali, and Gideon of the Tribe of Manasse, and Iphtah of the Tribe of Gad, commendeth also the faith of Samson of the Tribe of Dan, Hebr. cap. 2. vers. 11. One thing I cannot passe by: The inuenters of such fables, that the Antichrist shoulde bee of the Tribe of Dan, borne in Ba∣bylon, &c. in some thinges haue ouer-seene themselues mise∣rablie: namelie, when they affirme, that the Antichrist shall build the Temple of Hierusalem, and shall sit there in the Temple of God, and the nation of the Iewes shall adhere vnto him, and immediatelie after this, the ende of the worlde shall come, and Christ shall destroye the Antichrist by the Spirit of his mouth. Roman. 11. 26. and 31 32 Heere marke the great contradiction that is betwixt the pro∣phesie of Paul, concerning the conuersion of the Iewes, before the seconde comming of Christ, and the foolish opinion of Pa∣pistes: Paul saieth, that the Iewes shall bee conuerted to the true faith before the Great daye of the LORDES seconde ap∣pearance: but Papistes saye, that the Iewes shall bee adhering to the Antichrist, when Christ shall come to judge the worlde, and to destroye the Antichrist, by the brightnesse of his com∣ming. These two opinions cannot both consist: therefore, let the fable inuented by men fall, that place may bee giuen to the trueth of God, who is blessed for euermore, AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the Antichrist. CONTROVERSIES in ciuill matters, are not all of like moment: therefore it was ordained by the counsell of Iethro, that great matters shoulde be brought to Moses, and that inferiour Ma∣gistrates should judge in small causes. But in con∣trouersies Exo. 18. 22 of religion, all causes, both great and small, are to bee brought vnto the mouth of Christ, our true Moses, who will speake from his Sanctuarie vnto vs, and giue vnto vs resolution of all our doubtes out of His blessed worde. In this TREATISE especially, let vs runne to the month of Christ, speaking by his Apostle Paul, and vttering a notable pre∣phesie concerning the comming of the Antichrist in the wordes following: Let no man deceiue you by anie meanes: for that day shall not come, except there come a departing first, and that that man of sinne bee ds∣closed, 2. Thess. 2 vers. 3. euen the sonne of perdition, Who is an aduersarie, and exalteth himselfe against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that hee doeth sit as God in the Temple of vers. 4. God, shewing himselfe that hee is God. Remember yee not, that when I was with you I tolde you these things? vers. 5. And nowe yee knowe what with-holdeth, that hee might bee reuealed, in his time. vers. 6. For the mysterie of iniquitie doeth alreadie worke, onelie hee, who nowe with-holdeth, shall let, tell hee bee taken out of the way. vers. 7. And then shall the wicked man bee reuealed, whom the Lord shall con∣sume with the Spirit of His mouth, and shall abolish with the brightnesse of his comming. vers. 8. Euen him whose comming is by the working of Sathan, with all power, vers. 9. and signes, and lying wonders. And in all deceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse amongst them that pe∣rish, vers. 10.
because they receiued not the loue of the trueth, that they might bee saued. And therefore, God shall sende to them strong delusion, that they shall vers. 11. beleeuelies: That all they might bee damned, who beleeued not the trueth, but had vers. 12. pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. The occasion mouing the Apostle to embarke into this Pr∣pheticall prediction, concerning the comming of the Antichrist, was this, Because some in Thessalonica spake of the second com∣ming of Christ, that it was neare approaching, and euen at hand. The Apostle on the other part woulde assure the Thessalonians, that before the comming of that Great day, there should first be a defection from the true faith and that the Antichrist should be disclosed. It is not the purpose of the Apostle to disswade anie man from remembring the terrour of that Great daye, wherein the verie Elements shall melt: and if so be, what manner of men 2. Pe. 3. 11. 12. aught we to be in holy conuersation, looking for and hastening vnto ye comming of the day of our Lord: yea, and the obliuion of the second comming of Christ is the principall grounde of the securitie of the euill seruant. But the Apostle, ledde by the con∣duct Matth. 24. of the Holy Spirite, fore-seeing that two things were need∣full to bee remembered, to wit, the seconde comming of the Lord Iesus, and the preceeding comming of the Antichrist: hee would haue them so to remember the one, that they should not forget the other, lest whilest wee runne fast to the marke, with∣out marking the perilles that are in the waye, wee fall into the snares of the Deuil. Our maister Christ, when he corrected the foolish precipitation of the sonnes of Zebedeus, who woulde Mark, 10. 38 haue sitten at the right and left hand of Christ in His kingdome before they had beene baptized with his baptisme, and before they had drunken of the cuppe of the sufferings of Christ: hee disswadeth them not from continuall fastning their eyes vpon the glorie of Christes Kingdome, but rather so to looke vnto the marke, that they ouer-leape not the waye leading to the marke. God hath indedep: epared a kingdome for vs, but by Act. 14. 22 many tribulations we must enter into that kingdome. The apostasie whereof the apostle prophecieth, is not a dese∣ction in manners onely, but also a departing from the faith, as is
clearlie witnessed in another place, in those wordes, Nowe the Spirit speaketh euidentlie, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, &c. Defection in manners is so vsuall a thing, that 1. Tim. 4. 1 where the word of God is preached in most powerfull manner, there also corruption in manners doeth abound, arguing the euill inclination of our nature, which taketh occasion, by the commandement, and worketh in vs all kinde of concupiscence: so that the corruption of our nature is like vnto a gutter of wa∣ter, Roman. 7. 8 the passage whereof is hindered: it gorgeth, swelleth, and setteth forwarde its owne accustomed waye more impetuouslie than euer it did before. But the Apostle is speaking of a deeper mysterie, and of a thing more rarely contingent, to wit, of an apostasie from the faith. This is the sharpest of all punishments, which GOD inflicted vpon mankinde for the contempt of his trueth, to cast off a people into a reprobate minde, whether wee looke to the actions of God, who rejecteth, or to the miseries of them, who are rejected. The actions of God, who rejecteth, are set downe by the Prophet Zacharie, The Lord will not feede that people, yea, he will breake his shepheards staffe, to wit, the staffe called Zach. 11 beautifull, & the staffe called bandes. The miseries of them, who are rejected, are set downe by the Prophet Esai, in these wordes, Yee shall heare indeede, but yee shall not vnderstand: yee shall plainelie Isai. 6. 9. 10 see, and not perceiue: make the heart of this people fatte, &c. So it com∣meth to passe, when this heauie judgement is inflicted, there is no comfort to bee founde, neither in Heauen aboue, nor in the Earth beneath: When wee looke vp vnto God, hee will feede vs no longer: when wee looke downe to our selues, wee receiue no comfort by the externall ministerie of the worde, it is to vs the sauour of death: yea, and wee are in so desolate a case, as the Prophet speaketh, That that dieth, let it die: and that that perisheth, let it perish: and let the remnant euerie one eate the flesh of another. Of Zach. 11. 9 this vnsupportable and remedilesse euill, that there should bee a defection from the faith, neither could the Church of the Iewes of olde, nor the visible Church of late euer be content patiently to heare, because it seemed to bee repugnant to the euerlasting couenant of God, made with Abraham and his seede. Neuer∣thelesse, that same blessed mouth, which made the couenant with Abraham and his seede, fore-tolde also, that they should bee
cast off into a reprobate sense, and that the Great Shephearde would feede them no longer. Now both these things being vt∣tered by the blessed mouth of God, it is certaine, that there is infallible truth in both: & it is better, & more agreeable with the honour of God, to search out what way both these thinges can consist without impeachment one of another, than so to talke of the couenant, that wee shoulde gainsay the prophesie of the de∣fection of the Church of the Iewes. And the Apostle Paul hath wiselie obserued, that the couenant of God is not annulled by the defection of the most part of the Iwes, in respect that a rem∣nant Rom. 11. 5 are saued through the electiō of grace. The Romane Church in like manner, casteth vp, that God hath promised, that the Matth. 16 gates of Hell shall not preuaile against the Church. And the same God, by the mouth of his holie Apostle hath fore-tolde, that there shoulde bee a defection from the Faith. Both these 2. Thess. 2 Prophesies must bee true, neither doeth the apostasie of the great multitude presuppose, that the Church of Christ is pe∣rished, or the promise of God made of none effect, but in the middest of this apostasie a remnant are saued, according to the election of grace. Ioseph, in the yeeres of famine, was prouident, Genes. 47 and kept corne asore-hand, both for foode to men and beastes, and for seede to the ground: But Christ is more prouident in the yeeres of horrible apostasie from the faith, to keepe afore-hand a saued hand-full, as seede for the propagation of the Church. Wherefore, let no man conclude of the long lasting apostasie of the Iewes, or yet of the Popish Church, that the couenant of God is of none effect, and that the Church is perished. The Antichrist, of whom the Apostle speakeeh, is not one par∣ticular man, opposite to the kingdome of Christ, as manie doe thinke: but rather a kingdome, hauing fore-runners, hauing a growth, and hinderers of the growth, hauing aduancers, admi∣rers, worshippers, followers, discouerers, against whom warres are intended, ya, long lasting warres, vntill this kingdome be drunken with the blood of the Saincts: and finally, for this king∣dome God hath ordained a fall, whereat all her followers shall be sadde, and lament for her sudden and vnexpected desolation: but the Saincts in Heauen shall rejoyce. All these thinges can∣not bee done in one mans age. Therefore, I take the worde
Antichrist, for a kingdome opposite to the Kingdome of Christ: hee is called the man of sinne emphaticklie, because in multitude, ripenesse, and superlatiue excesse of all kinde of sinnes and abominations, this kingdome goeth beyonde all other kingomes, lewder in manners, more corrupt in doctrine, more blasphemous in opinion, more deceitfull in carriage, more proude in attemptes, euen against them who are in authoritie, than anie societie of people hath beene before: setting their mouthes against the Heauen, commanding the Angels of God to carrie soules to Heauen, because their armour was crossed, their feete were in the waye, leading to the Holy Land, their in∣tention was to fight against the Saracenes. This did Pope Cle∣mens the sixt, in his Bull giuen to the crossed souldiours. Nowe, whether their soules haue bene purged by faith in the fountaine of Christes blood or not, it is no matter, it is enough that they died in that journey, the Angls must bee obedient to the Ro∣mane Antichrist, to carrie their soules foorthwith to Heauen af∣ter their death. Notwithstanding of all this, the man of sinne must bee counted so complete and perfect, that hee cannot erre in matters of faith, and to bee in such high preheminence, that albeit hee carrie innumerable soules headlongs to Hell, no man Gratian. di∣stinct. 40. cap. 6 should demand of him wherefore hee did so. Yea, and further horrible sinnes, such as promise breaking to Infideles and He∣retiques, and vile treasons against Christian Princes, haue open allowance in the kingdome of the Romane Antichrist: and there∣fore he may justly be called the man of sinne. Moreouer, the Antichrist is called the childe of perdition, in two respects, to wit, actiuely, and passiuely: actiuely, because hee is a ring-leader to those who walke in the way of perdition: pas∣siuely, because hee is ordained for destruction, and to be consu∣med by the breath of the mouth of Christ. In both these re∣spectes Iudas seemeth to haue beene the type of the Antichrist: first he was a ring-leader to the band of souldiours which came from the High Priest, and the Rulers, to take Christ: secondlie, he was appointed to destruction, and of him Christ saide Surely, the Sonne of man goeth his way as it is written of him, but woe bee vnto Mat. 26. 24 that man, by whom the Sonne of man is betrayed: it had beene good for that man, if hee had neuer beene borne. Nowe the Antichrist repre∣sented
by Iudas, he is also , that is, the childe of de∣struction, for both the fore-mentioned respects: he leadeth men to destruction, and hee is ordained to bee consumed by the glo∣rious appearance of Christ. How the Romane Antichrist leadeth men headlonges to destruction, I might prooue by many ex∣amples, but for the present I shall content me with the example of one age, and of one nation in this age (to wit, in the seuenth CENTVRIE) absolutely ledde by the counsell of the Romane An∣tichrist: The nation of the Gothes domining in Spaine, they for∣sooke the impious Heresie of the Arrians, whereunto they were miserably addicted, in the dayes of Richaredus: After Richaredus dayes, they followed the Romane chaire so absolutely, that in the Councels conuened by the authoritie of Sesiuandus, Chintilla, Chindasuvindus, Recesuvindus, and Bambas, whatsoeuer was allo∣wed by the Romane Church, had allowance by them: and what∣soeuer the Romane Church disallowed. that was in like manner disallowed by them in the Councels of Toledo, Bracara, and His∣palis. Yea, and in following the Rmane Church, they were so of∣ficious, that albeit in bidding and forbidding, they exceeded not the preceptes of the Romane Church: yet in aggreadging the punishmentes of them who transgressed the ordinances which they borrowed from the Romane chaire, they ouer-went the se∣ueritie of the Romane discipline. In the ninth Councell of Toledo, marriage of men in spirituall callings is detested in Spaine, as it was in Italie: but the children Conc. To∣let. 9. can. 10. procreated by Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, &c. were ordained to bee more seuerely punished in Spaine, than they were in Italie: for in Italie we reade of Theodoretus, that hee was the son of Theo∣dorus, bishop of Ierusalem, yet was hee admitted to the Popedome, and was successour to Pope Ihonne the fourth: but in Spaine the children of bishops were not onely depriued of the heritage p∣pertaining to their parents, but also were mancipted to perpe∣tuall seruice, as slaues and seruantes who are bought with mo∣ney. In like manner, in the fourth Councell of Toledo, gathered Conc. Tol. 4. can. 4. by Sesinandus, they are superstitious out of measure euen beyond the Romane Church in doxologies, when Gloria Patri is sung, they ordained, that to Gloria, Honor should be added, with inter∣mination of punishment to them who should say, Gloria Patri,
& Filio, without this addition, Gloria, & Honor, Patri & Filio: in so doing, damning the verie perfect forme of prayer indited by our Lord to his Disciples, the doxologie whereof is this, For thine is the Kingdome, and the Power, and the glorie, for euer, Amen: Matt. 6. 13 without mention of the worde Honour. In a worde, the Gothes riegning in Spaine, the more officious they were in following absolutely all the customes of the Romane Antichrist, the nearer they were to eternall destruction, because hee is justly called the man of sinne, and the childe of destruction. Nowe it is to bee marked, that these two names of the Antichrist, to wit, the man of sinne, and the childe of perdition, they goe conjunctly toge∣ther, because when sinne is neare, destruction also is at hand, ex∣cept sinne by repentance be abolished: And ye Prophet pronoun∣ceth a woe against them that put farre away the euill day, and approach to the seat of iniquitie. More-ouer, the Apostle fore-telleth, that Amos 6. 3 the Antichrist shall bee disclosed, or reueiled: that is, how soeuer he shall maske himselfe with the vizards of holy titles, that he is the Vicare of Christ on earth, & the successour of Peter, & to him is concredite the care of all the sheepe of Christ, dispersed in the whole world: Neuerthelesse, he shalbe stripped naked, & all these masks shall be plucked from his face, and he shall be knowne to bee an aduersarie to Christ, and an abuser of Christes people. Now consider, that this prophesie presupposeth, that the Anti∣christ should bee vnknowne for a long space, and in ende, should be discouered. If it shall be demanded, how could the Antichrist be vnknowne, who lurked not in a corner, but sate in ye Temple of God, and had power of gouernement of Church-affaires? To this I answere, That in time of the darknesse of the night a foe is hardly discerned from a friend: and the smoke of the bot∣tomlesse pit, whereby both the sunne & the aire were darkened, Apocal. 9. 2 might easily haue dimmed the sight of simple people, so that they could not discerne the insolent pride of the Antichrist, vsur∣ping the honour only due to Christ. The meanes of the discoue∣rie of the Antichrist, I remit vnto the 8. verse, and I proceede to the next verse. In the 4. verse of the chap. the Apostle clleth the Antichrist an aduersary, to wit, to God: and he subjoyneh the reason, because be exalteth himselfe against euery thing that is called God, or that is worshipped. First let vs marke, that the Antichrist is pointed
out by one of the names of the Deuill, to wit, that hee is an ad∣uersarie, to God, to his word, and to his Saincts, yea, an aduersa∣rie in the superlatiue degree, because hee vsurpeth the honour only due to Christ. Mortall Princes count all subjectes, who are disobedient to their lawes, to bee their aduersaries: but if anie man vsurpe the title of the Kingdome, the King will count him his corriuall, and principall aduersarie: Euen so, amongst all the aduersaries of Christ, hee is counted his principall enemie, who enricheth himselfe with the honour due to Christ onelie. Howsoeuer he call himselfe the seruant of the seruants of God, yet indeede hee vsurpeth vpon himselfe higher honour than is due vnto a mortall man, and therefore is called an aduersarie to God: for the Lord will judge the world according to his Gos∣pell, as the Apostle speaketh, Roman. 2. 16. and not according to our conceites. The two principall pointes of the honour of Christ, are Faith and Obedience. The Romane Antichrist, for to moue ignorant people to put their trust in him, as the Vicare of Christ in earth, taketh vpon him power to open the gates of Paradise to whom he pleaseth, as an absolute commander of Heaué, and to deliuer to the Deuill and send to Hell, by his anathemes and cursinges, whom he pleaseth, as absolute commander of Hell, and to loose prisoned soules out of purgatorie, as absolute commaunder of purgatorie, and to distribute the kingdomes of the earth at his pleasre, as if the earth were his, and he had power to confer all the glory of the dominions of the world to whom hepleaseth. All this is done to moue people to put their trust in him, as said is. The other principall point of ye honour of Christ, is absolute Obedience to his blessed will, without disputation, doubting, or resoning in ye contrary, as Abrahā ye father of ye faithfull did, Gē. 22. The like obedience the Rom. Antich. demandeth to all his lawes & ordinanes, euen to such as are repugnant to the law of God, as namely, to inuocation of Saincts, worshipping of images, &c. therefore he is justly counted the principall aduersary of Christ. The Antichrist is said to exalt himselfe against all that is called God, or is worshipped, because he taketh vpon him to dispense against the law of GOD, which argueth, that he arrogateth vn∣to himselfe authoritie aboue the lawe-maker: for no lawe (as I
haue declared alreadie) can bee dispensed withall, but either by the same authority by which it is made, or by a greater. Against Christes Kinglie, Priestlie, and Propheticall offices, hee aduaun∣ceth himselfe, in abrogating the institution of Christ concerning the receiuing of the blessed Sacrament of the Supper, vnder both formes of bread and wine. In prohibition of marrige and meates, and in setting vp a newe propitiatorie sacrifice in the Church, as it were protesting the insufficiencie of the sacrifice of Christ once offered. Let vs in this point marke the degrees of the defection of the visible Church, not vnlike vnto the decaying estate of a diseased man: First, his naturall sappe and moysture decayeth: Secondly, corrupt humours doe abound: Thirdly, his blood is inflamed, & perilous feuers seazing vpon his bodie, doe threaten death: Euen so in the Church, when holy exercises of prayer and preaching are intermitted, this is a biginning of euill: Next, when superstitions, rites, and ceremonies, seruing to no profitable vse, doe abound in the Church, (as vitious hu∣mours in the bodie) then is the defection increased: But when the visible Church admitteth another Law-giuer than Christ, and stoupeth vnder the yoke of his obedience, then is the defe∣ction from the faith come vnto a ripenesse, and the Antichrist then siueth in the Temple of God. shewing himselfe that hee is God: and if the Lord had not kept vnto himselfe a remnant by his gracious election, the visible Church had beene like vnto Sodome and Gomorrha. In the 5. verse, hee saieth, Remember yee not, that when I was yet with you, I tolde you these thinges? This verse is not superfluously casten in, to admonish the Thessalonians, that the comming of the Antichrist was a matter of great moment, and tending to the hurt of manie mens soules: therefore it was needefull, that ti∣mous premonition shoulde bee made vnto the Saincts, to es∣chew the danger to come. This is the Lordes customable dea∣ling, in matters graue, weightie, and serious, to giue aduertise∣mentes proportionallie agreeing with the nature of the thing fore-tolde. But what shall wee speake of the lethargie and se∣curitie of the worlde? wee neuer read that men were so slug∣gishe, and ouer-laide with so deepe securitie, as when they were fore-warned of great thinges to come: as if the loude sounde of
the trumpet of God serued to none other vse, but onelie to lull men into a heauie sleepe. The deluge of waters, the first com∣ming of Christ, the destruction of Hierusalem, the comming of the Antichrist, and the great tempest of the wrath of God, that shall be reueiled at Christes second appearance: all these things (I say) haue bene fore-tolde: but the contempt of the warnings of God, haue procured, and will procure, the heauie weight of Gods indignation. Wee reade of Christes Disciples, that when they sawe their master walking vpon the waters, they supposed hee had beene a spirite, or , that is, a fantasie, and delu∣sion: this they did onely at one time, in fare and weaknesse; but the wicked at all times, and in the obstinacie of their vnbelee∣uing heartes, call both the promises and threatninges of GOD , that is, fantasies and delusions. For this cause, the Apostle, both by worde and writ, inculcateth this prophsie of the cōming of the Antichrist, into the eares of the Thessalonians, to the ende they should not lightlie regarde the fore-warnings of God, as the sonnes-in-law of Lot did in Sodome. Now follow the 6. and 7. verses, with the beginning of the 8. verse, And now yee know what with-holdeth, that he might beercuei∣led in his owne time: for the mysterie of iniquitie doeth alreadie worke: onlie he, who now with-holdeth shall let, till he bee taken out of the way: and then shall the wicked man be reueiled. The naturall order requireth, that in these wordes three things should bee entreated: First, howe the mysterie of iniquitie beganne to worke in Paules dayes: Secondlie, who is this, that should bee a let and hinderance to the Antichrist: And thirdlie, when was it, that hee was made out of the way, so that he could hinder the Antichrist no longer. The mysterie of iniquitie began to worke euen in the dayes of Paule, because some Heretiques sprang vp at that time, who denied the diuinitie of Christ, such as Ebion, and Cerinthus, these appertained to the kingdome of the Antichrist, because they were his fore-runners, beginning with entising speaches to seduce men from the trueth of God. And what was wanting in them, except power, and vncontrolled authoritie, to bring to a full ripenesse the worke of defection, al∣readie begunne. So Heresies, and the doctrine of lies, is the very first foundation of the kingdome of the Antichrist. And like as
an Eagle, that buildeth her nest in the face of a steepie rocke, the first sticke that shee carrieth to her nest, belongeth to the masse thereof: Euen so, without all controuersie, the Heretiques, who prepared a way to the kingdome of the Antichrist, they are mem∣bers of the bodie of his kingdome. If any man shall object, that the chaire of Rome damned the olde Heresies of Ebion, Cerynthus, and of the Manichies, and therefore such men cannot bee justlie reckoned to appertaine to his kingdome, whome hee separated from his fellowship, by detesting their opinions: To this I an∣swere, That like as the golde, and siluer, the brasse, and yron, and likewise the claye of the great image, which Nebuchadneser saw in his vision, had no agreement one with another, yet in this Danie. 2. 32 33 they agreede, to constitute one stately image, opposite vnto the little stone hewne out of the rocke without handes: euen so, he∣resies are repugnant one vnto another, yet all belong vnto the kingdome of darknesse, and to the throne of the Antichrist, set vp against the glorious throne of the kingdome of Christ: Yea, and these Heretiques, who impugned the true doctrine of the person of Christ, they brake the yce, as it were, & gaue example to others, to impugne the doctrine of his office also. In the second place, by him that letteth, Chrysostome vnder∣standeth Chrys. ho∣mil. 4. in 2. Thes. cap. 2 the Romane Empire, which consisting into its owne in∣tegritie, with vndiminished and vnbrangled authoritie, the Ro∣mane Antichrist durst not attempt high things, and thinges farre surmounting the modest carriage of subjects. And heere by the way it is to bee marked, that like as the Apostle by him who let∣teth and hindereth, vnderstandeth not one particulare Empe∣rour onely, but an Empire, wherein one Emperour succeedeth to another: Euen so, by him that is letted, hee vnderstandeth not one particulare man, but the estate of an vsurped kingdome, wherein likewise one succeedeth to another. But now let vs see how the Romane Emperour, so long as he consisted in his owne full strength, did hinder the attemptes of the Antichrist: First, no man was admitted bishop of Rome a long time, without the consent of the Emperour: Secondlie, inuestment of bishops, by staffe and ring, beeing likewise in the Emperours hands, the ex∣cessiue pride of the Romane bishops (euen after they were called Uniuersall Bishops) was mightilie borne downe: Thirdly, so long
as Emperours kept in their owne hand the power of conuoca∣ting Generall and Nationall Councels, the bishops of Rome all this while acknowledged Romane Emperours for their soueraine lordes: But when the Emperours were bereaued of all their fore∣mentioned rightes, as Palinurus, by storme of weather, was cast out of the ship, and the rudder, by violence of the tempest, was washen out of his handes, then all things were turned vp side downe, as we shall heare (God willing) in the subsequent words, wherein he prophesieth, that he who letteth should be taken out of the way, that is, the Romane Empire shall bee vtterly weakened, so that it cannot make resistance against the Antichrist, but it stoupeth vnder his might, adoreth him as the Vicare of Christ, who cānot erre and as a god on earth, is content to be crowned by him, and to make the oathe of alleadgeance to the Pope. In what base estate are the Emperours of late dayes? how is their golde turned into drosse? and the might of their dominion in∣to seruile subjection vnto the Antichrist? as was shortly com∣prised in these verses, ROMA tibi serui fuerant domini dominorum: Seruorum serui nunc tibi sunt domini. Is not the Romane Empire so farre deuested of their auncient glorie, that whereas their predecessours wanted nothing of the dominion of the habitable continent knowne in their time, ex∣cept a little part in the East, now it hath no commandement, ex∣cept in a little part of the West? But it may bee demaunded, How can the bishops of Rome be blamed, as ouer-throwers of the glorie of the Romane Empire? seeing it was the Saracenes who vndid the Empire of the East, and the Gothes, Vandales, Lombardis, Hunnes, Auares, Danes, and Normandis, weakened the Empire of the West: To this I answere, That the Bishops of Rome were like unto a lowse tooth, and a wrested foote, and were deceitfull friendes, both to the Empe∣rours of the East, and of the West, rendering vnto them euill for good. Did not the Emperour Iustinian deliuer them from the ty∣rannie of the Gothes? Did not Tiberius the second support them verie kindlie, when they were sore pinched with famine, and op∣pressed by the Lombards? But what recompence rendered the
bishops of Rome to the Emperours of the East, when they found their estate to bee weake? Euen such as the Edoites rendered to Gods people in the day of their trouble, of whom the Prophet speaketh, Thou shouldest not once haue looked on their affliction in the day of their destruction, nor haue laide handes on their substance in the day of Obad. 13 their destruction: Euen so, the bishops of Rome should not so much as haue laide their hands vpon the substance of the Emperours of the East, who had dealt so kindly and friendly with them. Neuerthelesse, the first occasion that they found to enrich them∣selues with the possessions of the Emperours of the East, they ouer-passed it not, but tooke the gift of Exarchatus Rauennae, and Pentapolis in Italie, which duely belonged to the Emperour of the East: These dominions, I say, they tooke by the gift of Pipinus, king of France (who was prodigall in bestowing vnto the chaire of Rome other mens possessions) and they possesse the domi∣nions afore-saide, with their townes, villages, and territories, euen vntill this day. On the other part, Carolus Magnus, Em∣perour of the West, was friendly to the chaire of Rome, and made them free of the molestation of the Lombards. Notwithstanding, after his death, and the death of Ludouicus Pius his sonne, when cruell hostilitie fell out amongst the children of Ludouicus Pius, to wit, Lotharius, Lewes, and Charles, whereby the puissance of France was weakened, and the Danes and Normans got the more easily place in France. What was the carriage of Sergius the se∣cond, bishop of Rome, at this time? Platina writeth, that hee sent Gregorius, Arch-bishop of Rauenna, to reconcile these brethren, who contended one against another, with insupportable ha∣tred: but the tragedie of Ludouicus Pius house, declared, that the bishops of Rome were little grieued, when the estate of Empe∣rours houses decayed prouiding, their owne estate did increase. And I remit to the course of the Historie, what friendship the posteritie of Carolus Magnus, and his sonne Ludouicus Pius, found at the hands of the bishop of Rome, for all their bountifull kind∣nesse towardes that vnthankfull chaire. Alwayes, remember the wordes of Salomon, Hee that ewardeth euill for good, euill shall not depart from his house, Prouerb. 17. 13. What shall I speake of the Emperiall authoritie, when it came amongst the Germanes? Otto the first, a worthie Emperour, what
fidelitie founde hee in Pope Ihonne the thirteenth, whome Onu∣phrius calleth Ihonne the twelft: Hee assisted Berengarius, and his sonne Albertus, against the Emperour Otto, nothing regarding his oath of alleadgeance made to the contrarie: And albeit eue∣rie Emperour was not so magnanimous as Otto, and euerie Pope was not so beastly as Pope Ihonne the thirteene: yet when one of the best Emperours, and one of the worst Popes were matched together, wee may easily perceiue whereat the Popes aimed con∣tinually, to wit, at the vndoing of the dominion of the Empe∣rour. By the waye let vs marke diuerse affections striuing in Onu∣phrius, as they did of olde in Medea, when shee killed her owne childe, to wit, anger and motherly affection contended one against another in her: but anger got the vpper-hand, and the childe was killed: Euen so in Onuphrius, a desire to couer the tur∣pitude of the Romane chaire, contendeth with a necessitie to re∣port the trueth of the Historie, and trueth getteth the vpper-hand at this time, and hee leaueth the defence of this vile beast. The valiant courage of the Emperour Hendrie the fourth, counted no lesse fortunate in warre-fare, than Iulius Caesar was in olde times: and the gallant spirites of Frederick the first and se∣cond, could not mende this matter: the curses of the Antichrist so terrified the world, that they forgot their duetie to their soue∣raine lordes, and suffered them to bee trodden vnder the feete of the Antichrist. In the 8. verse followeth the prophesie of the discouerie and destruction of the Antichrist: concerning his discouerie, three thinges are to bee considered: First, who shall bee discouered: Secondly, when shall hee be discouered: and thirdly, the means of his discouerie. The Antichrist is hee who shall bee discouered, to whome the Apostle attributeth a new name, and calleth him that wicked man Is he not pointed out already with a sufficient number of odious names? Hee is called the Antichrist an aduer∣sarie Apoc. 20. 10 ad 14. 9 and 17. 5 to God, the man of sinne, the childe of perdition: and in other places, the false prophet, the beast that is worshipped, great Babylon the mother of whoredomes: which stile, albeit they transfere it vnto the Romane chaire, when the tenne persecuing Emperours compelled men to worship heathen gods: yet the
holy Scripture referreth it to that whore, who braggeth that she is married, (to wit, to Christ) and shee is not a widowe, Apocal. cap. 18. verse 7. And this agreeth better with the chaire of Rome, wherein Popes doe sit, than with the chaire of Rome when persecuting Emperours sate into it. Besides all these odious names, the Apostle addeth another hatefull name, & calleth him , that is, that lawlesse man, who will bee subject to no lawe, neither diuine nor humane, but hee will bee aboue all lawes: hee will judge all men, and bee judged of no man: what regarde hee hath of the lawe of GOD, it maye bee knowne by this, That the breaking of the Popes lawe is counted a greater sinne, than the breaking of the Lawe of GOD: for in matters of marriage, and meates, if the Popes lawe bee transgressed, foorth-with a man is counted an Heretique: But when the Lawe of GOD is broken, for a small summe of money, a pardon may be purcha∣sed: Yea, further I am bolde to saye, that the moste discrepant Idiomes of the GREEKE language, such as the ATTICKE and IONICKE Idiomes, they differ not so farre, as the lawes of CHRIST and ANTICHRIST differ one from ano∣ther. Albeit the Atticke Dialect delighteth in contractions, and the Ionicke in resolutions, yet notwithstanding one, and the selfe same thing, in substance and matter, maye bee vttered in both these discrepant Idiomes. But the Lawes of CHRIST and Antichrist, are so opposite in matter and substance, that they cannot both consist and stand: namelie, when the Lawe of CHRIST biddeth, alloweth, and approoueth: and the lawe of the Antichrist, in that same subject, forbiddeth, dis∣alloweth, and disapprooueth. The Lawe of GOD (Exod. 20.) counteth worshippers of Images, haters of GOD: The lawe of the Antichrist counteth them good Catholiques. The lawe of CHRIST, in the doctrine of Faith, Inuocation, and Mediation, sendeth vs onelie to the Creator: The lawe of the Antichrist, sendeth vs to the creatures also: so that the Anti∣christ is justlie called , or a lawlesse man, in respect hee will not bee obedient to the Lawes of CHRIST. Concerning humane and ciuill ordinances: Hee who dare assoyle subjectes from the oathe of alleadgeance to their soue∣raine
lordes, hee vndoeth all ciuill gouernement, policie, and lawes from the verie foundation. I superceede to write further in this point. In the second place, let vs consider the time, wherein the An∣tichrist shall bee reueiled, pointed out in these wordes, : that is, and then shall the wicked man bee reueiled: which wordes beeing relatiue to that which im∣mediatelie passed before, importeth, that the Antichrist shoulde bee reueiled at that same time, when the mightie Monarchie of the Romanes was trodden vnder his feete. Then it seemed, that all the nations of the worlde should adore and worshippe the beast continuallie, and that the tongues of men shoulde haue bene locked vp in silence: so that no man euer shoulde take boldnesse to speake one word against the whore of Babylon: yea, and the Holy Apostle describeth the great securitie of the mo∣ther of whoredomes, saying in his heart, I sit, being a Queene, and am not a widow, and shall see no mourning, Apocal. 18. 7. At this same time the vnchangeable decreet of the Almightie God appoin∣ted, that this wicked one should first be reueiled, and afterward should be destroyed. Wherin it is to be noted, with what patient expectation wee shoulde attende vpon the times and seasons, wherein it should please the Lord to performe his owne works: for like as Christ thought it more expedient, & more tēding to the aduancement of His owne glorie, to raise Lazarus out of his graue, (Ioan. 11.) rather than out of the bedde of his infirmitie: Euen so, the Lord thought meet to suffer the Antichrist to mount vp vnto the top of all his desired preheminēce, & then the Lord put hand to work, both to discouer, & to destroy him, to the fur∣ther manifestation of his own vnspeakeable power & wisdome. In the third place, the meanes are to be considered, whereby the Antich. should be discouered, namely, by ye sincere preaching of the Gospel, by ye mouthes of men, holy & zealous, (Apoc. 11. 3) & in gifts not vnlike vnto Henoch & Helias. Now seeing the man of sin is to be discouered by ye sincere preaching of the Gospell, let vs consider what benefite redoundeth to vs by the true and sincere preaching of the Gospell of CHRIST: it is like vnto the light of the daye, which manifesteth euerie thing in its owne coloures: The thing that is beautifull, is seene to bee
bee beautifull, and the thing that is euill fauoured, is seene to be such as it is: where of the madnesse of some Heretiques, such as Gnostici and Mnichet, is clearly perceiued: who rejected the Scriptures of God, because in them is contained a commemo∣ration of the faultes of the Patriarches. Shall the light be despi∣sed, because it manifesteth both beautie and desormitie, both strength and debilitie, both the perfection of a complete body, and the imperfection of a dismembered and mutilate bodie? In like manner, the Holy Scriptures are to bee had in the more reuerende regarde, when they describe euery thing in their own colours, and manifesteth on the one part the riches of the mer∣cie of God in Iesus Christ, and on the other part the falsehood, subtiltie, hypocrisie, and pride of the Antichrist, to the end, that Gods people maye eschewe the Antichrist, and rejoyce in the sweete saluation of Christ Iesus. This discouerie of the Antichrist, in some weake measure, be∣gan about the yeere of our Lord 1300. at what time, learned men, fearing the tyrannie of the Emperour of the Turks, fled to Italie, and restored the Grieke and Latine languages to their own puritie. This vindicating of languages, from the grosse barbari∣tie of those times, opened a doore of knowledge, and a desire of reading, with a judicious consideration of that which was read, whether or not it were a suppositious worke. More-ouer, God annointed the eyes of many learned men, with the eye-salue of vnderstanding whose sight increasing by degrees, in end mani∣fested to the worlde, that the chaire of Rome was the seate of the Antichrist. Marsilius Patavinus. in his booke called Defensor Pa∣cis, writeth, that the Clergie of Rome is a denne of thiues, and that the doctrine of the Pope is not to bee followed, because it leadeth vnto eternall death. Franciscus Petrarcha, a man famously learned, calleth Rome the whore of Babylon, the Schoole, and mother of errour, the temple of Heresie, the nest of treacherie, growing and increasing by the oppression of others. This same Author (about the yeere of our Lord 1350.) writeth to one of Petrarch. Epist. 19 his friendes. Let none euill desire entangle thee, that thou shouldest dresse thy selfe againe, to those Princes of darknesse, &c. To what purpose wouldest thou goe thither? That thou mightest see good men borne downe, and euill men aduanced? Eagles creeping, and Asses flying?
Foxes in chariots, and Rauens in castles, and Doues in the dung? Wlues to bee free, and Lambes to bee in bandes? Finally, Christ to bee b∣nished, and Beelzebub to bee judge? To these spectacles am I called backc againe, I will not hearken, neither doe I agree with them, nor they with me. O cruell and wicked sect of men, louing no-bodie but themselues, and that altogether preposterously, and wickedly! Who shall relieue the oppressed woilde, and the afflicted towne? Who shall reforme the enormitie of man∣ners? Who shall collect the dispersed sheepe? Who shall reproue errontous Pastors? Who shall reduce and bring them backe againe vnto their owne chaires? Shall there bee none ende of licentiousnesse and sinne? Hath the Spirit in vaine threatned by the Prophet, These thinges hast thou done, and I helde y tongue, therefore thou thoughtest, that I was like vnto thee. John Wiklef, a Professor of Diuinitie in Oxford, affirmed, that whatsoeuer the Pope and his Cardinals command, which can∣not bee deduced clearely out of Scriptures, this same is to bee counted Hereticall, and not to bee obeied. These few witnesses of God, holy like vnto Hanoch, the seuenth from Adam, and zea∣lous like vnto Helias, by the example of their couragious zeale, and zealous courage, incited a greater number of Holy men in Germanie, Switserland, France, Britanie, and Poll, to be witnesses to the truth of God: whose number, albeit it was as contemptible in the eyes of Romane Prelates, as the number of the armie of Alexander of Macedo was in the eyes of Darius, king of Persia. Notwithstanding, by these witnesses of God, the Antichrist hath bene discouered, the citie of spirituall Babylon hath bene shaken, the head of the beast hath beene wounded, and all his Phy∣sitions haue much adoe to cure his wound againe. But let vs proceede to that which followeth in the ende of the 8. verse: namely, that the Antichrist should not only be re∣ueiled, but also should bee consumed by the Spirit of the mouth of Christ: whereof it may bee perceiued, that the Lord will not abolish the kingdome of the Antichrist, as hee did abolish other Monarchies of the Babylonians. Persians, Grecians, and Romanes: but hee keepeth the kingdome of the Antichrist afore-hand to bee consumed by the tempest of his owne wrath. This argueth the great indignation of God against the kingdome of the An∣tichrist wherein hee findeth might joyned withslight, so that the Lord will drawe out against him his great and mightie sworde,
wherewith hee visiteth Leuiathan, that piercing Serpent, and Le∣uiathan, that crooked Serpent, and hee slayeth the Dragon that Isai. 27. 1 is in the Sea, for all his might, the wrath of God shall bee reuei∣led against him from Heauen, because hee hath with-holden Rom. 1. 18 the trueth in vnrighteousnesse. Whatsoeuer shalbe done against this mother of whoredomes in this worlde, is nothing else, but an earnest-pennie of that vnspeakeable wrath of God, that shall seaze vpon the kingdome of the Antichrist at the latter daye. More-ouer, the equitie of the justice of God is to bee noted in this, that God rendereth vnto the Antichrist such punishment, as doeth moste proportionallie agree with the nature of his fault: for by the Anathemes and Curses of his mouth, hee subdued the mightie Monarches of the earth: so shall Christ pronounce a Curse against him, by the power whereof hee shall bee sent vn∣to Matth. 25 the fornace of euerlasting punishment. Nowe it might haue beene objected, Howe could it come to passe, that euer the Antichrist shoulde haue obtained so great place in the Temple of God? To this objection the Apostle re∣turneth a foure-folde answere: First, it came to passe by the mightie operation of the Deuill: Secondly, by lying miracles: Thirdly, by the deceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse: And fourthly, by the incredulitie of men who would not beleeue the trueth of God: therefore the Lord suffered them to be deluded with errours: These foure causes are set downe in the 9. 10. 11. and 12. verses, whereof when wee haue spoken a little, GOD willing, wee shall conclude this Treatise. The first cause of the preuailing power of the Antichrist, is the mightie operation of Sathan, concurring with him, who is to bee considered two manner of wayes, sometimes as bound, at other times as lowse and set at libertie: hee is a perillous enemie at all Apoc. 20 times, euen when hee is bound, in respect of our childish simpli∣citie: wee are like vnto babes, who through curiositie at some∣time will come within the reach of a bounde Lyon, and will bee harmed by the meanes. But when Sathan is set at libertie, then hath hee a mightie operation, euen so great, that albeit light bee offered vnto men, yet they loue darknesse better than the light of God. If euer Sathan was set at ample libertie, (who is euer, for Iean. 3. 19 the Elects sake, somewhat restrained) hee was set at greatest li∣bertie,
when the Romane Antichrist had greatest preheminence: for at that time the smoake of the bottomlesse pitte so ouer∣couered all thinges with darknesse, that men sawe neither Hea∣uen nor Hell, nor yet themselues: The Heauen was darkened, be∣cause Apocal. 9. 2 men sought an entrie into it another waye, than by the blood of the euerlasting Couenant of God, by the worthinesse whereof the moste Holy place is made patent to vs, and none other way: And Hell was darkened, because men liued in a deepe Hebr. 9 securitie, as if they had made a couenant with Death and Hell: Isai. 28. 18 the Popes pardon, and the fulfilling of the pennance injoyned by the Priest, was counted a complete armoure to saue them against the fierie indignation of Gods wrath: Yea and men saw not themselues, but in seeking to establish their owne righteous∣nesse, they were not subject to the righteousnesse of God. Now it is our duetie, with all our heartes, to blesse the King of Hea∣uen, Rom. 10. 3 who hath begun to cast Sathan into bandes againe: for ex∣perience of our wauering mindes declareth, that if Sathan were set at libertie againe, it were an easie thing to transport vs head∣longes to all kinde of errours. The second cause of the preuailing power of the Antichrist, is signes and lying wonders: in the Grieke language , signifieth, miracles, confirming a lying doctrine. All the miracles of the Antichrist, are either false miracles, wherein nothing is wrought aboue nature, nor contrarie to nature, or else the ende of his miracles is the confirmation of a false doctrine. The Ro∣mane Church braggeth much of miracles, as if the power of wor∣king miraculous workes were a gift continuallie to remaine, and an vndoubted token of the true Church of God: Howbeit Holy Scripture attributeth to false Teachers, who intise people to worship strange gods, power to worke signes and wonders. Deut. 13. 1. 2 Socrates also, in his Ecclesiasticall Historie, writeth of Eusebius Emisenus, an Arrian Heretique, vnder the reigne of Constantius, Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 9 who had the gift of working miracles. And Platina writeth of miracles wrought at the sepulchre of Rhotaris, king of Lombar∣dis, Platina in vita Ioan. 4 an Arrian prince. Yea, and the Apostle Paul saieth, if I had all faith, so that I could remooue mountaines, and had not loue, I were no∣thing. 1. Cor. 13. 2 Nowe what wisedome is it to count working of miracles one of the principall notes of the true Church of Christ. which
is found also in the kingdome of the Antichrist, and amongst Heretiques, & amongst them who in the sight of God are coun∣ted nothing? if we taught a doctrine, either in substāce or forme, different from the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, it were good reason, that we should confirme it with new miracles. But if wee teach no doctrine, except the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, then is that ancient doctrine alreadie sufficientlie con∣firmed by ancient miracles wrought by Christ, & his Apostles. Nowe let vs set forward to the purpose, and let vs speake of the false miracles, whereby the kingdome of the Antichrist was ad∣uanced, and that through the mightie operation of Sathan: for like as Achab is saide to haue consented to the death of Naboth, because the letters which procured his death, were sealed with his ring: Euen so, Sathan liked well the aduancement of the An∣tichrist, because he set himself to worke, by many lying miracles, to aduance the kingdome of the Antichrist. Before the 600. yeere of our Lord when the way was preparing for the Uniuersall Bis∣shop, was not the worshipping of the Crosse confirmed in Apa∣mea, by the fie which shined about Thomas, bishop there, and burned him not. The towne of Edessa, was thought to bee saued Euagr. lib. 4 cap. 26 by the picture of Christ dipped in water: which picture was al∣ledged to haue beene sent to King Agbarus. The towne of Ser∣giopolis Idem, lib. 4 cap. 27 to haue beene sued by the reliques of the martyr Ser∣gius. But after the 600. yeere of our Lord, false miracles were so Idem, lib. 4 p. 28 multiplied, that it would be tedious to reade ye shortest abridge∣ment of them that could bee compiled. The miracles wrought by the reliques of Sainct Oswald, King of ENGLAND, writ∣ten by Beda. The miracles wrought by the reliques of Iohn Bap∣tist, written by Sigebertus: and of S. Sebastian, written by Paulus Diaconus. The miracles of the popes, Deus dedit, and pope Aga∣tho, written by Platina. The miracles of S. Dionyse, S. Maurice, and S. Martine, who miraculously deliuered the soule of Dagoberius, King of France, out of the handes of euill spirites, written also by Platina. The miracle of Immas, a captiue and a prisoner in ENGLAND, whome no bandes could binde, because his bro∣ther, beeing a Priest and supposing that Immas had beene slaine in the battell, and that his soule had beene in purgatorie, hee made prayers to GOD, and saide Masse oft times, for reliefe of
his brothers soule: the benefite whereof, as Beda supposeth, re∣dounded to the weale of Immas soule and bodie. O foolishe fable! and yet thought worthie, by master Brestow, by a newe cōmemoration thereof, to be kept in continuall remembrance. To bee short, the Legendes, Portuses, Festiuals, Promptuaries, Sermones, and other bookes of the Romane Church, which are all stuffed so full, that nothing almoste is thought to bee suffi∣ciently proued, that is not confirmed by a number of false and friuolous miracles: all these, I saye, clearely prooue, in what ac∣count false miracles were, and are, in the kingdome of the Anti∣christ. Euery man, who is a judicious Reader, may consider, that I leaue this point, not for lcke of aboundance of matter, but for feare to offende the Reader with superfluitie of miracles vn∣worthie to bee rehearsed. The thirde cause of the preuailing power of the Antichrist, is set down in the 10. verse, in these wordes, In all deceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse amongst them that perishe. In which wordes the Apostle pointeth out vnto vs three thinges: First, that the marke and butte, whereat the Antichrist shooteth, is vnrighteous: Secondly, the meanes, whereby hee endeuoureth to attaine vn∣to his intended purpose, are deceitfull: and thirdly, that the de∣ceitfulnesse of the Antichrist shall not hurt the elect of God, but onely them that perish. The principall butte, and ende whereat they aimed continually, was superioritie and preheminence aboue their brethren. The deceitfull meanes, whereby they at∣tained to that preheminence, were flatterie lies, and flse accu∣sations of good men. They flattered the Emperours, Phocas and Basilius: They falsified the actes of the Councell of Nice, for ex∣cessiue desire to bee counted judges of appellations: They ac∣cused the bishops of Rauenna, moste falsely, of the Heesie of : And not content with superioritie ouer their bre∣thren, they aimed continually at the honour due to Christ, that is, to bee law-giuers in the Church of God. This was a matter of greater difficultie to bee brought to passe: for albeit a man may climbe vp vnto the toppe of the highest mountaine in the worlde, yet can hee not reach his hand aboue the Sunne and Moone, and the glistering lightes of the firmament: Euen so,
when all the Bishops in the worlde are casten vnder the feete of the Bishops of ROME, howe dare they presume with sa∣crilegious boldenesse, to make themselues companions to CHRIST, and to bee Lawe-giuers in the Church? By deceiueable meanes also this vnrighteousnesse behooued to bee brought to passe: for a false opinion was setled in the heartes of the people, That in matters of Faith the Bishop of ROME coulde not erre: So ignorant people, bewitched with vaine hopes, without all due examination, receiued all their ordi∣nances, howe repugnant soeuer they were to the ordinances of CHRIST. The last cause wherefore the ANTICHRIST shall pre∣uaile so mightilie, is the power of the wrath of GOD, justlie punishing the contempt of His trueth in the worlde. The con∣tempt of mercie deserueth punishment, and the contempt of great mercie deserueth great punishment. Nowe it is certaine, that amongst all the rich treasures of the mercie of GOD, CHRIST is the greatest, with whome, and for whose sake, all other thinges are giuen, as the Apostle PAVL speaketh, in the eight Chapter of his Epistle to the Romanes, and the thirtie and two verse. And seeing CHRIST is manifested to the worlde by the preaching of the Gospell, the contempt there∣of is an vtter rejecting of CHRIST. And what wonder is it that GOD suffer them to bee deluded with errours, who will not belecue the trueth of His worde? The strong delusions, or efficacie of errour, as the GREEKS worde soundeth, , is rather to bee referred to the ostentation of signes and wonders, than to the power of the doctrine that shall bee vnder the ANTICHRIST: for it is saide, (In the Gospell according to Sainct MATTHEW, in the twentle and fourth Chapter, and the twentie and fourth verse thereof) There shall arise false christes, and false prophets, and shall shewe great signes and wonders, so that if it were possible, they shoulde deceiue the verie Elect. The mindes of people in all ages haue beene mightilie trans∣ported with signes and wonders, in so much, that the GEN∣TILES firmelie beleeued, that there was a diuine power in
IVPPITER, because the LORD permitted the Deuill to raise a mightie storme of winde, and to ouer-blowe with sande the armie of CAMBYSES, which went to PENTAPOLIS, of purpose to spoyle the Temple of IVPPITER, AMMO∣NIVS. Herodot. in Thaleia. The GRECIANS likewise beleeued, that there was diuinitie in APOLLO, because GOD permitted the Deuill to shake the mountaine of PARNASSVS, and to destroye a great number of the armie of ZERXES, who came to spoyle Herodot. in Ourania. the Temple of DELPHVS. Heathen people were rauished with admiration of workes which seemed miraculous: But Christians, to whome the written worde of GOD belongeth, they shoulde regarde no miracle, which leadeth them from the forme of true worshipping, set downe in the written worde of GOD, (DEVTRONOM. CHAP. XIII.) for all such mi∣racles are called by the Apostle, , that is, miracles of falsehood, or miracles confirming a false doctrine. Nowe blessed bee our GOD, who by the breath of His owne mouth hath begunne to remooue the mistie cloude of horrible darknesse, and who hath made the beames of His trueth to shine vpon vs. And the LORD establishe our soules with His sauing Grace, vnto the ende, and in the ende, Amen.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrifice of the Masse. THE soule of the Antichristes kingdome is the Masse, which beeing abolished, the Antichristes kingdome cannot consist. Now, therefore, it followeth by due order, that I shoulde speake of the Sacrifice of the Masse, keeping this me∣thod: first to search out if it bee an auncient Seruice in the Church of God: secondly, to search out the definition of the Masse: and thirdly, to declare the absurdities of the Masse. To prooue the Masse to bee an auncient Sacrifice, vsed and approoued in the Primitiue Church, they alleadge the liturgie of Sainct Iames, the bookes of Abdias, bishop of Babylon, the bookes of Martialis, bishop of Burdeaux, and one of the seuen∣tie Antiqui∣. Disciples, the bookes of Clement and of Sainct Dionyse, the liturgies of Basill and Chrysostome, a booke founde in Verona, a towne of Itale, set foorth vnder the name of Amphlochius, bishop of Iconium, the head citie of Lycaonia, which describeth the life and miracles of Sainct Basill. But now it is time to bee ashamed of their supposititious bookes and legendes of lies, wherewith they were accustomed to deceiue simple people. These bookes, for the moste part, are so vnknowne to Antiquitie, that there is no mention made of them in ancient Authors. The liturgie of Chrysostome is a booke falsely shrowded vnder his name, because in that liturgie there is a prayer conceiued for the prosperitie and well-fare of Nicolaus the first, vniuersall bishop. And it is knowne, that Nicolaus the first was not borne three hundreth yeere and more after the death of Chrysostome. And in the booke set foorth vnder the name of Amphilochius, a description of the life of Thomas Bekket, bishop of Canterburie, is set downe, who was at least seuen hundreth yeeres posteriour to the dayes of A∣philochius.
Such legendes of lies doe verie well agree with the kingdome of the Antichrist. Moreouer, the forme of Church-discipline vsed of olde, will proue, that there was no such Church-seruice as the Masse: for these who had committed great sinnes, by the strict discipline Hist. tript. lib. 9. ed. 35 of the Church, were debarred, some from hearing of Sermons, others from the Prayers, and some from the Communion: but wee reade of no man, for the space of fiue hundreth yeeres, who was debarred from the sight of the Sacrifice of the Masse, be∣cause there was no such Seruice in the Church for the space aforesaide. For mine owne part, I found nothing in the Historie, that once seemed to countenance the Popish Masse, before the sixe hundreth yeere of our Lord, at what time the bishop of Centum-celle made a fabulous narration, to Gregorie the first, of a man tormented in purgatorie, who requested a Church-man to offer to God consecrated hosties for his reliefe out of paines: but this fable cannot prooue the Masse to bee an auncient Church∣seruice. Chrysostome clearly declareth the forme of approaching to dinine mysteries in his time, After Sermon a deacon stoode vp, Chrysost. in epist. ad Hebr. cap. 9 Homil. 17 and cried with a loude voyce, , that is, Holy thinges doe appertaine vnto holie persons: by which wordes hee inui∣teth holy men, and such as are duely prepared, to draw neare to the participation of holy mysteries, & others, who in conscience sound not themselues purged from the filthinesse of their sinnes, hee exhorteth to single out themselues, and not to approach to the holy Table. This hee amplifieth by a dissimilitude of the Olympiak playes, and the holy Supper: In the Olympiak playes (saieth Chrysostome) an harolde stoode vp, and after hee had poin∣ted out a mans name, who offered to giue a proofe of his valour in the Olympiak exercises, then the harolde cried with a loude voyce, ? that is, Doeth ani bodie accuse this man? can anie bodie accuse him of theft, of lewde manners, of a base and seruile condition, whereby he may be found vncapable of this high honou? But when a man is disposed to approach vnto the holy mysteries, the Church deacon calleth not vpon others to accuse him but sendeth him to the secrete parlour of of his own heart, to accuse himselfe, and to trie if he be absolued
from his sinne, and if hee bee refreshed with thè earnest-pen∣nie of the Holy Spirite, and made rich in good workes. This was the forme of communicating in Chrysostomes dayes. If there was besides this forme of communicating a sacrifice also, where∣in a Priest stoode at the Altar, and he only did eate and drinke, and the rest were onely spectators and beholders of the sacri∣ce, then let them produce testimonies of Scripture, or ancient Fathers, whereby it may bee prooued, that such forme of ser∣uice was in vse in the Church. Master Harding, foolishly singing the triumph before the vi∣ctorie, citeth a place of Chrysostome, as a full and perfect confir∣mation of the Antiquitie of the Masse. Chrysostome, when hee was a fellow-labourer, with Flauianus, bishop of Antiochia, hee Chryost. ad pop. An∣ioch. ho∣il. 6. complained of the slownesse of the people in approaching to the holy Communion, in these wordes, I see, saieth hee, great inequalitie of thinges amongst you: At other times, When as for the moste part yee are in cleane life, yee come not (to wit, to the Communion) but at Easter, though yee haue done something amisse, yet yee come: O what custome is this! O what presumption is this! the daylie sacrifice is offered in vaine: Wee stand at the Altar for nought, there is not one that will communicate. The verie purpose whereat Chrysostome aimeth, should make him ashamed to cite this place as a defence of the Masse: for Chysostome is reprehending the people for resorting at so fewe times, and in so small companies, vnto the holie Sup∣per, when as of olde the people were wont to communicate euerie daye, and therefore hee calleth the Lordes Supper a day∣lie sacrifice. The Papistes are so farre from reproouing the people for not communicating, that they make prouision onely for one to eate and drinke at the Altar, and not for manie: and they inuite not the people to communicate with them, but rather by the no∣ueltie of their newe inuented religion, they distinguishe the Al∣tar from the Communion table, and the Sacrifice from the Sa∣cramēt, farre contrarie to the custome of the Primitiue Church, who by a Metaphore called the Sacrament a Sacrifice, and by the like Metaphore called the Communion table an Altar. If anie man will rudely presse the wordes of Chrysostome, expresse contrarie to his meaning, let him vnderstand that the like forme
of speaking is vsed in Holy Scripture, where it is saide, And no Ioan. .  an receiued his testimonie, to wit, the testimonie of Christ. The meaning is not, that no bodie receiued the testimonie of Christ, but that verie fewe receiued it: Euen so, the meaning of the words of Chrysostome is, that verie fewe of the people did com∣municate. And this hath bene verie judiciously marked by Ma∣ster IEWELL, that worthie Bishop, in his disputation against master Harding. To bee short in this head of Antiquitie of the Popish Masse. Their bragging of Antiquitie is not vnlike to the Gibeonites shoos, which were olde, and put on of purpose to deceiue: yet Iosu. 9. 12 14 were not their shoos so olde, as the shoos of GODS people, which, by the miraculous worke of GOD, lasted fourtie yeeres in the Wildernesse, and were not rent. GODS people might Deut. 1. 4 haue bragged indeede, of ancient and vnrent shoos, but the de∣ceitful Gibeonites, they bragged, and deceiued Gods people with antiquitie falsely pretended. Such is the antiquitie of the masse, and no better. Before I leaue this head, I will admonishe the Reader, not to bee deceiued with olde Latine transations of Grieke Authors. Socrates writeth of the fauourers of Paulinus, that after hee died Socrat. lib.  cap. 15 they communicated not with Flauianus, bishop of Antiochia, but they kept Assemblies apart by themselues. Nowe the wordes of the Grieke language, , is better translated this way, Separatim conuentus faciebant, than as some olde Latine Wolfangus Musculus. interpreters translate the wordes, Separatim missarum celebrabant solennia, howbeit the olde interpreters by missarum solennia, vnder∣stand nothing but Ecclesiasticall conuentions. IN the second head we haue the definition of the Masse, to be set downe, and to bee examined. The Masse is called a sacri∣fice propitiatorie, & vnbloodie, wherein the Priest offereth the bodie of the Sonne of God to the Father, vnder the formes of bread and wine, and that without suffering for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead. From the worde of Sacrifice auncient Fa∣thers did not abhorre, but they called the Holy Sacrament a Sa∣crifice The Words Sacrifice. of thankesgiuing and a commemoratiue Sacrifice of the death of Christ the wordes of Augustine are these, Hujus sacrifitii Augus. cōtr. faustń Ma∣nich. lib. 20 cap. 21 caro ante aduentum Christi, per victimas similitudinum promittebatur:
in passione per ipsam veritatem reddebatur: post ascensum Christi, per sacramentum memoriae celebratur: that is to say, The flesh of this sa∣crifice was promised by sacrifices of similitudes: In the suffering of Christ, it was in verie deede exhibited: and after the ascension of Christ, it is cele∣brated by a Sacrament of His memoriall. In these wordes Augustine di∣stinguisheth a sacrifice prefiguratiue before Christes comming, and a sacrifice commemoratiue after the Lordes ascension, from the sacrifice of Christes bodie in veritie, and actually exhibited vpon the crosse; other sacrifices point out, as types and figures, the great sacrifice of the bodie of Christ once offered vpon the crosse: but they are not that selfe same sacrifice, except by a fi∣guratiue manner of speach. And like as the towne Nicopolis was not the victorie of Augustus Casar, when hee faught against An∣tonius Plutarch. in vita Anton. and Cleopatra, but it was onely a memoriall of the victorie: Euen so, the commemoratiue sacrifice of the new Testament, is not the true sacrifice of Christes bodie, but only a memoriall of that blessed sacrifice. Iustinus Martyr had good occasion offered vnto him to write of the sacrifices of Christes Church, because Paganes slaundered Christians, and called them Atheistes, in regarde they offered not bloodie sacrifices, nor incense, vnto their God: to whome Iustinus returned this answere, That Christians offered to GOD such sacrifices as they knew to bee moste acceptable to Him, to Iustinus apologia 2. wit, the sacrifices of prayer and thankesgiuing. And as concer∣ning the creatures of God, appointed for the sustentation of mankinde, we keepe them (saith hee) for our owne vse, and for the sustentation of indigent people, but we consume them not with fire. If there had bene anie corporal sacrifice in the Church of the bodie of the Sonne of God, vnder the formes of bread and wine, Iustinus had occasion offered vnto him to haue spoken of it: but hee knew no such sacrifice in his time. Yea, and the sa∣crament of the Lords Supper is called, by Iustinus, a Sacrifice of Iustin. dialo. cum Tryph. iudeo. thanksgiuing, who confidently affirmeth, that prayer & thanks∣giuing are the onely sacrifices perfect and acceptable to GOD, euen at that time when the Sacrament is ministred, which put∣teth vs in remembrance of the Lordes suffering. Testimonies out of the bookes of ancient Fathers should bee cited without fraude and deceite, and should not bee wrested to another sense
and meaning, than they were spoken into by the Authors. And so the worde Sacrifice could offend no man, if it were spoken in such sense as ancient Fathers spake it. The Romane Church shoulde doe well, so to remember the names that ancient Fathers haue giuen to the Sacrament, that they shoulde not forget, that Holy Scripture calleth it a Com∣munion 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17 of the bodie and blood of Christ. Then let it be such a sacrifice, wherein many participates of one bread and one cup, and thereby sealeth vp, that they are all members of one mysti∣call bodie of Iesus Christ: but not such a sacrifice wherein the people standeth gazing and looking, and the Priest alone eateth and drinketh, and distributeth nothing vnto the people. They answere, that the Priest, who offereth at the Altar, he communi∣cateth with others, who doe the like seruice in other places. This is but falsehoode, in reasoning arising vpon the deceitfull handeling of one worde hauing two significations: The worde Communion importeth two things: First, a Communion in re∣ligion: Secondly, a participation of ye Holy Supper in one place, and an eating of one bread, and drinking of one cuppe: and in this second sense, it is taken by the Apostle in the 10. Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians: in which sense their priuate Masse cannot be called a Communion. The second word of the definition of the Masse is propitiato∣rie. This word doeth signifie a sacrifice purchasing remission of Propitia∣torie. Hebr. 9. 22 sinnes, as the Apostle witnesseth. And this honour doeth onelie appertaine to the sacrifice of Christ, who is a propitiation for our sinnes, & the sinnes of the whole world. This ground being 1. Ioan. 2. 2 once laide, that Christ is the only person, in whom the Father is well pleased with vs: and Christes sacrifice is the onely meanes, whereby we are reconciled to God. In the second place, we shall consider, wherefore the word of propitiation was in so frequent vse in the olde Testament. The Exod. 25. 21 golden coucring of the Arke was called the propitiatorie: like∣wise the tenth day of the seuenth moneth, whereupon the High Priest entered once in the yeere within the Vaile, and into the most Holy place, it was called the daye of propitiation: and the Leui. 23. 27 Levit. 4. 20 sinne-offeringes were called propitiatorie sacrifices. To this doubt the Apostle answereth, that the lawe hauing the shadowe of Hebr. 10. 1
good thinges to come, and not the verie image of the thinges, can neuer, with those sacrifices, which they offer yeere by yeere, continuallie san∣ctifie the commers thereunto. By these wordes it is euident, that the sinne-offering, and the blood carried within the Vaile, and the golden couering of the Arke, had no power to purge the consciences of men from sinne: onelie they were types and fi∣gures representing Christ, in whome that was to bee actuallie performed, which was represented by those figures. And like as no prefiguration sacrifice in a proper sense could be called pro∣pitiatorie: Euen so in like manner, no commemoratiue sacrifice of Christes death, can bee called a propitiatorie sacrifice, except typically, and figuratiuely. The wordes of Augustine, speaking of the sacrament of the Altar, in the celebration whereof, there was a commemoration of the names of manie men, who were departed this life, pre∣senteth to Papistes some occasion of cauillation: for they saye, that Augustine thought the sacrament of the Altar to bee a pro∣pitiation: August. En∣chirid. ad Laurentium Idem, de octo dul∣citii quest. for men who had beene of a middle-ranke, that is, neither of the best, nor of the worst sort of people. But they who are well acquainted with Augustines writinges will not bee easi∣lie miscaried with such Amphthologies as lurke in wordes. True it is, that AVGVSTINE calleth the Sacrament a Sacrifice: but in what sense? A commemoratiue Sacrifice, as hath beene declared alreadie. And in the like sense, hee calleth the Sacra∣ment of the Altar propitiatio, because in it there is a commemo∣ration of the propitiatorie sacrifice, which CHRIST offe∣red vpon the Crosse. His distinction of men, who are depar∣ted, in three rankes, some haue beene verie good men, others haue beene verie badde men, the third ranke haue neither bene the best nor the worst sort of people, together with his doubt∣some opinion cōcerning the estate of weake Christians, who are departed this life, presenteth no solide grounde to any man to build his argument vpon the testimonie of a doubting author. The next worde of the definition is vnbloodie. Howe re∣pugnant this part of the definition is vnto the former part, Unbloodie wherein it was called a propitiatorie Sacrifice, GOD wil∣ling, I shall declare in the last head, concerning the absurdi∣ties of the Masse.
For one speciall respect Papistes shoulde speake sparinglie of their vnbloodie hostie: for they haue made it bloodie by the cruell shedding of the blood of manie innocent people, whome they haue persecuted to the death, massacred, tormented with formes of newe inuented crueltie, circumueened by false and deceitfull promises: and they haue excogitated horrible trea∣sons, the like whereof haue not beene hearde since the foun∣dation of the worlde: and these villanies were hatched in their hatefull heartes for the establishing of their Idolatrous Masse. Vesperae siculae, maye bee called an vnbloodie Euen-song: and the sacrifices offered to DIANA, in TAVRICA CHER∣SONESVS, maye bee called vnbloodie sacrifices, with better reason than the Popishe Masse can bee called an vnbloodie sa∣crifice, because the seruice done to DIANA, albeit it beganne with the shedding of humane bloode, yet it ended with the shedding of the bloode of beastes. But the crueltie of the Pa∣pistes will make no such exchange, because they walke in the way of Cain. The next part of the definition is this: That in the Masse the Priest offereth the bodie of the Sonne of GOD to the Fa∣ther. The Priest offereth the body of Christ. No part of the definition is more vntollerable, and more flatlie opposite to holie Sripture, than this part: for holie Scri∣pture setteth downe CHRISTES bodie, as the onelie propitiatorie sacrifice, and CHRIST himselfe, as the onelie High Priest, who offered this sacrifice. And to transferre this Heb. 10. 0 12 high honour onelie due to CHRIST, vnto a sinfull man, it is a thing vntollerable to true Christians, who are affectioned to the glorie of IESVS CHRIST their Master and Sa∣uiour. But incase a mortall and sinfull man will take vpon him such boldnesse, as to offer the bodie of the Sonne of GOD in a sa∣crifice to the Father, let vs consider, by what warrande of the calling of GOD dare hee presume so to doe. Papists affirme, that when CHRIST instituted the holie Supper, at one, and the selfe same time, hee instituted both a Sacrament and a Sacri∣fice, and consecrated his Apostles, and their successours, to bee Priestes of the newe Testament, to offer vp the bodie of Christ, vnto His FATHER, vnder the formes of Bread and Wine:
and these were the wordes whereby they were consecrated to Lue. 12. 19. this Priesthood, Doe this in remembrance of mee. The Apostle Paule vnderstood the meaning of the words of Christ better than the whole Councell of Trent did: and he expoundeth these wordes. , that is, Doe this, referring them both to Pastors and people: To Pastors, when he saith, That which I deliuered vnto you, 1. Cor. 11. 23 Ibid. ver. 25 I receiued of the Lord: to people, when he saith, As ost as yee drinke, drinke it in remembrance of me. Then the Pastors do this, when they minister the Sacramēt expressely according to the institution of Christ: and the people doe this, when they eate and drinke at the Lordes Table in remembrance of the Lords death. But the Apostle Paul doeth not expound the wordes, , as the Councell of Trent hath done. More-ouer, if CHRIST in these wordes,  that is, Doe this, hee ordained his disciples to be Priests of the new Testament, and to offer in sacrifice the bo∣die of Christ to his Father: then Christ, when hee ministred the holy Supper, hee offered himselfe in a sacrifice to the Father: (for hee biddeth them doe that same thing which hee did) and consequently hee offered himselfe at two diuerse times, and be∣houed to suffer twise, as the Apostle testifieth, which is an absurd Hebr. 9. 25 26 thing once to thinke such a thing. Further, I maye boldly affirme, that the Leuiticall sacrifices were not so farre different from the sacrifice of Christ, as the Masse is different from it: The Leuiticall sacrifices differed in manie thinges from the sacrifice of Christ: as namely in the or∣der of priesthoode in the worthinesse of the Priest, in the excel∣lencie Heb. 7. 8. 9 10 of the sacrifice, in the preciousnesse of the Tabernacle, in the glorie of the Vaile, and moste Holy place, and finally, in the vertue of the blood that was brought within the moste Holie place: Notwithstanding of all these differences betwixt the Le∣uiticall priesthood, and the priesthood of Christ: yet there was some agreement betwixt them, namely this, that both of them were instituted by God. But the sacrifice of the Masse, ouer and besides all other differences, whereby it is distinguished from Christes sacrifice, it is not the institution of God, but a foolishe inuention of the braine of man. Under the formes of bread and wine. The next part of the definition that Christes bodie is offered vnder the accidents of bread and wine, agreeth not well with the
glorie whereinto Christ entered by his ascension: for like as the resurrection of Christ hath glorious priueledges, he beeing ra sed from death, death hath no more dominion ouer him: Euen so, the Roman. 6. 9 ascension of Christ to Heauen hath glorious priueledges: for he who ascended to Heauen, he sitteth at the right hand of the power of God, and will come againe in the cloudes of Heauen: and it repugneth Mat. 27. 64 as farre to the glorie of his ascension to appeare againe in a base similitude, as it repugneth to the glorie of his resurrection to die againe. But so it is, that the accidentes of bread and wine are a base similitude to the blessed and glorified bodie of Christ to put on: yea, and baser than the shape of a seruant, wherewith he was cloathed before his ascension. Concerning the sacrifice of Melchisedek, and their confident assertion, that in the sacri∣fice of the Masse Christ is offered, without suffering, I remit these questions vnto the last head of this TREATISE. The last part of the definition of the Masse containeth, that For the sinnes of the quicke and the dead. it is a sacrifice for the quicke and the dead. If it bee that selfe same sacrifice which Christ offered vpon the crosse, not different from it in substance, but only in forme of offering, then behoo∣ued it to bee of infinite valour, as the sacrifice offered vpon the crosse was. But the multitude of Masses saide for the relieuing of one soule out of purgatorie declareth, that there is not infi∣nite and perfect valour in the sacrifice of the Masse: Ergo, it is not that same sacrifice in substance which Christ offered vpon the crosse: Euen as a Physition, who adhibiteth a plaster vnto a wound, hauing full vertue to cure the wound by once applying it, hee will not applie it the second time, because the wounde is perfectly healed by one sole application: Euen so if the Masse had perfect valour to saue, as the sacrifice of Christ offered vp∣on the crosse had, what neede were it to say manie Masses for the reliefe of one sou'e out of purgatorie? More-ouer, if they offer a sacrifice for the dead, it is not for them who hath died in infidelitie & mis-beliefe, for their soules are buried in Hell, and there is no redemption out of that euer∣lasting Luc. 16 prison: But they offer sacrifice for weake Christians, of whome notwithstanding holy Scripture saieth, that they die in the Lord, they rest from their labours, and their works follow them: so weake Apoc. 14. 13 Christians, when they die, their soules are not carried to purga∣torie,
to bee tormented, but vnto the place of rest, and refresh∣ment, and retribution of all the good thinges which they haue done, like as the Lord hath freely forgiuen them all euill which they did in their life time, because they haue repented, and be∣leeued in Christ their Sauiour. The offering of sacrifice for the dead, doe not only presup∣pone purgatorie, but also that some helpe may bee procured by them who are aliue, to shortē or to mitigate the paines of them who are departed this life. This opinion also repugneth to Ho∣lie Scripture, which admonisheth vs to seeke the Lord in a time when he may be found, that is, to seeke the Lord in our life time, for it is Psalm. 32. 6 vntimous seeking of the Lord after the soule be separated from the bodie. Some men seeke the Lord in a wrong place: some seeke him in a wrong manner, and some seeke him in a wrong time, as the foolish Virgines did. But of all sort of seekers of the Lord, they are most vnfortunate, who seeke him in a time when he cannot be found, and when the doore of his wedding cham∣ber Mat. 25. 10 is shut and locked. For others, who haue sought the Lord in wrong places, that is, in the synagogue of Sathan, where nothing was taught but a doctrine of lies, and they haue sought God in a wrong manner, inuocating Sainctes, and worshipping Images: yet afterward, when they haue receiued better instruction, they haue sought the Lord in a right place, and in a right manner, and haue found the Lord: but they who seeke the Lord in a wrong time shall neuer find him. IN the last head of this Treatise, I promised to speake of the The absur∣dities of the Masse. 1. Absur∣ditie. The Canon of the masse absurdities of the Masse, which albeit they be many in num∣ber, yet I shall reduce them vnto a few heads. First I begin at the blasphemous Canon of the Masse, whereunto the Councell of Trent hath giuen such a glorious testimonie, that it is perfect, ab∣solute, voyde of all errour, and therefore not to bee changed, or abrogated. I call the Canon of the Masse, that rule which pre∣scribeth what shoulde bee saide or sung in the Popish liturgie or Masse. It is not a worke composed by one author, but rather a rapsodie patched vp by many authors, and especially by Popes. Celestinus deuised the preamble or introit to the Masse: Gregorius added kyrie eleson: Telesphorus, gloria in excelsis Deo: Gelatius the first, Platina in vita Xifti 1. the Collations: Pelagius, a commemoration of the dead: Leo the
third added incense: Innocentius the first, added the paxe: Sergius the first, ordained agnus Dei to bee sung: other partes and mem∣bers of the Masse are assigned to their seuerall authors and in∣uentors. In it the Priest is commanded to bowe himselfe before the hostie, & say, I worship thee, I glorisie thee, I praise thee. Can there bee any Idolattie more monstrous than this? for like as GOD hath appointed some creatures to leade vs to our God in so far as he is our Creator: euen so he hath appointed other creatures to leade vs to our God in so far as he is our Redeamer. Now like as it is Idolatrie to subsist in the Sunne, Moone, and starres, and to worship them, because they are but creatures, leading vs to the knowledge of God our Creator: Euen so it is horrible Ido∣latrie, to worship the bread and wine in the Sacrament, be∣cause they are but creatures, appointed by God to leade vs to the knowledge of God our Redeamer. More-ouer, in the Canon of the Masse, the Priest is comman∣ded to praye such prayers as import that Hee is a Mediator be∣twixt Christ and his Father: for hee beseecheth GOD to receiue the oblation which he offereth, and in all things to make it bles∣sed: Nowe the oblation which he offereth (as they affirme) is the bodie of Christ. And shall a sinfull Priest be a mediator betwixt Christ and his Father? Heere they forget the doctrine of Augu∣stine, who saith, that the Mediator of Intercession prayeth for vs, but no man prayeth for Him. And to the ende it might appeare Augu. cont. Parmen. li 2 cap. 8 ye they are countenanced by antiquitie, they insert some prayers vsed by holy Fathers in time of celebration of diuine mysteries, but by a deceitfull transposition of their wordes, they vtterlie peruert the right sense and meaning of the words of the ancient Fathers: as namely, when Ambrose saieth, Command thou these (to wit, oblations) to bee caried by the hands of thine holy Angell vnto the Ambr. de Sacr. lib. 4 cap. 6. high Altar in Heauen. Ambrose spake of the bread and wine, that God would vouchsafe vpon those elements ye high honour, that they might represent vnto vs ye blessed body & blood of Christ, which was like vnto an eleuation of ye elements vnto ye Heauen. But by a deceitfull transposition of ye words of Ambrose, & inser∣ting them after the words of cōsecration, they ordaine their sin∣full Priest to pray for the body of the Sonne of God, which is a notable abusing of the words of Ambrose.
Likewise, in the Canon of the Masse there is inuocation of Saincts, farre contrarie to the auncient custome of the Church: who albeit they made a reuerend commemoration of the names of holy men, when they celebrated diuine mysteries, yet they in∣uocated them not, as Augustine clearly testifieth, saying, The names of Martyres are commemorated in their owne place and order, as men of August. de iuitat. Dei, li. 22. ca. 10 God, yet are they not inuocated by the Priest who offereth sacrifices. The seconde absurditie of the Masse, consisteth in the verie grounds thereof, which I referre first to the superstition of some 2. Absurd. the groūds of the masse Christian people, who had a zeale to God, but not rightly orde∣red with knowledge. Some Christian people were so supersti∣tious, that they were not content to eat the Communion bread at the holy Supper in the Church, but also they carried a part of it home to their houses, & they ate it secretly in their chambers. . Cla. Of this the defenders of the Masse inferreth, If it was lawfull for them to communicate alone in their chamber, much more is it lawfull for the Priest to communicate alone in the Church. Vpon such sandie ground is ye Popish Masse builded. The secōd ground of the Masse is the timorous minds of simple people, who being informed by their deceiuing teachers, that they might haue like benefite, with lesse hazard and danger, by seeing of the sacrifice, as they had by participation of the Sacrament. The people be∣gan to loathe the frequent resorting to the holy Sacrament, and they came to see the sacrifice of the Masse. Both these groundes of the Masse are abuses of ye Lords holy Supper. In ye first ground, that which Christ cōmandeth to be presently eaten in remem∣brance of him, a part thereof is reserued, to be eaten in ye cham∣ber, Luc. 22. 19 contrary to Christs institution, as is already declared. In the second ground, ye Apostolicke precept is neglected, which com∣mandeth vs to trie our selues, and so to eat & drinke at the Lords table: 1. cor. 11. 22 but he forbiddeth vs not to approach to the Lordes holy table, if we be duely & rightly prepared: neither giueth hee allowance to this new forme of communicating, that the people shall stand only gazing and beholding, and shall communicate by ye mouth of the Priest alone. They who brag of antiquitie, and follow new inuented toyes, they haue no honour by their bragging. The third absurditie of the Masse, consisteth in the rotten pil∣lars, 3. Absurd. the pillars of the masse whereupon the Masse standeth, to wit, Trans substantiation
and Purgatorie: for incase the bread bee not changed into the substance of Christs bodie, the priest cannot offer Christs bodie to His Father. And incase there be no soules tormented in Pur∣gatorie, how doeth the priest offer a sacrifice for the dead? So it is manifest, that these are the two rotten pillars vpholding the Masse. I shall refute the doctrine of Transsubstantiation (GOD willing) in its own place: for the present, I say, If there be Trans∣substantiation in the holy Sacrament, then is the spirite of man corporally fedde, and the body of Christ is eaten by many in the Sacrament, to whom hee is not promised in the Word, which is an absurd thing once to imagine it. And if such a place as Pur∣gatorie had beene, then Christ, who hath reueiled vnto vs all Ioan. 14. 2 thinges necessarie to be knowne, hee woulde haue reueiled that mysterie also vnto vs. But Christ hath tolde vs of the pleasures of Heauen, and of the terrours of Hell, but neuer a word of Purga∣torie. Mat. 10. 28 If a house, builded vpon sandie grounde, and leaning vnto rotten pillars, can stand, then possible the Masse also may con∣sist and stand: if not, the Masse also is in danger to fall. The fourth absurditie of the Masse, is a vile abusing of places of holy Scripture, for vpholding the sacrifice of the Masse. In the 4. Absur. a vile abu∣sing of pla∣ces of holie Scripture. Gen, 14. 18 olde Testament, they confirme the sacrifice of the Masse, by the fact of Melchisedek, who brought foorth bread and wine to refresh the wearie armie of Abraham: but not to offer these ele∣ments in a sacrifice to God. And the ancient Fathers, who trans∣late the Hebrew word (obtulit) in stead of (protulit) yet their opi∣nion is, that Melchisedek offered bread and wine to Abraham for his refreshment, but not to God in a sacrifice. But suppose the words of Moses did sound to that sense, that Melchisedek offered a sacrifice of bread & wine vnto God, What belongeth that to the sacrifice of the Masse, wherin they say, that bread and wine is not offered vnto God, but the verie bodie of Christ, vn∣der the accidents of bread and wine? This was not the sacrifice of Melchisedeck. Also, the words of the prophesie of Malachi are mis rably abused, for confirmation of the sacrifice of the Masse whereas hee saieth, For from the rising of the Sunne, vnto the going downe of the same my Name is great among the Gentiles, and in Malac. 1. 11 euerie place: ncense shall bee offered vnto my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name is great among the Heathen, saith the LORD of hostes.
The Prophet expoundeth his owne meaning so clearelie, that there is no neede of any other commentarie for hee is speaking of the calling of the Gentiles to the kingdome of God, and vn∣der one point of the true worship of God: namelie, inuocation of his blessed and glorious Name, hee comprehendeth all other Tertul. con∣tra Marciō. lib. 3. Chrysost. orat. 2. ad∣uers. Iudeo. Euseb. de demonst. Euang. li. 1. cap. 6 Iustin. dial. cum Triph. Iudeo. points of Gods worship, such as faith, obedience, and confession of God before men. Tertullian, Eusebius, and Chrysostona, expounde this pure sacrifice to bee prayer and thankesgiuing vnto GOD. Iustinus Martyr, citing this place of Malachi, affirmeth, that this prophesie was performed at that time, when Grecians and Barbarians, Hamaxobii, and Nomades, and Scenitae, offered prayers and thankesgiuing vnto GOD, the Father and Crea∣tor of all thinges, in the Name of IESVS, who was crucified. In the newe Testament, besides the wordes of Christ spoken at the institution of the holie Supper, where of I haue spoken already, two other places are mightily abused: First the place of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, chap. 8. vers. 3. For euerie high Priest is appointed to offer giftes and sacrifices: wherefore it is necessarie, that this man haue somewhat also to offer. What is in this place, that countenanceth the sacrifice of the Masse? Like as euerie priest was furnished with an offering: euen so the High priest and Bis∣shop of our soules, CHRISTIESVS, hee had an offering, to wit, his blessed bodie, which hee offered for our sinnes: But papists referre this place to an offering, which euerie priest must offer presently, so long as hee enjoyeth the honour of his priest∣hood: and therefore (saye they) seeing CHRIST offereth no externall sacrifice in Heauen, he must doe it in earth, by the sa∣crifice of the Masse: But the verie Grammer refuteth them, for the worde , is a worde of the preterit, and not of the present tense, and importeth, that CHRIST hath alreadie of∣fered a sacrifice for our sinnes, which hath no neede to bee ite∣rated, because it hath perpetuall vertue to saue them that be∣leeue. Another place of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, chap. 13. vers. 10. they abuse, wherein it is saide, Wee haue an altar, whereof they haue no power to eat, who serue in the tabernacle. Here (say they) mention is made of an altar: therfore in the Church there must not only bee a Communion table, but also an altar, in a proper sense to offer CHRISTES bodie vpon it. To this I answere,
That in the newe Testament, like as there is but one high priest, and one propitiatorie sacrifice: so in like manner, there is but one altar, euen Iesus Christ, who is in Heauen, and in whom our spirituall sacrifices are acceptable vnto God, as the Apostle Pe∣ter saieth, Bee you made a spirituall house, an holie priesthoode, to offer spirituall sacrifices acceptable vnto God, by Iesus Christ. 1. Pet. chap. 2. vers. 5. Of this Altar, to wit, Christ, the Iewes, who were mise∣rablie addicted to the ceremoniall lawe, they could not be par∣takers: for by adhering to shaddowes, they neglected to em∣brace the veritie, represented by those shaddowes, after it was indeede exhibited vnto the worlde. In the booke of the Reue∣lation wee reade of an Altar in Heauen, vnder which the soules of them who were slaine for the worde of GOD doe repose: (Apocal. chap. 6. vers. 9.) This is not a materiall altar, because it is in Heauen: but this Altar is Christ, vnder whose shaddow the soules of the Godlie finde comfortable refreshment. And Ireneus, in expresse wordes, saieth, Est ergo Altare in Coelis: illue Iren. aduers. Valentin. lib. 4. ca. 34 enim preces nostrae diriguntur: that is, Therefore our Altar is in Heauen, for thithertoe our prayers are directed. The Romane Church woulde deceiue vs in this point, as Zebul of olde deceiued Gaal, the sonne of Ebed: when Gaal sawe men comming from the moun∣taines, Zebul answered, The shaddowe of the mountaines seeme men vnto thee: (IVD. CHAP. IX. VERS. XXXVI.) Euen so, when holy Scripture speake of Christ the true Altar, they would perswade vs, that Scripture is speaking of a materiall altar, such as is among them. The fift absurditie of the Masse, is a contradiction to it selfe. In the description of the Masse there are two manifest contra∣dictions: 5. Absurd. contradi∣ction to it selfe. First it is called a sacrifice propitiatorie, and vnbloo∣die: which two thinges are so opposite, that they cannot con∣sist together, because the Apostle (in the ninth chap. to the He∣brewes, and the 22. verse) saieth, Without shedding of bloode there is no remission of sinnes. Secondlie they saye, that in the Masse the body of Christ is offered, without suffering: & these two things also are so flatte contradictorie one to another, that the Apostle continuallie joyneth suffering with offering, in so much, that hee saieth, If Christ had offered himselfe often, hee behooued also to haue suffered often. Heb. chap. 9. vers. 25. and 26.
The sixt absurditie, is a foolishe multiplication of vnprofi∣table . Absur. Foolish ce∣remonies multiplied in the masse ceremonies, both before the Masse, and in the celebration thereof with neglecting the essentiall rites of the Sacrament in∣stituted by CHRIST himselfe, such as breaking, distributing, eating, &c. for in their sacrifice, that which they brake in three pieces, to represent the threefolde estate of Christs bodie, dead, buried, and risen againe from death: (by the ordinance of Pope Sergius the first) this bread (I saye) which they breake, they di∣stribute not, and the bread which they distribute in the Sacra∣ment to the people, they breake it not. These essentiall rites beeing laide aside, they haue inuented manie vnprofitable cere∣monies: as namelie, before the celebration of the Masse, Vest∣mentes, Altars, Altar-clothes, Corporasses, Paxes, Torches and Candles, and manie other preparations. In the verie action and celebration of the Masse, are diuerse histionicall gestures of the Priest, to lift vp his eyes and cast them downe againe, to spreade abroade his handes, and to close them againe, to warble with his fingers, to bow downe, to bende vp, to turne from the right hand to the left, and from the left hand to the right, with ma∣nie other vnnecessarie ceremonies. All these they count cere∣monies of signification, representing viuelie the passion of CHRIST. But it appertaineth vnto GOD, to institute ce∣remonies of signification, who can seale vp by them some in∣warde grace in mens heartes. The Church maye content them∣selues with ceremonies of order, as the Apostle writeth, in his first Epistle to the CORINTHIANS, in the fourteenth chap∣ter, and fourtieth verse thereof, where hee saieth, Let all thinges bee done honestlie, and by order. The seuenth & last absurditie, is the vnhappie consequences of the Masse: Albeit they bee manie, yet at this time I reduce 7. Absur. The conse∣quences of the Masse. them to three heads. First, prohibition of marriage to men in spirituall offices, is a consequent of the Masse: for albeit in the Councell of NICE this matter was seriouslie vged, and IE∣ROME, in the furie of his disoutation against IOVINIAN, speaketh not so reuerentlie of marriage as became him: yet this prohibition preuailed not fullie, vntill the sacrifice of the Masse was receiued and established: Then it was thought meete, that
like as married persons, for prayer and fasting, (I. CO∣RINTH. CHAPTER VII. VERSE V.) shoulde abstaine, for a short time, from matrimoniall fellowship: In like manner, these, who are called to a continuall exercise of praying, and sacrificing, they shoulde also continuallie abstaine from the bed of marriage. So that prohibition of marriage, to men in spi∣rituall offices, attended the Masse, as a Page doeth his master. And Popes, such as SIRICIVS, CALIXTVS, GREGO∣RIVS the seuenth, &c. did vrge prohibition of marriage with no lesse vehemencie, than they did the establishing of the Masse. The seconde consequence of the Masse, is a miserable abu∣sing of the people of GOD, because by this sacrifice, for the moste part, the people were bereaued of the preaching of the Worde, and the ministration of the Sacramentes, the verie or∣dinarie meanes, whereby the Kingdome of GOD is builded amongst them: The Worde was seldome preached, and in verie vnfruitfull manner, and mixed with fables and lying miracles, borrowed out of legendes, not worthie to bee read: and the holie Sacramentes were seldome ministred, and with filthie ad∣dition of ceremonies, inuented by the braine of man, to Bap∣tisme, and a sacrilegious with-holding from the people, the cuppe, in ministring vnto them the holie Supper: and so the fountaines of liuing water were stopped, and cisternes were opened, and the wholsome foode of GODS people was tur∣ned into ashes: and in steade of preaching GODS Worde sincerelie, all Church-seruice was turned into a dumbe guise of the Masse: and in reading of prayers and passages of Scrip∣ture, into an vnknowne language: so the people, for fault of good instruction, withered as grasse, when it is not refreshed with dewe and raine: Yea, and SALOMON saieth, Where there is no vision, the people decay, PROV. 29. 18. The thirde, and moste venomous consequence of the Masse, is procession and adoration: for hosties, consecrated in time of Masse, although not broken and eaten, they are counted CHRISTES bodie, and carried about in procession, and
worshipped. This was not the ancient custome of the Church: for the sacrament consisting in the action and vse thereof, so long as the blessing, and the actions of breaking, distributing, and eating lasted, the bread was counted holie, and represen∣ted the blssed bodie of IESVS: but after these holie actions were ended, the rest of the bread, that was not vsed in the Sa∣crament, it was distributed to the poore: but it was not kept in boxes, to bee carried in procession, and to bee adored and wor∣shipped by ignorant people. And of all thinges, that are deficient in Poperie, I haue of times obserued, that antiquitie, whereof they principallie bragge, is moste deficient and lacking in them. The ground of Popish procession, no doubt, was the sending of the Sacraments to those who were sicke and absent by some Iustin. apol. 2. necessitie. But they reade not in IVSTINVS, nor in any other ancient writer, that people who met the deacon carrying the Eucharist to sicke persons, fell downe vpon their knees, and worshipped it. This abominable idolatrie, more vile than the idolatrie of the Gentiles, was not of ancient time in vse in the Church. Nowe the LORD, who hath redeemed our soules from death, and who hath called vs from darknesse vnto His marucilous loue, establishe our soules in the trueth of GOD, through CHRIST IE∣SVS our LORD, AMEN. FINIS.
THE VIII. CENTVRIE. CHAP. I. OF EMPEROURS. PHILIPPICVS. AFTER IVSTINIAN the second was slaine, PHILIPPICVS reig∣ned two yeeres, and nine monethes. Great dissention fell out betwixt the Emperour Philippicus and Constantine Bishop of Rome, for razing (as appea∣reth) the pictures of Fathers, who were present at the sixt Generall Councell, which beeing pictured in the Temple of Sophia, were abolished by the commandement of Philippicus. Constantine Bishop of Rome declared the Emperour an heretique, and commanded, that his name shoulde bee rased out of charters. This was the first great, direct, and violent op∣position, that the Bishops of Rome attempted against noble Emperours. Philippicus was taken, and his eyes were put out by Anastasius, otherwise called Artemius, his Secretarie, who reigned in his stead.
ARTEMIVS. ARTEMIVS, otherwise called Anastasius, reigned one yeere and three monethes: hee deposed Ihonne patriarch of Con∣stantinople, who kept not the true faith: and placed Germanus in his steade. Hee was taken by Theodosius, and sent prisoner to Nice, and from thence to Thessalonica, where hee was compelled to renounce his Emperiall dignitie, and to be cloathed with the habite of a Monke. THEODOSIVS. THEODOSIVS reigned scarce one yeere: and when hee heard that Leo Isaurus, gouernour in the East partes, was saluted Emperour by the armie, hee willinglie gaue ouer his Emperiall dignitie, and liued a priuate and peaceable man. LEO ISAVRVS. LEO ISAVRVS reigned twentie foure yeeres: great com∣motions were in his time, both in Church and policie: In Church-affaires, hee was an hater of Images, and burnt images made of wood, other images hee melted, and misfashioned: against whome Gregorius the seconde, puft vp with antichristian pride, hee opponed himselfen, t only allowing worshipping of images, but also forbidding to paye tribute to the Emperour Leo. The Emperour on the other part irritated with the proude attempts of Gregorius the second: he vsed indirect meanes to cut him off: but the enterprises of his deputies Marinus, Paulus, Eutychius, and their followers, succeeded vnprosperously. More∣ouer, the Bishop of Rome sought support from the Lombardis, who had beene at all times preceeding enemies to the chaire of Rome: yet in Leo his dayes they were bounde with the bishop of Rome in a couenant of friendship, for none other cause, but this onely, to shake off the yoke of the Emperours obedience. And when the bishop of Rome sawe that the Emperour had great bu∣sinesse in warres against the Saracens, he thought it a sit occasion to drawe the dominion of Italic vnto his owne subjection: and Hist. Magd, Cent. 1. cap. 3. therefore, with aduise of his Clergie, hee both excommunicated
the Emperour, as a destroyer of the images of the Saincts, and disauthorised him of his Emperiall soueranitie, So early began the increasing grandour of the Antichrist, to sende foorth the thuńder-boltes of cursinges against the annointed of the Lord. In this Emperours dayes the Saracenes passed ouer the Straites, inuaded the kingdome of Spaine, slewe Rodericus king of Gothes, and his sonne, and put an ende to the kingdome of the Gothes in Spaine, after they had reigned 346. yeeres: and being incited by Eudo, Duke of Aquitania, they marched towardes France: but Platin. in vit. Greg. 2. thorowe the valour of Carolus Martellus, a man of noble birth in France, they were so encountered, that three hundreth thou∣sand, and threescore and ten thousand Saracenes were slaine, and the countrey of France was made free of the feare of ye Saracens. CONSTANTINVS COPRONYMVS. AFTER LEO, his sonne CONSTANTINVS CO∣PRONYMVS reigned 35. yeeres: (Chytreus reckoneth on∣lie 23. yeeres) because hee hated the worshipping of images, (which errour had taken deepe roote in this age) the writers of the historie of this time haue dipped their pennes in gall and worm-wood to blaspheme the honourable name of Constātinus: but whatsoeuer Paulus Diaconus, or zonaras haue written to his disgrace, his name will bee in honourable account and regarde in the Church of CHRIST. The Senate, and the people, of Constantinople, addicted to the worshipping of images, hated the Emperour, and were glad of the false rumoured tithings of his death, when hee went to fight against the Arabians, & they chose Artabasdus to bee Emperour in his steade. But Constantine retur∣ned to Constantinople, besieged the towne, and recouered his owne kingdome againe. Hee gathered a Generall Councell in Constantinople, anno 755. wherein the worshipping of images was damned, as shall bee declared (God willing) in its owne place. In this Emperours dayes were warres betwixt the kings of Lom∣bardis, and the Bishops of Rome: but the Romane Bishops begged the helpe of Carolus Martellus against Luitprand, and the helpe of Pipinus against Aistulphus, and the helpe of Carolus Magnus
against Desiderius, all kinges of Lombardis: and so by continuall imploring the helpe of the Nobles & Kinges of France, the Lom∣bardes were vtterly fubdued, the chaire of Rome was inriched, the reuenewe of the Emperour of the East was impaired, and a ground was laide of the aduancement of the kinges of France to the Emperiall dignitie. In this Emperours dayes the Turkes, or Schythians, inuaded the Armenians, and molested the Saracenes, and some countreys of Asia minor, in ende they accorded with the Saracenes: But this agreement could not bee perfected with∣out Platina in vit. Steph. 2 condition, That the Turkes in Persia shoulde vndergoe the name of Saracenes, hoping thereby that they woulde easily em∣brace the Mahometane religion, wherein their exspectation was not frustrate. In the yeere of our Lord 579. and in the 18. yeere of the reigne of Constantine, a wonderfull thing fell out amongst the wise men of Persia, called Magi, and Maurophori Persae: they per∣swaded both themselues, and others also, That if any man would fell all that hee had, and throwe himselfe headlonges from the walles of the cities, his soule should incontinent bee tranfported Funct. com∣ment. lib. 8 to heauen. So prone and bent is the corrupt nature of man to leane vpon vaine hopes, and to belceue promises which GOD hath not made. LEO the sonne of COPRONYMVS. LEo the son of Constantinus Copronymus reigned 5. yeeres: he followed the foote-steps of his father in zeale against wor∣shipping of images: and punished the Groomes of his owne chamber, such as Iames, Papias, Strateius, and Theophanes, for wor∣shipping of images. The superstitious writers of the historie of this time, such as Zonaras, and Paulus Diaconus, reckon the afore∣said persons in the Catalogue of holy Confessors: But Christ, he will neuer count them to be His martyrs, who fight obstinatelie against his trueth, euen vnto the death: neither will Hee count them to be His Confessors who suffer justly inflicted punishmēt for contempt of the lawes of Magistrates, beeing agreeable to the law of God.
IRENE, and CONSTANTINVS her sonne. AFter the death of Leo, reigned Irene his wife, with her sonne Constantine ten yeeres. Afterwardes Constantine deposed his mother from her authoritie, and reigned alone 7. yeeres. And Irene on ye other part, taking this indignitie done vnto her grie∣uously, she spoyled her sonne both of his eyes, & of his Empire, cast him into prison, where he died for heart griefe: and she reig∣ned againe 4. yeeres after her sonnes imprisonment: So all the yeeres of the reignes of Irene & her sonne, conjunctly and eue∣rally, first & last, were 21. yeeres. This Empresse was superstitious, malicious, craftie, & infortunate. She was a superstitious defen∣der of the worshipping of images. A malicious & venomous ha∣ter of the name of Constantinus Copronymus, whose dead body she commanded to bee brought out of his graue, to bee burnt with fire, resolued into ashes, and to be casten into the sea. (albeit Con∣stantine was her owne father in lawe) The mercies of the wicked Prouerb. 12 are cruell. Her craft appeared in bringing her forces to Constan∣tinople, in the sixt yeere of her reigne, vnder pretence of fighting against the Arabians, and in disarming of them whom she knew to haue beene aduersaries to worshipping of images, & sending them in ships to the places from whence they came: For before the dayes of Constantinus Copronymus, the towne of Constantinople, by famine & pestilence, being besieged 3. yeeres by the Saracens, was miserably dispeopled, so that 30000. of the people of Con∣stantinople died. But Copronymus, for repairing of that losse, sent Platina in vita Greg. 2 for strangers, and replenished the towne with new inhabitantes. These strangers she sent back againe, to the places from whence they came, especially, because in populare commotion they had Funct. com∣ment. in chron. lib. 8 set themselues in armes, and minassed the Fathers conuened in Constantinople, by Irene and her sonne, for allowance of adoration of images. Shee was infortunate, because the Empire of the East was so extenuate in her time, that it was rather like vnto a shad∣dowe, than vnto an Empire. So that in the subsequent historie I will forget (after a manner) the Emperours of the East, and make mention of the Emperours of the West. Now, Irene was deposed, and banished, by Nicephorus, who reigned eight yeeres after her banishment.
CHAP. II. Of Popes, Patriarches, Pastors, and Doctors. AFTER Pope SERGIVS succeeded IOAN∣NES Jhonne the six. the sixt, and continued three yeeres and three monethes. And after him Pope Ioannes the seuenth continued two yeeres and seuen monethes he liued in the dayes of Iustinian the Jhonne the seuenth. second, who sent Ambassadours vnto him for procuring an vnion betwixt the Churches of the East and the West, because they differed in opinions con∣cerning the Canons of the sixt Generall Councell, wherein pro∣hibition of marriage to men in spirituall offices, was disalowed, and the Patriarch of Constantinople was equalled in authority to the Patriarch of Rome. These Ambassadours aforesaide returned from Pope Ihonne the seuenth without any answere: which proud carriage, or as others doe thinke, a cowardly forme of dealing all writers doe vituperate. And after him succeeded Sisinius, who continued not aboue twentie dayes in his Popedome. Sisinius. After Sisinius succeeded Constantine the first, and gouerned se∣uen yeeres, and twentie dayes. His Popedome was vndr the Constan∣tine the first. reignes of Iustinian the seconde, Philippicus, and Anastasius. The Emperour Iustinian supported him against Foelix bishop of Ra∣uenna, who had refused to paye to the bishop of Rome the summe of money imposed to him in time of his ordination: so that Foe∣lix was taken prisoner, by the Emperours Admirall, and sent to Constantinople, where his eyes were put out, and hee was banished to Pontus. Against the Emperour Philippicus, he contended, as one hauing authoritie to rase the name of the Emperour out of charters, as hath beene alreadie declared. This is the Pope who was made judge betwixt the bishops of Ticinum and Millane, who contended for superioritie: And Constantine eximed the bis∣shop
of Ticinum from the jurisdiction of the bishop of Millan: but in such way, as he should be subject to the Church of Rome. The Emperour Iustinian the seconde, sent for pope Constantine, who came to Constantinople, and from thence went to Nicomedia, where hee met with the Emperour, and the Emperour kissed his feete. Marke the growing, and daylie increasing pride of the Romane Antichrist. After Constantine succeeded Gregorius the second, & continued sixteene yeeres, nine monethes, and eleuen dayes. Hee liued vn∣der Gregorius the second. the reigne of the Emperour Leo Isaurus, whom he rashly ex∣communicated for abolishing of images. Also hee drewe awaye from the obedience of the Emperour, the countreys of He spe∣ria, Aemilia, Liguria, and other parts of Italie, forbidding them to paye tribute to the Emperour, expresse contrarie to Christes commandement, Matth. 22. 21. where He saith, Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars, &c. and this Christ spake concerning paying of tribute. Gregorie the thirde gouerned ten yeeres, eight monethes, and 24. dayes, and followed the foote-steps of his predicessor, both Gregorius the third. in aduancing the doctrine of the worshipping of images, and in with-drawing the people of Italie from the obedience of the Emperour. More-ouer, he gathered a Councell at Rome, wherein the worshipping of images had allowance. And the Emperour Leo was both excommunicated, and likewise, so farre as in him laye, depriued of his Emperiall dignitie. So early did the beast of Rome, euen in ciuill matters, vsurpe authoritie ouer the Princes and Monarches of the worlde. In his dayes the towne of Rome was besieged by Luitprand king of Lombardis. But Carolus Mar∣tellus, a noble prince in France, beeing sollicited by the letters of Gregorie, to support the distressed estate of the Church of Rome, hee perswaded Luitprand to desist from molesting and befie∣ging the towne of Rome. After Gregorie the third succeeded Zacharias the first, and con∣tinued ten yeeres, foure monethes, and foure dayes: In antichri∣stian Zacharias the first. pride hee surpassed all his predecessors, distributing the kingdomes of the worlde at his pleasure: For hee procured, that Pipinus, the sonne of Carolus Martellus (who was but a subject, and a ruler of the kinges house) shoulde bee annointed king of
France, and that Childericus, the lawfull successour of the king∣dome, Funct. com∣ment. in chron. lib. 8 should haue his head shauen, and bee thrust into a Mona∣sterie. Likewise he procured, that Carolomannus, the elder brother of Pipinus, should be a Monke of the Order of Sainct Benedict, in the Monasterie of Cassinates. Rachis also, king of Lombardes, after he had reigned foure yeeres, gaue ouer his kingly authority, and entered into a Monasterie, and exhorted his wife and children to doe the like: and so his brother Aistulphus obtained the king∣dome. Pipinus was annointed king of France, by Bonifacius, at the commaundement of pope Zacharias, anno 750. or as Platina rec∣koneth, anno 753. What recompense of reward Pipinus rendered to the chaire of Rome, for this beneuolence, or rather this mani∣fest iniquitie of Zacharias, it will bee declared in the description of the life, gouernement, and carriage of Stephanus the seconde, if the Lord please. AFTER ZACHARIAS succeeded STEPHANVS the second, and ruled fiue yeeres, & one moneth. In his time Aistul∣phus, Stephanus the second. king of Lombardes besieged Rome, at two diuerse times, and Stephanus implored the aide and assistance of Pipinus king of France at both times. At the first time Pipinus besieged. Aistul∣pbus in Papia the chiefe citie of the residence of the kinges of Lombardes, and compelled him to restore to the chaire of Rome all the townes and lands which by violence he had reaued from them. But at his second comming, hee not onely relieued Rome from the siege of the Lombardes, but also bestowed vpon the chaire of Rome the dominions of Rauenna and Penta-poles, apper∣taining to the Emperour of the East, and which they enjoyed since the death of Narses 170. yeeres. In so doing, there was Tlatina in vita Step. 2 such bargaining betwixt the kinges of France and the popes, as was of olde betwixt Herod and the Iewes, he gratified them with the blood of Christes Apostles, and they gratified him on the Acts 12. other part by giuing to him the glorie of God: Euen so, Zacha∣rias, bishop of Rome, bestowed vpon Pipinus the kingdome of France, which duely appertained to another: and Pipinus againe bestowed vpon the chaire of Rome the dominions of Rauenna and Pentapolis, which duely appertained to the Emperour of the East. It shall not bee amisse to make a particulare rehearsall of the
townes & territories bestowed vpō the Church of Rome, by the donation of Pipinus, but not of Constantine, as they haue rumou∣red most fabulously many yeeres agoe: INPRIMIS, Rauenna, Bono∣nia, Imola, Fauentia, Commaclum, Hadria, Pompilii Forum, Leuii Forū, Cesena, Bobium, Ferraria, Ficoclas, and Gabellum: all these townes were vnder the dominion of Rauenna. And in Pentapolis, Arimi∣num, Pisaurum, Concha, Fanum, Senogallia, Ancona, Auximum, Huma∣nam, Aesium, Sempronii Forum, Mons Feretri, Urbium, Balmense terri∣torium, Callas, Luceolos, Eugubium, together with the Castles and Landes appertaining to these townes, to wit, the Prouinces cal∣led in our time Romandiola, and Marca Anconitana, and of olde Aemilia, Flaminea, and Picenum. Thus wee see what a rich rewarde the chaire of Rome obtained for their defection from the Empe∣rours of the East, and their fauour towards the kings of France. Also, for further confirmation of friendship betwixt the bishops of Rome, and the kings of France, pope Stephanus the second pro∣cured, that he should bee inuited to bee witnesse at the baptisme of the king of France his young sonne, at which time, as a man couetous of vaine glorie, he suffered Pipinus, and Charles his son, to kisse his feete, and to holde his stirrope, and to lead his horse by the bridle: and finally, hee was content to bee mounted vp, and carried vpon the shoulders of men, leauing behind him an example of stinking pride to the posteritie after following. After Stephanus the seconde, succeeded his brother Paulus the first, who continued 10. yeeres, and one moneth. In antichri∣stian pride he was nothing inferiour to his predecessours, for he sent Paulus the first. Ambassadours to the Emperour of the East Constantinus Co∣pronymus, to exhort him to restore againe the images of the Saincts, which hee had demolished, with intermination of cur∣sing if hee refused to bee obedient to the popes counsell. In his time Aistulphus king of Lombardes died, and Desiderius the last king of Lombardes reigned in his stead. Constantine the brother of Desiderius king of Lombardis suc∣ceeded Constan∣tinus the second. to Paulus the first, a man admitted to the popedome be∣fore he had receiued Ecclesiasticall orders: therefore he was ha∣ted of the people of Rome, and denuded of his papall dignitie, after hee had continued one yeere and one moneth: some wri∣ters affirme, that his eyes were thrust out, and that hee was sent
to a Monasterie: others affirme, that he was burnt with fire, by the hatefull malice of the Romanes. To him succeeded Stephanus the thirde, who ruled 4. yeeres, 5. monethes, and 27. dayes: hee gathered a Councell at Rome, Stephanus the third. in the which 12. bishops of France, sent thither by Charles de Mame, were present, with the bishops of Italie, who disauthori∣sed Constantine his predecessour, & annulled all his decrees. Like∣wise, they damned the 7. Generall Councell conuened in Con∣stantinople by Constantinus Copronymus, wherein the worshipping of images was disallowed. But in this Laterane Councell assem∣bled by Stephanus the thirde, the worshipping of images getteth allowance. And it was thought, that God and the Sainctes were in deterior case, than mortall Princes, incase that images might be made to represent mortall Princes, but not to represent God and his Saincts. It was rumoured in this popes time, that Charls Platina in vita Steph. 3 king of France was of intention to marrie Bertha, the daughter of Desiderius king of Lombardes. Stephanus fearing lest this mar∣riage should vndoe the friendship lately contracted betwixt the bishops of Rome. and the kings of France, disswaded Charles from the marriage aforesaid, as if the marriage of a woman of the kin∣red of the Lombardes, were a mixing of darknesse with light, and of Belial with CHRIST. And the minassing letter of Stepha∣nus the third preuailed so farre at the hands of Charles the great, that he repudiated Bertha the daughter of Desiderius, his lawfull married wife, after he had cohabited with her one yeere: and he married another woman named Hildegarde, of the Dukerie of Sweue. These are the fruits of antichristian pride, to threaten the torments of hell against the princes of the worlde for marriage, if so be they fore-see anie damnage may redound to the chaite of Rome by the marriage of princes. After Stephanus the thirde, succeeded Adrian the first, and go∣uerned 23. yeeres, ten monethes, and seuenteene daes. In his dayes Charles the Great came into Italie with an armie, and ba∣nished Adrianus the first. Platina in vita Adti. 1 Desiderius king of Lombardes, his wife, and children, to Lions in France, and vtterly suodued the kingdome of the Lom∣bardes, which had continued in Italie 204. yeeres. Nowe in the yeere of our Lord 776. this kingdome was abolished & vndone, by Charles the Great king of France, for the fauour he carried to∣wards
the chaire of Rome. Likewise, he augmented the donation of his father Pipinus, and he bestowed vpon the Church of Rome the Isle of Corsica, and the places interjacent betwixt Luca and Parma, with the Dukedomes of Spoleto and Beneuento. This being Funct. com∣ment in chronol li.  done, Charles returned backe againe to France, carying with him Bertha his brothers wife, and hir children, who came to Adrian bishop of Rome, hoping for fauour at his handes, and that hee should haue annointed her sonnes to be kings of France, seeing Carolomannus their father was now dead but hee deliuered them into the hands of Charles, and so Charles the Great reigned with∣out exception, as absolute commander of France. Irene the Em∣presse of the East, during the time of Adrians popedome, assem∣bled a great Councell at Nice in Bythinia, where the adoration of images was allowed. In this Councell the popes Ambassa∣dours were present, and his owne letter was read in the Coun∣cell: no man gaue greater allowance to the worshipping of ima∣ges, than pope Adrian did, as shall be declared (God willing) in the head of Councels. It is to be marked, that Platina, writing of the death of Constantinus Copronymus, is compelled to beare wit∣nesse to the trueth, and testifie, that the opinion of the leprosie of Constantine the Great was a notable fable, and that it sprang vp by occasion of the disease of Constantinus Copronymus, the fa∣ther in law of the Empresse Irene. To Adrian succeeded Leo the third, and gouerned 21. yeeres: he was hated by Pascalis and Campulus, who lay in waite for him Leo the third. at the Church of Sainct Syluester, threw him downe to ye ground, spoy led him of his pontificall garments, beate him with manie strokes, and finally, cast him into prison and bands: but he esca∣ped by the meanes of a cubiculare, named Albinus, & lurked in the Vaticane vntill the time that Unigisius, duke of Spoleto, con∣uoyed him safely vnto his boundes. At this time Charles king of France had warres against the Saxones. The bishop of Rome, who came to him to complaine of the injuries which hee had recei∣ued, was sent back againe verie honourably, accompanied with the souldiours of Charles king of France: and with promise that hee shoulde without delay addresse his journey towardes Italie. When Charles came to Italie, the popes enemies were so dashed with feare, that they durst not appeare to accuse him: and the
Clergie of Rome thought meete, that no man shoulde judge of the Apostolike chaire, but the bishop of Rome should be his own judge. Leo tooke the booke of the Gospell in his handes, and swore, that he was innocēt of all ye crimes objected against him: Hist. magd. Cent. 8. c. 10 and so he was absolued: & Pascalis & Campulus, the friēds of ye late deceassed pope Adrian, were counted worthy of death: but pope Leo intercided for safetie of their liues: so they were banished to France. For this benefite, Leo caused Charles to bee declared Em∣perour of the West, and crowned him with the Emperiall Dia∣deme. And from that time forwardes, the custome beganne, that Emperoures shoulde receiue their Coronation from the Bishop of ROME. Notwithstanding of this, it was ordained, that no man shoulde bee elected Bishop of ROME, without aduice of the Emperour of the West, and without receiuing inuestment from him. THE Patriarches of Constantinople in this CENTVRIE, were Patriar∣ches of Constanti∣nople. placed and displaced according to the changeable conceits of the Emperours. Vnder the reigne of Iustinian the seconde, Cy∣rus was Patriarch, whom Philippicus remoued, and aduanced one named Ihonne, who had fore-tolde, that he should be made Em∣perour. This Ihonne was infected with the heresie of the Mono∣thelites, and was remoued by Artemius, by whome Germanus was aduanced to the chaire of Constantinople. Germanus continued vntill the reigne of Constantinus Copronymus: Hee was deposed and excommunicated by the Generall Councell assembled by Constantinus, because hee allowed the worshipping of images. To him succeeded Anastasius, who albeit hee disliked ima∣ges, yet hee was vnthankefull to the Emperour, and fauoured the seditious attemptes of the people of Constantinople, who ad∣uanced Artabasdus to the Emperiall dignitie. More-ouer, hee slandered the Emperour, as if he had spoken against the diuini∣tie of Christ. Hee receiued a just recompense of his vnthanke∣fulnesse: for hee was deposed, and scourged, and set vpon an Asse, with his face towards the Asses taile, and made a ridiculous spectacle to the people. After him, Constantine, a Mōke, was made Patriarch, who at the first seemed to damne images: but afterward he was found to be a maintainer and allower of them. The Emp. banished him to
Iberia, where hee spake contumeliouslie both of the Emperour and of the Councell holden at Constantinople: therefore hee was brought backe againe from banishment, and was beheaded, and his bodie was trailed through the towne with a corde, & casten into a pit, where the bodies of male-factors were accustomed to bee casten. After him succeeded Nicetas, a man vnlearned, & aduāced by the Em. Const. Copron. for none other cause but only for his zeale against the worshipping of images. After him succeeded Paulus Cyprius, who in the dayes of Const. Copron. damned the worship∣ping of images: but afterward repented: & vnder the reigne of Irene entered into a Monastery, & lamented, that he had cōsented to the abolishing of images. The vaine repentance of this timo∣rous and superstitious man, was the chiefe occasion of the con∣uocation of the seconde Councell of Nice, by the Empresse Irene. To him succeeded Tarasius, who was present at the se∣cond Councell of Nice, and gaue allowance to the adoration of images. The preuailing power of the Saracenes in Alexandria, Antio∣chia, and Hierusalem, did so obscure the names of the Patriarches of these cities, that I haue no remarkeable thing to write of them in this CENTVRIE. IN this declining age, wherein spirituall grace dayly decayed, Of Pa∣stors and Doctors. and nothing encreased except an heape of earthly treasures, which God permitteth to be powred into the bosomes of them who loue the wages of iniquitie. Alwayes, euen at this time some men of good literature and learning did manifest themselues vnto the world, such as Bonifacius bishop of Mentz. Damascene alearned Monke, Paulus Diaconus a learned writer of histories, and Beda a man counted venerable in his time: yet all these were miserably infected with the superstitions of their time, such as the opinion of Purgatorie, inuocation of Sainctes, and worship∣ping of Images, and prohibition of Marriage. Bonifacius was a man borne in ENGLAND, in a place neare adjoyning to EXCESTER: he was familiarly acquainted with fiue popes, to wit, with pope Constantinus the first, Gregorius the seconde, Gregorius the thirde, Zacharias the first, and Stepanus the seconde: And by them hee was aduaunced to manie honours,
First, to be the Popes Legate in ENGLAND, GERMANIE, and FRANCE, and afterwardes to bee Archbishop of Mentz. All his studies and trauels tended to this, to bring the people of ENG∣LAND, Germanie, and France, to the subjection of the Romane bi∣shop, and to a conformitie to the superstitions of the Romane Church. In the name, and at the commandement of pope Zacha∣rias, he disauthorised Childericus king of France, thrust him into a Monasterie, and anointed Pipinus, the sonne of Carolus Martellus to be king of France. So zealous was hee to performe all the de∣sires of the Romane bishops, by whome also his name was chan∣ged: for hee was first named Vinofridus, but the bishops of Rome, who delited in his seruice, called him Bonifacius. After he had ser∣ued the Romane bishops in slauish subjection 36. yeeres, hee was slaine by Pagans, because he had anointed Pipinus king of France, and for hope they had to enrich themselues by his coffers, in the which, when they had opened them, they found nothing, except bookes, and reliques of Saincts, whereof they made no account. And his bodie was buried in the Monasterie of Fulda. Damascene, a superstitious Monke, the disciple of Cosinas, liued Ioannes Damasce∣nus. vnder the Emperours Leo and Constantinus Copronymus: hee was a long time in companie of the Saracenes, and with the prince of Saracenes he went to the sepulchre of Mahomet, and like vnto a timorous bodie, worshipped the bones of Mahomet, fearing to Hist. magd. Cent. 8. c. 10 haue beene put to death, if hee had not done such homage. Hee was a patron of worshipping of images, and was excommuni∣cated in the Generall Councell assembled by Constantinus Copro∣nymus. It is written by Ihonne patriarch of Hierusalem, in the hi∣storie of Damascens life, that the prince of Saracenes was mooued to indignation against him, by a deceitfull letter, sent from the Emperour Leo Isaurus, in the which Damascene was charged as a man willing to haue betrayed the towne of Damascus into the hands of the Emperour Leo. Vpon this occasion (saieth Ihon pa∣triarch of Hierusalem) the prince of Saracenes cut off the hand of Damascene: and on the other part, Damascene, by humble knee∣ling before the image of the Virgine Marie, was miraculouslie cured, and restored againe to the power of his hand. But this is like to the rest of Popish fables, and lies: For Damascene writeth manie notable fables, for confirmation of adoration of images.
And incase a miracle had bene wrought in his owne person, by prostrating himselfe before an image, Damaescene had no man∣ner of waye ouer-passed with silence the memoriall thereof. But wee haue to doe with aduersaries, who are not ashamed of lies. Damascene was a diligēt reader of the bookes of ancient Fathers, as appeareth by his foure bookes, De Orthodoxa Fide: but not so diligent a reader of holy Scripture, which is the ground of mani∣folde errours. His historie of Iosophat, king of India, is knowne to bee a Monkish fable. Paulus Diaconus, of the kinred of the Lombardes, became a Deacon in Aquileia: hee was carried captiue into France, in the Paulus Diaconus. dayes of Charles the Great, who besieged Papia, banished Deside∣rius, and made an ende of the kingdome of the Lombardes. After∣wards he was accused of treason and conspiracie against Charles king of France. His malicious and hatefull accusers were bent to haue had his hands cut off, or his eyes put out: but K. Charles pittying him for his learning, was content that he should be ba∣nished to the Ile of Diomedes. From thence hee fled, and came to Beneuentum, where Arachis was dwelling, who had married Adel∣perga, the daughter of Desiderius. In his pallace it is thought hee writ his sixe bookes, De rebus gestis Longobardarum. After the death of Arachis hee came to the Monasterie called Cassinense, where hee ended his life. Beda, a man borne and brought vp in ENGLAND, was called venerable, and was in great account in his time. Onely hee was Beda. miserably intangled with deceitfull antichristian errours, vni∣uersally ouerspred in his dayes, such as inuocation of Sainctes, worshipping of Reliques, opinion of Purgatorie, and of support that might be had by saying of Masses. In writing, reading, and praying, hee was a man of incessant paines. Nothing is found in him more commendable, than his patient suffering of the ago∣nies immediately preceeding his dissolution, with a desire to be Albertus Gallus, with some learned mē of Scotlād, witnesses to the trueth of God. dissolued, and to be with Christ. Albertus Gallus, a Bishop in some part of France, a learned and godly man, opponed himselfe mightily to Bonifacius, the foote∣groome of the Romane Antichrist, with whome concurred two Iearned men borne in Scotland, named Clemens presbyter, and Samson, and offered to prooue both by worde and writing, that
Bonifacius was an author of lies, a troubler of the peace of Chri∣stians, and a corrupter and deceiuer of the people. But pope za∣charias excommunicated them before they were heard in a law∣full Assemblie, and gaue power to his foote-groome Bonifacius, Hist. magd. Cent. 8. c. 10 to depose them, & procured at the hands of the king of France, that they should be casten into prison, and bound with bandes, as schismatiques, false teachers, and sacrilegious men. Such re∣warde men receiued, who were witnesses to the trueth of God, and reprehended any corruption of the Romane Church. In like manner, Joannes Mailrosius, and Claudius Clemens, learned men of Scotland, sent by king Achaus, to Charles king of France, and the first professors of learning, in the Academie founded by Charles the Great in Parise: these two likewise were disliked of the Ro∣mane Church, because they could not assent to all ye superstitions of that Church in this age so miserably deformed. CHAP. III. OF HERETIQUES. MANIE were counted Heretiques in this age, because they worshipped God sincerelie accor∣ding to the rule of His owne blessed worde, and woulde not giue consent to the fonde errours of the Romane Church. But some were counted He∣retiques justly, and without all controuersie, as Foeliciani. namely, they who called Christ, in his humane nature, the adop∣tiue sonne of God. This wicked heresie repugneth vnto the Ce∣lestiall Oracle, which the three Apostles hearde in the holie mountaine, This is my welbeloued sonne, in whome I am well pleased. Matth. 17 2. Petr. 1 We are adopted in Christ, to be the sonnes of God. But Christ, euen in his manly nature, is the sonne of GOD by the excellent prerogatiue of personall vnion with the diuine nature. It is not certainly knowne, whether Elipandus bishop of Hispalis, or ano∣ther named Foelix, with whom some affirme, that Elipandus con∣sulted about this damnable opinion, was the author of this damnable heresie.
CHAP. IIII. OF COUNCELS. IN the yeere of our LORD 712. a Councell was assembled at LONDON, where 'Bonifacius A Coun∣cil at LONDON was present, and Brithuvaldus the chiefe Prelate of ENGLAND, and the kings of Saxons domi∣ning in ENGLAND were commanded vnder paine of cursing to bee present at this Councell. The purposes intraited in this Councell were two, to wit, concerning the ado∣ration of images, and prohibition of marriage to men in spiri∣tuall offices. About worshipping of images no disputation was heard, whether that forme of seruice did agree with the written worde of God, or not. This was counted a sufficient warrande for bringing images into places of Adoration, and for worship∣ping them (especially the image of the Virgine Marie) that Eguvinus, a superstitious Monke in England, of the Order of S. Bennet, who afterwardes was made a Bishop. Hee affirmed, that the Virgine Marie appeared vnto him in a dreame, & de∣clared, that it was her will that her image should bee set vp in Churches & worshipped. These dreames once confirmed by the oath of Eguvinus, and approued by Constantine bishop of Rome, and obtruded by Bonifacius the Popes Legate, they were embra∣ced in ENGLAND, with little contradiction in such a cor∣rupt time. The other purpose entraited in this Councell, was prohi∣bition of marriage to men in spirituall offices. This doctrine of the Romane Church was not receiued without reluctation of the Clergie. Alwayes, a ground was laide, wherevpon followed a building of the doctrine of Deuils.
ABout the same time, that is, about the yeere of our LORD 712. it is supposed, that the Emperour Philippicus gatha∣red The Coun∣cell of Con∣stantinople vnder Phi∣lippicus. a Councell at Constantinople, for vndoing of the sixt Generall Councell, in the which the errour of the Monothelues was con∣demned, and that he did this according to a promise made to a monke named Ihonne, who fore-tolde him that hee shoulde bee made Emperour, and craued this promise of him, that when hee should bee aduanced to the Emperiall dignitie, hee shoulde vn∣doe the sixt Generall Councell. But the writers of this Historie doe not make particular mention of the Fathers who were pre∣sent at this Councell. The rest of the Historie is cleare. that Phi∣lippicus razed the pictures of the Fathers who had bene present at this Councell, and were pictured in the Temple of Sophia: and that on the other part, Pope Constantine the first not onely caused the same effigies to bee pictured in the portch of the Church of Sainct Peter at Rome, but also procured that ye Emperours name should bee rased out of Charters, and that his effigie should not bee ingrauen in any kinde of coyned mettall. Also it is cleare, that Philippicus remoued Cyrus from his office, and placed in his rowme Ihonne, who fore-tolde him that hee shoulde bee Em∣perour. IN the yeere of our LORD 714. pope Gregorius the second A Councell at Rome, assembled by Grego∣vius the se∣cond. ☞ Sigebert. in Chron. assembled a Councell, in the which two bishops of Britanie, to wit, Sedulius, and Fergustus, were present. It was ordained, that Masses shoulde bee celbrated publikely in Temples, which cu∣stome was not in vse before. In the seconde Tome of Councels, this Synode is referred to Gregorius the third. A great number of the Canons of this Councell do concerne marriage, That no man should take in marriage a woman who was the relict of a pres∣byter or a deacon, or a nunne, or his spirituall sister, or his bro∣thers wife, or his neece, or his mother in lawe, or daughter in law, or his neare cosines, or a womā whom by theft or rauishing hee hath ledde away. And that no man should consult with in∣chaunters and sorcerers. And that no man shoulde violate the mandates of the Apostolicke chaire: no, not in a matter of an haire.
GREGORIVS the third, after he had receiued a mandate from the Emperour Leo, concerning abolishing of images, A Coun∣cell at Rome, as∣sembled by Gregorius the third. he assembled a great Councell at Rome, of 903. bishops: in the which the Emperour Leo was excommunicated, and depriued of his Emperiall dignitie. Here marke the tyrannie and fiercenesse of the Antichrist, who gaue such authoritie to a Romane prea∣cher, to dismount the Monarches of the world from their royall thrones? Yet Gregorius the thirde attempted such high matters, because the Em. Leo had disallowed the worshipping of images. Likewise, by his instigation the whole country of Italie refused to pay tribute to the Em. Now is the banner of the Antichrist displayed against the Emp. and this is a fore-running token of the hatefull inimirie which is to ensue betwixt the popes and the Emperours which (God willing) shall be declared in is own time. Likewise, Anastatius patriarch of Constantinople, was condem∣ned and excommunicated in this Councell. To fauour the Em∣perour, and to dislike the worshipping of Images, were two ir∣remissable sinnes, and meriting the great Anathems of the bis∣shop of Rome. IN the yeere of our LORD 742 and in time of the reigne of Charles the Great, and vnder the popedome of Zacharias ye first, A Coun∣cell holden in France, y Bonifa∣cius Arch∣bishp of Mentz. Bonifacius Archbishop of Mentz assembled a Councell of the bi∣shops prebyters, and Clergie of France for reformation of abu∣ses in that countrey: or rather as the trueth is, to bring the coun∣trey of France (as hee had alreadie brought manie parts of Ger∣manie) to a conformitie with the superstitious rites of the Romane Church. It is to be marked, that this Nationall Councell was as∣sembled by the mandate of king Charles, howsoeuer Bonifacius ordered the affaires of the Councell. It was ordained, That Synodes shoulde bee kept yeerelie, and that Clergie men shoulde not put on armour, and goe to warre-fare, except one or two bishops, with their presbyters Canon 1. and chaplens, to prescribe pennance to them who shoulde happen to confesse their sinnes: And that hunting and hal∣king, and such idle pastimes shoulde not bee vsed by the Cler∣gie.
That euerie presbyter shall bee readie to giue account of his Canon 2 ministerie to his owne bishop in time of Lent, especiallie con∣cerning his ministration of Baptisme, the summe of his Catho∣licke Faith, the forme of his Prayers, and the order of his saying of Masses. That none vncouth bishop or presbyter be admitted without Canon 3 the triall and allowance of a Synode. That presbyters and deacons bee not cloathed as seculare Canon 4 men, with short cloakes: but with the habite of men who are in spirituall offices: And that no woman cohabite in the house with them. That euerie bishop haue a care within his owne boundes to Canon 5 abolish all Heathnicke superstitions. IN the yeere of our LORD 755. and in the thirteenth The se∣uenth Ge∣nerall coū∣cell assem∣bled at Constanti∣nople. yeere of the Empire of Constantinus Copronymus, a Generall Councell of three hundreth and thirtie and eight bishops was assembled at Constantinople, by the commandement of the Em∣perour. In this Councell the worshipping of images was dam∣ned, and the placing of them in Oratories and Temples, where the diuine Majestie is worshipped, was forbidden, as a custome borrowed from Pagans, who had no hope of the resurrection, and therefore solaced themselues with pictured similitudes of their friendes, as if they had beene bodilie present with them. Yea, for three principall causes they damned the worshipping of images: First, because the worshipping of them is repugnant vnto holie Scripture: Secondlie, because the diuine and hu∣mane nature beeing vnseparablie vnited in CHRIST, and the diuine nature cannot bee presented by an image: therefore it is not meete to represent His manlie nature by an image, lest wee shoulde seeme to separare the two natures in CHRIST. And thirdlie, because the writinges of auncient Fathers doe vt∣terlie condemne the worshipping of Images, such as Epipha∣nius, Eusebius, Gregorius Theologus, Athanasius, Amphilochius, Chrysostomus, and Theodorus bishop of Ancyra. It were a pro∣lixt thing to make a rehearsall of the sentences of all the fore∣named Fathers: therefore, for breuities cause, I will heere only make choise of one place, which is this: Eusebius Pamphili, wri∣ting
to Constantia the Empresse, who was desirous that the image of CHRIST shoulde bee sent vnto her, hee returneth vn∣to her this answere: Because yee haue written vnto mee to sende vu∣to you the image of CHRIST, I woulde gladlie vnderstande what Histor. Magd. Cent. 8. Cap. 9. image of CHRIST yee are inquiring for: whether it bee that true and vnchangeable nature, bearing the charactor and ingrauen simili∣tude of the person of the Father? or if it bee the image of the shape of a seruant, which CHRIST tooke vpon him for our sakes? As con∣cerning His diuine nature, I hope yee are not sollicitous to seeke the image thereof, beeing sufficientlie instructed, that no man knoweth the Father, except the Sonne, and on the other part, no man knoweth the Sonne, ex∣cept the Father. But if yee desire the similitude of mans nature, where∣with Hee cladde Himselfe for our sakes, vnderstande, that the splendor and shining brightnesse of His glorie cannot bee represented with dead colsures, and shaddowed pictues: For euen His Disciples in the moun∣taine were not able to abide the brightnesse of His shining face (Matth. Chap. 17. vers. 1. Mark. Chap. 9. vers. 2. Luk. Chap. 9. vers. 28.) howe much lesse are wee nowe able to abide the celestiall splendor of His glorified bodie? In this Councell Germanus bishop of Constantinople, Gorgius Cyprius, and Damascene a Monke who were principall defenders of the worshipping of images, were excommunicated. In the Canons of this Councell, which were nineteene in num∣ber, inuocation of Sainctes hath allowance in the fisteenth and seuenteenth Canon. So that in this Councell also is presented vnto vs a viue paterne of the weaknesse of Councels. Like as in euerie sacrifice there was dungue, so likewise in euerie Councell there is found some note of infirmitie and weaknesse. And it is a foolishe thing to adhere to all the ordinances of Councels, except they doe agree in all pointes with the written worde of GOD. IN the yeere of our LORD 788. and in the eight yeere of The second Councel of Nice. the reigne of Irene, and her sonne Constantine, a Councell was assembled at Nice in Bythinia, of three hundreth and fiftie Bis∣shops. The Ahass dours of Adrian the first, bishop of Rome, were present in this Assemblie. Basilius bishop of Ancyra, Theo∣dorus, bishop of Myra, and Theodosius, bishop of Amorium, offe∣red
to the Councell their supplicant letters, confessing, that they had sinned in condemning the worshipping of images in the Synode assembled by Constantinus Copronymus. These reedes, shaken with the winde and vnconstant fooles, were accepted in fauour, as a preamble vnto this malignant Councell. The epistle of Adrian, bishop of Rome, was openlie read in the Councell, ap∣prouing the worshipping of images. His letter was full of fables and lies, such as the fable of the leprosie of Constantine, and of the shedding of the blood of innocent babes to procure remedie against his sicknesse, and the baptisme of Constantine by Syluester, the miraculous restoring of the Emperour to health after his baptisme, and of the images of Peter and Paul, produced to Constantine before his baptisme. Such a Legend of lyes no Coun∣cell could haue heard read in their audience, if it had not beene a time in the which the mysterie of iniquitie was effectuallie working: For the historie of the life of Constantine, written by Eusebius, expresselie prooueth the contrarie: to wit, that Con∣stantine was not leprous, but rather a man of a cleane and vn∣spotted bodie: and that hee was not baptized by Syluester in Rome, but by Eusebius in Nicomedia. Notwithstanding, the let∣ter of pope Adrian was accepted and allowed by the Councell. And it was ordained, That the images of CHRIST, of the blessed Virgine Marie, and of the Sainctes, shoulde not one∣lie bee receiued into places of Adoration, but also shoulde bee adored and worshipped: And the honour done to the image, is thought to redounde to him (or her) who is represnted by the image, according to the wordes of Basilius Magnus. But Basilius Magnus is writing in that place of CHRIST, the Bal. contra Eunomium, lib. 1. image of the inuisible GOD, and not of images made with mens handes. The Fathers of this Councell, as it were bewitched by the delusions of the Deuill, were not ashamed to confirme the ado∣ration of images, by lying miracles, and by a foolish confabu∣lation betwixt the Deuill and a Monke, whome Sathan ceassed not to tempt continuallie to the lust of vncleannesse, and would make none ende of tempting him, except hee woulde promise to desist from worshipping the image of the Virgine Marie.
But argumentes taken from the fables of Monkes, and delu∣sions of the Deuill, are not to bee hearkened vnto, in a matter expresselie repugnant to the written word of God. IN the yeere of our LORD 794. CHARLES THE, GREAT, King of FRANCE, assembled a great Councell The Coun∣cell of Frank∣ford. at FRANKFORD: partlie in regarde of the heretique Foe∣lix, who called CHRIST the adoptiue Sonne of GOD in his humane nature, and was condemned in a Councell assem∣bled at RATISBONA, ANNO 742. but hee was retur∣ned to his vomite againe: and therefore was of nwe againe condemned, as a notable heretique, in the Councell of FRANK∣FORD partly also in respect of the great disputation that arose euerie where concerning the worshipping of images, disallowed in the Councell of Constantinople, and allowed in the seconde Councell os Nice. Not onelie the bishops of France, but also of Germanie and Lombardie, as Prouinces subdued to the King of France, were pre∣sent at this Councell. Likewise, Pope Adrian sent his Ambassa∣dours, Theophilactus and Stephanus, to the Councell. And Charles himselfe, King of France, was present in the Councell of Frank∣ford. The Ambassadours of pope Adrian produced the actes of the seconde Councell of Nice, hoping that the Councell of Frankford shoulde haue giuen consent and allowance vnto the same. But the Fathers of this Councell collationed the actes of the Councell of Constantinople, with the actes of the seconde Councell of Nice. And they disallowed in the Councell of Con∣stantinople the strict prohibition to picture images, either in Temples or other places. And in the seconde Councell of Nice they disallowed the Act of worshipping of images, and of ho∣nouring them with garmentes, incense, candles, and kneeling vnto them: counting the afore-saide Act to bee so impious, that the Councell in the which it was concluded, was neither worthie to bee called Catholicke nor Oecumenicke. The ar∣gumentes whereby the seconde Councell of Nice endeuoured to approue the adoration of images, are all refuted in the Coun∣cell of Frankford, as I haue declared alreadie in a Treatise con∣cerning worshipping of Images.
Concerning the argument taken from the authotitie of Epi∣phanius, who in his booke called Panarium, reckoneth not the worshippers of images in the roll of Heretiques: it is answered by the Councell of FRANKFORD, that incase Epiphanius had counted the haters of the worshippers of images Heretiques, hee had likewise inferted their names in the catalogue of He∣retiques: but seeing hee hath not so done, the Councell of Nice had no just cause to triumph so much in this friuolous ar∣gument, which maketh more against them, that it maketh for them. More-ouer, in the Councell of FRANKFORD, the Epistle of Epiphanius, written to Ihonne, bishop of Hierusalem, was read, wherein hee disalloweth the verie inbringing of images into Churches: and this Epistle was translated out of Grieke into the Latine language, by Ierom. The Epistle is worthie to bee read. Reade it in the Magdeburg Historie, Cent. 8. Chap. 9.
TREATISES, Belonging to the VIII. CENTVRIE. A TREATISE, Of Transsubstantiation. SATHAN is a vigilant enemie, set∣ting himselfe in most opposite man∣ner against euerie thing that is a comfort and refreshment vnto the sheepe-folde of God: Now, the prin∣cipall comforts of the sheepe of God, are the pastures wherein they feede, Psal. 23 and the waters wherewith they are refreshed: Doubtlesse these two com∣forts are the preaching of the word, and the ministration of the Lordes holy Sacraments. If Sathan by any meanes can hinder the true preaching of the worde, and Gene. 26. 18 the right ministration of the Sacramēts, then his malice against Gods people is descried, as the malice of the Philistimes of olde against Isaac and his cattell, was manifested, when they stopped with earth the foūtaines of water, which Abraham had digged, & whereof the cattell of Isaac were accustomed to drink. It can∣not bee sufficiently expressed in words, what malice Sathan hath born against the true preaching of the word of God, & the right
ministration of the Sacraments. The sixt persecution of Ethnick Emperoures was so directly set against the Preachers of Gods worde, as the worlde might easily discerne, that the intention of Maximinus was to vndoe the sheepe-folde of God, for lacke of pastures, and of refreshing waters. For this cause let not our co∣gitations be rauished with admiration, when we heare or reade, that manie questions haue beene mooued concerning the holie Sacrament of the Lords Supper. If there were not plenty of spi∣rituall consolation to bee receiued by the right participation of this holy Sacrament, Sathan had neuer busied himselfe so ear∣nestly against it, as if the throate of his kingdome were cut, if this Sacrament be rightly ministred by the Preachers, & rightlie receiued by the people. Let the Christian Reader remember, that of olde vnder the tenne persecuting Emperoures the receiuing of the holy Sacra∣ment of the Lordes Supper was called the banquet of Thyestes: This proceeded from none other ground, but from the malice of the Deuill, hating the Lords holy banquet: Secondly, the Ma∣nichean heretiques so peruerted the Lords holy Sacrament, that Augustine (to whom their secret mysteries were not vnknowne) was compelled to call their Communion Execramentum, and not Sacramentum, that is, an execrable thing, and not a Sacrament: Thirdly, the Donatists, in ministring the Lords Sacraments, were in an opinion, That the Sacrament was onely effectuall, when it was ministred by one of their owne number. But seeing the ma∣lice of Sathan is an infinite thing, and hath not a period wherein it endeth. For defacing of the right vse of the holy Sacrament, Sathan filled the heart of an hereticall Monke called Damascene, with a lewde opinion, to affirme, That the bread in the holy Sa∣crament was transsubstantiate into the body of Christ, and that the wine was transsubstantiate into His blood. Which opinion I may justly call a Noueltie, because it was neither in worde nor writ hearde before the seuen hundreth yeere of our Lord. But it is the custome of Papists to follow Nouelties, and in the meane time to bragge of Antiquitie. What abuses of the holy Sacra∣ment followed after the seuen hundreth yeere of our Lord, God willing shall bee declared in its owne time, for the present thus much I say, That vpon a time I saw the images of Cain and Abel,
pictured by an vnlearned painter, with such habite as the Ger∣manes are appareled with in our dayes: These pictures made mee not to thinke that the Germane habite was in vse in the dayes of Cain and Abel, but rather that the painter was a foolishe man, & destitute of vnderstanding: Euen so, when I reade the works of Damascene, albeit I was at that time but young in yeeres, yet I thought not that the opinion of Damascene was agreeable to Apostolicke doctrine, but rather that Damascene was a foolishe and doating Monke, and somewhat ambitious also, desiring to be coūted the author of some new opinion, which no man had maintained before him. IN this TREATISE I shall first declare (God willing) what it is that they call Transsubstantiation: secondly, howe absurde an opinion it is: and thirdly, with what relùctation it was insi∣nuated into the bosome of the Latine Church, but euer vntill this daye was rejected of the Grieke Church. Nowe Transsub∣stantiation (as they saye) is an euanishing of the substance of bread and wine after the wordes of consecration, and a substi∣tution of the bodie & blood of Christ, in place of the euanished substance of bread and wine, the accidents of bread and wine alwayes remaining without inherence into anie subject. Albeit the worde Transsubstantiation seemeth to import a change of one substance into another, and the moste part of them define it to bee a chaunge of the substance of bread into the substance of Christes bodie: yet some of them doe forsee a great inconue∣niencie, if Transsubstantiation be defined to a chāge of the sub∣stance of bread into the substance of Christes bodie: namely this, that Christes bodie in heauen, cladde with a most glorious and celestiall brightnesse, and Christes bodie in earth, ouershad∣dowed with the accidentes of bread and wine, shall not bee counted one and the selfe same bodie, in respect that the bodie of Christ that is in heauen was formed by the holy Spirit, of the substance of the Virgine Marie, and the bodie of Christ in the Sacrament, woulde bee founde to bee made of the substance of bread. This is the cause wherefore they who are more subtile than the rest, abstaine from the grosse definition afore-saide. Howsoeuer, concerning the word Transsubstantiation, I admo∣nish the Reader, that , that is, an euanishing or dispa∣rition
hath no affinitie with Damascenes , which signi∣fieth a change of one thing vnto another thing that is better: so that there is no good agreement amongst themselues con∣cerning the signification of the word Transsubstantiation. Concerning consecration of the elementes, there are diuerse opinions: The Romane Church supposeth, that the wordes of Consecration are these, , &c. that is, Take, eat, this is my bodie. And againe these wordes, , Mat. 26. 26 that is, Drinke all of this, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shedde for manie for remission of Ibid. 27. 28 sinnes. But the Graecian Church thought that the blessing or consecration was not only made by the words afore-saide, but also by prayer, as Iustinus Martyr calleth the elements, , that is, The foode, blessed by the Worde of Iustin. apol. 2. pro Chri. prayer. Let no man separate the thinges that CHRIST hath conjoyned together, to wit, prayer, and the wordes of the ho∣lie institution, and wee shall easilie accorde about the consecra∣tion of the elementes. The time, in the which the elementes are thought to be con∣secrated, is not the time in the which these wordes, This is my bodie, &c. are begun to bee vttered, but rather when they are en∣ded: So that the consecration is not an action fashioned by partes, but wholly in one minute, and at once perfected, when the wordes are ended. Albeit I agree to this opinion with full consent of my mind: yet I could wish, that the Romane Church, who haue auouched ye same, would make no exception against their owne doctrine. But when they speake of the intention of the consecrating Priest (which is continually vnknowne to the people) the people are left in a doubt whether they are parta∣kers of Christes bodie or not. And this is not the forme of the teaching of Christ, to leaue the people in a suspence and doub∣ting, but to manifest clearely vnto them the mysterie whereof they doubt, if so bee it bee necessarie to bee knowne: as Christ manifested to his Disciples the parable of the sower and the, Matth. 13. seede, and of the husbandrie and the tares, &c. The first word of Consecration is the principall word impug∣ning Transsubstantiation: for the word  is a demonstratiue
pronowne, and it pointeth out something: and Scripture con∣ferred with Scripture, is the best Commentarie to declare what is pointed out by the worde . The Apostle Paule in his first 1. Cor. 11 26 Epistle to the Corinthians, expoundeth the word , by , that is, This bread: and the seconde , hee expoundeth it, , that is, This cuppe. So we see that the substance of the elementes in the Sacrament of the Supper, are neither chan∣ged nor euanished: but remaining in their former substāce, they are honoured with a great honour, to bee made Sacramentes of the Lordes blessed bodie and blood: but their substance is not changed, as saide is. The next words of cōsecration are these, , that is, is my body, The bread is the Lordes body, because it is the Sacra∣ment of the Lords body: like as the Sacrament of faith (to wit, August. ad Bonifac. epist. 32. Baptisme, saith August. after a maner) is faith: euen so the Sacra∣ment of the Lordes body, after a maner, is the Lordes body: the wordes, secundum quendam modum, and quodammodo, that is to say, after some maner of way, so oft repeted by August. is forget by papists: insomuch, that they remember when August. saith, fereba∣tur Christus in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum, ait, hoc est corpus meum, that is, Christ was borne vp in his owne handes, August. in Psal. 23 when as deliuering his owne bodie, hee saieth, This is my bodie: but they forgette the expositorie wordes, in the which Augustine manifesteth his owne meaning, namelie these, Accepit in ma∣nus suas, quod norunt fideles, & ipse se portabat quodammodo cum diceret, hoc est corpus meu: that is, Hee tooke into his handes, as is knowne to the belieuers, and did beare after a maner, himselfe in his owne hands, when he said, This is my body. It is better in singlenesse of hart to make a true rehearsall of the words of ancient fathers, in that same sense ye they spake, than with deceitfull speaches to abuse the simplicitie of the Reader, who possibly will not take paines to search out in what sense Augustine said, that Christ did beare himselfe in his owne hands. In like maner, Augustine, writing against Adimant, saieth, that the blood is the life, euen as Christ was the Rocke. Nowe August. contr. Adi∣mant. the Apostle saieth not, Petra significabat Christum: but saieth, Pra erat Christus: quae rursus ne corporaliter acciperetur, spiritua∣lm illam vocat, id est, spiritualiter intelligi docet: that is, the
Apostle saith not, the rocke signified Christ, but hee saieth, the rocke was Christ: which againe, lest it should bee taken in a corporall sense, hee calleth it a spirituall rocke: teahing vs, that wee should spiritually vnderstand it. Then if we fellow the exposition of an∣cient Fathers, it cannot be inferred of these wordes, this is my bo∣die, that the bread is transsubstantiated into the substance of Christes bodie, for such vaine conceits neuer entered into their mindes. Papistes doe grant, that after consecration Sainct Paule cal∣leth the elementes, bread and wine, because they haue the shewe and shape of bread and wine: as the brasen Serpent was called a Serpent, and Angels in Scripture are called men, because they so appeared. But this is a friuolous shift, because ye Apostle, when he speaketh of bread and wine, after the words of consecration, he 1. Cor. 11. 26 speaketh expressely of bread that is eaten, and of wine that is drunken. This cannot bee the shape and accidentes of the ele∣mentes, but their verie substance. The Angels did not appeare only in the shape of men, but also had mens bodies indeede, so that their feete were washed, and they did eate and drinke with Abraham and Lot. The brasen Serpent was not in shewe, but in Gen. 18. 19 substance, and altogether of brasse. These examples helpe not. An euill cause hath more neede of a true confession, than of a false defence, as August. writeth: and Chrysost. saith most truely, that albeit a bitter roote may sende foorth sweete and pleasant fruites: yet a roote of bitternesse can neuer produce sweete and Chrysost. in epist. ad Heb. cap. 12 Homil. 31 pleasant fruites: warning vs thereby, to beware of men who dis∣seminate and propagate erroures, and obstinately striue against the knowne trueth of God. The last wordes of the consecration are these, Doe this in re∣membrance of mee. Marke the worde : for albeit Christ only suffered but once, yet it is his will that wee should keepe a continuall remēbrance of his death, because the death of Christ is the fountaine of our life. Now when we offer the Sacrifice of thankesgiuing vnto God, in the holy Supper, because hee hath saued vs by the death of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. This Sacrifice which wee offer, differeth from that which Christ offe∣red vpon the Crosse, because that Sacrifice was but onely once offered, and was receiued into the most holy place, as Chrysostome
speaketh, but this which we offer, is , and , Chrysost. In epist. ad Hebr. cap. 9 Homil. 17 sub. , that is, wee offer in remembrane of his death: and this which wee offer is a type (to wit, commemora∣tiue) of that which he offered. But because they hing by an haire, and if any ancient Father cast out one worde (albeit it were hy∣perbolically spokē) they fasten their gripes vpon it, as if it made altogether for them. Now Chrysostome saieth, This Sacrifice which we offer, is one and the selfe same Sacrifice which Christ offered. Is it not good reason hee haue libertie to expounde the meaning of his owne words? and so he doeth, Our Sacrifice and Christs Sacri∣fice is one, because we celebrate a remembrance of that Sacrifice once of∣fered vpon the Crosse, and of none other. But that Sacrifice which Christ offered vpon the Crosse hath no neede to be reiterated (saith Chrysostome in that same Homilie) because it is like vnto a medicine, which beeing once applyed, hath a perfect vertue to saue vs from all our sinnes. Hitherto I haue declared that the words of Consecration, if they bee ex∣pounded as auncient Fathers expounded them, they make no∣thing to proue the doctrine of Transsubstantiation. Nowe let vs proceede further, to see howe this definition of Transsubstantiation agreeth with the doctrine of the Apostles, and of other auncient Fathers. The Scriptures of God neither ac∣knowledge an euanishing of the substance of bread and wine: neither yet a chaunge of their substance into the substance of Christs bodie and blood. For as much as the Apostle Paul, spea∣king of the sacred elementes of the Lordes Supper, at that time when they seale vp our conjunction with Christ, which is not before the blessing, breaking, and distribution: but after these holy actions, the Apostle calleth the eating of the blessed bread , and the drinking of the blessed Cuppe, 1. Cor. 10. 16 , that is, a communion of the Lords bodie and blood: not excluding the substance of the elementes, but ex∣pressely pointing out the wordes , and , that is, the bread and the cuppe. The moste ancient Fathers are moste vnacquainted with this Noueltie of Transsubstantiation: for they all in one voyce for the space of 500. yeeres, doe consent, that the substance of bread and wine remaineth in the Sacrament after the wordes of Con∣secration, Iust. apol. 2 albeit the vse of the elementes bee changed Iustinus
Martyr saith, that the elementes in the Sacrament of the Supper Ioann. 1. 14 are made the flesh and the blood of Iesus, in that same forme that the eternall worde of God was made flesh: but so it is, that the substance of the diuine nature, neither euanished, nor yet was changed into the substance of flesh: And in like manner, the bread is made the body of Christ, neither by the euanishing of the substance thereof, nor yet by changing the substance there∣of into another substance. In like manner, Ireneus, when he saith, that the holy Eucharist consisteth of things earthly, and of thinges celestiall: by mentio∣ning of earthly things, hee would declare, that the substance of Iren. contra Valent. lib. 4 cap. 34 the bread and wine remaineth after the consecration. And lest any man (by shifting wordes) shoulde saye, that Ireneus meaneth not by earthly thinges the substance of bread and wine, but ra∣ther the accidents, hee expresseth his owne meaning, in the 32. chap. that he is speaking of the bread and the cuppe. Ambrose, speaking of the operatiue vertue of the Lords word Ambros. de Sacr. 1. 4. c. 4 in the Sacrament, he saith, that the elementes remaine that same thing which they were, & they are changed into another thing, because the substance of the elements remaineth, and their vse is changed. Like as a regenerated man in substance both of soule and body, is that same man that hee was before, yet in qualities and conditions there is a great change. And who can interprete the words of Ambrose better than hee himselfe doeth illustrate them by the foresaide similitude? Theodoretus, in his first Dialogue, saith, that God hath honou∣red Theod. dia. 1. cap. 8 the elements in the Sacrament with the name of His bodie & blood: not by changing of their nature, but by adding grace vnto nature. And in his second Dialogue he saith, that after the wordes of consecration the elementes remaine in their former Idem dial. 2 cap. 24 substance, shape, and forme. The wordes of Theodoretus are not more effectual to instruct vs in the right judgement concerning the nature of the Sacrament, than the very purpose whereat hee aimeth in those his Dialogues: They are written of purpose, to refute the heresie of Eutyches, who affirmed, that after the diuine nature assumed the humane nature, all became diuinitie, and there was not two distinct natures in Christ, but one only. Theo∣doretus, for refutation of this heresie, bringeth a comparison ta∣ken
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in the which the bread in substance remaining bread, assumeth a name and vse that it had not before, by diuine institution to be called the bo∣die of the Lord▪ Euen so the diuine nature of Christ assumed the humane nature without any change of the one natue into the other. Moreouer, he proueth the veritie of Christs humane na∣ture by this, That the elements in the Sacrament of the Supper, are , that is, signes, types, and figures of the bodie and blood of Christ. And incase he had not a true body, how could the elements in the Sacrament be figures of his bodie? These speaches of Theodoretus doe import two thinges: First, that the elementes in the Sacrament of the Supper remaine still in their owne substance, and their substance is neither changed, nor euanished: Secondly, that in the holy Sacrament of the Sup∣per, there are signes, not accidentall, but the elementes in their owne substance remaining, are signes of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. And howe these two things can agree with the do∣ctrine of Transsubstantiation, let the judicious Reader consider. Augustine in like manner, is so farre from imagining that the substance of the bread is euanished, or turned into another sub∣stance, that he putteth a difference betwixt Sacramentum, and res August. in Ioan. cap. 6. tract. 26 Sacramenti, counting the elementes Sacramentum, and the bodie & blood of Christ res sacramenti. Now concerning the elements, that is, the bread and the wine, he affirmeth, that some doe eate them vnto saluation, others doe eate them vnto damnation: but as concerning the body and blood of Christ, which Augustine calleth res sacramenti, in expresse tearmes, he saith, No man recei∣ueth them but onely to eternall life. Of this it is euident, that Augustine calleth that Sacramentum, which is eaten, either wor∣thily or vnworthily, either to saluation or to damnation. And he is speaking of the substance of bread and wine which can bee eaten & drunkē, and not of accidents, which no man can eat or drinke. But wherefore doe I spende time to cite testimonies of Fathers, to prooue, that after the wordes of blessing the ele∣ments in the holy Supper, neither change their substance, nor yet doeth their substance euanishe, when I haue brought tenne times moe testimonies than I haue already done, I shall receiue this answere returned vnto mee, That whatsoeuer was the opi∣nion
of these Fathers, ye generall Councell of Lateran, anno 1215. which was wiser than these fore-mentioned Fathers, haue ta∣ken a deeper consideration into this matter, than these Fathers did: and they haue allowed the doctrine of Transsubstantiation. Howsoeuer, let me obtaine this fauour at the hands of the Chri∣stian Reader, that he may consider, that they who brag so much of Antiquitie, are driuen backe to seeke refuge in the Noueltie of late Councels. THE latter part of their definition, wherein they say, that after consecration the accidents of bread and wine, such as whitenesse, roundnesse, and rednesse, doe remaine in the Sacra∣ment without inherence into any subject. In this part I blame them againe of Noueltie. No ancient Father euer spake of acci∣dents without a subject. And albeit M. Harding impudētly citeth the testimonie of Basilius Magnus, to prooue, that accidentes may subsist without a subject because in the first dayes creation there was light, & this light had no subsistance in any subject. This citing of the authoritie of an ancient Father, expresse con∣trarie to his owne meaning and wordes, is an intolerable abu∣sing of the writinges of Fathers. The words of Basilius are these, (as is well obserued by the learned Doctor IEWEL) , Basil. in Hexamer. Homil. 2 that is to saye, The aire was lightened, or rather, it had the whole light whollie mingled with it selfe. Hee saith not, that the light was an accident without a subject, but hee pointeth out the subject wherinto it had inherence, euen before the creation of the Sunne, to wit, the aire. But seeing they haue refuge continually to the Omnipotent power of God, when they vtter pointes of new and absurde do∣ctrine, and they saye, that God by his Omnipotent power can make that accidents shall subsist without a subject. To this I an∣swere, That our disputation with them is not about the power of God, but about the will of God, in the matter of the Sacra∣ment. And it is the will of God in the Sacrament of the Supper, to leade vs vnto Christ, as the onely bread of life, by whome our soules are nourished vnto eternall saluation. And the Lord vseth the externall signes to leade vs to the thing signified. What are we, that wee should despise the simplest meanes of the working
of God? Not only doeth the externall signes leade vs to Christ, but also the analogie and similitude that is betwixt the bread & Christs body, leadeth vs to a consideration of the nourishing vertue that is in Christs body, to feede vs vnto eternall life. But Papistes by taking awaye the substance of bread and wine, and leauing only naked accidēts, in the which there is no nourishing vertue, they vndoe the nature of a Sacrament, taking awaye the similitude betwixt the signe and the thing signified, without the which Augustine affirmeth, that a Sacrament cannot subsist: but let vs heare Augustines owne words, Si enim sacramenta quandam August. ad Bonif. ep. 23 similitudinem earum rerum quarum sunt sacramenta non haberent, omni∣no sacramenta non essent: that is, If sacramentes had not some similitude with those thinges, whereof they are sacramentes, they coulde not bee sa∣cramentes Theod. dia. 2. cap. 24 at all. And Theodoretus in like manner saith, : that is, The types must needes haue some similitude with the veritie. IN the second head of our TREATISE, the Absurdities of The first absurditie. TRANSSVBSTANTIATION are to be considered. First this opi∣nion repugneth to the priuiledge alloted to the blesed bodie of Christ in holy Scripture, to wit that the body of the holy one psal. 16. 10 of God should not see corruption: but this substance which is in the Sacrament after the wordes of consecration, it may pu∣trifie and rotte: therefore, it is not the true bodie of Christ, otherwise than sacramentallie. Secondly, this substance that remaineth in the Sacrament af∣ter The second absurditie. the words of consecration, is knowne to be capable of poy∣son: for Emperours Kinges and Popes, haue bene poysoned by the consecrated hostie, such as the Emperour Henrie the se∣uenth, and Pope Victor the third, was poysoned in the Challice: therefore, it cannot bee the reall body of Christ, which fedeth the soule, & cannot empoyson the body, but it is called Christs body sacramentally. The third absurditie. Thirdly, if Christes body after the words of consecration bee corporally present in the Sacrament, then is it at one time both in heauen and in earth: in heauen vnder a glorious similitude, and in earth inuisible, and ouer-couered with the accidentes of bread and wine, which aggreeth not with the nature of a true humane bodie, to bee at one time in diuerse places, whereof I
shall speake at greater length hereafter, God willing. Onely at this time, I affirme, that the Papistes are vntimously serious to proue the corporall presence of Christs body in the sacrament, which position if it were granted, yet are they nothing nearer to their purpose, neither are we put backe in any thing whereunto we shoot and aime: because if Christ were corporally present in the Sacrament, as they speake, yet no vertue can be drawne out Marc. 5. 34 of him to the comfort of our soules, but onely by spirituall tou∣ching by faith, as appeareth in the woman diseased with the bloodie issue. The doctrine of Trans substantiation not only importeth corpo∣rall presence of Christs body in the sacramēt of the Supper, but The fourth absurditie. also corporal manducation of the body of Christ which is com∣mon both to godly & vngodly men: and this they deny not, on∣ly they say, that godly men eat Christs body worthily, & vngod∣ly mē eat Christs body vnworthily. But I affirme, that if vngod∣ly men eat the body of Christ corporally in ye holy Supper, then is his body receiued in the sacrament by them to whom it is not promised in the worde, which is an absurde thing: For like as a seale affixed to a charter, sealeth vp nothing to him to whome the charter promieth nothing: Euen so the scrament cannot seale vp a fellowship with Christ to an vnbeleeuing mā, because Gods promises are made onely to the beleeuers. They will an∣swere, True it is, ye vnbelecuers haue no fellowship with Christ, no not although they eat his body corporally, because they eat it vnworthily. But to this I answere, that this their doctrine is new, and vnknowne to antiquitie: For ancient Fathers acknow∣ledge a worthie & vnworthie eating of the Sacrament of Christs body, but not a worthy & vnworthy eating of ye body of Christ, in respect Augustine saith, Res veroipsa cujus sacramentum est omni homini ad vitam, nulls adexitium, quicunque ejus particeps fuerit: that August. in Ioan. 6. Tract. 26. is to saye, But the matter of the Sacrament (to wit, CHRISTS bodie) by eueric man who is partaker thereof, is receiued to life, and by no man to destruction. And this mooueth AVGVSTINE in another place to saye, That IVDAS did eate the bread of the Lord, but not the Lord himselfe, who is the true bread. The doctrine of Transsubstantiation importeth also accidentes without a subject, as hath beene touched in a part before in the
definition of Transsubstantiation. This is admirable, that the Scholasticke Doctors, who make Aristotle to be Master Caruer The fist absurditie of this most holy banquet, & who haue acquainted themselues better with his Preceptes, than with the heauenlie doctrine of the Apostles: yet in this point they haue forgotten euen the doctrine of their Schoole-master Aristotle, who saieth, that accidentes can haue no subsistence, but into a subject: as if a man bee talking of blindnesse, hee must also talke of eyes that are blinded: and if hee talke of deafenesse, hee must also talke of the eare: and if hee talke of lamenesse, hee must talke of some member of the bodie that is maimed: and finallie, if hee talke of a disease, hee must also talke of some bodie, either of man or beast, that is diseased: and this hee must doe, either ex∣pressely or couertly, because accidentes haue no subsistence, without a subject. There can bee nothing imagined more ab∣surde, & more repugnant to reason, than to talke of whiteness, roundnesse and rednesse: and in the meane time to saye, there is nothing that is white, round, or redde. The recourse which they haue to the Omnipotent power of God, who is able to make accidents to subsist without a subject, declareth, that they neuer rightly considered the cause wherefore the Omnipotent power of GOD is mentioned in holie Scripture, to wit, to bee one of the strong pillars of our faith, which faith com∣meth onely by hearing. Then let this order bee kept: First let GOD speake in His owne worde: Secondlie, let vs beleeue the worde of GOD by faith: Thirdlie, let the as∣sured pillars of the Omnipotent power and infalible trueth of GOD vpholde our faith, as it did the faith of ABRAHAM. Rom. 4. 21. But let vs not grounde vpon the Omnipotent power of GOD, in matters whereof wee haue no assurance in His written worde, as some of the wise men of PERSIA did, who assured both themselues, and others, that incase they woulde distribute all their goods to the poore, and throwe themselues headlonges from eminent places, then their soules shoulde bee transported immediatelie to Heauen. This madnesse fell out about the yeere of our LORDE and Sauiour IESVS CHRIST 759. What was this leaning of theirs to the Omnipotent power of
GOD, without assurance of his word, but only the conceits of braine-sicke men. And so let Papistes talke what they please In this purpose, that God by his Omnipotent power can make accidentes to subsist without a subject. I will conclude that the Omnipotent power of God is ordained to bee a confirmation to our faith, and not to be a citie of refuge to foolish fables. The doctrine of Transsubstantiation also importeth, that the body of Christ at one time may bee in infinite places, which re∣pugneth vnto the nature of a true body, which like as it is cir∣cumscribed, The sixt absurditie. and may be seene, so likewise at one time it is onely in one place, as Augustine writeth to Dardanus in these wordes, August. d Dardan. epist. 57 Tolle spatia locorum corporibus, nusquam runt, nec runt: that is to say, Take from bodies the rowmes of places, and they shall be no where, and consequently they shall not bee at all. And Theodoretus prooueth, that the body of Christ is a true humane body, albeit it be glorified, euen in the latter daye when hee commeth to judge the quicke and the dead, because it shall bee seene, according as it is writ∣ten, Matth. 26 64. Yee shall see the sonne of man comming in the cloudes of heauen: and like as it may be seene, so likewise it is circumscri∣bed, and consequently it is in a place, and is not turned into his diuine nature, which is both , and : that is, it cannot be seene, and it cannot bee circumscribed, as the humane nature is. Theodoret. dial. 2. ca. 23 It is well remarked by that learned Preacher Du Moulin, that in the last edition of S. Augustines workes, at Parise, anno 1571. a notable place of the foresaid epistle of Augustine to Dardanus, is vtterly left out, by aduice of the Fathers, correctors of the wri∣tings of the Auncientes, namely this, Destrai naturam humanam Christi si non detur ei certum spatium, quo more aliarum rerum corporea∣rum contineatur: that is, The humane nature of Christ is destroyed, if a certaine place be not attributed vnto it, wherein it is contained according to the custome of other corporall thinges. What credite is to bee giuen vnto Popishe Doctors, when they cite testimonies of auncient Fathers, after they are deprehended, to be deceitfull deprauers of their bookes? Ancient Fathers, a long ime before the question of Transsub∣stantiation of the substance of the elementes in the holy Supper The sevēth absurditie came in head, they were resoning of the two natures in Christ, to wit, the diuine and humane nature, and that the one nature
was not turned into the other: they could not find a fitter simi∣litude than that which is borrowed from the Sacrament, as I haue alreadie declared. Alwayes, they thinke, that if any man shall imagine, that by vertue of these wordes, This is my body, the substance of bread was chaunged into the substance of Christes body (as many doe thinke euen vntill this day) then in steade of one Transsubstantiation of the substance of bread into the sub∣stance of Christs body, there should be two Transsubstantiations, and the substance of Christs body should againe be turned into bread: for like as Christ, speaking of bread, saith, This is my body: Matth. 26 euen so Christ, speaking of his body, calleth it corne of wheat, in these words, Verily, I say vnto you, except wheat corne fall into the grounde, and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth foorth much Ioan. 12. 24 fruit. If by vertue of the former wordes bread bee changed into the substance of Christes body: then in like manner, by vertue of these words (for both are spoken out of one blessed mouth) the Theodoret. dial. 1. ca. 8 body of Christ should be turned into the substance of corne of wheat. I grant there is a difference betwixt a Sacrament and a metaphore: yet in neither of them is there such vertue in the word (is) to change the substance of any thing. IN the last head, let vs consider with what strife and relucta∣tion this erronious doctrine was intruced vpon the Church. I holde the Monke Damascene to bee the first author thereof, who perceiuing that his opinion was repugnant to the doctrine Damase. de orthod. fide, lib. 4, ca. 14 of ancient Fathers, namely, to the doctrine of Basilius Magnus, who calleth the bread and the wine  that is, figures of the body and blood of Christ. He forgeth a friuolous shift to excuse his contradiction to Basilius, because (saieth hee) Basilius calleth them , before the wordes of the blessing, but after the pronouncing of the wordes of the blessing, they are no longer figures, but the very body and blood of Christ. It is hard to bee a prolocutor for an euill cause, for it is like vnto a bulge in a wall, which falleth, and bruiseth him who woulde sustaine it, which cannot sustaine it selfe. It is certaine that the bread and wine are not types and figures of Christs body before the words of consecration: for it is after the words of blessing that the ele∣ments receiue this great honour, to be called Christs bodie and blood, that is, signes externall, wherewith Christes bodie and
blood is spiritually exhibited vnto vs. And therefore Sainct Ambros. de Sacram. li. 4 cap. 4. Ambrose calleth the bread before the wordes of consecration panis usitatus, that is, common bread: but it is after the wordes of consecration that they receiue this honour to beare the names of things represented by them, as Theodoreius in expresse words writeth, : that is, ee hath honoured the visible signes with the appellation of his Theodoret. dialog. 1. cap. 8 bodie and blood, not changing their nature, but adding grace to nature. Which place clearly prooueth, that the elementes obtaine not that great honour to bee called Christes body, or types of his blessed body, vntill the time that by diuine grace they bee con∣secrated to that holy vse. Mailrosius Scotus, liued vnder the reigne of Charles the Great, about the yeere of our Lord 800. and likewise RABANVS, Bishop of Mentz: these two had so acquainted themselues with the doctrine of Augustine, that they could in no manner of way giue allowance to the doctrine of Transsubstantiation. And about the yeere of our Lord 840. Carolus the second, the sonne of Lu∣douicus Pius, and brother to Lotharius, and Ludouicus Germanicus, he writ to Bertramus, a Presbyter, to haue his resolution concer∣ning the mysterie of the Sacrament, and after what manner of way the body and blood of Christ was present in the Sacrament. To whome hee returned this answere, That in the Sacrament of Bertram. de corpore & sanguine Domini. the holy Supper there were some thinges that were perceiued with bodily senses, other thinges were taken holde of onelie by faith: And the bread and the wine were to vs the body & blood of Christ, as MANNA, and the waters of the spirituall rock were Christs body and blood to the people of the Iewes in the wilder∣nesse. This opinion aggreeth well with the doctrine of Paul, that the Fathers in the wildernesse ate that same spirituall food which 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4 we eat: which they could not doe by corporall manducation of Christs flesh, because as yet the word was not made flesh. So this opinion of Transsubstantiation did no sooner put out its head, but assoone also contradiction was made vnto it. About the yeere of our Lord 1020. Berengarius maintained the opinion of Augustine, and other auncient Fathers: hee was a presbyter of Angiers in Fraunce, and denied the doctrine of
Transsubstantiation, and the Romane Bishops were cōmooued with great indignation, as appeareth by the number of Councels as∣sembled against one poore man, who durst presume to speake against the opinion once embraced by the Romane Church. Leo the ninth gathered a Councel at Rome, in the which he condem∣ned the opinion of Berengarius, and excommunicated him, euen before he was warned to be present at the Councell, and before hee was heard. Hee assembled also another Councell in Vercellis, about the yeere of our Lord 1051. in the which Borengarius was not present: but Messengers who came to pleade his cause, were imprisoned, and casten into bands, and the booke of Ioan∣nes Scotus Mailrosius, De Eucharistia, was condemned. By the way, if any equitie had beene kept in these Councels, looke by what reason they condemned Ioannes Scotus, whose opinion Berenga∣rius followed: by the like reason they shoulde haue condemned Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, whose opinion Ioannes Mailrosius fol∣lowed. But the Romane Church cannot erre. 'Another Councell was assembled by Pope Victor, the successor of Leo the ninth, in the which the Decree of the Coūcell of Vercellis was allowed. Yet all this coulde worke no contentment in their hertes, be∣cause the people of Angiers and Towrs, in Fraunce, liked the do∣ctrine of Augustine, Mailrosius, and Berengarius, about the Sacra∣ment of the Supper. Therefore, another Councell was assembled at Rome, by Pope Nicolaus the seconde, anno 1058. in the which Berengarius yeelded to the opinion of the Pope and his Coun∣cell: and his weaknesse strengthened the errour already recei∣ued in the Romane Church mightily. But the number of them who abhorred this newe found out doctrine, was exceeding great: therefore the Romane Church, af∣ter the yeere of our Lord 1079, and after the dayes of pope Gre∣gorie Blling. de Concil. li. 2 the seuenth, put hand to worke: And being now mightie & strong, they stirred vp Kings and Princes, to persecute with fire and sword, and all kind of hostilitie, as heretiques, all those that spake against worshipping of Images, & corporall presence and manducation of the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the ho∣ly Supper. So it is manifest, that this doctrine of Transsubstantiation was mightily contradicted, vntill the dayes of pope Innocentius the
third, who in the Councell of Laterane, anno 1215. gaue full al∣lowance thereunto. But when all this is done, rmember that the vniuersall & Catholicke Church dwelleth not in one coun∣trey or city. When ye Romane Church was miserably infected with this miserable scabbe of pestilent errour, what consent gaue the Churches of Asia, and all the Grieke Churches? They euer diss∣sented from this doctrine, vntill this daye, as appeareth by the last Sessions of the Councell of Florence, anno 1439. Therefore, let the Romane Church bragge of Antiquitie as they please, the do∣ctrine of Transsubstantiation shall neuer be found an ancient do∣ctrine, but a doctrine newe, false, absurd, and borne out more by might of the preuailing authoritie of men, than power of argu∣mentes grounded vpon holy Scripture. God teach them to re∣turne to the ancient trueth, from which they haue sliden: To whom be praise and glory for euer, Amen. A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Pennance. IN this CENTVRIE it was a receiued cu∣stome to men to confesse their sinnes secretly to Presbyters, and to receiue from them such forme of injunctions as they counted satisfactions for their faultes, as appeareth clearly by the Coun∣cell gathered in Fraunce, anno 742. in the which Bonifacius, bishop of Mentz was Moderator. In the first Canon of that Councell it was statuted and ordained, That no man of the Clergie should put on armour, and goe to warre-fare, except one or two bishops, with their presbyters and chaplens, to pre∣scribe pennance vnto them who should happen to confesse their sinnes. By this it is euident, that the custome of secret confes∣sion of sinnes to presbyter poenitentiarius, which was excluded
out of the Church in the dayes of Nectarius, Bishop of Constanti∣nople: yet it returned againe, and it was in vse in the VIII. CEN∣TVRIE. Now in the inseription of this TREATISE, I call it a Sacramēt (as ye Romane church in our dayes call it) not as though I were in the opinion that in this age the number of seuen Sacramentes was receiued, for that is a Noueltie, not hearde of before the 1200, yeere of our Lord: at which time the Scholasticke Do∣ctors, who peruerted all Theologie, woulde needes forge Sacra∣mentes in number agreeing with the number of seuen princi∣pall vertues, to wit, FAITH, HOPE, CHARITIE, IVSTICE, PER∣SEVERANCE, PRVDENCIE, and TEMPERANCE: So that Baptisme should answere to Faith, Confirmation to Hope, the holy Supper to Charitie, the Sacrament of Pennance to Iustice, extreame Unction. to Perseuerance, the Sacrament of Ordor to Prudencie, and the Sa∣crament of Marriage to Temperancie: These were the idle spe∣culations of Scholasticke Doctors, whereof the Romane Church in our dayes are almoste ashamed: because if the number of Sa∣craments be numbered according to the number of principall vertues, who seeth not that the number of Sacramentes in the olde and newe Testament must bee equall, and neither moe nor August. de doctrina Christ. li. 3. cap. 9 fewer, to the ende they may proportionally agree with the num∣ber of principall vertues? But Augustino saieth, that our Sacra∣ments are fewer in number, more easie to bee done, and more significatiuely expressing the grace of God, than the Sacramēts of the olde Testament. Seeing the principall purpose of my TREATISES is to mani∣fest the Noueltie of Popish Religion, therefore in this TREATISE I affirme, that the number of seuen Sacramentes was not men∣tioned by any Father preceeding this time. Therefore the Coun∣cell of Trent, in the prodigalitie of their Anathems and Cursings against all them who will acknowledge either moe or fewer Conc. Tri∣dent. sess. 7. can. 1. Sacraments of the new Testament than seuen hath pronounced very vnaduisedly, like as Aedipus slewe his father Laius king of Thebans, in time of a sedition, hauing no intention to slaye him: Euen so, the Councell of Trent, willing to deliuer vs vnto the Deuill, they are not aware, that they haue deliuered Iustinus Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Ambrose Augustine, and many other
auncient Fathers, to the Deuill, who neuer acknowledged the number of 7. Sacraments, as the Councell of Trent hath done. Nowe a good ordr required, that a definition of the Sacra∣ment of Pnnance should be set downe, & that we should search and inquire when it had a beginning: and finally, inquire what are the parts thereof and what things are necessarily required in it. First, concerning the definition of the Sacrament of Pen∣nance, all learned writers, whome I haue read, haue justly bla∣med the Scholasticke Doctors, for this, that they haue confi∣dently affirmed, that the Sacramentes are seuen in number, yet haue not set foorth a definition, which did agree with eue∣rie one of the Sacramentes, which they haue added to Baptisme and to the Lords Supper. Concerning the time, whereinto it had its beginning, they . Tri∣dent. sub Iulio 3. sess. 4. cap. 1 Ioh. 20. 23 are more particular: namely, that it had a beginning after that Christ arose from death, and breathed vpon his Disciples, and said, Rceiue the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, &c. Before this time (say they) there was no sacrament of Pennance, neither in the olde Testament, nor in the Baptisme of IHON, nor in the Preaching of CHRIST. when Hee preached the doctrine of Repentance. And when the cause is demaunded, wherefore there was no Sacrament of Pennance, when men confessed their sinnes with a contrite heart, and were baptized Matth. 3 by IHON, and brought foorth the fruits of amendement of life? Wee can heare no answere, except this, that men confes∣sed their sinnes in generall before they were baptized of IHON: But in the Sacrament of Pennance a particular confession of sinnes is required. And in this they discouer their owne weak∣nesse: for in the action of repentance, instituted by GOD, it is enough that all things be present, which God requireth: But in the Sacrament of Pennance, instituted by man, & not by God, if any thing be inlaking which humane cogitation hath founde out, the doctrine of Ihon Baptist, the contrition, consession, and satisfaction of the people, together with Ihon Baptists absolu∣tion all is nothing. There is yee one new piece inlacking, which the Romane Church hath sowed to an olde garment: and when that new clout is absent. which they haue imagined themselues, all is naught.
Now seeing that in the olde Testament there are found m∣nie testimonies of true repentance, the heart, the mouth, and conuersation, all witnessing, that the penitent sinner was vnai∣nedly conuerted vnto God. How commeth it to passe, that the Romane Church ouer-giueth the old Testamēt, as a time where∣into the Sacrament of Pennance had no place, because it was not as yet instituted by Christ? But they count it a Sacrament of the new Testamēt, instituted by Christ, after his resurrection. The Apostle Paul is not so vncouth in his speaches, who attribu∣teth Baptisme to the Iewes, and Circumcision to vs (1. Cor. 10. & Phil. 3.) in regarde their Sacramentes differed from our Sacra∣mentes, rather in the signe, than in the thing signified. But the Romane Church is so disgusted of the olde Testament, that they cannot admit, that the Sacrament of Pennance had place at that time. Notwithstanding, whatsoeuer can bee spoken of the repentance of Marie Magdalene and Zaccheus in the newe Testa∣ment, the like may be spoken of the repentance of Dauid in the olde Testament (2. Sam. 12. 13.) God mollified his heart, and it was pearced with a deepe sense of his sinne: God lowsed his tongue, and he confessed his iniquitie against himselfe (Psal. 32. 5.) hee patiently endured the fatherly chastisementes of GOD inflicted vpon him for his sinne: and the Prophet NATHAN pro∣nounced forgiuenesse from GOD. Heere no man can deny, but true repentance is founde in DAVID, consisting in contrition of the heart, confession of the mouth, satisfaction in his deedes, and absolution by the mouth of the Prophet: And what more is requisite in Popishe Pennance? Yet because DAVID con∣sessed his sinnes vnto GOD, and not to the Priest, and hee patientlie sustained the chastisementes of GOD, but not the pennance injoyned to him by the Priest. All that DAVID did appertaineth nothing to the holy Sacramēt of Pennance, which now is in vse in the Romane Church. The Romane Church, in this case, is not vnlike vnto an herde of cattell, possessed a long time into a folde: if any vncouth beast enter in amongst them, they will rudely putte at it, because it Similitude is vncouth & none of their fellowship: Euen so, when we speake of ye repentance of Dauid, which hath allowance in the holy Scri∣pture of God, & of the repentance of Miriam, whose satisfaction
(I meane, to remooue the slander shee gaue to Gods people) it was prescribed by Gods owne mouth, and the repehtance of Ionas sealed vp by a miraculous worke of his deliuerance from the Whales belly. All this is nothing to them: for albeit here be founde repentance and absolution, yet (saye they) not such as is founde in the Sacrament of Pennance in the Romane Church. For in the olde Testament, there is but a prediction, that GOD will forgiue their sinnes, prouiding that they repēt. But in their Sacrament, there is an actuall conferring of remission of sinnes, ex opere operato, to such as obeye the injunctions of the Priest. What haue we to doe with such foolish and babbling speaches, which are not grounded in Scripture? For the Apostles, who preached repentance and remission of sinnes, after Christes as∣cention to heauen, they ledde the people expressely to the pro∣mises Act. 3. 25 26 made to the Patriarches and Prophets, concerning the comming of Christ, and of remission of sinnes in him: heereby acknowledging no difference in substance betwixt repentance vnder the olde Testament and vnder the new Testamēt, because both they and wee are ledde to one fountaine of the house of Dauid, there to be washen, and to be cleansed from all spotte of Zach. 13. 1 sinne. Truely the doctrine of repentance, taught in holy Scripture, declareth, that it is a worke wrought in vs by the Lord himself, according as Christ our Lord witnesseth, saying, No man com∣meth Ioan. 6. 44 vnto mee, except my Father, who sent me, draw him. The meanes whereby this worke is wrought in vs, is by the fearefull trumpet of the law, and by the sweet promises of the Gospell. The instru∣mentes, which GOD vseth in this worke, are the Prophets, Apostles, their successors. None of these things can be denied: for the Apostle saieth, God was in Christ, and reconciled the Worlde 2. Cor. 5. 19. 20 vnto himselfe, not imputing their sinnes vnto them: and hath committed vnto vs the worde of reconciliation: no we then are wee Ambassadours for Christ, as though God did beseech you, through vs: we pray you in Christs sleade, to beereconciled vnto God. In these fore-mentioned places of Scripture three thinges are set downe: First, God is counted the efficient worker of repentance: Secondly, the promises of the Gospell (whereunto the terroures of the lawe prepare an open doore) are the meanes, alluring vs to repentance: Thirdly, the
Ministers of the Worde, are the instrumentes to carrie the mes∣sage of reconciliation vnto vs. The very law it selfe, and the Gos∣pell, cannot haue the honour due to God, who is the efficient worker of repentance, because both law and Gospell was prea∣ched to reprobate Iewes: but they were not conuerted by repen∣tance to the trueth of God, in regarde the Lord, who is the effi∣cient worker of repentance, wrought not inwardly in their hearts. As concerning the Preachers of the doctrine of recon∣ciliation, they receiue their honour from their Ambassadrie, and they giue no honour vnto it, except by accident, in respect of the people, who carry the greater reuerēce to an holy message, when they see the Ambassadour who carrietith, to bee an holy man. But now let vs consider God in the worke of repentance as the Isai. 43. 12 head, the message of reconciliation as the stomacke, the prea∣chers of the word, who carrieth this message, as the feete: whose feete, albeit they bee called beautifull, in regarde of the sweete message which they carry, yet the feete must neither haue the honour of the head, nor of the stomack. But the Romane church, by giuing this honour to a priest, that hee conferreth, exopere operato, remission of sinnes to the person who confesseth in par∣ticular all his faults vnto him, they giue the honour of the head to the feete. Like as in all their Religion their principall drift seemeth to bee this, to leade the people from the Creator, who is blessed for euer, to an excessiue confidence in the creatures of God. The grounde of the Sacrament of Pennance is a conceite of satisfaction, which men can make for their own sinnes commit∣ted after Baptisme: as if the promise of remission of sinnes made in Baptisme did extende onely to sinnes preceeding Baptisme. What is this else, but directly to contradict the words of Christ spoken to his Apostles. Hee who beleeueth, and is baptized, shall bee Mar. 16. 16 saued. Can any man be saued, by an absolution from a part of his sinnes, and not from all his sinnes? This doctrine of the Romane Church, bringeth in Christ as a Sauiour, and not a Sauiour, deli∣uering vs from the debt of by-past sinnes, and setting vs once without the prison doore, but knowing assuredly that wee shall be thrust into the prison againe, there to remaine, vntill wee sa∣tisfie for our own sins cōmitted after Baptisme. And they make
vs to be our owne sauiours, rather than Christ: for he who deli∣uereth a man from his last and greatest trouble, is rather to bee counted his deliuerer, than he who deliuered him from his first trouble. The particular thinges required in the Sacrament of Pen∣nance, they say, are foure, to wit, Contrition in the heart, Confes∣sion in the mouth, Satisfaction in the deede, and Absolution of Contrition the Priest. If these things were rightly conceiued, in repentance, all these thinges are necessarily required. But as they are in the Romane Church, all are meere abominations, and displeasing vn∣to God. First, concerning the Contrition of the heart, the Psalmist speaketh, The sacrifices of God are a contrit spirit: a contrite, and a broken heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. But in the Romane Church, psal. 5 1. 17 when a Poenitentiare commeth to his father Confessor, and disco∣uereth a sinne, not such as he hath already committed, and for the which he is pearced with sore displeasure, as Dauid was: but rather hee discouereth to his father Confessor, a treasonable at∣tempt, which he is minded to practise, with obstinate purpose, of an incorrigible heart: shall such a man bee counted to haue a contrite and a broken heart? Yet, in our dayes, no man is more welcome to a father Confessor, than such a man as discouereth to him horrible treasons, plotted against Noble Princes: Yea, and no confessions are more secretly buried in the mindes of father Confessors, than those confessions are. Is this a contrite spi∣rite, and a broken heart, wherein the Lord delighteth? Or can there bee a greater abuse of the doctrine of Contrition, than to count them contrite in heart, who are bent obstinately to runne forward in the course of vngodlinesse? Popish Contrition is not vnlike vnto the fighting of Marcus Crassus, both father and sonne against the Parthians. Crassus the elder, in his Oration made to encourage his army to fight va∣liantly, his voyce failed him: Marcus Crassus, his sonne, in his Plutarch. in vita Crass. first out-going out of the house he stumbled: Both these things were counted euill presages of the vnprosperous successe of the battell, which after followed. And what esperance can wee haue of this new found out Sacrament of Popish Pennance, when as they judge so boldly of the first point thereof, that is, of Con∣trition,
counting traitors to bee men of a contrite spirit, whome God hath appointed for the flames of euerlasting burning, ex∣cept they repent. The forme of Confession vsed in the Romane Church, hath neither warrand nor example in the Scripture of God, that anie Confession. person should bee bound in particulare to confesse all his secret sinnes to the Priest. The place of Scripture vildly abused, Ac∣knowledge Epist. Iam. cap. 5. vers. 16. your faultes one to another, and praye one for another, that yee may be healed, &c. it should bee expounded by another place of Scripture, wherein a man, who hath offended his neighbour, is commanded to confesse his faults to his neighbour, whome hee hath offended (Luke 17. 4) And it belongeth nothing to auri∣cular confession, except Popish Priestes would confesse in parti∣cular all their sinnes to the people, like as the people confesseth all their secret sinnes in particular to the Priestes, And our Lord and Master Iesus Christ, when hee receiued a particular confes∣sion of secret sinnes from the Samaritan woman, hee sent away his Disciples to Samaria, to the ende the weakenesse of a poore Ihon, 5. 8 penitent sinner should not bee troubled by a particular confes∣sion of secret sinnes before them who knewe not thinges which were done in secret. But let vs confesse secret sinnes to God, who knoweth things that are done in secret. But sinnes whereby the Church of God is openly slandered, let them also bee openlie confessed. Seeing that auricular confession hath no testimonie in Scrip∣ture, it followeth to search out by diligent examination, whe∣ther or no it had place after the dayes of the Apostles in the first three hundreth yeeres of our Lord. Wee reade of the first Chri∣stned Emperour Philippus, who slewe Gordianus, and was slaine by the Emperour Decius, anno 250, that hee was desirous about Easter time, to bee admitted vnto the participation of the holy Euseb. li. 6. cap. 34 Sacrament: but this benefit was refused vnto him, vntill the time that he made his publicke repentance, and vntill hee stood in the place where  were accustomed to stand. They were so called, because they were demaunded concerning the sinnes which they had committed, and the sense and feeling of griefe that God had wrought in their heartes for their precee∣ding offences. This was not a secret and auricular confession,
but an open confession of publike sins in sight & open audience of the people. So we see, that for the space of two hundreth and fiftie yeeres after the Lords ascension, auricular and secret con∣fession of sinnes, to the Bishop or Presbyter, was vnknowne in the Church. Nowe if at any time open confession of sinnes shoulde haue ceassed, and giuen place to secrete and auricular confession, it was in time of the tenne Persecutions, because that Christians were drawne continually before the judgement seates of vnbe∣leeuing Iudges, from whom the weaknesse and faultes of Chri∣stians might haue beene obscured, if auricular confession had beene in vse at that time. But the Fathers who liued in that age, were so carefull to purge the Church from slander, that they preferred the puritie of the Church vnto their owne liues. True it is, that euen before the ten Persecutions had an ende, some good Christians woulde consult with their Pastors, we∣ther it was expedient to confesse their sinnes openly before the people, to the edification and good of the Church, or secretly onely to God? But this secrete consulting with the Pastor, what was most needfull to bee done, was not an auricular confession to him of all secret sinnes, but rather an aduisement concerning some sinnes, whether the sinner himselfe and the Church might receiue greater benefite by open confession before the people, or by secret confession to God onely? The wordes of Origen very pertinently cited by Chemnisius are these, Consider circumspectly to whom thou shouldest confesse thy sinne. Origen. in Psal. 37. Trie first thy Physition: if hee vnderstand and fore-see thy disease to bee such as should bee confessed in the Congregation of the whole Church, and so be cured whereby possibly others may be edified, and thou thy selfe may bee easily healed: then (saieth hee) make haste to vse the counsell of thy Phisition. If the custome of the Primitiue Church were proponed in simplicitie and sinceritie, it shoulde bee founde, that the newe toye of auricular confession cannot bee shrowded vnder the vaile of great Antiquitie. Whatsoeuer a fewe men, wounded more deepely with a sense of sinne, than others, they did voluntarily in powring out their sinnes in the bosome of their Pastors, albeit they had neither sa∣crificed
vnto Idoles, nor yet giuen vp their names in the Romane deputies rolles, promising conformitie: but only they confessed other faults of lesse moment to their Pastors, with dejected and humbled mindes, seeking comfort to their afflicted soules. This Cypr. Serm 5. de Lapsi is a matter rarely contingent, wherewith wee are acquainted in our dayes, as familiarly as Cyprian was in his time. Yet was there no mandate and Church commandement, ordaining people so to doe in Cyprians dayes. And people likewise, who powreth out the dolour of their wounded cōsciences for secret sinnes in our bosome, they doe it voluntarily, and vncoacted, hoping for some mitigation of their griefe through vnburthening of their heart by confession, as Nazianzenus writeth,  Nazianzen. Cygn, car∣min. ad Epise.: that is, It is some medicinall cure of heart griefe to powre out our words into the verie aire. After the three hundreth yeere of our Lord, and after the tenne Persecutions ceassed, the discipline of making open re∣pentance for open sinnes, continued in the Church, as is euident by the Act of the Councell of Nice, in the 11. Canon, in the which a forme of Publicke satisfaction is prescribed vnto them who in time of the Persecution of Licinius had sacrificed to Idoles. But concerning a particulare confession of secrete sinnes to the Pa∣stor, there is no mention in the Councell of Nice. The Historie hath declared, that auricular confession had place in the East Churches, in the dayes of Nectarius bishop of Constantinople, whose Ministerie was vnder the reigne of the Em∣perour Theodosius. Here two thinges are to bee noted: First that the discipline of the East and West Churches was different: and in the West Church there remained a publicke confession of notorious and publicke sinnes: in so much, that the Emperour Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 18 Theodosius himselfe confessed his fault openly, and in sight of the people at Millane, for the slaughter of the innocent people of Thessalonica. Secondly, it is to bee marked, that Nectarius in abo∣lishing the custome of auticular confession, he acknowledged it to bee but an humane, and not a diuine constitution: for who dare abolishe, either in doctrine, or discipline, the constitutions and ordinances of God? Lindanus, a man in the Latine Language more eloquent than godly, cannot suffer that it shall be thought, that Nectarius abo∣lished
auriculare confession, but rather, that hee abolished the custome (then in vse) that one shoulde onely bee Presbyter Poe∣nitentiarius, to whome secrete sinnes shoulde bee confessed: and that in time to come, a man should make choise of any presby∣ter, whom he pleased, to be his father Confessor, But let the historie bee judge. Socrates saith, that Eudaemon gaue councell to Necta∣rius, Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 19 to abrogate presbyter poenitentiarius, & to remit euery man to the triall of his owne conscience, when he approached to the participation of holy mysteries. Satisfaction in the Romane Church, is an obedience to the in∣junctions of the Priest: by performance wherof, they are in hope Satisfactiō to obtaine forgiuenesse at the handes of God, for sinnes com∣mitted after Baptisme. But besides the Nouely that is in Popish Satisfaction, it is also a blasphemous opinion. It is a Nouelty be∣cause that ancient Fathers, whē they spake of Satisfaction, mea∣ned not of a satisfactiō made to God, but of a satisfaction made to the Church: Yea, and S. Augustine calleth it, Satesfactio, quiasatis Augustin. Enchyri. ad Laurent. fiebat Ecclesiae: that is because the Church was satisfied. It is al∣so a blasphemous opinion, because the honour only due to the merites of Christes suffering, is attributed to the worthinesse of mens satisfactions, such as Fasting, Praying, distribution of Almes, going in Pilgrimage to holie places, and such like offi∣ces. But the vsurpation of the least of the honoures belonging onelie to CHRIST, is hornbletreason in the sight of God, CHRIST is a propitiation for our sinnes, saieth the Apostle, 1. Ihon, chap. 2. vers. 2. If anie man doe imagine, that hee can make a satisfaction for his owne sinnes, hee is blasphemous against the sonne of God. And like as Iulian the Apostate, when hee suffered himselfe tò bee saluted by the Armie , that is, Emperour: CONSTANTIVS the Emperour, by that one worde, vnderstoode the treasonable attemptes of his aspiring minde. And let vs bee perswaded in our owne Similitude heartes, That incase anie man imagine, that hee can satifie for his owne sinnes, hee is but a Traitor against the SONNE of GOD. THe last head of Popishe Pennance, is Absolution, wherein three things doe concurre, to wit, blasphemie, vncertaintie Absolutiō and foolishnesse. It is blasphemie to saye, that any man can for∣giue
finnes, who is not Eternall GOD, (Marke 2. 7.) ex∣cept in forme of a Messenger, executing GODS commaun∣dement in such manner as GOD hath prescribed in his holie worde. It is great vncertaintie to absolue men from the guilti∣nesse of their faults, but not from their punishment: insomuch, that if they bee preuented by death, before they haue fulfilled the pennance enjoyned by the Priest, then their soules must bee tormented in Purgatorie, vntill they haue made full sa∣tisfaction for their offences. Then Popishe Absolution, de∣pending vpon the vncertaintie of a mans life, cannot bee a certaine thing, but a miserable excrutiation of poore soules, put in vaine hope of absolution, and yet vncertaine whether they be absolued or not. Nowe because they will needes referre the institution of the Sacrament of Pennance vnto CHRIST, as the Author thereof, when Hee breathed vpon His Disciples, and saide, Whose sinnes yee remitte, they are remitted, &c. (Ihon, chapt. 20. verse 23.) Necessitie constraineth them to prooue two thinges out of the wordes of CHRIST, which they count essen∣tiall in the Sacrament of Pennance; First, that CHRIST commaunded a penitent sinner to make a particulare rehear∣sall of his secrete sinnes in the eare of the Priest: which thing CHRIST neuer commaunded. Secondlie, that in the abso∣lution of a penitent sinner, CHRIST commaunded to en∣joyne vnto him a satisfaction, whereby hee might merite at the handes of GOD forgiuenesse for sinnes committed after Ba∣ptisme: which thing CHRIST neuer commaunded: yea, repugneth manifestlie to the Holie Scriptures of GOD, in the which it is saide, With one offering hath Hee consecrated for euer them that are sanctified, Hebr. chapt. 10. vers. 14. This is not a single and vpright dealing to referre the institution of the Sa∣crament of Pennance vnto CHRIST, when as they cannot prooue, that thinges moste essentiallie requisite in their Sacra∣ment, hath allowance from the mouth of CHRIST. I compare the Romanists in their doctrine of Pennance to king Hezekias, not in time of his zeale & vprightnes, but in time of his reproueable weaknes: for hee shewed vnto the Ambassadours of Isai. 39. 2
the King of BABEL, the house of his treasures, his Siluer, Golde, Spices, and Precious Ointmentes, and all the house of his Armour. The Messengers of the King of BABEL had no such commission from their Master, to viewe the Treasures, Riches, and Armour of King HEZEKIAS: but onely to present letters of congratulation for the miraculous restitution of HEZEKIAS to health, and to bring vnto him a present from MERODACH BALADEN, King of BABEL. But HEZEKIAS, King of IVDA, in his reprooueable weake∣nesse (as I haue alreadie spoken) let the Ambassadoures see maine chinges, which they had no commission to see, to the great harme and disaduantadge of his posteritie: Euen so, CHRIST sent out His Apostles, and their true Succes∣sours, to preach the doctrine of repentance, and remission of sinnes. But the ROMANE Church will let the Ambassa∣doures of GOD see such thinges, as are not contained in their commission, to wit, a particular confession of all secrete sinnes, together with a satisfaction to GOD for sinnes com∣mitted after Baptisme, of which thinges no mention is made in the written worde of GOD. Heere I leaue them, delighting in their Nouelties, which haue no grounde from the mouth of CHRIST, nor from the doctrine of His Apostles. Yea, they are like vnto the frogges of the Ile of SERI∣PHVS, one of the Iles called CYCLADES, in the which the Frogges sette vp their heads in the Monethes of March and Aprill, but they vtter no sounding voyce. as the Frogges in Similitude other places doe: Euen so, the ROMANE Church holdeth vp their heads, as if they would prooue, that CHRIST in∣stituted this Sacrament, but they faint in the probation.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Confirmation. IN the Sacrament of Confirmation, there is a glorious shewe of a signe, and a spirituall thing signified. The outward signe is Chrisme, that is, Oyle, mixed with some mixture of Baulme, which beeing signated with the signe of the Crosse, vpon the fore-head of him who is con∣firmed, in the Name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost: they saye, that with this outwarde signe is conferred the seuen-folde grace of the holy Spirit. And this Sacrament they extoll aboue the Sacrament of Baptisme, because the grace of God which is begunne in vs by Baptisme, is perfected by the Sacrament of Confirmation: Yea, and a Priest, or Deacon of the Church, may baptize: but the Sacrament of Confirmation must only bee mi∣nistrated by a Bishop. Verie early did Popish bishops prouide, that they shoulde not be altogether idle: for they beganne to loath the office of prea∣ching and baptizing: and lest they should seeme to bee idle bel∣lies, they reserued some easie exercise to themselues, to wit, the making of Chrisme, and anointing the people therewith. To all this is added a Rhetoricall discourse, That the people of Israell, after they had passed thorow the redde Sea, they ente∣red into a Wildernesse, in the which they had a great combate with many troubles, before they could enter into their rest. And in like manner, after that we are baptized, we haue a great fight with many aduersaries & troubles, before we can enter into the rest of God. All this is true, but what is inferred vpō this? If the Apostle Paul were our instructor, hee woulde bid vs put on the
complete armour of God, to the ende that we might withstand Ephes. 6 spirituall wickednesse, and eate the blessed bread, and drinke the cuppe of blessing, to the ende that beeing corroborated by 1. Cor. 10 the strength of the Sacramentes ordained by God, wee might fight a good fight, and finishe our journey with joye. This is the Apostolicke doctrine. But Papistes will correct the Apostolicke doctrine in all points, & they wil haue a Christiā to be corrobo∣rated by Chrisme & ye sacrament of confirmation, to the end he may passe ouer the stormie tentations of this world in peace. Let mee now demand of them two thinges: One concerning the signe, Another concerning the thing signified. Concerning the signe, I demand who gaue commandement to vse it? Con∣cerning the thing signified, I demaunde who hath promised to conferre the seuen-folde grace of the holy Spirite to them who are signated vpon the fore-head by the bishops thombe with the signe of the Crosse? These two thinges, to wit, the comman∣dement and the promise are inlacking in Popish Sacramentes: and so their newe found out Sacramentes are like vnto a bodie that is not quickened with a soule. The Scholasticke Doctors, the first inuentors of this pluralitie of Sacraments, they confesse roundly, that the Sacrament of Confirmation hath no authori∣tie in holy Scripture, such as Alexander Alensis, Bonaventura, and Thomas Aquinas, who after much fatigation of himselfe and others also, hee cannot finde, that euer Christ, or yet His Apostles, conferred this Sacrament to any person. Whatsoeuer they can cite out of Tertullian, or Basilius, or any ancient Coun∣cell, for the confirmation of Chrisme, it is certaine, that they confesse, that this custome hath no authoritie of the written worde of God. And this is the principall marke whereat I aime in all my writinges, to prooue, that there is no Antiquitie where , that is, the written word of God, doeth not confirme the antiquitie of that which is alleadged. The Romane Church waketh great businesse to proue that in holy Scripture many promises of confirmation and corrobora∣tion of the worke of God begunne in vs are contained: But they bestirre themselues in vaine, in proouing that thing, which no man denieth. But incase they would prooue, that the Sacrament of Confirmation is a Sacramēt in a proper sense, then it became
them to proue, that God in His word hath promised the grace of confirmation, to such as are signated vpon the fore-head and annointed with Chrisme, and buffeted vpon the chieke with the bishops hand. Seeing none of these thinges can bee prooued by Scripture, it is a friuolous thing for them to alleadge a promise made by God, when as they inuent the element whereunto this promise shall bee annexed. If this bee a forme, according to the which Sacraments should be fashioned: then I dare affirme, that the number of Sacraments may be multiplied, according to the number of the promises contained in the word of God: So that God shall make a promise, and man shall inuent, without anie warrand of Gods commandement, an external element, where∣vnto the promise shall bee annexed. By this forme of doing not onely may they make vp seuen Sacramentes, but also seuentie times seuen Sacraments. True it is, that the holy Apostles, by imposition of handes, conferred the gift of the holy Spirit (that is, the gift of Langua∣ges) Act. 8. to many professors of the true Faith: and this gift conferred vnto them, confirmed them in the faith of Christ. But what be∣longeth this vnto the Popish Sacrament of Confirmation, in the which the externall signe of imposition of handes is inlacking, and the promise of a spirituall grace annexed to the signe is al∣so inlacking: and finally, that thing which was extraordinarie and appertaining to a few, is brought in as the ground of an or∣dinarie Sacrament, which shoulde appertaine to all them who beleeue. I will not insist long to speake of this new Sacrament of Con∣firmation. Onely this I say, that whatsoeuer is brought in into the Church of God, with derogation of the dignitie of Bap∣tisme, an holy Sacrament instituted by Christ himselfe, it should Matth. 28 be abhorred. But so it is, that the Sacrament of Confirmation is brought in with a derogation to the dignitie of Baptisme, ergo, &c. The seconde part of the argument is prooued by their slen∣der and derogatiue speaches of Baptisme, together with their superlatiue aduancements of the eminencie of the Sacrament of Confirmation. In Baptisme they say that wee receiue not the vp∣holding, defending, gouerning, and strengthening Spirite of God: but all these graces are conferred in the Sacrament of
Confirmation. Likewise, in Baptisme is prepared an habitation to God: but the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost enter not into this habitation before wee receiue the Sacrament of Confir∣mation. What can be more directly repugnant to H. Scripture? Marke 16 wherein it is expressely said, He who beleeueth, and is baptized, shall be saued. Can any man be saued, befor his soule be an habitation and Temple in the which God is content to dwell? So that the doctrine of the Romane Church is like vnto the nauigation of men who dare presume to saile in deepe and dangerous Seas without a Compasse: Euen so, they talke of matters of great im∣portance without the warrande of holy Scripture: whereby it commeth to passe, that their doctrine in many pointes is flatte repugnant to holy Scripture. Concerning the testimonies of Fathers, whereby they ende∣uour to proue the Sacrament of Confirmation, I might answere compendiously with S. Augustine, Quicquid attulerint, & unde∣cunque attulerint, audiamus potius, si oues sumus vocem pastoris nostri: non ergo audiamus, haec ego dico, haec tu duis: sed haec dicit Dominus: August. de unitate Eccles, cap. 3 that is, Whatsoeuer they bring in, and from whence soeuer they haue brought it in, if we be the Lords sheepe, let vs rather bearken to the voyce of our shephearde: therefore, let vs not hearken to them who saye, This I saye, or this thou sayest, but this saieth the Lord. Neuerthelesse, seeing they glorie so much of ancient Fathers, let the judicious Rea∣der beware of supposititious writings, and he shall not find this Chrisme in ancient writers. The Sermon of Cyprian, De Chrismate, is knowne to be supposititious. The opinion of Tertullian, who writeth, that they who are baptized with water, haue not recei∣ued the Holy Spirit, but are prepared to receiue it by anointing Tertull. de Baptism. with oyle, and imposition of handes, after baptisme: doeth not euery man, who is versed in the reading of Fathers, smell, that Tertullian writte this when hee made defection from the trueth, and was intangled with the errour of the Montanistes? And Cy∣prian, in the bookes of his epistles, when he attributeth too much to Vnction with Oyle and imposition of hands, after baptisme, Cypr. lib. 1 epist. 12 it is easie to perceiue, that he borrowed this errour from Tertul∣lian, whom he acknowledged as his Master. But neither Tertullian Idem, lib. 2 epist. 1 nor Cyprian are speaking of the Popishe Sacrament of Confir∣mation, but of annointing with oyle and imposition of handes
immediately after baptisme. Marke the words of Cyprian, where he saith, Non posse esse filios Dei, si non utroque sacramento nascantur, lauacro scilicet aquae in verbo, & unctione Chrismatis: that is, They can∣not bee the sonnes of God, except they bee borne againe by both the Sacra∣ments to wit, by the lauacre of water in the word, and the anointment of Chrisme. True it is, that Cyprian calleth the anointment of oyle after baptisme, a Sacrament different from the dipping in wa∣ter: but his meaning is, that the anointing with oyle is an ele∣ment different from the element of water, and Augustine long after Cyprian, calleth the externall signe of the Sacrament, a Sa∣crament, August. in Euangel. Ioan. cap. 6 tract. 26 and the thing represented by it, res sacramenti. Nowe what vantadge hath the Romane Church, when they take holde of the wordes, utroque Sacramento, that is, both the Sacraments? and in the meane time they neither take heede to the sandie grounde, whereupon Cyprian leaneth, to wit, the opi∣nion of Tertullian, neither yet take they heede in what sense Cy∣prian calleth anointing with oyle a Sacrament, to wit, because it is one of the elementes, whereby our spirituall birth is repre∣sented. The reuerence that was carried toward the ceremonies of si∣gnification in the law of Moses, hath made a patent doore vn∣der the Gospell, to receiue many legall ceremonies, such as con∣secration by oyle, the linnen Ephod, the lightes shining all the night long, and many other ceremonies, which are the more easily embraced, because in Poprie the substance of godlinesse is vtterly forsaken, and vaine ceremonies are adhered vnto, euen such as are ceassed, because they had their performance in Similitude Christ. And like as it is a follie to take the huskes of the wine grapes, after the liquor is pressed out of them, and to cast them into the wine-presse againe: Euen so, it is a foolishe conceite to returne the ceremonies of signification, which haue had their performance in Christ, and are abolished, to haue place againe in the Church of God. Therefore, let the Romane Church bragge of Antiquitie as much as they please, in their Sacrament of Confirmation, no antiquitie shall bee founde, and that for three causes: First▪ be∣cause the anointing with oyle, whereof the Fathers doe speake, is not a different sacrament from baptisme, but a ceremonie
Preceeding and following Baptisme. Secondly, the oyle where∣with persons baptized were anointed, was not mixed with Bal∣some. And thirdly, after baptisme, anointing with oyle, and im∣position of hands followed immediately: but in the Sacrament of Confirmation, when it began to take place in the Church of God, anointing with oyle mixed with Balsome followed not immediately vpō the necke of baptisme, as a continuate action: but it was ministred 12. or 15. yeere after baptisme: so that it is a deluding of the world, and a peruerting of those who are weak in vnderstanding, to proue that the Sacrament of Confirmation is an auncient Sacrament in the Church, because it was an aun∣cient custome to anoint with oyle those who were baptized, as if Baptisme and Confirmation were both one thing, which they vtterly denie. Let the judicious Reader vnderstand, that the purpose of the Romane Church to aduaunce their Sacrament of Confirmation with impairing of the dignitie of Baptisme, is but a new Popish inuention: For the writers, after the dayes of the Apostles, the more auncient they are, the more they magnifie the holy Sa∣crament of Baptisme: by which (saieth Clemens Alexandrinus) : that is, Wee Clemens Alexa. paed. lib. 1. cap. 6 are enlightened, wee receiue the adoption of children, wee are made per∣fect, wee are made immortall. What affinitie hath the doctrine of the Romane Church with Antiquitie, who counteth the Sacra∣ment of Baptisme onelie a preparation to the Sacrament of Confirmation? Whereas auncient Writers haue attributed to Baptisme receiued truelie, and with singlenesse of heart, such perfection as leadeth vs vnto immortallitie and eternall life. Lindanus pineth himselfe much, as a woman trauelling in birth, to bring foorth her childe: so doeth hee endeuour with Lindan. pa∣nopl. lib 4 cap. 29 all his might, to prooue, that CHRIST instituted the Sa∣crament of Confirmation, and that the Chrisme shoulde bee renewed from yeere to yeere, and that this custome hath beene continuallie in vse since the dayes of the Apostles, not onelie in the Church of ROME, but also in the Churches of AN∣TIOCHIA, HIERVSALEM, and EPHESVS. This is a verie confident assertion, if hee coulde make it good. And for proofe of all this geare, is brought foorth asupposititious let∣ter
of Fabian, bishop of Rome. The cause is weake that is foun∣ded vpon such sandie grounde as Decretall Epistles doe falselie attribute to a great number of the bishops of Rome. The olde prouerbe hath place in Lindanus, as much as in anie Writer, Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus Mus: that is, The Mountaines are trauailing in birth, and aridiculous Mouse shall bee brought foorth. Fabianus testimonie, written in a Legende of lies, that is, in Decretall Epistles, vnknown to Antiquitie, is no sure ground to any man to leane his Faith vpon it. Moreouer, he fetcheth a compasse to draw this Sacrament of Confirmation out of Scripture one way or other, and hee saith, that Christ commaunded his Apostles, who were already bapti∣zed, to remain at Ierusalē, vntill they were endewed with strēgth from aboue (Act. 1) & in the day of Penticost, the H. Ghost descē∣ded vpon them in the similitude of fiery & clouen tongs (Act. 2) & again, the disciples at Samaria, who were already baptized, yet by imposition of the handes of the Apostles, they receiued the gift of the H. Spirit (Act, 8. 17) What can Lindanus inferre vpon these groundes? Christ bestowed vpon Christians, who were al∣ready baptized, a more ample grace than they had at the begin∣ning: whē they were baptized, & Christ added a signe in time of Confirmation, somtimes fiery tongues, & somtimes imposition of hands: ergo, Confirmation is a Sacrament of ye new Testamēt: it followeth not: for God in ordinary sacraments, like as he ma∣keth promises appertaining to al ye beleeuers: euen so in like ma∣ner he sealeth vp these promises by signes appertaining to all ye members of the Church of God: but promises belonging to a small number, & sealed vp with signs cōferred vnto a few, cānot bee the ground of a sacrament, which is a seale of the couenant of God, belonging to all true professors and beleeuers. And when Lindanus hath troubled himselfe with much businesse, in end he granteth that Chrisming is an vnwritten tradition, and hath no authoritie in the written word of God, citing the testi∣monie of Basilius Magnus to this effect: God confirmeth and Basil. aduer. sus Eunom. strengtheneth them who are baptized in his name, to bring his owne worke begunne in them to a perfection, but not to in∣stitute a newe SACRAMENT. And like as the GEN∣TILES of olde, who worshipped the SVNNE, they
worshipped it not onely for the glory and splendor that was in it, but also for the benefite that it did communicate vnto the earth, by warming it, and making it fruitfull. Euen so, wee doe magnifie God our Creator and maker, not onely for his owne most excellent and incomprehensible glorie, but also because he daylie refresheth our soules with his goodnesse, & strengtheneth our weaknesse with the power of his sauing grace. These are points whereof no man doubteth: and a large and fruitfull dis∣course vpon this subject is a commendation of the superabun∣dant goodnesse of God: but it belongeth nothing to prooue that Chrisming is a Sacrament distinct from Baptisme. The African Councell, called Mileuitanum, pronounced an Anatheme against all those who saye, that the grace of God in Canon 3 Baptisme conferreth only remission of sinnes already cōmitted, & that in it there is no support promised to preserue men from sinnes in time to come that they bee not committed. Whereby wee may euidently perceiue, that the spirituall graces, which the Romane Church referreth to the Sacrament of Confirmation, were of olde referred to the Sacrament of Baptisme. Likewise, Antididagma Coloniensis (as Themnisius declareth) de∣mandeth, for what cause doth the Presbyter anoint him, who is baptized, with Chrisme, seeing that he is to be anointed of new againe, with Chrisme, in the Sacrament of Confirmation? And out of the booke, De Gestis Pontificum, he recordeth a constitution of Syluester, That for the perill of vnexpected death, it is meete, that the Presbyter shall anoint with Chrisme him who is to bee baptized, lest through absence of the Bishop the person bapti∣zed should depart this life without Confirmation: but if the bi∣shop be present, let him be anointed by the bishop. This decla∣reth. that of olde Chrisming was annexed to Baptisme. But af∣terwards, to multiplie the number of the Sacraments, they sepa∣rated it from the action of Baptisme, and made it a peculiar Sa∣crament, to bee ministred some space of time after Baptisme, at the least seuen dayes, for reuerence toward the seuen-folde gra∣ces of God conferred in the Sacrament of Confirmation, as Durandus citeth out of RABANVS: vsually twelue or fifteene yeeres interuene betwixt Baptisme and the Sacrament of Con∣firmation in the Romane Church. Onely this I request of the ju∣dicious
Reader, that when hee readeth of Chrisming in the an∣cient Church, hee would not take it for the Sacrament of Con∣firmation, but for anointing with oyle in Baptisme. And this custome also had no allowance in the written worde of GOD, as Basilius expressely graunteth, in these wordes, , that is, What Scripture Basil. aduer. sus Eunom. Lindan. pa∣nopl. lib. 4 cap. 32 hath taught vs anointing with Oyle? Doeth not this proceede from secret and mysticke tradition? Finally, let vs search out this matter to the very grounde, whereby it may bee euidently knowne, howe this Sacrament of Confirmation crept in into the Church. It was a custome of auncient time, that children were presented to Baptisme by their Christian parentes: and albeit their infancie coulde not comprehende the summe of Christian Faith, yet neuer thelesse they were instructed and catechised when they came to yeeres of discretion: and when they had sufficiently comprehended the summe of Christian Faith, their parentes of newe againe presented them to the Bishop, who after hee had receiued in audience of the people, a cleare confession of their Faith, hee blessed them, and with the ceremonie of imposition of handes, prayed to God, that these persons, who had giuen out of their owne mouth a confession of that same Faith, which their pa∣rentes had professed in their name in Baptisme, might continue in that same true Faith constantly vnto their liues ende. This imposition of handes was vsed to imprint into the heartes of the persons, who had made a confession of their faith, a dee∣per reuerence of God, and a greater care to continue constant. But in doing of this, there was no purpose to institute a newe Sacrament of Confirmation in the Church. Moreouer, persons who were baptized by Heretiques, when they forsooke their heresie, they were not rebaptized, but they were receiued into the Church by the ceremonie of imposition of handes, as hath beene declared in the life of Stephanus, bis∣shop of Rome, CENT. III. CHAP. II. And this imposi∣tion of handes was joyned with prayer, That it woulde please God to vouchsafe vpon him who was receiued into the bosome of the Church by imposition of handes, the gift of the holy Spi∣rit,
which was offered vnto him in Baptisme, but it was not re∣ceiued, because hee professed not the true Faith. Neither can there bee founde in this seconde sort of imposition of handes anie grounde for the Sacrament of Confirmation. To conclude, this Sacrament of Confirmation is either of God or man. If it bee of God, let the warrande of His com∣maundement bee brought foorth, in the which Hee commaun∣deth to anoint with Chrisme those who are alreadie baptized. And is it not a disficill thing, to these who are content to sacri∣fice their life for Christes sake to offer their children also to bee signated with Chrisme when they are twelue or fifteene yeeres of age. But if no diuine commaundement can bee founde out, commanding vs so to doe, but it is a plaine humane inuention, Then let the Romane Church bragge lesse of Antiquitie than they doe, seeing there is nothing in hu∣mane inuentions, but Antiquitie of Errour. FINIS.
CENTVRIE IX. CHAP. I. OF EMPEROURS. CAROLVS MAGNVS. IN the yeere of our LORD 801. CHARLES THE GREAT, King of FRAVNCE, was declared Empe∣rour, by LEO the thirde, Bishop of ROME: and hee reigned sixteene yeeres in his Emperiall dignitie: for hee continued King of FRAVNCE fourtie and sixe yeeres. The Empire of the West had beene cut off since the dayes of Augustulus, the sonne of Orestes, whom Odoaser, king of Rugiheruli, &c. had compelled to denude himselfe of the Emperiall dignitie. Nowe after the issue of 300. yeeres, and after the Hunnes, the Gothes, the Lombardes, and other Nations had obtained dominion in the West, all ab∣staining (notwithstanding of their preuailing power) from the name, dignitie, and stile of Emperoures. Nowe at length (I saye) Charles the Great is anointed, and crowned Emperour, by Leo the thirde, in the Towne of Rome. And this was the beginning of that euill custome which after followed, to wit, That Emperours
should receiue their coronatiō from the Bishops of Rome. At this time the Empire of the East was in ye hands of ye Empresse Irene, & in the hands of the Emperour Nicephorus. who had banished Irene, and reigned in her steade. The Empire of the East was also weake at this time, as apppeareth by a Couenant of Peace which they cōcluded with Charles, Emperour of the West: in the which no mention is made of Exarchatus Rauenne, to be rendered again vnto them only, that the Isle of Sicll, and the Townes & Landes which lie from Naples Eastwarde on the right hande, and from Manfredonia (sometimes called Syponto) on the left hand, com∣pessed about with the Seas, called Superum & Inferum: these should remaine in the possession of the Emperours of Constanti∣nople. Charles was a prudent & godly Emperour, more sound and vpright in sundry heads of christian doctrine, than many others: for he detested the worshipping of Images, as vile Idolatrie, as appeareth by his bookes written against the seconde Councell of Nice. Charles was very friendly to Christians, and defended them against the violence and tyrannie of their persecuting ene∣mies: namely, against Godefridus, King of Denmarke, a fearce ad∣uersary against the Christians who dwelt in Saxonie. Likewise, he subdued the Sclavonians and Bohemians, enemies to Christian Re∣ligion: and was justly called Magnus for his great exploytes & valiant acts which God prospered in his hand Pipinus, the sonne of Emperour Charles, was declared King of Italie who died be∣fore his father: and after his death he appointed Bernard his ne∣phew to reigne in Italie, with expresse commandement, That he should be obedient to his sonne Ludouieke, whom hee ordained to be successour to himselfe in the Emperiall office. So the Em∣perour Charles, full of dayes, died in the 71. yeere of his age, and was buried in AKEN. LVDOVICVS PIVS. AFter Charles succeeded his sonne Ludouicus Pius. and reig∣ned 26. yeeres. For his gentle and meeke behauiour hee was called Pius. Hee receiued the Emperiall Diademe from Ste∣phanus the fourth, at Aken. Bernard his brothers sonne, forget∣full of the mandate of Charles the Great, rebelled against Ludo∣douicus
Pius, and was beheaded at Aken. Likewise, his owne sonnes (assisted with Hugobortus, Bishop of Lions, and Bernhardus Bishop of Vienne, and other bishops, who did excommunicate the Emperour for adherence to Iudith his wife) they behaued them∣selues very vnduetifully towards their father. Neuerthelesse, hee freely pardoned his sonnes, and accepted them againe into fa∣uour. Also, Fredericke, bishop of Wtrecht, threatned to excommu∣nicate the Emperour, if he did not for sake the company of Iudith his welbeloued wife, and daughter to the Duke of Bauaria, be∣cause shee was his neare kinswoman, to wit, in degrees of con∣sanguinitie forbidden in the Popish law. The Empresse willing to be reuenged of the bishop, she hired two gentlemen, who set vp∣on him after Church seruice, and slewe him in his Priestly gar∣ments. In his time also, the Saracenes, in hudge numbers, like vn∣to Locusts swarmed out of Aegypt and Africk, and inuaded the Isle of Sicill. By cutting down all fruitful trees, burning Townes, Temples, and Monasteries, and by killing bishops, priestes, and monks, they brought the Isle to an vtter desolation. Gregorie the fourth, at this time, was Pope: and hee exhorted the Emperour, and his sonne Lotharius, to support the distressed estate of the Isle of Sicill. They answered, That albeit that matter duely belonged to Michael, Emperour of Constantinople, yet neuerthelesse, they refused not to vndertake the worke, vpon the common charges of the countrey. Nowe whilest these thinges were in reasoning, Bonifacius, Count of Corsica, and his brother Bertarius, with sup∣port Platina in vit. Greg. 4 of the people of Hetruria, arriued with a Nauie at Africke: and betwixt Vtica and Carthage, encountered with the Saracenes foure times: and slew of them so great a number, that they were compelled to recall their forces backe againe from Sicill Like as of olde the Carthaginians, vexed by Scipio, recalled Hanniball for the safety of his owne countrey: So Bonifacius returned backe againe with an armie victorious, and richly ladened with the spoyle of his enemies. Nothing was more vnprouidently done by the good Emperour Ludouicus Pius, than the ouer-giuing of that right, voluntarily conferred to Charles his father by Adrian the first, and Leo the third: to wit, That no man should be elected Pope without the consent and allowance of the Emperour. Functii comment. lib. 9 This fore-saide right Ludouicus gaue ouer to the Clergie and
people of Rome: onely, the Romanes, for keeping of friendship, should sende an Ambassadour to the Kinges of Fraunce, decla∣ring whome they had elected to bee Pope. Heereby a patent doore was opened to all mischiefe, which after followed: and to that horrible contention betwixt Emperoures and Popes, con∣cerning investment of Bishops. In his time three Emperoures reigned in the East, at Constantinople: to wit, Leo Armenius, Mi∣chaell Balbus, and Theophilus. Leo Armenius reigned seuen yeeres. Hee banished Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, for defen∣ding adoration of Images. Michaell Balbus slew Leo his predi∣cessour, whilest hee was praising God in the Church, and reig∣ned in his steade nine yeeres. In his time the Saracenes mightilie preuailed: a number of them issued out of Spaine, and tooke the Isle of Candie. Another companie, comming from Africke, wasted the Isle of Sicill. Theophilus reigned tenne yeeres, and faught against the Saracenes, who did oppresse the Countrey of Asia: but hee had no good successe. LOTHARIVS. LOTHARIVS, the sonne of LVDOVICVS PIVS, was declared King of Italie, and Augustus before his fa∣thers death. Hee was anointed by Pope Pascalis, in the Church of Sainct PETER: and hee reigned fifteene yeeres. Great hostilitie and bloodie warres fell out amongst the children of Ludouicus Pius: to wit, Lotharius, Lewes, Charles, and Pipinus, for diuiding of their fathers Landes. In this ciuill dissention the Nobilitie of Fraunce was so miserably weakened, that the Nor∣mandes and Daines tooke boldnesse to inuade the Countreye of Fraunce: which they vexed for the space of twentie yeeres. In the East, after Theophilus had concluded his life, his sonne Michael, with his mother Theodora, gouerned the estate. Mi∣chael reigned foure and twentie yeeres. Theodora continued on∣lie eleuen yeeres. Shee persecuted those who woulde not wor∣ship Images: albeit her husband before his departure from this life had seriously admonished her, that shee should not trouble the Church for restoring of Images.
LVDOVICVS the second. LVDOVICVS the seconde, and sonne of Lotharius, reigned twentie yeeres and one. The intestine dissention betwixt him and his brother Charles, seemeth to bee like vnto an here∣ditarie sicknesse. Howsoeuer, the Emperour Ludouicke had dis∣honour thereby: because the reballes of Charles desired the Em∣peroures protection against his owne brother: which when hee had graunted, the rebelles were reconciled againe with their owne King Charles: and the Emperour, with dishonour, was compelled to retire from his brothers Dominions. In the East, Michael, Emperour of Constantinople, slew his brother Theoctistus, and thrust his mother Theodora, and her sisters, into a Monaste∣rie, and reigned himselfe alone after his mothers deposition thirteene yeeres. So the whole time of the gouernement of Mi∣chael, was twentie and foure yeeres. Hee faught against the Sa∣racenes, but very vnprosperously, and was slaine by Basilius, who reigned in his steade seuen yeeres. CAROLVS CALVVS. LVDOVICVS the second dying without children, his bro∣ther Carolus Caluus, king of Fraunce, obtained at the handes of the Bishop of Rome, by many liberall giftes, to bee annointed Emperour. He continued Emperour not aboue two yeeres: and was poysoned by one Sedekias, a Iewe, whome hee vsed for his Physition. CAROLVS CRASSVS. CAROLVS CRASSVS was the sonne of Lewes, king of Germanic: he reigned 10. yeere. Carolus Balbus, the son of Ca∣rolus Caluus, was incontinent cut off by death. Therefore, I haue ouer-passed his name with silence. In this Emperoures time the Normandes and Daines made such horrible excursions and desolations in FRAVNCE, that the Emperour, who came with a great Armie, to support the distressed estate of
Fraunce, was compelled to make peace with them, anno 888. and assigned vnto them that part of Fraunce which lieth beyonde Seane, towardes the Britannicke Ocean, to bee their habitation: which hath the name of Normandie vntill this daye. Crassus, for His. Magd. Ceat. 9 Cap. 16 his negligence and euill gouernement, was deposed from his authoritie, and Arnulphus, his nephewe, was declared Empe∣rour. ARNVLPHVS. AFter the death of Carolus Crassus, great troubles ensued in Italie, by the factions of Berengarius, whome the Lombardes choosed to bee King of Italie, on the one part: and Guido, Duke of Spoleto, whome others choosed to reigne in Italie, on the other part. In the middest of these factions Arnulphus leadeth an ar∣mie out of Germanie. Hee tooke the Towne of Bergamum, and hanged Ambrose, the Earle thereof, vpon a Gibbet, before the port of the Towne. This seueritie terrified other Townes, and made them to yeelde. Hee addressed towardes Rome, and was rowned Emperour by Formosius, whose enemies hee punished vnto the death. From thence hee addressed to fight against Guido: but hee fledde, and escaped the Emperoures handes. The wife of Guido, hauing no puissance to resist the Emperoures forces, shee hired some of the Emperoures seruantes, who gaue vnto him a cuppe of poyson, which brought vpon him a le∣thargie, and three dayes sleeping continuallie. After this hee arose sicke, and left the siedge, (for hee was besieging the wife of Guido) and hee died, after hee had reigned twelue yeeres. In the East gouerned Leo, the sonne of Basilius, in whose time the Saracenes conquered Taurominium, a Towne in Sicill, and the Isle of Lemnos.
CHAP. II. Of Popes, Patriarches, Pastors, and Doctors. AFTER LEO the third succeeded STEPHA∣NVS the fourth, and ruled seuen monethes. Stephanus the fourth. He was not elected with consent & allowance of the Emperour, but only by the Clergie and people of Rome. Here it is well marked by Fun∣ctius, that the Romane Church doeth obserue Funct. Comment. Lib, 9. their owne lawes so inuiolably, that the priui∣ledge granted to the Emperour by Pope Leo the thirde, it is vn∣done againe euen in his first successors time: to wit, in Pope Ste∣phanus the fourth his time. In the thirde moneth of his Pope∣dome, he journeyed toward France, for what cause it is not cer∣taine: but it appeareth he would trie the Emperours mind, whe∣ther or no hee was grieued for this, that hee had beene elected Pope without the consent and fore-knowledge of the Empe∣rour. When he returned againe, finding that Ludouicus Pius the Emperour, was not greatly grieued at the matter, but accepted his excuse, he began to make Commentaries vpon the Decrees of Hadrian the first, and Leo the third: to wit that they meaned not that the Emperour should be first acquainted with the ele∣ction of the Pope: but rather, that after his election, the Emp. should be acquainted with this businesse, before the Pope were anointed. By such false Glosses and Commentaries, they were by degrees excluding the Emperour from all kinde of intromis∣sion with the election of the Pope. After Stephaus the fourth, succeeded Pascalis the first, who Pascalis the first. was elected without consent of the Emperour. He sent Ambas∣sadours
to excuse himselfe to the Emperour Ludouicus Pius, be∣cause the Clergie and people had compelled him to accept the Popedome. The Emperour Ludouicus Pius on the other part, seeing how this matter went, and that he was troubled with the vnconstancie, ambition, and obstinacie of the Romane Church, hee gaue them libertie to choose their owne bishop, without the fore-knowledge and consent of the Emperour in time to come. And Pascalis, after hee had ruled seuen yeeres and seuenteene dayes, hee ended his course. Eugenius the seconde, succeeded to Pascalis, and ruled foure Eugenius the second. yeeres. His popedome was in the time when Lotharius was ap∣pointed to gouerne Italie. His commendations are these, Great Learning, great Eloquence, with a mixture of great hypocrisie. Valentinus, the successour of Eugenius, within the space of four∣tie Valenti∣nus the first. dayes after that hee was elected, (of a Deacon) to bee Pope, hee concluded his life. To Valentinus, succeeded Gregorius the fourth, and ruled six∣teene yeeres. Ludouicke and his sonne Lotharius were Emperours Gregorius the fourth at this time: without whose consent hee woulde not accept his Popedome. Gregorie would haue seemed to haue bene a media∣tor betwixt Ludouicke and his sonnes: but hee is marked with a note of shame in the Magdeburg history, as a man who encreas∣sed Hist. Magd. Cent. 9. Cap. 10. discord, rather than quenched it. What hee did in the Con∣uention at Aken, which was conueened by the authoritie of the Emperour, it shall bee declared, God willing, in its owne place. To Gregorie the fourth, succeeded Sergius the second, and ru∣led three yeeres. Hee seemed to be the first Pope, who changed the name giuen vnto him in Baptisme: for he was called Ospor∣ci, Sergius the second. that is, the mouth of the Sowe: and for the turpitude of the name he called himselfe by the name of one of his antecessours Lotha∣rius sent Ludouicke his eldest sonne, accompanied with manie Noble persons, to be crowned Emperour: for Lotharius thought meete to enterinto a Monasterie, and to lament for his by-past sinnes, especially, for grieuing the heart of his father Ludouicus Pius. He augmented the liturgie of the Masse, with the addition of Agnus Dei, and ordained, that the Hostia should be diuided in three parts.
To Sergius the seconde, succeeded Leo the fourth, and ruled Leo the fourth. eight yeeres, & three monethes. Hee was a man of many crafts, a builder, a warriour, and a Bishop, Hee compassed the Vatican with a wall, and made it in the similitude of a Towne: and buil∣ded bull-warkes in the passages of Tyber, as it issued from the Towne. He was also a warriour, and faught against the Saracenes: against whom also hee preuailed. And finally, at some times hee was a Bishop: and hee gathered a Councell of 47. Bishops, in the which Athanasius, a Cardinall Presbyter was damned, for ne∣gligence in the worke of his calling. This is the first time, in the ☞ which mention is made of a Cardinall in the Historie: for the Decretall Epistles, as I haue alreadie declared, are but fabulous and lying writinges. In this Popes dayes, Eáelwulphus, King of ENGLAND, came to Rome, for performance of a vowe that hee had made. Hee was courteously accepted by Pope Leo: for which cause he ordained a tribute yeerely to be paide to the bi∣shop of Rome: to wit, a pennie Sterling out of euery house in ENGLAND that kindled fire. It is well remarked by Philip Morney, that Leo thefourth, in a certaine Epistle, written to the Lib. Myste. iniquitatis. ☞ Bishops of BRITANNIE, derogateth credite to all the De∣cretall Epistles assigned to the bishops of Rome, preceeding the dayes of Pope Siricius, except onely to the Decretall Epistles of Pope Syluester. So all the authorities that are alleadged by the Romane Church, out of the Decretall Epistles, for the space of 384. yeeres, are of none effect, by the confession of Pope Leo the fourth. After Leo the fourth, succeeded Pope Ihonne the eight, an EN∣GLISH Ihonne the eight. woman, borne in the Towne of Mentz. She went to Athens, cloathed with the apparell of a man, accompanied with a Learned man: and shee profited in learning beyonde her fel∣lowes. When shee came to Rome, shee was regarded for her lear∣ning, and was promoted to the dignitie of the Popedome, and ruled two yeeres, fiue monethes, and foure dayes. About the Marian. Scot. lib. 3 chron. yeere of our Lord 854. (being Pope) she played the Harlot: and by the prouidence of God, this viilanie of the Romane Church, which cannot erre, was manifested to the whole worlde: For, in the time of a solemne Procession, as she was going to ye Church of Latcra, she trauelled in birth, and died, and was buried with∣out
honour. Onuphrius, the Aduocate of all euill causes, cannot ouer-passe this matter with silence: but hee bringeth an argu∣ment from the authoritie of Anastatius, a writer of Chronologie, to infringe the credite of this historie, in this manner: Anasta∣tius (saith hee) liued about this time and knew best who succee∣ded to Leo the fourth: and hee maketh no mention of Ioannes the eight, but of Benedictus the thirde, as successour of Leo the fourth. To this Philip Morney answereth, That an argument ta∣ken from authoritie, negatiuely, hath no force. Anastatius ma∣keth no mention thereof: ergo, it was not done. It followeth not: for hee bringeth in the restimonie of Ranulphus, declaring the cause wherefore Anastatius omitted the name of the foeminine Pope: to wit, Propter deformitatem facti: that is, For the deformitie of Ranulph. lib. 5. ca. 32 the fact. The nature of a short Compend permitteth me not to insist: but let them, who are desirous accurately to trie out the veritie of this matter, reade that worthie Booke of Philip Mor∣ney, called Mysterium iniquitatis. Then followed Benedictus the third, and ruled two yeeres, six monethes, and nine dayes. A man in honouring the Funeralles Benedi∣ctus the third. of the Clergie, with his presence, readie at all times: and desirous likewise, that the Funerall of the Bishop shoulde bee honoured with the presence of the whole Clergie. To Benedict the thirde, succeeded Nicolaus the first, and go∣uerned seuen yeeres, nine monethes, and thirteene dayes. Hee Nicolaus the first. subdued the Bishop of Rauenna to his obedience. He suffered the Emperour, Ludouicke the seconde, to light from his horse, and to leade his bridle, vntill hee came to the Campe, which was the space of a mile. Hee permitted diuorcement betwixt married persons, for Religions cause, without consent of partie. And that persons in spirituall offices, shoulde not bee subject to the Hist Magd. Cent. 9. cap. 10. justice seates of ciuill Magistrates. He ordained also, that no man shoude receiue the holy Sacrament from a married Priest And that the Emperour should not be present at Ecclesiasticall Con∣uentions: except when questions concerning Faith shoulde bee entraited. Likewise, hee ordamed, That the seruice of GOD in all countreyes, should bee celebrated in Latine: dispensing in Funct. com∣ment. lib. 9. the meane time with the Sclauonians and the Polonians, to haue the seruice of GOD in their owne Vulgare Language. Hee
added vnto the Liturgie of the MASSE, GLORIA IN EXCELSIS. Hadrianus the second, succeeded to Nicolaus the first, and ru∣led fiue yeeres, nine monethes, and twelue dayes. He vsed Anti∣christian Hadrianus the second. authoritie, not onely against Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhe∣mes, but also against Carolus Caluus, king of Fraunce, whome hee commanded imperiously to present one Hincmarus, Bishop of Laudunum, and nephewe to Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, to the ende that his cause might bee judged by the Apostolicke seate. The King tooke these letters in a very euill part, and writ vnto the Pope, That the Kings of Fraunce had euer beene Soueraigne lordes in their owne countreye, and not vice-gerentes and vas∣salles to Bishops: and, That hee woulde not permitte any man, who had bene damned in a lawfull Councell in his owne coun∣trey, to wit, in the Councell of Acciniacum, to make appellation to Rome. In this Popes time the eight generall Councell was assembled, whereof I shall speake in its owne time, GOD willing. Ioannes the ninth succeeded to Adrianus the seconde, and go∣uerned ten yeeres, and two dayes. This is hee who for rewardes Ioannes the ninth. crowned Carolus Caluus to bee Emperour: and was casten into prison, because hee was more affectionated to Ludouicus Balbus, sonne to Carolus Caluus, and king of Fraunce, than to Carolus Cras∣sus, king of Germanie. Neuerthelesse, hee escaped out of prison, and fledde to Ludouicke, king of Fraunce: whome also hee crow∣ned to bee Emperour. But Balbus, after his coronation, incon∣tinent died: and Pope Ihon the ninth must seeke newe acquain∣tance, because his olde friendes were gone: therefore, hee crow∣ned Carolus Crassus to bee Emperour. This was the first Pope who in time of his Popedome crowned three Emperours. Martinus the seconde, ruld one yeere, and fiue monethes. Martinus the second. Hadria∣nus the third. Hadrianus the thirde, succeeded to Martinus: the time of his gouernement was also short: for hee continued not aboue one yeere, and two monethes: yet neuerthelesse, men who are busie, may make much stirre in short time. Hee perfected that worke which his predecessours had beene busied in bringing to passe many yeeres preceeding: namely, That the Clergie and people of Rome should not attend vpon the allowance of the Emperour,
but they shoulde freely choose whome they thought meetest to bee Pope. Hee tooke the greater boldnesse to doe this, because the Emperour Carolus was occupied in warre-fare. The Nation of the Normandes were now so sauadge and mightie, and mole∣sted Fraunce with an hudge Armie, that the Emperour was com∣pelled to transact with them in manner as is aboue rehearsed in the Historie of the life of Caralus Crassus. Another constitution was made by Pope Hadrian: to wit, That after the death of Carolus Crassus, who died without succes∣sion, the Emperiall Title, together with the gouernement of Italie, shoulde belong to one of the Princes of Italie. This was the grounde of vnsupportable debate, and of factions, in Ita∣lie, euery man according to the greatnesse of his power, con∣tending to bee King and Emperour: But chiefely Albertus, Marques of TVSCIA, Brengarius, Duke of FOROVI∣LIVM, and Guido, Duke of SPOLETO. This seditious plotte also perturbed the Ecclesiasticall es∣tate: For, after this, euery one of the Princes of ITALIE, stroue with all their might, to haue such a man seated in the Popedome, as coulde best aduance his faction, as will clearelie appeare in the election of Pope Formosus. To Hadrian the thirde, succeeded Stephanus the fifth, and ruled sixe yeeres, and eleuen dayes. The lesse Holinesse, Lear∣ning, Stephanus the fift. and Vertue that hee had, the greater audacitie and bold∣nesse was founde in him: for hee made a constitution, where∣of GRATIAN recordeth (Distinct. 19. Cap. Enimvero) Quicquid ECCLESIA ROMANA statie, quicquid ordirat, perpetuo quidem, & irre-fragibiliter obseruandum est: that is, What∣soeuer the ROMANE CHVRCH doeth statute and ordaine, it  perpetuallie, and without all contradiction, to bee obserued. After STEPHANVS the fifth (whome others doe call the sixth) succeeded FORMOSVS, and continued fiue yeeres, and sixe monethes. Hee obtained the Popedome, not without strife: For one SERGIVS, a Deacon, was his competitor, suppor∣ted Formosus. with the TVSCVLAN faction. Alwayes, FORMOSVS preuailed. It was supposed, that hee was one of them who conspired against Pope IHONNE the ninth, and cast him in∣to bandes. After this hee seared the authoritie of Pope
IHONNE, and fledde into FRAVNCE: but Pope IHONNE denuded him of all Ecclesiasticall office, and put vpon him the habite of a Laicke person: which indignitie done vnto him, hee tooke it so grieuouslie, that hee bounde himselfe by an Platin. in vit. Formo. oath, That hee shoulde neuer see the Towne of ROME, nor returne againe to his Bishopricke: for hee was Episcopus POR∣TVENSIS. But Pope MARTINVS absolued him from his oath, and repossessed him into his Bishopricke againe, and in ende hee was made Pope, as saide is. Neuerthelesse, the faction of his competitor, SERGIVS, ceassed not to vexe and molest FORMOSVS: so that hee sent secrete aduertisement vnto ARNVLPHVS, the Nephewe of Carolus Crassus, to come to ROME: who came with an Ar∣mie, and was crowned Emperour by Formosus, as hath beene alreadie declared. To Formosus succeeded Bonifacius the sixt, who concluded his course, after he had continued twentie and sixe dayes. Bonifacius the sixt. Stephanus the sixt. After Bonifacius the sixt, succeeded Stephanus the sixt, and ruled one yeere, and three monethes: Hee not onely annulled all the Decrees of his Predecessor Formosus: but also caused his dead bodie to bee taken out of his graue, and cutte off his three fin∣gers, wherewith hee was wont to consecrate persons admitted to spirituall offices, and threwe them into Tyber: and caused all them, who had receiued ordination by Formosus, to receiue newe ordination. This fact of Stephanus the sixt, is so full of vncouth and vnna∣turall inhumanitie, that Onuphrius denieth that any such thing was done: whose impudencie Morneus discouereth by the te∣stimonie of Luitprandus, who liued at that same time, and was a Deacon of the Church of Ticinum, and maketh mention of this vile fact, not without horrour and detestation thereof. Baronius is not so impudent as Onuphrius, and will not de∣nie the fact, but extenuateth the atrocitie and vilenesse there∣of: for hee saieth, Non fuit error in side, sed violenta tyran∣nis in facto: that is to saye. It was no errour in the faith, but a vio∣lent tyrannie in the fact. And like wise, hee annulled the inauguration of the EMPE∣ROVR ARNVLPHVS, and annointed ALBERT, or
Lambert, Marques of Tuscia, who followed the Popes course to bee Emperour. Nowe is the Popedome encreased to the mea∣sure of a full strength, when they dare authorise and disautho∣rise, place and displace Emperoures at their owne pleasure. So that there remaineth nothing, but to enter into grippes with the Emperour, to throwe him downe to the grounde, and to treade vpon the excellent honour of his Soueraignitie, which in the next CENTVRIE will follow. To Stephanus, succeded Romanus, and continued onely three monethes. Hee abrogated the Decrees of Stephanus, his prede∣cessour. Romanus. Theodorus, the successour of Romanus, continued in his Pope∣dome twentie dayes onely. In this short time hee allowed the Theodorus the second. Decrees of Formosus. Patriarches of Constantinople. PAtriarches of Constantinople, in this Centurie, were changed, according to the disposition of Emperoures, fauouring or disliking the worshipping of Images. Nicephorus was a defender of adoration of Images, and was banished by the Emperour Leo. Theodotus againe, Antonius, and Syngelus, who had beene Schoole-masters to the Emperour Theophilus, were haters of Images. But after the death of Theophilus, Theodora, his Wife, aduaunced Methodius, a superstitious man, and an ob∣stinate defender of adoration of Images, and intercession of Sainctes. Concerning Ignatius and Photius, and the great troubles that arose about placing and displacing of them, occasion will bee offered to speake of these thinges in the head of Councels. Of other Pastors, and Doctors. IN this corrupt and backe-sliding age, wherein the Romane Antichrist had so great vpper-hande, the head of Councels will compell mee to make mention of the names of a num∣ber
of Learned men, At this time, the name of Claudius Tauri∣nensis, putteth a great number of the rest out of my remem∣brance, because hee was a faithfull witnesse vnto the trueth of God, in a difficill time. Hee was a man borne in Spaine: and vn∣der the reigne of Ludouicus Pius, hee was made Bishop of Thu∣rin, in Pemont: At his first entrie to his Bishopricke, hee threwe the Images out of his Church, affirming, that the Sainctes, who in their lifetime were not content to bee worshipped, much lesse coulde they bee content to haue their pictures worshipped af∣ter their death. In speciall, hee condemned the worshipping of the Crosse. affirming, that if it shoulde bee worshipped because Iesus died vpon it: then the Shippe, in the which Christ sailed, the Asle, whereupon Christ did ride into Hierusalem, and infinite other thinges, which Christ touched, by the like reason, behoued also to bee worshipped. Concerning the Bishop of Rome, he said, that hee was not to bee counted an Apostolicke Bishop, who sate in the Apostolicke Chaire: but hee who fulfilled an Apo∣stolicke office. Hincmarus, bishop of Rhemes, liued vnder Carolus Magnus, and continued in office almost vntill the reigne of the Em. Arnulph. He had great strife with his nephew Hincmarus, b. of Laudunum, who refused to be vnder his Diosie: and appealed from him vnto the b. of Rome. Likewise, in the cause of Rhotardus, b. of Soission, whom Hincmarus deposed and remoued from his office. Nicolaus the first, b. of Rome, absolued him. Hadrian 2. gaue him comman∣dement to excommunicate C. Caluus, k. of Fraunce, his soueraigne lord: but hee refused to performe such an vnlawfull commande∣ment: and writ vnto the Pope, to be circumspect, and not preci∣pitate rashly his sentences of excommunication. The question wherunto Hadr. 2. was so serious, was about di∣uision of lāds betwixt C. Caluus. & his brother Lotharius. C. Caluus denied, that hee did vnjustly inuade any of his brothers landes, but landes duely belonging vnto himselfe by paction and coue∣nant. And the Nobles of the countrey saide, that it was a strange and an vnaccustomed thing, that the Pope would take vpon him to be judge in a controuersie concerning the Titles and Rights of Kingdomes, because hee coulde not bee both a Bishop and a King.
CHAP. III. Of Heretiques. THEY who of olde were accustomed to con∣demne Heresies, nowe they are become the Iconolatra chiefe Patrones and maintainers of adoration of Images, a notable heresie: whose pusillani∣mitie argueth the weaknesse of their cause: for vnder the reigne of Ludouicus Pius, Claudius Taurinensis wrote bookes against the adoration of Images: and the Emperour, by a publicke edict, commanded them, who were disposed to answere to his bookes, to answere whilest Claudius was aliue. But Ionas bishop of Orleans concealed and obscured his bookes, during Claudius lifetime. But after his death, with impotencie of railing wordes, rather than with po∣wer of solide arguments, he endeuoureth to refute Claudius Tau∣rinensis. But I entrait the judicious Reader, without partialitie, to reade the bookes of Ionas, bishop of Orliens, & the very stinking breath of the adversary of the trueth, shall giue great allowance to the trueth of God. Godescalcus, a man of the Lowe Countreyes, is reckoned in the number of Heretiques of this age, about the yeere of our Lord Godescal∣cus. 849. because hee spake of Predestination perilously: to wit, that these who were predestinated to life by the decree of Gods pre∣destination, were forced to doe well: and those who were prede∣stinated to condemnation, were forced by the decree of God to doe euill. But I remit a further Treatise of this vnto the head of Councels. Concerning olde extinguished Heresies, such as the Manicheans, Arrians, and Donatists, and such like, who preassed to builde vp the walles of Iericho, which God had destroyed, there is no necessitie to speake, because these were vaine at∣tptes, without anie successe.
CHAP. IIII. OF COUNCELS. IN the yeere of our LORD 813. by the com∣mandement of Carolus Magnus, in the Towne The Coun∣cell of Mentz. of Mentz, were conuened 30. Bishops, 25. Ab∣bots, with a great number of Priestes, Monkes, Countes, and Iudges, about reformation of the dissolute maners, of Ecclesiasticke & Laicke per∣sons. After 3. dayes abstinence & fasting, joyned with Litanies, publicke Prayers, and imploring the helpe of God, they diui∣ded themselues into three companies: In the first company were the Bishops, with some Noters, reading the history of the Euan∣gell, and the Epistles, & the Actes of the Apostles, together with the Canons and workes of ancient Fathers, and the Pastorall booke of Gregorie, to the ende, that by the Preceptes contained in these bookes, the enormitie of mens liues might be corrected. In the second companie were Abbots and Monkes, reading the rules of S. Benedict, for the reformation of the liues of Monkes. In the thirde companie were lordes and Iudges, pondering the causes of all men, who came to complaine, that wrong was done vnto them. The 1. 2. and 3. Canons of this Councell, entrait concerning Faith, Hope, and Chatitie. 4. Concerning the Sacramentes, to be ministred chiefely at Easter & Whitsonday, except necessi∣tie and seare of death require preuening of these times. 5. That vnitie and concord should bee kept in the Church, because wee haue one common Father in heauen: one Mother, to wit, the Church, in earth: one Faith, one Baptisine, and one Celestiall inheritance prepared for vs: Yea, and God is not the God of
dissention, but of peace, according as it is said, Blessed be the peace makers, for they shall bee called the children of God. The 6. and 7. Canons, entrait of Orphanes, and poore people, whose weaknes is to bee supported: but no man should take vantadge of their poore and desolate estate. The 8. Can. recommendeth vnitie to be kept betwixt men in spirituall offices, and ciuill Iudges: a Canon indeede, if it had beene obserued, verie necessarie for the estate of this time. The 9. and 10. Canon, prescribeth to the Clergie Preceptes of a modest and sober life, with abstinence from the delicate pleasures of the worlde, and from Theatricall Spectacles, from pompes, and vnhonest banquets: and to bee more readie to goe to the house of mourning, to comfort them who are heauie hearted, than to the house of banquetting. Vsu∣rie, auarice, ambition, and taking of rewardes, for the benefites of God, such as vse to bee taken for medicinall cures, is forbid∣den. To beware of deceit and conjurations: to flec hatred, emu∣lation, backe-biting, and enuying, wandering eyes, & an vnbri∣dled tongue: a petulant, and proude gesture are forbidden: fil∣thie wordes, and workes, are altogether abhorred: chastitie is recommended: the frequent visitations of the houses of Wi∣dowes and Virgines is prohibited: due obedience is to bee gi∣uen to Seniors: to take heede to doctrine reading, and spirituall songes, as it becommeth men who haue addicted themselues vnto diuine seruice. Precepts concerning the behauiour of Monkes and Nunnes, and the fabricke of their dwelling places, I ouer-passe with si∣lence, lest I shoulde ouercharge a short Compend with an heape of vnnecessarie thinges. In the 32. Canon, the difference betwixt , and , is set downe. 33. The great Litanie or Rogations, to bee obserued three dayes, by all Christians, with fasting, sacke∣cloth, ashes, walking barefooted, and all kinde of humble car∣riage. 34. 35. and 36. Publicke Fastinges, and keeping of Fe∣stiuall dayes is commanded. 37. The Sabboth daye is to bee kept holy. In it no Merchand Wares to be sold, and no criminall cause to bee judged. 38. and 39. Tythes are precisely to bee payed. And, men fleeing to Churches for safeguarde, are not to bee violentlie drawne out of the place of their refuge. 40. In
Churches, and the portches thereof, let no secular judgements be exercised. 41. Let no ancient Church be spoyled of tythes and possessions, for the building of new Oratories. 42. Con∣cerning Church rentes bestowed for reparation and vpholding of Churches. 43. and 43. That no Priest saye Masse himselfe alone: for if hee haue no person present except himselfe, howe can hee say, Dominus vobiscum, or sursum corda, or such other pas∣sages? Also frequent offering of the Sacrifice of the Masse, and presenting of the Paxe, is recommended to Christian people. 45. That euery person bee acquainted with the Lordes Prayer, and the Beliefe: and they who can no otherwayes comprehend these thinges, let them learne them in their owne vulgare lan∣guage. 46. Drunkennesse is detested: and they who continue in this sinne, without amendement, are ordained to be excom∣municated. 47. God-fathers shall attende that their spiri∣tuall children bee brought vp in the true Faith. 48. Filthie li∣bidinous songes are not to bee sung about Churches. 49. The cohabitation with women is forbidden to all the members of the Clergie. 50. Let all Bishops, Abbots, and Church-men, haue such Aduocates and Agentes in their affaires, who are men that feare GOD, and are haters of all vnrighteous dealing. 51. Let not the dead bodies of the Saincts bee transported from place to place, without the aduice of the Prince of the countrey, or the Bishop, and Synode. 52. No dead bodie shall bee bu∣ried within the Church, except the bodie of a Bishop, or of an Abbot, or of a worthie Presbyter, or of a faithfull Laicke person. 53. Incestuous persons are to bee searched out, and separated from the fellowship of the Church, except they bee penitent. 54. 55. and 56. Marriage, in the fourth degree of consanguini∣tie, is forbidden: and that no man shall marrie his spirituall daughter, or sister, neither the woman, whose sonne or daughter hee hath ledde to the Sacrament of Confirmation: and, incase they bee founde to bee married, they shall bee separated againe. And no man shall take in marriage his wiues sister: neither shall a woman marrie her husbandes brother. IN the yeere of our LORD 813. a Councell was assembled The Coun∣cell of Rhemes. at Rhemes, by the commaundement of Charles the Great: for it is to bee remarked, that hee not onely assembled that famous
Councell of FRANKFORD, anno 794. in the which adora∣tion of Images was condemned: but also, when hee was nowe aged and saw many abuses in the Church, hee endeuoured, by all meanes possible, to procure reformation of the lewde man∣ners of Church men. Therefore, hee appointed at one time, to wit. anno 813. fiue Nationall Councels, to be conuened in diuerse places, for reformation of the Clergie and people: One was conuened at Mentz as hath bene declared: Another at Rhemes: the third at Towrs: the fourth at Cabilone, or Chalons: and the fist at Arles. In all these Councels no opposition is made to ye Coun∣cell of Frankord: neither was the adoration of Images auowed in any of thse Councels. So much auaileth the authoritie of a Prince for suppressing of false doctrine & heresie. In this Coūcel at Rhemes, Wulfarius, archbis. was presidēt. 44. canons are rehear∣sed in the 2. Tome of Councels made in this Councell. In the 1. Can. it was concluded, That euery man should dili∣gently acquaint himselfe with the Articles of his Faith. 2. That euery man should learne the Lords Prayer, and comprehend the meaning thereof. 3. That euery man, promoted to Ecclesiasti∣call orders, shall walke worthily, conforme to his calling. 4. The Epistles of Paule were read, to giue instructions to sub-dea∣cons, howe they should behaue themselues. Yet is there not one worde in all the Epistles of Paule of a subdeacon. 5. The Go∣spell was read to giue instruction to Deacons, to minister con∣dingly in their office. 6. Ignorant Priestes are instructed to celebrate the Seruice with greater vnderstanding. 7. In like manner, they are instructed howe to prepare  to the Sacrament of Baptisme. 8. The holy Canons were read out of the Decretall of Innocentius, for ordering the life of Chanons. 9. The rule of Sainct Benedict was read to reduce Abbots, and their Conuents, to a remembrance of their order 10. The Pa∣storall booke of Gregorius was ead to admonish Pastors of their duetie 11. Sentences of diuerse ancient Fathers were read, to admonish men of all āks, both Prelats & subjects, to bring forth the fruit of a good conuersation. 12. These things being done, they set down a forme of receiuing of confessions, & prescribing of pennance, according to the Canonicall institution. 13. They reasoned about the eight principall vices, to the ende, their di∣uersitie
beeing distinguished, euerie man might know what vi∣ces hee should eschewe, and teach others to beware of the same. ☞ 14. That Bishops should take heed to the reading of the bookes of the Canonicke Scripture, and the bookes of Fathers: & should attend vpon the preaching of the word of God. 15. That bis∣shops should preach the Sermons and Homilies of H. Fathers, in such sort as all the people might vnderstand them. The 16. can. ☞ is coincident with the 12. 17. That bishops & abbots permit no man to solace ye company with filthy gesting in their presēce: but let poore & indigent people be refreshed at their tables with lecture of diuine Scripture, and praysing of God, according to the Precept of the Apostle, that whether wee eate or drinke, let all thinges bee done to the glorie of God. 18. Gluttonie and drunker∣nesse for bidden to bishops, and the Ministers of God. 19. Let not bishops bee rash to judge in thinges secret, which are to bee referred to the judgement of God, who can manifest thinges hid vp in darknesse, & discouer the secrets of the heart. 20. Pres∣byters shall not transport themselues from a lowe place to a greater. 21. Whosoeuer, by money-paying, procureth a pre∣ferment in the Church, shall bee deposed. 22. No Church man shall cohabite with a woman, except it bee with his mo∣ther, or sister, or such like persons, by whose companie no suspi∣tion of vncleannesse can arise. Precepts giuen to Monkes and Nunnes, I passe by, as I did in the former Councell. Can. 35. The Sabboth day shall be kept holy, and in it no ser∣uile worke shall be done, according to the Lords Commande∣ment. 36. Let no man bestow vpon the Church yt thing which by vnlawfull meanes hee hath fraudulently with-drawne from others. 37. nor yet by lies and deceitfull meanes withdraw any thing duely belōging to the Church. 38. Let tythes be precisely payed. 39. Let no man presume to receiue rewards for his de∣creet and sentence. 40. Let Prayers & Oblations be made for the Emperour, and his noble rase, that it woulde please God to preserue them in all happinesse in this present life, & vouchsafe vpon them Celestiall joyes in companie of the Angels in the life to come. In the 41. Canon mention is made of a certaine rent, left by king Pipinus of good memorie, which they wish the Emperour Charles, Pipinus sonne, shoulde not alter nor
transferre into another summe, in respect, that by so doing ma∣nie perjuries and false testimonies might ensue. 42. And that no man should bee remooued from his mansion, to whome the Emperoures Almes is distributed. 43. And that the statute may bee confirmed by his Highnesse allowance, whereby all contentions and strifes are ordained to haue a decision, & end. 44. And that the statute, made in Bononia, concerning false wit∣nesses, maye bee ratified, and confirmed: with augmentation, if neede require, for eschewing of perjuries, false testimonies, and many other inconueniences. IN the yeere of our LORD 813. and at the commaunde∣ment of the Emperour Carolus Magnus, a Councell of manie The Coun∣cell of Towrs. Bishops and Abbots was assembled, about establishing of Eccle∣siasticall Discipline, in the Towne of Towrs. In the 1. Canon all men are admonished to bee obedient to the Emperour Charles the Great, and to keepe the oath of al∣leadgeance made vnto him, and to make prayers and supplica∣tions for his prosperitie and well-fare. 2. All Bishops shall di∣ligently reade, and frequently peruse, the bookes of holy Scrip∣ture, the histories of the Euangell, and the Epistles of Paul, to∣gether with the bookes of ancient Fathers written thereupon. 3. It is not lawfull for any Bishop to be ignorant of the Canons of the Church, and of the Pastorall booke of Gregorius, in the which euery man, as in a viue mirrour, might see himselfe. 4. Let euery Bishop feede the flocke committed vnto him, not onely with doctrine, but also with examples of a good conuersation. 5. A Bishop must not bee giuen to sumptuous banquets, but, be content, with a moderate diet, lest hee should seeme to abuse the counsell of our Lord, saying Take heede, that your hearts be not surfetted with gluttonie, or drunkennesse: but let holy lecture be at his table, rather than the idle wordes of flattering fellowes. 6. Let strangers and indigent people bee at Bishops tables: whome they maye refreshe both with corporall and spirituall repaste. 7. The delicate pleasures of the eare and the eyes, are to bee es∣chewed, lest by such pleasures, the minde bee effeminate, and in∣chaunted. 8. Let not the Lordes seruantes delight in vaine jesting, nor in hunting, nor halking. 9. Let Presbyters and Deacons followe the foot-steps of their Bishops, assuring them∣selues,
that the good conuersation enjoyned vnto their Bishops, is also enjoyned vnto them. 10. Let Bishops haue a great sol∣licitude and care towards the poore: and be faithfull dispensa∣tors of Ecclesiasticall goods, as the Ministers of God, and not as hunters after filthie lucre. 11. It is lawfull for Bishops, with consent of Presbyters & Deacons, to bestow out of the Church treasure support to indigent people of that same Church. 12. A Presbyter is not to bee ordained vntill hee bee 30. yeeres olde. 13. Let the B. make diligēt inquisitiō in his own Paroch Church, that no Presbyter, cōming from any other parts, make seruice in his Church, without letters of recommendation. 14. Let a Pres byter, leauing a lowe place, and presuming to an higher, in∣curre that same punishment, which a Bishop, deprehended in the like fault, should incurre. 15. A Presbyter, who attaineth to a Church, by giuing money for it, let him be deposed. 16. Let tythes, bestowed vpon Churches, by aduise of Bishops, be faith∣fully distributed to the poore, by the Presbyters. 17. The fa∣milies of Bishops shall bee instructed in the summe of the true faith. In the knowledge of the retribution to be giuen to good men, and the condemnation of vngodly people, and of the re∣surrection and last judgement, and by what kinde of workes eternall life may bee promerited: and that the Homelies, con∣taining these instructions, shall bee translated into Rusticke La∣tine language: to ye end that euery person may vnderstand them. Marke in what estimation the Latine language hath bene at this time: that instructions, in Rusticke and Barbarous Latine, are ☞ counted better than instructions in good French Language. 18. It is the duetie of the Bishop to instruct his Presbyters con∣cerning the Sacrament of Baptisme, what it is that they should desire the people baptized to renounce: namely, they should re∣nounce the deuill, & all his works, & his pomps. Now the works of the Deuill are murther, fornication, adulterie, drunkennesse, and other such like faultes. But the pompes of the Deuill are pride, ostentation, swelling conceites, vaine glory. lostinesse, and such other faultes, as spring vp from such groundes. 19. Pres∣byters are precisely to bee admonished, that when they say the Masse, and doe communicate, they doe not distribute the Lords bodie indiscretely, to children, and to all persons, who happen
to bee present, who if they bee entangled with great sinnes, they procure vnto themselues rather damnation, than any remedie to their soules, according to the saying of the Apostle, Whosoeuer eateth this Bread, and drinketh this Cuppe vnWorthilie, hee shall bee guiltie of the bodie and blood of the LORD: Let a man, there∣fore, trie himselfe, and so let him eate of this Bread, and drinke of this Cuppe. By this let the judicious Reader marke, that euen in the dayes of Carolus Magnus, priuate Masses had no place: but they who were duely prepared did communicate with the Priest. NOT A. 20. Presbyters shall not suffer the holy Chrisme to be touched by euery man. 21. Presbyters shall not resort to Tavernes to eate or drinke. 22. Bishops and presbyters, shall prescribe to sinners, who haue confessed their sines, pennance, discretly, according to the weightinesse of their fault. 23. Chanons, who dwell in Cities, let them eate in one Closter, and sleepe vn∣der one roofe, to the ende they may bee readie to celebrate their Canonicall houres. From the 24. Can. vnto the 32. are contai∣ned Constitutions concerning Monkes and Nunnes, which I ouer-passe with silence, fearing to bee prolixt. Can. 32. All men should studie to peace and concorde, but especially Chri∣stians: forsaking hatred, discorde, and enuie. 33. Lordes and Iudges should bee obedient to the wholsome admonitions of their bishops: and bishops on the other part, should reuerent∣lie regarde them, to the ende they may bee mutually supported euery one with the consolations of another. 34. Lordes and Iudges are to bee admonished, that they admitte not vile and naughtie persons to beare witnesse in their judicatories, be∣cause there are manie, who for a contemptible price are readie to make shipwracke of a good conscience. 35. Let no man, for his decreet, receiue a rewarde: for diuine Scripture in manie places for biddeth this, as a thing that blindeth the eyes of the wise. 36. Let euerie man bee carefull to support indigent persons of his owne familie and kinred: for it is an impious and abomi∣nable thing in the sight of God, that men abounding in riches, should neglect their owne. 37. Christians, when they make supplications to God, let them in humble manner bowe downe their knees, following the example of the Martyr Steuen, and of the Apostle Paul: Except vpon the Lordes daye, and other so∣lemne
dayes, on the which the vniuersall Church keepeth a me∣moriall of the Lordes resurrection: and at such times they are accustomed to stand and pray. 38. Faithfull people must be admonished, not to enter into the Church with tumult and dinne: and in time of Prayer, and celebration of the Masse, not to be occupied in vaine confabulations and idle speaches: but euen to abstaine from wicked cogitations. 39. Let not the Consistories and Iudgement seates of secular Iudges bee in the Church, or portches thereof, in any time to come: because the house of God shoulde bee an house of Prayer, as our Lord Iesus Christ saieth. 40. Let it bee forbidden, that Merchandize be vsed vpon the Lordes daye, or Iustice Courtes: because all men should abstaine from seruile laboures: to the ende this day may bee spent in praysing and thanking God, from Morne till Euen. 41. Incestuous persons, parracides, and murtherers, are found, who will not hearken to the wholsome admonitions of Church men, but perseuere in their vitious conuersation, who must bee reduced to order by the discipline of the secular power 42. Let the people bee admonished to abstaine from Magicall Artes, which can bring no support and helpe to the infirmities of men and beastes: but they are the deceitfull snares of the Deuill, whereby hee deceiueth mankind. 43. A frequent custome of swearing is forbidden, wherein men, vpon euery light occasion willing to purchase credite to that which they speake, they take God to bee witnesse of the veritie of their speaches. 44. Ma∣nie frie subjectes, by the oppression of their Masters, aro-reda∣cted to extreame pouertie. whose causes, if our clement Soue∣raigne please to examine, hee shall finde, that they are vnjustlie redacted to extreame indigence. 45. A false measure, and a false ballance, is an abomination vnto the Lord, as Salomon re∣cordeth. The 46. Canon containeth a regrate, that tythes were not duely payed to the Church: notwithstanding that the Church had giuen in their complaint to the ciuill Magistrate: whereby it came to passe, that not onely Lightes in the Church, and steependes to the Clergie, beganne to inlacke, but also the very Paroch Churches became ruinous. 47. When generall Fastinges are appointed, for any impendent calamitie, let no man neglect the fellowship of the humbled Church, for desire
to fearce his bellie with delicate foode. 48. Drunken∣nesse and surfetting are forbiddē, as offensiue both to soule and and bodie, and the ground of many other sinnes. 49. Lords and Masters are to bee admonished, not to deale cruelly and vn∣mercifully with their subjectes: yea, and not to seeke that which is due vnto themselues with excessiue rigour. 50. Let Laicke people communicate at least thrise in the yeere, vnlesse they bee impeded by some hainous sinnes committed by them. 51. In the last Canon mention is made, that they diligently examined the cause of them who complained to the Emperour, that they were disherited by the donation of landes, which their fathers and friends had bestowed vpon the Church: and in their bounds they found no man who did complaine. Alwayes, in that mat∣ter, if any thing was done amisse, they humbly submitte them∣selues to be corrected by their Soueraigne lord and king. THE Councell of Chalons was the fourth Councell, conue∣ned in the yeere of our Lord 813. by the commandement The Coun∣cell of Chalons. of Charles the Great, for the reformation of the Ecclesiasticall estate. Manie of the Canons of this Councell are coincident with the Canons of the former: therefore I shall bee the shorter in the commemoration thereof. 1. That Bishops acquaint themselues diligently with rea∣ding the Bookes of holy Scripture, and the Bookes of auncient Fathers, together with the Pastorall booke of Gregorius. 2. Let Bishops practise in their workes the knowledge which they haue attained vnto by reading. 3. Let them also constitute schooles, wherein learning maye bee encreassed, and men brought vp in them, maye bee like to the sault of the earth, to season the∣corrupt manners of the people, and to stoppe the mouthes of heretiques, according as it is saide to the commenda∣tion of the Church, A thousande Targ are hung vp in it, euen all the Armour of the strong, Cantiel. cap. 4. vers. 4. 4. Let Church men shew humilitie, in worde, deede, countenance, and habite. 5. Let Priestes bee vnreprooueable, adorned with good manners, and not giuen to filthie lucre. 6. The blame of filthy lucre, where with many Church men were charged, for this, that they allured secular men to renounce the worlde, and to bring their goods to the Church, they endeuour, with multi∣plied
number of wordes, to remoue. 7. Bishops and Abbots, who with deceitful speaches haue circumuened simple men, and shauen their heads, & by such meanes doe possesse their goods, in respect of their couetous desire of filthie lucre, let them bee subject to Canonicall or Regulare repentance. But let those simple men, who haue laide downe their haire, as men destitute of vnderstanding, who cannot gouerne their owne affaires, let them remaine in that estate, which they haue once vndertaken: but let the goods giuen by negligent parentes, and receiued, or rather reaued by auaritious Church men, bee restored againe to their children and heires. 8. If Church men lay vp prouision of Cornes in Victuall houses, let it not bee to keepe them to a dearth, but to support the poore in time of neede therewith. 9. Hunting and halking, and the insolencie of foolishe and fil∣thie jests. are to bee forsaken of Church men. 10. Gluttonie & drunkennesse is forbidden. 11. The Bishop or Abbot must not resort to ciuill judicators, to pleade their owne cause, except it bee to support the poore and the oppressed. Presbyters, Dea∣cons, and Monkes, hauing obtained licence from the Bishop, maye compeare in Ciuill judgement seates, accompanied with their Aduocate. 12. Let not Presbyters, Deacons, or Monks, bee fermers or labourers of the ground. 13. It is reported of some brethren, that they compell the persons, who are to bee admitted, in time of their ordination, to sweare, that they are worthie: and that they shall doe nothing repugnant to the Ca∣nons: and that they shall bee obedient to the Bishop, who or∣daineth NOT A. them, and to the Church in thewhich they are ordai∣ned: which oath, in regarde it is perilous, wee all inhibite, and discharge it. 14. Bishops in visiting of their parishioners, let them not be chargeable vnto them, but rather comfortable, by preaching the word, and by correcting things that are disor∣dered. 15. It is reported, that some Arch-deacons vse domi∣nation ouer the Presbyters, and take tribute from them, which smelleth rather of tyrannie, than of due order. For if the Bishop should not vse domination ouer the Clergy, but by examplares to the flocke, as the Apostle Peter writeth. Much lesse shoulde these presume to doe any such like thing. 16. Like as in dedi∣cation of Churches, and for receiuing of orders, no money is re∣ceiued:
euen so, for buying of Baulme to make Chrisme, the Presbyters (keepers of Chrisme) shall bestowe no money: but Bishops, of their owne rent, shall furnish Baulme for the making of Chrisme, and Lightes to the Church. 17. It hath beene found in some places, that Presbyters haue payed 12. or 14. pen∣nies in yeerely tribute to the Bishop: which custome wee haue ordained altogether to bee abolished. 18. The receiuing of paunds from incestuous persons, & from men who pay not their Tythes, and from negligent Presbyters, is forbidden, as a thing which openeth a doore to auarice: but rather let Ecclesiasticall discipline strike vpon transgressours. 19. Let people giue their Tythes to those Churches wherein their children are baptized, and whereunto they resort all the yeere long, to heare Church seruice. 20. Let peace bee kept amongst all men, but in spe∣ciall betwixt Bishops and Countes, whereby cuery one of them maye mutually support another. 21. Ciuill Iudges ought to judge righteously, without exception of persons, and without receiuing of rewardes: and let their Officiars, Vicars, and Cen∣tenaries bee righteous men: lest, by their auarice and griedi∣nesse, the people bee grieued, and impouerished. And let the witnesses bee of vnsuspect credite: for, by false witnesses the Countreye is greatly damnified. 22. The Abbots and Monkes in this part of the Countreye, seeing they haue addi∣cted themselues to the Order of Sainct BENEDICT: let them endeuoure to conforme themselues vnto his institution and rules. 23. The ordination of Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferioures, is to bee made at a certaine prescribed time. 24. Concerning Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and Monkes, who shall happen to bee slaine, let the Emperour giue determination to whome the satisfaction of blood shall be∣long. 25. In manie places, the auncient custome of publicke repentance hath ceasted: neither is the auncient custome of ex∣communication and reconciliation in vse. Therefore, the Empe∣rour is to bee entraited, that the auncient discipline maye bee restored againe and they who sinne publikely, may be brought ☞ to publike repentance: and euery man, according as hee deser∣ueth, maye either be excommunicated, or reconciled. 26. It is reported, that in some Churches there is contention & strife
for diuiding of Church rentes: It is ordained, therefore, That no Masse shall bee saide in those Churches, vntill they, who are at variance, be reconciled againe. 27. Neither the Sacrament of Baptisme, nor the Sacrament of Confirmation, should bee re∣iterated. 28. Concerning the decrees of affinitie, and in what degree Marriage may bee bounde vp, euery man is sent to the Canons of the Church to seeke resolution. 29. Seeing that the man and the woman are counted in SCRIPTVRE as one fleshe, their Parentage is to bee reckoned by like degrees in the matter of Marriage. 30. The Marriage of seruantes is not to bee dissolued which is bounde vp with consent of both their masters, euerie seruant remaining obedient to his owne master. 31. It is rumoured, that some women by negli∣gence, and others fraudulently, doe present their owne chil∣dren NOT A. to the Sacrament of Confirmation, to the ende they may bee separated from the companie of their husbandes. There∣fore, wee statute and ordaine, that such woman as either neg∣ligently or fraudulently present their owne children to the Sa∣crament of Confirmation, they shall be compelled to do pen∣nance all the dayes of their life: neither shall they in anie wise be separated from their husbandes. 32. Let a sinner con∣fesse vnto his Father Confessor all his sinnes which hee hath committed either in thought, worde, or deede: because that hatred, enuye, and pride are such pestilentious bothes of the soule: and the more secretly that they are couched; the more periculously they hurt. 33. Sinnes shoulde not onely bee confessed to GOD, according to the example of DAVID, who saieth, I will confesse against my selfe my wickednesse vnto the LORD, and thou for gauest the punishment of my sinne, Psal. 32. vers. 5. But also wee shoulde confesse our sinnes to our Father Confessor, according to the precept of the Apostle, Acknow∣ledge your faultes one to another, and pray one for another, that yee may bee healed, Iac. 5. 16. 34. In prescribing of pennance, let fa∣uour and hatred of any person bee laide aside, and let the injun∣ctions be giuen according to the rule of H. Scripture, & accor∣ding to ye canōs & custome of the Church, following ye example of ye physitions of the body, who without exception of persons doe adhibit cuttings, burnings, & vehemēt remedies to perilous dis∣eases.
35. Many in doing of pennance, are not so desirous of remis∣sion of sinnes, as of the accomplishment of the prescribed time of their humiliation: and beeing forbidden to eate fleshe, or drinke wine, they haue ye greater desire of other delicate meates and drinkes: but spirituall abstinence, which should bee in peni∣tent persons, excludeth all bodily delightes. 36. Let no man sinne of purpose, to the ende hee maye abolishe his sinnes by Almes deedes: for that is all one as if a man should hye God to grant vnto him a libertie to sinne. 37. Seeing all Canons of Councels are to be diligently read, in speciall such as appertaine vnto faith, and reformation of manners, shoulde bee moste fre∣quently perused. 38. Bookes, called Libelli Poenitentiales, are to bee abolished, because the erroures of these bookes are cer∣taine, how beit the authors of them bee vncertaine: and they prepare pillowes to laye vnder the heads of them who are slec∣ping in sinne. 39. In the solemnities of the Masse, Prayers are to bee made for the soules of them who are departed, as well as for them who are aliue. 40. Presbyters, who are degraded, and liue like seculare, neglecting repentance, whereby they might procure restitution to their office, let them bee excom∣municated. 41. A Presbyter, who transporteth himselfe from his owne place, shall not bee receiued in any other Church, ex∣cept hee prooue, both with witnesses and letters sealed with lead, and containing the name of the Bishop. and of the Citie which hee liued in, that hee hath liued innocently in his owne Church, and had a just cause of transportation. 42. Let no Church bee committed to a Presbyter, without consent of the Bishop. 43. In some places are founde Scots men, who call themselues Bishops, and they ordaine Presbyters and Deacons, whose ordination wee altogether disallowe. 44. Presbyters ☞ must not drinke in Tavernes, wander in Markets, nor goe to vi∣site Cities, without aduise of their Bishop. 45. Many, both of the Clergie and Laickes, goe to holy places, such as Rome, and Turon: imagining, that by the sight of these places, their sinnes are remitted: and not attending to the sentence of Ierome, It is a more commendable thing to liue well in Hierusalem, than to haue seene Hierusalem. 46. In receiuing the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christ, great discretion is to bee vsed: Neither let the
taking of it bee long differred, because Christ saieth, Except yee eate the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drinke his blood, yee haue no life in you: Neither let vs come without due preparation, because the Apostle saieth, Hee who eateth and drinketh vnworthilie, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation. 47. The Sacrament of the bo∣die and blood of Christ, which in one daye is accustomed to bee receiued of all Christians: let no man neglect to receiue it, ex∣cept some grieuous crime doe hinder him from receiuing of it, 48. According to the precept of the Apostle Iames, Weake per∣sons shoulde bee annointed with oyle by the Elders, (which oyle is blessed by the Bishop) these wordes inclosed in a parenthesi are added to the Text: for hee saieth, Is anie man siecke amongst you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and annoint him with oyle, in the Name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall saue the sicke, and the Lord shall raise him vp: And if hee haue committed sinne, it shall bee forgiuen him, Iam. cap. 5. vers. 14. 15. Such a me∣dicine as cureth both bodily and spirituall maledies, is not to bee neglected. 49. In the Councell of Laodicea it was forbid∣den, that Masses should bee saide, and Oblations offered by Bis∣shops, or Presbyters, in priuate houses. This questiō also was dis∣puted in this Councell. 50. The authoritie of the Emperour, is to bee interponed for reuerent keeping of the Lordes daye. 51. Because the Church is constituted of persons of dine: se conditions, some are Noble, others are ignoble, some are ser∣uantes, vassalles, strangers, &c. It becommeth them who are in eminent rowmes, to deale mercifully with their inferioures, knowing, that they are their brethren, because God is one com∣mon Father to both, and the Church is one common mother to both. From the 52. Canon vnto the 66. are contained pre∣cepts of chaste and honest liuing prescribed to Prioresses and Nunnes, which I ouer-passe, as I haue done in the preceeding Councels. 66. It is ordained, that prayers and supplications shall bee made for the Emperour, and his children, and for their well-fare both in soule and bodie. 67. These things haue wee touched shortly, to bee exhibited to our Soueraigne lord the Emperour. Hee who desireth a more ample declaration of all vertues to bee followed, and vices to be eschewed, lt him reade the volume of the holy Scriptures of God.
IN the same yeere of our LORDE, wherein the preceeding foure Councels were conuened, and by the mandate of the The Coun∣cell of Arles. Emperour Charles the Great, another Councell was conuened at Arles. The Canons of this Councell were in number 26. 1. They sette downe a Confession of their Faith. 2. They ordaine, That Prayers shall bee made for the Emperour, and his children. 3. They admonish Bishops and Pastors diligently to reade the bookes of holy Scripture: To teach the Lordes people in all trueth: and, To administrate the Sacramentes rightly. 4. Laick people are admonished, not to remooue their Presby∣ters from their Churches, without consent of their Bishoppes. 5. That Presbyters bee not admitted for rewardes. 6. It is ordained, That Bishops shall attende, that euery person liue or∣dinately: that is, according to a prescribed rule. The 7. & 8. Ca∣nons belong to the ordering of Monkes and Nunnes. The 9. Can. pertaineth to the payment of Tythes, and first fruits. 10. It is ordained, That Presbyters shall preach the worde of God, not only in Cities, but also in euery Parochin. 11. Incestuous co∣pulations are to bee vtterly abhorred. 12. Peace is to bee kept with all men, according to the wordes of the Apostle, Fol∣low peace, and sanctification, without the which no man shall see God, Hebr. cap. 12. vers. 14. 13. Let lordes, Iudges, and the rest of the people, bee obedient to their Bishop: and let no vnrighteous judgement bee vsed: and no bribes receiued, nor false testimo∣nie bee admitted. 14. In time of Famine, let euery man sup∣port the necessitie of his owne. 15. Let all weightes and mea∣sures bee equall and just. 16. Let the Sabboth day bee kept holy, without Markets, Iustice Courtes, and seruile labour. 17. Let euery Bishop visite his boundes once in the yeere: and if hee finde the poore to bee oppressed by the violence of the mightie, then let the Bis. with wholsome admonitions, exhort them to desist from such oppression: & incase they will not de∣sist from their violence, then let the Bishop bring the cause to the eares of the Prince. 18. Let Presbyters keepe the Chrisme, and giue it to no man, vnder pretence of Medicine. 19. Pa∣rentes NOT A. and Witnesses, shall bring vp baptized children in the knowledge of God, because God hath giuē them vnto Parents, and Witnesses haue paunded their worde for their saith.
20. Ancient Churches shall not bee depriued of Tythes, nor of none other possession. 21. That the constitution of ancient Fathers shall bee kept concerning Buriall in Churches. 22. Ci∣uill Iudgement seates shall not bee in Churches. 23. The goods belonging vnto the poore, if they bee bought, let it bee done openly in sight of the Nobles and Iudges of the Citie. 24. Let fugitiue Presbyters and Church men bee inquired, and sent backe againe vnto their owne Bishop. 25. He who hath a Benefice bestowed vpon him, for helping the fabricke of Churches, let him support the building of them. 26. They who sinne publickely, let them make their publicke repentance, according to the Canons. These thinges haue we shortly tou∣ched, to bee presented vnto our lord the Emperour, and to bee corrected by his Highnesse wisedome. IN the yeere of our LORD 871. and in the third yeere of the reigne of Basilius, Emperour of the East: and vnder the reigne of Lewes the second Emperour of the West: the Ambassa∣doures The eig Generall Councell. of Pope Adrian the second came to Constantinople. Ba∣silius the Emperour gathered a Councell against Photius, the pa∣triarch of Constantinople. In this Councell great policie was vsed, to haue all thinges framed to the contentment of Adrian bishop of Rome: For no man was admitted to the Councell, except on∣lie they who had subscribed the supremacie of the Bishoppe of Rome, aboue all other Bishops. They who refused to subscribe the fore-saide supremacie, were contemptuously rejected, and not admitted to the Councell. So did the authoritie of the Bis∣shop of Rome proceede to further grouth, by flattering of Basi∣lius, who slewe his associate Michael: as it was founded in the flatterie of Bonifacius the thirde, who flattered that vile murthe∣rer Phocas, who slewe his master Mauritius. In this Councell Photius was deposed, and excommunicated, and his bookes which hee wrote against the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome were commanded to be burnt. Photius was accused for this, that hee had accepted the office of a Bishop, before hee had recei∣ued other Ecclesiasticall orders. Photius alleadged, that this was no sufficient cause of deposition, in respect that Ambrose, bishop of Millan, Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople, and of late dayes Tarasius, with consent of the bishop of Rome, of Laickes they
were made Bishops. The Ambassadours of Pope Adrian the second answered. that Ambrose was endewed with extraordina∣rie giftes, Nectarius was called at an extraordinarie time, to wit, when heresie was so ouer-spred, that it was an harde thing to finde out a man who was not spotted with heresie: and, concer∣ning the aduancement of Tarasius to bee bishop of Constantinople, to whose admission Adrian the first gaue consent, they answe∣red, That it was done for a speciall cause, in regarde hee was a zealous maintainer of the adoration of Images. This answere declareth, that incase Photius also had beene a zealous maintai∣ner of the adoration of Images, the Romane Bishop and his Am∣bassadoures coulde haue dispensed with the want of Ecclesiasti∣call orders preceeding his admission to his Bishopricke, as they ☞ did in the person of Tarasius. In this Councell also the Ambassadoures of Adrian, magni∣fying the authoritie of the Pope, affirmed, that the bishop of Rome might judge of the actions of all other bishops: but no man might judge of him. And albeit the Orientall bishops in the sixt Generall Councell, cursed Pope Honorius after his death: yet it is to bee marked (saye they) that hee was accused of here∣sie: And in this case onely it is lawfull for inferiours to resist their superioures, and to disclaime their peruerse opinions. In this point also they saide, That none of the Patriarches and Bishops Hister. Magdeb. Cent. 9. Cap. 9. Caranza de Conciliis. proceeded against the defunct bishop of Rome, without the consent of the Romane Chaire going before them. Now obserue (good Reader) with what fidelitie Onuphrius defendeth the name of Honorius the first: as free of all suspition of heresie: when as the Ambassadours of Adrian the second, for verie shame durst not presume to doe it. More-ouer, the worshipping of Images in this Councell got a newe allowance againe, and it was commaunded, That the image of Christ shoulde bee holden in no lesse reuerence than the bookes of the Gospell. The Bulgarians also were made subject to the Romane Bis∣shop. And Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople, in regarde he was restored to his place again by the meanes of the bishop of Rome, hee made no opposition in the contrarie. Neuerthelesse, this al∣teration continued but short time: for the Bulgarians droue out
of their bounds the Latine Priests, and were serued with Grieke Priests againe. Diuerse Canons were constituted in this Councell, but so coincident with the Canons of other Councels, that it is a su∣perfluous thing to make a rehearsall of them. In the subscrip∣tion of the Actes of the Councell, great controuersie fell out: for the Graecians could not abide the name of Ludouicke, Empe∣rour of the West, because they thought, that the honourable name of an Emperour only belonged to their owne Soueraigne lord, who was Emperour of Constantinople. More-ouer, a number of them came to the Emperour Basilius, and requested him, that their subscriptions might bee redeliuered vnto them againe, wherein they had subscribed to the supremacie of the Romane Bi∣shop, or else the Church of Constantinople would be in perpetuall NOT A. subjection to the Chare of Rome. These subscriptions afore-saide were restored againe, but with great difficultie. CArolus Caluus conuocated a Councell in Fraunce at Acinia∣cum, consisting of ten Bishops. The bishops of Lions, Vason, and Trier were chiefe Presidents in the Councel. Hincmarus, bis∣shop The Coun∣cell of Accinia∣cum. of Rhemes accused in this Conuention his owne Nephewe, Hincmarus, bishop of Laudunum. as a man disobedient to his Me∣tropolitane, and a man who for priuate injuries had excōmu∣nicated all the Presbyters of his Church, debarring them from saying of Masse, baptizing of Inphantes, absoluing of Penitents, and burying of the dead. And Hincmarus bishop of Rhemes, pro∣poned vnto the Councell 50. Canons, which hee desired to bee read in the Synode: and they allowed all the Canons written by the bishop of Rhemes. Also, they condemned Hincmarus, bishop of Laudunum of petulancy, and compelled him to subscribe obe∣dience to Charles his King, and to his Metropolitane: hee was also depriued of his office, and his eyes were thrust out. But Pope Ihonne the ninth, vnder the reigne of Carolus Crassus, resto∣red Histor. Magdeb. Cent. 9. Cap. 9. him to his office againe, beeing the more affectioned vnto him, because he had appealed from his owne bishop, and from the decreet of a Synode in his owne countrey, to be judged by the Chaire of Rome. The Coun∣cell of Tri∣burium, or Sirasburg IN the yeere of our Lord 899. and in the eight yeere of the reigne of the Emperour Arnulphus, in the Towne of Triburium,
twentie and two Bishops of Germanie were assembled, who made many constitutions, a great number whereof Caranza is com∣pelled to ouer-passe with silence, lest he shoulde make a super∣fluous repetition of Canons mentioned before. First it was concluded in this Councell, That excommunicate persons, if they repent not, are to be subdued by the Emperour. Canon 10. That a Bishop shall not be deposed, before his cause be judged by twelue Bishops: and a Presbyter by sixe Bishops: and a Deacon by three Bishops. 11. A Church man, who committeth slaughter, shall be deposed, albeit he hath beene in∣forced vnto it. 12. Baptisme shall not be ministred, except at Easter & Whitsonday, without necessitie require. 13. Tythes are to bee payed for the sustentation of the Ministerie, the sup∣port of the poore, and the fabricke of the Church. 15. Let mens bodies bee buried in that Paroch, vnto the which they payed their Tythes. 16. No buriall place shall bee solde for money. 17. Let Laicke people be buried in the Church yarde, not in the Church: but if they be buried alreadie, let not their bodies bee remoued. 18. The vesselles, wherein holy myste∣ries are celebrated, are Challices and Platters: whereof Sainct Bonifacius, a Bishop and Martyr, being demanded, If it was law∣full to celebrate the Sacrament in vesselles of wood? He answe∣red, That of olde there were golden bishops, and woodden ves∣sels: but nowe by the contrary, saith he, the Bishops are wood∣den bishops, and the vesselles are vesselles of golde. And Sepheri∣nus ministred the Sacrament in vessels of glasse. Neuerthelesse, this Councell straitly inhibiteth the Sacrament to be consecra∣ted in vesselles of wood. 19. Let not wine without water bee offered in the holy Challice, because both blood and water flo∣wed out of the side of Christ. 20. Priestes are shauen, to the end they may carrie vpon their heads a similitude of the crowne ☞ (to wit, of thornes, wherewith the Lord was crowned) who is their lot and portion. 21. Let not Presbyters, who are cal∣led before Iustice seates, bee compelled to sweare, but let them bee put in remembrance of their holy consecration in stead of an oath. 22. The triall of persons defamed by the burning iron is ceassed: but let no man giue out rashe judgement in se∣ret matters. 27. They who haue vnder-taken a spirituall of∣sice,
shoulde not goe to warre-fare, nor accept vpon them ciuill offices, according to the seuenth Canon of the Councell of Chalcedon. 31. A thiefe, or a robber, who is slaine in the perpe∣tration of his diabolicall fact, let no man praye for his soule, nor distribute almes for his reliefe. 35. Let no justice Courtes bee holden on the Lordes daye, neither on Festiuall nor Fasting dayes. 39. A man who marrieth a woman of a strange coun∣trey, but not of a strange religion, shall be compelled to coha∣bite with her. 40. It shall not be lawfull for a man to marie a woman whome hee hath polluted in adulterie during her hus∣bandes life-time. 45. Hee who hath defiled two sisters, let him bee subject to pennance all his dayes, and remaine conti∣nent. 46. A woman that hath committed adulterie, and for feare of her husband, who persueth her vnto the death, shee fleeth vnto Bishops to seeke reliefe: let them trauell seriouslie for the safetie of her life: and if that can bee obtained, let her be restored to her husband againe: but if that cannot bee obtai∣ned, let her not bee restored: but her husband during his life time, shall not marie another. 54. A forme of externall repen∣tance is prescribed to them who of precogitate malice and of purpose haue committed slaughter.
TREATISES, Belonging to the IX. CENTVRIE. A TREATISE, Of Extreame Unction. THE Councell of TRENT en∣traiting of this subject of Extreame Unction, setteth downe a glorious Pre∣face before their Canons, That Sathan, that vigilant enemie, who is readie at all occasions to take his aduantadge, he is most readie in the last conflict to assault poore soules, when naturall powers are weakened, and the feare of approaching death doeth perturbe the cogitations of sinfull people, then hee endeuoureth to brangle their faith, and to bring them to a distrust of the mercies of GOD. But on the other part (saye they) Christ hath instituted the Sacrament of Extreame Unction, as an armour to guarde vs at our last breath against the subtile inuasions of that deceitfull aduersarie. This Preface importeth, that all the weapons of our spirituall warre∣fare,
both defensiue and offensiue, wherewith wee faught against spirituall wickednesse in our life-time, are not sufficient to guarde vs in our last combate, except wee bee annointed with oyle at our last departure, Neuerthelesse, the holie Scripture expresselie saieth, I am the resurrection, and the life: hee that belee∣ueth in mee, though hee were dead, yet shall hee liue: and whosoeuer li∣ueth, and belecueth in mee, shall neuer die, Ioann. Chap. 11. verse 25. 26. In which wordes it may bee euidentlie perceiued, that the word of GOD, apprehended by faith, can saue vs both in life and death. The Romanistes, in proouing Extreame Unction to bee a Sacra∣ment of the Newe Testament, in the which there is a signe in∣stituted by GOD, and to the signe there is added a promise of forgiuenesse of sinnes, and consequentlie of eternall life. They are like to the drunkardes of our Nation, who when their stomacke is ouer-laden with too much drinke, then they laye them downe to sleepe: but incase by any occasion they be wake∣ned Similitude before the drinke be digested and gone out of their heads, they arise like madde men, and make such a stirre and businesse, that all men wishe that they were in their bedde againe: Euen so, the Romane Church hath beene so miscarried with the tradi∣tions of men, with the writinges of auncient Fathers (especial∣lie in poinctes of doctrine in the which they were weake) and with the authoritie of Councels, that they layed them downe, and slept securelie, as people who were perfectlie instructed in the way of GOD. But nowe they awake, after a manner, out of their sleepe: and they will seeme to grounde their doctrine vpon Scripture, which they so miserablie abuse, that they are in no better case, but rather in a worse, than when they misre∣garded Scripture, layed it aside, and counted the Decretalles of Popes to bee of as great authoritie as the holie Scriptures of GOD. True it is, that about the yeere of our LORD 520. Chem∣nisius reckoneth the yeere of our LORD 528. Foelix the fourth, the successour of Ioannes the first, and predecessour of Bonifacius the seconde: hee ordained, That Christians, be∣fore they departed this life, shoulde bee annointed with oyle.
And this is the true originall of Extreame Unction, yet in such manner, that in the dayes of Pope Foelix the fourth, it had not the name of a Sacrament. But seeing the Councell of TRENT referreth it vnto a more auncient beginning: let vs examine the places of SCRIPTVRE whereupon they grounde this their opinion. The wordes of the APOSTLE IAMES are these, Is anie sicke amongst you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them praye for him, and annoint him with oyle, in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall saue the sicke: and the Lord shall raise him vp: And if hee haue committed sinne, it shall bee forgiuen him. Iacob. Chap. 5. vers. 14. 15. For better vnderstanding of this place of SCRIPTVRE, let vs consider these three thinges, to wit. That when the Gospell was first preached, for the propagation and aduan cement there∣of, GOD appointed extraordinarie offices, (EPHES. 4.) which were not to continue in the Church, such as the office of Apostles, Euangelistes, and of Prophets. Likewise, hee en∣dued them, and some other beleeuers, with extraordinarie giftes, such as the gift of tongues, of prophesie, and working of miraculous workes. And like as the extraordinarie offices continued not in the Church: euen so the extraordinarie giftes continued not long in the Church: for they were giuen to open a doore to the Gospell: which beeing once opened, Christians must content themselues with ordinarie offices and gifts. Secondlie, let vs consider, that persons who had receiued a gift of GOD to cure diseases miraculouslie, they vsed not at all times the selfe same signes and ceremonies in curing of dis∣eases, but sometimes they sent hand-kirches to the diseased persons, (ACT. CAP. 19. vers. 11.) sometimes they ouer∣layed the dead, and restored them to life, (ACT. CAP. 20. vers. 10.) and sometimes they annointed them with oyle. (MARC. CAP. 6. vers. 13.) Which diuersitie of signes had not beene lawfull to vse, if Extreame Unction had beene an or∣dinarie Sacrament in the Church: For, like as it is not lawfull to baptize with anie other liquor except water, because Bap∣tisme is a Sacrament instituted by GOD▪ Euen so, in curing
the diseased it had not beene lawfull to vse anie other signe and ceremonie but annointing with oyle, if so bee it had beene an ordinarie Sacrament. Thirdlie, it is to bee considered, that when signes and cere∣monies doe accompanie extraordinarie giftes, incase the gift doe cease, it is a foolishe thing to keepe in vse the signe and ce∣remonie, except it were to bee a memoriall of a thing done of olde, as the people of GVIDVS dedicated the shelles of the Fishe Remora to VENVS GVIDEA, for a memoriall of their deliuerance. But wee reade not of anie Prophet, to whome GOD gaue not the gift of working miraculous workes, who counterseited HELISEVS, by sending their staffe to raise the dead, (2. REG. CAP. 4. vers. 2.) or directing anieeprous person to washe his bodie seuen times in the waters of Iordane, as HELISEVS directed NAAMAN the Syrian to doe. (2. REG. CAP. 5. vers. 10.) For in vaine is the outward signe adhibited, when the gift of miraculous he ling of diseases is ceassed. Yea, and the Priestes in the Romane Church, conuicted in conscience, that by annointing with oyle, they cannot restore a diseased person to health, they delaye to applie Extreame Un∣ction, vntill all hope of recouerie bee vtterlie past. But nowe, lest it shoulde seeme, that their Extreame Unction is altogether vneffectuallie applied, the verie wordes vsed in the application thereof testifieth, that they belieue that remission of sinnes shall bee conferred with to the diseased person, by ver∣tue of Extreame Unction: for these are their wordes, Peristam sanctam Unctionem, & piissimam, suam misericordiam indulgeat tibi DEVS, quicquid peccasti per visum, per auditumodoratum tactum, gustum: that is to saye, By this moste holie Unction, let GOD be∣stowe vpon thee his mercie, for all sinnes thou hast committed, by seeing, hearing, smelling, touching, or tasting. Heere remember, that the benefite which the APOSTLE saieth is chieselie obtained by prayer, they referre it vnto annointing with oyle. Next, they take not hede to whome the APOSTLE directeth this ex∣hortation: namelie, to the faithfull members of CHRIST, whome in the twelfth verse hee calleth his brethren, and in the soureteenth and fifeenth verses hee speaketh to such as reue∣renced
the order of Church-gouernement. Nowe it is certaine, that faithfull men are so taught in the schoole of GOD, and perswaded, that other mens prayers can auaile them nothing, except there bee faith in their owne heartes: for the prayer of SAMVEL coulde benefite King SAVL nothing in respect of his reprobate and vnbeleeuing heart. (1. SAM. CHAP. 16. vers. 2.) But these men of whome Sainct IAMES speaketh, were faithfull men, penitent sinners, obedient to the ordinan∣ces of GOD: And when the Seniors of the Church prayed for such men, their sinnes were forgiuen them, GOD hauing regarde to their owne faith, and to the prayers of the Elders of the Church for them. In this they glorie much, that Extreame Unction may be cal∣led a Sacrament of the newe Testament in a proper sense: for∣asmuch as in it there is a signe instituted by CHRIST (Mar. cap. 6.) and vnto the signe there is added a promise, to wit, the healing of the diseased person, if the LORD thinke it expe∣dient, at least a promise of remission of sinnes. But all this is nothing except the thirde circumstance bee added, to wit, that CHRIST hath giuen vnto vs this signe to bee vsed, and hath annexed the promises afore-saide as belonging vnto vs: for who can denie. but in circumcision there was a signe instituted by GOD, whereunto a diuine promise was annexed? Neuer∣thelesse, both the signe and promise appertained vnto them who liued vnder the olde Couenant, (GALATH. CAP. 5. vers. 3.) and not to vs: euen so, the signe and the promise afore∣saide, appertained vnto that time onelie in the which extraor∣dinarie giftes had place in the CHVRCH of GOD, and not to vs. Nowe, to the ende that this their Sacrament of Extreame Un∣ction, might bee holden in the greater reuerence, they haue founde out manie circumstances not mentioned in holie SCRI∣PTVRE: as namelie, that it shall bee made onelie by a Bishop: It shall bee saluted with bowing of knees, and nine congratu∣lations in this manner, It shall bee saide thrise, Aue sanctum Oleum: and againe it shall bee saide thrise, Aue sanctum Chris∣ma: and the thirde time it shall bee saide thrise, Aue sanctum
Balsamum: that is to saye, Haile, holie Oyle: Haile, holie Chrisme: Haile, holie Balsome. No such commaundement is contained in the Scriptures of GOD. In like manner they saye, it is on∣lie lawfull for a Priest to applie this Oyle: as if in the dayes of the Apostle IAMES there had beene such sacrificing Priestes, as are in our dayes: Whereas by the contrarie Pope INNO∣CENTIVS the first, who liued in the dayes of AVGVS∣TINE, permitted not onelie Priestes, but also common Chri∣stians, to comfort themselues and their friendes by annointing them with oyle, as SIGEBERTVS writeth in his Chro∣nicles. Also with this oyle, made by the Bishop, exercised, consecrated, and saluted, as if it were a sensitiue and reasonable creature, the organes of mens senses are to bee annointed, such as the eyes, the eares, the nosthrils, the lippes, the handes, the feete, and the reines. In this poinct their heartes are ouer∣casten with darknesse: and they erre, mis-knowing the Scrip∣tures and power of GOD: For the grounde of corruption is in the heart, and not in the senses: and the verie heart of EVA. was corrupted with infidelitie and pride, before her eyes, or hands, or mouth did sinne. (GENES. 3.) No man can discourse rightlie of sinne, nor of anie other thing, except hee knowe the fountaine and well-spring thereof. Concerning auncient Fathers, they had no such custome to annoint with oyle the eyes, eares, and the rest of the organes of senses, before mens departure from this life. And whereas they bring foorth the testimonie of AVGVSTINE (Lib. 2. De visitatione infirmorum) reckoning Unction as one of the necessarie consolations to bee adhibited to them, who are concluding their life. This citation is an ouer-giuing of their cause, and a secret confession, that Extreame Unction is but the inuention of man: for they cannot bee ignorant, that those bookes, De Visi∣tatione Infirmorum, were not written by AVGVSTINE, bishop of HIPPO, but by another after his death, who sette them foorth vnder the name of AVGVSTINE. AECVMENIVS, writing vpon the aforesaide place of the Apostle IAMES, is shorter in his Commentarie than the Apostle is in his precept or counsell: which thing hee could not
haue done, if hee had thought that an holie Sacrament had beene recommended to the Church, to remaine vnto the ende of the worlde: for hee writeth onelie, that the Apostles had this custome whilest CHRIST was conuersant with them in the earth, to annoint sicke persons with oyle, and to restore them to health. Aecum, in Epistol. Iacob. cap. 5. vers. 14. The custome of the Romane Church approacheth somewhat nearer to the fashions of the Pagans, and olde Heretiques cal∣led Gnostici, than to the custome of the Apostles: for the Pa∣gans annointed with oyle the bodies of the dead, as the Poete witnesseth in these wordes, Corpusque lauant frigentis, & vnguunt. (Iren. Lib. 1. Cap. 18.) And olde Heretiques annointed the head of the dead with oyle and water, to procure redemption to their soules. The Romane Church annointeth not the dead with oyle, but they annoint them who are halfe dead, in whome there is no hope of life and recouerie. LINDANVS, in all his writinges, is like vnto an ASIA∣TICKE Oratour, fighting rather with the shaft, than with the poinct of the Speare: and when hee citeth a place of CHRY∣SOSTOME, (De Sacerdotio, Libr. 3.) to prooue Extreame Un∣ction to bee an ordinarie Sacrament in the Church, hee proo∣ueth starke nothing, yea the thing that is not in controuersie betwixt vs and the Papistes: for CHRYSOSTOME affir∣meth, that men are more benefited by their teachers, than by their parentes: in respect their naturall parentes haue begot∣ten their bodies, but their pastors haue begotten their soules to GOD: Yea, and their naturall parentes haue not suppor∣ted their bodilie infirmities so much, as their pastors haue done: for oft times by prayer and annointing them with oyle, they haue procured health to their bodies, as Sainct IAMES wit∣nesseth, which their naturall parentes were not able to pro∣cure. In all this discourse there is not one worde which wee denye. But this prooueth not Extreame Vnction to bee a Sacrament of the Newe TESTAMENT, instituted by CHRIST, to continue vnto the ende of the worlde.
This Popishe Sacrament LINDANVS in his Panoplia en∣traiteth of it in the last rowme, as a secure hauen, in the which hee will leaue them of his religion, reposing and resting them∣selues. And truelie, when I consider the grounde, whereup∣on Papistes woulde haue their disciples to leane, and the hauen vnto the which they woulde haue them to arriue: I am com∣pelled to saye, that their grounde is sandie grounde, (MAT. 7.) and that their hauen is like vnto the hauen of NAVPLIVS: and they are wisest, who hath least confidence in such deceit∣full refuges: yea, they are wise who with VLISSES and DIOMEDES can beware of the stonie rockes of EVBOIA, and sette their course another waye. Nowe the LORDE open vnto vs the bosome of His sweete Compassions, which is the true Citie of our Refuge, in the which our soules maye finde true securitie and rest: AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Order. THE ORDERS in the ROMANE Church, are diuided into inferiour and superiour Orders: The inferiour Orders are doore-keepers, readers, exorcistes, and , that is, fol∣lowers, whome by a newe inuented name they call Ceroferarii, or Waxe∣taper-bearers: The superiour Orders are sub-Deacons, Deacons, and Pres∣byters, By inferiour Orders mens humilitie and obedience was tried, and so by degrees they were promoted to superiour Or∣ders. But seeing in euerie one of these Orders the outwarde signes at their entrie are different, and the thinges signified are different, to wit, diuerse graces of the holie Spirite, increassing according as men by ascending degrees mounted vp to higher honoures: what is the cause that all these seuen are counted one SACRAMENT, and not rather seuen SACRA∣MENTES? To all these Orders one thing was common, to wit, all were shauen in the vpper part of their heads, to represent (as Lindanus affirmeth. Panopl. Libr. 4 Cap. 77.) that the glorie of Church∣men is to weare a crowne of thornes, and to bee partakers of the sufferinges of CHRIST. And the Councell of Tribu∣rium,
in the 20. Canon thereof, citeth the same cause of shauing the heads of Clergie men. It is true, that men and women of olde delighted in haire, as a naturall ornament of their bo∣dies: and MARIE is commended for this, that shee dryed the feete of CHRIST with the haire of her head, (IOAN. CAP. 12. vers. 3.) And all the glorie of the worlde, yea, and the crownes of immortall glorie, shoulde bee casten downe at the feete of CHRIST. (APOCAL. CAP. 4. vers. 10.) Neuerthelesse, the fact of SAMSON is reprooueable, who suffered his haire to bee cutte off, and casten at the feete of DE∣LILA. (IVDG. CAP. 16. vers. 19.) And the shauing of the haire of men to bee casten at the feete of the Antichrist, and to bee a signe of subjection vnto him, that is a thing no lesse re∣prooueable, than the fact of Samson. Wee reade of CONDALVS, Gouernour of LYCIA, vn∣der MAVSOLVS, King of CARIA, that hee gained infi∣nite summes of Golde and Siluer, for suffering the people of LYCIA to weare their haire as an ornament of their bodies, wherein they much delighted: But it is otherwise with the shauelinges of the ROMANE Church, whose expectation of gaine beginneth not vntill their heads bee shauen: then they gette some benefice, by ascending degrees their estate is ad∣uanced, vntill they become companions to Princes. LINDANVS, according to his accustomed manner, , that is to saye, Serious in trifles: hee will needes haue this custome of shauing the heads of Church∣men, to bee referred vnto the APOSTLE PETER, whose head, saieth hee, the enemies of the GOSPELL did shaue, before they executed him vnto the death. And this rebuke of CHRIST, the CHVRCH conuerted it into an honourable rite of shauing the heads of Church men, after the similitude of the shauing of Simon Peters head. But if the ROMANE Church had beene verie sollicitous to haue kept the doctrine of the true faith of CHRIST, i puritie, as it was deliuered by SIMON PETER, and the rest of the APOSTLES, they had not beene so serious in matters of haire.
ANOTHER custome in the ROMANE Church, is to an∣noint with oyle all them who are admitted to Church Or∣ders. Where haue they learned this custome? from the sonnes of AARON, who were annointed with oyle, (LEVIT. CAP. 8. vers. 30.) and consecrated to the worke of their ministra∣tion. Maye it not justlie bee spoken of them, which was spo∣ken of olde vnto him who was too loftie in his vaunting spea∣ches, : that is to saye, Either encrease your strength, or diminishe your loftinesse: Euen so, I saye to the Chaplens of the ROMANE Church, That they shoulde either bee liker vnto CHRIST, (who was a Priest according to the order of MELCHISEDECK) or else they shoulde bragge lesse of the ceremonies of the LEVITICALL Lawe, seeing that the Priesthood of Melchisedeck is farre diffe∣rent from the Priesthood of Aaron. To grace this Sacrament of Order, all these seuen Orders afore-saide are attributed vnto CHRIST himselfe: Hee was a Doore-keeper (saye they) when He cast out the buyers and sellers out of the TEMPLE: (IOANN. CAP. 2. VERS. 15.) Hee was a Reader, when Hee read the place of ISAIAS in the Synagogue of NAZARETH, saying, The Spirite of the LORD is vpon mee, &c. (LVKE CAP. 4. vers. 17.) Hee did the office of an Exorcist, when Hee cured a man possessed with a Deuill: (LVKE CAP. 4. vers. 33.) Hee practised the office of Acoluthus, when Hee saide, Hee who followeth Mee, shall not walke in darkenesse, but shall haue the light of Life: (Ioann. Cap. 8. vers. 12.) The office of a sub-Deacon, when Hee washed His Disciples feete: (Ioann. Cap. 13. vers. 4.) The office of a Deacon, when Hee distributed Bread and Wine to His Dis∣ciples: (Matth. Cap. 26. vers. 26.) And finallie, Hee execu∣ted His Priestlie office, when Hee offered Himselfe vpon the Crosse, a Sacrifice for our sinnes. (Matth. cap. 27. vers. 50.) Who can bee so babishe ignorant, but hee maye vnderstande, that CHRIST, in working sauing miracles, Hee decla∣red Himselfe the promised MESSIAS and Sauiour? In re∣forming the abuses of the Temple, Hee declared Himselfe to
bee both King and Priest, to whome reformation of abuses in the Church belongeth: In reading Holie Scripture, and ope∣ning the sense and meaning thereof to the people, Hee decla∣red Himselfe to bee the Great Prophet, whom GOD promi∣sed to sende into the worlde: (DEVTER. XVIII.) And when CHRIST saieth, Hee who followeth Me shall not walke in darkenesse, &c. these wordes doe import, That wee, who followe CHRIST are , but not that CHRIST himselfe is . Who could once imagine that the hearts of men coulde bee ouer-casten with such horrible darkenesse, as to attribute to the Lorde of the House of GOD, the basest rowme in all the House, and to make a Doore-keeper of him for a time? NOwe the Ceremonies which are vsed in the Consecration of them who are admitted to inferiour Orders, are these: The Doore-keepers are admitted with the signe of deliuering the keyes of the Church-doore vnto them. The Readers, by deliuering vnto them the Holie Bible. The Exorcistes, by de∣liuering vnto them certaine formes of adjuration of persons possessed with Deuils, or transported with madnesse. And , by deliuering vnto them Tapers of waxe, with a little water potte. Are these elementes instituted by GOD? and hath GOD annexed vnto Keyes, Bookes, Adjurations, and Tapers of waxe, a promise of spirituall grace? If these two thinges cannot bee prooued by Holy Scripture, then no Sacra∣ment can bee acknowledged in these Orders: especiallie since the administration of these offices is committed to boyes, to ignorant fellowes, and to men who haue no extraordinarie gift of casting out of Deuils, as the Exorcistes of the Primitiue Church had of olde. The like I speake of superiour Orders, The signes and Ce∣remonies which are vsed in admitting of Presbyters, (whome now they call Priestes) are the presenting vnto them a platter, in the which consecrated Hosties are contained, to declare, that they are called to stande at the Altar, to consecrate the ele∣mentes, and to offer vp the bodie and blood of CHRIST,
as a proptiatorie Sacrifice to the Father. Howe blasphe∣mous this opinion is, I haue alreadie declared, in the TREA∣TIS Of the Sacrifice of the Masse, but for the present this I saye, That if the auncient Ceremonie of Imposition of handes had beene kept in admission of Presbyters, yet it coulde not haue beene called a Sacrament of the Newe Testament, be∣cause a Sacrament is a visible signe, of the inuisible grace of GOD, and belonging to all them to whome the Couenant of GOD belongeth. Onelie this obserued, that euerie Sacrament must bee applied in its owne time, as GOD hath ordained. The Ceremonie of breathing vpon them who are admitted Priestes, conjoyned with these wordes, Receaue the Holie Spirite, (Ioann. Cap. 20. vers. 22.) it is a preposterous counterfeiting of CHRIST, whome wee aught to followe, in such thinges as Hee hath sette downe to bee followed: but not to presume to doe all thinges which Hee did for demonstration of His diuine power. The Deacons in the Romane Church, are ordained by a Bis∣shop, who cloatheth them with their Stoles, and their Oraria, vpon their left shoulders, and putteth into their handes the Booke of the Euangell, whereof they shoulde bee Preachers. Their office is to attende vpon the Presbyters, when they mi∣nister the Sacramentes, to laye the Hosties vpon the Altar, to prepare, and to couer the LORDES Table, to carrie the Crosse, and to preach, and sing, the Gospell, and the Epistle, to the people. In the ordination of Deacons, there is nei∣ther a regarde of the first institution of Deacons appointed by CHRISTES Apostles, (Acts 6.) neither is there anie similitude or resemblance of a SACRAMENT there∣in. The office of a sab-Deacon is not mentioned in Holie Scri∣pture, and their seruice in carrying the Challice, and the Paxe, and the potte with water to washe the handes of them who mi∣nister at the Altar, and the Towell: they are such a masse of friuolous toyes, inuented by the braine of man, that I will leaue of to speake anie further of them, remembring alwayes
this auncient saying, That which Scripture hath not com∣maunded, maye bee as easilie rejected, as it maye bee fur∣therlie obtruded. NOwe seeing I haue remembred in all my preceeding Trea∣tises, to speake of Antiquitie, I shall not ouer-passe with silence this poinct (GOD willing) in this Treatise also. Albeit the Hierarchie of the Romane Church were founde to bee auncient, yet it sufficeth for this Treatise to declare, that of olde these Orders were not called a Sacrament. And there is no ancient Writer whome I haue read, who reckoneth Church Orders in the number of Sacramentes. As for the wordes of Cyprian and Pope Leo, cited by Lindanus, they are not worthie of refutation, because in a generall signification manie thinges maye bee called Sacramentes. But to call Order a Sacrament in a strict signification, it is a newe inuention founde out by the Scholasticke Doctors, who behooued to bee serious in some thing after they had lost the substance of Religion. But I will set forwarde, and declare, that the Hierarchy it selfe is not so auncient as they affirme it to bee. True it is, that about the yeere of our LORD 250. Cornelius, Bishop of Euseb. hist. Libr. 6. Cap. 43. Rome, abhorring the arrogancie of Nouaius, describeth the Hierarchie of the Romane Church, in the which there was one Bishop, fourtie and sixe Presbyters, seuen Deacons, and seuen sub-Deacons, fourtie and two Acoluthi: of Exorcistes, Rea∣ders, and Ianitors fiftie & two: of Widowes & afflicted people, aboue a thousande and fiue hundreth persons, who were all su∣stained by the liberalitie and goodnesse of GOD in the Ro∣mane Church. Heereof it appeareth, that ouer and beside offi∣ces instituted by the Apostles to continue ordinarilie in the Church, other offices crept in (into the Church) by humane in∣stitution, hauing no such warrand as Elders and Deacons had. And after the time of the promotion of the Bishop of Rome, to the honour of Vniuersall Bishop, the number of Church offices encreassed: and to Presbyters were added Arch-priestes: and to Deacons were added Arch-deacons. And Lindanus lamenteth that other inferiour offices, which were inuented by men, had
ceassed in the Church, such as Fossores, Syngeli, Copiatae. When the liberalitie of the people bestowed superfluitie of riches vp∣on the Church, then newe offices behooued to bee founde out, to the ende, that all which was bestowed might seeme too litle, because manie Church offices were to bee sustained: the pro∣uerbe spoken of olde of women, , that is, A woman is naturally sumptuous: nowe it might bee justly transfer∣red to the Church Hierarchie, that it was a sumptuous and costly thing. About the yeere of our Lord 308, and vnder the reigne of Dioclesian, a constitution is attributed to Caius, Bishop of Rome, that men should bee promoted to superiour Orders, by degrees ascending from inferiour Orders. And all the fore-mentioned Orders are reckoned in that Decretall of Caius, to wit, Ostiarius, Lector, Exorcista, Acoluthus, Sub-diaconus, Diaconus, Presby∣ter, and Episcopus. But the Epistle of Leo the fourth, written to the Bishops of Britannie, derogateth credite to all the decretall Epistles written before the dayes of Pope Siricius, except onelie to the decretall Epistles of Pope Syluester: So that argumentes taken from decretall Epistles, preceeding the 384. yeere of our Lord, hath the lesse credite amongst vs, because they cannot ob∣taine credite at the handes of their owne Popes. But seeing nothing is to beee called auncient, which hath not flowed from the mouth of Christ and His Apostles, lest they should seeme to be discountenanced in this poinct, they cite the booke of the Canons of the Apostles, to prooue, that the de∣grees afore-saide were Apostolicke constitutions. This booke is not onely supposititious, but also moste impertinently cited by Papistes, because in the Councell of Trent (De Sacramento ordi∣nis, cap. 2.) Anathema is pronounced against them who acknow∣ledgeth not all their Orders, both superiour and inferiour. But the booke of the Canons of the Apostles acknowledgeth onely fiue Orders: namely, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Readers, and Psalmists, or Chantors: but no mention is made of Exorcistes and Sub-deacons: Therefore, it were good for them either to bragge lesse of Antiquitie, or to prooue better, that their Hie∣rarchie is auncient.
Ambrose (in cap. 4. ad Ephes.) reckoneth fiue Orders, to wit, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Readers, and Exorcistes, making no mention of Subdeacons, and Acoluthi. The Ca∣nonistes recken nine Orders, adding to the seuen aboue men∣tioned Bishops and Psalmists. This diuersitie of opinions concerning Church Orders, de∣clareth two thinges: First, that of olde there was no Sacrament of Orders: Secondlie, that there was no setled opinion in the Church about Orders, but one Church vsed one forme, and an∣other Church another forme, as is customably obserued in thinges indifferent: insomuch, that when it was thought ex∣pedient, that all house-holde seruantes in Bishops houses, shoulde bee Clergie men, then the number of Church offices Cyprian. Libr. 3. pist. 22. were multiplied, according to the number of Oecumenicke of∣fices accustomed to bee in Noble mens houses. Would God, that in matters of faith, of manners, and Church Discipline, men had fixed the eyes of their minds as attentiuelie vpon the written worde of GOD, as Ship-men doe vpon their Com∣passe, then had there beene lesse aberration, and lesse disputa∣tion, and lesse diuersitie of opinions. The LORD worke this in His owne time, to whome bee all Honour, Praise, and Glorie, for euer and euer, worlde without ende, Amen.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Matrimonie. IN the TREATISE of the Sa∣crament of MATRIMONIE, the inconstancie, obliuion, contradiction, and head-strong insolencie of the Romane Church, maketh mee vncer∣taine whereat to beginne: For who coulde once imagine, that they, who call Marriage a worke of the fleshe, and an estate of liuing vncompetent to them who are called to holie Or∣ders, (forgetting what they had spoken) they woulde make of it an holie Sacrament: as if the Ministers of GOD should bee debarred from the holie Sacramentes of GOD. If they saye, that they debarre men in spirituall offices onelie from copula∣tion with women: yet in this they debarre them from the Sacra∣ment, forasmuch as they debarre them from the externall signe, whereby the spirituall grace is represented. Can anie man bee partaker of Baptisme, and not washen in water? Or can anie man bee partaker of the LORDES Super, and not be per∣mitted to eat and drinke at the holie Table? And how is a man admitted to the Sacrament of Matrimonie, and debarred from copulation, which they themselues graunt to bee the externall signe of the Sacrament.
But let vs marke the fraudulent dealing of the ROMAN Church, who hath made Marriage to bee a Sacrament, albeit all the members of their Hierarchle haue forsaken it: yet this they gaine, that Marriage beeing counted an holie Sacrament, they haue drawne the cognition of all Matrimoniall causes vn∣der their judicatorie. This beeing done, and their authoritie beeing setled, they tooke boldnesse to make lawes, both im∣pious against GOD, and injurious to men: as namelie, that Marriages, bound vp betwixt young persons, without consent of Parentes, shoulde bee firme and itable: That amongst kins∣folke it shoulde not bee lawfull to marrie within the seuenth degree: and these were alreadie married within these degrees, shoulde bee separated againe: That a man, who is diuorced from an adulterous woman, shall not haue libertie to marrie during her life-time: That they who are spirituall brethren and sisters, by the Sacrament of Baptisme and Confirmation, shall not haue leaue to marrie one another: And, Marriage is for∣bidden at certaine seasons of the yeere: And finallie, that the Church may dispense with the degrees of consanguinitie, for∣bidden in the eighteenth CHAPTER of LEVITICVS, and finde out moe degrees impeding Marriage to bee bound vp. The Apostle PAVL, when hee calleth Marriage a great mysterie, (EPHES. CAP. 5. VERS. 32.) hee is speaking concerning CHRIST, and concerning His Church: And it is indeede a mysterie vnspeakeable, whether wee consider the beginning, or the progresse, or the consummation of this Marriage: It is begunne in Earth, and perfected in Heauen: And the loue of CHRIST and His Church, is vnspeakeable: For euen the Spouse of CHRIST, albeit shee bee infirme and weake in the Earth, yet her heart is so inflamed with the loue of her husband, that shee forgetteth all thinges, and re∣membereth vpon Him: shee counteth all thinges to be dongue in comparison of him: one sight of His reconciled face is dea∣rer to her than all the treasures of the worlde: His name is like a sweete oyntment powred out, and delighting her soule with the sweete smell of saluation. And if the loue of the Church to∣wardes CHRIST bee vnspeakeable, who can comprehende
the length, breadth, and deepnesse of the loue of CHRIST towardes His Church, who hath purged her from all spotte of sinne in this worlde, and prepared a glorious mansion for her in His Fathers house, that is, in Heauen. But this is not spoken of the marriage of mortall men with their wiues. True it is, that the Apostle PAVL in that same place setteth downe some similitude betwixt corporall marriages, and the spirituall marriage betwixt CHRIST and His Church: But that is not enough to furnishe out an ordinarie Sacrament in the Church of GOD, for then shoulde there bee infinite Sa∣cramentes: For the Kingdome of GOD (MATTHEW 13.) is compared to a man who soweth good seede in his fielde: It is compared to leuen, and to a treasure that is hidden in the fielde, and to a drawe nette, and to a graine of Mustard. seede: yet all these thinges are not Sacramentes in the Church. Yea, and in the marriage of ADAM and EVA, wee see a certaine similitude of the spirituall marriage betwixt CHRIST and His Church: for ADAM loued the woman which was fleshe of his fleshe, and bone of his bones, and in whom hee saw his owne similitude: (GENES, CHAP. 2. VERS. 23.) And CHRIST in like manner, by feeding vs with His owne bo∣die and blood, Hee maketh vs fleshe of His owne fleshe, and bone of his owne bones: and more-ouer, Hee stampeth vs with His owne similitude, to assure vs, that He loueth vs, whom Hee hath stamped with His owne likenesse. In like manner, a matrimoniall bande is more indissoluble than other bandes: for other bandes, like as they are bounde vp with consent of parties, so in like manner they maye bee dissolued and vndone with consent of parties: but the bande of Marriage cannot bee vndone, except by death or fornica∣tion. But the conjunction betwixt CHRIST and His Church, (ROMAN. CHAP. VIII.) cannot bee vndone by death it selfe. As concerning spirituall whordome, the true Church, which consisteth of a number, whome GOD hath elected, called, justified, sanctified, and whome Hee intendeth to glorifie: These, I saye, the LORD in mercie preser∣ueth
from spirituall whordome, and apostasie from the knowne trueth. And, like as a chaste woman delighteth in her husbande, whether hee bee present with her, or absent from her: if hee bee present, shee delighteth to conferre with him: if hee bee absent, shee delighteth to talke of him, to reade his letters, to beholde the tokens of his fauour towardes her, and finallie, in the secrete parloure of her heart to meditate of his goodnesse towardes her. (Basil. Magn. De vera Virgini.) Euen so, the Church is rauished with an vnspeakeable delight of her hus∣band IESVS CHRIST: Hee is spirituallie present, and by holie prayers shee talketh with Him night and daye: Hee is corporallie absent, therefore shee delighteth to talke of His loue and goodnesse towardes her, and to reade the bookes of holie Scripture, wherein His good will towardes her is clearlie manifested, and in the secrete chamber of her heart continual∣lie to meditate of His second blessed appearance. IN nothing doeth the ROMANE Church agree better with vs, for a time, than in magnifying Marriage as an ho∣lie bande instituted by GOD in PARADISE, and hauing a type and similitude of the loue of CHRIST towardes His Church: and therefore they make it an holie Sacrament in the Church, which no man euer did before the dayes of Pope GRE∣GORIE. But when they perceaued that this was not consented vnto, that Marriage shoulde bee counted one of the ordinarie Sacramentes in the Church, especiallie, the whole Hierarchie of the ROMANE Church disclaiming it, and the East Church in a generall Councell, disallowing prohibition of Marriage to men called to spirituall offices. The ROMANE Church tooke offence at euerie thing, which was repugnant to their opinion. They coulde neither abide them who denied that Marriage was a Sacrament, nor yet them, who gaue libertie to Church men to marrie: And so beeing irritated on all sides, they beganne to speake euill of Marriage as a worke of the fleshe, and an estate vncompetent to men in spirituall offices.
Is not the ROMANE Church, in this poinct, like vnto the Riuer EVPHRATES, which flowing out of the Mountaines of ARMENIA, setteth its course Westward, vntill it forga∣ther with the skirtes of Mount TAVRVS: and then when the course of it is hindered, it fetcheth a contrarie course, and run∣neth Similitude directlie East, vntill it bee mixed with the water of TY∣GRIS: Euen so, the ROMANE Church, which coulde neuer abide to bee controlled, it tooke occasion to speake vnreue∣rentlie of Marriage, because their opinions were not receaued in the Church without contradiction. NOwe seeing the cause is euidentlie knowne, wherefore they were so serious to drawe in Matrimonie into the number of Sacramentes: namelie, to the ende that matrimo∣niall causes might bee founde spirituall causes, and might bee judged by spirituall Iudges. Let vs consider what constitutions they made in matters of Matrimonie, without anie warrand or regarde of Scripture: insomuch, that their vilepending of Scri∣pture Con. Trid. de Matrimon. Can. 3. maketh a number of their constitutions to bee so vile∣pended, that they are not worthie of an answere: and namely, when they saye, that the Church hath power to dispense with the degrees of consanguinitie, forbidden in the eighteenth CHAPTER of LEVITICVS, and for to appoint moe de∣grees impeding the binding vp of Marriage, than are contai∣ned in that CHAPTER of LEVITICVS. What answere shall bee giuen to such Apostates from the trueth of GOD? They make so great account of the Canons of their Councels, that they accurse all them who dare contradict anie of them: and on the other part, they make so light account of holie Ca∣nonicke Scripture, that euen when they adde to the Scriptures of GOD, or diminishe anie thing from them, they are worthie to bee hearde, and to bee regarded. But HENRIE the eight, King of ENGLAND, when hee sought resolution in this question at the moste part of the Vniuersities in EVROPE, if it were lawfull for the Bishop of ROME, or for a Councell, to dispense with the degrees of consanguinitie, forbidden in the eighteenth of LEVITICVS, hee receaued a negatiue answere, That it was not lawfull so to doe.
The prohibition of Marriage in moe degrees of consangui∣nitie and affinitie, than are contained in the XVIII. of Leui∣ticus, is a wicked inuention, to make the Law of GOD of none effect: For like as Cyrus, when hee caused manie channels to bee made, wherein the water of the Riuer Gyndes should bee de∣riued. What intention had hee, but to drie vp the Riuer Gyndes, and to make it ebbe of water, that young boyes & girles should not bee afraide to wade thorowe it: Euen so, prohibitiue de∣grees, added to the Lawe of GOD, tended to none other pur∣pose, Similitude but to vndoe, and make of none effect, the blessed Lawe of GOD. And this appeareth the more manifestlie, because in that same Canon, in the which they claime libertie to adde moe degrees of prohibition of Marriage, to the degrees forbidden in Leuiticus, they claime also a libertie to dispense with the de∣grees forbidden by GOD. But GOD confoundeth the coun∣sels of men, which are opposite to His diuine institution, and turneth them all to follie. And the prohibition of Marriage vn∣to the seuenth degree was retrenched in the Councell of Late∣rane, anno 1215▪ and reduced to the fourth degree of consan∣guinitie. So men, who woulde correct the ordinance of GOD, they are like the Serpent, whereof Epiphanius writeth, (contra he∣res.) which for hunger is compelled to gnaw his owne taile, and to procure his owne death. More-ouer, the prohibition of Marriage with spirituall sis∣ters, that is, with them to whome they haue beene witnesses in the Sacrament of Baptisme or Confirmation: it is a constitu∣tion neither countenanced by Scripture, nor knowne to Anti∣quitie: but onelie leaning vpon the authoritie of the ROMANE Church: and therefore, the people and nations in our time, who acknowledge CHRIST to bee the onelie Lawe-giuer in His owne Church, they haue giuen this Antichristian lawe as the ashes that are casten to the dongue-hill. Their constitution concerning diuorcementes, that it is not lawfull for the innocent partie to marrie, so long as the other Trident. Concil. Can. 7. partie is aliue with whom he was once married, is partly concea∣ued vpon wrong interpretation of Scripture, and partly vpon the opinion of ancient Fathers, who misconceauing the right
meaning of holy Scripture, haue giuen to others occasion of stumbling and erring. True it is, that the Apostle Paul saith, Let not the wife depart from her husband: but if shee depart, let her remaine vnmarried, or be reconciled vnto her husband, and let not the husband put away his wife. (1. Cor. 7. 10. 11.) In this place the Apostle is spea∣king of such alienation of minds as falleth out betwixt man and woman, and separateth their cohabitation for a time but hee is not speaking of diuorcements, justly made for fornication: for like as death cutteth insunder the bandes of Matrimonie, & gi∣ueth liberty to the liuing party to marry in the Lord (Rom. 7. 2. 3) Euen so, fornication cutteth insunder the matrimoniall bande, and giueth libertie to the innocent partie to marrie another in the Lord. Matth. 5. 32. The billes of diuorcement giuen to honest women in the old Testament after the receauing whereof they married other hus∣bands, as clearly appeareth in the booke of Deuteronomie, cap. 24. vers. 4. this custome (I saye) is no sufficient grounde to prooue that the innocent partie may marrie after diuorcement: for such diuorcementes were rather tollerated for the hardnesse of the Iewes heartes, than commaunded or allowed: and because they were made without anie triall of fornication, they are damned by Christ, as occasions of adulteries. Matth. 19. 9. But the exception that Christ maketh in expresse words of fornication, declareth that the diuorcement made for fornication, is a law∣full diuorcement, and consequently giueth libertie to the inno∣cent partie to marrie, as death interuening, giueth libertie to the partie liuing to marrie. The opinion of Augustine concerning the exception of for∣nication, made by Christ in the question of diuorcement, (Mat∣thew 19. 9.) hath so blinded the eyes of Lindanus, and manie others of the Romane Church, that they suppose the meaning of the words of Christ to bee this, That a man who putteth awaye Augustir Serm. D mini, in monte, li cap. 14 his wife for fornication, and marrieth another, hee sinneth not so grieuouslie, as hee who putteth away his wife vngrieued with anie such transgression on her part. Alwayes, both the one and the other sinneth, saieth hee) if they marrie another during the life time of the first bedde-fellowe. But, with Augustines fa∣uour,
exclusine wordes, such as  is, cannot bee expoun∣ded by Magis and Minus: but the meaning of Christs words is euident, That except fornication cutte the matrimoniall band, the husband should not repudiate his wife, and hee who marrieth a woman, who is not diuorced for whordome, com∣mitteth adulterie. TO conclude this TREATISE, let no man bee mooued by the honour which the Romane Church seemeth to giue vnto Marriage, when they call it an holy Sacrament: neither bee much troubled when they speake vnreuerently of Marriage: for in the Courtes of Caiaphas and Pontius Pilate, Christ was scorne∣fullie honoured, and seriously mocked, and buffetted: (Mat. 27) Euen so, when the Romane Church speaketh honourably of Mar∣riage, they are onely sporting and delighting themselues with conceits and discourses: but when they abhorre Marriage, and speake vnreuerently of it, then they speake seriously, and from their heart. But the LORD in His owne time, will stoppe the mouthes of them who teach a doctrine of Deuils, from whose deceitfull doctrine the LORD make His Church free, to whome bee all praise, power, and dominion, both nowe and euermore, AMEN. FINIS.
