24396 S118789 99853996 19401
Essaies POLITICKE, and MORALL. By D. T. Gent. printer's device of Humphrey Lownes, a compartment featuring two angels or cherubs with Lancashire and Yorkshire roses at the top, and a lion and dragon separated by a corinthian column at the bottom (not in McKerrow) Printed By H. L. for Mathew Lownes, dvvelling in Paules Churchyard. 1608.
The chiefe Heads, handled in this Booke. Of Perswasion: wherin is discoursed Of Opinion. Of Affection. Of The force of Reason. Of Prayses. Of Paines, and Industrie. Of cautions in Friendship. Of three thinges prejudiciall to Secrecie. Of Reputation. Of Accusation.
To the Right Honora∣ble, and vertuous LADIE, the Ladie Anne Harington. MAdam, The desire I had to manifest my seruicea∣ble affection towards your Honour in outwarde Com∣plement, hath on such idle houres, as remained free to mee from your imployments, begot this young and tender Infant; whom I presum'd, vpon his birth (beeing yet an Em∣brio in his fathers braine) to de∣vote, & consecrate wholly to your honourable Selfe, as to the chiefe,
and finall end of his beeing. His ca∣pacitie is not of the weakest: and therefore, howsoeuer hee may now seeme altogether vnfashion'd, I make no doubt, but by conversing with your Ladiship (whose bosome the hand of heauen hath so richlie furnisht with all exemplary ver∣tues, that from among so many, Wisdome selected you, to be the Go∣vernesse, from whom the Princely issue of a royall bed might receiue instruction) his ruder ignorance may be reduced to a better forme. Essaies are the things hee vttereth. His yeeres deny him that length of breath, which should enable him to holde out in a continued, and long discourse. My selfe haue imparted vnto him, part of that beauty and
Perfection, which Art, & Nature hath bestowed on me. Such therfore as he is, I present him to your Ho∣nours view; who, I hope, will af∣foorde him such worthy entertaine∣ment, as may hold some euen corre∣spondencie, with his desires, as well as his deserts. And so in the hum∣blest degree of service, that either loue, or dutifull observance can imagine, I kisse your Honourable handes; desirous of nothing more, then alwaies to be reputed, Madam, Your Honors most affectionate seruant, D. T.
Of Perswasion. TO ground a per∣swasion of what nature soeuer, in the hearts of a publique Audi∣ence, there are three things ne∣cessarily required: The one con∣sists in the opinion had of the partie perswading: The other, in the affection of the parties to be perswaded: and the last, in the perspicuitie, and soundnesse of the reason it selfe, by which hee
labours to perswade them. As concerning the first, it was thought by the Magistrates of Sparta, to be a matter of so great importance, that when they per∣ceiued one of loose, & dissolute behauior, ready to propounde vnto the people, an aduertise∣ment, the approbation whereof, they knew, would be no smal en∣largement to the good, & quiet∣nes of their State, & Common∣wealth, they did immediatly cō∣mand him silēce (fearing, it shold seeme, least his known manners might haue preiudic't the excel∣lency of the thing) and intreated one, who for his graue & vertu∣ous carriage, was of some honor and reputation amongst them, to
take vpon him the invention, & to deliuer it vnto thē, as if it had proceeded meerly frō himselfe. And it hath bin alwaies the prac∣tice of wiser States-men, for the better cōposing of exasperated minds, whither it were in the blo∣die factions of the greater, or in the tumultuous broyles of the meaner, to chuse som one whose graue representation, accompa∣nied with a remarquable, honest, and vertuous disposition, might vpon his very first approch, work an awful respect towards his per∣son, & withal a reuerend attentiō towards his words, in the hearts and mindes of such as should be∣hold him. For there are not any so mutinous & turbulent assem∣blies,
howsoeuer they may seem to consist of those actiue & wor∣king spirites, quibus quieta mo∣vere, as Salus said of some of his time, magna merces videtur: that thinke the very disturbance of things established, a sufficient hyre to set them on worke, but will some-what (though incen∣sed Passions arme them with ne∣uer so desperate a resolution, to effect their mischieuous projects and designes) honour the sight & presence of such a one: espe∣cially, when they think he is not interested in the cause, or indu∣ced by any priuate obligation, to seek the good of the one par∣tie, with any hurt, or disaduan∣tage to the other: but that his
loue and affection, doth equal∣lie border vpon both, & that the reducing of thē to a peaceable agreement of their differences for the publique good, and wel∣fare of the State, is the chiefest, and onelie marke he aymes at: and this was excellentlie descri∣bed by the Poet, when he said, — Magno in populo cùm saepè coorta est Seditio, saeuit{que} animis ignobile vulgus: Cū{que} faces, et saxa volant: furor arma mini∣strat. Tūpietate grauē, ac meritis, si fortè virū quē Conspexêre, silent: arrectis{que} auribus adstant. And for this cause it hath been a custom among the Spanyards, to make choice of Church-men for the better managing of such businesses: yea, they haue beene often-times imploy'd by him in
matters of treaty, with an intent and purpose, to lende a greater Maiestie to his negotiations, and more feinedly to colour his sub∣til fetches & deuices: as when for the assurance of his new-got cō∣quest of Nauarre, he sent 2. Cor∣deliers into France, to talke with the Queene about a peace, who by reason of the credit their pro∣fession had gain'd them, returned homewards with no ill successe. Whereas if they be men of a dif∣fering fame, that haue the carry∣ing of such affaires, their reasons, be they neuer so apparātly good, doe lightlie serue to no better vse, then to sharpen and stirre vp the ill-affected humours of their crazie mindes the more; where∣by
in the end, themselues becom a subiect for their distempera∣ture to worke vpon: especiallie, when that smal sparkle of Vnder∣stāding (which is vsually the por∣tion of the vulgar) is dimm'd, & obscur'd with any mist of preiu∣dice, or clowde of Passionate af∣fection. And the reason hereof is, the shallow ignorance of a waue∣ring and vnsteadie multitude, which beeing for the most part led to iudge of matters onely by a Sensitiue apprehension they haue of thē, & not able of thēselues to looke further into the depth of things, then the superficiall bark will suffer the eye of their exter∣nall Sense to winde it selfe into them, doe often times by reason
thereof growe iealous euen of Ʋertue it selfe; as the manie ex∣iles, and Ostracismes practiced in those Democraticall, and Popular states of elder times can suffici∣entlie witnesse: and therfore are the more to be excused, if they suspect the ends and purposes of such, as are not knowne to them at all, or not knowne to them at least for any eminent good qua∣lity that is in them, but rather for the contrarie; it beeing an Axi∣ome approoued of most men, that Malus, Publius. vbi bonum se simulat, tunc est pessimus. So that howsoeuer good Wine let not to be good by beeing poured out of an earthen vessell: yet to present a whole∣some medicine, to a weaker sto∣mack
in an vnhandsome box, is to the grieued Patient oft-times a cause of disease; and by conse∣quence, may fall out to bee a meanes of vtter refusall. For in∣deed, . Good thinges loose the grace of their goodnesse, when in good & conuenient maner they be not performed: and so like∣wise, when by good and conue∣nient persons they bee not pro∣pounded. Eccles. 20. ver: 19. Hist. l. 1. In∣visum semel principem, saith Taci∣tus, seu benè, seu malè facta pre∣munt. A Prince, after hee hath once incurr'd the hatred and ill opinion of his subiects, and by some one particular bad action or other, alienated & estranged
their affections from him, shall find the glory of whatsoeuer en∣terprize he shal vndertake, to be blasted euē in the very blossom, by some sinister and scandalous interpretation: neither will the lawfulnes, or goodnesse of his in∣tention, be a sufficient plea, to preuent it from being burthen∣some vnto him. For the illustra∣tion whereof, I need produce no other instance then that of Vi∣tellius, who as Tacitus reports, af∣ter his entrance into Rome, Om∣nē infimae plebis rumorē affectabat, endeuord, all he could, to mark & fashion out his actions, by the square and rule of Popular appro∣bation, doing many things, which had they proceeded from a ver∣tuous
ground, would haue been receiued as pleasing, & accepta∣ble; but in him, memoriâ vitae pri∣oris, indecora et vilia accipiebātur, by the memory of his fore-spent life, they were of most men ac∣coūted as dishonorable, & base. Tiberius, when Spanish Adulation wold haue erected a tēple to the perpetual honor of his name, did most earnestly oppose himselfe against their determination, euē in open Senat: Ego me P. C. saith hee, mortalē esse, et hominū officia fungi satis{que} habere, si locū principē impleam, et vos testor, et meminis∣se posteros volo: qui satis, super{que} memoriae meae tribuent, vt ma∣ioribus meis dignum, rerum ve∣strarum providum, constantem
in periculis, offensionum pro vtili∣tate publicâ non pavidum credant: haec mihi in animis vestris templa, hae pulcherrimae effigies, et mansu∣rae: That I am mortall, and that I vndergoe the offices of humane frailtie, and that it sufficeth me, if I can performe the place where∣vnto I am called, I take you to witnesse, O chosen Senators, and I would posteritie should bee mindfull of it, who shall suffici∣ently honour my remembrance, when they are perswaded, that I am woorthie my Ancestors, pro∣vident in your affaires, constant in dangers, and carelesse of of∣fences, where question is of the publique good. These shall be to me those honorable temples,
and those excellēt statues, which once grounded in your mindes, shall remaine for euer: whereof one saith, they were praeclara verba, sed non pro Tiberio: they were excellent words, had they beene vttered by an excellent man: but proceeding from him, they serued but to aggrauate, & make worse, the fore-conceiued suspicion they had of his dissem∣bling carriage. So likewise, Legi à se militem, non emi, said Galba: whereof Ta∣citus speaking, saith it was Vox pro Repub. honesta, sed ipsi anceps, an honest, and well-beseeming voyce in regard of the common wealth, but doubtfull in respect of himselfe. Nec enim ad hanc for∣mam
caetera erant: for the rest of his life was not agreeable heere∣vnto. And hence it is, that the O∣racle of heauen, speaking by the mouth of Timothie, 2. Epis. 2. ver. 19. warneth eue∣ry one that calleth vpō the name of Christ, to depart frō iniquitie: . Non est enim, saith Theo∣philact, speciosalaus in ore peccato∣ris. And this is the reason why Christ himselfe in Mark 1. v. 25. rebuked the vncleane spirit, and commaunded him to hold his peace, euen then, when hee pro∣claimed him to bee , the holy one of God: & why Paul likewise, Act. 16. ver. 18. beeing vexed with the praises, and commendations of the Pythonist, who folowing him,
and his company, continually cryed out, , these men are the ser∣uants of the most high God, , who make knowne vnto vs the way of saluation, commanded the spirit to come forth of her, quasi nolens sanctus ab immundo ore cōmenda∣ri. Neither was it without reason, that a graue & wise Philosopher of former times, suspected the vprightnes of his owne carriage, when hee heard himselfe com∣mended by one, whose life and conversation was of a diffe∣ring strayne. How then can those impious, those irreligious and Pharisaicall Levites of this corrupted and depraued age,
free thēselues from those asper∣sions and imputations, which e∣uē by the least discerning iudg∣ments (such is the palpablenesse of their irregular enormities) may bee iustlie cast vpon them; for that notwithstanding the spi∣rit of Truth & Knowledge hath enobled them so farre, as to en∣title them the Salt of the earth (where-with whatsoeuer is not seasoned, is fatuous & vnsauou∣rie) and graced thē with so high a vocation, as is the dispensation of his heauenly mysteries, doe runne themselues breathlesse in a course of life, which is altoge∣ther disproportionable to the grounds and principles of Ver∣tue, derogating therby not a lit∣tle
from the excellencie and ma∣iestie of his celestiall and eter∣nall Word? For whence is it, that prophane Atheisme hath taken such sure footing in the hearts of ignorant, and simple men; who for the most part beeing vnable to iudge, or conceiue of vniuer∣salities, suffer themselues (as I said before) to be wholly guided by their externall sense, but on∣lie frō the boundlesse dissoluti∣ons of some Church-men, Rom. 2. v. 24. who practise not thēselues, that which they propound to others. Wherefore I cannot choose but commend his policie, who hauing converted a Iew a friend of his, to Christianitie, & percei∣uing him presentlie after desi∣rous
for his better satisfaction to goe to Rome, laboured by all meanes to disswade him from it; fearing, least the corrupt, & dis∣ordered manners of the Clergie there, might haue wrought in him some dislike of the Religion, & so by consequence haue moo∣ued him to turne Jew againe. So that whosoeuer would effectual∣ly work vpon the minds of men, with aduantage to himselfe, hee must not onely say well, but doe well also. Facta mea, non dicta vos milites sequi volo, nec disci∣plinam modo, sed exemplum etiam à me petere, qui hâc dextrâ mihi tres Consulatus, summamque lau∣dem peperi; saide Ʋalerius Cor∣vinus to his souldiors, when they
were to march against the Sam∣nites. The very ayre and Eccho of which wordes, according to the apprehension my selfe haue of them, was sufficient to haue breath'd a warlike motion, and resolution, into the very steele where-with their hands were ar∣med, and made the palest-liuerd wretch amongst them, suddainly Conquerour. Wherfore, he that thinks much the wordes of his mouth should be neglected, hee must so carrie himselfe, that his deedes may be alwaies readie to giue authori∣tie, and countenance to his words: yea there must not be a∣ny thing in him, or about him, but what may work a wondrous
admiration of him in the hearers eye, and a zealous imitation of him in his heart: finallie, he must haue in him those three tongues whereof the Scripture maketh mention; and which are founde in euery well-disposed naturall man. The first is the tongue of the heart: Qui loquitur verita∣tem in Corde suo. Psalm. 15. v. 2. The other is the tongue of the mouth; Qui non egit dolū in lin∣guâ suâ. v. 3. The third and last, is the tongue of our workes; whereof Christ saith, Ioh. 10. v. 25. . Opera quae ego facio, testimoniū perhibent de me: and whereat Saint John the Baptist aym'd, when after the Iewes had sent their deputies to
enquire of him what hee was, his aunswere to them first was alto∣gether negatiue, to wit, that hee was not Christ, that hee was not Elias, that he was not a Prophet; till constrained by their impor∣tunacie, to tell them positiuelie what he was, he said vnto them: . I am the voyce of him that cryeth in the de∣sert. Shewing thereby, that his whole course of life, was but a tongue; the particular actions whereof were so many seuerall voyces, which with a silent Rhe∣torick, did most apparantly make knowne the soundnesse, and sin∣cerenesse of that infallible truth which he was sent to teach. So that without the helpe and assi∣stance
of this last, all the exhor∣tations, perswasions, encourage∣ments and instructions, that can possibly be produc't by any mā, be they neuer so good, can little or nothing preuaile. And there∣fore was it, that God himself be∣ing about to send Jsaias abroad to preach, hee did first of all, to purifie his lips, touch them with a coale from the Altar: and that to encourage Jeremie, hee saide vnto him; Antequā exires de vul∣uâ, sanctificaui te. Spiritu princi∣pali confirma me Deus: establish me, O God, saith the kingly pro∣phet, by thy free spirit, and then docebo iniquos vias tuas; I wil in∣struct the wicked in thy waies: et impij convertentur ad te: and sin∣ners
shall bee converted vnto thee. Wherefore, : thou that takest vppon thee to reforme the manners of others, redresse thine owne, that thou mayst free both thy selfe, and that which thou vtterest, frō the traducements and detracti∣ons of a vulgar ignorance; and that it may not be said of thee: Clodius accusat moechos, Catilina Cethegum. For then shalt thou be able to graft a perswasiō of whatsoeuer thou shalt deliuer, in the mindes of thy Auditors. It is an excellent harmony, and I knowe not if vnparallell'd by that concent of Spheares; to see the words of men accompanied
with their thoughts, & followed by their deedes: and besides, there is a naturall inclination in all men, to learne the Theorie, of such as they know to haue beene excellent in the Practike. Hannibal will but scorne the Philosopher that takes vpon him in his presence to discourse of War: & Cleomenes will account that Orator but a chattering Swallowe, that shall presume (he beeing by) to describe the office and dutie of a Generall: the like happens to those depraued and exulcerated mindes, — qui de virtute locuti clunem agitant — For who can with patience en∣dure to heare Ʋitellius preach
against intemperancie: or Grac∣chus complaine of seditious and mutinous assemblies? Manus, quae sordes abluit, mūda esse debet; saith S. Gregorie: and therefore, Quis coelum terris non misceat, et mare coelo, Si fur displiceat Verri, aut homicida Miloni? Wherefore let euery man (as Saint Paul saith) so runne, 1. Cor. 9. v. 27. that he may obtaine; so fight, that hee may not beate the ayre: but as in other things, so likewise in this, bee followers of his example: , &c. I beate downe my bodie, and bring it into subiection; least after I haue prea∣ched to others, my selfe should bee reprooued. It is said of Vespasian, that be∣ing himselfe antiquo cultu, victu∣que,
he was to the Romans praeci∣puus adstricti moris author, euen then when riot and excesse were the onely Stewards that atten∣ded them in publique & priuate meetings. Obsequium enim inde in Principem, et aemulandi amor validior quàm poena ex legibus, et metus, saith Tacitus. And hence it came, that The∣odoric King of the Goths writ vn∣to the Romane Senate in this manner: Facilius est errare natu∣rā, it is easier for Nature to erre, qùam dissimilem sui Princeps pos∣sit Remp: formare, then that a Prince should frame a Cōmon∣wealth vnlike vnto himselfe: so much availeable with inferiours, is the force of an example in any
person of authority. But if I may lawfully, & without offence op∣pose my weaknes against Maie∣stie, I will briefly showe him, that his opinion doth in som sort me∣rit cōtradiction. For, Sylla being a disordered liuer, made his Ci∣tizens reformed: and Lysander on the contrarie, polluted his with vices, where-with himselfe was no way blemished.
Of Affection. A Second thing to help and further Perswasiō, is Af∣fection: vvhich being once tho∣roughly wrought and setled in the hearts and mindes of a Mul∣titude, & that specially through a good opinion conceiued of the Partie perswading, is sufficient of it selfe, though the matter which is propoūded be neuer so weak, & the reasons that should vsher it neuer so lame, to make an easie & speedie passage for it through
all the oppositions, and contra∣dictions of any deeper discer∣ning Spirit whatsoeuer. Witnes Pisistratus, who beeing brought (according to his own appoint∣ment) in a Chariot to the Mar∣ket-place, and there hauing in the sight of all men, charged o∣thers with those woundes which his own hands had wrought: So∣lon could come and tel him, that he did not rightly counterfet the person of Ʋlysses; for the Itha∣cans intent was, onely to beguile his foes: whereas what hee did, was to deceiue his friends: but he could not preuent him for all this, from beeing followed by the people; so great a commiserati∣on towards himselfe, & so wrath∣ful
an indignation towards his e∣nemies, had the viewe of those selfe-made hurts effected in the hearts of the vulgar: who, not discouering the depth of his des∣signes (nor yet considering with themselues, that the desire of Soueraignty and rule, is so great in the mindes of ambitious men, that they will not sticke to pur∣chase it at the highest rate the Heauens can holde it at) gaue sentence in his behalfe, accor∣ding to the apprehension they had of that bloodie obiect, which was before their eyes. And the reason heereof is not farre from hand. For Passions are certaine internall acts, and operations of our soule, which
beeing ioyned and linked in a most inviolable, and long-con∣tinued league of friendship with the sensitiue power, and facul∣tie thereof, doe conspire toge∣ther like disobedient and rebel∣lious Subiects, to shake off the yoake of Reason, and exempt themselues from her commaund & controlement, that they may still exercise those disordered motions, in this contract world of our frayle and humaine bo∣dies, which during her nonage or minoritie, they were accusto∣med to doe. And for the bet∣ter effecting heereof, they doe first of all (through the helpe of a corrupt imagination) set vp∣pon the Wit, and aftervvardes
vpon the Will, which harbouring in it selfe two diuers inclinati∣ons: the one to follow Reason as her Soueraigne; the other to content the Senses as her friends, is easilie brought (being by thē corrupted, & bribed with plea∣sure) intirely to loue the one, & vtterly to leaue and forsake the other: or at least, like a carelesse Magistrat (who, for the auoiding of som particular mens displea∣sure, neglects the good and pro∣fit of the Common-weale) to o∣mit that care, which as Gouernesse of the Soule, she is bound in du∣tie to haue ouer it: loathing to see the quietnes of her owne e∣state interrupted by the diuided factions, and tumultuous partia∣lities
of inferior ministers; espe∣cially when shee perceiues the soule to be partaker likewise of those benefits wherwith herselfe is fee'd, and vndermined, by the Passions. So that when our harts are once possest with any vehe∣ment affection, the Wit on the one side labours to find out rea∣sons presently, that may counte∣nance & grace it: and the Ima∣gination on the other side, like a deceitfull Counsellor, seeking to blinde the eyes of the Iudge, represents them to the Vnder∣standing in a most intensiue ma∣ner; and with more showe and appearance then they are in∣deede. Neither can the Soule (which by reason of her limitted
influence, cannot possibly at one & the same instant, impart suffi∣cient actiuity to 2. differing ope∣rations) exactly then cōsider the soundnesse of such arguments, as might stay the violence of her course in folowing the affectiōs: but like a weaker Prince, suffers herselfe (for quietnes sake) to be led away by the suggestions of such her followers. And hence it was that a certain Orator, with no smal aduantage to himself, as of∣ten as he was to pleade, would most earnestly entreate the Iud∣ges, that he might be first heard, but specially whē himself distru∣sted the soūdnes of his cause. For he knew ful well, that whē he had ended, their mindes would be so
busied in examining the weight and firmnesse of his reasons, that they could not possibly giue any diligent attention to the allega∣tions of his aduersary. Wherfore who-so-euer perceiueth those proofes and inducements that should maintaine his cause, to be wanting, let him settle himself to worke vpō the affections of such as are to further it. For, if he gain neuer so little footing heere, hee need not despair of any thing. It was a saying of a prince of Spar∣ta, that for a man to keep himself strictly to the rule of Justice, in matters which concern'd his friends, was but a colour, where∣with such as were vnwilling to doe for them, were content
to shadowe their inhumanitie: and therefore writing to Idrien, Prince of Caria, for the deliue∣rance of a certaine friend of his; If Nicias, saith he, haue not offen∣ded, deliuer him; if hee haue offen∣ded, deliuer him for my sake: but howsoeuer the matter goe, deliuer him. Brutus & Cassius contending one against the other for the Vr∣bane Praetorship, Caesar hauing heard their allegations, said vnto his friends; It is true, that the rea∣sons which are alledged by Cas∣sius are most iust: but Brutus ne∣uerthelesse must be preferd. So Brutus had the first place, and Cassius the second. Out of which exāples we may
easilie discerne, that Reason may giue out precepts, which Passion will not sticke to countermaund. For, Reason teacheth vs, that it is a poynt of ciuilitie, to continue alwaies stedfast, and faithfull to our friends; but with this cauti∣on, , not beyond the Altar, that is, no further then the rules of pietie and equitie vvill giue vs leaue: which, blinder Passion dooth not a whit regard. And this, Agesilaus knew ful wel, when beeing constrained one day to vnlodge somwhat in hast, & to leaue a certaine sick friend of his, who as hee was readie to depart, besought him that hee would not abandon and forsake him: O, quoth hee, returning
back, how difficult a thing is it, to loue, & to be wise, & both at once! Besides, it is the nature, and pro∣pertie of Passions, euen to make those thinges make with them, which (were not the eye of our Vnderstanding dimm'd, & obscu∣red, with such mistie humors as distill from thē) would otherwise peraduēture proue to be as rubs and lets, which would turne the by as of mens consent a cleane contrary way from our desires: and therfore they are not much amisse cōpared to a green glasse, which makes euery thing seeme of the same colour, that is seene thorough it. That fore-alledged Spartā being very much impor∣tun'd by his wife, to make her
brother Lysander, his Admirall for the seas, cōsidered with him∣self, that he had many Nobles of far more yeres, & greater expe∣rience then he; and that to invest him (beeing but a youth) with a charge so farre surmounting his sufficiencie, was to hazard at one cast, the flourishing estate of his whole kingdom: but in the end, after many long suspensions, and irresolute determinations, the vehemēt affection which he bore his Queene, commanded him to throw the dice, and to abide the chance. It is saide of Agrippina, that shee did so worke vpon the loue which Claudius bore her, that nondum vxor potentiâ vx∣oriâ vtebatur, beeing as yet
but onely affianced vnto him, she tooke vpon her the state and power of an Emperesse: but af∣terwards, whē she was thorough∣lie assured of her marriage, and that her thoughts had got a strō∣ger wing to soare withall, then did shee dare to motion a match between Octauia, Caesars daugh∣ter, and her owne sonne Domiti∣us, which (because her father had betroathed her to Silanus not long before) coulde not bee brought to passe without impie∣tie: but that did nothing discou∣rage her. For, nihil arduum vide∣batur (saith Tacitus) in animo principis, Lib. 12. 240. et 267. cui non iudiciū, non odi∣um inerat, nisi indita, et iussa: no difficultie could hinder her from
obtaining any thing at the hands of a Prince, that had ney∣ther life, nor soule, but what was breathed into him by her and hers. And hence it was, that Ʋitelli∣us, vayling his seruile flatteries vnder the name of Censor, was embold'ned to fasten vpon Sila∣nus, labouring by forged accusa∣tions to obscure his merit, and procure his ouerthrowe, which shortly after hee effected: Caesar beeing (as our Author saith) ac∣cipiendis aduersum generum suspi∣cionibus caritate filiae promptior; somwhat prone to entertain su∣spicions against his sonne in law, by reason of the charitable af∣fection which he bore his daugh∣ter.
And indeede the malignant aspect of any person in authority towards his inferiour, is thought a sufficiēt warrant for euery man to wrong him. And this is the reason, that in the courts of prin∣ces, few or none, after they once begin to slide, can recouer their footing, & keep themselues from falling finally. For, those Court-Parasites, that haue their eyes cō∣tinually fixed vppon the sky of their Soueraignes inclination, & make the sundry revolutions of his affections, the only heauen of their contēplation, do labor vp∣on the least distast that is offred, to procure an vtter dislike; that so they may come to be sharers in those offices & places of dig∣nitie,
which while they were gra∣cious in the sight of their Ma∣ster, were appropriated to none but them: verifying heerby that excellent saying of the Greekes; : when the tree begins once to fal, euery one hastēs to gather sticks. Wher¦fore let no man feare to be ouer∣bold in this case, but rest vndou∣tedly assured, that where Reason cannot preuaile, Affectiō wil. And therefore it is not without cause, that such as aspire to a crown, & scepter, do first of al (considering their want of right, that should authorize, and make lawful such a claime) endeuour (as the one∣lie meanes to vvinde themselues into the hearts of the people)
to seem religious, and vertuous; as Pepin did, who stryuing to put the house of Merouée from the throne of France, and to appro∣priate it wholly to him and his, did most infinitely honour, and most affectionatly imbrace, such as had any charge or office in the Church; knowing wel, that those which haue rule ouer the con∣science, are of great authoritie, and estimation among the rest. Secondly, they doe labor to per∣forme all offices of Loue, that may serue to shaddowe foorth in some apparant manner, a desire in them to further the publique good of the State and Common∣weale. And thus did Absalom, when to euery one that came to∣wards
him, he put out his hand, and tooke him & kissed him: wi∣shing withall, that he were once made Iudge in the Land, that such as had any suits, or contro∣versies, might come to him, that he might doe them Iustice. And thus likewise did those ancient Romane Captaines, who pow∣red out the wealthy treasures of whole kingdoms in excessiue donatiues, and prodigalities to∣wards their Souldiors; and that with no better intent, then to make sure such hopes & expec∣tations, as Ambition long before had nourished in their breastes, by the so-wonne ayde, and assi∣stance of their militarie & war∣like Legions. For indeede these
two actions are the only harbin∣gers that must lodge Perswasion in the bosome of a multitude. And therefore haue they alwaies been put in practise by the chiefe patron of wicked Policies, Sa∣than, the common and professed enemy of mankind. For, as con∣cerning the first, the Scripture doth assure vs, that he doth often times, the better to deceiue, trās∣forme himselfe into the glorious similitude of an Angel of light: & hence was it, that not without good advice, and iudgement of the Paynter, in some ancient im∣pressions of the Testament, hee was pictur'd out in the religious garment of a Monke; not to sig∣nifie that the life and conversa∣tion
of such Monasticall persons, was diabolicall; but to shewe, that this beeing the habit of ho∣linesse and pietie, there was not a more easie and certaine way for him to surpryze the consci∣ences of wel-meaning men, then it. And as concerning the se∣cond, experience hath taught vs, that al he aymes at, is to work an impression in our weaker minds, that whatsoeuer he seeketh to in∣duce vs to, is for the good, and benefit of mankinde: & therfore in his very first assault, wherein was successiuely included the vtter ruine and ouerthrow of vs all, he told our first parents, that Gods forbidding thē to eate of the tree of good & euil, procee∣ded
not frō any other groūd, thē frō an enuious fear he had of that happinesse and prosperity, which was like to redound to thē there∣by: and withall, hauing conside∣red with himselfe, that all thinges in the world, are said in som sort to seeke the highest, & to couet more or lesse the participation of GOD himselfe; but especially man, whom hee knew did foster in his breast these three desires; the one to liue alwaies, as GOD is eternall: the other, to rule all, as GOD is Lorde ouer all: the third, to knowe all, as GOD is wise aboue all: hee came like a cunning Rhetorician, whō prac∣tice, and long experience, hath taught how to aduantage him∣selfe,
by working vpon the knowne inclinations, and affecti∣ons of his Auditory, & layes be∣fore them a ful and perfect satis∣factiō in euery one. For, saith he, if once yee but taste of this for∣bidden fruit, nequaquā moriemi∣ni, ye shal neuer die; heere was a continued beeing: sed eritis sicut Dij, but yee shall be like Gods; heer was an absolute cōmaund: scientes bonum, et malum, vnder∣standing both good and euill; and heerein was comprehen∣ded a vniuersall, and boundlesse knowledge. Wherefore, he that can handle men aright in their affections, & knowes at what times, in what manner, and by what meanes
they may best be stirred vp, may rest assured, that before his mind be thoroughly knowne, he is al∣readie Maister of what his heart desireth. Of the force of Reason. THE third, and last meanes to ground beliefe in the minds of men, is out of probable coniectures to gather sufficient reasons, by force wher∣of, we may demonstrat the thing
which wee propound, to be ey∣ther actually, or at least appa∣rantly necessary, & convenient, and no waies repugnant to the rules and principles of iustice, or honestie. And these are so much availeable, that where there is neyther opinion, nor affection, but rather an obstinate, and selfe-will'd resolution in the hearer, to put backe all perswasions, they will enforce him notwithstand∣ing to alter his so-decreed deter∣mination, and to giue credit & approbation to what he heares. Witnes Caesar, who when he vn∣derstood that Cicero had taken vpon him to defende Ligarius, whom the vnhappinesse of the times had accus'd to haue borne
armes against him, and hauing not heard him of a long time before; What will it now annoy vs, said hee (by way of iesting) to certaine of his friends, if we goe and listen awhile to Cicero; for, as for Ligarius, he is by me already irrevocably condemn'd? But the pregnant reasons, and forci∣ble allegations of the Orator, did so wonderfully mooue him, that before he departed, mauger that prejudicat opinion where-with he came, hee was constrained to absolue him. And for a further confirmation heereof, I will produce that me∣morable apothegme of Thucy∣dides, who when Archidamus de∣maunded of him, which was the
better wrastler of him, or Peri∣cles, his aunswere was, that when he had cast him, he had so excel∣lent a tongue to deny it, that he made the standers by belieue he was not foyl'd, and perswaded them the contrary of what their eyes had seene. So that heere we may discouer an incongruitie cōmitted by M. Brutus, in the managing of State affaires; whē not considering the force of Eloquēce, but presuming vpon the good opinion his Citi∣zens had of him, & the great af∣fectiō they bore towards him, he permitted Anthony to performe the exequies of Caesar in such so∣lemn maner as he would himself. For, by this meanes, the hearts
of such as were so desperatlie bent, & inclyn'd to embrace his faction, that they would not at the first so much as lende an eare, no not vpon his entreaties, to the speeches of the other; vp∣on the hearing of his sunerall O∣ration, were on a suddaine vio∣lently carried a cleane contrary way. Such is the force of these Rhetoricall Enthymems, and In∣ductions; especially, when they be seconded by a liuely and de∣cent action: to which, Demosthe∣nes did attribute so much, that in desyning an Oration, hee sayd, the first & principall part therof, was action; the second, the same; and the third, no other. For, in an Orator, there is both an elo∣quence
of speech, and a decencie of action necessarily required. He must not onely ornatè dicere, sed etiam concinnè agere: the one cōsists in the fitnes of his words, and soundnes of his reasons; the other, in the variation of his voyce, and qualification of his gestures. So that when I consi∣der in how eminent a degree these two things did appeare in Cicero, I cannot so much admire (as otherwise I should) that nota∣ble speech of his, when beeing vehemently displeased with Mu∣natius (whō once his eloquence had patroniz'd in a most dange∣rous cause) for that he did eger∣lie follow the extreamitie of law against a certaine friende of his,
hee could not refraine from tel∣ling him, that it was not long of his innocēcie that he was last ab∣solv'd, but of the dust, which hee had cast into the eyes of his Iud∣ges, which hind'red them from discerning aright the qualitie of his misdeede. Aeschines after his banishment beeing arryu'd at Rhodes, in an Oration composed for the purpose, laid open to the people the cause of his exile: who wondering thervpon at the Athenians, that had banisht him so vndeseruedly; O (quoth hee) ye did not hear the forcible reasons by which Demosthenes coūterman∣ded mine: ascribing whollie the cause of his misfortune, to the e∣loquēce of his aduersary. Wher∣fore,
he did not greatly erre, that cōpared Rhetorick in an ill cause, to a dangerous weapon in a mad mans hand. It is an instrument which was at first invēted for the easier managing of an vnruly populace, & which is neuer im∣ploid in his right kind, but in the weake & crazie languishment of Estates. And indeed, if we do well consider, we shal find that it hath most flourished, where quietnes of gouernment hath been most impoverished, as in those Com∣mon-wealthes, where eyther the people, or the ignorant, or all, haue borne all the sway; as namelie, that of Athens, of Rhodes, of Rome, where al things did continuallie labour of a
dangerous Epilepsie. For, in bet∣ter established Gouernments, as those of Sparta, and of Crete, it was neuer had in any great ac∣count, or estimation. Nay, they would haue whipt him out of their dominions, that shold haue made profession of such a lying and deceitfull Art. But it is not my purpose, for the abuse of any thing, to con∣demne the vse of it: I will onely heerevpon aduertise him, that goeth about by Reasons to in∣duce Perswasion, to imitate heer∣in the practice of wise Physicians, who apply the same Medicines to the same Maladies; but with particular respect, & considera∣tion of the constitution of the
Patient. For, the learned, and the ignorant, are not to be handled both alike. Popular allegations they pryze not, and deeper de∣monstrations these pearce not. Wherefore, hee must labour to finde out a meane, by which hee may deliuer deepe reasons per∣spicuously, and plausible perswa∣sions sharply; that by the plain∣nesse of the one, & the acuteness of the other, he may yeeld a full and perfect satisfaction to them both. And for the better per∣formance heerof, I will refer him to a diligent survey of such To∣picall heads, and Common-pla∣ces, as are by Orators accoun∣ted to be the arcenalls, & store∣houses of perswasiue prouision;
from whence, as neede requires, they draw those solide amplifi∣cations, which lend a maiestical, and glorious luster to their rea∣sons: for, beeing nakedly deli∣uer'd, the motion they produce is eyther weake, or none at all. So that where there is neyther opinion, nor affection to pur∣chase credit, wee must seriouslie endeuour to find out reasons, & inductions that may serue the turne, and know, that it will bee no small furtherance to our in∣tention, if either by the represen∣tation of any visible obiect, or by some preceding extraordinarie action, that carrieth engrauen in the very front of it, the honourd characters of loue & loyalty: we
can strengthen our own perswa∣sion, and worke an alteration in the hearers passion. An example of the former wee haue in Cato: who perceiuing that the Rom did neglect, & contemne the forces of the Carthaginians, because they were somwhat remote, and far distant from them, whervpon som incōvenience might happily haue redounded to the Cōmon∣welth, shewed thē presētly green figges, which at that instant were brought frō thence, wherby they conceived, that the country was not so far as they imagin'd: for o∣therwise the figs would haue bin dried, or corrupted; & thervpon altered their opinion, & became more respectiue. Of the latter,
in Seianus: who hauing very pro∣digally ventur'd his owne safety for the preseruing of Caesars, and that in a most dangerous, and di∣sastrous accident, where sad De∣struction seem'd to haue enlar∣ged her throat, for the speedier deuouring of them, got this ad∣uantage thereby, that as Tacitus saith, quanquam exitiosa suaderet, vt non sui anxius, cū side audieba∣tur: when his so-dooing, perad∣venture was grounded vpon no better consideration, then the minoritie of his ambitious pur∣poses. But (for a finall cōclusion of this discourse) let Delphidius assure himselfe, that if reasons, & arguments bee altogether wan∣ting, it wil little availe him to ac∣cuse
Numerius; and afterwards, feeling himselfe sorely trauailed for want of proofes, & witnesses to cōvince him, to cry out in the vehemencie of his distemper'd passion, Ecquis erit nocens, floren∣tissime Caesar, si negare sufficiet? will any man bee found guiltie, when to deny the fault, may be sufficient to absolue him? For, Julian, out of the serener calm∣nes of his more setled iudgemēt, will presently reply: Ecquis erit innocens, si accusare sufficiet? will any man bee founde guiltlesse, when to accuse him, may be sufficient to con∣demne him?
Of Prayses. THE loue of Prayse, though it be a vice, yet because that by meanes of it, far greater vices are suppressed, hath alwaies (of the better sort of iudge∣ments) been honoured, and re∣spected as a Ʋertue: the contēpt whereof, was made an argument to cōvince Tiberius, of contem∣ning likewise those heroical and princely actions, whereby men
are ledde through many difficult & dangerous passages, in a most eager and violent pursuit there∣of. Contemptu famae contemni vir∣tutes, saith Tacit. Optimi. n. qui{que} mortalium altissima cupiunt. And indeed, if we but cast an eye a lit∣tle on the Romans, we shall find that the onely thing which made men thinke, that some extraordi∣narie Genius did cōtinually wait, & attend vpon al their attempts, raysing the valour of euery par∣ticular, and individuall person a∣mongst them, to a farre higher pitch, then humane weaknes was euer thought possible to attaine vnto, was only an vnsatiable de∣sire, to leaue behind them a pro∣sperous remembrance of their
name, from the effecting wherof, not death it selfe (had hee neuer so fearfully disguis'd his counte∣nance) could euer haue deterr'd them. Witnesse that vndaunted Curtius: who when the Oracle had commaunded some one to be cast head-long into that open pit, which seem'd to threaten ru∣ine, and desolation to them all, as an attonemēt, that might alay the incensed fury of the Gods to∣wards the people; arm'd himself presently, & with such a fearlesse and constant resolution, hied him to the place, as if vpon his very first approach he had inten∣ded to tryumph ouer Death, & giue Destruction the ouerthrow. So Brutus, when for the good and
preseruation of his Country (a∣gainst the liberty whereof, his sons, as men wholly possest with dislike, and discontentment at thinges present, did vnderhand oppose themselues) hee was to be not only a Spectator, but an Actor likewise in their tragicke fall, could not choose but feele himselfe sorely shaken, with the furious & violent incounters of divided Passions: Popular applause distracting him on the one side, and Fatherly affection on the o∣ther. But this in the end (like too weake an enemy to confront so great an adversary) was cōstrai∣ned to forsake the fielde, and to resigne the honour and glorie of the victorie to vs.
Vicit amor patriae, laudís{que} immensa cupido. But, not to stand vpon particu∣lars, the whole Nation in gene∣rall was so transported with this appetite of Praise, that all other irregularities whatsoeuer, did as it were lie buried in this one. Wherefore, (I thinke) there is no readier way to breede a wil∣lingnesse in the minds of vnriper youth, whereby to make them seriouslie addicted to embrace the harsher rudiments of Vertue, that afterwards they may attaine to a more essentiall knowledge in the managing, & performance of honorable imploiments, then to enflame their tender bosoms with a desire of Commendation;
which is in euery generous, and ingenious disposition, the onely spurre to any vertuous action. Compertum ego habeo (saide Cati∣line to his souldiors) verba vir∣tutem non addere, ne{que} ex ignauo strenuum, ne{que} fortē ex timido ex∣ercitum oratione Imperatoris fie∣ri. No, no (saith hee) quemne{que} gloria, ne{que} pericula excitant, ne∣quicquam hortere. By vertue of which words, hee did inspire thē with such a valiant resolution, that after the vnfortunate euent of warre had bereft them of their General, it was wonderful to see the invincible courage, which had spred it selfe through euerie particular branch of his whole Armie. For, as Sallust wrytes, quē
quis{que} vivus pugnando locum ce∣perat, eū amissâ animâ corpore te∣gebat: looke what place euerie one had taken to fight in whilst he was aliue, the same did he co∣ver with his body after hee was dead: leauing behinde them an example, wherevpon posteritie might ground the memorable saying of that woorthy Martialist Consalvo, who whē his Captaines advised him (by reason of the weaknes of his forces) to turne back to Capua, did vtterly repell their counsaile, as preiudiciall to the honour and reputation of a Souldior; telling them, if the true spirit of Magnanimitie had har∣bour'd in their bosoms, they wold haue desired rather to haue
had their graues digged pre∣sentlie a foote further, then by re∣tyring, to haue prolongd their liues a hundred yeeres. The fore-alledged Historian, speaking of the ancient flourish∣ing estate of Rome, before such time as the dissolute excesse, and effeminate nycenesse of corrup∣ter age, had (like a Canker) ea∣ten into the very marrow of her, and through a vicious in-bred habit and disposition, alt'red the sweete complexion of her coun∣tenaunce, ranks this desire of prayse amongst the chiefest causes of her transcendent hap∣pinesse. Her Children (saith hee) were laudis auidi, full of thrift in husbanding their honor;
but pecuniae liberales, very prodi∣gall in spending of their wealth: gloriae maximum certamen inter ipsos erat; Glory was the onelie subiect of all their differences & contentions. Laudatas of∣tendit avu Iu∣nonia pennas: Si tacitus spect∣es, illa recondit opes. Sic se quis{que} hostem ferire, murum ascendere, conspici, dum tale facinus faceret, propera∣bat: which I cannot thinke pro∣ceeded so much from vanitie, as from a desire to publish & make known their sufficiencie, that af∣terwards for the good of their Country, they might be call'd to offices of a higher nature. A certaine Laconien at the feast of Olympike-games, beeing of∣fred a great sum of mony, not to present himselfe to combat, would by no meanes be perswa∣ded
to accept it. And in the end, beeing demaunded of one, what the praise which with such labor, and sweat he had purchast, could auaile him; his aunswere was in smyling manner, that he should fight for it in battaile before the King. Eò labor, et periculum à ple∣risque impēditur, vnde bonos, et e∣molumentū speratur, saith Liuie. And indeede, if wee suffer our Senses to be guided a little by Obseruation, we shall easilie per∣ceiue, that in those Camps, where Prayse and Honour haue been ioyn'd patent with Exercise, for the training vp of youth in arms, there hath not been a priuat sol∣dier, but when occasion hath brought him on the scene to bide
some tryall of his proficiencie, hath beene thought woorthy, by reason of his Martiall carriage and aspect, to haue the leading, & conducting of an army. Wit∣nes the Ottomans: who by taking notice of euery extraordinarie action, performed by the least, & meanest in their troopes, haue so enflamed the courage of their Musulmans, that now the sound∣ding of a Trumpet amongst thē, is but to foretell the erecting of a Trophie; & the striking vp of a Drumme, is as a passing-bell to giue warning, of the approching ruine and subversion of a King∣dome. And, by this meanes haue they marcht (like tryumphant Con∣querors)
ouer the bellies of the most victorious Nations; ma∣king (as they passe along) the wretched carkases of slaughte∣red Christians, litter for their ambitious and aspyring pride to trample on. Peuertie, with them is not made an argumēt of base∣nesse and pusillanimitie, nor thought a let or impediment, to hinder Desert from any place of eminencie. It is no principle in their Philosophie, to measure Vertue by the ell of Fortune, or to respect her the lesse, for ha∣uing bin trayn'd vp in a homelie cottage. No, the greatest among them, will think it no detraction frō their reputation, to com, whē, or whersoeuer, the starre of merit
shal appear within the compasse of their Hemisphere, & offer pre∣sents of great value to her deer∣deere Infants, lay they in a Man∣ger. And heerein may their practice serue like a seuerer Cen∣sor, to condemne vs of high trea∣son against her glorious and im∣periall Maiestie; and summoning the blood into our faces, make vs ashamed of our erroneous, and senselesse follie, qui omnia prae diuitijs humana spernimus, nec honori magno locum, nec virtuti putamus esse, nisi effusae affluant opes: that iudge of her greatnes by outward circumstances; thin∣king it a thing impossible, that such a puissant, & mighty Prin∣cesse, should abase herselfe so
farre, as to vouchsafe to lodge within the inclosure of a smokie roofe, or vaile her glory vnder the thred-bare habit of misera∣ble, and wretched Want. But for all this, the goodnes of such pro∣ceedings, makes me not so farre delighted with those barbarous, and hellish infidels, as that I shold erect a Tabernacle, with an in∣tent to dwell in a continuall me∣ditation of their vertuous dispo∣sition in this kind: and therefore I will now passe them ouer, and come to other Considerations of more weight, and moment in this discourse. The first whereof is, whom we prayse; the second, to whom; the third, for what; the fourth and
last, is the end Why. In the first, men are very likely to erre, by too easily granting out their commendatory Letters; making them the escorte and guide, to bring a man vpon some future hopes, into the loue, and fauour of a third. Heerin therfore ought euery one to be very circūspect: for, if the merit of the party, doe not in some sort answer the rela∣tion that is made of him, it is al∣waies so much out of the Wry∣ters reputation. Qualē cōmendes, etiā, at{que} etiā aspice; ne mox Incutiant aliena tibipeccata pudorem. Polyperchon, hauing entertaind a fellow for the report Xenocra∣tes gaue of him, and finding af∣terwards by his actions, that hee
did no way deserue it, writ to him, that thence-forwarde hee should be more diligent in exa∣mining the worth and value of a man, before hee did commend him. But, because the hearts of men are to him onely knowne, who is the searcher of all hearts, and who alone could testifie of Nathanael with such certainty as he did, that hee was an Jsraelite, in whom there was no guile, and that the rules of pietie com∣maunde vs to conceiue of their inward disposition, by their out∣ward conversation, that is, by coniectures of charity, and not by demonstrations of know∣ledge; our iudgements may be easily mistaken in them:
Fallimur, et quondam non dignū tradimus.— And therefore the verse follow∣ing may serue heere for a pre∣cept: Quem sua culpa premet, deceptus omitte tueri. For he that takes vpon him the patronage of any man in this case, hee makes himselfe an ac∣cessary to the cryme. But for the better auoyding of all these in∣conveniences, it is good in mat∣ters of this nature, to make vse of that restraint of Plato, who writing to Dionysius the Tyrant, in the behalfe of Helicon the Ci∣zicenien; & fearing least he shold attribute too much to his words, limited his beliefe with this cau∣tion, that what he writ, hee writ,
: of a creature, who by nature was the very obiect of change. And in∣deede man is a Tree, the fruite whereof is neuer rype but in the latter season: his nature cannot easily be discerned while it is in greene: vve must see the floure, & the fruit of it. His first actions lightly neuer issue forth, but sha∣dowed with the beautious mask of formall dissimulation: & such a one enters into the Popedom, as common rumor did report of Boniface, like a Fox, that raignes in it like a Lyon, and goes out of it like a Dogge. Il dì loda la sera, saith the Italian; It is the eue∣ning must commend the day: & the life of man must be censured
by his end. There are som which now resolue with themselues to put on the grauitie of Cato; but presently show thēselues in pub∣lick, apparelled with the disso∣lute lightnesse of Vatinius. One while Curius is not austere e∣nough for them, Fabricius not poore inough, Tubero not sparing and thrifty enough: yet by & by they wil not stick to prouoke Li∣cinius with their riches, Apicius with their riots, Mecaenas with their dainties: so great and diffi∣cult a thing is it, vnū hominē age∣re, to measure out this earthlie course of ours, with one, and the same pase. No: there are fewe in this corrupted age, that are not somwhat tainted with the humor
of that fantastical Musician, who, as the Poet writes of him, — saepè velut qui Currebat fugiens hostē: saepè velut qui Iunonis sacra ferret: habebat saepè ducentos, Saepè decē servos; modò, reges, at{que} tetrarchas, Omnia magna loquens: modò, sit mihi mensa tripes, & Cōcha salis puri, et toga, quae defendere frigus Quamvis crassa queat: — Whē not∣withstanding this his outward profession of frugalitie, — decies cent ena dedisses Huic parco, paucis contento, quin{que} diebus Nilerat in loculis: noctes vigilabat ad ipsum Manè: diem totū stertebat: nil fuit vnquam Sic impar sibi. — Yea, there is not one, of whom that may bee truly saide, which the Spirit of all truth ob∣serued to be true in Helcana, Sa∣muels Father; who, for that hee suffered not himselfe to be car∣ried away with any such humo∣rous fluctuatiō, but remained cō∣tinually firme vpon his square,
and vnshaken, was saide to be v∣nus vir, one and the selfe same man alwaies, what sinister acci∣dents soeuer did befall him. And therfore let not him that is care∣full of his credit, launch too farre out into the prayses of any man, but keepe neere vnto the shore, & on the lee-side of such vnfor∣tunate euents as may any wayes endanger it: let him not be too forward in superlatiues; but so commend good men, as hee may still reserue a caueat for their er∣rours. The second consideration that wee are to haue in matters of Praises, is, to whom. Many men (what by reason of the weaknes of their iudgements, somewhat
tainted with Selfe-conceit, or the greatnesse of their Spirits, not principled peradventure with such sounde instructions as they ought to be) are so tender, and iealous of their own reputation, that whatsoeuer they hear attri∣buted to the worth, and merit of another, is presently taken by them, as derogated from their owne. And hence it is, that to commend a man for any speciall vertue, or eminencie that is in him, either to his superior, or his equall, is to make him oftentimes suspected of the one, enuyed of the other, and himselfe that doth it, hated of both. Solyman the great, hauing heard the acclamations, and cryes of
ioy, which by a generall consent of the whole Campe, were giuen to Mustapha his sonne, at his re∣turn from Persia, grew so enrag'd thereat, that after hee had most sauagely strangled him in his in∣ner chamber, he caused his dead bodie to bee cast out to the view of his whole Army: proclaiming withall, that as there was but one God in heauen; so was there but one Sultan vpon earth. Nor was the massacre of this his warlike sonne the period of his furie. He likewise exercised this his inhu∣mane and beastlie crueltie vpon Sultan Gobé, his second Sonne, for bewayling onely the fatall and vntimely miscarriage of his brother: and vpon Sultan Me∣hemet,
his third, because he fled for feare; construing these their actions, by no better rules, then his owne disordinate and crimi∣nall affections, to be most sensi∣ble reproouers of that his bar∣barous, and vnnaturall inhuma∣nitie: So little could he brooke a sharer with him-selfe, in the glorie of his so great an Em∣pyre. But (alas!) he is not the only man, that hath bin subiect to the commaunde of such irregular, & confused Passions. Many haue deserued to bee parallell'd with him in the like kinde. For, how∣so-euer they made not so o∣pen a profession of tyrannie as hee, but like cunning Paynters,
could so shadow their malicious proceedings, as that they neuer came abroad in their owne like∣nes, but apparrell'd with the out∣ward habit of Law & Justice; yet can they not be altogether freed frō the deepe-wounding stroke of such deserued imputations. I coulde instance the truth of this assertion vpon many: but, for breuitie sake, I purpose to omit them, & come to Tiberius; who, vnderstanding that the Senate was minded to grace the remē∣brance of his Mother, with fresh additions of honourable titles, endeuors by wise pretexts to al∣ter their so decree'd determina∣tion: tells them they must ob∣serue a moderation, in graunting
any speciall preheminences, or prerogatiues to women: him∣selfe wold expresse the like tem∣perancie, in qualifying those that should be attributed to him. But, what-soeuer hee pretended in words, it is manifest, that this his outwardly professed modestie, proceeded from no better grounde, then from an enuious distaste he had of her aduaunce∣ment. And therefore (as Tacitus reports) he would not so much as assigne her one lictor, Mulie∣bre fastigiū in diminutionē sui ac∣cipiens: thinking with himselfe, that vnlesse hee topt the spred∣ding branches of her glory, they could not choose but fall out to be very hurtfull and preiudiciall,
by their ouershaddowing great∣nesse, to the prosperous & flou∣rishing vprising of his owne. A∣lexander will at no hand admit of any more then one onely Sunne: and whosoeuer shall presume to parallel his atchiuements (were it with the valorous attempts of his Father) shall hardly free him∣self from being made the tragick subiect of his incēsed furie. Prin∣ces cannot brooke, that eyther their Vertues, or their Fortunes, should admit comparison. As they haue the start of all men in the one: so loue they not to bee out-stript by any in the other. Such as are beneath thē in estate, and bounde by reason of their birth to acknowledge (as infe∣riour
homagers) a dependencie vpon their greatnesse, must (in their presence) esteeme of them∣selues, how qualified soeuer, but euen as bare and naked Cyphers. Thēselues alone will be thought the Numbers, that giue a sub∣stantiall existence to the being of them all. Dionysius, because hee coulde not equall Philoxenus in Poetrie, nor Plato in discourse, condemned the one to the Gal∣lyes, and sent the other to bee solde for a slaue in the Island of Aegina. And hence was it, that Brisson, running a match with A∣lexander, was willing (instructed peradventure by the like ex∣amples) somewhat to conceale, and obscure his owne abilitie
in the course: knowing (as it is indeed) that as to be permitted to contende in any thing with a Prince, is glorious; so to doe it with that obstinacie, as not to giue ouer without victorie, is ve∣rie dangerous. Favorinus there∣fore, the Philosopher, had rea∣son, when his friends vpbraided him, for yielding himselfe van∣quisht by Adriā the Emperor, in a cōtroversie which was betwixt them, about the interpretation of a worde, to fashion them this reply: What, said he, would you that I should seeme to bee more learned then hee who is Com∣maunder ouer thirtie legions? Augustus writ verses against A∣sinius Pollio, & I, saith Pollio, hold
my peace. It is no wisedom for a man to show himselfe a Scribe against him, who (if he once be nere so little mooued) can easily proscribe. And from this consi∣deration, grew that witty saying of Carneades, that the children of Princes, neuer learnt any thing so well, as the managing of hor∣ses. For, in all other exercises they tooke in hand, euery man was content to disable himself to hearten them: but a horse, that was neither Courtier, nor flatte∣rer, threw the heyre apparant of a kingdome, with as little respect as he would the sonne of a Cob∣ler. Wherefore euery man (as well for his owne securitie, as his friends safetie) must bee very
nyce in commenting vppon his woorthinesse, in the hearing of a∣ny soueraigne authoritie. Regibus (saith Sallust) boni, quàm mali suspectiores sunt; sem∣per{que} his aliena virtus formidolo∣sa est. The goodnesse of a subiect, giues Princes oftentimes occa∣sion to suspect; and his vertue doth but furnish them with mat∣ter of feare. Yea, the like respect must not be altogether neglec∣ted, in relating it, though but be∣fore their equalls, and such, as in the neerest degrees of consan∣guinity, may seeme allyed vnto him. For, oftētimes there is dan∣ger euen in those: for proofe whereof, I wil produce one one∣ly accident, which not long since
happened betweene two bre∣thren of Ferrara. The one was the Cardinall Hippolitus da Este, who fell extreamely in loue with a neere kinswoman of his owne: and perceiuing that shee with no lesse affection doted likewise on Don Giulio, his naturall brother, whom very often, euē vnto him, out of the vehemencie of her Passion, shee would commende for the best-deseruing gentlemā that Italie then affoorded, extol∣ling (among many other extra∣ordinary parts wherwith Nature had sufficiently inricht him both in body and mind) the beautie, and fairenesse of his eyes, vvhich shee protested to the Cardi∣nall, vvere the principall, and
chiefe Solicitors of her affections towards him: Heereat he grew presently so much enraged, that hauing waited his time, and opportunitie, one day as Giulio was a-hunting, most inhumane∣lie he depriued him of thē both; glutting the violēce of his beast∣lie furie, with the ruinous defa∣cing of those parts, which were the main disturbers of his hopes: A tragedie fit to be recorded, as well in regarde of the person by whom it was acted, as in regarde of the thing that occasioned the action. Which may serue vs like∣wise, for a precedent whereon to grounde this Caution; that it is not good to commend any man, so, as that the hearer may thinke
himselfe any kinde of way disa∣bled therby. And therfore, it will not be amisse for wiser men, so to qualifie the approbation of their friends deserts, as that they may not seem, either by their inward passion, or their outward words, to insinuate an impossibilitie to the stāders-by, of euer matching their so eminent perfections, or to vpbraid them with a defectiue want of such good parts, as they confidently giue out to bee so excellent in them: for this is but to expose himselfe to danger, & his friend to envie. L. Quintius, surnamed Cincin∣natus, when he tooke vpon him to plead for his sonne Cęso (who by carrying himselfe as a profes∣sed
enemy to popular procee∣dings, had incurr'd the hatred, and displeasure of the Tribunes, and thereby so endangered his life, as that nothing was left him but the very bare chance of the dyce to saue it) knew that to al∣leage his worthinesse, & knowne deseruing, as other his friends had done, was not the way to se∣cure him from their malice; but a meanes rather to set an edge vpon that envious dislike, which so apparātly threatned his vtter ouerthrowe. And therefore, di∣rected (as it were) by a better discerning wisdom then the rest, hee chooseth out a path (for the safetie of his Sonne) directlie contrarie to that which they had
trode: omits the recitall of his merites, as thinges not fitting to bee seene of a distempered sight; acknowledgeth a faulte; and in that regarde, with great instancie, desires the people (in humble and submissiue tearmes) to beare with the weakenesse of his yeeres, and not to vrge the forfeiture of his vnadvised er∣rour. And indeede, it is farre bet∣ter some-times to confesse our selues tainted vvith such impu∣tations, as (beeing vndeserued∣lie cast vppon vs) cannot great∣lie blemish our reputation, then (by standing obstinatelie vp∣pon tearmes of innocencie) to contende with Greatnesse; who
would willingly enough (per∣haps) in colder bloode, admit a reconcilement, so it might not seeme to proceede from any di∣versitie or alteration of opinion in themselues. The third consideration is, for what. Nō omnis fert omnia tellus: euery ground is not fit for euery seede; no more is euery man for euery action. The powerfull hand of irreprooueable wisdom, hath divided our sufficiencie in∣to little portions; so that he who is excellent in the leading of a Company, may happely prooue vnsufficient in the guiding and conducting of an Armie: which Saturninus did not sticke to in∣stance on himselfe, when those
which were his equalls in the warres, were minded to invest him with that absolute cōmand. Wherfore, whosoeuer he be, that out of desert (as it were) shall seeme to challenge a speciall ap∣probation of his own dexterity beyond all men, in the right per∣formance of all things, hee doth but manifest his ouerweening weaknesse in presumptuous ar∣rogancie; and what-ere hee be, that shall yeeld to him heerin, his vnwoorthy basenesse in seruile flatterie. The heathen thought it a thing impossible, that any one Deitie should be of power so infinite, as to be able of it selfe, to swaye the rule, and gouernment of this
whole Vniuerse: and therefore did they seeke out Gods of an inferiour nature, on whom (as vppon ministring Spirits) Ju∣piter, the Superiour of the Co∣vent, might in some sort vn∣burthen him-selfe of so great a care; allotting to euery one of them (according to their seue∣rall endowments) a speciall charge. And heer-hence it came, that one was surnamed ENYALIOS; another, MANTOOS; a third, KERDOOS; and that Ʋenus had her soueraignty allotted her in Nuptiall-chambers, rather then in Martiall-tents: as bee∣ing a thing altogether vnde∣cent, that one of her compo∣sition,
should any way intermed∣dle with Armes. But, that vvee may descend a∣gaine a little lower, to creatures of our ovvne moulde; doe wee not plainlie see, that in the dis∣pensation of spirituall gifts, there is so great a difference, and varietie, that hee who hath the spirit of wisedom, may want the vtterance of knowledge? he that hath fayth, may be altoge∣ther destitute of the power to worke miracles? and hee that is endued with diuers tongues, may bee thoroughlie vnfur∣nisht of the meanes to inter∣pret them? The reason wherof, is deliuered
by the mouth of Truth, in the 12. of the first to the Corinthians, to be only this, viz. that there might bee amongst vs a necessary vse one of another; and that like so many seuerall members, wee might serue for the comforting, and building vp of one and the same bodie. Moses, howsoeuer he excelled in all the learning of the Egyptians, yet because him∣selfe was not an Aaron, that could vtter things; nor a Iethro, that could order them in such manner as was requisite; hee was faine to craue the assistance of the one, and willingly follow the directions of the other. There is the like diuersitie in the distribu∣tion of such gifts as are vsuallie
tearmed naturall: so that he who is swiftest in running, is not al∣waies the nimblest in wrestling. Castor gaudet equis; ovo progna∣tus eodem, pugnis. Euery man hath his speciall talent giuen him frō aboue; and ought therefore to endeuor, as much as in him lyes, to beautifie, & adorne that Spar∣ta which is befalne him. For, whosoeuer shal attempt further, hee shall but manifest his weake∣nesse, and reape deserued laugh∣ter for his recompence. Antony, angling one day in the presence of Cleopatra, grewe discontent because hee caught not any thing: but she, percei∣uing it, willed him (in smyling manner) to lay-by the lyne, as
fitter for the Egyptians to han∣dle, then for him, whose handes were better taught how to sub∣due whole Countries, and con∣quer Kingdoms, then how to manage so mean an instrument. Hence is it, that to giue out confidently of any man, & with∣out exception, that he is skilfull in many things, is but secretly to insinuate, that hee is eminent in none. Mans iudgement and ca∣pacitie, is bounded with verie strict limits. And it is a prouerbe no lesse true then ancient, that he which grypes at most, doth al∣waies lightly fasten vppon least. Wherfore, what-ere hee be, that desires to advantage his friende by any commendations, let him
instance his speeches alwaies on particulars: besides, let him haue regard to the qualitie of his per∣son. Philip, hearing his sonne A∣lexander sing wonderfull well at a certaine banquet, wherevnto himselfe was invited, did not stick to vpbraid him with his ex∣cellencie therein; asking him, if hee were not ashamed to be so skilfull in a facultie, which was so farre belowe him: thinking, it should seeme, that the following of such things, as were no lesse ful of vanity, then voyde of pro∣fit, might argue a neglect of ho∣nourable enterprizes; and so fal out to be preiudiciall to his thē∣growing reputation, rather then otherwise.
And indeede Prayses are no way gracefull, vnlesse they be presen∣ted with the troupe, and in the traine of such as are proper vn∣to vs. It is a kinde of scorne and indignitie, to pryze a man by such abilities, as holde not some decent correspondencie with his ranke; as likewise by such as ought not to be the chiefe and principall in him. And this, De∣mosthenes knew full well: who ha∣uing alwaies been a professed e∣nemie to the fore-saide Philip, King of Macedon, & hearing that Aeschines and Philocrates highlie commended him for that he was well-spoken, faire of counte∣naunce, & could with ease swal∣low downe the largest cups, did
not sticke to retort their spee∣ches backe, to his disgrace; tel∣ling them, that none of all those qualities, were any way besee∣ming the person of a prince. For, the one was rather the propertie of an Advocate; the other, of a Woman; & the third, of a Sponge. So that prayses, vnlesse they be somwhat sutable to the estate, & condition of the partie whō wee praise, they may prooue to be burthensome vnto him, rather then otherwise; and therefore, due consideration must be had of those things, for which we goe about to commend such as wee affect, before we doe apply thē; though of themselues, and with∣out extrinsecall relation, they be
neuer so laudable. For, that which is a beautie in one face, (the right proportion of linea∣ments well considered) may be a blemish in another. The fourth and last considera∣tion, is the end Why. Mens acti∣ons can not well be construed by a better rule, then by the scope whereat they ayme. The first apparances of thinges are very dangerous, and deceitfull: and therefore, out of them it is im∣possible to extract a setled iudg∣ment of their sequel. The end a∣lone is that, which must intitle them by the attribute of good, or euill. VVherefore, howsoeuer wee are bounde to giue our neighbours proceedings a cha∣ritable
interpretation; yet in those thinges, which may some∣what neerelie concerne our selues, and vvherein wee dis∣couer not the drift of their des∣signes, a wise distrust, and slowe∣nesse of beliefe, is not prohibi∣ted. They are the sinewes of wis∣dome: and whosoeuer is so nyce and scrupulous, as to refuse the benefit of them in this case, is no way to be pittied, if at length he reape the fruite of his superstici∣ous follie. Many there are, that haue hony in their mouthes, but wormwood in their hearts; and like vnto our Ower-men, looke one way, and row another: which, Alfonso king
of Naples, very wisely discoue∣red in a certaine Gentleman, that was a follower of his Court. For, hauing one day (with no bet∣ter intent, thē to make the smoo∣ther passage for his calumnious detractions) exceedingly com∣mended vnto him the worth, & good deseruing of one, whom he hated euen vnto death; Surelie, said the King to those that were about him, this fellow goes a∣bout to lay some snare wherein to entrap his enemy. And heer∣in was hee nothing deceiued: for, shortly after (when by rea∣son of his former commendati∣ons, hee thought his speeches might pass without suspicion ei∣ther of enuie or malice) he came
vnto him with a contrary note. Wherefore, it behooues euerie man to stande warily vpon his guarde; as well for other mens good, as for his owne. Fronti nul∣la fides. Harpies haue Virgins faces, but Vultures talents: and the Hyaena, though it looke like a friend, deuoures like a foe. This world is a Theater, wherein no∣thing is represented vnto vs, but in a personated fashion. Looke into Epeus horse; and whatsoe∣uer the outside promise, you shall find in the bowels of it, the destruction of Troy. It may well argue a generous spirit, but with all, a want of iudgement in anie man, that on the suddaine shall repose much trust, & confidence
in a reconciled friendship. The Lyon is a Lyon, though he shrink vp his clawes: & there be many, who (notwithstanding they pre∣tend a sincerenesse of loue, Eccle. 13. and affection, in all their dooings) want not a wil to conceiue a mis∣chiefe, if they had means, & op∣portunitie to effect it. Tacitus, making a briefe recapitulatiō of those causes, which brought A∣gricola into disgrace with Domi∣tian, among others, rankes these kind of persons, as the chiefe. Causa periculi, saith he, non crimē vllū, aut querela laesi cuiusquā: sed gloria viri; ac pessimū inimicorum genus, laudantes. That which en∣dangered him, was not any crime in himselfe, or complaint in o∣thers:
but the greatnesse of his worth; and (the most dangerous kinde of enemies) those that cō∣mended him. And indeed, in the courts of Tyrants (where, as Ta∣citus reports, honores pro crimine, honorable atchiuements are ac∣counted capitall offences; et ob virtutes certissimum exitium, and Vertue is rewarded but vvith sure destruction) there needeth nothing to procure the downe∣fall of a hated enemy, but a cunning applauding of his once suspected merits. In vita Agric. Sinistra illic erga eminentes interpretatio; nec minus periculum ex magnâ fa∣mâ, quàm ex malâ. It is the na∣ture of those inhumane Cani∣balls, to growe iealous of such
abilities as are reported to be so excellent in others; and wherof they find so great a want, and de∣fect in themselues. Their owne vicious disposition, makes them apt, and prone enough to inter∣pret the nature, and qualitie of mens desires, by the greatnes of their deserts. Hence was it that Tigellinus, a man renowmed vnder the go∣uernment of Nero for diuelish practices, Annal. lib. 14. that hee might with more ease, and lesse suspicion, ef∣fect the ouerthrow both of Plau∣tus and Sylla, began (as our hi∣storian saith) metum principis ri∣mari, to search the feares, & iea∣lousies of his Soueraigne: which after hee had once found out, he
did so cunningly worke vppon them, that with commēding vn∣to him their Nobilitie, together with their sufficiency, he brought him shortly after, to be the bloo∣die actor of that vnhappy Tra∣gedie, whereof himselfe had bin the accursed author. But Princes are not alwaies to be burthened with the disastrous euēts of such proceedings. They doe but as weaker Patients, who by the counsaile, and advise of their Physician, doe swallowe often∣times a deadly poyson, in stead of a wholsome drug: themselues beeing altogether vnable to dis∣couer the deceit, when arte and skill hath cunninglie disguised it. In fenny regions, saith Varro, 1. Dere Rust. 15.
there are certain creatures bred, of quantitie so small, that no eye can possibly discerne thē; which beeing drawn with the very ayre thorough the nostrils, into the braine, and through the mouth, into the body, are afterwards the cause of many dāgerous dis∣eases. Thus, in the head of an I∣talian (as Holerius writes) was engendred a Scorpion, Cap. 1. Praxis Medic: & that by his often smelling to the herbe Basile. For euen so likewise may those little Atomies be snuft vp with the ayre. No maruaile then if, with the prayses of an ill-af∣fected minde, there steale into the eares of Princes, that which may poyson, and corrupt their iudgement, mouing their fancies
to a causelesse iealousie of the partie praysed. All men are prone to belieue those things, that cary any showe with them of securing, either thē∣selues, or their estates; as likewise to distrust the cōtrary. And how∣soeuer a Caesar, or a Guisard, who neuer vnderstoode the meaning of that worde Feare (out of the height of their vndaunted cou∣rage) might in a carelesse maner seeme to neglect the true relati∣ons of intended treacheries, or (scorning as it were a strict en∣quirie) confront them only with an invincible spirit, & say, On n'o∣seroit, they dare not attempt it: yet where wisdome is vs'd as an ingredient to qualify that, which
exceedes in eyther, they may be takē as soueraine preseruatiues, and that without feare of preju∣dice to a generous and vertuous mind. But, that wee may not leese our selfes in things extrauagant, let vs draw some-what neerer to our home. There are another kinde of cunning vndermyners, who, when they see their aduer∣saries, or such as they affect not, advanced to any place of digni∣tie, the discharge whereof, re∣quires an extraordinarie suffici∣encie, will not let, as often as oc∣casion is giuen, highly to com∣mend their worth: but, if we ob∣serue them, it is neuer lightlie,
but with disabling them in the maine. Thus hath Subtiltie been oftētimes the supplanter of true Desert, and craftie Ignorance the deposer and dispossesser of an a∣ble Ʋertue. Thus was Taurion wrought out of the gouernment of Peloponnesus by Apelles, whilst hee perswaded the King that hee should doe well, to employ such worthy men as he, about his per∣son: which consideration, serv'd but as a colour to shadow his si∣nister aimes; for, his direct and principall end, was to invest a creature of his owne with that charge and dignitie. Wherfore, it behooueth Princes, not to giue too much credit to the informa∣tions that are giuen them by o∣thers,
of such as they imploy in any charges of importance; but for their owne safety, and theirs, to haue a certaine experimental knowledge, of themselues. The Fencer some-times cun∣ningly takes his ayme at the foote, when his intent is to reach the head: and many men, by blaming the seruaunt, haue sought the ouerthrowe of the Maister. Francis Sforza, being very de∣sirous to remoue both Troilus & Peter Brunorus, two Leaders of no small account, from the ser∣vice of Alfonso, king of Naples, framed a Letter, in the end wher∣of hee willed, that without delay they should put in execution the
consultations that had past be∣twixt them; which he conueyed in such manner, as it fell into the handes of the king: who, vnder∣standing the contents, sent them therevpon as prisoners into Ca∣talogne; and by that meanes, de∣priued himselfe of the benefit, & vse of two experienced Cōman∣ders, and gaue his enemy that contentment which hee looked for. I could instāce the truth of this assertion on many more exam∣ples: but I am call'd away by an∣other kinde of sinister praysers, who are not absolutely led with any malicious intent to offende others, but onely with a desire to benefit themselues; & these are
vsually termed flatterers. Their end is altogether different from the former: and howsoeuer they prooue to be no lesse hurtfull thē any of the rest, yet is it but by ac∣cident, and as the Ivie, corrupts the wall which it embraceth. But because they are easily discer∣ned by purer iudgements, and such as are not tainted with anie humorous Selfe-conceit, I will heare leaue both them & this discourse.
Of Paines & Industrie. THere is no bet∣ter marke of a true generous disposition, thē to attēpt those things, which are hard to bee at∣chiued. The easinesse of dooing, worketh oftentimes in some, an vtter distaste of what is to bee done. Ingrata quae tuta: Vertue admits not facilitie for her com∣panion; the path shee treads, it must be rough and thorny. No
accidents haue power to make her turne her backe. Labour and paines, are the onely foode wher∣with she fats herselfe. The threats of Tyrants, tortures, and tortu∣rers, are so farre from dismaying her, that they serue rather to breathe a second life into her. Duris vt ilex tonsa bipennibus Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido, Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso Ducit opes, animum{que} ferro. Like a topt Elme, whom harder Axe bereaues In Algid's fruitfull soyle of his blacke leaues, Through loss, through slaugh∣ter, and excessiue paine,
Euen from her wounds she gathers strength againe. It is no part of hers, to go cree∣ping into a hollow Caue, or bee beholding to a massy toombe for freeing her from the strokes of an incensed fortune. She breaks not off her intended purposes, neither dooth she alter her pro∣pounded courses, what-soeuer storm, or tēpest is like to happen. Si fractus illabatur orbis, Impavidam ferient ruinae. Though the wide world, being broke, should chance to fall, Her may the ruines hurt, but not appall. No: 't is in vulgar, and adulte∣rate spirits, that the soule of
Motion is whollie deriued from the likelihood of Action. Avida est periculi Virtus: true noble dis∣positions, cannot relish any en∣terprize, further then it is seaso∣ned with difficulties & dangers. Edward the third of England, vn∣derstanding on what nice tearms the life of the Blacke-Prince, his sonne, did stande, when at the towne of Crecy (by reason of the great advantage the French had of him, both in multitude of men, and commodiousnesse of place) he was (in all mens iudge∣ments) accounted but as matter, out of whose ruines his enemies might frame vnto themselues a glorious victorie: and fearing least by sending fresh supplies,
he might hap to derogate from his transcending reputation, re∣turnes him no better comfort, then this short answere could af∣foorde him; That eyther hee must win the fielde, or lose his life: him∣selfe would remaine a witnesse of his valour, ready to second what he had begun, when need required. This vnexpected message, in so great a necessitie, from a father, was so far from dismaying him, as that it rather added vigour to his strength: so that, considering with himselfe if he ouercame, his glory would be the more; if hee were ouercome, it could not be much lesse; hee hastens to the fielde, giues the onset, & enno∣bles both the day, and place by
the fall of thirtie thousand of his adversaries, 1500. of them bee∣ing Earles, Barons, and Gentle∣men of note: which, like a dan∣gerous feauer, did so shake eue∣rie particular member of the Realme of France, as that long time after, it lay bed-rid of that ouerthrow. And indeed, the de∣spaire of conquering, yea, and some-times the feare of beeing conquer'd, hath to many Armies been the onely meanes, by which they haue obtained what they little sought for. Witnes the first iust battaile, which the Romans fought against Hannibal, vnder the conduct of Sempronius the Consull: in which, a troupe of well nigh tenne thousand foote∣men
were seised on the suddaine with such an affright, that not seeing which way els they might make passage for their fainting baseness, they cast themselues a∣thwart one of the thickest ranks of their opposites, which they pearced with a wonderfull furie, to the great amazement, & dis∣comfiture of the Carthaginians: but (alasse!) 't was but a shame∣full and dishonourable flight, bought at the same pryce they might haue done a glorious and renowmed victorie. Julius Caesar made knowne vnto the vvorlde the singular proofe of his valour, vvhen be∣eing (with his Cohorts) to passe the Riuer Rubicon (which was
the vtmost bound & limit of his Prouince) and hauing weighed with himselfe, the danger that at∣tended so high an enterprize (wheras Peace and Safetie offred to kisse his feete vpon the altera∣tion of his proceedings) he sets vp his rest, throwes the dyce, and in a desperate resolution, cryes Haue at all: intending, it should seeme (rather then hee would misse the purchase of his aymes) to polish and fashion out his thē rough-hewen fortune, with the edge of his subduing sword; and to make way for his ambitious hopes, through fieldes of Iron, and streames of blood, to that imperiall dignitie, where-with in the end, hee saw himselfe most
honourably possest. That Vertue is but weake, and ill deserues the grace and credit of so high a style (being of it selfe vnable to giue life to any heroi∣call dessigne) that cannot with a fixed countenance out-stare the threatning eye of Danger, and make day for them, through all opposed discouragemēts what∣soeuer. Pelopidas, beeing advertised that Alexander came against him, with a farre greater Armie then his, was nothing mooued ther-with, but aunswers present∣lie: So much the better; wee shall subdue the more. The Lacedemo∣nians were neuer wont to aske, , how many are our ene∣mies,
but , where be they: knowing their valour to be of so sounde, and strong a temper, as could not any way bee daunted with advantages. And this same warlike humour, which was na∣turally bred in them, hath vpon vrgent necessitie beene found in many. It is an errour therefore, and an ouer-sight (which in a skilfull Commander merits no excuse) To depriue his enemies of all meanes & opportunity of flight; enforcing them to exercise the strength of their hands, whē their owne basenes would willinglie (perhaps) haue embraced any occasion, that might haue put in vse the swiftnes of their heeles.
It was Scipios opinion; Ʋiam hostibus, quâ fugiant, muniendā. For indeede, there is nothing so hard to bee withstoode as armed Feare. Those of Gaunt, percei∣uing Lewis, Earle of Flaunders, vnwilling at all hands to receiue them againe into his fauour, vn∣lesse with halters about their necks, they would aske pardon of him for their past offence; as∣sembled themselues together to the number of 5. thousand; went and confronted his Army of for∣tie thousand; ouercame it, and free'd themselues whollie from that Despotical kind of gouern∣ment, to which before (vpon in∣different tearms) they offred to submit both thēselues & theirs.
The Earle of Fois, who in lesse thē three months (shewing him∣selfe a Captaine, when hee was scarce a Souldier) had with such valour, and celeritie, ennobled his name, by so many victories obtain'd in Italie, against the Spanyards, in the yeere 1512. was slaine by a troope of their Infan∣trie, whilst hee stroue to perfect his victorie; beeing not able to endure, that (all the rest beeing scattered and discomfited) it a∣lone should depart the fielde as tryumphant, with her ranks vn∣broken, and vnsever'd. It is not good therefore for a∣ny man to presume too much vpon his fortune. Vitrea est: tune cùm splēdet, frangitur. And, as the
French prouerbe dooth testifie, Par trop presser l'anguille, on la perd: he that grypes an Eele too hard, is in danger to lose it. Ma∣ny haue had the victory snatcht (as it were) out of their jawes, & themselues become the disho∣nourable pryze of whome they had earst most honourably sur∣pryz'd, for not making a golden bridge for the retyring forces of their enemy to passe ouer: So great a power hath necessitie, to rowze vp the drowsie courages of men, and to enflame their pa∣ler livers, with a resolution to sel their liues at as high a rate as possibly they can, rather then of∣fer themselues gratìs, and vnre∣venged, to be like sheep slaugh∣tered
by the furie of their adver∣sarie. Vna salus victis, nullā spera∣re salutē. What greater motiues or encouragements could haue been vsed, to support the weak∣nesse of a yielding Armie, then those which Vectius applyed to his soldiers, when hee perceiued them to faint vnder the furious encounter of the Romans? What (saith hee) are you desirous to see your houses, your wiues, your parēts & your children? follow me. There are no walls, nor rāparts, to inter∣rupt your passage: Armes only are oppos'd to armes: your valour doth altogether equall theirs: but now necessitie giues you the vpper hand of them. And indeed, where haue we seen greater valiancie, then in
those desperate troopes, that like Catilines sedicious followers, di∣vitias, decus, gloriam, libertatem, at{que} patriam, in dextris portarunt; carried their wealth, their honor, their freedom, and their country in their hands. Witnes those se∣verall inundations of warlike le∣gions, which the populous fruit∣fulnes of Scythia, and the rest of those colder clymats in former times haue afforded; who want∣ing place to inhabit in at home, haue sought abroad, & by vertue of their swords, entitled thēselues in most of the chiefest parts of Christendom, disseising the right owners, and making themselues Franc-tenāts of their kingdōs, & possessions, both in law, and deed.
The proofe heereof wee may see in the Longobards: who bee∣ing driven (by want) to forsake their natiue soyle (which was an Island in the Alman-sea, called Scandinavia) entred into Italie, made thēselues absolute Lordes of Gallia Cisalpina, and styl'd it afterwards (in remembrance of their so wonne conquest) by the name of Lombardie: as likewise in the Huns, and Garians, who vnder the ensignes of that victo∣rious, and so renowmed Attila, their king, after his expulsion out of the territories of France, pos∣sessed themselues with the whole Country of Panonia, and by a compound name, called it Hun∣garia. And, that we may draw a
little neerer to our owne home; the Normans (a people gathered together not onely from Den∣marke, but from Suedland, and o∣ther Septentrionall Countries there adioyning) tooke such sure footing in Neustria (by thē now Normandie) during the time that Charles, surnamed the Grosse, cō∣maunded it, that hee was faine, considering hee could not doe otherwise, to graunt it thē, con∣ditionally they would acknow∣ledge thēselues euer after, liege∣homagers for it to the Crowne of France. Ʋertue is neuer in her proper element, but when death & dan∣ger seeme to haue hemm'd her in on euerie side: shee scornes the
pryze, whose purchase requires not the vse of all her nerues. Im∣peria dura tolle, quid virtus erit? saith the Tragick. Inveniet viā, aut faciet: Wheresoeuer shee be∣come, she will either find a way, or make one. No calamitie is of power sufficient to bring her vn∣der. This Maiesty alone, knowes not what it is to suffer checke: it can neither be elevated, nor de∣jected. Her greatnesse (like the highest heauens) is alwaies firme and without clowdes. Are you desirous to see her? you shall finde her in the Temple, in the market, in the Court: you shall finde her standing at a breache, or scaling of a wall; her garments dustie, her countenaunce all
tann'd, and her hands as hard as Iron. VVherefore, whosoeuer is possest with her, let him pre∣pare himselfe for dangerous as∣saults. The Gladiator thinkes it a dis∣grace, to see himselfe compos'd with one, eyther in strength, or skil, inferiour to himselfe; know∣ing (as it is indeede) the victory cannot be glorious, which is not dangerous. Bellum cum captivis, & foeminis, gerere non possum: Ar∣matus sit oportet, quē oderim, said Alexander. And at the games of Olympus, hee vvould not runne, vnlesse hee might haue Kings for his competitors in the pursuit of the victorie. Paul. Aemylius, by reason of the
base, and fearefull speeches, that issued out of the mouth of Perse∣us after his captiuitie, thought himselfe nothing honour'd by the ouerthrowe of so faint, and cowardlie a foe. In Tauros ruunt Lybici Leones: Non sunt Papilionibus molesti. Against stout Bulls the Lybian Lyons hie: And ne're molest the weaker Butterflie. The like doth Fortune; Fortissi∣mos sibi pares quaerit, shee lookes out the strongest for hir Antago∣nists: the rest shee passeth ouer with disdaine. Transit tutos Fortuna sinus:
Medio{que} rates quaerit in alto, Quarum feriunt suppara nubes. Wherefore, whosoeuer hee bee, whose happinesse was neuer sha∣ken with any rough encounter, may rest assur'd, that she sees no∣thing in him able to sustaine it; so that he need neuer feare her. His own basenes doth sufficient∣lie secure him. Servantur magnis isticervicibus vngues; Nec gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis. Shee seekes a Mutius, when she is arm'd with fire: and glories in his vertue, that (like Fabricius) can shewe himselfe an Atlas a∣gainst her vnder the heauy bur∣then of Pouerty: or that can with Rutilius, cōfront her in the force
of banishment: or with Regulus outstare her in the horrible a∣spect of hell-bred tortures. Giue her a Socrates for her adversarie, that can swallow poyson with as vnchang'd a countenaunce, as hee would a delightfull potion: or a Cato, that dares challenge the field of Death, and hold him at hard play with his owne wea∣pons, and then she is pleasd. An easie yielding spirit, she esteems a subiect too vnwoorthy for her ambition to worke vpon. Wher∣fore, whosoeuer shall at all times haue beene so pamperd vvith prosperitie, as that hee neuer felt the heauie hand of Afflicti∣on, let him not glorie in the mild∣nesse of his starres, attributing
that peaceable, and calme tran∣quillitie to the goodness of God towardes him; for this were but to flatter himselfe in an errone∣ous opinion. Let him rather take notice of his owne defects, and be assur'd, that hee is altogether destitute of that heroicall, and generous heat, that should ena∣ble him to make head against Adversitie, and is therefore pur∣poselie past ouer. Had he beene a Samson, many thousand Phi∣listins should haue bent the force of their malicious minds against him: or had hee beene a Dauid, a Lyon should haue beene sent to try him, and a Giant to pro∣voke him. Did the all-seeing Eye of heauē
discerne but the least sparke of vertue in any, he would not suf∣fer it to lie buried vnder the em∣bers of a secure, & vncontroll'd estate: some stormy accident, or other, should haue serv'd for winde to kindle it, and make it blaze foorth to the sight of the whole world. Had not Rutilius bin wrongd, his innocencie had nere bin knowne. Illustrat for∣tuna aliquos, dum vexat. Crosse accidents are often-times the publishers of a concealed ver∣tue. Zeno knew himselfe fitter for a Philosopher, then a Merchant; yet seeing the life hee led was both pleasant, and profitable, he was loth to giue it ouer, to im∣brace the other: but hauing vn∣derstoode
that the ships hee had at sea, beeing very richly laden and vppon returne, were cast a∣way, he did then acknowledge a superior prouidence; and out of a carelesse apprehēsion (it shold seeme) of so great a losse, tells Fortune shee did well to range him to the gowne, and to the studie of Philosophie. Languet per inertiam saginata virtus. The edge of In∣dustrie is cleane abated by the force of pleasure, and securitie. It is neuer busied but when some vrgent inconvenience doth find it worke. After that man had forfeited those faire possessions, in which his Lord, and Maker (out of the
abundance of his fatherly loue) had placed him, & was enforc't thereby with his posteritie to shift for himselfe in so vast, and desolate a wildernesse, as the world was then; how quicklie sundry arts Mechanicall, which otherwise perhaps had nere bin heard of, were found out, who can be ignorant? Want was their mother, howsoeuer Plenty after∣wards fell out to be their Nurse. Yea, the like may bee likewise seene in creatures of an inferior nature: and hence is that of the Satyrist; Quis expedivit Psittaco suum , Picas{que} docuit nostra verba conari? Where did the Parot learne Good morrow Sir to cry,
Or who the chattering Pyes did teach, our words to proue & try? The reason whereof, is by him∣selfe set downe in the verses fol∣lowing. Magister artis, ingenî{que} largitor, Venter, negatas artifex sequi voces. That which doth art impart, and wit bestow, The belly, skill'd voyces deny'd to know. This was it, that brought them to it, saith hee. But there are ma∣ny other respects sufficient of themselues, without the ayde of this, to worke the like effect in man: as, hope of gaine, feare of danger, & such like. Yet there be many of so effeminate, and soft a disposition, that they are readie
to swoune at the very first allarū of any sinister, and disastrous ac∣cident: and whereas they should employ themselues in seeking to redresse what they cannot avoid, stande gazing one at another in the greatest dangers, expecting ayde from the immortall Gods but not remembring, that (as the Grecian prouerb saith) they must , adde their owne industrie to th'invo∣cation of divine assistance; and not be followers of that Rustick in the Apologue, who, when his cart was layd fast vp in the mire, stood still, and lookt vpon it, de∣siring Hercules, by his celestiall power, to helpe him out with it: who beeing present, bad him put
his own hand to the wheele, prick forward his Oxen, and so cal vp∣pon GOD. For, as Cato saide in his aunswere to Julius Caesar, Nō votis, nec supplicijs muliebribus, deorum auxilia parantur. Gods helpe is not gotten onelie by wishes, prayers, and womanish supplications. It is by watching, by labouring, & taking good ad∣vise, that matters gaine a pros∣perous and true successe. Vbi so∣cordiae, at{que}, ignaviae te tradideris, nequicquam Deos implores: irati, infesti{que} sunt. If thou giue thy self ouer to sluggishnes and sloth, in vaine dooest thou call vpon him: hee is displeased, and offended with thee. The clay, vnlesse it be thoroughlie wrought, cannot
possibly receiue the forme or fa∣shion of a pot. Ceres, when shee shewed Triptolemus the vse of Corne, shee gaue him this aviso withall, : vnlesse thou cleanse, and grind it, thou canst neuer eate it. Insinuating as it were thereby, that no man could possibly at∣taine any thing, to the purchase whereof he added not his owne industrie. Charles the Emperour bore for an Impresa the signe Capricorne, the constellation vnder which he was borne: and the word that gaue it life, was Fidem fati vir∣tute sequemur: Our vertue shall pursue that, which our fate hath promised; A Motto fitting the
person of so noble and victori∣ous a Prince. For, in euery acti∣on, it is GOD that giues the mat∣ter: but wee are they that must second him in the giuing of it forme. Hee dooth nothing that concernes vs, without vs; no, not so much as saue vs. Dij labo∣ribus omnia vendunt. VVithout pains & industry nothing can be got; & with it, most things may: Et labor ingeniū miseris dedit.— Demosthenes had many imper∣fections, which in an Orator were much vnseemely: to redresse thē therefore (saith Valerius) prae∣liatus est contra rerum naturam, hee made open warre against Nature, and vvent his way at length with triūphant conquest;
hauing by the obstinacie of his owne minde, maister'd the ma∣lignitie of hers: wherevppon it was rumour'd, that his Mother had brought forth one Demosthe∣nes, & Industrie another. Wher∣fore, though it be somwhat trou∣blesome to take paines, yet once learne of a Mimik, Feras quod laedit, vt quodprodest, perferas. Beare that, which dooth a little displease thee, that thou maist beare away that, which wil much profit thee. Fortiter malū qui pa∣titur, saith the Comike, post po∣titur bonū. Sowre accidents are seasoned with sweet events; and stormie tempests, are often fol∣lowed with quiet calmes. And this was, though obscurely, yet
most elegantly set out by Ho∣mer in that herbe Moly, to which he attributes a blacke roote, and a white flower; signifying the troublesomnesse of labor by the one, by which that tranquillitie of mind is obteyned, which is the reward of an absolute vertue, expressed in the other.
Cautions in Friendship. IT was not with∣out reason, that Anacharsis when he slept, was al∣wayes wont to hold his right hād on his mouth, and his left hand on his naturall parts; as if the one had needed a farre stronger restraint then the other. For there are many men of such a temper, that they can with greater patience endure to carry burning coales in their
breasts, then secrets: and hence is it, that those thinges often∣times, which are whispered in the eare, are presently after pu∣blisht in the Market. There are few, that can say, & say truly, as that Graecian of for∣mer times did, who beeing told that his breath did smell, answe∣red, that it was by reason of the many secrets, which had a long time layne rotting, and putrify∣ing within him. Nay, many are neuer quiet, till they haue vn∣burthened their bosomes of what they goe with (and that often-times without anie re∣spect, or choyce) vppon the first they happelie encounter, thogh the matter cōcerne either
themselues, or their friends ne∣uer so neerely: but (alas!) in the end, they reape the fruit of their vnadvised folly. It is an ancient saying, but very true; The good, or ill hap in all a mans life, Is the good, or ill choyce of a friend, or a wife. Wherein, the cleerest, & best di∣scerning iudgements, may easi∣lie be deceiued. Many haue ho∣ny in their mouthes, but a Razor at their girdle: and few doe vse to carry a map of their mindes ingraven in their forheads. Mul∣tis simulationum involucris, saith the Orator, tegitur, et quasivelis quibusdam obtenditur vniuscu∣ius{que}
natura. Frons, oculi, vultus persaepe mentiuntur; oratio saepissi∣mè. Dissimulation hath set her foote vpon the throat of Simpli∣citie: and how-soeuer it be good, yet is it dangerous to measure others by our owne innocencie. The Marquess of Pescara, was wont (as Guicciardine reports) to draw men into dangerous prac∣tices, and afterwards, by his du∣plicitie, and double dealing, to discouer them himselfe; making other mens offences, the first step to his owne greatnesse. It was not mine enemie, saith the kinglie Prophet, that disgra∣ced mee, for then I could haue borne it: neither did he that ha∣ted mee, extoll himselfe against
mee; for then would I haue hid me from him: but thou; a man, whom I pryz'd as deerely as my selfe, my guide, and my familiar: who sweetned our secrets by im∣parting them together, and went in each others companie to the house of the Lord. As who should say, 't was not my open enemy, nor my known adversarie, that wronged me: but hee whose friendship I esteem'd, not onely for worldly respects, but likewise for the zealous, and religious affection, which hee seem'd to nourish in his bowels towards the house of the Lord, 't was he, 't was he that deceiued me. Hence was it that Antigonus in his prayers, was wont to desire
the Gods they would defende him against his friends. And be∣ing demaunded, why not rather against his enemies: from them, saith he, that openly professe ho∣stilitie, I can easily beware; but from those that vaile a wrink∣led hart, vnder a smiling counte∣naunce, I stand in need of divine protection. And indeed, feare∣ful diftrust secures vs frō the ma∣lice of the one: but fearlesse con∣fidence betraies vs to the trea∣cheries of the other. Who but our Sauior Christ could haue di∣scouered the secret practices of Judas? considering how forward he was to kisse him, & likewise to performe all other ceremonious offices of loue that wer required.
Ave is vttered often-times by some, who if their tongues shold not belye their harts, Cave wold sound the truest in their mouths. Joab takes Amasa by the bearde to kisse him, when he intends to kill him: and indeed, as the Poet witnesseth; Tuta, frequens{que} via est, Ouid. li. 1 de arte. per amici fallere nomen. It is a safe, and common way, by friendship to deceiue. And Socrates therevpon exclai∣meth; : Friendes, there is not any man a friende; meaning such a one as the Co∣mick speaketh of, Cui tuam rem cùm credideris, sine omni curâ dor∣mias: to whom, when thou hast
cōmitted any businesse that con∣cernes thy selfe, thou need'st not interrupt thy owne sleepe, with careful thinking on't. Some such there are, but not in euery soyle: they must be sought for amongst liberall Arts; amongst honest, & vertuous offices; amongst pain∣full, and industrious exercises: thy sumptuous entertainement affoordes thē not. Quae inter po∣cula contrahitur amicitia, saith Seneca, vitrea est, & fragilis. Cup-friendship, is of too brittle and glassie a substance to continue long. Hūc quē coena tibi, quē mēsaparavit amicū, non te; Martial. lib. 9. E∣pigr. 15. Esse putas fidae pectus amicitiae? Aprum amat, & mullos, & sumen, & ostrea, Tam benè si coenem, noster amicus eris.
Whom plentious meales, and tables make thy friend, Think'st thou, his loue can haue a trusty end? He likes thy daintie cates; hee likes not thee: Make mee such cheere, and thou my friend shalt bee. These are like the Swallow, that changeth her habitation with the season; and when comfort faileth her in one place, repaireth pre∣sently to another: & such a one was Crottos mouse; for while he was in prosperitie, it fed conti∣nuallie with him: but his house beeing set on fire, it fled imme∣diatlie from him. Wherevpon he tooke occasion to frame this di∣stich,
not so much to denote the vngratefulnesse of so imperfect and base a creature, as the muta∣bilitie, and fleeting disposition of trencher-amitie: Vixistimecum, Fortunâ matre; novercâ, Me fugis: at poteras aequa, et iniqua pati. Thou wast cōtent to liue with me while Fortune was a Mother: Whē she a cruel stepdame grew, thou left'st me for another: But if so thou a creature vile, and thanklesse hadst not bin, Thou wold'st not haue deny'd to share the troubles I was in. Hee therefore (saith Seneca) dooth mainly erre, qui amicum in atrio quaerit, in convivio pro∣bat; that seekes a friend in the
Court, and without further try∣all, confirmes him in the Cup. It is a preposterous order, first to trust, and afterwards to iudge: a methodicall proceeding, would require an inverted course. We are to deliberate of all thinges, with our friend; but first, of our friend himselfe. There is no man so simple, but, before he intend to make vse of a new vessell, try∣eth by the infusion of water, whi∣ther it be well bound, and fit to containe more pretious liquour, or no. Alcibiades conveighed the image of a man into the darkest part of his house, and thither ha∣ving brought his friends, one by one, tolde them hee had slaine a man, and withall defired, that by
their ayde, & counsell, he might be so assisted, as that the mur∣ther might be concealed: All of them deny to be partakers with him in so great a fact. Onely Cal∣lias willingly condescends to sa∣tisfie his demaunds, by dooing him the best offices, which in that case he possibly could, bee∣ing as yet altogether ignorant of the veritie of the thing: wher∣vpon hee made no difficultie to embrace him euer after as his bosome-friend, and confidently to impart, vnto him, the vtmost, and inmost of his secrets: yet, in those thinges by which his life might become questionable, he would not trust his Mother, for feare she might mistake the black
beane, for the white. Wherfore, euery man ought to be somwhat nyce and scrupulous in this kind; and not impart any thing, that may import eyther himselfe, or his friend, but with sufficient caution. For, as the Italian pro∣uerb witnesseth: Servo d'altrui si fà, Chi dice il suo secreto, à chi no'l sà. Hee makes himselfe a seruile wretch to others euermore, That tells his secrets vnto such, as knew them not before. Vnitie neuer passeth his bounds; but remaineth in it selfe alwaies one, & is therefore called : but the binary number is indefi∣nite, and the beginning of di∣vorce;
because in doubling the vnitie, it turnes into pluralitie. A word, whilst it remaines in him that first knew it, is secret: but when it comes to another, it beginnes to haue the name of a common report. And howsoe∣uer the Florentine be of opinion, that with one, any thing may bee spoken, because the affirmation of the one, in case of detection, is no more availeable then the negation of the other (prouided alwaies he haue not suffred him∣selfe to be led by the perswasions of any, as Plautine was by Satur∣nine the Tribune, to commit a∣nie part of his minde to vvry∣ting, vvhereby his owne hand, afterwardes may bee made the
onely meanes to convince him; yet would I willingly giue no as∣sent vnto him. For, howsoeuer it may seeme, for the faciliting of treacherous, and disloyall prac∣tises, a necessarie Axiome, by force whereof, the lewd Conspi∣rator being emboldned, dooth freely open himselfe, to such as hee is perswaded may be easily drawn to second his mischieuous attempts; knowing, that if his expectation should chaunce to faile him in any one, hee keepes himselfe notwithstanding out of the danger, and compasse of the law; whose Equitie pronounceth not the sentence of death against any man, without a iust, and law∣full conviction, which in this case
(considering the many disorde∣red passions, wherewith men are led to scādalize each other) can not be had (witnesse those seue∣rall duells, and combats, which heere-to-fore both in this King∣dome, and diuers others, haue beene assign'd by Princes for the avoyding of such differences; the staine of infamie and disho∣nour, resting alwaies, how iustly often-times God knowes, with the partie vanquished, whither Plaintife, or Defendant): yet for the concealing of honest coun∣sailes, it is very hurtful, and dan∣gerous. I call honest Counsailes, such as concerne the publike good of my Prince, or the pri∣vate good of my friende; which
indeed is so farre forth to be ac∣counted good, as it stands with the good, or at least not against the good of my supreame Soue∣raigne; to whom, by a threefold law, to wit, Diuine, Naturall, & Ciuill, I am bounde to purchase (with my best endeuours) all the good, and safetie, that I can. I owe all fayth, & loyaltie to both; and am as a friende to satisfie with all alacritie the desires of the one, so farre foorth as they impugne not the alleageance, which, as a subiect, I am to ren∣der to the other. But, as I would not willinglie nourish a Serpent in my bosom, which in the end should deuoure me: so on the other side, I would
not be too strict and rigorous a Censurer of his dessignes; least by my rash, and scandalous dela∣tions, I brand both my selfe, and him, with an opprobrious mark of euerlasting ignominy, & that that of the Satyrist may not bee truly said of me; Stoïcus occidit Baream delator amicum. Histories abounde with exam∣ples of this kinde: but the pow∣erfull hande of heauen hath fru∣strated the ambitious hopes of their effected villanie; &, wher∣as they expected honour, and promotion, hath iustly requi∣ted them vvith neuer-dying shame, and vtter confusion. But because a tragicall Catastrophe
to a friendlie discourse, might seeme (peradventure) somwhat ominous, I will stretch the thred of my subiect to a further length. There are some that fashion themselues to nothing more, thē how to become speculatiue into another, to the end to know how to worke him, or winde him, or gouerne him: but this procee∣deth from a heart that is double, and cloven; and not entyre, and ingenuous. And as in frendship it argues a great defect, and want of integritie: so likewise towards some persons, a defect of dutie: and such as please themselues in these barbarous speculations, are to be no better accounted, then the very Gangrenes, and Canker∣wormes
of humane societie. Scire volunt secreta domus, at{que} inde timeri. They seeke the secrets of our house to know, That thence in vs some feare of them might grow. And indeede, if they chance to come, where Dissolution is the Steward of a disord'red familie, their hopes flie right to their si∣nister ayme; they gin to be be∣lov'd: but (alas!) that loue is but the spurious, & adulterate issue of a conscious & guilty feare: Carus erit Verri, qui Verrē tempore quo vult Accusare potest — To him no kindnesse Verres will refuse,
That, when hee please, can Verres life accuse. Hence was it, that Tigellinus (as our Historian witnesseth) to adde the better strength to his transcending fortune, endeuou∣red (as much as in him lay) prin∣cipem sibi societate scelerū obstrin∣gere, to endeare the Prince vnto himselfe, by making him a part∣ner in his villanies: which accor∣ding to his brutish expectation he cunningly accomplisht. But, those that like Agesilaus, who in trauailing tooke vp his lodging alwaies in the Temples, to the intent that men, and Gods might see into his actions: or, like Ju∣lius Drusus, who, when certaine Masons had offred him for three
thousand crowns, so to contriue his house, as that his neighbours should no longer enioy that o∣pen prospect into it, which they had: I will giue you, saith he, fixe thousand, and frame it so, that they may looke into it on euery side: those, I say, that like these men, doe all things, tanquā spec∣tet aliquis, as if they had a Cato in their bosome, that did continu∣allie behold them, cannot easily be toucht, or tainted vvith the noysome corruption of such dangerous & hurtfull flyes: nor likewise those that shall but dili∣gentlie obserue the difference, betweene a starre, and a Meteor, a true friende, and a false: The one, is curious, and inquisitiue
to learne more then he should; the other, is afraid to know more then he would: following there∣in the exāple of Philippides, who, when Lysimachus demaunded of him, what of so many things that were his, hee should communi∣cate vnto him; Whatsoeuer it shal please you Sir, answered he, , so it bee not of your secrets: distrusting it should seeme his own imperfection, for the concealing them; or know∣ing (as it is indeed) arduū nimis esse meruisse Principis secretum, v∣bi si quid cognoscitur, prodi velab alio formidatur. A prying eye, a listning eare, & a prating tongue, are all birds of one wing; and by reason thereof, seldome times
found separated one from an o∣ther. For the better avoyding therefore of such dangerous in∣conveniences, as the commerce and societie of such intemperate persons might happelie bring with it, it would not be much a∣misse, secretlie to examine, what his carriage hath beene towards others his associates in former times: and thereafter as we find it, to frame a setled resolution in our selues; if faultie, absolutelie to avoyde him: if otherwise, cō∣fidently to embrace him. For to distrust without a cause, is verie dangerous: I doe but teach an∣other to deceiue, by fearing o∣uermuch my selfe to bee decei∣ued. This was it, which did anni∣hilate
the practices of peace be∣tweene Charles the fift, & Fran∣cis king of France, in the yeere 1528. For, hauing (in a manner) accorded all their differences, the question onely was, which of them both did best deserue to be trusted. Caesar gaue out he might not safely trust him, that had once deceiued him: wherevnto, the Orators of France did witti∣ly reply; that the more hee did pretende himselfe to haue been deceiued by the King their mai∣ster, the more might the King their maister imagine he should be deceiued by him. Hence was it that Otho, after the ouerthrow of Galba, Tacit. hi∣sto. lib. 1. hauing deliuered Celsus, per speciem vin∣culorum,
vnder the colour of se∣verer punishment, from the fu∣rie of his followers; non quasi ig∣nosceret, not by way of pardon (for hee would not seem to taxe him of any crime) but, least be∣ing an enemie, metum reconcilia∣tionis adhiberet, the sincereness of his recōcilement might any way prooue questionable, hee rankt him presently amongst his dee∣rest friends, & made him withall, a speciall Cōmander in his after∣wars: in which, hee behav'd him∣selfe as loyally, as euer hee had done in the imployments of his formerly deposed Soueraigne. Vpon the good euent of which exāple, Lew. 12. did peraduērure ground that memorable answer,
wherewith he nipt the bloody in∣stigations of those Parasits, that, after hee was come vnto the crowne, by the decease of Charles the eight, did animate him to vengeance, against Lewis de la Trimouille, who during the raign of that aforesaid Prince, had, in the battaile of Saint Aubin, ouer∣throwne his Armie, & taken him. It is not fit (said hee) a King of France should marry the quarrels of a Duke of Orleans. If he serued faithfully the king his Maister a∣gainst me, who then was but Duke of Orleans; it is not to bee feared, but he will do the like for me hence∣forward, who now am king of France. But where wee finde a defect of loyaltie in any towards
others, it is not safe to hazard our selues vpon the hope of their amendment towards vs. — vetabo, qui Cereris sacrum Ʋulgarit arcanae, sub ijsdem Sit trabibus, fragilem{que} mecum Solvat faselum.— It is true, that many are con∣tent to take the benefit, and ad∣vantage of a treacherous subiect against his Master, in cases of ho∣stility; but neuer loue to put him in trust with any thing that con∣cernes themselues: or if they do, it is with more then Juno's iea∣lousie, or Argus obseruation. Charles the fift, during the dif∣ference betweene the Imperialls and the French, was willing to
make what vse hee could, of the disloyall seruice of the D. of Bourbon against his Lord & Mai∣ster, Francis the first: but howso∣euer he lov'd his actions, he ne∣uer lik't his person. His infideli∣tie had purchast him the hatred, and dislike of all men: for, after his arriuall to the Emperours Court, Caesar hauing entertained him with all the friendly demon∣strations, that were possible, sent afterwards to desire the house of one of his Nobles for to lodge him in: who answered the Mes∣senger with a Castilian courage, That hee could not but satisfie his Maiesties demaunde: but let him knowe, saide hee, that Bourbon shall no sooner bee gone out of it,
but I will burne it; as beeing infec∣ted with his infamie, and thereby made vnfit for men of honour to in∣habit in. Vertue, and Vice are vtter op∣posites: and how-so-euer many seuerall accidents, and occasi∣ons may bring them to some complementall enterviewe, yet is it altogether impossible to e∣stablish a true, and perfit league of amitie betwixt them. There can bee no true fellowship be∣tweene Light and Darknes, be∣tweene Christ and Belial, Saint Michael and the Serpent. Where there is a difference therefore in Religion, there is alwaies lightly a discordancie in affection. And hence hath risen that deadlie
hatred betweene the Pagan, and the Christian: and among Chri∣stians, betweene the Catholick & the Protestant, the Protestant and the Puritan, the Puritan and o∣thers, whilst euery one contends to iustifie the soundnesse, & sin∣cerenesse of his owne: but the Lord of heauen, the vnitie of tri∣nitie, vnite their harts, & minds, together in the bonds of CHA∣RITIE, & grant that the Church may not alwaies speake in a con∣founded Dialect, to the distrac∣tion of weaker Ignorance, who is not able (among so many divi∣ded cryes) to distinguish the voyce of her lawfull Sheepheard. The Church of SARDIE giues out, that she alone doth liue: and
that of LAODICEA, that she a∣lone doth see, that shee alone is clothed: whereas, the Holy-one of holy ones pronounceth of the one, that she is dead; and of the other, that she is both blind, and naked. But, that I may not seem to ga∣ther sweetnesse frō euery flower, wandring too far from my pro∣pounded course; there can be lightly no great affection be∣tween those that are of one pro∣fession, whether it be liberall, or mechanicall. Figulus figulo, saith the Prouerb. There can bee no∣thing but Envie, and Emulation betweene those that run at one, and the same goale, whatsoeuer
(whither Gaine, or Honour) be the proclaimed pryze of their contention. The one seeketh continually to supplant the o∣ther, for his owne advantage. Hectora Priamidē animosū, at{que} inter Achillē Irafuit capitalis, vt vltima diuideret mors: Non aliā ob causam, nisi quòd virtus in vtro{que} Summa fuit.— So likewise, where there is a dis∣proportion eyther in meanes, or mindes, there can bee no other friendship, then that Microphilie, which Plato had with Dionysius the Tyrant. Eccle. 13 Quid enim communi∣cabit olla ad cacabum? Wherein can the earthen Pipkin benefit the brasen Pot? Which conside∣red, the Emperour had reason, when worde was brought him,
that a certaine Cardinall of the court of Rome, who before times had much affected him, was ad∣vanced newlie to the Popedom, to say, that of a trustie friend, be∣ing a Cardinall, he would becom a deadly enemie beeing a Pope: and indeede, hee did prognosti∣cate aright; for it fell out accor∣ding to his expectation. Where∣fore, if thou would'st not be de∣ceiued, , take one, whose greatnesse may not ouer∣awe thee: & so when thou stand'st in need of his assistāce, thou shalt not feare that cōfortlesse reply, which Abraham gaue to Diues in his tormēts; Nimis magnus est hia∣tus interte, et nos: ther is too great a distance betweene vs and thee.
Last of all, there can be no safe or setled conversation with him, who, as the Poet saith; — absentem rodit amicum: Aut non defendit alio culpante: solutos Qui captat risus hominum, famam{que} dicacis: Fingere qui non visapotest: commissa tacere Qui nequit — Gnawes, like a Cur, vpon his absent friend, Or from Detraction doth him not defend: Affects profused laughter at a feast, And would be famous for some byting iest: Can faine the things, which he did neuer see; But not conceale ought that he knowes, from thee.
Hic niger est—he carryes haye in his horne; and therefore —hunc tu Romane caveto: avoyde his company, if thou respect thine owne safetie. Of three things prejudiciall to Secrecie. HE that hath made his bosome, tan∣quam secretorum aerariū, as it were the Storehouse, or Eschequer of his friendes secrets, must diligently take heede of
three things, not suffering him∣selfe in any case to be vanquisht by any of them: and those are, Wine, Women, and Anger. As for the first, Momus hauing taken a generall survey of those infinite deceits, which continu∣ally were bred, & fostered in the hart of man, did most impiouslie taxe his maker, & Creator, of in∣discretion, in that hee made not some window open into his bo∣som, by which, the visual beames of our externall Sense, not mee∣ting with an impenetrable ob∣ject, might easily discouer what was done within: but wee, that know the workes of God to be euery way so absolute, that, as the Poet saith,
— Non vllum carpere Livor Possit opus Domini — will with Plutarch aunswere him, In Sym∣pos. lib. 3. That we neede not the profane in∣vention of his fantasticall imagi∣nation, to make knowne vnto vs, the darker minds, & meanings one of another. Wine, saith he, doth in a most abundant manner disclose our inward thoughts, and vnbare vs of that disguis'd, and persona∣ted habit, vnder the which we are accustomed to marche. The wiser sort of Princes therefore, accor∣ding to that verse of Horace, In Arte Poet. are reported, — multis vrgere culullis, Et torquere mero, quem perspexisse laborant, An fit amicitiâ dignus. —
And indeed, the nature and dis∣position of man, dooth neuer lightly (as a certain Author wit∣tily affirmes) open, and discouer it selfe at full, but either in oculis, loculis, or poculis. One of the chiefest causes of the ouerthrowe of Claudius, was a word, which vnaduisedly slipt from him in his drunkennesse; to wit, vt coniugum flagitia ferret, dein puniret: that for a while, he would beare with the intempe∣rancies of his wife, but in the end he would seuerely punish them: which, Agrippina fearing, as fa∣tall to herselfe, went presently a∣bout, for the better preuenting of her owne end, to hasten his. And indeed, Il vino, non ha ti∣mone;
wine, saith the Italian, hath no sterne. Wherefore, hee that tastes of it beyond the Cup of pleasure, puts himselfe in excee∣ding great danger of suffering shipwracke; considering hovv many are the envious Rocks, and vnsatiable Quick-sands, that de∣sire nothing more, then to split such vessells in sunder, that they may see, what Marchandize the inward bulke containes. Yea, it hath been the practice of sundry Nations (and that in the persons of Embassadors) vnder a pre∣tence of drinking healths to their Soueraigne, first to drowne their wisedome in their Graecian Cups, that afterwards they might draw, from them, that, which by
meanes of it, was before kept se∣cret to themselues. And surelie, few or none haue euer fayled in this their enterprize; vnlesse it were by ouer-hastilie striuing to effect that, which they so ear∣nestly desir'd: it hauing then be∣falne thē, as it did to Aesops Wo∣man, who gaue her henne more meat, to make her lay more egs: but it fell out otherwise; for, through extreame fatnesse, shee surceast from laying any. And no marvaile the danger should bee so eminent. For, Wit is not then any longer their Pilote, nor the light of Reason the Pole, by which their actions should be cōducted to their wonted haven. Judge∣ment, and Discretion are both a∣way;
which, like two firme an∣chors, should secure them in the greatest tempests, frō the mer∣cilesse and furious violence both of Wind, and Waue. Quid non ebrietas designat? saith the Poet; —operta recludit. And indeede, That which is in the heart of the sober, is in the tongue of the drunkeard. How many can with right ap∣ply that answer of Bias to them∣selues? who, beeing carpt at for his silence in a certaine banket by a fellowe, vvhose Wit had beene alwaies Traine-bearer to his Tongue, answered onelie this, that silence in Wine, was no argu∣ment, or signe of follie: to showe
that his taciturnitie proceeded not from any defect, as hee had falsely, and foolishly surmyzed. Surely, there are fewe, that are possest with so great, & marvai∣lous a moderation, & that haue so absolute, and powerfull a cō∣maund ouer themselues, as this. Wherefore, let him that is wise, keep himselfe from being ouer∣taken with the envenomed cups of this enchaunting, and sense∣bereaving Circes; vnlesse he make light account of ruinating both himselfe, and others. The second thing, are Women: who with an artificiall disposing of those seuerall beauties, wher∣with Nature, desirous (as it were)
to stall foorth her treasures, hath prodigally adorn'd them, haue made the spoyles of the greatest Conquerors, trophies of their victories, and led in triumph the harts, and mindes of the wisest; and that in such manner, as hee that hath once suffred himselfe to be captivated by the power∣full attractiō of their starry looks, thinkes nothing to bee done a∣miss, that is done to purchase, of them, euen the least fauourable aspect that may be: deeming in his fond conceit, that libertie is no where to be found, but in the inclosure of his Mistresse armes. And because hee thinks his tongue too weake an instrument to expresse the strength, & vigor
of his affection towards her, hee makes his heart ascend vp into his eyes, thorough which, as tho∣rough transparent glasses, hee discouers vnto her, yet stil thinks hee discouers not enough, the very secret bed-chamber of his most retyred cogitations; Not remembring (silly wretch as hee is) that such kinde of creatures, haue often-times beene made the instruments, to effect the downefall, and confusion of manie: nor yet weighing vvith himselfe, the vveakenesse and imbecillitie of the sex: vvhich, as it harbours in it selfe a cer∣taine curious desire to knovve all thinges, so is it accompanied with a kinde of carelesse respect
to conceale any. They are for the most part, , leaking vessels: and like that Comike seruaunt, ple∣nae rimarum, huc at{que} illuc effluen∣tes. And therefore hath the Spi∣rit of the Highest (the better to expresse the nature, and proper∣tie of such a one) allotted her, in the sacred volumes of his diui∣nest Oracles, the name of Nacha∣bah, from the word Nacab, which signifies perforare; showing vs, as 't were, that she is no fitter a ves∣sell, then either a Siue, or a Co∣lander, to haue that infus'd in∣to her, the losse whereof wee any thing regarde. A Romane Ladie vvas verie importunate with her husband to knowe of
him, what secret matter had that day been handled in the Senate, with great oathes, and protesta∣tions neuer to reueale it: he de∣sirous to try her, made vse of his invention; tolde her that the Priests had seene a Larke flying in the ayre, , hauing a golden helmet, and a launce: and how they had con∣sulted together, to know whe∣ther this prodigy might portend either good, or euill to the Com∣mon-wealth. Scarce had shee heard it, but presently shee dis∣closed it to one of her maydes; the mayde to another of her fel∣lowes: so that the report was spred, & known throughout the whole Palace, before hee came
thither himselfe: but all of them are not made in the same mould. There is, sometimes, plus virtu∣tis in stolâ, quàm in armis. Nero, after the detection of Piso's conspiracie, remembring that Epicharis was likevvise of the Faction, commaunded shee should presently be set vppon the racke; imagining, saith Ta∣citus, muliebre corpus impar dolo∣ri, that beeing a Woman, shee would neuer bee able to ouer∣come the paine. But all the tor∣tures that either he, or his could possibly deuise, were not suffici∣ent to draw from her, the least confession of any thing, that was then obiected against her. The first dayes quaestion she so vtterlie
contemn'd, that the very chayre, in which they conveighed her from the place, did seeme as a Chariot, whereon shee rid trium∣phing ouer the barbarous as∣saults of their inhumane crueltie. The morrow following, beeing brought thither againe, to play her Maister-pryze vvith impi∣ous Tyrannie, her courage (after many rough encounters) remai∣ned so vnshaken, that Wrath it selfe grew mad, to see the stroaks of an obstinate, and vnrelenting furie, fall so in vaine vppon the softer temper of a Woman; and therevpon, did adde new vigor to the hands of her tormentors: which shee perceiuing, tooke a scarfe from about her neck, and
with it (to manifest their weake∣nesse in her fall) knits vp within her bosome the knowledge shee had of the fact, together with that little remainder of Spirit, vvhereof by force and violence they laboured to depriue her. Clariore exemplo (saith our Hi∣storian) in tanta necessitate alie∣nos, ac propè ignotos, protegendo, cùm viri, Senatores, & equites Romani, intacti tormentis, claris∣sima quae{que} suorum pignorum pro∣derent. Former ages haue likewise pro∣duced a Portia, and a Leaena; the remembrance of whose vertue, shal remain for euer, as an exem∣plary precedent to all Posteritie. For, after her 2. louers, Armodius
and Aristogiton, hauing fayled in the execution of their enter∣prize, had been put to death, she was brought to the torture, to be made declare, what other Com∣plices there were of the Conspi∣racie: but she continued so con∣stant, that she neuer detected a∣ny one. In remēbrance of which fact, the Athenians caused a Ly∣on of brasse to be erected, which had no tongue, and placed it at the entrance of a Castle: shewing her invincible courage by the generositie of the beast; and her perseuerance in secrecie, in that they made it without a tongue. Sed non omne mare generosae est fertile testae. Euery soyle aboundes not with
golden oare; nor euery channell with precious pearles: wherfore, it behooues a man to be very cir∣cumspect, and wary in opening himselfe to any of them, till suffi∣cient triall shall haue manifested the soundnesse of their dispositi∣on. But (alas!) — quid deceat, non videt vllus amans. Avvake Samson, the Philistins are vppon thee, so often repeated, was a suf∣ficient aviso of intended trea∣chery; had not the Eye of Rea∣son, with the ravishing sound of Dalilah's voyce, as was Argus with the delightful tunes of Mer∣curies pipe, been lull'd asleepe in the lap of heedlesse Sensualitie. He must needs tel her (so far had the force of her enticing tongue
prevailed with him) wherein it was that his strength consisted, though the hazard of his life (by revealing it) were neuer so emi∣nent. Antonie cannot choose, but yeelde himselfe a prisoner in the height of his conquest, to the imperious lookes of Cleopatra, though the shamefull eclypse of his glory, be the sequele of his follie. Curius, to make himselfe gratious in the eyes of his Ful∣via, will, who-so-euer saith nay, disclose vnto her, the secret plots and practices of Catiline, though himselfe haue as deepe a hand in them as he. The Prior of Capua, can no sooner purpose any thing against the state of the Ʋeneti∣ans,
but his loue-sick souldiour wil presentlie giue notice of it to his Curtizan, & she to the Senate. It is the nature of high-aspiring spirits, alwaies to affect that cō∣pany, where they may bee most eminent: and therefore vsuallie, they make choice of Women to frequent withall; imagining that whatsoeuer they doe, or say, will be esteem'd, and wondred at by them: wherevpon, to make their admiration more extreame, they wil not let to acquaint them euen with their highest thoughts: and thē, the opinion that they are be∣lov'd, begets a fearelesse confi∣dence of secrecie; wherby, what∣soeuer they intende to doe, shall be disclosed vnto them.
They must of necessity, now & then, out of the humour of their jollities, giue vent vnto the smoake of their Ambition: and then, out comes that, which racks nor tortures could euer haue re∣vealed. Yea, these are the crea∣tures their wisdoms deeme most fit to impart their high-built pur∣poses vnto; who, either for loue, or want of wit, wil willingly (they thinke) conceale, what euer they heare. But (alas!) wofull experience hath taught many, that they le∣vell'd (in so conceiting of them) at a wrong marke. Wherfore, let vs, with Dauid, make a couenant with our eyes; and, like Alexan∣der, not vouchsafe so much as to
glance a look vpō the daughters of Darius, least we be made the spoyle of their beautie. For in∣deed, the pregnant force of wis∣dome, is hardly to bee presum'd vpon in this case. Nescio quid la∣tentis veneni, saith an ancient fa∣ther, habet caro foeminea, vt pru∣dentiores citiùs corrumpat. And hence proceeded that pleasant Motto of the Graecian Courti∣zan, in derision of those bearded Stoïks, Qui curios simulant, et Bacchanalia vivunt; that in publick places seem to be as graue as Saturne, but in pri∣vate corners are as waggish as Jupiter: I know not, J, said she, what bookes, what wisdome, what
Philosophie; but sure I am, such manner of men knock at my gates as oft as any other. They are An∣gels in complexion: but if they be not the like in condition, let him esteeme of them no better then of whited Sepulchers; for all this while they bee but Semi∣pulchrae. They haue a face to be∣guile the Eye, and an Eye to be∣witch the Heart: yea, there is not any one thing in them, or about thē, but is (though a silent, yet) a forcible Sollicitor of mans Will. The Creator of all things, did frame her exquisitlie beautifull, to please man; and the Deuill made vse of her perfection, to deceiue him. They haue caused many to fall downe wounded.
Prov. 7. ver. 26. and the strong men are all slaine by them. Their lips drop as an hony-combe, and their mouth is more soft then Oyle: but the end of thē is bitter as Wormwood, & sharp as a two∣edged sword: their feet go down to death, & their steps take hold on hel. Yea, GOD himselfe (the searcher of all hearts, and who a∣lone intuitiuelie knowes all thinges) hath euen from heauen assured vs, by that mirror of true wisedom, Salomon, Prov. 6. v. 26. that the pretious life of man, is the only thing, which like blood∣thirsty Tigers, they most eagerly hunt for: and therfore, not with∣out iust cause, did hee adde to their stile, in regarde of their
proceedings, the attribute of strange. Prov. 5.3. The Hebrew word, Zonah, sig∣nifies not onely Meretrix, but withall, Caupona, and Arma: frō whence we may gather the craft, and subtiltie of her practices, as shee is Meretrix, in affecting the downefall, and ouerthrowe, of such as are earnest, and deuoted followers of her sect. First, she is Caupona, and then Arma. First she feedes, and satisfies their de∣sires, with the daintiest dishes that possibly shee can; giuing thē the best entertainment, that an affected countenance & gesture can affoord: but when they once draw neere the Lees, then begin they to be minus grati, lesse wel∣come
vnto her; and that for no other reason, quàm quòd inopiâ minus largire possūt, then that Po∣vertie hath cut the wings of their former Bountie: then are her sweete wordes converted into sharpe swords; so that look what∣soeuer shee knowes by thee, or hath at any time known frō thee, that she thinks may procure thy ouerthrow, shall now be revea∣led. She is become Arma, shee is become a weapon to destroy thee. I speake not, all this while, of such as heauē hath allotted men for companions, to beguile the tediousnesse of this their earth∣ly pilgrimage, linking them to∣gether in loue, and vnitie, by the
bond of an honorable & lawfull Hymen: Though euen in those, considering them as one, and the selfe-same body, it is not alwaies requisite, that the left hand shold know, what the right hand doth. Seianus had no better meanes to worke the tragick ouerthrow of Drusus, who, like a dangerous rub, hind'red the smoother run∣ning of his ambitious thoughts, then by assaulting hir, whose bo∣som he had made, as 't were, the Cabinet of his inmost purposes. For, after hee had try'd many things, promptissimū visum, saith Tacitus, ad vxorē eius Liviā con∣vertere; the readiest way he foūd, was to set vpon his wife: where∣in he sped so well, that, corruptâ
illâ, secreta eius prodebantur; frō her he had intelligence of all his secrets. The night it selfe could not secure him; for, euen thē did she obserue his vp-sitting, and his down-lying, leauing not so much as his sighes vnregistred, vigili∣as, somnos, suspiria patefecit: shee betray'd him wholly to his ene∣my. It was Esops lesson therfore, Commit no secrets to the con∣cealement of a Woman; which the Poet secondeth in this man∣ner: Crede ratē ventis; animū ne crede puellis: Nam{que} est foemineâ tutior vnda fide. Octavius Caesar, found a want of this principle in his friende Me∣caenas; who, being somwhat more vxorious then was meete, and
one who (as Seneca saide of him in his Epistles) hauing but one wife, was married yet a thousand times, revealed to his Terentia a secret, that Caesar had imparted to him, concerning the detecti∣on of Muraena's conspiracie; by which meanes it was suddainlie vented, and became of no im∣portance. And Augustus impu∣ted this Eccho-like disposition of reiterating vvhat-so-euer is heard, to Fulvius, as the true Symptome of a distempred, & vn∣setled iudgement. For, hauing disclos'd vnto him the griefe, which he conceiued, concerning the succession of his Livia's chil∣dren in the Empire, for want of issue of his owne; Fulvius went
and related it to his wife, and she againe to Livia, who sharply re∣prehended the Emperour her husband for it: wherevpon, the morrowe after, cōming to salute him with Salvus sis Caesar, he was requited with Sanus sis Fulvi. But, least I seeme an vnciuill, and snarling Satyrist, in taxing (without exception) a Sex in generall, I will adde (in praise of some particulars) that saying of Menander, : Penu virtutis, generosa mulier. And though neither Cato, nor Euripides were so fortunate, as euer to be partakers of so great a happinesse, which indeed incited them to fasten those vndeserued
imputations vpon thē, that they did; yet Rubius Celer is able to avouch it, against the strongest opposer of them all: who, as him selfe commaunded to be engra∣ven vppon his Monument, liv'd with Caia Ennia his wife, 43. yeres 8. monthes; and that, Sine quere∣lâ: without any difference, com∣plaint, or jarre. The third, and last thing, which is to be refrain'd, is Anger. Sei∣anus heartned Drusus against his brother Nero, and made him an instrument, to hinder him from succeeding Tiberius in the Em∣pire: yet in such maner, as he did not forget to lay the ground∣work likewise of his future ouer∣throw:
but hee did not seeme to hasten it at all; gnarus, saith Taci∣tus, praeferocē et insiaijs magis op∣portunū: knowing, as experience teacheth, that the fiercest cou∣rage doth alwaies lye most open to treacherous attempts. Fabi∣us therfore, notwithstanding the provocations of his enemies, & the exprobrations of his friends, who, not sounding aright the depth of his proceedings, chal∣leng'd him (by reason of his pro∣tractions and delayes) of base & servile cowardize, wold neuer be diverted from that course, which in his owne reason and iudgement, hee thought surest, and fittest to recreate the ill-affected forces of the Empire: and indeede,
si tantum ausus esset, quantum ira suadebat, it had vtterly been sub∣verted. For, Anger is prone to rashnesse; and, so it endanger o∣thers, cares not for securing it selfe. Wherefore, it were not a∣misse for any man, to imitate those antient Champions, whose policie like to Fabius, was onely to warde the blowes of their ad∣verse parties, till such time as they perceiued their strength in assaulting to be well-nigh spent; neuer vsing to strike, thēselues, when wrath perswaded them, but when Occasion. The wakefull Eye of Reason must continually keepe Centinel ouer his Passions: and setled Pa∣tience must be the Fort, that must
protect him frō the furious bat∣try of all incensing, and blood∣disturbing speeches whatsoeuer. They are charmes of a cunning Charmer: against which, if (like the wiser Adder) he stop not his eare, his vtter ruine cannot chuse but instantly follow. For they are vsed, either to avert him from some course hee hath alreadie vndertaken, which in the end, beeing thoroughly followed, would proue prejudiciall to thē, as by the fore-alledged example of Fabius, may bee easily discer∣ned; or to vrge-him thereby, to manifest som part of his most in∣ward, & private thoughts: wher∣of the Poet being nothing igno∣rant, dooth most elegantly call
Passions, tortures; whereby men are vrged, and enforced to con∣fesse their secrets: Hor. Epi∣stl. lib. 1 Epist. 18. — Et vino tortus, et irâ. Tiberius, Annal. 4. who, as Tacitus reports, nullam aequè ex virtutibus suis, quàm dissimulationem diligebat, feeling him-selfe stung with a sharpe invectiue of Agrippina, concerning the accusation of Claudia Pulchra, her Cosen ger∣mane, came a step foorth of his dissimulation, when he said, You are hurt, because you do not raigne. Of which, our Historian saith: Audita haec raram occulti pectoris vocem elicuêre, correptam{que} Grae∣co versu admonuit, ideo laedi, quia non regnaret. And Catiline, qui
ad omnia dissimulanda paratus, did likewise erre in this. For, had he prosecuted his first dessigne (which was, with an outward and forced apparance of true humi∣litie, expressed by the liueliest characters hee could, both in his gesture, countenance, and wordes, to dash the accusations of his Adversaries, and to insi∣nuate him-selfe into the loue, and fauour of the Senate) hee might peradventure (hauing freed him-selfe by this meanes frō all sinister conceite of theirs) easilie haue effected his purpose. But, when hee heard those odi∣ous titles of Enemie, and Pari∣cide, cast vppon him by the full∣mouth'd multitude, then Quia
circumventus ab inimicis praeceps agor, incendium meū ruinâ extin∣guam must needes discouer the marke of his disordinate Ambi∣tion, and make knowne vnto the world, what massacrous, and im∣pious thoughts, had (notwith∣standing his smooth external car∣riage) anchred in his bosom. Wherefore, let euery man en∣devour, by all meanes possible, to calme, and allay, those sud∣daine, and tempestuous motions of the mind; & to be that which few are, so true to himselfe, and so setled, that at no time, either vpon heat, or vpon braverie, or vpon kindnesse (as I shew'd be∣fore) or vpon trouble of minde, and weakenesse, hee open him∣selfe,
or suffer his tongue to eli∣minate any part of his thoughts: no, not though he should be put to it by a Counter-dissimulation; which is a fashion of enquiry, ve∣rie currant with many, who will not stick, according to the Spa∣nish Adage, Dezir mentira, para sacar verdad; to tell a lye, for to extort a truth.
Of Reputation. THere is nothing more hard, and difficult to com by, thē a true & certaine know∣ledge of the inward disposition, and abilities of man. His mind is subiect to many secret inclinati∣ons: 't is like a Labyrinth, full of crooked windings, & turnings. His deedes, wordes, & gestures,
are neuer lightlie beautified, but with some outward imposture: they are fraught with vanitie, and deceite: and, like that spe∣cious Figge-tree in the Gospel, doe make a glorious florish, but affoord no fruite. The sillie Sheepe (saide Ar∣chidamas) can neuer change his naturall voyce: but man can alter, and fashion his, to as ma∣ny seuerall, and sundry Dialects, as he please, till such time as his Ambition haue attain'd to that, which it desired. Some haue beene thought vvoorthie of advauncement, saue vvhen they had it: and some againe, haue purchast to them-selues good reputation,
and been well esteemed in place of Greatnesse, which before were otherwise. It hath beene often seene, that such as became a meaner part well, haue failed in a greater, and disgraced it. Hence was it that Galba, maior privato visus, dum privatus fuit, et omnium consensu capax imperij, nisi imperasset: whē hee was a private subject, did seeme to out-runne the meane∣nesse of his fortune; and, by a generall consent of all men, was thought worthy to rule, if he had neuer ruled: whereas, the con∣trary was bruted of Ʋespasian, to wit, that, omnium ante se princi∣pum in melius mutatus, of all the Princes that euer did precede
him, he alone was changed to the better: which may bee likewise instanced vpon the Son of Bul∣lingbrooke, entitled after the de∣cease of his Father, Henry the fift of England. Ignorance, ther∣fore, is of too dull an apprehensi∣on to censure aright the nature of mens actions. Shee depriueth Reason of her discursiue facultie, and frames her iudgement, ac∣cording to the illiterate verdict, that ouward Sense giues of them. And hence commeth it often∣times, that many are reputed wise, and valiant, who, were the ground of their so cōceited me∣rit well examined, would seeme the contrary. True Valour con∣sists not in being desperatly ven∣trous.
It is not the loue of vertue, but the hate of life, that makes men so. Antigonus had a Souldi∣our, whose forwardnes vpon any dangerous seruice he much ad∣mired; and therfore hauing vn∣derstoode, that hee was troubled with an Impostume in his bodie, gaue his Chirurgians expresse commaund to see him diligent∣lie cured: which done, Antigo∣nus perceiued, that hee shewed not himselfe so valiant as he was wont, & therevpon rebuk't him for it: but the Souldiour answe∣red him, that hee might blame himselfe; for it was hee, that had made him lesse hardie then hee was before, in causing him to bee cured of those ills, which had
made him altogether carelesse of his life. And hither may that speech of the Sibaritans, concer∣ning the Lacedaemonians auste∣rer kind of living, be well refer∣red: That it was no maruell, they sought for death so furiously in the warres, considering how labour∣some, and strict a life, they did en∣dure at home: Rebus in angustis facile est contemnere vitā. And therefore, that Reputation which is purchast this way, can∣not possibly be of any long con∣tinuance. It is a vapour, drawne out of the earthy bosome of Po∣pular admiratiō, which, where the rayes of cleerer Apprehension do shine out, is suddenly dispersed. True Vertue is alwaies like her∣selfe,
she squares with euery ac∣cident, and keeps a iust propor∣tion in all her actions. Shee will not feare to die, as Cato did, though Caesar were her deerest friend. Such therefore, as beeing in the prime, and flower of their youth, doe seeme content with euery breath of honor; and, af∣ter they haue gain'd some little reputation in the world, betake themselues immediatly vpon it, to a retyred life, confining their so begunne fortune, within the bounds of some solitary Mansi∣on: it is to bee suspected, they were generous but onely in ap∣pearance, and that the consci∣ousnesse, and distrust of their owne weakenesse, made them
withdraw themselues from acti∣on, least by their vnsufficient ma∣naging of matters, they might happelie lose that accidentall glory, which vpon no certaine principles they had formerlie got. For, honour serues but as a sawee, to whet the appetite of those, whose hearts are firme, & of a noble, and vnyeelding tem∣per. It is a gale, which beares thē speedilie to the vndertaking of euery haughtie enterprize. The prayse of hauing well conducted the course of one, is a bayte, which drawes them on to the vn∣der-going of another. Hercules, in his trauailes, vvil not leaue so much as Hell vnvi∣sited: but euen vppon the gates
thereof, will striue to erect a tro∣phy to his triūphant merit. Yea, in military matters, the report of any one thing valorously execu∣ted, especially vpon the begin∣ning of an imployment, is that, which makes a smooth, and easie passage for future attempts. It is a meanes to driue the wauering affection of ambiguous friendes to a certaine stand, and to bring forth an encrease of loue in the harts, and mindes of such, as are firme, and loyall. It works a wil∣ling Obedience in thy whole Ar∣mie, and procures thee meanes, and munition, with store of all o∣ther warlike necessaries from thy friendes and allyes, & that with∣out paine & trouble to thy selfe;
For, whil'st euery one contends to bee thought a meanes in the raysing of thy transcending for∣tune, thy worth cannot possibly want ladders by which to climbe. And therefore Domitius Corbu∣lo, at his first comming to the go∣uernment of Armenia, endeuou∣red to doe somewhat, as Tacitus reports, vt famae inserviret, that in those parts might purchase him the credit, and reputation of sufficiencie; which in nevve businesses is most availeable. And Iulius Agricola, at his first arriuall into Brittaine, carried himselfe in the like manner, non ignarus instandum famae, ac pro∣vt prima cessissent, fore vniversa; that fame was to bee follovved,
and as he sped in the first, such it was likely would his successe be in the rest. But it is heer, as it is in meates: if taken immoderat∣ly (though they be neuer so nou∣rishing) they proue a burthen to the body, rather then otherwise. It is requisite therefore, that wee sometimes clip the wings of our Reputation, and not suffer them to growe beyond the compasse of our neast. Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui, Vltra quā satis est, virtutē si petat ipsam. The wiser sort will of their owne accord, a little now and then, de∣grade the opiniō of their worth, by stripping themselues awhile of all imployments. They know there is nothing lost, by making
themselues (for a time) lesse then they are. Ouermuch Estimation hath bin the bane of many. Al∣cibiades, by reason of the sundry great exploytes he had atchiued in the behalfe of his Country, had got so great an opinion of Suf∣ficiencie, that when hee fayled in the due performance of anie thing, hee was presently suspec∣ted: euery one was apt to iudge, that it was not, bicause he could not doe it, but because he would not; and that where-soeuer hee was minded to imploy himselfe, nothing could possibly escape him. Hence likewise was it, that Iohn Guicciardine vvas accused to haue beene corrupted by those
of Lucca, because hee fayled in the expugnation of their Cittie. The safest way therefore to se∣cure our selues from danger, is to attire our worthinesse in such manner, as it may still bee the same it was in inward substance; onely altred, and disguis'd a lit∣tle in outward showe. It is reported of Poppaeus Sa∣binus, Tac. An∣nal. lib. 6. that for the space of 24. yeeres, and that in the dayes of tyrannie, he was still made Ruler ouer the greatest Prouinces be∣longing to the Empire, nullam ob eximiam artem, not for any excellent ability that was in him; Sed quòd par negotijs, ne{que} suprà erat; but that his sufficiencie did no more then equall the
charge, vvhich was imposed vp∣pon him. And to speak plaine∣lie, VVisemen, in the choyce of instruments, are sildome wil∣ling to make vse of such, in mat∣ters of importance, vvhose cun∣ning iudgement, they thinke can sounde the depth of their intent, or, out of their imployments, contriue any thing whereby to grace themselues. Agricola (saith Tacitus) not∣withstanding his many seruices done to the Empire, Nunquam in suam famam gestis exsultavit, did neuer boast of any action to his owne fame; but (as an in∣feriour Planet) did modestly ac∣knowledge the light he had, to be
wholly deriued from a higher Sunne: thus did hee steale from Envie, and not defraude himselfe of his deserued glory. Germa∣nicus likewise, hauing calmed & alayed the tumultuous broyles, & insurrections of the Germans, caused a pyle of weapons to be raised, with this stately title; DE∣BELLATIS, INTER RHENVM ALBIMQVE NATIONIBVS, EXERCITVM TIBERII CAE∣SARIS EA MONIMENTA MARTI, ET IOVI, ET AV∣GVSTO SACRAVISSE. That the Nations betweene Rhene, and Albis beeing ouercome, Tiberius Caesars Armie had consecrated those Moniments to Mars, Jupi∣ter, and Augustus: but added no∣thing
of himselfe, metu invidiae, for fear that either Envie or De∣traction, might find a subiect in him, for their malicious, and en∣venom'd teeth to gnawe vppon: or thinking (as it is) the consci∣ence of a well-done deed, to be a sufficient recompence for the dooing it. And this it was that kept them vpright, amidst the ruines of so many Woorthies, in those vnworthy times. But (alas!) the high-erected thoughts of an ambitious heart, cannot possibly bee brought to conceiue the meaning of this principle. They will alwaies saile by the Carde and Compasse of their own mind; and rather then yeelde in their popular depen∣dencies,
their entertainments, gifts, or publike grace, most wil∣fully hazarde the distaste of all men. Caesar careth for nothing, but the executiō of his dessignes; his spirit is beyond the reach of feare. If the Sea swell in waues to let his passage to Brundusium: hee swells againe in wordes, and bids the Mariner, Saile on, Thou carriest Caesar, and his Fortunes with thee. And indeed, his For∣tune was the onely thing, that kept both him, & his estate from beeing shaken, and disjoynted, by the violent events of such resolved courses.
Of Accusation. IT is no golden age in which we liue; but an age so corrupted, & depraved, that in comparison of others, many are esteemed vertuous, at a reaso∣nable rate. Yea, hee is thought to doe good enough, who, whē he is in place of authoritie, doth but little ill.
Iampridem equidem rerum voca∣bula amisimus; Sallust: bello Ca∣til. quia bona aliena largire, liberalitas; malarum re∣rum audacia, fortitudo vocatur. All thinges haue vndergone an alteration, both in name and na∣ture. Simplicitie hath principled her selfe with stronger Axiomes then heeretofore, & hath learn'd to square and order the vvhole course of her conversation by an other kinde of Methode, then that shee practiced during the harmlesse infancie of the World. The silly Dove hath beene con∣strained, for her owne securitie, to ioyne in friendship with the Serpent: and the Lyon thinks it no disparagement, to case his valour (if neede require) vnder
the out-side of the subtile Fox. For, Pietie now is counted but a fantasticke fiction: and Vpright-dealing, but an aierie apparition. True vertuous actions, are ne∣uer seene vpon the Scene, but when by the necessitie of Lawes, they are enforced to show them∣selues. For, where election a∣bounds, and that all libertie may be vs'd, euery thing is presently brought to a most irregular, and confused motion. The Will of man is so perverted, that Good∣nesse is sildome made the scope of his dessignes. It is said of Catiline, that when he wanted present matter for his mischieuous mind to worke vp∣pon, hee was no way scrupulous
to circumvent, and kill, insontes, sicuti sontes, those that had neuer purchast his hatefull fury by of∣fending him, as well as others: and least either his hart, or hand, might happely wex numme, for want of imployment, gratuitò potiùs malus, at{que} crudelis erat, hee would be voluntarily cruell, and without expectance of re∣ward. And what was saide of him, I feare mee, may be too truly iusti∣fied in many. For (alas!) the cō∣science of a vertuous deede, is too weak a motiue to incite our dull affections to the dooing of it. Tis eyther hope of Reward, or feare of Punishment, that in the attempt of thinges, orders,
and directs our choyce. Giue way but to Impunitie, and yee shall see how Vncivilitie, like a ravening Deluge, will (on the suddaine) wash away the print, and forme of all Mortalitie. Non sum moechus— I am not an Adulterer, saith one; —ne{que} ego hercule fur, vbi vasa Praetereo sapiens argentea.— But, as the Satyrist affirmes in the verses following, — tolle perîclum, Iam vaga prosiliet fraenis natura remotis.
So that, for the better orde∣ring, and preseruing of a Com∣mon-wealth, 't is very requisite, there should be such Ministers appointed in it, as may without respect, or partialitie, giue Ju∣stice information of the particu∣lar proceedings of private men. For, by this meanes, eyther the feare of beeing accused, will curbe their ambitious purposes, and keepe them from attempt∣ing any thing against the libertie of that State, in which they liue: or, hauing attempted, the accu∣sation it selfe will presently sup∣presse them. Besides, it will giue ayre enough for the venting foorth of those pestiferous tu∣mours & inflammations, which
thorough hatred, or emulation, are bred in the crazie mindes of ill-affected persons. Yea, there is nothing, that can more firmelie settle and establish a Common∣wealth, then to order it in such manner, that the alteration of those humors, which do trauaile and molest it, may find a Recipe at home, for her recouerie, pre∣scribed by the Lawe. Wherefore, if at any time wee see, that in the divisions, and di∣stractions of an vnsetled Popu∣lace, either partie shal haue neede to ranke thēselues with forraine correspondēcie, the cause heer∣of may lawfully be suspected to proceed from some manifest de∣fect in the institution of that go∣vernment.
But, if with vs (as heere-to-fore in Rome, and such like Popular and Democraticall Polities of elder times, Envy and Malice were authorised, either by Ostracisme, or any other such specious kinde of proceedings, to top the branches of a sprea∣ding Vertue, there should not an Aristides breathe amongst vs, but euery base, and illiterate groome, wold striue (not know∣ing why perhaps) to procure his banishment. Nothing can scape the forked tongue of Detraction. Slaunder, we see, did fasten her envenom'd teeth vpon the pretious body of our Sauior Christ himself, & gaue him not ouer vntil death; yet was
his nature no way so imperfect, as to offend. It was the advertise∣mēt of Medius, a damnable Pro∣moter, in the court of Alex. That a man shold not spare to bite the re∣putation of any one, with vntruths & forged accusations: for, howsoe∣uer (said he) the hurt may happely be cur'd, the scar yet wil stil remain. And what successe did followe vpon the practice of this his dia∣bolical positiō, may easily be dis∣couer'd in the fall of Callisthenes, Parmenio, & Philotas. Wisdome therefore & moderation, should continually sit in the eares of Greatnes, & there most carefully distinguish betweene Truth and Falshood, between a lawful accu∣sation, and that which is fained.
It was an easie matter (consi∣dering the suspicious nature of Tiberius) for Caepio Crispinus, who (as Tacitus reports) by humou∣ring his bloody mind, with close, and scandalous delations, had set a golden outside vppon his formerlie dejected and ragged fortunes, to call the life of Inno∣cencie it selfe in question. Hee o∣uerthrewe Marcellus, by accu∣sing him to haue spoken some∣what sinisterly of Caesar, which then (saith our Historian) was accounted an inevitable crime; by reason that the Accuser did (by continuall obseruing) ga∣ther out of the vicious carriage, and disposition of the Prince, whatsoeuer was most vile, & apt
to be reproch't, and vpon that did frame and fashion his Indite∣mēts, Nam quia vera erant, etiam dicta credebātur. For, euery thing was prone to bee belieued, be∣cause 't was knowne to be deser∣ued. But, howsoeuer barbarous and inhumane Tyrants, may thinke by countenauncing such Sycophants, to secure thēselues, and their estates; yet milder Princes will warily avoyd them. Ambitious Vsurpation, hath bin seene to cut the throat of lawfull Soueraigntie, and (afterwards) to seate it selfe by this meanes, in the chayre of Maiestie. K. Richards banishing of Mow∣bray, vpon the difference be∣tweene him & Bullingbrooke, was
his owne deposing. The Empe∣rour Ʋalentinian II. hauing cau∣sed Aetius to be executed, de∣manded afterwards of Proximus, how he approov'd the fact: who answered, that he knew not whi∣ther hee had lawfully put him to death, or no; but sure hee was, that by so dooing, with his owne left hand, he had cut off his right. Which happ'ned shortly after to be very true; for he was slaine by Maximus, a Romane Patrician, whose treacherous attempts, du∣ring the life of Aetius, were so o∣ver-aw'd, that they durst neuer offer so much as once to showe thēselues. Alexander had depri∣ved himselfe of a true & faithfull Physician, if he had suffered him∣selfe
to be led away with the re∣ports, and iealousies of others. Tis therefore requisite, some exemplarie punishments should be inflicted vppon those, that spightfully endevour to soyle, and blacke, the reputation of a∣ny man, with the filthy slime of their malicious and viperous iawes. For, otherwise, the sillie Lambe shall neuer drinke at the fountaine, but the greedy Wolfe will accuse him without cause, and deuoure him without lawe. Let Haman hang vpon the gallowes, vvhich by his com∣mand was erected for the death of Innocencie: let those ranke and Goatish-eyed Elders, vn∣der-goe that cruell sentence,
which their vnsatisfied Lust, had wickedly cōtriv'd against a spot∣lesse Chastitie. Finally, let the Prophet Daniel be quit; & those, which falsely did accuse him, be condemned by Darius to the Lyons den. — Ne{que} n. Lex iustior vlla est, Quā necis artifices arte perire suâ. FINIS.
