4097 S106918 99842625 7293
AN ANSVVERE TO A POPISH LIBELL IN∣tituled A Petition to the Bishops, Preachers, and Gospellers, lately spread abroad in the North partes, By FRANCIS BVNNY Prebenda∣ry of Durham; sometimes fel∣low of Magdalen Col∣ledge in Oxford. Thus saith the Lord: stande in the waies and beholde and aske for the old waies, which is the good way, and walke there∣in, and yee shall finde rest for your soules. Ierem. 6.26. AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, Printer to the Vniversity. 1607.
TO ALL POPISH RE∣cusants who desire to know the truth, F.B. wisheth grace to see and to be sorry for their ignorance & errour. THE Prophet Da∣vid complayneth grievously of some, whose wordes were softer then butter,Psal. 55.22. yet vvarr vvas in their harte: they vvere more gentle then oile, yet they were swords. Wherein he seemeth to me, to paint out in some liuely colours, the Recusants of our daies who hauing bloud in their minds, & most savage purposes still in hammering: yet to blinde mens eies, or to turne away their harts from anie care of preuenting
their danger, deale by Petition & Request, as if they were verie loiall and reasonable subiects. To this end (by that which hath followed we maie iudge) was that Petiti∣on in September last sent abroad, To the Bishops, Preachers, and Gospellers, that be∣ing deceiued by their wordes of charitie, we should not once doubt of anie vncha∣ritable purpose that they would haue, & so shoulde bee taken in the snares which they had privilie laide. But how so euer they smoothlie dawbed ouer their most monstrous designes, and couered with shew of sugred words their most barba∣rous intent: yet the event hath shewed, that vnder the wings of that Popish dissi∣mulation, was hatched the most strange and vnnaturall treason, that hart of man could thinke of; in respect whereof, the massacre of Fraūce though inhumane, the purpose of Haman though very cruel, the murder committed by Simeon and Levi of the Shechemits, though exceeding bloudie; yea the Attempt of Pope Lucius the 2. though monstrous enough, & cō∣ming
neerest to this of our Recusants, yet haue some honest coulour of excuse. For in that of France, the King being seduced by bad Coūcell, was made to beleeue that by no other means he could execute Iu∣stice (as they tearmed it) on his subiects, & therin not many of great reckoning di∣ed. Haman sought the destruction of strā∣gers; The childrē of Iacob had their sister abused by Hamours sonne who was Lorde of that Coūtrie; & the attempt of Lucius against the Praetor and all the Senators of Rome, was by open force, and not by such dastardlie or cowardlie practises. But this Popish designe, was to the destructiō of almost al the noble, learned either in di∣vinitie or Law, wise and worshipfull in the Land, onlie to attaine to their owne wicked desires without cause of iust wrath not of forainers, but of Contriemen and kinsfolke, and that in a most treacherous and sudden manner. It shal not there∣fore hencforth be strange to me, that our Learned Antiquarie writeth of certaine springs with vs,Camden in Brit. that turne wood into
stone: neither yet that of Circe fabled to change men into swine: since that wee see the Popish humour, maketh the harts of men to be harder then flint: and Romish Circes by their inchantments, can cause them who before had humane & pitifull affectiōs like others to neighbours, frinds prince, and countrie, to cast of al naturall loue or dutie to all, hauing harts more harde then stones, and being in crueltie worse then Tigers. Oh Sr. wil some men saie, not al Papists were acquainted with this conspiracie. I am of that minde too. But withal this is my resolution, that all perfect Papists, & such as are reconciled to the Pope, though they knewe not of it yet being called vpon, would haue beene assistāts therin. For that subiecting of thē selues to the Pope, as their Head & direc∣tour, and vowing their obedience to his commandements, which if he saie they be to the furtherance of the Catholick faith, they dare not but execute them if they be able; maketh vs iustlie to doubt of their faith & loialtie to our dread Soue∣raigne.
And if all knew not the verie mys∣terie of this Iniquitie, and the depth of of this purpose, namelie in what sort, or at what houre it was intended to be exe∣cuted: yet in the North parts, where this Petition perchance was framed; yea and in other places too, as I haue beene crediblie informed, there was such bold∣nes and contempt of law, so litle feare to offend, and such open resort to their Ido∣latrous seruice: that manie good mē iudge nether are deceiued (J suppose) therin, that most of the Recusāts, had at the least some great expectation, of an Alteration of the Estate. Nether is it much to be re∣garded that the Preists tell vs, that in Ci∣uill matters, and if the Pope should be a∣gainst the wealth of our Countrie, they would not obay; as VVatsons Treasō him selfe being a Preist, and a Teacher of that lesson, did proue vnto vs. For I am sure he could not make it a matter of Religiō (except of Popish Religion) to murder his prince, to whom hee owed all subiection. And who knoweth not, that it is an easie
matter for the Pope, whose voice Papistes take as the voice of God, to make his fa∣vorites to beleeue, that all things tend to Religion, that will inlarge his Authoritie? And what will hee not commende as a thing Religious, that compared the mur∣dering of Henry the 3. the French King, to that Miraculous worke of Christ his Incarnation and Resurrection? Can we i∣magine that they who dare vtter such a∣bominable blasphemies, wil shame to af∣firme anie thing? And these so dangerous subiects, because their cōsciences wil not suffer thēto come to our Churches, must craue ether to be resolued that it is lawful to come to our seruice (which they are ful¦ly bēt neuer to be, for they wil nether hear vs, nor read our writings) or else be freed from such punishments as Lawes impose vpon Recusants. A strang conscience it is that manie of them haue, who would bee thought to be more singular, and to haue more feeling and feare to offend then the common sort, & yet if we trie their con∣versation, they are not to be reckoned a∣mong
the best sort of such as follow noe other direction for Religion, then to bee obedient vnto his Maiesties Lawes, with out respect vnto that God commandeth. Not to speake of their vsual whoredoms, oppressions, malice towards others, and such like good qualities which dailie are seene and knowne to be among them: let the fift of November bee a witnesse whi∣lest that daie shall be numbred in the Ca∣lenders, of the more then Turkish cruel∣tie of Poperie. Haue they a conscience to steale, to liue in adulterie, to deale hardlie with their Tenants or neighbors against Gods laws: & wil not their cōscience suf∣fer them to heare that Service wherein themselues confesse there is no evill? Stand not anie more vpon such tearmes O yee seduced Papists. Leaue that Romish Synagogue whose doctrine cōcerning the worship of God, is superstitious and be∣sides the Word,1. Tim. 4.8. whose deuotion cōsisteth in toies and trifles, & bodily exercise that profiteth little. Leaue I say that crue that warranteth, nay maketh meritorious and
honorable the deposing or killing of Prin∣ces and Potētates. Depart frō that church whereof to bee is but discredit; For the chiefe Teachers of Poperie assure vs, that to bee of the Romish Church, there nee∣deth no Internall vertue, but onlie to be∣leeue that faith that the Papists teach, & to acknowledge the Pope to be supreame head. The Divell himselfe may be of that Church: what credit gaine you by being of that companie? Be ashamed of them that teach you neither to keepe oath nor promise, to such as they call heretickes. To be short, seeing that church, hath so put vpō her the face of a harlot, that she sha∣meth not to be accompted, in corrupting Scriptures, & the writings of the fathers most vēturous, in treacheries most dāge∣rous, in crueltie most barbarous, & in all odious & vnnatural attēpts, most audaci∣ous:Apoc. 18.4. Go out of her, that you be not partakers of her sinnes, & that yee receiue not of her plagues. O Romish Recusants (for Catholiks I maie not call you, it is not a name that you maie truelie claime) you haue forsa∣ken
your first loue, or at the least that loue,Apoc. 2.4. that you seemd once to bear to the truth: Remember from whence you are fallen,5. Esa. 51.1. re∣pent, and doe your first works. And as Esay the Prophet calleth the Iewes to consider of Abraham in whom they were first cho∣sen to be Gods Peculiar people: so doe I most earnestlie intreate you,Philip. 2.1. If there be a∣ny consolation in Christ, if anie comfort of loue, if any fellowship of the spirit, if anie compassion and mercie, euen of your own soules, that you looke not from hence forth vnto the glittering shewe of exter∣nall pride in a Mortall man;Heb. 12.2. but vnto Ie∣sus the authour and finisher of our faith. Marke well what he in his word commā∣deth that you maie doe it, what worship he requireth that you may yeeld it, what duties he teacheth that you maie learne and obey the same. So shall you finde the righte true waies to your feete, and peace vnto your soules:Esa. 50.11. whereas if you still walke in the sparkes of the fire vvhich you haue kindled (to your selues) This shall you haue at Gods hand, you shal lie downe in sorrow.
An Answere to a Popish Petition. ADoniah the sonne of David by Hag∣gith,2. Sam. 3.4. whē he saw he could not by might & violence ob∣taine to bee king (though he attemp∣ted it,1. King. 1.5. David yet li∣ving,) sought by subtilty to attaine ther∣to, in causing Bethsabe the mother of Sa¦lomon,1. King. 2.17. (David being now dead) to sue to her sonne, that hee might haue Abishag the Sunamite to wife. The Romish Ca∣tholicks (for so they wil be termed,) haue sought by many violent meanes, & those most barbarous and cruell to beare the sway in this Church & Common-wealth, but God not giving successe answerable to their desires, but frustrating their ma∣ny wicked hopes, they proue whether by false flattery they can deceiue, since by violence and might they can do nothing. To this ende haue they presented their
supplications, both to our late gracious Governesse & Queene of everliving me∣morie, & also since to our most dread So∣veraigne, that since by murder and mis∣chiefe they cannot performe their de∣signes, they may make triall, if by his gra∣ces good leaue, (in graunting them their desired Toleration) they may subiect this noble Realme, to the Vicar of Rome. Diverse petitions haue to this end bin scattered abroad, some also delivered to his Maiesties hands; but God hitherto hath mercifully preserved him, so that he hath not suffered himselfe to bee taken in those their snares, neither over-reached by their crafty inchantments. But now of late haue they framed another petitiō, more reasonable then their former sup∣plications haue beene, both in respect of the manner, more milde & in shew more humble; and in regard of the matter too, because it requireth not a Toleration of Poperie, or immunitie from penalties by law imposed, as the rest of them (that I haue seene) doe, simply and without con∣dition:
but the drift thereof is (as by the words I can gather) at the least to insinu∣ate, that if good reasons may be shewed, how they of the Romish Religion, with∣out danger of deadly sinne may resort to our Churches, they would be most ready so to doe. More reasonable, I say, it is thē others, which may rather be called comminati∣ons then supplications: in this yet an vn∣reasonable demand, that the thing so of∣ten and so throughly performed, by sun∣dry learned treatises, is yet now againe required at our hands, and that with such cōfidence, as that the Petitioner seemeth to assure himselfe, that his desire herein cannot be satisfied. And in truth I am al∣most of his minde too; not because the thing he requireth, is hard in it selfe to be done; but because their hearts are for the most part so hardened against the infalli∣ble truth of Gods vndoubted worde, that that seed can hardly take any roote with them. Seeing therefore this petition is in a
manner a challenge to provoke vs to en∣counter him, and carieth perchance a great shew among his favorits, that wrot it, as if the cause must needs be good, that hath so confident a patron or proctour to defend the same: I thinke it not amisse to examine the same as briefly as I can, and to buckle my selfe to answere by Gods grace the prowd brag of this Popish Go∣liah. Who though he raile not so plainely as did that Philistine, vpon the host of the living God; yet covertly hee promiseth himselfe the victorie, & by his overbold∣nes of words, hopeth to assure his friends that al is on his side cocke sure, and no pe∣rill at al. And having considered with my selfe of the summe of this Petitiō, I finde three general points thereof, vnto some one whereof, al that is said may be referred. For first there is a complaint of the hard case the Recusants are in. Then followeth a narration or reporte of the meanes by thē vsed, to redresse the same. In the third place commeth the suit it selfe or petitiō,
with some shew of reason to perswade & moue the reader. And though my pur∣pose is to handle every of these parts: yet so, as that I will followe the very trace of his words.1. Pars. Thus therfore his petition be∣ginneth, and with this inscription. A Petition to the Bishops, Preachers, and Gospellers. That he maketh petition vnto Bis∣shops anb preachers concerning instru∣ction, were not to be misliked, because it is intended that such men both in re∣spect of their learning are best able, and for their place and office, should be most ready and willing to performe such due∣ties. But that so many sufficient satisfac∣tions of this demande, seeme to him in∣sufficient, sheweth that the Petitioner ei∣ther will not read that is written, or read∣eth it with a preiudicate opinion, & ther∣fore that he hath a purpose not to be satis¦fied: but that he rather asketh questions of our Bishops & preachers, as the Scribs and Pharises did of Christ often, not to informe themselues, but to intrap him in
his words, or to trie if possibly they might haue put him to silence. And as touching the Gospellers here spoken of, if by that tearme he meane the professours of that Religion which the said preachers teach, (as J suppose he doth) I am then glad that he imagineth there should in our Lay people such abū∣dance of knowledg be found, that they as well as others, should be required to sa∣tisfie, the learned diuines among the Pa∣pists, in points of religiō. For it is no rea∣son they should denie that to their owne Layitie, that they require in ours: & then shal they not from henceforth hang alto∣gether at the lippes of ignorant Priests their blind guides, but shalbe better able to instruct and informe themselues. Nether wil I iudge that this petitioner vseth this name Gospeller, in Ironicall scorne & mockerie, as some other of that Sect doe.Tabui. 3. vi. gene. haeres. So doth Lindanus that scorne∣ful companion, both against the Gospel it selfe, speaking of some who saith he, de∣test certaine things, haud secùs, at{que} à pu∣ro
Lutheranismo (Euangelio dico) alienis∣sima: as if they were quite cōtrarie to pure Lutheranisme (I meane the Gospell:) and also against the professours therof:Ibid. Apos∣trophe lectoris catholici ad Euangelicos is∣tos: An Apostrophe of the catholick rea∣der to these gospellers with such a like spi∣rit doth prophane Eckius cal such,Enchirid. de script. The∣ologos atramentales, Inky diuines. Nether is the blasphemy of Capreolus here to be omitted,Capreol. l. 5. Elench. hae∣ret. Act. 24.5. & 14. . Hos. lin. 1. de haeres. who (as Tertullus dealt with S. Paul, branding him with the name of heretick for embracing and teaching this selfesame Gospel) reckoneth among his Heretickes Evangelicos Gospellers, as be∣fore him also did Hosius, and as he also citeth Lindanus in his dubitātio, dialog. 2 But howsoeuer these Enemies to the Gospel of Christ & his vndoubted word, speake or write, reprochfully or blasphe∣mously of that glorious Gospel,Rom. 1.1. yet as wee are not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ: for it is the power of God vnto saluation to euery on that beleeueth: so doe we not deny the name, or take in evil part to be called
Gospellers, since that we knowe it to be the instrument of our regeneration: For in Christ Iesus (faith S. Paul to the Co∣rinthians) I haue begotten you through the Gospel.2. Cor. 4.15. And the same Apostle testifieth to the Thessalonians,2. Thess. 2.13.14. 2. Cor. 6.7. Iacob. 1.18. 2. Cor. 5.18 19. Phil. 2.16. that God hath called them to the faith of truth, by the Gospell. Therfore is it called the word of truth by S. Paul and by S. Iames too: as also, the word or ministery of reconciliation; & the word of life. Nether deny we but that we may more iustly make claime to that title, thē al the Papists in the world cā do: for that our preaching and doctrine is according to that Gospel, wheras the teachers in the Romish Synagogue, worship God in vaine,Mat. 15.9. teaching for doctrines mans pre∣cepts, and insteed of the sound and whol∣some food of gods vndoubted word, they feed them that follow them, with empty huskes of mens traditions. Howsoever therfore our aduersaries meane whē they cal vs by that nāe, yet we haue iust cause to reioice therin. because therby we are
assured, that the foundation of our hope is certaine and sure, being built vpon so firme a ground as the gospel is. Now af∣ter this title or inscription, he commeth vnto the matter itselfe, and first (as I said) beginneth with the accusation or com∣plaint in this sort. VVhereas we your Suppliants haue long time indured, and doe dayly receiue ma∣ny disgraces, imprisonments, and losses, to our great impouerishing, yea to the vt¦ter vndoeing of a great many of vs: to the which our afflictions ther is at this time by your LL. added the heauy cē∣sure of Excommunication: and withall we do finde our selues dayly (to the inex∣plicable greif of our harts) deeper to in∣cur the aversion and indignation of his maiestie, more heavy and greiuous vnto vs, then all our temporal losses and affli∣ctions: and all those calamities to haue only their being, in regard only of our Recusancie and constant persevering in the Religion we haue receiued from our forefathers, as they frō theirs &c.
In this cōplaint the Petitioner shew∣eth first the supposed greifes and vexati∣ons of the Recusants, then also the cause of their afflictions. Their vexations as he setteth them downe, are of sundry sorts; in the first ranck he placeth such losses & disgraces as they would seeme to suffer; then they find themselues greiued with the Ecclesiasticall censure of excōmuni∣cation: thirdly that his maiestie doth not so fauorably respect them, as they would he should. The disgraces that this Petitioner cō∣plaineth of, I cannot certainly speake of, because the complaint is so indefinite, without comming to any particulars. It may be that he accompteth it a disgrace, that Recusants haue not that grace and credit, that themselues desire, or that au∣thority in the common wealth that they would haue. But that is not properly a disgracing of them, because nothing is done therin to bring them into cōtempt; but only a not adding of titles or offices to them, for their further reputatiō. And
who would thinke it fitt that any state should be managed, & the rudder of that ship gouerned, by such as are of a contra∣ry Religion to the same? So that if this were true, yet is there no iust cause of cō∣plaint therfore. But there are of them but too many in grace and reputation, wherby they haue great meanes to discourage the simple people ouer whome they haue gouern∣ment; & to make more obstinate against true obedience to god and Prince, such as are of themselues but too ready, to start aside from the right way. And the further that they are frō the Soueraigne authority, the more dangerous is any of∣fice that is committed to them: because the eye of him, that is to answere for the evil that cōmeth by bad Officers, which he permitteth or reformeth not, is far frō such, that it cannot behold their doinges. It were therfore not only to be wished, but by earnest praier to be sued for, that God would in this point more and more lighten the hart of our most Gratious So∣ueraigne,
in any wise to take heed that the enemies to Gods truth, haue no credit, I meane for office or autoritie in the cō∣mon wealth; especially in these North parts, where it wil be hard for him truly to knowe what hurt cōmeth by such vn∣to the truth, what danger to the state. Oh that that golden sentence of the wisest man that euer was, and a king too, were written on the back of the right hād of all Kinges and Princes that haue soue∣raigne authority, that it might be in their eie when they signe the Billes wherby they grant authoritie to anie vnder thē: VVhen the wicked rise vp,Provreb. 28. men hide them∣selues; but when they perish, the righteous increase. Or that other much like the for¦mer,Prou. 25.2. VVhen the righteous are in authoriy the people reioice, but whē the wicked bea∣reth rule, the people sigh. For there can be no greater hart-breaking to the godly, then to haue wicked men to beare the swaie or to them that are zealous for the truth, then when enemies to the same, may do what they list. Good therfore is
the councell of Salomon elsewhere, and such as Kinges should carefully follow, forhe no doubt learned it by experiēce. Take away the wicked from the King (frō being partakers vnder him of his authori∣ty) & his throne shalbe established in righ∣teousnes. For this gracing then, his maiestie is to haue a special regard that it be not be∣stowed vpō any, (if he haue a due care of Gods glorie and the good of his people) but only vpon such as are favorours of the Gospel, and furtherers of all good; fol∣lowing that most godly paterne, which Dauid, a King, setteth before al such as are of his ranck,Ps. 101. and haue the gouernmēt of Kingdomes and contries. So that they being so opposite as they are, to the state as now it is, may not in any discretiō cō∣plaine, if greater authority be not com∣mitted to them, then may stand ei∣ther with the furtherance of Gods truth, or with the safty of the weale publike. What is then the disgracing here mentioned? Or rather what are the dis∣gracinges?
For so he speaketh as if they were disgraced sundry waies. If the Peti∣tioner complaine of disgracings, because some few of them, are, after long time of Recusancy, and after diuers presumpti∣ous actions against the Lawes of this Realme, and ordinances of this Church, conuented before Authoritie: hee shoulde haue called to remembrāce, that we holding, yea certainly knowing, that Religion which we professe, to be the vn¦doubted Truth, can doe no lesse in de∣fence of that Truth, then to cal vpon thē that despise the same, to knowe what mo∣ueth them to reiect the same. But when they appeare before authoritie, they are not sharply rebuked (vnlesse themselues giue greater occasion therof) much lesse are they by approbrious tearms disgrac∣ed, or by any vnseemlie punishments, not fitt and convenient for their persons re∣proached: with milde and christian ex∣hortations moued to heare such as them∣selues wil choose to be farther instructed by. And I trust in al this there is no disgra∣cing.
But I would this Petitioner would look back vnto those dayes not lōg since bypast. Many of our Recusāts may remē∣ber the daies of Queene Mary, wherin they that complaine so much that they are disgraced (though vntruely) did in∣deed by what means they could, disgrace such Godly Martyrs as came before thē, by stocking and base vsage of many, who though they had bin in an error, (which their aduersaries could neuer proue a∣gainst them) yet in regard of their paren∣tage, degree, or place that they had in the Church & common wealth, should not haue been so disgracefully so cruellie delt withall. And what was the beating of Tho: Hinshaw, and Iohn Milles & di∣uerse others with rods? Did not that blo∣die Bishop Boner disgrace them thereby as much as he might? To be accoumpted an Hereticke is a thing odious & of great disgrace: yet was it then and still is, a cō∣mon name that the Romish Synagogue bestowed vpon vs, though nether they nor yet their fathers, could proue any he∣resie
in our doctrine. To be called Schis∣maticks is a great reproach: yet dare they staine therwith vs, who are alwaies rea∣dy to shew by good warrant and sufficiēt testimony that we swarue not from the true, holy, Catholick and Apostolick Church. Thus they who most accuse vs, as if we disgraced them, may more iustly be charged that they disgrace vs. And herein the Petitioner offereth great wrong vnto the state, in seeking to make the world beleue, that we wish the disgrace of them, for whose want of grace we rather sigh and mourne, in that their eies are so blinded, & their harts so hardē∣ed against the māifest light of truth, that they will not vse any meanes to trie the spirits (that come in secret vnto them) whether they be of God or not,1. Ioh. 4.1 although S. Iohn expressly adviseth all so to doe: but rather wittingly yea and wilfully too, they suffer their blinde guides to lead thē into the bottomlesse pitt of eternall per∣dition. This part therfore of this cōplaint may seeme rather to tend to this end, that
our state be the staine of crueltie may be made odious, to such as will beleeue this Petitioner, and their case seeme a great deale worse then it is; rather I say thē for any iust cause that is giuen him, to vse such words. And wheras the petition, seemeth to make these, and the other supposed vex∣ations after mentioned, to be common to them all, (for I take the Petitioner to be a suiter for al Recusants) it is most cer∣taine that a great number of them are so far from suffering any disgrace in respect of their Recusancy, that it is the greatest ornament they haue among their fauo∣rits that they are accompted Recusants; as if they by that name would seeme to haue some conscience in Religion, who otherwise in all their behauiour, shew plainly enough, that they haue nether conscience, nor honestie, but haue vtter∣ly cast of all feare of god & shame of mē: and hauing obtained the report to be Re∣cusants or Romish Catholicks, it is a cloake that couereth all faults.
The next part of this cōplaint is touch∣ing their imprisonment, wherin as in the former, his accusatiō seemeth to be more generall, then is their imprisonment. For vnlesse the Recusants in other countries be more obediēt vnto Law then in these North parts, wherin they haue no regard at all of any Summones, but shew them∣selues too contemptuous of all lawfull authoritie: I suppose J may be bould to saie that not the hūdreth Recusant indu∣reth this vexation. Nay of sundry whole families in a manner, perchance not one can be convented. And therfore were it greatlie to be wished, that for the better execution of godlie lawes, some more forcible and effectuall order might be ta∣ken for the bringing before authoritie, such as yet make a mock of gods truth, despise all good ordinances, and scorne all lawfull authoritie. And if anie being found verie obstinat, in so much as nether they will conforme themselues according to the Christian lawes of this Realme in that case proui∣ded,
nether will, or can giue anie sound reason of such their obstinacie; nether yet heare others who can instruct them (even such of our profession, as thēselues can best like of) be for such contumacie committed to some prison: yet is there not anie Papist that hath iust cause to complaine of such imprisonment, seeing that our correction that we laie vpon Re∣cusants, is but with rodds, wheras Papists whipp with Scorpions, we stocke thē not, we hinder them not, but that they may be releiued of their owne (if they haue it) or by their freinds, if they will bestow a∣nie thing vpō them. We permit them to haue light or fire, or any other thing ne∣cessarie for them: al which things were denied vnto many of the godly, in the late bloudy persecution, as sundry of the Recusants may yet remember. So that we may truly say that the litle finger of the Papists towards vs, hath bin heauier then our loines towards them: their gen∣tlest dealing more sharp for matters of Religion onlie, thē our greatest punish∣ments
that we impose vpon them. But why doe they accompt imprison∣ment such a vexation, who thought the most cruell death little enough for those of our profession? Let our Petitioner call to remembrance the mercylesse racking of Mistresse Anne Askew by him that was then L. Chancelour, to cause her to be∣wray others of her profession; the barba∣rous burning of the hande of Tho. Tom∣kins, Rose Alin, and a blinde harper in Queene Maries daies; the forcible draw∣ing of an arrowe through the fingers of Cutbert Simpson harde tyed togither so that the bloud sprong out. Let him I saie consider of these and such like vnchristiā vsage of Christian men, whereby they would haue constrained them, either to haue accused others, or to denie their faith. And though the Popish rabble, take exception (I know) to the storie wherein these things are reported, yet the Author of that booke, brings so good proofes of that he writeth, that they who will denie
these things, shall rather shew a minde they haue to darkē the light of truth, that their shame may not appeare, then any good reason that they can bring, to im∣paire the credit thereof. These stories thē being extant, and in eies of al men to read and know, and in the memories of manie men who yet living can testifie the truth thereof, may stop the mouthes of all Pa∣pists for complaining of anie great vexa∣tion for their imprisonment. But what woulde the Petitioner haue vs to do in this case? The Recusants are contrarie to vs in Religiō, they trāsgresse our Lawes, and breake al godlie ordinan∣ces that are made, for the edifying & in∣struction of al his Maiesties subiects: they wil not heare, but stubbornlie refuse all councel and teaching, vnlesse it bee such as their blind guides doe afford them. (I wil not here say, they are also verie dan∣gerous to the state, for that followeth af∣ter to be discussed, when I come to the cause that this Petitioner yeeldeth, why they are thus vexed.) If it be the truth
that we teach, (as wee are most assured it is) is it any reason we should suffer others to be lead away by deceitfull words, of in∣tising and seducing false teachers, & not seeke by all meanes we can to reclaime them? It is our part, if possible we may, to bring againe to the sheepfold, those wā∣dering sheep. And if gentle & mild per∣swasions will not serve, we must compell thē by more sharpe chasticement.Luc. 14.23. This I knowe the most milde Papistes in the world, would think they should do to the professours of the Gospel, if authoritie were with them, as now it is with vs. We see then, that it is not for Papists (whose crueltie is, I suppose far greater, against such as are not of their profession then any other religion whatsoeuer doth vse) to complaine of such gentle imprisō¦ment as is imposed vpon them for Recu∣fancie; vnlesse they will thinke it fitt, that in a wel gouerned and setled state, lawes may be broken without due punishmēt, or offences may be winked at, and impu∣nitie should be esteemed to bring safty to
a common wealth, that is pestred with obstinate subiects. Which to imagine, is to let loose the raines of libertie, to al dis∣order & disobedience, & to trouble the quiet estate of a common wealth. S. Augustine was once of that minde as himselfe confesseth, that it liked him nothing,Retract. 2 cap. 5 Vllius secularis potestatis impetu schismaticos ad communionem, violentèr, vehementèr{que} arctari; that schismatickes should by the force of anie secular power, be violentlie, and earnestly constrained to cō∣municate, meaning in Religion with the godly. But he in that place acknowledg∣eth, that it was his errour, quia nondū ex∣pertus eram, vel quantum mali eorum au∣deret impunitas, vel quantum eis in melius mutandis conferre posset diligentia disci∣plinae; because (saith he) as yet I had not proued, ether to what audacious mischiefe their impunitie would draw them, or howe much it would further their amendment to vse the diligence of discipline & seueri∣tie towards them. The same Father therefore writing to
Vincentius,Epist. 48. & reporting of the Donatists, as we haue found, the Papists to be; Do∣natistae nimiū inquieti sunt, the Donatists (saith he, the Papists may we say) are too factious & combersome, addeth, quos per ordinatas à Deo potestates cohiberi at{que} corrigi, mihi non videtur invtile: VVho that by such powers as are ordained of God they should be restrained and corrected, it seemeth good to me. And afterwards hee sheweth how greatly hee reioiceth at the amendement of manie of them by such sharpnes, who would not otherwise haue beene bettered. To this end also he allea∣geth that place of the gospel,Luke 14.23 Cōpell such as you finde, to come in. Quia (saith he) vt phrenetici ligantur, sic Haeretici; men in error of Religiō are like Lunatick or mad men, they must bee bounde and tyed, and as it were by the Physick of discipline broughte from the deadlye disease of their dying soules. And afterwardes declaring, how diverse men spake of di∣verse occasions, whereby they were hin∣dered from comming to the Catholicke
faith, but being reformed, they gaue thanks to God, who in mercie reclaimed them by such chastisementes: Among o∣thers he bringeth in some saying, as most of our Recusants no doubt may saie, Nos falsis rumoribus terrebamur intrare, quos falsos esse nesciremus, nisi intraremus, nec intraremus, nisicogeremur. Gratias Domino, qui trepidationem nostram flagel∣lo abstulit, expertos docuit quam vana & inania de Ecclesia sua mendax fama iacta verit: that is, wee by false reportes vvere scarred from entring, which reports vvee should not know to be false, vnlesse wee en∣tred: neither would we enter, but being cō∣strained. Thanks be vnto the Lord, who by a scourge took away our feare, teaching vs by experience, how vaine & false rumors, lying fame had spread of his Church. How manie are discouraged from our Churches, by vntrue reportes, that we are schismaticks, our Religion is Heresie; to follow vs, is to leaue the Church? We are (say they) enemies to good works, we speake against fasting and praier; our Gos∣pel
is a Gospel of libertie, and manie such like most false slanders, do they scatter a∣broad among their favourites: and al to make the simple and ignorant afraid, to resort to our assemblies. And when they haue once taken them in the snares of Re∣cusancie, and bound them in the chaines of promise, oath, & reconciliation, to the Romish Church; then must they not in a∣ny wise heare vs preach, or our Service read; they must not read our bookes, least their eies being opened, they shoulde see the mysterie of iniquity, that worketh in, and by Poperie. But as in St. Augustines time manie euen in the cittie of Hippo, where he was Bishop, were by punish∣ment converted from being Donatists, & became Catholickes: so no doubt sundrie of our Recusants, if good meanes and suf∣ficient might be obtained, to bring them before authoritie, would easily be com∣pelled to come in, and being come into our Churches, would of themselues dis∣couer the false reportes, that they haue hard of our Religion.
Not only Augustine is of this minde, but sundrie other of the Fathers too; as Basill, Gregorie, (for his excellencie called the Divine) and manie mo sought for re∣straint of such as troubled the Church, by authoritie of the sword, as may sufficient∣lie (if it were needful) bee proued out of their owne writings. But to knit vp this matter, of it selfe not hard, but by that which hath bin alreadie said, most plaine, the Scriptures themselues afford vs suffi∣cient proofe hereof, especially in that no∣table storie of Iosiah that good king of Iu∣da, who after the booke of the Law was foūd, he read therin before al the people, & made a covenāt before the Lord,2. Chro. 34 31.32. to walk after the Lord. And he caused al that were foūd in Ierusalē & Beniamin to stande to it. Marke that it is said he caused thē, that is, the people, to stande to the couenant that he had made: and yet it is further to his immortall praise recorded of him in Gods Register booke,33 that he compelled al that vvere found in Israell, to serue the Lord their God: so all his daies they turned
not backe from the Lorde God of their fa∣thers. May good king Iosiah make his people to stand to the covenant, that hee made with God: and may not our godlie King Iames doe the like? May he compell them to serue the Lorde God, yea and that in such sort, that all his daies (though no doubt of themselues prone enough to I∣dolatrie) they durst not turne backe from the God of their fathers; and shall wee so manacle the hands of our most gracious Soveraigne, or of his Magistrates vnder him, that they may not vse such meanes to force and compell, to the true service of God, as our lawes haue appointed? Shal the king of Iuda, haue the testimo∣nie of Gods spirit to his eternal commen∣dation in holy writ, for this his godly se∣veritie in Gods cause: & can it be thought a thing worthie to be complained of, and too severe, if the king of Great Brittaine shall follow his zeale? No, no, the same God that thē approued the zeale to Gods glorie, that was in that Mirrour of all
Christian Kings, good king Iosiah: the same God (I say) doth stil allow, especial∣ly in al Princes and Magistrates, a Chri∣stian care, and feruent desire, to haue his honour aduanced within their domini∣ons, by seting forth and maintaining the true worship of God, and compelling all their subiects to yeeld therto. Nay if they doe not with care and courage performe this seruice, let them remember the time shall come, when this voice shall sound full shrill in the eare of their conscien∣ces to their great terror,Luke 16.2. yeeld an accompt of thy Stewardship. For horribly and suddainely will God appeare vnto you (O you mighty monarchs if you vse not well your greatnes) For a hard iudgmēt shal they haue that bear rule.Wisd. 6.5. For he that is most low is worthy mercy:6. but the mighty shall be mightely tormented;7. For he that is Lord ouer al wil spare no person, nether shal he feare any greatnes: for he hath made the small and great, and careth for all alik.8. But for the mighty abideth the sorer triall. And as God hateth in great
ones, al neglect of duty: so especiallie to be cold and carelesse in the thinges that properly concerne his Glorie, he wil not suffer vnpunished. For this cause, in the stories of the Kings ouer Gods people, as there is nothing so much commended in them as their zeale in Gods cause; so are not any their vices in a māner set downe, (though they were no doubt subiect to many, as by the Prophets it may be ga∣thered) but their Idolatries, or carelesse∣nes in the seruice of God: so that it is a cō¦mon staine euen to the good Kings, the high places, hill-altars, or groues vvere not put downe. Which glasse if Princes would often looke into, they might ther∣in see, not only that by their office they may, but also that of dutie they ought, as Elias saith he was,1. Kings 19.10. to be very ielous for the Lord God of Hostes: & that the maintaine∣ing of the truth, and abolishing of super∣stition is a principall charge belonging vnto them. This appeareth plainelie e∣nough, in that it is required of kings, that they be much exercised in Gods booke,
He shal read therin all the daies of his life,Deut. 17.19 that he may learne to feare the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this lawe, and these ordinances (not to knowe them onlie) for to doe them. Now the last of the vexations (for so he tearmeth their milde and meeke cor∣rections) which hee speaketh of, of this ranke, is their losses. And in deed, Recu∣sants haue great and grievous losses, (I confesse) and such, as if they could consi∣der of them aright, would make the haire of their heads to stand on end, and their verie harts to melt and bleed for sorrow. Oh that they were wise,Deut. 32.29 Luke 19.42 thē would they vn∣derstand this, they would consider their lat∣ter end. O if they had knowne at the least in this their day, those things which belong vnto their peace: but nowe are they hid frō their eies. They complaine of their vexa∣tions,Prov. 1.31. Ier. 17.10. Esa. 50.11. but they are most of all vexed with their own inventions; and their fruitlesse & wicked imaginations, are chiefe cause of their endlesse sorrow. They haue losses; it is most true. They haue
lost the reputation of dutifull subiects. And how can it be otherwise, since they haue vowed themselues to the obediēce of him, who is an enemie to al Soueraign∣tie besides his owne.Mat. 6.24 As noe man can serue two masters (for so our Sauiour Christ telleth vs) For either he shall hate the one and loue the other, or else shall he leane to the one and despise the other: so noe man certainely, can promise & performe sub∣iection to two such Monarches, as are of that nature, that the one of them over∣throweth the state of the other. They who are subiect to the Romish Bishop, whose greatest care is to maintain super∣stition and his owne pride, that he may be exalted aboue the greatest Potentats vpō the earth: can neuer truely serue him (whatsoeuer in words they do pretend) who opposeth himselfe against all such will-worships, and will not subeict his Soueraigne power, to the ambitious wil of that Romish Preist. Yea they haue lost the harts of dutiful Subiects; For the Romish Theef who rob¦beth
God of his honour, Princes of their obedience, and subiects of their salvatiō, hath by his inchantments stolē away the harts of Recusants frō their natural Prin∣ces, and dread Soveraignes. So that they rest vpon his wil, and do but waite for his commandement, if it be, to oppose them selues against their friends, their Sove∣raigne, yea and their Natiue Coūtry too. For Recusants are not to bee reckoned in that ranke, neither are they accōpted of among the Papists themselues, vntil they haue promised obedience vnto him, who vnder colour of beeing Heade of the Church (for that vniust title hee challen∣geth) robbeth the greatest members of the Church, of their due honour and al∣leageance. They leese also the benefit of the word, which in our Churches soundeth in such a tongue & language, as the ignorantest may vnderstand, so that they therby may be edified and instructed, their soules fed and nourished to eternall life: yea that they may haue that sword of the Spirit in
readines, the better to be inabled, to with∣stand the daungerous assaultes of Satan. And by this losse of the word of God, they are also deprived of the knowledge of the truth, and of the true service of God; they make shipwracke of faith; they want the true light of conscience, the sweete com∣fort of Gods most comfortable promises. These (I say) and manie such like heaven∣lie graces they leese, and in recompence of these so great losses, they gaine from Rome (if it may be called gaine, which they buy with so deere a price as those things cost them, and with so evident pe∣ril to their soules,) they gaine (I say) Pardons, Agnus-Deis, blessed graines, con∣secrated crosses, with other such trash & trumperie, things of no worth; though e∣steemed by them most deere & precious, if anie their seducers bring them newes from Rome, telling them the holy Father, himselfe did consecrate the same, & hea∣ved his holie hands over them. But these are not the losses that grieue our Recusants or wherof the Petitioner
complaineth. we dayly receiue losses (say they) to our great impouerishing, yea to the vndoeing of a great many of vs. First for the common sort who are the greatest number, for ought I knowe, few of them are any way touched to their losse. Some few, and those very few indeed, are some∣time conuented, perchance also imprisō∣ment for their great stubbornnes, & of∣fensiue example that they giue of disobe¦dience. But this withall I dare affirme, that many of them gaine by their Recusā∣cie, so farr are they from leesing therby. For hauing no good meane to liue, there are that sort themselues with these diso∣bedient persones obtaineing therby bet∣ter maintenance, then otherwise their owne state would afford them. I could also name if I would one, who (as I haue credibly hard) being imprisoned in Yorke Castle, liued so by this losse, that he gained wherby to purchase lād worth one hundred pound by the yeare. It is a common thing and vsed of very many of good reckoning, vnder colour of their
trouble for their Recusancy, to lessē their charge, and liue far vnder that state, that their ancestors haue heretofore liued & they might liue in saueing much therby, for ought the world can iudge, whether to some good purpose or not, the Lord best knoweth. Yea that is also many times a colourable pretence, for racking of rents, and dealing hardly, ether with Te∣nants or with any other, with whom they haue to deale. So that if some of the greater sort doe pay to his Maiesties coffers somwhat: yet cā many of them find means enough to make that paiment verie litle in com∣parison of that should be paid, and more thē that litle, they cā raise by such means as J haue mentioned, to keep them from losse. Our Petitioner therfore cannot per∣swaid vs, that generally their losse is such as that they need so to complaine of im∣pouerishing, much lesse of vtter vndoing. But grant their losses to be greater thē they are. I am sure they are no heauier then the law it selfe doth impose; no not
so sharp by farr. And if any man wil think our lawes to be too seuere, he must con∣sider, that nether we only, nether first of all, haue made Pecuniarie punishments to restraine such as are of contrarie Reli∣gion.Epist. 50. St. Augustine liketh wel of a lawe made by Theodosius that godly Empe∣rour, generally against all Hereticks, that their Bishops or Clerks whersoeuer they were found should be finde in ten pounds, & wisheth it might be more particular∣lie made against the Donatists, because they denied themselues to be Hereticks. And because of some outrages after cōmitted by the Donatists,Ibid. a more sharp law was decreed, that they who were of that sect, should be pūished by the purse, But their Bishops or Ministers should be ba∣nished: vt tātae immanitatis haeresis Dona∣tistarum; (cui crudeliùs parci videbatur quā ipsa saeuicbat) non tantum violentae esse, sed omnino esse non sineretur impunè: that is, That the Heresie of the Donatists being of so great crueltie that the sparing therof might well seeme to be greater cru∣eltie,
should not only not be suffered to be so fierce, but not to be at al vnpūished. wher∣by sufficiently it appeareth tstat Christiā Princes, giue no iust cause to Recusants of complaint, if by the purse, or other moderate and resonable punishments, they doe not only restraine the overbold∣nes of such as dare infringe their godlie lawes, but also force thē to come to their Churches, Hither to we haue seene that the losses of Recusants are not so greate as they would haue them esteemed; and though they were such; it is plaine they were iu∣stifiable, before anie of indifferent iudge∣ment. But what are the losses that Recu∣sants can speake of, in respect of the losse, not of some goods onlie, but of libertie also, and of life too? In the Persecutiō that was in the daies of Queene Mary, against the Professours of the Gospell, the fathers and mothers lost their children? the chil∣dren their parents, the husbands lost their wiues, and wiues their husbands, & dee∣rest friends were taken the one, from the
other. These were losses indeede, and such as were verie grievous & gaue iust cause of complaint. But to haue some restraint of libertie, or a smal Pecuniarie punish∣ment, is no heavy burdē for a mā to beare for conscience sake. In the late daies of persecutiō, which euen now I spake of, a great number of godlie Martyrs woulde haue accompted such disgraces as are here complained of, great glorie, such imprisonment, great li∣bertie and freedome, yea such losses, an exceeding great gaine; if in a meane state of life, though in prison, they might haue beene free to serue their God. It cannot cannot therfore but seeme a thing to me very strange, & to all other too of indif∣ferent iudgment, that they, who when they had the Law and the sword in their owne handes, omitted almost no kinde of crueltie, against such as vpō good groūds and such as their adversaries themselues could not tel how to disproue, dissented from them in Religion; should now vpon so light occasion, make so great cōplaint,
as if some great cruelty were shewed vp∣on them. And whereas then these impri∣sonments and losses, were laid vpon al that they could heare of, that loued the Gos∣pel, with sharpe inquirie and cruel con∣straining of manie, to accuse others: yet now we know, and dailie see before our eies, sundrie whom we know to be Recu∣sants, and yet doe not vse that extremitie against them that wee might but rather looke for their conversion, being nothing so forwarde to take them, as they were to burne vs. But by whom haue our Recusants such losses, as are to the impoverishing, yea the vtter vndoing of many of them? The kings coffers get not much, as hath bin shewed and that which goeth that waie, is taken of such as are wel able to pay. If thē their losses be so great, let them consider vvell with themseues by whom their losse cō∣eth. The Iesuites, the Great Masters of al out Recusāts, how proud they are in their followers, apparell, and diet, & in things that belong vnto them,Quod lib. VVilliam VVatsō
that traiterous Preist, and other Popish Preists can tell vs, in a Memoriall of Ac∣cusations (thought to be devised by one Fisher) in the 4 Paragraph of it,Reply to Fa. Parsons Li∣bell. fol. 14. thus saith Noe Iesuit goeth to visit any in England, or trauelleth from on place to another, but he is richly appareled, and attēded on with a great traine of seruants, as if he were a Baron or a Earle. And the Reply of Parsōs Libell telleth vs of Fa Garnett, whose ex∣penses could not be lesse thē 500. pounds by the yeare, And of Master Iohn Gerard the worth of whose apparel he shameth to report, whose Geldings also were of great price and many. And one Oldcorne whom he calleth but a pety Iesuite, he knoweth his apparell to be seldome lesse worth then 30. or 40.yea a Iesuite girdle and hāgers of 30l price. Letters of A. C. p. 65 pound and he had 8 good Geldings at one time. I would that our Petitioner should consider, frō whēc maintenance must be had for these irre∣gular Regular spendthrifts, and prodigall lauishers of other mens goods: is it not from Recusants? If it be; let thē not charg the state with their losses, but their owne
Traiterous harts who vpon their charge maintaine such vnprofitable burdens of of the Common-wealth, such dangerous Canker wormes to the state. Yea and further the same reply telleth vs that in the Colledge of Iesuits at St. O∣demars (notwithstanding all their Pensi∣ons from the King and others) there be few English youthes there, whose parents doe not largly pay for their educations; nether can any poore youth be admitted thither (for all their pensions) but he must either haue anual stipēd of 20. markes plus minus by the yeare, or 40. 50. or 60. poūds portiō in grosse summe. Such continual portions to be bestowed vpon Recusants Children sēt to their Seminaries, are indeed the im∣pouerishing of them, nay the cause of a great want in the vvhole Realme, from which so many summes are transported. In the meane seasō, haue the Priests who tel vs these tales nothing? They haue bel∣lies to fill, and backes to cloath, and that is done not of the worst. Manie a wife robbing and vndoing their owne Hus∣bands,
to cherish (such is their hot deuo∣tion) these their Corner-friends; who whē they are seene abroad, are taken & repu∣ed for Courtiers and Gallants, VVatson & others of them cōplaine that the Iesuits are nothing liberall to them. Of whom then haue they their finding? Of whom, but of Recusants? These are great meanes to impoverish men of good abilitie, to mainetaine such a number of Caterpillers or Grashoppers worse thē those of Aegypt. Besides these things VVilliam VVatson in the Quodlibets, & the Reply to the fore∣said libell especially telleth vs, that they haue manie moe waies to get from Re∣cusants: there are Legacies in Pios vsus,Reply fol. 24. yeerely almes, extraordinarie gifts, restitu∣tions de bonis incertis, dispensations in di∣vers cases, alienations, advowsons, &c. and that the Legacies in Pios Vsus haue within few years come to 2000. or 3000. pound. And declareth also how Iohn Ge∣rard a Iesuit got of one Gentl. at one time 200. pound, at another time 700, and the bestowing of an 100. pound by yeere: of
another 160. poūd, of another 500. poūd & of a Gent. & his Mother 1000. marks. Is not this good getting for one man? I neede not here report what is testified in the Quodlibets concerning many notable pillings of men and women by the Iesuits and especiallie by that cheating Letcher Gerrard,Quod lib. 2 art. 5. Quod. lib. 3 art. 10. who besides his ordinarie couse∣ning of women, (with which sex hee was most intimat,) drew 3500li. at one clap from one man. But verie probably wee maie thinke, that if not all, yet much of that that our English men haue abroade, commeth frō our Recusants, & no doubt, such as are at home are nourished by thē. Is it any maruel if the very vaines of their riches bee drawne,Quodlib. 3. art. 10. From H. Druy 3500 A. Rowse 1000l. E. VVolpool. 1000••. Hudlestone. 1000l. &c. Anat. of T. B. l. 3. advis. , who haue so manie Horsteaches to sucke the same? Adde vnto these their Holy exercises, whereof the Priests make report, & you shal finde the Iesuits the most cunning cony catchers. I thinke in the world to abuse folke and co∣sin them of their wealth. So that our Recusants we see, maie in∣deede by Iesuits and Priests marvelously
be impoverished, though slowe enough they be, to beare anie burdens of the Cō∣mon-wealth. For when such things are demanded of them, then wil they alleage their paiments they make to the Prince, when he shall perchance not get the sixt part of that which is their due. But as if nothing were gotten from them, but that which by godlie Lawes is iustlie clai∣med from some few of them, for their ob∣stinate recusancie, they crie out of their losses and impoverishing, yea of their vn∣doing, as if what the Prince hath, or the Law requireth of them, went to a wrong purse: but what Traiterous seducers get from them, be it much more, is al wel be∣stowed. Wee see then that the penalties that Law imposeth are not so grieuous as the Petitioner woulde it should bee thought: they are not imposed vpon manie, and that they should bee more imposed then they are it is necessarie; and hath exam∣ple from former ages, with the godly ap∣probation
of St. Augustine. And to bee short it is most evident, that the fauour that they beare to the Enemies of God and the State, is greater cause of their im∣pouerishing, yea and of the vndoing of a great number of them, then is anie exe∣cution of Law against them, onlie in re∣spect of their Recusancie. For if their con∣tempt of Law, which is to great in them, by penalties be, if not reformed, yet cha∣stised; their obstinacie therein, not their Recusancie, is fined. To the which our afflictions there is at this time added by your LL. the heavie censure of Excommunication. This is the seconde part of the Petitio∣ners complaint, that Recusants be excom∣municated. And is this Censure so heavie vnto Recusants. They willinglie & obsti∣natlie refuse our Assemblies, flie from our Churches, disdaine our praiers, contemne our administration of Sacraments; to be short they wil be none of vs, and yet are grieued that they are not accompted a∣mong vs. Nay when they heare of their
Excommunication, there are of them that can saie, it is their desire so to be; they are euen as they would be. And yet to aggra∣vat the vexations that Recusants suffer, this is added as a thing that much trou∣bleth them, that they are Excommunica∣ted, this is now a heavy censure. What, is it more grievous that our Bishops pro∣nounce them to be none of our Church then that themselues abandon thēselues from the same? May they dispise all pow∣er, abuse all authoritie, breake al good or∣der, and seperate themselues from God and godlie Exercises of our Christiā pro∣fession, and our Bishops & wee looke on in the meane time, and vse no discipline to reforme disordered persons? I am glad that Excommunicatiō is now iudged to be a heavy censure, euen that excommunication that is done orderlie & as it ought to be; the parties vpon whom it is to be inflicted, being iudicially called and that vnto such places, as they maie come without danger. For hereby appea∣reth what iust occasion of cōplaint those
Romish Censures haue giuen to vs, who haue ere novv Interdicted this Realme, Excommunicated our Princes, not being their lawfull iudges,Euen as at this time they deale with the state of Ve∣nice. not calling them iu∣dicially to place conuenient, not hearing no not careing to heare what they could say in their defence. Jt seemeth they are of that mind that whatsoeuer those sur∣lie Censures of Rome doe against vs, must go for good, and whatsoeuer wee doe a∣gainst them, must be holden too severe and heauy. A Heavie Censure (I warrant you) to put thē out of the Church, whom vve cā by no meanes faire or fowle bring to the Church, much like as if truantlie and stubburne Schollers should say they find themselues greiued, because their Master chargeth them to come no more to Schole, or if a loitering lubber should finde fault, that he is not set to worke. But if this lavv were so executed as it might be, it would indeed be much the heauier and giue them inster cause ether of complaint, or of amendment. For (as I take it) they who stand excommunicate,
are depriued of all benefit of Subiects, or of defence by Law, against such wrongs as are offered vnto them. But we are not of the Popish spirite, to seeke by all mis∣chiefe & malice, to wreake them, as they would vs. No, some of vs are rather con∣tent to suffer their manie wrongs, then to offer them such hard measure. Neither doe I remember, that I haue euer hard that aduantage taken against anie of thē, sauing that in Northumberland (as is re∣ported) one Recusant thought to plead that against another of that Sect: But he against whom it should be pleaded, vn∣derstanding of his purpose, came to the Church, and so auoided his intent. But to end this point, we know & confesse that the Censure of Excommunicatiō is indeed heavy and grieuous vnto the godlie, and such as are of the Church: but because Recusants are out of our Churches, and will not be of our Assemblies, this com∣plaint therefore is of it selfe nothing, but added onlie as a cipher to make the num∣ber of vexations seeme greater.
The third vexatiō that this Petitioner cōplaineth of, is vttered in these wordes: and withall we doe finde our selues dayly (to the inexplicable griefe of our harts) dee∣per to incurre the aversion and indignatiō of his Maiestie, more heavie and grievous vnto vs, then all our temporall losses & af∣flictions. In deed if this be considered as it ought to be, it is iust cause of griefe. For the wisest that euer was, hath set it down in writing,Prov. 19. i2 that, The kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lyon: as on the other side, his favour is like the dew vpō the grasse. And againe,Prov. 20.2. The feare of the king, is like the roaring of a Lyon, he that provoketh him to anger, sinneth against his owne soule. And yet againe in another place,Pro. 16.14. The wrath of a king is as messēgers of death; but a wise man will pacifie it. In the later of which places we see, what aduice king Salomon giueth vnto them, who feele the displea∣sure of their Soveraigne, heavie and grie∣vous; namelie, that they if they be wise, shoulde frame themselues to pacifie the same.
His aversion (you saie) and indignati∣on is grievous. Indeed Recusants haue iust cause to feare it. For if his Maiesty should deale according to rigour of Law, as Re∣cusants diuerse times prouoke him to do, not onlie by their stubbornes, but also by their strange and sawcie, yea and barba∣rous attempts: their case would bee yet much harder then hitherto it hath been, and their punishments more sharpe. But you are grieved you saie, how shal your griefe be remedied? Must the king yeeld vnto your vnlawfull & vnchristian desire, to grant Toleratiō? Is it not rather fit that you should cōdescend to his Ma∣iesties most godlie and Christian laws, & agree with him in his most holie Professi∣on? His Religion is such, as is directlie op∣posite to Popish superstitions and Idola∣tries, neither maie he, vnlesse he wil incur gods displeasure, permit or suffer any Po∣pish abominatiōs within his dominions, as perchance maie hereafter bee suffici∣entlie proued, when I come to the thirde general point of this Petitiō. Seeing ther∣fore
he cānot condescend to you, vnlesse he wil goe against the light of his Consci∣ence, and neglect the necessarie dutie of a Christian king: if you will looke for ease of your griefe, it is reason you conforme your selues to his godlie lawes. And that the rather, because Recu∣sants verie iustly giue cause of his Maie∣sties aversion & indignation, in that they hold a contrarie Religion, his being so in∣falliblie grounded vpon Gods vndoubted written VVord; they thinke themselues bound to obey the Popes will, though a∣gainst the King and this State, vowing their seruice vnto that prowd & presump¦tuous Man of sinne, that abuseth all Au∣thoritie & Maiestie whatsoeuer.Lib. sacr. Ceremon. He ma∣keth Emperours & kings hold his stirrup, lead his horse, naie to be his foot stooles, to powre the water when hee washeth, to serue him at his table, to kisse his feet, and in Coūcels to sit no higher then his feet;Pontifical. de inaug. Reg. yea, he maketh them sweare Canonical o∣bedience to him. He taketh vpon him to depose them at his pleasure, to giue their
right & inheritance to whom it pleaseth him, to discharge subiects of oath & obe∣dience. Hath his Maiestie, or anie other Prince that hath anie wise care of his e∣state, anie cause to like or loue such sub∣iects? Your answere I knowe is ready, that you wilbe subiect to the Pope for Religi∣on onlie. But who shall be iudge therin; the Pope or you? If he saith that it belong∣eth to the cause of Religion to depose an Hereticke, (as he tearmeth all that loue the Gospel) you dare not say, it is not so. In such case his Maiestie hath noe cause to hope wel of so doubtful subiects. Ther∣fore if you would haue his cheerfull coū∣tenance, ioine not with him who is an E∣nimy to our gracious Soueraigne, and al others that maintaine the truth. Nether can your words perswade vs, that your o∣bedience to the Bishop of Rome shall ex∣tend no further then you promise, so lōg as you retaine and maintaine among you Iesuits and Priests such firebrands of mis∣cheife, & trumpets of Rebelliō; of whose
mischieuous purposes and practises a∣gainst this their Natiue countrie, as the Priests in their many bookes extant are good witnesses against the Iesuits; so the late conspiracie of VVatson, and many o∣ther mischeiuous intents and meanings by them before plotted and intended, do plainlie declare, how dangerous your Priests are too. Is it not then for the safty of his Maiestie to haue indignation a∣gainst those Hoasts, that intertaine such guests? Moreouer his Maiestie hath yet great∣ter cause of indignation, when he calleth to rememberance, how wholy the Scrip∣tures charge subiects, to honour & obey their Kings and Princes. Let every soule be subiect to the higher powers.Rom. 13. i. For there is noe power but of God,Rom. 13.1. & the powers that be, are ordained of God. &c. And the same Apostle vvriting vnto Titus, put them (of Creta, saith he) in remembrance, that they be subiect vnto principalities and powers,Tit. 3. i. and that they be obedient. S. Peter likwise, submit your selues to al manner ordinance
of man, for the Lords sake,1. Pet. 2.13. whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the superiour,14. or vnto gouernours,17. as vnto them that are sent of him. Feare God, Honour the King. These I saie, and many such like places, proue that we owe this duty to him. But for the Pope there is not one, I say not one testimonie in all the Scriptures, to proue that vniuersall power that he challengeth; vniuersall J tearme it, be∣cause he extendeth his iurisdiction, by force and subtletie, not onlie ouer al Per∣sons and causes Ecclesiasticall, in al places whatsoeuer, but also medleth so far with Princes too, that they who are vnder his slavish obediēce, may not but by his leaue presume to enter vpon their lawful right and inheritance. Yet this man, whose Au¦thoritie is so lawlesse, and so destitute of all good ground, beareth so great a swaie in the harts of Recusants, that if he com∣mand, they easily forget all duty and ale∣geance, that the law of God and man re∣quireth of them. Giue therfore to Caesar the things thatMat. 22.2.
are Caesars, and giue vnto God those things which are gods. Rob not Potentates and Princes of their authoritie, deny thē not their due obedience, acknowledge not a∣ny aboue them, or equall to them, in the affaiers of their owne dominis. By such meanes you shal more perswade his Ma∣iestie, and assure him of your louing and loiall affections, then by al the faire shew of words wherwith you gloze. Nether is there any cause you should feare, to cast of your yoke of bondage & seruitude to that Romish Preist, who (as I said) hath not any warrāt of gods word, to take vpon him as Head of the vniver∣sall Church. The first that gott that title was Boniface the 3. who was at the least 600. yeares after Christ; and he that gaue that superiority, was that wicked Phocas, who murdered his Master to obtaine the Empire. He it was that granted, Vt Episco∣pus Romanus, vocaretur, & haberetur ca∣put omnium Ecclesiarum, that the Bishop of Rome,Plat in Bo∣naf. 3. should be counted and called head of all Churches, as Platina and other sto∣ries
report. The Headship ouer the Church being thus obtained, by the meanes of that wicked Emperour; Boniface the 8. af∣terwards,Benevenuti August. in Alberto. he who was called papa famo∣sus, The famous Pope, not for any good∣nes I warrant you, and Magnificus tyrā∣nus sacerdotū, The stately Tirāt of Priests, (for indeed he vsed them very cruelly, so did he Princes too) he who appearing on day like a Pope, the next day attired as Emperour, with the Imperiall diadē on his head, & a sword by his silly side, cried, Ego sū Caesar, I am Emperour (for he thought the matter being so vnlikelie, noe man would haue beleeued that he was Empe∣rour, vnlesse he spak so) others (as Friar Ri¦och) report his words thus,Rioch in Al∣berto. Ego solus Cae∣sar, I am only Emperour; he I say caused it to be holden a thing de necessitate salutis necessarie to saluatiō to beleeue the Church of Rome to be the head of all Churches. Which also more then 120. yeares after was decreed in the Councell of Florence. Wherby it appeareth, that it is very late∣ly set downe to be a matter of faith & that
it may evedētly therby be gathered, that the Popes supremacie is not by Gods law, but by mans deuise established, & there∣fore that it may by man also be reiected. Jf therfore Recusāts vvil stil be slaues to that Romish Priest, who vsurpeth Au∣thoritie vvithout anie warrant, & vvhose headship over the Church, vvas not need¦ful to be beleeued vntil within these 160 yeares or there about; then may vve iust∣lie charge them, to be the causers of their owne griefs, & the workers of their owne vvoe, in that they are obedient to a for∣raigne power, vpō so smale or rather no ground, if he command thē: against that dutie that the lavve of Nature, the lavv of Nations, and the Lavv of God requi∣reth of al Subiects. The Petitioner ther∣fore in vaine maketh their case herein so lamentable, and their greife so great, as if nothing were greater corsiue or discom∣fort to them, then the vvant of his Ma∣iesties fauour, if to obtaine it, they vvill not yeeld to that, which so easilie, so law∣fully, so honestlie may be done: yea which
of necessitie and in cōscience they ought to doe: I meane if abandoning al forraine Power whatsoever, that wil not wholly imploy and vowe their seruice to their & our Dread Soueraigne. For whatsoever they pretend to be, or how much soever they say they wil doe in his cause, if like the Gadits, they had faces like lions,Chro. 12.8. and were like the Roes in the mountaines in swiftnes,14. If one of the least of thē could resist a hundred, and the greatest a thousād yet is it not for his Maiestie to trust any but such as are like to them of Zabulon mentioned in that chapter,33. that had not a double hart. One hart for the King, ano∣ther for the Pope, I like not. Thus haue we seene, how they (in cō∣parison of the persecutions which they haue laid vpon others) complaine of ease and make as if their burdens were not to be borne, though vpon others they did lay heavier by many degrees. Now let vs consider to what cause they impute all these vexations. And all these calamities to haue only their being, in regard only of
our Recusancie (saith this Petitioner) and constant perseuering in the Religion wee haue receiued frō our forefathers, as they from theirs. He seemeth to touch two cau∣ses of theise their supposed vexations; The one is their Recusancy, the other their Constancy. Their Recusancy is a re∣fusing to be partakars with vs in the word, Sacraments, and Praiers, and such excercises of our Religion: the other is a Resolute perseuerance in their Poperie. It ought not seeme strange vnto Pa∣pists, if for Recusancy onlie, they indure the griefes before mentioned, since they for matter of Religion onlie, haue tyran∣nized in most grieuous manner, and tor∣mented euen vnto death, farre better thē anie of them that I heare of. Was it not a common snare to take al true Professours of the Gospell in those bloodie daies of Queen Mary, what say you to the sacramēt of the altar? And if therin they woulde not beleiue as they did, and say as they said (though their absurditie in ihat point
was exceeding grosse) vvas it not then thought cause sufficient to bring them to the fire and stake. The stories are for this point so manie, that I need not par∣ticularlie to alleadge anie: they are so tes∣tified most of them in their Bishops owne Registers, and by so good proofe, as that iustlie they cannot be doubted of. Yea hath it not bin cause sufficient in the times of Poperie, greiuouslie to per∣secute such as onlie had, or hard read vn∣to them, some peice of Scripture in the English tongue? Lett the Register booke of Longland Bishop of Lincolne, testifie hearin against such as will not beleeue the truth: For their shal they finde that An. 1521. manie had that obiected a∣gainst them, as sufficient cause of shame∣ful penance or cruel death. Nether was anie matter of State, but of Religion only laid to the Charge of Richard Baifeild somtime Monke of Bury, but after a Mar∣tyr for the truth of the Gospel, most cruel∣lie dealt withal in the Lollards tower, be∣ing hanged by the necke, middle, & legs,
his hands also manicled,Art. & Mon ex Regest. Longlandi. against whom a∣mong other articles this was one, That in the yeare of our Lord, 1528. He was de∣tected and accused, to Cutb. then Bish. of London, for affirming & holding certaine articles contrarie to the holy Church, and speciallie that all land and praise should be giuen to God alone, and not to Saintes or creatures. No doubt if S. Paul had been brought before Bishop Longland and his fellowes, he should haue had the rewarde of an he∣reticke, for saying vnto the king everla∣sting,1. Tim. 1.17. immortall, invisible, vnto God only wise, be honour and glory for ever & euer. The like hee hath also in another place;1. Ti. 15.16. .6 but especiallie for teaching such doctrin, or rather such heresie (in the Romish lan∣guage.Heb. 13.15.) Let vs therfore by him (Christ) of∣fer the sacrifice of praise alwaies to God. Jf praise must alwaies be offered to God, what time shall wee haue to offer that sa∣crifice to Saints? And yet the Apostle is not alone in this heresie,Revel. 4.9. Re. 5.11.12 but the 4. Beastes in the Revelation also, yea and the thou∣sand
thousands of Angels (because Pa∣pists like so wel of multitude) giue honour and praise, and power, to him that sitteth vpon the throne & to the Lambe. And the 24. elders yeeld this reason why they also did rhe like, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to re∣ceiue, glorie, honour and power, For thou hast created all things. Now because wee cannot truelie saie so of Saints and Crea∣tures, it seemeth they by that reason will conclude, that Saints and Creatures must not haue that sacred honour & praise as∣cribed vnto them. So that their song of thanksgiuing, is quite contrarie to the do∣ctrine of the Church of Rome; & verie cō∣sonant to that which Papistes call heresie. Now if the Professours of the truth, haue beene bloodily persecuted by Papists for hearing onlie, or reading the VVorde of Truth for their instruction: why should Recusants thinke their Punishmēt for ob∣stinate Recusancie so hard a matter? But Recusants besides that they are E∣nemies to our profession and faith; are al∣so dangerous subiects, moe waies then
one, as before I said. First in that they in∣tertaine, yea and thinke it needfull vnder colour of perfourming the exercises of their Religion, that they shoulde haue a∣mong them such, as when occasion ser∣ueth, must put them in minde of their o∣bedience to that Prophane VVretch, whō they tearme most Holie Father, and ther∣by withdraw them from the kings obedi∣ence. Then also in that they take him to be the head of their Church, and so haue their harts bent on him, howsoeuer their bodie and goods, are for a time liable to the Princes will. And yet also they can finde meanes to make a state of all they possesse, to defraude his Maiestie of his right: & can finde such as would be loath to be accompted bad subiects, who can be content to be vsed as cloakes & skon∣ces, in these their treacherous shifts. Recusancie onlie then, how little so e∣ver the Petitioner maketh reckoning thereof, is cause sufficient to make them indure disgraces, losses, & imprisonmēts, with such other penalties as law imposeth
though as before I haue said, verie few in comparison of rhe number of Recusants, are so dealte with all I say the abstaining from our Churches (J meane in the time of diuine Seruice) vvhich is properly to be accompted recusancy, importeth a fur¦ther matter, as namelie because they wil not be of our Church, that therfore they are of sōe other. And if of anie, thē of the Romish, which hath for many hundred of yeares bin a Schole & nursery, of treasōs and treacheries of poisonings, & murde∣rings, of disobedience and Rebelliōs, and al such dangerous attempts against Prin∣ces and Commonwealths. The case then standing thus, that ma∣nie of his Maiesties subiects are stolen a∣way by the inchaunting and sugred spee∣ches, of the Romish Syrenes; I would sup∣pose it vvere vvise Policie, but I am sure it were good Christianity, to cause the Peo∣ple to sweare not to Supremacie of our Gracious Soveraigne onlie, (a thing in these daies verie needful) but to the main¦tenāce of Rligiō too. A thing not strang
or voide of example of former times For Asa & the people with him,2 Chron. 15.12. made a cove∣nant to seeke the Lord God of their fa∣thers, with al their hart, and with al their soule;13. and that who soeuer wil not seeke the Lord God of Israel shalbe slaine, whe∣ther he were smal or great, man or woemā And they sware vnto the Lord with a loud voice,14. and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets. We see here an oath sollemnlie taken for the Seruice of God, wherby the People thought thē∣selues more straitlie bound to performe the same. And whē Esdra would reforme the transgressiō of them that had marri∣ed strange wiues (as our Recusants are wedded to the Italian head) he caused the cheife preists, and Levits, and all Israell, to sweare that they would doe according to this word,1. Ezra. i0. 5 (of putting away their strang wiues) so they swore. Yea it seemeth the selfe same othe was put in practise in his Maiesties Realme of Scotland,The gene∣ral band. Anno. (as J take it) 1588. by a generall band, wherin, in the presence of
Almighty god, and with his Maiesties au∣thorizing and allowance, the Nobles and other that subscribed to the same, faith∣fully promised and solemnly swore, like as (say they) hereby we faithfully and solē∣ly sweare and promise to take ane true, cafauld and plaine part with his Maies∣tie amōg is our selues, for averting of the apearand danger, threatned to the said Religion &c. So that we may vnderstand hereby, that examples of the godlie prac¦tise of Zealous Kings, both old and new, may teach vs this godlie and Christian policie, to prouide as wel as we can, for the continuāce of Gods truth among vs: vvhich if we would in deuour as did Eze∣chiah, no doubt god shal bless our attēpts as he did his. In all the workes that hee be∣gan for the seruice of the house of God,2. Chro. 31 21. both in the Law & in the comāndemēts to seeke his God; he did it with al his hrt,2. Cor. 7. & prospered. For as God loueth a cheerfull giuer, so he best accepteth obediēce, that is done with cheerfulnes & courage; not this faint seruice, or such as is done with
vnwillingnes and grudging. In the former examples of Asa and Ezra, we see also, that there was a Coue∣nant made for the Service of God, besids the oathe that they tooke. Agreeable vvherevnto was (in my iudgment) not onlie that General band before mentiōed wherin very many in Scotland bound thē selues to defend the Religion professed then, and now also within that Countrie: but also that Subscription to a confession of the faith, whervnto the Kings Maies∣tie & al his Houshold did subscribe; which subscription also, is vpō sufficient penal∣tie commanded vnto al Ministers, that they shovld require the same of their Pa∣rochians, and with all diligence and speed to certifie the Refusers of such subscrip∣tion; as may appeare by the Confession of faith, and his Maiesties charge concern∣ing it, Ano. 1580, Which courses if they were taken vvithin his Maiesties domini∣ons, with some execution of punishmēt against the obstinate; J nothing doubt, but a great number would leaue Recusā∣cy,
and would vvith hart and mouth pro∣test against the same, & with their hand also (that might be an abiding witnes) shew their mislike. And why shoulde Papists themselues mislike of such a course, seeing they also do practise the same? The leaguers in their Association doe sweare, to restore Religiō according to the forme of the Catholicke Rom: Church, as appeareth in a booke in∣tituled,In Henry 3 An historicall collectiō of the most memorable accidents and tragicall massa∣cres of France; where also is to bee seene, that Henry the third the French king, in∣stituting an order of the holy Ghost bound them by solemne oath to such cōditions, as onlie pleased Catholike mindes, Anno 1579. Nay the late king of Spaine ordai∣ned, that all his haires and successours in the Estate of the Low Countries, shall for euer vpon their entrie into those Signio∣ries, take an oath for the maintenaunce of the Papacie & that Religion; as is repor∣ted in a treatise latelie published, vnder the title of A relation of the religion vsed
in the west part of the worlde. And the Prince of Parma too, Governour for the said Philip in the Low Coūtries, made the Cities subiect to his gouernment, sweare to certaine Articles of the Romish Religi∣on, set forth by the appointment of Iohn Houchin Archb. of Machelen; which Articles being printed, Anno 1585. con∣taine the summe of that is taught in the Popish Church, both for the Pope, and po∣pery; which they did sweare to maintaine euen to death, as much as in them should lie, by councel or instruction. Shall this course then seeme strange to anie, that hath so manie examples? Or can it bee thought vaine or needelesse, in these so dāgerous times? Shall we be lesse zealous for the truth, then they for falshood? Or shall they be found more circumspect to maintaine superstition, and mens Tradi∣tions, then wee for Gods true and accep∣table seruice, and the vndoubted written word? God forbid. O therefore that it woulde please our gracious God in mercie to looke vpon vs
in moving his Maiesties Heart to vse the selfe same meanes throughout al his Do¦minions, either to cōpell the back-sliders vnto the true Service of God, or to dis∣couer such false harts, as would make vs beleeue they build with vs, as did the ad∣uersaries of Iudah and Beniamin, and seek the Lorde our God, as wee doe;Ezra 4.2. though in∣deed they desire nothing more, then to e∣stablish againe among vs the Popes Au∣thoritie, and to bring into our Churches those Popish abominations. Another cause of their vexations, saie they, is their constant persevering in the religion received from their forefathers, as they from theirs. But that which the Petitioner tearmeth constācie, may much more aptlie be called wilfulnes or obsti∣nacie. For I finde Constancie thus defined,Iac. Hertel. de finit The¦olog. that it is, Virtus, quae vera, iusta, & neces∣saria, constantèr, id est, eodem modo & per∣petuò, dicit & facit: a vertue that saith and doth the things that are true, iust, and necessarie, constantly, that is after one mā∣ner, and alwaies. It is therefore required
that men should first be sure of the Truth and Necessity of the things they hold, be∣fore they set thēselues firmely to beleeue the same. But for Popish doctrines, as it is certaine that manie of them beeing tried by the true Touchstone of Gods VVorde, are found but Copper and counterfet: so sundry points also, which they esteeme as matters of great importaunce, are meere toies and trifles, fitter for fooles and chil∣dren to sport them withal, then for Chri∣stians to vse in Gods seruice. I praie you then what constancie is in maintaining such trumperie? That such wilfulnes maie wel bee cal∣led obstinacy, partlie in respect of the foū∣taine from whence it floweth, & partlie in respect of the bad effect it worketh in Recusants, maie easilie appeare. For frō whence springeth this stubbornes? Aske S. Bernard he wil shew it.Bernard. in cap. ieiuni ser. 2. Inde cordis duri∣tia, (saith he) indementis obstinatio, quia meditatur quis non legem Domini, sed pro∣priam volutatem. From hence commeth hardnes of hart, from hence springeth ob∣stinacie
of minde, that a man doth not me∣ditate vpon Gods law, but on his owne will. How wel this painteth out the whole rab∣ble of Papists, I wold they had eies to see. For Gods worde is little respected among thē, but they are so wedded to their owne opinions, that hardlie wil they suffer thē∣selues to be diuorced from the same. And if you desire to taste of the bad fruit, that this corrupt tree yeeldeth,Tertul. de paenit. learne of Ter∣tullian. Ne{que} enim timorem alia res quam contumacia subvertit, saith he, There is not anie other thing that overthroweth feare; then contumacie or stubbornes. Wee finde by experience this to bee most true. For obstinacie maketh sillie Re∣cusants, who are able to saie nothing at al in defence of their opinions, neither are acquainted with the verie Principles, no not of their owne Religion, (whereof to be ignorant, is a great shame for any that professeth Christianitie,) I saie their ob∣stinacie is cause that they feare no Lawe, no Magistrate, no punishment, no perill of vtter destruction of bodie & soule, but
run on headlong to their own perdition, like men senselesse, because they are be∣come fearlesse. Yea my selfe could name some, that being conferred withall, haue made so little reckoning of anie threat∣nings of Gods wrath, against such mani∣fest contemners of his worde, as if they thought it a good sport to goe to the Di∣vell, for companie of such as they relie vpon. Another infallible note of their obsti∣nacie is, that they wil not heare, they re∣fuse to conferre. If anie thing for their good and edifying be spoken vnto them, they stand mute much like their Images, that haue eares and heare not, mouthes and speake not. And if with much a doe, you wring some words from them, their cōmon excuse is, they are ignorant, they cannot reason: if I maie call it an excuse, that is their greatest accusatiō. For wher∣as Christ teachech vs, that ignorance is the cause of errour,Mat. 22.29. You erre or are decei∣ved, because you knowe not the Scriptures, nor the power of God; they should therby
be made more desirous to learne, if they will avoide errour: but they being settled, yea frozen in the lees of their superstitiō, will not suffer themselues to be reformed in anie wise, contenting themselues with these stubborne answers, I am resolued, I am satisfied, my conscience is perswaded. As if God hauing commended vnto his Church the Ministery of his VVord as the onlie waigh-scales, and true Touchstone of all Doctrins: and withall hauing giuen a generall charge to euerie member of of his Church to trie the spirites whether they be of God or not,1. Iohn. 4.1. because there are as wel spirits of Errour, as of Truth: yet it should be accōpted a high point of good Christianity, to receiue and stiflie to hold whatsoeuer their Popish Priestes shall saie vnto them, (for so they al teach, that spi∣ritualis à Nemine iudicatur) without any triall thereof, by waight or touch. But what is it wherein they persevere so constantlie saie they, so stubbornlie saie I? In the religion they haue received from their forefathers, as they from theirs. Con∣fitentem
habemus Reum. The Petitioner, in vttering his Griefe, confesseth his Er∣rour; his owne mouth iudgeth him & his fellowes; his owne words condemne thē. They haue their Religion from their fa∣thers, that is to saie, from men: we haue ours from God. For wee are saide to bee  taught of God, not onlie in re∣spect of having Gods Spirit our inwarde Schoolemaster to direct our harts, but also in regard that our Religiō is by inspi∣ration from him,2 Tim. 3. i6. as S. Paule teacheth Ti∣mothy. Jt is therefore a sufficient disprofe of the Religion that Recusants professe, that it is receiued from their forefathers, as they receiued it frō theirs, though the Petitioner bringeth it as an ornament & beautie to Poperie, and a sure argument of the truth thereof. Esa. 29.13.Their feare towards mee (saith God by his Prophet Esaie of the People of the Iews) is taught by the precepts of men. As if he said; they worship and serue me, not as I haue commanded, but as men haue taught. Grievous is the accusation wher∣in
God laieth to the charge of his people, that they followe the corruption of their fathers.Eze. 20.30. Are you not polluted (saith hee by his Prophet) with the customes of your fa∣thers, & commit you not whoredome after their abhominations?Mat. 15.3. VVhy transgresse you the commaundement of God, by your Tra∣dition, saith our blessed Saviour to the Scribes & Pharises? And because it hath alwaies beene the fashion of hypocrites to excuse their Idolatries and superstiti∣ons, by that which their forefathers haue done before them: therefore God by his Prophet giueth this caveat,Eze. 20.18 VValke not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither ob∣serue their manners, nor defile your selues with their Idols. And the Apostle exhor∣teth the Colossians:Coloss. 2,  Beware least there bee any man that spoile you through Philosophy and vaine deceipt, through the Traditions of Men. And S. Peter chargeth the Iewes with vaine conversation,1 Pet. 1.18. received by the Traditions of fathers. Yea in Matters of Religion, to hange vpon the doings or faith of forefathers,
or of any men, is altogither vnlawfull and against Gods expresse commandement; VVhatsoever I command you, take heed you doe it,Deuter. 12.30. thou shalt put nothing thereto, or take ought there from. If then Gods com∣mandemēt must be obayed,Deut. 4.2. without tur∣ning to the right hand, or to the left, as else where is saide without adding anie thing to it, or taking any thing from it, as here God by his servant Moses chargeth; there is no libertie giuen to vs to followe our forefathers, but God only; who hath also appointed Christ to be our only Ma∣ster.Mar 23.8.10. And therfore Tertullian that ancient writer most notablie testifieth, that no men may make choice what they will be∣leeue, no not the Apostles themselues might teach as they would,Tert. ipraes∣cript. sed acceptam à Christo doctrinam fidelitèr nationibus annuntiarunt; That which they had lear∣ned of Christ, they taught the people faith∣fully. And then after teacheth vs howe to know the truth or true Religion, not by looking vnto our forefathers, but holding that which Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apo∣stoli
a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepìt,Ibidem. the Churches receiued from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from God. Godly therfore is the wish of Iustine the Martyr, more ancient then Tertulliā; For he liued not much more then 100.Iust. Marc. colloq. cum Tryp. Iu∣daeo. yeares after Christ; Optarim (saith he) candem mentem & cateris, ne a seruatoris verbis discederent. Possunt enim religio∣nem incutere, a via recta deflectentibus, & meditantes ipsa, quiete reficere incun∣dissimâ. I would wish that others also were of that mind that they would not depart from the words of our Sauiour. For they cā worke Religion, in such as turne from the right way, and refresh with most sweet rest, such as meditate therupon. And as he wisheth that others would doe, so him selfe giueth example therin, insomuch as Tryphon the Iew hauing experience ther¦of by the reasoning which they had toge¦ther, thus speaketh vnto him: Iam ante dixite semper Scripturis haerere quo ince∣das tutior: I haue said before, that you all∣waies stick to the Scriptures, that you may
walke more safly. Thē afterward he yeel∣deth it as a reason why he will set downe their talk and conference in writing, Nec enim sequor homines,Iustin. Mar. Ibi. post. me. aut doctrinas huma∣manas, sed Deum, et quae ille docuit. For ne∣ther doe I follow men, or the doctrines of men, but God & that he teacheth. Thus then vve see, that the commen∣dation that the Petitioner giueth vnto their Popish Religion, that they receiued it from their forefathers, is a sufficient ar∣gument to reiect the same, vnlesse they can fetch further the originall of it, then frō their forefathers, or their forefathers forefathers. And when they haue gon as farr as they can, to claime all Antiquitie of Man yet the Truth is that only, that cometh from God. If they therfore vvill perswade vs, that their Religion is good, they must shew it out of Gods Booke; they must giue it this praise, that it is in Gods written word: which if they can, wee will rather beleeue one sentēce rightly allea∣ged, according to the circumstances of the place out of Scriptures: then all that
they cā speake of their forefathers to ma∣nie generations. Herein we haue good warrant out of the sacred word as I haue shewed; this was the practise of the Pri∣mitiue Churches, as partlie is proued, & maie verie plentifullie be confirmed. Neither must it be graunted vnto the Petitioner, that Recusants indure such vexations as they complaine of, onlie for their ancient Religion. For as there hath beene other cause of making both of the ancient and newer Lawes, against manie of the thinges wherewith they maie bee touched; so is ther other cause, why those lawes should be put in Execution: name∣lie to keepe vnder dangerous and doubt∣ful subiects to the Estate. For euen that point of their Religion, whereby without anie good ground they subiect thēselues to the Pope, an vtter Enemie to al Sove∣raigntie in Princes, maketh them to be such, as must carefully bee looked vnto. And yet that is not the Religion they re∣ceiued from their forefathers, and they from theirs, seeing it was neuer decreed
as a thing to be beleeued, in anie Councell before that of Florence, which was kept, Anno. 1439. We know also, as hath before beene said, that they who are the dailie Plotters of all mischieffes & more then Pagan vil∣lanies against this flourishing Realme, (Iesuits I meane & Priestes,) are fostered and maintained by Recusants, yea so ho∣nored & embraced by them, as that both their wil and their wealth is at their dis∣posing: and that they prepare thē against their long looked for daie, that Cardinall Alen spake of (in a letter to a friend of his which is to be seene,) and diuers other since him,VVeston de tripl. stat. in Prorat. doe inculcate, that vpon anie fit occasion they maie ioine with them, in their mischieuous attempts. That is al∣so confessed by one of the Scottish Iesuits in a letter he writeth to the Prince of Par∣ma (as I remēber for I haue not the booke now by me, but they are yet to be seene) wherin hauing reported what good suc∣cesse they haue of their labours, he shew∣eth also what they indevour, namely with
Religion,Discou. p. 7. Answ. to a Iesuited Gent. Quodiib. 2. art. 7. Jnfanta's intertain. in the English Coll. at Val Iedolid. Jesuit. cat. l. 3. c 16. Import. con∣sid. p. 25. Reply to Pars. li f. 65 Quodlib. 6 art. 10. to plant in them an affection to the Catholicke king. And to that end doe they still teach, that the Catholicke Religi∣on & the Catholike king are so linked, that one cannot take footing here vvithout the other; yea, that it is an Honourable Action to plant Religion here by Conquest. And though that smooth-tongued Traytor Ric. Southwell the Iesuit, confessed from the Duke of Medina's owne mouth, that so roome might bee made in England for the king Catholicke, little care would be had what became of other Catholicks: yet our Recusants, rather then this Romish plot shoulde faile, will not only hazarde their owne estates and persons here at home; but also send their Sonnes abroad to places purposely erected for our Coūtries Conquest;Engl. Sem. at Siuil. val∣led. S Lucar, &c. Quodlib. 8. art. 10. where they are sure to proue Ie∣suiticall fire-brands, neuer to returne but to ruinate their Natiue soile. And must we yet thinke these men are only for Reli∣gion vexed, who shew themselues so ma∣nie waies, so dangerous subiects? No, no, as their Religion is not the plant that GodMat. 15.13.
hath planted and therfore must be rooted vp, so are their doings such as make thē iustlie deserue to be rooted out together vvith it. The complaint of this Petitioner being in some sort considered of: it followeth also that we examine the Remedies which they say they haue vsed. The second part of the Petition.VVhich (supposed vexations for Religiō) moued vs before the end of the last par∣liament, by our supplication deliuered to his Maiestie, after declaratiō of our most dutifull alleageance, and protesta∣tion, that our Recusancy proceeded frō no other ground but feare to offend god: to offer (as before by a like supplication deliuered to our late deceased Queene in the 27 yeare of her raigne we had done) that if LL. Bishops or other of singular note of learning among them at those times should be able to proue to the lear∣ned diuines of our Religion, that we be¦ing of the Catholicke Romane faith, might without committing deadly sinne repaire to their Churches, and be
there present at the exercising of your Religion (it being different from that we professe) we would haue beene most ready & willing to haue performed their desiers therin This is the second generall point hand∣led in this Petition, and toucheth the Re∣medies which the Recusants haue (as hee saith) vsed, to ease them of their troubles. But the Petitiōer might haue dealt some what more plainely, if he had shewed all the waies they proued to shak of the yoke of their obedience; but indeed that Nar∣ration would haue deserued litle fauour. For they haue vsed many moe waies thē are good, to effect this their desire. They haue somtime burst foorth into open Re∣bellions, as the stirres here in the North, the 11. yeare of her Maiesties raigne, that is now past all their practises, at rest vvith god; and the sundrie troubles of Ire¦land doe testifie. They haue had also di∣uers secret purposes of poisening, and murdering by any means they could de∣vise, the sacred person of their Soueraigne
not fearing Gods wrath, ether against murderers or against the dispisers of Gods ordinance.Iesuit. Ca∣tech. 3. c. 16. J speake not of the Invasion, nor of that thrise diabolical powder Tre∣ason that was by them & their Teachers procured, wherby they shewed that ra∣ther they would indanger the state of the whole Realme, then not seeke to bring their purposes to passe; of which the Ro∣manists of France seemed to prophecy, vvhen they vvrit that the Iesuites cared not to destroy a soule, a King, a paradice, the Church al at one blowe,Jesuit ca∣tech. 1. 3. c. 13. &c. 18. to make way to their Spanish and halfe pagā designemēts. These and such like their vnnaturall & vnchristian plots and purposes, the Pe∣titioner had good reason to passe ouer vvith silence: and he maketh mention of that only, that without discredit he may speake of, namely of some supplications, which he saith, they preferred both vnto our Late Gracious Queene of most happie memorie, and also to our most Renowned King, vvhō God in his great mercy hath giuen vnto vs. That which was deliuered
(as he saith) to our Late Queene J never saw, nether (I thinke) haue hard of. But vnto the Kings most excellent Maiestie that now raigneth (vvhose gouernment also the Lorde for his goodnes lengthen and prosper many yeares over vs) I haue seene sundry, whether should I call them Comminations or railing Libels; for some of them are noe other; and therfore sup∣plications I cannot truely tearme them. But whatsoeuer they are, I meane not further to deale with them, then this Pe∣tition shall occasion me. Our Petitioner complaineth afterwards that they recei∣ued no answere to the former supplicati∣ons. Jf that to Queene Elizabeth, were like vnto most of those that J haue seene to his Maiestie (for foure haue come to my hands) they deserued no fauorable an∣swere. It is too saucie a part for subiects to pretend humble suit, and yet closly to threaten if their desiers be not satisfied; as doth the one especially of their papers, by setting before his Maiesties eies, the departing of the Ten tribes from Rehobo∣am
his gouernemēt, for that his answere to them was otherwise then they vvould haue it. And howsoeuer they vvill seeme to professe more loyaltie, then they did shevv: yet is it harde trusting thē of their vvord, seeing manie deeds done by them of that faction, haue been dangerous and troublesome to the state, how smoothlie soeuer novv they speake, that they may by that meanes speed. And what good can they meane by a∣vowing, that God approued that depar∣ting of the Ten tribes for Rehobohams de∣nying their iust petitions, vnlesse they meane to defend that Popish Paradox (& doe thereafter too, if they be able) which is called by Sigebertus,Sigebert{us} in Chron. Ano Dom. 1088. Novella haeresis, a new heresie; quòd malis Regibus nullam de∣beant subiectionem, & licet sacramē∣tum fidelitatis fecerint, nullam tamē debe∣ant fidelitatem, nec periuri dicantur, qui contra regem senserint; imn ò qui regi pa∣ruerit pro excōmunicato habeatur: qui cō∣tra regem fecerit, à noxa iniustitiae & per∣iurij absolvatur; that is, That they owe no
subiection or obedience to evill kings (and who are good or evill kings, must bee thought as it pleaseth them to iudge) and though they haue sworne to be faithful, yet owe they no obedience, neither are they to be called periured, if they bee against the king: but who so obeyeth the king is to be accompted for excommunicated: but who so is against him is absolued from the fault of evill dealing or periurie. Nether is this new haeresie, as he cal∣leth it, an opinion of those times onlie wherof he then wrot: but that heresie is stil maintained in the Popish Church, as Iansonius (no Enimie to Poperie, I warrāt you) telleth vs.Mercur. Gal lib. 2. Ann{us} 1589. For whē the French King Henry the third, had for sauing his owne life (or at least his Crowne as the Preists confesse) killed the Duke of Guise; the Di∣vines of Parise in a solemne Convocation did conclude,Quod lib. 9. art. 4. that the subiects were fre∣ed from his obedience, and their oath, they might leuie mony against their King, con∣spire, beare armour and fight. And this their diuelish Conclusiō they sent to Rome
to get it ratified. Much like vvas this Po∣sition,Anthon. Col∣linet. li. 2. Trag. Hist vnto that which a Bacchelaur of di∣uinity maintained in Disputation, some foure years before in the Colledge of Sor∣bone, That it was lawful for anie man, pri∣vat or otherwise, to depose or kil any kings or Princes, which were wicked, evill men, or heretickes. Anthon. Colinet trag hist. li. 6.True it is, that the Senate of Parise re∣fused to ratifie the bloudie Conclusion of the Divines of Sorbone, & required respit; but some seditious persons by force took them, cast them into prison, chose a new Councell. But how wel the Pope allowed thereof, maie appeare by the euent: for the king was murdered,Quod lib. 9. art. 4. (by the Iesuites practises, as VVatson the Priest cōfesseth) the Pope by a most blasphemous speech commended the fact, and in token of his good approbation thereof, that Beastlie wretch Sixtus Quintus, was not ashamed to cōpare the Miraculousnes of the mur∣der, with the Incarnation and Resurrectiō of Christ Iesus, and to affirme that that Spirit guided the king-killing Frier, that
guided the Prophets and Apostles.Ant. Colyn. trag. hist. li. 7. Lib. intit De iusta abdi∣catione. Hē 31. Anno. 1602 Mark. 7. Reply to Par¦sons lib. An. to cap. 4. But what will you more? He canonized for a Saint that bloudie Beast, and made him the God of the Parisians. And for farther coūtenancing of that holy murder, the Ie∣suits set forth a discourse, wherein they maintaine, that Any man might lawfullie kill a Tyrant (and such must euerie one be reckoned whō they dislike,) though there be neither sentence of Church, or kingdome against him. Neither is this taught for good Popish Divinitie, in France onlie or Rome, but also in His dominion, who is tearmed the Catholicke king, is this worse then heathnish lesson, holden for sound and good, as your Priests thēselues assure vs. For in Salamanca it was concluded by the Professours of Divinitie in that Vni∣versitie, and the Preacher in the Colledge of the Society of Iesus at Tire, that the Ca∣tholickes in Ireland, might fauor the Earle of Tiron (when he was a Rebell and Trai∣tour) in his warres, & that with great me∣rit, and hope of eternall rewarde, as though they warred against the Turkes. And that
al Catholicks sinne mortallie, that take part with the English against Tyrone, and can neither bee saved, nor absolved from their sinnes by anie Priest, vnlesse they repent & leaue the English. Moreouer, They are in the same case that shall helpe the English with anie victuals, or any such like thing. Lastly, that the most worthy Prince Hugh O Neale and other Catholickes of Ireland, that fight against the Queene, are by no cō∣struction Rebels. I am not ignorant that the Priests charge the Iesuits, with this doctrine: but the Pope hath also confir∣med the same as before is said, & therfore if ever opportunitie to execute the same would serue their turne,Jmport: cō∣sid. p. 23. 24. what Papistes hands would not be bloudie? Especiallie since they are taught that in warrs for Re∣ligion, euerie Catholicke is bound to do as the Pope directeth without regarde to his Temporall Soveraigne:Parsons Philopater. De iusta ab∣dicat. H. 3. Bannes in Thomam A∣quin. Quod lib. 9. art. 4. and that though they may make shewe of obedience for a time yet as soone as they can get strength to make a part, they may and ought put downe an Hereticall king.
To this most impious, detestable, & dan∣gerous Heresie these hūble Supplicatours (as they would be thought) sing their A∣men as I take it, in saying, that departing from Roboam his gouernment by the Is∣raelites, was by the approbation of God as it seemeth. As if their departing frō their lawfull king, could be liked of God. But S. August. bringeth this among others as an example vvhereby hee will proue Gods iust iudgement in punishing sin by sinne, not Gods approuing the fact.De gra. &. lib. Arbit. cap. 21. Yet these men that defend such daun∣gerous pointes of doctrine, in another Supplication, goe about to perswade his Maiestie, that they are the true & faith∣full subiects who obey for cōscience sake: they (I saie) who are at the commaunde∣ment of him, that is a plague to all Prin∣ces; they who haue alreadie sundrie waies tainted their credit, and shewed their dis∣obedience; not content to intreat for thē∣selus, pronoūce (as vntruly, as boldly) that Protestāts, only for moral honestie of life, or instinct of nature, or for feare of some
some tēporall punishment, doe pretend true obedience. As if we, who are better ac∣quainted with the duety we owe vnto the powers that are ordained of God, out of Gods Booke, by farre then they are, and de∣nie his authority who taketh vpon him to commaunde the Mightiest Monarches vpon earth, acknowledging our Gracious King within his Dominions, to bee Su∣preame Governour vnder God; can be dee∣med so vndutifull, as they that neither bee acquainted with those sacred Scrip∣tures, & are deuoted to that Romish Priest and beleeue & acknowledge his supreme power to commande. I vvil not speake how leavvdly they seeke to dishonour and disgrace as much as they dare the sacred Maiestie of our King, and the most honorable Senate of sage counsellers, in making resemblance betwene him & Roboam, vnlesse he yeeld to their requests, & betwene his Maies∣ties most vvise Councell, and the youths, whose advise Salomons sonne followed. Nether will I speake of the multitudes or
manie thousands that they speake of to be of their minde as if therby they would make his Maiestie afraid to deny that, which so manie request at his hands. But in charging his Maiesties meeke & mer∣ciful gouernment vvith crueltie as they doe, they shew themselues to be of that crue,2. Pe. 2.10. Iude. 8. that feareth not to speak evil of thē that are in dignitie, but despise gouerne∣ment. These and many such Reasons maie be alleadged, whie their Supplica∣tions, might not seeme worthie to be an∣svvered but buried rather in silence. But to returne to the words of our Pe∣titioner he saith that in the former suppli¦cation they haue protested, that their Re∣cusancy proceeded from no other ground but feare to offend God. The ground wee confesse to bee good, if the cause of feare be iust; otherwise not. And I praie you what cause is there of beeing affraide to offend God by comming to our service? Will he be offended if he onlie be praied vnto, as in our Churches we vse to doe? I trow not; He hath giuen vs that commā∣dement,
he will not be angrie if we obey it.Psal. 50.15. David calleth him a hearer of praiers; Thou hearer of praiers,Ps. 65.2. to thee shall all flesh come, which property because we cannot saie it can belong to anie but God, wee therefore dare not pray to anie, but to him. And that which I haue said of praier and & crauing of such things as we stand in need of at Gods hands, is also to be vn∣derstood of Giving thanks for the things we receiue.Iac. 1.17. For seeing Everie good gift commeth from him, wee acknowledge our selues beholding to him for the same, and thanke him for it. We haue the Sacramēts administred ac∣cording to Christs institution, which we haue iustified against your learnedest di∣uines, & are stil ready to do. The rest of our Service is nothing else, but that which your selues will confesse to be the Scrip∣tures. In all this there is no suffici∣ent cause of feare, vvhy God should bee offended, but rather vvell pleased. But indeed iust cause you haue to feare his heavy wrath, because of your abomi∣nable
Idolatries and Superstitions, wher∣by you pollute the name of God, and de∣file his worship. The substance of their former Suppli∣cation which hee speaketh of, standeth vpon two Points, a Suite, and a Promis. The former is vttered thus, that the LL. Bishops, or other of singular note of lear∣ning should proue to their learned divines, that Romish Catholicks might resort to our churches, and be present at the exercise of our Religion, it being different from that they professe. Here first I woulde aske the Question, why their Request was, that their learned Divines should haue this proued to thē? It behoueth euery one of you to bee satis∣fied for your owne selues and perswaded in your owne consciences,2. Habac. 4. For the iust shall liue by his owne (not an other mans) faith. And you Recusants, must answere (not your Priests for you) for your diso∣bedience to the Lawes that you shewe a∣gainst God and man.Reply to the Apol. c. 6. Yea & a reply made by a Priest to a Libell called a breefe A∣pologie,
sheweth that sundry learned men of the Popish Religion, haue beene of that minde, that Recusants might come to our Churches;So did Fa. Langdole also. Dia∣log. p. 97. 98 And that Bosgraue him∣selfe a Jesuite refused not our Churches, but came to them. Why then is it now required that your learned Divines should be taught that lesson, which long since they had learned? Jt was (saie the Priests) sometime law∣full, but it is nowe made vnlawfull, be∣cause it is a signe distinctiue, whereby a Catholicke is knowne from one who is no Catholicke. Well, then there is in our Seruice nothing that maketh it vnlawful, there is not in our Churches, to make Re∣cusants abstaine from them. All the mat∣ter is, that Papists must be knowne to bee Papists, & their not going to the Church is this signe distinctiue, whereby they are knowne; in so much as the writer of the Replie,Repl. to the Libel. c. 6. in the chapter and place afore na∣med, saith thus, it was somewhat more to be lamented perchāce (speaking of Papists comming to church) then to be blamed, be∣fore
it became to be a signe distinctiue. And thē he addeth, For this consideration only, in the iudgment of the Iesuits in their Rom. Colledge, made the going to Church, vn∣lawfull in England. Thus may our Petitioner see that their Learned Divines agree in this point, that if it had not beene the signe distinctiue to know a Romish Catholicke from a True Christian, they mighte haue come to Church. Now if I should aske of our Ma∣sters of this new learning, where they did learne in Gods Booke, that this signe distin∣ctiue is a thing so necessary, that in regard therof it is required that a Subiect should breake his Princes godlie Lawes, & such as commaunde presence at such Seruice, as thēselues cannot finde anie fault with∣al; it would I suppose trouble both Iesuits and Priests, to make a direct answere. For the Apostles of our Saviour Christ, though the Ceremonies were abolished, and therefore the Iewes Service & Rites not to be vsed of Christians; yet came in∣to their Synagogues, and so could not but
be present at their Seruice. And yet their difference in Religion was such, as that S. Paule writeth to the Galatians plainely,Gal. 5.2. If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;4. Yee are abo∣lished from Christ, who soever are iustified by the law, yee are fallen from grace. But notwithstanding this diversitie of Religiō that was now betweene Iewes and Chri∣stians, it was not made a signe distinctiue, whereby a Christian should bee knowne, that hee might not resorte to their Syna∣gogues.Art. 13. 13. 14 No one the cōtrarie, Paule & they who were with him, entered into the Syna∣gogue (of the Iewes) on the Sabbath day, & sate downe. Neither did the Iewes knowe anie such signe distinctiue,15. but after the lecture of the Law and Prophets, The Ru∣lers of the Synagogue sent vnto them say∣ing, yee men and bretheren, if you haue a∣ny word of exhortation for the people, say on. Now if Christiās were not thē charg∣ed, to obstaine from Iewish Synagogues, where such were as held a Religion that would quite depriue them of the Grace
of Christ: I trust our Recusants haue noe cause of feare to come to our Churches, where themselues confesse that in our Service is nothing but good, and godly. Nether was there any signe distinctiue that Christians were bound to vse, wher∣by they should be knowne from Pagans, or from Heretickes such as were the Ar∣rians & others. For this is easie to be ga∣thered, in that they had at Rome their se∣cret Conventicles, and some of Nero his Court resorted to them, but they kept thē selues as much as they could vnknowne, because they knewe that being detected, they should be cruelly dealt withal. They therfore neuer so much as dreamed vpon anie signe distinctiue, but rather destered to appeare like other men, sauing only in such things, as were aginst the true Ser∣vice of God. And Catholicke and Orthodoxe Christians, in the time of the Arrians, vvere faine to hide themselues in Caues and corners, as themselues confesse, seek∣ing to be vnknowne rather then knowne. And why doe these Pharises J meane
Iesuits and Priests, lay such burdens vpon the Laie Recusants, as themselues will not touch vvith their little finger? They dis∣guise themselues in their apparel, and vse what meanes they can, not to be discouer¦ed for such as they are. Whie should ther not be aswel a signe distinctiue of the or∣der, as of the Profession? It seemeth Preists and Iesuits are wel content, the Lay Recu∣sants should shew themselues in the fore front, and they wil take part vvith him that said Ego cro post principia. For hee knevv the end of the fraie, was the safest part therof. Againe if it be lawfull for Iesuits and Preistes in their Scholes to appointe what shalbe a Signe distinctiue, whie maie not rather our King & the States of the Realme in Parliament command that Papists shal come, the Men with shauen crownes, the woeman couered with vayles like to Nunnes, or al of them with some other badge or Marke into our Churches, that therby they might be knowne what they are. Wil they then come, if there may be
such a Signe distinctiue? Jt were not amisse they were proued whether they would or not. And I am verilie perswaded, that if such order should be taken, their Romish Teachers would finde out some other new cause, why they should not come at our Churches. For it is not (if truth were know¦en) a signe distinctiue that they so much regard, as a bād retētiue, wherby they may be holden in their blindnes still. It is Iero∣boams policie, that maketh the blind guids of our Recusants, keep their followeres from our Churches, of whom the Scrip∣ture thus testifieth.1. Kings 12.26.27. And Ieroboam thought in his hart, now shall the kingdome returne to the house of David, if this people goe vp and doe sacrifice, in the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem, then shal the hart of this peo∣ple turne againe to their Lord, even to Re∣hoboam king of Iudah. And therfore, as af∣ter followeth in the storie, the King by ad¦vise of his Councel, made and set vp Calues at Dan, and Bethel, and got Preists, fit for the purpose, and so kept them frō go∣ing
to Ierusalem to worship there. The Pope & Popish diuines knowe, that if Recusants might haue free libertie to come to our Churches, they would soone growe into mislike of their superstitious toyes, and grosse Idolatries, howsoeuer di∣verse through their intising wordes, are for a time holden in ignorance, and mislik not poperie. And for that cause they dare not somuch as permit their Recusāts to cō∣ferre with Protestants, forfeare least in the end, they leauing thē, should make choice of the vndoubted Truth.Reply to a li. cap. 6. For euen Confe∣rence the Preists hold as vnlawful, as re¦pairing to our Churches for ought I see. Thus then I reason, to satisfie in some part the Request of the Suppliants heare mētioned: The Popish divines are resolued that comming to our Churches is not vn∣lawful, but only that it is now accompted a signe distinctiue, to knowe a Papists frō a Protestant: but other signes distinctiue may be devised besids that, therfore it is not necessary that that signe should be re∣tained, and so by consequent it may bee
left. Nay seeing it is but the signe distinc∣tiue that they stand vpon, and other signes of distinction may be vsed, lesse repugnāt to our Godly lawes, and wherby Papists shal not be found, so disobedient Subiects as now they are: I therfore may be bold to affirme, that if Recusants Teachers had that loialtie to their Soueraigne, and obe∣dient affection to the Sate, that here they doe and elswhere they will pretend; they would teach them a new lesson, and per∣swad them, that vsing some other signe, in this they should not be Rebellious a∣gainst God and man. For the more offen∣siue that they are (especially to the Powers ordained of God) the more they sinne, and the greater shalbe their condemnation. Againe wheras signes distinctiue are but Accidentall and belong not to the ve∣ry Substance of our Religion, as in this point in question is plaine, seeing that it is by learned diuines amōg Papists resolued that once Papists might lawfullie haue come to our Churches, vntil sōe mē made their not coming, a signe to knowe a Pa∣pist
by, I may therof thus reason; No ex∣ternall signe or obseruation must make vs leaue necessarie duties, that belong to the Substance of our obedience, but the signe distinctiue, is such an externall obseruati∣on, therfore for it we must not leaue such necessarie duties, as belonge to the sub∣stance of our obedience: and by consequēt the Kings Maiesties Lawes are not for it to be broken. The first two Arguments are so gather∣ed out of the verie words of the Preists & Iesuits, and so grounded vpon good reasō agreeable to the word that I hope I need not proue them. In this Third Argument, the Maior is confirmed by that which God commanded Samuel to say to Saul, when he had broken Gods commande∣ment,1 Sam. 15.22. in sparing Agag King of Ameleck and some of the best of their cattle, to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to harken, is better then the fatt of Rammes. I desired mercy & not Sacrifice, saith God by his Pro∣phet Hosea & the knowledg of God,Hos. 6.6. is more then burnt offerings. If that externall ser∣vice
that God commaunded, be not re∣garded in respect of obedience: what shall we thē saie of this signe distinctiue, which some Politicke heade of a Popish Iesuit, hath found out? Now the Minor Proposition, which is that Recusants not cōming to our Chur∣ches is such an external observatiō, wher∣by their fellowes maie know them to bee Papistes, that which I haue alleadged out of the Reply to the Libel, teacheth vs to be true, and for that cause they call it a signe distinctiue. Againe; The hearing of the Word, & Receiving of the Sacraments, is not to be omitted for any signe distinctiue, as the Example of Christ himselfe and his Apo∣stles, who entred into the Ievvish Syna∣gogues, though they were Enemies to the doctrine that Christ & his Apostles taught, maie sufficiently confirme vnto vs. And yet our Aduersaries neither cā nor do say, that our doctrine, especially in our Booke of Common Praier, is more faultie then theirs was: nay they cōfesse therin no fault
to bee found: therefore much better may Papists resort to our Churche, without in curring any danger of deadlie sinne. For what deadly sinne can be so much as sus∣pected to be, in comming to the Church∣es where there is first, Confession of our sinnes, Prayer vnto God for forgiuenes & other his Graces, Thankes giuing for his benefits, Hearing of the word of God, Re∣ceiuing of the Sacraments, and such like Godly excerscies? But for the better satisfaction of the Petitioner his demaund, I would haue the Learned diuines of the Popish Sect, to an∣swere the Reasons that M. Bell a Papist, alleadged in a certaine discourse, wherin he defendeth it to be lawful for Recusants to resort to the exercises of our Religion so it be with protestation. By which reasōs it seemed the Iesuits were perswaded to set downe their Resolution before menti∣oned, that onlie (marke only) the considera∣tion of this signe distinctiue, made Recu∣sants cōming to Church in England, vn∣lawfull. And because the Reply to the Li∣bell
seemeth to bee of that minde too, as I haue shewed, therefore having spoken somewhat to that, I thinke it needlesse to goe through the nine Reasons that How∣let bringeth,Martin of Schisme. or the nineteenth that Greg. Martin hath, wherby they would proue their comming to our Churches vnlaw∣full partly because in so short a discourse as this is, it cannot bee perfourmed, but chieflie because it seemeth that the mat∣ter being better examined, that signe of distinction is in their opinions the onlie let. But that being but a devise of Man to haue such difference, is not sufficient to discharge anie Subiect of their Obedience to their Soveraigne and his Lawes com∣manded by God. Now somewhat having beene spoken concerning their Petition to answere it: their promise was, to haue beene more rea∣dy and willing to haue performed (said the Suppliants) their desires therein, that is, in cōming to our churches. Which promis how easily it may bee perfourmed out of that which hath bin said, may be gathred.
For we call thē not to Idolatrous service, or anie superstitious or will-worship: we know to come to such, it is vtterly vnlaw∣ful. We wil them not to heare a tongue that they know not, a language that they vnderstād not, as in Popish Churches they doe. But they are by Law commaunded, and therefore in things so lawful and ho∣nest, their obedience is of dutie required, they are commanded (I saie) to come to Churches, where God onlie is serued, & to hear his word in such a tongue, as they that will heare may also learne such due∣ties, as God requireth of them. The Peti∣tioner thus goeth forward. And for that vvee received none an∣swere to either of the said petitions, the defect whereof as we are in charitie to thinke, proceeded in regarde of the LL. Bishops then being, nor your LL. were not made acquainted therewith: vve now deemed it very behoofefull, yea ne∣cessarie for vs, to tender and prostrate the same offer to your LL. most humblie beseeching your Honours, that wee may
receiue some satisfying answere there∣in, from your LL. The Petitioner not finding the former Supplications to haue that effect that Re∣cusants desired, now tendereth this Peti∣tion especiallie vnto such as are of chiefe place, & best accompt among the Clear∣gie in the Church of England. And as he doth charitably interpret, the not recei∣ving answere of the former Requests: so doth he also in my iudgment demand but that which is reasonable in his Suit, if it were not that hee requireth a satisfying answere, in that matter, that hath beene spoken to so oft, & so fully, that it is much to be doubted, that they who cannot bee satisfied with that which hath alreadie beene set downe, wil not thinke anie an∣swere a fit satisfaction to their demands. But yet because they assure vs of their yeelding to our desires, which is in effect nothing els, but that they would bee in∣treated to be reconciled vnto God, as Paule writeth to the Corinthiās,2 Cor. 5.10 for wee seeke not theirs, but them: therfore wil J inde∣vor
to performe what they request. And thus it followeth. Assuring you, that if it may be proved in manner as is before mentioned, that we may goe to any such Church without committing deadly sinne; or that which wee doe nowe professe, is not the same which we receiued frō our forefathers, & that which they received frō theirs successiuelie, ever since the conversiō of this countrie to Christianitie, that wee will then bee readie to satisfie your de∣sires therein. The third part.Wee are nowe come to that which in the beginning I said, was the third & last part of this Petition which is the Request it selfe. But this hath sundrie branches. For first the demand is vttered by way of condition, with promise of performing our desires, if the Request be accomplish∣ed. But vpon a secret supposall, that it cā∣not be done that is required, they woulde hope not to be prosecuted by Ecclesiasti∣call Censures, but rather that our BB. shoulde bee meanes to His Maiestie for
them, or else they assure vs it will much incourage their followers as in that which followeth in the Petition, they professe. Now then to come to the Conditions here first proposed; they are two. The first is this: If (say they) it may be proued in man∣ner as is before mentioned, that we may goe to any such Church, without committing deadly sinne: Concerning this their condi∣tion I suppose I haue already spoken suffi∣ciently, considering that the Reply to the Libell called a breife Apologie, written by a Preist, very latelie (for it was printed An{us}. 1063.) saith in plaine words (as be∣fore I haue alleadged) that Catholicks cō∣ming to Church was sōwhat more to be la∣mented perchance,Reply. c. 6. then to be blamed be∣fore it was a signe distinctiue. Now that it is not needfull that there should be any such distinction, or if any should be, yet that anie other rather then this may serue that turne, yea that this being so offensiue as it is, may not be vsed, J haue already touched al these points. To be short Bells discourse, and the Ie∣suits
determinatiō tend al to that end too. So that this point J will shut vp with this one Argument. That which is agreed vp∣on to be lawfull, by consent of their Lear∣ned Diuines on their side, sauing in respect of a thing that may easily, yea must neces∣sarily be altered, they maie doe without committing deadlie sinne: Bur Recusants comming to Church is such as is lawfull, but ōly in respect of that distinctiō which they suppose should by this meanes ap∣peare, which maie and must be altered: therfore their comming to our Churches maie wel be vvithout deadlie sinne. The Maior cannot be denied; But for the bet∣ter vnderstanding of the Minor propositi∣on, it must be somwhat vnfolded. The distinctiue signe that is hetherto spoken of, is ether to be taken, in respect of Recusants themselues, as that one of them may by it knowe another, in which sence J haue hitherto spoken of it: And af∣ter this taking of a distinctiue signe, my Minor is sufficiently proued before, in that such signes are not needfull, nether
haue beene vsed in the time of Christ, & his Apostles, yea they are manie waies offensiue, & for that cause to be abolish∣ed. Or else, the distinctiue signe is to bee vnderstood, as that we therby knowe thē to be Romish Catholicks. If in this sence they speake of a distinctiue signe, then J giue them to vnderstand, that this signe we trust not. For the Preists tell vs in the Reply to a breife Apologie,Reply. cap. 17. & 18. that the Iesu∣its taught that lesson in Scotland (wee doubt not also but in England too) that a man might lock vp his conscience, after he had hard masse, and then goe to the Protes∣tants Churches, which we suppose too manie doe beleiue and practise; wherof also commeth that name of Church Pa∣pists. Therfore cōming to our Churches, is not a signe wherby wee esteeme them that soe doe, to be Recusants. Since ther∣fore by that signe wee doe not knowe al Papists; no, nether yet Papists only ab∣staine from our Churches, but sundry o∣thers also, who haue as little agreement with Papists, as Papists haue with the
Truth that is not a true signe distinctiue betwene Romish Catholicks, and profes∣sours of the Gospel, whervpon your Lear∣ned diuines conclude, your going to our churches not to be vnlawful or vngodly. What is performed for the first condi¦tion let the indifferent Reader iudge. The second followeth: Or (if it be proued that) that which we now professe, (saith he) is not the same which we Receiued from our forefathers, and that which they receiued from theirs successiuely, euer since the con∣versiō of this countrie to Christianitie &c. Cōcerning the Argumēt wherby the Peti¦tioner supposeth he cōmēdeth their Reli∣gion, because they receiued it from their forefathers, I haue before spokē sufficiēt∣ly. But here he goeth somewhat further, challenging this doctrine that nowe they haue in the Romish Church, to haue conti∣nued and come to them successiuely, from the first conversiō of this Country to Chri∣stianity: or as the former Petition to his Maiestie saith, from the Conversion of Donaldus, which was king of the Scotts,
and became a Christian about the yeare of Christ 203. And hath the Romish Religion that now is, wherein we dissent from them so great Antiquitie, as frō the first time that Eng∣land receiued Christianitie? No; neither yet from the time of Donaldus, who came to the knowledge of Christ, more then a hundred yeares after this parte of this Ile of Brittaine did. For though many of our Chronicles, report, Lucius, who raigned over vs about the yeare of our Lord, 156. first to haue receiued Christianitie into this Iland:Caes. Bar. 0. 1. p. 286. yet Barronius (whom I hope our Petitioner will trust,) telleth vs that Ioseph of Aramathia who begged the Bo∣die of Christ & buried it, came hither out of France, and planted the Gospel, being sent by Philip the Apostle,Patricij Hib epist. Caes. Baro. tom. 1. p. 286. Doroth. Synops. of whose plā∣ting the Gospell about Glascenburie, there are manie testimonies approued by Pa∣pists themselues. Yea there are that affirme, that Simon Zelotes came hether, and here was cruci∣fied; and that Aristobulus of whom St.
Paul to the Romanes maketh mentiō,Niceph. Theod. Soph. was Episcopus Britanniae factus, made Bishop of Britaine. Yea there be also, & they ve∣rie ancient, that write that Peter & Paule preached here; so that it cannot be doub∣ted of, but our Conversion vnto Christia∣nitie, was in the time of the Apostles thē∣selues. And hath Romish Religion conti∣nued from them successiuely? Jt will not proue so. To goe through al the doctrine which they professe, were a matter of greater la∣bour then is requisite; & yet because the Petitioner so faithfullie doeth assure vs, that if ether the one, or the other of these maie be proued by vs, they wil bee ready to yeeld to our desire in comming to the Church; as I haue alreadie assaide to doe the one of the thinges they require: so doubt I nothing, but that I shall satisfie the other part of their demande, and so binde them as by a double bond, to doe as they promise. And that the matter may be more plaine, evē vnto the meanest of that sort, I purpose only to speak of those
pointes, which are chieflie required of them. And first of the verie props that Pope∣rie standeth on, and the feete whereby it creepeth forward: that is, the Supremacie, and Traditions. It is a doctrine which Po∣pish Catholicks do hold most firmely, that the Bishop of Rome is supreame head of the Church: yea if we will giue any credit to Boniface the eighth Pope of that name,Extra. de Maior & o∣bedient. vnā It is necessarie to salvation to beleeue, that e∣verie creature is subiect to the Bishop of Rome. But how will it bee proued, that they, or any of them that planted Christi∣anitie in this Realme, taught anie such thing, that it might come from them suc∣cessiuelie? It is certaine the Apostles knewe no such Supremacie belonging to Peter. For if they had, it being so necessa∣rie to saluation, as Pope Good-face telleth vs, they had beene vnfaithful Stewards in not deliuering that doctrine: yea by their doings they teach vs there vvas no such thing. For the Apostles hearing that Sa∣maria had receiued the VVord of God, be∣ing
careful to haue thē confirmed there∣in,Act. 8.14. sent vnto them Peter & Iohn. If he had knowne himselfe to haue beene supreame head ouer them, he would haue directed them, they should not haue appointed him to goe. And did not Paul withstand him to his face,Gal. 2.11. because he was to be blamed? It would be thought a sawcie part for anie body to do so to the Pope now. But let any mā look with an indifferent eie throughout the whole New Testament, and he shal neuer finde anie such Authoritie granted vnto Peter, from whom they would perswade the world that they haue this supremacy. I know there are some places wrested to serue that turne, which also are so fullie answered in sundrie learned bookes, that all the Papists in the world, will neuer be able out of them to proue, the Romish Vi∣car to be Supreame Head of the Church. I therefore will but point vnto that, which the Fathers of the purer Age of the Church thought hereof, wherby we maie truely gather, whether they thought this
superiority of the Pope, to haue any good ground in Gods book or not. Howsoeuer Cardinall Bellarmine, more boldlie then truelie doth pronounce,De Rom. Pontif. lib. 1. cap 10. Est revera non simplex error, sed pernitiosa haeresis, nega∣re B. Petri primatum a Christo institutum: It is (saith the Cardinall) in deed no simple errour, but a pernitious heresie, to deny that the Supremacie of S. Peter, was instituted by Christ. Was then the 6.Conc. Carth 6. capit. 6. Councell of Carthage an Hereticall Councell, or did they holde a pernicious heresie, whē they decreed that the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch, should haue their proper priuiledges re∣serued to them, as well as the Bishop of Rome had his? Faustinus, & others whom Boniface 1. sent thither for him, did what they coulde by alleadging false Canons of the Councell of Nice, to haue reserued a superioritie to Rome, but they coulde not preuaile. Neither coulde the Popes best friends then saie, that either Christ had giuen him such preeminence, or the A∣postles had taught it, but onlie they allead¦ged
a false Canon of the Councell, to haue deceiued the world withall, as the story of that Councell sheweth. Preamb. Concil. Chal.And when Valentinian the Emperour, and Placidia also & Endoxia Emperesses, wrote to Theodosius that a Councell might be assembled within Italie, being moued thereto by Leo himselfe (then Bishop of Rome) as is there confessed; and they were disposed to speak as much as they could, for credit of that See, yet all they could write was, that to him principatum Sacer∣dotij super omnes, antiquitas contulit. An∣tiquitie bestowed vpon the Bishop of Rome, to be chiefe over Priests. They therefore intreated, vt locum habeat & facultatem, de fide & Sacerdotibus iudicare: that hee might haue place and power, to iudge of the faith, and of Priests. A verie vnequall re∣quest, made as it seemeth by the instiga∣tion of Leo himselfe, perchance preten∣ding the errors that were in manie of the Easterne Churches, and the soundnesse which yet the Rom. Church retained, as partlie also appeareth he did.
But the Councell of Chalcedon vvhich was the fourth Generall Councel, smelling out the purpose of Leo as it seemeth, did plainelie decree that the Archbish. of Cō∣stātinople should haue as good priviledge as had the Bishop of Rome.Concil. Chal¦ced. Act. 16. And doe Pas∣chasinus the Popes Legate what he could, by alleadging again, a false Canon of the Nicene Councell, Quòd Ecclesia Romana semper habuit primatum, that the Church of Rome, hath alwaies had the supremacie, (so you see, forgerie & false dealing hath bin an old practise of the Romish Church) yet the Councell would needes so decree, crying with one consent, Haec iusta sen∣tentia, haec omnes dicimus, haec omnibus placent, haec omnes dicimus, hoc iustum de∣cretum, Quae constituta sunt valeant: It is a iust sentence, we all saie thus; we are all pleased with this: we all say thus. It is a good decree, As it is said, so let it stande. And thus is it plaine enough, that since nether Faustinus and they who were ioined with him as Legates in the Coūcel of Carthage; neither Paschasinus and his Associates in
the Councel of Chalcedon, neither the Em∣perour & Emperesses in their Epistle, writ∣ten at Leo his owne Request, and by like∣lyhoode vpon his Information; neither lastlie the 630. Bishops in that Councell as∣sembled, could once alleadge any Scrip∣ture for the Popes Superioritie, but that the Councell decreed against the same; it is (I saie) manifest, that for 455. yeares af∣ter Christ, the Scriptures which nowe they wring to prooue the same, were not supposed to avowe the Popes Supre∣macie. So that Succession of this Doctrine wil never be brought frō the time of the Con∣version of this Land to Christianitie: no there was no such doctrine for many hū∣dreds of yeares after Christ. But in deede the first ground of that doctrine must be soughte for, in the time of Phocas that Cruell Murderer, who (as before I saide) because by so euill meanes hee came to the Empire, that hee might with more approbation keepe his place, he was con∣tent to gratifie Boniface Bishop of Rome,
with an vnwonted, but not vndesired ho∣nour: Magnâ contentione (saith Platina) obtinuit à Phoca,Plat. in Bo∣nifac. 3. vt haberetur & dicere∣tur ab omnibus, Romana Ecclesia, caput om∣nium Ecclesiarum.Palmerius. An addition vnto Eu∣sebius his Cronicle saith, Id consentient Phoca institutum esse: that with much a doe (as saith Platina) Boniface the third obtai∣ned of Phocas, that the Church of Rome, should be accompted and called, the head of all Churches, and as Palmerius in his Ad∣dition saith, Phocas was cōtent that should be ordained. And another storie saith that Phocas first obtaiēd,Benevenuti. Augustal. in Phoca. (marke first obtained) this title to the Church of Rome. So that now, somewhat more thē 600 yeares after Christ began the Claime to this Title to be somewhat worth, if the vniust honor, giuē by a bloudy Vsurper of the Empire, may make a good claime. But notwithstāding all that Phocas his decree could prevaile, the Bishops of Constantin∣ople, and the Patriarches also of Raven∣na and sundrie others, yea all the Greeke church held out, nether wold acknowledg
anie such Supremacie in the Pope, though it cost some of them ful deare,Pla. in Leo 2 & namely the Patriarche of Ravenna. In the ende commeth Boniface 8. in honestie much like the first foūder of the Papacie,Extra de Maior. & o∣bed. vnam sanctam. Phocas, and he laieth the second stone of this foū∣dation, making it as before you hard, a matter necessarie to salvation to beleeue this so euill a proued Article. And yet for al this the Church of Rome thought their ambitious Title not well grounded, nether that men would for all Pope Boniface his decree, that came al∣most 1300. yeares after Christ, beleeue the Pope to be such a one: therfore in the Councel of Florence about some 8. or. 9. score yeares since, they got it and some o∣ther such substantiall and soūd pieces of doctrine,Bartho. Gar∣ranza sūma concil. ratified and confirmed, in these words, Definimus sanctam Apostolicam sedem, & Romanum pontificem, in vniver∣sum orbem tenere primatum. Thus nowe some 1400. yeares after our Conversion to Christianity, is this principall point of do∣ctrine in the Romish Church, come to that
honour, to be accompted a doctrine to be beleeued, For vntil the Councell had decreed it, it might not properly haue that credit. I trust then, it appeareth to a∣nie indifferent iudgmēt, that this first do∣ctrine which our Recusants hold, wanteth at the least 1400. yeares, of the consent of the Romish Church it selfe, of that successi∣on which our Recusants imagine it hath. The other Propp of the Romish Church, is the doctrine of Traditions, which that wicked conventicle at Trent,Concil. Tri∣dent Sess. 4 decret. de Script. canō. is not ashā∣ed to make equal to the vndoubted worde of God, Traditiones ipsas, tum ad fidem, tū admores pertinentes tanquā vel ore tenùs a Christo, vel a spiritu sancto dictatas, & cō∣tinuâ successione in Ecclesia Catholica ser¦uatas, pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit & veneratur. This councel say they with like honour and affection, doth receiue and reverence euen the Traditions aswell belonging to faith, as to manners, as if they had beene pronounced from Christs owne mouth, or from the holy Ghost. A de∣cree subiect to that reprofe of our Saui∣vour
Christ, why doe ye transgresse the cō∣mandement of God,Mat. 15.3. by your traditions? For in verie manie things, doth the Church of Rome expreslie against Gods written word, vnder colour of those vnwritten verities, as they falslie tearme them, as a∣none I trust it shall appeare by the indif∣ferent Reader. But here my purpose is only to exa∣mine whether Traditions be a fit Touch∣stone to try our doctrines by, and especi∣allie, whether we haue receiued this Rule or Trial of our Religion, successiuely frō the Apostels or not? But the matter is plaine, though the Apostle sometime nāe¦eth Traditions, yet hath he noe meaning to deliuer vs anie Article of faith, or les∣son belonging to our saluation, but onlie such as are contained in the writtē word. For this cause the Apostle to Timothy cal∣leth it depositum more then once,1 Tim. 6.. that is, a thing committed, and already deliuered, that we should not looke daielie for newe Tradition therof. And St. Iude speaketh therof much to the purpose, exhorting
thus striue earnestly for the saith once de∣liuered to the Saints,Iude. 3. meaning that our Religiō is not like vnto mens lawes, which must alwaies, as incōveniēces are espied, be reformed: but once it is deliuered, and that which already we haue receiued, we must not change. Keepe (saith S. Paul) the true patterne of the wholsome words,2. Tm. 1.13. which thou hast hard of me. So that we see they had a Pat∣terne from which they might not swarue. And necessarie it was so to be, that they might the better obserue the Exhortatiō of the same Apostle elswhere, who would not haue vs henceforth any more as Chil∣dren caried about,Eph. 4.14. and wauering with eve∣ry winde of doctrine, which in noe wise cā be avoided, if Traditions should be the Touchstone. But as in the matter of Supre∣macie, so in this also let vs see what the Fa¦thers did when any question of Religion was to be descussed. For therby shal it ap∣peare vnto vs, whether they iudge the Scriptures or Traditiōs, the fittest meane to trie our Religion by. Nether doe I pur∣pose
here to trouble the Reader with in∣finite numbers of Sentēces, which might be gathered out of the Fathers touching this point. For there is not anie thinge so common in them, as Teach this out of the Gospels and the writings of the Apostles; or proue this out of the law, the Prophets, and the Euangelists and Apostels writings. J saie nothing more common in sundry of them, then these or such like sentences. I therfore purpose but to point to sōe generall thinges which in their practise for this matter may be obserued, whervp∣on maie be inferred, that the Fathers did not so vnderstand that which in the writ∣tings of the Apostles may be read of keep∣ing that which they haue deliuered, as if it were meant of any secret doctrines, or other lessons then are set downe in writ∣ing. For by Scriptures especially did they disproue heresies,August. in Apoc. Hom. 10. as all stories plainelie teach. Occiduntur haereses per Catholicos (saith S. Augustine) cum in scripturarum testimonijs opprimuntur. Heresies are kil∣led by Catholicks, when they are ouerlaied
with testimonies of Scriptures.Theodoret hist. li. 1. cap 8. And Theo¦doret in one Chap. recordeth twice, howe Euseb. of Nicomedia and other Arrians were by the Scriptures confuted. But this is in the Ecclesiasticall histories and writ∣ings of the Fathers, so plaine & commō, that it is needlesse to bring many proofes therof. I wil therfore conclude with that notable Testimonie of S. Augustine:Aug. in epi. Joh. tract. 2 con∣tra insidiosos errores, Dominus voluit po∣nerefundamentū in Scripturis: The Lorde woulde lay in the Scriptures a foundation or ground worke, against deceitfull er∣rours. But as in priuate writings, Heresies were by Scriptures, not by Traditions besides the Scriptures, confuted: so in Coūcels too. Jn the Councel of Nice,Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 7. ther was a charge giuen by Constantine the Great and good Emperour, that they should determine & debate such matters, as should be in con∣trouersie among them, literarum diuini∣tùs inspiratarum testimonijs: by the testi∣monie of Scriptures giuen by inspiration; which he immediatly before called the
Bookes of the Evangelists, Apostles, and Prophets. S. Augustine being desierous that a good end should be made, and a quiet order taken, between the Catholicks and the Donatists, writeth to a Bishop of their Sect called Fortunius, requiring that some peaceable course maie be thought vpon, and some indifferent place apoint∣ed,August. epist 63. where they may haue a councel or con∣ference but with this condition, Faciamus Codices Canonicos praesto esse, let vs take or∣der that the bookes of Canonical Scriptures be there ready, much like is that which is reported of Meletius,Samb. Con∣cil. Constāti∣nop. per Cralb. between whom & Pauling there was some question, In sede ponatur sacrum Evangelium, et nos ex v∣tra{que} parte sedeamus: let the holy gospel be laied vpon the seate, and let vs fit on ether side. These things I haue breiflie touched, which sundry others haue fully & largly handled, that Recusants may see, that the Fathers of the purer time, did not so vn∣derstand these words of the Apostle, or a∣nie such like, The, 2.15 Stand fast, and keep the in∣structions
or traditiōs, which you haue bin taught ether by word or by our Epistle; as if he deliuered one thinge by writing and a∣nother by worde of mouth: For they ac∣knowledge no other Rule of faith or Re∣ligion, thē that which in the writtē worde is contained, and therfore doe they so cō∣monlie vrge the Heretickes, to shew that they teach out of the writings of the Pro∣phets, Evangelists, and Apostles: Therby declaring, that the written word (for that onlie is to be said that it maie be shewed wheras words not written are not seene but hard) maie be Iudge in matters of Re∣ligion. And therfore S. Augustine calleth This word the waigh-scales of Truth verie aptlie, as also the Scriptures are even for this cause called Canonicall, because they are the Canō or Rule according to which our life and Faith must be framed.August de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 2 cap. 6. Ad∣feramus (saith he) stateram canonicam de scripturis sāctis tāquā de the sauris domi∣nicis, & in illis quid sit grauius appēdamus, imò non appendam us, sed a domino appēsa recognoscamus. Let vs bringe the Canoni∣call
waigh scale out of holy Scripture, as out of the Lords treasure &, let vs waighin thē what beareth waight: or rather let not vs waigh them, but acknowledge that, which the Lord hath waighed. Jn prescript aduers. Hae∣ret.Indeed Tertullian maketh mention of certaine Heretickes that saide that Christ and the Apostles deliuered not al their do∣ctrine openlie, but some in secret, iust as now our Papists doe, but they haue that note of Heretickes for their labour, & are written against both by him, and Irenei also,Iren lib. 1. c. 24. Jrē. li. 3. c. 2. who was before him. And Irenei chargeth the Carpocratians with that He∣resie, and the Valentinians too. So that though the Fathers did not so vnderstand those words, keepe the Traditions, &c. as doe the Papists; yet you see, who did vn∣derstande them so, of whom I trust you wil be ashamed to be accompted follow∣ers, seeing that you seeme by your Peti∣tion so desirous to bee satisfied for such points. It appeareth by that which I haue said, that not Traditions, but onlie the written word, must both decide al contro∣versies
in Religion, and also be the groūd, wherevpon they must be built. Now that I may yeelde some Reason of that which before I said, that the Per∣suasion they haue of the Popes Supremacy, and this their doctrine, that Traditions are of equall Authority with the vvritten word of God, are the verie props that vp∣hold Popish Religion; you must confide, that when Fathers yea & Scriptures too, are so plaine against them, that they can in no wise wrest them to serue their turn, neither haue anie reasonable colour of Answere, to such Arguments as out of them are framed against Popery: then do they either flie to the Popes Authoritie & Priviledge, to allow and Interpret what∣soeuer is written; or to this orher shift of Traditiōs, wherby they would perswade, that they haue it from the Apostles, and so they bring some shew of Truth, to that which is otherwise, & indeed, most false. To stād vpō euery particular doctrine which is in the Church of Rome receiued, it were too tedious: Yet needfull it is that
Recusants should be satisfied in this their Reasonable Request, whether the Religiō that they professe, haue beene from the Conversion of this Land or not. For per∣formance hereof, let them aske of their learned Divines,VVhitak. cō crov 1 quest . c. 5. whether Master VVhi∣taker hath trulie reported, out of the wri∣tings of Peter a Soto a Papist of no small reckoning, Canisius, Lindan, and Peresius, al great vpholders of the Popish Religion, of such doctrines, as themselues acknow∣ledge, they receiue from Tradition. For if he haue written truelie (as indeed hee hath) thē the learnedst Divines that haue beene of the Papistes in our age, whose Bookes the Priests or Iesuits now are not worthie to carrie, do confesse that which now our Recusants professe, almost in e∣verie point, is grounded not vpon Gods word, but vpon Traditions, yea and some of them late too: and therefore not that faith, which was at the first conversion of this Countrie. Pet. Soto cō∣tra. Brentiū.Out of Peter a Soto he reckoneth these The offering of the sacrifice of the Altar,
Invocation of Saints, praier for the dead, The supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, hal∣lowing of water in baptisme; The whole Sacrament of Confirmation, Order, Ma∣trimonie, pennance, annoyling, merit of workes, necessitie of satisfaction, numbe∣ring of our sinnes to the Priest. Out of Ca∣nisius he reckoneth these,Canis. cate∣chis. cap. 5. Lind. pan. pl. li. 4. c. 10. worship of Ima∣ges, certaine times of fasting, lent, all that is in the Masse, praier and offering for the dead. Out of Lindane, that Peter was at Rome, and his supremacy,Tabul. 6. yea and the sea∣ven Sacraments too, are (saith hee) by tra∣dition, consecration of oile and water in baptisme, reall presence, Communiō in one kinde, that the Eucharist is a sacrifice, that it must bee kept and worshipped, private Masse, Confession of sinnes, satisfaction, Indulgencies, Purgatory;Peres. par And Peresius ad∣deth, that single life of Priestes, is by Tra∣dition. So that, if these Learned Divines of the Papists say true, our Recusants may easilie vnderstand, that all their Religion is built, not vpon the Rocke of Truth, but vpon the Quick-sand, of Mens Traditiōs
and Inventions. Yea and Canus, who may wel be rec∣koned among the learnedst Divines,Canus de trad. Aposto li. 3. ca. 3. Fū¦dament. 2. that Papists haue had in our times and our Fa∣thers daies too, confesseth Transubstan∣tiation,Fundamen 3 not to bee taught in Scriptures plainely: yea Invocation of Martyrs for helpe, celebrating of their memories, wor∣shipping of Images, In the sacrifice of the Eucharist, that the Priests must make and receiue with the body the bloud also, that the Sacrament of Confirmation & Orders are not to be reiterated; these things (saith he) and manie such like, are neither plain∣ly, nor closely contained in Holy writ. But what stand I vpon this? Fisher sometime Bishop of Rochester, well knowne to the Recusants of our time, and accounted a learned Divine in his time: granteth that Purgatory and Indulgences,Assert. Lu∣ther. confut. Artic. 18. are but of late found out. Now therfore I suppose our Recusants Request is satisfied. Jt is plainely shewed, that wheras this our Realme was brought to the knowledge of the truth in the daies
of the Apostles, if not by the Apostles thē∣selues: yet all that ever the Church of Rome holdeth, is of Tradition, & not out of the word of God: yea and for sundrie points thereof very late too, as out of Fi∣sher I haue shewed for Purgatorie & Par∣dons, as for the number of 7. Sacraments, the Supremacie, yea and Purgatorie, they had their approbation but in the Floren∣tine Councell, almost in our Fathers daies. But for those other, that are fathered vpō the Apostles, as manie of the rest of the Popish opinions are: it is plaine enough that the Ancient Fathers in the Primi∣tiue and purer Age of the Church, neuer acknowledged anie such for materiall points of Religion, which must of necessi∣tie be beleeued, neither would receiue a∣ny thing, but out of the written word. Yet I graunt they vse also often the name of Tradition; somtimes therby sig∣nifying, that which in the Scriptures is written for our learning and instruction, not mens Traditions or devises: And in this sense it is commonlie vsed by Irenei
and others:Irē, li. 3. c. 1 as when he saith, ab Apostolis traditum est veritatis Evangeliū, the Gos∣pell of truth is delivered from the Apostles. Now the Gospel we know to bee written. Yea three times in one chap. he vseth this word tradiderunt,Lib. 3. cap. 1 they delivered (from whence commeth the worde Tradition) speaking of the writing of Gods worde. Somtime also they vse it in the sēse wher∣in it is now most common, for vnwritten doctrines. This I note, that such as wit∣tingly would not be deceiued, may know that not everie place wherein anie of the Ancient Fathers name Tradition, must make for the Traditiōs, for which the Ro∣mish Church striueth so earnestlie, & of which they make so great reckoning. But for the Recusants sake, thus I rea∣son: whatsoeuer doctrine was not taught and proued out of the written word, the Fathers for 4. or 5. hundred yeeres after Christ, did not receiue as the doctrine of the Church: But the doctrine the Recusāts now professe, (as out of their learned Di∣vines before is shewed,) is not prooved
out of the Scriptures: therefore the Fa∣thers for 4. or 5. hūdred yeers after Christ did not allow it to be the doctrine of the Church; & so it followeth that their fore∣fathers successiuelie from the Conversion of this land, that is, from the Apostles times, haue not beene taughte that do∣ctrine. Wee nowe looke for performance of promise, whereby you haue assured vs, that either of the Conditions beeing per∣formed, as I trust both are: you wilbe rea∣die to satisfie our desires in comming to Church. We would haue some hope that you would be as good as your word, but that your Blinde-guides, haue grauen (I thinke) with a pen of steele in your harts, a most sottish & Vnchristian perswasiō, that you must not see, but by their eies, nor heare, but by their ears; you must not know anie thing, but that they will haue you to know: and then bee you sure you shall know nothing, that maie bring their credit into any question, or their doctrine into anie triall. Well said Tertullian, and
most truely, of the lawes that were made against Christians, and fitly it maie be ap∣plied vnto the matter in question, Suspe∣cta lex est,Tertul. in A¦polog. quae probari se non vult; impro∣ba autem, si non probata, dominetur. The Law is to be suspected, that will not suffer it selfe to be tried: but it is wicked, if not being tried it bear the sway. For I am sure, that no man woulde thinke hee meant to warrant his gold to be good, that woulde charge him that receiueth it, that in anie wise he must not try it, either by Scale or Touch. Yet Recusāts, in matters of Salua∣tion, are content to trust such as will let them trie nothing. By this meanes, howsoeuer our an∣swering of this or anie other Petitiō, may be of it selfe sufficient, yet if they whome you take to be your Learned Diuines, saie it is not answered, you must trust them, & continue stil in Ignorance. And who can hope that they, that partlie vpon discon∣tentednes, partlie vpon vaine intisments, have entered by vndutiful disloialtie, into great danger and disfauour, wil leese you,
if by any meanes they maie hold you one their side, by whom only they are maine∣tained, in their vnsatisfied humour. So that Recusants are (J must needs cōfesse) through their owne wilfulnes or follie, much to be pittied; because they are not only lead aside from the right way, but also are cōtēt to be lead so by them, that will neuer let them returne into it againe. Therfore howsoeuer your Petition, maie be deemed reasonable: yet I feare you shal finde alwais (if God would giue you eies to see it) your Preists dealing with you herein not vnreasonably only, but al∣so damnable. But if vpon such mature discussion it shall appeare, that we can noe way goe to your Churches without incurring god his wrath, and the damnation of our selues; we hope that your LL, will thē forbeare to prosecute vs with any spirituall cen∣sure, but rather mediate, in respects wel knowen to your selues, or restoring againe into his Maiesties fauour, and the mittigation of such penalties and
vexations, as for our Recusācie are dai∣ly imposed vpon vs. Vpon an absurde Supposition, the Pe∣titioner frameth a twofold Request, the one that our Bishops should not oppose themselues against them by Censures Ec¦clesiasticall; the other that they should be meanes to procure his Maiesties fauour. But the Petitioner here offereth greate wronge to Bishops, Preachers, & Gospellers to all whom his Petition is directed, in that he imagineth, that, they, who haue this 47. yeares, preached, taught & main∣tained the truth of the Gospel, should all this time neuer haue vsed mature discus∣siō of the same vntil now they should be rouszed, as it were out of a slumber, by this Remembrācer, wheras intruth every point of Poperie, hath so often beene dis∣coursed, and discussed too; in so many learned Treatises the impietie therof so discouered, that all that their Iesuits and Preists can doe, can neuer couer & hide the nakednes therof againe. Yea the more we vnfold the plaites of
Poperie, the more cause we see to detest the sāe, & to pray that our king and rulers should haue a watchfull eie ouer the fa∣uorers thereof. For what is Poperie but a Religion pached vp of Mens Inventions, as is before shewed, a sea of superstition & Idolatries, of will-worships; a Religion contrarie to the word, that must be, and is the ground of True Religion: wherin trifles and toyes, are accompted as accep¦table worship of God; wherin God is dis∣honored, by vndue honour giuen to the Creatures; A Religion that teacheth to disobay Princes, whō God hath set in the throne, to disobay Magistrates and them that haue Authoritie, to poison, murder and kill, by what meanes they can, who∣soeuer they imagine to withstand their designements? These and such like staines we finde in Poperie, when with mature discussion we trie the same. For your cōming to our Churches, we knowe nothing in our Religion, whie anie Christian maie not resort to our Churche, without danger of sinning; nay one the cō∣trary
we dare affirme, that without dan∣ger of Gods heavie displeasure, you maie not absent your selues from our Churches  First because Christians are boūd to heare Gods word, which is there read, yourselues cannot denie it.  Secondly, because the Lawes of the Realme require it, against which (vnlesse they require things vngod¦lie) al disobedience is sinne: and there can be noe vngodlynesse, in heareing Gods word, and godlie praiers.  Thirdly, the not comming to our Churches, is a condem∣ning of our comming to be not good; which is vncharitable, vnlesse it be groū∣ded vpon a better foundation, then anie that I heare Recusants can lay.  Fourthly in comming, they come not to that which is evil (for that is confessed even of the greatest Recusants that I knowe) But of this before. But how falleth it out that there is here not one worde of the Claime of Antiquity of your Religiō? Before you said that if it might be proued that you might without incurring deadlie sinne, goe to
Church: or your Religion professed now by you, not to be of such Antiquity as there you claime &c. Now here this Lat∣ter is quite left out, as if you rued, you made that former offer. If it be because you stand in doubt (as iustlie you maie) whether vpō mature discussiō, that which you now professe, wilbe found to be al on with that which at the first was taught in this Land, repent in time, and leaue them that haue so long deceiued you. But wee knowing our faith to be no other, then that which was heare at the first taught (for the Apostles nether anie other whō they thought fit to instruct vs, would teach any other then according to that true patterne of wholsome words,2. Tim. 1. i3 which was deliuered to them) thinke it great rea¦son, that such as wittinglie withstand the Truth, or refuse to come to that great sup∣per, should be for our parts, by such Eccle∣siasticall Censures as we haue, compelled to come to the Gospell of Saluation. And to confesse the truth, I suppose that we are rather to be reproued, for be∣ing
to cold in this worke of the Lord, thē for being to sharpo, against you, who so stubburnlie refuse the offer of Saluation and abuse the clemencie that hath beene shewed. But what meaneth this, that you would not we should persecute you with any spiritual Censure? Stād you so much in feare of Excommunication? These your words and your doings are as two strings quite out of tune. Here you would not in any wise be Excommunicated, and yet in∣deed you wil not in anie wise come to our Churches. You wil not come to them your selus, nether would you haue vs put you out of them. But this I tel you, when anie of you come, we wil not keep you out. For your returning to god, and to his Church, is it that we desire earnestlie, & hartelie praie for, that God will worke it in you. Now if our selues see no reason to re∣mit the Censures against you: lesse cause is there for vs to mediate vnto his Maie∣stie, that such dāgerous Subiects, as your verie Religion maketh you to be, shoulde
without controlement of Law, liue with∣in his Dominion. Jt is fitter for vs to make such suit to his Maiesty against you, as S. Augustine, (a man of singular lear∣ning, and nothing giuen to crueltie,) did verie often make vnto such as were Go∣vernors about him, that by punishments (so that not by death) they wold represse the Donatists, those hereticks;Epi. 127. Epi. 129. Ep. 158 159 as in his E∣pistles to Donatus who was Proconsull in Aphrica, to Olimpius, also to Marcellinus a Tribune, and manie other, it maie ap∣peare. So that the Causes that wee can thinke vpon, which maie induce vs to mooue anie thing in this matter, are as you see, altogither against your Request. For indeede by that which alreadie wee haue seene, and by all likelyhood we may looke for at your hands, so virulent dea∣ling is in most of you, and so vnbrideled a course you thinke you should run, & you so snuffe if you by anie meanes bee stop∣ped, that I am verilie perswaded, that if feare of Laws did not curb you, you wold be (if alreadie you be not) much more vn∣rulie
then ever were the Donatists in A∣phrica. And therfore I cannot cōiecture, what you should meane by those wordes that we should mediate for you, for re∣spects best knowne vnto our selues. If this iust and most equall kinde of triall shalbe denied vnto vs (saith the Petitio∣ner) or this our petition (like to the two former) bee suppressed without a satis∣fying answere; your wisdomes cannot then but knowe it will assure vs, that in your owne iudgementes the cause of our Recusancie, and constant persevering in our Religion, are not by learned Di∣vines to be disproved, which will adde confidence in the iustice of our cause, & giue notice to the world, how little vvee deserue the opprobrious name of obsti∣nacie, or other odious tearmes, dayly im∣posed vpon vs: and it maie giue cause that manie will thinke, that our goods or lands, and the vndoing of vs and our posteritie, is the things more sought, thē the eternall salvation of our soules. Sed meliora speramus.
The Petitioner to make vs the more willing to regard his Petition, doth here insinuate, what disadvantage may growe vnto vs, if this iust and most equal kinde of trial shalbe denied, saith he. Because this triall hath heretofore often already been made by writing, and yet the Petitioner still vrgeth further triall: it may well bee that hee meaneth it shoulde bee by some Publike disputation. And indeed some Po∣pish Thrasoes haue made as great vaunts against the truth, as did that prowde Phi∣listine against the Host of the Lord God of Israell, and with much like successe. As Campian,Camp. 10. Rat. a sillie man for such an Incoun∣ter, who challengeth the Vniversities of Oxford and Cambridge, as if hee (more mightie and puissant then Hercules) were able to overmatch so manie. So did Du∣reus too And so doe manie, lesse able thē these, (though these are found too weake to performe their Challendge) rather in hope that it will not be granted to them, then for any cōfidence they haue in their cause, if it were granted.
In the beginning of her Maiesties daies before the State of Religiō was setled, the Popish Bishops & others were in this tune too. And when as good order was taken to haue an Equall Triall indeed, and that indifferēcie should be vsed, for searching out of the Truth: though Beares may by meanes be brought to the stake, yet by no means would they be made to dispute: but now by one Allegation, then by ano∣ther, alwaies shifted of the matter. And when disputations haue bin, Papists haue gained so little thereby, as that the Car∣dinall of Loraigne (no friend to Protestāts I trow) hauing hard Beza in the Disputa∣tiō at Poissy, in the presence of the French King and al the Great Peeres there assem∣bled,An. hist. Col¦lect of Frāce Chart. 9. was hard to saie, I woulde either this man had beene dumbe, or wee had beene all deafe. But what reason is there why this now should be coūted a iust & most equal kind of Triall, which was by Clement the 7. (when the Emperour Charles the 5. and Frauncis the first French king, required a
free Generall Councell for deciding the questions in Religion) called,Gentiles. e an. Concil. Trid. li. 1. res periculo sa pravi{que} exempli: a dangerous matter and of evill example? Jt is no more iust & equall, now to call into question a settled & well grounded Religion in any State: then it was, to bring the Popish doctrines, which are builte of no sure foundation to a due triall: no, nor so iust by farre. And what further triall would our Pe∣titioner require of the things hee propo∣seth? He would haue it proued to their di∣vines, that without danger of deadly sinne they maie resorte to the Exercises of our Religion. I haue before shewed that this is made so cleare to the Iesuits & Priests too, who are the learnedst Divines that they haue, by Mr. Bell, that they are resol∣ved that it is lawfull, so that it bee not a signe distinctiue, as they suppose it is, but indeede it is not; for since manie Papistes come to the Church, & are called Church-Papists and so we reckon of thē, that they are as dangerous as they that come not: and likewise manie honester then any Pa∣pists,
come not to our Churches, moued vpon an vndiscreet zeale. Jf then neither Papists only abstaine from our Churches neither yet al they, it cannot be a signe di∣stinctiue, & so no hinderāce for their cō∣ming to Church. Moreover, for proofe of Popish Reli∣gion, that it hath not beene from the be∣ginning of the Conversion of this land frō Gentilisme, it is strongly proued by con∣fession of sundrie Arch-Papistes who ac∣knowledge almost all that they teach to be taken from Tradition & not out of the Scriptures; and sundrie of those Traditiōs as I haue shewed, are of so late time, that he must needs shew himselfe verie parti∣all, that can once imagine they haue such Antiquitie. So I trust his former demāds are sufficiently answered, with that which formerly hath bin alleadged, which (were it not for prolixitie) I could demonstrate in the particular practise of our own coū∣trie, as in especiall maie appeare in the point of the Sacrament (for which they chieflie except against our Service) the
verie same doctrine which wee now pro∣fesse,Homil. ma∣nuscript. in the Libra. of Oxford Exe∣ter VVorces∣ter Lincoln. Beda Hist. Eccle. Petr. Cluniac. in ep. ad. Bern. being generallie retained in this lād in the Saxons time, with expresse reiecti∣on of all faigned Transubstantiation, as plainely maie appeare by their Homilies yet extant in the Saxons tongue. As like∣wise I could haue shewed by the Rites of the Easterne Churches, which both Bri∣tans & Saxons many hūdred of yeers ob∣serued, that the first cōversiō of this Islād was not by any of the Roman Profession. Now what hee meaneth by a satisfy∣ing answere to this Petition it maie bee a question. For some other of their Petiti∣ons, require either Toleration of their Re∣ligion for exercise thereof, or at the least, Immunitie frō punishment, if they come not to our Churches. But a Christian King borne and brought vp in the Light of the Truth, & beautified with the ornaments of true learning; who acknowledgeth Gods vnspeakeable goodnes towards him selfe, in aduancing him to so great ho∣nor, preseruing him from so manie perils, crowning him with so manie blessings;
whose Religion teacheth him to pray to God only, by the Mediation of Christ alone and to offer vnto him for his graces, the Calues of his lips, praise & thanksgiuing: such a king (I saie) cānot be ignorant, that to tolerate, a Sect of People in his domi∣nions, that should cal vpon Saints & An∣gels, and so darken Gods honor, prophane his Name, & despise his Word, may pro∣voke against him, & his, the heauie Indig∣nation of him, who being king of kings, doth require of them this Royal seruice of preseruing inviolable the sinceritie of his Truth and worship in their kingdomes. And looke how manie cōmandemēts there are to roote out Idolatrie, destroie I∣dolaters, abolish their groues, their Altars to shunne conversing or marrying with them; how many threatnings against thē that performe not these offices; how ma∣ny examples of the Godlie, commend∣ed for doing them: so many Arguments there are against, not onlie Toleration but euen connivēcie a such superstiti∣ons.
And therfore to satisfy them, whō you tearme your Learned Diuines we thinke it a thing most easie, in respect of the cause, yet most impossible in respect of the persons. For it standeth them vpon not to be satisfied, especially they being, such as rather respect their owne mainte∣nance, then your saluation, whatsoeuer they pretēd. If they should confesse, that our Reasons satisfie them, and you ther∣vpon resort to our Churches, your liking of them will soone decay, and their state must needs be much impaired, which by their good wils I warrāt you shal neuer be But if anie Recusant being desirous to know the Truth, repaire to our Bishops, or other in our Church of singular note of Learning (as you speake) for resolution of anie point in controuersie between vs and your Diuines; if sufficient reasons be not yeelded out of Gods booke, and the purer Fathers, of that doctrine we professe, and against that that you hold, euen such as your Learned Di∣uines shal not be able to answere them
then I confesse, you haue iust cause to speake of the goodnes of your cause, & to alleadge your perseuering therein. But your cause being of it selfe not good, as we shall alwaies by Gods grace, be readie to iustifie: you haue no more cause to brag of your sufferings & constancy, nor so much neither, as had the Donatists, at whose wilfull yea and desired deaths, St. Augustine,S. Aug. in. epist. marueileth. The Scriptures therefore, and consent of Antiquity being as in part I haue shew¦ed in this short Answer, so plaine with vs as they are, neither can you in continu∣ing Recusants, avoide the note of obstina∣cie: or others once deeme, that so cor∣rupt a Religion as the Romish is, cannot sufficiently by godly and Christian lear∣ning, bee disproued. As for that you af∣firme, that (vnlesse your Requests be grā∣ted) cause wilbe giuen to many to thinke your lands and goods are sought for, and the vndoing of you and your posteritie, rather then your salvation, it maie wel be that such vndutifull surmises are often in
your harts, and such malitious reports in your mouthes. But is there so much as a∣ny colour why any should so thinke? Leauing therfore the iuster examinatiō of this vniust charge, to trie whether wee seeke their goods and vndoing or not, to him who knoweth the secrets of all harts, and shal one daie reveale & reward such vncharitable surmises: we wish vnto the Petitioner and al Recusants, that it would please God to indue them with better grace, that seeing the Errours wherinto they are lead, and rightly considering of the blind devotions, wherwith they are delighted, they maie detest such abomi∣nations, and forsaking both the Pope and Poperie cleaue soūdlie and sincerlie both to our God and to our Soveraigne, that they & we with one voice and hart, maie singe the songes of Sion to the Lorde our God. This is the onlie waie to hope for better things here, & to obtaine the best thinges elsewhere. FINIS.
