5029 S107752 99843448 8183
A RELATION OF THE GLORIOVS TRIVMPHS AND ORDER of the Ceremonies, obserued in the Mar∣riage of the High and Mighty CHARLES, King of Great Brittaine, and the Ladie HEN∣RETTA MARIA, Sister to the most Christian King of France. TOGETHER WITH THE CEREMONIE obserued in their Troth-plighting, perfor∣med in the Castle of the Louure, in his Maiesties Chamber there. AS ALSO THE KINGS DECLARATION containing a Prohibition vnto all his Subiects to vse any Traffique or Commerce with the Kingdome of Spaine. Published in the Parliament of Paris, the 12. of May, 1625. Whereunto the Originall French Copie is added. LONDON▪ Printed by T. S. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at the signe of the Pyde-Bull, neere S. Austens Gate, 1625.
THE GLORIOVS TRIVMPH AND ORDER OF THE Ceremonies obserued in the Marriage of the High and Mightie CHARLES King of Great Bri∣taine, and the Lady HENRETTA MARIA, Sister to the most Christian King of FRANCE. NOW at last, God being fauourable vnto our Countrey of France, hath pleased to grant what wee most desired so long since; and those thicke cloudes which seemed to obscure the lustre of our Country, and had as it were conspired to kill the fruite thereof in the very blossome, are now scattered and blowne ouer, together with the bad influence which threatned vs, God in his secret will permitting that two of the most mighty and potent King∣domes of Christendome, should be vnited together, by the most glorious Marriage that euer was seene in the world. Therefore now our Inuincible King Lewis the Iust, must needes promise to himselfe all felicity, glory and happinesse heaped vpon him by this Vnion. What great contentment hath France, and Great Bri∣taine profit, to see themselues so inseparably vnited, by a more vndissoluable knot then the Gordian, and by a friend∣ship better cimmented together, then the Stones of the Ba∣bilonian walles, founded by Semiramis? For neuer shall
any enemies be found strong enough to shake two so flou∣rishing Kingdomes, which deriue their greatnesse from heauen, and their limits from the circumference of the Globe: Let all good Frenchmen now then reioyce, at such time as the aduersaries of our State, trembling with amaze∣ment and feare, haue their very soules afflicted with so goodly an alliance: And that I may leaue an eternall me∣mory thereof vnto all posterity, I will most succinctly here declare, the magnificent triumphes and true manner of this happy marriage. ON Thursday, the 8. day of May, the King came forth into his Chamber, and there appeared like the glorious Sunne, out-shining the other Starres, hauing his Queene with him, his second light: the Prince his onely brother, my Lords the Dukes of Nemours, and of El∣beuf, the Marshals of Vitry and Bassompiere, with other Lords of his Court, and sent for the Ladie his Sister, who came thither accompanyed with the Queene her mother, the Princesses of Conde and of County; the Dutchesses of Guise, of Cheureuse, and Elbeuf, with many other great Ladies. Her Gowne was of cloth of gold and siluer, all poudered ouer with Flower-deluces of gold, and enriched with many Diamonds, and other precious stones, and her traine was borne vp by the yong Ladie of Burbon. As she entred into the Kings Chamber, with a Maiestie correspondent to her birth, my Lords the Earls of Carlile & Holland, Embassadours for the King of Great Britaine, came likewise also in, as richly clad as can possibly be expressed, giuing vnto the King the Contract of Marriage, which was read alowd by the Lord Chancellour, after the King had agreed vnto the Couenants. This done, the Ambas∣sadours with-drew themselues into the Duke of Cheureuse his Chamber, which was ouer the Kings, and hauing com∣municated
the Contract vnto him: He forthwith repaired vnto his Maiestie, accompanied with the afore-said Am∣bassadors, and many other great Lords, apparelled in a Sute of Blacke, the Paines whereof were all garnished with Dia∣monds, and the very tags of his points were enriched with the like. Being come before his Maiestie, he presented vnto him his Procuration, and the power which the King of great Brittaine had giuen him, which was inserted at the end of the said Contract, which the King signed, and the Lady, both the Queenes, my Lord the Duke of Cheureuse, and the Lords Ambassadors likewise. This done my Lord the Cardinall De la Roche Foucault made them sure, after the manner accustomed. Now as such an vnion as this could not be performed without great pompe, and infinite ioy and contentment: So our Ladies Church was chosen for the Ceremonies of the accomplishment of the Marriage and was hung with rich tapistry and cloth of Gould and Siluer Tissue. Then was there a faire and long Gallery raised, begin∣ning at the entry of the Archbishops pallace, and reached euen vnto the Quire of the said Church: This gallery was vnder-propped with many pillers, which were couer∣ed at the top with Violet-colour Sattin, embrodered with golden Flowre-deluces, and below with faire fine lynnen, trimmed with waxe, through this same passed along all the Ceremonies of the Marriage as followeth. First, the hundred Suissers of the Kings Guard, clothed in his Maiesties Lyuery, their Drumbe beating and their Ensigne displayed. After them 12. Haulbois clothed in the like lyuery, which rauished the hearts of the hearers. Then eight Drumbes couered with the like, which were so lustily beaten vp, that the most coward courages were animated with the noyse thereof.
Ten Trumpets also sounded so merrily that it reioyced all the hearers. Then followed Monsieur de Rhodes, great Maister of the Ceremonies, brauely apparelled, and well accompanied. After him marched my Lords the Knights of the Order of the Holy Ghost, all glistering with precious stones. Then came seauen Heraulds of Armes with their Coats of Red Crimson Veluet, powdered all ouer with golden Flower-deluces. Then followed them my Lords of Vitry and Bassompiere, Marshals of France: After them my Lord the Duke of Elbeuf. Then my Lord the Duke of Cheureuse, apparelled in a Sute of Blacke-Cloath, cut and lyned with cloath of Gould, with a Cap also of cloath of Gould, and vpon his head a Iewell, which dazelled the eyes of the beholders, a Scarfe spotted all ouer with Roses of Diamonds, with a short Cloake all imbroidred with Gold, and powdred with precious stones. Then followed both my Lords the Ambassadors Ex∣traordinary of the King of Great Brittaine, &c. clad in cloth of siluer. Then came the King of France, in a garment all imbroi∣dred with Gold and Siluer, holding the Lady his Sister in his right hand, who had a crowne vpon her head, and her Gowne powdred all ouer with Flower-deluces of Gold: And Monsieur the Kings Brother on the other side, who led her in his left hand, being very brauely accoutred. The Queene Mother followed next. The Queene her selfe, in a gowne all imbroidred with Gould, Siluer, and precious stones. The Princesses of Conde and of County bearing vp the long Traine of the same. The young Lady of Montpensier. The Countesse of Seisons. Madame De Guise. Madame De Chereuse. Madame De Elbeuf, with many Lords and Ladies, of whom I cannot now make rehearsall the number of them was so great.
All this Royall and generous troupe stayed at the entry of the great Portall of the said Church, before which was a place appointed to celebrate the Marriage in, and whereon was raised a Canopie of inestima∣ble vallew, vnder which the King and Monsieur his Brother left the Ladye their Sister, and consigned her into the hands of my Lord the Duke of Chevreuse, and then my Lord Cardinall de la Roche Foucault es∣powsed the Ladye with the ordinarie ceremonies of the Church. From thence all the Orders aboue said marched in∣to the Quyer through a long Gallerie which was squa∣red out by a line, in the middest of the body of the Church all couered with Tapisterie, the richest that might be. In the middest of the said Quyer were all ready pla∣ced on the one side vpon emminent seates, my Lords the Presidents, hauing their Morters of gold on their heads, and in their scarlet Robes lyned with Ermines, and the Councellors of the Court of Parlia∣ment in the like Gownes. On the other side fate alone the Prouost of the Marchants, in a long Robe of Crimson and violet veluet, being accompanyed with the Shirifes of the Towne. In the Quyer of the said Church, was there more∣ouer another floore raised three steps high, vpon which was another great Canopie, where the King, the Queenes, and Monsieur the Kings Brother were pla∣ced and conducted by the fore-named Duke of
Chevreuse & the Ambassadours, who withdrew them∣selues into the Archbishops Pallace vntill the Ser∣uice was ended, and then afterwards returned to the King and the Queenes. Prayers being done, they returned all in the like order as before into the Archbishops Pallace, where the whole Court supped. During which, was heard such a noyse and thun∣dring of Cannon, as men would haue iudged that heauen and earth had ioyned together: In the like sort Bon-fires, squibes, and such like were not spa∣red throughout all the streetes: and it may well be verified that France neuer sawe so much reioycing. And God I pray, who hath euer beene propitious vnto vs, maintaine our Countrie in her greatnesse, and graunt our King a glorious triumphe ouer his enemies, and a large extent of his Dominions.
The Order of the Royall Feast. THe Suppper was kept in the Archbishops great Hall, and the Table reached from the one end thereof vnto the other, The King sate in the middest of the Table, serued by my Lord the great Prior, who repre∣sented the great Masters person, before him there marched a number of Drummes, Trum∣pets and Clairons, accompanyed with Mon∣sieur de Beaumont, great Steward of the Kings House, and thirtie two others Stewards of his Maiesties House-hold, with their staues in their hands. The meate was carryed by my Lords the Princes, Dukes, Peeres, and Marshals of France, followed by the Gentlemen of the Court and their seruants. Monsieur de Joinuille serued as great Pant∣ler, Monsieur d' Elboeuf as Cup-bearer, and my Lord the Earle of Harcourt as Caruer.
The Queene Mother sate on the right hand of the King, serued by my Lords the Dukes of Belgarde, d'Vzais, and Luxembourg. The Queene her selfe on the right hand of the Queene Mother, serued by my Lords the Dukes d' Alvin, Brissac, and de Chaune. The Queene of great Brittaine sate on the Kings left hand, serued by the Marshall de Vitry as great Pantler, the Marshall d' Aubeterre as Cup bearer, and my Lord of Bassompierre as Caruer. My Lord the Duke of Chevrouse sate next the Queene of great Brittaine, serued by the Lord of Rochefort. The extraordinarie Ambassadous of great Brittaine sate next vnto the afore said Duke of Chevreuse. My Lord the Kings Brother sate neere vnto the Queene, and next them all the Princes, ser∣ued in most magnificent and Royall manner.
The Kings Decla∣ration, contayning a Prohibition vn∣to all his Subiects, to haue any Tra∣fique or Commerce with the Kingdome of Spaine, Published in the Parliament the 12. of May. LEVVIS by the grace of God King of France and of Nauarre, To all vnto whom these pre-sent Letters shall come greeting. Vpon the complaints which haue bin made vnto vs by many of our Subiectes traffiquing into Spaine, of a Decree made the 2. of this month by our most deare & wellbe-loued Brother, and Brother in law, the Catholique King, vnto his Officers, to seaze vpon and stay in all his Ports and Hauens, the Shippes, Goods, and Merchandize of the French (our Subiects:) vnder pretext of Re∣prisals of some summes of money, which Our most deare and well-beloued Cousin, the Duke
of Guise, our Gouernour and Lieuetenant Generall in Prouence, did make stay of certaine Barques, not far from Marseilles, as belonging vnto some Genoway Merchāts: as also because they haunted the desert Hauens of our said Country of Prouence, to the preiudice of our Ordinances & Prouisions made by Our Court of Parliament of Aix: The said King pretēding that some part of ye said mony did appertain vn∣to his Subiects (which is a thing not yet ve∣rified) and part thereof vnto the said Genowaies. NOW therefore, because it is a matter of great importance for our Subiects good, to preuent them from receauing any further losse or hinderance of such their seizure and detenti∣on of their Shippes and Goods as is ordained in Spaine, wherein there can be no better or∣der taken, then a generall interdiction of Com∣merce in those places, where the Merchants Our Subiects can no longer be at their liber∣tie. WEE make it knowne, That hauing deliberated of this affayre in Our Councell, where was present Our most honoured Lady and Mother, some Princes of Our Blood, o∣ther Princes and Officers of Our Crowne, Lords and notable Personages of Our sayed Councell, WITH THEIR ADVICE, and of Our owne knowledge, full power and royall Authority, We haue made, and doe by these presents, signed with Our hand, make
most expresse prohibition vnto all Our Sub∣iects, of what Quality and Condition soeuer they be, to haue any Trafique or Commerce in the Kingdome of Spaine, of any Corne, Wine, Cordage, and generaly neither to carry thither, transport or buy any Merchandize whatsoe∣uer, vpon paine vnto the Offenders, of the confiscation of their Vessels and Goods, and to bee punished according to the rigour of Our Lawes: and this to continue vntill a restitu∣tion be fully made of Our Subiects Goods seazed vpon in Spaine, or that by Our Letters Pattents We shall otherwise ordaine. WHEREFORE Wee charge and com∣mand all Our louing and loyall Officers in Our Courts of Parliament, that they cause these Our present Letters to be read, published and Registred, and the contents thereof to bee kept and executed each one apart, and Our ge∣neral Procurors or their Substitutes, to make for the due execution of the same, all diligent & necessary persuite and inquirie. Also We giue charge vnto Our Gouernors, and Our Liuetenants Generall in Our Pro∣uinces, particuler Captaines and Gouernors of Our Towns and places, chiefely those vpon Our Frontiers, and the Bayliffes, Seneshals, and Prouosts of Our most deare Cousins, the Constable & Marshals of France, or their Lieue∣tenants, And vnto all Our Iustices, Officers,
and Subiects, to assist vnto the due execu∣tion of these presents: for such is Our pleasure. In Witnesse whereof, Wee haue caused Our Seale to be put vnto these aforesaid presents. Giuen at Paris the 23. of Aprill; in the yeare of Grace, 1625. and of Our Raigne the fifteenth. Lewis. And vppon the Fowld By the King. De Lomenie. And Sealed with the Great Seale of yellow Waxe, vpon double taile: And vpon the Fowld hereof is written: Read, published, and registred in Court, yea and the Kings Atturney generall requiring the same to be put in execution, kept, and obserued according to their tennor and forme, and collected Copies of the same to be sent to the Bayliffes and Seneshals of that Iurisdiction, to be there likewise read, published, and executed by the diligence of the Substitutes of the a∣forsaid generall Atturney, which he enioyneth to cer∣tifie the Court hereof within the month. In the Par∣liamement at Paris the 12. of May, 1625. Signed Du Tillet. Cum Priuiligio Maiestatie Imprinted at Paris, 1625.
Le Triomphe glorieux & l'ordre des Ceremonies obseruees au mariage du Roy de la Grand' Bretagne, & de Madame soeur du Roy. Ensemble l'ordre tenu aux fiançailles faictes au Chasteau du Louure, en la Chambre de sa Majesté. EN fin le ciel propice a la France, a voulu ce qu'elle re∣spire, il y a si long temps. Les nuages qui sembloient vouloir obscurcir son esclat, & qui auoient comme con∣spire de faire mourir le fruict en sa fleur, sont maintenant dis∣sipez, & cette mauuaise influence est aneantie a ce coup, Dicu a permis par vne volonte secrete, que les deux plus puissantes Couronnes de la Chrestiente soient vnies ensemble, par le plus celebre mariage qui se soit iamais veu dedans l'Vniuers. C'est donc auiourd'huy que tant de felicite, de gloire, & de bon-heur ne promettent pas moins a nostre grand Roy, in∣uincible LOVYS LE IVSTE, que l'Empire de tout le mon∣de. Quel contentement a la France, & quel profit a la grand' Bretagne, de se voir vnies si inseparablement, par vn noeud plus indissoluble que le gordien, & par vne amitie mieux ci∣mentee que les murs Babiloniens fondez par Semiramis? Il n'y a point d'ennemis assez forts pour esbranler iamais deux Royaumes si florissans, qui puisent leur grandeur du ciel, & borner leur puissance de toute la terre. Resiouissons nous donc, bons François, a ceste heure que les aduersaires de l'E∣stat tremblant de peur & de crainte, ont leur ame migeed v∣ne il belle alliance. Mais pour en laisser la memoire eternel∣le, & la donner est depost a la posterite. Ie veux descrire icy
le plus succintement qu'il me sera possible, les magnificences, les triomphes, & l'ordre veritable de cet heureux mariage. Le Ieudy huictiesme iour de May, le Roy paroissant de∣dans sa chambre comme vn beau Soleil qui luit au dessus de tous les autres Astres, ayant auec luy la Royne seconde lu∣miere, Monsieur son frere vnique, Messieurs les Ducs de Ne∣mours & d'Elboeuf, Mareschaux de Vitry & de Bassom-pier∣re, & autres Seigneurs de la Cour, enuoya querir Madame, qui y fut assistee par la Royne sa mere, Mesdames les Prin∣cesses de Conde & de Conty, Mesdames les Duchesses de Guyse, de Cheureuse, & d'Elboeuf, & plusieurs autres gran∣des Dames. Sa robe estoit de toile d'or & d'argent toute par∣semee de fleurs de Lys d'or, & enrichie de plusieurs diamants, & autres pierres precieuses. La queue de ladite robe estoit portee par Madamoiselle de Bourbon. Comme elle fut entree dedans la chambre du Roy auec v∣ne Maieste digne de sa naissance, Messieurs les Comtes de Carlile, & Milor Holand, Ambassadeurs pour le Roy de la Grand' Bretagne, y entrerent aussi tost, vestus auec le plus bel aduantage qui se puisse dire, donnant au Roy le contract de mariage, qui fut leu tout haut par Monseigneur le Chan∣celier, apres que sa Maieste eut agree les conuenances. Les Ambassadeurs se retirerent en la chambre de Monseigneur le Duc de Cheureuse, au dessus de celle du Roy, & luy ayant fait entendre les accords. Il fut trouuer aussi tost sa Maiestie, accompagne desdits sieurs Ambassadeurs & plusieurs autres Seigneurs de marque, estant vestu d'vn habit noir a bandes toutes garnies de diamants, & les fer d'aiguillettes en estoient enrichis. Arriue deuant sa Maieste il luy presenta sa procuration & le pouuoir que luy auoit donne le Roy de la Grand' Bretagne, qui ut incce au bout dudit contract de mariage, que le Roy siga, Madame, les Roynes, Monseigneur le Duc de Che∣ureuse, & Messieurs les Ambassadeurs. Coa fait & arreste,
Monsieur le Cardinal de la Roche-foucaut fit les fiançailles a la maniere accoustumee. Comme vne telle vnion ne se pouuoit pas paracheuer sans de grandes pompes, & d'infinies resiouissances. L'Eglise de Nostre-Dame fut choisie pour les ceremonies de l'accomplissement du mariage, & fut toute tendue de ri∣ches tapisseries, tissues de soye, d'or & d'argent. L'on esleua enuiron de huict pieds de terre, vne belle & longue gallerie, qui prenoit son commencement des l'entree de la maison Archi-Episcopale, & se venoit rendre a l'entree du Coeur de ladite Eglise. Elle estoit soustenue de plusieurs pilliers, couuerte par le haut de satin violet, tout brode de fleur de Lys d'or, & par le bas d'vne belle toile de lin ciree, par dessus laquelle passerent toutes les ceremonies du mariage, comme il s'ensuit. Premierement, les cent Suisses des Gardes du corps du Roy, vestus des liurees de sa Maieste, le tambour battant, & l'enseigne desployee. Douze haut-bois vestus de semblables liurees qui rauis∣soient par leurs sons agreables les ames par les oreilles. Huict tambours couuerts de pareilles parures battoient si furieusement que les courages les moins hardis s'animoient au bruit d'vn tel tintamarre. Dix trompettes faisoient sauter de ioye & d'alegresse les coeurs dedans les corps. Monsieur de Rodes Grand Maistre des Ceremonies mar∣choit apres tout cela, vestu a l'aduantage & fort bien ac∣compagne. Apres luy Messieurs les Cheualiers de l'Ordre du S. E∣sprit tous brillans de pierreries. Sept Herauts d'armes alloient en suitte auec leur cottes de velours rouge cramoisy fleurdelisees d'or. Messieurs de Vitry & de Bassompierre, Mareschaux de France.
Monsieur le Duc d'Elboeuf. Monseigneur le Duc de Cheureuse, vestu d'vn habit de dap noir tout couppe & d'ouble de toile d'or auec vne toc∣que aussi de velours noir, sur sa teste vne enseigne qui esblo∣uyssoit la veue par son esclat, vne escrape toute couuerte de roses de diamants, vn capot tout brode d'or & seme de pierreries. Messieurs les deux Ambassadeurs Extraordinaires, tous deux couuerts de toile d'argent batu auec la toque. Le Roy auec vn habit tout en broderie d'or & d'argent, tenant a sa main droite Madame, qui auoit vne Couronne sur la teste, & sa robe toute parsemee de fleurs de Lys d'or. Monsieur de l'autre coste qui la tenoit de sa main gauche aussi superbement vestu. La Royne mere. La Royne couuerte d'vne robe toute brodee d'or, d'argent & de pierreries. Mesdames les Princesses de Conde & de Conty, portans la longue queue de ladite robe. Madamoiselle de Mont-penfier. Madame la Comtesse de Soissons. Madame de Guyse. Madame de Cheureuse. Madame d'Elboeuf. Et tous les autres Seigneurs & Dames de la Cour queie ne peux specifier par le menu, tant le nombre estoit grand. Toute ceste Royale & genereuse troupe s'arresta a l'entree du grand portail de ladite Eglise au deuant duquel estoit vn grand parterre destine pour faire le mariage, & ou estoit esleue au dessus vn grand poesle d'vne valeur inestimable, sous le∣quel le Roy & Monsieur son frere quitta Madame, la mirent entre les mains de Monseigneur le Duc de Cheureuse, & a∣lors Monsieur le Cardinal de la Roche-foucault espousa Ma∣dame, auec les ceremonies ordinaires de l'Eglise.
Dela tout l'ordre cy-dessus s'en alla dedans le coeur par vne longue gallerie qui est oit allignee au milieu de la Nef de l'Eglise toute couuerte de tapisserie, la plus bell qui se peust iamais voir. Au milieu dudit coeur estoient des-ja placez d'vn coste en des sieges eminents, Messeigneurs les Presidents ayant leur mortier d'or sur la teste vestus de leur robes d'escatlates dou∣blees d'hermines, & Messieurs les Conseillers auecques de semblables robes. De l'autre coste proissoit a part Monsieur le Prouost des Marchands, conuert d'vne longue robe de velours rouge cramoiscy & violet, assiste des Escheuins du corps de ville. Dans le coeur de ladite Eglise estoit esleue de trois mar∣ches vn par-terre, au dessus duquel estoit vn autre grand po∣esle, ou le Roy, les Roynes, & Monsieur furent placez, & con∣duits par lesdits Duc de Cheurcuse & Ambassadeurs, les∣quels se retirenta l'Archeuesche iusqu'a ce que le seruice fut acheue, puis y retournerent trouuer le Roy & les Roynes a∣pres la fin de l'office. Leurs oraisons finies, ils s'en retournerent au mesme ordre dedans l'Archeuesche, ou toute la Cour soupa. Et puis en mesme temps, l'on ouyt vn tel bruit des coups de canons qui se tirerent, que l'on eust dit que la terre & le ciel se vouloient ioindre ensemble. Les feus de ioye & d'artifices se firent par toutes les reus, & l'on peut dire auec verite, que iamais la France n'cust plus de resiouyssances. Dieu qui luy a este tousiours fauourable la maintienne en sa grandeur, & face que son grand Roy triomphe glorieux de tous ses ennemis, & borne ses terres de l'enclos de tout le monde.
L'ordre du festin Royal. LE soupper fut dans la grand' Salle lambrissee de l'Ar∣cheuesche, & la table tenoit d'vn bout a l'autre. Le Roy estoit au milieu de la table, seruy par Mon∣sieur le Grand Prieur, representant Monsieur le Grand Mai∣stre, deuant luy marchoient nombre de tambours, trompet∣tes & clairons, accompagne de Monsieur de Beaumont pre∣mier Maistre d'Hostel, & trente-deux Maistres d'Hostel, tous le baston a la main. La viande estoit portee apres eux par Nosseigneurs les Princes, Ducs, Pairs, & Mareschaux de France, suiuis des Gentils hommes de Cour & seruans, Monsieur de Ioinuille seruoit de grand Panetier: Monsieur d'Elbeuf d'Eschanson, & Monsieur le Comte d'Arcourt d'Eseuyer tranchant. La Royne Mere au coste droict du Roy, seruie par Mes∣sieurs le Ducs de Bellegarde, d'Vzais & Luxebourg. La Royne sur le coste droict de la Royne Mere seruie par Messieurs le Ducs d'Aluin, Brissac, & de Chaune. La Royne d'Angleterre a coste gauche du Roy, seruie par Messieurs les Mareschaux de Vitry, comme grand Panetier: Monsieur le Mareschal d'Auloterre Eschanson; & Monsieur de Bassompierre Escuyer trenchant. Monsieur le Duc de Cheureuse sous la Reyne d'Angli∣terre seruy par le Sieur de R. Les Ambassadeurs extraordinaires d'Angliterre pres du∣dit Sieur de Cheureuse. Monsigneur frere de sa Majeste estoit assis aupres de la Royne, & toutes les Princesses a la table, qui fut seruy auec quantite de seruices autant magnifiques que splendides & Royaux.
Declaration du Roy, portant defenses à tous ses subjets de faire aucun traficq ny commerce au Royaume d'Espagne. Publiée en Parliment le douziesme, May, 1625. LOVIS par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France & de Nauarre, A tous ceux qui ces presentes Lettres ver∣ront, Salut. Sur les plaintes qui nous ont este faictes de la part de plusieurs de nos subjets traffiquans en Espagne, d'vne Ordonnance decernee le deuxiesme de ce mois, par nostre tres-cher & tres-ame bon frere & beaufrere le Roy Ca∣tholique, a ses officiers, pour saisir & arrester en ses ports & haures les nauires, effects & marchandises des François nos subjets, sous pretexte de represailles de quelque somme d'ar∣gent que nostre tres-cher & bien-ame Coufin le Duc de Guyse, Gouerneur & nostre Lieutenant general en Prouince, afaict arrester dans des barques es enuirons de nostre ville de Marseille, comme appertenans a des marchands Geneuois, aussi qu'ils alloient dans les ports des-habitez de nostredit pais de Prouence, au preiudice de nos Ordonnances, & des Arrests de nostre Cour de Parlement d'Aix: Pretendant le∣dit Roy, que partie dudit argent appartient a ses subjets (chose qui n'a point este verifice) en partie aux Geneuois. Et d'autant qu'il importe pour le bien de nos subjets, d'em∣pescher qu'ils ne puissent receuoir plus grande perte & dom∣mage de la saisie & detention de leurs nauires & biens, qui est ordonnee en Espagne: a quoy il ne peut estre plus conuena∣blement pourueu, que par vne interdiction generale du com∣merce au lieu ou les marchands nos subjets ne sont plus en liberte: SCAVOIR faisons, Qu'ayant mis cet affaire en de∣liberation en nostre Conseil, ou estoient la Royne nostre tres-honoree Dame & Mere, aucuns Princes de nostre Sang, autres Princes & Officiers de nostre Couronne, Seigneurs & notables personnages de nostredit Conseil: DE L'ADVIS d'iceluy, & de nostre certaine science, pleine puissance & au∣ctorite
Royale, Nous auons faict & faisons par ce presentes signees de nostre main, tres-expresses inhibitions & defenses a tous nos subjets de quelque qualite & condition qu'ils soient, de faire aucun trafficq ny commerce au Royaume d'∣Espagne, de Bleds, Vins, toyles, cordages: & generalement d'y mener, conduire, transporter ny achepter aucunes mar∣chandises de quelque qualite que ce soit, sur peine aux con∣treuenans de confiscation de leurs marchandises, vaisseaux & effects, & d'estre punis & chastiez selon la rigueur de nos Ordonnances, & se iusques a ce quela main leuee des effects saisis en Espagne sur nos subjets, aye este pleinement donnee, & que par nos Lettres patentes Nous en ayons autrement ordonne. SI DONNONS en mandement a nos amez & feaux les gens tenans nos Cours de Parlements, Que ces presentes ils facent lire, publier & enregistrer, & le contenu en icelles, garder & executer exactement chacun endroit soy, & a nos Procureurs generaux ou leurs Substituts, de faire pour l'execution d'icelles, toutes poursuites & diligences re∣quises & necessaires. Mandons aussi aux Gouuerneurs & nos Lieutenans generaux en nos Prouinces, Capitaines & Gou∣uerneurs particuliers de nos Villes & places, mesmes celles qui sont sur nos frontiers, Baillifs, Seneschaux, Preuosts de nos tres-chers Cousins le Conestable & Mareschaux de France ou leurs Lieutenans, & a tous autres nos Iusticiers & Officiers & subiets, de tenir la main a l'execution de ces pre∣sentes: CAR tel est nostre plaisir. En tesmoin de quoy, Nous auons faict mettre nostre seel a cesdites presentes. Dōne a Paris le vingt troisiesme iour d'Auril, l'an de grace mil six cens vingt-cinq. Et de nostre regne le quinziesme, Signe, LOVIS. Et sur le reply, Par le Roy, DE LOMENIE. Et scellees du grand sceau de cire iaune sur double queue. Et sur ledit reply est cscrit, Lues, publices & registres és Registres d'icelle: Ouy, & ce requerant le Procureur General du Roy, pour estre executees, gardees & obseruees selon leur forme & te∣neur, & copies collationnees d'icelles enuoyees aux Bailliages & Seneschaussees de ce ressort, pour yestre pareillement leues, publices, registrees & executees a la diligence des Substituts dudit Procureur General, ausquels enionct d'y tenir la main, & d'en certi∣fier la Cour auoir ce faict au mois. A Paris en Parlement le douziesme iour de May mil six cens vingt-cinq. Sifine, DV TILLET.
