5023 99843436 8170
THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES KING of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, Into his auncient and royall City of EDINBVRGH, the fifteenth of Iune, 1633. Printed at EDINBVRGH by Iohn Wreittoun. 1633.
The entertainement of the High and Mighty Monarch, Prince CHARLES, King of great Brittaine, France and Ireland, into his ancient and Royall Citie of Edenbourgh, the 15. of Iune. 1633. WITHOVT the Gate which is to∣wards the West, where the streete as∣cendeth to Heroites Hospitall, did an Arch arise of height .... of breadth .... square with the battlements and inmost side of the towne-wall, the face looking to the Castle, represented a Citie situated on a rock, which with pointed Clifts, Shrubs, Trees, Herbs, and Verdure, did appeare in perspectiue upon the battlements; in great Letters was written, As Ptolomeus nameth it: in a lesse and different Character was written. Castra Puellarum. And under that in a different colour M. Eden∣bourgh: The Rocke was inscribed Montagna de
dia mant, after two Italians which gaue that name to the greatest Rocke neere Edenborough, and Car∣dan, who in his booke, De rerum varietate, highly priseth the Diamond of the Rocke. In the Freeze under the Towne was written Ingredere ac nostris succede penatibus. Vpon one side of the Towne was drawne the flood Lithus, in a Mantle of sea-greene or water colour, a Crowne of sedges and reeds on his head with long locks; his arme leaned upon an earthen pot, out of which water and fishes seemed to runne forth, in his hand hee held a bundle of flowers, over him was written Picciol Mafamoso. On the other side of the Towne appeared Nep∣tune bestriding his Hippocampius, the Nereides about him, his Trident in his hand, the word over him was, Adsum Defensor vbi{que}. The Theater under the Arch was a Mountaine, upon which appeared the Genius of the towne re∣presented by a Nimph; shee was attired in a sea-greene velvet Mantle, her sleeves and under roabe of blew tissue, with blew Buskins on her feete, about her necke shee wore a chaine of Diamonds, the dressing of her head represented a Castle with turrets, her locks dangled about her shoulders; upon her right hand stood Religion all in white
taffeta, with a blew Mantle seeded with starres, a Crowne of starres on her head, to shew from whence she is, shee leaned her on a Scutcheon, where upon was a Crosse with the word, Coelo descendet ab alto. Beneath her feete lay Superstition trampled, a woman blind, in old and worne garments, her Scutcheon had — Vltra Sauromatas. On the left∣hand of this Nymph stood Iustice, a woman in a red damaske Mantle, her under garments Cloth of silver, on her head a Crowne of Gold, on a Scut∣cheon she had Ballances and a Sword drawn. The word was, Fida regnorum Custos. Beneath the feet of Iustice lay Oppression tram∣pled, a person of a fierce aspect, in armes but bro∣ken all and scattered. The word was, Tenente Carolo Terras. The Mountaine at the approach of the Kings Majestie moved, and the Nymph thus spake un∣to him. Sir, If nature could suffer Rockes to move, and abandon their naturall places, this Towne founded on the strength of Rockes (now by all cheering rayes of your Majesties presence, taking not onely motion, but life) had with her Castle, Temples, and Houses moved towards you, and be∣sought
you to acknowledge her yours, and her in∣dwellers your most humble and affectionate Sub∣jects, and to beleeve how many soules are within her circuits, so many lives are devoted to your sa∣cred Person and Crowne; and here Sir, she offers by me, to the Altar of your glorie, whole Heca∣tombes of most happy desires, praying all things may prove prosperous unto you, that every vertue and heroicke grace which make a Prince eminent, may with a long and blissed governament attend you; your Kingdomes flourishing abroad with Bayes, at home with Olives. Presenting you Sir, (who art the strong key of this litle world of Great Brittaine) with these keyes, which cast up the gates of her affectioun, and designe you power to open all the springs of the hearts of these her most loyal citizens. Yet this almost not necessary, for as the Rose at the farre appearing of the Morning Starre displayeth and spreadeth her purples, so at the very noyse of your happy returne to this your native country their hearts (if they could have shi∣ned without their breasts) were with joy and faire hopes made spatious, nor did they ever in all parts feele a more comfortable heate, then the glorie of your presence at this time darteh upon them. The old forget their age, and looke fresh and young at the sight of so gracious a Prince, the young bear a part in your welcome, desiring many yeares of life, that they may serue you long, all have more joyes then tongues; for as the words of other Nations farre goe beyond and surpasse
the affection of their hearts; So in this Nation the affection of their hearts is farre above all they can expresse by words. Daigne then, Sir, from the highest of Majestie, to looke downe on their lownesse, and embrace it, accept the homage of their humble minds, accept their gratefull zeale, and for deeds, accept that great good-will which they have ever carried to the high deserts of your Ancestors, and shall ever to your owne, and your Royall race, Whilst these Rocks shall bee over∣shadowed with buildings, these buildings inhabi∣ted by men, and while men bee endued either with counsell or courage, or enioy any peece of reason, sense, or life. The keyes being delivered in a bason of silver, and his Majestie received by the Majestrates, under a Pale of state, where the streete ascendeth prou∣dest, beginning to turne towards the Gate of the old Towne, hee meeteth with an Arch, the height of which was .... the breadth .... the fronti∣spice of this represented, in Land-skip, a countrey wild, full of Trees, Bushes, Bores, white Kine; along the which appeared one great Mountaine to extend it selfe, with the word upon it, Grampius. In some parts was seene the Sea enriched with Corrall, and the Mussell that conceiveth the
pearle; farther off in an Iland appeared a fla∣ming Mountaine with the word, Tibi serviet vltima Thule. On the Chapter was a Lyon rampant, the word Imperat ipse sibi. On the Land-skip was Caledonia in great Letters written, and part represented a number of men in Armes flying and retiring with S. P. Q. R. on their Ensignes, which shew them to bee Romanes; an other part had a number of naked persons fly∣ing and enchayned, with the figures of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, drawne on their skins, and shapes of flowers, which represented the Picts, under the Romanes, and under-written, Fracti bello fatisquè repulsi. A Courten falling, the Theater discovered a Lady attired in tissue, her haire was dressed like a Cornucopia, two chaynes, one of gold, another of pearle baudricke wayes, hung downe her shoul∣ders, a Crowne of gold hung from the Arch be∣fore her, fhee represented the Genius of Caledonia; neere unto her stood a woman with an Olive-coloured
maske, long blacke Locks waving over her backe, her attyre was of divers coloured fea∣thers, which shew her to bee an American, and to represent new Scotland, the Scutcheon in her hand bare the Armes of new Scotland, with this word, Auspicijs CAROLE magne tuis. His Majestie comming neere, was welcomed with these verses by Caledonia. THe heavens have heard our vowes, our just desires Obtained are, no higher now aspires Our wishing thoughts, since to his native clime The flower of Princes, honour of his time, Encheering all our Dales, Hills, Forrests, streamos, (As Phoebus doth the Summer with his beames) Is come, and radiant to us in his traine The golden age and vertues brings againe; Prince so much longed for, how thou becalm'st Mindes easelesse anguish, every care embalm'st With the sweet odours of thy presence! now In swelling tydes joyes every where doe flow By thine approach, and that the world may see What unthought wonders doe attend on thee, This Kingdomes Angel I, who since that day That ruthlesse Fate thy Parent rest away, And made a Starre, appear'd not any where, To gratulate thy comming saving here.
Haile Princes Phoenix, Monarch of all hearts, Soveraigne of love and justice, who imparts More then thou canst receive; to thee this Crowne Is due by birth; but more, it is thine owne By just desert; and ere another brow Then thine should reach the same, my flood should flow With hot vermilian gore, and every Plaine Levell the hills with Carcases of slaine, This Ile become a red Sea: Now how sweet Is it to me, when love and Lawes thus meet To girt thy Temples with this Diadem, My nurselings sacred feare, and dearest Gemme. No Roman, Saxon, Pict by sad alarmes Could this acquire and keepe; the heavens in armes From us repelld all perills, nor by warres Ought here was wonne but gaping wounds and scarres, Our Lions Clymaterick now is past, And crown'd with Bayes, he rampant's free at last. Heere are no Serean fleeces, Peru gold, Auroras gemmes, nor wares by Tyrians sold; Townes swell not here with Babilonian walles, Nor Nero's sky-resembling gold-seel'd halles, Nor Memphis spires, nor Quinzayes arched frames, Captiving Seas, and giving Lands their names: Faith (milke-white Faith) of old belov'd so well, Yet in this corner of the World doth dwell With her pure Sisters, Truth, Simplicitie; Heere banish'd Honour beares them company, A Mars-adorning brood is heere, their wealth Sound mindes and bodies, and of as sound a health: Walles heere are men, who fence their Cities more Then Neptune when he doth in mountaines roare,
Doth guard this Isle, or all those Forts and Towres Amphions Harpe rais'd about Thebes bowres, Heavens arch is of their roofe, the pleasant shed Of Oake and Plaine oft serves them for a bed. To suffer want, soft pleasure to despise, Runne over panting Mountaines crown'd with Ice, Rivers orecome, the wastest Lakes appall (Being to themselves, Oares, Steerers, ship and all) As their renowne; a brave all-daring race Couragious, prudent, doth this Climate grace: Yet the firme Base on which their glory stands, In peace true hearts, in warres is valiant hands, Which here (great King) they offer up to thee, Thy worth respecting as thy pedegree: Though much it be to come of Princely stemme, More is it to deserve a Diadem. Vouchsafe blest people, ravisht here with me, To thinke my thoughts, and see what I doe see, A Prince all gracious, affable, divine, Meeke, wise, just, valiant, whose radiant shine Of vertues (like the Starres about the Pole Guilding the night) enlightneth every soule Your Scepter swayes, a Prince borne in this age To guard the innocents from Tyrants rage, To make Peace prosper, Iustice to reflowre, In desert hamlet as in Lordly bowre; A Prince, that though of none he stand in awe, Yet first subjects himselfe to his owne law, Who joyes in good, and still as right directs His greatnesse measures by his good effects, His Peoples pedestall, who rising high To grace this throne make Scotlands name to flie
On Halcyons wings (her glory which restores) Beyond the Ocean to Columbus shores, Gods sacred picture in this man adore, Honour his valour, zeale, his piety more, High value what ye hold him, deep ingrave In your hearts heart, from whom all good ye have: For as Moones splendor from her brother springs, The peoples welfare streameth from their Kings. Since your loves object doth immortall prove, O love this Prince with an eternall love, Pray that those Crownes his Ancestors did weare, His temples long (more orient) may beare. That good he reach by sweetnesse of his sway, That even his shadow may the bad affray, That heaven on him what he desires bestow, That still the glory of his greatnesse grow, That your begunne felicities may last, That no Orion doe with stormes them blast, That victory his brave exployts attend, East, West, or South doe he his Forces bend, Till his great deeds all former deeds surmount, And quaile the Nimbrot of the Hellespont; That when his well-spent care all care be calmes, He may in peace sleepe in a shade of Palmes; And rearing up faire Trophees, that heavens may Extend his life to worlds extreamest day. The other face of the arch shew men, women, and children, dauncing after diverse postures with many Musicall Instruments, the worde above them in great Characters was, HILARITATI PVBLICAE. S.P.Q.E.P.
Where the great streete divideth it selfe in two, upon the old Foundations, inhabited by the Gold∣smiths and Glovers, did an Arch arise of height ... of breadth ... upon the Chapter of his Arch was a Crowne set with this word Nec primam visa est similem, nec habere secundam. The face of the Arch had an Abacke or Square with this inscription, Carolo, Mag. Brit. Reg. Iacobi fi∣lio Princi: optimo, maximo, libert. vindici. Restauratori legum, fun∣datori quietis, Conservatori Eccle∣clesiae, Regni vltra Oceanum in Americam Promotori. S.P.Q. E.P. Amidst flourishes of Armes, as Helmes, Lan∣ses, Corslets, Pikes, Muskets, Bowes, Cannons,
at the one side of the abacke stood Mars, the word by him was, Patrium cognoscite Numen. At the other side, amongst flourishes of in∣struments of peace, as Harpes, Lutes, Organs, Cisseres, Hauboises, stood Minerva, her word, Quo sine me. Vpon each side was Armes of the two King∣domes, and an Intertexture of Crownes with a word, Nexus foelix. Vpon the Freeze was written —Genus immortale manet, multos{que} per annos Stat fortuna domus & avi numerantur avorum. At the approach of the King, the Theater
(a Courten drawne) manifested Mercury, with his feathered hat, and his Caduceus, with an hundred and seven Scottish Kings, which hee had brought from the Elisian fields, Fergus the first had a speech in Latine, which is here desired.—Vpon the Crosse of the Towne was a shew of Panisques, Bacchus crowned with Ivie, and naked from the shoulders up, bestroad a Hogshead, by him stood Silenus, Silvanus, Pomona, Venus, Ceres in a straw co∣loured mantle, embrodered with eares of Corne, and a dressing of the same on her head, should have delivered a speech to the King but was inter∣rupted by the Satyres; shee bare a Scutcheon, upon which was, Sustulit exutis vinclis ad sydera palmas. Meaning by the King shee was free of the great abuse of the Tithes in this Countrey. In the midst of the streete, there was a Moun∣taine dressed for Parnassus, where Apollo and the Muses appeared, and ancient Worthies of Scot∣land, for learning was represented; such as Se∣dullius, Ioannes, Duns, Bishop Ecphistoun of Aberdeen, Hector Boes, Ioannes Major, Bishop Sawen Douglasse, Sir David Lindsay, Georgius Buchananus; the word over them was Fama super aethera noti.
The Muses were clad in varying taffetas, cloath of silver and purle; Melpomene, though her under vesture was blacke, yet her Buskines and Mantle were crimson, they were distinguished by the Scutcheons they bare, and more properly then by their flats; every one had a word, the first was Clio, who bare Si vis omniatibi subjici, subjice te rationi. Which was the Kings Simbole when hee was Prince. Melpomene had the Simbole of King Iames, Parcere subiectis, & debellare superbos. Thalia had that of Queene Anna, Mia Magrandezza del excelso. Euterpe had the word of Prince Henry, Fax gloria mentis honestae.
TERPSICHORE. Regni clementia custos. ERATO. Parendo imperat. CALLIOPE. Aurea sors regum est, & velle & posse beare. VRANIA. Non vinci potis est, ne{que} fingi regia virtus. POLYHYMNIA. Patiens fit principis auris. Apollo sitting in the midst of them was clad in Crimson taffeta, covered with some purle of gold, with a bowdricke like the Raine-bow, a Mantle of tissue knit together above his left shoul∣der, his head was crowned with Laurell, with locks long and like gold; hee presented the King with a booke.
Where the great streete contracteth it selfe, at the descent of the Easterne Gate of the Towne, did an Arch arise of height .... of breadth .... the face of this represented a Heaven, into the which appeared his Majesties ascendant Virgo, shee was beautified with sixe and twenty starres, after that order that they are in their constellatioune. One of them being of the first magnitude, the rest of the third and fourth; by her was written Habet quantum aether habebat. Beneath on the earth lay the Titanes prostrate, with Mountaines over them, as when they at∣tempted to bandy against the gods; their word was on the Freeze. Moniti ne temnite divos. The Chapter shew the three Parcae, where was written, Thy life was kept till these three Sisters spunne Their threads of gold, and then thy life begunne. The Stand discovered the seven Planets sitting on a Throne, and Endymion. Saturne in a sad blew Mantle embrodered with golden flames, his
Girdle was like a Snake byting his tayle, his Scut∣cheon bare Spondeo digna tuis ingentibus omnia coeptis. Iupiter was in a Mantle of silver, embrodered with Lillies and Violets, his Scutcheon bare Sat mihi fit Coelum, post haec tua fulmina sunto. Mars, his haire and beard red, a Sword at his side, had his robe of deepe crimson Taffeta, embroide∣red with Wolves and Horses, his head bare a Hel∣met, and his Scutcheon, Per tela, per hostes. The Sunne had a Crowne of flowers on his head, as Marigolds, and Panses, and a Tissue Mantle, his Scutcheon bare, Imperium sine fine dedi. Venus had the attire of her head rising like parts in a Coronet, and roses, shee was in a mantle of greene Damaske embroidered with Doves, in∣stead
of her Caestus she wore a scarfe of diverse co∣lours, her word Nullas recipit tua gloria metas. Mercury had a Dressing on his head of parti-co∣loured flowers, his Mantle parti-coloured, his word Fata aspera rumpes. The Moone had the attyre of her head, like an halfe Moone or Cressant of pearle; her Mantle was sad Damasse Frenzend with silver, embrode∣red with Chamelions and Gourdes, her word Consequitur quodcun{que} petit. At a corner of the Theater, from out a Ver∣dant Groue came Endymion, hee was apparelled like a Shepheard in a long Coat of crimson vel∣vet comming over his knee; hee had a wreath of flowers upon his head, his haire was curled, and long; in his hand he bare a Seep-hooke, on his legs were Buskins of gilt Leather: These before the King had this actioune.
Endymion. ROws'd from the Latmian Cave, where many years That Empresse of the lowest of the Sphaenes, Who cheeres the night, and kept me hid, apart From mortall wights, to ease her love-sicke heart, As young as when she did me first inclose As fresh in beauty as the Maying rose, Endymion; that whilome kept my Flockes Vpon Ionas flowry hills and rockes, And warbling sweet layes to my Cynthea's beames, Out-sang the Swannets of Meanders streames; To whom (for Guerdon) she heavens secret barres Made open, taught the paths and powers of Starres; By this deare Ladies strict commandement To celebrate this day I here am sent: But whether is this heaven, which starres doe crowne, Or are heavens flaming splendors here come downe, To beautify this neather world with me? Such state and glory did e're Shepheard see? My wits my sense mistrust, and stay amaz'd, No eye on fairer objects ever gaz'd, Sure this is heaven, for every wandring starre, Forsaking those great orbes where whirl'd they are, All dismall sad aspects abandoning, Are here assembled to greet some darling; Nor is it strange if they heavens hight neglect, Vnwonted worth produceth like effect, Then this it is, thy presence (royall youth) Hath brought them here within an Azymuth,
To tell by me (their Herauld) comming things▪ And what each Fate to her sterne distaffe sings; Heavens volume to unclaspe, wast pages spread, Mysterious golden cyphers cleere to reade, Heare then the augur of the future dayes And all the starry Senate of the Sayes; For what is firme decreed in heaven above In vaine on earth strive mortalls to improve. Saturne. TO faire hopes to give reines now is it time, And soare as high as just desires may climbe; O Halcyonean, cleere, and happy day, From sorry wights let sorrow flie away, And vexe Antarticke climes, great Britaines woes Evanish, joy now in her Zenith glowes, The old Leucadian Syth-bearing Sire (Though cold) for thee feeles flames of sweet desire, And many lufters at a perfect height Shall keep thy Scepters majestie, as bright And strong in power and glory every way, As when thy peerelesse Parent did it sway, Nere turning wrinkled in times endlesse length, But on in her first beauty, youthfull strength, Like thy rare mind, which stedfast as the Pole Still fixed stands, however Sphaeres doe role; More, to inchant thy favours, this thy raigne His age of gold he shall restore againe, Love, Iustice, Honour, Innocence renew, Mens spirits with white simplicity indue,
Make all to live in plenties ceaselesse store With equall shares, not wishing to have more; Then shall not cold the Plow-mens hopes beguile, On earth shall skie with lovely glances smile, Vntill'd, which shall each flower and hearbe bring forth, And with faire gardens make of equall worth; Life (long) shall not be thrall'd to mortall deats, Thus heavens decree, so have ordain'd the Fates. Iove. DElight of heaven, sole honour of the earth, Iove (courting thine ascendant) at thy birth Proclaimed thee a King, and made it true, That Emperies should to thy worth be due, He gave thee what was good, and what was great, What did belong to love, and what to state, Rare gifts whose ardors turne the hearts of all, Like tunder when flint attomes on it fall; The Taramont which thy faire course directs, Shall counsells be, approv'd by their effects; Iustice kept low by grants, and wrongs, and jarres, Thou shalt relieve, and crowne with glistering starres, Whom nought save law of force could keepe in awe Thou shalt turne Clients to the force of law, Thou armes shalt brandish for thine owne defence, Wrongs to repell, and guard weake innocence, Which to thy last effort thou shalt uphold, As Oake the Ivy which it doth infold; All overcome, at last thy selfe orecome, Thou shalt make passion yield to reasons doome:
For smiles of fortune shall not raise thy mind, Nor dismall most disasters turne declin'd, True Honour shall reside within thy Court, Sobrietie, and Truth there still resort, Keepe promis'd faith thou shalt, Supercheries Detest, and beagling Marmosets despise, Thou, others to make rich, shalt not make poore Thy selfe, but if that thou mayst still give more; Thou shalt no Paranymph raise to high place, For frizl'd leape, quaint pace, or painted face; On gorgeous rayments, womanising toyes, The workes of wormes, and what a Moth destroyes, The Maze of fooles, thou shalt no treasure spend, Thy charge to immortality shall tend, Raise Pallaces, and Temples vaulted high, Rivers ore arch, of hospitality, Of Sciences the ruin'd Innes restore, With walls and ports in circle Neptunes shore, To new found worlds thy Fleets make hold their course, And find of Canada the unknowne Sourse, People those Lands which passe Arabian fields In fragrant Wood and Muske which Zephyre yields; Thou fear'd of none, shalt not thy people feare, Thy peoples love thy greatnesse shall up-reare, Still rigour shall not shine, and mercy lower, What love can doe thou shalt not doe by power, New and vast taxes thou shalt not extort, Load heavy those thy bounty should support, By harmelesse Iustice graciously reforme, Delighting more in calme then roaring storme, Thou shalt governe in peace as did thy Sire, Keepe, save thine owne, and kingdomes new acquire, Beyond Alcides Pillars, and those bounds Where Alexanders fame till now resounds,
Till thou the greatest be among the Greats; Thus heauens ordaine, so doe decree the Faits. Mars. SOnne of the Lyon, thou of loathsome bands Shalt free the earth, and what e're thee withstands Thy noble pawes shall teare, the God of Thrace Shall be the second, and before thy face, To Truth and Iustice, whil'st thou Trophees reares, Armies shall fall dismayd with Pannick feares, As when Aurora in skies azure lists Makes shaddowes vanish, doth disperse the mists, And in a twinckling with her opall light, Nights horrours checketh, putteth starres to flight, More to inflame thee to this noble taske, To thee he here resignes his Sword and Caske▪ A wall of flying Castles, armed Pines Shall bridge thy sea, like heaven with steele that shines, To aide earths tennants by soule yoakes opprest, And fill with feares the great King of the West: To thee already Victory displayes Her garlands twin'd with Olive, Oake, and Bayes, Thy triumphs finish shall all old debates; Thus Heavens decree, so have ordain'd the Fates.
Sunne. WEalth, Wisedome, Glory, Pleasure, stoutest hearts, Religion, Lawes, Hyperion imparts To thy just Raigne, which shall farre farre surpasse, Of Emperours, Kings, the best that ever was; Looke how hee dims the starres; thy glories rayes, So darken shall the lustre of these dayes: For in faire vertues Zodiacke thou shalt runne, And in the heaven of worthies be the Sunne. No more contemn'd shall haplesse Learning lie; The maids of Pindus shall be raysed high; For Bay and Ivie which their browes enroll'd, Thou shalt them decke with gems and shining gold; Thou open shalt Parnassus Cristall gates, Thus heavens ordaine, so doe decree the Fates. Venus. THe Alcidanian Queene amidst the Bayes Shall twine her mirtles, grant thee pleasant dayes; She did make cleare thy house, and with her light Of churelesse starres, put backe the dismall spight, Thy Hymenean bed faire brood shall grace, Which on the earth continue shall their race, While Floras treasure shall the Meads endeare, While sweete Pomona Rose-cheekt fruits shall beare,
While Phaebes beames her brothers emulates: Thus Heavens decree, so haue ordain'd the Fates. Mercury. GReat Atlas Nephew, shall the workes of peace, (The workes of plenty) Tillage, Trades encrease, And Arts in times gulfes lost againe restore, To cheere Perfection; nay, find many more, More perfect artists, Ciclopes in their forge Shall mould those brasen Tiphones, which disgorge From their hard bowels mettall, flame and smoake, Mufling the ayre up in a sable cloake: The Sea shrinkes at the blow, shake doth the ground, The worlds West corners doth the sound rebound, The Stygian Porter leaveth off to barke, Blacke Ioue appall'd doth shrow'd him in the darke; Many a Typhis in adventures lost By new found skill shall many mayden coast, With thy sayle-winged Argoses find out, Which like the Sunne shall runne the earth about; And farre beyond his pathes score wavie wayes, Cathayes Lands by Hyperborean Seas, Hee shall endue thee both in peace and warre, With Wisedome, which then Strength is better farre, Wealth, Honour, Armes, and Arts shall grace thy states: Thus Heavens ordaine, so doe decree the Fates.
The Moone. O How the faire Queene with the golden maids, The Sunne of night, thy happy fortunes aids, Though turban'd Princes for a badge her weare, To them shee wain'd, to thee would full appeare; Her Hand-maid Thetis daily walkes the round About the Delos that no force it wound, Then when thou left it and abroad did stray (Deare Pilgrim) shee did straw with flowers the way, And turning forraine force and counsell vaine, Thy Guard and Guid return'd thee home againe; To thee she Kingdomes, Yeares, Blisse did divine, Quailing Medusas grim Snakes with her shine, Beneath thee raigne Discord (fell mischiefes forge The bane of peoples, state and kingdomes scourge) Pale Envie (with the Cockatrices eye, Which seeing kils, but seene doth forthwith dye:) Malice, Deceit, Rebellion, Impudence Beyond the Garamants shall packe them hence, With every Monster that thy glory hates, Thus Heavens decree, so haue ordayn'd the Fates.
Endymion. THat heretofore to thy heroicke mind Haps, (hopes not answer'd as they were design'd:) O doe not thinke it strange, times were not come, And these faire starres had not pronounc'd their doome; The destinies did on that day attend, When to this Northren Region thou should lend Thy cheering presence, and charg'd with Renowne, Set on thy browes the Caledonian Crowne; Thy vertues now thy just desire shall grace, Sterne Chance shall change, and to Desert give place; Let this be knowne to all the Fates admit To their grave Counsell, and to every Witt That spies Heavens inside; this let Sibilles know, And those mad Corybants which dance and glow On Dindimus high tops with franticke fire: Let this bee knowne to all Apollo's Quire, And people let it not be hid from you, What Mountaines noyse and Floods proclaime as true▪ Where ever fame abroad his prayse shall ring, All shall observe, and serve this blessed King
The backe face of this Arch towards the East, had the three graces drawen upon it, which were naked and in others hands; they were crowned with eares of Corne, Flowers and Grapes to sig∣nifie fecunditie; their word Loeto testamur Gaudia plausu. By them was Argos full of eyes; his word Vt videam. Vnder all was written, Tales Roma fuit quondam admirata triumphos. The Emperour Iustinian appoynted that the Shewes and Spectacles made to Princes, should be seaven for the East; on the Battlements of the East Gate, in a Coat all full of eyes and tongues, with a Trumpet in her hand (as if shee would sound) stood Fame, the wings of the Bat at her, feete, a Wreath of gold on her head, and by her, Honour a person of a reverend countenance in a blew Mantle of the colour of silver, his haire
broydered with silver shaddowing in waves his shoulders, they were aboue the statue of King Iames, under which was written Placida populos in pace regebat. AT length we see those eyes, which cheere both over earth and skies, Now ancient Caledon thy beauties highten, richest robes put on, and let young joyes to all thy parts arise. Here could thy Prince still stay, each moneth should turne in May, We need not starre nor Sunne, save him to lengthen dayes and joyes begunne, sorrow and night to farre climes hast away. Now Majestie and Love combin'd are from above, Prince never Scepter swayd lov'd subjects more, of subjects more obey'd, which may indure whilst heavens great orbs do move Ioyes did thee alwayes last, lifes sparke ye soone would wast, Griefe followes sweet delight, as day is shaddowed by sable night, yet shall remembrance keep you still, when past.
EPIGRAMME. ILlustrious Top-bough of Heroicke Stemme, Whose head is crown'd with glories Anademe, My shallow Muse, not daring to draw neere Bright Phoebus burning flames in his careere; Yet knowing surely that Apollo shines Vpon the Dung-hill, as on golden Mines: And knowing this, the bounty of best Kings, To marke the giver, not the gifted things, Doth boldly venture in this pompous throng To greet thy greatnesse with a wel-come Song; And with the Pye doth Ave Caesar sing, While graver wits doe greater Offrings bring.
A PANEGYRICKE TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES, KING of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, &c. By WALTER FORBES. ADmired Phoenix, springing from those Syres, Whose soules the heaven, whose merit fame ad∣mires Whose memory is wrapped up in roles, Keept by Eternity above the Poles; Thrice-blessed CHARLES, sprung from thy royall Sire Great IAMES, whose fame shall with this frame expire, And yet beginne afresh for to be sung, By sacred Quires in a celestiall tongue; O thou the Subject of this wel-borne thought! Immortall King, hast neither said nor wrought Any thing yet, which can detract thy praise, Since thou'rt more old in vertues then in dayes: Bred in the bed of honour, thou art blest With rare perfections, farre above the rest Of mortall kind: for as thy birth is great, So is thy mind, too high a marke for hate:
Envie may spew her spight, yet cannot harme The Man, whom all the hoast of Heav'n doth arme: When bright Apollo circling in his Carre, Doth drive away the day-denuncing Starre, His pow'rfull rayes diffuse in mortall minds A sweete desire of day, which straight unbinds Sleep-fettered-senses and his chearefull light Doth wast all vapours closde in cloudy night: So my deare Phoebus whilst Thy face doth shine Vpon this Land, which by discent is shine From hundred and eight Kings, thy chearefull rayes, Doe change my nights in Halcyonian dayes, And straight dissolue these frightfull formes of woe, Which did possesse my troubled thoughts agoe. What sad affliction did my soule possesse, When Ibers streames reflex'd thy glorious face; My groanes are turn'd to greetings, and my wrongs Are chang'd in hymnes and sweete Syrenean songs: My spirit then, which for thy absence groan'd, Rejoyceth now to see thee here enthron'd. What greater joy can conceive, then see My native Prince, his native Throne supply: Thrice happy CHARLES with all those gifts enricht, Which heavens allot to Mortals, I'me bewitcht In admiration of these royall parts, Which makes thee more then Monarch of mens hearts, My heart and hands, and all submitted here, Attest the Heavens that I account thee deare, And dearest deare of all this All: I place My chiefest joyes in favour of thy face, I doe not poynt my prayses, nor this Land, Although rich Nature with a liberall hand Hath bravely deckt her with all kind of things, Which from her wombe for humane use foorth springs,
Both Pan and Pales, Pleasures, Gems and Ore, Which wretched worldlings for their God adore: I, onely I, when all the VVorld by Warre, VVas boylde in blood as red as Marses Starre, Did safely sleepe, secur'd from forraine Armes, And did disdaine Bellonas lowd Alarmes: The Gothes, the Danes, the Saxons here did feele, And Normanes fierce, the fury of my Steele: Here Caesar pitcht his tens, and proudly thought His Trophees o're our tombes to Rome haue brought, But all in vaine, his conquering hand was stayed. And by his troupes a wall-dividing layed At Carons bankes, whose ruines yet may tell. How farre in worth I did his force excell: And as in Mars, so in Minervas field For Armes and Arts I keepe rich Pallas shield, Did not the Germanes borrow light from me, And France, which all posterity shall see Ev'n to the fatall doome, when All's in fire, Then shall the records of my worth expire: Thus gracious CHARLES daigne with a loving eye, The sweet desires of my pure heart to spy. Looke with vvhat love and with vvhat chearefull part, I consecrate to thee, a loyall heart, My humbled knees loe! and my heav'd up hands, The sacred oath of loue from thee demands: Thrise Glorious CHARLES, hovv amiable's thy face, VVhose loving lookes my clouds of care doe chase: I reape more joy from this thy comming here, Then e're Penelope of Vlisses deare, VVho after thousand dangers did returne, And cur'd those griefes, vvhich did her bovvels burne: O thou more vvorthy then Vlisses farre, Honours bright Ray, Goodnesse, and Greatnesse, Starre,
Long did I wish to see thy sacred Face, My Townes and Temples with thy presence grace. Great Ioves Vice-gerent looke with kind aspect On my Emporium EDINBVRGH, direct No oblique Rayes, accept in love her Showes, Her Verdant Glory which so brauely goes, To doe thee service, all her cost compense With kind acceptance, with her faults dispense, And if in Her omission shall be found, Let Her Endeavours braue, Defects confound: If Iove who all the starry Heavens doth guide, Delights sometimes at Creta to abide, As in the place, where first he suck't the ayre; And i Apollo, Delos doth repaire, Leaving his Claros, Tenedos behind; Thus since th'immortall gods have such a mind To Native soyle, it is no wonder then Though Demi-gods be mov'd, and earth-borne men. May still Great CHARLES thy Scotland Creta be, And Delos where thou may delight, to see The Naides and the Mountaine Nymphes most faire, With unaccustom'd clamours beate the Ayre, The Satyres dance, the Corribantean Priests O're-joyde with joy to pulse their panting breasts: O what great joy, hath thy deare presence brought, Let all the Annals through all age be sought, The like was never seene, the senselesse stones Doe melt for joy, the Mountaines leape at once, The winds are calmde, and Neptunes lowdest roare Deavde with my shouts of joy is heard no more, And when the Aire with thy great Name I wound, The Mountaines answere, and the Rockes resound, The Woods re-echo'd, and the Floods proclaime, Melodious murmures hearing of thy Name,
The Fishes, Fowles, and Beasts are strucke with wonder, Whilst to the clouds I tell my Ioyes in thunder. Thou art my rich Palladium, while I keepe My God and thee, I may securely sleepe, And feare no terrour nor disturbing Foe, Whilst I have thee to ante-vert my woe, God hath by nature wall'd me round about, And given me Neptune sentinell and scout, Whose tossed Trident threatneth death to such As dare in deepe disdaine my borders touch, And if by Fates I be enforc'd to warre, And make my Lyons roare be heard afarre, O may it be for some such sacred cause! As doth subsist with Heaven and humane Lawes, O! may it be to vindicate the wrong Of thy deare Sister, and her Children young, Whose matchlesse Worth and vertues merit praise From all which can set, sing, o sound sweet layes, Till shee, (deare she,) be re-invest againe With her owne Rights, possest with her demaine, Till she be safely situat on her Rhyne, (And as the Moone amongst the Starres doth shine) Till she in greatnesse doe exceed all those, Who to her glory did their rage oppose, Till that Sun-gazing Eagle be forc'd to fall Before her feete, and for her pardon call: Let's beate Alarmes, and let our trumpets sound, Let Cornets shrill the yeelding ayre now wound, Let frightfull shouts of Souldiers pierce the sky, And reach the convexe of Olympus high Above the thundring clouds, let noyses make, The soaring Eagle for feare of CHARLES to shake. Let Vienn's walls astonisht with our cry Like stubble before the fire, fall downe and fly
Scattred with winds of his revenging wrath, Who in his hand hath pow'r of life and death. Let Rome with her seven hills be shaken too, And at thy Name O CHARLES obedient bow. (Heav'n grant I may victorious still returne, Drunke with the blood of Foes sleepe in the Vrne Of my Ancestors, whose Manes shall be glad, When it shall be to future ages said That I in worth did so exceed them farre, As doth the Sunne in light each little starre.) O may thy Ensignes ever be displaid! O may my hearr and hand be nere dismaid In thy defence, till all the world adore Thy dreadfull name from Vesper till Aurore. Thine be the Night and Day, may starres bright shine, And Plannets wander o're no Land but thine, And when by Death thou shalt shut up thy dayes, Thy memory shall still inherit praise, And after age shall Obeliskes upreare, In which thy worth and vertues shall appeare, High Phanes and Temples shall by thy name be call'd, And thou among th'immortal Gods install'd Shalt see the Offrings and the yearely vowes Posterity unto thy fame allowes. Religious rites and games for thee erected, Shall shew on earth how much thou wast respected. FINIS.
