5211 S117145 99852360 17676
THE True trauaile of all faithfull Christians, howe to escape the daungers of this vvicked vvorld. VVhereunto is added a Christi∣an exercise for priuate housholders. HEBR. 12.1.2. Wherefore let vs also seeing that we are compassed with so great a clowde of witnesses, cast away euery thing that presseth downe, & the sinne that han∣geth so fast on. Let vs run with pati∣ence the race that is set before vs, loo∣king vnto Iesus the autor and finisher of our faith. Printed at London, by Iohn Charlewood. 1585.
To the right worshipfull Ma. Iohn Thinne Esquier, his very good Patrone and Master. THe continuall fauoure I haue found at your han∣des (right worshipfull) especially of late in Lon¦don, as well hy writing as by your personall trauel, doth charge my minde with so many gnawing co∣gitations, that I can neuer expresse a sufficient thankfulnes, nor render some token of a partepay, such is the hardnes of my happe and the straightnes of pre¦sent time, that nowe I can not match wishing with wyll, nor sufficiency with desire. How be it, I yeelde my selfe to your accustomed acceptation, and my hope which shalbe a pledge de attica fide, do I bequeath vnto future time. I holde you so firme my good freende, that notwithstanding the subtiltye of interceptors, you stand vngaged, to my no small comfort, wherefore seeing
I haue no thankfull signification of good wyll, I present vnto your worship a portion of my profession, not as a suf∣ficient workmanship for your worthi∣nes, but as a token of my grateful mind It is  and therefore the vntimely hatching may bring foorth sickly Byrds. But I humbly beseech you worship that as you are already patrone of my poore liuing, so you will freendly allowe of the patronage of my selfe, & this my slender worke, and so I shall not onely be so much beholding to you as processe of time cannot weare away the remembrance, but euermore bound in harty prayers that the Lorde may prosper your affayres, and daily blesse your selfe and all yours to whose merci¦full tuition I commend you. Your worships to be com∣manded during life most faithfull W. Chub. From Zelwoode the 8. of September.
To the godly Reader. IF a man shoulde sit stil but a litle while and behold this pre¦sent last age of the worlde, and viewe the contents of this time,Catastro¦phe. and pawse vpon it with indif∣ferent reason. It would in a maner amaze a well setled minde to consi∣der it. But if one shold sit in an open place, wher there is daily concourse to and froe of great multitudes, and should scarse see one sound and per¦fite man to passe by, would you not thinke it were a crippelled worlde? and that they hadde beene among mighty enimies in a daungerous skyrmish? Surely if we consider the whole parts of a man, and weigh in conscience that he should consist of godlines, reason, and vertue, and do find that either the spirituall aduer∣sary, or the worldly consort, hath
so grappled & battelled, that some are become Heteroclites, and some Monsters. It is a very hard thing in this last age to finde a sound and perfit man, but that in one or other of these former partes hee seemeth to haue a defect, and that is percei∣ued in the common society of man. For wherin wee ought to commu∣nicate one with the other in godly exercises and heauenly councell we iarre, we vary, we disdaine, we enuy, backbite, and slaunder one an other yea of the same profession and reli∣gion, as though we were straungers to each other, and fauters to our ad¦uersaries, and I haue founde them most busie to speake behinde a mans backe, that haue had neuer a worde to his face, nay neuer a mat∣ter but by heeresay and surmise. I sorrow to heare it, I sigh to knowe it, and I desire God to amend it, for I dreade me in these daies in the fai∣rest Rose is sonest found a Canker. Reason that in times past hath
beene taken for a age Couno in the common wealth, and a gouer¦nour as well of naturall as of morall yea and oeconomicall matters, and hath beene distributed into diuers degrees for their direction, and in all sortes of people she hath beene ad∣uaunced to the highest woman, and without the which, neither the bo∣dy of a common wealth hath beene any thing worth at all, neither with out it hath man beene esteemed as a man, now she is abased like and old schoolemaster that hath taught ma∣ny good schollers, in the ende com∣meth to teache one the poore A. B. C. For whereas shee hath beene a publique teacher of all men, both for counsell, comfort, and helpe, nowe she teacheth men to looke to them∣selues, and if they will be wise, to loue their owne selues, and to care for their owne selues, in so much, that all her schollers are become in a manner singular fellowes, neither imparting to others, neither com∣municating
with others, and yet it is a lamentable matter to see those whom they so councell, if they fol∣lowe it, they are nowe called snud∣ges and pigges, that erewhile were called beggers and bankrupts.uo tene  vultus tantem tea no∣ A pit∣tifull worlde, to see such a forcible doctrine, where is the lawe of God, which commaundeth all not one? Loue God, and thy neighbour as thy self where is the Law of nature? which giueth generall commaundement, Fac aliis fieri quod cupis ipse tibi. Doe to others as thou wouldest be done vnto. Where is S. Paules counsel? Doo good vnto all men, VVhat is there become of Tullies sentence? Non nobis sed patriae nati sumus. wee are not borne for our selues but for our Country. In times past, wise∣dome was accounted of, at this time wealth & they that haue it, be they neuer neuer so bare and base serue∣linges are best esteemed, the time may come, that a man may bee had in reputation, in meane tyme, Gods
wyll be doone, et caetera infinita. A∣gaine if wee beholde vertue conside∣ring her noble beauty and shape, & that she was a singuler braunch and member to sette foorth and adorne man, howe she is now disfigured, & dismembred and defaced with infi∣nite actions of vice, it is pittifull to see that her ornaments, namely Iu∣stice, temperancy, chastity, equity, trueth, pitty, charity and such like &c. are quite cut of, and the twigges little esteemed. I feare me where the mighty boughes are so often and so vnseasonably cut of, in the ende, they will hazard the whole tree and stocke, God of his mercye preserue his little flocke. For thy better preseruation (good Reader) I haue heere composed a small peece of worke,The Argu∣ment. in the which I haue breefely layd downe the suf∣ficient suruey of a Christian. And first he shall see himselfe what he is naturally, what sin reigneth in him. How it is nourished, howe many
greeuous enimies he hath by reason of sin, last of all the ease and remedy he hath against the force of sinne. VVhich I haue doone, the rather because I see a great many Trauel∣lers in opinions, and some ouer∣rech themselues, and some ouerla∣bor them selues, which is more for want of wit, then for lacke of wyl. And for that I pitty their weary & vnprofitable trauell, doo in Christes name inuite them to this Harbour, as the best preparation I haue for mine owne part to entertaine them, beseeching the Lorde to giue them knowledge, iudgement, and a hun∣gry desire. It is but shortly compo∣sed, because it shall not bee loth∣some and chargable vnto thee gen∣tle Reader, a small almes is inough for this hard world. Reade it ouer with discretion, and where thou findest any thing toothsome, take it as thankfully, as I bestow it hartily, and if thou hap with any grosse or vnsauerye matter, passe it ouer as
freendly as I shall take it sorrowful∣ly, and if thou be one of them that loue me, thou wilt take it howsoe∣uer it be, in good part, but if thou be one of them that of late condemned me of Idlenes, I sorrow no more to be slaundered, then thou dost shame to be deceiued, and yet as charitye bindeth mee, I wyll pray for thee, and byd thee hartily farewell.
Autor calumniatoribus. NOn ego conticui, iacui ne{que} desidiose, lingua licit fiuit penna locuta fuit: Nec me delituisse putes, reticente talentum, En patet officii, cura, laborque mei Fatur, et in seculum conscriptus sermo perenne Viuit, et in longa posteritate manet. Vade liber, causa domini, damnabere forsan: Sed quos, sunt docti, consulit ille prius Inuidiat, pro me, vel si te nauseat vllus Dic, sibi quod nullum scripserat autor opus Sim licet indoctus, tibi dico perlege, disce te{que} monere mouet me, tua causa, lege Meué alios legito si fit tibi cura salutis Sera nisi capiat te Metanaea nimis. Plurima nam{que} fluunt totum peccata per orbem et genus humanum crimine polluitur. VV. Ch.
What man is. SIth it is, and hath béene alwayes the de∣sire of man,Cap. 1. to know things naturall what they are, what opera∣tions, vertues, and ef∣fectes procéedeth from them, and to what purpose euery thing is ordeyned, and thereby dooth best séeke for those thinges that are necessary, and auoy∣deth those thinges that are hurtfull, and measureth his knowledge by times & seasons fittest for his purpose, by the which hee hath looked so into the bowels of naturall thinges, that al∣most no faculty wanteth yt knowledge, wherein he hath a delight, either for the preseruation of his body from noy∣some thinges, or his estate from pouer∣tie. He knoweth the disposition of the heauens, the yéelding of the earth, the vertue of the one, and the best season of
the other, neyther is there a corner of the heauens, or of the earth, or of the seas left vnserched, as for example. The Astronomer fléeth to heauen, and show∣eth his skyl. The Husbandman search∣eth the earth, and sheweth hys skyll. The Marryner the Seas, and likewise sheweth his skyll. Euery Artificer on the earth profiteth his skyll, with an encreasing knowledge, and as touching the estate of our bodyes euery mā desi∣reth that knowledge to preserue it both in helth and also in prosperity, accor∣ding to natures expectation. But aboue all these knowledges, me thinke I see not man to runne so néere home as to knowe himselfe whereof he is made, what procéedeth naturally from him, and wherefore hée is made, howe hee is compassed about with many calami∣ties and miseries, and how death dooth followe him step by step, whether so e∣uer he goeth. A thing to be desired by the Heathens example, who sayd Nosce teipsum,Psal. 8. Psal. 144.4. Likewise by the good prophet Dauid, who said, VVhat is man that &c. and that he may be the better ac∣quainted héerewith, conferring it wyth
hys owne estate, I wyll lay downe the opinion of our auncesters, who wyth experience and knowledge, haue gyuen vs a true light thereof. The Hebrewes described man wholy by thrée proper names that were giuē vnto him which in the Bible, especially in the Psalmes are founde in many places, that is Ish, Enosh, Adam,Three names giuē to man. which according to the true interpretation of the wordes, and true meaning of the writers, I wyll lay downe, the rather that by them (as by a bréefe table) wee may not onely quickly suruey our estate, but excellent∣lye Calender in our myndes, the true proportion of our selues, and I wyll describe the signification of them, as they are and first with Adam. Adam is a name of signification giuen to our first parent Adam, not one¦ly properly to be called by it, but by sig∣nification to witnes as wel to himselfe as to all his posterity, what God ment by it, and doth signifie Red earth, which name doth put vs in remembraunce of what substaunce we be of, and whereof we be created, that is, of ye verye brittle
earth, according to Gods owne saying, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shalt returne againe,Gen. and this chaunge is not attributed to one man, or to one nation but vnto all people in the worlde, of what estate or degrée soeuer. As appea∣reth well by the History of Zerxes, who had a very great Armye of Souldiers, and as he marched on the side of an hill looking back on his great hoste, did not glory in them, but receiued a suddaine motion, and therewithall wept, hys vncle Artabanus béeing present, and séeing so suddaine a chaunge, demaun∣ded the cause, to whom he aunswered, now I record in my minde, how shorte the life of man is, when of this greate multitude after and hundred yéeres not one of these shall remaine aliue. Ho∣race sayth, Quo pius Eneas, quo Tullus diues, et Ancus, puluis et vmbra sumus. Whether are those Kinges gone, the godly Eneas, rich Tullus, and Ancus? an∣swer is made, we are but dust and as a shaddow. The prophet crying out vn¦to all the world, dooth speake vnto man kinde, O earth, earth, earth, now vpon this true certificate of our substaunce,
we are to learne thrée good considerati∣ons, 1. The frailty of our substaunce:Three con∣siderations to be lear∣ned. 2. What fruite it yéeldeth. 3. Thirdly what regard we should haue to it. As touching the frailty of man in his na∣turall substaunce; we se by the course of his time, is but sho, as Iob sayth,Iob. 14.5. He hath but a short time to liue, and com∣meth vp like a flower, and suddainly is cut downe. Likewise, in the 39.Psa. 39.6.7. Psal. Beholde thou hast made my dayes as it were a span long, and mine age is euen as nothing, in respect of thee, and ve∣rily euery man lyuing is altogether va∣nity, for man walketh in a vaine shad∣dow, and disquieteth himselfe in vaine &c.Plutarch. Anaxagoras did expresse this frail∣tie when newes came vnto him that his sonne was dead, he aunswered. Scio¦me mortalem eum genuisse. I know that I my selfe being a mortall man did be∣get him. So that in all ages and times we haue seene, that all sorts of people haue vayled theyr chéefest top sayle vn∣to death, & haue shewed that they haue had no strength at all to striue against him. In consideration whereof, let vs goe farder & sée the second poynt, which is,
what fruite this frailnes yéeldeth. As we haue prooued the very substaunce of man to be but earth,2. Conside∣ration. so let vs consider that the very earth of it selfe (without great trauell) bringeth foorth nothing but thornes and bryers and wéedes, ac∣cording to the curse of God, which hap∣pened to it for mans disobedience, as ap¦peareth in Genesis.Gen. 3.18. Et spinam et cardu∣um proferat tibi. It shall bring foorth thornes and thistles vnto thée. Euen so, if we behold the fruite of mans nature it bringeth foorth vnto vs nothing but thornes and vnprofitable wéedes, as it is recorded in the Prophet Ezechiell,Ezech. 2, when he was wylled to goe vnto a sto∣ny harted people, and such as had a har∣lots face, and whether they will heare or no, goe thou vnto them, and be not rebellious as they are, for thou shalt goe amongst thornes and Scorpions sayth the Lord, nowe we must consider that the nature of the thorne is to choke vp euery good séede that is sowne néere him,Math. 13. as appeareth in the Gospel, where some séedes fell among thornes, and the thornes grew vp and choked it, so when this ground of mans flesh is such, that
can bring foorth nothing but thornes, that is, worldly care, couetousnes, iust or any such vice, it wyll not onely choke vp the good seedes of vertue and honesty that are sowen in mans eares, but whē the same thornes are rooted vppe to bee cast into the fire, then shall it draw vp by the rootes, such séedes as haue hadde but small roote, growing among ye same thornes, and to the fire they shall bothe together. O woefull life, when honesty and godlines shalbe sowen among such thornes as shall choke it vp, and bring it to the fire of eternall damnation, such there be a great many, which haue sow∣en their godlines among thornes, of whom S. Paule maketh mention, ha∣uing a taste of godlines, but denying the vertue thereof, furthermore, we sée that if a man goe among thornes, as he tra∣uelleth, sometimes this twig catcheth his clothes on this side, sometimes a twig on that side, that it doth not onely rent his clothes but his very skinne al∣so. Euen so when as wee passe through the thornes of this world, sometimes our mindes, sometime our conscience is tyed by a twig, but eftsoones our harte
is rent and defaced, in so much, that be∣holding some men,re laketh ogenes th hys ndle at one day they are so defaced, that you shall scarce know a man from a monster. Besides these thornes, our corrupt nature, or rather cursed ground is such as doth bring foorth so many bad wéedes, (if we looke into nature it selfe) that we cannot as much as thinke one good thought, but as the Euangelist sayth, euen from the seate of our though¦tes and affections,ath. 15. that is from our hart procéedeth euill thoughts, adulte∣ries, fornications, thefts, murders &c. yea such aboundaunce, and so continu∣ally, that of our selues we may well hée called a barren ground,. 4.4. not able to yéeld any one good fruite, vnlesse the dewe of heauen, euen the manifold graces, fa∣uour, and goodnes of God be powred vpon vs. And yet (because I will ap∣proch to the thirde consideration) not∣withstanding,Conside∣tion. we finde our substaunce but fraile earth, and our fruite vnprofi∣table thoughts, we séeke dayly to pam∣per the same, as though it were made of pure nobility, or of a heauenly and imaculate substaunce, for we must haue it cased in silkes, veluets, & rich robes
of dyuers colours and straunge fashi∣ons, we must haue it stuffed with tost∣ly and delicate choises of meates and drinkes, with diuers confections of ∣ly deynties, we must haue it preserued in huge houses, and rested on easy be, with all as they are appointed to man; so are they necessary for man, if man would vse temperancie and not forget∣fulnes, which forgetfulnes maketh him many times, that he neither knoweth his substaunce whereof it is made, nor his creator wherfore he made it, that in the one he myght bee humble and low∣lie, in the other alwaies thankfull, by reason whereof we finde our vnderstan¦ding darkned, our conscience hardened, and our harts translated, in so much, that if we shold reason with our selues in this our prowde eleuation of minds, what if the poore creatures of ye worlde did sée and know our boasting heartes? and had reason to discerne it, would not the silke worme, whose web we weare, or the shéepe whose fléece we put on, or the byrd, on whose feathers we easilye laye our carcases, rather perceiuing a superfluity then a necessary vse, and
therewith a monstrous fashion rather then a contented mind, would they not laugh more at vs then the byrds did, at the Chough which did put on the Pea∣cockes feathers? yes no doubt, and tell vs of our naked comming into ye world and of our naked departure,clesi. 1. yea and say that all is but vaine vanity, better then we our selues do expresse in our selues. Thus much for the first name of man, wherein I haue set foorth his substance with the fruites thereof, now to the se∣cond man. Enosh. This word Enosh, which in English signifieth a man,osh. sterus. commeth from ye Ra∣dicall Anash, which betokeneth a per∣sone or a thing so ouercome with euill, that it is in a manner desperate or void of any hope of safety, euen so mankinde after hys fall did first sée his substaunce, whereof he was made, as I haue sayde before, then he felt the rewarde of his disobedience, which is signified by thys word Enosh, which is as much to say, as a miserable man, mortall, and despe∣ratly lost, and although the name was
first giuen by Seth vnto his sonne 3727. yeeres before Christ, and after Adam 236. yeeres, yet so was the inuocasion of Seth vnto God; and likewise the wyll of God vnto man,Ally. as to signifie vnto Seth (being not onely a member, but a head of the generation of the godly) that in the whole members of the Churche should be séene among the elect as long as they liued in this world, nothing but misery, affliction, trouble, calamitye, and persecution, according to the say∣ing of the Apostle, As many as wyll liue godlie in Christ Iesu,2. Tim. 3. shall suffer persecution. Since which time ye godly haue very well séene, not onely the dis∣obedience of Adam, but tasted the inhe∣ritaunce and lot of his fall for many mi¦series, persecutions, troubles, and chan∣ges, haue béene so heauy and burthen∣some to the godly,Phil. 1, that they haue wi∣shed themselues to bee released of thys life, for to be with God, some haue suf∣fered such imprisonment, such bondes, such banishment, such torments, some∣times to be rente wyth wylde beastes, sometimes to be boyled in leade, some∣times laide on the Grydiron some their
tongues plucked out, some their eyes, some let blood to death, and some their heads cut of, that it were a most lamen∣table matter to lay downe such a blody record. It was no maruell that Saint Paule, Dauid, Stephen, and a great many more godly, desired to be wyth the Lord,ita quasi ia taesa. for that this lyfe séemed to bée no more but a weary trauel vnto them. Iob describing the estate of man,ob. 14.1. sayth, Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuaunce, & full of trouble, and trueth it is, that many troubles and chaunges doo happen vnto him, now healthy, suddainly sicke, now rich, and now poore, sometimes vp, & quick∣ly down, & neuer continuing in a peace∣able stay, sometimes beloued of one, and sometimes hated of twenty, nowe merry, and suddainly sorry, now a liue, and to morrow dead, as the wyse man saith, hodie mihi cras tibi, to day to mée, to morrow to thée, thys wee sée the in∣constancie of time. Besides that, if wée looke into the care of our education, the care for the prouision of our necessaries how to get them, and how to hold them maketh many a man amazed, to sée the
running whéele of Fortune. I myghte speake very much of the sorrowe and care of men, but it were too long, it shal be inough to yéeld the reader to ye Map of thys present age, wherein we sée pa∣rents to slyde away, and children to wexe stoute, fréendes to fayle, charitye to growe colde, trueth banished, fayth féeble, againe, iniquity to raigne, enuye and mallice to beare the sway, & these doo shewe the estate to be so sorrowfull, that a man woulde rather wysh death with quietnes, then such a life with mi∣serye. Ish, An other name that the Hebrewes doo gyue vnto manne is Ish, which is found in diuers places of Scripture, but aboue all, I note one place cited out of the second of Genesis, Therefore let a man forsake Father and Mother,Gen. 2. &c. which by the Euangelists and the Apo∣stell is translated  a man, some suppose thys word taketh hys roote frō the very essentiall power of man,Ish. and some from hys qualityes, and bothe of them doo accorde with my purpose in this signification: this is manifest, that
hée is flesh, hee is earth, so are ye beastes of the fielde, yet notwithstanding, God hath made a difference in shape, propor¦tion and honor, as Ouid sayth: Prona∣que cum spectent animantia cetera terram Os homini sublime dedit celumque videre, Whyle brutish beastes doo groueling looke, and downeward hang their eyes: Mans countenaunce is lift aloft, and looketh to the skyes. Yea and though among a great many Philosophers, their substaunce shall be made equall, yet I finde the greater ex∣cellency in man, by howe much he is made the more honourable, not onely in this life, wherein he is made Empe∣rour of all Gods creatures, & all things are put in subiection vnder his féete, but in the world to come,Psal. 8. where he shall be assures of immortalitie and life euerla∣sting, whereas the beastes themselues doo lose the benefite of honour. Before mans fall, in the time of in∣nocency, there was no such power at∣tributed to any creature, as there was vnto man, since which time, though
man be decayed and fallen into miserye corruption & depriuation of life in this world, by his disobediēce, yet by Christe hee shall haue restitution to his former beauty and state, so that the true defi∣nition of Ish, in my poore iudgement, is a man in power, decaying himselfe, and therefore may iustly be called An∣thropos according to the translation that is to say, a subuertion or ouer∣throwe, which neuer happened neither by Gods appointment, nor by anye meanes, but by mans owne disobedi∣ence, for as man béeing then in power and honour, would wylfully fall and dishonour himselfe, as appeareth in the 49 Psalm.Psal. 49.20. Man being in honour hath no vnderstanding, but is compared vn∣to the beasts that perish. Euen so wée sée in these dayes of restitution, wherin Christ Iesus hath appeared perfectly in comfort, in acceptation, in redemption & knowledge, and hath crowned vs with glory, and brought vs into fauour with his father againe, wee not accounting thys fauour nor regarding our resto∣ring to honour. Doo wilfully and wyc∣kedly, fall vnto our olde vomit againe,
and in our selues doo deface the nobili∣ty that God hath giuen vs, alwayes ex∣pressing our ouerthwart disposition, and making it agréeable to our ouer∣throwen nature, which is as much to say as a nature turned vp side downe, euen as one demaunding once of a Phi∣losopher what a man was, aunswered, a trée turned vpside downe, for sayd hée, as the trée hath his roote downewarde, and groweth vpwarde, hath his nutri∣ment below, and spreadeth her limmes aboue, euen so man hath his roote and nourishment in the higher parte, and spreadeth hys twigs downewarde, for behold his brayne which féedeth euerye artery downewarde, and beholde euery limme, bone, heayre, arme, legge, &c. and you shall finde them all to growe downewarde, not as though nature were an autor or president of ouer∣thwartnes, but rather that it should bée a remembrance and signification of our growing downeward to the earth (con∣cerning our flesh) frō whēce wee came, and that our roote béeing fedd aboue the earth, did looke vp into heauen, in the which he hath hys perfit féeding, and as∣sured
life, and although the workes of God are so wonderfull in theyr kynde, that we are not able to searche out the déepenes of them, nor to reason why it should be made thys way or that, yet we may haue an honest & godly gesse in the framing of our ouerthwart na∣ture when wée suruey & iudge our dis∣positions agréeable to the same, to bee fit fruits for such a trée, and the better to vnderstand this, doo we not sée that we account least of that thing which is best for vs? and best of that which is worst for vs? doo wee not breake that which is commaunded vs, and followe that which is not commaunded vs, doo we not in stéede of godly exercises, de∣light in fleshly pleasures, in steede of charity put on enuy? in steede of pitty, vse stony harts? doo wee not for pati∣ence vse vengeaunce? for loue hatred, for humility pryde, for liberality couetous∣nes, for vertue vice, for honesty vngod∣lines, as the Poet sayth, Nitimur in veticum semper cupimusque negata, we en¦deuour our selues in things vnlawfull, and alwayes desire thinges forbidden, we find the like in Adam, who deligh∣ted
in the Apple that was forbidden him, and likewise in Lots wyfe, that looked backe to Sodome which was for¦bidden her, and so we sée and find in all men their vntowardly disposition, wil¦fully to lose the nobilitie and power of their image and creation, and to caste theyr honour in the dust, manne may very well be compared in all his actions vnto the Snayle,Man com∣pared to a Snayle. who in his na¦ture hath these thrée properties, hee is slowe in going, blinde in sight, & defileth the way that he goeth in, for commonly you shall sée hys trace. Euen so man∣kind, in going any the wayes that a mā should trauell in, namely the way of godlines, of truth, of fayth, of honesty, of mercy, of loue, of equity, which are the onely wayes we shoulde treade in thys world, we finde him wholly to bée very slowe and slacke in his pace, and touching his sight, euen as he hath lame legs to tread his pathes (euen a snailes pace) so hath hee blinde eyes to see the same pathes as they ought to bee séene, and behold, but rather in hys slowe and blind trauell, defileth his passage, either with ignoraunce, pride, whoredome, en∣uye,
theft, murther, or some one filthye sinne or other. In so much, that if man doo but account the wandring motions of hys mynde, the wylling consents of his hart, and the wicked actions of hys body, hée shall in himselfe beholde such a filthy account, as if with a conscience and consideration, he looke backe and be hold but the trauell of a fewe dayes (I wyll not say many yéeres) peraduen∣ture he shall be ashamed to beholde hys defiled pathes, and the steppes that hée hath left behind him so filthy. O Lorde howe many desires arise in the concu∣pisence of mans flesh, howe many wic∣ked wyshes spring out from the bad af∣fection of his hart, howe many vanities haue taken possession in his eyes, and howe many felons are written in hys bloddy handes, how many bright daies hée hath occupyed in drousie sléepe, to wander in the darke night, howe hée hath obeyed sathan, & refused his swéete sauiour. Howe he hath followed fables, and refused the comfortable counsell of the Gospell, howe he hath turned hys eyes from hys poore afflicted brethren, and followed the wicked crewe of in∣fidells,
how he hath shut vp his compas∣sion from the poore, and opened his libe∣rality to drunkards, wantons, and light persons, what greater losse of nobili∣tie cane there be, then to refuse the glo∣rious company of heauen, yea euen that swéete Christ himselfe, and to be con∣uersant with sathan & hys crew, what greater deformity, then to flee from the protection of the almighty, to be subiecto eyther to the flesh or to the world, and what greater shame, then to cast of the iewels of honesty and godlines, and to be bankerupt with the infidels of thys worlde, not able to boast of one good work, no not so much as delighted with one godly thought. God himselfe hath proclaimed all his seruice to be doone in the open light, and open places, and in all congregations, namely faith, loue, charity, pitty, patience, equity, the prea∣ching of hys word, the vsing of his Sa∣craments, insomuch, that he that is hys seruaunt, in these thinges may boldly knocke his breast and say, Hic mu∣rus aheneus esto nil conscere sibi,Horace E∣isto. 1. nulla im∣pallescere culpa. To know no guiltines, and to blush at no offence, is a brasen
wall, on the otherside, sathan shutteth vp all hys workes in hugger munger, he wyll haue none of the come in light, as for example, the théefe, the whore∣monger, the drunkard, and euery euill dooer wyl not be knowne of his action, neyther committe any of these wycked offences in the sight of the worlde, but secretelie and in feare of daunger, yet notwithstanding, such is the folly of thys world, and ye peruersnes of mans nature, that notwithstanding that light be come into the worlde,Iohn 3.19 yet men loue darknes more then light, because theyr déedes are euill. Thus you sée the whole state of man described, and his lyfe to consist of a weake substaunce, his estate in mysery, and his honour cast downe to the grounde.
A prayer. O Eternall God and most merci∣full father, who of thine owne goodnes haste vouchsafed to frame vs of a vile substance & made vs to thine owne similitude, and likenes, and didst set our first parents Adam and Eue in the pleasant Paradise and didst crown them with innocency & immortality which they lost by their disobedience, plucking vpō thēselues & their posterity thy iust curse, by the which wee alwayes in this transitorye world, sauour of sin, sorrowe & death, yet thou of thy goodnes O Lord, for∣getting thy wrath, and remembring thy mercy, didst giue vs thy sonne Ie∣sus Christ to restore vs againe to our e∣state, and bring vs againe into thy fa∣uour, who hath already entred the gates, & taken possession for vs in thy heauenly Paradise, where wee shall bee
assured of euerlasting comfort, ioy and blessednes. Vouchsafe (O Lorde) wee humbly beseech thee, to comfort our harts with thy holy spirite, and open our vnderstandings with the continu∣all preaching of thy holy worde, that we may truely acknowledge thee to be our onely creator, preseruer and redee¦mer, and that we may so viewe and be∣hold our owne lamentable estate, and hauing our owne insufficiencie alwaies bfore our eyes, may alwayes flee to thee for succour, graunt O Lord that wee may so acknowledge our owne weakenes, that we bee not caryed away with vaine pompe, nor fed with filthy pleasure and lust, nor drawen away by the allurements of the world, but may alwaies settle a firme confidēce in thee, which art the only stay & gage of our frayle and casuall estate, for thy sonne Iesus Christ his sake, our onely media∣tour and aduocate. Amen.
¶ Howe Sinne doth al∣wayes budde forth and grow in our nature, and how it is nourished and encreased in our flesh. p. 2.SIthence the fall of Adam, there is a cer∣taine defect, and cor∣ruption of nature in man, by the which hée is prone and ready to commit sin, and neuer able fully to sa∣tisfie the Lawe of God, this corruptnes lieth hidden and taketh roote in that na∣ture of ours, which procéeded from A∣dam, and buddeth or breaketh foorth by the thoughts and wyll of the hart, bée∣ing enclined vnto euill, euen in ye whole course of our life,en. 8.21. as God himselfe sayd, The imagination of mans hart is euill, euen from hys youth. Although we sée
in youth no such apparant showe of sin, as wée doo in ryper yéeres, yet that euil which is called originall or inhabiting, dooth assuredly so remaine, that some∣time is séene anger, reuenge & vntruth in them, and then concupiscence, which sticketh in nature from the beginning, and aptnes to sin dooth appeare euerye day more and more, euen as age dooth encrease, and then as S. Iames fayth,Ia. 1.14.1 He is drawen away by his owne con∣cupiscence, and is enticed, then when lust hath conceiued, it bringeth foorth sinne, and sinne when it is finished bringeth foorth death. Sinne it selfe is found in our corrupt nature, but the or∣der and encreasing thereof, is séene in the maturitye and ripenes of yéeres. Touching the first sinne and simple sin, which is called Originall. The prophet speaketh,Psal. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in wic∣kednes, and in sinne hath my mother conceaued me. Likewise S. Paul doth say, By nature we are the Children of wrath. Hence we gather in the verye generation of man, when by the Lawe of nature the issue is conceaued and fra¦med, then the spotte of sinne dooth passe
into them begotten, and so from age to age, and from one to another passeth sin euen with the framing and conception of nature, and then (as the Prophet sayth) in an ther place, who can make that clean which is conceaued of an vn¦cleane seede. If that séede then be vn∣cleane, néedes must the fruites be agrée able which doo appeare in order as in a séede, first there is the very graine, from thence the stalke, last, the very same fruite: so in man, first the dokled na∣ture by discent euen from Adam, then his thoughts, lastly his actions & déedes. Now touching the first, we receiue our contamination in generation, from the defiled generator, then our thoughtes begin to frame a consent and shape of sinne, and it is working in our hartes and mindes when it is sayd, we cannot as much as thinke one good thought, as appeareth in the Gospell.th. 15.19. Out of the hart come euill thoughs, murders, adul∣teries, fornications, thefts, false testimo¦nies, slaunders. So that first in ye harte is the séede, then from thence procéedeth the thought or imagination, which in ye 8. 8. of Gen. is called Gezer, a cogitation or
cuspicence, which doth shape a delight, a pleasure, a wyll and desire to sinne, and last of all appeareth in the same work∣manship of nature, the very fruites of our corruptnes which sheweth ye which is called Atoxia, which is a confusion of order, not framing our selues according to the Law of God, forasmuch as in our selues, we behold not that which is ne∣cessary for our selues, or required in our selues, as the Apostle saith: The natu∣rall man beholdeth not those thynges that are of the spirite of God,1. Cor. 2.1. & for thys cause are we called  wicked, and lewde, for when we haue doone of our selues what we can, yet we are vnpro∣fitable in respecte of our owne abilitye and power, which I speake not to dis∣may ye weaker sort, to signifie vnto thē their valure before God and the world, to be nothing worth, and so to bee reiec∣ted and not regarded, but rather to their great comfort, that being so vile and wicked in their kinde and genera∣tion, it pleaseth almighty God to beau∣tifye them wyth the spyrite of know∣ledge: and allowe of them in hys fa∣uourable acceptation, and to blesse
them with his continuall mercye and loue in his sonne Iesus CHRIST, especially those that féele the heauye burden of the flesh and wyll hearken to the louing call of the Lord, and come vn¦to him, but such as wyll not hearken and returne when they are called, but perseuer and continue in the hardnes of their hart, in such this hroode of sinne is nourished and encreased two manner of wayes.wo wayes ne nouri∣ed. 1. By the dilligence of sathā, secondly by the pleasure of the flesh. As touching the dilligence of sathan, when ye shall perceiue manne to goe astraye from God, which is his preseruer and shéepeheard, and from the comfortable flocke of the Church, and company of the godly, then as a straying shéepe is, he the sooner taken by the Woolfe, and so deuoured of him, for sathan diligent∣ly goeth about as a roaring Lyon, séeke∣ing whom he may deuoure, and when he hath taken him, euen as the fleshe of the shéepe is digested in the stomacke of the Woolfe, euen so is this wicked mā resolued into the inticements & sugge∣stions of sathan, so that where as the motions of the flesh doo prick and stirre,
there is sathan ready to sette forwarde and egge man vnto the accomplishing of euery sinnefull desire, vntill it be per¦formed, and then followeth the resolu∣tion & consumption of the whole man, eyther in shame or confusion, thys hap∣peneth chéefest in those that goe firste astray and forsake theyr louing GOD,Strayers. to whom he hath louingly called and of∣fered himselfe, and then afterward shal followe the wandring of their owne wyll, as appeared in Iudas, who fyrste forsooke hys God, followed hys owne wyll, and then was taken of sathan, and so consumed. And now to conclude in thys poynt, there is no roote or séede of sinne in the hart of man, but sathan is alwayes watring it, and attending it, to make it growe and waxe rype, and being so, it is reapt either with shame, or rewarded with confusion, as the A∣postle sayth, What profite had yee in those thinges whereof yée are nowe a∣shamed. Dauid to auoyd it, sayd in hys prayer to God,Psal. 25.2. All they that hope in thee shall not be ashamed. so likewise after the continuaunce of sin commeth confusion, as we haue séene by experi∣ence,
many whoremongers, haue béene brought to extreame pouerty or to most horrible diseases, the drunkard vnto the dropsie, and extreame palyes and séeble¦nes, the tyrant vnto vtter ruine hatr and corruption,. 7. as appeared by Antio∣chus, who did so rotte where hee laye, that his Chamberlayne could not abide the smell of him. The couetous, God doth abhorre, as the Prophet sayth, the Rebel is rewarded, (as woorthely) with the losse of his life, besides their tempo∣rall punishments layd vpon some of the vngodly. The Apostle sayth vnto all the vngodly, Neyther fornicators, nor Ido∣laters,Co. 6.9, 10. nor wantons, nor adulterers, nor theeues, nor couetous, nor drunkerdes, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall in∣herite the kingdome of God, this sée∣meth to be gréeuous and terrible sen∣tence, and all these sinnes are styrring in our flesh, but vrged and sette on by sathan, who séeketh (as I sayd) nothing but shame and confusion. Now there re¦steth an other sort of nourishing of this sin in our fleshly nature, when we giue ouer our selues as seruants to vnclean∣nes and iniquity,om 6.19 to commit iniquity, &
bée ouercome either with pleasure or with idlenes, or with aboundaunce, if a∣ny of these take hold in our fleshly min∣des, and we anker our wylles therevn∣to, then that sin which stirreth in hidden nature, appeareth in open actions, as for example, the man that is giuen to plea∣sure, whether it be the pleasure of the minde, or of the flesh, as Herode was giuen to both, ye effect of them was mur¦ther against his owne conscience, and if you giue scope vnto the wandring mind to haue his delights wherein he wil, as we sée many delights in the world, as hawking, hunting, dycing, carding, py∣ping, dauncing, bare-bayting, and ma∣ny other such pastimes, sometimes they are taken for recreations, but that is a∣mong the graue, that knoweth howe to rule (not to be ruled) but giue ye carnal minde an inche, and it desireth an Ell, and hardly it can be remooued or appea∣sed because it is in league & lincked to the flesh, which alwaies desireth con∣trary to the spirite, and that is ye cause we sée greater flocking, & more delight in any these pleasures among the grea∣ter company, then in resorting to Ser∣mons,
or to the Churche, hence gro∣weth the greate abuse of the Sabaoth day, in bowsing, drinking, gaming and pastime. The heathen Poet did gyue good counsell, Animum rege, qui nisi paret imparat hunc frenis hunc tu compes∣ce cataena.. Rule thy minde, vnles thy minde rule thée, bridle him, and fetter him fast with chaynes. For this cause did the Apostle gyue counsell, that wée should mortify our earthly members, that is to say, Kyll our carnall affecti∣ons and delights. But doo we goe about to kyll them when wee water them? and allowe of them? nay rather prefer them before godly meditations. I wyll not condemne pleasures (as I say) that are vsed of the wise and well setled for their recreations, nor yet our Englishe musicke, vnles it be among wanton mindes or light braynes, for if it be v∣sed among them,Effect of Musicke. you shall sée what a monstrous effecte it vseth, it maketh theyr thoughts and mindes to runne a∣stray a great waye of, and fall into dy∣uers and sundry desires and vnlawfull wishes, and ambitious appetites, be∣sides that, it shapeth a thousande fanta∣sies and imaginations in theyr conceits
making themselues in their fantasies to be of great valure, and estimation, whereas they are nothing towarde, to what proportion eyther of behauiour, ambition, or desire they frame them∣selues that be louers of Musicke, they can best iudge that haue delighted it, but this I am sure, though preferred in many houses before the preaching of the Gospell, yet I knowe the Gospell delighteth the godly so much, as they vtterly refuse musicke, in respect of the greater, for in the Gospell we finde this swéete harmony,Ioh. 14. the gates of heauē are open, mercy and loue is sent vnto vs, euerlasting life is prepared for vs, in the kingdome of heauen, and what bet∣ter melody. The other yéeldeth but vn∣certaine soundes, not distinct, lightlye heard and quickly gon, and therefore fitter rather for an vnsensible flesh then for a reasonable spirite, and thys plea∣sure of the minde beeing first growen strong and ripe in the minde, dooth worke in the flesh so mightily, that all good order being excluded, these are pla∣ced. First idlenes, then the delight of euill company, thirdly euill and filthy
words, and last, immoderate dyet, and what procéedeth from all these 4. you shall iudge by the sequell. As for the first, which is Idlenes, the Poete sayth, Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis ercus,Idlenes. Take away Idlenes, and thou doost breake Cupides bowe, againe. Queritur Aegistus quare sit factus adul∣ter? In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat. Why was Aegistus an adulterer? be∣cause he was Idle. King Dauid came from hys fluggish bed at noone day, and walked on the roofe of hys house, when he beheld from thence, Bath-sheba the wyfe of Vriah,2, Sam, 11.2. and did by hys idlenes engender hys adulterous practize. The wise man saith, Idlenes bringeth much euill.Eccl. 33, 26 Likewise S. Paul speaketh of young wyddowes to Timothy: Being idle they learn to goe frō house to house. 1, Tim. 5, 13.Now to the next vice, which is euill company, which is a great occasion to translate a good disposition, and make it become very bad,Euill com∣panye. as the wyse man saith Ex malo consortio malus eris, by compa∣ny of the wicked, thou shalt learne wic∣kednes.Gen. 6.2. The children of God being in the company of the daughters of wyc∣ked
men, discending of ye stocke of Cain, were rauished with their beautye, and tooke them agaynst the wyll of God, in∣somuch as he beholding the wickednes of their harts, sayd: It repenteth me that I made man,Eccl. 13.1. It is sayd in Ecclesi∣asticus, He that toucheth Pitch shal be defiled with it. Also in the Reuelation it is sayd, by the whore of Babilon: Goe put of her my people that ye be not par¦takers in her sinnes.Reu. 18.4 If a Lambe stand by a Woolfe, or towe néere the fire, the one shalbe in hazard to be deuoured, the other to be burned. If a mā goe among bryers, he shalbe plucked, scratched and defaced in euery side, euill company hath wholy consumed many a man, dis∣credited his house, blotted out his good name, impouerished his estate, and con∣sumed the body in most horrible disea∣ses. The Prodigall childe, that fell into bad company, is a good example to ma∣ny prodigall children in Englande, to make them auoyd that thing that brin∣geth shame, diseases, pouerty, hanging, or some other bad death, there is no mā so vnreasonable, but he will auoyde the plague, leprosie and such contagious
diseases, and shun and detest such as are infected with them, but those spirituall diseases, as doo infect both body & soule, are neuer auoyded nor detested, nor the company of them that haue them: the horrible punishment whereof, is ex∣pressed in many places of Scripture, es∣pecially if you reade ye Homily againste adultery, there is a most terrible pu∣nishment ordeyned of God in all ages, against adulterous personnes, of all e∣states and degrées, yet we haue a great many stony harts, hauing vysardes of impudency on their faces, that do know God, haue heard his word & his threats against such horrible sinne, and yet not∣withstanding wyll delight in that filthy and damnable sinne, and wyll buylde (presumptuously) on the mercy of God, but this let them be warned, and in the bowels of Christ I charge them take héede, that they build not theyr pleasure and lust, but theyr fayth vpon the mer∣cy of God, if they doo, the building wyll fall euen as Sampsons house did vpon theyr owne pates, and crush them to péeces, for the seruaunt that knoweth hys Masters wyll, and wyll not doo it,
shall be whypped with many scourges, If such adulterers wyll not bee terrifi∣ed with the temporall punishments of which before are layd downe, yet lette them looke to the day of iudgement, where the vpright Iudge Christ sitteth who hath pronounced the swéete sen∣tence already in Mathew.Math. 19. Verily I say vnto you, that when the sonne of man shall sit in the throne of hys maiestye, ye which followed me in the regenera∣tion shall syt also vpon the xii. thrones and iudge the twelue tribes of Israell. And whosoeuer shall forsake house or brethren, or sisters, or father or mother or wyfe or children or landes for my names sake, he shall receiue an hundred fold more, and shall inherite euerla∣sting life. Let them looke into thys sen∣tence, and they shall find a promised pleasure, which shall drowne all carnall and filthy delights, if at least wise hée haue any desire to be the child of God, and doo expect and looke for the lyfe to come. The thyrd vice, which corrupteth a man is filthy talke,3. Vice fil∣thy talke which indéede dooth set our nature so at liberty, yt we shame
not to fall in the sandes and shore of fil∣thy pleasure, for if the tongue, as the A∣postle sayth,m. 3.4. be the helme and guyde of the shyp of our body, néedes must the ship run at large, whose guyde is vnru∣lie. . Cor, 15.S. Paule recording the wordes of Menander, sayd: Euill words corrupt good manners. Likewise Dauid descri∣bing the vngodly, among other things sayth: Vnder his tongue is vngodlines and vanitie.am. 3.6 Yea Iames sayth, The tongue set among our members, defi∣leth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature, and especially you shall note it in those whose inclination is to euill, and in whom there is founde a towardnes, and a wylling readines to a wanton, wicked, and filthy life, wher∣fore I fréendly admonish with S. Paul Fornication,ph. 5.34.5. and all vncleannes, and co∣uetousnes, let it not be once named a∣mong you, as it becommeth Saintes, Neyther filthynes nor foolish talking, neyther iesting, which are thinges not comelye, but rather gyuing of thankes.
Last of all, there remaineth an other sustenaunce to carnall pleasure which is immoderate diet,Immode∣rate dyet, an imd to all temperancy, an ouerthrowe of know∣ledge a rfer out of reason, a disfigurer of shape, and a murtherer of vertue. Likewise, a fréede vnto vice, a main∣tainer of appetite, and a copartner with lines, for if you behold the man in ned eyther to gluttony or drunken∣nes, you beholde him that dooth so stuffe the flesh, as he séemeth to be wylling to féede the effectes and desires thereof, whych appeared shamefully bothe in Lot and in Holophernus, to their con∣fusion. And as Marcinus sayth, Tu ga∣nea indulges Ciprian sectare nefandam, So thou doost fauour gluttony, that in the ende, thou doost nourish venerye. The wise man sayth,Ecc. 31.30 Drunkennes en¦creaseth the courage of a foole, till he of∣fende, it dimisheth his strength, and ma¦keth wounds? Also in the Prouerbes of Salomon.Pro. 23, 31, 32, 33. Looke not thou vpon ye wyne when it is red, and when it sheweth hys colour in the cuppe, or goeth downe pleasantlie, in the end therof it wil bite like a serpent, & hurt like a Cockatrice,
thine eyes shall looke vpon strange wo∣men, and thy hart shall speake lewde thinges. Héerein you may sée the lewde forces of excessiue wine, it maintaineth venery, gyueth courage to offende, di∣minisheth strength, woundeth, stingeth as a serpent, hurteth like a Cockatrice, turneth the eyes to straunge women, and maketh the hart speake lewde thin∣ges, what greater ouerthrow can there be to the honour and dignity of a man. Now beholde what God pronounceth against such. In the Prophet Esay hée sayth?sa. 5, 11 Woe vnto them that rise vppe earely to folow drunkennes, & to them that continue vntill night, till the wine doo enflame them. And a little after, in the same Chapter.rse, 22, Woe vnto them that are mighty to drinke wine, and to them that are strong to powre in strong drinke.el, 1, 5, Likewise, the Prophet Ioel cryeth out at them. Awake ye drun∣kardes, and wéepe and howle, all yée drinkers of wyne, because of the newe wyne, for it shalbe pulled from your mouth. Nowe because mans nature is apt and prone héerevnto, God did not onely gyue a threatning to this reason
to be terrified but an order to his bodye to be mortified, and therefore ordeyned and proclaimed fasting,Fasting. as a most godly and commendable constitution of the body in temperancye, and that wee shold so order our dyet, that we shoulde be féeders of nature, and not releuers of appetite, neyther should this fasting su∣persticiously consist in ye choyse of mea∣tes and drinkes, as the Maniches did,August. d¦moribus. Manich, l 2, cap, 13, which refrayned flesh, and yet in other dainties were distenti & crepantes, but rather that we shoulde take to relieue nature, and no more. To this ende sayth Caluin, was fasting ordeyned,Institu, li, cap, 12. sec 15, first to supprosse the flesh, least that it shoulde were wanton. Secondly they should be the better gyuen to prayer, and thirdly it should be a testimony vnto humility, in those that did vse fasting orderly, that is to saye, in refraining ouermuch stuf∣fing and pampering of the bellye, the Lord God graunt it spéedily in all good Christians for his Christs sake. Amen.
A prayer. O Mercifull God, forasmuch as wee see that we are but very dust and ashes, and though wee growe vp glori∣ously as the flower of the fielde, yet we are cut downe quickly and wyther as the grasse, and forasmuch as out of this corruptible nature of ours, proceedeth no good thing, but wicked thoughtes, deuilish inuentions and moste damna∣ble actions. VVe humbly beseech thee, gyue vs grace that wee may so beholde our vile nature and wicked inclination that we may be ashamed at the fruites thereof, that by shame we may be ∣uen to shun the wickednes of sin, and forced to shadow our selues vnder the winges of thy protection, and learne to put on the beautye of thy sonne Ie∣sus Christ, that in him wee may bee re∣stored to the shape and forme of ver∣tue and godlines, to the honour and glory of thy holy name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Howe many greeuous enemies we haue by reason of sinne. COnsidering howe ouglye and monstrous sinne is in the mind & fleshe of man,Chap. 3. and howe diuerse it is in hys wyll, as it is a thinge impossible to proportionate it, so is it a thing so detestable, that by reason ther∣of, (I meane sinne onely) we haue ma∣ny most gréeuous and intollerable ene∣mies. As for example, Gods vengance and wrath, our owne conscience, death and damnation, of the which, some of thē are enemies vnto our sin & fréends vnto vs, as are, Gods vengeaunce, and our owne conscience: and some of them are fréends vnto sinne, and enemies vn∣to vs, as are, death and damnation, but by reason that sinne raigneth in vs, and we fauour it, and water it, and cannot nor wyll not seperate our selues frō the hazarde of it, but kéepe a society wyth it. Wée are like the Corne that is
is found among the chaffe, which is ga∣thered vp & cast into the fire, and so they perish togeather: Euen so, when sinne is founde to excéede in our mortall bo∣dies, and that we ouermuch defile the house of the Lorde, (I meane his Tem∣ple) he shal come with his Fanne in his hand, and purge hys flower, and that séede which is not séene, but couered with the Chaffe, and dust of the flowre, shall be cast away, and that man whose multitude of sinnes doo couer him so, that neyther repentaunce, nor any good conuersation doth discouer, vndoubted∣ly eyther the broome of Gods vengance shall swéepe him away, or els ye worme of his conscience shall gnaw him, or the sting of death shall confound him, or els the fire of hell shall consume him, for all these are enimies vnto vs for sins sake. Nowe therefore, least sinne myght raigne among vs too aboundantly, with¦out the cutting off of the buddings and blossomes of it, either with amendmēt, with grace or with feare, I wyll laye downe what the force of all those ene∣mies is, that we may sée how that day∣ly by the entertainement of sinne, wée
prouoke gréeuous enimies against vs. And touching the first, which is the ven¦geaunce of God vpon sinners.Vengeance of God. I wyll begin with the Hystory of the Isralites expressed in the Bookes of Exodus and Numery, where the people for theyr murmuring, wyshing of their fleshpots for worshipping the Golden Calfe,Exo, 15, 16, 17, 19, 32, Chapters. and many other sinnes, had the plague, le∣prosie and gréeuous diseases among them, and many of the Idolaters were slayne. And in Numery, such as rebel∣led were swallowed vppe in the earth,Chapters, 16, 21, 25, such as murmured, had firye Serpents sent among them, and such as commit∣mitted fornication among them, hadde the plague, in so much, as there dyed in the plague twentye foure thousande. We reade also that for the sinnes of the people, the world was drowned, and for the sinne of Sodome and Gomor,Gen, 6, 13, those Citties were consumed with fire and brimstone. Horosius reporteth,Gen, 19, 24, that for sinne the two great Citties in Asia, Colossa and Hierapolis, suncke into the earth, and were swallowed vp. Iericho was besiged by Iosua, and the Cittye was taken,Iosu, 6, 21, and all the inhabitants (sa∣uing
Rahab, and they that were wyth her) bothe olde and young were put to the sworde, and the Citty burnt, but of all lamentable plagues sent from God, the destruction of Ierusalem by Titus and Ʋespasian, may be a terrible exam∣ple vnto vs, for they hadde the Lawe, Prophets,Math, 11. yea Christ himselfe, who bitterly wept ouer them, and yet they would not turne from theyr wicked sinne, but hardned theyr harts, and ca∣red not for the Lords swéete warning, and comfortable calling, nor yet for their owne harme and confusion, which was so néere at hande, but euer they thought that the Lorde woulde not de∣story hys Temple among them, nor yet that they shoulde bee spoyled for their Temples sake, and besides that they were so many, they boasted of their mul¦titude and strength, and thought all the worlde could not ouercome, but all the world cannot preuayle, where God him selfe dost sette against, as appeared by this great and populous Ierusalem. Whereof Iosephus maketh mention, that they were besieged so long, that a bushell of Corne, was worth a talent,
yea they were so hungry, that they dyd eate the Leather of their Targets and shooes,Anno salu∣tus. 73. and glad were some of them to eate the dunge of Oxen, the mother kil∣led her owne child to eate if, which was a most lamentable & vnnaturall thing, there were x.C.M. besides Galeans slayne by Vespasian, xvii.M. sent to Alexandria by Titus, to be kept  vile bondage. Two thousand to be brought  Rome for a triumph, which after∣ward were deuoured of wylde beastes, lles that, xxv.M. Iewes were sold, all this gr multitude, (which man  ha thought could haue conque¦red the whole ) the Lord  their sinnes, and for the contemning of hys word and trueth, deliuered vppe to the bloddy hands of their enimies. What har is so hard that wyll not tremble to hee this lamentable vengeaunce and wrath  God, with so sharpe punish∣ment vpon his owne people, which be∣fore he loued so well, and among all o∣ther nations of the worlde, chose for his peculiar flocke. Besides this, ye hayle, thunder, light∣ning, stormes, tempest, fluds, mists, pal∣pable
darknes, frogges, caterpillers, and firye serpents, which the Lorde hath sent vn∣to hys people for sin. The Prophet saith that for the sinnes of the people, ye Lord wil send a dearth vpon thē, not of bread and oyle onely, but of hys holye worde, and therfore for their Idolatry and in∣iquity,Eze. 14, the Lorde sent false Prophets a∣mong them, and the Lord sent word vn¦to the people by the Prophet Ezechiell. That if they did sinne by committing any trespasse against him, he woulde stretch foorth hys hande and break the staffe of bread, and sende such a famine vpon it, that man and beaste shoulde bée destroyed, likewise be would sende ∣soe beastes into the lande to spoyle it, a sword to destroy them, or a pestilence to ouerthrowe man and beast, and their if Noab, Daniell, and Iob were among them, they shold deliuer but theyr owne soules, but their sonnes and daughters should not be deliuered. How bitterly were the offences of Ahab and Iezabel punished for the taking away of a little péece of land. I would to God it were séene in England, by them that taketh away great liuings and manours, and
sendeth a whole housholde it begging, if the sonnes of those menne were so vsed as Achabs sonnes, theyr heads cut of all in one day, and likewyse theyr hungrye Iezabels, were vsed as Achabs. Iezabel deuoured of dogs, and foules of ye aire, they would (I thinke) consider what a a God there is, that séeeth into ye harts of wicked offenders, and dooth beholde the multitude of their sinnes, not onely entertained in corrupt nature, but al∣lowed in corrupt wyll. Good Lord con∣sidering the ripenes of sinns in these dayes, it is to be lamented, that wee feare not the vengeaunce of God.Eze, 16, 19 The Prophet Dauid could say, If thy wrath be kindled O Lord, who may abide it. Ezechiell doth shewe howe greatly the Lorde cryed out against Ierusalem, shewing the offences of Sodome, for the which they were destroyed, whych were, pryde, fulnes of bread, Idlenes and contemning the poore. But alas we haue not onely thys, but an infinite more of most horrible sins raigning a∣mongst vs. As disobedience, murther, enuy, couetousnes, horedome, extortion, vsury, false accusation, drunkennes,
lying, dissimulation and periury, from the iust iudgement of which sins nowe ripe among vs, I beséeche God of hys mercy defend vs, and be fauourable vn∣to vs. Truely our owne sins of Englād béeing so many, and so boldly and open∣lye vsed, doo blind vale a great many that they neither beholde the maiestye and authority of God, not yet the iu∣stice he may lay vpon vs, as barrennes, dearth, famine, and pestilence, and in stéede of our great plenty, to sende vs scarcity, in stéede of our peace to send vs warre, and for the quietnes of our ha∣bitations and families, to banish vs frō our owne houses, and to scatter our fa∣milies before our faces, and to deliuer them and vs into our aduersaries hand as a pray. This God can doo, and vn∣les we spéedily repent, vndoubtedly this first enemy to sin, which is Gods ven∣geaunce, wyll be powred vpon vs. The second enemy vnto sinne, is our owne conscience,Second ene∣my to sin. which forasmuch as it hath an inward taste of ye law of nature & a knowledge of our deformed conuer∣sation & a sight of our going a stray from the image of our good creator, doth al∣waies
at the rebellion of sin (especially when we ioyne our wils therto) stir in our bodies as though we had ye féeling of some liuing thing there, crawling,Synteresis gnawing, clogging, accusing, pressing down as a heauy lump of lead, shaming at, & condemning our own reasons, and wils for giuing entertainmēt vnto sin, in asmuch as sometimes ye shal find the tormēts, & gréeues of consciēce to worke greater sorrow & care in our minds, thē if we were either in prison or ready to goe to execution, and although there bée 2. consciences, the good and the bad,Two con∣sciences. for∣asmuch as I write vnto the good people of God, I will haue to doo but with the conscience of the good, referring ye other to his continual hardnes. And although oftentimes we sée not the conscience of the good, by their wickednes of sin, for that they are not yet called, yet if theyr consciences do not shew her force of ac∣cusation, no doubt it is imprisoned, and so hid in ye great heape of corruptiō that though it cannot now speake in the end wil breake foorth, & that we sée in many disordered personnes in these daies which in the hardnesse of their hartes
haue contynued in theyr sinne a long tyme, vntouched or vndisclosed. Yet in the ende, when God wyll call them, or sathan bring them to shame, or whē no man can iustly accuse them, (how be it suspect them of euill liuing) being cal¦led to examinacion before any magi∣strate, then who can better accuse then the conscience, (who doth first condemn and then strike a great feare) in ye ende produceth two witnesses, that is eyther the stammering tongue, or els the blush¦ing face to accuse the guilty wyth hys owne mouth, and make him speake al∣though he sée eyther shame to discredite him, or the magistrate to punish hym or the Gallowes to confound him. There∣fore is the conscience called Mille testes, a thousand witnesses, because it dooth more euidently know that which is hid in him, then a thousand men, and dooth boyle and burne in the harts of wicked men like a fire. As Tully sayth, Nolite putare (quemadmodum in fabulis sepenu∣mero videtis,In oratione pro Roscio eos qui aliquid impie, scelera te que commiserunt agitari & perterreri taedis ardentibus sua quemque fraus suus terror maxime vexat, suum quemque sce¦lus
exagitat, amentiaque afficit, suae malae cogitationes, conscientiaeque animi terrent &c. Thinke not as Poets haue fayned, that they that haue committed some∣thing vngodly or wickedly, are vexed and scourged with burning Torches, it is our owne guile, and our owne feare doth most trouble vs, it is our owne wickednes doth torment vs and amaze vs, our owne wicked thoughts and con∣sciences that dooth affright vs &c. There is a great accusation of the conscience in the hart of the sinner, as when the Scribes and Pharisies had taken a wo∣man in adultery, they brought her to Christ to sée what sentence he woulde gyue against her, because they hadde found in Moses Lawe, that such a one should be stoned to death, but they dyd it not for Iustice, but to tempt him. Then he writ wyth hys finger on the ground, and said: (béeing vrged by them for his sentence) Let him that is among you without sinne cast the first stone at her. And when they heard it,Ioh. 8.7.9 being accused by their owne consciences, they went out one by one, beginning at the eldest euen vnto the last, It is
most true that Iuuenall sayth: t, 13,Euasisse putes quos diri conscia facti Mens reddit attonitos, et surdo verbere caedit. Doost thou thinke he can escape, whō the conscience of a moste horrible facte maketh amazed, and whippeth with a deafe scourge. And as the same Iuue∣nall saith in an other place. Nocte di∣eque suum gestat in pectore testem. But day and night, where that he goe or rest, hee till doth beare a witnes in his brest.Conscientia S. Paule speaking of the Gentiles, sheweth that they haue the effect of the Lawe, written in their harts, their con¦sciences bearing witnes,Rom, 2, 15, and as long as we liue in this worlde, God graunt that this witnes may alwayes stirre and sting vs, till we be ashamed of sin vnlesse after this life, it be opened as in an inditement to accuse at ye iudgment seate,Reu. 20, 12 as Iohn maketh mention. And I saw the dead both great & small stand before God, and theThat is their con∣sciences. bookes were opened, and an other booke was ope∣ned, which is the booke of life, & the dead were iudged of those thinges which were written in the bookes ac∣cording to their works. Thus we may
sée the conscience in thys world that ac∣cuseth, and the conscience in the worlde to come that condemneth. God grant ye we may in this worlde so behaue our selues, as with Horace to say. Hic mu∣rus ahaeneus esto. This is a brasen wall when a man may knock his breste and say, I knowe nothing héere that ma∣keth me ashamed or a feard.Miscellan prelect sep time, To primi. He yt wyll sée more of the conscience, let him looke in the Bishoppe of Exceter hys booke Not in Ally, though indéede he wryte of conscience at large. But D. Wolton that is now Bishop, who wryte larger in his booke called the Conscience, dedi∣cated to a godly zealous knight, S. Iohn Gilbert, mine olde good master & louing fréend a fit Patrone for such a booke and title, there he shal find inough, touching the conscience.The third enemy v to sinne, An other most terrible enemy vnto mankind for sinnes sake, is death, who by reason that our bodye is all spotted & corrputed with sinne, hath his lawfull accesse vnto mankind, and foloweth him step by step, from place to place, of what estate or degrée soeuer he bée, either King, Prince, Duke, Mar∣ques, Earle, lord, baron, knight, or whe¦ther he be rich or mighty, wise or poli∣tike,
tyll at last he plucketh him downe, and depriueth him of life, wife, children, hou¦ses, lands, goods, and all those thinges in the world, wherin he setled his hart. The cause of this his power is, yt man beeing corrupted wyth sin, is rewarded with death: a certaine appoyntment of God in our first parent for his sin and disobedience.n, 2.17, As appeareth in Genesis, 2. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die the death. In that he dyd eate, he disobeyed, and so sinned, which sinne hath runne into all hys posterity by discent hetherto,m. 5, 12 and shall vnto the worlds ende, and that is the cause that Death triūpheth ouer vs in this world in ouerthrowing vs. S. Paul sayth: Stipendium peccati mors,om. 6, 23 The rewarde of sinne is death. Likewise the Apostle Iames sayth:m. 1.15. When lust hath concea∣ued, it bringeth forth sinne, and sin whē it is finished bringeth foorth death. So that there is no doubt among men, but by reason of sinne death hath taken hold in them,om, 5.12, and as sin is entred into all the worlde, as the Apostle sayth: euen so death is like to run vpon all thē which are in the world by reason of sinne. But
now some will obiect,  that whether wée sinne much or little, it is all one, for we are assured of death thereby, not regar∣ding the multitude of sinnes, but (as it were) féeding the inclination of sinne, knowing that there is but to the one and to the other, a death for a rewarde. But I answer,Resp. if any man shall there∣vpon boldly presume on sinne, and feede the humor thereof,Short de terrible. Deu. 30.18. he shall not only ha∣sten death vnto him, but also plucke vp∣on him a most terrible death, as appea∣reth in Moses. If thy hart turne away so that thou wylt not obey, but shalt bée seduced, and worshippe other Gods and serue them, I pronounce vnto you thys day, that ye shall surely perish, you shal not prolong your daies in the lande. S. Paule charging the Corinthians for a∣busing the sacrament, sayd:1, Co. 11.3 For thys cause many are sicke among you, and many fall on sléepe. And yet it is not a generall rule, that they which are cutte off, that theyr dayes are shortned tho∣rough sinne, for Iohn Baptist, and the Innocents that were murthered by He¦rode are no such examples, for such the Lord dooth not onely take away because
they are vnworthy of the worlde, but sometimes they are arguments of con∣demnation vnto their oppressers, again in them was not séene such manifest sin wherby they did drawe vnto thē Gods wrath to cut of their dayes, but in those in whom plentifulnes of obstinate sin doth raigne, vndoubtedly they shorten their dayes, as on the otherside, they which serue the Lord, and followe hys precepts and lawes, their daies shalbe prolonged. 0, 20, As appeareth in the com∣mandements. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy daies may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gi∣ueth thée.K n, 20, 6, Was there not xv. yeeres ad∣ded to Ezechias in seruing ye Lord. The prophet Dauid saith.sal, 34, 12 What man is he that listeth to liue, & wold faine sée good daies: kéepe thy tongue frō euil, and thy lips that they speake no guile. The ve∣ry same & like wordes hath the Apostle Peter, also when the Lord appeared vn¦to Salomon in Gibeon,Pet, 3, 10, and had giuen him the excellency of wisedom, he adui∣sed him saying, Kin. 3, 14 If thou wilt walk in my waies to keepe my ordinances and my commandements, as thy father Dauid did walk. I wil prolong thy daies. And
yet not only this blessing of prolonging of daies shalbe giuen to the seruaunts of God, but euen in the ende, they shall die a peaceable death, as happened to ye good king Iosias, to whom ye Lord said,2, Ki, 22, 2 for his good embrasing of ye booke of the Law, and fearing him. Beholde I wyll gather thée to thy fathers, & thou shalt be put in thy graue in peace, and thine eies shall not sée all ye euil which I wyl bring vpō this place. O good God, what sweeter wordes to a christian hart, and what greater ioy to a good conscience then to depart in peace, ye neither God in vengeaunce, nor the worlde in excla∣matiō lay any thing to our charge, ney∣ther this length of life, nor this peacea∣ble death shalbe assured to the vngodly and wicked, but as I said, their daies shalbe cut of, and their end shalbe in ter¦ror & feare, as it appeareth in Ezechiel,Ezech, 14 either by famine, pestilence, sworde, or wyld beasts. Howe terrible was the death of the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomor, O howe lamentable and most dreadfull was the ende of Hierusa∣lem when it was sackt by Tytus and Vespasian. Howe fearefull was the end of Iezabell, being rent a sunder
with dogges, and deuoured by peece-meale. How was the ende of rebellious Absalon, which was caught from hys horse, and hanged by the haire. Howe odious was ye ende of Antiochus, which putrified and rotted where he lay, that hys Chamberlaine coulde not abide his smell. Most horrible was the ende of Holophernus, who was beheaded in hys drunken sléepe, and all these wyth a great many more abridged their daies, and ended them in most terrible and fearefull manner, and that for their wicked and abhominable lyuing, in most detestable sinne and wickednes, some in horedome, some in pryde, some in disobedience, some in extortion, some in tyranny and cruell murther, &c. I remember I was by the bedside of an olde preacher,Hunting  who di¦n froo∣ Zel∣d. who lay in his death bed, and sayd vnto me. Euen as the water which is poysoned, killeth all the multi∣tude of fish in it, so I tell thée in thys world, the whole ayre is so corrupted with the sinne of man, that I doubt mée it wyll bring all the world to a confusi∣on in a short time. I pray God deliuer me, and giue England repentant harts.
The most horrible and most fearefull enemy that yet was spoken of agaynste the sinne of man, is hell,The last e∣nemy to sinne. a place of dam∣nation for euer, without release, appoin¦ted for sathan, & all such as haue stoutly serued him, without veyling theyr ban∣ner of repentaunce to almighty God: an enemy so dreadfull, as me thinkes the verye remembraunce of so terrible a place, should séeme to reuoke and drawe backe a sinner, although he had neuer so great a delight in his iourney. A place not onely full of all paynes & torments, but also continuing and enduring for e∣uer, and euer, a place voyde of release, or mitigation of paynes, thether com∣meth neyther mercy nor bayle, compas∣sion nor pittye. The lamentable out cryes and scriches of them that are tor∣mented, doo neuer come from thence vn¦to the eares of helpe, or vnto the com∣passion of pitty.Esa. 30, 33 It is described in the Prophet Esay, Topheth is prepared of olde, it is euen prepared for the King, hée hath made it déepe and large, the burning thereof is fire & much woode, the breath of the Lorde like a fire of Brimstone doth kindle it. He speaketh
figuratiuely, that as the state of heauen in many places of the new Testament is set forth by similituds, because other wise we cannot conceiue of it, euen so hell in this place is called Topheth,Topheth which was a vallye of the children of Hinnom néere Ierusalem,2, Ki, 23, 10 where the childrē were sacrificed to Moloch which was a great Image of brasse,Lyra. proporti∣oned like vnto a man, and being holow within, it should first be made fire redde hote, and when the child shoulde be put into it and closed vp, then the priestes would make such a noise with Targets and timbrels, that ye parents should not heare the voice of the infant, whereby they myght be moued to cōpassiō, but beléeue yt the infant died peaceably with out paine, and yt the Gods did presently receiue ye soule of the infant: this was their abhominable Idolatrye, in thys vally néere Ierusalem, which yet is cal¦led Ben-hinnom, which is asmuch to say by interpretation as the sonne of Hin∣nom, afterward for ye filthy abuse of the place, & for the contēpt therof Iosiah cau¦sed dead carions to be cast there. Nowe Topheth taketh his deriuation frō Toph which signifieth Timphanū a Tabret,Psa. 81, or
dromslade which they vsed as I said, in this vally, to take away the pittiful cry of the child, frying in this Images hote hollow place. And in our owne capaci∣ties we sée a certaine description of hell by this figure, a place full of torments, in the which the tormented shall suffer such paines,Mat, 13, 42 as shall prouoke wéeping and gnashing of teeth, yea such as are intollerable, on ye otherside, the children of God, shall not be moued to compassi∣on to behold them, no although they sée their father, mother, children, kinsfolke or such like, for as the Tabret, and tim∣brell tooke away the childs cry in the I∣dol Moloch, so shall the ioy and swéete melody of heauen, stop their pittye or compassion of them which shall dwell in heauen. And although this similitude holdeth not in all parts to the reason of them, that would discourse vpon it, yet so farre it holdeth, as we must conceiue the matter, although we omit the man∣ner. As the vally of Hinnom was a place néere Ierusalem, wherein after∣ward Iosiah caused all the filth and cari∣ons of the citty to be layd, as fit for no better thing, because of ye horrible abuse and Idolatry therin sometimes doone.
Euen so the heauenly Ierusalem doth purge it selfe of all those filthy carions, I meane the reprobate that stincke of their sinne, before the face of God, and are ordayned to bee caste out into thys Topheth as a place fitte for such a receypt. Nowe as there is a damnable place, wherin the fire is neuer quenched, and the worme neuer dyeth. Euen so there are some men, whose sinnes are so ma∣ny, & offences so greate, that neuer sée∣keth the grace and fauour of almightye God, neuer repent them of their sins, these (I say) shalbe possessors and inhe∣ritours of thys place of torments,Math. 13.41, 42, as our sauiour Christ sayth: The sonne of man shall sende foorth hys Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdome all thinges that offend, and them which doo iniquity, and shall cast them into a Fornace of fire, there shalbe wayling and gnashing of téeth. Lykewise Saint Paule to the Hebrewes. If we sinne wyllingly,Heb, 10, 26, 27, after that we haue receiued the knowledge of the trueth, there re∣maineth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking for of iudgement
and violent fire, which shal deuoure the aduersaries. Also it is sayd in ye seconde Epistle of Peter.2, Pe, 2, 9. The Lorde knoweth to deliuer the godly out of temptation, and to reserue the vniust vnto the daye of iudgement to be punished. Also in S. Iohn hys Reuelation.Reu. 20, 15, And who soe∣uer was not found in the Booke of life, was cast into the Lake of fire. Howe woefull and terrible shall the dreadfull day of iudgement bee vnto the wycked and reprobates, when Christ Iesus shall sit and make diuision the Goates from the Shéepe, when he shall say to the shéepe. Come yee blessed, receyue the kingdome prepared for you &c.Math, 25 34 And to the Goats, that is to say, the wic¦ked, he shal say,Verse, 41, Depart from me ye cur¦sed into euerlasting fire, which is prepa¦red for the deuill and his aungells. Wherfore while we are héere in thys worlde, let vs with terror beholde the dreadfull sentence of damnation, & with all diligence and care, call our selues to account,Eph, 5, redéeming and purchasing a∣gaine, the time which we haue wicked¦ly spent, and become not onely new, but stedfast members, and then, if thy hand
or eye cause thée to offend, cut them off, and cast them from thée.Mat, 18, 8, 9, It is better for thée to enter into life halt, maymed, or blind, then hauing two handes, two féete, or two eyes, to be cast into hell fire. And because sathan goeth on styll so busily with his worke, and all the world in a manner séemeth wyllinglye to be his workmanship. It is necessa∣ry that now, euen nowe, we reclaime our selues, according to the caueat of the Euangelist. Nowe is the axe layde to the roote of the trées,Luk. 3.9, therefore euery trée which bringeth not foorth good fruit shalbe hewen downe, and cast into the fire. Thus haue I bréefely layde downe the most gréeuous enimies to mankind which preuaile the more against him, by reason of the sinne which he séemeth to nourish, and make ripe in his ready wyll, and wylling inclination. I would it mought be so surueyed, that it may be lothed, and so lothed, that it may bée thoughly mortified, wherby these ene∣mies may not so lay siege vnto ye soule of man, that in ye ende, he may be taken captiue, and led to an vnbailable gaole, the Lord grant it for his Christes sake.
The prayer. O Lord God, full of all pittie & com¦passion, looke downe vppon vs miserable wretches and sinners, who are not onely laden & ouerladen with the multitude of sinnes and wickednes but are ready to be swallowed vp and vtterly destroyed, vnles thou of thy pit∣ty and mercy, which haue beene euer of olde, vouchsafe to gard and defend vs, for the enimies are at hand ready to ouerthrow vs, thy vengeaunce han∣geth ouer our heads, ready to fall vp∣on vs, our conscience burneth in vs, ready to consume vs. Death wayteth daylie vpon vs, and calleth vs, hel gate is open, and we shall be vtterly consu∣med. If thou O most mercifull God extend not thine accustomed fauoure. Although we haue sinned O Lord, and that most greeuous in thy sight, wee are hartely sorry for it, and forasmuche as thou requirest a humble harte, and a penitent minde, accept O Lord, the re∣pentaunt teares of thy humble ser∣uaunts, and vouchsafe to restore thy Israell agayne which hath gone a
a stray and though we bee wylling to cast away our selues, yet O Lorde bee thou our guyde and director, we see not the deepenes of our owne sinne, not yet the sweetenes of thy mercy, nor yet the bitternes of the scourges, which thou hast ordeyned for sinne, o∣pen our eyes O Lord and giue vs thy holy spirite to mollifie our harts that we may wholy become thine, & saue vs for thy mercy sake at the last, for syn is so rype, and the time so corrup∣ted, that vengeaunce is at hand, and when it is ready to fall, we are not a∣ble to abide it, wherefore O Lord call thy whole flock speedily, and deliuer them out of Sodome, as thou diddest thy seruaunt Lot, that they may not be partakers with the infidels, which know not thy name, nor come when thou callest, but are gon to the worlde, and followed the concupiscence of their owne harts. Graunt vnto vs O Lorde, the sweete consolation of thy spirite, for Iesus Christ hys sake. Amen.
How we shall in Christ Iesu, take away the force and accu∣sation of sin, and remooue the siege of those enemies aforesayde, and howe we shall become good Christians. THe meane howe we shall reforme our selues,Cap, 4, take away the force of sinne, and to cause almightye God to become our good and merciull father & protector, omit∣ting the sacrifice of Christ, which is all in all, and shewing our owne duety. I wyll lay downe in these sixe poynts. 1.6, Thinges learned ma¦keth vs new crea∣tures in a christian shape. We must looke into our creation and sée what we are, and what we should bée. 2. We must heare ye word of God, and what is to be gathered out of it. 3. Wée must vse harty prayer. 4. Wée must suffer affliction. 5. Forsake the world and ye flesh. 6. We must looke in to the swéetenes of the second life: and all these béeing wel looked into as they are, and as I purpose by Gods grace effectually & briefely to lay them down shall bee inough for a christian man to learne for his office and duety.
The first thing yt we ought to looke into, and the first lesson that we shoulde learne is, to knowe our creation and forme, not our quallities and dispositi∣on, that by the view thereof, we should in all behauiour shewe, that neither in mind or in action, which is agréeable to our title, name, calling and kinde, that as we are the image of God, so wee should frame our selues to that shape of godlines, and as wee are reasonable creatures, so we should vse our know∣ledge with vnderstanding, and as wée haue the dominion ouer all other crea∣tures, so we should kéepe our honour and estimation, not communicating with them. So long we be men, and so long we kéepe the honour of our kinde, as we vse our selues not only after the Lawe of God, but at least wise accor∣ding to the Law of nature, for we are endued with a reasonable soule and spi¦rite,Heb, 4, 12 not to affect wicked, sinfull, and de∣uilish thinges, nor yet to will & desire thinges that are against the glorye of God, for if God be glorified in his crea∣tures, euen so much ye more we oughte to set forth his glory, by how much hée hath exalted vs aboue all other crea∣tures
with true holines, with perfecte charity, with sound knowledge, with continuall deuotion, with thankes gy∣uing, with equity, with mercy, and so foorth, as it becommeth a man endued with a reasonable soule, againe, foras∣much as he hath sette vs aboue all hys handy workes, and hath set all thinges in subiection vnder our féete, let vs not loose that honor and dignity, and be∣come brute beastes our selues in our behauiour, but rather as I sayd be like men, as we are created, and kéepe the image of God in perfect knowledge, iu¦stice and temperance, sanctification and holines, according as the Apostle sayth. This is the wyll of God,1, Thessa. 3, 4 euē your sanc¦tification, and that we should abstayne from fornication, that euery one of you should knowe howe to possesse his ves∣sell in holines and honour, but assoone as we giue ouer a holye conuersation, a reasonable spirite, a chast minde, and a good behauiour, then wee fall into beastly behauiour, and brutish maners, and from men quickly become beastes, and called by the name of beastes, be∣cause then from reason wée fall euen to the corruption of nature and lustes
thereof, and doo not sée the violation of Gods commandement, defacing of our image, nor the ouerthrow of our honor. Therefore is it,e, 2.12 that the Apostle calleth vs beasts, saying: But these as brute beastes, led with sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed, speake euill of those thinges which they know not, and shall perrish through their own cor¦ruption., 10, 14 Likewise the Prophet Iere∣my sayth. Euery man is a beast by hys owne knowledge. Horace in his tyme called the people of Rome for their in∣constancy, and vnstablenes, and chang∣able desires.Episto. Bellua multorum capitum. A beast of many heads: there are many (which for their affections and quali∣ties in scripture, are called beasts, some by the name of a Lyon for his tyranny.on. anny. Of such the prophet Dauid spake, whē he did flée to the Lord for succor, saying: O my God,. 7, 1, 2, in thée haue I put my trust saue me from all them that persecute me, and deliuer my soule, least he de∣uoure my soule like a Lyon, and teare it in péeces while there is none to help. Such we haue not a small store in Eng¦lande, which through tyranny and op∣pression haue deuoured many a poore
soule, and eate them out of house, liuing and all, and may well be called Lyons, for in their tyranny as they haue no cō∣passion nor pitty,Scorpion flattery so who dare of all the beasts in the field, to take ye Lambe out of the lions clawes, and what man dare speake or controll some of our lyons for their pray. Some are called Scorpions for stinging vnder the shew of faire flat¦tering, as the prophet Ezechiel,Ezech, 2,  béeing wylled to speake vnto a stout harted na¦tion, should not feare them, as it is writ¦ten. And thou son of man, feare thē not, neither be afraid of their wordes, al∣though rebels & thornes be with thee, & thou remainest with scorpions, feare not their lookes &c. The nature of the scorpion is thus described,Plini et Barth, A Blandiuntur facie sed cauda pungunt acute, they flat∣tet with their face, but they sting wyth their tayle, many a faire word, and ma∣ny a faire shew hath deceiued many an honest English hart, swéetely pypeth the fowler, when the poore byrd goeth to wrack, many a faire promise, louing looke, and bidding to bankets, hath de∣ceiued many a one of his liuing, depri∣ued many a one of his life burdened ma¦ny a one with cares, I wyl not say, that
in causes of marriage by faire wordes many a one hath béene deceiued, but e∣specially the poore old widdowes, race, Sunt qui frustis et pomis viduas venentur aua∣ras.yne for hines, Some are called Swine for their filthines, and sluttish wallowing in the dunghill of lust, and for yt they estéeme not their owne clenlines, as appeareth in Mathew.at, 7, 6 Cast not pearles before swyne. And as S. Peter sayth. The sowe that was washed,Pe, 2, 22 is returned to the wallowing in the myre, and wee that haue béene washed in the fountain of Christianity, are returned into the puddell of adultery and filthy fornicati∣on, if this deformed shape, were séene in forme, as it is knowne in desire in all the worlde, there be a great many magistrates and Officers, yea and such as be shepheardes myght be ashamed to sée that nowe they are swyneheards. Brybery affection and negligence hath (the more pitty) engendred to manye swyne in these dayes. Some are called by the name of Bulls,s Oxen  Kine theyr ression Oxen, and Kine, for their oppression and cruelty, & they are said to be of Bashan, which was an hill of excellent pasture in the Country
néere Iordan, wher Og was King. A signification in those whose bellyes bée∣ing full, are most cruell & fierce against the poorer sort.Psal, 22, The Prophet Dauid cry∣eth out against them saying, Many Ox∣en are come about me, fatte Buls of Ba∣shan close me in on euery side. Likewyse the Lord himself cryeth out against them in ye prophesie of Amos.Amos 4 Heare this word ye Kine of Bashan, that are in ye Moun∣taines of Samaria, which oppresse the poore and destroy the néedy.Foxe fo subtilty▪ Some are called by the name of a Fox, for theyr subtilty, which is naturally in the Foxe. As appeareth in the Prophet Ezechiell.Ezech. 1 where the Lorde himselfe cryeth out a∣gainst the subtilty of the prophets of Is∣raell, saying. O Israell, thy prophets are like the foxes in the waste places. Al∣so in the Gospell of Luke, Our sauiour Christ calleth Herode by ye name, when the Pharisies came and wylled him to depart, least that he would kil him, say∣ing to them. Goe and tell that foxe,Luke. 1 be∣hold I cast out deuills, &c. We haue a great many foxes in England, (God help vs) which kéepe their holes a day time, & goe about mischiefe in ye night season,
many subtill practises, they imagine in their idle lurking dens, some to destroye the estate, & some to alter religion, and some to make a confusion of order, the Lord turne their harts, or spéedilye con∣found them. We haue besides them a great many hungry foxes that goe about to spoyle the poore Lambes of the coun∣try, as the buier & seller vnder ye coloure of swearing, lying, facing, &c, deceiueth many a simple néedy man, especially hée that buieth vpon lende, and cannot for∣beare, he that buieth of such foxes, shall assuredly haue the worst, and pay well for the best. But we haue worse foxes then these, that is, our vsurers, for they bite not onely but deuoure vp quite, and their subtiltie is to beguile God almigh¦tye, and to cozen the law, for they haue no mony of their owne, but can borrow of a fréend, and yet he shall haue none of that, but if he wyll take ware, (beware the fox) hee wyll fléece you and skin you also, and make you pay vii. skore for the hundred, before the yere be out, for hee saith, it is lawfull to buy and sell. And yet we haue worse foxes then these, which are some of our Lawyers (God forbid I should say all) they wyl so draw
men and win men, wyth their warran∣ting of good and sufficient matter, tyll they haue sucked out all the blood in his purse, then they care neither for him nor hys matter. I remember Isope speaketh of such a beast, which sawe the Rauen hauing a péece of chéese in his mouth on a trée, to whom this fox said. O what a fayre byrd you are, and how brauely you can sing, I meruaile men say you are a fowle byrd, and a bad singer, I promise you I like your singing of all ye byrds in the world, with that the Rauen offered to sing, and opened his mouth, and down fell the chéese, which the fox tooke, and ran away with it laughing, and had no more to doo afterward with hys beautye or commendation: neyther haue our Foxes to doo any more wyth mens mat∣ters when they haue the chéese. Some are called by the name of dogges for their disdainefullnes and enuye,Dog for disdainful∣nes & enuy for that the nature of a dogge is alwaies to disdaine and enuy his owne kind, as the olde saying is Dum canis os rodit sociari pluribus edit. VVhile the dog doth gnaw the bone, He doth desyre to eate alone.
For this cause he dooth shew his surfai∣ting nature, which is rather then he wil impart to an other, we will ouer charge his owne stomacke wyth eating, to hys owne anoyaunce. Therefore it is that Peter sayth.1, Pe, 2, 22, The Dog returneth againe to his vomite, to séeke phisicke for his sur¦feyte, when his belly is ouercharged, for that carying an enuious mind, and a dis∣dainfull to others, he would rather hurte himselfe, then leaue any thing to plea∣sure others, and for that cause they were called also dogges by Christ, to whome holines was not imparted, partly be∣cause they wold make a surfaiting meale of it, kéeping all to themselues, and yet dooing no good to themselues, and partlye because they wold not impart to others, when he sayd,Math, 7, 6 Gyue not holy thinges vnto dogges. for that indéede thinges ought to be bestowed on them that bene∣fite themselues, and doo good with it vnto others. Many more such beastes there bee in mens shape, as the slothfull man is cal∣led an Asse, the deuourer is called a Woolfe, the scornefull, as Ecclesiasticus sayth:Eccl. 33, 6 is like an horse, that neyeth. Pit∣tifull
it is, that Circe raigneth to be∣witch such men, and to transforme them from their honourable estate and shape of mankind, into the disfygured shew of brute beastes, but this happeneth, when men fall from God, and obey their owne appetites, and lusts, then they become bruite beastes, that haue no vnderstan∣ding, and God giueth them vp vnto their owne vile affections. Woe bee vnto that people whom God hath forsaken, but double woe vnto them that fall from their estate,Rom, 1, 26 and lose their shape of reason vertue, and godlines, and become bruite beastes in their dooings, they are so disfi∣gured, that he wyll not knowe them at the day of iudgement, from the shape of beastes. The seconde meane to take away the force, of sinne,2. Poynte is that we must heare the word of God, and learne what is to bee gathered out of it, and héerein wee must take thys order. 1. What the word of God is. 2 How we must heare it, and vse it. 3 What we must gather out of it. First,What the worde of God is. because I wil not stand vpon the large definitions & interpretatiōs of lear¦ned
men. I wyll deliuer out of the scripture what the reward of God is. Firste in Deutronomye it is called wisedome,Deu, 4, 6, where it is said, Kéepe them therefore and doo them, for that is your wisedome, and your vnderstanding in the sight of the people, which shall heare all these ordinaunces, and shall say, onely this people is wise, and of vnderstan∣ding, and a great nation. Therefore it is necessary that Magistrates, councellers, and officers, (who are chosen for theyr wisedome) shoulde learne their wise∣dome and knowledge out of the word of God,Psal, 2, 10 as Dauid said. Be wise now there∣fore O ye kinges, be learned ye that are Iudges of the earth, that their know∣ledge, policy, and gouernement myght, procéede from a godly direction, & from the rule of Gods word, which woulde not onely terrifie the people the more from their folly, but inflame thē a great deale the sooner with obedience, because it procéedeth from so good a fountaine. Also the prophet Dauid called it a Lan∣terne,A Lanterne or Lyght. Psa, 119, 105, saying: Thy word O Lorde is a Lanterne vnto my feete, and a light vn∣to my pathes. that forasmuch as wee walke in a darke sinfull world, by the
word of God we should be directed how to goe, and which waies, least we knock our selues in euery blocke of sinne, our sauiour Christ by the same light, giueth light to them that sit in darknes,Luk, 2, and in the shadowe of death, and to guyde our féete into the way of peace. What grea∣ter comfort vnto trauellers then ye day light, and what greater discomforte to wayfaring men then the darke night, God be thanked that hath giuen vs the light of hys holy worde, therefore while it is day let vs not harden our hartes, as in the prouocation,Power of GOD. Rom, 1, 16 and in the day of tem¦tation. Likewise S. Paule dooth call the word of God the power of God to saluation, to euery one that beléeueth, hée saith not that it is a secrete reuelation, or the Hystorye of prophane matters, but that it is the same wherein the ver∣tue and power of God is hidden, to helpe succoure, defende and comforte the be∣léeuers. Also it is called a mighty worker as S. Paule sayth:A mighty worker. Hebr. 4, 12, The worde of God is louely and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sworde, and
entereth through, euen to the deuiding a sunder of the soule and the spirite, and of the ioynts and the marowe, and is a dis∣cerner of the thoughtes, and the intentes of the hart, so that as we haue many ma∣ladies, sores, byles, aches, and inwarde diseases. Euen so God hath ordeined such an excellent oyntment, euen the oynt∣ment of his holy word, to pearce through euery artery, ioynt, sinewe and bone, to purge vs, ease vs, and cure vs. So that nowe what greater comfort then wyse∣dome to our knowledges, light vnto our darke pathes, defence for our poore vn∣shielded bodies, and health for our sicke soules, which the Lord of his mercy hath imparted vnto vs, by & in his holy word. Now it reasteth howe we heare the word of God and vse it. First we must consider that we vse all diligence and hu∣mility in hearing the word of God, and put of all phantasies, cares, heauines, and worldly imaginations, and that wée put on true vnderstandinge and know∣ledge, as it is sayde: Hée that recey∣ueth the séede (which is Gods worde) in good ground,Mat, 13, 23 is hée that heareth the
word, and vnderstandeth it. Otherwise if we endeuour not to vnderstand, if the Trumpet sounde an vncertaine sounde,1, Cor. 14,  who can prepare himselfe to the battell, there may be a fault in the Trumpettor, there may be a fault in the hearer, there∣fore, let the one be diligent to teache tru∣ly and sincerely, let the other heare atten¦tiuely, and vnderstand fruitfully, and when we haue so doone, it is not inough to learne and to leaue off, but to followe the rule of Moses in Deutronomy, who sayth: These wordes which I com∣maund thée thys day,Deu. 6, 6, shalbe in thy hart thou shalt rehearse them continually vn∣to thy children, and shalt talke of them when thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest downe, and when thou rysest vppe, and thou shalt bynde them for a signe vppon thyne hande, and they shall bée as frontlets betwéene thyne eyes, also thou shalt write them vppon the postes of thy house, and vppon thy gates. It is not inough to heare ye worde of GOD, but to exercise it, to the buil∣ding vppe of the menne of GOD, and for the preseruation of hys Tem∣ple
in safety. The Euangelist saith, Whosoeuer heareth the worde of God,Math. 7, 24 and doth the same, I will liken him to a wise man, which hath builded his house on a rocke. But now because there are many doubtes and repugnances in scrip¦ture that it séemeth to be harde and ob∣scure, which wyll lothe many a man to the reading or hearing of it. It follow∣eth not that therefore he should be wea∣rie or shrinke backe, for he is wylled to séeke and shall find, to knocke and it shall be opened, and againe on the other side, the Lord wyll not leaue his church deso∣late and comfortles, for he willed Phil∣lip to ioyne vnto the Eunuch that was doubtfull, he caused all his Apostles to goe preach in all the worlde, and sayth that he wyll rayse vp prophets vnto hys people, yea and hath truely sayde him selfe Ero vobiscum, I wyll be wyth you vnto the worlds ende. Last of all we must consider what is to be gathered out of the worde of GOD, which is the fruite, and benefite that wée receiue by it. Whereof the firste is knowledge by the which wee may discerne thynges and knowe our crea∣tor,Knowledge and what he hath and dooth for vs,
and also our owne duty how we should behaue our selues in his seruice, this knowledge did Saint Paul wishe, and pray to be increased, in the Collosians.Col. 1.10. When he sayd. For this cause we also since the day we heard of it, cease not to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled, which knowledge of his will in all wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding. Likewise the prophete Hosea sayth. I desired mercy,Hos. 6 6. and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt offeringe. The second benefite, is fayth, by the which we are assured of the promises of God,Fayth. and eternall saluation in his sonne Christ Iesus,Heb. 11.1. Saint Paul dooth call it the ground of thinges which are hoped for, and the euidence of thinges which are not séene, which is as muche to say, as the certaintie of those things to come. That is, acceptation, redemp∣tion, sanctification, euerlasting life, and the kingdome of heauen, which things we do expecte, and it is the writing or euidence of the same hold, and we are perswaded, that though we are vnwor¦thie of our selues, of those heauenly
riches, and graces to be bestowed vpon vs, yet by the death of Christe Iesus, and by his onely sacrifice we shall en∣ioy them, which writing an euidence of fayth he hath written in our hearts, and sealed with his owne blood, so that as in euery euidence or indenture hold the tenant oweth due loyalty vnto his Lorde, and consenteth vnto, and obey∣eth all couenaunts comprised in the same writinges, so we should obeye, serue, and assent vnto the Lorde, and his statutes, and couenauntes. For so is the nature of fayth, according vnto the Gréeke word, to assent vnto the word of God, and to haue a sure truste in God, that he will of his owne mercy perfourme all those thinges that are written in the word of God, so that to haue fayth, or to be faythfull, is spoken by correlation, that is, that God simp∣ly and absolutely offereth not his mer∣cy and grace vnto all, but vnto such as doo acknowledge it with thankes gy∣uing, accept it with ioyfulnesse, and be∣come his seruauntes in newe obedy∣ence, and then they are called iuste or ryghteous, by imputation, and
therefore it is sayde. The iuste shall lyue by fayth. Nowe because God is knowen to be mercifull,Rom. 1.17. there be that follow their owne lustes and appe∣tites, and put of from day to day their returning vnto God, buylding ney∣ther on fayth, nor yet on Godes mer∣cye, but on their owne lustye wylles and desires, and that buylding cannot stande, neyther can that be a sufficient pleasing of God, that is done without fayth. Yea,Iames. and yet fayth of it selfe in some poyntes fayleth, that is, where it doth trouble, or is inconstant,Mat. 7.21. as for example. The Diuels beleeue but they tremble. Agayne. Not euery one that sayth vnto mee Lorde, Lorde, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of my fa∣ther which is in heauen. But this fayth fayleth,Howe ye shall know true fayth. because it tasteth of weakenesse, feare, and synne. The true fayth is tryed by constancie in Trybulation, as appeareth in Saint Paul to the Thessalonians,1. Thes. 3.5 and by perfecte Loue as appeareth in Saint Paull to Timothye, where
he sayth. The ende of the com∣maundement is loue,1. Tim. 1.5. out of a pure hart, and of a good conscience, and of fayth vnfayned. The true fayth hath a frée accesse vnto God with boldnesse.Eph. 3.12. By true fayth we resist the Diuell, and ouercome the world,1. Iohn. 5.4. as S. Iohn saith. This is the victory that ouercom∣meth the worlde, euen our fayth: And Peter saith,1. Pet. 58.9. your aduersary the Diuell goeth about like a roring Lion, séeking whom he may deuour, whom resist stedfast in fayth, by true fayth we are preserued vnto saluatiō, as Peter saith. Which are kept by the power of God through fayth vnto saluation.1. Pet. 1.5. After all this we must consider that as know∣ledge goeth before fayth, so perseue∣rance and stedfast continuance, follow∣eth after fayth, which stedfast continu∣ance hath béen founde in all the godlye Patriarches,Perseuerāce Prophets, and Apostles, vnremooueable, and which is so neces∣sary in a christian man, and so muche required in a Christian man, as fruit is expected of the trée, without the which the trée is not estéemed, for it is the tryall of a man in temptation, or
affliction. For the Diuell will séeke to remooue hym, the world will séeke to shake him, the flesh wil seke to weigh his Anker, then if he be vnstedfast, or if he be not founde to be the good figh∣ting souldier of Christ, what auayleth all his christian doctrine, yea wat auai∣leth his sworde and buckler, if he run away from his aduersarie, as Demo∣stenesDemoste∣nes. hauing written in his Target.  good fortune, as who woulde say, fortune was his guide, yet in the face of his enemie he ranne away, so that whether it be in prosperitie to hold fast the Lord, and not to be vaine∣ly puffed vp in the worlde, nor to set∣tle his heart in the world, nor to turne his eies away from his poore brethren, not to oppresse, nor couet or desire an other mans goods, This is stedfast a∣biding in the Lorde in prosperitie. Or whether it be in aduersitie to be pati∣ent in all tribulations to be thankefull for all crosses, and to tarrie the Lordes leasure, to suffer euery burden that is layde vpon hym, whether it be sicke∣nesse, pouertie, imprisonment, slander, or whatsoeuer. Christ sayde, He that
wyll be my disciple, must take vp his crosse and follow me. He sayd not take his crosse and stande styll, or goe backe, but to followe hym, this is sted∣fast fayth in aduersity. As touching his persecution which is, that we shoulde not slyde backe from almightie God, there are many notable examples in scripture of it.Iosu. 1.8 Iosuah sayth. Let not this booke of the lawe depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest obserue and do according to all that is written in it. The Prophet Dauid sayth, in his fyrst Psalme.Psal. 1.12 Blessed is the man that hath not walked in the counsell of the vngodly. &c. But his delight is in the lawe of the Lord, and in his lawe will he exercise hym selfe day and night. Iob sayth. Although he kyll me I will not forsake hym. Our Sauiour Christ sayth, happie is he that continueth vn∣to the ende. By the lawe of reason we ought so long to be the Lordes,Heb. 8.13 as the Lord is ours, but Christ Iesus is ours yesterday, and to day, and for euer, he findeth vs euery day, comforteth vs e∣uery day, sendeth to vs his grace euery
day, encreaseth his blessinges on the earth for vs euery day. Euen so euery day we should be faythfull and stedfast seruauntes vnto hym.Psal. 116.33 The Prophete Dauid desireth the Lord to teach hym the waye of his statutes, and he would kéepe it vnto the ende. Besides these benefites, knowledge,New birth Phil. 1. faith, and perseueraunce, which we ga∣ther out of the word of God, we fynde the regeneratiō, the new byrth or new shaping of our selues, for that in déede we were disfigured by reasō of Adams fall, and lost the shape of righteousnes, & true obedience, which now in Christ are accepted, and nowe we shoulde fa∣shion our selues not according to Adā in disobedience, & the lust of the flesh, but according to the children of God, and like our forerunner Christ Iesu, as Saint Paul saith.1. Pe. 1.23. Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Iesu. Of this newe birth the Apostle speaketh. Being borne a newe not of mortall séede, but of immortall, by the worde of GOD who lyueth and endureth for euer. O what great comforte
do the decayed members of Adam re∣ceyue by the word of God, when by reading or hearing it, they sée their restitution in Christ Iesu, how muche we are bound to almightie God for his worde. Peace.Also in the worde of God we finde peace, euen that peace which is conclu∣ded by God to vs ward. Which as the Apostle sayth.Ep. 2.13.14, Passeth all vnderstan∣ding, for as much as he was to stoute an enemie to be set agaynst vs, & great was our ouerthrowe where he was an aduersary, and there our Citie was like to be sackte, and we confounded in our dwellinges. Where the Lorde be∣sieged it, but nowe in Christ Iesus, ye which were once farre of, are made néere by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace which hath made of both one and hath broken the stop of the partiti∣on wall. And he hath commaunded his disciples that into what Cittie,Mat. 10.13. towne, or house so euer that is worthie that they came into, their peace shoulde cōe vpon it. This peace if it be well weied and well considered, what the value of it is, it shalbe estéemed the most preci∣ous
iewel that can be hid in our mind, and the swéetest ambassage that euer was sent vnto mankinde, for the great accusation that was layde agaynst vs, is nowe pacified, and God is at peace with vs. An other benefite we gather out of the word of God, which is consolation,Consolati∣on. that is to say, the comforte, ioye, and delight of the minde, and the lifting vp of the heart from the oppressing cares, the burden of sinne, and tormentes of this miserable lyfe. The Prophet Da∣uid being plunged in many miseries, and broyles, sayde. In the woorde of the Lorde will I reioyce, in the worde of the Lord will I comforte mée.Psal. 119.92 Also in the .119. Psalm. Except thy law had been my delight, I should nowe haue perished in mine afliction. And againe in the same Psalme .111. verse. Thy testimonies haue I taken as an heri∣tage for euer, for they are the ioy of my heart. And so vndoubtedly in our ex∣treame miserie, in our banishment, in our sicknes, and article of death, when affection is quite deade, and naturall appetite and digestion gone, yet the
worde of God being reade or hearde is a great comforte and consolation vnto the minde. The third meane in Christ to vanquish the force of sinne. 3. Meane. Prayer.The thirde meane to vanquish the force of sinne, is humble & hartie pray∣ers, not such as procéedeth a primori∣bus laboris. From the téeth forward, but suche as commeth from the very heart stringes, and féeling of the con∣science, which is the same that pear∣ceth the gates of heauen, and knock∣eth in the eares of the Lord, and wher∣as some haue called it the messenger betwéene God and man,Ang. see. 26 de tempore. Chris, sup. 22. Nath. some the keye of heauen, and some the strength of man. Yet for mine owne experience, I acknowledge this definition. Prayer is the acknowledging of sin, the feeling of the burthen of conscience, the ver∣tue of mās helples trust, & the appea∣ling to gods mercy. By the which I sée myne owne weakenesse. I confesse myne owne necessitie, and I flye vnto hym that is the onely helpe, but the manner howe we all shoulde flée vnto
hym, is, that as he is a spirite him selfe, so in spirite we should come vnto him, we vse not to haue a Clowne of the Countrie, or an Husbandmā to be our atturney in the common lawes of this realme, but a Lawyer, and such a one as may lawfully haue accesse to the pleading place, euen so in spirite and soule, which is the seate of knowledge, we shoulde come vnto the Lorde, for the soule is that part of man that séeth, knoweth, and affecteth the best.Psal. 25.1 Dauid when he prayed vnto the Lorde sayde, Vnto thee O Lorde will will I lyft vp my soule. and the Virgin Mary sayde. My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirite hath reioysed in God my sauiour. So that the spirite must labor, the conscience must feele, and the heart must flée vnto the almighty, and none other. A good example was shewed in Dauid whē he sayd.Psal. 86.4 Comfort the soule of thy seruaunt, for vnto thée (O Lord) do I lift vp vp my soule. Likewyse in an other place he sayth. O let me heare thy louing kindnesse be∣tymes in the morning, for in thee
is my trust, shewe thou me the way that I shoulde walke in, for I lift vp my soule vnto thée, and this is not to be vsed only for necessities sake, when any occasion or extremitie doth vrge vs, but continually as our Sauiour Christ doth warne vs,Luke. 21, 36 saying. Watche therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be accompted worthie to es∣cape all these thinges that shall come to passe.Rom. 12.12. Likewyse Saint Paul to the Romans sayth. Reioycing in hope, pa∣tient in tribulation, continuing in praier.Ephe. 6.18. Also in the .vi. to the Ephesians. Pray alwaies with all maner prayer, and supplication in the spirite, by rea∣son whereof, as long as we are in the fleshe, subiect to miserie and sinne, and as longe as Sathan and the flesh con∣tinueth alwaies to stirre, or prouoke vs to sin, so long should we be carefull, and diligent to continue in prayer. So that nowe to knowe what pray∣er is, is necessary and howe to vse it is more requisite, and what is got by it, and what effect it worketh. We may sée by good examples in many pla∣ces in scripture.
The effect of prayer. The Lorde sayth by the Prophete Dauid,Psal. 50.15. 1. Kin. 18.45 1. Sam. 1.20 Call vpon me in the dayes of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thée. Eliah prayed for rayne, and it was ob∣tayned. Hannah being barren, prayed vnto the Lorde for a child, and she con∣ceiued, and bare a sonne, whom she na∣med Samuell. Iehoahaz being deliue∣red into the hands of the Sirians, for his wickednesse, was by prayer deliue∣red agayne from the King of Aram. Salomon prayed,2. Kin. 13.4. and obtayned wise∣dome. When all Bethulia with the el∣ders therein, coulde by no meanes re∣mooue the siege of Holophernes, with his mightie host. By Iudithes prayer, her hand was strengthened, and obtai∣ned the victory.Nu. 16.14.18. Aaron in the time of Plague, pray∣ed for the people, and the Plague sea∣sed. When Iosua fought agayng the A∣mellekites, he did vanquish them, not so much by his owne might and policy, as by the continuall prayer of Mo∣ses,Exo. 12. who as long as he helde vp his handes vnto god, so long did Israel pre∣uaile, but whē he faynted & let downe
his hands, then did Ameleck, and his people preuaile. In so much that Aron and Hur, stayed vp his handes till the going downe of the sonne, otherwise they had béen put to flight & discōfited.Iosua. 10. Iosua caused the sonne to staye hys course one whole day. At the beséeging of Gibeon, when he made his prayer to almightie God. Thus we sée prayer to be a messen∣ger from man vnto God, and worketh most effectually in the faythfull and humble minded man,4. meane. To forsake the world & the flesh. as it hath appea∣red in these places, and in manye moe expressed in the holy scriptures. The fourth meane in Christ, to vanquish the force of sinne. An other meane for vs to vse that sinne may with lesse force take hold in vs, is to forsake the worlde, & the flesh, and the Diuell, according vnto our first promise made vnto God in Bap∣tisme, for so mightie are those enimies in mans inclination, that they remoue his good affections, and leade hym to a kinde of vayne delite & wicked affecti∣on, so mightie is this world, especially with his contentes, and the fleshe with
her desires, that hardly can a man looke vpward, whose eyes are fixed downeward, and scarce can a man bée of God, whose felicitie is set eyther in the flesh, or in the world. An innume∣rable offences it doth cause to be prouo∣ked, and many vertues and honest acti∣ons therby are quite extinguished, and because I haue spoken heretofore of Sathan and of the flesh, I will nowe onely speake of the world, as one of the mightiest enimies that man hath in these dayes, for by it the worde of God is little regarded, and for the loue of it the Sabbaoth is the more prophaned, by reason wherof iustice is corrupted, truth is banished, charitie is colde, pit∣tie is remoued from mens harts, frēd∣ship faynteth, and naturall affection is quit altered, agayne by it, blindnes ru∣leth, lyes are vsed, periury is suffered, honors are desired, offices are bought, blynd bayard is a good horse, & a slowe Iade is a good Gelding, by it manhoode is not regarded, chastitie is not estée∣med, worldly mariags, & vnfit matches are not gainsaid, vertue had in small price, trust is had in litle estimation,
and learning in no accompt, we sée that for the wordes sake, naturall loue be∣twixt the father and the childe is alte∣red. For the father that is a worldling accompteth not of that childe that is liberall, no although his liberalitie be godly and commendable bestowed on the poore, and howe many do preferre their children to learning for the mini∣strie sake, or to the law for iustice sake, or to any faculty for the same faculties sake, but rather because they shall liue, and beare a countenance in the world. On the other side, we sée the good na∣ture of the childe chaunged, for whome the father hath taken great paynes, trauelled much, watched often, to pro∣cure liuinges vnto hym, he thinketh to long the father doth lyue, euery daye wisheth his death, to haue his goodes and liuing, besides that, what going to lawe, and mortal hatred betwixt frēds of néerest kinrede, & all for the world. A freend chaungeth his frendship in respect of the worlde, and so long as the other hath, he is a freend, and when he hath nothing, then is he gone, and his frendship beginneth to dissemble, wise∣men,
tal men, honest men, trusty men, & such as haue good qualities not estéemed, if they haue no worldly shewe with all, many a one haue shut vp his compassion from the poore, putting on vngodlynesse, lying and swearing, that these things and these they haue giuen alredie, & di∣uers waies they are charged, which is very oftentimes an vntruth, many vn∣der the pretence of Christian profession, hid their wicked actions, and are lyke Cleophas they go with Christe but they knowe hym not. It is not without cause that Esdras sayde that the world was ful of vnrighteousnesse and wickednes,2. Esd, .27 and because of the sin and wickednesse of the world, the Lord hath Prophesied vnto the world a mighty curse in Esa the pro∣phet. And therefore as the Apostle sayth.Esa. 24.1 Loue not the world, neyther the thinges that are in the worlde, if any man loue the world, the loue of the father is not in hym, for all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of lyfe) is not of the father,1. Io. 2.15 6. but is of the world. There is an olde saying, Vide homo ne sic hereas, vt cum mundo pere∣as. Take héede man,Augustine. that thou sticke not
so to the world that thou perish with the world. The young man in the gospel had fulfilled all the commaundementes,Mat. 19.21. and was desirous of the kingdome of heauen, but when Christ bid hym go sell all that he had, and giue it to the poore, it touched his delight, wherefore Saint Barnard sayth. Durus est hic sermo. &c. This say∣ing séemeth very harde. Sel all that thou hast. &c. But yet it is a hard saying whē Christ shall say. Goe ye wicked into e∣uerlasting fire. The great loue of the worlde as I haue sayde, is the cause of much sinne, as couetousnesse, oppression, extortion, vsury, wresting of iustice, and putting poore men from their right, and their thirst is so great, that a great many will breake their bellies, then leaue or moderate their lust, they be lyke the flye in a Tarre-barrell, the more he stirres, the faster he is. They are not lyke the Dogges of Egipt, which running by the ryuer Nilus, and being thirsty, will but lappe, and begone for feare the Croco∣diles take them, but these worldlinges wil so long lap, tyl the Diuel hath wrap∣ped them vp, they force neyther for the feare of Sathan, nor the fauour of God.
Saint Iames sayth.Iames. 4.4 Who so euer wil be a fréend of the world, maketh hym selfe an enimie of God, we daylie sée how lyt∣tle mē wil be at charges for gods glory, in mayntaining preaching, or in bring∣ing vp schollers, nay, they will rather take away both preachers and schollers liuinges from them, then adde any thing to it. It is a pittiful matter to sée ye hard∣nes of the rusticke worldlinges, for some murmure at charitie, some grudge at substance, some strayne at the charges of souldiers, not looking into the commodi∣tie and ease of it, but thinke they haue a gut drawen out of their body, when they haue a pennie taken out of their purses. For these purposes, and I thinke they haue cause to grudge sometimes, because their charge is the greatest burthen, though they be the poorest iades. The .v. meane in Christ, to vanquish the force of sinne. When two valued thinges of like quantitie shalbe layde together that are of estimation, as gold and siluer,The sweet∣nes and esti∣mation of the second lyfe, will not euery man make choyse rather of the gold then of the siluer? Nay rather if som¦thing and nothing, or good and bad were
set together, would there not be an easie choyse: I make no lesse differēce betwixt heauen and earth, this lyfe, and the lyfe to come. For in the one there is misery, sorow afflictiō, tribulation, disdayne, con¦tempt, malice, slaunder, infamie, enuie, pouertie, nakednesse, sickenes, and death. In the other there is ioy, felicitie, accep∣tation, helth, sufficiencie, company amōg the whole felowship of heauen, & euer∣lasting lyfe,Psal. 84.1.2 touching the description of ye place of ioy, Dauid sayth. O howe amia∣ble are thy dwellinges thou Lorde of hostes, My soule hath a desire and long∣ing to enter into the courts of the Lord.Esa. 35 10 Likewise the Prophet Esay sayth. The redéemed of the Lord, shall come to Zion with prayse, and euerlasting ioye shalbe vpon their heades,Esa, 51.3. they shall obtayne ioy and gladnesse. The same Prophet also sayth. Surely the Lorde shall comforte Zion, he shal comfort al her desolations. and he shall make her desert like Eden, and her wildernes like the garden of the Lorde, ioye and gladnesse shalbe founde therein,Iohn. 16.22. prayse, and the voyce of singing. Our sauiour Christ hym selfe sayth. And ye nowe therefore are in sorrow, but I
wil sée you agayne, & your harts shall re∣ioyce, & your ioy shall no man take from you. O most comfortable reléefe, euen the very deade may be raysed vp to heare these great and comfortable ioyes yt are prouided for the Lordes beloued.1. Cor. 2.9. Which ioyes as. S. Paul sayeth, although our hartes cannot conceiue, yet let our harts beléeue those vnspeakeable ioyes, and al∣though the worthinesse and excellency of the place be such as we may dispayre of, in our owne iudgement, because of our great vnworthines, and the multitude of sinnes: yet if we beléeue that Christ is yt sonne of the liuing God, and that he hath payed the ransome for our sinnes, and yt he hath nayled our sinnes to his crosse, & also if we turne vnto him, loue him, and obey him with all our hart, with all our minde, and with all our soule, then will he assuredly bring vs vnto that place of consolation, as he sayeth in Iohn. And though I goe to prepare a place for you,Iohn, 14 3 I will come agayne and receyue you vn∣to my selfe, yt where I am, there might ye be also.Ma. 19.28.29. Also the Euangelist Mathewe sayth. And Iesus sayde vnto them, verely I say vnto you, that when the sonne of
man shal sit in the throne of his maiesty, ye which followed me in the regenerati∣on, shall sit also vpon the twelue thrones and iudge the twelue tribes of Israell. And who so euer shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or childrē, or lāds, for my names sake, he shall receiue an hundred folde more, and shall inherite euerlasting life. These wordes are not spoken by a mor∣tall man, who may lye, and deceyue, but they are spoken by ye very sonne of God hym selfe, whose word shal stand and en∣dure for euer, tyme shall not chaunge it, nor age shall not weare it out. And fur∣thermore forasmuch as the nature of mā is desirous to be resolued, whether wée shall know one another after this lyfe. I thought good to answere briefely, that as our state shalbe farre better, so shall also our knowledge be farre clearer, for in this world we are the more ignoraunt, & our sences deceyued by reasō of a corrup∣tion. But in the world to come, when we shalbe chaunged into an incorruptible es∣tate, then our sences shalbe much more clearer, and we shall know farre the bet∣ter, and let vs be thus perswaded, that
that worlde is a world of knowledge not of ignoraunce, as our sauiour Christ him selfe sayth vnto the chiefe priest yt would knowe whether he were Christ the sōne of God or no? He answeared, thou haste sayde it, neuerthelesse I say vnto you hereafter shall ye sée the sonne of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God,Mat. 26, 24. and comming in the cloudes of hea∣uen, which is to no purpose that they sée his sitting, and his comming, vnlesse they know it, and yet he speaketh this vnto ye wicked Iewes that did crucifie him, that they should sée it, & know it. Much more assuredly shall the righteous, sée him and knowe him. The Apostle Paul touching this matter sayth.1. Cor. 13.12. Nowe we sée through a glasse darkely, but then shal we sée face to face, Now I knowe in part, but then shall I know euen as I am knowen. So that now what remayneth more comfor∣table to the godly, and to them that thirst after Christ Iesu, then to go to a place after this life replenished with all ioye, comforte, consolation, and euerlasting lyfe, vnto ye which also our sauiour christ Iesus shall conducte vs by his mightie power, and in the which is all fulnes of
knowledge & perfection of a blessed state. The God of all blessing and comforte for his sonne Christ Iesus his sake, spéedely bring vs vnto that celestiall ioye, & pea∣ceable estate. To whome both with the holy ghost, be all glory, dominion and power, now and for euer. So be it. A Prayer. O Mercifull God, the king of all crea∣tures, and gouernour of all thinges, which of thy mercy and goodnes didest bring thy people out of Egipt from the bondage of Pharo, and didest conducte them through the red sea, into the com∣fortable land of Canaā, we beseech thee of thy accustomed mercy, deliuer vs frō the bondage of sinne, the tiranny of Sa∣than, and the persecution of the world, and conduct vs vnto the heauenly Ieru∣salem, the onely Canaan of our euerlast∣ing inheritaunce, where we may raigne in eternall felicitie, with thee and the sonne Iesus Christ, to whome, both with the holy Ghost be all honour and glory now and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
A Christian exercise for priuate Housholders. Question. WHat doo you chiefely pro∣fesse. Aunswere. Christianitie. Question. What is the badge of a Christian. Aunswere. Fayth. Question. VVhat is fayth. Aunswere. The verye same thing that cannot playnely be expressed in wordes, for it is aboue the reach of man, and therfore not vnder the reason of man. Howe be∣it, we may giue eche to other intelli∣gence of it by wordes out of the Scrip∣ture, and by the deedes of the godly, which is, that it is the séede of assured reconciliation, sowen by God in our heartes, for his sonne Iesus Christ his sake, to stirre vs to comfort, and to bind vs to obedience, to giue vs a true certi∣ficate in our consciences, that we are called againe to be the children of God,
and that we are ingraffed into the bo∣dy of his sonne Iesus Christ, and to be his members. So that although fayth be such a thing as is giuen om aboue, as a seale of gods mercy. Yet it is requi∣red here be low of vs as a talent of assu∣raunce and knowledge,Luke. 19. receiued of him to be increased by vs. Question. What doth fayth woorke in vs? Aunswere. The knowledge of God, the assu∣raunce of our redemption, and the con∣solation of conscience, through the holy Ghost. Question. Let me vnderstand at large your meaning by this. Aunswere. By the knowledge of God, we learne that he is our creator, our gouernour, and defender in all necessities & daun∣gers. And as he hath a speciall care day∣lie to prouide for our bodies, in giuing the plentifulnesse of the earth, so are we perswaded that he hath a more care for our soules, to preserue them to be hono∣rable
ornaments in his heauenly man∣sion. Furthermore, by this knowledge, we confesse hym to be the Almightie God, to whom all honour ought to be attributed, of thinges in heauen, and thinges in earth, whereby we abandon all Idolatrie and superstition, as meere inuention of man, and as perswasions of Sathan to delude men, and deface the knowledge of the high and mightie God, whom we worship, as our maker, and acknowledge to be our defendour, in all euilles, ghostly and bodyly. By the assuraunce of our redemp∣tion, we are perswaded that Christ Ie∣sus hath payed the ransome of our sins, and is the sufficient sacrifice to appease gods wrath, and hath for all the church fulfilled the whole lawe, hath vanqui∣shed death, sinne, and hel, and hath don all that for vs, which is required of vs, so that in hym, God is well pleased, and by hym the gats of heauen are opened, and euerlasting life is promised. By the consolation of the conscience through the holy Ghost. We receyue
an inward féeling, quickening, and stir∣ring vp of our mindes. That whereas the fleshe, sinne, death, and Sathan, do séeke dayly to suppresse vs, and burthen vs with manye miseries & infirmities, and leade vs euen vnto the gate of des∣peration, the holye Ghost doth certifie our spirite, that we are gods children, he will preserue vs, that the gates of hell shall not preuaile. Question. Why then, fayth is a knowledge and an as∣suraunce sent from God to vs, and no∣thing els? It requireth nothing in vs? Aunswere. Yes. It is a louing consent and em∣brasing of the same knowledge, and as∣suraunce on our part, yea and doth re∣quire in vs a framing of our selues a∣gréeable to all those dueties, and serui∣ces as are expressed in ye worde of God, and as do become good Christians. Question. VVhat benefite haue you by fayth. Aunswere. By fayth we are iustified, that is, we are accepted of God as righteous, be∣cause
of his sonne Iesus Christe, and shalbe restored agayne into his fauour, and haue the felowship of the blessed saintes, in euerlasting ioye, and blisse. Question. If then by faith we are iustified, we neede not good workes. Aunswere Fayth onely doth iustifie, but this woord (onelie) doth not exclude good works. For fayth is not a perfect faith, vnlesse it be of it selfe fuller of good workes, so that fayth, and the workes procéeding from that fayth, are not di∣uers but one. As a trée and his twiggs, or lymmes, is but (all) a trée, and such a fayth is accepted, and knowen to God. And yet many deceyue man. For the hippocrite may do good works, and yet haue no fayth, so likewise fayth it selfe, generally is not allowed. For the Di∣uelles beléeue, and yet they tremble, & that maketh their fayth to be nothing woorth. Wherefore we must neither iudge nor learne faith by imagination, vnlesse it procéede from the woorde of of God. For that fayth which is sowen
in our hearts by the holy Ghost, and watred by the same spirite, cannot stād as an idle and frtlesse trée, but brin∣geth foorth abundance of fruite, for wée may not thinke that the gyftes of the holy ghost, (wherof faith is the chiefest) are barren, but fruitfull. Question. Then by your comparison and meaning, vnlesse God water the tree which he him selfe hath graffed. There is no fruit, so that in him is all, and he is all in all, what neede heere anie thing to be requi∣red in vs? Aunswere. We are likened to good trées, not too badde, for our capacitie, not for a capti∣ousnes, for in vs there is affection, rea∣son, and will, which are not in trées, & therefore we should gouerne and direct our selues according vnto the rule of fayth. Euen as the ship-maister com∣ing with his vessell on the Seas; let∣teth not the ship to runne whether shée list, but looketh to the North starre, and is guided by the windes, and with all diligence and care auoydeth the sandes,
and the Rockes, and yet all this is in gods handes. And so we may reason in∣finitely. God doth sende vs abundance of Corne and victualls, but we receiue it, order it, and vse it, or els we maye starue. Question. What good workes be there best knowen, and seene in a perfect faith. Aunswere. Many, both spiritual & temporal, ye spiri∣tual works, are loue, prayer, patiēce in affliction, hearing and daylie exercising of gods holye woorde, vsing the Sacra∣ments, and such lyke. The temporall workes are generally to do good to all men, to giue Almes, to Fast, to pittie the poore, and helpe their necessities, to do equitie and iustice, to vse our selues honestly, faythfully, and orderly: in obe∣dience to our Prince, Maiestrates, Pa∣rents, and superiours. Question. Then if we haue fayth, we neede no more but to leaue of by the same. Aunswere. If we haue a good father, it is ynough,
but we may not leaue of by the same, for as the lyfe of man is not mayntay∣ned by one meale, and as he ought not afterward to be carelesse for his main∣tenaunce, but to haue a care for the day∣lie prouision thereof. Euen so should he alwayes mayntaine and strengthen fayth, that it might liue vnto lyfe, for in our corrupt nature, it may weaken and sterue, if the fleshe, or the enemies reigning in the flesh, shoulde haue the vpper hand. A spirituall thing cannot be maintayned with a carnall thing, al∣though it be mayntained in a carnall thing, fayth being a spirituall thing, may not be mayntayned, neyther with vs, nor of vs, but in vs, and that thing or thinges that are agréeable to the pro∣prietie of fayth, is the sufficient mayn∣teynaunce, our nature is not agréeable to the propertie of fayth, and therefore our nature cannot be the maintenance, and vnlesse this fayth be maynteyned, it will be ouergrowen, with the wéeds of the flesh, and so wil dye, and then we perish with it. Question.
What is the true maintenaunce of fayth. Aunswere. The exercising of gods holy word, con∣tinuall prayer, and vsing the Sacra∣mentes. Question. How shall we exercise gods worde? Aunswere. Not onely by reading it, but by hea∣ring learned preachers to expounde it, and not by hearing it expounded, but by vnderstanding it, whē it is expounded, and not onely by hearing and vnder∣standing it, but afterward by applying and vsing it vnto the honour of God, and our euerlasting comfort and refor∣mation. Question. How shall we praye? Aunswere. Not with the lipps, but with our hart, not ignorauntly,1. Co. 14.15 but with vnderstan∣ding, hauing alwayes in the very bot∣tome of our harte, the sorrofulnesse of our sinne, and the ioyfulnesse of Gods mercy, shaking of ye one with defiance, neuer to put it on agayne, and embra∣cing
the other with affiaunce, alwayes to holde it fast,Psal. 25.1.2. lifting vpp our hartes chéerefully, and beléeuing verely that the Lord doth heare vs when we call vnto hym, and wyll helpe vs. Question. vvhy should we pray continually. Aunswere. Luke. 21.36 Ro. 12.11.12 Eph. 6.18.19 Mat. 26.41. 1. Pet 5.8.Because we are so commaunded, and for that our enimies do cōtinually hang about vs, and tempt vs, and séeke euery day, and euery houre, to bring vs to de∣struction both of body and soule. Question. Should we pray but for our selues onelye, and for none els. Aunswere. Yes, we ought to pray one for an o∣ther,Acts. 7.60. Ex. 23.11. Acts. 12.5. Nu. 47.48. aswel our enimies as our fréends, that the vertue and force of the prayer which shall procéede from the mouth of the godly, may extend aswell vnto the vngodly for their amendement, as also to the oppressed, for their ease, and also to the néedefull for their helpe. Question. Ought we to pray for the deade.
Aunswere. No. Question. vvhye? Aunswere. Their estate is not such as néedeth our prayers, for God in his secret wise∣dome, hath elected whom he wyll, and his determination will he not alter, wherefore those which are appoynted to saluation, cannot be in better state by our praiers, and those that are damned, can we not redéeme by our praiers, vn∣lesse we will make our praiers of grea∣ter force then the blood of Christ. The Apostle would not haue vs to praye for them that be a liue;1. Io. 5.16. which do sinne vn∣to death, much lesse for them that be deade. For whose sinnes sake, they are rewarded with vnbaylable death, Question. But some in saying. Lord haue mercie vp∣pon him, or God take him to his mercie, when their freind is deade, do say that it hurteth not, but is a word of charitie. Aunswere. It hurteth, in that it continueth igno∣rance in the speaker, & giueth a boldnes
& yl example to ye weaker who in their ignorāce, taketh euery thing for a presi∣dent yt is agréeable to their owne mind, neyther can it be a woord of charity, be∣cause it is fruitlesse, for charitie ought to haue eyther pittie, remorse, ayde, or good assistant action, as féeding the hun∣grie, clothing the naked, assisting them that want, or such lyke, but this worde helpeth not, neyther assisteth any thyng at all, therefore no charitie. Question. How shall we vse the Sacraments? Aunswere. Reuerently, penitently, and faythful∣ly: according to gods institution set foorth in his holy word. Question. vvhat is a Sacrament? Aunswere. A Sacrament is the pledge of gods mercy and loue towards vs, which be∣ing receyued and vsed of vs reuerently and worthely, is as a comely and decent ornament, to fashion and shape vs to the forme of Christ Iesus. Question. How many Sacraments be there?
Aunswere. Two. Question. vvhich be they? Aunswere. Baptisme, and the Lords Supper. Question. vvhat is Baptisme? Aunswere. It is a signe of our newe byrth, and regeneration, that as we were concey∣ued and borne in sinne by Adam, and continue the course of our nature vnto the full age of man, so are we new sha∣ped in Christ, and continue to growe vnto the full age of Christ in righteous∣nesse and holynesse, not that the water in Baptisme hath the force to do it, but as with water we wash away the spots and filth of our garment, so by the holy Ghost, whose figure the water is, we washe our inwarde man from all the corruption of Adam, as appartayning to death, and put on the fresh and cleane garment of holinesse, and newe conuer∣sation, by the which as God hath made a perpetuall league and couenaunt of
his mercy, with man vnder the figure of Circumsition, which represented Baptisme, so is there a couenaunt in man, in the which is required fayth, newe obedience, and newe conuersati∣on, and the putting off, of the olde man, and putting on of the newe, which is shaped in true holinesse and righte∣ousnesse. Question. vvhat benefite haue we by Baptisme? Aunswere. First remission of our sinnes, second∣ly, the planting of gods grace and all good vertues in vs, thirdely, the vniting of vs into Christ, and fourthly our sal∣uation, as appeareth by these testimo∣nies of scripture following. Acts. 2.38.Amend your liues, and be Baptized e∣uery one of you, in the name of Iesus Christ, for the remission of sinnes, and ye shall receyue the gift of the holye Ghost. Rom. 5.2.By whome also wee haue accesse through fayth, vnto this grace where∣in we stand.
By one spirite are we all Baptized into one bodie,1. Cor. 12.13 whether we be Iewes or Grecians. Goe ye into all the worlde,Mark. 1.6.6 and preach the Gospell to euery creature, and he that shall beleeue and be Bap∣tized, shall be saued. Question. Is there nothing required of vs in bap∣tisme? Aunswere. Yes, fayth, for it is sayde, whosoeuer beléeueth and is baptized, shalbe saued, and agayne Saint Paul sayth. Knowe that a man is not iustified by the works of the lawe,Gal. 2.16. but by fayth in Iesus Christ. Question. vvhie then, are Infants Baptized in whom there can be no faith, because they haue not heard the word of God. Aunswere. It is necessary that Infants shoulde be Baptised assoone as they are borne, because at their first entrance, they shoulde take possession of the Lordes
couenaunte which he graunted to our forefathers, and to all the posteritie yet vnborne, when he gaue the signe of Circumsition,Deut. 29.13 which is the signe of Baptisme, vnder which league and co∣uenaunt, all Infantes are enclined, and as they dyd in circumsition, cir∣cumcise Infantes. So in Baptisme ought we to Baptize Infantes. To whome (as vnto the posteritie of our forefathers) this couenaunt extended. And as touching their fayth, Saint Paul calleth the same the seake of righ∣teousnesse of fayth,The fayth of Infants. which is as muche to say that the same signe of Circum∣sition which was a figure of Baptisme,Rom. 4.11. and nowe Baptisme it selfe, was that couenaunt wherein was sealed the righteousnesse of fayth, which in déede worketh from the beginning by grace. In the electe secretely, and in ryper yéeres apparauntly, otherwise it should be thought, that fayth sprang from our selues, whiche cannot be, least there myght followe an error, that we Iusti∣fie our selues, because fayth iustifieth. Howe be it in our selues we take the
better holde thereof, because it is the better strength of lyfe, like good children which estéeme the best thinges, and leaue the worst, and direct our selues according vnto the same. Besides all this in the innocencie of our infancie, we must beléeue touching the very ce∣remonie it selfe, that the beléeuing pa∣rent sanctifieth the childe, which is as much to say, that God hath blessed the posteritie of the faythfull, with fayth,1. Pet. 3.21. by giuing that figure of saluatiō, which to all the godly generation,1. Cor. 12.15 is called the figure of fayth, and if among them any be reprobated as some of the godly af∣firmeth, that is not vnto vs, but we must leaue it vnto God, who hath re∣serued his secret iudgemēt to him selfe, not acquainting man with it, and yet hath left Christ to be the swéete sa∣uour of life, to them that are saued,Rom. 3.22. and the sauour of death, vnto death. For as in the elected, Christ hym selfe, is for them faythfull, and by his fayth, God hath shewed his righteousnesse vnto all and vpon all, so is he vnto the reprobate and wicked, the sauour and taste of death, vnto death.
Question. Then Baptisme is nothing worth, but vnto the faithfull. Aunswere. No, for Symon the sorcerer was Bap∣tised,Acts. 8.21. but because he receiued not the ho∣ly Ghost (which was for lacke of fayth) he was damned Question. VVhat is the Lordes Supper? Aunswere. It is a gage of our resurrection, and a mainteynaunce of that lyfe which is begun in Baptisme, whereby we féeding by fayth, on the bodie and bloud of Christe, receyue a strong nourish∣ment to eternill lyfe. Or it is the sound ioyning togeather of the Churche into the body of Christ spiritually: whereby the head and members may be knit to∣geather in vnitie. And this supper of the Lorde cannot be a perfect Sacra∣ment, without two speciall meanes,
whereof the one is the holy Ghost wor∣king in vs effectually, and opening our mindes to sée the trueth, and féele the consolatiō of the participation of Christ his death and passion. The other is the godly affection in vs,Fayth can∣not be sepe¦rated from a godly af∣fection. Cal. institu. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Sect, 8. sanctified by the same spirite, and directed by a perfect fayth, which worketh thankefully, cha∣ritably, and penitently, stirring in vs a newe continuall conuersation, which maketh a worthie receyuing. And vn∣to this twoo meanes, is added a figure, which is breade and wine, and vnto the bread and wine are added similitudes, and then it is a full Sacrament. And the similituds, as diuers wryters saith, doo importe these operations, namely Nourishment, Vnitie, and Conuersa∣tion; whereof the first, which is Nou∣rishment is this, that as bread & wine do nourish and comforte our bodies, so the bodye and bloud of Christ, do nou∣rish and comfort our soules. The similitude of vnitie is, that as many séedes make one lofe, and many Grapes, one Cup of wine, so we being many, are vnited as one in Christ, and
Christ in vs, he is our head, and he our members. The thirde similitude, which is conuersatiō is this, that as the bread and wine are digested and turned into the substance of our bodies, so are wée one flesh in Christ, and Christ in vs, as the Apostle sayth. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part. Question. Haue you any more to say? Aunswere. That which is spoken, is spoken briefely,1. Cor. 12. how be it Christianly, where∣fore we conclude with this counsell, that for as much as the sacraments are ordayned of God, and their dignity con∣sisteth of the word of God, we ought to haue them in high estimation and reue∣rence. And for as much as we are pro∣moted (from a low) to an high estate, and estéemed greatly in the fauour of God, by vsing them, we ought with all carefulnesse and diligence, to embrace them. Which to do, the Lorde giue vs grace, for his sonne Christ his sake. A¦men.
A Prayer. VVE see and behold our owne es∣tate (O most merciful father) to be very miserable and lamentable, and we are compassed about with manye forcible enimies, which do seeke to make it worse and woorse, & to bring vs to the vtter ouerthrow of our selues, our soules and bodies, and to heape a curse vpon our posteritie. We are so se∣cure, that we are made as the fat Bulles of Basan, and as the wilde Bores of the wood, so that we fall into al filthie con¦uersation, lewde lust, abhominable sin, and diuellish desires, in so much that our conscience is putrified, our heartes are hardened, and our soules do faynt, thy word is not esteemed, thy messen∣gers not regarded, godly exercises neg∣lected, and we are like to perish, vnlesse thou O Lord come spedely with thine acquainted mercy, & help, for vaine is the help of mā, fained is the loue of mā, mā is quit gone frō man, truth is bani∣shed, & iniquitie rayneth, Iustice is per¦iured, and falsehood hath taken the regall seate. The septer of righteousnes is broken, & our honour is cast downe
to the ground, the gates of hell are o∣pened, and the floodes of Sathan hath ouerflowen the whole world. We feele no comforte in the societie of man, no ioye in the lyfe of nature, no recreation in the time, for the longer it continu∣eth, the more it is corrupted O Lorde, the very infernall hell flasheth and dis∣perseth his flames, in all the world, the hartes of men are taken prisoners, and their consciences seared. Let vs not O Lorde be partakers with the Infideles least we perish with them. Strengthen vs for our trust is in thee, and vnder the winges of thy mercy is our refuge, O the comforte of Iacob, & the stren∣gth of Israell, be mercifull vnto thy poore stocke of Iaphets, thou hast not lockte vp thy fauour in Canaan, but dispersed it in all the worlde. Let not the multitude of our sinnes drawe thy vengeaunce vnto our confusion, but let the plentifulnes of thy mercy, draw our speedie reconciliation vnto thee, stop our wilfull race O Lorde betimes least we runne headlong to confusion, beate downe the force of Sathan that
he may not haue a dominion ouer vs. And establish vs in thy trueth, that we may haue a comforte in thy woorde, and Sacrament, and ioyfully trauell to the meeting of thy sweete sonne Iesus Christ, to receyue with him the im∣mortall crowne of glory, in the euerlasting kingdome of hea∣uen. To the which we humbly beseech thee to send vs all. Amen. FINIS.
