5276 99846614 11595
The booke of freendeship of Mar∣cus Tullie Cicero. Anno dn̄i. 1550.
To the righte vertu∣ouse, and my singuler good Lady, Katharine duchesse of Suffolke. AS my prison∣ment and aduersi∣tee, most honora∣ble lady, was of their owne nature ioigned with great and sun∣drie miseries, so was the suffe∣rance of the same eased, by the chaunce of diuerse and many commoditees. For thereby founde I great soule profite, a little minde knowlage, some holow hertes, and a few feith∣full freendes. Wherby I tried prisonment of the body, to be
the libertee of spirite: aduersi∣tee of fortune: the touche stone of freendship, exempcion from the world, to be a contempt of vanitees: and in the ende qui∣etnes of mind, the occasion of study. And thus somewhat al∣tered, to auoide my olde idel∣nesse, to recompense my lost time, and to take profite of my calamitee, I gaue my selfe a∣mong other thynges to study and learne the Frenche tonge, hauyng both skilful prisoners to enstruct me, and therto plen∣ty of bookes to learne the lan∣guage. Among whiche as there were dyuerse notable, and for their sondry mattier woorthy readyng, so none liked me a∣boue this Tullius booke of
freendship, nor for the argu∣ment any with it to be compa∣red. The whole wherof whan I had perused, and saw the goodly rules, the naturall or∣der, and ciuile vse of freend∣ship, where before I but liked, than was I rauished, and in a certaine wonder with the hea∣then lernyng, which chiefly for it selfe I phantasied, and for my state I deemed good to be embraced, as a glasse to dis∣cerne my freendes in, and a ci∣uile rule to leade my life by. These causes moued me to thinke it mete for moe. Wher∣apon I (as I coulde) transla∣ted it, and though not so liue∣ly, nor yet so aptly, as some wold loke for, and many culd
doe, yet I trust thei will rather beare with my good will, then rebuke my boldnes, for that it proceded more of a good mind than of any presumpcion of knowlage: and so my enter∣prise is to be enterpreted rather by freendes, as a treatise of frendship, then by lerned clerk{is} in an argumēt of translacion. Well, how so euer it shalbe li∣ked of the learned, I hope it shalbe allowed of the vnlati∣ned. Whose capacitees by my owne I cōsider, and for lacke of a fine and flowyng stile, I haue vsed the plaine and com∣mon speache. and to thende the sence might not be chaunged, nor the goodnes of the matter by shift of tounges, muche mi∣nished,
I caused it to be con∣ferred with the latine auctor, and so by the knowen wel ler∣ned to be corrected: after whose handelyng me thought a new spirite and life was geuen it, and many partes semed as it were with a new cote araied, aswell for the orderly placyng and eloquently changeyng of some woordes, as also for the plainly openyng and learned∣ly amending of the sence, whi∣che in the Freenche translaci∣on was somewhat darkened, and by me for lacke of know∣lage in many places missed. ¶Thus whan the thing was perfected, and I behelde the fame of the auctor, the nature of the treatise, and the clere∣nesse
of his teachyng, I coulde not iudge to whom I shoulde rather offre it, than vnto your grace, whom the freendelesse dayly find their defence, and the helples repaire to as a re∣fuge. This did I not to teache you, but to let you see in lear∣nyng auncient, that you haue by nature vsed: nor to warne you of ought you lacked, but to sette forth your perfection: the proufe wherof the deade might witnesse, and their of∣spring hath iust cause to know¦lage it, as mo can record it, then can requite it. And suche your freendly stedfastnesse de∣clared to the deade, doth asser∣taine vs of your stedfast frend¦linesse toward the liuyng, whi∣che
many haue felt, and di∣uerse doe proue, and few can want. Of which numbre your grace hath made me one, that neyther leaste nor seldomest, haue tasted of your benefites, both in my trouble and also li∣bertee. Wherfore your grace in my sight is of all other most worthy this smal fruite of my prisons labour, as a fitte pa∣tronesse to the honour of such a worke, and a trew example, in whom it is fulfilled. Thus the lord of trueth preserue you in freendship, encrease your frendes, and defend you from enemies. Iohn Harryngton.
To the reder. THe wise man ī his prourbes saieth: A frende loueth at all tymes, that is, as well in the tyme of aduersitee as prosperitee. And agayne he saith, The man that is apt to amitee, and that hath bent his herte to entre∣teyne freendship, dooeth more loue, & faster sticke to his frēd, than one brother to an other. And it is writen in the Eccle∣siasicus: Doo not become a foe of a frend. For suche a mā obteyneth an ill name, blame∣worthy and reprochefull, euen like as the double tonged is in∣famous. And againe it is there writen, A feithfull and a trusy
frende is a stronge garrison: he that atteyneth suche one, fyn∣deth a precious treasure. To a sure and trusy frend (saith he) no price is equall. For an assu∣red freende is the medicine of life: Suche a one shall thei ob∣teyne, that reuerently honoure the lorde. He that honoureh the lorde, dooeth stablishe and make sure this freendship for euē as an other hym selfe shall his frende bee to hym. Forsake not thyne olde freende: for thy new shall not be equall vnto him. A new frende is like vnto must or new wyne: the whiche at lengthe thou shalt drynke with pleasure. A frende (he saith) in prospertee can not bee iudged: nor the ennemie in
aduersites will bee hid. In the tyme of mans prosperitee his ennemies are sory: and in ad∣uersitee his freende forsaketh hym. Shew thy self trusty and sure to thy frende a poore mā, that thou maiest with hym re∣ioyce in prosperitee: Obserue fidelitee to hym in tyme of ca∣lamitee, that thou maiest toge∣ther with hym come into his possession. See (saith he) that thou loue thy frende: and shew thy selfe sure and trusty vnto hym: And if thou babble a∣brode his secretes, thou losest hym. Thus whan I remēbre, in howe many places of holy scripture, preceptes are geuen cōcernyng frendes and frend∣ship: I dooe not a littell muse
and meruaile at the diuine gefte, that the most noble and excellent lerned man, the most worthy Romayne Mar. Tul. Cicero had: who in this his booke of Amitee here after fo∣lowyng, hath so eloquently, so liuely, so pithyly, and so plainely descriued and set out, what Amitee is, how to choose a frende, how muche is to bee doone for a frēde, how frendes shuld ponder requestes, what maner of menne are mete for frendship, the propretee of true frendship, the principall cause of freendship, the chief poynct in frendship, the commoditees of frēdship, what thyng trieth frendes, the bondes of loue in frendship, the dissimulacion in
frendship, feigned freendship, the profite of freendeship, the fruite of frendship, the waies to proue freendes, what is to bee attributed to true frendes, what a freende ought to es∣chew, and so foorth the ende of freendeship, that I thynke there is no man, but that he maie learne out of the saide booke, all the poynctes neede∣full for hym, that will entre into, and cōtinue in that most happy & blissefull life of true frendship: wherby he maie so order and gouerne hym selfe, that at length he maie atteyne to that glorious name, to bee called a sure & a trusty frende. And certaynely no man can clyme so high ( by the descrip∣cion
of Tully) but he that is both good and wise, and that liueth vertuousely. And so, af∣ter the determinacion of Ci∣cero, I maie conclude, that he that is a feithfull, a sure, and a trusty freende, muste needes bee a good, a wise, and a vertu∣ous man.
The booke of freendship of Marcus Tullie Cicero. QUint{us} Mu∣tius Scae∣uola Augur was wont to tell redi∣ly and plea¦santlie ma∣ny thynges o Caius Laelius his father in law,Laelius, father in lawe to Scaeuola the Augur and to Fnie and not to sticke in al his kynde of comunicacion to call him wise. But I was so put to Scaeuola by my father, whan I came to mans state, that as nigh as I wel could or might, I shoulde neuer goe from the olde mans sleue. And therfore
I bare away many thynges wysely reasoned, and many thinges briefly and handsom∣ly told, and sought by his wis∣dome to growe better learned. When he was dead, I gat me to P. Scaeuola, whom alone I dare boldly name the chefest of our citee for witte & know∣lage, but an other time we shal speake of him, now I retourn to Scaeuola Augur. As he of∣ten talked of sundrie matters, so I remembre, sittyng at home in his half round chayre (as his maner was) when I and very fewe his familiars were presente, he fell into that talke, which then was almost common in many mens mou∣thes. For you remembre (as
I thinke) Atticus (and so mu∣che the rather,Pom. At∣ticus.) because you haunted Sulpitius companie very muche. What a wonder of lamentacion of men there was, when he beyng Tribune of the people,P. Sulpi∣tius Tri∣bune. Q. Pōpeius Consull. disagreed from Q. Pompeius with a deadlie foode, who then was Consul, with whom very friendly and louynglie he had liued. Ther∣fore at that tyme Scaeuola, when he fell in a rehersal ther∣of, declared vnto vs the talke that Laelius had vpon friend∣ship with hym and his other sonne in lawe C. Fannius, the sonne of Marcus, shortely after Affricanes death. The summe of whiche disputacion I bare awaie, and haue set it
foorth in this booke after my owne phantasie. For I haue brought in as it wee thēselfes speakyng, to the entent, these woordes {quod} I, and {quod} he, should not be to oftē rehersed. And the rather I dyd it, that the talke might seme of two that were present before yu. For where as often times ye wer in hand with me Atticus, that I shulde write somwhat vpon freend∣shippe, me thought it a thyng both meete for the knowlage of al men, aud also for our fa∣miliaritee. And therfore at your request I dyd it, not vn∣willynglie, that I might pro∣fit many But as in my booke called Cato Maior, the . whiche is witte to you of olde age. I
haue brought in Cato the olde man reasonyng, for that there seemd no meter man to speke of age then he, who had been very long aged, and aboue o∣thers in that his age, had flo∣rished: so for as muche as we haue vnderstand by our elders the notable acquaintaunr be∣twene C. Laelius and P. Sci∣pio,The frēd∣shippe be∣twne C. Laelius & Scipio. I haue thought Laelius a vry fitte person, to reason the self same thinges of frēdship, which my maister Scaeuola remembred, was often dispu∣ted by hym And certes ths kynd of talke, st out with the auctoritee of acient men,The au∣ctoritee of auncient nobl mē. and the same famous, seemeth I wot not howe to haue in it a more weightinesse and graui∣tee.
And therfore I my self rea∣dyng mine own workes, som∣time am in that moode, that me thinketh Cato speketh and not I. But as then age with age did speake of age, so now to his freend the freendly wri∣teth of frendship. Then spake Cato at those dayes, in a ma∣ner the eldest and wisest: Now speketh Laelius of frendship, a man both wyse (for so was he counted) and for the prayse of freendship the chiefest. I woulde for a whyle you mynded not me, but suppose that Laelius him self speaketh. C. Faunius, and Q. Mu∣tius cometh to their father in lawe after Affricanes death, the talke ryseth on them. Lae∣lius
maketh answere. Whose disputacion is whole of frend¦ship, whiche your selfe (when you reade) shall vnderstand. Caius Fannius. FAnn. These thynges be true O Laeli, for neyther better, neither nobler hath there been any then Affri∣canus. But you muste thinke all men haue cast their eyes vpon you, and you onely they call & iudge wyse. This name was geuen not longe sence to M. Cato. We knowe also, that L. Acilius in our father tyme was named wyse.L. Aciliu. But either of them in a sher maner. Acili{us}, because he was though connyng in the Ciuile lawe: Cato, because he had experi∣ence
of may thinges, and ma∣ny of his dooynges, bothe in counsayle in the Senate, and in the iudgement place of Iu∣stice, were reported to be fore∣seen wisely, doen stoutly, and aunswered wittilie: atteigned now in his olde ag (as halfe a surname) to be called Cato the wyse. But you in an other knde, not only by nature and condicions, but alo by studie and knowlage, tey accompte wyse. Nether after the comon peoples reckenyng, but as the learned sorte are wonte to cal one wy, that is suche a one as in al the rest of Grece is not the lyke. For those, whiche na∣rowlie searche out these mat∣ters, doe not reken them in the
numbre of wyse men, which be called the seuē sages of Grece.Suē sa∣gs of Grece. In dede one we haue heard of, that was at Athenes, and the ame Apolloes oracle adiud∣d the wysest.Socrates iudged most wyse by Apollo This wisdome en thinke in you, that you accompt all your richesse lod∣ged within you, and that all worldlie happes be infriours to vertue. And for this cause (I beleue) they enquire of me, and of Scaeuola here aso, howe you beare Affricanes deathe, and so muche the ra∣ther, because these last non as, when we came into D. Brut{us} orchardes the Augur, (as the vsage is) to reason vpon mat∣ters, you wer not presēt there, who was woonte moste dili∣gently
to attend both that day and businesse. Scae. Many truely aske, Caius Laelie, as Faunius saieth. But I make this aunswere, that I per∣eiue, you beare your sorowe sobrelie, whiche you take for so noble and freendly a man, and that you oulde not choose, but be somwhat trou∣bled, and otherwyse of your owne naturall kindenesse ye could not be. And as to that you were not presente at our meetyng these nones, I saied, sickenesse was the cause, and not sorowe. Lae. Well saied Scaeuola and truely: for ney∣ther oughte I for any losse to be withdrawen from this du∣tie, whiche whyle I was in
healthe, I alwaies perfour∣med: neythr dooe I thynke, that it can happen by any oc∣casion, that there shoulde be anie slackenesse of duitie in a constant manne. But you Fannie,Constant men. dooe lyke a freende, that you tell me, the worlde ascribeth so muche vnto me, as neyther I acknowelage, neyther desire: but yet as me seemeth, you iudge not true∣lye of Cato: for eyther no manne there is (as in deede I rather beleue) or if anie bee, Cato it is that is wyse. Ah howe (to leaue the reste vn∣spoken) dyd he take the death of his sonne?Cato er∣keded wise if a∣ny be wise. I can remem∣bre Paulus, and saw Caius. But these may not be cōpared
to Cato, the great and the no∣ble. Wherfore beware, howe you prefer any before Cato, no not hym, whom Apollo (as you saied) adiudged the wy∣sest. for of this man his dedes, and of that man his saiynges be cōmended.Socrates for his saiynges, Cato for his dedes cōmended But concernyng my selfe (to answere now you bothe) reaken thus. If I denie to be grieud with the losse of Scipio, lette the wyse iudge, howe well it were dooen: but certes lye I shoulde, for I am troubled, that I am nowe bi∣reft of such a freend as I sup∣pose neuer none shalbe, and as I can approue,Scipio cō¦mnded. neuer none hath been. But I nede no phi∣sicke, I can comforte my selfe, and chiefly with this kynde of
comfort, that I am not in that errour, wherwith moste men are woont to be accombred, at the departing of their frendes. For I think that Scipio hath no hurte, mine it is, if any be. And for a man to be greuously troubled for his owne losses, it is selfly loue, and not frend∣ly loue.Selfe loue, But who can denie, that Scipio is not happi? for except he woulde haue wyshed euer lyfe, (whiche was farthest out of his thought) what hath he not obteined, that was mte for a man to wishe? who in the beginnyng of this mannes state, with vnheard vertues, exceaded the great hope the ci∣tesins conceiued of him, beyng  chylde, who neuer sued for
the Consulship,Scipio twise con∣sull. and yet was twise made Consull: first be∣fore tyme, beeyng vnder age: secondlie in tyme by course, and for the common wealthe almost to late: who by destroi∣yng two cities, moste egar e∣nemies to this Empire, clerely brake vp not onely warres, that were present, but warres whiche were to come. What should I speake of his gentle maners, his naturall dutie to∣wardes his mother, his libera¦ltie towardes his sisters, his goodnesse towardes his ser∣uant{is}, his vprightnes towar∣des all men?All Rome bewailed Scipioes death. All these be right wel knowen to you. But how deare he was to the citee, it was declared by the mourning
at his funeralles. What then could hauyng of a fewe yeres moe, haue profited hym? for old age, although it be no hea∣uie burden (as I remēbre Ca∣to did the yere before his death discourse with me and Scip.Olde age.) yet it taketh away that freshe youth, wherin thē Scip. was. Wherfore his life was suche, either by fortune, or by glorie, as nothyng colde bee added more. But his quicke depar∣ture, toke awaie the greefe of death, of the which sort of di∣yng, it is hard to speake any certaintee. What menne su∣specte, you see. Neuerthe∣lesse, this a manne maie safe∣ly saie, that amongest ma∣ny his daies, whiche he had
seen in his lyfe tyme most faire and ioyefull, that daie was the noblest to P. Scipio,Howe ho∣norably Sci. was brought from the Snate house. whē the Senate house beyng bro∣ken vp, he was brought home again at nyghte, by the eldest Senatoures, by the league freendes of the Romains, and also by the Latines, the daie beefore he departed this lyfe, that from so high a slep of ho∣nour, he might seme rather to haue mounted to God, then to haue gone doune to hell.Immorta¦litee of the soule. For I can in no wyse agree with them, whiche began of late to reason thus, that the soule di∣eth with the body, and al thin∣ges end by deah. I waie more th auctoritee of olde writers, and of our elders, which made
so godly lawes for the deade. as in mine opinion they wold neuer haue dooen,The part of Italie nowe cal∣led Cala∣bria in the kyngdome of aples. if they had thought there hadde nothyng concerned them. And their au∣ctoritee also I more regarde, whiche were sometyme here in this land, and instructed great Grece with their good rules and lessons, whiche nowe is destroyed, and at that tyme flourisshed. And his also I esteeme more, whiche by Ap∣polloes oracle was adiudged the wisest,Socra who did not affirm somtym one thyng, and som∣tyme an other, as in many ca∣ses is vsed, but alwaies helde one,Mannes soult. that mans sowle was an heauenlie thyng: and that the same, when it departed from
the bodie, had a waie to re∣tourne to heauen very spedie, for euery good and iuste man. Whiche self same thyng Sci∣pio also thought, who seemed as it were to haue a forefeling of the thyng, a verie fewe dai∣es before his death, when both Philus and Manilius beyng present,Phi. Ma∣nilius. and others moe: yea, and you your selfe Scaeuola, comoned with me, he reasoned three whole dayes vpon a co∣mon wealth, the latter ende of the whiche disputacion, was of the euerlastyng lyfe of the soule, which (he said) he heard of Affricanus in his slepe by a vision. If that be so, that eue∣ry good mans soule doth easi∣ly make his flight to heauē, as
out of prisō and cheines of the bodie, whom can we iudge to haue had an easier passage to God, then Scipio? Wherfore to lament this his good end, I feare were rather enuio{us} then freendly. And on thother side, if I were afeard of this, that the soule died with the bodie, and that there remained ney∣ther felyng of weale nor woe: then as in deathe there is no goodnes, so neither is there e∣uelnesse. For whan a mans fe∣ling is once gon, he is made as though he had neuer ben born: yet that Sci. was begot, both we dooe reioyse, and the citee (while it stand{is},) ought to be glad. Wherfore, as I said a∣fore, he is verie well, but with
me it is somwhat wurse, whō reason rathr woulde, as I came beefore hym into this worlde, so I should haue gone before him out of this life: but yet I take such fruite of the re∣membraunce of our frendship, that I thinke I lyued happi∣lie, that with Scipio I ledde my lyfe, with whom I had a ioynct care, for the common wealthe, and for our priuate causes, with whom bothe in peace and warre I tooke lyke parte: yea, and we agreed e∣uermore in loue, mynde, pour∣pose, and opinion, in whiche thyng the whole pithe of frēd∣ship standeth.Freende∣shp. Therfore this fame of wysdom, which Fan∣nius euen nowe rehearsed, do∣eth
not so greatly delighte me, (specially beyng false) as tha I trust there shalbe an euerla∣styng memorie of our freend∣ship: and the same the rather is an heartiye vnto me, be∣cause that in so many hundred yeares, as haue passed, there haue he founde skace three or owre couples of freendes,Scase thre or fowre co¦ples of freende a∣monge the whiche sorte I see there is hope, that Scipioes and Laelius frendship shall be knowen to our of pring. Fan. Uerely Laelie, this can not otherwyse be chosen. But seeyng you haue made menci∣on of frendship, and we be al∣so at leasure, you shall dooe a great pleasure to me, and no lesse I trust to Saeuola, if as
ye are wont of other matters, when they are demaunded of you, you wil so nowe dispute of frendship, what you thinke thereof, whom you counte a freende, and what good rules you geue theron. Scaeuo. It pleseth me wel, and as I was about to be in hand with you for it, Fannius did forespeke me. Wherfore you shall excea∣dynglie pleasure bothe vs. Lael. And I surelie thynke it no payne, if I thought my self well able, for both the matter seemes goodlie, and we (as Fannius alledged) be at lea∣sure. But who am I? or what eloquence is in me? This is the facion of lerned men, and that amonge the Greekes, to
haue a matter proponed vnto theim, whereon they shoulde reason, although out of hand. It is a buisie peece of worke, and needeth no small exercise. Wherefore my iudgement is, you shoulde seake the poyn∣ctes to be disputed of freende∣ship, of those, whiche professe this manner of reasonyng. As for me,Frēdeship to be pre∣ferred a∣boue all thyng. I can no more but ex∣horte you, to sette freendship beefore all kynde of worldely thynges. For nothyng is so agreable to nature, nor so fitte for prosperitee or aduer∣sitee.Fēdeship onely be∣twene good men But firste and fore∣most this I thinke, that frend∣shippe can bee but in good men. ¶Neyther do I so search the
matter to the quicke, as they whiche reason this geare more subtillie, although perchaunce ruely, and yet little to any co∣mon profite. For they denie, that any is good, but he bee wyse. And be it so hardily Yet suche a thyng call they hat wysedome, as neuer earthely man atteigned hytherto. But we must hope for suche thyn∣ges as bee in vre, and in our daiely life, and not for those thynges, whiche be feignd or wished aftr. I wil neuer saie, that Caius Fabritius, Mar. Curius,C. Fab. Mar Cu. . Coruu¦canus. and Titus Cornuca∣nus, whom our lders demed wyse, were after these mennes rule accompted wyse. Wher∣fore let them keepe to them sel∣ues
their name of wisedome, bothe enuied and vnknowen, so thei cōfesse these afore were good men: but yet that wyll not they graunt, for thy will denie, that that can bee saied but by them that be wyse. Let vs goe then euen plainlie to woorke lyke a packe staffe, as the prourbe is. They whiche behaue themslues,Prouerb and doe so liue, that their faieth, their ho∣nestee, their vprightnesse and liberalitee is allowed, and in them neither couetousnesse, neither trecherie, neither rash∣nesse is seene to be: and besyde this, be of great constancie, as they wer, whom before we na∣med: all these lyke as they bee taken for good men,Good men o we
thinke them worthie to be cal∣led, who folow nature, the best guide of welliuyng, so far as mans power can leade them. For this me thinkth I do spie, that we are so borne together, as there shoulde be among all men a certain felowship.Thorder of freend∣ship. And the greater the felowship shuld be, th nearer that euerie one cometh to an other. And ther∣fore citsins be derer to vs thē forrains, and kinsfolke nerer then frennefolke: for towarde these Nature her selfe hathe bredde a frendelinesse: but in this there is not suretee y∣nough. for in this point frēd∣shippe passeth kinred, in that kinred maie be without good will: but frendship in no wise
can lacke it. For take awaie good wil, and frēdship lseth, but cosinage keepeth styll his name. But how great the ver∣tue of frendship is, it may here of best be vnderstand, that of innumerable compaignies of mankinde, whiche nature her selfe hath knitte together, it is a thyng drawen and broughte into such a streight, that frēd∣ship is alwais ioigned either betweene twoo, orels betwene fewe.What a∣mitee is. For frendshippe is no∣thyng els, but a perfect agre∣ment with good will and true loue in al kind of good thing{is} and godlie. And I knowe not whether any better thyng hath been geuen of GOD vnto men, wisedome excepted, then
this same freendship. Some set richesse before, some health, othrs power, and othes ho∣nour, many also pleasures.Plesure. But certes this last is for bea∣stes, and those other vpper∣more be fading and vncertein, and bee not so muche within the compasse of ou wysdome, as within the ficklenes of for∣tune. But they, whiche place our cheefest weale in vertue, doe therin very well: and yet this same vertue it is, whiche bothe engendreth and vphol∣deth freendship.No frend∣ship with∣out vr∣tue. Neither maie freendship by any meanes bee without vertue. Nowe let vs st out, what is vrtue, ater the maner of our liuyng, and facion of our talke: and let vs
not measure it as certeine vn∣learned mn dooe, by the state∣linesse of the woordes. And let vs reken thm good mn, whi∣che are so counted, that is to saie, the Paules, the Catoes, the Caians, the Scipiōs, and Philons. These were conten∣ted with this common kind of lyfe. And as for suche, whiche can not any where be founde, let vs leaue theim of.Commo∣ditees of frendship. There∣fore among suche sort of men, freendship hath so many com∣moditees, as I can scacely wel expresse. First who can be vi∣ta vitalis (to vse Ennius ter∣mes) whiche in english is, li∣uyng in this lyfe, that liueth not in mutual loue with some freend? What sweeter thyng
can there be, than to haue one, with whō thou darest so bold∣ly talke all mattiers, as with thine owne selfe: how shoulde the profit of welfare, and pro∣speritee be so great, if you had not some, which should reioise so muche therat as your self? But as for euil plight and ad¦uersitee, it were harde to beare them without such an one, as wold beare the same more gre∣uously than your self. To con∣clude, all other thynges, that are desired, eache one to eache man serueth the tourne, as ri∣chesse for vse, wealth for wor∣ship, honoure for prase, plea∣sure for delite, health to want grefe, and to dooe the office of the bodie. Freendship conteig∣neth
more thyng{is} in it. Whi∣ther so euer you tourne, it is at hand, it will be kept out of no place, it is nuer vnseasona∣ble, nor neuer troublo{us}.Frēdeship is as neces¦sary as the element{is}. Ther∣fore neither water, nor fier, ne aire, as thei say, do we in more places vse, then this frēdship And now doe I not speake of the common or meane sorte of freendship (which yet deliteth and proiteth) but of the true and perfecte, as theirs was, whiche beeyng fewe are soone tolde. For frendship maketh welfare the goodlier, and euill fare, by sonderyng and par∣tyng of greefes, the lighter. And where freendshippe hath in it manie and greate com∣moditees, yet this exceadeth
al the rest, that she forecōfortes vs, with the good hope that is to come. She suffreth mens hertes neither to eint, nor yet to fall: but he that beholdeth his friend, doeth as it wer be∣hold a certain patterne of him selfe.The excel∣lencie of mitie. Wherfore in frendship the absent be present, the nedie neuer lacke, the sicke thyncke them selues whole, and that which is hardest to be spoken, the dead neuer dye. So great honour, remembraunce, and desire breedeth in thē towarde their freendes. By reason wherof their dethes be thought happie, and the others lifes be muche preisid. But if you shoulde take out of the worlde the knot of frendship,Want of frendship. nither
can there any house,wante of freēdship. neither a∣ny citie be able to continue, no not the tillage of the land can endure. And if this can not be vnderstand herebi, yet of strife and debate it maie wel be per∣ceiued, howe great the power of concorde and freendship is. For what howse so stedie, or what citie stand{is} so faste, but thorough hatered aud strife,Hatred & strife. it may be vtterlie ouerthrowen? Whervpon, how much good∣nesse resteth in freendshippe, it maie be easily iudged. Men report,Empdo∣cies. that a certein Agrigen∣tine, beeyng a learned manne, wrote in Greke verses, that al thyng{is}, hauyng their beyng in the world and mouyng, be by freendship kept togither, and
by debate skattered: and this all menne bothe perceiue, and proue in very deede. And ther∣fore if at any tyme, there hath appeared, any kynde parte of one freend toward an other, in aduenturynge of parell, or els ī part waryng the same, what is he that would not set it out with great preyses? What a great show was there, the last daie all the place ouer, at the newe made plaie of mine olde hoste and freend M. Pacuui∣us,M. Pacu¦ius tra∣gdy Ami∣tee of Ore¦stes and Pylades. when the kynge, not kno∣wing whether of the two was Orestes, Pylades answered, that he it was, that was Ore∣stes, because he woulde haue been put to death for him: and Orestes again, that was so in
deede, auowed stiffely, that he it was that was Orestes. The herers that stode aboute, prei∣sed it with clapping their han∣des, beyng but a matter feig∣ned. What thinke we then thei would haue doen in a true matter? Here nature her selfe did soone bewraie her own er∣nestenesse, when these men iud∣ged the same to be well dooen in another, whiche they could not doe them selfes. And thus farre me seemeth, I haue tho∣roughly spokē what I thynke of freendshippe. if there be any more thyng{is}, as A beleue there be many, aske it of them if ye thinke good, whiche dispute these kynd of matters. Fan. But we rather couet to heare
t of you, although for my part I oft tymes haue soughte it at their hand{is}, and haue hearde theim very wyllynglie: but we looke for an other manner of veine in your talke. Scae. You woulde the sooner haue saied so Fannie, if you had of late been present in Scipioes orcharde, when the reasonyng was concernyng a common wealth, and had heard, what a defender of iustice be was at that day, against a curiouse oracion that Philus made. Fan. hat surely was an ea∣sie matter for the iust to defend iustice. Scae. And what saie you by freendship? shall it not be lyke easie for him to doe the same therein, who hath gained
great honour, for keepyng the same with all trustinesse, sted∣fastnesse, and vprightnesse. Lael. Naie, this is as though ye would force me to speake. But what skilleth it, by what meanes you driue me to it, I take it truely, that ye force me. Yet to withstande the earnest desires of a mans freendes, es∣pecially in an honeste matter, partlie it is an harde thyng to doe, and partly not well stan∣dyng with reason. Wherfore many times thinkyng of frend shippe, this was woont to be chiefly weighed of me, whether for staie and for neede, menne ought to seeke for frēdship, to thentent that in doyng and ta∣kyng of pleasures, one mighte
receiue of another,Wherfore freendes are sought that he told not come to by him selfe, and after that sorte mighte requite others: and whether this were the very propertee of frēdship, or elles there were some other cause more ancient, more com∣mendable, and more proceding of nature. For loue, wherof freendly loue and freendshippe commeth, is the chiefe cause, to fasten good willes together. Commoditees often times al∣so bee gotten at their handes,Loue. whiche with flatteryng fren∣ship be soughte vpon, and as tyme serueth, be attended vpō. But in frendshippe there is no faining, there is no dissēbling, and what so euer is in it, the same is true and vnforced.
Wherefore I am of opinion, that freendship toke his begin∣nyng rather by nature,Natural freēdship thē for any helpe of staie, and rather by the castyng of ones phanta¦sie toward thother, with a cer∣tein felyng of loue, then by the thinkyng, howe muche profite mighte ensue of suche a thyng. The which surely what kinde of thyng it is, maie wel be vn∣derstande, euen in certeine bea∣stes, whiche so tenderlie loue their yong ones for a certayne space, and be so loued of them again, that their nature soone appeareth: whiche thyng in man is muche more euident. Firste of the loue that is bee∣twene the children & parentes, whiche can not possibly with∣out
some heinouse mischife be withdrawen. And secondarily when a lyke bearyng of loue appeareth, as if we haue foūd any body, with whose maners and nature we agree, because we thinke we see in theim as it were a certeine sparke of ho∣nestie and vertue. For no∣thyng is better beloued than vertue,Uertue. nor nothyng more al∣lureth men to cast fauour, in so muche, that for vertue and honestie we fauour, after a cer¦teine sorte euen those, whom we neuer sawe in our life. For who is it, that doeth not vse remembraunce of Caius Fa∣britius, or Marcus Curius,C. Fabri∣ius. M. Curius. whō he neuer saw with a cer∣teigne loue and good fauour
toward them. Who again do∣eth not hate Tarquinius the proude, Sp. Cassius, and Sp. Melius? With the two capi∣teins Pyrrhus and Hānibal,Pyrrhus Anniball. we foughte for the Empire in Italie. Notwithstandyng frō the one, we withdrewe not muche our heartes, for his ho∣nest name, and thother alwai∣es the citie hated for his cruel∣tee. But if the power of hone∣stie be so muche,Power of honestie. that we loue the same, yea in those, whiche we neuer sawe, and more then that, we like it euen in our ve∣ry enemies: what meruaile is it, if the hert{is} of men be mo∣ued, when thei seeme to behold the vertue ad goodnesse of suche, with whom they may be
ioigned in acquaintaunce.Loue con∣firmed by benefites. Al∣though loue be fastened by ple∣asures receaued, by good will well tryed, and acquaintaunce had: all which thynges toge∣ther when they bee laied to the same firste phantasie of mans mynd and loue, a certein won∣derfull greatness of good will doeth kiendle. Whiche, if anie thinke it commeth of desire,Base ot spryng of freēdship to haue a hlpe of staie, that it should be a mane, wherby eue∣rie one should come by that he most desireth, truely they leaue vs a very base, and no gentle∣manlie out spryng of frēdship to be, which of lacke and nede would haue it to issue. But if this wr so, then as euery man felt in hym self smallest habili∣tee,
so should he be most rediest to freendship: whiche thyng is farre otherwyse. For as eury man trusteth most to him self, and as euery man chiefy with vertue and wisdome, is so fur∣nished, that he hath no nede of any other, and taketh all his owne thyng{is} to lye in his own power: so he dooeth moste ex∣ceade all others in sekyng and honouryng freenshippe.Affcan{us} and Lael{us} had no nede one of an o∣ther. For what, had Affaican{us} any nede of me? Nothyng at all truely, Nor I of him neither: but I, for certein woonder I was in of his vertue, and he perchāce agein for an opinion he had of my behauiour, loued me, and our daylie cōpanie encreased our good will. But although
manie and great commoditees ensued thereof, yet did not the cause of our louyng one the o∣ther, come of any hope of such thyng{is}. For as we be profita∣ble to othrs and liberall, not of purpose to get thankes,Usury of plesures. (for in deede we make no vsurie of our pleasures) but euen of ve∣rie nature be geuen to liberali∣tee: so doe we thinke, that we ought to couet freendship, not led therto by hope of rewarde, but bcause all the fruite there∣of resteth ī verie loue self.Frute of Amitee. We are farre from the opinion of these, whche after the nature of brute beast{is}, dooe referre al thynges to pleasure & sensua∣litie. And no meruail at al For they, whiche haue cast all their
myndes, vpon so vyle and so lothsome a thing, can haue no eye to any heavenlye, to anie goodly, or godly thing. Wher fore those maner of menne, we wil set a syde from our talke, and let vs imagine and iudge, that loues feelyng, and ernest∣nesse of good wil is engendred of nature, by some profe of ho¦nestie declared. Whiche hone∣stie who that loue, doe applie theim selues to the same, and drawe neerer, that they maie take the vse of the compaigny and maners of him, whō they began to phantasie: and that they maie be mates and a lyke in loue, readier to doe pleasu∣res than to rquire any And let this bee an honest kynde of
strife betweene freendes. And thus shall great commoditees be takn of freendship, and the beginning therof shal come of nature, rather then of neede, a beginnyng both weightier and trewer.Freēdship beginning of nature. For if profite shoulde fasten frendship, then the same beyng changed, shoulde vnlose it againe. But because nature cannot be chaunged, therefore true frendships be eurlasting. ¶Thus the first begīning of freendship you see, excepte per∣aduenture ye haue some thyng els to aske. Sae. Naie Laeli∣us, I praie you goe forth with your matter, and as for hym here, whiche is my younger, of mine owne ead I dare make answere. Fan. In deede you
saie but wel, wherfore lette vs heare foorth Laelius. Hearken then my frendes these thyng{is}, whiche many tymes and ofte haue been reasoned, betweene me and Scipio, concernyng freendshippe.Continuā¦ce of frēd∣ship. He truely was woont to saie, there was no∣thyng more harde then freend∣ship to continue vnto the last houre of death. For he woulde saie, it oft tymes hapned, that either it should not auaile both parties, to haue it continue still, orels that freend{is} woulde ot be alwaies of one mynde, in the matters of the common wealth. He would saie also, that mennes maners dyd ofte chaunge, sometyme by reason of euill lucke, somyme as age
grewe on theim. And of thes thing{is} he would bryng an ex∣ample by a similitude of boies state, whiche was, that the whotte loue of children, was oft tymes caste vp with their chaunge of voyce. And in case they had continewed it, til thei became young men of full age: yet that frendship was broken sometyme, eithr by reason of sryfe, either by some maner of riote, either by some gain and profite, whiche bothe of theim beyng freendes, coulde not at∣teigne to at once. So that if any had gone on, somewhat longer in freendship, yet they brake often tymes, if they fell in any contencion for honour or dignitee. For he would saie
there was no sorer pestilence in freendship,Couetus∣nesse in frendship. then couetous∣nesse of moneie, whiche is in the moste part of menne, and strife about honor and glorie, whiche is in the beste sorte of men. Wher vpon great enmi∣tee oft times groweth betwene right deare freendes. He fur∣ther would say, that great va∣riance, and many tymes iuste dyd spryng, when any thyng was required of freendes, that was not honest, as either that they should be instrumentes to others trecherie, orels helpers to dooe wronge. The whiche thyng suche as would refuse, although they should dooe ho∣nestlie in it, yet should they be reproued of them, whose myn∣des
they would not folow, a breakers of the lawe of frend∣ship. But thei, whiche had the face to require any thyng, what so euer it were, of their freend, he was woont to saie, did by their very askyng pro∣fesse, that for their frend{is} sake they would attempt all maner of thynges. And when suche mennes malice was once long growen and festered in hearte, not onely their acquaintaunce was wont to be geuen vp, but also great and continuall ha∣tered grewe betwene theim. These many thynges so hang ouer freendshippe, euen as one should saie, by destinee, that he aied, to escape all these, he thoughte it to bee not onely a
parte of wisedome, but also of very happinesse.Bondes of loue. Wherfore if ye be pleased, let vs firste see this poinct, how farre oughte loue to stretche in freendship, as if Coriolanus hadde any freendes,Comociō of Corio∣lanus. whether they oughte to haue borne weapon with hym against their countreye: whether Becillinus freendesBecillin{us} should haue ordered him in his enterprise for the kyngdome: whether Spu. Melius fren∣des shoulde haue holden with hym? We sawe Tiberius Graccus, when he made an vp sturre in the common wealth, was forsaken of Quin{us} Tu∣bro and his companion fren∣des. But Caius Blossius the Cumaine, a geast of your fa∣ilie
Scaeuola, when he came to me as a sewter, because I sate in counsaile with Laenas and Rutilius the Consulles, alledged this cause for him self that I shoulde pardone hym, which was that he had Tibe∣rius Graccus in suche a reue∣rence, that whatsoeuer he wil∣led, he thought it meete to be enterprised. Than {quod} I, what and this to, if he woulde haue had you set fyer on the Capi∣toll? Naie {quod} he,Capitoll. he would ne∣uer haue willed me to suche a thyng, but and if he had once bydde me, I must needes haue doen it. You see how shame∣full a saiyng this was,Wicked answere of Blosi{us}. and in very deede so he did, yea and rather more than he saied. For
he did not folowe Tiberius Graccus rashenesse, but was also a ryngleader to it, nor made not him self a compaig∣nion of his furie, but a capi∣tein. And therfore in this mad∣nesse beyng afearde of a newe examinciō, he fled into Asia, and gat hym to our ennemies, and in the ende, suffered iuste and greuous punishement of our citie.Offence i our freen∣des bhalf. There is therefore none excuse for the faulte, if a manne offend for his freendes sake,Honeste rquests. for seeyng the opinion of ones vertue is the breeder of frendship, it is hard for frend∣ship to remain, if one swarue from vertue. But if we agree it to be honest, both to graunt o our freendes what so euer
they woulde haue, and to ob∣teigne of our frendes what so euer we desire: there truely we be of a through tried wisdom, if there can be no faulte found with the thing. But our spea∣kyng is of these freendes that be in our lye daily, of suche as we see, or suche as we haue heard of, and our daily expe∣rience teacheth vs. Oute of these sortes we muste take ex∣amples, and of theim chiefely, who come neerest to wisdome. We know,P. Aemi∣lius. that Paul{us} Aemi∣lius was of muche familiari∣tee with Caius Lucinius,C. Lucini{us} as we haue heard of our fathers, and that they wer twise Con∣sulles to gether, and felowes in office of the Censureshippe.
And we reade also in stories, that in that time Marcus Cu∣rius and Titus CoruncanusM. Curi{us} C. Crun¦canus. were great freend{is} with them, and dearest one to thother al∣so among them selues. Ther∣fore we can not so muche as suspecte or deeme, that any of these would haue earnestly re∣quired any thing of their frēd, that should haue been against their faith, against their othe, or against the common welth. For to what purpose were it, to say that these euils were in suche men? For if they had er∣nestlie required any thyng in that maner, I know thei could not haue obteigned, for asmu∣che as these we spake of, were very godlie men. But let it be
of a lyke euill to graunt, as to make an vnhonest suite. Yet Caius Carbo cōsented to Ti∣berius Graccus, and so did C. Cato, who at that tyme was neuer awhit his brother Cai∣us ennemy,First law in frnd∣ship. but at this present is his earnest aduersarie. Let this then bee the firste lawe e∣nacted in freendship, that nei∣ther we require vnhonest thin∣ges, nor beyng desired do any. For it is a fowle excuse, and in no wise to be alowed, when a man shall either in priuate faultes, other elles in faultes against the comon wealth cō∣fesse,Foule ex∣cuse. he did it for his freendes sake. For we are nowe, O Fannius and Scaeuola, sette in such place, that it behoueth
vs longe afore to foresee the chaunces that maie happen to the comon wealth For the old custome of our fathers al rea∣die is somwhat swarued from hir course and race.Ambicion of Tiberi{us} Graccus. Tiberius Eraceus went about to haue gotten the kyngdome, and ru∣led as a kyng to, for certaine monethes, did euer the people of Rome heare or see the lyke? And his frendes and kinsfolke also after his death did folow the exaumple of hym. What partes they plaied against P. Scipio Nasica, I can not without teares reporte. For as for Carbo, whō we spake of earwhile, we did suffer and beare with, because of Tiberi∣us Graccus new punishment.
But what I looke to folowe of Tiberius Gracc{us} Tribune∣ship, I luste not to prophecie, for from thence comth al ma∣tiers, whiche be ready for mis∣chiefe: and after they once be∣ginne, they folowe headlong on. Ye see alreadie afore hand in the tables of the lawes, howe great a decaie hath hap∣pened, first by the lawe called Gabinia,Gabinius law. and thē within two yeres after, by the lawe called Cassia.Cassius law. And me think{is} I doe alredie see the communaltee of Rome deuided from the Se∣nate, and that the greatst ma¦tiers be ordered after the will of the people. For mo men shal learne howe suche thyng{is} may be doen, then howe they maie
be withstanded. But to what ende speake I all this? verely because no man goth about any suche thyng without fel∣lowship. The honest sort ther∣fore muste bee warned, if vn∣wares they lyght by any ad∣uenture in suche a kynde of freendshippe, that they thinke not them selues so bounde, but that thei mai forsake their freende, if in any great matter thei conspire against the com∣mon wealth.Punishe∣ment as due to the partners as rynge∣leaders. And for naughty men a punishment must bee de∣ised, and no lesse for suche as followe others, then for those whiche bee the verie capitai∣nes and ryngeleaders theym selues of all wickednesse. Who was nobler, who was
of more power in al Grece th Themistocles?Themi∣stocles. who beyng ca∣pitayne in the warre againste the Persians, when he had de∣liuered Greece from bondage, and afterward was banished for enuie, coulde not beare the same enuie of his vnthankful countrey, which his part was to haue borne. He plaied the like part that Coriolanus did with vs twentie yeares a goe.Themisto¦cles and Coriola∣nus slew thēselfes. These twayne found no ayde agaynste their countrey, and therfore thy kylled thēslfes. Wherfore suche naughtie mē∣nes conspiracie, is not to bee cloked with any excuse of frēd¦ship, but rather punished with all extremitee, that no manne maie thinke it lawefull to fo∣lowe
his freende, that makes warre against his countreie. Whiche thyng (as the worlde beginneth to goe) I wote not whether one daie it will be so or not. But truely I for my parte, haue no lesse care,A good but a rare care. what the state of the common welth shalbe after my deathe, then what it is at this day.First rule of freend∣ship. Let this therfore be agreed, to bee the fyrst rule of freendshippe, that we aske of our freendes thyn∣ges that be lawfull, and dooe for our freendes sakes thyng{is} that be honest. And that we looke not vpon our freend till he desire vs,Preuen∣tyng of honest re∣queses. but that good wil bee alwaies readie, and that ackenesse be not vsed Let vs be glad in dede to geue faith∣full
counsaill. Let theim be of great accompt in freendeship,Mocions in freend∣ship. whiche counsaill well. And let vs geue theim a rule ouer vs, to warne vs, not only plaine∣ly: but also if neade be, sharpe∣ly, and suche authoritie geuen must be obeied. For I suppose some wonderfull wonders pleased some of theim, whom I heare saie were taken for wise in Greece. But there is nothing, but that thei can des∣cant theron with their quidi∣tiues, as for example we shuld auoide frendship with to ma∣ny,Few fren∣des for that one man thereby must nedes be carefull for ma∣ny, and that it is enough to doe, euery man to care for his owne. Also to be ouermuche
combred with other mennes mattiers (they saie) is vn∣weldie, and to haue the raines of freendshippe at length to plucke straiter or make slac∣ker, as one will, they thynke it a pleasure. For they say, quietnesse is the chiefe poincte of happines, which the minde can not enioye, if one musts beare the burdeine, or as it were, trauaile with childe for many. Another sort of them (thei saie) speake muche more beastelie yet then this, whiche place a littell aboue I briefely touched, and that was, that freendeshippe ought to bee de∣sired for an healpe and staies sake, and not for good will and fauour to anie body.
And therfore as euery manne hath little staie, and little suc∣cour, so he shoulde the more seeke after freendship. And for this cause (they saie) it is, that women seeke more the helpe of freendship then men, and the poore more then the riche, and the wretched more thē the for∣tunate. Takyng freendship out of the world.¶ O gaye and goodlye wise∣dome. For they goe aboute to take the sōne out of the world, that would take frendship out of it, then the whihe we haue of God nothyng better, ne no∣thyng pleasaunter. For what maner of quietenesse is this? truely to see to, pleasaunt, but in verie deede at many tymes to be refused For it is no rea∣son,
either not to take in hand or to leaue of beyng taken in hande,We must alwaie do well. anie honest cause or deede, because thou wouldest not be troubed. But if we wil refuse paine, we must also refuse verue, whiche must of necessitee with a certeine pain∣fulnesse dispise and hate his contraries, as for example, the good must hate the euill, the chast the lecherouse, the hardie the cowardly. Therfore you see the ryghte, moste of all gre∣ued with vnrightuousenesse, the mightie with the weake∣lynges, the honest with the shameles. This therfore is the propertie of a wel staied mind,Propertee of a well staide mīde to reioice at good thyng{is}, and to be greued with the contra∣ries.
Wherfore if greefe of minde light in a wise man (as in veraie deede it doth) except we suppose the nature of man is cleane rooted vp out of his hert, what cause is there, that we shoulde vtterly bannysh frēdhip from the life of man, because we woulde suffer no troubls for it? For what dif∣ference is there, I saie not be∣twene a beast and a man, but euen betwene a man and a stone, or a dead stocke, or any suche like thing, if you take a∣way the mouynges and modes of the mind?He mea∣neth the stoikes. Neither are these to be hrd, that wil nedes haue vertue to bee an harde thyng, & as it were like iron. Whi∣che trwely aswell in manie
thyng{is}, as also in freendship, is easie and gentle, so that at the good fortune of his freend it spredeth it slfe abrode, and at his misfortune it shrinketh in again. Wherfore this grefe of minde, that is oftimes to be taken for freendes, is not so great as it ought to take a∣waie freendship among men: no more than vertue shoulde be refused, because it bringeth with it many cares and trou∣bles of mind. But for asmuche as vertue knitteth reendeship together (as I saied afore) if any sparke of vertue doe ap∣peare,Where loue groweth. whervnto one of a like minde maie applie and ioyne it selfe, there loue must necessa∣rily grow, when suche a thing
hapneth.Beastli∣nsse. For what is so trast∣lie, as to be delited with these many kynde of vaine thinges, as honour, glorie, buildyng, apparell, and deckeyng of the bodie, and not marueilousely to be delighted, with suche a mind endewed with vertue, as bothe can loue and yelde loue for loue againe.Requi∣tng of benefites. For there is nothyng goodlier, then rqui∣tyng of benefit{is}, nor any thing pleasanter, than thentrchan∣geyng of loue and dutie. And also if you putte this vnto it, which maie wel be added, that there is nothyng, whiche al∣lureth and so draweth oughte vnto it,Cause prī¦cipall of frendship. as lykenesse of condi∣cions doeth one to freendship. This surely is graunted to be
true,Like wol to like. that the honest, loue the honest, and so haunt together, as men nre ioigned by kinred and nature. For nothing more coueteth, or is more egar of his lyke, then nature. Wherfore this is paine,Nature. O Fannie and Saeuola, in mine opinion, that the honest beare towarde the honest, a certein goodwill, as of course, whiche is apoin∣cted by nature, to bee the well spryng of freendship. But this kynd of goodnesse also should appeere towarde the common sorte.Uertue. For vertue is not chor∣lishe, nor emptie handed, nor yet loftie: but hir custome is to defend all men, and to doe the best for them she can. Whiche thyng vndoubtedlie she would
not dooe, if she disdeigned the common sorte. Profite.¶ Furthermore me thinkth those men, that for profites sake dissemble freendship, doe cleane take awai the louingst knot of freendship. For the veraie profite gottn by ones freend, doth not so muche like one, as his freendes very loue doth delite hym: and than is that, whiche commeth from a mans freend a pleasure, whan of good will and loue it pro∣ceadeth. And it is so beyonde reason, that freendship should be sought for necessitee, seeyng that those, whiche be endued with wealth, richesse and ver∣tue chiefly, wherin most aide is, haue no neede of any other,
and be most liberal and boun∣teouse. And I know not, whe∣ther it be a meete thyng, that frendes shoulde neuer neade anie thyng: for where should our good will haue appeared, yf Scipio had neuer neaded, neuer fauour, neuer counsail, neuer our assistaunce, neither in peace nor in warre. Ther∣fore freendship huntes not af∣tr profite,Profite foloweth freēdship. but profie folo∣weth freendship. Mn than that swimme in richesse, be not to be heard, if thei shall at any tyme dispute of freendship, in which nether by expriēce, nor by knowelage, they haue anie vndrstandyng. For who is there (in very sadnesse) that neither to loue any, neither to
be loued again, would walow in all richesse, and liue with plentie of all hyng{is} earthlie? For this kynd of lyfe is for ty∣rans,A tyrans lyfe. wherein there is no tru∣stinesse, no loue, no hope of as∣sured good will, but all thyn∣ges euermore suspected and ca∣red for:Loue and feare. nor there is no place of frēdship. For who can loue one, whom he feareth: orelles loue one whom he dreadeth? Suche yet be honoured with feigned freendship onely for a time, that if thei happē to take Aduersi∣tee trieth freendes.a fall (as it doeth many times come to passe) than is it well perceyued, howe naked they be of freendes. Whiche thing the reporte goeth, Tarquinius the tyranne saied, at suche time as
he was banished, that he well vnderstode, what freendes he had faithfull, and what vn∣faithfull, nowe when he was hable to recompence neither of theim. And yet I meruail, if in that his pryde and loathsome condicions, he could possible haue any at all. And as this mannes maners, of whom we haue spoken, could not pour∣chase any true frendes, so ma∣ny mens riches, that be in high authoritie,Richesse. do cleane shut out, as it were true freendship. For Fortune her selfe is not onely blynde,Fortune. but maketh these also often tymes blynde, whom she moste embraceth. And therfore (for the moste parte) they are puffed vp with pryde and dis∣deigne,
and nothing is so irk∣some,A foole fortunate. as a foole in good for∣tune. And this a man maie see, that such as before tymes wer of indifferent maners, by rule, power, and prosperitee, dooe chaunge and despise their olde freendes, and leane to newe. But what more foolishe thing can be, than to studie, thei may be hable with great heapes and plentie, to gette other thynges that be sought for, as monie, horses, seruauntes, gaye cloa∣thing, and costly plate, and yet not to secke for freendes, being the best & goodlyest riches of this lyfe.Freendes the best ri∣chesse. For they knowe not for whom they get other thyn∣ges, when they are gotten, nor to whose vse thei trauaile. For
euery one of these he his, whi∣che will win them with strong hande. But freendship once gotten, abydeth with euerie man stedfast and surly.efes of fortune. And although these thynges conti∣new, whiche be as one woulde saie, the giftes of fortune, yet a rude lyfe and destitute of freendes can not be pleasant. But here an ende of this mat∣tier. ¶And nowe we must set out,Bondes of loue in frendship. howe farre the boundes and pointes of loue doe reache in freendeshippe. Whereof I see there be three opinions, and I allow neither of them. One is, that we so loue our freend, as we doe our selfes. The other, that our good will towarde
our freendes, doe a like and e∣quallie answere theyr good will towarde vs.. opiniōs of freend∣ship disa∣lowed. The thirde, that howe muche euery man setteth by him selfe, so muche he shoulde bee sette by of his freendes. But I agre to none of these three opinions. For the first is not trewe, that eue∣ry man, is a like herted tow∣arde his freende, as he is tow∣arde him selfe. For how many thynges enterprise we for our freendes sake, whiche for our selues we woulde neuer doe, as to praie and sue to an vn∣worthy man for our freendes cause: to be ouer earnestly bēt against one, and to pursue him very sore: whiche thynges in our owne mattiers stande not
well with honestie, but in our freendes causes bee moste ho∣nest. There be many thynges also, in whiche the honest sort, hoth take awaie and suffer to bee taken from theyr owne gaines, to thende their frendes rather than them selues, maie enioy them. The second opini∣on is, that appointeth freend∣ship, to vse like benefites, and like good will, but this is to straight and to nere, to bryng freendship to be weied in bal∣launce, as though there ought to be a like iompe measure of taking and receiuyng of plea∣sures.Trewe frendship. Me thinketh trewe freendeship is a richer and a bountifuller thyng, and doeth not take so narrowe heade to
geue no more than it maie re∣ceiue. Neither is there suche feare to bee taken in freende∣ship, that we lease not a good tourne, or let it fal in the mire, or that we heape not vp more benefites than iust measure. The thirde is the worst, which is, that how muche euery man maketh of himselfe, so muche he shoulde bee made of by his freende. But in some often tymes either the is a more bashful spirite, o a more com∣fortes hope of amēdyng their state. It is not therefore the propretee of a freende, to bee toward him, as he is towarde him selfe, but he ought rather to studie and find the meanes, that he cheare vp his freendes
dismaied minde, and bryng hym in a more hope and better comfort. There is therfore another ende of trewe freend∣ship to be mad, so that first I shall tell that whiche Scipo was wont chiefly to reproue. He wolde denie, that any sai∣yng coulde be founde more a∣gainste freendshippe than this that saied, men ought so to loue, as at sometyme they shoulde hae And he could not be brought to beleue,A saiyng most repu¦gnant to frendship. that this was saied by Bias, as it was reported, who was one of the seuen wise men: but that it was the saiyng of some vile and ambicious man, or els of one that woulde bryng all ynges to his owne power
and swaie. For how can one be his freende, whose enemie he thinkes also to be. For first he must nedes desier and wish, that his freende might verie often offende, that he might geue as it were occasions to chide. Againe, he must needes be greued and freated, or else enuie at his frendes good hap and doynges. Wherfore this rule truly were enough (whose so euer it be) to destroy fren∣ship. But this rather were mete, to haue a rule made, that we should vse suche warenesse in prouidyng of freendes, that we shoulde not begin to loue hym, whom at anie tyme we might after hate. Besides, if we had not bene most fortu∣nate
in chosyng of our frendabis;, yet Scipio thought men shuld eare that mischaunce, rather than to seeke an occasion of fllyng out.What is to be attri¦buted to honest frē∣des. These endes in freendeship therfore I thynke bee to bee vsed, that whan freendes maners be honest, all their goodes, counsaill, and good will, should be as comon among them, without any ex∣cepcion: and also if chaunce so come to passe, that the v∣honest doynges of freendes, bee to bee holpen in thynges, where they stande vpon lyfe and death, or vpon their esti∣macion, they maie somewhat swarue out of the waie, so that great dishonestie follow not of it. For freendship maie
be pardoned herein. Neither is estimacion to be reiected. Nor yet muste we thinke, that the peoples voice is a small helpe to haue a dooyng in thynges, whiche to get with flatterie & fayre woordes is dishonestie. Therfore vertue, who hath the loue of all men folowyng it, is not to bee dipised. But it was ofte demaunded (for now I returne to Scipio, al whose talke was of freendeshippe,) why in all other thyngs men were more diligent, as that e∣uerie one coulde tell how ma∣nie goates and sheepe he had of his owne,A questiō worthy the yng. yet coulde not umbre howe manie freendes he had: and that in compas∣syng the one he bestoweth a di∣ligence,
and in choosyng the other, he is negligent, and hath as it were, no certeigne signes and marks, by the whiche he should iudge who be fittest for freendeshippe. We must ther∣fore choose sure, stedfast, and nwaueryng freendes, of the whiche sorte, there is a greate arsitie, and it is harde to knowe theim without a triall. But we muste make the tryall n freendeshyppe it selfe, for so freendeshippe goeth before our iudgement, and taketh a∣waie the occasion of tyall. It is therefore a wyse mannes parte, so to staie the earnest∣nsse of his loue, as he dooeth his race in rnning, to thetēt we mae so vse our frendship,
as men that had assaied their horse,Waies to proue frē∣des. and somewhat tryed the maners of their freendes. Ma∣ny men often tymes in a little monei matter, be founde how vnconstant they be: there be o∣thr some again, whom when a little money can not attēpt,Money. by a great sūme of money may be soone knowen. But if some maie be founde, whiche thinke it beastly to set moneie before freendship, where then shal we finde them,Honour. that dooe not sette honour, rule,Rule. auctoritie,Auctoritee and power, before freendship? that when these be set foorth on the one side, & the power of frend∣ship on the other side, who is there, that wil not rather chose the firste then the laste?
For mans nature is weake  refuse rule, which if mē folow and little regarde freendeship, they thinke thei are to be exc∣sed, because not without a great occasion, they haue bro∣ken of freendship.Frēdship hardly found a∣monge gre¦atte men. Therfore trew freendship is very hardly found in theim, whiche liue in honour and rule. For where can you finde suche a one, as woulde preferre his freendes honour before his owne? But to leaue these, howe greuouse and dangerouse do most men thinke it, to be fellowes and partenars in miseries, wherto not one is easily founde, that wilbe contēt to come, although Ennins saied well:Sure freend. The sure freende in thynges vnsure is
knowen. Yet these two thyn∣ges make mē for the most part to be noted of vnstedfastnesse and lightnesse, if either in their owne prosperitee they set their frēdes light, or in their frēdes aduersitee they cast theim of. Who therfore shall shewe him self in both these discrete, sted∣fast, and faithful in frendship,A feithful frend. him oughte we to iudge of the perfectest kind of men, and in a maner as a god. For the groūde worke of that stedfast∣nesse & constācie, which we seke to be ī frēdship, is faithfulnes. For nothyng is stedfast, that is vnfaithfull. Besides it is fitte we chose our frēd simple,How to chose a freend. familiar, good to agre with, & one that will be moued with
the same thing{is}, wherwith we be. All which thing{is} belong to the faithfulnesse that ought to be in frendship.Wue∣ryng mynde. For nether can he b faithful, that wil be in ma¦ny mind{is}, or that hath a tour∣ning hed. Nor he stedfast & sure that is not of the same mode that his frend is, and agreable to his nature.What a freēd must schew. Herevnto must be ioyned that he which shalbe a frēd, may not take plesure in accusing, nor lightly beleue ac∣cusacions offred, which thing{is} belong to that stedfastnesse, wherof arwhile I entreated. And so commeth it to be true, which in the beginning I said that freendship can not be but betwene good men. For it is the propertee of a good manGood mē. (whom we may also call wise)
o keepe these twoo rewles in freendship. Two ru∣les in frēd¦ship.¶ First, that nothyng be fei∣gned nor dissembled: for it is more honeste openlie to hate, than in countenance to cloke. Nxt, that not onely he cleere his freend of faultes, whereof he is charged by ani other, but also that he him slf in no wise be suspicious, or thinke his freend hath doen any thyng a∣misse. There must be besydes this,Pleasant talke. a certein pleasantnesse in ones talke and facions, which is not one of the worst saues for freendship, but sowernesse and solemnesse must in no wise be had, yet sadnesse and sage∣nesse in all matters haue in it surely a certein grauitee.Sagenesse But
freendshippe ought to be som∣what more at large, more free & pleasant, & to all feloweship and gentlenes more disposed. ¶ And here riseth a very hard question,Whethe newe or old frēdes are to be prered. whether our newe freendes worthy of frendship, be to be preferred before our olde, as we vse to esteme yong horses more than olde. A doubt surely vnsemely for men, for of freendship as there is of o∣ther thynges, ought there to be no gluttyng. And our oldest kinde of thinges like good old wines, ought to be most regar¦ded. And that is a trewe saied saw,Prouerb whiche comonly is saied, that we muste eate manie bus∣shelles of salte togeather, with whom we shall perfourme the
partes of freendship. Yet new acquaintaunces be not to be refused, if there be any hope in theim,Simili∣tude. as in good trees where appeareth fruite. And yet olde acquaintance must be kept in his dewe place. For in olde freendes, and acquaintaunce, and custome is no small trust. ¶ And as to the horse, wher∣of we made mencion ewhile, if nothyng lette, there s none, but had rather vse him, whom he hath vsed,Custome. than a new and vnhandled. Neither doth cu∣stome muche onlie in liuyng thynges, but also in thynges lackyng life. For euē with hil∣lie places and wooddy coun∣treis be we delited, wherin we haue dwelled longe. But it is
a chiefe poinet in freendeship,Chiefe-point in freēdship. the higher to bee equall with the lower. For often tymes there bee certaine graces in it, as was in Scipio tow∣arde our company of frendes, he neuer put hym selfe foorth before Philus, before Rutili∣us, before Mummius, or any of his baser freendes. But he honoured Quintus Maxi∣mus his brother,The elder in honour preferred. as his bet∣ter, because he was his el∣der, who was surely a nota∣ble man, yet nothyng like him, and he was desirouse, that al his freendes might be made richer by hym. Whiche all men muste bothe dooe and fo∣lowe, that i they gette anie betternesse of vertue, witte,
or fortune, they should parte if among their frendes, and part it with their kinsfolkes, as if they be borne of a low socke, orels haue their kynred either in witte or substaunce woorse then them selfes, they shoulde enlarge their richesse, and bee as an honoure and glorie to their state, as we reade in the playes of some, that were in seruauntes states, by reason ther birth and stocke was vn∣knowen, but after they were perceiued, and founde eyther Gods sonnes, or kyngs chil∣dren, yet they bare still a loue toward the sheapherd{is}, whom they toke manie yeres as their fathers. Whiche thyng we ought much rather do toward
our true and well knowen fa∣thers. For thence chiefly is the fruites of ones witte, vertue, and all honestie taken, when it is bestowed on hym that is nerest alied. Therfore as those whiche in freendeshippe be the betters in degree,Mutuall behauiour of freen∣des. ought to equall theim selues with their infriours, so ought in∣friours not to be greeued, if either in witte, either fortune, either worship, their freendes doe excede theim Of the which the moste part eyther plaine them selfes of somwhat, or els vpbraide men with their bene∣fites, and so muche the more if they thinke they haue ought,Upbrai∣des of plesures. whiche they can proue to haue be done either dewtifully, or
frendely, or by any of their trauaile. But surely thee vp∣briders of pleasures, be an hateful kinde of people. Whi∣che pleasures he only, on whō thei be bestowed, ought to re∣member, and not he that dyd bestow thim. Wherfore as the better man must abase him selfe in freendeship, so after a sort the better muste preferre the inferior. For there be some whiche make freendeship ve∣ray yrkesome, where as they thinke theim selfes not regar∣ded. Whiche happeneth al∣moste to none but suche as thinke theim selfes worthy to be dispised. Who must both by woordes and deades bee brought from this opinion.
You muste dooe for euery one first so much as your selfe can do.Howe much is to be done for frēdes. Next so muche as he is ha∣ble to discharge, whō you loue and would further. For you can not bring all your frendes to high honour, although you be farre aboue other. As Sci∣pio was hable to make Publi∣us Rutilius Consull,Scipio made Ru∣tilius con¦sull. but he coulde neuer make his brother Lucius. And if you bee hable to prefer one to what you lust, yet most you take heede, what he is hable to discharge. And we must alwaies thinke frnd¦ship to be in full growen ages and well stayed wittes.Freēdship in ages & wittes. Nor those, whiche in their boistate, haue been desirous of hunting and teesse, muste of necessitee
take them their freend{is},Cōpaniōs of youth. whom they loued and delighted than with their plesure. For so shal nurss{is} and youth maisters cha∣lenge muche frendship, by rea∣son of olde right, who in dede be not to bee dispised, but yet after some other sorte to be e∣stemed. For els freendship can not continue stedfast.Unlike maners. Unlyke maners haue vnlyke studies, whose vnlykenesse of condici∣ons doeth breake of all freend∣ship And for none other cause the good with the wicked, and the wicked with the good can not bee freendes: but for that there is betwene them so great differēce, as the greattest may be of maners and affections. It maie be also a good lesson
in frendship, that no man hin∣der his frend{is} profite, through vnmeasurable loue towarde him, as it often happeneth. For to come to fabes.Inordi∣nate loue ī frendship. If Ne∣optolemus would haue heard Lycomedes, with whom he was brought vp, whan he wolde haue staied his iourney with muche weepyng, he could neuer haue taken Troie. And oftentymes there chaunceth waighty mattiers, why a man must depart from his frend{is}: the whiche who so euer wolde let or trouble, because be can not beare well his absence, is to bee compted a weakelyng and cockney natured: and ther¦fore vnreasonable for freende∣ship. And in all thynges we
must take heade,Freendes ought to ponder re∣questes. both what we aske of our freende, and what we suffer to be obteyned of vs. There happeneth also many times, as it were a certaine ne∣cessarie lamentacion for the partyng of frendship, for now our talke tourneth from sage mens to the common peoples freendship.Comon peoples rendship. Oftymes freendes faultes burst out, partly vpon freendes, and partely vpon sraunges, yet the shame re∣downes to theyr freendes. Suche sort of frendship ther∣fore muste bee eased with lea∣uyng of companie, and as I haue hearde Cato saie, muste bee vnhaunted, rather than hastily broken of, except some vnbeareable iniurie shall fier
it out, as a thyng neither com¦ly, neither honest, neither fit t e, without a present change and a seuerance. But if thr shalbe a certaine chaunge ī their maners and likynges, a some tyme there happeneth,  some variance shall fall abo some part of the cōmō wel (for I spake as I said a litt afore not of wisemens but cō∣mon freendeship) a warinesse is to be vsed,Wari∣nesse to be vsed in frendship least freendeship seeme not only to be left of: but malice also to be bredde. For nothyng is more dishonest, than to be at warre with hym, with whom thou hast freendly liued.Disho∣nestie Scipio for my sake (as you knowe) had seuered hym selfe from Quintus Pōpeius
freendship. For the discencion that was in the comon welth, he was also withdrawen clene from our ellow in office Me∣tellus.Scipios alienaciō rom two of his frē∣ds, Both these he did sageli with auctoritie, and no great grife of minde. Wherfore we must first take heade, that dis∣sencion happen not amonge freendes, and that their frend∣ship seeme rather cast of, than oppressed. Also we must be∣ware, that great frendshippes turne not in to great hatredes: wherof chidynges, tauntyng{is}, and euill reportes do rise, whi∣che yet be to be borne, if any wai they be sufferable. And here is the honor of old freend¦ship to be geuen, that the fault alwaies bee in the doer, and
not in the sufferer of wronge.Rdresse of vis in frenship. There is one counsaile, and ease for al these vices and dis∣cōmoditees, and that is, that we loue not ouer soone, nor loue the vnworthy.Who be worthy of frendship. They be worthy of frendship, in whose selfe there is a cause why they should be beloued. It is a rare kinde, and so surely all wor∣thy thynges be rare, yea and nothyng harder than to finde a thyng in his kynde through perfite. But the most part of men in worldly thynges will knowlage nothyng good, but that is profitable,Beastes. and lyke beastes thei loue those freend{is} chiefly, of whom thei hope thei shall receiue moste profite. Therfore they want that fai∣rest
and naturallest frendship, whiche is to be sought euen by it selfe and for it selfes sake: neither do thei shew vnto thm selfes any token or example of the strength of this frendship, what and how muche it is. For euerie man loueth hym selfe not as though he woulde chalenge of him selfe a reward for his loue, but because euery man of nature is dearest to hym selfe: which kinde of loue and dearenesse who so doeth not vse it in freendeship, shall neuer bee founde a trew and faithfull frende. For he surely is a freend,Who is a freende. that is an other I. That if it appeare in beastes, in foules, in cattell, in fish, in swine, and wilde sauage, first
that they loue them selfes,Compari∣sō betwene beastes and men. (for that propertee is geuen to eue∣rie liuyng thyng from the first birth) and next that they couet and lust after some other bea∣stes of their kynd, with whom they maie be conuersaunt, and that thei do with a dsire, and certein likenesse to mans loue: howe muche the more is it by nature in man, who bothe lo∣ueth hym selfe, and gett{is} hym a nother, with whom he maie breake his mind, as though of two he wold make almost one But the moste sort of men euen frowardlie, (I will not saie shamefully) would haue suche a freend as thei thmselfes can not be,Unfrenly request. and those thyng{is}, whi∣che they doe not to their freen∣des,
they yet theim slfes will craue of thm. But it is firste mte, that one be good himself,A frend must be a good mā. ond thē ske after for his like: for in suche, that kynd of sted∣fast freendship whiche I trea∣ted of earwhile, may be surelie setled, when men ioigned to∣gither with good wil, wil first rule those affctions, which o∣thers doe serue, and then take a pleasure in vprightnesse and iustice, and the one will ake in hand all thynges for the o∣ther, and one will not require of an other, any thing but that is honest and lawfull, and thei wyll not onely agree and loue together, but they will also stand in a shamely awe of eche other. For he that taketh a∣waie
honest bashefulnes from freendship,Honest bashful∣nesse in frendship. dooeth take awaie freendeshippes chiefe beautie. Therfore in those men is a ve∣rie daungerous errour, whi∣che thynke that by freendship, a gate is set open to all luste and vice. For frendship is ge∣uen by nature as an ayde to vertue,Freēdship an aide to vertue. and not as a guide to vice, to the entent that seeyng vertue can not achieue alone to the chiefe thyng{is}, she should come as it were in arme and accompanied with a nother, whiche kynde of felowship if either it be, either hath been, or shall be amongest any, they must be saied best and luckiest accompaigned, for the atteig∣nyng of natures chiefe happi∣nesse.
For this is (I say) the verie fellowship,Uaie fe∣louship. wherein all thynges be, whiche men thinke to be wisshed after, as hone∣slie, glorie, quietnes, and plea∣sure of mynde, so that where these be, there is the happy life,Happie lie. and without these it can not be. The whiche life seeyng it is the best and chiefest thyng, we must geue our mind to ver∣tue,Uertue if we will obtaine it, with out whiche nither freendship, nor any thing els to be desired we can attaine to. And sure∣ly where vertue is dispised, those whiche thynke thei haue freendes, doe than feale thy wre deceyued, whan anie eighty aduenture doth driue theym to make a tryall.
Wherefore when you haue iudged of your freende,Witty sentece. you must loue, and not whn you haue loued, than iudge. Yea and this had neade yet oftner to be tolde you. But where as in many thynges we be muche punisshed for negligene, yet most of all in louyng and re∣gardyng of our freendes. For we vse oftentymes the cleane contrary counsaile, and euen forbidded we doe and vndoe, as the olde prouerbe saieth.Prourb For when we bee toste hither and thither, either by daiely compaignie, or else by some kinde of dutee, sodinly in the niddes of our course we burst of our freendship, whan there yseth anie little offence.
Wherfore suche a carelesnesse of so necessarie a thyng,Recheles∣nesse in frendship. is the rather to be dispised. For frēd∣ship is the onely thyng in the worlde,Profite of frendship. of whose profite all men with open mouthes do a∣gree of, although vertue selfe of many is vnsetby: and is saied to be a certein outbragge or outshewe.Richesse. Many also re∣garde not riches, who beeyng content with a little, right ho∣mely fare and homely appa∣rayle pleaseth them Promoci∣ons also,Promo∣cions. with the desire wher of many be sette a fyre, a great sort dooe so little esteme, that they thinke nothyng vayner nor lighter. Also other thing{is}, whiche some euen wonder at, very manie esteme them as no∣thyng.
Of freendship all men haue one opinion, both those, whiche haue geuen them selfes to meddle with the common welth, and those who be deli∣ted with the knowelage and learnyng of thinges, and those which quietly tend their owne businesse, and finallie those, whiche geue them selfes ouer whollye to folowe pleasures, thinke there is no life without freendeshippe, if it so be they will liue somewhat honeslie. ¶ For freendship I wote not how creapeth through al kind of liues,Freēdship crepeth through all kind of life and wil suffer no part of a mans life that is ledde to want hir. So if there be any, of that sowernes and grimnes of nature, that he flieth and ha¦teth
the compaignie of felow∣ship of men, of the whiche sort we haue heard saie, one of the Tymons of Athenes was,Timon of Ahenes. but whiche of them I knowe not, yt he culd not abide, but must nedes seke after one, to whom he mighte vomitte vp euen the bitternesse of his gaule. And this chiefly woulde be iudged, if any such thyng mighte hap∣pen, that God would take vs out of this prease of men, and would set vs some where in a wildernesse, and geeuyng vs there store & plentie of al thin∣ges, whiche nature desireth, would take frō vs the libertie of seeyng any man at all, who wer there so stonie herted, that could abide that kind of lyfe?
And from whom woulde not solitarinesse take the fruicte of all pleasures?Solitari∣nesse. Therefore that is true, which I trowe I haue hearde oure elders tell, was wont to be fathered on Archi∣ta the Tarentine,Archia. and so they heard saie of other olde men, that is, if any man shold climb to heauen once, and thorough∣lie beeholde the nature of the worlde, and the beautieful∣nesse of the sterres: it woulde be an vnpleasaunte woonder vnto him, whiche would haue been a most pleasant mruaile, if he had anie, with whom he mighte haue commoned there∣of.Nature loueth no solitari∣nesse So Nature (we see) lo∣ueth no solytarinesse, and al∣waies hangeth vpon another,
as vpon a staie, which euen a∣mongest the freudliest kind of men is had for most delght. But where as the same nature dclareth by so many signes, what she meaneth and seketh, what she coueteth & desireth, yet I can not tell howe we waxe deafe, and here not hose thinges, wherof we be warned by her. For diuerse and many waies the vse of frendship ser∣ueth, and many occasions of suspiciouse offences be geuen, whiche somtime to shonne, sō∣tyme to ease, and sometyme to beare thē, is a wise mans part. And this one maner of offence is to be auoided, that bothe the profite, and faithfulnesse of frendship may be kpt still.
For oftentimes we muste both warne, yea and chide our frē∣des to. And the same is to be taken freendly,Chidyng in freend∣ship. when it is done of good will. But I know not howe it cometh to passe to be trew, that my familiar Te∣rence saied in his comoedy An¦dria,Familiar, because he vsed to rede his bookes. that sowthyng getteth freendes, and truth doth pur∣chase hatred. Truth is noi∣some, if there grow hatrede of it, which is a poison to frend∣ship,Southin flattery. but yet sowthing is much more hurtfull, whiche cokereth vp his freende in his faultes, and suffereth him to renne still on hedde. But there is great blame in him, that careth not for the truth, and muche fault in hym, that for disceite is ge∣uen
to sowthyng. Herein ther∣fore we must haue all our re∣garde and warinesse, that our warnynges be without bitter∣nesse, and our chidynges with out spitefulnesse: but in sow∣thing (because I delight to vse Terence worde) lt there be an honest likyng,attery. and let flattery the egger on of vice be sete a loufe, whiche not only for a freende, but for no honest man is mete. For men lyue aftr one sort with a tyanne, and after an other sorte with a freende: but his good daies be to be dispaired of, whose eares be so shute vp from the trewth,wth is  be  that he will not heare it of his freend. For it is a tri∣ed saw of Catoes, that earnest
foes dserue muche more plea∣sure of some,A tried saw of Catoes. then those that seeme to be fawnyng freendes. For they sometyme, but these neuer tell the truth. And his is to to foolish,To to oolish & thyng. that hose, who be warned of their freendes, be not agreaued at that they ought, but at that they ought not. For they be not sory thy did amisse, but they take it vn∣kyndly tha be hidden, whr as contrary wyse thei shoulde bee sory for their fault, and gladde of the chidyng. As then to warne our feende, and to be warned againe, is the pro∣pertee of trew freendship,Propretee of we frendship and to do the one honestlie, and no spitefully, and to take thother gentilly, and not rowardly,
so must we thinke,Greatest pestilēce in frendship. there is no greatter pestilnce in freende∣ship than flattery, faire speach and sowthyng, howe be it for many causes, this may be no∣ted the fault of light and sub∣tile persons, whiche speake all to pleasure, but nothyng to truth.Dissimu∣lacion in frendship. But wheras dissimula∣con is euill in all thynges (for it keapeth a man from iud∣gyng the truth) yet most of all it is contrary to freendeship, for it taketh away all trueth in word, without the iche the very name of freēdship can not continew.Ende of frendship. For seeyng the power of frēdship is in a man to none other ende, but that o two mdes there shold be mad one, how can it be brought to
passe, if in one mā there be not one and a like minde alwaies, but a diuerse, a wauering, and a changeable. For what thing can be made so variable, so out of course, as his mynd, whiche not only turneth at euery mā phantasie and pleasure, but also at euery mans becke and looke? saie ye nay? and nay saie I. saie ye yea? and yea say I: and to be plaine, I haue e∣uen appoincted with my selfe to holde vp all thynges with yea and naie,Gnato the parasite. as the same Te∣rence saieth. But this Terence speaketh in Gnatoes person, whiche kynde of speakyng to make in a freende, were to to muche lightnesse. But wher as there be many lyke these Gna∣toes,
and in place, richesse, and estimacion aoue others,Flattery very hurt∣full. their kynde of flattery is very hurt∣full, when auctoritee is ioig∣ned with thir vanitee. But a flatteryng freende may be as∣well discerned and knowen from a trew freend by takyng good heade, as all counterfait and feigned thynges may be tried out from trew and right thynges. The assemble of the commons of a citee, which stā∣deth moste of vnskilfull per∣fons, is wont yet to iudge, what difference is betwene a people pleaser, that is a flat∣terer, and curriaour, and a constant, a sage, and a discrete citesin.Caius Pa¦pyrius. With the whiche kind of flatteries Caius Papyrius
consull stuffed a late the peo∣ples eares, whan he woulde haue made a law for the resto∣ryng of the Tribunes for the commons. We perswaded the contray, but  will saie no∣thyng of my selfe, of Scipio I wil speake gladly.Pithy o∣racio of Scipio. Good lord, howe pithy was he that daie, how great a maiestie was in his talke, that you might well haue called hym the leader of the people, and not a felowe commoner. But what neade I to speake muh hrof, y were present, an  oracion is in euery mands ade. And by that manes , fr the gttyng of he  fauou, by the voics of th eopl selfe was dasshed.
¶And that I maie rturne to the matter, you remēbre, when Q. Maximus Scipios bro∣ther, and L. Mancinus wre Consuls, howe the lawe of C. Lycinius Crassus, concer∣nyng the Priestes dignites, was thoughte to be fauell see∣kyng of th commons. For the choyce of colldges was tur∣ned to the peoples benefit. And he first made this ordre, to dele more truel with the common people. Yet the religion of the euer liuyng godds (we defen∣dyng it by our aunswere) did soone ouercome his oracion, which was euen a thyng pein∣cted for sale woorke, and was doen whn I was Pretor fiue yeare beefore I was Consull.
Therfore that cause was de∣fended, rather of it selfe, than by auctoritie of the seaker. ¶But if in stage plaies, wher¦in many feigned and resem∣bled matters be vsed, trueth is regarded, so that it be sette out and declared: what must it be in frendship, which hang{is} all on trewth? In the whiche, except you know (as thei saie) a mans hert to the bottome, and you show likewise yours, there is no trust nor trial in it, and surely you can not loue nor be loued, when you knowe not how trewly it is mēte. al∣though this flattery be hurt∣full, yet can it not hinder none but him, that geues eare to it, and is delited with it. And so
it commeth to passe,Flatterer herknth flatterers. Uertue. that he o∣peneth his eares to flatterers, whiche flattereth and bste ly∣keth him selfe. Uertue alwaies loueth r selfe. For she best knoweth her slfe, and percei∣uth how she is to beloued. But I spake not nowe of vertue, but of the opinion whih men haue of vertue. For with ver∣tue sefe so manie bee not as woulde seeme to be indwed. These sorte of menne flattrie delighteth, when feigned com∣municacion is put foorthe to please theim, and thy thinke that kynde of ayne talke to be a witnesse of thir prayses. This threfore is no we frendeshppe, when the one will hare no trewhe, and the
other is readie to lye.Feigned frendship. Neither woulde the clawyng of these trencher frendes, which be pa∣rasites, seeme feate and plea∣saunt in comoedies, excepte there were myxte therein some glorious souliours, whiche bee Thrasoes: as for exaum∣ple saieth Thraso:In Enu∣cho Terēce comoedy. Did Tha∣is my woman gee me greate thankes. It had been enough for Gnato the Parasite to haue aunswered, Ye sir great, but he sayed, ye sir excedyng greate thankes. Flatterie al∣wayes settes a thyng to the moste,Flattery maketh muche of a little. whiche he woulde haue seme great, for whose pleaure it is spoken. Wherefore al∣though this kynd of fawnyng vanitie, is muche estemed
with thē, whiche embrace and like it them selfes, yet the sager and constantee sorte of menne must be warned, that thei take hede, they be not snared with subtle flatterie. For eueri man can see an open flatterer, ex∣cept he be a very sotte. But we must diligently beware, leaste the subtill and secrete flatterer wynde hym selfe in with vs. For he cannot easily be kno∣wen. Because euen with con∣trariyng of one often tymes he flattereth,Snares of subtill flattery. and feignyng that he chideth, he is fayre spoken, and at length he yeldes & suf∣fers him self to be ouercōe, that he that is disceued maie thinke he hath gotte a great victorie. But what is more dishonestie
then to be skorned? And ther∣fore we must vse the more di∣legence, that it maie not hap, as in a plaie named the Epi∣cure. To day before all my old dotyng foolish freendes, you tost me goodly, and mocked me gaily: for in plaies olde mēs persons without forecast and beyng light of beliefe, be the most foolish. But I can not tell by what meanes from the freendship of perfite and wise men (I meane in suche wisdome as is supposed may be in man) our cōmunicacion is turned to slight and slender freendship. Whrfore let vs come again to the firste we spake of, and let vs conclude at length vpon it.
Conclu∣sion of the mattier.¶I saie vertue, O C. Fanni{us} and Q. Mutius, both getteth and keepeth freendes. For in it is all agrement, all stedfast∣nesse, and all contancie:Uertue. Whi¦che when she aduaunceth her self, and sheweth out hir light, and bothe seeth and knoweth the same in another, she geueth hir selfe to that to, and takes likewyse that she findeth in a nother. Where vpon loue and louyng frendship toward eche other, is enkendled. For both these two woordes haue their names of ths woord, to loue. But to loue is nothyng elles, but to beare good wil toward hym,To loue what it is whom you loue, not for anie neede or profite that is sought, Whiche profite flo∣risheth
yet of freendshippe, al∣though you the lesse nothyng folow it. With this kynde of good will, we when we were young menne, dyd loue Luci∣us Paulus, Marcus Cato, Caius Gallus, Publius Na∣sica, Tiberius raccus, our Scipides father in lawe. This freendshippe also doeth more appeare among suche as be lyke of ages, as betweene me and Scipio, Lucius Fu∣rius, Publius Rutilius, and Spurius Mummins. And we old men also do take plasure in young mennes loue towar∣des vs, as you see, I am de∣lited in yours, and in Quint{us} Tuberos, beyng a very young man, and in P. Rutili{us} Uirgi∣nius
compaignie. And seeyng an order is so appointed in our lyfe and nature, that one age maie spryng of a nother, chiefely we shoulde desire, that we might liue with our like in ages,Liuyng with lyke. that euen as we came to¦gither with them in our swad∣lyng cloutes, so we might kepe theim compaignie to the win∣dyng sheete. But because this worldlie substaunce is brikle and fadyng, we alwaies pro∣uide some, whom we mai loue, and of theim be loued againe. For if loue and frēship be ta∣ken from man,Scipio beyng deade liued yet with Laelius. all pleasure of lyfe is taken awaie. Scipio surely although he was taken awaie sodeinly from this life, liueth yet with me, and shall
liue euer For I alwaies loued the vertue of that man, whiche is not deade with me, neither standeth it daiely alone before myne eye, who alwaies haue had it in sight, but also to our childens children shall it be noble and notable. No man shall euer enterprise greatier thynges with hope ad cou∣rage, whiche hath not thmage and memoy of him before his eies.The ima∣ge and me∣mory of Scipio. Truely of all the thynges whiche fortune or nature gaue me, I haue nothyng to matche with Scipioes freendship.Scipioes frenship n it was my conference for the common wealth: in it was my counsaile for priuate causes: In it was my rst full of al de∣lite. And I neuer offended him
in any thing that euer I could perceiue, and I neuer herd any thyng of hym that I was a∣gainst. We had one howse, one diet, and that euen com∣mon: yea not that onely, but warfare, and also our iorneis and goyng abrode were a like common. But what shall I speake of our studies in ser∣chyng alwaies and learnyng of some what, in the which we bestowed all our leasure and tyme, whan we were out of the sight of men. The remem∣braunce and onthynkyng of the which thyng{is}, if with hym thei had died, I coulde by no meanes haue borne the lacke of so freendly and louyng a man. But those nother be dead
yet, but rather nourished and encreased by the onthynkyng and remembraunce of theim. And although I shold wholy be bereft of them, yet myne age self wolde bryng my greattest comfort. For I could not very longe continew in this state. And all short griefes be suffe∣rable, although they be great. These thynges be they, whiche I had to speake of freendship. And I doe exhort you, that you so esteame vertue, (with out which freend¦ship can not bee pos∣sible) as sauyng it, ye thinke nothyng better than freende∣ship. FINIS.
The table. A ADuersitee trieth frēdes. 36 Affricanus & Laeli{us} had no nede one of an other. fo. 22. Amitee what it is. fo. 14. Amitee of Orestes and yla∣des. fol. 17. Ambicion of T. Graccus. 29. Anniball. fo. 21. Archita. fo. 56. Authoritee. fol. 3.42. B ¶ Base outspryng of freend∣ship. fol. 21. Becillinus. fo. 26. Beastlinesse. fo. 34. Beastes. fo 1. Boundes of loue in frendship. fo. 26.38. C ¶Cato the elder. folio. 2.
Cato reckened wse. fol. 6. Cato for his deedes commen∣ded eodem. Calabria. fol. 9. Caius Fabritius. 20. Capitoll. fo. 26. Caius Lucinius. fo. 27. Cassius law. fo, 29. Care good but rare. fo. 1. Cause principall of frendship. fol. 34. Caius Papyrius. fo. 59. Chief poinct in frendshp. 46. Chidyng in freendship. fo. 57. Constant men. fol. 6. Couples of freendes. fo. 11. Cōmoditees of freendship. 15. Continuance of frendship. 24. Couetounes in frendship. 25. Cōmocion of Coriolanus. 26. Coriolanus. fol. .
Companions of youth. fo. 48. Common peoples freendship. folio. 49. Comparison betwene beastes and men. fo. 52. Conclusion of the matter. 63. Custome. fo. 45. D ¶ Dishonestie. fol. 50 Dissimulacion in freendeship fol. 58. Doe well we must alwaie. 33 E ¶Elder in honour preferred. fol. 46. Empedocles. fo. 17. Ende of freendship. fol. 58. Excellency of freendship. 16. F ¶ Familiar. fo. 57. Feigned freendship. fol. 62.
Feithfull freende. fo. 43. Few freendes. fol. 31. First law in freendship. fo. 28. First rule of frendship. fo. 31. Flattery very hurtfull. fo. 59. Flattery. fol. 57.62. Flatterer herkeneth flatterers. fo. 61. Foule excuse. fol. 28. Fortune. fol. 37. Foole fortunate. fol. 37. Freendship betwene C Laeli∣us and Scipio. fol. 3. Freendship .10. preferred a∣boue all thing, and only be∣twene good men .12. with∣out vertue .14. as necessary as the elementes. fo. 16. Fruite of Amitee. fol. 22. Frendship beginnyng of na∣ture. fol. 23.
Freendeship taken out of the worlde. fol. 32. Freendes the best richesse. 37. Freendship hardly founde a∣mong great men. fo. 43. Frendship in ages and wittes. fol. 48. Freendes ought to ponder re∣questes. fo. 49. Freende must be a good man. fol. 52. Freendshippe an aide to ver∣tue. fol. 53. Freendship creepeth through all kinde of life. fol. 55. G ¶Gabinius lawe. fo. 29. Geftes of Fortune. fol. 38. Gnato the Parasite. fo. 59. Good men. fo. 13.44.
H ¶Hatred and strife. fo. 17. Happie lyfe. fo. 53. Honest requestes. fo. 27. Honour. fo. 42. How to chose a freend. fo. 43. Howe muche is to be doen for freendes. fo. 48, Honest bashefulnesse in frend∣ship. fo. 53. I ¶Image and memory of Scipio. fo. 65. Immortalitee of the soule. 8. Inordinate loue in frendship. fol. 65. L ¶ Laelius father in lawe to Scaeuola the Augur, and to Fannius. folio. 1. Like woll to lyke. fo. 25,
Loue. fol. 19. Loue confirmed by benefites. fol. 21. Loue and feare. fo. 36. Lucius Acilius. fo. 4. Lyuyng with lyke. fo. 64. M ¶ Mannes soule. fo. 9. M. Pacuuius tragaedie. f. 17. M. Curius. fo. 20.28. Mocions in frendship. fol. 31. Moneie. fol. 42. Mutuall behauiour of freen∣des. fol. 47. N ¶ Nature in frendship. fo. 20 Nature. fol. 35.56. O ¶Offence in our freendes be∣halfe. fo. 27. Olde age. fo. 8.
Opinions of freendship disa∣lowed. fol. 38. Order of freenship. fol. 13. P ¶ Paulus Aemilius. fo. 27. Pestilence greattest in freend∣ship. fol. 58. Philus Manlius. fo. 9. Pithy oracion of Scipio. 60. Pleasant talke. fo. 44. Pleasure. fol. 14. Power of honestee. fo. 21. Pomponius Atticus. fol. 2. Preuentyng of honest reque∣stes. fol. 31. Propretee of a well staied mynde. o. 33. Profite. fo. 35.36. Prouerbe. fol. 45.54. Profite of freendship. fo. 54. Promocions. fo. 54.
Propretee of true freendship. fol. 8. P. Sulpitius tribune. fol. 2. Punisshement as due to the partners as to the rynglea∣ders. fo. 30. Pyrrhus. fol. 21. Q Q. ompeius onsull. fo. 2 Question woorthy the askyng folio. 4. R ¶Rqutyng of benefites. 34. Redrss of vices in freende∣ship. fol. 51. Rechlesnesse in frendship. 54. Richesse. fol. 7.4. Rule. fo. 42. S ¶Saiyng most repugnant to freendship. fo. 40.
Sagenesse. fol. 44. Scipio commended. fo. 6. Scipoes death bewailed. 7. Twise Consull .7. Honora∣blie broughte from the Se∣nate house. 8. Scipio made Rutilius Con∣sull. fol. 48. Scipioes alienaciō from two of his freendes. fo. 50. Scipio beyng dead, liued yet with Laelius. fo. 64. Scipioes freendship. fo. 65. Seuen sags of Grece. fol. 5. Similitude. fol. 45. Snares of subtile flatterie. 62 Socrates iudged wyse. f. 5.9. Socrates for his saiynges cō∣mended. fol. 6. Solitarinesse. fol. 56. Southng flatterie. fol. 57.
Stoikes. fol. 33. Sure freend. fo. 43. T Terence comoedie. fol. 62. Themistocles. fol. 30. T. Coruncanus. fol. 28. Timon of Athenes. fol. 55. To to folishe a thyng. fol. 58. To loue what it is. fo. 63. True frendship. fol. 39. Treuth is to be heard. fol. 57. Tried saw of Catoes. fol. 58. Treuthe. fol. 61. Two rules in frendship. 44. Tyrannes lyfe. fo. 36. U Uertue. fol. 20.34.35.53.63. Ueraie felowship. fo. 53. Unhonest requestes. fo. 25. Unlyke maners. fo. 48. Unfreendly requestes. fo 52.
Upbraydes of pleasures. 47. Usurie of pleasures. fol. 2. Want of frendship. fo. 16.17. Waies to proue frendes. 42. Waueryng mynde. fol. 44. Warinesse in frendship. 50. Wherfore frendes are sought. fol. 19. Where loue groweth. fol. 34. What is to be attributed to honest freendes. fo 41. What a freend must eshew. fol. 44. Whether new or old freendes are to be preferred. fol. 45. Woorthy of frendship. fol. 51. Who is a freend. fo. 51. Witty sentence. fo. 54. Wicked answere of Blosius. fol. 26. FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete, in the hous of Tho. Berthelette. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
