6099 S121933 99857090 22762
scenes of cavalry or soldiers on horseback, including battle formations, marching formations, and single combat MILITARIE INSTRUCTIONS for the CAVALL'RIE According to the Moderne warrs
MILITARIE INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE CAVALLRIE: OR RULES AND DIRECTIONS FOR THE SERVICE OF HORSE, COLLECTED OUT OF DIVERS FORRAIN AUTHORS ANCIENT AND MODERN, AND RECTIFIED AND SUPPLIED, ACCORD∣ING TO THE PRESENT PRACTISE OF THE LOW-COUNTREY WARRES. PROVERBS 21.31. The horse is prepared for battell: but victorie is from the Lord. Printed by the printers to the UNIVERSITIE of CAMBRIDGE. MDCXXXII.
To the Reader. OF making many books there is no end,Eccles. 12.10. said the wise King, many ages past; yet for some arts and fa∣culties, I suppose (even in this printing age of ours) we may complain of scarcitie. For among so many au∣thors ancient and modern, which have written of the Art Militarie, is it not strange that hardly any hath fully handled that which concerneth the Cavallrie? Among the ancients, Aelian hath somewhat touched upon the manner of ordering the horse, among the Grecians; and Vegetius (where he speaketh of the Romane Cavallrie) lightly passeth it over, and concludeth inLib. 3. cap. 26. these words, De equitatu sunt multa praecepta: sed cùm haec pars militiae usu exercitii, armorum genere, & equorum nobilitate profecerit, ex libris nihil arbitror colligendum, cùm praesens doctrina suffici∣at. Now the reason why they (bestowing their chief labour about the Infan∣terie) left so little direction for the horse, may be, either because that (both with Grecians and Romanes) theMagis reipublicae ne∣cessarii pedites; qui pos∣sunt ubique prodesse. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 1. foot were of greatest esteem (as that wherein their chief strength consisted, and whereon they principally relyed) & so the lesse regard was had of the horse; or else because the service of horse was notEquestris Romaneram militia imperfecta fuit, unde nostra jure potior existimanda est. Scipio Amiratus, Dissert: po∣lit. lib. 19. grown to that perfection in those times, which it since attain∣ed. For what great effect could be expected of horse using noWhen they were to charge the enemie, they used to pull off their bridles T. Liv. lib. 4. bridle, and having neitherLip. ad Polyb. lib. 3. 219. 220. saddle nor stirrops: bearing onelyPolyb. lib 6. a weak slender pole (which the very motion of the horse would shake in pieces) and a little round target (as the Romanes manner was at first) or else a staffe or kinde ofContus. lance (which they afterward used in imitation of the Grecians) with three or foure darts? and having no surer stay to counterpoise their forced motion, what cer∣taintie or violence could they use, either in charging or casting their weapons? and whereas they usually had of the light armed footCaes. Com. lib. 1. cap. 17. So did the Ger∣mans, of whose light armed foot Caesar re∣porteth thus; Tanta erat horum exercitatio∣ne celeritas, ut, jubis equorum sublevatis, cur sum adaequarent. Com. 1.10. entermingled among them, how could they be so serried together for the shock as to do any great effect in making impressions upon their enemie? which surely was the cause they were often commandedSo did the Consul Valerius in the warre against the Sabines. Liv. lib. 3. And S. Tempanius, a∣gainst the Volsci. idem lib 4. and many others. to alight, and (forsaking their horses) to fight on foot. But for modern authors there is not the like reason: and yet of so many as have written, none have treated of rules and instructions for the Cavall∣rie, untill lately George Basta, Count of the holy Empire, and Luys Mel∣zo knight of Malta, wrote their books of Cavallrie. These works of theirs afford good directions: but yet it may be said of them as Aelian saith of those authors which had written before him,Omnes ferè ità unani miter scripsisse, quasi do∣cere homines vellent non ignaros, sed satìs earum rerum peritos, quas expli∣care statuerent. Aelian. de instruend. acieb. cap. 1. That they had so written, as if none should read them but such as were alreadie skilfull in the art militarie. This defect one Walhausen taketh upon him to supply something he hath done in the motions, but for the first rudiments, for the handling of arms &c. he (as all others) is silent. But these and the like being written in the forrain lan∣guages, and among so many of our militarie pamphlets none treating of Ca∣vallrie; I have adventured (though altogether unfit for such a task) to employ some idle houres in the diligent reading, and conferring of the said authors to∣gether with such other books and informations as I could obtain out of the Low-countreys and other places, for my better satisfaction herein:Lapides & ligna ab aliis accipio, adificii tamen extructio & forma, no∣stra. Nec aranearum sa∣nè textus ideo melior, quia ex se fila gignunt: nec noster vilior, quia ex alienis libamus, ut apes. Lips. Polit. endea∣vouring
to extract the marrow and quintessence of their prolixer discourses, and to digest them into such a method, as I conceived might afford brevi∣tie and perspicuitie: wherein I have observed to go upon good grounds, affir∣ming nothing of mineNihil mihi authoritatis assumo, sed horum, quos suprà retuli, ea quae di∣spersa sunt, velut in ordi∣nem epitomata conscribo. Veget. lib. 1. cap. 18. owne authoritie. It is true, I have sometimes made bold to dissent from others, but adding my reason, and leaving the judicious reader to his libertie. For the stile, I conceived theNeque curiosam ali∣quam verborum inanita∣tem conquirentes, sed verbis tantùm communi∣bus planísque usi, milita∣rem dicendi formam po∣tissimùm secuti sumus. Leo Tact. in Epilogo. bluntest and plainest to be most proper for this subject. If my annotations be displeasing to any, they may use them like countrey stiles, and step over them. To others they may serve to shew the truth of that assertion, That aProved at large by Sr. Cl. Edmonds, in his pre∣face to Caesars commen∣taries by him transla∣ted. meer practicall knowledge cannot make a perfect souldier: for had we not been beholding toApud veteres res mili∣tatis in oblivionem saepi∣us venit, sed à libris repe∣tita est, postea ducum authoritate firmata. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10. books, the militarie art (in all likelihood) had been utterly obscured from our know∣ledge. For what is there in these modern warres, which is not borrowed from antiquitie? wherein we follow them step by step (mutatis mutandis, the later inventions of fire weapons, and the use and dependencie there of onely excepted) not onely in their manner, but even retaining their very words of command; as in this treatise is partly shewed, and would be more manifestly apparent if the subject were Infanterie; which no way disparageth the modern practise, but rather (for the antiquitie of it) gives it the more respect and estimation. Now, lest the Tyro or untutored horseman should be deterred, and should judge his task to be overgreat; I have set down a table of the chapters, that so he may apply himself, onely to those things (at first) which are princi∣pally necessarie for him to know and practise. The defects of our trained bands of horse, will argue the work neither unne∣cessarie nor unseasonable, had it but had the hap to light into the hands of a better workman. But as I have seen when an excellent musician could not be intreated to handle an instrument, some bungler hath fallen upon it; which caused the musician (out of impatience and indignation) to undertake it; so, if these essaies may be a means to incite some one or other, better able,Nam cùm hoc opus, usús potiùs aliorum, quàm meae commendationis causâ ag∣gressus sim, adjuvari me ab bis, qui aliquid illi astruent, non argui cre∣dam Frontin. in praef to put pen to paper, I shall think my pains abundantly rewarded. In the mean time I desire they may be received with the right hand, as they are offered; and conclude in the words of the Poet, —Horat. epist. 6 lib. 1. Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
❧ A table of the chapters. PART I. Of levying of men. Chap. 1 OF Officers in generall page 1 Chap. 2 Of the Generall of horse page 3 Chap. 3 Of the Lieutenant generall of horse page 5 Chap. 4 Of the Commissary generall page 7 Chap. 5 Of the Quartermaster generall page 8 Chap. 6 Of the Captain ibid. Chap. 7 Of the Lieutenant page 10 Chap. 8 Of the Cornet page 12 Chap. 9 Of the particular Quartermasters page 13 Chap. 10 Of the Corporalls page 14 Chap. 11 Of the Trumpetters ibid. Chap. 12 Of the Auditor page 15 Chap. 13 Of the Provost marshall page 15 Of souldiers in generall. Chap. 14 Of the corruption of the Cavallrie page 16 Chap. 15 How to reform the Cavallrie page 18 Chap. 16 Of distributing booty page 20 Chap. 17 Of the souldiers pay page 22 Chap. 18 Of supplying the Cavallrie with good horses page 24. Chap. 19 Of the proportion of Cavallrie with the In∣fanterie page 26 Of souldiers in particular. Chap. 20 Of the enrolling of a souldier, and his qualities page 27 Chap. 21 Of the arming of the Cavallrie, and their kindes page 28 Chap. 22 Of the Lancier his arming ibid. Chap. 23 Of arming the Cuirassier page 29 Chap. 24 Of arming the Harquebusier & Carabine page 30 Chap. 25 Of arming the Dragon page 31 Chap. 26 Of exercise in generall, and the necessitie of it ibid. Chap. 27 Of managing the horse page 34 Chap. 28 Of exercising the lance in their postures page 36 Chap. 29 Of exercising the Cuirassier in their postures page 37 Chap. 30 Of exercising the Harque∣busier and Carabine in their postures page 43 Chap. 31 Of exercising the Dragon in their postures page 44 Chap. 32 Of exercising the Cavallrie in their motions page 45 PART II. Of marching. Chap. 1 OF Guides page 56 Chap. 2 Of intelligence page 57 Chap. 3 Of the order of marching page 59 Chap. 4 Of scouts and discoverers page 60 Chap. 5 Of the order of marching by day page 61 Chap. 6 Of the order of marching by night page 62 Chap. 7 How the baggage is to march page 64 PART III. Of encamping. Chap. 1 OF making the quarters page 65 Chap. 2 Of distributing the quarters page 66 Chap. 3 Of the necessity of securing the quarters page 67 Chap. 4 Of the manner of securing the quarters page 68 Chap. 5 Of the Rendez-vous, or alarm-place page 69 Chap. 6 Of the guards page 70 Chap. 7 Of the sentinells page 72 Chap. 8 Of scouts to discover the high-wayes page 75 Chap. 9 Of forraging page 78 Chap. 10 Of garrisons page 79 Chap. 11 Of spies page 81 Chap. 12 Of dislodging. page 83 PART IIII. Of embattelling. Chap. 1 HOw to assail a quarter page 85 Chap. 2 Of giving the charge page 88 Chap. 3 Of embuscadoes page 89 Chap. 4 How to do, meeting the enemy marching page 94 Chap. 5 How to receive the charge page 95 Chap. 6 Of ordering the troops for combat by single companies page 97 Chap. 7 How the Cavallrie are to fight against foot page 99. Chap. 8 Of ordering the Cavallrie in battell page 100 Chap. 9 Of certain ceremonies before fight page 105
MILITARIE INSTRUCTIONS for the CAVALLRIE. THE ARGUMENT. CAVALLRIE, so called ofDerived from the Latine word Caballus, and this from the Greek word . Cavallo; (which in the Italian and Spanish signifi∣eth a horse) is worthily esteemed a most noble and necessarie part of the military profession: which being the subject of my discourse, it may be reduced to these foure heads. Primùm idoneos eliga∣mus, &c. dein & in iti∣nere, & in castris, & in praeliis ipsis instructum exercitum habeamus; Aelianus de instruen∣dis aciebus, cap. 3.1 The levying of men, 2 Their marching, 3 Their encamping, 4 Their embattelling. In the levying of men, there be two things considerable; 1. The election of officers. 2. The election of souldiers. Concerning the officers, they may be considered, 1. In ge∣nerall, 2. In particular. CHAP. I. Of officers in generall. AS in politique government, so in this militarie profession, every man by a naturall impression is ready to conceive himself to be fit to com∣mand and govern others, though he never knew how to obey; whereas in every mechanicall trade or manufacture, an apprenticehood is first passed in the learning of it, before it be professed and exercised. In this
profession of armes (Le plus relevé, le plus hasardeux, & le plus difficille sub∣ject du monde. Le mestier des Nobles, la prattique des courageux, & l'exer∣cice des Princes & des Roys; Monsieur Praissac. an art obtained with greatest dif∣ficulty, and practised with most danger) men would be Captains before they be souldiers. And hereof the chief cause is ignorance, the fruitfull mother of all errours. For surely, if their end and aime were honour, and they knew how frail and mutable the estate of a souldier is; and that in a moment a man may loose all the reputation obtained by many yeares industry; (In aliis rebus si quid erratum est, potest post∣modum corrigi: Praelio∣rum delicta emendatio∣nem non recipiunt, cùm poena statius sequatur errorem; Cato apud Vegetium, lib. 1. cap. 13 the errours in warre admitting no amendment, as in other professions; but carrying their present punishment with them) and had they seen many shamefully chased from the army, and proclaimed infa∣mous; and others passe through the hands of the hang∣man; they would (doubtlesse) strive with much industry and diligence to enable themselves, before they came to un∣dertake the exercise of so dangerous an employment. And they are not a little mistaken, which think theirNon repellatur impe∣rator pauper si cum vir∣tute sit, quanquam claris ac illustribus majoribus ortus non sit; Leo. Tract. cap. 2. 25. birth a sufficient pretence to places of honour, without any quali∣fication or merit; there being other things more reall and essentiallIn legitimo duce quin{que} haec requiro; Scientiam, virtutem, providenti∣am, autoritatem, for∣tunam; Lips. polit. lib. 5. cap. 15. required in an officer; namely, Knowledge, experi∣ence, valour, dexteritie, &c. To be under command for a time, depresseth those ve∣hement passions which nature exciteth, especially in young men, which would be very dangerous in a chief or com∣mander. Moreover, it accustometh a man to danger, andScientia rei bellicae di∣micandi nutrit audaci∣am; Veg. lib. 1. cap. 15. maketh him couragious; so as being suddainly assailed, he can recollect himself without astonishment; a most neces∣sary thing in a commander. Adde to this, that by using himself to travell and labour, watching, hunger, thirst, rain, and frost; and byMars is therefore called Gradivus (as Fe∣stus hath it) quia grada∣tim, & per ordinem mi∣litaria officia distribuen∣da sunt. And that this was the constant practise of antiquitie, is most ap∣parent. Rufus diu ma∣nipularis, deia centurio, mox castris praefectus; Tacit. lib. 2. &c. an orderly ascent (by degrees) from a Cor∣porall to a Quartermaster, from thence to a Cornet, and so to a Lieutenant, he prepareth himself for a Captains charge. He learneth the trick of entertaining his souldiers, and to keep them in good affection and reverence towards him. He knows their severall dispositions and sufficiencies, and accordingly entrusteth them with employments. Honour must be his chief end; to attain which, he must be very vi∣gilant not to looseOccasio in bello am∣pliùs solet juvare quàm virtus; Veg. lib. 3. cap. 26. any occasion of any brave exploit: by which means he will be alwayes observing his enemy, studying how to prevent him or endammage him; alwayes bearing in minde this maxim, That in warre no great or
remarkable matter can be effected without danger and di∣ligence. To this end let him be sure to take heed that heQuid fieri debeat tra∣ctato cum multis; quid verò facturus sis, cum paucissimis ac fidelissi∣mis, vel potiùs ipse te∣cum; Veg. lib. 3. cap. 26. trust not too much to his own judgement and valour, without acquainting his officers with his counsels. And let him so know the severall inclinations and sufficiencies of his souldiers, as to take particular notice of such as deserve well, and to reward them accordingly; and to rid himself of base and debauched fellows and cowards. He must alwayes aspire (in way ofFor this, Caesar re∣cordeth a memorable example in Pulfio and Varenus; lib. 5. cap. 19. vertuous emulation) to higher degrees of honour.Sit celso adversus pe∣cuniam animo; Plutarch. in Philop. Covetousnesse he must hate; for nothing will better continue his souldiers good affecti∣ons towards him then liberalitie. Gaming he must detest.Philopoemenes pubem ad se armandum impulit, deinde delicias & luxum eorum optimè invertit. Omnes inflammavit, ut quotidianis repressis in corpus sumptibus, gesti∣rent in militari & bellico ornatu ostentare se splen∣didos. Profusio impensa in hujusmodi res, roborat animum, extollítque; Plutarch. in Philop. In stead of costly apparell, let him delight in good armes and horses; wherein oftentimes both his life and honour consisteth. He must be continent and sober, not given to lu∣xurie norThe States edict of Marshall law provi∣deth, that such as in their drunkennesse shall commit any of∣fence, shall not there∣fore be any way excu∣sed, but the more se∣verely punished; Art. 67. drunkennesse, but alwayes be as a good example to his souldiers: for otherwise he cannot have that requi∣site libertie to chastise them for those vices which his own conscience will accuse himself to be guiltie of. Above all, let him set before his eyes (as the originall and foundation of all perfection) the feare of God; carry∣ing himself (so farre as may be) internally and externally inculpable. For the horrour of a guiltie conscience, and the imminent danger and apprehension of death meeting toge∣ther, take away all courage and valour. And thus having reformed himself, he shall the more easily reform his soul∣diers, and make them fit for every honourable enterprise. CHAP. II. Of officers in particular. Of the Generall of horse. TOuching the particular officers, theIphicrates resembled an army to a mans bo∣dy; calling the heavy armed the body, the light armed the hands, the horse the feet, and the Generall the head; Plutarch. Generall of the horse, as being one of the principall Chiefs of an armie, must be a souldier of extraordi∣nary experience and valour; having in charge the nerve of the principall forces, and on whom the good successe of many designes and actions dependeth, as being
most usually executed by the Cavallrie, especially in bat∣tells: where the charging of the enemy in good order usu∣ally giveth victorie; and contrariwise, theWitnesse the battell of Gembloers, described by Meteren. lib. 8. where the Infanterie is over∣thrown by their own horse. So did the Burgundians; Les hommes d'ar∣mes Bourguignons rompirent leurs propres Archers; Phil. de Comines. lib. 1. cap. 3. disorders of the Cavallrie often disturb and disband the whole armie. The Generall of the horse was wont to supply the place of Lieu∣tenant Generall of the army, and in the Lord Generalls ab∣sence to command the whole armie. True it is, that the Lord Marshall, forasmuch as he giveth the orders, used to have some superioritie of command, according to the opi∣nions of some; whence it cometh that the Lord Generall, absenting himself from the army, used to take along with him either the Generall of horse, or the Lord Marshall, to avoid the occasions of competition. It is his office to take particular notice not onely of the Captains and officers, but also of those private souldiers which are carefull and pun∣ctuall in their service,Perscrutaberis qui se in bello stremè gesserint, illisque idoneos honores habebis, ignavos antem quo par est supplicio con∣stringes; Leo. Tact. cap. 16. rewarding andMonsieur de la Noiie reporteth, that (in his time) in the regiment of Collonel Pedro de Pas (consisting of 23 companies of Spani∣ards) there was more then 1200 crowns a moneth given for ex∣traordinary services & signall acts. Whence he draweth this obser∣vation, Qui est un bon tesmoignage quil estoit rempli d'hommes valeu∣reux; Discours Polit. & Milit. honouring them in publique when they perform some signall act, and advan∣cing them to offices without partialitie. On the other side,Omnes culpas legibus vindicet, nulli errantium credatur ignoscere; Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10. he must chastise delinquents, and such as are wanting in their endeavours: by which means he shall be reverenced and loved of good men, and feared of such as are bad. It belongeth to his care, that the Cavallrie be in good equi∣page, and fitted with all necessaries requisite: And that the companies (being to march) be provided of nags; without which the souldiers can hardly preserve their horse of ser∣vice, by reason that with them they must go to forrage (for want of bidets or nags) after their march, and presently enter into guard in the army or quarter, without any rest to refresh their horses. He is not to suffer the Captains ei∣ther to make officers, or to absent themselves from their companies, without his leave and approbation. He hath his officers apart, and in that which concerneth the Cavall∣rie, neither the Lord Marshall, nor Lord Generall himself useth to dispose of any thing without his advice. If he passe among the quarters of Cavallrie or Infanterie, his trumpets are to sound; but not where the Lord Generall lodgeth, or where he is in person. When he commandeth in the armie (in absence of the Lord Generall) upon occasion of fight, his place is in the battell, that he may be able to give order to all. He hath usually a companie (heretofore of lances) to
lodge with him, and to serve him as his guard; having usually six souldiers or more of his companie attending on him.Of Caesar it is said, Dubium cautior an au∣dentior. Suet. A good Commander should rather look be∣hinde him then before him, said Sertorius. Plutarch. in Sertor. He should not resolve upon any enterprise, unlesse he first consider seriously of all that might happen; that so, propounding to himself greater difficulties in the action, then in effect they be, he may prepare remedies surpas∣sing all the said difficulties: it being a benefit not to be ex∣pressed, to be able toTemeritas, praeterquam quòd stulta est, etiam in∣felix; Livius 22. foresee (with good judgement) those things which might succeed in the uncertain and va∣riable accidents of warre. Especially he must beIntentus fis, ut neque tua occasioni desis, neque suum hosti des. Ibid. ready in execution: for suppose a determination never so well grounded, yet it may prove vain and hurtfull, if it be not executed with requisite promptitude. CHAP. III. Of the Lieutenant Generall of horse. THe charge of the Lieutenant Generall of the horse hath ever been held of very great im∣portance; and therefore must be supplyed by a person of great experience and valour: one that must be very carefull and diligent, because he usually marcheth and lodgeth with the Cavallrie. For which cause he ought to be well versed in the opportuni∣tie of the wayes, upon occasion of meeting the enemy in marching. Erat Philopoemen prae∣cipuae in ducendo agmine locísque capiendis soler∣tiae atque usus. Nec bel∣li tantùm temporibus, sed etiam in pace ad id maximè animum exer∣cuerat. Ʋbi iter quo∣piam faceret, & ad diffi∣cilem transitu saltum ve∣nisset, contemplatus ab omni parte loci naturam, cúm solus iret, secum ipse agitabat animo; cùm co∣mites haberet, ab iis quae∣rebat, si hostis coloco ap∣paruisset; quid si à fronte, quid si à latere hoc aut illo, quid si à tergo adori∣retur, capiendum consilii foret; T. Livius dec. 4. lib. 5.He must alwayes have his thoughts busied about the motions of the enemie, discoursing with himself from what part they might shew themselves, with what num∣ber of men, whether with Infanterie or not, in how many houres they might come upon him from their armie or gar∣rison, and whether they might present themselves in a place of advantage; that so it might be prevented, as need should require. He must also advisedly choose commodious places for the quarters or lodgings, providing good guards, causing the highwayes to be scoured or discovered, placing men on
those passages where the enemie might make head, not neglecting to send out rounders, and omitting no diligence to secure the quarter in which the Cavallrie findeth it self exposed to greater dangers then can befall it any other way, especially being lodged without Infanterie. He must also procure to have spies, not onely in the ene∣mies army, but also upon their frontiers, to penetrate their designes and intentions, omitting no inventions which may stand him in stead to avoid inconveniences; know∣ing that diligence is the mother of good fortune.Cui enim tanta potesta∣tis insignia tribuuntur, cujus fidei atque virtuti possessorum fortunae, tute∣la virium, salus militum, rei publicae creditur glo∣ria: non tantùm pro uni∣verso exercitu, sed etiam pro singulis contuberna∣libus debet esse solicitus. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10. His par∣ticular care is to see that the Captains wrong not their soul∣diers, that they keep their companies in good state and well armed, and that themselves and their officers do their en∣deavours, and observe good order and discipline. Towards the souldiers he must be no lesse affable, and readie to heare them willingly in their just complaints, and to help them in their necessities, then rigorous in pu∣nishing. He should also (himself being free from covetousnesse) give order to others to use noExtortions (of di∣verse kindes) are pu∣nishable with death, by the edict of Mar∣shall law, published by the States of the united provinces; Artic. 41. extortion, whereby the country is ruined, and the souldier made odious, to the prejudice of the Prince his service; it being evident that too great a libertie of the souldiers produceth nothing but very bad effects. Upon divers occasions of sending a good part of the Ca∣vallrie to divers places, the charge is given to the Lieute∣nant generall; not onely of the horse, but also of the foot which accompany them, according to the occurrences: for which cause he must also know how to command the In∣fanterie. In absence of the Generall the whole weight resteth up∣on him; and to him are the orders sent from the Lord Ge∣nerall or Lord Marshall, and to him (as Chief) reports are made of all the occurrences of the Cavallrie. He may sequester a Captain from his companie, upon just cause and demerit; but cannot restore him without or∣der from the Generall, who first gives notice thereof to the Lord Generall. He was wont to have a companie of lances, which usually were lodged neare his person; whereof foure soul∣diers
alwayes attend him. When he passeth by the quarters of Cavallrie the trumpets sound, but not in the Generalls quarter, or where he is. When the Generall of horse com∣mandeth the whole army, and therefore takes his place (in fight) in the battell, the Lieutenant Generall placeth him∣self in the vanguard of the Cavallrie, where otherwise the Generall useth to be. CHAP. IIII. Of the Commissarie Generall. THe Commissarie Generall commandeth in the absence of the Lieutenant Generall, and there∣fore must be a man of great experience. This charge was first instituted by Don Ferrand de Gonzagua, afterward continued by the Duke of Alva, and confirmed by the Duke of Parma, and so remained. He must be vigilant, and carefull to appease dissentions which grow among the souldiers, as he which dealeth most with them. He is to send and distribute the orders, and keepThe Romanes were very exact in keeping records and lists of their forces, watches, duties, payes, &c. Quotidianas (etiam in pace) vigilias; item ex∣cubitum sive angarias de omnibus centuriis & contuberniis, quae vicis∣sim milites faciunt; ut nè quis contra justitiam praegravetur, aut alicui praestetur immunitas: no∣mina eorum qui vices suas fecerunt, brevibus inseruntur. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 19. re∣cord of the lists of the guards, convoyes, and other services. He is to go every evening to receive the orders and the word; and having given it to the Generall and Lieutenant Gene∣rall, he is to give it to the Quartermaster Generall, that he may distribute it. Sometime he hath a company of har∣quebusiers given him, in acknowledgement of his merit, not as annexed to his place. In all actions he is of singular use, entrusted especially with the execution of the orders. In appointing the lodgings, or places in severall exploits, he must be free from partialitie; and such as at this time have cause of discontent, he must make amends the next; that so they may see it was of necessitie, not of partialitie. His place is of very great use and importance, as will appeare throughout this discourse.
CHAP. V. Of the Quartermaster Generall. THe Quartermaster Generall must be a man of great dexteritie and diligence, and well experienced in Cavallrie.This officer among the Romanes was cal∣led Praefectus castrorum. Ad quem castrorum po∣sitio, valli & fossae desti∣natio pertinebat. Taber∣nacula vel casae militum, cum impedimentis omni∣bus nutu ipsius curaban∣tur; Veg. lib. 2. cap. 11. It is his office to appoint the lodgings or quarterings; wherefore he must well know the coun∣trey, the villages and places, where to place the corps dugards, and sentinells, and what wayes must be scoured. He is to keep a list of the guards, convoyes, caval∣cadoes (or exploits by horse) &c. He must visit the guards and sentinells by day and night, and must shew the allarm-place to the particular Quartermasters, when they go to him in the evening to receive the word. He must (byItineraria non tantùm adnotata, sed etiam pi∣cta habent: ut non solùm consilio mentis, verùm aspectu oculorum viam profecturis, locúmque castris idoneum, eligat; Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6. maps or otherwise) be well informed of the countrey, know∣ing the qualitie and bignesse of every village, and their di∣stance one from another, obtaining from the Marshall of the field some one of the countrey to inform him. He must be true in his reports, and if any order (for haste) be given him by word of mouth, himself must go and deliver it, and not trust it to others. On the Spanish side, in the Low-countrey warres, the Quartermaster Generall hath two assistants allowed him, to help to discharge the travells of his office; but on the States side that service is performed by the particular Quartermasters. CHAP. VI. Of the Captain. SInce that theSo Melzo and Basta testifie, and complain of it in their writings. Captains places have been dispo∣sed of by the Prince (as the Captains in Flan∣ders are appointed at the court of Spain) there are grown these two inconveniences upon it; First, young and unexperienced gentlemen are made Ca∣ptains. Secondly, many good souldiers are lost, which see∣ing
their hopes of advancement by degrees and merit cut off, abandon the service. Whereas the charge of a Captain of horse is of so great importance and qualitie in the army, as it should not be given to any, but to men of singular valour and experience: for often it falleth out, that of themselves, without orders or counsel of any other (as occasion requi∣reth) they must execute services of great weight and conse∣quence.Dux itaque vigiians, sobrius, prudens, &c. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9. Sit agilis, magìs ad fa∣ciendum quàm ad loquen∣dum paratus: qui suos ad disciplinam retineat, & ad armorum exercitia co∣gat, ut bene vestiti sint, ut arma omnium defri∣centur ac splendeant; Cum admiratione equum possint ascendere, equitare fortissimè, conto scienter uti, ad omnia eruditi quae equestris pugna deposcit; Veg. lib. 2. cap. 14. He must be vigilant, sober, continent, modest in his apparell, curious to have good horses and arms, thereby to give example to his souldiers, and to see them punctuall in their service, and exactly observant of discipline; for their excursions and extortions cannot be remedied, unlesse the Captain keep them in order: wherein if he be negligent, he looseth his reputation with his superiours. If he be co∣vetous or given to gaming, he is ready to be drawn to lay hands (oftentimes) on the pay due to the souldiers; where∣by he also overthroweth his reputation and credit. A co∣vetous desire of riches should not enter into a generous heart. He must diligently and punctually observe the or∣ders which shall be given or sent him from his superiours, and be at the place at the appointed houre with his com∣panie, and others under his charge. On all occasions he must be first on horseback, and keep his company full and com∣pleat. He must alwayes strive by desert to advance him∣self to higher places, alwayes studying how to endammage his enemy; to this end he ought often toPraecipua res & utili∣tas ducis, est ut, adhibitis ex universo exercitu sci∣entibus viris, de suis & hostium copiis saepius tra∣ctet, &c. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9. consult with his best experienced souldiers. He must endeavour to know every one of his souldiers by theirSciat etiam (si potest fieri) nominatim, quis comes, quis tribunus, quis domesticus, quis contubernalis, &c. Ibid. cap. 10. names, that so he may distinctly name them upon occasion of employment; it be∣ing an encouragement to them to be known by name of their Captain. Whatsoever should befall, he mustNam necesse est, ad fu∣gam parati sint, qui du∣cem suum sentiant despe∣rare; Veg. lib. 3. cap. 22. take heed of discovering any feare, on whose courage and coun∣tenance the souldiers depend, and must alwayes shew a good resolution in the orders which he shall give, without confounding himself; knowing that there is no place for counsel in him, who hath his discourse of reason seazed by feare. He mustStrenuos viros mune∣ribus honorabis, &c. Ità enim fiet, ut majori fortiorí{que} animo sint qui dimicabunt. Ʋbi enim honores & praemia ha∣bentur bonis, supplicia & poenae afferuntur malis, ibi bonam spem habebit ex∣ercitus; Leo, Tact. cap. 16. cherish his well deserving souldiers, and cashere the contrary; and it must be his care to have one or more of his souldiers wellTuum & hostilem exer∣citum, locorum situm, na∣turam regionis nosce; Livius, 22. skilled in the wayes of the countrey, to serve him as guides: (because the boores
are neither alwayes at hand, nor alwayes to be trusted) and to such he is to give some allowance extraordinary. Out of his company he is to choose his Lieutenants, Cornets, &c. weighing onely every ones merit, without any passion; whereby he shall give content and encouragement to his souldiers, and shall be sure not to be crossed by the Generall in the confirmation of the said officers. The charge of the troops used to be given to the Ca∣ptains of lances, as having a prerogative above other Ca∣ptains of horse, or to the eldest Captain: yet the Chief ought to have regard to their sufficiencie for command, and to give the charge to them that are ablest to perform it. In absence of the Captains of lances (when they were in use) the Captains of cuirassiers commanded; and in their absence, the Captains of harquebusiers. The Lieutenants observed the same rules. CHAP. VII. Of the Lieutenant. IT is necessary, that the Lieutenant of a troop of horse be a man of abilitie and experience, nou∣rished and educated in Cavallrie. To this office such were usually raised, which (for their de∣serts) had been Corporalls and Cornets. So much his name implieth: for the French word Lieu∣tenant signifieth one which supplieth the place of another.In the Captains absence he commandeth the compa∣nie, upon whom usually all difficulties do rest; because (oft times) the companies are given to young gentlemen which want experience. He must be strict in seeing the souldiers do their service with all fitting punctualitie, and to have a care of their horses and arms.The Lieutenant (with antiquity) was called Tergidux, that is, Reare-comman∣der; and therefore the reare is fitly assigned him as his proper place. He alwayes march∣eth in the reare of the companie, causing the souldiers to follow the Captain and Standard (or Cornet) in good or∣der, well closed together, and to suffer none to depart from the troop. Upon occasion of fight he is still to be on the reare with his sword drawn, encouraging the souldiers, and killing any that shall offer to flie or disband: but in case
of the Captains absence, he shall take the Captains place, appointing an officer to be in the reare. In the ordinarie marching of the companie, or passing by some place, or go∣ing to the allarm-place, or to the parado, the Lieutenant must not take the Captains place, but march in the reare, because the lances and cuirassiers have their Cornets to leade them at the head of the companie. Among the harquebu∣siers the Lieutenant was wont to take the Captains place, (according to Melzo and Basta) because then they had noAs the Velites among the Romanes, qui nec signa propria habuere, nec duces; Lips. ad Po∣lyb. lib. 2. Cornets; but these last warres having given them Cornets, the rule holdeth for them as for the lances and cuirassiers. The Romanes re∣quired it in their pri∣vate souldiers, and to cast account also. In quibusdam notarum peritia, calculandi com∣putandíque usus exigitur; Veg. lib. 2. cap. 19.He must of necessitie be able to write and reade, because he keepeth the list of the names and surnames of the soul∣diers of the companie; and by reason of orders or letters sent to him from his superiours, which he must not shew to others. He must know the sufficiencie of every souldier, and upon occasion make use of them accordingly. The companie going to the guard in any place, and ap∣proaching neare it, the Lieutenant goeth before to take no∣tice of the Corps-du-guard, and speaking with the Lieute∣nant of the companie which is to change, informeth him∣self by him of the place, of the sentinells, for day and night, what wayes he must scoure, and of all other things requisite. He must himself go and place the sentinells, visit∣ing them often, and using all diligence, keeping himself al∣wayes armed, (at least with the breast and cask) and his horse bridled, when he hath the guard. The companie being lodged in some village, he must cause the billets to be signed by the Quartermaster of his companie, to be distributed to the souldiers before the Cor∣nets lodging, where the Alto is made to attend the said bil∣lets; that so (in case of an allarm) the souldiers may know where to assemble together at their Cornet. If they stay longer then a day in one place, the Lieutenant is to visit the houses, to see good rule kept by the souldiers; and being to march away, to command them carefully to put out their fires. Going to be lodged in a town or sort, there to keep their garrison, the Lieutenant must accommodate their lodgings according to their degrees and deserts. And wheresoever they lodge longer then a day, he must write
the names of the souldiers on the said billets, and keep a register of them; that so upon any complaint of their hostes, it may be easily remedied, by the ready finding and punish∣ing of the delinquents. When the companie is to march, and the trumpets sound to horse,The good example of a Leader hath ever been observed to be of marvellous efficacie, according to that of the Poet, —Componi∣tur orbis Regis ad exem∣plum, &c. Ipse manu sua pila ge∣rens, praecedit anheli Militis ora pedes: mon∣strat tolerare labores, Non jubet; Lucan. 9. de Catone. he must be first ready and mounted, having care that all the souldiers immediatly do the same. And if he finde any lingering, either of lazinesse, or with a purpose to stay behinde to pillage the houses, he must chastise them with all severitie, for example to others. He must have knowledge of the countrey and wayes, being often sent upon exploits where the guides are not alwayes readie. If the company be charged by the enemy, the Lieutenant, with some of the best mounted souldiers, is to remain be∣hinde. CHAP. VIII. Of the Cornet. THe Cornet of horse must be couragious. In absence of the Captain and Lieutenant he commandeth the companie. His place of march is in the front, before the first rank, yet behinde the Captain. In fight, the Cornet of lances used to march even with the Captain, upon his left hand; and charging with him, strove to break the standard upon his enemy; which being so broken and falling to the ground,This is contrary to the use of Infanterie, among which the pre∣serving of the co∣lours hath ever been prized above life: as appeared (among o∣thers) by one Jaques Martaeus, who finding himself forsaken by most of the souldiers, fought so long as he could; then wound himself in his colours and died; Meteren. lib. 4. But if the enemy should get the cornet unbroken, then it were a great disgrace; Basta lib. 4. he was not to regard to get it up again (especially not to alight for it.) If he were to charge a flying enemy (whether horse or foot) he was also to assay to break his standard. The Cornet of cuirassiers in march hath his place at the head of the company, and also presenteth himself in the allarm-place; but in fight he is to be in the middle of the troop, leaving ⅔ parts of the souldiers behinde him:Optimus cujus{que} decu∣ria praponi, & ductor caeterorum omnium esse debet; Aelian. cap. 5. Curandum, ut etiam ju∣gum secundum milite constet idoneo; Ib. cap. 13 The reason is, because the first rank being the edge, it must be made good by the se∣cond and the rest, if occasion be. those before him must be of the best armed, and most couragious. He must also keep a list of the companie, to send so many to the guard as the Captain or Lieutenant shall appoint. Once
a day, at the Lord Generalls first passing by the troop, he is to do obeysance, by inclining the cornet towards the ground. CHAP. IX. Of the particular Quartermasters. THeThe particular Quartermasters, the Romanes called Meta∣tores; Veg. lib. 2. cap. 7. Also Mensores, qui in ca∣stris ad podismum dime∣tiuntur loca, in quibus milites tentoria figant, vel hospitia in civitati∣bus praestant; Ibid. Metatores sive mensura∣tores praemittes, qui ca∣strorum ambitum, in quo castra ponentur, dimeti∣antur; & certam quan∣dam mensuram cum pro∣portione justa unicuique turmae tribuant; Leo Tact. cap. 9.7. particular Quartermasters should be men so qualified, as reasonably they might pretend the Cornet, and (in absence of the Cornet) might command the companie. When all the companies are lodged together, they accompanie the Quar∣termaster Generall in making the quarters: but being to be lodged in severall places (as often it happeneth) some ac∣companie the Lieutenant Generall, others the Commissary Generall. Where a Captain commandeth the quarter, the particular Quartermaster of that respective company ma∣keth the quarter. There is much fidelitie required in them, in consideration of distributing the word, and the billets. They use also to distribute the souldiers pay, in the King of Spains warres; but on the States side the clerks of the companie onely meddle with the souldiers pay, and ac∣count to their Captain; having a cuirassiers pay, and be∣ing exempted from bearing arms, or doing the duties of a souldier. In going with the Quartermaster Generall to make the lodgings, the Quartermaster must be very diligent, taking with him one or two souldiers (such as the Lieutenant shall appoint him) which shall return to their companie, and conduct them to their quarter.
CHAP. X. Of the Corporalls. COrporalls are very usefull in a troop of horse. They must assist the Lieutenant in placing the sentinells, when the souldiers of their particu∣lar squadron are to perform that service. The harquebusiers are usually sent to discover or scoure the high-wayes, and to be forerunners or scouts, under the charge of one of their Corporalls;Mistakes in such as are sent out to disco∣ver, do often bring much trouble upon the army, and shame upon themselves. A memorable example hereof is recorded by Phil. de Comines, of the Burgundians, who ta∣king a field of great thistles to be a grosse of their enemies lan∣ciers, reported it so to their Chiefs, and cau∣sed a great hurly bur∣ly in the whole army; Lib. 1. cap. 11. for which respects he must be a man of experience. Some passage or place of im∣portance being to be guarded, a Corporall is sent thither with his squadron. He must be able to write and reade, keeping a list of his squadron. The Captain alloweth him half a place of forrage, and a share of 10 per cent. CHAP. XI. Of the Trumpeters. IT is not enough that a Trumpeter know how (exactly) to sound all the severall sounds of the trumpet, but he must also be discreet and judi∣cious; not onely to be fit to deliver embassies and messages as they ought, but (at his return) toNe manco si lasci troppo usare la fre∣quentia di venire trombetti & tam∣burri: perche in quel'essercito tall'-hora son huomini molto astuti & pra∣tichi; da poterti no∣cere assai; G. Cata∣neo. di fortif. &' cap. 4. report what he hath observed concerning the enemies works and guards, and what he hath further gathered and spied. To do this, he must be wittie and subtile, knowing how to in∣vent and affirm things which are not, artificially concealing whatsoever passeth among those of his own side. He must sound theThat is, set on the saddle; being the first sound when the horse are to march: the next is a chevall, that is, mount on horseback: the third and last is a standart, that is, repaire to your Cornet. See chap. 32. boutezselle precisely at the houre appointed him; and when the Cornet giveth him the list of the guards, he must signifie it unto them. One Trumpeter must alwayes lodge with the Cornet, to whom the Captain is to give means for his entertainment. He must alwayes have his trumpet about him, to have it ready at a sudden allarm.
CHAP. XII. Of the Auditor. ON the Spanish side in the Low-countreys, the Cavallrie have an Auditor by themselves; who must be a man of great integritie, well seen in the laws, and of great practice. In the absence of the Auditor Generall, he supplieth his place. He hea∣reth and judgeth the causes of the Cavallrie, and maketh re∣port of all that passeth to the Generall, or the Lieutenant Generall in his absence; without whose order he cannot ex∣ecute any of his sentences. The Cavallrie lying in garrison, he condemneth not to death, without reporting first to the Lord Generall and Auditor Generall. He is to keep neare the person of the Generall or Lieutenant Generall, who are to see him duely respected. He is to take notice of the prices of victuall which are brought to the quarter of horse, that they be sold at a reasonable rate; and to see that the victu∣allers suffer no extortion by the Provost Marshall or his officers. But in the States army, the horse and foot have but one Auditor or Fiscall Generall; who passeth no sentence him∣self, but that is done by theThe councel of warre among the Ro∣manes, consisted of their Legates, Questor, Tribunes, and the Cen∣turions: Convocato con∣cilio, &c. omniúm{que} ordi∣num adhibitis centurio∣nibus; Caesar Com. lib. 1. cap. 16. councel of warre, wherein every Captain hath a voice. CHAP. XIII. Of the Provost Marshall. OF all things in the charge of the Provost Mar∣shall, his principall care must be about the vi∣ctualls. He must be an honest man, and con∣tent with his fees. He is to look to the weights and measures, and to guard the victuallers (or sutlers) from insolencies. Himself or some of his men must alwayes be in the market-place, or where the victualls are sold; and he is to inform himself where and at what price the sutlers
buy their victuall, that the Commissarie and Auditor may tax them accordingly. He must cause the orders to be strict∣ly observed which shall be published in the horse-quarters: and those quarters must he purge of rogues and theeves. He must alwayes carry his staffe or truncheon in his hand, (the badge of his office) and having the same,See the States edict, Art. 78. it is death for any souldier any way to lay hands on him. If he be to take a pri∣soner, he must not enter the quarter without leave of the Chief, but the Chief is to cause the delinquent to be deli∣vered to him. But if the offence be hainous, so as the delin∣quent is like to run away for it, he may (of his own autho∣ritie) enter any quarter; but not carry the prisoner away without license of the Chief of that quarter. In marching, he is to cleare the by-wayes of stragling souldiers, to pre∣vent them of pillaging. Some make it part of his charge to provide guides, and to have regard to the baggage, both for the placing of it in the quarter, as also for the safetie of it; to that end sending one of his men before, with the Quartermaster Generall, by whom the baggage may be conducted to the place as∣signed. But this more properly belongeth to the office and charge of the waggon-master. CHAP. XIIII. Of souldiers in generall. Of the corruption of the Cavallrie. SOuldiers take their name from the Dutch word Soldye, which signifieth pay or stipend; profit being one of the ends why men undertake the military profession, and honour not the onelyMonsieur de la Noüe his souldiers, in service of the States, so regar∣ded their reputation, as (after some want of pay) news being brought that it was come, & they being to receive it, they made answer, it was not then a time to take money, but to attend the exploits which they had in hand; Meter. lib. 9. (though the chiefest) of their aimes. And therefore they which were of opinion, that the way to reform the Mi∣litia of Flanders, was to redouble the labours of the soul∣diers and shorten their pay, were much mistaken. And it will rather be found, that the scanting of the souldiers pro∣fits
and increasing their toile, procured the corruption of their Cavallrie. The honest profit of a souldier may be twofold. 1. Ordinarie, which is set pay. 2. Extraordinarie, which are rewards for speciall meriting services; and these are joyned with honour. Among the Romanes,Anno urbis conditae 349. decrevit Senatus ut stipendium miles de publico acciperet, cum an∣te id tempus de suo quis∣que sunctus eo munere es∣set. Livius. lib. 4. the Legionary souldiers had al∣lowance of pay, corn, and apparrell, by a decree of the Se∣nate 349 yeares after the building of the city; having till that time served without pay, but not without many pro∣fits, and having all necessaries provided them of the pub∣lique. A horse-mans pay was then a drachma or denarius a day (of our money aboutImperatoris miles, qui veste & annonâ publicâ pascitur. Veget. lib. 2. cap. 19. 7½) In Caesars time it was doub∣led; (asJulio, cap. 26. Suetonius testifieth) and Augustus augmented it to 3. denarii a day. They had theirImperatoris miles, qui veste & annonâ publicâ pascitur. Veget. lib. 2. cap. 19. apparrell allowed them of the publique, and corn; namely wheat for themselves and at∣tendants, and barley and oats for their horses,Polyb. lib. 6. being two medimni of wheat, and seven of barley and oats a moneth (the medimnus being about a bushell and a half of our measure) They had also their shares of booties, which were very large and ample. Besides, for extraordinarie rewards, they had oftentimesLivius, lib. 31. assignements of land, of inheritance, and houses also; sufficient to maintain them without using any trades. Moreover, they had rewards in money. At the triumph ofAppianus. Mithrid. Pompey out of Asia, every private souldier had 1500 drachmas, (of our money 46 pounds 3 shillings 9 pence) and the officers in proportion. And shortly after, at the tri∣umphIbid. de Bel civ. lib. 2. of Caesar, every souldier had 5000 drachmas, (which is 156 pounds 5 shillings) &c. Furthermore,Lipsius de Milit. Rom. lib. 5. ex Polyb. they had many kindes of honourable rewards for signall acts, and those be∣stowed in great pomp at publique assemblies of all the commanders, by the Imperator (or Generall) himself, and a record kept of those services. These rewards were of ma∣ny kindes; as severall sorts of arms, horses, rich trappings, jewels, golden bracelets; &c. Besides, their severall sorts of crowns, as theirFor the several kinds of these Crowns (both for matter and form) see them repre∣sented in figure by Stewechius upon Vege∣tius. For what merits they were bestowed Lipsius setteth down, lib. 5. de milit. Rom. Corona civica, obsidionalis, muralis, castrensis, vallaris, navalis; &c. which crownes were put upon their heads in great state and solemnitie by the Generall. These they wore upon all publique occasions; as at playes, in tri∣umphs, in judgment, &c.Ʋrbanum verò magi∣stratum non antè capere cuiquam fas, quàm de∣cem stipendia militíae ad∣implerit. Polyb. for their militarie profession made them the more capable (afterwards) of offices
in the administration of the Common-wealth. If but such profits and encouragements were given to souldiers in these dayes, it were easie to keep them in good order and discipline. But what isA horsemans pay in the king of Spains ar∣mie. seven Phillips dallers (35 shillings english) a moneth for a horse-man, to maintain himself, his boy, and two horses, and that but ill paid? whence shall he have meanes to provide himself apparrell? and if his horse fail, how shall he be able to buy another? And whereas a horse-man at the time when this pay was first ordered, could put himself inThe Romans (out of the publique treasurie) allowed to every horse∣man dena millia aeris (a∣bout 25 pounds ster∣ling) to buy his horse: and bina millia (five pounds) to keep him, Livius, lib. 1. sufficient equipage for 20 or 25 Phillips dallers (which is 5 pounds, or 6 pounds 5 shillings) now the price of all things is so raised, as he shall hardly accomplish it with 60, which is 15 pounds starling. As for extraordinarie rewards they are very rare, offices usu∣ally being bestowed for favour, if not for money. So that good spirits and honest men (seeing their way ofThus Melzo and Ba∣sta complained, being both Lieutenant Ge∣nerals in the king of Spains warres, in the Low countries. advance∣ment cut off, and considering that without pillaging and robbing they cannot live) give over the service. They which remain, infringing all discipline (many of them)Quibus ob egestatem & slagitia, maxima pec∣candi necessitudo est. Tacit. 3. Annal. fall to extortion and stealing: and if an officer shall punish them for it, he giveth occasion of mutinies. CHAP. XV. How to reform the Cavallrie. AS every Common-wealth is supported by re∣ward and punishment, so to reform the Caval∣rie (where there is need of reformation) there must be good laws, and good pay: for,Disciplinam non potest servare jejunus exerci∣tus. Cassiod. to suffer a souldier to fall into want by not giving him competent maintenance, maketh him forget obedience and discipline. It were therefore better to diminish theirLa discipline manquante, plus y a d' hommes, plus y a de desordre et confusion. De la Noüe. disc. milit. & polit. 13. number then their profits: That done, they may easily be brought to a strict observation of discipline and obedience. The laws and articles which ought to be propounded unto them, should comprise all that is to be observed in militarie disci∣pline: for brevitie sake (presupposing all good orders about
the service of God, the severe chastising of blasphemers, the strict forbiding of gaming (as the occasion of waste of mo∣ney, and begetting quarrels) and such like morall instituti∣ons. It shall here suffice to touch upon some few of the most necessarie for the Cavallrie. 1The States edict in∣tituled Crychs-recht &c. in the 17. article. Alle Capitetjuen &c. punisheth every Captain with death that shall receive any souldier of another company without lawfull consent of his former Captain. That no Captain receive any souldiers of another com∣panie, or make any officers, without approbation of the Ge∣nerall; to the end he may take notice of the qualitie of the person. And that such souldiers as are disabled to undergo the labour of the warre, through age, be removed to some castle &c. and be provided of some competencie, out of dead payes, or otherwise. 2 That, to avoid theThe baggage, the Romanes called impe∣dimenta; because of the hinderance which it bringeth to the ar∣mie marching. trouble of much baggage, which much slackeneth the motion of the Cavallrie, no man carry aAmong the militarie institutions of the Emperour Frederick the first (an̄o. 1152) recorded by Guntherus, this is one; Non erit in nostris nobis∣cum foemina castris. &c. woman into the field. That no souldier have above one horse of service for his baggage, unlesse some person of qua∣litie, with whom the Commissarie Generall may dispense. And that no officer of a companie have a waggon, but one∣ly the Captain, and he to have onely one. 3 That rewards and honourable recompenses be esta∣blished for souldiers of speciall desert, and punishments for sluggards: in particular, about attending the Cornet and obe∣dience to the sound of the trumpet.Die marcherende &c. syn vaandel oft Cornette sal veriae∣ten, sal (sonder alle genade) metter doot gestraft worden. Ibid. artic. 24. And that such as for∣sake the standard (or cornet) whilest it is advanced, be punish∣ed with death. That in fight, when the trumpet sound∣eth a retreat,Cyri miles hosti immi∣nens repressit ensem, simul receptui canere audierat. Plutarch. Lac. Inutilis miles qui signum receptui datum negligit. Seneca de ira. cap. 9. whosoever presently retireth not, be punished with severitie. And that the Captain (as oft as the Cornet entereth the Corps-du-guard) himself enter with it, all excu∣ses set aside. 4So saith the said e∣dict. totidem verbis. artic. 38. And that on pain of death. That the souldiers be kept from stragling here and there, and have the companies readie upon all occasions: the officers are bound not to absent themselves from their companies without leave of their superiours.To this agreeth the edict; whether it be under pretence of for∣raging, or any other colour whatsoever. Artic. 22. And if any souldier depart without license, he is to be punished with death. 5 That good order be observed about distribution of bootie; whereof shall be treated in the chapter following. 6All Mutiners or ac∣cessaries thereunto, all causers of unlawfull assemblies, or such as are present at any such, or that shall ut∣ter words rending to mutinie &c. the said edict commandeth to be punished with death. Art. 6. 7. 10. 11. &c. That mutinies be prevented: and whosoever is found to have a hand in any, is to be proclaimed infamous, and perpetually banished.
7 To the end that these (and what other orders may be thought fitting) be duly observed, the authoritie of the Captain and other officers must be established and confirm∣ed, as also that of the Provost Marshall, according to those rules before mentioned in the office of the Provost Marshall. CHAP. XVI. Of distributing bootie. ALlThe Romanes had excellent laws for di∣stributing of bootie. It was all brought to the Questor, and by him sold. The Tribunes di∣vided it equally a∣mong the souldiers. At the taking of any town by assault, none left their stations but such as were appoint∣ed to pillage, because they were sure of their just share Spe enim lucri inter omnes certâ, sive mane∣ant, sive pradas agant, nemo locum ordinémque deserit. Polyb. lib. 10. The States, in their edict for Martiall law, have established many excellent laws about the taking, registring, selling and distribu∣ting of bootie as may be seen, Crychs-recht Artic. 41. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64. Also about taking and ransoming of pri∣soners. ibid. bootie (whether it be given by occasion of defeating the enemy, or going out upon par∣ties, &c.) is free to them that take it, whether they be prisoners, or any thing else, the Lord Generall being in the field. But otherwise, it is to be shared among them that were employed in the action. One part is for the Infanterie, and two for the Cavallrie: and it is death to him that shall let go any prisoner, or horse, or other bootie, or shall use any fraud whatsoever: and they that shall not discover it (knowing of any such deceit) shall loose their shares. The Captains, being present at the ta∣king of bootie, use to have five shares, and two for two pa∣ges. The Lieutenants three. and the Cornets two, and either of them one for a page. But of later times the Captains take ten parts, the Lieutenants six, the Cornets foure, according to the places which they have in forage. The bootie being reparted, every company giveth 10 per centum to their Captain of what is gotten, though he were not present: to the chief of the troop (though but a private souldier) two parts, and so to the guides. All the bootie being brought together, they choose two of the discreetest souldiers to cause the bootie to be sold: these keep accompt of the money taken for it, certifying the Chief thereof, who ordereth to every man his due propor∣tion. The trumpets must have leave of the chief Com∣mander of the place to sell the said bootie, and the buyer is
to give one of every twenty to the trumpeter, for his pains in the sale: which money is to be divided among the trum∣peters which were employed in the taking of that bootie; they having no other share. If one or more horses were hurt or killed in the combat, or any souldiers chanced to be hurt in the said action, those horses must be made good, and the souldiers are to be re∣compensed, before the bootie be divided, at the discretion of the Chief. If any souldiers horse fall lame, after the troop be mar∣ched a good distance from the quarter, so as he be forced to return back, yet shall that souldier have his share of the bootie, as if he had been present at the taking thereof. Moreover, concerning the taking of prisoners, because other authors are scant in this particular, it will not be amisse (for the better satisfaction of such as are not acquaint∣ed with that language) to adde something out of the States edict, as followeth. Every souldier (of what condition soever he be) shall forthwith, and before evening, bring all such of the enemy as are taken prisoners before him, which commandeth in the quarter; upon pain of loosing his prisoner, and being punished with death. And if any should take some eminent officer, or com∣mander of the enemy prisoner, or other person of qualitie; they shall be bound to present the same (or cause him to be presented & delivered) immediatly to the Lords the States generall, or the Councel of state, receiving for them (as also for other prisoners which the said States shall take to them∣selves) some reasonable recompence, according to the quali∣tie or abilitie of the said prisoners; yet not exceeding the summe of 500 pounds, whereby the said prisoner shall re∣main at the disposing of the said States: and they which took him, ought to have no further pretence to him. It shall not be lawfull for any man to cause a prisoner to be killed, or set at ransom: nor (after ransom be paid) to suffer him to depart, without leave of the Generall, or of him that commandeth in the quarter, on pain of being disarmed, and banished out of the provinces. And if any prisoner be found to walk about the lea∣guer
or place of garrison, without leave of the Generall or Commander in that quarter or garrison; the partie which had taken him shall forfeit his said prisoner, to the profit of him who first shall apprehend the said prisoner. All lawfull booties are to be certified by the takers there∣of, to the Commander of the quarter within three houres after their arrivall; and are to be registred, and sold in the open market &c. upon pains of forfeiture, and of corporall punishment, &c. CHAP. XVII. Of the souldiers pay. THe means to have these and other good orders duly observed, is (as is above said) by giving to the souldiers their pay in competent measure and due time.On the Spanish side they were wont to al∣low no Cornet to the Harquebusiers (as is elsewhere shewed) and therefore no pay is here set down for him; but that course is since altered, and his pay is only 1/12 part inferiour to the pay of a Cornet of Cui∣rassiers. The proportion which was observed on the king of Spains side, since the end of the late truce with the States of the united provinces, is as fol∣loweth. The Generall of horse his pay or entertainment, is 500 crownes a moneth, besides 86½ for his companie. The Lieutenant Generall 200 and 86½ for his companie. The Commissarie Generall 80. and the pay of a Captain of Harquebusiers, when he hath a companie. The Captains of lances and Cuirassiers 80. and 6½ for their page. The Lieutenant of lances and Cuirassiers 25. and 6½ for a page. The Cornets 15. and 6½ for a page. The souldiers of lances and Cuirassiers have 6½ crownes a moneth. The Captains of Harquebusiers have 70 crownes a moneth, and 6 for a page. The Lieutenant 25 and 6 for a page. The souldiers have six crownes a moneth. Besides these stipends, there is given to every companie 10 per centum, (without the advantages and entertainments)
which the Captain distributeth among the best deserving souldiers. The Captains or other officers which are reformed (that is, dismissed from their service, for their age or otherwise) have their wonted pay continued. The Quartermaster Generall hath 25 crowns a moneth, and each of his assistants 15. The chief Chaplain hath 30. The Auditor 30, and 18 for his three officers. The Provost Marshall hath 25, and for every of his men (which must not exceed 12) he hath 5 crowns. The chief Chirurgeon hath 25. In winter when the Cavallrie is in garrison, the souldiers are paid by the day, for the better keeping of their horses. To the Generall 40 places are allowed as Generall, and 10 as Captain. To the Lieutenant Generall 20, and 10 as Captain. To the Commissarie Generall 10, and 10 as Captain. To every Captain 10. To the Lieutenant 6. To the Cornet 4. To the reformed officers 1½. To the Auditor 6. To the Quartermaster Generall 4. To each of his assistants 2. To the Provost Marshall 2, and 1 to each of his men. To the chief Chaplain 5. Every place is worth 13 stuyvers (about 16 pence En∣glish) of these 13 stuyvers, 10 are paid for forrage, and 3 for service. Half of the said 13 stuyvers is paid to the souldiers in money, the other half in 16 pound of hay,Picotins. three small measures of oats, and two bundles of straw, which are sufficient to keep a horse for a day. At the end of the accompts, every souldier is abated half a reall (3 pence) upon every place. The severall payes given by the States of the united Provinces at this day, being reduced to English money, are much about this proportion following. To the Generall of horse 4l per diem. To the Lieutenant Generall 2l.
To theOr Commissarie Ge∣nerall. Sergeant Major 30s. To the Quartermaster Generall 6s 8d. To the Provost 5s. To the Carriage-master 3s 4d. To the Preacher 4s. Note, that the Ca∣ptain of horse muster∣eth 6 horse, the Lieu∣tenant 4, the Cornet 3, for which they re∣ceive allowance ex∣traordinarie.To the chief Chirurgeon 4s. To the Captains 8s. To the Lieutenant 5s. To the Cornets 4s. To the Corporalls 2s 6d. To the Trumpets 2s 6d. To the Quartermasters 2s 6d. To the Chirurgeons 2s 6d. To the souldiers Cuirassiers 2s. To the Harquebusiers 1s 6d. CHAP. XVIII. Of supplying the Cavallrie with good horses. FOr the reforming of the Cavallrie, there is more∣over required a singular care, that the compa∣nies be supplied with good horses: wherefore it will be necessarie, that when the Cavallrie is retired from the field, the Captains make sale of such horses as be unfit for service, and buy better. When the com∣panies be entered into garrison, the souldiers which are on foot must presently be remounted; that so, in the time of winter, they may at leisure fit their horses for service: for be∣ing only remounted at the time of their going into the field, theEquos assuluo labore convenit edomari. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 14. horses are not fitted for service, and being yong and not used to the bridle, by any little toile they become un∣profitable: besides, when a man is put (on the suddain) to buy such as he findeth, they prove not onely the worser, but the dearer. Moreover, those souldiers which want horses are of no service; and these are they (usually) which straggle disbanded, and do most mischief about the quarters. And because oftentimes there is not money assigned apart to re∣mount the souldiers, it were good that among the compa∣nies there were a brother-hood or fellowship erected,
(which the Spanish call Platta) which consisteth in making a cash, wherein the money which is gathered to that end, is kept; as followeth. First, the souldiers of every companie choose foure of their most judicious fellows, with con∣sent of the Captain. These, with the farrier of the compa∣nie, must view all the horses of their companie, prising eve∣ry one according to his value, and concealing it from the souldiers, to avoid disputes: and of this prising they must keep a record, that so, if any horse happen to die, it may be known what is to be allowed; provided alwayes, that they go no higher then 50 crowns. To raise this cash, the Captain must give order, that a crown be defalked out of every souldiers first pay, foure realls out of a third of pay, and eight out of the contributions of a moneth: or else this proporti∣on to be for the first beginning, and afterwards the moytie; or more or lesse as need shall require. Every horse dying in service, or by mischance, without the souldiers fault, shall be made good to the souldier that lost him. If a souldiers horse be killed, or otherwise die whilest he is abroad (with the Captains or Officers leave) about his private busines, he shall not be allowed for the same. If a souldier by negligence or malice hurt his horse, or use him so ill that he die; he shall not onely beare the losse of him, but be chastised by his superiours, and chased from the companie. The Captains must take care that the said deputed soul∣diers and the farrier visit all the horses of the companie once every week: and finding any not fit for service, to sell them, and buy others. The said deputies must admonish the souldiers to give their horses good use, as is fitting, giving them oats ordina∣rily; and against such as they finde to do otherwise, to pro∣ceed as abovesaid. These courses will be found very available to preserve the horse; but when the companies are in the field, by occa∣sion of combats, sometime twentie, or twentie five, or more horses being lost in a day out of one entire companie, in such cases the said cash is not of sufficiencie to supplie them, but the Prince is to furnish them.
CHAP. XIX. Of the proportion of Cavallrie with the Infanterie. IN every well ordered armie, it is fit that there be such a number of Cavallrie as may be pro∣portionable to the place where the warre is to be, and to the number of Infanterie which shall be resolved to be levied. Touching the diversitie of places and countreys, it shall not be necessarie here to say any thing, considering that we are to direct our course according to the practice of the Low-countreys, which will be found not unfitting to be appropriated to this kingdome. As for the proportion to be observed between the Infanterie and Cavallrie, the Ro∣manes in Romulus his time had their legion consisting of 3000 foot and 300 horse; one horse to ten foot. In the free state the number was farre encreased.Vegetius lib. 2 cap. 6. Legio plena habet pedites sex millia centum, equites septingentos viginti sex; that is, A full legion hath of foot 6100, and of horse 726. But when their Auxiliaries were added to a legion (which exceeded them in horse) the proportion was altered.Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 1. Vna legio mixtis auxiliis, hoc est, decem millia peditum, & duo millia equi∣tum. They were (together) 10000 foot and 2000 horse,Alexander the great invaded Persia (the mightiest and largest empire then in the world) with 30000 foot, and 5000 horse: which is one horse to six foot; agreeing with Aelians proportion, Tact. cap. 8. which was one horse to five foot. Melzo, for the warres in the Low-countreys would have, for 15000 foot, 4000 horse; which proportion was nearely observed in the States army at the famous battel of Newport, which consisted of 12000 foot and 3000 horse. Touching the severall kindes of Cavallrie, what number of each were most fitting, the said Melzo would have his said 4000 horse to be ofThe Graecians had 64 in a troop. Omnes turmae numero sexaginta quatuor statuentur. Aelian cap. 20. The Romans but 32. Habet una turma equites 32. qui sub uno vexillo re∣guntur. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 14. 100 men in every companie, so to make 40 cōpanies; of these he would have 10 to be lances (as then the manner was) 18 Cuirassiers, and 12 Harquebusiers. Basta would have the Cavallrie to be divided into foure parts, two whereof should be Cuirassiers, one Lances, and one Harque∣busiers. For the number of each companie,Wallhausen. fol. 56. some would have the Lances to be but 64 in a companie, the Cuirassiers 100, Harquebusiers 64, & Dragons 200.D. De solemne. Others proportion the Cuirassiers to be 80 in a companie, & the Harquebusiers 100 &c.
CHAP. XX. Of Souldiers in particular; their Enrolling, Arming, Exercising. Of the enrolling of souldiers, and their qualities. IN a souldier to beThe Romanes allow∣ed none of the 6 classis (being the infe∣riour rank of citi∣zens) to be enrolled into their legions: but of such as were è tri∣bubus benestissimis. Their reason was this, Diligenter pro vi∣ctoria laborant, qui prae∣ter libertatem bona de∣fendunt: illi autem qui∣bus nullae opes sunt, faci∣lè poterunt existere pro ditores. Neither did they pre∣sently enroll their Tyrones (or new soul∣diers) verùm antè exer∣citio praetentandi, utrùm verè tanto operi apti sint. Veg. lib. 1. cap. 8. Non leve hoc officium &c. Juventus enim cui defensio provinciarum, cui bellorum committenda fortuna est, & genere & moribus debet excellere. Honestas enim idoneum militem reddit. Verecun∣dia, dum prohibet fugere, facit esse victorem. Ibid cap. 7. enrolled into the Cavallrie, all things must be presupposed which are com∣mon to him with the Infanterie; as soundnesse of bodie, vigor of members, fitting age, (as from 20 to 40 yeares) a resolution to addict himself to that profession, and a desire to learn it; a vertuous emula∣tion of advancement by merit; due obedience to his superi∣ours; a strict observation of militarie discipline. Above all the feare of God, which will direct him to vertuous acti∣ons, and to abhorre vices. Besides, in particular, though he need not be so strong as the foot, yet he must be more active and nimble, and one that loveth (and knoweth what belongeth to) a horse. And because it is the propertie of horse-men not to attend the enemies coming, but to go & affront him; he must be a man of spirit and resolution. He must be carefull and curious to keep his horse andCataphractas & cassides frequenter ter∣gere curent: quis enim credat militem bellico∣sum, cujus arma rubigine foedantur? Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 14. Concerning the ele∣ction of souldiers, Vegetius sheweth at large lib. 1. For their countrie, cap. 1. Their profession, cap. 3. & 7. Their age, cap. 4. Their stature, cap. 5. Their countenance and proportion of bodie, cap. 6. &c. Also Leo Tact. cap. 4.1. arms in the best manner. Every horse∣man must weare a skarf of the Princes colour whom he serveth, and not put it off, whether he go out of the quarter or not, whether he be alone or in companie, upon great pe∣nalties: by which meanes (besides the ornament) they will forbear many unfitting actions (as being subject thereby to be distinguished) and upon occasions of battell they shall be sure by that meanes not to offend each other.
CHAP. XXI. Of the arming of the Cavallrie, and their kindes. AS the ends and employments of the Cavallrie are divers and severall, so there is a diversitie ne∣cessarily required in their persons, arms, and horses.The Grecians and Romanes distinguish∣ed their horse by hea∣vy and light armed. Cataphracti, qui non so∣lum sua corpora, sed etiam equos lorica undique mu∣niunt. Partis autem non cata∣phractae alii hastati (vel contati) alii ferentarii. Aelian. cap. 2. The Cavallrie are according to their arming, of two sorts; heavie, and light. The heavy armed (the ancient manner of men at arms being long since abolished) are for the most part said to be Lances and Cuirassiers, howsoever authors differ in their opinions about them: for Basta rekoneth the Lancier, and Melzo both Lance and Cuirassier among the light. The light armed are of three kindes, Harquebusiers, Cara∣bines, and Dragones; being three distinct and severall kindes of arming, howsoever the said authors (and others) take them promiscuously for one and the same. The arm∣ing of the Cuirassier, is chiefly Defensive. The arm∣ing of the Harquebusier, Ca∣rabine, and Dragon; is chiefly Offensive. The arm∣ing of the Lancier (where he is used) is chiefly Offensive, and Defensive. CHAP. XXII. Of the Lancier his arming. THey which preferred the Lance before any o∣ther kinde ofThis kinde of Ca∣vallrie was borrowed from the Grecians, & Romanes, which were called Hastati, being armed with a cuirasse, a head-piece, a lance, and a sword; some of them also bore a small target. Polyb. lib. 6. 471. Cavallrie, gave this double rea∣son. 1 Because the Lancier requireth more exer∣cise and pains both for himself and his horse: 2. Because he must haue a horse of a higher price then the rest. This kinde of arming was first invented to pierce and di∣vide a grosse body, and therefore requires force and velocitie for the shock. His horse was to be of 15 hand high at the
depiction of a suit of armour for a cavalry lancer, with its component parts and equipment The Caske open The Gorgett The right Pouldron and vambrace The left Pouldron and Vambrace The fore parte of the armed Lancier The Placcate The Brest The Backe The guard de reine The Pistoll wth. the appurtenances The Pistoll The Spanner Figu: 1. Par: 1. Cap: 22.
least, strong, swift, and well managed. His arms were a close casque or head-piece, gorget, breast, pistoll proof (as all the cuirasse in every piece of it) and calli∣ver proof (by addition of the placcate) the back, pouldrous, vanbraces, 2 gauntlets, tassets, cuissets, culets, or guard-de-rein; all fitting to his bodie: A good sword (which was to be very stiffe, cutting, and sharp pointed) with girdle and hangers, fo fastened upon his cuirasse as he might readily draw it: a buffe coat with long skirts to weare between his armour and his cloathes: his lance, either after the wonted manner, or (as VValhausen hath it) after the manner of a pike, onely some what thicker at the but end, the head of it to be either three-edged or otherwise like a pike-head, made strong and sharp, the length to be aboutBecause it hath been usually objected (to such as stand for the continuance of the lance) that it is of no effect against foot, be∣cause of the length of their pikes. Walhausen here would take a way that argument, by having the lance made of a length exceeding the pike: but how any man (so laden with arms) should be able (with one hand) to weild a lance of 18 foot long. I leave to the consideration of the judicious. 18 foot, it being (otherwise) of little effect either against Infanterie or Cavallrie: within two foot of the but end to be bored through, and through it a thong of strong leather to be put, to fasten it to the right arm, for the surer holding and better managing thereof. On the outside of his right stirrop, to have a socket of leather fastned therunto, to place the but end of his lance there∣in. His saddle to be handsome, made with advantage, fit for the rider, to keep him firm against the violence of a shock: thereat he should have one, if not two pistols, of sufficient bore and length, with keyes and cartouches: also he must have flask and touch-box, and all appurtenances fit∣ting. All which is apparently demonstrated in figure 1. Par. 1. CHAP. XXIII. Of the arming of the Cuirassier. THe Cuirassier is to be armed at all points, and accounted with a buffe coat under his arms, like the Launce.By the Edict for mu∣sters published by the States, neither cuirassi∣er, nor harquebufier, is allowed to have his horse under 15 hand high. His horse not inferiour in sta∣ture and strength, though not so swift. He must have two cases with good firelock-pistols, hanging at his saddle, having the barrell of 18 inches long, and the bore
of 20 bullets in the pound (or 24 rowling in) a good sword stiffe and sharp pointed like the Lancier. This sort of Ca∣vallrie is of lateNamely by the Ger∣manes, il leur faut donner l'honneur d'auoir mis les premiers en vsage les pistoles. De la Noüe. Dis∣cours. 18. invention: for when the Lanciers proved hard to be gotten; first,Another (if not the chief) reason, why the Lances were left, is because they are of no effect, or use, but in a straight line, and where they may have leisure and room for their careere: where∣as the Cuirassier is not subject to either of those inconveniences. by reason of their horses, which must be very good, and exceeding well exercised: secondly, by reason their pay was abated through scarcitie of money: thirdly and principally, because of the scarcitie of such as were practised and exercised to use the lance, it being a thing of much labour and industry to learn: the Cuiras∣sier was invented, onely by discharging the lancier of his lance. He is to have a boy and a nagge (as is other where said) to carry his spare arms, and oat sack, and to get him forrage. His saddle and bit must be strong, and made af∣ter the best manner. He is also to weare a skarf, as hath been shewed cap. 20. He is to have his bridle made with a chain, to prevent cutting; and he must be very carefull to have all his furniture strong and usefull. CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Arming of the Harquebusier and Carabine. THe Harquebusier was first invented in France, at the time of the warres of Piedmont; whom Melzo and Basta would have either not armed (though they confesse themselves contradicted therein by others) or but slightly (onely with a head-piece & breast) and those but some few of the formost. But the printed edict of the States of the united provinces expresly commandeth, that every Harquebusier beWhich condemneth the late practice of our trained Harque∣busiers to be errone∣ous; which have whol∣ly left off their arms, and think themselves safe enough in a calfs skin coat. It was otherwise with the Romanes, for which Vegetius giveth this reason; Necesse enim est, ut dimicandi a∣criorem sumat audaciam, qui munito capite & pectore non timet vulnus. lib. 1. cap. 20. armed with an open cask, gorget, back and breast, of the horse-mans furniture: and Captain Bingham, in his Low-countrie exercise, appointeth him a cuirasse pistoll proof. Moreover, by the late orders resolved on by the councel of warre, the Harquebusier (besides a good buffe coat) is to have the back and breast of the Cuiras∣siers arming, more then pistoll proof, the head-piece, &c. For offensive arms, he must have the harquebuse of two foot and a half long (the bore of 17 bullets in the pound
rowling in) hanging on a belt by a swivell, a flask and touch-box, and pistols like the Guirassiers (as some writers have it.) His horse (according to the said edict of the States) should not be under 15 hand high, being swift and well managed. The Carabine is to be mounted on a midling gelding, and to have a good buffe coat, a carbine or petronell (the barrell 2½ foot long, the bullet 24 in the pound, rowling in) hanging as the harquebuse, a sword, girdle and hangers, flask and touch-box, as the Harquebusier. CHAP. XXV. Of the arming of the Dragon. THeOne De Renol. hath (not long since) pub∣lished a book which he calleth Milice Roy∣ale, or Infanterie vo∣iante, wherein he is earnest to have the Carabines or Harque∣busiers put down, and Dragoniers used in their stead: their mus∣kets having the bar∣rell of 2 foot 9 inches long, but wider bore then the musket: their pikes but 13 foot &c. He is very confident in his conceits, for the ordering of them for fight, but such as can judge, hold him frivolous. Dragon is of two kindes; Pike, and musket. The pike is to have a thong of leather about the middle of the pike, for the more commo∣dious carrying of it. The musketier is to have a strap or belt fastned to the stock thereof, almost from the one end to the other, by which (being on horse-back) he hang∣eth it at his back, keeping his burning match and the bridle, in the left hand. His horse is of the least price, the use there∣of being but to expedite his march, allighting to do his service. CHAP. XXVI. Of exercising the Cavallrie, in Generall and Particular. Of exercise in generall, and the necessitie of it. THe Romanes called an army exercitus,Exercitus ex re ipsa atque opere exercitii no∣men accepit, ut ei nun∣quam liceret oblivisci quod vocabatur. Veg. lib 2. cap. 1. Legio ab eligendo. ib. a word derived ab exercendo, of exercising, and not with∣out reason: for, in every battell, not so much the multitude and untutored strength of men, as art and exercise, use to give victorie: (asLib. 1. cap. 1. Exercitus dicitur, quòd melior fiat exercitando. Varro. Vegetius testifieth) for which he giveth this reason, (among the rest) that the
knowledge of that which belongeth to warre, giveth cou∣rage. Nema facere metuit (saith he) quod se bene didicisse con∣fidit; No man feareth to do that which he hath well learned how to do. The benefit of this exercise is such, as the same author doubteth not to affirm, that nothing is more firm, nor more happie or commendable, then that common-wealth in qua abundant milites eruditi, in which skilfull souldiers abound. To this end antiquitie maintained their campi doctores, teachers for the field, by whom the young and new-entertained soul∣diers wereManè & post meridi∣em. Nam pro tyronibus habendi sunt, qui pugna∣re longo tempore desie∣runt. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9. Neque enim longitudo atatis, aut annorum nu∣merus artem bellicam tradit, sed continua exer∣citationis meditatio: post quanta volueris stipen∣dia, inexercitatus miles semper est tyro. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 23. exercised twice every day ad omne genus armorum, at all kindes of weapons and arms; and the old practised souldiers sine intermissione semel in die, once a day without intermission. To which purpose they had very spacious buildings, within which (in winter, or upon occasion of unseasonable wea∣ther) they could exercise both horse and foot. The Graeci∣ans were they which gave a pattern to the Romanes in the practice of this art, for so saithLib. 3. cap. 10. Discat miles in otio, quod proficere possit in bello. Animos subitò ad arma non erigunt, nisi qui se ad ipsa idoneos, praemissâ exercitatione, confidunt Theod. apud Cassiod. The Imperatores them∣selves (as Valerius, Pompey, Trajan, &c.) continually exercised among their souldi∣ers: Omnia inter infi∣mos militum munia haud gravatè abeundo. saith Livie of Valerius. And of Pompey Plu∣tarch reporteth thus (in Pompeio) in bello civili jam senem & duo de sexaginta annos natum, peditem atque equitem, se inter suos assiduè exer∣cuisse. Vegetius: Artem bellicam quon∣dam, relictis doctrinis omnibus, Lacedaemonii, pòst coluere Romani. Among other examples tending to this purpose (wherein all histories abound) that is worthy of observation, which is testified of the inhabitants of the Balearie islands (now called Majorca and Minorca) where the women would not suffer their children to eat any meat, but that which they could hit at an appointed distance, with a stone cast out of a sling: by which means they grew so expert at it, as that people are said to be the inventers of that weapon, and therein to have excelled all others. Every mean trade requireth exer∣cise for the obtaining of it; how much more the art mi∣litarie? which is rebus omnibus potior, per quam libertas retinetur, & dignitas provinciae propagatur, & conservatur imperium: that is, by which libertie is continued, the dignitie of the province is propagatd, and the empire preserved. And this is confirm∣ed by Josephus (Exid. lib. 3.) to be true, that not fortune, but the good orders of the Romanes in their Militia, made them masters of the world: whose forces (even in times of peace, and (as it were) to keep their hands in ure) were 32000 foot, 2400 horse; but upon occasions they could make 70000 or 80000: and at a view taken of their own forces, and their allies, in Italy, there were found 700000 foot, and
70000 horse. Augustus maintained 23 legions; Tyberius 25. In Galbaes time the State maintained 31 legions: so that ordi∣narily in those and later times, there were (of legionarie and auxiliarie souldiers) maintained 372000 foot, and 37200 horse: whose ordinary pay (besides corn and apparrell) at one denarius a day for the foot, and three for the horse (besides the increase of wages given to the officers) amounteth to five millions, five hundred sixteen thousand sixtie two pounds, and ten shillings, by the yeare: which is more (as Sr. H. Savile observeth) then the great Turk at this day receiveth in two yeares towards all charges. Besides these, they maintained a guard of many thousands for the Prince, with double pay, and others for other employments; and yet they never mutined for lack of pay.Virtus militaris prae∣stat caeteru omnibus. Cicero, pro Mur. Nobilis res atque inpri∣mis utilis, militaris est scientia. &c. Leo. Tact. cap. 20. O viros summâ admiratione laudandos (may be said of them, as Vegetius saith of the Lace∣demonians) qui eam praecipuè artem ediscere voluerunt, sine qua aliae artes esse non possunt! that is, O men worthie to be praised with highest admiration, which would principally learn that art, (speak∣ing of the art militarie) without which other arts cannot sub∣sist! But now, if we shall compare our times with these, must we not be forced to cry out withDe militia Rom. lib. 5. Lipsius, O pudor, O dedecus! The Low-countreys are (without all controversie) wor∣thily stiled the Academie of warre, where the art militarie (if any where) truely flourisheth; and yet, in comparison of the Romanes, the said Lipsius is constrained to say (who would not speak the worst of his own countrey (Exercitium nobis neglectum, &c. Ubi campi doctores nostri sunt? ubi quotidianae me∣ditationes armorum? &c. With us (saith he) exercise is neglected. Where are our teachers for the field? where are our daily practisings of arms? Or whereas otherwiseOmnes artes in medita∣tione consistunt. Athleta, auriga, venator, propter exiguam mercedem, vel certè plebis favorem, quo∣tidianâ meditatione ar∣tes suas aut servare, aut augere consuescunt. Militem (cujus est mani∣bus servanda respublica) studiosiùs oportet scienti∣am dimicandi, usúmque rei bellicae jugibus exerci∣tiis custodire. Cui contingit non tantùm gloriosa vi∣ctoria, sed etiam amplior praeda, quémque ad opes ac dignitates ordo militiae & imperatoris judicium consuevit evehere. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 24. no man professeth any art which he hath not learned, shall the militarie art be onely that which men suppose they can leap into, and be expert in, both at an instant? Tympanum sonuit &c. The drumme beats, they runne together, and enter their names with the Clerk of the band, something they change in their habit, and their gate; they swagger and drink; ecce jam miles, behold (saith he) here is a souldier alreadie. Another complaineth after the like manner.Voyla que c' est de nostre milice et dis∣cipline militaire, et principalement de ceste partie, tant noble; Vn rustault chargé d'armes, et monté a cheual, c'est assez pour la Caval∣lerie. Walhauson. Disciplina hodie non di∣cam languet apud nos, sed obiit: neque mala, sed nulla est. Lips. Politic. lib. 5. cap. 13. Hodiernam militiam tri∣sti oculo intueor; puden∣dam lugendámque nobis, hosti ridendam aut sper∣nendam. Ibid. cap. 8. See (saith he) what our militia and militarie discipline is come to, and principally this so noble a part of
it. (speaking of the horse) A clown is laden with arms, and mounted on horse back, that is enough for the Cavallrie. Now if we should bring our trained bands (especially the horse) to the touchstone, and trie what alloy they be of, I feare we may ask (with Lipsius) haec ridenda, an miseranda sunt? A principall defence and bullwork of the kingdome, consisteth in having the trained bands (horse and foot) well chosen, well armed, and well disciplined. But how this is generally in every part neglected is too shamefully apparant. Whether for want of good laws, or of good men to see them strictly executed, it is not for me to determine. Sure I am, there is great need of reformation. But my zeale trans∣ports me beyond my bounds, and I digresse from what I in∣tended; therefore, for this matter, hîc terminus esto. CHAP. XXVII. Of exercise in particular. Of managing of the horse and arms. THe Cavallrie being to be exercised, must be in∣structed how to manage their horse and their arms. Concerning the horse (presupposing him to be of sufficient stature and strength, nimble of joynts, and sure of foot &c.) he must (of necessitie) be made fit for service, so as you may have him ready at command to pace, trot, gallop, or runne in full careere; also to advance, stop, retire, and turn readily to either hand, and all with alacritie and obedi∣ence. Now, to bring him to this readie turning, he is to be ridden the ring, and figure 8, first in a great compasse, and so in a lesse by degrees; first upon his pace, then on the trot, and so to the gallop and careere. These things he may be taught by using the hand, leg and voice. For the hand (ob∣serving not to move the arm, but onely the wrist) if you would have him to face to the left, a little motion of the little finger on that rein, and a touch of the left leg) with∣out
using the spurre) doth it: if to face (or turn) to the left a∣bout, a harder, &c. If you would have him to trot, you are to move both your legges a little forward; for the gallop, to move them more forward, and for the careere to yerk them most forward, and to move the bodie a little forward with it. After every motion performed, it were good to keep him a while in that motion, as when you bid him stand, to stand a while, &c. Also it were not amisse, after every thing well done, to give him some bread or grasse as a reward. For the voice, you may use the vvords, Advance, hold, turn, or the like, but because the voice cannot alwayes be heard, it were good to use him chiefly to the motions of the hand and leg. It will also be very usefull to teach him to go sidewayes: this he may be brought unto by laying his provender somewhat farre from him in the manger, and keeping him from turning his head towards it. He must also be used to the smell of gunpowder, the sight of fire and armour, and the hearing of shot, drummes and trumpets, &c. but by degrees and vvith discretion. When he is at his oats (at a good distance from him) a little povvder may be fired, and so nearer to him by degrees. So may a pistoll be fired some distance off, and so nearer: in like manner a drumme or trumpet may be used. The groom may sometime dresse him in armour, and he may be used (novv and then) to eat his oats from the drumme head. It vvill be very usefull some∣time to cause a musketier to stand at a convenient distance, and both of you to give fire upon each other, and thereupon to ride up close to him: also to ride him against a compleat armour, so set upon a stake, that he may overthrovv it, and trample it under his feet: that so (and by such other means) your horse (finding that he receiveth no hurt) may become bold to approach any object. He may also be used to moun∣tanous and uneven vvayes, and be exercised to leap, svvimme, and the like. But for further directions for the art of riding and managing the horse, I referre the reader toBesides many of our owne writers; Pierre de la Noüe in his Cavallerie Fran∣choise et Italienne. also Instruction du Roy (de France) en l'exercice de mon∣ter a Cheval, par Antoyne de Plubi∣nel. lately published, and divers others. them vvhich have vvritten of horse-manship ex professo, vvhose books are every vvhere obvious.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of managing arms, extending to postures and motions. Of exercising the lance. HOvvsoever the use of the lance be novv left off in the Lovv-countreys, either for the reasons al∣ledged chap. 23, or by reason of the discommo∣dity of the countrey (for the lance is of no use but in a spacious, hard, and even ground) yet will it not be altogether impertinent to shew the manner of exercising the same, seeing thatI. Lips. . Item de Milit. Rom. N. Machiavell. G. du Bellay. C. Bingham upon Alian. Sr. Cl. Edmonds, on Caes. Com. Sr. Hen. Savilc. &c. many have taken pains to revive unto us the knowledge of those arms which sometime were in use among the Graecians, Romanes, and other nations, which have been for many ages totally abolished. The manner of carrying the lance, is either advanced, or couched, that is, when it is carried so abased, as the enemie can hardly discover it untill he feel the shock. The charging of the lance is twofold, either by the right, or left. The right is, when it is presented or charged along by the right side of the horse. The left is, when it is born acrosse the neck of the horse, by the left eare. The first is the manner used by the Turks and Hunga∣rians, and by some preferred before the other. One reason which they give for it, is, because that in charging by the left, the Lancier must incline his bodie to the left, and so sitteth the lesse sure in his saddle. Basta would have the second way to be best. Howsoever, all agree that a Lancier must ever strive to gain the left side of his enemie, and charge him on the left. Now there be three wayes of charging; 1 By carrying the lance sloaped upwards. 2 By charging it levell, in a straight line. 3 By charging it sloaping, or inclining downwards. The first is, if against Cavallrie, to take the sight of the
four representations of of a knight on horseback aiming a lance at a target Fig: 2 Par: 1 Cap: 28
enemie with the point of the lance; or, if against foot, the head or neck of either pike or musketier. The second is, by charging a horse-man about the middle, (to bear him out of the saddle) or on the breast of the foot. The third serveth to pierce the breast of the enemies horse, or a kneeling musketier, or pike charging at the foot against horse. These three severall wayes must be diligently practised, and require much dexteritie: to which end a stake is to be set up, having an arm (as it were) stretched out from it, and thereunto a white (either of paper or linen) fastned, at seve∣rall heights, which the Lancier must exercise himself to hit in full careere; also to take up a glove (or the like) from the ground with the point of his lance, &c. All which is shown figure 2. part 1. chap. 28. In his charging of the enemie, he begins upon his pace or trot,Monsieur de la Noüe, blameth the French for their er∣rour in this point. De 200 pas ils com∣mencent à galloper, et de 100 à courir à toute bride, qui est faire erreur, n' es∣tant besoin de pren∣dre tant d'espace. Discours. 18. then falls into a gallop, but must not begin his careere untill he be within some 60. paces of his enemie; presenting his lance (from the advance) at the half of that distance, and charging it for the shock as occasi∣on serveth. Against an armed Lancier, the best way of char∣ging is judged to be, not after the two first wayes, but by the third, that is, at the breast of the horse, and that towards the left side of him, where his heart and vitals are; and for this, the charging by the right is held best. Having given his charge with the lance, so as it becometh unusefull to him, he must betake himself to his pistoll, in the use whereof he is to be very skilfull. His last refuge is his sword, which he must also be well practised in. Of both which weapons shall be spoken in the next chapter. CHAP. XXIX. Of exercising the Cuirassier. ALthough it be supposed and expected that no horse-man will presume to mount his horse to repaire to his cornet before his pistols, harque∣buse, or carabine be spanned, primed, and la∣den: his cases furnished with cartouches and all other equi∣page
depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 1 To Horse depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 2 Vncapp your Pistolls depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 3 Draw your Pistoll depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 4 Order your Pistoll
depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 5 Spann your Pistoll. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 6. Prime your Pistoll. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 7. Shutt your Pann. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 8. Cast about your Pistoll.
depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 9 Gage your Flasske depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 10 Lade your Pistoll depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 11 Draw your Rammer depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 12 Lade with Bullet and Ramhome
depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 13. Returne your Rammer. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 14. Pull down your Cock. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 15. Recover your Pistoll. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 16. Present and giue Fire.
depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 17 Returne your Pistoll depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 18 Bend your Cock depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 19 Guard your Cock depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 20 Order your Hammer
depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 21. Free your Cock depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 22. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 23. depiction of a cavalry soldier and horse 24.
3. Draw your pistoll. He is to draw the pistoll out of the case, with the right hand, (and alwayes the left pistoll first) and to mount the muzzell of it, as in posture 15. 4. Order your pistoll. He is to sink the pistoll into his bridle-hand, and to re∣remove his right hand towards the muzzell, and then to rest the but end upon his thigh. 5. Span your pistoll. He is to sink the pistoll into his bridle-hand, and taking the key (or spanner) into his right hand, to put it upon the axletree, and, and to winde about the wheel till it stick: and then to return the spanner to its place, being usually fastned to the side of the case. 6. Prime. Holding the pistoll in the bridle-hand (as before) he is to take his priming box into his right hand, and (pressing the spring with his fore-finger to open the box) to put powder into the pan. 7. Shut your pan. He is to presse in the pan-pin with his right thumbe, and so to shut the panne. 8. Cast about your pistoll. With the bridle-hand he is to cast about the pistoll, and to hold it on the left side, with the muzzell upwards. 9. Gage your flasque. He is to take the flasque into the right hand, and with his forefinger to pull back the spring, and turning the mouth of the flasque downward, to let go the spring. 10. Lade your pistoll. Having gaged his flasque (as in the former posture) he is to presse down the spring (which openeth the flasque, with his forefinger, and so to lade his pistoll.
11. Draw your rammer. He is to draw his rammer with the right hand turned, and to hold it with the head downward. 12. Lade with bullet, and ramme home. Holding the rammer-head in his right hand (as before) he is to take the bullet out of his mouth, or out of the bullet bag at the pistoll case, being in fight, with the thumb and forefinger, and to put it into the muzzell of the pistoll, and the rammer immediately after it, and so to ramme home. 13. Return your rammer. He is to draw forth his rammer with the right hand turned, and to return it to its place. 14. Pull down your cock. With the bridle-hand he is to bring the pistoll towards his right side; and placing the but end upon his thigh, to pull down the cock. 15. Recover your pistoll. He is to take the pistoll into his right hand, mounting the muzzell. 16. Present, and give fire. Having the pistoll in his right hand (as in posture 15) with his forefinger upon the tricker, he is to incline the muzzell (with a fixed eye) towards his mark; not suddainly, but by degrees, (quicker or slower according to the space he rideth) and that not directly forward toward the horse head, but towards the right; turning his right hand so as the lock of the pistoll may be upward: and having gotten his mark, he is to draw the tricker, and give fire. 17. Return your pistoll. He is to return his pistoll into the case, and then to draw his other pistoll (as occasion may serve) and to do as before. Now concerning the snap-hane pistoll, those postures
wherein it differeth from the fire-lock pistoll, are these as in figure.) 18. Bend your cock. Holding the pistoll in the bridle-hand, (as before hath been shewed) with the right hand he is to bend the cock. 19. Guard your cock. With the right hand he is to pull down the back-lock, so to secure the cock from going off. 20. Order your hammer. With the right hand he is to draw down the hammer upon the pan. 21. Free your cock. With the right thumbe he is to thrust back the back-lock, and so to give the cock libertie. But the more compendious way of lading, for the gain∣ing of time (which in the instant of skirmish is chiefly to be regarded) is by using cartouches. Now, the cartouch is to be made of white paper, cut out of convenient breadth and length, and rowled upon a stick, (or the rammer, if it be not too little) fit (according to the bore of the barrell) to contain a due quantitie of powder, & the bullet. The proportion of powder usually required is half the weight of the bullet; but that is held too much by such as can judge. Having moul∣ded the paper, the one end of it is to be turned in (to keep in the powder) and the due charge of powder to be put into it, at the other end; which powder is to be closed in by tying a little thred about the paper: then the bullet is to be put in, and that also tyed in with a little thred. When the Cuirassi∣er is to use his cartouch, he must bite off the paper at the head of it, and so put it into the barrell of his pistoll, with the bullet upward, and then ramme it home. ByFor the more speedy lading of the pistoll, and avoiding the trouble of carrying either flasque or touchbox, there is a late invented fashion of spanner or key, (which I have repre∣sented in figure 1) which contains six charges of powder (at the least) and priming powder sufficient for those charges, & for the cartouches where∣with the pistoll cases be furnished: which the Cuirassier will finde to be of very good use, when he is used thereunto. this means he shall much expedite the lading of his pistoll. The Cuirassier being become ready in his postures, his next (and chiefest) study is, to be an exact marks man. And to this end he must frequently be practised at someThe Romanes exer∣cised their souldiers at severall heights at stakes set up in Campo Martio. Ad palum quo∣que vel sudes juniores exerceri percommodum est, cùm latera, vel pedes aut caput petere punctim caesímque condiscant. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 23. But their manner of fighting with their swords was not caesim, but all upon the thrust or point; because that manner sooner pier∣ced the vitalls, and laid not open the bo∣die in fetching of a blow. Ibid. lib. 1. cap. 2. marks, to be set up at some tree or stake, of severall heights. Now because the Cuirassier is armed pistoll proof, he must not give fire but at
a veryLa pistolle ne fait quasi nul effect, si elle n'est tirée de trois pas. Monsieur de la Noüe. discours. 18. neare distance, being carefull to bestow his bullets so, as they may take effect. The principall place of advantage to aime at, is the lower part of the bellie of the adverse Cui∣rassier, also his arm-pits, or his neck. Some would not have a Cuirassier to giveLes Reitres bien instruits ne des∣chargent point leurs pistolles qu'en heur∣tant, qu'ils addres∣sent tousiours aux cuisses ou aux visa∣ges. Ibid. fire, untill he have placed his pistoll un∣der his enemies armour, or on some unarmed parts. If he fail of an opportunitie to hurt the man, he may aime at the breast of the horse, or his head, as he shall see occasion. He usually giveth his charge upon the trot, and seldome gallopeth, unlesse it be in pursuit of a flying enemie, or such like occasion. Having spent both his pistols, and want∣ing time to lade again, his next refuge is his sword; whereof the best manner of using is to place the pummell of it upon his rightAs is shewed in the posture 22. thigh, and so with his right hand to direct or raise the point to his mark, higher or lower as occasion serveth: either at the bellie of the adverse horse-man (about the pummell of the saddle) or at his arm pits, or his throat, where if it pierce not, (as it is very like it will not fail, by slipping under the casque) yet meeting with a stay in that part of the bodie, where a man is very weak, and having a sword of a very stiffe blade, (as afore-said) it will doubtlesse unhorse him. Being past his enemie, he is to make a back-blow at him, aiming to cut the buckle of his pouldron, whereby he disarmeth one of his arms, &c. Basta highly commendeth the aiming at the enemies fight, and so (by raising the vizures of his casque with the point of the sword to runne him into the head. But this seemeth not so likely to take effect as that of aiming at the throat; and sometimes (as some casques are made) it would be of no use. In these and the like exercises the Cuirassier is frequently and diligently to practise himself at some mark; which will render him fit for service when need shall require. Some authors (for the disposing of the Cuirassiers for fight) hold that they ought to be ordered in grosse bodies, that so (The Cuirassiers a∣mong the horse, are like the gravis armatu∣ra of foot among the Romanes, quae tanquam murus ferreus stabat, & si hostes fugâsset, non se∣quebatur; quia ejus jus est, facilè nec fugere, nec sequi. Veg. lib. 2. cap. 17. Or like the Equites Ca∣taphracti among the Graecians. Aelian. cap. 2. by their soliditie and weight) they may entertain and sustain the shock of the enemie. They are also fit for troops of reserve, to give courage to the other Cavallrie, and to give them opportunitie to re-assemble themselves be∣hinde them, &c.
CHAP. XXX. Of exercising the Harquebusier and Carabine. ALthough there be some difference between the Harquebusier and the Carabine, in regard of their horse, their arming, and their piece, (howso∣ever most authors take them for one and the same) yet in regard the harquebuse differeth nothing from the carabine in length, but onely in the bore, their manner of using their severall pieces is one and the same; and so one instruction may serve for both. In march, he is either to carry his carabine hanging at his belt by the right side,See fig. 3. posture 23, and 24. (as is shewed chap 24.) or else to order it upon his right thigh, as the Cuirassier, in posture 4. In fight he is to strive to gain the left side of his enemie, (contrarie to the Cuirassier) because that in presenting he is to rest his carabine on his bridle-hand, placing the but end on the right side of his breast, neare his shoulder. He must be taught to use his carabine with all exact∣nesse and dexteritie, and to be an exquisit marks man. For theWalhausen would have the Harquebusi∣er to give fire not onely to the front and flanks, but to the reere also, by turning his bodie onely; the horse running the contrarie way in full careere. But how pos∣sible this is to be done, I leave to the judgement of any man that knows what be∣longs to Cavallrie. manner of handling of the harquebuse or carabine, the directions for the pistoll (in the foregoing chapter) mutatis mutandis, may serve for sufficient instruction. Yet in regard the carabines with us are for the most part snap-hanes, and so something differing from the firelock, I will set down the order of handling it, in the words of command: holding it needlesse here to dilate them. Postures for the Snap-hane carabine. 1 Order your carabine. 2 Sink your carabine into your bridle-hand. 3 Bend your cock. 4 Guard your cock. 5 Prime. 6 Shut your pan. 7 Cast about your carabine. 8 Gage your flasque. 9 Lade your Carabine. 10 Draw your rammer.
11 Shorten your rammer. 12 Lade with bullet, and ramme home. 13 Withdraw your rammer. 14 Shorten your rammer. 15 Return your rammer. 16 Recover your carabine. 17 Order your hammer. 18 Free your cock. 19 Present. 20 Give fire. For the use of his sword, he is to demean himself as the Cuirasier. CHAP. XXXI. Of exercising the Dragon. THe Dragon was invented for speciall services to assist the Cavallrie as Infanterie; considering there be many exploits which cannot be ef∣fected by the Cavallrie alone. The musketier must exercise himself to give fire on horse-back, as the Harquebusier. Being come to guard a passage, or to do any other the like service, they are to allight, and to demean themselves as Infanterie. Whereof it shall be need∣lesse here to enlarge, seeing we have books in such abun∣dance upon that subject, as they are able rather toBy reason of the fri∣volous impertinen∣ces, and manifest er∣rours which abound in many of them. distract, then instruct the reader; and (in my opinion) had need of an Index expurgatorius. Being so allighted to do their service (as abovesaid) every of them is to cast his bridle over the neck of his side-mans horse, in the same order as they marched: keeping them so together, by the help of such as are thereunto especially appointed.
CHAP. XXXII. Of exercising the Cavallrie in their motions. HAving shewed how every horse-man is to be exercised in the managing of his horse, as also in the use of his particular arms; it follow∣eth now that he be taught how to demean himself, being joyned in a bodie. And here, before we enter into the motions, it were fit to explain the terms ofThe Graecians and Romanes had the same order of exercise, and that in the same words, which we re∣tain to this day. A file, the Romanes called Versus, and De∣curia: A rank, Jugum. A file-leader, Decanus, because their decuria (or file) used to con∣sist of 10 among the foot, with some 16. a bringer up, Tergi∣ductor: a leader (be∣ing every odde man in the file) Prostes: a follower (which is every even number) Substes: a side-man, Astes. Their distances were the same with us. Their 2 cubits (every cubit being a foot and an half of our mea∣sure) agreed with our 3 foot. Their 4 cubits, our 6 foot: and so in∣creasing upon occasi∣on. They ordered their horse-troops at 6 foot distance be∣tween file and file, in march, and 3 foot in fight. art therein used, and to shew what is meant by a file, a rank, half files, and half ranks; the front, flanks, and reere, and the like. But (for brevitie sake) I passe them over, referring the reader to the books of Infanterie. To exercise the horse, they are to be drawn up into a bo∣die, not by ranks, but by files: and those of 5 deep, as most affirm, or of 6, as others would have it, and that because the number of 5 is not divisible by 2, and so in doubling of ranks, or half files, or the like, there is alwaies an odde rank. Some would have them (especially the Harquebusiers) to be 8 in file, taking the troop to consist of 64. Being put in Batta∣lia, that is, ordered into a square bodie, and silence strictly commanded; the first thing to be taught them, is distance. And herein authors disagree. Some make close order to be 2 paces; open order, 4 paces, and so for double, triple, and qua∣druple distance proportionable. Others make but 2 kindes of distances: Close order, which is 3 foot: and open order, which is 6 foot. But this must be understood cum grano sa∣lis: (as the Civilians speak) for here we must observe a diffe∣rence between the manner of taking the distance of the Ca∣vallrie, and that of the Infanterie: for in the foot, the di∣stance is taken from the center of the souldiers bodie, which here cannot be so understood, but onely of the space of ground between horse and horse. Monsieur de Praissac is more plain, who would have the distance between rank and rank (both for the length of the horse, as also for the space between horse and horse) to be six paces, & one pace between file and file. Yet, if we take every pace for five foot (as that is the usuall dimention) by
this rule they should be at a verie large distance. In my opinion, the Cavallrie, being to be exercised in their motions, should be at ther distance of six foot, or open order (taking it as hath been shewed) d standing right in their ranks and files.Omnes milites inceden∣di ordinem servent. Veg. 1.9. Ʋt aquali legitimóque spatio miles distet à milite, nec ultrà quàm expedit, aut con∣globent agmen aut la∣xent. ibid. cap. 26. In all the motions we also retain the same words of com∣mand which they used. Facing, they call∣ed declinatio, to the right ad bastam. and left ad scutum. facing about, immuta∣tio. Doubling, by ranks and files. Duplicandi due genera, per juga & versus. Their countermar∣ches the same which we use, evolutio Chorica. per decu∣rias, & juga. evolutio Mace∣donica. per decu∣rias, & juga. evolutio Laconica per decu∣rias, & juga. Wheelings the same with us, conversio ad hastam vel conversio ad scutum. Reversio est conversionis restitutio. Inflexio, wheeling about. &c.Now the motions are of foure kindes. 1. facings. 2. doublings. 3. countermarches. 4. wheelings. The use of facings is to make the companie perfect to be suddainly prepared for a charge on either flank or the reere. Doubling of ranks, or doubling by half files, or bringers up, is used upon occasion of strengthening the front. Doubling of files, or doubling by half ranks serveth to strengthen the flanks. Countermarches serve, either to reduce the file-leaders in∣to the place of the bringers up; and so to have the best men readie to receive the charge of an enemie in the reere: or to bring one flank into the place of the other: or front, and reere, or either flank into the middle of the bodie. The use of wheelings, is to bring the front (which is al∣wayes supposed to consist of the ablest men) to be readie to receive the charge of the enemie on either flank or reere. These motions (for the more easie apprehension of the untutored souldier) are represented in figures, by a companie of Harquebusiers of 64 men. And therein the file-leaders and bringers up are distinguished by a differing letter, as followeth.
military diagram The form of the first standing. To face them to the right, is done by commanding Front. Right flank. Reere. Left flank. military diagram To the right hand. Which is done by turning (all at one and the same time) to the right hand. Thus the front is where the right flank was. To reduce them to their first form, the word of command is As you were. Which they perform by turning to the left hand. From thence, to face them to the left, you command
military diagram To the left hand. Which is performed by turning towards the left. From hence they are to be re∣duced by commanding As you were. Which they do by turning to the right. Now, to face them to the reare, though it be proper first to do it by the right hand, yet for the more ready way, I would say, military diagram To the left hand about. Which is done by turning to∣wards the left hand, untill their faces front to that place which was before the reare. To reduce them to their first form (as that must be observed) the word is To the right hand about, as you were.
military diagram Ranks, to the right double. The use hereof hath been shew∣ed before. Every other rank, that is, every even number passeth into the odde, upon the right hand of his leader. The second rank into the first, and so suc∣cessively. To reduce them, the word is Ranks, as you were. Which is best done, by causing those ranks which doubled to stand, and those which stood to ad∣vance. military diagram Ranks, to the left double. The difference of this motion from the former, is nothing, but that here they which double do it to the left hand of their leaders, which before they did to their right hands, as the figure maketh it plain. This done, they must be reduced by commanding Ranks, as you were.
military diagram Files to the right double. To do this, the second file pas∣seth into the first (every man be∣hinde his sideman) accounting from the right hand: the 4 into the 3, and so the rest: which must be done throughout the companie at one instant, all together. But because the first rank of the companie is as the edge, and the files are for the most part appointed but 5 deep, there seemeth no great necessitie of doubling of files. They are reduced by command∣ing Files to the left as you were. military diagram Files to the left double. The difference between this and the former motion, is the difference of hands. And by this means, those files that stood before, now move; and they which moved, now stand, as appeareth by the figure. They are reduced by commanding Files as you were, or, Ranks to the right double.
military diagram Half files, to the right hand double the front. Thus the middle-men double the first rank, on the right hand. The other three ranks double the three following ranks, as is ma∣nifest in the figure. To reduce them, the word is Half files as you were. Unlesse it be better (and so I con∣ceive it) to cause them that double, to stand: and the first division to advance. military diagram Half files, to the left hand double the front. This motion onely differeth from the former in the hand. There be also doublings of ranks by the half files entire to the right, or left, or both by division: But be∣cause the files (especially of Cuiras∣siers) are seldome above five deep; the doubling of ranks, half files, &c. is little used. The reducing of them hath been shewed in the former motion.
military diagram Bringers up, to the right hand double the front. In this motion, the last rank pas∣seth into the first, and so successively, as the figure sheweth it. It is of good use: yet because it is very troublesome for the horse to perform, (especially in reducing them) it may be used, or omitted, as shall be thought fit. They are redu∣ced by saying, Bringers up, as you were. military diagram Files, to the left hand Countermarch. Though it were fit to begin with the right hand, yet for the conveni∣ent turning of the horse to the left, I think it not amisse to preferre the left. The figure representeth the Cho∣raean manner. There be also countermarches af∣ter the Macedonian and Lacedemonian wayes, and those in ranks as well as files, which are here omitted for bre∣vitie sake.
military diagram Files, close to the right and left to your close order. Being about to wheel the com∣panie, they must be closed, first the files, and then the ranks. And being to open them again, the ranks are first to be opened, and then the files. All the files close from the right and left, towards the middle of the bodie. military diagram Ranks, close forwards, to your close order. All the ranks move forwards, sa∣ving the first, which standeth. The second rank having their di∣stance, stand; so all the rest. Now the horse being to wheel, it must be considered that it cannot be perform∣ed by them in such exact manner, and so strait a room as the foot: there∣fore, the commander is to ride a rea∣sonable compasse, that so they may do it with convenience.
military diagram To the left hand wheel. military diagram Because Melzo and Basta would have the horse, in all their wheel∣ings, to do it by the left (which in∣deed is the readier way unlesse the ground, or other hindrance will not permit it) I have omitted the wheel∣ing to the right, which in order should go first. All the bodie moveth to the left, upon the left file-leader, as the cen∣ter. Then to wheel as they were. military diagram There is also wheeling to the right, or left about, wheeling wings into the front, &c. which are here omitted for brevitie. To reduce them, first the ranks are to be opened, (as abovesaid) then the files, which bringeth them to their first form. In opening the ranks, the best (if not the onely) way is to do it by opening forward.
These and the like motions are directed and command∣ed by the voice of the commander:Vox autem percipi in∣terdum non petest, aut propter armorum soni∣tum, aut propter equorun transitum & himitum, & multitudinis strepitum, &c. Aelian. cap. 35. but because the voice sometime cannot be heard (especially in grosse bodies) by rea∣son of the clashing of armour, trampling or neying of horses, or tumultuous sound, or noise of the multitude, (and that especially in fight)Nam cum voce sola in∣ter praeliorum tumultus regi multitudo non possit, &c. antiquus omnium gentium usus invenit, &c. Tria generasignorum, Vo∣caliae, semivocalia, muta. &c. Veget. lib. 3. cap. 5. Antiquitie hath invented helps; making three kindes of militarie signes or directions: 1 Vocall, which is by the commanders voice, pronounced by the inferiour officers to the eare. 2 Semivocall, by trumpet or other war like instrument, to the eare. 3 Mute, by signes to the eye, as the ensigne, &c The Cavallrie therefore must be taughtPraecipies autem ut perfectè cognoscant bucci∣nae sonum, ut ubi consistere eos jubet, consistant, &c. Leo Tact. cap. 9.82. distinctly to know the severall sounds of the trumpet; as when to clap on their saddle, when to mount, when to repair to the cor∣net, when to troop away, when to give a charge, when to retreat, when to attend the watch, and the like. All which being the lowder voice of the commander,Intenti ad ducis non signum modò, sed nutum. Curtius. 3. they must punctually observe and obey. Now, howsoever I have here propounded a companie of 64 horse, to be exercised in the motions, and those of 8 in file (as I see it observed byWalhausen would have the Harquebusiers to be 8 in file, and the Cuirassiers 10. lib. 2. cap. 2, & 3. But therein (as in divers other things) he is sin∣gular, and dissenteth from others. some) yet the generall opini∣on is, that they ought not to be deeper then 5 in file, though the companie consist of 100 horse. Every such companie must be furnished with A Captain. A Lieutenant. A Cornet. A Quartermaster. Three Corporalls. Two Trumpeters. A Clerk. A Saddler. A Chirurgeon. A Farrier. When the companie beAbout the manner of marching of a com∣panie of horse, there is much disagreement among authors. Melzo, Basta, and Walhausen would have them to march in one entire deduction) not by squadrons) the Ca∣ptain to march first, next after him two attendants with spare horses, they bearing his armour: then the trumpeters, then the cornet, in the first rank of horse. But VValhausen placeth the Lieutenant next after the Trumpeters, before the Cornet: all others place him (as he ought to be) in the reere. Flamin: de la Crore would have them march in divisi∣ons, and every Corpo∣rall to lead one; but this (the Corporalls being leaders of files) disordereth their ranks. I follow that order which is pre∣scribed to be general∣ly observed by the councel of warre. to march, they are to be divided into 3 equall parts (and each of these is called a squadron) ac∣cording to the number of the corporalls; and these are distin∣guished by the names of the Captains, Lieutenants, & Cor∣nets squadron.) The first squadron to be led by the Captain, the second by the Cornet, the third by the eldest Corporall. The Lieutenant & Quartermaster are to come in the reare. And when they come to be exercised (or to do service) the Captains squadron stands, & the other squadrons sleeve up on the left hand, & so they become a Battalia. As for their mar∣ching in grosse, that comes to be spoken of in the next part.
THE SECOND PART. OF MARCHING. THE ARGUMENT. HAving shewed in the first part, how the Ca∣vallrie is to be levied, it followeth now to speak of their manner of marching: a matter of no smallPlura in itineribus, quàm in ipsa acie solent contingere pericula. Nam in conflictu armati sunt omnes, & hostem comi∣nus vident, & ad pu∣gnandum animo veniunt praeparati. In itinere mi∣nùs armatus minùsque attentus est miles, & su∣perveniente impetu vel fraude repente turbatur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6. consequence, in the well ordering whereof, oftentimes (especially upon occasion of suddain charges) the safetie of the troops, or of the whole armie consisteth. For the orderly handling where∣of I purpose to direct my discourse to these 3. heads. 1. The knowledge of the wayes, and discoverie of the enemies designes, and residence. 2. The conducting of the troops to their Rendez-vous, and their orders. 3. The particular distribution of the whole train upon the way; And the scouts or fore-runners. And how they are to march in an open or strait countrey, by day or night. CHAP. I. Of guides. FOr the knowledge of the wayes (aFor want of good guides the late Prince of Orenge failed of an Aenslach (or en∣terprise) upon Bru∣ges, a citie in Flan∣ders. For when he had marched all the night (himself and many other great perso∣nages often riding up to the horses bellies in waters) he found him∣self within half an houres march of the place he landed at; The day appearing frustrated the designe, and caused him to dis∣march re infectâ. Meteren. lib. 17. matter of great importance, either to prevent the taking of one way for another in marching, or in pur∣suing the enemie, he having received the charge, and flying by usuall wayes) the use of mappes may somewhat help, but (being too generall) is not sufficient. And therefore the waggon-master is to provide good guides, of the inhabitants of those places where the march is to be, which may be able to give certain and particular information concerning theDux locorum interval∣la non solùm possuum numero, sed etiam via∣rum qualitates per discat: compendia, diverticula, montes, stamina, ad fi∣dem descripta consideret. high-wayes and crosse-wayes, how many there be of them; whether they be even, large, and free: or straight, hilly, or impeached with difficult passa∣ges.
Also concerning ditches and rivers, whether there be bridges or not. And if there be divers wayes, which is the most safe and shortest, or most exposed to the enemies ad∣venues or approaches, or most commodious for the bag∣gage. Whether there be requisite commoditie for the lodge∣ings, as forrage, water, &c. In so much as they may be able to know every hedge or ditch, and all other particulars. And that you may be assured of their fidelitie, and the truth of their informations, it is good to have them to be souldi∣ers in pay; or where they are not, to take them of theAd hoc a prudentioribus locorumque gnaris sepa∣ratim debet universa perquirere, & veritatem colligere de pluribus. boores or inhabitants (as aforesaid) from place to place, keeping them seperated from each other. And if they differ, either from the souldiers which serve for guides, or from each other, they must be confronted; and by the mutuall consent of all, the best way is to be resolved on. These guides usually (to prevent their run̄ing away, which they will often do if they see an opportunitie of escaping) are led bound,Eósque custodiae manci∣pare, additâ poenae ostenta∣tione, vel praemii, &c. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6. or at least committed to the custodie of some soul∣dier. Recompence is promised them if they doe their en∣deavour, and punishment threatned if they direct amisse. CHAP. II. Of Intelligence. EVery good commander must have these two grounds for his actions; 1. The knowledge of his own forces, and wants, (knowing that the enemie may have notice thereof, and therefore must he be alwayes studying for remedies, if the enemie should come suddainly upon him) 2. The assurance of the condition and estate of the enemie, his commodities, and necessities, his counsails and designes: thereby begetting divers occasions, which afterward bring forth victories.M. Cato in Hispania, quia ad hostium conslia aliâ viâ pervenire non poterat, jussit trecentos milites simul impetum facere in stationem hosti∣um, raptúmque unum ex his in castra perferre inco∣lumem; tortus ille, omnia suorum arcana confessus est. Frontin. Stratagem. lib. 1. cap. 2. And because the commoditie of spies cannot alwayes be had; some of the enemies men must be assayed to be taken, from whom there may be drawn a relation of the estate of the adverse part, and this exploit is called,The French call it prendre langue. taking of intelli∣gence,
a dutie of great importance, (whereon the delibera∣tions which are to be taken do depend) and also of much travail and danger. To effect this, an expert officer, with 20 or 25 of theDux cum agmine exer∣citús prosecturus, fide∣lissimos argutissimosque cum equis probatissimis mittat, qui loca per quae iter faciendum est, in pro∣gressu, & a tergo, dextrâ, leváque perlustrent, nè aliquas adversarii moli∣antur insidias. Ibid. Veg. best mounted, stoutest, and hardiest Harquebusiers (or mixt of Cuirassiers and Harquebusiers, according to Melzo) with two Trumpets are to be employed. These are to carry with them some refreshment for themselves and their horses; to that purpose retiring themselves into some wood, or shadie place; placing good Centinells upon trees. If they finde the enemie marching, they shall follow him on either flank (as opportunitie shall direct them) or on the reare, or meet him on the front, assaying to take some that are disbanded, or some forrager. In the night they must approach the ene∣mies armie, assaying to take some Centinell, or some disband∣ed souldier in some of the houses there about. And because it well may fall out that (after the taking of some prisoner) the troop shall be charged by the enemie; the Chief (which must be valiant,How abundant An∣tiquitie was in strata∣gems, all their histories testifie. Frontine (a man of con∣sular dignitie among the Romanes) hath written foure books of stratagems, being collected out of divers authors Greek and Roman; and yet many by him let slip, as him∣self acknowledgeth in praefatione ad lib. 1. also Poliaenus. In stratagems Hannibal is said to have excel∣led. d and abundant in resolutions and inventions of stratagems to make his retreat by some woodie place,) shall send (or first there leave them) foure of his best and best mounted souldiers with a Trumpet; with order, that when they see the troop coming, charged by the enemie, they shew them selves, the trumpet sounding. For, it being an usuall thing in militarie courses to go and observe who they be which appear, the enemie by this means makes Alto, (or a stand) for feare of some embuscado, which gives leasure to the troop to advance their retreat: and the said foure soul∣diers may make their retreat, either severally, or together, safe enough, by reason of their good horses. If the enemie be likely to come from divers parts, the like number would be sent to each suspected place. These should be sent before with the Quartermasters which go to make the quarters, that so they might have 2 or 3 houres refreshment, before they go to take intelligence. If the armie be lodged in a very suspicious place; after the first troop so sent out, a second shall be sent; but neither of them knowing of each others send∣ing out. if the armie be to march the next day, the chiefs of the said troops must know towards what place the march is intended.
CHAP. III. Of the order of marching. THe Commissarie Generall, grounding himself upon good informations, is to give the orders in writing for the manner of marching, as well of the souldiers as the baggage. Everie Captain is to receive his written directions overnight, that so, the signe given, he may appeare at the Rendez-vous in such rank and place as shall be commanded him. Epoi lodata consu∣etudine il dividar gli esserciti in tre squadrons, cioè vanguardia, Bat∣taglia, & retroguar∣dia; & che ogni gi∣ornato si venga mu∣tando. Cataneo di fort. cap. 8. Alternis diebus altera legio & alterum cornu praecedunt, eadémque rursus sequuntur, mutan∣tes semper ordinem, ut alternatim primi ince∣dant. Polyb.Every armie is divided into three parts; The vanguard, battail, and reare. That part of the armie which is most exposed to the enemie (and that most usually is the front) should be the best; and therefore all chiefs desire the van∣guard. The manner therefore is (for generall satisfaction) that they which this day had the van, to morrow have the reare; and they which had the reare, the battail. So chan∣ging alternatively; except the Lord Generalls guard (consist∣ing of two troops, as Melzo hath it) or the Generalls regi∣ment (according to C. Bingham) which hath alwayes the vanguard. And if the enemie should change place, and from your front become to be upon your reare, whereby the reare (as most dangerous) becomes most honourable; that Ca∣ptain which to day hath led the battaillon, to morrow (in stead of the vanguard) may challenge the reare. The scouts alter their course also, and attend the enemies proceedings on the reare. If occasion be (in time of march) to send out one or more troops for some service, they are to observe the same or∣ders. But the armie being come to their quarter, and occasi∣on being to send outWhen all or a good part of the horse are employed in some exploit, without In∣fanterie, it is called a cavalcado. Such was that when the States men surprised the castle of Crapoel in Limburg. &c. Meteren. lib. 23. all or part of the Cavallrie upon some exploit; that troop which first appeareth at the place of Rendez-vous shall be appointed by the Commissarie Gene∣rall (who is to be there) to the first place; the second to the second place. If two troops come together, at the same instant, they shall cast lots. By this means, every man desiring honour, they will be
the readier to appeare in due time. The same course shall be taken when the troops are to be sent upon some em∣buscado, convoy, or the like. If the march be but of one day, he which commandeth shall appoint the best experi∣enced and ablest to lead;Others hold it much better to observe the same order in the dis∣march which was used in the march, so that companie which went out first, comes in first. who is to be in the reare, returning back to the quarter. And these may have private order to be at the place of Rendez-vous sooner then the rest, to avoid jealousies. The vanguard, battaillon, and reare, must be divided from each other 300 paces. CHAP. IV. Of scouts, or discoverers. TO be secured from unexpected assaults of the enemie, neither the armie nor the Cavallrie alone, no not a companie, must march with∣outThese the Romanes called exploratores, or speculatores. See Veg. lib. 3. cap. 22. Nè secreta noceant, ducis praestat industria, quem omnia prius convenit explora∣re. Idem lib. 3. cap. 6. discoverers: which must be sent out, not onely by the direct way where the enemie is like to come, or you are to march, but to scoure all the by-wayes on either side. And sometime the first discoverers are seconded by a second companie, to secure the march. They that shall be employed in this service must be choice men, valiant, vigilant, and discreet: such as neither feare nor misconceit can easilie distract. They must see that with their own eyes which they inform, the least errour of theirs misleading the whole bodie. Those select men appointed for this service, are to beP. Considius, qui rei militaris peritissimus ha∣bebatur, & in exercitu L. Syllae, & postea in M. Crassi fuerat, cum exploratoribus praemitti∣tur. Caes. com. lib. 1. c. 5. led by an able officer; it being a task so difficult, that many have lost that reputa∣tion by it which they had been long in gaining of. This officer shall send word of what he discovereth; and what he seeth not himself, he is to signifie it as so reported to him; and having seen it, then to certifie it as for certain.
CHAP. V. Of the order of marching by day. THeOmni curā, omnique diligentiâ providere de∣bet dux, ne proficiscens patiatur incursum, vel si non facilè, at sine damno repellat illatum. Veg. ibid. march must be so ordered as the companies may readily (from that order) be brought into a good form of battell, upon occasion of a sud∣dain charge. The Cavallrie (supposed to consist of 40 troops, and the countrey spacious) is to be divided in∣to two bodies of 20 troops a piece. Melzo would have 3 troops of Harquebusiers in front of the vanguard, which Basta and VValhausen are against, because they are (for the most part) but ill armed. These two divisions are to march in even front, 150 paces divided. Coming to strait pas∣sages, the right wing is to march before the left. The offi∣cers must suffer none of the baggage nor any other to inter∣mingle with their troops. The Captain of Harquebusiers which hath the van∣guard (or one of them in that division, when the Cuirassiers have it)Praemittes etiam ad lo∣ca exploranda equites quosdam, praesertim si syl∣vosa sint, aut collibus aut montibus inclusa, per quae transeundum est, &c. Leo cap. 9.38. must send out a Corporall with 15 horse and a good guide, some league before; whereof two shall be sent out directly before him; two towards the right, and other two towards the left;Caesar exercitum per insidiosa itinera duxit nunquam, nisi praespecu∣latus locorum situs &c. Sueton. Jul. to discover among the woods and val∣leys, and to get intelligence, at any dwelling houses or villa∣ges, advising the Corporall of what they discover. Who is from time to time to advise the chief, which is to march at the head of the first troop. After these 15 he is to send out 4 others, led by a suffi∣cient souldier, to bring reports of what those 15 shall disco∣ver; the rather because the enemie might come upon them upon the flanks, after the first 15. were past. The Captain of Harquebusiers which hath the reare of the left wing, must leave a Corporall with 15 horse a mile behinde him. Of these 15, two are to be some 12 or 14 score behinde the rest, to give notice if the enemie follow them in the reare. Illud vitandum, nè aliis festinantibus, aliis tardiùs incedentibus, in∣terrumpatur acies, aut certè tenuetur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6.The Captain which leads in front must march so as the other troops must keep foot with him; and passing over a bridge or narrow passage, must make Alto so soon as he
is over, or in the plain, leaving a souldier at the bridge or strait, which shall give him knowledge so soon as the reare be past over or through.Quando per angustias aliquas, aut per arduos aviósque montes profe∣cturus es, praemitte ex tuis qui juga montium & loca ibi editissima oc∣cupent, & qui aditus angustos & minùs pa∣tentes anticipent. &c. Leo Tact. cap. 9.26. And if in these strait passages there be any advenues by which the enemie might charge you, those must be prepossessed by Harquebusiers, or Dragons, alighting, and keeping themselves upon some height, or in some valley, or behinde some hedge or ditch, to secure their flanks. Every troop is to leave 100 paces distance between each other, and are to suffer no baggage nor others to trouble them, as abovesaid. CHAP. VI. The order of marching by night. UPon occasion of marching with all or part of the Cavallrie by night, the companies are pun∣ctually appointed their places of march by written orders delivered to their officers. Before the troops, a Corporall with 12 or 15 Harquebusiers is to be sent, by the space of half a league, to discover and take intelligence at the houses, whether there be any news of the enemie. And passing by places which are at the enemies devotion, some of them must have the language, and feigne themselves friends, the better to know what passeth. Not long after these, 4 others are to follow, as in the former chapter. Besides, a chosen troop of Cuirassiers are to be readie, led by a Captain of speciall desert, with order toCapienda rebus in ma∣lis praeceps via est. Seneca. charge resolutely upon any adversary; and these are to march 150 paces before the rest. The chief Commander is to march at the head of the first troop which followeth the said chosen troop of 60 Cuirassiers, and with him one of the best souldiers of every troop, to carrie the orders (upon all occasions) to their Ca∣ptains: sending before him 4 of his ablest men, to give him notice if the said select troop of 60 Cuirassiers charge the enemie: which if it happen, he shall cast his companie out
of the way, and charge the enemie on the flank; and so the rest of the troops, observing that they intermix not their troops. The troops must not leave such distances between each other as in the day march, unlesse they heare news of the enemies approach.Progredientes viam faciunt silentio & quie∣tè, decenter omnes pro∣prium ordinem asservan∣tes. Josephus, of the Romanes manner of marching, cited by Lipsius de milit. Rom. lib. 5.142. They must march with all possible si∣lence. At any by way, the first companie must leave a soul∣dier at the entrance thereof, which shall be relieved or changed by the next companie, and so successively untill all be past. Coming into open and champion places, the offi∣cers shall draw up their troops, and cause them to march in square bodies, well closed, having regard that none slep. The spare horses or pages must not march at the heads of the troops. If the enemie charge the reare, the chief offi∣cer in the reare shall cause the last companie to face about; and so the rest, if need be: but those companies which were in front must not come to the reare, for avoiding of disor∣der, and lest the enemie cunningly make an alarm in the reare, when he meaneth to charge the front. In the reare of all, a Corporall with 15 horse shall march as above men∣tioned, with a guide. The day being come, the said 60 Cuirassiers shall return to their severall companies. If the companies refresh themselves in the night, they must not be suffered to unsaddle their horses, nor disarm themselves The guides (diverse of them) must go before the troops, whether on foot or on horse-back, guarded by two souldi∣ers which know the language, and no other to speak to them.Interdum autem im∣perita rusticitas plura promittit, & credit se scire quae nescit. Veg. lib. 3. Cap. 6. These are diligently to observe them whether they seem doubtfull, looking here and there, as doubting of the way, and thereof shall presently certifie the officer, that he may call others, to be assured.
CHAP. VII. How the baggage is to march. AS little baggage as possible may be must be con∣ducted with the Cavallrie. It is the waggon-masters charge to order it for the march. First the Generalls baggage is to march, then the Lieutenant Generalls, then the Commissarie Generalls, and so the other officers in their degrees. The place of march is uncertain;Auuertendo anco∣ra, che tutti li im∣pedimenti & arti∣glierie sempre ca∣mino da quelle par∣te, che non sia volta verso al nemico. Cataneo. cap. 8. This agreeth with Aelians directions, cap. 51. Impedimenta &c. but alwayes it must be most remote from danger. If the danger be in the front, it marcheth in the reare, &c. The waggon-master (or with some the Provost) must see that all march in their appoint∣ed place, and disband not. A company of Harquebusiers is to guard the baggage. The horse boyes march after the waggons, and must not be suffered to march among the troops.
THE THIRD PART. OF ENCAMPING. THe next part to be handled (according to our former distribution) is Encamping. In the skil∣full performance whereof, the militarie pru∣dence and good judgement of the Comman∣der of an armie chiefly appeareth. And herein three things are principallie considerable. 1 In what place, and by whom the quarter is to be made, and how distributed. 2 The manner of securing the quarter, by guards, senti∣nels, discoverers, spies, &c. 3 Of dislodging, and the way how to perform it. CHAP. I. Of making the quarters. INCastra tuto semper faci∣enda sunt loco: ubi & lignorum & pabuli & aquae suppetat copia. Et si diutiùs commorandum est, loci salubritas elige∣tur, &c. Veg. lib. 1. cap. 22. the choice of a fitting place for encamping or quartering, regard must be had, 1 To the com∣moditie of the souldiers. 2 To the situation; to be able to resist the enemie. For experience teacheth what benefit or losse an armie may receive by a good or bad quartering, and hereof histories yeeld a world of examples. To lodge or encamp the Cavallrie, a speciall care must be had of the commoditie of water, and where they may be under shelter: for one cold or rainie night might ruine the Cavallrie, nothing hurting a horse sooner then cold or wet. By this means the souldier shall finde forrage at hand, and needeth not to go seek it abroad with his horse of service, all not having nags. When the horse be lodged in severall quarters, two souldiers of every quarter attend the person of the Generall, or the chief Commander, to carrie
any sudden orders to their severall quarters. But of such companies as are quartered neare him,Ʋnus ex omnibus ma∣nipulis imperatori in diem excubat. Polyb. one is sufficient. When all the Cavallrie is lodged together, the Lieutenant Generall, Commissarie Generall, and Quartermaster Gene∣rall are usually lodged neare the Generall, for the better di∣stributing of the Generalls orders. The appointing of the quarters belongeth to the Com∣missarie Generall and the Marshall, by whose directions the Quartermaster Generall proceedeth. It is fit for them to have some demonstration on paper, of the place beforehand; and to know the commodities and discommodities, also the advenues of the enemie; wherein the guides can better di∣rect them then the usuall maps, which (if not false) are too generall. When the Quartermaster GenerallCùm verò appropinqua∣verint ubi castra ponen∣da, praeeunt Tribunus, & Centurionum illi, qui ad hoc munus semper electi sunt, &c. Polyb. goeth before to make the quarters, not onely the particular Quarterma∣sters, but also two souldiers of every companie are to go with him; which then go back again to conduct their re∣spective companies to their assigned quarters; especially in the night. The Provost (or rather the Waggon-master) sendeth one of his men to take notice of the place for the lodging of the baggage, who afterward conducteth him thither. Where he then assigneth the Sutlers (or victuallers) their quarter, and causeth all carts or waggons to be remo∣ved out of the streets, lest an alarm be given. CHAP. II. Of distributing the quarters. GReat discretion must be used in appointing to everie one such quarter as isPro gradu legionibus & auxiliis, equitibus & peditibus, loca depu∣tantur in castris. Veg. 3.8. fitting & conform∣able to the qualitie of his person, and conveni∣ence of the place. The best way to avoid su∣spicion of partialitie is, that such as be ill lodged now, be better accommodated the next time. The market-place (for the conveniencie of all, and for safetie) is to be in the middle; but so as no streets runne through it leading to the Rendez∣vous or place of arms.
military diagram Fig: 4 Par: 3 Cap: 2 THis Regiment consisteth of 4 Troopes of Horse, viz. two of Cuirassiers, and two of Harquebusiers: which Regiment containeth in bredth (or front) from A. to B. 700 foot, and in depth (or length) from B. to C. 300 foot. from A. to D. is 205 foot in bredth, for one Company of Cuirassiers, which consisteth of 80 horse, together with 80 Nags, which have 5 files of huts, and 5 files of horse, which Cuirassiers are quartered (or lodged) on the right hand of the Regiment. From E. to Z. is 115 foot in bredth for a Company of Harquebusiers, which consisteth of 100 horse, and it hath 3 files of huts and horses. From A. to G. is the space of ground where the Collonell of the Regiment is lodged, on the right hand of these 4 Companies, and the said enclosure for the Collonell is 70 foot broad, from A. to G. From G. to H. is 40 foot in depth (or length) for the said enclosure for the Collonell: and so are all the other enclosures of the Officers. From H. to I. is 20 foot in bredth, for the streete betweene the Collonels Enclosure, and the Enclosure for the Lieutenant and Cornet of the said Collo∣nels Company (which are both lodged in one Enclosure, marked I. K.) which hath also 70 foot in bredth, as that of the Collonell; which Enclosure is di∣vided into 2 parts: The Lieutenant being lodged on the right hand, and hath 40 foot in bredth for his Enclosure: And the Cornet on the left hand (with one of the Trumpetters) having the other 30 foot in bredth of the said En∣closure; which maketh 70 foot for them both. Frō K. to L. is another street of 20 foot broad, to the enclosure marked L. M. L. M. is the Enclosure where the Quartermaster is lodged, with two other horsemen which he pleaseth to admit of, which is 25 foot broad, and 40 foot long, as the rest. Their hut (within the said Enclosure) being 12 foot square for them three, and their Stable is 25 foot broad, for their six horses. From M. to N. is 30 foot for the street betweene the Quartermasters En∣closure, and the first huts for the horsemen, marked N. Frō N. to O. is 180 foot for the quartering of the files of huts for the hors∣men. viz. for 16 huts, and their 32 horses in a file, agreeable to the Regiments of Infantery: That so, where the Regiments of Cavalry are to be lodged in the Champaine ground, among the Infantery, they might all make one and the same ligne before and behinde the Regiments. And through the said two Troopes of Cuirassiers there bee 2. streets marked P. which streets are of 13 foot broad, and the huts of the horsemen are 10 foote broade, and 8 foote long for one horseman and his Boy. And betweene 2 huts there is 2 foote of space for the drayne of rayne water, dropping from the thatch or covers of the huttes. These huts have their chiefe dores or passages towards the heads of their horses, and a small one opening into the street where they lay their hay and straw, every one behinde his owne hut. Q. are two streets of 12 foot broad, which passe through the Troopes of Harquebusiers. R. is a street of 5 foot broad, betweene the horsemens huts, and the man∣gers for their horses. S, is 10 foote for the Stables for their horses, which horses are placed with their heads toward their huts, and every horse hath 4 foot in bredth for his Litter, and 8 foot for the 2 horses; according to the length of their huts. And more ground than 8 foot they must not take; for otherwise it would cause a great disorder and confusion, not observing the said precise measures. T. is a street of 20 foot broad betweene the heeles of their horses: in which streete they mount and alight off their horses; which streete they are bound to keepe cleane, and to carry away the dung every two or three dayes. V. is 30 foot in bredth, for the street called the Victuallers (or Suttlers) street. W. are the Suttlers huts, being  foote square, and more roome they they must not take, unlesse (when they have many Pensioners) the Quarter∣master give them a foot or two more in bredth, but not in depth, to observe the measure of 300 foot in the depth of the Regiment, as the Infantery. X. is 10 foot of ground behinde the Suttlers huts, for a place for the Sut∣tlers, the hors-men and their wives to dresse their victuals. And in no other place of the Quarter must any fire bee made. Neither are they to cast any filth, &c. within the Quarter, but to carry it to the place appointed thereunto, upon payne of a fine, which the Provost taketh. E. F. is the Enclosure of the Captaine of a troope of Harquebusiers, being of the same bredth and depth as those of the Capt. of Cuirassiers, viz. 70. foot broad, and 40 foot deepe. And the ancientest Captaine of Harquebùsiers, or Cuirassiers closeth the battalion of the Regiment on the left hand, at the cor∣ner marked B. F. Y. is a street of 20 foot broad, to the Lieutenant of the Troop of Harque∣busiers his enclosure Y. Y. Z. is 25 foot in bredth for the enclosure of the said Lieutenant, where also are placed his 4 horses; having in depth 40 foot. And the Cornets of the Troops of Harquebusiers are lodged on the right hand in the 2 first huts of the horsemen, and that to place his 3 horses, and the 4th horse is the Trumpeters, who alwayes lodgeth with the Cornet. These Companies of Harquebusiers have also 180 foot depth for the quartering of their 3 files of huts marked (in the Cuirassiers) N.O. but these have but 15 huts in every file for 30 horse. having also two streets (as the Cuirassiers) through them marked Q. being of 12 foot broad (as above said) leaving 3 foot of space betweene their huttes for the draine (whereas the Cuirassiers have but 2 foot) their hutts are (also) of 10 foot broad and 8 foot deepe for 2 Harquebusiers, and 8 foot for the litter of their two horses, and 10 foot for their Stable. And 5 foot for a street be∣tweene their huts, and the mangers for their horses: their Suttlers streets, their Suttlers huts, &c. are as the Cuirassiers.
military diagram The maner of Quartering the Pr. of Orange his Army both horsse and foote Fig: 5. Par: 3. Cap: 2.
When the quarter, is to be in some suspected place, it should (if possibly it could) be made in the day time, before the approach of the night, that so the fittest place for the alarm place might be made choice of, and also for the corps-du-guard; also the better to discover and observe the approa∣ches of the enemie, and to appoint the stands of the Sen∣tinells; that so the souldiers finding all things readie, be not put to finde out their lodgings in the dark with lighted straw, in danger to fire the houses: besides, a Lieutenant with 25 Harquebusiers useth to be sent out before, and to place themselves beyond the further side of the village where the quarter shall be, placing Sentinells a good di∣stance before them, to prevent the enemies suddain approach on that part. The best house must be appointed for the Generall, as neare the Corps-du-guard as may be; the rest of the officers are to be accommodated in their order. Everie Captain must lodge among his souldiers. The troops, be∣ing come neare to the quarter, make Alto; and receiving in∣formation by the Quartermaster Generall, or one of the particular Quartermasters, that the quarters are readie, the Chief giveth license to the Captains to enter their quarters. They which have the guard are to be conducted to the place by the Quartermaster Generall. But if the armie be en∣camped in the field, the Cavallrie is to be quartered, accord∣ing to theThe Romanes man∣ner of quartering or encamping, is shewed in figure by Lipsius, in his book de Milit. Rom. lib. 5. dial. 4. Also by Sr H. Savile, in his annotations upon Tacitus. And by Sr Cl. Edmonds in his observations upon Caesars commenta∣ries, lib. 2. cap. 9. And described by Veg. lib. 3. cap. 8. manner of quartering of a regiment,For the modern quarterings, see S. Ste∣vin his castrametari∣on. Also D. de Solemne, and others. represented in figure 4. part 3 chap. 2. And of the whole armie in Fig. 5. CHAP. III. Of the necessitie of securing the quarters. NOthing sooner deceiveth an unexperienced Captain, then to perswade himself that he is superiour in forces, and in advantage of place, and so farre distant from his enemie as he cannot, or dare not assail him. Upon which supposition theMilitibus ad capien∣dum cibum occupatis, aut munera facienda dispersis, facilè nectuntur insidiae. Noctis obscuritas, necessi¦tas somni, pascentium equorum dispersio, occasio¦nem supervenientibus praestat. Veg. lib. 3.8. surprisings of quar∣ters are often grounded, it being no marvail that secure & dis∣ordered men should be assaulted by vvel ordered men & reso∣lute;
among the Cavallrie especially, where the souldier cannot arm himself without help his horse-boy nor him∣selfe being scarce themselves, (as but newly rouzed out of their sleep by the alarm) can hardly tell where to finde bridle or saddle, or light: so as the enemie is upon their jacks before they can mount, or at least unite themselves together. These things oftentimes happen, but are justly derided by good souldiers,Castrorum munitio cu∣randa: nihil enim neque tam salutare, neque tam necessarium invenitur in bello. Idem lib. 1. cap. 21. and therefore all diligence must be used at all times as if the enemie were at hand, readie to set upon the quarters everie moment. CHAP. IV. Of the manner of securing the quarters. ALl the diligences used about securing of the quarters, seem onely to serve for the gaining of time,Subita conterrem hostes, ustata vilescant. and that the enemie may not charge you on the suddain, so as the souldiers have not con∣venient time to arm themselves, mount their horses, and assemble at the place of arms. To effect this, there is no better way then toThe Romanes man∣ner of fortifications about their camps, for securitie, are fully de∣scribed by Veges. lib. 1. cap. 24. If the enemie were neare, all the armie stood readie for bat∣tell, to guard them which (behinde them) wrought about the trenches. And this was done by every centurie by turns: every souldier becom∣ing a pioner for the time. Ibid. cap. 25. make sure the enemies ap∣proaches. If the quarter be in a suspected place, the com∣panies of Harquebusiers are to be quartered in the adve∣nues of the village, the Lances (if any be) and Cuirasfiers in the middle. At the entrances of all the streets, either trees orFor a suddain de∣fence of the quarter (it being in a cham∣pain countrey, desti∣tute of any other) it hath been usuall to enclose the quarter with waggons and carts. So did the Hel∣vetians (now called Swissers) as Caesar re∣cordeth it, Com. cap. 10. And to this pur∣pose vide Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10. Persae (imitantes Roma∣nae) ductis fessit castra constitt; & quia are∣sa sunt propè omnia, s qu ies porta∣verant, ex pver (qua ) rra comp,  facium. ibid. wag∣gons are to be placed acrosse, giving order to the Harque∣busiers to guard those passages, and that none of them mount on horse-back without speciall order: that so, the rest may have time to assemble at the place of arms, if the enemie come upon them, unto which a new passage must be cut, for the more privacie and securitie. If there be Dra∣gons, then they are to guard the said approaches: If infante∣rie, then is it their task to do it. If the scituation of the place be such as that the enemie may environ it round, the usuall entrances or approaches to
the village are to be stopped up, and new ones cut in some secret places, as gardens or the like, distant from the usuall wayes: that so the enemie may be afraid to charge home a Centinell or Corps-de-guard, thereby to enter with them as they retreat. The quarters are to be well barricadoed about, except the new cut passages leading to the Rendez-vous. CHAP. V. Of the Rendez-vous, or alarm place. THe alarm place is that place without the vil∣lage, where the souldiers are to assemble to withstand an assailing enemie, being a place of great consequence. In the election of this place, consideration must be had of the scituation of the villages and countrey, whether it be large or strait; also of the time, whether it be by day or night: again, whether the Cavallrie be lodged together, or in severall villages. If together in one village, and in the night, (when the enemie may come upon them the more at unaware, as not being discoverable very farre) then this place must not be in front of the village, as being too neare the enemies approach, whereby it might be seised on by him, and so your men cut off one after another as they come thither to assemble themselves: but it must be on the sides or flanks of the village, though the baggage be hazarded; whichThis all ages have verified. The States men (by a stratagem) had surprised Sr. Her∣togen-Bosh, anno 1585. but by reason of the covetousnesse of the souldiers (neglecting their charges, to fall to pillaging) were beaten out again with losse. Meteren. lib, 12. inviting the enemie to pillaging, often giveth him occasion of disorder. But in the day time it were best to be in front, shewing the more courage. If the Cavallrie be quartered in diverse villages (which often happeneth, especially in places little suspected) the qua∣litie of the countrey must be considered. Some villages may be backed with rivers, & so give but one entrance to the enemie: then the generall place of arms or rendez-vous shall be in the center. And those villages which are exposed to the first brunt, shall be as corps-de-guards to assure the rest. These (upon alarm given) must assemble in their particular
alarm places, from thence they shall advance, united to re∣ceive the charge, though the enemie farre exceed them in number: and must sustain him so long, till they may be as∣sured that the rest are all met at the generall Rendez-vous, whither (being forced by the enemie) they shall retreat by little and little, the other advancing to relieve them. If the countrey be open, so as the enemie may assail which he please, then they must use those diligences as when the Ca∣vallrie is lodged altogether in one village. They which are first assaulted must make resistance untill the other be met at the generall Rendez-vous. Touching the order of their assembling together in the alarm place, the Commissarie Generall, or Quarter-master Generall, overnight appointeth a certain place for every troop, where they shall stand, which way faced, &c. CHAP. VI. Of the guards. THe Commissarie Generall is to keep account of theOf the guards, and means of securing the quarters, used among the Romanes, Vegetius handleth at large, lib. 3. cap. 8. guards, and to give orders requisite to those that are to have the guard: wherein he may employ one or more companies, according to occasions. The Corps-de-guard must be in the middle of the village. The guards, being disposed in their places, must be every night visited by the Commissarie Generall (which often the Lieutenant Generall, and sometime the Generall himself ought to do) to keep the souldiers in the greater awe. The Generalls companie is exempt from the ordi∣narie guards and convoyes, because they must be a guard to the Generall, (unlesse the Generall go in person) and so is the Lieutenant Generalls companie. The companies entring the guard, must be compleatly armed, and sound their trumpets; their Lieutenant taking information of all things from the Lieutenant which go∣eth from the guard, and then certifying his captain, who is to acquaint his superiour officers with all occurrences, and
with the reports of such as went to discover and scower the high wayes, also of the convoye, and other duties. If the Cavallrie lodge in severall villages (which ever must not be farre distant from each other) in everie village a companie must have the guard and Sentinells. Edict for Martiall law. art. 58.The Captains, officers and souldiers which have the guard must be armed all night, and have their horses at hand, readie bridled, observing all possible silence. In the day time, if there be any open champain with∣in half a league (or thereabout) of the quarter, the com∣panie which hath the guard shall send out a Corporall with 12 or 15 horse, which shall hide himself in some covert place neare the entrance of the said champain. There he shall place double Sentinels in some eminent place, who seing some Cavallrie, one shall go to descrie them, the other shall go and tell the Corporall; who sending word to the Corps-du-guard, shall advance at large, sending out 2 horses to take knowledge of the said Cavallrie. If there be some high tree neare the place where the said Corporall stood, he may thereon place a Sentinell, and save the sending out of the said 2 Sentinels. These horse shall be changed (or relieved) twice a day, by those which have the guard. If the enemie charge them, they are to retreat to the said entrance and there to entertain the enemie till they of the guard can be readie (upon the former notice given them) and come to second them. If all the Cavallrie go to oppose the enemie, the Captain of the guard shall have the vanguard. If more companies then one be employed for guard, that companie shall have it, neare which the alarm was given. Sometime it so happeneth as that the troops come to their quarter in the night and in ill weather, so as the adve∣nues cannot be observed, nor fitting places for the guards nor Sentinels: Then the Commissarie Generall (or the Ge∣nerall himself) is to go and appoint them as he shall judge most convenient: appointing to every companie 10 souldi∣ers of guard, (more or lesse as need shall require) and com∣manding all to be in readinesse, giving order to the Corps-du-guard (as the onely remedie) that if the enemie assail the quarter, they go resolutely & charge him: which (besides the
honour and reputation so gotten) oftentimes provethAndaces fortuna juvat. for∣tunate. Some use (to keep their souldiers awake) to sound the boute-selle at midnight, as if the enemie were at hand; but that might prove more dangerous then profitable: For after the first time, it maketh the souldiers secure and care∣lesse. Better it is that (after 2 or 3 houres refreshing) in such cases, the companies be caused to go out into the champain, everySi fiut ista cattelae, nihil nosturni aut diur∣ni superventus hostium nocere possunt. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 10. souldier taking with him some oats and other re∣freshments; placing the Corps-de-guards as shall be thought fit, and not giving eare to the murmuring of the souldiers. But if the weather be rainie and tempestuous, such as that they must be under shelter, every officer (by certain houres) shall divide the night, and go from house to house, knock∣ing and calling to the souldiers, causing them to saddle their horses. A while after him, another is to enter the houses, and see every souldier armed and ready to mount, punishing those that are sluggish. The Quartermasters shall also (by turns) visit the quar∣ters and guards. The Chief himself is also to visit the souldiers, calling to one and to another with a loud voice, to make them the more attentive. CHAP. VII. Of the Sentinells. SEeingThe Romanes man∣ner of setting out of Sentinels, and all that belongeth to the watch, Vegetius shew∣eth lib. 3. cap. 8. that they of the guard cannot be alwayes on horse-back, nor discover the enemie a farre off, to prevent a suddain surprise, Sentinels have been invented; which every Corps-de-guard setteth out, of those souldiers which have the guard. These are usually placedNecessariis locis ac temporibus non modò simplices, verùm etiam duplices vigiliae constitu∣endae sunt, ut si quid al∣teram lateat, ambas la∣tere non possit. Leo Tact. cap. 14. 31. double, that while one goeth to certifie the Chief of the Corps-de-guard what he hath heard or seen, the other stayeth to observe new accidents which might happen. They are placed where most high wayes joyn, to pos∣sesse all the advenues, if they exceed not 300 paces distance. Nearer to the Corps-de-guard there useth to be placed a
single Sentinell, to observe the motions of the other double. Between these, another single Sentinell sometime is pla∣ced (when the double are somewhat further off to possesse some crosse way, or when for some other hinderance they are not in view of him) which may have both them and the nearest single Sentinell in view. So that every Sentinell must know that he is onely placed there to certifie the Corps-de-guard of all occurrences; so as (though he were provoked by any advantageous occasion) he must not stirre a foot; or else he committeth aThat souldier which (by day or night) shall remove from the place where he was placed Senti∣nell by his Corporall, before he be by him called away or re∣lieved, shall be pu∣nished with death, without favour. Edict. art. 28. Poena mortis apud Ro∣manos, illi qui locum de∣seruisset aut omnino fu∣gisset ex statione Polyb. lib. 1. capitall crime. While the one is gone to relate his observation to the Corps-de-guard, if the second be forced by the enemie, he shall by little and little retreat to the said Corps-de-guard. No Sentinell must alight from his horse, unlesse for na∣turall necessitie; and then but one at once. In the day time, the Sentinells are to be placed on high places to discover the further, but not on the highwaies, lest they be surprised by forragers or others of the ene∣mie, pretending to be friends: he shall therefore keep a stones cast out of the highway, suffering none to accost him. In the night (if it may be) they shall be placed in valleys, because from thence one seeth best what cometh from the higher ground. They shall suffer no person (whosoe∣ver he be) to enter or go out of the quarter; but causing him to stand at 30 or 40 paces distance from them, the one shall go and certifie his officer; who (Since the Prince of Parma's time, the Sentinells have not been trusted with the word: by reason of a miscarriage at the siedge at Tournay, which the States men relieved by wresting the word from a Cen∣tinell. having the watch-word) shall go and take notice of him, and know his businesse in that place, and at that time. The Sentinells are to be changed (or relieved) after this manner, TheThe Romanes divi∣ded their night (& so-their day) into 4 watches, every watch containing 3 artifici∣all houres, which were unequall and plane∣tarie. The first night-watch ever began at sunsetting; the se∣cond continued un∣till midnight: the rest accordingly. Eve∣ry Sentinell watched 3 houres, and then was relieved. In quatuor partes ad Clepsydram sunt divisae vigiliae, ut non ampliùs quàm tribus horis noctur∣nis necesse sit vigilare. A tubicine omnes vigiliae committuntur, & finitis horis à cornicine revocan¦tur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 8. houre being come, the Lieutenant parteth from the Corps-de-guard with that number of horse which are to stand Sentinell, the one half of these he com∣mitteth to a Corporall, or old expert souldier which goeth with him (for the Cornet must not forsake his standard) the other moytie he retaineth to himself. This division made, the Lieutenant with his troop goeth one way, the Corporall with his, the other; encom∣passing the whole quarter, each of them having a trumpet with them. Thus they (riding one towards another)
change the Sentinells from place to place, conducting the discharged Sentinells with them, till they meet each other. The Captain having gone the first round,The sending out of rounders was also used by the Romanes. Ido∣neos tamen tribuni & probatissimos eligunt, qui vigilias circumtant, & renuntient si qua emerse∣rit culpa, quos circuito∣res appellabant. Veg. ibid. the roun∣ders are to be sent out, to see whether these Sentinells be vi∣gilant. And sometimes 4 other rounders are sent out, twice as farre beyond the Sentinells, as they are from the quarter, (twice at least in a night) to discover round about the quarter, and to observe whether the dogs bark more then usually, &c. If they observe any thing, one comes back to bring the news, the other 3 go on. In the day time, a Sentinell shall be placed on the top of the steeple of the village, where the quarter is, and a boore with him, as best knowing the passages and approaches. If the Sentinell which alwayes walks before the Corps-de-guard cannot heare him, ano∣ther Sentinell shall be placed at the foot of the steeple, so that these three may understand each other, and (with∣out losse of time) give notice to the Corps-de-guard. Be∣sides, there ought to be doubleEquites extra vallum nocturnas excubias facere debent. Ibid. Sentinells on horse-back pla∣ced on high places without the quarter, to be able to disco∣ver the further. The Generall hath alwayes a Sentinell at his tent, so hath the Lieutenant Generall, (taken out of their own guards) and so the Commissarie Generall. No Captain may have a Sentinell (not to overburthen the souldiers) unlesse he command the quarter, or have the Cornet lodging with him: except the Captains of Harquebusiers which lodge in the advenues, that so they may the sooner have no∣tice of an alarm. The Commissarie Generall must shew the Captain that hath the guard, where the Sentinells for the quarter shall be placed. The one Sentinell (when they see men ap∣proaching) shall withdraw himself somewhat from the other, towards the quarter; that so (if any violence be of∣fered to the other) he may runne to the Corps-de-guard. They are not onely to certifie of the approach of the enemie or any other; but also are to observe the fires which they see, or the barking of dogges which they heare
more then usuall, or shooting with canon or small shot afarre off, and of all to inform the Corps-de-guard. If an alarm be given whilest the Lieutenant and Cor∣porall aforesaid are about to change the Sentinels, they must presently send word to the quarter, and instantly ha∣sten towards the place where the alarm is, leaving the Sen∣tinels to stand somewhat the longer. Castra munire semper tutum est, &c. si enim aliquid adversum contin∣gat, minùs imperatorium erit dicere aliquando, Non putâram. Leo Tact. cap. 20.To assure the quarter in an open and champain coun∣trey and much suspected, it is good to place Sentinels 200 or 300 paces from the quarter, answering one upon ano∣ther (as upon all occasions they must be) as in a circle round about it. And these not to stand neare the wayes or principall approaches, (as the manner is) but alwayes passing to and fro, one towards another, as if they would change places: By which continuall motions none may passe undiscovered. As farre beyond these, they which went to discover have their courses, sometimes riding up even to the adverse garrisons (if they be not too farre distant) which shall be shewed at large in the next chapter. CHAP. VIII. Of scouts to discover the highwayes. THe quarters being thus accommodated, the Commissarie Generall shall depute a Corpo∣rall with 12 or 15 horse, and a trumpet to discover or scowre the highwayes to∣wards the enemies aboad; without which diligence the enemie might charge the Sentinels so sudden∣ly, and enter with them, as there would be no time for the Corps-de-guard and others to prepare themselves for de∣fence. These do consist partly of Cuirassiers, and partly of Harquebusiers, to give the alarm. They are to advance to∣wards the enemie some 3 or 4 houres march, by the seve∣rall highwayes, 4 or 5 to a way, as occasion shall require.
They must not set foot a ground, but must silently go, list∣ning if they heare any rumour, which in theTutiùs operantur explo∣ratores noctibus quàm di∣ebus; nam quodammodo ipse sui proditor inveni∣tur, cujus speculator fue∣rit ab adversariu depre∣bensus. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6. night is easie to be heard. If they heare any thing without being disco∣vered, the Corporall shall secretly send word to the quarter by a souldier of the approach of the enemie. And when he judgeth the first is arrived, he may send a second to assure the former advice, retreating by little and little, and obser∣ving the enemie and the number of his horse: which he may easilier guesse by their footing, then by view. But if the enemie perceived him, he shall cause a Carabine or two to be discharged, and shall speedily dispatch away a soul∣dier to certifie the quarter. Or if the enemies number be great, he shall set on fire some house thereabout, they of the quarter knowing beforehand wherefore it is done. And sending two souldiers with more certain news, they shall give fire to their Carabines when they be so neare the quarter as that they may be heard, thereby to give them the more time to get ready. If the quarter be in a very suspicious place, more companies of discoverers must be sent out, and they are to have a countersigne given them (as the name of some town, &c.) to know each other by in the night. Alarms (though false) cannot be prevented, it being in the enemies choice to shew himself as often as he please, happily for no other intent but to weary your souldiers; or by that stratagem to make them secure and carelesse. To remedie this, the Captains use to give the alarm secretly (vvithout sound or noise) by silent advices; that so the enemy vaunt not of putting you to trouble, but wearie himself And thus the horrour of the sounds of trumpets and noise of warlike cries is avoided, which hinder the hearing of the Commanders directions. But if the enemie charge the said Discoverers or Sentinells so heard, as that they have no opportunitie to send word, but the enemie puts on to enter the quarter with them (which is the best way for him to compasse his purpose) then they shall (flying to the quarter) give the alarm with firings of the Harquebusiers and calling out aloud, entering not at the usuall wayes; but at the pri∣vate ones, to give the enemie occasion of suspence, not knowing whither they might draw him on. Moreover,
when the alarm is thus secretly given (as before shewed) and having some notice of the enemies forces how strong they are in number, you may cause your souldiers to mount with all possible secrecie, and order them for fight, on the flank of the enemies advenue, leaving the Sentinels (with some trumpets) there standing, with command that, when the enemie approacheth them, they shallSuch a stratagem was used by Sr Fran. Vere, Anno 1589. who being to passe through a wood neare Lo, the enemie from that ca∣stle came forth, to gaule them in their passage. Sr. Fran. with 50 horse and 6 Trum∣pets made a stand about the middle of the wood, hasting the troops and carriages out of the wood into the plain, placing 100 foot with 6 drums in the reare. The ene∣mie gave 3 showts (as the Spanish manner is when they go to charge) bur could neither see nor be seen by reason of the wind∣ing of the way in the wood. Upon this he commanded the Drums and Trum∣pets to stand, & sound a charge: whereat the enemie made a stand, expecting to be charged; which gave time for all the troops to get into the plain, by hastening their march. Manuscript penned by Sr. Fran. Vere, of his own exploits, &c. bravely sound an alarm. Whereupon the enemie (if he be a souldier) will charge them in full careare with one squadron to enter with them, and then second those with the rest of his troops: whereupon it will be hard (especially in the night) to keep the souldiers from pillaging. The first (entring without resistance) will be scattered about the houses; the rest will hasten to get their shares and whatsoever the Ca∣ptains do, they shall not be able to keep them in such order as they ought. Then shall your troops resolutely charge them, not doubting of a good issue, they being now surpri∣sed which thought to finde you asleep. Or if it be not thought fit to fight, yet may you by this means make a safe retreat, so as you be not troubled with too much baggage. If there be no bridges or strait passages between the quar∣ter and the enemie, by which he must necessarily passe, the further the discoverers ride towards the enemie, the better; if he lay in garrison (so as the distance be not too great) they may ride to the very gates. But if there be such strait passages or bridges by which the enemie must of necessitie passe if he will assail the quarter, there must be guards of Harquebusiers placed, which by their giving fire, or other∣wise, shall give notice if the enemie shall approach. Some∣time a whole companie is to be sent out upon this service, being a guard for the whole armie.
CHAP. IX. Of forraging. FOrraging is an action of great importance and danger. 1 Of importance, because thereon de∣pendeth the sustenance of the horses. 2 Of danger, by reason ofHostes qui longè a suis aut pabuli, aut praedae gratiâ commorantur, sub∣itò occupandi cum dele∣ctis. Veg. lib. 3 cap. 10. the enemies endeavours to set upon the guards and convoyes of forragers, which must be sent out at least twice a week. Therefore, that these forragers may the better be secured, there must alwaies be a good grosse of Infanterie and Cavallrie sent with them, under the command of a chief officer, or at least a well ex∣perienced Captain. The Provost or one of his assistants is to go with them, to punish such as are exorbitant or straggle. If the forrage be for the whole armie, the Lieute∣nant generall is to lead the convoy.Pugnatores ab impedi∣mentis laxamento aliquo dividuntur, nè constipati laedantur in praelio, am∣bulante exercitu. Ibid. cap. 6. The baggage nor horse-boyes must be mingled among the troops. It is not fit to go twice together to one place to forrage, lest the enemie knowing it, watch an opportunitie. At first it is good to forrage in the most remote places, & where the enemie is like to come to encamp: but if the enemie be set∣led, it is not good to forrage so neare him as that he might set upon the convoy with Infanterie and Cavallrie; but ra∣ther in such places, where he can hardly (without great danger to himself) endammage the forragers.Ʋt locorum varietas ad∣venerit, ità defensionis ratio varietur. Ibid. If there be one or more streets by which the enemie might come, be∣tween the quarter and the place of forrage, some convenient number of foot, and 10 or 12 horse must be left at the advenues of each of the said streets. The horse are to place a Sentinell, & to send out tvvo to discover the wayes a good distance before them. By this means the forragers having fi∣nished their forraging, make their retreat safely; to which purpose also one or two troops of 25 horse a piece use to march upon the flanks of the forragers. When all the for∣ragers are marching back again towards the quarter, all the convoy marcheth in the reare; it being unlikely that the ene∣mie will set upon them with any great forces between their convoy and their quarter.
At the place ofƲbi pabulandi tempus fuerit, alii pabulum colli¦gant, alii apparati instru∣ctique sequantur, ut nè si omnes se ad pabulum col∣ligendum converterint, & subita quaedam irruptio aut insidiae fuerint, ip∣si imparati sparsíque op∣primantur. Leo Tact. cap. 17. forrage, the Chief shall cause a troop of Harquebusiers to advance somewhat before the rest, there to stand and to suffer none to passe beyond: he is also to send out some souldiers on every side, and to visit woods and valleys, &c. For the better securing of the said forragers, or the quar∣ter, there use to be 50 or more of the Infanterie (which may be fitly performed by Dragoniers) with a competent number of horse, placed in some castle or strong Church within 2 or 3 houres riding of the quarter. But to secure the quar∣ter, there ought to be two places equidistant so guarded, which might cut off those small troops which runne neare the armie on either side. And if the troops be of num∣ber, these may (by their discoverers or spies) receive notice thereof, and so suddenly inform the quarter. CHAP. X. Of garrisons. BY reason of the affinitie between a camp and a garrison, it will not be amisse (though some∣what by way of digression) to say something of them. The fittest places for the Cavallrie to be laid in garrison are those which are frontiers towards the enemy: thereby the enemies excursions are hindred, and their own friends secured. Whereas otherwise (though they be never so strong of Infanterie,) they are like to have some of the enemies horse alwayes at their gates. Besides, it gives moreAdversus omnia profu∣it, milites quotidiano ex∣ercitio reborare, &c; & courage to the Cavallrie to have their garrison thus on the frontiers, against the time of their going out upon service; then if they had spent all the winterseverè in defides vindi∣care. Veg. lib. 1. cap. 1 Exercitus labore profi∣ficit, otio consenescit. Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 26. lazily in some garrison more within the countrey. It is good to appoint them their ordinarie settled garrisons, that so they may there leave their baggage, and go into the field with the lesse incumbrance; which will also make them the better skilled in the knowledge of the countrey and wayes. If there be one troop or more of horse laid in garrison in some
kinde of spies cannot continue long without being dis∣covered. If it be possible, such spies must be had, as are entertained into domesticall service of the chief officers of the enemie, the better to know their intentions and designes. On the other side, there must be exceeding great care ta∣ken to beware of the enemies spies, which otherwise may do you as much mischief as you reap benefit by your own. To remedie this inconvenience, 1 First, those which shall be discovered must be punished with extreme rigour, which will be a means to deterre others which are or might be so imployed. 2 Rogues, vagabonds, and idle persons must be chased out of the leaguer. 3 No officer is to entertain any unknown person into his service. For oftentimes at table and otherwise things hap∣pen to be spoken, which were more fit to have been kept secret. 4 No stranger is to be lodged within the quarters by any officer or souldier without speciall license. To this purpose a suddenCùm explorator hosti∣um latenter oberrat in castris, omnes ad tento∣ria sua per diem redire jubeantur, & statim de∣prehenditur explorator. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 26. command useth to be published, for every man to repaire to his tent or cabin, whereby the Provost takes such as are remaining in the streets; which are made to give account of their businesse there. 5 A means may be used to deceive the enemie by his own spies, giving it out that you intend one thing, and do a contrarie: also by seeming no way mistrustfull of the enemies drummes and trumpets (which are often sent with some pretended message, to heare and observe) and letting fall some words (which carrie with them some probabili∣tie) in their hearing, which they may take for truth. 6Si speculatores hosti∣um ceperis, nè uno eo∣démque modo illos tra∣ctaveris, &c. Leo Tact. cap. 17. Sometimes it is wisedome, having discovered a spie, in stead of punishing of him, to tell him that (out of a good inclination to him) in stead of severe punishment you desire to do him good, &c. by such baits they may become double spies. And if you suspect any of your own souldiers, it is best to dissemble it, and to make much of them, the better to discover them. Edict for Marshall laws. Art. 13.Lastly, no drumme nor trumpet of the enemies is to be
admitted into the leaguer, but first to be stayed by the Sen∣tinells of the Cavallrie, untill notice be given to the Lord Marshall, and he give leave for their admission: then they are to be committed to the Provost Marshall, which suffereth no man to speak with them. The Lord Marshall having understood their message, acquainteth the Lord Generall therewith, that so a course may be taken for their dispatch. Other waies and means may be used for discovering and preventing of spies; wherewith the readySolertia enim impera∣toria ubi occasionem re∣rum gerendarum ceperit, non in iis solùm quae in∣venta sunt consistit, sed etiam multò plura ac saepe meliora excogitat. Leo Tact. cap. 18. invention of a quick spirited Commander will abundantly furnish him upon every occasion. CHAP. XII. Of dislodging. FOr the manner of dislodging or removing of the Cavallrie out of the quarter, there are also necessary advertisements to be given. All the Cavallrie lodging together, and or∣der being given for their remove, the Commis∣sarie Generall is to take notice of the precise houre: and at the distributing of the word to the Quartermasters, he is to warne them to give notice thereof to their Captains; which must be carefull to cause theWith antiquitie it was usuall to remove or dislodge, by sound∣ing the trumpet three times. Leo cap. 11. boutez-selle to be sounded when they heare the Generalls trumpets do it. This useth to be sounded 2 houres before the time of departing, and the a chevall when it is time to march. Upon sudden occasions or for privacie no other warning is given but onely theTubicen unus insonuit, mox alii pariter respon∣derunt. Dio. lib. 47. Generalls trumpets sound, and the rest take it from them. If the Cavallrie be quartered in severall places, the Quar∣termasters (coming for the wordScipio tesseram vesperi per castra dedit, ut ante lucem viri equíque cura∣ti & pransi essent, arma∣tus eques froenatos tene∣ret equos. T. Livius lib. 28. the evening before) car∣rie the orders to the Captains, acquainting them with the just houre for their assembling at the generall Rendez-vous. If the remove be sudden, word is carried by one of the two souldiers which attend the Generall, as is before shewed. In suspected places they are to remove with all possible silence. The Rendez-vous where the troops must assemble, to be
readie to march, must be out of the village, and free from hedges &c. (though it be somewhat the further of) to∣wards the place to which they are to march. The companie which hath the vanguard is to be first on their march to∣wards the Rendez-vous; the souldiers of every companie assemble at their Cornets lodging, who is to be first on horse-back; and theJohn, Duke of Cala∣bria is said upon all oc∣casions to have been le premier homme armé, et de toutes pieces. Ph. de Comines. lib. 1. cap. 11. Captain by his readinesse is to give a good example to his souldiers. The greater part of the companie being met, the Captain is to advance towards the Rendez-vous. The companie which that day hath the guard, must not stirre untill all be gone, their Lieutenant going to the con∣trarie side of the village (remotest from the Rendez-vous) to draw in his Sentinells. All the troops and baggage being marched away, the said companie shall also march. But if the said companie be to march in the van or battail∣lon (to save the travell of the horses to hasten to their place of march, and the trouble of passing before the other troops) it is best to commit that dutie to the companie of Harquebusiers which is to march in the reare of all. Every Lieutenant (when his companie marcheth) is to stay to reprehend orHow severe the an∣cients were in punish∣ing of abuses, may be seen in that example of Lucillius the Centu∣rion, who having bro∣ken a staffe about the bones of one of his souldiers, called for a second, and a third after that, for which he was called Cedo al∣teram, among the fa∣ctious souldiers. Tacit. 1. Annal. Which seve∣ritie of theirs wrought so good effects (as Frontine reporteth) that the Romane ar∣mie being to encamp where a tree laden with fruit grew with∣in the quarter, it re∣mained so laden and untouched when the armie was dislodged. Front. lib. 4. cap. 3. severely punish such as stay behinde, especially doing it to pillage, or for the like bad intent. The Provost or his assistants are also to stay to see the fires put out, and good order kept. As the troops enter the Rendez-vous, the Quartermaster Generall, or some of the particular Quartermasters are to place them one after another in their due places, according to the written orders; leaving spaces for every companie that is to come, which after 2 or 3 dayes they can observe of themselves. The companies entring the Rendez-vous must fit them∣selves as for fight. The Captains must put on their casques, so must the Cornets, &c. The Harquebusiers must place their Carabines on their thighs. The Cuirassiers must hold their pistolls in their hands, the trumpets sounding, untill all be come to their places. If they be there to make some stay, they may put off their casques and alight a while, (with leave) but must not omit to place Sentinells on some high places:
THE FOURTH PART. OF EMBATTELLING. THE ARGUMENT. OF all other militarie actions, theAcies, si suplenter dispo∣nitur, plurimùm juvat: si imperitè, quamvis op∣timi bellatores sint, malâ ordinatione franguntur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 14. chiefest is that of embattelling, or ordering an armie for combat; which now (in the last place) I am to treat of. The occasions of combat for the Cavallrie are many and frequent, (sometime by a sole companie, sometime by more troops, otherwhile by all the horse together) of di∣vers kindes, upon differing accidents, and those (for the most part) sudden and unexpected. Since therefore noNulla ars mittùs habet stabilia pracepta quàm militaris ars, adeò subita in bellis ingruunt pericu∣la, & fortunae varietas dominátur. Scipio Amiratus, Dis∣sert. Politic. lib. 21. discours. 2. rules nor directions can be so full and ample as to meet with all sorts of accidents, my purpose is to aim at the cheifest; & to shew 1 How to assail a quarter; to give the charge in fight; and to order embuscadoes, by way of offence. 2 How to do, meeting with the enemie in marching; and how to receive the charge, by way of defence. 3 How to order the troops in battell, 1. by single com∣panies apart. 2, by all the Cavallrie united in a grosse bodie. CHAP. I. How to assail a quarter. A Captain which is desirous to gain ho∣nour by some enterprice upon the ene∣mie, though much his superiour in strength, hathIn mansione dormienti∣bus opportunum praelium semper infertur, cum ho∣stis priùs interimatur quàm praeparare se possit. Veg. Ibid. cap. 19. no better way then to assail him in his quarter. To effect this, he must have good knowledge of the village and the countrey thereabout: and if he can (by taking a little compasse) charge him on the reare or on the flanks: if there be any negligence in the quarter, it is like to be on those parts.
If he cannot (by other means) get knowledge how their guards are kept, and other duties either observed or neglect∣ed; he may conjecture by theAd rem pertinet qualis ipse adversarias vel ejus comitos sint, nósse: utrùm temerarii an cauti; auda∣ces, an timidi; scientes ar∣tem bellicam, an ex usa temerè pugnantes, &c. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9. qualities of their Chief, whe∣ther he be a good souldier or not; whether he be proud and hastie, or that he be advised and deliberate: for ignorance joyned with a naturall furie causeth a man to despise his enemie, and to think it a disparagement to him (as an argu∣ment of feare) to use such cautelous courses in assuring his quarter; especially knowing himself the stronger. In the assailing of his quarter, there are two things to be observed; 1 To make your approaches as neare the village as pos∣sible may be. 2In campis sparsis atque securis, opportunum prae∣lium infertur, exceptis superventibus vel incursi∣onibus repentium ex occa∣sione, quam nunquam dux exercitatus amittit. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 19 To hinder him from uniting his troops into a bodie. Touching the first, the first troop shall advance (without any forerunners) as secretly as may be: and assoon as they perceive themselves to be discovered (without loosing a moment of time) shall charge the Sentinels, and enter the quarter with them, and surprise the Corps-de-guard before they be able to mount on horseback. For the second, there must be an exquisite observance of the orders given, and not a man to disband. Suppose the enemie hath 1000 horse and you but 500, you may fitly di∣vide your forces into five troops. The first having surprised the Corps-de-guard (as before mentioned) shall from thence passe to the market-place, with resolution to sustain any re∣sistance which they shall meet with. The second troop (perceiving the quarter invested) shall follow upon the gal∣lop closely united, and finding no resistance, shall possesse the alarm place, and send some horse to run through the streets, to keep the souldiers in; and to hinder them from mounting on horseback. The third shall come fairely on to the said place, and so the fourth; which (leaving the third there firm) shall hasten to the place where they heare the most noise: then shall they alight and enter the houses, putting to the sword what enemies they finde. The running of these horse through the streets, hindering the souldiers to mount, will surely make them think ratherNec insequentium ul¦lum periculum est, cùm victi (quibus defendi po∣terant) arma converterint in fugam. Ibid. cap. 21. of escaping by flight through the gardens or otherwise, then of resisting: neither can there (in
such a tumult) be good orders given or observed. There∣fore the fift troop hearing the noise cease, may conjecture there is no need of there help to take the village; and so shall divide themselves into two parts, and inviron the quarter on the outside, to hinder the enemies flight on foot. The horse-boyes may fire a house or two, especially where the enemie shall endeavour to fortifie: then (as the souldiers) to enter the houses to pillage and take pri∣soners, &c. Another way of assailing the quarter, is this. The ene∣mies camp removing, the Chief or Captain must labour to inform himself of the place where he purposeth to lodge that night; and where the quarter for the Cavallrie shall be: which may easily be learned, because overnight it is usually published: or having good knowledge of the countrey, he may conjecture it. He must consider the number of his enemies horse, and of his owne, and though he be inferiour by half (as beforesaid) yet may his enterprise take good effect, if it be well carried. He must fit the timeNam vel celeriùs vel tardiùs aliquò pervenire quàm constitutum est, propositum persaepe no∣strum intervertit. Leo Tact. cap. 15. 42. so justly, as that he may come to the enemies quarter in the evening, before the guards be disposed, or the orders given. And if the di∣stance were such, as that he must march when the enemie marcheth, he shall depart from his quarter with all secrecie, andA good commander (like a good wrastler) ought to make shew of one thing, and to put another in pra∣ctise: to the end to de∣ceive the enemie, and gain the victorie. Ibid. cap. 20. Tutissimum namque in expeditionibus creditur, facienda ab hostibus nesciri. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 6. pretend to march to some other place, taking a way contrarie to that which leadeth to the place intended. And (when he thinketh fit) he shall face about, and march on the flank of the enemie as covertly as may be. But to do this two things must be observed; 1 That your march be through your friends countrey. 2 That you have more then one spie in the enemies Cavallrie, so as they be not able to stirre without your knowledge. It must be also considered, that if you go to assail your enemies quarter, he may have means to discover your purpose by his scouts or otherwise, and so be prepared for you therefore must you have a care to be provided for it by taking good order be∣forehand, and securing yourNam disciplinae bellicae, & exemplorum periti, nusquam majus pericu∣lum iminere testantur, quam in recessu ab hosti∣bus. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 21. retreat by placing a good number of Infanterie or Dragoniers in the mid way at some convenient place. Going about this exploit in the night (as the fittest and safest way) every souldier must have some token or signe of aThis kinde of service is called a Camisado, be∣cause the souldiers use to put shirts over their arms to be distinguish∣ed by. So did the Duke of Alva his souldiers (An∣no 1572) in the night assail the Prince of Orange his quarter, dou∣nant une Camisàde. Petit. lib. 10. white colour on their casks, to
distinguish each other by. It often falleth out that the ene∣mie (having got intelligence of some intention to set upon his quarter) keepeth extraordinarie guards, and is verie vi∣gilant in the night; but in the day time they all go to rest and are carelesse, as fearing no danger: at which time many have been so found and defeated. CHAP. II. Of giving the charge. TO know rightly how to charge the enemie, is a matter of great consequence. If you meet the enemie marching in the day time, and he retreat, whereupon you resolve to charge him; you are first to send a troop of Harquebusiers to charge him on the reare, as followeth. The Lieutenant shall first give on with 25 horse, charging the enemie upon a full trot or gallop: him shall the Captain follow with the rest of that troop. These are to be seconded by a companie of Cuirassiers, as fittest to sustain the enemie, if he resist. But if the way be narrow, the said Cuirassiers shall follow im∣mediately after the first 25 Harquebusiers, and then the Captain with the rest of them. The other troops shall se∣cond these, keeping alwayes 100 paces distance betwen eve∣ry companie. If you meet a troop of the enmies horse, your self ha∣ving also but one troop, both of equall number, and that it so fall out that the enemie retreat; you are to send your Lieutenant with 20 horse to charge him in the reare, fol∣lowing him with 50 to the same effect, closed as firm as may be: the rest must follovv at a good distance under a good Corporall, which shall not engage himself to fight (though the enemie turn head) unlesse he see his Captain and Lieute∣nant in great danger: and then he shall couragiously charge the enemie, to give time to those of his companie to reunite themselves:Milites lectissimes ha∣beat Dux post aciem in subsidiis praeparatos: ut sicubi hostis vehementiùs insistit, nè rumpatur aci∣es, provalent subitò & suppleant loca; additâque virtute, inimicurum au∣dacium frangant. Hâc dispositione nulla melior invenitur. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 17. there being nothing more dangerous in com∣bat, then to engage the whole troop at once; because if they
never so little disorder themselves, they cannot reassemble unlesse they have fresh men to sustain the enemie. Besides, the meere sight of a reserve gives a terrour to the enemie, which (upon occasion) may charge him on the flank. And if there be but 50 horse in a troop, yet some 10 or 12 would be left for a reserve. If the troop which retreateth be of 60 horse, at least 15 horse must be sent with the Lieutenant to charge the enemie, so as he be constrained to entertain them, to give time to the rest that follow to arrive in grosse and united: for by your sending of a smaller number, they might save themselves without losse, by leaving onely some few to make the retreat. CHAP. III. Of embuscadoes. IT is an ordinarie thing in warre, to studie how to endamage an enemie, and to distract his forces: to which purpose all possible means must be used, especially when the camps lie neare each other. The Cavallrie must principally be employed to travell and molest the enemie, sometime by hindering him from his victuall, sometime by endamaging his forragers, some∣time by sending some troops even up to his camp to take some bootie, by that meansBoni duces, non aperto marte (in quo est com∣mune periculum) sed ex occulto semper attentant; ut (integris suis) quantos possunt hostes interimant, certè vel terreant. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9. to draw him forth, and to make him fall upon some embuscadoe disposed before∣hand in some fitting place. To order your embuscadoes (or ambushes) as they ought, you must first know what number of Cavallrie the enemie hath: if he have fewer horse then you, you may employ all yours; attempting to draw out all his, and to rout them. Or else you may employ some small number, by which you may (at severall times) make some good bootie, the enemie not daring to issue out of his quarter. But if the enemie ex∣ceed you in horse, it is not convenient for you to make em∣buscadoes, unlesse it be with some few horse: for being a small number you may easilie retreat; but being a grosse, it
might be entertained by part of the enemies Cavallrie pre∣sently issuing, and those seconded by more, whereby you should be hardly able to retreat without disorder, and losse. Count Philip of Nassaw anno 1595. in∣tending to set upon Mondragons forragers, with 600 horse passed the river Lippe, to lay an embuscadoe. But being discovered by some of the enemies souldiers or betrayed, (as Meteren hath it. lib. 17.) was taken una∣wares and routed: him∣self and count Solms wounded to death, many others slain, and divers taken priso∣ners. The Romanes were exquisite in laying & discovering of am∣bushes.The good successe of an embuscadoe consisteth chiefly in their not being discovered; for which cause they are usually appointed to march in the night: or being to march a great way, to cause them to passe by those places in the night, where the enemie might most likely discover them. So pro∣portioning the time, as that they might arrive at the place appointed for ambush before day, that so they may give time to lay their embuscadoe under favour of the night. The said troops arriving long before day, they are to be kept firm on the plain, and Sentinells are to be placed on every side. In the mean time youQui superventus & in sidias subsessas passus est, culpam suam non potest excusare: quia haec evi∣tare potuit, & per specu∣latores idoneos ante co¦gnoscere. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 22. must diligently search and dis∣cover about the place appointed for your embuscadoe, lest there should be any ambush of the enemies: then (being assured for that) you are to lay your embuscadoe before the dawning of the day, and to place Sentinells in places conve∣nient, where they may be unseen: some on trees, others couched on the ground, to discover such places as they can∣not discrie from the trees. The embuscadoe must not be laid much before break of day, because (otherwise) they cannot discover the approach of the enemie, but at hand, and so the embuscadoe should have no time to come forth, and put themselves in order; and being so taken on the sudden,Deprehensa subsessa, si circumveniatur ab hoste, plus periculi sustinet quàm parabat inferre. Ibid. cap. 6. they might be defeated in their own ambush. Besides, in that re∣mainder of the night, many might be overcome with sleep, and not use that vigilance which is required. The troops must be placed at good distances one from another, that so they intermix not, nor hinder each other in time of fight. In making the embuscadoe with a grosse of Cavallrie, some number of Infanterie must be laid in ambush about the mid-way, to sustain the Cavallrie in their retreat (if need were) or otherwise to assist them upon occasion.With antiquitie em∣buscadoes were very frequent and were to be used by either par∣tie. Ʋtrique parti in itinere ad subsessas communis occasio est. Nam qui prae∣cedit, opportunis vallibùs, vel sylvosu montibus, quasi post se relinquit in∣sidias, in quas cùm inci∣derit inimicus, recurrit ipse & adjuvat suos. Qui verò sequitur ad∣versis semitis, longè amè destinat expeditos, ut praecedentem adversari∣um arceat transitu, de∣ceptúmque à fronte & à tergo concludat. Ibid. cap. 22. In march∣ing, some horse must be sent out a good way before, by the right way and the by-waies, to discover whether there be no ambush of the enemies. And indeed, to be the better assured of the good successe of an ambush, it should be ac∣companied with some new and extraordinarie invention. If the Chief of a frontier garrison will attempt to endam∣mage
the enemie by an ambush, being inferiour in strength to the enemy, he must gather together so many of the troops of his neighbour garrisons, untill he be superiour. And by making embuscadoes two or three times in this manner, it will terrifie the enemie; in so much as that it may be conje∣ctured, that though afterward he make embuscadoes with fewer horse, the enemie will not hazard to come forth, and so he may the safelier take bootie. When the armie march∣eth, there is usually some Cavallrie left behinde in embusca∣doe in some eminent place, from whence they may discover farre off, by that means to be secured from the enemies Ca∣vallrie, which usually is sent to charge the reare of the marching armie, to take some prisoners, or to get intelli∣gence. But these must not go to their place of ambush by the right way, but having passed the place, they must return to it by some by-way, lest the enemie following them, dis∣cover them by their footing. To employ all the Cavallrie (supposed to be 4000, in 40 troops) in Embuscadoe, three troops must be sent before towards the enemie, under an able Commander, giving no∣tice onely to him and the Captains where the embuscadoe shall be; & letting none of the souldiers know that any more horse are to follow them, lest any of them (in the enemies charge) being taken prisoner, should reveal it to the enemie. Of these three troops, 100 are to be sent to the enemies camp, viz 50 Cuirassiers with their Captain and Lieutenant; & 50 Harquebusiers with their Lieutenant. Of these Harque∣busiersPauci equites praemit∣tuntur, vallida manus per alia mittitur loca: primi ubi ad agmen ini∣micorum pervenerunt equites, tentant leviter atque discedunt, &c. tunc illa Manus superve∣niens, opprimit ignoran∣tes. ibid. 25 shall advance before with a good Corporall, at∣tempting to take horses, prisoners &c. as they shall be able. In view of these Harquebusiers; at the distance of a ca∣non shot, 25 Cuirassiers must make Alto, under command of their Lieutenant, to receive those 25 Harquebusiers when they return with bootie. The Captain, with the other 25 Cuirassiers & 25 Harquebusiers shall, keep behinde some half league off, divided into two troops; the Harquebusiers being placed nearest the enemie in convenient manner, partly to succour the said 50 horse (which likely will be charged by the horse of the enemies guards) & also to make their re∣treat, wherein the Cuirassiers are of principall use. These 4 troops must still retreat in fitting distance one from another,
one of them still turning face to the enemie; unlesse the ene∣mie so charge them as they must be forced to flie in disorder. The other 200 horse (being 150 Cuirassiers, and 50 Har∣quebusiers) shall enter the embuscadoe, with their Chief, about half an houres riding off from the other 50 horse, which when they see returning and charged, they shall issue out: The 50 Harquebusiers first giving a charge rank after rank, then the Cuirassiers, leaving 20 horse in the reare to make the retreat. The grosse (which had taken another way, lest the ene∣mie should perceive by the footing that there was a greater number, and so should stay or turn back) must be in ambush about an houres march behinde the said 200 horse. And seeing them return charged (as surely they will, the enemie thinking himself the stronger) shall suffer them to passe, and the enemie also, that so they may charge them on the reare when they see their time. For better assurance, it were good to lead out with them (as before was intimated) someC. Cassius in Syria ad∣versus Parthos ducens aciem, equitem ostendit à fronte, cùm à tergo pedi∣tem in confragoso loco occultâsset: dein cedente equitatu, & per nota se recipiente, in praparatas insidias perduxit exer∣citum Parthorum, & cecidit. Frontin. Stra∣tagem. 2. lib. cap. 5. 500 musketiers, and 300 pikes, which must be in ambush about a league behinde the grosse of Cavallrie, on the way by which the said 300 horse should return charged. These foot must take heed they be not discovered untill the ene∣mie be come up to them, and then shall give them a full volly to disorder them. Upon this, the grosse of Cavallrie (now issued out) shall charge them on the reare and flanks: and then the said 300 horse are to face about, and sustain the charge; by all which means it is not like that the ene∣mie can escape without much losse. According to this proportion, a greater or smaller number may be ordered, so as, if you would make an em∣buscadoe with 100 horse onely, 50 of them must be sent before towards the enemies camp, or village where he is quartered. Of these 50, 15 are to advance before the rest, to take some prisoners or horses: the other 35 shall be in am∣bush about half a league behinde them, in some place (if it be possible) whence they may see those 15: but if not, then to place 2 horse between themselves and those 15, to give notice when the said 15 shall return charged. Where∣upon 25 (of these 35) shall advance, leaving 10 of the best mounted at the place, to let the enemie see there is a greater
number of horse. These 10 must make good the retreat, untill the other 50 arrive which lay in ambush two leagues behinde, with Sentinels to discover afarre off towards the other 35, betwen which (about the midway) two horse were also placed to discover the motions of the first 50, and thereof to inform those 50 which were in ambush be∣hinde them. These seeing the first 50 return charged, shall let them passe, and then issue out against the enemie: the first 50 (making their retreat by 13 or 15 of their best mounted horse-men) having reunited themselves and taken breath, they must makeThe word Alto, or Alte, is used in all lan∣guages in Christen∣dome, and signifieth to make a stand. I can∣not guesse whence it should be derived, un∣lesse it be from the highdutch word halte, which is (as we say) hold, and with us is used in the same sig∣nification. Alto, and assist the other as hath been shewed. This order is to be observed when you have cer∣tain intelligence (by your discoverers) that the enemie hath no forces thereabout. But when you cannot be assured of that (lest the enemie with a troop of 50 or 60 horse casual∣ly meeting with some of your said small divisions, should defeat them) there might be 20 or 25 horse first sent out, whereof 15 to advance to take some bootie, the other stay∣ing about half a league behinde in some covert place, shew∣ing themselves when those 15 return charged, so to give suspicion to the enemie, or to make their retreat. The rest might be in ambush all together, some two leagues be∣hinde them, demeaning themselves as before hath been shewed. InEst autem optimum in∣struendi artificium, ut plus inferas adversariis copiarum, quàm primo aspectu ostendas. Aelian cap. 47. grosse ambushes they must make their number seem as small as may be;Sin parvum habeas ex∣ercitum, plures buccinae sonent, ut magnam mul∣titudinem hostium venire arbitrentur. Leo. Tact. cap. 17.28 but in small ones, they are to make shew of a greater number then they have: for which reason, all the horse must not go out of the embuscadoe at once, but some 12 or 15 (when their number is small) must remain at the further part of the wood, to favour the re∣treat of the rest, (as hath been said) and to cause the enemie to think that there is a greater number of them vvithin the wood. To this purpose some six horse may be left some league behinde the rest, a little out of the way but so as they may discover if the rest return charged, and then shew them∣selves at the end of the wood (as before is shewed) to make the enemie think there is a grosse embuscadoe, leaving one horse-man further within the wood then the rest, and he to give fire when the enemie may perceive or heare him, which the enemie may think was done by a mistake.
CHAP. IV. How to do, meeting the enemie marching. A Commander, marching with one or more troops, and chancing to meet the enemie, or otherwise having newes of him, must present∣ly resolve either to offer combat, or to retreat, or to attend the charge of the enemie: and herein he must govern himself according to the intelligence he hath, and the convenience of theBonum Ducem convenit nôsse magnam partem vi∣ctoriae, ipsum locum, in quo dimicandum est, pos∣sidere. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 13. place. To get the more certain intelligence, besides his scouts, he shall send out (a good distance before him) a Corporall with 10 or 12 souldiers, who (pretending to be of the enemie, if the coun∣trey be at the enemies devotion) shall discover and take in∣formation, &c. If you meet the enemie neare his own quarter, and farre from yours, you must resolve with a generous courage to go andIn rebus asperis & te∣nui spe, fortissima quaque confilia tutissima sunt. Livius, lib. 35. charge him, though inferiour in number; it being often seen that valiant resolutions are seconded with good luck. But being neare to your own holds, and knowing the enemie to be much stronger then your self, it will be prudently done toObservandum autem est, baud par esse, sine magna necessitate, ut pau∣ca copiae cum magno & instructo exercitu dimi∣cent. Leo Tact. cap. 12. 36. save your men by the nearest retreat: making your retreat in good order, and taking heed you spoile not your horses by too much haste, but suffer them now and then to gather breath, leaving a Lieutenant in the reare with some of the best mounted souldiers. The retreat shall be by the same way you went, so long as day continues; but night being come, you must take some other way (though the longer) to return to your garrison, or quarter. Thus you shall gain time by turning away from the enemie by the benefite of the night; causing the footing of your horses to be defaced at the place where you left the way, for it is to be supposed the enemie will follow you by the direct way. To deface or put out the footing of the horse, if the way be dustie, two souldiers are appointed to stay behinde all the rest, which draw a great bough betwen them along the ground, and so put out the marks of the horses footing. Or if there be a great number of horse, and the way be
broad, then foure souldiers with two boughs do it. But if the way be soft, the Chief commandeth five or six souldi∣ers to alight, and with their hands and feet to deface the footings; and in such wayes the horse are commanded to march with doubled files and closed, for a little space when they turn out of the usuall way, that so they may trample the lesse. Besides, you may avoid the danger of being traced by the horse footings (especially in the night) by turning out of the way at some house, or through some garden, breaking the hedge on the further side, and going into the way by wayes unthought off: by all which means you gain time, whilest the enemie is constrained to spend time in discover∣ing of your footing, and taking informatiom of the way that you took. CHAP. V. How to receive the charge. IT hath been shewed how necessarie it is, that the Corporall which is sent out with the scouts or discoverers, be a very able souldier, to know what to do upon occasion of unex∣pected accidents. One or more troops of horse being on their march, with their discoverers before them, if they shall meet the enemie, and perceive him to be the stronger, the said Corporall shall presently send a souldier to certifie the grosse, that they may retreat: himself with his scouts also retreating, but by differing wayes. For suppose the enemie hath received tidings of his contrarie partie, it is likely that (having discovered the said scouts) he will fol∣low them, perswading himself that they flie to their grosse: by which means the grosse shall have time to save them∣selves, while the enemie is pursuing the said Corporall and his fellows. When the enemie is much stronger, and the other partie have neither time nor convenience to put themselves into good order; the Chief shall call with a loud voice, and
command every man toQuintus Sertorius pul∣sus acie a Quinto Metello pio, nè fugam quidem sibi tutam arbitratus, milites dispersos abire jussit, ad∣monitos in quem locum vellet convenire. Frontin Surat. lib. 2. cap. 13. save himself: whereupon the soul∣diers disband into many parts, so as the enemie cannot charge them all: and so (especially in the night) many may escape. But this course is dangerous, and must be com∣manded with great judgement: howsoever, in all retreats, some of the best mounted must be left behinde under a good Commander, to make the retreat. If passing by or through some village or wood, the first discoverers discrie the enemie, not being able to discern of what number he is, one of them shall presently come and certifie the Corporall which followeth with the other scouts, whereof the Corporall instantly certifieth the Chief of the troops; who thereupon puts his men in order, cau∣sing them to put their casks on their heads, (which other∣wise in march they carrie at their saddle, or hanging on their left arm) and in some convenient place he maketh Alto, and resolveth according to the more certain newes which the Corporall shall send him. Which since it may be such as mayPrince Maurice, at the battell of Newport, sent the messenger (which brought him the newes of Count Ernests overthrow) away to sea, and kept it from the knowledge of his souldiers: com∣manding away all the ships (to take away all hope of escape by flight) and caused his forces to march through the haven, to meet the enemie. Meteren. lib. 33. discourage the souldiers, the Chief perceiving him coming that brings it, advanceth towards him, with one or two of his discreetest souldiers, and receiveth his mes∣sage in private. Having heard his relation, he must pre∣sently resolve, either to retreat or to fight. If he resolve to fight (the enemie being so strong) he must give such orders as shall be fitting, especially commanding the troops to go serried close; and if there be divers troops, that they enter∣mingle not, but observe good order: for it might so happen, that the enemie might charge himQui dispersis suis, in∣consultè insequitur; quam ipse acceperat, adversario vult dare victoriam. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 26. so disorderly, as he might make head and endamage the enemie, especially if he have not one or more troops of reserve following him, well united and in good order.
CHAP. VI. Of ordering the troops for combat, by single companies. BEfore we come to shew the severall forms of battell which may be used among the Cavall∣rie, it will be fit to speak of their severall kindes of fighting, which they are to be practised in apart by themselves, before they be joyned with the grosse. If a companie of Lances were to fight against foot, they were not to give their charge in an united bodie (neither upon this, nor any occasion whatsoever) because even the second rank of them hardly doth any certain execution; but they were to charge them rank after rank, wheeling off to the reare; to that end keeping large distances between rank and rank. The same order they were to observe, if they fought against horse upon the offensive. For the defensive, the companie (consisting of 64, as before, Part. 1. Chap. 19.) might order themselves in this manner. Two ranks (of 8 in rank) should face to the front: two to either flank, and two to the reare; leaving an open square space in the middle, they all standing back towards back, faced every way, to re∣ceive the charge wheresoever the enemie shall give on. The same manner might be used in greater bodies, as should seem good to the skilfull Commander. If the Lances were to fight against Cuirassiers,Par. 3. rangs de lances lui aller gail∣lardement donner par les flancs: car par ce moyen ils l'entr' ouuriront. Monsieur de la Noüe. Disc. 18. they were (by two ranks together) to fetch their careers, and so to charge them, espe∣cially on the flanks and reare: every second rank forbearing the shock, till the first had done it, and was wheeled off. If one companie of Cuirassiers be to fight against ano∣ther, your enemie charging you in full career, you are to make aSo Walhausen would have it. Carracoll, that is, you divide your body by the half ranks, and so suddenly open to the right and left; so as the enemie passeth through you, and you (facing inward) charge him on the flanks, as is shewed in Fig. 6. Part. 4. Or if two companies fight against two other, then they observe the same manner, but keeping each companie entire, as may be seen in the same figure.
It is also to be done by the Carracoll first, and then (the enemie being within you) to wheel to the right and left inward, and so to charge him on the reare, in full career. These forms (in Walhausens opinion) are ofSo the said author conceiveth; but it is very doubtfull. For by this opening to the right & left, you must turn troop, and then make a whole turn again, & so give advan¦tage to your enemie. It were better there∣fore to cause three or foure files of each of your wings to ad∣vance on the sudden, and so to charge the adverse troop on ei∣ther flank. And, to equall your enemies front, you might cause the half files of your bodie to double your front to the right and left by divi∣sion. All which your troop must be ac∣quainted with before∣hand, and are to do it in a moment of them∣selves, with all pos∣sible dexteritie. speciall advan∣tage, for the enemie (having charged you in full carreere while you went on upon the trot, onely on the sudden opening to the right and left) either (saith he) must run through and effect little or nothing, or (staying himself in the career)The principall strength of Cuirassi∣ers consisteth in keep∣ing themselves close ferried together: for this the Germanes are commended. Il faut dire que les Allemans surpassent toutes les autres nations, parce qu'il ne semble pas seulement qu' ils soient serrez, ains qu' ils soient collez les uns auec les au∣tres. De la Noüe: Discours 18. disorder his troop, and loose the force of his charge: as by Fig. 7. part. 4. appeareth. The Harquebusiers must be exercised to give fire by ranks. The first rank, having given fire, is to wheel off to the left (unlesse the ground will not permit it, but that it must be to the right) making readie and falling into the reare; the second rank immedi∣ately gives fire upon the wheeling away of the first, and so the rest successively. Walhausen would have them also give fire by files, the outward file towards the enemie (whether right or left) advancing before the bodie, in full career, and so firing; the rest successively to do the same, and in this man∣ner to fight against Infanterie that might charge them on the flanks. But others do utterly reject it, as too much expo∣sed to inevitable danger. In their firing by ranks, the first rank advanceth some 30 paces before the bodie, first on the gallop, then in career (as some direct) and so to give fire: the second doth the same, and so the rest. The Dragoniers being a kinde of Infanterie, and doing their chief services on foot, (as hath been shewed Part. 1. Chap. 31.) it will be needlesse here to shew how they are to be exercised for skirmish, partly in regard there is no want of books for theSo farre as concern∣eth the exercising of the foot in their po∣stures and motions, I suppose Pr. Maurice his booke, & Captain Binghams notes upon Alien (with the ap∣pendix) sufficient alone: But I wish some bodie would go on, and fully handle that which belongeth to the Infanterie. practi∣sing of the foot (though I dare say they exceed rather in num∣ber then in weight) and principally, because I desire to con∣fine my self to that which properly belongeth to the Ca∣vallrie. How they are to dispose of their horses in fight, hath been shewed ibid. cap. 31.
depiction of a battle between cavalry formations Fig: 6. Cap: 6. Par: 4.
depiction of a battle between cavalry formations Fig: 7. Par: 4. Cap: 6.
CHAP. VII. How the Cavallrie are to fight against foot. A Commander having intelligence of some grosse of the enemies Infanterie, and resolving to set upon them, he must principally aim to encounter them in a place of advantage for the Cavallrie, that is, in anSi equitatu gaudemus, campos debemus optare; si pedite, loca deligere an∣gusta, fossis, paludibus, vel arboribus impedita. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 9. open champain. He must also use all possible diligence to charge them, before they can be ordered for battell, though they exceed him much for number. But if the said Infanterie be put in good order at his ap∣proach, (if the ground be champain, and the number equall) yet may they be charged by the horse: First by some troops of Harquebusiers (or rather Dragons, because they do execu∣tion at a larger distance) which shall give on on their front, flanks, and reare. These were to be seconded by the Lan∣ces (in small divisions) when they were in use; but now by the Cuirassiers, who shall make their benefit of such over∣tures or disorders as shall be caused by the said Dragons and Harquebusiers. If the Infanterie exceed in number, and so be serried in a grosse body, it will be hard for the Cavallrie to rout them, as hath been found by experience by the Swisses, which still had the better of the horse, by reason of their grosse bodies of pikes. If the Infanterie be ordered into severall battallions, the horse are to charge them where they perceive them most open and naked. But if the foot have possessed themselves of some place of advantage, as some wood, trench, or covert way, then the horse are not to charge them, though equall, or somewhat superiour to them in number, in respect of such advantage.
CHAP. VIII. Of ordering the Cavallrie in battell. THe forms of battell used among the horse (pre∣supposing such as are made by election, in a free and spacious champain, and not such as are forced through discommoditie of place, or other respects)Ʋna aciei bellicae for∣ma non est, sed muitae & diversae, pro varietate ar∣morum, militum, hostium, locorum, temporum. Leo Tact. cap. 20. 182. are many;Ordinaturus acient, so∣lem & ventum antè prospiciat. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 14. and do varie according to the ground and strength both of your own side and the ene∣mies, accidents, and occasions. In all forms a principall care must be had, that the troops be drawn up from an even front, that so they may be free from disturbing each other in the retreat. Basta reduceth these forms to foure sorts, and Melzo to three, (making the second and third to be as one and the same) which are these: The first is, when the troops are ordered as in one file, every troop following each other in a single order: which form is utterly disallowed, because it bringeth but few hands to fight, and the disordering of the first troop must needs endanger all the rest.The Grecians had their troops of re∣serve, and herein the Carthaginians imi∣tated them, and these the Romans also fol∣lowed. Veg. ibid. cap. 17. The second is, when all the troops are placed as inSi nimiùm fuerit acies attenuata, citò ab adver∣sariis factá impressione perrumpitur, & nullum postea potest esse remedi∣um. Veg. lib. 3. cap. 16. one rank, or one front; the one troop being placed on the flank of the other in a single order or straight line. Which form is also disapproved, because in it all the Cavallrie is engaged at once, the one not being able to succour the other, and having no troops of reserve. The third is, when the troops are ordered chequer-wise, in squadrons, enterchangeably placed one behinde another: so as three or foure squadrons being in front, such distances are left between each, as others behinde them may come up to the front, without hindring the former.Exercitus contractus & quadratus, aut non ità multùm oblongus, ad omnem occasionem atque eventum firmus, utilis, atque tutus est. Leo Tact. cap. 9.34. The Grecians had three kindes of horse-battells; The Square, the Wedge, and the Rhombe (which is as the diamond battell.) The Square was held the best for the defen∣sive, the other two for the offensive. Of these the Wedge is prefer∣red, because it bringeth most hands to fight; the reare division of the Rhombe being of little use. Aelian. cap. 18. This form may well be allowed of, and is retained by the best Com∣manders in the present wars of Christendome: yet the fore∣named authors have this exception to it, because the Har∣quebusiers having taken up the said distances would hinder the Lances. (then in use) And if they should be drawn from those intervalles, and placed on the wings, they must be exposed to the first assaults of the enemie.
military diagram Figu: 8 Cap: 8 Par: 4
The fourth kinde of forma, they make the Lunarie, re∣sembling a half moon: but in this they differ from each other in the manner. That which they call single, must needs be weak, their double form is better. But both these last forms (the Checquer, and the Lunarie form) shall be more fully represented in figure. Walhausen maketh six sorts of battells: namely, 1. The Lu∣narie. 2. The Checquer. 3. The Broad-fronted. 4. The Em∣bowed. 5. The Sharp pointed. 6. The Divided. The Lunarie (as he makes it, and the figure, Fig. 8. Part. 4. cap. 8. sheweth it) is good, and indeed better then that of Basta; but is improperly called the Lunarie form: for it is rather a Hollow, or Open-fronted wedge, like Aelians,De instruend. acicb. cap. 36. Coe∣lembolos. His Checquer is as the forementioned, and allowable. His Broad-fronted is also not to be rejected. His Embowed (which by the name should be a Convex halfmoon, likeWhich the Latine translation tearmeth Acies incurva; Aelian. cap. 47. Aelians Cyrte) he maketh a meere wedge. The form is not the worse, though the name be not so proper. The Sharp pointed (in regard there is but one troop in front and that seconded but by two troops on the reare an∣gles; then but one troop again, seconded as the first) seemeth not to be so good as the former, because it bringeth few hands to fight, and is very subject to beWhereof Aelian sheweth the inconve∣niences, cap. 50. overwinged or overfronted by the enemie, and so to be charged on the flanks. The Divided, especially at so large a distance, I hold to be dangerous. True it is, that here the Dragons are used as foot, but whether so single and so extended an order be the best for them to be placed in, I referre to the judicious. Now concerning these six kindes of battells, they are in deed and in effect but two: that is, the Checquer and the Lunarie, as he calleth them; and from these grounds the rest be formed. But these forms being onely imaginarie, and withall wanting that perfection (in many respects) which is requi∣red in reall battells, I shall now (to give fuller satisfaction to such as are lovers of militarie knowledge) communicate some forms of embattellings, which never yet were pub∣lished by any.
These are true delineations of divers battells really or∣dered and performed by the absolutest Commanders of our times, according to the exactest rules of art; and such as experience hath approved to be fittest for the modern warres. For the better understanding whereof, I have thought fit first to put down these directions following. All the forces of the whole armie (both horse and foot) are usually distinguished and divided intoSo did the Romanes; the Vanguard they called Cornu dextrum, the Battell Acies media, and the Reare Cornu si∣nistrum; as is shewed by Sr. Cl. Edmonds, up∣on Caesars Com. lib. 1. cap. 7. Observ. 1. out of Lipsius de milit. Rom. lib. 4. and is handled at large by Leo the Em∣perour, Tact. cap. 18. three parts, name∣ly, the Vanguard, Battell, and Reare. (as hath been shewed Part. 2. chap. 3.) Each of which parts is governed by it's particular Officer or Chief; yet so as the absolute command belongeth to the Generall. These distinctions are alwayes so understood, in the order of marching, to avoid disputes about precedencie; so as they which march foremost are said to have the Vanguard, they which march in the middle, the Battell, and they which come last the Reare. And these divisions alter their names according to the place they march in, wherein they observe a diuinall change, as hath been shewed in the chapter above mentioned. But if we shall take the meaning of these words (according to their proprietie and usuall acceptation) in matter of fight or bat∣tell, conceiving that that part of the armie which is called the Vanguard shall give the first charge; and that which is called the Battell, shall give the second charge, & the Reare∣ward, the last; it will prove a meere mistake. For we are to know that the first charge must be given by the first troop, or foremost order of companies which are in front placed as in one rank, extended from the one front-angle of the whole armie, to the other: and so it were impossible for them to be commanded or directed by one Commander, or Chief of one particular squadron of the armie, by reason of the large extent thereof: for we see that the front of the ar∣mie embattelled before Dornick. Fig. 14. (which was farre inferiour to that of late, employed at the siedge of the Bossch) took upSix foot make a fa∣thom, 100 fathoms a furlong, seven fur∣longs and a half, a mile. Five foot make a pace, 1000 paces make a mile. 6380 foot of ground (being in their close order prepared for fight) which is above a mile and a quar∣ter of our measure. Besides, if the Vanguard (as it is called) should give the first charge, the Battell (which then must second them) may
chance to be of a nation not onely differing from the Van∣guard, but at variance with them, or else some grudge or dis∣gust between the Chiefs. And in that respect they might either neglect or slacken the seconding or relieving of those of the Vanguard, and not use that diligence which is re∣quired. In consideration therefore of these and other incon∣veniences, it is best that every squadron of the armie be so ordered, as each of them may have their first, second, and third troops: by which means every division shall both be commanded by their own Chiefs, and shall also be second∣ed by those of their own squadron, or division; which will give them the more courage and assurance. The manner therefore for the ordering of an armie for battell, is as fol∣loweth. That squadron which is called the Battell, is pla∣ced in the middle, the Vanguard on the right hand of it, and the Reare on the left: and all these (usually) in one front and single order; one regiment (or sometimes one compa∣nie, especially among the horse as in Fig. 10.) flanking the other, as in Fig. 12. From hence the first troop of every division is drawn up, and placed in an even front or straight line, from one angle of the bodie to the other. At a convenientUsually 300 foot. distance behinde these, the second troop of every squadron is placed, in an even rank, as the former; but so as theThe Romanes also ordered their battells in three divisions, or troops: viz. their Ha∣stati, Principes, and Tri∣arii. The first were called Acies prima, and these were the Hasta∣ti which were to give the first charge. At a distance behinde them were the Principes placed, which were called Acies secunda: these were so ordered with spaces or inter∣valles, that the Hasta∣ti (being put to re∣treat) might fall back into these spaces, and the Principes might advance to give the second charge with∣out disturbing each other. The third troop (Acies tertia) were the Triarii, which were placed behinde the Principes, obser∣ving therein such in∣tervalles as before mentioned. Vide Livi∣um lib. 8. & Lipsium de milit. Rom. lib. 4. ubi etiam Aciei Iconismus. first troop (which are to give the first charge) being to retreat, and this second troop to advance, they disturb not each other: for which reason, convenient spaces are left in the first order or troop, for the second to come up into. The third troop is placed just behinde the first, but at twice as large a600 foot. distance from the second, as the second is from the first: that so the first troop retreating behinde the second, they may have convenient room to make their retreat in good order. All this will appeare in the figures following, among the rest in Fig. 9. If the Infanterie and Cavallrie be joyned together, the manner is to place half the horse on the right flank of the foot, and the other half on the left, as appeareth in Fig. 12, 14, and 15. But upon occasion either of the enemie his ordering of horse within the bodie of foot, whereby he might annoy your Infanterie; or for other respects of mo∣ment,
some of the horse may be placed within the bodie of the armie, as is shewed in Fig. 16. What distances be observable, between Regiment and Regiment, between Squadron and Squadron, betwen each Troop, the second from the first, and the third from the second, the figures will sufficiently shew, and especi∣ally the Scales of measure in every figure. For the more easie understanding of them, observe that every bodie of pikes is single hatched, thus  and the musketiers crosse-hatched, thus . the horse are left white or void, as in Fig. 12. by which the other forms may easily be under∣stood.
military diagram THE PRINCE OF ORANGE HIS CAVALLRIE, ORDERED FOR BATTAILE BEFORE GVLICK, ANNO M.DC.X. Fig: 9. Par: 4. Cap: 8.
military diagram The forme of the Duke of Brunswycks horse Battaile in the plaine of Elton. The 5th of September 1623. Fig: 10 Par: 4 Cap: 8
military diagram The Embattailing of 37 Troopès of horsse before, REees the 23 of September Ao. 1614. Fig: 11. Par: 4. Cap: 8.
military diagram THE PRINCE OF ORANGE HIS HORSE AND FOOT EMBATTAILED BEFORE REES, THE XIX. OF OCTOBER, M.DC.XIIII. Fig: 12. Par: 4. Cap: 8.
military diagram THE CAVALLRIE EMBATTAILED BY HIS EXCELLENCE, PRINCE MAVRICE, BEFORE REES, IN OCTOBER, M.DC.XXI. The whole Front containeth 3895. foot of ground. Fig: 13 Par: 4 Cap: 8
military diagram THE FORME OF BATTAILE OF HORSE AND FOOT, AS IT WAS ORDERED BY HIS EXCELLENCE, PRINCE MAVRICE, BEFORE DORNICK THE XI. OF SEPTEMBER, M.DC.XXI. The whole Front containeth 6380. foot. Fig: 14. Par: 4. Cap: 8.
military diagram THE INFANTRIE AND CAVALLRIE EMBATTAILED BY THE PRINCE OF ORANGE, NEERE VORSTENBVRGH, TOWARDS GVLICK, THE XXII. OF AVGVST. M.DC.X. Fig: 15 Par: 4 Cap: 8
military diagram FORME OF BATTAILE ORDERED NEERE VORSTENBVRGH, IN THE MARCH TOWARDS GVLICK THE XXII. OF AVGVST, M.DC.X. Differing from figure 15. in that some of the Horse are here placed within the body. Fig: 16 Par: 4 Cap: 8
CHAP. IX. Of certain ceremonies before fight. HAving shewed by these former rules and ex∣amples, how the horse are to be ordered for fight, not onely by themselves, but also when they shall be joyned with foot: that whichQuid superest nifi pugna? quae jam manu∣um est, non verberum. Lips. de milit. Rom. lib. 4. now remaineth seemeth rather to require action then words. Indeed with antiquitie, when the ar∣mie was embattelled and readie for combat, it was usuall for the Generall to deliver some set speech, either from some higher place of turf or stone, or at the head of the troops; and riding amongst the Maniples to encourage his souldi∣ers. And they either with an acclamation, lifting up of their hands, or clashing of their arms, used to manifest their as∣senting resolution. Unto which kinde ofCaesars armie, being so dismaid through feare as they were al∣most brought to de∣speration, (tantus subi∣tò timor omnem exerci∣tum occupavit, &c.) was by an elegant oration of his suddenly revi∣ved. Hac oratione ha∣bitâ mirum in modum conversae sunt omnium mentes, summáque ala∣critas & cupiditas belli gererdi iunata est. Cae∣sar de bello Gal. lib. 1. cap 9. allocutions the ancient Sages use to ascribe a marvellous efficacie, not onely amongst the Grecians or Romanes, but also those whom they then accounted barbarous, as the Britons, Gaules, Ger∣mans &c. as the histories of those times sufficiently testifie. Next to this, they sounded the Classicum (that is) a generall charge; and this was seconded by a generall shout of the souldiers, or a concussion of their arms. Moreover, aTunicarussa, punicea, vel caccinea. Some re∣semblance hereof there is in the bloody flagge at sea. scar∣let, red, or carnation coloured coat or cassock was hung out upon the top of the Generalls tent: and a countersigne, or a word of distinction was given to the souldiers, as,Veg. lib. 3. cap. 5. Victoria, palma, virtus, or the like, to know each other by. The Greci∣ans used also to sing the Poean, before the fight to Mars, and after battell to Apollo, &c. Of all which ceremonies (which they duly observed as found to be of very good use, and which were much graced by the solemne and stately manner of performing them) our times have retained very few. For as the actions of the modern warres consist chiefly in sieges, assaults, sal∣lies, skirmishes, &c. and so affoard but few set battells; so the practise of delivering publike speeches is almost grown out of use and esteem amongst our chief Commanders. Yet the lateMeteren. lib. 12. J. Petit. lib. 15. Prince of Orange at the battell of Newport
before the conflict, delivered a pithie short speech to his souldiers: adding to his publike Oratorie, publike Orisons, and riding up and down, gave courage to his souldiers. The Classicum is still retained (that is) to sound a generall charge, namely amongst those troops which are to give on. And sometimes the Clamor militaris, or shout of the souldiers; which was not onely an acclamation or assent unto the Generalls speech, but also aThis by the Greci∣ans was called , and by the La∣tines Barritus (the ori∣ginall of which words is shewed by Lips. ubi supra) yet afterwards when the Empire was become Christian, they used (when they were readie for con∣flict) to crie , (that is) the victorie of the crosse: as appeareth by Leo the Emperour (who reigned in the East from the yeare of our Lord 886 to 903) Tact. cap. 12 69. Cùm ad conflictatio∣nem movet exercitus, consueta Christianis vox usurpanda est, . And after this, in the very charge, they were to make their shout, as it followeth there 106. Conflictationis tem∣pore post vocem, Victo∣riae crucis, magna atqui altos clamores edere opor∣tet, &c. loud and dreadfull kinde of noise which they used to make when they gave the charge, thereby to encourage one another, and to strike a terrour into the enemies: as the Turks crie, Bre, Bre, Bre; the Irish, Pharro, Pharro; the French, Sa, Sa, Sa; the Dutch, Vallaen, Vallaen, &c. But as for the countersigne or word of distin∣ction, that is seldome used now adayes, unlesse upon occa∣sion of some Camisado, or other exploits in the night, when the souldiers may easilie misse those means to know each other by, which in the day time the light, the sight of the ensigne or cornet, their skarfs (required among the Cavall∣rie) or long acquaintance, may afford them. But these being but ceremonies (as I called them in the title of this chapter) I willingly withdraw my self from them. Neither should I have been desirous to have meddled with them at all, but that the example of othersLips. de milit. Rom. Reusnerus de arte strata∣gem. (who have writ in this kinde) led me unto it; and the respect un∣to my reader (in common civilitie) required it at my hands; whom I could not well leave (after the sight of so many dumbe figures) without a word or two at the parting. There remaineth onely now, that every one (according to his office, rank, and abilitie) strive for honour and victo∣rie; propounding to himself the goodnesse of the cause, the authoritie of the Prince, the command of the Leaders, the vertue of the souldiers, the honour of the conquest, and the disgrace and damage of the defeat. Above all, lifting up his eies and heart unto Almightie God, from whose hands victorie, and the means to obtain it, is especially to be expected.Psalm. 18. vers. 32, 34. It is God that girdeth me with strength of warre, and maketh my way perfect. He teacheth my hands to fight, &c.Psalm. 144. vers. 1. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth mine hands to warre, and my fingers to fight.Psalm. 44 vers. 5, 6, 7. Through thee will we overthrow our enemies, and in thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us. For I will
not trust in my bow, it is not my sword that shall help me. But it is thou that savest us from our enemies, and puttest them to confusion that hate us. And to this purpose we may (not unfitly) apply that which Hezekias spake to his Captains and souldiers (by way of encouragement) after that he had fortified himself against the power of the Assyrians,2 Chron. cap. 32. vers. 7, 8. Be strong and couragious, be not afraid nor dismaid for the King of Assyria, nor for all the mul∣titude that is with him: for there be more with us then with him. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battells. Conformable to this was that admo∣nition of Alphonsus, King of Arragon and Sicilie, given to his sonne Ferdinand, when he sent him with an armie in aid of the Venetians against the Florentines, in these words,Cited by Reusnerus, out of Panormitanus lib. 3. derebus gestis Al∣phonsi, and Marineus lib. 11. rerúm Hispani∣carum. Omne robur corporum, omnis equitatus, armo∣rúmque apparatus, Deo non adjuvante, ab agmi∣ne formicarum prorsus nihil differt. Nicepho∣rus Gregoras Byzan∣tinae Historiae. lib. 3. —non me tua fervida terrent Dicta ferox: Dii me ter∣rent, & Jupiter hostis. Turnus ad Aeueam, apud Virg. Aeneid. lib. 12. Nunc maximè te admoneo, fili, nè tantum aut tuae, aut commilitonum audaciae tribuas, ut putes absque Dei auxilio victoriam ullam haberi posse. Victoria (mihi crede) non hominum consilio & industriâ paratur; sed Dei Opt. Max. benignitate atque arbitrio. Scientia igitur rei mili∣taris ità demum profutura est, si Deum nobis pretate atque innocentiâ pacatum propitiúmque habuerimus. Deum igitur inprimis cole, in eum confide, a quo tum victorias omnes & optima quaeque provenire non dubium est. Quemsi quando tibi iratum suspicaberis, cave contendas; imò quicquid ab eo tibi accidisse videbitur, bene consule, & patientiâ atque poenitentiâ eum placa. Solet enim Deus, quos diligit, interdum malis afficere: & quos constantes in adversis videt, rursus in meliorem fortunam restituere. And now for a conclusion (in stead of an Omen) I will adde that ejaculatorie prayer of the Psalmist,Psal. 90. vers. 17. The glorious majestie of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handie work.
THus have I breifly (according to my weak abilitie) runne through that part of the Art militarie, which principally concerneth the Cavallrie: Which subject I have the rather chosen to treat of, because it is so little and so sparingly handled by those that have given us dire∣ctions for warre, and lesse observed in our ordinarie practise,Witnesse those fre∣quent and sharp repre∣hensions, expressed in his Majesties letters, from time to time: a∣mong others, that of the 21 of September. 1628, from Windsor. And the continuall & serious callings upon for reformation, by the letter, from the Lords of his Majesties most honourable pri∣vie counsell, and the right honourable the Lords Lieutenants of every county. especially in the exercise of our trained troops here at home. Wherein yet I do not presume to have attained un∣to that maturitie which is required for the perfect know∣ledge and instruction of it; much lesse do I take upon my self to teach others (as I doubt not but there are many thou∣sands that are a great deale better able then my self) but one∣ly in hope that these my collections may serve either as a manuduction to those, that are desirous to be instructed in the first rudiments or confused knowledge of this Art: or else as an occasion to the judicious Masters of it, friendly & favorably to correct or supply what they shall finde here to be amisse, or wanting. For my self, I shall account it a sufficient reward of my poore endeavours, if by my untunable jangling I may chance to towle and call in better ringers. But it is too late now (and at all times least of all expected in this kinde of subject) to labour for apologies, or with Rheto∣ricall colours to varnish or dawbe over the wants and imperfections of this discourse.2. Maccab. cap. 15. vers. 38. If I have done well, and as the matter required, it is that which I desired: but if slender∣ly and meanly, it is that which I could attain unto. FINIS.
