649 99857222 22913
THE History of Trauayle in the VVest and East Indies, and other countreys lying eyther way, towardes the fruitfull and ryche Moluccaes. As Moscouia, Persia, Arabia, Syria, Aegypte, Ethiopia, Guinea, China in Cathayo, and Giapan: VVith a discourse of the Northwest pas∣sage. In the hande of our Lorde be all the corners of the earth. Psal. 94. Gathered in parte, and done into Englyshe by Richarde Eden. Newly set in order, augmented, and finished by Richarde VVilles. ¶ Imprinted at London by Richarde Iugge. 1577. Cum Priuilegio.
To the ryght noble and excellent Lady, the Lady Brigit, Countesse of Bed∣forde, my singuler good Lady and Mystresse. AL studies haue theyr speciall tymes (Ryght noble Lady) all good partes, and singuler quali∣ties of the mynde are holden vp, and maynteyned with honour. The seely chylde learneth in his tēder age how to speake, to reade, to write: yoūg laddes bestowe theyr tyme in the study of other liberall sciences: as yeeres come on, and wyt en∣creaseth, so finally, the whole course of learnyng is runne ouer. Agayne, the arte of Grammer is wont erst to be learned, and than Logike after∣warde: naturall Philosophie goeth not before e∣loquence in our schooles: Geometry is first read, & than Geography. So that the studies of good letters haue their times in respecte of mans age, they haue theyr tymes in the order of learning: yea they haue a tyme, that maketh vs all to be∣stowe therein our tyme, and to studie eche facul∣tie in due tyme, I meane that speciall tyme they floryshe in. I may not denye but that learnyng hath at all tymes ben well accompted of, in most countreys the skyll of dyuers languages well thought of, & learned men to haue ben alwayes rewarded. what is than that speciall tyme wher∣in all studies doe flooryshe? Learnyng may bee ryght well compared vnto the floutes & fruites
of the earth, and the speciall tyme of learnyng, vnto theyr singuler seasons. In May, floures: in Iune, Cheries: at Haruest, corne: in September, Grapes: so fareth it in the study of good letters. There was a tyme whā the arte of grammer was so muche esteemed, that Gramariens proceeded masters thereof as woorshypfully, as other pro∣fessours now doe in any other facultie. Than was it honourable to be a Poet: honourable I say, for that the Poet Laureate enioyed the honour of a Palatine. that tyme is paste. There was a tyme whan Logike & Astrology onely so weeried the heades of young schollers, yea and busied olde age also, that true Philosophie in deede was al∣most forgotten, eloquence defaced, the langua∣ges exiled. that tyme is past. Not long since hap∣py was he that had any skil in the greke tongue, he was thought a great scholler that could make a greeke verse. Nowe a dayes, who studieth not rather the Hebrue language? VVhere haue you almost any greeke aucthour printed? Geography laye hydden many hundred yeeres in darkenesse and obliuion, without regarde and price: of late who taketh not vppon him to discourse of the whole worlde, and eche prouince thereof parti∣culerly, euen by hearesay, although in the first principles of that arte, he bee altogeather igno∣rant and vnskylfull? This tyme is now. So long as Poetry was esteemed, the arte of grammer accompted of, Logike muche made of, Astro∣logy well thought of: Diuine Poets, good Gra∣mariens, perfecte Logiciens, excellent Astro∣nomers no where wanted.
A Virgile can you neuer want where one Mecènas is. Honour & promotion bestowed vppon the maynteyners of controuersies in religion, hath brought gray heares from endlesse Sophistry, from Scotus for∣malites, from Buridan and Burley, from Hol∣cot, from Bricot, from Vademecum, from Dor∣mi secure, and taught yonger yeeres rather to passe through Aristotle and his interpreters, than euer to dwell therein: caused them to studie the scriptures, to reade ouer the fathers, to conferre the counseyles, to learne the greeke and Hebrue languages, to searche the Chalday Paraphraste, to peruse the olde Doctours, to translate the newe wryters, to heape vp common places, to discourse of sectes, to wryte cunningly, to preach eloquently: and made them to be, for braulyng Sophisters, graue Philosophers, for formal Dun∣ses, plaine doctors, for rude questionaries, diuine Orators, for vnskilful schoolemen, eloquent and graue diuines. It is nowe almost one hundred & fiftie yeeres agoe, that Don Henrico, sonne of Iohn the fyrst of that name Kyng in Portugale, and Nepheu vnto our Kyng Henry the fourth, made his vy∣age after the conquest of Sepa to the Canaries, and euraged the Portugales to searche the coastes of Africa, and to seeke the landes therea∣bout not spoken of to fore. His grande Nepheu Iohn the seconde, so furthered this enterpryse, that the Portugale shyppes halled the Cape of good hope, discouered Aethiopia, and sayled where antiquitie denyed passage, beyond all A∣frica into the Indian seas. He sent also expert and
cunning traueylers into Aegypt, and the redde sea coastes to espye what way the Portugales might looke for beyond the Cape of good hope to Calecut in India: the which viage in his sonne Emanuell his tyme, was prosperously taken in hand by Vasquez Gama, the nienth day of Iuly, in the yeere of our Lorde .1497. & happely ended in Iuly againe, two yeeres after, to his great cre∣dit and preferment, to the immortal fame & ho∣nour of his Prince and countrey. Here began the studie of Geographie, that euer since Ptolomeus raigne laye troden vnder foote, & buried in dust and ashes, to spring vp agayne, and by the relati∣ons of skilful traueylers in Europe, Affrike, & A∣sie: through the discouery of the far Indies, the Moluccaes, & new founde landes, of late so to be wondred at, as no other facultie more. I dare be bold to say, that generally all Christians, Iewes, Turkes, Moores, Infidels, & Barbares be this day in loue with Geographie. The wylde and rogishe Tartares myght for famine perishe in the winter, if they in the sommer skylfully followed not the sunne. The heathen Giapans diuided the worlde into three partes: Afrike was described by a Moore. The Iewes report the estates of all coun∣treyes to the Turkes. The Turkishe Basshaes go∣uerne the sweetest prouinces in Europe, A∣frike, and Asia, no men greater traueylers than Christians. VVho but Geographers doe teach vs what partes of the earth be cold, warme, or tem∣perate? Of whom doe we learne howe to diuyde the world into partes, the partes into prouinces, the prouinces into shyres? of Geographers. vnto
whom haue wee to make recourse for Mappes, Globes, tables, and Cardes, wherein the dyuers countreys of the worlde are set downe? vnto Ge∣ographers. Set Geographie asyde, you shal ney∣ther be able to get intelligences of the situation and strength of any citie, nor of the limites and boundes of any countrey, nor of the rule and go∣uernement of any kingdome, nor be able wel to trauayle out of your owne doores. wil you see what wise and experte traueylers, skilful in geo∣metry and Astronomy, (for that is to bee a Geo∣grapher in deede) be able to doe?Kyng of Portugale & Algarbs, Lorde of Guinea, of the cōquest, nauigation, and trafike into Ethio∣pia, Arabia, Persia, & In∣dia. Looke you on the King of Portugales title: the two partes, of the three therein, were atchiued by Vasques Ga∣ma, and other traueylers aduentures. Consider the fruites, the drugges, the pearle, the treasure, the millions of golde and siluer, the Spanyardes haue brought out of the VVest Indies since the first viage of Columbus: The great commodities our nation reapeth by the traueyle of our coun∣treymen into Barbary, Guiny, and Moscouia, wil be a sufficient testimony vnto all vs Englishmen, what it is to be a skilful traueyler, what to bee a paineful Geographer, and learned. Desire of rule breedeth victories, victories come by cōquestes, conquestes are furthered by traueyle, traueyle can not bee maynteyned without great wealth, wealth maketh all traueyle pleasant. The North∣westerne vyage, be it neuer so full of difficulties, will become as plausible as any other iourney, if our passengers may returne with plentie of sil∣uer, silkes, and pearle. Let Columbus, Americus, Cortesius, be wel set foorth againe, and bounte∣fully
rewarded, you shal heare of other newe found landes yet altogeather vnknowen. Let Gama be set in place, and Gama will tell you the situation, the maners, the force and wealth of forreyne na∣tions▪ for Gama his endeuor was, not onely by his friend Coelius to descrye the countrey wher∣soeuer he came, but also to learne him selfe the riches, strength, and conditions of the people. Honour maynteyneth arte: and the skill in Ge∣ography, as all other sciences, hath but a tyme of preferment, the whiche than chiefly myght bee looked for, whan it is most esteemed. This in the noble mynde of Cadamust bred that earnest de∣sire, after Don Henrico his example, to traueyle, to pen his owne aduentures into the Southeast and East partes, to make the nauigation of Gama and his companions knowen vnto the worlde. The occasions, the good successe, the great com∣modities wherof, Barros a counseller of the Por∣tugale Kyng, paynted out long agoe in manye bookes, Osorius of late, historically hath written the same in fewe. This made Marcus Paulus Ve∣netus a courtier in Tartary, Hayton the Arme∣nian to become a Frenchman, Lewes Vartoman∣ne a traueyler in Ethiopia, Brocardus an inhabi∣ter of Iury, & eche one of them to leaue his pain∣ful iorney with posteritie in wrytyng. This enfla∣med the Spanyardes to take vppon them the dis∣couery of the VVest and Southwesterne landes, done and written by Columbus, Pinzonus, Al∣fonsus, Cortesius, and Americus, of whom that region America hath name. VVhose long letters and tedious reportes of thinges there brought to
passe in the conquest of that halfe worlde, the straunge beastes, the sundry sortes of fruites, the ioyes and riches the whiche that countrey yeel∣deth, the manners and fashions of the people, their cities, and princely palaces, theyr nobilitie, their maner of gouernement, their warres, theyr seruile estate vnder the kynges of Spayne, their conuersion vnto the Christian fayth, P. Martyr a learned and graue man, borne at Angleria in the duchy of Milane, then President of the Spanish kinges counsell for the west Indies, gathered in∣to one volume, and leauing a side all superfluous narrations, made thereof, as it were, one briefe and continuall historie. This volume deuided he into eyght Decades, after the Greeke worde, so calling the sundry parcels thereof, for that eche one conteyneth in it ten particuler bookes or chapters. R. Eden our countreyman dyd into English, whan K. Philippe was in Englande, the three first Decades, and the fourth also, though vnder a wrong title, according to the Dutche Printers edition, wherin the fifte, sixte, seuenth, and eight Decades were lefte out. He translated moreouer Gonzales Ferdinandus Ouiedus bre∣uiary of the west Indies, & geathered togeather out of many myghty and huge workes, some other prety pamflettes concernyng the Spany∣ardes and Portugalles voiages into the late dis∣couered lands, adding thereto certeine discour∣ses of the north partes. These his aforesayde do∣inges, as fewe mennes workes at the first come exactly abrode, this paynefull translatour myn∣ded, if not to amende, at the least to augment,
by puttyng thereunto in English Lewes Varto∣mannus Nauigation into Aegypte, Arabia, Si∣ria, Persia, and India, with our Merchantes Mos∣couian and Persian trauelles: but death preuen∣ted his purpose, not suffryng him to accomplish his desire. Christian charitie therefore vnto the party de∣parted, caused me to helpe his workes forwarde: Nature moued me to take some paynes in pla∣cing orderly, that whiche he had confusely gy∣uen out, the better to direct, and the more to profit the reader: My profession enforced me to cut of some superfluous translations, and to fill vp the rest of his doinges with P. Martyrs other writinges, and finally to furnishe his want with my owne store. Hoping and perswading with my selfe, that if God likewise call me from these worldly Nauigations, and earthly descriptions, before my other trauell in this facultye, taken long since in hande, be ended: some other profes∣sor of Cosmography wil so rewarde me after my death, as presently of this dead man I doe de∣serue. Other credite seeke I none therefore, I loke for no prayse, I hope not for honor, I gape for no gayne by this kind of studie. I knowe this day no place, no preferment, no publike chayre, no ordinarie lecture, no commune stipende, no special reward due vnto the studentes in Geo∣graphy: no not at this time, when this faculty was neuer more set by: no not in this realme, where yt neuer more florished. The honorable name of a Christian, and the infallible fruites thereof, euer inclined me, euen from my tender
yeeres, for the smal portion of learning that god hath lent me, to do good, if I could, vnto many: and specially to make those my friendes and wel doers knowen vnto the worlde, by whose bene∣uolence & fauour I doe liue, and am mainteined. In the smal number whereof, for amongst many wel willers I finde but few well doers, your Ho∣nor (right noble Lady) my Lorde & you, his no∣ble children and yours, since my first returne from beyond the seas, must I confesse to haue stoode me chiefly in steede: & humbly acknow∣ledge, the first yeerely pension I euer was assu∣red of in England, to haue ben by your Ladiship bestowed on me. VVherefore as I will most wil∣lingly yeelde vnto many other of your Honors gētlemē to come of great houses, to haue welthi∣er friendes, larger possessions & reuenues than I, to be more actiue, more comely, more wyse, po∣litike, learned, & to haue seene more: so in hūble duety, loyal seruice, sincere affection & good wil to your Honor, I may, I can, I wyl contende with any of them all, euen to the vttermust force and power of my hart, head, body, life, blood, mynd, & soule. In testimony wherof, and full assurance of my seruice vnto you for euer, these last doings of R. Eden newly encreased, my first labours in our language, his history & mine of trauel in the west & East Indies, altogeather in one volume, duetifully do I present vnto your Honour, with al humility praying & most earnestly requesting your good Ladiship, that you will vouchsafe it, & by leysure, in this iourney, the whiche my
Lorde and you haue determined into the west countrey, to let your page reade them ouer to your Honours recreation, as one of the princi∣pall causes wherefore at this tyme they were set foorth. If varietie of matter, occurrents out of forraigne countryes, newes of newe founde landes, the sundry sortes of gouernement, the different manners & fashions of diuers nations, the wonderfull workes of nature, the sightes of straunge trees, fruites, foule, and beastes, the in∣finite treasure of Pearle, Golde, Siluer, & ioyes may recreate and delight a mynde trauelled in weighty matters, & weeried with great affayres: credit me, good Madam, in listning vnto this worke, shall you haue recreation, you shall finde delight in reading ouer these relations, wherein so newe, so straunge, so diuers, so many recreati∣ons and delightes of the mynd are expressed. Your Honours good lykyng thereof, wyll be to me no small contentation for this worke payne∣fully doone, a good occasion spedyly to finish the rest of my owne labours concerning this fa∣culty, a great encouragement and comfort to be∣stow my whole time hereafter only in that study, wherewith all my former knowledge in Philoso∣phy and Geography may ende. The whiche, conueniently now, I am in good hope to per∣fourme, with my Lorde and your Ladyshyps good leaue, and continuance of my duety and effectuall desire to doe your Honours the better seruice. At London the 4. day. of Iuly. 1577. Your Honors seruaunt humbly at commaundement. Richarde VVilles.
R. VVilles Preface vnto the Reader, wherein is set downe a generall summe as it were of the whole worke. THis greate and large bolume consisteth principally of foure partes, agreeable vnto those foure corners of the worlde, whereun∣to the skilfull seamen and merchauntes ad∣uenturers of late yeeres haue chiefely tra∣ueiled, and yet specially are wont to resorte. The first part conteyneth foure Decades, written by P. Martyr,The first part, the first Decad a learned & graue counseller of Charles the Emperour fifte of that name, concernyng the Spanyardes voyages Southwestwarde, & theyr famous exploites doone in these newly discouered partes of the worlde, the whiche vsually wee now call the west Indies. Hereunto haue we added Gonza∣lus Eerdinandus Ouiedus breefe historie touching the same mat∣ter, so that the first part of our volume hath fiue particular bookes. In the first whereof cap 1.2.3 4 and 5. P. Martir describeth Co∣lumbus first and second nauigations and discoueries of certaine Ilandes made by hym specially and his brother. In the 6. chapter or booke thereof (for both names we finde) is set foorth Colum∣bus third voiage, and the discouery of Peru, in the maigne west Indish lande. In the seuenth, his troubles both in the west Indies, and retourne into Spaigne with his brother, being both priso∣ners. The 8. is of P. Alfonsus voyages that same way. In the 9. are declared the trauailes of Vincent and Peter Pinzoni, and other Spaniards likewise thither from Palos. The 10. is a conclusion of the whole Decade, with particuler mention of some special no∣uelties, & Colūbus fourth voiage beganne. So that in the first De∣cade you haue historically set downe the discouerye of the west Indies, taken in hande about the yeere of our Lorde .1492. by Co∣lumbus and his companions, vntill the yeere 1510. as P. Martir witnesseth fol. 8. 43 47. and 54. This worthy trauayler and skil∣full seaman died at Validolid in Spaigne. An. dom. 1506. as Lopez reporteth cap. 25. in his generall historie de las Indias. The second Decade conteyneth Peru matters,The second Decade. entituled by P. Martir, Creditus Cortinens, that is, a continent or maigne lande, as
in deede it is of it selfe with the rest of America, in lyke ma∣ner as Europe, Affryk, & Asia, be one continent or maigne lande vnited togeather. In the fyrst and seconde chapters of this De∣cade, shall you reade the voyages of Fogeda and Nicuesa, to Da∣riena. In the thyrd, Colmenaris trauayles, Nicuesa his death, and the Indishe kyng Comogrus beneuolence: In the fourth, Vasquez Nunnez doynges in Vraba gulfe. His conquest of rebellious Barbarian kyngs in the fifte. In the syxt Quicedus & Colmenaris ambassage out of Dariena to Hispaniola, and the religion of king Commendator in Cuba. The seuenth booke conteineth Petrus Arias iorney to Paria in Peru. The .8. the dissention betwixt the Spani∣ardes and Portugales for theyr boundes, and makyng of fyue Bishops in these newely founde partes of the worlde. In the 9 are shewed the ryuers of Darien, and philosophically the causes of so great waters there. That countrey is described in the .10 and the extreme hunger, abydden by the companions of Nicuesa, set forth. In the fyrst, second, and thyrd chapters of the thyrde Decade, is conteyned an abridgement of Vascus Nunnez relations,The third Decade. con∣cerning his voyage to the south sea, for it lyeth south from Darien, vsually termed nowe a dayes Mar del zur, and may also be called the wyde east Indyshe Ocean. The discouery thereof made by Nunnez, the kyng subdued by hym, especially kyng Commo∣grus christenyng by the name of Charles, and the wynnyng of kyng Tumanama or Tubanama and his countrey. In the fourth chapter shal you fynd Columbus fourth vyage, began An. do. 1502 to the mayne west Indyshe lande, with the description of some part therof, lying betwyxt our Atlantike or westerne Ocean, and the aforesayde Mar del zur, as Vraba, and Beragua. In respecte of the history and course of yeeres, this booke myght haue been placed before the seconde Decade, but it shoulde seeme that these reportes came no sooner to. P. Martyr his handes, wherefore he began this fourth booke ryght well thus. I was determined. &c. The fyfth booke conteyneth. P. Arias iorney mentioned dec. 2 lib. 7. to the north syde of Peru, wherein Carthagena and S. Mar∣tha, two famous hauens, do stande, with a description of the coun∣trey and people thereof. In the syxt you haue a disputation touch∣yng the Leuant streame or easterne surge of the sea, the discouery
of Baccalaos done by Cabot. P. Arias arriuall in Darien, the buil∣dyng of. S. Maria antiqua there, with other fortresses, finally the commodities and vnwholesomnesse of Darien. In the .7 8. & .9 bookes, shal you haue a description of Hispaniola, Cuba, and other Ilandes thereabout, done by Andreas Moralis. And in the .10 shall you reade of the Ilande Diues in Mar del zur, of the kyng therof subdued by Andreas Moralis, of Pearles & the finding ther∣of, of Petrus Arias Captaynes doinges agaynst the Caniballes, of the Barbares fowlyng, & the manner of the geatheryng of gold in Dariena. The fourth Decade, for so was it named in the Spanyards edi∣tion of.The fourth Decade. P. Martyr his woorkes set forth at Alcala in Spayne An. do. 1530. though the Basile and Cullen printers haue entituled it, De insulis nuper inuentis, that is, of Ilandes lately found out, to wyt, after Columbus voyages: this booke I say was by. P. Mar. culled out of the Indian registers, conteynyng speciall notes that seemed vnto hym most meete to be publyshed: as the disco∣uery of certayne Ilandes and creekes, namely Iucatan (done by Fernandes of Corduba & his companions) Cozumella, the Ilands of Sacrifice, the Ilandes of women, the prouince Coluacan and Palmaria &c. by Iohn Grialua & his felowes: the Iucaians cap∣tiuitie and discouery of Florida made by those Spanyardes which Diegus Velasquen sent out of Cuba, and Ferd. Cortesius fyrst naui∣gation, wherein he conquered Potanchana in newe Spayne, the death of Valdiuia, ye execution of Vascus Nunnez, king Muteezūa his presentes to Charles the Emperour, his bookes, letters, and superstitions, finally the ruine of Hispaniola, and vtter decaye thereof, if heede shoulde not be taken in tyme. Last of al Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouedus historie conteineth in .18. seuerall chapters (eche one whereof hath his proper title) a briefe declaration of the west Indysh nauigation, of the metals the which are found in those lately discouered lands, of the maners of the people, rites, customes, and cerimonies, of the beastes, foules, byrdes, wormes, fyshes, seas, riuers, sprynges, trees, plantes, hearbes, & diuers other thinges that are engendred there both on the land & in the water. To this haue we added certaine speciall reports of new Spaine or Mexico, of Peru▪ of Rio de la Plata, & the countrey lying therunto, of the lands Laborador & Baccalaos, with the discoueryng of Florida. And thus muche for the fyrst part of this volume.
The seconde part of this worke appeareth what it is, by the title thereof set downe.The seconde part. Fol. 230. to wyt, a discourse to proue that there is a passage to the Moluccaes by the northwest, the whiche presently. M. Cap. Furbisher attempteth, with certayne reportes of the prouince China in Cathayo, where he hath to strike in his voyage, and thyrdly of Giapan, and other Ilandes by the way. The whiche seconde part, wherein matter concernyng the northwest is handled, is so muche the shorter, by how much the fyrst part seemed ouerlong: besydes that the particularities of this corner of the worlde are not yet so throughly knowen, but that other writers shal doubtlesse in more ample maner employe theyr labour therein after the returne of our northwesterne tra∣uaylers. The which I wyshe to be most happie and prosperous, as they most valiantly & painefully, to the renowne of our Eng∣lyshe nation, do shewe to haue taken it in hande. In the thyrd part shal you fynd a discription of the northea∣sterne frosty seas and kingdomes lying that way: as Moscouia, Schondia,The thyrde part. or Denmarke, Groenlande, Islande, Laponia, Norway, Sue∣cia▪ or Swethlande, Bothnia, and Gothlande: out of Zeiglerus, Pau∣lus Iouius, Haiton, and Sebastian free lord or Baron of Herbestein, with the countreys as well north and northeast beyond Moscouia, namely Petzora, Iuhra, and other prouinces of the Tartars: as also the voyages made through Moscouia by the merchauntes of London into Persia, conteinyng many speciall thynges woorth the knowledge, both of the countrey it self, the commodities there∣of, the manners of the people, and the priuiledges graunted vnto our merchauntes by the Sophie or Shaugh the Persian kyng. Finally in the fourth part are set downe our merchauntes voyages into Guinea,The fourth part. and the other parcelles of Affrike lying towardes the Southeast, Lewes Vertomannus nauigations into Egypte, Ethiopia, Arabia, Syria, Persia, and east India, euen to the fruitefull Moluccaes, with the prices of drugges and other wares brought from thence. Whereto for a con∣clusion, haue we added partly out of Maximilian Transiluanus let∣ter wrytten vnto the Cardinall of Saltzburge, and partly out of P. Martyrs other woorkes, that famous nauigation made round about the whole world: the contention betwixte the Portugales and Spanyardes for the Moluccaes, & the decydyng thereof by
Pope Alexander the syxt: and last of all the abridgement of. P. Martyrs foure last Decades, wherein especially that noble and gloryous conquest of Mexico is wrytten. Generally this much of the foure partes of this large volume. The lesser parcelles and speciall matter conteyned in eche part, you haue so exactely rehearsed in the table of the Decades. Fol. 173. and in the resy∣due of the whole woorke before eche chapter so euidently set downe, that any particular table thereof at al the reader greatly needeth not, if so be that he be able to remember in what region of the worlde, East, West, North, or South, that be, the which he looketh for. Nowe concernyng. R. Edens owne doynges, syncerely to say what I thynke, and curteousely to yeelde hym that due prayse the whiche worthyly these his labours deserue, yet not to flatter hym neither, where any faulte hath ben committed: as hyghly he was to be commended for Englyshyng so straunge, so wonder∣full, so profitable histories as these are, nothyng inferior to the bookes of auncient writers, far exceedyng the multitude of foo∣lysh commentaries and friuolous translations, to to licentiousely vsed in our tyme: So may the gentle reader forbeare his ouer∣syghte, in so great a woorke, where some Spanyshe prouerbe, harsh latine phrase, or vncleane speache may seeme hardly Eng∣lyshed, or any rashe note to shame the texte. I woulde excuse hym for translatyng the dayes by the latine names, as Fol. 12. Non. April. thus. At the Nones of Apryll. item, 3. Idus Octobris. thus. The thyrd daye of the Ides of October. item. Fol. 17. tertio Kalend. Maij. thus. The thyrd daye before the Kalendes of Maye: mea∣nyng in deede, the fyfth daye of Apryll, the .13. day of October, the 29. of Aprill: but therein it shoulde seeme that he folowed his owne humor, for he obserueth the same phrase of transla∣tyng throughout. P. Martyrs whole worke. Many of his Eng∣lyshe woordes cannot be excused in my opinion for smellyng to much of the Latine, as Dominators. Fol 5. Ponderouse. Fol. 23. Ditionaries. Fol. 25. Portentouse. Fol. 28. Antiques. Fol. 31. des∣picable. Eol. 387. Solicitate. Fol. 76. obsequiouse. Fol. 90. homicide. Fol. 390. imbibed. Fol. 395. Destructiue. Fol. 276.
Prodigious. Fol. 279. with other such lyke: in the steede of Lords, weyghtie, subiectes, wonderfull, auncient, lowe, carefull, dueti∣full, manslaughter, drunken, noysome, monstrous. &c. the which faultes he confesseth in other his owne verses, wrytyng thus of hym selfe. I haue not for euery worde asked counsayle of eloquent Eliot, or Sir Thomas Moore: Take it therefore as I haue intended, the faultes with fauour may soone be a mended.
Certayne Preambles here folowe, gea∣thered by R. Eden, for the better vn∣derstanding of the whole worke.
Of the fyrst discoueryng of the west Indies. A Certayne Carauel saylyng in the West Ocean, about the coastes of Spayne, had a forcybly and continuall wynde from the East, wherby it was dryuen to a land vnknowen,A harde begyn∣yng. and not described in any map or carde of the sea, and was dryuen styl along by the coaste of the same for the space of ma∣ny dayes, vntyll it came to a hauen, where in a short tyme the most part of the maryners, beyng long before very weake and fe∣ble by reason of hunger and trauayll, dyed: So that onely the Pilot, with three or foure other, remayned alyue. And not only they that dyed, dyd not inioye the Indies whiche they fyrst disco∣uered to theyr mysfortune, but the resydue also that lyued had in maner as litle fruition of the same: not leauyng, or at the least not openly publyshyng any memorie thereof, neyther of the place, or what it was called, or in what yeere it was founde: Albeit, the fault was not theyrs, but rather the malyce of other, or the enuie of that which we call fortune. I do not therfore marueyle, that the auncient histories affyrme, that great thynges proceede and in∣crease of small and obscure begynnynges, syth we haue seene the same veryfied in this fynding of the Indies, being so notable and newe a thyng. We neede not be curious to seeke the name of the Pilot, syth death made a shorte ende of his doynges. Some wyl, that he came from Andaluzia, and traded to the Ilandes of Cana∣ria, and the Iland of Madera, when this large and mortal naui∣gation chaunced vnto hym. Other say that he was a Byscanne,The Pylot that fyrst founde the Indies. and traded into Englande and Fraunce. Gther also, that he was a Portugale, & that either he went or came from Mina or India: which agreeth well with the name of these newe landes,Mina. as I haue sayd before. Agayne, some there be that say that he brought the Carauel to Portugale, or to the Iland of Madera, or to some other of the Ilandes called De los Azores. Yet do none of them affyrme any thyng, although they al affirme that the Pilot dyed in the house of Christopher Colon, with whom remayned all suche writynges and annotations as he had made of his voyage in the sad Carauell, aswell of such thynges as he obserued both by land and sea, as also of the eleuation of the pole in those landes whiche he had discouered.
VVhat maner of man Christopher Colon (other∣wyse called Columbus) was, and how he came fyrst to the knowledge of the Indies. CHristopher Colon was borne in Cugureo, or (as some say) in Nerui, a vyllage in the territorie of Genua in Italie. He descended as some thynke, of the house of the Pelestreles of Placentia in Lumbardie. He beganne of a chylde to be a maryner: of whose arte they haue great exercise on the ryuer of Genua. He traded many yeeres into Suria, and other partes of the East. After this, he became a maister in makyng cardes for the sea, whereby he had great vantage. He came to Portugale to know the reason & description of the south coastes of Affrica, and the nauigations of the Portugales, thereby to make his cardes more perfecte to be solde. He maryed in Portugale, as some say: or as many say, in the Ilande of Madera, where he dwelt at suche tyme as the sayd Carauell arryued there, whose Pilot soiorned in his house, and dyed also there, bequeathyng to Colon his carde of the description of suche newe landes as he had found, whereby Colon had the fyrst knowledge of the Indies. Some haue thought yt Colon was wel learned in ye Latine tongue and the science of Cosmographie: and that he was thereby fyrst moued to seeke the lands of Antipodes, and the rych Ilande of Ci∣pango, wherof Marchus Paulus wryteth. Also that he had redde what Plato in his dialoges of Timeus and Cricias, writeth of the great Ilande of Atlantide, and of a great land in the west Ocean vndiscouered, beyng bygger then Asia and Affrica. Furthermore that he had knowledge what Aristotell and Theophrastus saye in theyr bookes of maruayles, where they wryte that cer∣tayne merchauntes of Carthage, saylyng from the streyghtes of Gibraltar towarde the West and South, founde after many dayes a great Ilande not inhabited, yet replenyshed with al thynges requisite, and hauing many nauigable ryuers. In deede Colan was not greatly learned:Colon was not much learned. yet of good vnderstanding. And when he had knowledge of the sayde newe landes by the information of the dead Pilot,Colon confer∣red with lear∣ned men. made relation thereof to certeyne learned men, with whom he conferred as touching ye like thinges mentioned of olde autours. He communicated this secrete
and conferred chiefely with a fryer, named Iohn Perez of Mar∣chena, that dwelt in the monastery of Rabida. So that I veryly beleeue, that in maner all that he declared, and many thynges more that he leaft vnspoken, were written by the sayde Spa∣nyshe Pilot that dyed in his house. For I am persuaded, that if Colon by science atteined to the knowledg of the Indies, he would long before haue communicat this secreate to his owne countrey men the Genueses, that trauayle all the worlde for gaynes, and not haue come into Spayne for this purpose. But doubtelesse he neuer thought of any such thyng, before he chaunced to be ac∣quainted with the sayde Pilot, who founde those landes by for∣tune, accordyng to the saying of Plinie, Quod ars docere non po∣tuit, casus inuenit. That is, That arte coulde not teache, chaunce founde. Albeit, the more Christian opinion is, to thynke that God of his singuler prouidence and infinite goodnesse, at the length with eyes of compassion as it were lookyng downe from heauen vppon the sonnes of Adam, so long kept vnder Sathans captiuitie, intended euen then (for causes to hym onely knowen) to rayse those wyndes of mercy whereby that Carauell (herein most lyke vnto the shyppe of Noe, whereby the remnante of the whole world was saued, as by this Carauel this newe worlde re∣ceyued the fyrst hope of theyr saluation) was dryuen to these landes. But we wyll now declare what great thynges folowed of this small begynnyng, and howe Colon folowed this matter, re∣uealed vnto hym not without Gods prouidence. VVhat labour and trauayle Colon tooke in attemp∣tyng his fyrst voyage to the Indies. AFter the death of the Pilot & maryners of the Spanyshe Carauell that discouered ye Indies, Christopher Colon pur∣posed to seeke the same. But in howe muche more he de∣syred this, the lesse was his power to accomplyshe his de∣syre. For, besyde that of hym selfe he was not able to furnyshe one shyppe, he lacked also the fauoure of a kyng, vnder whose protection he myght so enioye the ryches he hoped to fynde, that none other myght take the same from hym, or defeate him therof.
And seyng the kyng of Portugale occupied in the conquest of Africa, and the Nauigations of the East, whiche were then fyrst attempted, the kyng of Castyle lykewyse no lesse busyed in the warres of Granada, he sent to his brother Bartholomewe Colon (who was also priuie to this secrete) to practise with the kyng of England (Henry the seuenth) beyng very ryche and without warres,Kyng Henry the seuenth. promysyng to bryng hym great ryches in short tyme, if he woulde shewe hym fauour, and furnyshe hym with shyps to discouer the newe Indies, whereof he had certayne knowledge. But neyther here beyng able to bryng his sute to passe, he caused the matter to be moued to the kyng of Portugale Don Alonso, the fyfth of that name: at whose handes he founde neither fauour nor mony,Barnarde knewe not all thynges. forasmuch as the Licenciat Calzadilla the bishop of Viseo, and one maister Rodrigo, men of credite in the science of Cosmo∣graphie, withstoode hym, and contended that there neither was nor coulde any golde or other ryches be founde in the west, as Colon affirmed. By reason whereof he was very sad and pensiue: but yet was not discouraged, or despaired of the hope of his good aduenture, which he afterwarde founde. This doone, he tooke shyppyng at Lisburne, and came to Palos of Moguer, where he communed with Martin Alonso Pinzon, an expert Pilot, who offered hym selfe vnto hym. After this, disclosyng the whole se∣cretes of his mynd to Iohn Perez of Marchena (a fryer of thor∣der of saint Frances in Rabida, & well learned in Cosmographie) and declaryng vnto hym howe by folowyng the course of the Sunne by a temperate voyage, rych and great landes myght be founde: the fryer greatly commended his interpryse, and gaue him counsayle to breake the matter to the Duke of Medina Sido∣nia, Don Enrique of Guzman, a great lorde, and very rych: and al∣so to Don Luis of Cerda, the Duke of Medina Celi, who at that time had great prouision of shyps wel furnyshed in his hauen of Santa Maria. But whereas both these Dukes tooke the matter for a dreame, and as a thyng deuised of an Italian deceyuer, who (as they thought) had before with lyke pretence deluded the kynges of Englande and Portugale, the fryer gaue hym courage to go to the courte of the Catholyke princes Don Ferdinando, and lady Isabell princes of Castyle, affyrmyng that they woulde be ioyful of suche newes: And for his better furtherance herein, wrote
etters by hym to fryer Ferdinando of Talauera the queenes con∣fessor. Christopher Colon therefore, repayred to the courte of the Catholyke princes, in the yeere .1486. and delyuered vnto theyr handes the petition of his request, as concernyng the discoueryng of the new Indies. But they beyng more careful, and applying al theyr mynde howe they myght dryue the Moores out of the kyngdome of Granada,The conquest of Granada. whiche greate enterprise they had alredy taken in hande, dyd lyttle or nothyng esteeme the matter. But Colon not thus discouraged, founde the meanes to declare his sute to suche as had sometymes priuate communication with the kyng. Yet because he was a straunger, and went but in simple apparell, nor otherwyse credited then by the letter of a gray frier, they beleeued hym not, neyther gaue eare to his woordes, where∣by he was greatly tormented in his imagination. Onely Alonso of Quintanilia, the kynges chiefe auditour, gaue hym meate and drynke at his owne charges, and hearde gladly such thynges as he declared of the landes not then founde: desyryng hym in the meane tyme to be content with that poore enterteynment, and not to despayre of his enterpryse: puttyng hym also in good con∣forte that he should, at one tyme or other, come to the speache of the Catholyke princes. And thus shortly after, by the meanes of Alonso of Quintanilia, Colon was brought to the presence and audience of the Cardinall Don Pero Gonzales of Mendoza, arch∣bishop of Toledo,The archbshop of Toledo, a man of great reuenues and authoritie with the kyng and queene, who brought hym before them, after that he well perceiued and examined his intent. And by this meanes was his sute hearde of the Catholyke princes, who also redde the booke of his memorials whiche he presented vnto them. And although at the fyrst they tooke it for vayne and false that he pro∣mysed, neuerthelesse they put hym in good hope that he shoulde be well dispatched when they had fynyshed the warres of Grana∣da whiche they had nowe in hande. With which answere, Colon began to reuyue his spirites, with hope to be better esteemed, and more fauorably to be hearde among the gentelmen & noble men of the courte, who before tooke hym onely for a craftie felowe and deceyuer: and was nothyng dismayde or discouraged when soeuer he debated the matter with them, although many iudged hym phantasticall, as is the maner of ignorant men, to cal all
suche as attempt any thyng beyonde theyr reache, and the com∣passe of theyr knowledge, thynkyng the worlde to be no bygger then the cagies wherein they are brought vp and lyue. But to returne to Colon. So hotte and vrgente was the siege of Granada, that they presentely graunted hym his demaunde to seeke the newe landes, and to bryng from thence golde, syluer, pearles, precious stones, spices, and suche other ryche thynges. They gaue hym also the tenth part of all the reuenues and customes due vnto the kyng, of all such landes as he shoulde discouer, not doyng preiudice in any thyng to the kyng of Portugale. The particulars of this agreement were made in the towne called Sancta Fe: and the priuiledge of the rewarde in Granada the .xxx. daye of Apryll, the same yeere that the citie was woonne. And whereas the sayde Catholyke princes had not mony presently to dispatch Colon, Luis of. S. Angel, the kynges secretary of ac∣comtes, lent them syxe Quentes of Maraz, whiche in a grosse summe make .xvi. thousande ducades. In the scutcheon of armes geuen to Columbus by Don Ferdinan∣do and queene Isabella, these verses were written. Por Castella, y por Leon. Nueuo mondo hallo Colon. For Castile and for Leon. A newe worlde founde was by Colon. VVhy they were called Indies. SOme thynke that the people of the newe world were called Indians, bycause they are of the colour of the east Indians. And although (as it semmeth to me) they dyffer much in colour and fashions,The colour of the East Indi∣ans. yet is it true, that of India they were called Indians. India is properly called that great prouince of Asia, in the whiche great Alexander kepte his warres, and was so named of the ryuer Indus: and is diuided into many kyng∣domes confinyng with the same. From this great India (called the East India) came great companyes of men, as wrytteth He∣rodotus, and inhabited that part of Ethiopia that lyeth betweene the sea Bermeia (otherwyse called the red sea, or ye gulfe of Arabia) and the ryuer of Nilus: all whiche regions that great Christian prince Prester Iohn doth nowe possesse. The said Indians preuayled so muche, that they vtterly chaunged the customes and
name of that lande, and called it India: by reason whereof, Ethi∣opia also hath of long tyme ben called India. And hereupon came it that Aristotle, Seneca, and certayne other olde authours sayd, that India was not farre from Spayne. After this also, of later dayes our west India was so called, of the sayde India of Prester Iohn where the Portugales had theyr trade: For the Pilot of the Carauell that was fyrst dryuen by forcible wynde to an vnknowen lande in the west Ocean, called the same India, be∣cause the Portugales so called such landes as they had lately dis∣couered eastward. Christophor Colon also, after the sayd Pilot, cal∣led the west landes by the same name: Albeit some that take Colonus for an expert Cosmographer, thynke that he so named them of the East India, as to be the furthest and vnknowen ende thereof, reachyng into the West, vnder the other hemisphe∣rie or halfe globe of the earth beneath vs: affirming that when he fyrste attempted to discouer the Indies, he went chiefly to seeke the ryche Ilande of Cipango, whiche falleth on the part of great China or Cathay, as wryteth Marcus Paulus Venetus, and other: And that he shoulde sooner come thyther by folowyng the course of the Sunne Westward, then agaynst the same. Of the colour of the Indians. ONe of the marueylous thynges yt God vseth in the com∣position of man, is coloure: whiche doubtlesse can not be consydered without great admiration, in holdyng one to be whyte, and an other blacke, beyng colours vtterly contrary: some lykewyse to be yealowe, whiche is betweene blacke and white: and other of other colours, as it were of diuers liueries. And as these colours are to be marueyled at, euen so is it to be considered, howe they dyffer one from an other, as it were by degrees, forasmuch as some men are whyte after dyuers sorts of whitnes, yelowe after diuers maners of yelowe, & blacke after dyuers sorts of blackenes: & how from white they go to yelow by discolouring to browne & red, and to blacke by ashe colour, & murry, somwhat lighter then blacke,The coloure of the west In∣dians. & tawny like vnto the west Indians, which are altogether in general either purple or tawny,
lyke vnto sodde Quinses, or of the colour of Chestnuttes or O∣lyues, which colour is to them naturall: and not by theyr goyng naked, as many haue thought: albeit theyr nakednesse haue some∣what helped therevnto. Therefore in lyke maner, and with suche diuersitie as men are commonly whyte in Europe, and blacke in Affrike, euen with lyke varietie are they tawney in these Indies, with diuers degrees diuersly inclinyng more or lesse to blacke or whyte. No lesse marueyle is it to consider, that men are white in Siuile, and blacke at the cape of Buena Speranza, and of Chestnut colour at the ryuer of Plata, being all in equall degrees from the Equinoctiall lyne. Lykewyse, that the men of Affrike and Asia, that lyue vnder the burnt line (called Zona Torrida) are blacke: and not they that lyue beneath, or on this syde the same lyne, as in Mexico, Iucatan, Quauhtema, Lian, Nicaragua, Pana∣ma, Santo Domingo, Paria, Cape Sainct Augustine, Lima, Quito, and other landes of Peru, which touche in the same Equinoctiall. For in all the tracte of these coastes, certayne blacke men were founde only in Quarequa, when Vaschus Nunnez of Balboa disco∣uered the sea of Sur. By reason whereof it may seeme, that such varietie of colours proceedeth of man, and not of the earth: which may wel be, although we be al borne of Adam & Eue, & know not the cause why God hath so ordeyned it, otherwise then to consider that his diuine maiestie hath done this, as infinite other, to declare his omnipotencie and wisedome,Gods wyse∣dome & power is seene in his workes. in such diuersities of colours, as appeare not only in the nature of man, but the like also in beasts, byrdes, and floures, where diuers and contrary colours are seene in one litle feather, or the leaues growyng out of one litle stalke. An other thing is also greatly to be noted, as touching these In∣dians: and this is, that their heare is not curld, as is the Moores and Ethiopians that inhabite the same clime: neyther are they balde, excepte very ildome, and that but litle. All whiche thynges may gyue further occasions to Philosophers to searche the se∣cretes of nature, and complexions of men, with the nouelties of the newe worlde.
❧ A most auncient testimonie of the VVest Indies, by the writing of the diuine Philosopher Plato. PLato in his famous and diuine Dialogue, named Timeus, where he entreateth of the vniuersall nature and frame of the whole worlde, taketh for his principle the moste auncient hystorie of an Ilande, in tyme of great antiquitie, named Athlantides, ma∣kyng also mention of the kyng, people, and inhabitantes of the same: and that they kept warre agaynst the Atheniens, and were ouercome of them. Plato also there inducing the sayde hystorie to be rehearsed by one named Critia, who af∣firmed that he had often hearde it of his Uncle, who was in the tyme of Solon, one of the seuen sages of the Grekes. This Critia declared, that when Solon went into Egypt to a certayne citie named Sim, situate vpon the riuer of Nilus, where the diuisi∣on and recurryng of the riuer, maketh the Ilande Delta, he there spake with certayne learned priestes, very skylful in knowledge of antiquities of many worldes past. Insomuch that they made mention of manye thinges that were before the flood of Noe, or Deucalion, and also before the vniuersal conflagration or burning of the worlde in the tyme of Phaeton, forasmuche as the warres betweene the people of the sayde Ilande of Athlantides and the Atheniens, was long before the general flood, and the conflagra∣tion aforesayde. Plato induceth the priest, speaking to Solon in maner as foloweth. Thinges most marueylous and true (O Solon) remayne in auncient writynges and memorie of our predecessours, and olde ages long before our tymes. But aboue all thynges, one exceedeth al admiration for the greatnesse and singularitie there∣of, whiche is this: It is in our recordes of moste antiquities, that in times past your citie of Athens hath oftentymes kepte warres agaynst an innumerable multitude of nations whiche came from the sea Athlantike, in maner into al Europe and Asia: whereas nowe appeareth no suche nation, forasmuche as the sayde sea is nowe al ouer nauigable: And yet at that tyme had,
in the mouth, and as it were in the entrie (where you place the Columnes of Hercules) an Ilande whiche was sayd to be much greater then al Africa and Asia, and that from thence was pas∣sage to many other Ilandes neare thereabout, and from the sayde Ilandes to the continent or fyrme lande, whiche was right ouer agaynst it neare vnto the sea: Yet, that within the mouth, there was a litle gulfe with a porte: the deepe sea without, was the true sea, and the lande without was the true continent. This Ilande was named Athlantides, and in it was a kyng of mar∣ueylous great power and myght, who had the dominion of the sayde Ilande, and many other, and also a great part of the conti∣nent lande whereof we haue spoken, and muche more towarde our partes also, forasmuche as they were dominatours of the thyrde part of the worlde conteynyng Africa, Egypt, and Europe, euen vnto the sea Tirrhenum. The power therefore of them be∣yng then so great, they came to inuade both your countrey and ours, and all other that are within the Columnes of Hercules. Then (O Solon) the vertue of your citie shewed it selfe famous in magnanimitie and feates of armes, with the assemblance of the other Grecians, in resystyng theyr great power, vntyl you had driuen them out of our lands, and restored vs to our libertie. But shortly after that this enterprise was atchiued, befel a mar∣ueylous great earthquake, and exundation or ouerflowing of the sea, which continued for the space of one day and nyght: In the whiche the earth opened it selfe, and inglutted all those vali∣ant and warlike men, and the sayde Ilande Athlantides sunke into the bottome of the sea, whiche was the occasion that neuer from that tyme forwarde, any shyp coulde sayle that way, by rea∣son of the great mudde and slyme whiche remayned of the drow∣ned Ilande. This is the summe of those thynges whiche olde Critia sayde he had vnderstoode of Solon. And certaynely these wordes of Plato of the said Iland, haue caused great contention among ma∣ny great Philosophers, which haue written commentaries vpon the sayde Dialogue of Timeus composed by Plato: Insomuche that the same in those dayes being vtterly vnknowen, many haue taken this narration of Solon, for an allegorical fable, and haue interpreted the same in diuers senses and meanynges. But it
may nowe well appeare the true meanyng hereof to be this: that Plato intendyng to wryte of the vniuersall frame of the worlde, the whiche he knewe to be made an habitation for the diuine best man, and also beholdyng therin the great ornament and beautie of the heauen and starres, whereby man myght knowe his God and creatour, it myght seeme to hym a thyng to farre from rea∣son, that only two partes thereof shoulde be inhabited, and the other part desolate and depriued of men: and that the Sunne and starres might seeme to shewe theyr lyght only halfe theyr course without profite, shining only vpon the sea and desolate pla∣ces, destitute of man and other liuing creatures. And therefore Plato had in great admiration the hystorie of the sayde Egypti∣an priest, makyng mention of an other part of the worlde besyde Asia, Europa, and Africa, and thought it woorthy to be rehearsed in the beginning of his diuine Dialogue aforesayde. We ought therefore certainely to thinke our selues most bounde vnto God, that in these our tymes it hath pleased hym to reueale and disco∣uer this secrete in the fyndyng of this newe worlde, whereby we are certaynely assured, that vnder our Pole starre, and vnder the Equinoctial line, are most goodlye and ample regions, as well and commodiously inhabited, as are other partes of the worlde best knowen vnto vs. The testimonie of the Poet Seneca in his Tragedie De Medea, where by the spirite of Poetical furie, he sayth. Venient annis Secula seris, quibus Oceanus Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens Pateat tellus, Typhisque nouos Detegat Orbes, Nec sit terris, vltima Thyle. Whiche may be thus Englished. In late yeeres newe worldes shalbe founde, And newe landes shal then appeare on the grounde.
When Typhis Nauigation newe worldes shal fynde out, Then shal not Thyle for last be left out. Thyle is Islande.For then shal the Ocean dissolue his large bandes, And shewe foorth newe worldes, regions, and landes. ❧ To the moste noble prince and ca∣tholike kynge, Charles, Peter Martyr of An∣gleria wisheth perpetual felicitie. THe diuine prouidence, from the time that he fyrst created the worlde, hath reserued vnto this day the knowledge of the great and large Ocean sea:The largenesse of the Ocean vnknowen to this day. In the whiche tyme he hath opened the same, chiefely vnto you (moste mightie Prince) by the good fourtune and happie successe of your grand∣father by your mother syde. The same prouidence (I knowe not by what destenie) hath brought me out of my natiue coun∣trey of Milane, and out of the citie of Rome (where I continued almost .x. yeeres) into Spaine, that I myght particularlye col∣lecte these marueilous and newe thinges, which shoulde other∣wyse perhappes haue lien drowned in the whirlepoole of obliui∣on, forasmuche as the Spanyardes (men worthy great commen∣dation) had only care to the generall inuentions of these thinges. Notwithstanding, I do not chalenge vnto me only, the thankes of the trauaile bestowed herein, whereas the chiefe rewarde ther∣of is due to Ascanius,Cardinal As∣canius. vicount Cardinal, who perceauyng that I was wylling to departe out of the citie to be present at the warres of Granatum,The warres at Granatum a∣gaynst the Moores. disswaded me from my purpose: But seeing that I was fully resolued to departe, exhorted & required me to write vnto him suche newes as were famous in Spaine, & worthy to be noted. I toke therfore my iourney into Spayne, chiefely for the desyre I had to see thexpedition whiche was prepared agaynst the enimies of the fayth, forasmuche as in Italye, by reason of the dissention among the Princes, I coulde fynde nothyng wherewith I myght feede my wytte, beyng a younge man desyrous of knowledge and experience
of thynges. I was therefore presente at the warres, from whence I writte to Cardinal Ascanius, and by sundry epistles certifyed hym of such thinges as I thought most woorthye to be put in memorie. But when I perceiued that his fortune was turned from a naturall mother to a stepdame, I ceassed from wrytyng. Yet after I sawe, that by thouerthrowe of the enimies of our fayth, Spayne was pourged of the Moores, as of an euil weede plucked vp by the rootes, leste I shoulde bestowe my slippery yeares in vnprofitable idlenesse, I was mynded to re∣turne to Italie. But the singuler benignitie of both the Catho∣lyke kyng and queene nowe departed, and theyr large promises towarde me vpon my returne from my legacie of Babylon, deteyned me from my purpose. Yet doth it not repent me that I drew backe my foote, aswel for that I see in no other place of the world at this tyme the lyke woorthy thinges to be done: as also that in maner throughout all Italie,Italy disquie∣ted with warres. by reason of the discorde of Christian Princes, I perceiued all thynges to runne headlong into ruine, the countreys to be destroyed and made fatte with humane blood, the cities sacked,The sequeles of warre. virgins and matrones with theyr goods and possessions caried away as captiues, and mi∣serable innocentes without offence to be slayne vnarmed within theyr owne houses. Of the whiche calamities, I dyd not onely heare the lamentable outcryes, but dyd also feele the same: For euen the blood of myne owne kinsfolkes and frendes, was not free from that crueltie. As I was therefore musyng with my selfe of these thynges, the Cardinal of Arragone, after that he had seene the two fyrst bookes of my Decades wrytten to Asca∣nius, required me in the name of kyng Frederike his vncle,Kyng Frede∣rike. to put foorth the other eyght epistle bookes. In the meane tyme also, whyle I was voyde of al care as touching the matters of the Ocean, the Apostolicall messengers of the byshop of Rome, Leo the tenth (by whose holsome counsayle and aucthoritie we trust the calamities of Italy shalbe fynished) raysed me as it were from sleepe, & encoraged me to proceede as I had begun. To his holynesse I wrytte two Decades, comprysed in short bookes, after the maner of epistles, and added them to the fyrst, which was printed without mine aduise, as shal further appeare by the preface folowyng. But nowe I returne to you (most
noble Prince) from whom I haue somwhat digressed. Ther∣fore wheras your grandfather by your mothers side, haue subdu∣ed al Spaine vnder your dominion,Spayne subdu∣ed from the Moores. The kyngdome of Naples. except only one corner of the same, and haue also lefte you the kingdome of Naples, with the fruteful Ilands of our seas, it is surely a great thing and worthy to be noted in our cronacles. But not offendyng the reuerence due to our predecessours, whatsoeuer from the begynnyng of the worlde hath been doone or wrytten to this day, to my iudgement seemeth but lyttle, yf we consyder what newe landes and coun∣treys, what newe seas, what sundry nations and tounges, what golde mynes, what treasuries of perles they haue lefte vnto your hyghnesse, besyde other reuenues. The whiche, what they are, and howe greate, these three Decades shall declare. Come ther∣fore most noble Prince elected of God, and enioye that hyghe estate of thinges not yet vnderstode to men. We offer vnto you the Equinoctiall lyne hytherto vnknowen,The temperat∣nesse of the E∣quinoctiall vn∣knowen to the olde wryters. and burnte by the furi∣ous heate of the sonne, and vnhabitable after the opinion of the olde wryters, a fewe excepted: but nowe founde to be most re∣plenished with people, faire, fruiteful, and most fortunate, with a thousande Ilandes crowned with golde and bewtifull pearles, besydes that greate portion of earth supposed to be parte of the firme lande,Continent or fyrme lande as bygge as three Europes. excedyng in quantitie three Europes. Come ther∣fore and embrase this newe world, and suffer vs no longer to con∣sume in desyre of your presence. From hence, from hence I say (most noble young Prince) shal instrumentes be prepared for you,Riches are the instruments of conquestes. wherby al the worlde shalbe vnder your obeysance. And thus I byd your maiestie farewell: to whose taste if I shal perceaue the fruites of this my tyllage to be delectable, I wyll heareafter do my endeuoure that you may receaue the same more abun∣dauntly. From Madrid, the day be∣fore the Calendes of October, In the yere of Christ M.D.XUI.
The fyrst Booke of the Decades of the Ocean, written by Peter Martyr of Angleria Mi∣lenoes, counsaylour to the king of Spayne, and Protonotarie Apostolicall to Ascanius Sphorcia, Vicount Cardinal. &c. THe reuerende and thankful antiquitie was accustomed to esteeme those men as gods,The reward of vertue. by whose industrie and magnanimitie such landes and regions were discouered, as were vnknowen to theyr predecessours. But vnto vs, hauyng only one God, whom we honour in triplicitie of person, this re∣steth, that albeit we do not worship that kinde of men with diuine honour, yet do we reuerence them, and woorthyly marueyle at theyr noble actes and enterpryses. Unto kynges and princes we geue due obeysaunce, by whose gouernance and furtherance they haue ben aided to perfourme their attempts: we commend both, and for theyr iust desartes woorthyly extol them. Wherefore, as concerning the Ilandes of the west Ocean, lately discouered,The Ilandes of the West Ocean. and of the auctours of the same (whiche thyng you desyre by your letters to knowe) I wyl begyn at the fyrst aucthour thereof, lest I be iniurious to any man. Take it therefore as foloweth. Christophorus Colonus (otherwyse called Columbus) a gentle∣man of Italie, borne in the citie of Genua,Christophorus Colonus. perswaded Fernando and Elizabeth, catholike prynces, that he doubted not to fynde certayne Ilandes of India, nere vnto our Ocean sea,India. if they woulde furnyshe hym with shyppes and other thynges appartey∣nyng: affyrmyng that therby not onely the Christian religion myght be enlarged, but Spayne also enryched by the great plen∣tie of golde, pearles, precious stones, and spices, whiche myght be founde there. At the length three shyppes were appoynted hym at the kinges charges: of the whiche one was a great carace with deckes, and the other two were light marchaunte shyppes without deckes, whiche the Spaniardes call Cara∣uelas. Thus he departed from the costes of Spaine about the
calendes of September, in the yeere of Christe .1492. and set forwarde on his viage,The fyrst voy∣age of Colonus being accompanied with CC.xx. Spa∣nyardes. The fortunate Ilandes (as manye thynke them to be, whiche the Spaniardes call Canariae,The Ilandes of Canarie. Gades, or Cals¦mals. found but of late dayes) are distaunte from the Ilandes of Gades a thousande and two hun∣dreth myles, accordyng to theyr accomptes, for they say they are distant three hundred leagues:A league, what it conteyneth by sea. The fortunate Ilandes. whereas suche as are expert sea men, affirme that euery league conteineth foure miles, after theyr supputations. These Ilandes were called fortunate, for the temperate ayre whiche is in them. For neyther the coldnesse of wynter is sharpe vnto them, nor the heate of sommer intolle∣rable. Yet some men are of opinion, that those were in olde tyme called the fortunate Ilandes, whiche the Portugales call Capo Verde.Capo Verde. Colonus therfore sayled fyrst to the Ilandes of Canariae, to the intente there to refreshe his shyppes with freshe water and fuell, before he committed hym selfe to this so laborous a viage. And because I haue heare made mention of the Ilandes of Ca∣nariae, it shal not be muche from my purpose, to declare howe of vnknowen they became knowen, and of sauage and wilde, bet∣ter manured: For by the long course of many yeeres, they were forgotten, and remayned as vnknowen. The .vii. Ilan∣des of Canarie. Betanchor a Frenche man subdued the Ilandes of Canarie. &c.These seuen Ilandes (therefore) called the Canaries, were founde by chaunce by a frenche man, called Betanchor, by the per∣mission of queene Katharine, protectrixe of king Iohn her sonne, while he was yet in his nonage, about the yeere of Christe. M.CCCC.U. This Betanchor inuaded two of these Ilandes called Lancelotus and Fortisuentura, which he inhabited & brought to better culture. He being dead, his sonne and heire solde bothe the sayde Ilandes to certayne Spaniardes. After this, Farnandus Peraria and his wyfe, inuaded Ferrea and Gomera. The other three were subdued in our time. Grancanaria, by Petrus de Vera, citizen of the noble citie of Xericium, and Mi∣chael of Moxica. Palma and Tenerifen, by Alphonsus Lugo, at the kings charges. Gomera and Ferrea were easily subdued: But the matter went harde with Alphonsus Lugo.Alphonsus Lugo. For that naked and wylde nation, fyghtyng only with stones and clubbes, droue his armie to flight at the first assaulte, and slue about foure hundred of his men: But at the length he ouercame them. And thus all
the Ilandes of Canariae were added to the dominion of Spayne. From these Ilandes Colonus directyng his voyage towarde the west, folowyng the falling of the sunne, but declining somewhat towarde the left hande, sayled on forwarde .xxxiii. dayes continu∣ally, hauyng only the fruition of the heauen and the water. Then the Spanyardes whiche were accompanyed with hym,Colonus men rebel agaynst hym. began fyrst to murmure secretely among them selues, and shortly after with wordes of reproche spake euil of Colonus theyr gouernour, and consulted with them selues, eyther to rydde hym out of the way, or els to cast hym into the sea: ragyng that they were de∣ceyued of a stranger, an outlandyshe man, a Ligurian, a Genues, and brought into suche daungerous places, that they might neuer returne agayne. And after .xxxiii. dayes were past, they fu∣riously cryed out against him, and threatned him that he shoulde passe no further.Fayre woordes and promises. But he euer with gentle wordes and large pro∣mises, appeased their furie, and prolonged day after day, some tyme desyryng them to beare with hym yet a whyle, and some time putting them in remembrance that yf they shoulde attempt any thing against him, or otherwyse disobey hym, it would be re∣puted for treason. Thus after a fewe dayes, with cheareful harts they espied the lande long looked for. In this fyrst nauigation, he discouered .vi. ilandes, wherof two were exceedyng great: Of whiche, the one he called Hispaniola, and the other Iohanna.Hispaniola. Iohanna. But at that tyme he knewe not perfectly that Iohanna (otherwyse called Cuba) was an ilande. As they coasted along by the shore of certayne of these ilandes,Nightingales syng in No∣uember. they hearde Nyghtyngales syng in the thycke wooddes in the moneth of Nouember. They founde also great ryuers of freshe water, and naturall hauens, of capa∣citie to harbour great nauies of shippes. Sayling by the coastes of Iohanna, from the north poynt to the west, he rode litle lesse then eight hundred miles (for they cal it a hundred and fourescore leagues) supposing that it had ben the continent or fyrme lande, because he coulde neither fynde the landes ende, nor any token of the ende, as farre as he could iudge with his eye: wherfore he de∣termined to turne backe agayne, beyng partly thereto enforced by the roughnesse of the sea, for the sea bankes of the ilande of Iohanna, by sundrye wyndynges and turnynges, bende them selues so muche towarde the north, that the northnortheast winde
roughly tossed the shyps by reason of the winter. Turning ther∣fore the stemmes of his shyppes towarde the East, he affyrmed that he had found the ilande of Ophir,The Ilande of Ophir. whither Solomons shippes sayled for golde. But the discription of the Cosmographers well considered, it seemeth that both these, and the other ilandes ad∣ioynyng,The Ilandes of Antilia. are the ilands of Antilia. This ilande he called Hispani∣ola, on whose north syde as he approched neare to the lande, the keele or bottome of the biggest vessell ranne vpon a blynde rocke couered with water,A shypwracke. and cloue in sunder: but the playnenesse of the rocke was a helpe to them that they were not drowned. Ma∣kyng haste therfore with the other two shyps to helpe them, they brought awaye al the men without hurte. Here comming fyrst a land,The people of the Ilande. they sawe certayne men of the Ilande, who perceiuyng an vnknowen nation comming toward them, flocked togeather, and ranne al into the thycke woods, as it had ben hares coursed with grehoundes.Naked people. Our men pursuing them, tooke onely one woman, whom they brought to the ships: where fylling her with meate and wyne, and appareling her, they let her depart to her compa∣nye. Shortly after a greate multitude of them came runnyng to the shore to behold this newe nation, whom they thought to haue discended from heauen. They cast them selues by heapes into the sea,Expert swym∣mers. Gold for earth and glasse. & came swimming to the shyppes, brynging gold with them, whiche they chaunged with our men for earthen pottes, drinking glasses, poyntes, pinnes, hawkes bels, looking glasses, & such o∣ther trifles. Thus growing to further familiaritie, our men were honorably entertained of the king of that part of the iland,Many kynges whose name was Guaccnarillus: for it hath many kyngs, as when Ene∣as arriued in Italy, he found Latium diuided into many kingdoms and prouinces, as Latium, Mezeutium, Turnum, and Tarchontem, which were separated with narowe boundes, as shal more largly appeare hereafter. At the euen tide about the falling of the sonne, when our men went to prayer, and kneeled on their knees after the maner of ye Christians,Religious and humane people they dyd the lyke also. And after what maner so euer they sawe them pray to the crosse, they folowed them in al poyntes as wel as they coulde. They shewed much humanitie towards our men,Canoas. and helped them with theyr lygh∣ters or smal boates (which they cal Canoas) to vnlade their broken
shyppe, and that with suche celeritie and cherefulnesse, that no frende for frende, or kynseman for kynseman, in such case moued with pitie, coulde do more. Theyr boates are made only of one tree,Monoxyla, They haue no iron. made holowe with a certaine sharpe stone (for they haue no yron) and are very long and narowe. Many affirme that they haue seene some of them with fortie ores. The wilde and mysche∣uous people called Canibales, or Caribes,Canibales, or Caribes. Anthopo∣phagi. whiche were accustomed to eate mans fleshe (& called of the olde writers, Anthropophagi) molest them exceedyngly, inuading their countrey, takyng them captiue, kyllyng & eatyng them. As our men sayled to the ilandes of these meke and humane people, they left the ilands of the Ca∣nibales, in maner in the middest of theyr viage toward the south. They complayned that theyr ilands were no lesse vexed with the incursions of these manhuntyng Canibales when they goe forth a rouyng to seeke theyr pray, then are other tame beastes,The crueltie of the Canibales. of Lions and Tigers. Such chyldren as they take, they geld to make them fat, as we do cocke chickens and young hogges, and eate them when they are wel fedde: of suche as they eate, they fyrst eate the intralles and extreme partes, as handes, feete, armes, necke, and head. The other most fleshye partes, they pouder for store, as we do pestels of porke, and gammondes of bakon: yet do they ab∣steyne from eatyng of women, and counte it vyle. Therfore suche young women as they take, they kepe for increase, as we do hen∣nes to leye egges: the olde women, they make theyr drudges. They of the ilandes (which we may nowe cal ours) bothe the men and ye women, when they perceiue the Canibales commyng, haue none other shyft but onely to flee: for although they vse ve∣ry sharpe arrowes made of reedes, yet are they of small force to represse ye furie of the Canibales: for euen they them selues con∣fesse, that ten of the Canibales are able to ouercome a hundred of them if they encountre with them. Theyr meate is a certayne roote, which they cal Ages,Ages. Rootes in the steede of meate. Iucca. Bread of rootes muche lyke a nauewe roote in fourme and greatnesse, but of sweete tast, much lyke a greene chestnutte. They haue also an other kynde of rootes, which they call Iucca, whereof they make bread in kyke maner. They vse Ages more often rosted or sodden, then to make bread thereof. But they neuer eate Iucca, except it be first sliced and pressed (for it is full of lycoure) and then baked or sodden. But this is to be
marueyled at, that the iuice of this roote is a poyson as strong as Aconitum,In hearbe of strange nature. so that if it be drunke, it causeth present death, and yet the bread made of the masse thereof, is of good taste and hol∣some, as they all haue prooued. They make also another kynde of bread of a certayne pulse, called Panicum, muche like vnto wheate,Maizium. whereof is great plentie in the Dukedome of Millane, Spayne, and Cranatum. But that of this Countrey is longer by a spanne, somewhat sharpe towarde the ende, and as bygge as a mans arme in ye brawne: the graynes wherof are set in a mar∣ueylous order, & are in fourme somewhat lyke a Pease. Whyle they be soure and vnripe, they are whyte, but when they are ripe, they be very blacke, when they are broken, they be whiter then snowe: this kynde of grayne they call Maizium. Golde is of some estimation among them:Golde in esti∣mation. for some of them hang certayne small peeces thereof at theyr eares and nosethrylles. A litle be∣yonde this place, our men went a lande for freshe water, where they chaunced vpon a riuer,Golde in the sandes of ri∣uers. whose sande was myxed with muche golde. They founde there no kindes of foure footed beastes, ex∣cept three kindes of litle conies. These ilandes also nouryshe serpentes,Serpentes without ve∣nime. Turtle doues. Duckes. Popiniayes. but suche as are without hurt. Likewise wilde geese, turtle doues, and duckes, muche greater then ours, and as white as swannes, with heades of purple colour. Also Popiniayes, of the whiche some are greene, some yelowe, & some lyke them of India,Plini. with yelowe rynges about theyr neckes, as Plinie descri∣beth them. Of these they brought fourtie with them, of moste lyuely and dilectable colours, hauyng theyr feathers enterming∣led with greene, yelowe, and purple, whiche varietie delyghteth the sense not a litle. Thus muche thought I good to speake of Popyniayes (ryght noble prince) specially to this intent, that albeit the opinion of Christophorus Colonus (who affyrmeth these ilandes to be part of India) doth not in all poyntes agree with the iudgement of auncient wryters as touchyng the bygnesse of the Sphere and compasse of the Globe,These Ilandes are part of India. The Indians are Antipodes to the Spa∣nyardes. as concernyng the na∣uigable portion of the same being vnder vs, yet the Popiniayes and many other thynges brought from thence, doo declare that these Ilandes sauour somewhat of India, eyther beyng neare vn∣to it, or els of the same nature: forasmuche as Aristole also, about the ende of his booke de Caelo & Mundo,Aristotle. Seneca. and likewyse Seneca▪
with diuers other aucthours not ignoraunt in Cosmographie, do taffirme that India is no long tracte by sea,India not farre from Spayne. Mastyx. Aloe. Gossampine cotton or bom∣base. Seres. distant from Spaine by the west Ocean, for the soyle of these ilandes bryngeth foorth Mastyx, Aloes, and sundry other sweete gummes and spyces, as doth India, Cotton also of the Gossampine tree, as in India in the countrey of the people called Seres. The languages of all the nations of these ilandes, may well be wrytten with our Latine letters. For they cal heauen Turei.The language of these In∣dians. A house Boa. Golde Cauni. A good man, Taino. Nothing, May∣ani. Al other words of theyr language, they pronounce as plain∣ly as we do the Latine tongue.Trees & fruites vnknowē to vs In these ilandes they founde no trees knowen vnto them, but Pine apple trees, and Date trees, and those of marueylous heyght, and exceedyng harde, by rea∣son of the great moystnesse and fatnesse of the grounde,Fat and moyst grounde. Heate continu∣al & temperate. The fruiteful∣nesse of Hispa∣niola. with continual and temperate heate of the sunne, whiche endureth so al the whole yere. They playnely affirme the ilande of Hispa∣niola to be the moste fruitefull lande that the heauen compasseth about, as shall more largely appeare hereafter in the particuler description of the same, which we entende to set foorth when we shalbe better instructed. Thus makyng a league of frendshyp with the king, and leauing with hym .xxxviii. men to searche the ilande, he depared to Spayne, takyng with hym tenne of the in∣habitauntes to learne the Spanishe tongue, to the intent to vse them afterward for interpretours. Colonus therfore at his returne was honourably receiued of the kyng and queene, who caused hym to syt in theyr presence, whiche is a token of great loue and honour among the Spanyardes. He was also made Admi∣ral of the Ocean, and his brother gouernour of the ilande. Toward the second voyage he was furnished with .xvii. ships, wherof three were great caractes of a thousande tunne .xii. were of that sort which the Spaniards cal Carauelas, without deckes,The seconde voyage of Co∣lonus. and two other of the same sorte somewhat bygger, and more apt to beare deckes, by reason of the greatnesse of theyr mastes. He had also a thousande and two hundred armed footemen well ap∣poynted: among which were many artificers, as smythes, Car∣penters, myners, and suche other, certayne horsmen also, well armed: Lykewyse mares, sheepe, heyghfers, and suche other of both kindes for encrease: Lykewise al kinde of pulse, or grayne,
and corne, as wheate, barley, rye, beanes, and pease, and suche other,Corne & seedes to sowe. aswel for foode as to sowe: besyde vines, plantes, and seedes, of suche trees, fruites, and hearbes, as those countreyes lacke, and (not to be forgotten) sundry kyndes of artyllerie and iron tooles,Tooles and artyllerie. as bowes, arrowes, crosbowes, bylles, hargabusses, brode swoordes, large targettes, pykes, mattockes, shouelles, hammers, nayles, sawes, axes, and suche other, Thus beyng furnished accordyngly, they set forward from the Ilandes of Ga∣des (nowe called Cales) the seuenth day before the Calendes of October, in the yeere of Christ .1493. and ariued at the ilandes of Canarie at the Calendes of October: Of these ilandes, the last is called Ferrea, in whiche there is no other water that may be drunke,Water drop∣pyng from a tree continu∣allye. but only that is geathered of the deawe, which conti∣nually distylleth from one only tree, growyng on the hyghest bancke of the ilande, and falleth into a rounde trenche made with mans hande: we were enfourmed of these thynges within fewe dayes after his departure. What shall succeede, we wyl certifie you hereafter. Thus fare ye well, from the courte, at the Ides of Nouember .1493. The seconde booke of the first Decade, to Ascanius Sphorcia, Vicount Cardinal. &c. YOu repeate (ryght honourable prince) that you are desyrous to knowe what newes we haue in Spayne from the newe worlde, and that those things haue greatly delyted you, whiche I wrote vnto your hyghnesse of the fyrst Nauigation: You shal nowe therefore receiue what hath succeeded.Methymna Campi. Castella Ve∣tus. Methymna Campi, is a famous towne in high Spayne, in respect from you, and is in that parte of Spayne whiche is called Castella Vetus, beyng distant from Gades about .xl. myles. Here the courte re∣mayned,Gades. when about the .ix. of the Calendes of Apryll, in this yeere of ninetie and foure, there were postes sent to the king and queene, certifiyng them that there were twelue shyppes come from the newe ilandes, and ariued at Gades: but the gouernour
of the shyppes sent woorde to the kyng and queene, that he had none other matter to certifie them of by the postes, but only that the Admiral with fiue shyppes, and fourescore and ten men, remayned styll in Hispaniola to searche the secretes of the ilande, and that as touchyng other matters, he hym selfe would shortly make relation in theyr presence by woorde of mouth: therefore the day before the Nones of Apryl, he came to the Courte hym selfe. What I learned of hym, and other faythfull and credible men, whiche came with hym from the Admirall, I wil rehearse vnto you, in suche order as they declared the same to me, when I demaunded them: take it therefore as foloweth. The third day of the Ides of October, departyng from Ferrea, the laste of the ilandes of Canariae, and from the coastes of Spayne,The Iland of Ferrea. with a Na∣uie of seuenteene shippes, they sayled .xxi. dayes before they came to any ilande, inclining of purpose more towarde the left hand then at the fyrst voyage, folowing the north northeast winde, and arriued fyrst at the ilandes of the Canibales or Caribes,Ilandes of the Canibales. of whiche only the fame was knowen to our men. Among these, they chaunced fyrst vpon one, so beset with trees, that they coulde not see so muche as an elle space of bare earth or stonie grounde, this they called Dominica, because they found it on the Sunday.The Ilande of Dominica. They taried here no time, because they saw it to be desart. In the space of these .xxi. dayes, they thynke that they sayled eyght hundred & xx. leagues, the north northeast wynde was so ful with them, and so freshly folowed the sterne of theyr shyppes. After they had say∣led a lytle further, they espied diuers ilandes replenyshed with sundry kindes of trees, from the whiche came fragrant sauours of spyces and sweete Gummes: here they sawe neyther man nor beast, except certayne Lysartes of huge bygnesse,Lysartes. as they re∣ported which went aland to viewe the countrey. This iland they called Galana or Galanta: from the cape or poynt of this ilande,The Ilande of Galanta. espying a mountayne a farre of, they sayled thyther. About .xxx. myles from this mountayne, they sawe a ryuer dessendyng, which seemed to be a token of some great and large flood. This is the fyrst lande whiche they founde inhabited from the ilan∣des of Canariae, and is an ilande of the Canibales,The Iland of Guadalupea. as they learned by the interpretours whiche they tooke with them from Hispa∣niola into Spayne at theyr fyrst voyage. Searching the ilande,
they found innumerable villages of .xx. houses, or .xxx. at the most, set rounde about in order,Villages of .xx. or .xxx. houses. makyng the streete in compasse lyke a market place. And forasmuche as I haue made mention of theyr houses, it shall not be greatly from my purpose to describe in what manner they are buylded:The buildyng of theyr houses. They are made rounde lyke belles or rounde pauilions. Theyr frame is raysed of exceedyng high trees, set close togeather, and fast rampaired in the ground, so standing aslope, and bending inwarde, that the toppes of the trees ioyne togeather, and beare one agaynst another, hauyng also within the house certaine strong and short proppes or postes whiche susteyne the trees from fallyng. They couer them with the leaues of date trees, and other trees stronglye compact and hardened, wherwith they make them close from winde and wea∣ther. At the shorte postes or proppes within the house, they tye ropes of the cotton of gossampine trees, or other ropes made of certayne long & rough rootes,Gossampine cotton. much lyke vnto the shrubbe called Spartum, wherof in old tyme they vsed to make bandes for vines, and gables and ropes for shyppes. These they tye ouerthwarte the house from poste to poste, on these they lay as it were cer∣taine matresses made of the cotton of gossampine trees, whiche growe plentifully in these ilandes. This cotton the Spanyards cal Algodon,Bombase. Hangyng beddes. and the Italians Bombasine: and thus they sleepe in hangyng beddes. At the entrance of one of theyr houses, they sawe two images of wood lyke vnto serpentes, whiche they thought had been suche idols as they honour: but they learned afterwarde that they were set there onlye for comelynesse, for they knowe none other god then the sunne and moone, although they make certaine images of gossampine cotton to ye similitude of suche phantasies as they say appeare to them in the nyght.Images. Our men found in theyr houses, al kindes of earthen vessels, not muche vnlyke vnto ours. They founde also in theyr kytchens, mans fleshe,Fine cookerie. duckes fleshe, & goose fleshe, al in one pot, and other on the spyts redy to be layde to the fyre. Entring into their inner lodgynges, they founde faggottes of the bones of mens armes and legges,Arrowheades of bones. whiche they reserue to make heades for theyr ar∣rowes, because they lacke iron, the other bones they cast away when they haue eaten the fleshe. They founde lykewyse the head of a young man fastened to a poste, and yet bleedyng. They haue
in some vyllages, one great hall or pallace, about the whiche theyr common houses are placed: to this they resort, as often as they come togeather to playe. When they perceiued the com∣myng of our men, they fledde. In theyr houses they founde also aboue thirtie children captiues, whiche were reserued to be eaten, but our men tooke them away to vse them for inter∣preters. Searching more diligently the inner parts of the iland, they founde seuen other ryuers, bygger then this whiche we spake of before, runnyng through the ilande, with fruitefull and pleasaunt bankes, delectable to beholde. This ilande they called Guadalupea, for the similitude that it hath to the mount Guadalupus in Spayne,The mount Guadalupus. where the image of the virgin Marie is religiously honoured, but the inhabitauntes call it Carucueria, or Queraquiera: It is the cheefe habitation of the Canibales.Carucueria. They brought from this iland .vii. Popiniayes, bigger then Phesants,Popiniayes bygger then Phesantes. muche dyfferyng from other in colour, hauyng theyr backes, brestes, and bellies of purple colour, and theyr wynges of other variable colours: in al these ilands is no lesse plentie of Popyn∣iayes, then with vs of sparrowes or starelynges. As we bring vp capons and hennes to franke and make them fat, so doo they these bigger kindes of Popyniayes for the same purpose. After that they had thus searched the ilande,The Canibales driuē to flyght. and driuen these Canibales to flight (whiche ran away at theyr fyrst approche, as soone as they had espied them) they called their company togeather, and as soone as they had broken ye Canibales boates or lighters (whi∣che they cal Canoas) they loosed theyr ankers the day before the Ides of Nouember, and departed from Guadalupea. Colonus the Admiral, for the desyre he had to see his companions, whiche at his fyrst voyage he left the yeere before in Hispaniola to search the countrey, let passe many ilandes both on his ryght hande, & left hande, and sayled directly thyther. By the way there appeared from the north a great iland, which the captiues that were taken in Hispaniola, called Madanino, or Matinino,Matinino an Ilande of wo∣men. affirming it to be inhabited only with women, to whō the Canibales haue accesse at certayne tymes of the yeere, as in olde tyme the Thracians had to the Amazones in the ilande of Lesbos: the men chyldren they sende to theyr fathers, but the women they keepe with them
selues. They haue great and strong caues or dennes in the grounde, to the whiche they flee for safgarde if any men resorte vnto them at any other tyme then is appoynted, and there de∣fende them selues with bowes and arrowes, agaynst the violence of suche as attempte to inuade them. They coulde not at this tyme approche to this ilande, by reason of the North northeast wynde, which blewe so vehemently from the same, wheras they nowe folowed the East southeaste. After they departed from Madanino, and sayled by the space of .xl. myles, they passed not farre from an other ilande which the captyues sayde to be verye populus, and replenyshed with al thynges necessarie for the life of man.The Ilandes of Mons Ser∣ratus. Huntyng for men. This they called Mons Serratus, because it was full of mountaynes. The captyues further declared, that the Cani∣bales are woont at some time to goe from theyr owne coastes aboue a thousande myles to hunt for men. The day folowing, they sawe an other ilande, the whiche because it was rounde, they called Sancta Maria Rotunda.Sancta Maria Rotunda. The next day, they founde an other, whiche they called S. Martini, whiche they let passe also,Sanctus Mar∣tinus. because they had no leasure to arrye. Lykewyse the thirde daye they espied an other, whose Diametral syde, extendyng from the Easte to the west,Sancta Maria Antiqua. they iudged to be a hundred & fyftie myle. They affirme all these ilandes to be maruelous fayre and fruite∣full: This last, they called Sancta Maria Antiqua. Saylyng for∣warde, and leauyng many other ilandes, after they had say∣led about fourtie myles, they chaunced vpon an other, much byg∣ger then any of the rest, which thinhabitans call Ay Ay, but they named it Insula crucis:Insula crucis, an Ilande of the Canibales. Here they cast anker to fetche freshe water. The Admiral also commaunded .xxx. men to goe a lande out of his owne shyp, and to search the ilande: Here they founde foure dogges on the shore.The Canibales are expert Ar∣chers. The Inhabitants are Canibales, and maruelous experte in shooting, as wel women as men, and vse to infect their arrowes with poyson. When they had taried there two dayes, they sawe a farre of a Canoa, in the whiche were eight men, and as many women, hauyng with them bowes and arrowes.Arrowes in∣ected with enime. They fiercely assayled our men without all feare, and hurt some of them with theyr venemous arrowes. Among these there was a certayne woman, to whom the other gaue reuerence, and obeyed as though she were theyr queene. Her sonne wayted vppon her, beyng a young man, strongly
made, of terrible and frownyng countenance, and a Lions face. Our men, leaste they shoulde take the more hurte by beyng wounded a farre of, thought it beste to ioyne with them.A conflict with the Canibales. Ther∣fore with al speede, setting forward with their ores the brigandine in whiche they were sette alande, they ouerturned their Canoa with a great violence, whiche being ouerwhelmed, they notwith∣standing, as wel the women as the men, swymming, caste theyr dartes at our men thicke and threefolde. At the length, gea∣theryng them selues togeather vpon a rocke couered with the water, they fought manfully vntyll they were ouercome and ta∣ken, one beyng slayne, and the queenes sonne sore wounded. When they were brought into the Admirals shippe, they dyd no more put of their fiercenes and cruel countenaunces, then do the Lions of Lybia when they perceiue them selues to be bounde in chaynes. There is no man able to beholde them,The fiercenesse & terrible coun∣tenance of the Canibales. but he shall feele his bowels grate with a certayne horrour, nature hath endued them with so terrible menacing and cruell aspect. This coniecture I make of mee selfe, & other which oftentymes went with me to see them at Methymna Campi: but nowe to returne to the voyage. Proceeding thus further and further,Methymna Campi. more then fyue hundred myles, fyrste towarde the west southwest, then towarde the southwest, and at the length towarde the west northwest, they entred into a mayne large sea, hauyng in it in∣numerable ilandes, marueylously dyfferyng one from another,Innumerable Ilandes. for some of them were very fruitefull, and full of hearbes and trees, other some, very drye, barren, and rough, with high roc∣kye mountaynes of stone, whereof some were of bryght blewe, or asurine colour, and other glysteryng whyte: wherefore they supposed them, by good reason,The mynes of mettals & pre∣cious stones. to be the mnes of mettalles and precious stones: but the roughnesse of the sea, and multitude of ilandes standyng so thycke togeather, hyndered them so, that they coulde cast no anker, lest the bigger vesselles shoulde runne vppon the rockes: therefore they deferred the searchyng of these ilandes vntyll another tyme: they were so manye, and stoode so thycke, that they coulde not number them, yet the smaller vesselles whiche drewe no great deapth, entred among them, and numbred fourtie and syxe ilandes, but the bygger vessels kept aloofe in the mayne sea▪ for feare of the rockes.
They call the sea where this multitude of ilandes are situate, Archipelagus.The sea called Archipelagus. From this tracte proceding forward, in the midde way there lyeth an ilande whiche thinhabitantes call Burichina, or Buchena:Insula. S. Io∣hannes or Bu∣chena. but they named it Insula. S. Iohannis. Dyuers of them whom we had delyuered from the Canibales, sayde that they were borne in this ilande, affirming it to be verye populous and frutefull, hauing also many faire wooddes and hauens. Ther is deadly hatred and continual battayle betwene them and the Canibales. They haue no boates to passe from their owne coastes to the Canibales: but if it be their chaunce to ouercome them when they make incursion into theyr countrey to seeke their praye (as it sometyme happeneth, the fortune of warre being vn∣certayne) they serue them with like sause, requiting death for death.Death for death For one of them mangeleth an other in pieces, and roste them, and eate them euen before their eyes. They taryed not in this ilande: Yet in the west angle therof, a fewe of them went a lande for freshe water, and founde a great and high house after the maner of their buyldyng, hauing .xii. other of their vulgare cotages placed about the same, but were all lefte desolate, whe∣ther it were that they resorted to the mountaynes by reason of the heate which was that tyme of the yeere,he moun∣ynes are col∣er then the aynes. and to returne to the playne when the ayre waxeth coulder, or els for feare of the Ca∣nibales whiche make incursion into the ilande at certayne seasons. In al this ilande is only one kyng. The south syde hereof exten∣deth about two hundreth myles. Shortly after, they came to the ilande of Hispaniola, being distante from the firste ilande of the Canibales, fyue hundreth leagues. Here they founde al thinges out of order, and theyr felowes slayne whiche they lefte here at their fyrst voyage.rom Domi∣ca to Hispa∣ola fiue hun∣ed leagues. In the begynnyng of Hispaniola (hauing in it many regions and kyngdomes as we haue sayde) is the region of Xamana, whose kyng is named Guaccanarillus. This Guaccanarillus ioyned frendship with our men at the fyrst voyage,he Spaniar∣s left in the ande are yne. yng Guacca∣rillus re∣leth. and made a league with them: but in the absence of the Admirall, he rebelled, and was the cause of our mens destruction, although he dissimuled the same, and pretended frendship at the Admirales returne. As our men sayled on yet a litle further, they espied a long Canoa with many ores, in whiche was the brother of Guaccanarillus, with only one man wayting on hym.
He brought with him two images of golde, whiche he gaue the Admyrall in the name of his brother,Two images of golde. and tolde a tale in his language as concernyng the death of our men, as they prooued afterwarde, but at this tyme had no regarde to his communi∣cation for lacke of interpretours, whiche were eyther all dead, or escaped and stolne away when they drewe neare the ilandes. But of the ten, seuen dyed by chaunge of ayre and dyet. The in∣habitauntes of these ilandes haue ben euer so vsed to lyue at li∣bertie, in play and pastyme,Libertie and idlenesse. that they can hardly away with the yoke of seruitude, which they attempte to shake of by all meanes they may. And surely yf they had receiued our religion,A happie kinde of lyfe. I woulde thynke theyr lyfe moste happie of all men, yf they myght therewith enioye theyr auncient libertie. A fewe thinges contente them, hauyng no delyte in suche superfluities,Superfluitie. for the whiche in other places men take infinite paynes, and commit manye vnlawfull actes, and yet are neuer satisfied, whereas ma∣nye haue to muche, and none yenough.Many haue to much, and none yenough. But among these symple soules, a fewe clothes serue the naked: weightes and measures are not needeful to suche as can not skyl of craft and deceyte, and haue not the vse of pestiferous money, the seede of innumerable mischeeues: so that yf we shall not be ashamed to confesse the trueth, they seeme to liue in that golden worlde of the whiche olde wryters speake so muche,The golden worde. wherein men lyued symplye and innocentlye without enforcement of lawes, without quarrel∣lyng, iudges, and libelles, content only to satisfie nature, without further vexation for knowledge of thynges to come. Yet these naked people also are tormented with ambition, for ye desire they haue to enlarge their dominions: by reason wherof,Naked men troubled with ambition. they kepe war and destroy one another, from the whiche plague I suppose the golden worlde was not free. For euen then also, Cede, non cedam, that is, geue place, and I will not geue place,Geue place. had entred among men. But nowe to returne to the matter from which we haue di∣gressed. The admiral desyrous to know further of ye death of his men, sent for Guaccanerillus to come to him to his ship, dissimu∣lyng that he knewe any thyng of the matter. After that he came aboord shyp, saluting the Admiral and his company,The Admirall sendeth for the kyng. geuing also certayne golde to the captaynes and officers, turned hym to the women captiues, whiche not long before our men had delyuered
from the Canibales, and earnestly beholdyng one of them whom our men called Katherine, he spake gentely vnto her. And thus when he had seene and marueyled at the horses,No horses in the Ilandes. and such other thyngs as were in the shyppe, vnknowen to them, and had with a good grace and meryly asked leaue of the Admiral, he depar∣ted. Yet some there were whiche counsayled the Admirall to keepe hym styll, that yf they myght by any meanes prooue that he was consentyng to the death of our men, he myght be puny∣shed accordyngly. But the Admiral consyderyng that it was yet no time to incense the inhabitantes mindes to wrath,A tyme for all ynges. dismis∣sed him. The next day folowyng, the kynges brother resortyng to the shyppes, eyther in his owne name or in his brothers, sedu∣ced the women. For on the next nyght about mydnyght, this Katherine,A desperate aduenture of a woman. aswell to recouer her owne libertie, as also her fe∣lowes, being suborned thereto either by the king or his brothers promises, attempted a muche more difficult and daungerous ad∣uenture then dyd Cloelia of Rome, whiche beyng in hostage with other maydes to the king Porcena,Cloelia of Rome. deceiued her keepers, and rode ouer ye riuer Tiber, with the other virgins which were pled∣ges with her. For whereas they swamme ouer the riuer on hors∣backe, this Katherine with seuen other women, trustyng only to the strength of their owne armes, swam aboue three long miles, and that also at suche time as the sea was somewhat rough: for euen so farre of from the shore lay the shyppes at rode, as nygh as they coulde coniecture. But our men folowing them with the shipboates, by the same light seene on the shore, whereby the wo∣men were ledde, tooke three of them, supposing that Katherine with the other foure, went to Guaccanarillus: for in the spryng of the morning, certaine messengers being sent vnto him by the Admirall, had intelligence that he was fledde with al his familie and stuffe, and the women also, whiche thyng ministred further suspection that he was consentyng to the death of our men. Wherefore the Admirall sent foorth an armie of three hundred men, ouer the which he appoynted one Melchior to be captaine, wyllyng him to make diligent search to fynd out Guaccanarillus.Guaccanaril∣lus is sought. Melchior therefore with the smallest vesselles entryng into the countrey by the riuers,Melchior. and scouryng the shores, chaunced into certaine crooked goulfes, defended with fiue litle & steepe hilles,
supposing that it had byn the mouth of some great ryuer. He founde heare also a very commodious and safe hauen, and there∣fore named it Portus Regalis. They say that the enterance of this is so crooked and bending, that after the shyps are once within the same, whether they turne them to the left hand, or to the right, they can not perceyue where they came in, vntyl they returne to the mouth of the ryuer, although it be there so brode that three of the byggest vessels may sayle togeather on a froont. The sharpe and high hylles on the one syde and on the other, so brake the wynde, that they were vncertaine how to rule theyr sayles. In the myddle gulfe of the ryuer, there is a promontorie or point of the land with a pleasant groue, ful of Popingiayes and other byrdes,Popyngiayes and byrdes. which breede therin & sing very sweetly: They perceyued also that two ryuers of no smal largenesse fell into the hauen. Whyle they thus searched the lande betwene both, Melchior espied a high house a farre of, where supposing that Guaccanarillus had lyen hyd, he made towarde it: and as he was goyng, there met hym a man with a frownyng countenance, and a grymme looke, with a hundred men folowyng hym, armed with bowes and ar∣rowes, and long and sharpe staues lyke iauelynnes, made harde at the endes with fyre, who approching towardes our men, spake out aloud with a terrible voyce, saying that they were Taini (that is) noble men, and not Canibales:Taini. but when our men had geuen them signes of peace, they left both theyr weapons and fiercenesse. Thus geuyng ech of them certayne haukes bels,Haukes belles. they tooke it for so great a rewarde, that they desyred to enter bondes of neare frendshyp with vs, and feared not immediatly to submit themselues vnder our power, and resorted to our shyps with their presentes.A large house. They that measured the house (beyng made in round fourme) found it to be from syde to syde .xxxii. great pa∣ces, compassed about with xxx. other vulgare houses, hauyng in them many beames crosse ouer,Reedes of sun∣dry colours. & couered with reedes of sundry colours, wrethed & as it were weaued with marueilous art. Whē our men asked some of them where they might find Guaccanaril∣lus? They answered, that that region was none of his, but theyr kynges, beyng there present: Yet they sayde they supposed that Guaccanarillus was gone from the playne to the mountaynes.
Makyng therefore a brotherly league with this Cacicus (that is to say a kyng) they returned to the Admiral,Caccius. to make relation what they had seene and hearde: whereupon he sent foorth di∣uers other Centurians with theyr hundredes, to searche the countrey yet further:Hoiedus and Gorualanus. among whiche were Hoiedus and Goruala∣nus, noble young gentlemen, and of great courage. And as they went towarde the mountaynes to seeke Guaccanerillus, diuiding the mountaynes betweene them, one of them founde on the one syde thereof, foure ryuers fallyng from the same mountaynes, and the other founde three on the other syde.Gold in riuers allyng from mountaynes. In the sandes of al these riuers is founde great plentie of golde, whiche the inhabi∣tauntes of the same ilande whiche were with vs, geathered in this manner: makyng holes in the sande with theyr handes a Cubite deepe,The manner of gathering gold. and takyng vp sande with theyr left handes from the bottome of the same,Graynes of golde. they pycked out graynes of golde with theyr ryght handes without any more art or cunnyng, and so deliuered it to our men, who affirme that many of them thus geathered, were as bygge as tares or fytches. And I mee selfe sawe a masse of rude golde (that is to say, suche as was neuer moulten) lyke vnto suche stones as are founde in the bottomes of ryuers, weighyng niene ounces, whiche Hoieda hym selfe founde.A masse of rude gold weyghing ix. ounces. Beyng contented with these signes, they returned to the Admirall to certifie hym hereof. For the Admirall had com∣maunded vnder payne of punyshment, that they shoulde meddle no further then theyr commission: whiche was only, to searche the places with theyr signes. For the fame went that there was a certayne kyng of the mountaynes from whence those ryuers had theyr fall,Caunaboa▪ kyng of the house of golde. whom they cal Cacicus Caunaboa, that is, the lord of the house of golde, for they cal a house Boa, golde, Cauni, and a kyng or lorde Cacicus, as we haue sayde before. They affirme that there can no where be founde better fyshe,Holsome wa∣ter, and plen∣tie of fyshe. nor of more plea∣sant taste, or more holsome then in these riuers: also the waters of the same to be moste holsome to drynke. Melchior him selfe tolde me, that in the moneth of December, the dayes & nyghtes be of equal length among the Canibales:The day and nyght of equall length in De∣cember. but the sphere or cir∣cles of the heauen agreeth not thereunto, albeit that in the same moneth, some byrdes make theyr nestes, and some haue alredye hatched theyr egges by reason of the heate,Byrdes breede in December. beyng rather conti∣nuall
then extreme. He tolde me also when I questioned with him as concerning ye eleuation of the pole frō the horizontal line,The eleuation of the pole. The starres are called guardens of the pole. that al the starres called Plastrum or charles wayne, are hyd vn∣der the North pole to the Canibales. And surely there returned none from thence at this vioage, to whom there is more credit to be geuen, then to this man. But if he had byn skilfull in Astro∣nomie, he shoulde haue sayde that the day was almoste equall with the night: For in no place towarde the stay of the sonne (called Solsticium) can the night be equall with the day. And as for them, they neuer came vnder the Equinoctial,The Equinoc∣tial line. forasmuch as they had euer the North pole theyr guyde, and euer eleuate in sight aboue the Horizontal. Thus haue I briefely written vnto your honour, as muche as I thought sufficient at this tyme, and shall shortly hereafter (by Gods fauoure) wryte vnto you more largely of such matters as shalbe dayly better knowen. For the Admiral hym selfe (whom I vse famyerly as my very frende) hath promised me by his letters, that he wyl geue me knowledge of al such thinges as shall chaunce. He hath nowe chosen a strong place where he may build a citie, neare vnto a cōmodious hauen, and hath alredy buylded many houses, and a chapel,A chappell and priestes. in the which (as in a newe worlde heretofore voyde of all religion) God is dayly serued with .xiii. priestes, accordyng to the maner of our churches. When the tyme nowe approched that he promysed to sende to the king and queene, and hauyng prosperous winde for that purpose, sent backe the .xii. Carauelles, wherof we made mention before: which was no smal hynderance and greefe vnto hym, especially consyderyng the death of his men whom he lefte in the ilande at the fyrst voyage, wherby we are yet ignorant of many places and other secretes, wherof we myght otherwyse haue had further knowledge: but as tyme shall reueale them a∣gayne, so wyll I aduertyse you of the same. And that you may the better knowe by conference had with the Apothecaries and marchaunt strangers Sirophenicians, what this Regions beare,Marchantes Syropheni∣cians. & how hot theyr ground is, I haue sent you all kyndes of graines, with the barke and inner partes of that tree whiche they suppose to be the Cinamome tree.The Cina∣mome tree. And yf it be your pleasure to taste ey∣ther of the graynes, or of the smal seedes, the whiche you shoulde perceaue to haue fallen from these graynes, or of the wood it
selfe, touch them fyrst softly, moouyng them to your lyppes, for although they be not hurtfull, yet for theyr excesse of heate, they are sharpe, and byte the tongue yf they remayne any while thereon: but yf the tongue be blystered by tastyng of them, the same is taken away by drynkyng of water. Of the corne also whereof they make theyr bread, this brynger shall deliuer some graynes to your lordshyp, both whyte and blacke, and therwith also a trunke of the tree of Aloes, the whiche yf you cut in peeces, you shall feele a sweete sauour to proceede from the same.Xiloaloes, or Lignum Aloes. Thus fare you hartily well, from the Court of Methymna Campi, the thyrde day before the Calendes of May. Anno Dom. 1494. The thyrde booke of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinall of Aragonie, and Neuiewe to the kyng. YOu desyre that foolyshe Phaeton shoulde a∣gayne rule the chariots of the Sunne, and contende to drawe sweete licours out of the harde flynt, wheras you require me to dis∣cribe vnto you the newe world, found in the west by the good fortune and gouernaunce of the Catholique princes Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, your Uncle and Aunte, shewyng me also the letters of kyng Frederike your Uncle, written to me in that behalfe: But syth you haue layde this burden on my backe, in whose power it is to commaunde me to take vppon me more then I am well able, ye both shall receiue this precious stone rudely closed in lead after my manner of workemanshyp. Wherefore, when you shal perceiue the learned sort frendly, the malitious enuiously, and the backbyters furiously, to bende theyr slaunderous dartes agaynst our fayre Nimphes of the Ocean, you shall freely protest in howe short tyme, and in the myddest of what troubles and ca∣lamities you haue enforced me to wryte of the same. Thus fare you wel, from Granata the nienth day before the Calendes of May. We haue declared in the booke herebefore, how the Admiral passed by the coastes of the Canibales,Hispaniola. to the ilande of Hispaniola
with his whole nauie: But nowe we entende further to shewe what he founde as concernyng the nature of this ilande, after that he had better searched the secretes of the same: Lykewyse of the ilande of Cuba neare vnto it, whiche he supposed to be the fyrme lande. Hispaniola therefore (whiche he affirmeth to be Ophir, whereof we reade in the thyrde booke of the kynges) is of latitude fyue south degrees,Ophir, whither Solomons shyps sayled for Golde. hauyng the north pole eleuate on the north syde .xxvii. degrees, and on the south syde (as they say) xxii. degrees, it reacheth in length from East to West, se∣uen hundred and fourescore myles, it is distant from the ilandes of Gades (called Cales) xlix. degrees, and more, as some say: the fourme of the ilande resembleth the leaffe of a Chesnutte tree. Upon a hygh hyll on the North syde of the ilande, he buylded a citie, because this place was most apt for that purpose,Isabella. by rea∣son of a myne of stones whiche was neare vnto the same, ser∣uyng well both to buylde with, and also to make Lyme: at the bottome of this hyll, is there a great playne of threescore myles in length, and in breadth somewhere .xii. somewhere .xx. myles where it is brodest, & sixe myles where it is narrowest: through this playne runne diuers fayre ryuers of wholsome waters, but the greatest of them, whiche is nauigable, falleth into the hauen of the citie for the space of halfe a furlong: howe fertile and fruit∣ful this valley is, you shal vnderstande by these thynges whiche folowe. On the shore of this ryuer, they haue lymitted and en∣closed certayne ground, to make gardens and orchyardes,A token of mar∣ueilous fruite∣fulnesse. in the whiche al kynde of bygger hearbes, as radishe, letuse, coleworts, borage, & suche other, waxe rype within .xvi dayes after the seede is sowen, lykewyse Melones, Gourdes, Cucumers,Hearbes greene al the whole yeere. and suche other, within the space of .xxxvi. dayes, these garden hearbes they haue freshe & greene al the whole yeere. Also the rootes of the canes or reedes of the licour whereof suger is made,Suger reedes, Plantes and vines. growe a cubite hygh within the space of .xv. dayes, but the licour is not yet hardened. The lyke they affirme of plantes or shroudes of young vines, and that they haue the seconde yeere geathered rype and sweete grapes of the same: but by reason of to muche rankenesse they beare but fewe clusters. Furthermore, a man of the countrey sowed a lytle Wheate about the Calendes of Februarye,Corne & grayne ripe twyse a yeere. and brought with hym to the citie an handful
of the rype eares of the same the thyrde day before the calendes of Aprill, which was that yeere the vigile of the Resurrection of our Lord. Also, al kyndes of pulse, as beanes, peason, fytches, tares, & such other, are rype twyse in the yeere, as al they whiche come from thence affirme with one voyce, yet the grounde is not vniuersally apte to beare wheate. In the meane tyme whyle these thinges were doing, the Admirall sent out a com∣panye of .xxx. men to searche the Region of Cipanga, otherwyse called Cibana.The region of Cipanga, or Cibana. This Region is full of mountaynes and rockes: and in the myddle backe of the whole ilande is great plentie of golde.Golde. When they that went to searche the region were returned, they reported maruelous thinges as touching the great ryches of this Region. From these mountaynes, descende foure great ryuers, which by the maruelous industrye of nature, diuideth the whole ilande into foure partes, in maner equal, ouer∣spreading & wateryng the whole ilande with their branches. Of these foure ryuers, the one reacheth towarde the Easte, this the inhabitantes call Iunna: another towarde the weste, and is called Attibunicus: the thirde toward the North, named Iachem: the laste reacheth into the South, and is called Naiba. The day before the Ides of Marche, the Admirall him selfe, with al his horsemen, and foure hundred footemen, marched directly to∣warde the South syde of the golden Region. Thus passing ouer the ryuer, the playne, and the mountayne which enuironed the other syde of the playne,The golden region of Cibana. he chaunced vppon an other vale, with a ryuer much bygger then the fyrste, & many other meane ryuers running through. When he had also conueighed his armye ouer the ryuer, and passed the seconde vale, which was in no part in∣feriour to the fyrst, he made away through the thirde mountaine, where was no passage before, and descended into another vale, whiche was nowe the begynnyng of Cibana.The vale of Cibana. Through this also runne many fluddes and ryuers out of euery hyll, and in the sandes of them all is founde great plentie of golde. And when he had nowe entred threescore and twelue myles into the golden Region from the citie, he entended to buylde a fortresse vppon the toppe of a hyll, standyng by ye shore of a certayne great ryuer, that he myght the better and more safelye searche the se∣cretes of the inner partes of the Region: this he called the
fortresse of saint Thomas, the whiche in the meane tyme whyle he was buyldyng,Golde for haukes bels. the inhabitauntes beyng desyrous of haukes belles, and other of our thinges, resorted dayly thyther, to whom the Admirall declared, that yf they woulde bryng golde, they shoulde haue whatsoeuer they woulde aske. Foorthwith turning theyr backes, and runnyng to the shore of the next riuer, they returned in a shorte tyme, bryngyng with them theyr handes ful of golde. Amongst all other, there came an olde man, bryngyng with him two pibble stones of golde, weyghyng an ounce,Graynes and pibble stones of golde. desy∣ryng them to geue hym a bell for the same: who when he sawe our men marueyle at the bygnesse thereof, he made signes that they were but small and of no value in respecte of some that he had seene, and takyng in his hande foure stones, the least wher∣of was as bigge as a Walnut, and the biggest as bigge as an Orange, he sayd that there was founde peeces of golde so bygge in his countrey, beyng but halfe a dayes iourney from thence, and that they had no regarde to the geatheryng thereof, wherby we perceiued that they passe not muche for golde,They passe not for golde, in that it is golde onely but. &c. inasmuche as it is golde only, but so farre esteeme it, as the hande of the Arti∣ficer hath fashioned it in any comely fourme. For who dooth greatly esteeme rough marble, or vnwrought Iuorie? but if they be wrought with the cunning hande of Phidias or Praxiteles, and shaped to the similitude of ye fayre Nimphes or Faires of the sea (called Nereiades) or the Fayres of the wooddes (called Hama∣driades) they shal neuer lacke byers. Besyde this olde man, there came also diuers other, bryngyng with them pybble stones of golde, weighing .x. or .xii. drammes, & feared not to confesse, that in ye place where they geathered that gold, there were found som∣tyme stones of golde as bygge as the head of a childe.Stones of golde as big as the head of a childe. When he had taried here a few dayes, he sent one Luxanus, a noble yong gentleman, with a few armed men, to search al the partes of this region: who at his returne, reported that the inhabitants shewed him greater thynges then we haue spoken of here before, but he dyd openly declare nothyng thereof, whiche they thought was done by the Admirals commaundement. They haue woods ful of certayne spyces, but not such as we commonly vse: these they geather euen as they do golde, that is,Spices. as muche as wyl serue for their purpose, euery man for himselfe, to exchange the same with
the inhabitauntes of other countreys adioyning to them, for such thynges as they lacke, as dyshes, pottes, stooles, and such other necessaries. As Luxanus returned to the Admirall (whiche was about the Ides of Marche) he founde in the woods certaine wilde vines,Wilde vines of plesaunte taste. rype, and of pleasant taste, but the inhabitauntes passe not on them. This region, though it be full of stones and rockes (and is therefore called Cibana, whiche is as muche to say as a stone) yet it is wel replenyshed with trees and pastures, yea they constantly affirme,Fruitful moun∣taynes. that yf ye grasse of these mountaynes be cutte, it groweth agayne within the space of foure dayes, hygher then wheate. And forasmuche as many showres of rayne doo fall in this region, whereof the ryuers and flooddes haue theyr encrease,Golde in the lande of ry∣uers falling from the mountaynes. in euery of the whiche golde is founde myxt with sande in all places, they iudge that the golde is dryuen from the mountaynes, by the vehement course of the streames whiche fall from the same, and runne into the ryuers. The people of this region are geuen to idlenesse and play, for suche as inhabite the mountaynes,Libertie and idlenes. The moun∣taynes are colde. syt quakyng for colde in the Wynter season, and had rather to wander vp and downe idelly, then take the paynes to make them apparell, where as they haue wooddes full of Gossampine cotton: but suche as dwell in the valles or playnes, feele no colde in Wynter. When the Admirall had thus sear∣ched the beginning of the region of Cibana, he repayred to Isabel∣la (for so he named the citie) where, leauyng the gouernaunce of the Ilande with his deputies, he prepared hym selfe to search further the limittes of the Ilande of Cuba or Iohanna, whiche he yet doubted to be the firme lande,The ilande of Cuba. and distant from Hispaniola only .lxx. myles. This dyd he with more speedye expedition, callyng to remembraunce the kynges commaundement, who wylled hym fyrst with al celeritie, to ouerrunne the coastes of the new Ilandes,Least any other prince. &c. lest any other prince shoulde in the meane time at∣tempt to inuade the same, for the kyng of Portugale affirmed that it parteyned only to him to discouer these vnknowen landes: but the bishop of Rome,Discention betweene the Portiugales and Spani∣ardes. Alexander the sixt, to auoyde the cause of this dissention, graunted to the kyng of Spayne by the aucthori∣tie of his leaden bulles, that no other prince shoulde be so bolde, as to make any voyages to any of these vnknowen regions, ly∣ing without the precinct of a direct lyne drawen from the North
to the South a hundred leagues Westwarde, without the para∣lels of the Ilandes called Capud Viride, or Cabuerde,The ilandes of cobouerde or Hesperides. whiche we thinke to be those that in olde tyme were called Hesperides: these parteyne to the kyng of Portugale, and from these his Pylotes, whiche do yeerely searche newe coastes and regions, directe theyr course to the East, saylyng euer towarde the left hande by the backe of Aphrike, and the seas of the Ethiopians: neyther to this day had the Portugales at any tyme sayled Southwarde or Westwarde from the Ilandes of Cabouerde.The Portu∣gales vages. Preparing ther∣fore three shyppes, he made haste towarde the Ilande of Iobanna or Cuba, whyther he came in short space, and named the poynt therof, where he fyrste arryued, Alpha and O, that is, the fyrste and the last: for he supposed that there had ben the ende of our East, because the sonne falleth there, and of the West, because it ryseth there. For it is apparant, that Westwarde, it is the be∣ginning of India beyonde the ryuer of Ganges, and Eastwarde,The ende of the easte and weste. the furthest ende of the same: whiche thyng is not contrary to reason, forasmuche as the Cosmographers haue left the lymittes of India beyond Ganges vndetermined, where as also some were of opinion, that India was not farre from the coastes of Spaine,Note. India not far from Spaine. as we haue said before. Within the prospect of the beginnyng of Cuba, he founde a commodious hauen in the extreme angle of the Ilande of Hispaniola, for in this part the Ilande receiueth a great goulfe: this hauen he named Saint Nicholas porte,Sainte Nico∣las porte. be∣yng scarcely twentie leagues from Cuba. As he departed from hence, and sayled Westward by the South syde of Cuba, the fur∣ther that he went, so muche the more the sea seemed to be exten∣ded in breadth, and to bende towarde the South. On the South syde of Cuba, he founde an Ilande whiche the inhabitauntes call Iamaica, this he affirmeth to be longer & broder then the Iland of Scicile, hauyng in it only one mountaine, which on euery part,The iland of Iamaica. beginning from the sea, ryseth by litle and litle into the myddest of the Ilande, and that so playnely without roughnesse, that such as goe vp to the toppe of the same, can scarcely perceiue that they assende: This Ilande he affyrmeth to be very fruiteful and ful of people, aswel in thinner partes of the same, as by the shore,Quicke wit∣ted people. and that the inhabitantes are of quicker wytte then in the other Ilandes, and more expert Artificers, and warlyke men: For
in many places where he woulde haue aryued, they came ar∣med against him, and forbode him with threatnyng wordes: but beyng ouercome, they made a league of frendshyp with hym. Thus departing from Iamaica,The compas∣sing of the earth. he sayled toward the West, with a prosperous wynde, for the space of threescore and tenne dayes, thynking that he had passed so farre by the compasse of the earth being vnderneath vs,Aurea Cher∣sonesus, or Malaccha. that he had ben neare vnto Aurea Chersone∣sus (nowe called Malaccha) in our east India, beyonde the be∣gynnyng of Persides: for he playnely beleeued that he had left on∣ly two of the twelue houres of the sunne,A secreate of Astronomie. which were vnknowen to vs, for the olde wryters haue left halfe the course of the sunne vntouched, where as they haue but only discussed that superficial parte of the earth whiche lyeth betweene the Ilandes of Gades, and the ryuer of Ganges,The riuer of Ganges. or at the vttermost, to Aurea Chersone∣sus. In this Nauigation, he chaunced on many furious seas, running with a fall as it had ben the streames of floods, also many whyrlepooles,Daungerous streightes by reason of ma∣ny Ilandes. and shelfes, with many other dangers, and strayghtes, by reason of the multitude of ilandes whiche lay on euery syde. But not regardyng al these perylles, he determined to proceede, vntil he had certaine knowledge whether Cuba were an ilande, or firme lande. Thus he sayled forward, coastyng euer by the shore toward the West for the space of .CC.xxii. leagues, that is, about a thousande and three hundred myles, and gaue names to seuen hundred ilandes by the way, leauyng also on the left hande (as he feared not to report) three thousande here and there. But let vs nowe returne to suche thynges as he founde woorthy to be noted in this nauigation. Saylyng therefore by the syde of Cuba, and searchyng the nature of the places, he espy∣ed not farre from Alpha and O a large hauen,A large hauen. of capacitie to har∣borowe many shyppes, whose entraunce is bendyng, beyng in∣closed on both sydes with capes or poyntes whiche receiue the water: this hauen is large within, and of exceedyng deapth. Saylyng by the shore of this porte, he sawe not farre from the same, two cotages, couered with reedes, and in many places fyre kyndled. Here he sent certayne armed men out of the shyppes to the cotages, where they founde neyther man nor woman, but rostemeate yenough,Rosted fishe and serpents of viii. foote longe. for they founde certayne spyttes of wood lying at the fyre, hauyng fyshe on them about a hundred
pounde weight, and two serpentes of eyght foote long apeece: whereat marueylyng, and lookyng about if they could espye any of the inhabitauntes, and that none appeared in syght (for they fledde al to the mountaynes at the commyng of our men) they fel to theyr meate, and ate the fyshe taken with other mens tra∣uayle, but they absteyned from the serpentes, which they affirme to differ nothing from the Crocodiles of Egypt,Crocodiles of Egipte. but only in byg∣nesse: for (as Plinie sayth) Crocodiles haue sometymes ben found of .xviii. cubits long, but of these the biggest were but of eyght foote. Thus being wel refreshed, they entred into the next wood, where they found many of the same kynde of serpentes, hanging vpon boughes of trees, of the whiche, some had theyr mouthes tyed with strynges, and some theyr teeth taken out. And as they searched the places neare vnto the hauen, they sawe about .lxx. men in the top of a hygh rocke, whiche fled as soone as they had espyed our men, who by signes and tokens of peace callyng them agayne, there was one which came neare them, and stoode on the toppe of a rocke, seemyng as though he were yet feare∣full: but the Admiral sent one Didacus to hym, a man of the same countrey, whom he had at his fyrste voyage taken in the ilande of Guanahaini, being neare vnto Cuba, wyllyng hym to come neare, and not to be afraide. When he hearde Didacus speake to hym in his owne tongue, he came boldly to hym, and shortly af∣ter resorted to his company, perswading them to come without al feare. After this message was done, there dessended from the rockes to the shyps, about threescore and ten of the inhabi∣tantes, profering frendship and gentlenesse to our men: whiche the Admiral accepted thankfully, and gaue them diuers rewar∣des, and that the rather, for that he had intelligence by Didacus the interpreter, that they were the kynges fyshers,The kinges fishers. sent of theyr lorde to take fyshe agaynst a solemne feast whiche he prepared for another kyng. And whereas the Admiralles men had eaten the fyshe whiche they lefte at the fyre, they were the gladder therof, because they had lefte the serpentes: for there is nothing among theyr delicate dysshes, that they esteeme so muche as these serpentes, in so muche that it is no more lawfull for common people to eate of them,Serpentes esteemed for delicate mea then Peacockes or Phe∣santes among vs: as for the fyshes, they doubted not to take
as many more the same nyght. Beyng asked why they fyrste rosted the fyshe whiche they entended to beare to theyr kyng? they answeared, that they myght be the fresher and vncorrupted. Thus ioynyng handes for a token of further frendshyp, euerye man resorted to his owne. The Admirall went forwarde as he had appoynted, folowyng the fallyng of the sunne from the be∣ginning of Cuba, called Alpha and O: the shores or sea bankes euen vnto this hauen, albeit they be full of trees, yet are they rough with mountaines:Blossomes & fruites both at one time. of these trees, some were full of blos∣somes and flowres, and other laden with fruites. Beyonde the hauen, the lande is more fertile and populus, whose inhabitantes are more gentle, and more desyrous of our thynges: for as soone as they had espied our shyppes, they flocked all to the shore, bryngyng with them suche bread as they are accustomed to eate, and gourdes ful of water, offeryng them vnto our men, and fur∣ther, desyryng them to come alande. In al these Ilandes is a cer∣taine kinde of trees as bigge as Elmes,Trees which beare gourds. whiche beare Gourdes in the steade of fruites, these they vse only for drynkyng pottes, and to fetche water in, but not for meate, for the inner substance of them is sowrer then gall, and the barke as harde as any shell. At the Ides of May, the watchmen lookyng out of the top castle of the shyp, towarde the South, sawe a multitude of Ilandes standyng thycke togeather,A multitude of Ilandes. being al wel replenished with trees, grasse, and hearbes, and well inhabited: in the shore of the conti∣nent, he chaunced into a nauigable riuer, whose water was so hot,Hotte water. that no man might endure to abyde his hande therein anye time. The day folowing, espying a farre of a Canoa of fyshermen of the inhabitantes, fearyng lest they shoulde flee at the syght of our men, he commaunded certayne to assayle them priuily with the ship boates: but they fearing nothing, taryed the commyng of our men. Nowe shall you heare a newe kynde of fyshyng. Lyke as we with Greyhoundes do hunt Hares in the playne feeldes,A straunge kinde of fis∣shing. so doo they, as it were with a hunting fishe, take other fishes: this fyshe was of shape or fourme vnknowen vnto vs, but the bodye thereof not muche vnlyke a great yeele, hauyng on the hynder parte of the head a very tough skynne, lyke vnto a great bagge or purse: this fyshe is tyed by the syde of the boate with a corde, let downe so farre into the water, that the fishe
may lye close hid by the keele or bottome of the same, for she may in no case abyde the syght of the ayre. Thus when they espye any great fyshe, or Tortoyse (wherof there is great abundance,Abundance of Tortoyses. byg∣ger then great targettes) they let the corde at length, but when she feeleth her selfe loosed, she inuadeth the fyshe or Tortoyse as swiftly as an arrowe, and where she hath once fastened her holde, she casteth the purse of skynne, whereof we spake before, and by drawyng the same togeather, so graspeleth her pray, that no mans strength is suffycient to vnloose the same, excepte by lytle and lytle drawyng the lyne, she be lyfted somwhat aboue the brymme of the water, for then, as sone as she seeth the bright∣nesse of the ayre, she letteth goe her holde. The praye therfore beyng nowe drawen nere to the brymme of the water, there leapeth sodenly out of the boate into the sea,Fisher men. so manye fyshers as may suffice to holde fast the praye, vntyll the rest of the company haue taken it into the boate. Whiche thyng doone, they loose so muche of the corde, that the huntyng fyshe may agayne returne to her place within the water, where by an other corde, they let downe to her a peece of the pray, as we vse to rewarde greyhoundes after they haue kylled theyr game. This fyshe, they cal Guaicanum, but our men cal it Reuersum. They gaue our men foure Tortoyses taken by this meanes,The fishe Guaicanum. and those of suche byggenesse, that they almost fylled theyr fyshyng boate: for these fyshes are esteemed among them for delycate meate. Our men recompensed them agayne with other rewardes, and so let them depart. Beyng asked of the compasse of that lande, they aunsweared that it had no ende westwarde. Most instantly they desyred the Admirall to come a lande,Humane people. or in his name to sende one with them to salute theyr Cazicus, (that is) their kyng, af∣firmyng that he woulde geue our men many presentes, yf they would goe to hym. But the Admirall, lest he shoulde be hindered of the voyage whiche he had begunne, refused to goe with them. Then they desyred to knowe his name, and tolde our men lyke∣wise the name of theyr king. Thus sayling on yet further euer towarde the West, within fewe dayes he came nere vnto a cer∣tayne excedyng high mountayne,A mountayne fruitfull and well inhabited wel inhabyted by reason of the great fertilitie of the same. Thinhabitauntes of this mountaine, brought to our shyp, bread, gossampine cotton, cunnies, & sundry
kyndes of wyldfoule, demaundyng relygiously of thinterpre∣tours, if this nation descended not from heauen. The kyng of this people, and dyuers other sage men that stoode by him, infor∣med hym that that lande was no Ilande. Shortly after, entring into one of the ilandes being on the lefte hande of this lande, they founde no body therin, for they fledde al at the comming of our men: Yet founde they there foure dogges of maruelous de∣formed shape,Dogges of strange shape and dumme & suche as coulde not barke. This kynd of doggs, they eate as we do goates. Here is great plentie of geese, duckes, and hearons. Betwene these ilandes and the continent, he en∣tered into so narowe streyghtes, that he coulde scarsely turne backe the shyppes, and these also so shalowe, that the keele of the shyppes somtyme rased on the sandes.white and thicke water. The water of these strey∣ghtes, for the space of fourtie myles, was white and thycke, lyke vnto mylke, and as though meale had ben sparkeled throughout al that sea. And when they had at the length escaped these stray∣ghtes, and were nowe come into a mayne and large sea, and had sayled theron for the space of fourescore myles, they espyed an o∣ther exceding hygh mountayne, whyther the Admirall resorted to store his shyppes with freshe water and fuel. Heare among certayne wooddes of Date trees,Wooddes of ate trees. & pyneapple trees of excedyng height, he founde two natiue sprynges of freshe water. In the meane tyme, whyle the woodde was cuttyng, and the barrelles fyllyng, one of our archers went into the wood to hunt, where he espyed a certayne man with a whyte vesture,Men appare∣d like white yers. so lyke a fryer of thorder of saynt Marye of Mercedis, that at the fyrste sight he supposed it had ben the Admirals priest, which he brought with hym, beyng a man of the same order: but two other folowed him immediatlye out of the same wooddes. Shortly after, he sawe a farre of a whole company of men clothed in apparel, being about xxx. in number.pparelled en. Then turning his backe, and crying out to his felowes, he made haste to the shyppes with all that he myght dryue. These apparelled men, made sygnes and tokens to hym to tary, and not to be afrayd, but that notwithstandyng he ceassed not to flee. The Admirall beyng aduertysed hereof, and not a lytle reioycyng that he had founde a ciuile people, in∣continently sent foorth armed men, with commaundement that yf neede should so requyre, they shoulde enter fourtie myles
into the ilande, vntyl they myght fynde eyther those apparelled men, or other inhabitauntes of that countrey. When they had passed ouer the wood, they came into a great playne ful of grasse and hearbes, in whiche appeared no token of any pathway. Here attemptyng to goe through the grasse and hearbes, they were so entangled and bewrapt therein, that they were scarselye able to passe a myle, the grasse beyng there lytle lower then our ripe corne: beyng therefore weeryed, they were enforced to returne agayne, finding no pathway. The day folowyng he sent foorth xxv. armed men another way, commaundyng them to make dili∣gent search and inquisition what manner of people inhabited the lande: Who departyng, when they had found, not farre from the sea side, certayne steps of wyld beastes, of the which they suspec∣ted some to be of Lions feete, beyng strycken with feare, retur∣turned backe agayne. As they came, they founde a wood in the whiche were many natiue vines, here and there creepyng about hygh trees,Natiue vines. Trees bearyng spices & sweete fruites. with many other trees bearyng aromatical fruites and spyces. Of these vines they brought with them into Spaine many clusters of grapes, very ponderous, and ful of licour: but of the other fruites they brought none, because they putrified by the way in the shyp, & were cast into the sea. They say also that in the landes or medowes of those wooddes, they sawe flockes of great Cranes, twyse as bygge as ours. As he went forward, and turned his sayles towarde certayne other mountaynes, he espied two cotages on the shore, in the whiche he sawe only one man, who being brought to the shippe, signified with head, fyngers, and by al other signes that he coulde deuise, that the lande whiche lay beyonde those mountaynes was very full of people: and as the Admiral drew neare the shore of the same, there met him cer∣tayne Canoas, hauyng in them many people of the countrey, who made signes and tokens of peace and frendshyp. But here Dida∣cus the interpretour,Diuers lan∣guages in the Ilande of Cuba. which vnderstoode the language of thinha∣bitantes of the beginning of Cuba, vnderstode not them one whit, whereby they consydered that in sundry prouinces of Cuba, were sundry languages. He had also intelligence, that in the inlande of this region was a king of great power, & accustomed to weare apparell: he sayde that all the tracte of this shore was drow∣ned with water, and ful of mudde, besette with manye trees,
after the maner of our maryshes: Yet whereas in this place they went alande for freshe water,Pearles in shel¦fyshes. they founde many of the shel∣fyshes in the whiche pearles are geathered. But that coulde not cause the Admirall to tracte the tyme there, entending at this viage, only to proue howe many landes & seas he could discouer according to the kinges commaundement. As they yet proceded forwarde, they sawe here and there, al the way along by the shore, a great smoke rysing, vntyll they came to an other mountayne foure score myles distant, there was no rocke or hyll that coulde be seene, but the same was all of a smoke. But whether these fyres were made by thinhabitantes for their necessary busynes, or (as we are wont to sette beacons on fyre when we suspecte thapproche of our enimies) thereby to geue warning to theyr neyghbours to be in a redines, & geather togeather, if per∣haps our men shoulde attempt any thyng against them, or other∣wyse as (seemeth most lykely) to cal them togeather, as to a won∣der, to beholde our shyppes, they knowe yet no certentie. In this tracte, the shores bended somtyme towarde the South, and sometyme towarde the West and west southwest, and the sea was euerye where entangled with Ilandes,The sea entan∣gled with I∣landes. by reason whereof, the keeles of the shyppes often times rased the sandes for shalow∣nesse of the water: So that the shyppes being very sore bruised and appayred, the sayles, cables, and other tackelinges, in maner rotten, and the vytailes (especially the biskette bread) corrupted by takyng water at the ryftes euyll closed, the Admirall was en∣forced to turne backe agayne: This laste poynte where he touched of Cuba (not yet being knowen to be an ilande) he called Euangelista. Thus turning his sayles towarde other ilandes ly∣ing not farre from the supposed continent, he chaunced into a mayne sea, where was suche a multitude of great Tortoyses, that somtyme they stayed the shyppes:A multitude of great Tortoy∣ses. A gulfe of white water. Not long after, he entred into a gulfe of whyte water, lyke vnto that wherof we spake before. At the length, fearing the shelfes of the ilands, he returned to the shore of Cuba by the same way whiche he came. Here a multitude of thinhabitantes, as well women as men, resorted to hym with cheerefull countenances, and with feare, bringyng with them popingayes, bread, water, and cunnyes, but especially stocke doues, much bygger then ours, which he affirmeth, in sauour and
taste, to be muche more pleasaunt then our partryches. Where∣fore where as in eating of them he perceiued a certayne sauoure of spyce to proceede from them, he commaunded the croppe to be opened of suche as were newely kylled, and founde the same full of sweete spyces, whiche he argued to be the cause of theyr strange taste: For it standeth with good reason, that the fleshe of beastes, shoulde drawe the nature and qualitie of theyr ac∣customed nouryshment. As the Admirall harde masse on the shore, there came towarde hym a certayne gouernoure, a man of foure score yeeres of age, and of great grauitie,The humanitie of a reuerende olde gouernour although he were naked sauing his pryuie partes. He had a great trayne of men wayting on hym. All the whyle the prieste was at masse, he shewed him selfe very humble, and gaue reuerent attendance, with graue and demure countenaunce. When the masse was ended, he presented to the Admirall a baskette of the fruites of his countrey, delyuering the same with his owne handes. When the Admirall had gentelly entertayned him, desyring leaue to speake, he made an oration in the presence of Didacus the inter∣preter, to this effect. I haue byn aduertised (most mighty prince) that you haue of late with great power subdued many lands and Regions, hytherto vnknowen to you,An oration of the naked go∣uernour. and haue brought no litle feare vppon all the people and inhabitauntes of the same: the whiche your good fortune, you shal beare with lesse insolencie, if you remember that the soules of men haue two iourneyes after they are departed from this body: The one, foule and darke,Theyr opinion of the soule of man. pre∣pared for suche as are iniurious and cruell to mankynde: the other, pleasaunt and delectable, ordeyned for them which in theyr lyfe tyme loued peace and quietnes. If therfore you acknowledge your selfe to be mortall, and consider that euery man shal receiue condigne rewarde or punyshement for suche thynges as he hath done in this life, you wyl wrongfully hurte no man. When he had saide these wordes and other lyke, which were declared to the Admirall by the interpreter, he marueyling at the iudgement of the naked olde man, answeared, that he was gladde to heare his opinion as touching the sundry iourneys and rewardes of soules departed from theyr bodyes, supposing that nother he, or any other of thinhabitantes of those Regions, had had any know∣ledge thereof: declaring further, that the chiefe cause of his
comming thither, was to instruct them in such godly knowledge and true religion:Desyre of gold, founde that which religion coulde not ynde. and that he was sent into those countreyes by the Christian kyng of Spayne (his lord and maister) for the same purpose, and specially to subdue and punyshe the Canibales, and suche other mischeuous people,Virtus post nummos. &c. and to defend innocentes against the violence of euyl dooers, wyllyng hym, and al other suche as imbraced vertue, in no case to be afrayde, but rather to open his mynde vnto hym, yf eyther he, or any other suche quiet men as he was, had susteyned any wrong of theyr neyghbours, and that he woulde see the same reuenged. These comfortable words of the Admirall so pleased the olde man, that notwithstandyng his extreme age, he woulde gladly haue gone with the Admiral, as he had done in deede, yf his wyfe and chyldren had not hyn∣dered hym of his purpose: but he marueyled not a lytle, that the Admiral was vnder the dominion of another: and much more, when the interpretour tolde hym of the glorye, magnificence, pompe, great power, and furnimentes of warre of our kinges, and of the multitudes of cities and townes whiche were vnder theyr dominions. Intendyng therefore to haue gone with the Admirall, his wyfe and chyldren fell prostrate at his feete, with teares desyring him not to forsake them and leaue them desolate: at whose pitiful requestes, the woorthy olde man beyng mooed, remayned at home to the comfort of his people and familie, sa∣tisfiyng rather them then hym selfe: for not yet ceassyng to woonder, and of heauie countenance because he myght not de∣part, he demaunded oftentymes yf that lande were not heauen, whiche brought foorth suche a kynde of men? For it is certaine, that among them the lande is as common as the sunne and wa∣ter,The lande as common as▪ the sunne and water. and that Myne and Thyne (the seedes of all myscheefe) haue no place with them. They are content with so lytle, that in so large a countrey they haue rather superfluitie then scarce∣nesse: so that (as we haue sayde before) they seeme to lyue in the golden worlde without toyle, lyuyng in open gardens, not intrenched with dyches, diuided with hedges, or defended with walles: they deale truely one with another without lawes, with∣out bookes, and without iudges: they take hym for an euyl and myscheuous man, whiche taketh pleasure in dooyng hurt to o∣ther. And albeit that they delyte not in superfluities, yet make
they prouision for the increase of suche rootes whereof they make theyr bread, as Maizium, Iucca, and Ages, contented with suche symple dyet, whereby health is preserued, and diseases auoyded. The Amirall therefore departyng from thence,Simple dyet. and myndyng to returne agayne shortly after, chaunced to come agayne to the Ilande of Iamaica, beyng on the south syde thereof, and coasted all along by the shore of the same from the West to the East, from whose last corner on the East syde, when he sawe towarde the North syde on his left hande certayne hygh mountaynes, he knewe at the length that it was the south syde of the Ilande of Hispaniola, whiche he had not yet passed by. Wherefore,Hispaniola. at the Calendes of September, entryng into the hauen of the same Ilande, called saint Nicholas hauen, he repayred his shyppes, to the intent that he might agayne waste and spoyle the Ilandes of the Canibales, and burne all theyr Canoas,The Cani∣bales. that those rauenyng wolues might no longer persecute and deuoure the innocent sheepe: but he was at this tyme hyndered of his purpose, by rea∣son of a disease which he had gotten by to much watching. Thus beyng feebl ad weake,Sickenesse of to much Wat∣ching. he was ledde of the Maryners to the citie of Isella, where, with his two brethren whiche were there, and other of his familiars, he recouered his health in shorte space: yet coulde he not at this tyme assayle the Canibales, by reason of sedition that was risen of late among the Spanyardes whiche he had left in Hispaniola, whereof we wyll speake more hereafter. Thus fare ye well. The fourth booke of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie. COlonus the Admiral of the Ocean, returning (as he supposed) from the continent or fyrme lande of East India,Easte India had aduertisment that his brother Boilus, and one Peter Mar∣garita, an olde familiar of the kynges, and a noble man,The Spani∣ardes rebell in the Admi∣rals absence. with diuers other of those to whom he had left the gouernment of the Ilande, were (of corrupted mynde agaynst hym) departed into Spayne. Wherefore, aswel to purge hym selfe of suche crimes,
as they should lay to his charge, as also to make a supply of other men in the place of them whiche were returned, and especiallye to prouide for vyttualles, as wheate, wine, oyle, and suche other, whiche the Spanyardes are accustomed to eate, because they coulde not yet well agree with such meates as they founde in the Ilandes, determined shortly to take his voyage into Spayne: but what he dyd before his departure, I wyll breefely rehearse. The kynges of the Ilandes which had hytherto lyued quietly, and content with theyr lytle whiche they thought aboundant, wheras they nowe perceiued that our men began to fasten foote within theyr regions,The kinges of the ilande rebell. & to beare rule among them, they toke the matter so greeuously, that they thought nothyng els but by what meanes they myght vtterlye destroy them, and for euer abolyshe the memory of theyr name,The Spani∣ardes misbe∣hauiour. for that kinde of men (the Spany∣ardes I meane, which folowed the Admiral in that nauigation) were for the moste part vnruly, regarding nothyng but idlenesse, play, and libertie, and woulde by no meanes absteyne from iniu∣ries, rauishing of the women of the Ilandes before the faces of their husbandes, fathers, and brethren: by which theyr abomina∣ble mysdemeanour, they disquieted the myndes of all the inhabi∣tantes, insomuche that wheresoeuer they founde any of our men vnprepared, they slue them with such fiercenesse and gladnesse, as though they had offered sacrifice to God.A iust reuenge. Intendyng therfore to pacifie theyr troubled myndes, and to punyshe them that slue his men before he departed from thence, he sent for the king of that vale, whiche in the booke before we described to be at the foote of the mountaynes of the region of Cibana, this kynges name was Guarionexius: who, the more strayghtly to concyle vnto hym the frendshyp of the Admirall, gaue his syster to wyfe to Didacus, a man from his chyldes age brought vp with the Ad∣mirall, whom he vsed for his interpreter in the prouinces of Cu∣ba. After this, he sent for Caunaboa, called the lorde of the house of golde, that is, of the mountaynes of Cibana: For this Caunaboa he sent one Captayne Hoieda, whom the ditionaries of Caunaboa had enforced to keepe his holde,Capitayne Ho∣ieda. besieging for the space of thirtie dayes the fortresse of saint Thomas, in the whiche Hoieda with his fyftie souldiers stoode at theyr defence, vntyll the comming of the Admirall. Whyle Hoieda remayned with Caunaboa, ma∣nye
ambassadours of the kynges of diuers regions were sent to Caunaboa, perswading him in no condition to permit the Chri∣stians to inhabite the Ilande, except he had rather serue then rule. On the other partie, Hoieda aduertised Caunaboa to goe to the Admiral, and to make a league of frendshyp with hym: but the ambassadours on the contrary part, threatned hym, that if he woulde so doo, the other kynges woulde inuade his region. But Hoieda aunswered them agayne, that whereas they conspired to maynteyne theyr libertie, they should by that meanes be brought to seruitude & destruction, if they entended to resist or kepe warre against the Christians. Thus Caunaboa on the one side and the other beyng troubled, as it were a rocke in the sea beaten with contrary flooddes, and muche more vexed with the stormes of his gyltie conscience, for that he had priuily slayne .xx. of our men vnder pretence of peace, feared to come to the Admirall: but at the length, hauyng excogitated his deceyt,Caunaboa con∣spireth the Ad∣mirals death. to haue slayne the Admirall and his companye, vnder the colour of frendshyp, yf oportunitie would so haue serued, he repayred to ye Admiral, with his whole familie, and many other wayting on him, armed after theyr manner. Beyng demaunded why he brought so great a rout of men with him, he aunswered, that it was not decent for so great a prince as he was, to goe out of his house without suche a bande of men: but the thyng chaunced muche otherwyse then he looked for, for he fell into the snares whiche he had prepared for other, for whereas by the way he began to repent hym that he came foorth of his house, Hoieda with many fayre woordes & pro∣mises brought him to the Admiral, at whose commaundement he was immediatly taken and put in prison, so that the soules of our men were not long from theyr bodyes vnreuenged. Thus Caunaboa with al his familie beyng taken, the Admirall was de∣termined to runne ouer the Ilande, but he was certified that there was suche famine among the inhabitauntes,Famine in the ilande of his∣paniola. that there was alredy fyftie thousande men dead thereof, and that they dy∣ed yet dayly, as it were rotten sheepe, the cause whereof, was wel knowen to be theyr owne obstinacie and frowardnesse: for wheras they sawe that our men entended to choose them a dwel∣ling place in the Ilande, supposing that they myght haue dry∣uen them from thence if the vittualles of the Ilande should fayle,
they determined with them selues, not only to leaue sowyng and plantyng,The hunger of golde cau∣seth greate famine. but also to destroy and plucke vp by the rootes, euery man in his owne region, that whiche they had alredy sowen, of both kyndes of bread, whereof we made mention in the firste booke, but especially among the mountaynes of Cibana, other∣wyse called Cipanga, forasmuche as they had knowledge that the golde whiche aboundeth in that region, was the chiefe cause that deteyned our men in the Iland. In the meane tyme, he sent foorth a Captayne with a bande of men, to searche the South syde of the Ilande, who at his returne, reported that throughout all the regions that he trauayled, there was suche scarcenesse of bread, that for the space of .xvi. dayes, he ate nothyng but the rootes of hearbes, and of young date trees, or the fruites of other wylde trees: but Guarionexius the kyng of the vale, lying beneath the mountaynes of Cibana, whose kyngdome was not so wasted as the other, gaue our men certayne vyttualles. Within a fewe dayes after, both that the iourneys myght be the shorter, and also that our men myght haue more safe places of refuge, if the inhabitauntes shoulde hereafter rebell in lyke manner, he buylded another fortresse (whiche he called the Towre of Con∣ception) betweene the Citie of Isabella,The tower of conception. and Saint Thomas for∣tresse, in the marches of the kyngdome of this Guarionexius, within the precincte of Cibana, vpon the syde of a hyll, hauyng a fayre riuer of holsome water runnyng harde by the same. Thus when the inhabitantes sawe newe buyldinges to be dayly erected, and our shippes lying in the hauen rotten and halfe bro∣ken, they began to dispayre of any hope of libertie, and wandred vp and downe with heauie cheare. From the Towre of Concep∣tion, searchyng diligentlye the inner partes of the mountaynes of Cibana, there was a certayne kyng whiche gaue them a masse of rude golde as bigge as a mans fyst, weighing .xx. ounces: this golde was not founde in the banke of that riuer, but in a heape of drye earth, and was lyke vnto the stone called Tophus, whiche is soone resolued into sande. This masse of golde I mee selfe sawe in Castile, in the famous Citie of Metbymna Campi, where the Court lay al that wynter. I sawe also a great peece of pure Electrum, of the which belles, and Apothecaries morters, & many suche other vesselles and instrumentes may be made, as were in
olde tyme of copper the citie of Corinthus.Electrum is a metall natu∣rally mixt of one portion of golde, & an other of siluer, being of pro∣pertie to be∣wraye poyson, and was ther∣fore in olde time in grea∣ter estimation then golde. The mine of Electrum. This peece of E∣lectrum was of suche weight, that I was not only with both my handes vnable to lift it from the ground, but also not of strength to remoue it eyther one way or other: they affirmed that it wey∣ed more then three hundred pounde weyght, after eyght ounces to the pounde, it was founde in the house of a certayne prynce, and left hym by his predecessours: and albeit that in the dayes of the inhabitauntes yet lyuyng, Electrum was no where digged, yet knewe they where the myne thereof was, but our men with muche adoo coulde hardely cause them to shewe them the place, they bore them suche priuie hatred, yet at the length they brought them to the myne, beyng now ruinate and stopped with stones and rubbyshe: it is muche easyer to dygge then is the iron myne, and might be restored agayne, yf myners and other work∣men skylful therein were appoynted thereto.An other kinde of am∣ber is taken out of greate whale fishes. Not farre from the towre of Conception, in the same mountaynes, is founde great plentie of Amber, and out of certaine rockes of the same, distilleth a substance of the yelowe colour whiche the Paynters vse. Not farre from these mountaynes are many great woods,Orpement o oker. in the whiche are none other trees then Brasile, which the Itali∣ans cal Verzino.Wooddes of brasile trees. But here perhaps (ryght noble prynce) you woulde aske, what should be the cause, that where as the Spany∣ardes haue brought out of these Ilandes certayne shyppes laden with Brasile, somewhat of Gossampine cotton, a quantitie of Amber, a lytle golde, & some spyces, why they haue not brought suche plentie of golde, and suche other ryche marchaundizes, as the fruitefulnesse of these regions seeme to promyse? To this I aunswere, that when Colonus the Admirall was lykewyse de∣maunded the cause hereof, he made aunswere, that the Spa∣nyardes whiche he tooke with hym into these regions, were ge∣uen rather to sleepe, play, and idlenesse, then to labour,Licentiusnes of to much li∣bertie. and were more studious of sedition and newes, then desirous of peace and quietnesse: also, that being geuen to licenciousnesse, they re∣belled & forsooke him, findyng matter of false accusation against hym, because he went about to represse theyr outragiousnesse: by reason whereof, he was not yet able to breake the power of the inhabitauntes, and freelye to possesse the full dominion of the Ilande, and these hynderaunces to be the cause that hy∣therto
the gaynes haue scarsely counteruayled the charges: al∣beit,And this only geathered, and not dygged out of the bodye of the mine. euen this yeere whyle I wrote these thyngs at your request, they geathered in two monethes the summe of a thousande and two hundred poundes weyght of gold. But because we entende to speake more largely of these thynges in theyr place, we wyll nowe returne from whence we haue digressed. When the inha∣bitauntes perceiued that they coulde by no meanes shake the yoke from theyr necks, they made humble supplication to the Ad∣miral, that they myght stande to theyr tribute, and applye them selues to reincrease the fruites of theyr countrey, beyng nowe al∣most wasted. He graunted them theyr request, and appoynted suche order that euery region shoulde pay theyr tribute, with the commodities of theyr countreys, accordyng to theyr portion, and at suche tyme as they were agreed vpon: but the violent fa∣mine did frustrate al these appoyntmentes, for al the trauayles of theyr bodyes, were scarcelye able to suffise to fynde them meate in the wooddes, whereby to susteyne theyr lyues, beyng of long tyme contented with rootes and the fruites of wylde trees: yet many of the kynges with theyr people, euen in this ex∣treme necessitie, brought part of theyr tribute, most humblye desyryng the Admiral to haue compassion of their calamities, and to beare with them yet a whyle, vntyl the Ilande were resto∣red to the olde state, promysyng further, that that whiche was nowe wantyng, shoulde then be double recompenced. But fewe of the inhabitauntes of the mountaynes of Cibaua kept theyr pro∣mise, because they were sorer oppressed with famine then anye of the other. They say that the inhabitantes of these mountaynes dyffer no lesse in language and manners from them whiche dwel in the playnes,The nature of the region dis∣poseth the ma∣ner of the peo∣ple. then among vs the rusticalles of the coun∣trey, from the gentlemen of the courte: wheras notwithstanding they lyue as it were both vnder one portion of heauen, and in ma∣ny thinges much after one fashion, as in nakednesse, and rude simplicitie. But nowe let vs returne to Caunaboa the king of the house of golde,Kyng Cauna∣boa in capti∣uitie. beyng in captiuitie. When he perceiued hym selfe to be ast in prison, frettyng and gratyng his teeth, as it had been a Lion of Libia, and dayly and nyghtly deuysyng with hym selfe howe he myght be delyuered, beganne to perswade the Admiral, that forasmuche as he had nowe taken vnto his
dominion the region of Cipanga or Cibaua (wherof he was king) it shoulde be expedient to sende thyther a garrison of Christian men, to defende the same from the incursions of his olde enimies and borderers: for he sayde, that it was signified vnto him, that the countrey was wasted and spoyled with suche incursions. By this craftie deuise, he thought to haue brought to passe, that his brother whiche was in that region, and the other his kyns∣folkes and frendes with theyr adherentes, should haue taken, ey∣ther by sleight or force, as many of our men as myght haue re∣deemed hym. But the Admiral vnderstandyng his craftie mea∣nyng, sent Hoieda with suche a companye of men, as myght vanquishe the Cibauians, yf they shoulde moue warre agaynst them. Our men had scarcelye entred into the region, but the brother of Caunaboa came agaynst them with an armie of fyue thousande naked men, armed after theyr manner, with clubbes,Caunaboa his brother rebel∣leth. arrowes tipt with bones, and speares made harde at the endes with fyre. He stole vpon our men beyng in one of theyr houses, and encamped rounde about the same on euery syde. This Ciba∣uian, as a man not ignorant in the discipline of warre, about the distaunce of a furlong from the house, diuided his armie into fyue battayles, appoyntyng to euery one of them a circuite by equall diuision, and placed the froont of his owne battayle directly agaynst our men. When he had thus set his battayles in good aray, he gaue certayne signes that ye whole armie should marche forwarde in order with equall paces,A conflict be∣twene the Ci∣banians and the Spaniards. and with a larome freshly assayle theyr enimies, in such sort that none might escape. But our men iudging it better to encountre with one of the bat∣tayles, then to abyde the brunt of the whole armie, gaue onset on the mayne battayle aranged in the playne, because that place was most commodious for the horsmen. When the horsmen therefore had geuen the charge, they ouerthrewe them with the brestes of theyr horses, and slue as many as abode the ende of the fight, the residue beyng strycken with feare, disparcled, and fledde to the mountaynes and rockes: from whence they made a piti∣full howlyng to our men, desyryng them to spare them, pro∣testyng that they woulde neuer more rebell, but doo what so e∣uer they woulde commaund them, yf they woulde suffer them to lyue in theyr owne countrey. Thus the brother of Caunaboa
beyng taken, the Admiral licenced the people to resort euerye man to his owne: these thynges thus fortunately atchiued, this region was pacified. Among these mountaynes, the vale whi∣che Caunaboa inhabited, is called Magna, and is exceeding fruit∣ful, hauing in it many goodly springes and riuers, in the sande whereof is founde great plentie of golde. The same yeere in the moneth of Iune,A greate tem∣pest in the mo∣neth of Iune. they say there arose such a boystous tem∣pest of winde from the Southwest, as hath not lightly ben heard of, the violence wherof was such, that it plucked vp by the rootes whatsoeuer great trees were within the reache of the force ther∣of. When this whyrlewynde came to the hauen of the citie, it beat downe to the bottome of the sea three shyppes, whiche lay at anker, and broke the cables in sunder, and that (whiche is the greater marueyle) without any storme or roughnesse of the sea, only turnyng them three or foure tymes about. The inha∣bitauntes also affyrme, that the same yeere the sea extended it selfe further into the lande, and rose hygher then euer it dyd be∣fore by the memorie of man, by the space of a cubit. The people therefore muttered among them selues, that our nation had troubled the elementes, & caused suche portentous signes. These tempestes of the ayre (whiche the Grecians call Tiphones, that is, whyrlewyndes) they call Furacanes, whiche they say, doo often tymes chaunce in this Ilande:Whirle win∣des. Furacanes. but that neyther they, nor theyr great graundfathers, euer sawe suche violent and furious Fura∣canes, that plucked vp great trees by the rootes, neyther yet such surges and vehement mocions on the sea, that so wasted the land: as in deede it may appeare, forasmuche as wheresoeuer the sea bankes are neere to any playne, there are in maner euery where floryshyng medowes reaching euen vnto the shore: but nowe let vs returne to Caunaboa.The death of king Cauna∣boa and his brother. As kyng Caunaboa therefore and his brother shoulde haue ben brought into Spayne, they dyed by the way, for very pensiuenesse and anguish of minde. The Admiral, whose shippes were drowned in the foresayd tempest, perceiuing him selfe to be nowe enclosed, commaunded forthwith two other shyppes (whiche the Spaniardes cal Carauelas) to be made: for he had with hym all manner of Artificers parteyning thereun∣to. Whyle these thynges were dooyng, he sent foorth Bartho∣lomeus Colonus his brother, beyng Lieuetenant of the Ilande,
with an armie of men to searche the golde mynes, beyng distant threescore leagues from the citie of Isabella, whiche were founde by the conducte of certayne people of the Ilande, before the mynes of Cipanga or Cibana were knowen. In these mynes they founde certayne deepe pittes, which had ben dygged in old time, out of these pyttes, the Admiral (who affirmeth this Ilande of Hispaniola to be Ophir,The golde mines of Sa∣lomon. as we sayde before) supposeth that So∣lomon the kyng of Hierusalem had his great ryches of golde, whereof we reade in the olde Testament, and that his shyppes sayled to this Ophir by the gulfe of Persia, called Sinus Persicus. But whether it be so or not, it lyeth not in me to iudge, but in my opinion it is farre of. As the myners dygged the superficial or vppermost part of the earth of ye mynes,Gold in the superficiall partes of the earth. duryng for the space of sixe myles, & in dyuers places syfted the same on the drye lande, they founde suche plentie of golde, that euery hyred labourer could easily finde euery day the weight of three drammes. These mynes beyng thus searched & founde, the Lieuetenant certified the Admirall hereof by his letters, the which when he had recei∣ued, the fifth day of the Ides of March, Anno. 1495. he entred into his newe shyppes, and tooke his voyage directly to Spayne, to aduertise the kyng of all his affayres, leauyng the whole regi∣ment of the Ilande with his brother the Lieuetenant. The fift booke of the fyrst Decade, to Lodouike Cardinall of Aragonie. AFter the Admirals departing into Spaine, his brother the Lieuetenaunt buylded a fortresse in the golde mines, as he had com∣maunded hym: this he called the golden towre,The golden tower. because the labourers founde golde in the earth, and stone wherof they made the walles of the fortresse. He consumed three monethes in makyng the instrumentes wherewith the golde shoulde be geathered, washed, tryed, and moulten: yet was he at this tyme, by reason of wante of vittualles,Lacke of vi∣tayles. enforced to leaue al thynges imperfecte, and to goe seeke for meate. Thus as he, with a bande of armed men, had entred threescore myles
further within the land, the people of the countrey here and there resortyng to hym, gaue hym a certayne portion of theyr bread, in exchaunge for other of our thynges: but he coulde not long tary here, because they lacked meate in the fortresse, whyther he hasted with such as he had now gotten. Leauyng therefore in the fortresse a garrison of ten men, with that portion of the Ilande bread whiche yet remayned, leauyng also with them a Hounde to take those kyndes of lytle beastes whiche they call Vsias, not muche vnlyke our Conies, he returned to the fortresse of Con∣ception. This also was the moneth wherein the kyng Guarione∣xius, and also Manicautexius borderer vnto hym, shoulde haue brought in theyr tributes. Remaynyng there the whole moneth of Iune, he exacted the whole tribute of these two kynges, & vyt∣tualles necessary for hym and such as he brought with hym, whi∣che were about foure hundred in number.Vittualles brought from Spayne. Shortly after, about the Kalendes of Iuly, there came three Carauels from Spayne, bringing with them sundrye kyndes of vyttualles, as wheate, oyle, wine, bakon, & Martelinas beefe, whiche were diuided to euery man accordyng as neede required, some also was lost in the caryage for lacke of good lookyng to. At the aryual of these shyppes, the Lieutenaunt receiued commaundement from the kyng and the Admiral his brother, that he with his men should remoue their habitation to the south syde of the Ilande, because it was nearer to the golde mynes: Also that he shoulde make diligent searche for those kinges whiche had slayne the Christi∣an men, and to sende them with theyr confederates bounde into Spayne. At the next voyage therefore he sent three hundred cap∣tiues, with three kynges, and when he had diligently searched the coastes of the south syde, he transported his habitation, and buylded a fortresse there, vpon the toppe of a hyll neare vnto a sure hauen:Saint Domi∣ikes towre. this fortresse he called saint Dominikes towre. Into this hauen runneth a riuer of wholsome water, replenished with sundry kyndes of good fyshes: they affyrme this ryuer to haue many benefites of nature, for where so euer it runneth, all thinges are exceedyng pleasaunt and fruitefull, hauyng on euery syde groues of Date trees, and diuers other of the Ilande fruites so plentifullye, that as they sayled along by the shore, oftentymes the braunches thereof, laden with flowres
and fruites, hong so ouer theyr heades, that they might plucke them with theyr handes: also that the fruitfulnes of this ground, is eyther equall with the soyle of Isabella, or better. In Isabella he lefte only certayne sicke men, and shippe wryghtes,Isabella. whom he had appoynted to make certayne carauels, the residue of his men, he conueighed to the south, to saynt Dominickes towre. After he had buylded this fortresse, leauyng therin a garryson of .xx. men, he with the remanent of his souldiers, prepared them selues to searche the inner partes of the West syde of the Ilande, hytherto knowen onely by name. Therefore about .xxx. leagues, (that is) fourescore and tenne myles from the fortresse, he chaunced on the ryuer Naiba,The Riuer of Naiba. whiche we sayde to defende from the mountaynes of Cibaua, ryght to∣warde the south, by the myddest of the ilande. When he had ouerpassed this ryuer with a companye of armed men diuyded into .xxv. decurions, that is, tenne in a company, with theyr ca∣pitaynes, he sent two decurions to the regions of those kynges in whose landes were the great woodds of brasile trees. Incly∣ning towarde the lefte hande, they founde the wooddes, entred into them, and felled the high and precious trees,Wooddes of Brasile trees. which were to that day vntouched. Eche of the decurions filled certayne of the ilande houses with the trunkes of brasile, there to be reserued vntil the shippes came which should cary them away. But the Lieutenaunt directing his iourney towarde the right hande, not farre from the bankes of ye riuer of Naiba, founde a certaine kyng whose name was Beuchius Anacauchoa, encamped against thin∣habitantes of the prouince of Naiba, to subdue them vnder his do¦minion, as he had done many other kings of the iland, borderers vnto him. The palace of this great king, is called Xaragua, & is situate toward the West ende of the ilande, distant from the ry∣uer of Naiba .xxx. leagues. All the prynces which dwell betwene the West ende & his palace, are ditionaries vnto him. All that region from Naiba, to the furthest marches of the west, is vtterly without golde, although it be full of mountaynes. When the kyng had espied our men, laying a part his weapons,Mountaynes without golde. & geuyng signes of peace, he spake gentelly to them (vncerteyne whether it were of humanitie or feare) and demaunded of them what they woulde haue. The Lieuetenaunt aunsweared, That he should
paye tribute to the Admirall his brother, in the name of the Christian kyng of Spayne. To whom he sayde, Howe can you requyre that of me, whereas neuer a region vnder my dominion bringeth forth golde? For he had heard, that there was a strange nation entred into the ilande, whiche made great search for golde: But he supposed that they desyred some other thyng. The lieu∣tenaunt answeared agayne, God forbydde that we shoulde en∣ioyne any man to paye such tribute as he myght not easely for∣beare, or such as were not engendered or growing in the region: but we vnderstande that your regions bryng foorth great plen∣tie of Gossampine cotton, and hempe, with such other, wherof we desyre you to geue vs parte. When he heard these woordes, he promysed with cherefull countenaunce, to geue hym as much of these thynges as he woulde requyre. Thus dismissing his army, and sending messengers before, he him selfe accompanied the Lieutenaunt, and brought him to his palace, being distant (as we haue sayde) .xxx. leagues. In al this tracte, they passed through the iurisdiction of other princes, beyng vnder his domi∣nion: Of the whiche, some gaue them hempe, of no lesse good∣nes to make tackelinges for shyppes then our wood: Other some brought bread, and some gossamppne cotton. And so euery of them payde trybute with suche commodities as theyr countreys brought foorth. At the length they came to the kin∣ges mansion place of Xaragua. Before they entered into the pa∣lace, a great multitude of the kynges seruauntes & subiectes re∣sorted to the court, honorably (after their maner) to receyue their kyng Beuchius Anacauchoa, with the strangers which he brought with him to see the magnificence of his court. But now shal you heare howe they were intertained. Among other triumphes and syghtes, two are especially to be noted: Fyrst, there mette them a company of .xxx. women,The kinges wiues. beyng al the kynges wyues and concubines, bearyng in theyr handes branches of date trees, singyng and daunsyng: they were all naked, sauyng that theyr pryuie partes were couered with breeches of gossampine cotton: but the virgins, hauyng theyr heare hangyng downe about their shoulders, tyed about the forehead with a fyllet, were vtterly naked. They affirme that theyr faces, breastes, pap∣pes, handes,Well fauored women. and other partes of theyr bodyes, were exceedyng
smothe, and well proportioned, but somwhat inclynyng to a loue∣ly broune. They supposed that they had seene those most beuty∣full Dryades, or the natyue nymphes or fayres of the fountaynes whereof the antiques spake so muche.Driades. The braunches of date trees, which they bore in theyr right handes when they daunced, they delyuered to the Lieuetenaunt, with lowe curtesy and smy∣lyng countenaunce. Thus enteryng into the kynges house, they founde a delycate supper prepared for them, after theyr maner. When they were well refreshed with meate, the nyght drawyng on, they were brought by the kynges officers, euery man to his lodgyng, according to his degree, in certayne of theyr houses about the pallaice, where they rested them in hangyng beddes, after the maner of the countrey, wherof we haue spoken more largely in an other place. The day folowyng, they brought our men to their common hall, into the whiche they come togeather as often as they make any notable games or triumphes, as we haue sayde before. Here, after many daunsynges, synginges, maskinges, runnynges,A pretie pastyme. wrestlyngs, and other trying of mastryes, sodaynly there appea∣red in a large plaine neere vnto the hal, two great armies of men of warre, whiche the kyng for his pastyme had caused to be pre∣pared, as the Spaniardes vse the playe with reedes, which they call Iuga de Canias. As the armies drewe neere togeather, they assayled the one the other as fiersely, as if mortall enimies with theyr baners spleade, should fight for theyr goodes, theyr landes, theyr lyues, theyr libertie, theyr countrey, theyr wyues & theyr children, so that within the momente of an houre, foure men were slayne, and many wounded.Foure men slayne in sport The battayle also shoulde haue contynued longer, yf the kyng had not, at the request of our men, caused them to ceasse. The thyrde day, the Lieuetenant coun∣saylyng the kyng to sowe more plentie of gossampine vppon the bankes neere vnto the waters syde, that they myght the better paye theyr trybute pryuately, accordyng to the multitude of theyr houses, he prepayred to Isabella, to vysite the sycke men whiche he had lefte there, and also to see howe his woorkes went forwarde. In the tyme of his absence .xxx. of his men were consumed with diuerse diseases.Prouision for diseased men. Wherefore beyng sore troubled in his mynde, and in maner at his wyttes ende,
what he were best to doo, for as muche as he wanted al thynges necessarie, as wel to restore them to health whiche were yet acrased, as also vitayles to mayntayne ye whole multitude, where as there was yet no shyppe come from Spayne: at the length, he determyned to sende abrode the sicke men here and there to sundrye Regyons of the ilande, and to the castelles whiche they had erected in the same. For directly from the citie of Isabella to saynt Dominikes towre, that is, from the north to the south, through the ilande,The castels or towers of hispaniola. they had buylded thus many castles. Fyrst, xxxvi. myles distant from Isabella, they buylded the castell of Sperantia. From Sperantia .xxv. myles, was the castell of saynt Katharine. From saynt Katharines .xx. myles, was saynt Iames towre. Other .xx. myles from saynt Iames towre, was a strong∣er fortresse then any of the other, whiche they called the towre of Conception, which he made the stronger, because it was situat at the rootes of the golden mountaynes of Cibana, in the great and large playne,The golden mountaynes of Cibana. so fruiteful and well inhabited as we haue be∣fore described. He buylded also an other in the mydde waye be∣twene the towre of Conception, & saynt Dominikes towre, the whiche also was stronger then the towre of Conception, because it was within the lymittes of a great kyng, hauyng vnder his dominion fiue thousande men, whose chiefe citie and head of the Realme, beyng called Bonauum, he wylled that the castell should also be called after the same name. Therefore leauyng the sicke men in these castels, and other of the ilande houses nere vnto the same, he hym selfe repayred to saynt Dominikes, exacting trybutes of al the kynges whiche were in his way. When he had taryed there a fewe dayes, there was a rumour spredde, that all the kynges about the borders of the towre of Concep∣tion, had conspyred with desperate myndes to rebell agaynst the Spaniardes.The kinges rebell. When the Lieutenaunt was certified hereof, he tooke his iourney towarde them immediately, not beyng discoraged eyther by the length of the waye, or feeblenesse of his souldyers, beyng in maner foreweried with trauayle. As he drewe nere vnto them, he had aduertysement that kyng Guarionexius was chosen by other prynces to be the Capitayne of this rebellion, and that he was enforsed therto halfe vnwyl∣lyng, beyng seduced by perswasions and prouocations: the
whiche is more lykely to be true, for that he had before had experience of the power and policie of our men. They came to∣geather at a daye appoynted, accompanyed with .xv. thousande men, armed after their manner,An army of xv. thousand Barbarians. once agayne to proue the for∣tune of warre. Here the Lieutenaunt, consultyng with the Cap∣tayne of the fortresse and the other souldiers of whom he had the conducte, determyned to sette vpon them vnwares in their owne houses, before they coulde prepare theyr army. He sent foorth therefore to euery kyng a Centurion, that is, a captayne of a hundred, which were commaunded vpon a sudden to inuade theyr houses in the nyght, and to take them sleepyng, before the people (being scattred here & there) myght assemble togeather. Thus secretly enteryng into their vyllages, not fortified with walles,The kinges are taken pri∣soners. trenches, or bulwarks, they broke in vpon them, toke them, bound them, & led away euery man his prisoner according as they were commaunded. The Lieuetenant hym selfe with his hundred men, assayled kyng Guarionexius as the worthier personage, whom he tooke prysoner, as did the other captaines theyr kings, and at the same houre appoynted. Foureteene of them were brought the same nyght to the towre of Conception. Shortlye after, when he had put to death two of the kynges whiche were the chiefe autours of this newe reuolte,king Guari∣onexius is pardoned. and had suborned Guario∣nexius & the other kynges to attempt the same, least the people for sorowe of theyr kinges shoulde neglecte or forsake their coun∣trey, whiche thyng myght haue ben great incommoditie to our men, who by thincrease of theyr seedes and fruites were often∣tymes ayded, he freely pardoned and dismissed Guarionexius and the other kynges, the people in the meane tyme flocking togea∣ther about the towre, to the number of fyue thousande without weapons, with pitiful houling for the deliuerance of their kinges: The ayre thundered, & the earth trembled through the vehemen∣cie of theyr outcry. The Lieutenaunt warned Guarionexius and the other kynges, with threatenynges, with rewardes, and with promyses, neuer thereafter to attempt any suche thyng. Then Guarionexius made an oration to the people, of ye great power of our men, of theyr clemencie towarde offenders, & liberalitie to suche as remaine faithfull, desyring them to quiet theyr mindes, and from thencefoorth neyther in deede nor thought to interpryse
any thyng agaynst the Chrystians, but to obeye and serue them, excepte they woulde dayly bryng them selues into further cala∣mities. When the oration was fynyshed, they tooke hym vp, and set hym on theyr shoulders, and so caryed hym home to his owne pallace: and by this meanes, this Region was paci∣fyed for a whyle. But our men, with heauy countenaunce wandered vp and downe, as desolate in a strange countrey, lack∣yng vittailes, and worne out of apparell, whereas .xv. monethes were nowe passed sence the Admirals departure,Lacke of vy∣tayles. duryng which tyme, they coulde heare nothyng out of Spayne. The Lieue∣tenaunt comforted them all that he coulde with fayre wordes and promyses. In the meane tyme, Beuchius Anacauchoa (the kyng of the West partes of the Region of Xaragua (of whom we spake before) sent messengers to the Lieuetenaunt, to signi∣fye vnto hym, that he had in a redynes the gossampine cotton, and suche other thynges as he wylled hym to prepare for the payment of his trybute. Whereupon the Lieuetenaunt tooke his iourney thyther, and was honorably receiued of the kyng and his syster, somtyme the wyfe of Caunaboa the kyng of Cibana, bearyng no lesse rule in the gouernaunce of her brothers kyng∣dome, then he hym selfe: For they affirmed her to be a wyse woman, of good maners, & pleasaunt in company. She earnestly perswaded her brother, by thexample of her husband, to loue and obey the Christians. This woman was called Anacaona. He founde in the palace of Beuchius Anacauchoa .xxxii. kyngs,xxxii. kinges. which had brought theyr tributes with them, and abode his comming. They brought with them also, besyde theyr tribut assigned them, further to demerite ye fauour of our men, great plentie of vitailes, as both kindes of bread, cunnies, and fishes, alredy dried, because they should not putrifie:Serpentes eaten. Serpentes also of that kynde which we sayd to be estemed among them as most delicate meat, and lyke vnto Crocodiles sauing in bygnes. These serpentes they cal Iu∣annas, which our men learned (somwhat to late) to haue ben en∣gendred in the ilande: For vnto that day, none of them durst ad∣uenture to tast of them, by reason of theyr horrible deformitie and lothsomnes. Yet the Lieuetenant, being entysed by the plea∣santnes of the kynges syster, determined to tast of the serpentes. But when he felte the fleshe thereof to be so delycate to his
tongue, he fel to amayne without al feare: the whiche thyng his companions perceiuing, were not behinde hym in greedynesse, insomuch that they had now none other talke, then of the sweete∣nesse of these serpentes, which they affyrme to be of more plea∣saunt taste, then eyther our Phesantes or Partriches: but they lose theyr taste, except they be prepared after a certayne fa∣shion, as doo Peacockes and Phesantes, except they be enter∣laded before they be rosted. They prepare them therefore after this manner: Fyrst, taking out theyr bowelles,The dressing of serpentes to be eaten. euen from the throte to the thyghes, they washe and rubbe theyr bodyes very cleane both within & without, then rolling them together on a cir∣cle, inuolued after the manner of a sleepyng snake, they thruste them into a pot, of no bigger capacitie then to holde them only, this done, putting a litle water vnto them, with a portion of the Ilande Pepper, they seethe them with a soft fyre of sweete wood, and suche as maketh no great smoke: Of the atte of them beyng thus sodde, is made an exceedyng pleasant broth or pot∣tage. They say also, that there is no meate to be compared to the egges of these serpentes, which they vse to seethe by them selues: they are good to be eaten as soone as they are sodde,Serpentes egges eaten. and may also be reserued many dayes after. But hauyng sayde thus much of their entertaynement and dayntie fare, let vs nowe speake of other matters. When the Lieuetenaunt had fylled one of the Ilande houses with the Gossampine cotton which he had receiued for tribute,Gossopine cotton. the kynges promysed furthermore to geue hym as muche of theyr bread as he woulde demaunde: he gaue them hartie thankes, and gently accepted theyr frendly proffer. In the meane tyme, whyle this bread was a geatheryng in sun∣dry regions, to be brought to the pallace of Beuchius Anachaucoa kyng of Xaragua, he sent messengers to Isabella, for one of the two Carauelles whiche were lately made there, intendyng to send the same againe thither laden with bread. The Maryners glad of these tydynges, sayled about the Ilande, and in shorte space brought the shyppe to the coastes of Xaragua. The syster of kyng Beuchius Anacauchoa, that wyse and pleasaunt woman Anacuona (the wyfe sometyme of Caunaboa the kyng of the gol∣den house of the mountaynes of Cibana,Queene Ana∣caona. whose husbande dyed in the way when he shoulde haue ben caryed into Spayne) when
she hearde say that our shyppe was arriued on the shore of her na∣tiue countrey, perswaded the king her brother, that they both myght goe together to see it: for the place where the shyppe lay, was not paste .vi. myles distant from Xaragua. They rested all nyght in the midway, in a certayne vyllage in the which was the treasurie or iewel house of Anacaona.The treasurie of Queene Anacaona. Her treasure was neither golde, siluer, or pretious stones, but only thynges necessary to be vsed, as chayres, stooles, settels, disshes, potingers, pottes, pannes, basons, treyes, and such other housholde stuffe and in∣strumentes, workemanly made of a certayne blacke and harde shyning wood, which that excellent learned phisition, Iohn bap∣tist Elisius, affirmeth to be Hebene. Whatsoeuer portion of wit nature hath geuen to the inhabitantes of these ilandes,Hebene wood. the same doth most appeare in these kynde of woorkes, in which they shewe great art and cunnyng, but those which this woman had, were made in the iland of Guanabba, situate in the mouth of the west syde of Hispaniola:The Ilande of Guanabba. In these they graue the lyuely images of such phantasies as they suppose they see walke by nyght, which the antiques called Lemures: Also the images of men, ser∣pents, beastes, & what so euer other thing they haue once seene. What woulde you thinke (moste noble prince) that they coulde doo,Cunnyng Ar∣tificers. if they had the vse of Iron and steele? For they only fyrst make these soft in the fyre, & afterwarde make them holowe and carue them with a certayne stone which they fynd in the ryuers.A stone in the steede of Iron. Of stooles and chayres, she gaue the Lieuetenaunt fourteene, and of vesselles partayning to the table and kitchen, shee gaue hym threescore, some of wood, and some of earth, also gossam∣pyne cotton redye spunne, foure great bottomes of exceeding weight. The day folowing, when they came to the sea side, where was an other village of the kynges, the Lieuetenaunt com∣maunded the shyppe boate to be brought to the shore. The kyng also had prepared two Canoas, paynted after theyr maner, one for hym selfe, and certayne of his gentelmen, an other for his si∣ster Anacaona and her wayting women: but Anacaona desyred to be caried in the shippe boate with the Lieuetenaunt. When they nowe approched neare vnto the shippe, certayne great pee∣ces of ordinaunce, were discharged of purpose, the sea was fyl∣led with thunder,Gunnes. and the ayre with smoke, they trembled
and quaked for feare, supposyng that the frame of the worlde had ben in daunger of fallyng, but when they sawe the Lieuetenant laugh, and looke chearefully on them, they called agayne theyr spirites, and when they yet drewe nearer to the shyp, and hearde the noyse of the fluites, shawlmes, and drummes, they were won∣derfully astonied at the sweete harmonie thereof.Musical in∣strumentes. Entryng into the shyppe, and beholdyng the foreshyp and the sterne, the toppe castel, the maste, the hatches, the cabbens, the keele, and the tack∣lynges, the brother fyxyng his eyes on the syster,Ignorance cau∣seth admira∣tion. and the syster on the brother, they were both as it were dumme and amazed, and wyste not what to say for to muche woondryng. Whyle beholdyng these thyngs, they wandered vp and downe the ship, the Lieutenaunt commaunded the ankers to be loosed, and the sayles to be hoysed vp. Then were they further astonyshed, when they saw so great a mole to mooue as it were by it selfe, without ores, and without the force of man: for there arose from the earth suche a wynde, as a man woulde haue wyshed for of purpose. Yet furthermore, when they perceiued the shippe to mooue sometime forwarde, and sometyme backward, sometyme toward the right hande, and sometyme towarde the lefte, and that with one winde, and in manner at one instant, they were at theyr wyttes ende for to much admiration. These thynges finished, and the shippes la∣den with bread, and suche other rewardes, they beyng also re∣compenced with other of our thynges, he dismissed not onely the kyng Beuchius Anachauchoa and his syster, but lykewise all theyr seruauntes & women, replenished with ioye & wondering. After this, he hym selfe tooke his iorney by foote with his soul∣diers to the citie of Isabella, where he was aduertised that one Roldanus Ximenus, a noughty felowe (whom before, beyng his seruant, he had preferred to be capitayne of the myners and la∣bourers, & after made hym a Iudge in causers of controuersie) had vsed hymselfe outragiously, and was maliciously mynded against hym, and further,The intempe∣rancie & malice of a seruile wit aduaunced. the cause of much mischiefe in his absence. For kyng Guarionexius (who a whyle before was par∣doned of his former rebellion, and persuaded the people to obey the Spanyardes) was by his noughtie vsage, and suche other as were confedered with hym, so accensed to reuenge the iniuries whiche they susteyned at his handes, besyde the abominable
actes whiche they, folowing only the lawe of nature, abhorred to admit,Ciguanians. that he, with his famylie, famylyers, and ditionaries, of desperate minde fledde to the mountaines, being distaunt from Isabella only tenne leagues westwarde, towarde the north side of the sea. These mountaynes, and also the inhabitauntes of the same, they call by one name, Ciguaios. The great king of all the kinges and regions of these mountaynes is called Maio∣banexius, and his court or pallace is named Capronus: the mountaynes are rough, high, and such as no man can passe to the toppes therof, they are also bending, and haue their corners reaching downe to the sea. Betweene both the corners of the mountaynes, is there a greate playne, by the whiche many ri∣uers fall from the mountaynes into the sea, the people are verye fierse and warlike men, hauing theyr original of the Canibales: for when they descend from the mountaynes to the playnes, to keepe warre with theyr borderers, they eate all such as they kil. Guarionexius therfore, fleeing to this kyng of these mountaynes, gaue him many presentes of such thinges as are wanting in his countrey, therwith declaring how vilely, villanously, and violent∣ly he had ben vsed of our men, with whom he coulde nothyng preuaile, neither by fayre meanes, nor by foule, nother by humi∣litie, nor by stoutnesse, and that to be the cause of his resorting, to hym at that tyme, most humbly desyring him to be his defence agaynst thoppressions of suche myscheuous people. Maioba∣nexius hereuppon, made hym promisse to ayde and helpe hym against the Christians al that he might. The Lieutenant there∣fore made haste to the fortresse of Conception, whither, as soone as he was come, he sent for Roldanus Xeminus, who with suche as folowed hym, lay in certayne of the Iland villages, xii. myles distant from the fortresse. At his commyng, the Lieuetenaunt asked him what al these sturres and tumultes meant? He answe∣red without abashment, Your brother the Admiral hath to doo therewith, and shall aunswere for the fame before the kyng, for we perceiue that the kyng hath so put hym in trust, that he hath had no regarde to vs: here we peryshe for hunger, whyle we folowe you, and are dryuen to seeke our vnhappye foode in the desartes: Your brother also assigned me assystaunt with you in gouernyng the Ilande. Wherefore, syth you haue na more
respecte vnto vs, we are determined no longer to be vnder your obedience. When Roldanus had spoken these wordes, and suche other, the Lieuetenaunt woulde haue layde handes on hym, but he escaped his fyngers, and fledde to the West partes of the regi∣on of Xaragua, hauyng with hym a trayne of threescore and ten men, whiche were of his confederacie. Here this fylthy synke of rebelles thus conspired, playde theyr vages, and lyued with loose brydles in al kynde of myscheefe, robbyng the people,Licenciousnesse in libertie. spoyling the countrey, and rauishyng both wyues and virgins. Whyle these thynges were dooing in the Ilande, the Admiral had eight shippes appoynted him by the kyng, of the whiche he sent two laden with vyttualles, from Cales or Gades of Hercules pyllers,Hercules pyl∣lers. directly to the Lieuetenant his brother. These shyps by chaunce arryued fyrst on that syde of the Ilande where Roldanus Xemi∣nus ranged with his companions. Roldanus in short tyme had se∣duced them, promysyng them in the steede of mattockes,A violent per∣swasion. wen∣ches pappes: for labour, pleasure: for hunger, abundance: and for weerynesse and watching, sleepe and quietnesse.The furie of Guarionexius. Guarionexius in the meane tyme assembled a power of his frendes and con∣federates, & came oftentymes downe into the playne, and slue as many of the Christian men as he coulde meete conuenientlye, and also the Ilande men whiche were theyr freendes, wasting theyr grounde, destroying theyr seedes, and spoyling their vyl∣lages. But Roldanus and his adherentes, albeit they had know∣ledge that the Admiral woulde shortly come, yet feared they no∣thing, because they had seduced the newe men whiche came in the fyrst shyppes. Whyle the Lieuetenaunt was thus tossed in the myddest of these stormes, in the meane tyme his brother the Admiral set forwarde from the coastes of Spayne: but not di∣rectly to Hispaniola, for he turned more towarde the south.The thyrd voy∣age of Colonus the Admiral. In the whiche voyage, what he dyd, what coastes both of the lande and sea he compassed, and what newe regions he discouered, we wyl fyrst declare: for to what ende and conclusion the sayd tumultes and seditions came, we wyl expresse in the ende of the booke fo∣lowyng. Thus fare ye well.
The syxt booke of the fyrst Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie. COlonus the Admirall, the thirde day of the Calendes of Iune, in the yeere of Christe 1498. hoysed vp his sayles in the hauen of the towne Barramedabas, not farre distant from Cales, and set forwarde on his voyage with eyght shyppes laden with vittualles and other necessaries. He diuerted from his accustomed race, whiche was by the Ilandes of Canarie, by rea∣son of certayne frenchmen pyrates and rouers on the sea, whiche lay in the ryght way to meete with hym.Frenche men pyrates. In the way from Cales to the Ilandes of Canarie, about fourescore and tenne myles to∣warde the left hande, is the Ilande of Madera, more southward then the citie of Ciuile by foure degrees,The iland of Madera. for the Pole Artike is eleuate to Ciuile .xxxvi. degrees, but to this Ilande (as the Ma∣riners say) only .xxxii. He sayled therefore fyrst to Madera, and sendyng from thence directly to Hispaniola the residue of the shippes laden with vittualles and other necessaries, he him selfe with one shyppe with deckes, and two Marchant Carauelles, coasted towarde the South to come to the Equinoctial lyne, and so foorth to folowe the tracte of the same towarde the West, to the intent to search the natures of suche places as he coulde finde vnder or neare vnto the same, leauing Hispaniola on the north side on his ryght hande. In the middle of this race, lye xiii. Ilandes of the Portugales, whiche were in olde tyme called Hesperides, and are nowe called Caput Viride, or Cabouerde, these are situate in the sea, ryght ouer agaynst the inner partes of Ethiope, West∣warde two dayes saylyng. One of these the Portugales call Bonauista. With the Snayles, or rather the Tortoyses of this I∣lande, many leprous men are healed and cleansed of theyr lepro∣sie.Healing of the leper. Departing sodainly from hence, by reason of the contagious∣nesse of the ayre, he sayled .CCCClxxx. myles toward the West southwest, whiche is in the middest betweene the West and the South.Contagious ayre and ex∣treeme heate. There was he so vexed with maladies and heate (for it was the moneth of Iune) that his shyps were almost set on fyre: The hoopes of his barrels cracked and brake, and the fresh wa∣ter ranne out: the men also complayned that they were not able
to abide that extremitie of heate. Here the north pole was eleuate onely .v. degrees from the Hozizontall. For the space of .viii. dayes, in the which he suffered these extremites, onely the fyrst day was fayre, but al the other, clowdy and rayny, yet neuer∣thelesse feruent hotte: Wherefore it oftentymes repented hym not a litle, that euer he tooke that way. Being tossed in these dan∣gers and vexations eyght continuall dayes, at the lengthe an Eastsoutheast wynde arose, and gaue a prosperous blaste to his sayles. Whiche wynde folowing directly towarde the west, he founde the starres ouer that paralell placed in other order, and an other kynde of ayre, as the Admirall hym selfe toilde me. And they al affirme, that within three dayes sayling, they founde most temperate and pleasaunt ayre. The Admiral al∣so affirmeth, that from the clime of the great heate and vnholsome ayre, he euer ascended by the backe of the sea, as it were by a hygh mountayne towarde heauen, yet in all this tyme, coulde he not once see any land: But at the length, the day before the Ca∣lendes of Iuly, the watchman lookyng foorth of the toppe castel of the greatest shippe, cried out aloude for ioy that he espied three exceding hygh mountaynes, exhorting his felowes to be of good cheere, and to put away al pensiuenes: for they were very heauy and sorowfull, as well for the greefe which they susteyned by rea∣son of thintollerable heate, as also that their freshe water fayled them, whiche ranne out at the ryftes of the barels, caused by ex∣treme heate, as we haue sayd. Thus being wel comforted, they drew to the land, but at theyr fyrst approch they could not aryue, by reason of the shalownes of the sea neere the shore: Yet loking out of theyr shyppes, they myght well perceiue that the Region was inhabyted, and wel cultured, for they sawe very fayre gar∣dens, and pleasaunt medowes: from the trees and herbes wher∣of, when the mornyng deawes beganne to ryse, there proceaded manye sweete sauoures. Twentie myles distant from hence, they chaunced into a hauen, very apte to harborowe shyppes, but it had no ryuer running into it. Sayling on yet somwhat further, he founde at the length a commodious hauen, wherin he might repayre his shyppes, and make prouision of freshe water and fuel. Arenalis calleth this land Puta.The iland of Puta. They found no houses nere vnto the hauen, but innumerable steppes of certeyn wilde
beastes feete, of the whiche they founde one dead, muche lyke a goate. The day folowyng, they sawe a Canoa commyng a farre of, hauyng in it foure and twentie young men of goodly corpora∣ture and high stature,People of com∣ly corporature, and long heare, neere the Equi∣noctial. al armed with targets, bowes, & arrowes: the heare of theyr heades was long and playne, and cutte on the forehead much after the manner of the Spanyards, their pryuie partes were couered with fyllets of gossampine cotton, of sun∣dry colours enterlaced, & were beside al ouer naked. Here the Ad∣miral, consydering with him selfe the corporature of this people, and nature of the lande, he beleeued the same to be so muche the nearer heauen, then other regions of the same paralel, and further remooued from the grosse vapours of the vales,The higher, the colder. and maryshes, howe muche the hyghest toppes of the byggest mountaynes are distant from the deepe vales. For he earnestly affirmeth, that in al that nauigation, he neuer went out of the paralels of Ethi∣ope: So great difference is there betweene the nature of thinha∣bitauntes, and of the soyles of diuers regions, al vnder one clime or paralel, as is to see betweene the people and regions beyng in the fyrme lande of Ethiope, and them of the Ilandes vnder the same clime, hauyng the pole starre eleuate in ye same degree. For the Ethiopians are all blacke, hauing theyr heare curled, more like wool then heare: but these people of the Iland of Puta, (beyng as I haue sayde vnder the clyme of Ethiope) are white, with long heare, and of yelow colour Wherefore it is apparant, the cause of this so great difference, to be rather by the disposition of the earth, then constitution of heauen. For we knowe, that snowe falleth on the mountaynes of the Equinoctial, or burnt lyne, and the same to endure there continuallye: we knowe lykewyse, that the inhabitauntes of the regions farre di∣stant from that lyne towarde the north, are molested with great heate. The Admirall, that he myght alure the young men to hym with gentlenesse, shewed them lookyng glasses, fayre and bryght vessels of copper, haukes belles, and suche other thynges vnknowen to them. But the more they were called, so muche the more they suspected craft and deceyte, and fledde backe∣warde: Yet dyd they with great admiration beholde our men and theyr thynges, but styll hauyng theyr ores in theyr handes redy to flee. When the Admirall sawe that he coulde
by no meanes allure them by gyftes, he thought to prooue what he coulde do with musicall instrumentes, and therefore com∣maunded that they whiche were in the greatest shyp, should play on theyr drummes and shawlmes.Musical in∣strumentes. But the young men suppo∣sing this to be a token of battayle, left theyr ores, & in the twinc∣lyng of an eye had theyr arrowes in theyr bowes, and theyr tar∣gets on their armes: and thus directing theyr arrowes towarde our men, stoode in expectation to knowe what this noyse might meane. Our men likewyse preparyng theyr bowes and ar∣rowes, approched towarde them by litle and litle. But they de∣parting from the Admirals shyppe, and trusting to the dexteritie of theyr ores, came so neare one of the lesse shyppes, that one of them plucked the cloke from the gouernour of the shyppe, and as wel as they coulde by signes, required hym to come alande, promisyng fayth that they woulde commune with him of peace. But when they sawe him goe to the Admirals shyp, whyther he went to aske leaue that he might commune with them, suspecting hereby some further deceyt, they leapt immediatlye into the Ca∣noa, and fleedde as swyft as the wynde, so that to conclude, they could by no meanes be allured to familiaritie: Wherfore the Ad∣miral thought it not conuenient to bestowe any long time there at this voyage. No great space from this Ilande, euer towarde the West,The violent course of the water from the East to the West. the Admiral sayth he found so outragious a fal of wa∣ter, runnyng with suche a violence from the East to the West, that it was nothyng inferior to a myghtie streame fallyng from hygh mountaynes. He also confessed, that synce the fyrst day that euer he knewe what the sea meant, he was neuer in suche feare. Proceedyng yet somewhat further in this daungerous voyage, he founde certayne gulfes of eyght myles, as it had ben the entraunce of some great hauen, into the whiche the sayde violent streames dyd fall. These gulfes or streyghtes he cal∣led Os Draconis, that is, the Dragons mouth: and the Ilande directly oueragaynst the same, he called Margarita.The gulfe cal∣led Os Dra∣conis. Out of these strayghtes, issued no lesse force of freshe water, whi∣che encounteryng with the salte, dyd stryue to passe foorth, so that betweene both the waters, was no small conflycte: But entryng into the gulfe, at the length he founde the water thereof verye freshe and good to drynke. The Admirall
hym selfe, and they which were his companions in this byoage, beyng men of good credit, and perceauing my dilygence in searchyng for these matters, tolde me yet of a greater thyng, that is,A sea of fresh water. that for the space of .xxvi. leagues, amountyng to a hundreth and foure myles, he sayled euer by freshe water, inso∣much that the further he proceaded, especially towarde the west, he affirmed the water to be the fresher. After this, he came to a highe mountayne inhabited onely with Monkeyes or Mar∣masits,Marmasets. Monkeyes. on that part towarde the East: For that syde was rowgh with rockye and stony mountaynes, and therefore not inhabited with men. Yet they that went a lande to searche the countrey, founde nere vnto the sea, many fayre fieldes, well tylled and sowen, but no people, nor yet houses or cotages: Parhappes they were gone further into the countrey, to sowe theyr corne, and applye theyr husbandry, as wee often see our husbandemen to leaue theyr stations and villages for the same purpose. In the west syde of that mountayne, they espyed a large playne, whither they made hast, and cast anker in the brode ryuer. As soone as the inhabitantes had knowledge that a strange nation was arryued in theyr coastes,The fayre and large region of Paria. they came flockyng without all feare to see our men. We vnderstode by theyr sygnes and poyntynges, that this Region was called Paria, and that it was very large: in so muche that the further it reacheth towarde the weste, to be so muche the better inhabited and replenished with people. The Admiral therfore, takyng into his shippe foure of the men of that lande, searched the west partes of the same. By the temperatenes of the ayer, the pleasaūtnes of the ground, and the multitude of people which they sawe daily more & more as they sayled, they coniectured that these thynges portended some great matter: as in deede their opinion failed them not, as we will further declare in his place. The sonne not yet rysen, but beginnyng euen nowe to ryse, being one day allured by the plea∣sauntnes of the place, and sweete sauours whiche breathed from the lande to the shyppes, they went a lande: Here they founde a greater multytude of people, then in any other place. As our men approched towarde them, there came certeine messengers from their Cacici,Humane people. that is, the kinges of the countrey, to desyre the Admirall in the name of theyr princes to come to theyr palaces
without feare, and that they and al theyrs shoulde bee at his com∣maundement. When the Admirall had thanked them, and made his excuse for that tyme, there came innumerable people with theyr boates to the shyppes, hauyng for the most parte cheynes about theyr neckes, garlandes on theyr heades, and braselettes on theyr armes of pearles of India, and that so com∣monlye, that our women in playes and tryumphes, haue not greater plentie of stones of glasse and crystall in theyr garlands, crownes, girdels, and suche other tyrementes. Beyng asked where they gathered them, they poynted to the next shore by the sea bankes. They signified also, by certeyne scornefull iestures whiche they made with theyr mouthes and handes, that they no∣thyng esteemed pearles. Taking also baskettes in their handes, they made signes that the same myght be fylled with them in shorte space. But because the corne wherwith his shyppes were laden to be caryed into Hispaniola, had taken hurt by reason of the salt water, he determined to deferre this marte to a more conue∣nient tyme: Yet he sent to land two of the shyp boates laden with men, to thintent to fetch some garlands of pearles for exchange of our thynges, and also somwhat to searche the nature of the Re∣gion, and disposition of the people. They enterteyned our men gentelly, and came flocking to them by heapes, as it had ben to beholde some strange monsters. Fyrst there came to meete our men, two men of grauitie, whom the multitude folowed: One of these was well in age, and the other but young. They thinke it was the father, with his sonne whiche should succeede hym. When the one had saluted and embrased the other, they brought our men into a certeyne rounde house, neere vnto the whiche was a great courte.Chayers and stooles of He∣bene. Hyther were brought many chayers and stooles made of a certeyne blacke wood, and very cunnyngly wrought. After that our men and theyr Princes were sette, theyr waytyng men came in laden, some with sundry delycate dysihes, and some with wyne: But theyr meat, was only fruites, and those of dyuers kyndes, and vtterly vnknowen to vs. Theyr wyne was both whyte and redde, not made of grapes, but of the lycour of dyuers fruites, and very pleasaunte in drynkyng. After this banquet made in the olde mans house, the young man brought them to his tabernacle or mantion place, where
was a great company both of men and women, but they stoode disseuered the one from the other. They are whyte, euen as our men are,Whyte men neere the Equi∣noctiall. sauing suche as are much conuersant in the sunne. They are also very gentle, and full of humanitie towarde stran∣gers. They couer theyr priuie partes with gossampine cotton, wrought with sundry colours, and are besyde all naked. There was fewe, or none, that had not eyther a coller, a chayne, or a bracelet of golde and pearles, and many had all. Beyng as∣ked where they had that golde, they poynted to certayne moun∣taynes, seemyng with theyr countenaunce to disswade our men from goyng thither: For putting theyr armes in theyr mouthes, and grynnyng as though they bytte the same, styll poyntyng to the mountaynes, they seemed to insinuate that men were eaten there: but whether they meant by the Canibales, or wylde beastes, our men coulde not wel perceiue. They tooke it excee∣dyng greeuouslye, that they coulde neyther vnderstande our men, nor our men them. When they whiche were sent to lande, were returned to the shyppes about three of the clocke at after noone the same day, bryngyng with them certayne garlandes, and collers of pearles, they loosed theyr ankers to departe, min∣dyng to come agayne shortlye, when all thynges were set in good order in Hispaniola: but he was preuented by another, whiche defeated him of the rewarde of his trauayle. He was al∣so hyndered at this time by reason of the shalownesse of the sea,Shalownesse of the sea. & violent course of the water, which with continuall tossyng, bruised the greatest shippe as often as any great gale of wind arose. To auoyde the daungers of suche shalowe places and shelfes, he euer sent one of the smallest Carauelles before to trye the way with soundyng,The vse of Ca∣rauels or Bri∣gandines. and the byggest shyppes folowed be∣hynde. The regions beyng in the large prouince of Paria, for the space of .CCxxx. myles, are called of the inhabitants, Cumana, and Manacapana: from these regions distant. lx. leagues, is there an other region called Curiana. When he had thus passed ouer this long tract of sea, supposing styl that it had ben an Ilande, & doub∣tyng that he myght passe by the West to the North directly to Hispaniola,A riuer of mar∣ueylous deapth and breadth. he chaunced into a ryuer of .xxx. cubits deapth, and of suche breadth as hath not lyghtly ben hearde of. For he af∣fyrmeth it to be .xxviii. leagues. A lytle further towarde the
West, yet somewhat more southwarde, as the bendyng of the shore requyred, he entered into a sea full of herbes or weedes. The seede of the herbes whiche swymme on the water, are muche lyke the berryes of the tree called Lentiscus, whiche bear∣eth the sweete gumme called Mastix: they grewe so thycke, that they somtyme in maner stayed the shyppes. The Admiral reported, that here there is not one daye throughout all the yeere much longer or shorter then an other, and that the North pole is here eleuate onely fyue degrees as at Paria, in whose tracte all these coastes lye.The eleuation of the Pole a Paria. He also declared certayne thinges as concernyng the variete of the north pole: the whiche because they seeme contrarye to thopinyons of all the Astronomers, I wyll touche them but with a drye foote, as sayth the prouerbe.Note a secrete as concernyng the Pole starre. But it is well knowen (most noble prince) that whiche we call the pole starre, or north starre (called of the Italians Tramon∣tana) is not the very poynt of the pole Artyke, vppon the whiche the axes or extremities of heauens are turned about. The whi∣che thing may well be proued, if when the starres fyrst appeare, you beholde the pole starre through any narowe hole: For so,An experience. applying your instrument therto in the mornyng, somwhat be∣fore the daye spring haue blemished theyr light, yf then you looke through the same hole, you shall perceiue it to be moued from the place where you sawe it fyrst. But howe it commeth to passe, that at the begynnyng of the euenyng twilight it is eleuate in that Region only fyue degrees in the moneth of Iune, and in the mornyng twylyght to be eleuate .xv. degrees by the same quadrant, I doo not vnderstande,A marueylous secrete. nor yet doo the reasons whiche he bryngeth, in any poynt satysfye me. For he sayth, that he hereby coniectured, that the earth is not perfectly round: but that when it was created, there was a certayne heape raysed theron, muche hygher then the other partes of the same. So that (as he sayth) it is not rounde after the forme of an apple or a bal (as other thinke) but rather lyke a peare as it hangeth on the tree, and that Paria is the Region which possesseth the superminent or hyghest part therof nearest vnto heauen: In so muche that he earnestly contendeth, the earthly Paradyse to be sytuate in the toppes of those three hylles, whiche we sayde before, that the watchman sawe out of the toppe castel of
the shippe, and that the outragious streames of the freshe waters whiche so violentlye isshue out of the sayde gulfes, and stryue so with the salt water, fall headlong from the toppes of the saide mountaynes: But of this matter, it shall suffyce to haue sayde thus muche. Let vs nowe therefore returne to the hystorie from whiche we haue digressed. When he perceiued him selfe to be thus inwrapped in so great a gulfe beyonde his expecta∣tion, so that he had nowe no hope to fynde any passage towarde the north, wherby he myght sayle directly to Hispaniola, he was enforced to turne backe the same way by the whiche he came, and directed his vyoage to Hispaniola by the north of that lande lying towarde the East. They whiche afterwarde searched this lande more curyouslye, wyll it to be parte of the continent or firme lande of India, and not of Cuba as the Admiral supposed: For there are many whiche affirme that they haue sayled round about Cuba. But whether it be so or not, or whether enuying the good fortune of this man, they seeke occasyon of quarelyng agaynst hym,Time reuealeth l thynges. I can not iudge: But tyme shall speake, whiche in tyme appoynted, reuealeth both truth and falsehod. But whe∣ther Paria be continent or not, the Admirall doth not muche contende, but he supposeth it to be continent: He also affir∣meth that Paria is more southwarde then Hispaniola, by eyght hundred fourescore and two myles. At the length he came to Hispaniola (to see his souldiers which he left with his brethren) the thyrd day of the calendes of September, in the yeere .1498. but (as often times chaunceth in humane thynges) among his so many prosperous, pleasaunt, and luckye affayres, fortune myngled some seedes of wormewood, and corrupted his pure corne with the malicious weedes of cockle. ¶ The seuenth booke of the fyrst decade, to the same Lodouike Cardinal. &c. WHen the Admiral was now come to the I∣lande of Hispaniola, he founde all thynges confounded and out of order. For Roldanus (of whom we spake before) refused in his absence to obey his brother,The Spaniar∣des rebell in the Admiralles ab∣sence. trusting to the multitude of such as were confedered with
hym, and not onely behaued hym selfe proudely agaynst the Admiralles brother and Lieuetenant, sometyme his maister, but also sent letters to his reproche to the kyng of Spayne, ther∣in accusyng both the brethren, laying heynous matters to theyr charges. But the Admirall agayne sent messengers to the kyng, whiche myght informe hym of theyr rebellyon, instant∣ly desyring his grace to sende hym a newe supplye of men, wherby he might suppresse theyr lecentiousnes, and punish them for theyr mischeuous actes. They accused the Admirall and his brother to be vniust men, cruel enimies,The Spaniar∣des accuse the Admiral. and shedders of the Spanyshe blood, declaryng that vppon euery lyght occasyon they woulde racke them, hang them, and head them, and that they tooke pleasure therin, and that they departed from them, as from cruell tyrantes and wylde beastes reioycyng in blood, also the kynges enimies: affyrmyng lykewyse, that they wel perceiued theyr entent to be none other then to vsurpe thempire of the Ilandes, whiche thyng (they sayde) they suspected by a thousande coniectures, and especially in that they woulde per∣mit none to resorte to the golde mynes, but only suche as were theyr familiers. The Admirall on the contrary part, when he desyred ayde of the kyng to infring theyr insolencie,The Admiral answere. auouched that al those his accusers, which had deuised suche lyes agaynst hym, were noughtie felowes, abhominable knaues and vilains, theeues and bandes, ruffians, adulterers, & rauishers of women, false periured vagaboundes, and such as had ben eyther conuict, in prysons, or fledde for feare of iudgement: so escaping punish∣ment, but not leauing vice, wherin they styll contynued, and brought the same with them to the iland, lyuing there in like ma∣ner as before, in thefte, lechery, & all kyndes of mischeefe, and so gyuen to Idlenes and sleepe, that wheras they were brought thyther for myners, labourers, & scullyans, they would not now goe one furlong from theyr houses, except they were borne on mens backes, like vnto them whiche in olde time were called Ediles Curules: For, to this office they put the miserable iland mē, whom they handled most cruelly. For least theyr handes should discontinue from sheddyng of blood,These had the custodies of the temples. and the better to trye theyr strength and manhod, they vsed now & then for their pastyme, to stryue among them selues, and proue who coulde most cleanely
with his swoorde at one stroke stryke of the head of an innocent: Soo that he whiche coulde with moste agilitie make the head of one of those poore wretches to flee quyte and cleane from the bodye to the grounde at one strocke,A cruel & deuil∣lyshe pastyme. he was the best man, and counted most honorable. These thyngs, and many suche other, the one of them laid to the others charge before the king. While these thinges were dooyng, the Admirall sen his brother the Leauetenaunt with an army of fourescore and tenne footemen, and a fewe horsemen (with three thousande of the Ilande men, whiche were mortall enimyes to the Ciguauians) to meete the people of Ciguaua, with Kyng Guarionexius theyr graunde capitayne, who had doone muche myscheefe to our men, and suche as fauoured them. Therefore when the Lieutenaunt had conducted his army to the bankes of a certeyne great ryuer runnyng by the playne, whiche we sayde before to lye betwene the corners of the mountaynes of Ciguaua and the sea, he founde two scoutes of his enimies lurkyng in certeyne bushes, where∣of the one, castyng hym selfe headlong into the sea, escaped, and by the mouth of the ryuer swamme ouer to his companions: the other being taken, declared that in the woodde on the other syde the ryuer, there lay in campe sixe thousande Ciguauians redy, vnwares to assaile our men passing bye. Wherefore the Lieute∣naunt finding a shalow place where he might passe ouer, he with his whole army entred into the ryuer, the which thing when the Ciguauians had espyed, they came runnyng out of the wooddes with a terrible crye, and most horrible aspect, much like vnto the people called Agathyrsi, of whom the poet virgil speaketh: For they were all paynted and spotted with sundry colours, and es∣peciall with blacke and red, which they make of certeyne fruites nooryshed for the same purpose in theyr gardens, with the iuyce wherof they paynt them selues from the forhead, euen to the knees,Heare made long & blacke by arte. hauyng theyr heare (whiche by art they make long and blacke, if nature deny it them) wreathed and rolled after a thou∣sande fashions, a man woulde thinke them to be deuylles incar∣nat newly broke out of hell, they are so like vnto helhoundes. As our men waded ouer the ryuer, they shote at them, and hurled dartes so thycke, that it almost tooke the lyght of the sonne from our men: insomuche that if they had not borne of the force
thereof with theyr targettes, the matter had gone wrong with them. Yet at the length, manye beyng wounded, they passed ouer the ryuer: which thyng when the enimies sawe, they fledde, whom our men pursuyng, slue some in the chase, but not manye, by reason of theyr swyftnesse of foote. Thus beyng in the wood∣des, they shotte at our men more safely, for they beyng accusto∣med to the wooddes, and naked without anye lette, passed through the bushes and shrubbes, as it had ben wylde bores or Hartes, whereas our men were hyndered by reason of theyr ap∣parell, targets, long iauelins, & ignoraunce of the place. Wher∣fore, when he had rested there al that nyght in vayne, and the day folowyng he sawe no stirring in the wooddes, he went (by the counsel and conducte of the other Ilande men whiche were in his army) immediatly frō thence to the mountaynes, in the whi∣che kyng Maiobanexius had his cheefe mansion place, in the vil∣lage called Capronum,Kyng Maio∣banexius. by the which name also the kyngs palace was called, beyng in the same village. Thus marching forwarde with his armie, about twelue myles of, he encamped in the vil∣lage of another kyng, whiche the inhabitauntes had forsaken for feare of our men: Yet makyng diligent searche, they found two, by whom they had knowledge that there was tenne kinges with Maiobanexius in his palace of Capronum, with an armie of eight thousand Ciguauians. At the Lieutenants fyrst approch, he durst not geue them battayle,An army of eight thousand Ciguauians. vntyll he had somewhat better searched the region: yet dyd he in the meane tyme skyrmyshe with them twyse. The next nyght about mydnyght, he sent foorth scoutes, and with them guides of the Ilande men whiche knewe the countrey: Whom the Ciguauians espying frō the mountaines, prepared them selues to the battayle, with a terrible crye or ala∣rum after their maner, but yet durst not come out of the woods, supposing that the Lieuetenant with his mayne army had ben euen at hande. The day folowyng, when he brought his army to the place where they encamped, leaping out of the wooddes, they twyse attempted the fortune of warre, fiercely assayling our men with a mayne force, and wounding many before they coulde coouer them with theyr targettes: Yet our men put them to flyght, slue manye, and tooke manye, the resydue fledde to the wooddes, where they kept them styll as in their
most safe holde. Of them whiche were taken, he sent one, and with him another of the Ilande men, which was of his part, to Maiobanexius, with commaundement in this effect, The Lieue∣tenaunt brought not hyther his army (O Maiobanexius) to kepe warre either against you, or your people, for he greatly desyreth your frendship: but his intent is, that Guarionexius, who hath per∣swaded you to be his ayde against him, to the great destruction of your people, and vndoyng of your countrey, may haue due correction, aswell for his disobedience towarde hym, as also for raysng tumultes among the people: Wherefore he requireth you,Kyng Guari∣onexius. and exhorteth you to deliuer Guarionexius into his handes, the whiche thing yf you shal perfourme, the Admirall his brother wyll not only gladly admyt you to his freendshyp, but also en∣large and defende your dominion. And yf herein you refuse to accomplyshe his request, it wyll folowe, that you shal short∣lye repente you thereof: For your kyngdome shalbe wasted with sworde and fyre, and you shall abyde the fortune of warre, whereof you haue had experience with fauour, as you shall further know heareafter to your payne, yf with stubbernesse you prouoke him to shewe the vttermoste of his power. When the messenger had thus doone his arant, Maiobanexius answered, that Guarionexius was a good man, indued with many vertues as all men knewe, and therfore he thought him worthy his ayde, especially in as much as he fled to him for succoure, and that he had made him suche promise, whom also he had proued to be his faithfull frend: againe, that they were noughty men, violent, and cruell,Naturall ha∣tred of vyce. desiring other mens goodes, and such as spared not to shed innocentes blood: in fine, that he would not haue to doo with suche myscheuous men, nor yet enter into frendshyppe with them. When these thynges came to the Lieuetenauntes eare, he commaunded the village to be burnt where he hym selfe encamped, with manye other villages there about: and when he drewe nere to the place where Maiobanexius lay, he sent mes∣sengers to him agayne, to common the matter with him, and to wyll hym to send some one of his moste faythfull frendes to entreate with hym of peace. Whereuppon the kyng sent vn∣to hym one of his cheefe gentelmen, and with hym two other to wayte on hym. When he came to the Lieuetenauntes pre∣sence,
he frendly requyred hym to perswade his lord and maister in his name, and earnestly to admonishe hym,The Lieuete∣naunts gentel∣nesse toward Maiobane∣xius. not to suffer his florishyng kyngdome to be spoyled, or hym selfe to abyde the ha∣sarde of warre for Guarionexius sake: and further to exhorte hym to delyuer hym, excepte he woulde procure the destruction both of hym selfe, his people, and his countrey. When the messenger was returned, Maiobanexius assembled the people, declaring vnto them what was doone: but they cryed out on him to deliuer Guarionexius, and began to curse the daye that euer they had re∣ceaued hym, thus to disturbe theyr quietnesse. Maiobanexius an∣swered them, that Guarionexius was a good man,A rare faithful∣nesse in a bar∣barous kyng. & had well de∣serued of him, geuing him many princely presentes, and had also taught both his wife and him to sing and daunce, which thing he did not little esteeme, and was therfore fully resolued in no case to forsake him, or agaynst al humanitie to betray hys frende, which fled to him for succoure, but rather to abide al extremities with him, then to minister occasion of obloquie to slaunderers, to reporte that he had betraied his ghest, whom he toke into his house with warranties. Thus dimissing the people, sighing and with sorowfull hartes, he called Guarionexius before him, promi∣sing him agayne, that he would be partaker of his fortune while life lasted: in so much that he thought it not best to send any fur∣ther woorde to the Lieuetenaunt, but appoynted him whom be∣fore he sent to him, to keepe the way with a garrison of men, to thintent, that yf any messengers should be sent from the Lieue∣tenaunt, to slay them by the way, and admit none to communica∣tion, or further entreatie of peace. In the meane time, the Lieu∣tenaunt sent two, wherof the one was a captiue Ciguauian, and the other an Iland man, of them which were frendes to our men: and they were both taken and slaine.The Lieuete∣nauntes mes∣sengers are slayne. The Lieutenaunt fo∣lowed them only with ten footemen & foure horsemen, finding his messengers dead in the way, he was further prouoked to wrath, and determined more extremely to deale with Maioba∣nexius, & therfore went forward incontinently with his whole ar∣my to his cheefe pallace of Capronum, where he yet lay incampe. At his approche, al ye kinges fled. euery man his way, & forsoke their capitaine Maiobanexius, who also with al his famylye, fled to ye rough moūtaines. Some of the Ciguauians sought for
Guarionexius to slay hym, for that he was the cause of all these troubles: but his feete saued his lyfe, for he fledde in tyme to the mountaines, where he lurked in maner alone among the desolate rockes. Wheras now the Lieuetenauntes souldiers were fore∣weryed with long warre, with watching, laboure, and hunger (for it was nowe three monethes sence the warres began) many desyred leaue to departe to the towre of Conception, where they had graneges, & exercised tillage. He gaue them their passeports with alowance of vittayles, and so that onely thyrtie remayned with hym. These three monethes warre, they contynued very paynefull and myserablye: So that duryng al that tyme, they had none other meate but only Cazibi,The Spaniar∣des are painfull in the warres. that is, such rootes wher∣of they make theyr bread, and that but seldome to theyr fyll: al∣so Vsias, that is, lyttle beastes lyke Conyes, if by chaunce nowe and then they tooke some with theyr houndes. Their drinke was none other then water, such as they founde, somtyme sweete, and somtyme muddy, saueryng of the maryshes. Emong these delicates, that lyttle sleepe that they had, was euer for the most parte abrode vnder the firmament, and that not without watche∣men, and in continual remoouing, as the nature of warre requi∣reth.A desperate ad∣uenture with thirtie men. With these fewe therfore, the Lieuetenaunt determined to searche the mountaynes, dennes, and caues, if he coulde in any place fynde the steppes of Maiobanexius or Guarionexius. In the meane tyme certayne of his men (whom hunger enforced to goe a hunting, to proue if they coulde take any conies) chaunced vp∣pon two of Maiobanexius familyers, which were sent to certaine villages of his, to make prouision of bread. These he enforced to declare where theyr lorde lay hid, & vsed the same also for guides, to bring our men to the place. Twelue of our men tooke this en∣terpryse in hand, painting them selues after ye maner of the Cig∣uauians: So that by this stratageme or policie, they came soden∣ly vppon Maiobanexius,A pollicie. and tooke hym prisoner, with his wyfe, children, & family, and conueighed them to the towre of Concep∣tion to the Lieuetenaunt. Within a fewe dayes after, hunger compelled Guarionexius to come out of the dennes, whom cer∣taine of the people fearing the Lieuetenaunt, bewrayed to our hunters. The Lieuetenaunt being certified hereof, sent foorth a bande of foote men, commaunding them to lye in ambushe vn∣tyll
suche tyme as Guarionexius went from the playnes to the mountaynes, and then sodenly to entrappe hym. They went as they were commaunded, tooke hym, and brought hym away with them, and by this meanes were al the regions neare about pacified and quieted. A certayne noble woman of neare kynred to Maiobanexius, and wyfe to another kyng, whose dominion was yet vntouched, folowed hym in all these aduersities. They affirme this woman to be the fayrest and most beautifull, that euer nature brought foorth in the Iland: Whom,A beautifull woman. when the king her husbande, who loued her most ardently (as her beautie deser∣ued) hearde say that she was taken prysoner, he wandered vp and downe the desartes lyke a man out of his wytte, not know∣yng what to doo or say. But at the length, he came to the Lieutenaunt, promisyng most faythfullye, that he woulde sub∣mit him selfe and al that he coulde make, vnder his power, so that he woulde restore hym his wyfe. The Lieutenaunt accep∣ted the condition, & restored him his wife, with certaine other ru∣lers and gentlemen which he had taken prysoners before: char∣ging them, and bynding them with an othe, to be euer redy at his commaundement. Shortly after, this king of his owne free motion, came agayne to the Lieutenaunt, bryngyng with him fyue thousande men without weapons, sauyng only suche instru∣mentes as they vse in tyllage of theyr ground. He brought with hym also seedes to sowe, wherwith at his owne charge, he cau∣sed such plentie of theyr corne and fruites to growe in sundry pla∣ces of the larg vale, wherof we spake before, that shortly after, were seene many fayre and fruitfull feeldes that came therof: and for his gentelnesse being rewarded of the Lieuetenaunte with certayne of our thynges, he departed ioyfullye. When the report hereof came to the Ciguauians,The kynges submit them selues to the Lieuetenaunt. it mooued the mindes of the kynges to hope of clemencie, whereuppon they came together to the Lieuetenaunt with humble submission and faith∣full promyse, euer after to be vnder his obedience, desyryng hym to restore vnto them theyr kyng with his familie. At theyr request, the kynges wyfe and his housholde was set at liber∣tie, but the king kept styl as a prysoner. These thynges dyd the Lieutenaunt in the Ilande, not yet knowyng what his aduer∣saries and accusers had layde to his charge before the kyng of
Spaine: who being disquieted with theyr quarelinges and accu∣sations, and especially for that by reason of theyr discention, of so greate abundance of golde and other thynges, there was as yet but lyttle brought into Spayne, appoynted a newe gouernour, which shoulde see a redresse in these thynges:A newe gouer∣nour of the Ilande. and eyther to pu∣nyshe such as were fautie, or els to sende them to him. What was founde agaynst the Admirall and his brother, or agaynst his aduersaries which accused hym, I do not well knowe. But this I am sure of, that both the brethren are taken, brought, and caste in prison, with theyr goodes confiscate. But as soone as the king vnderstode that they were brought bounde to Cales, he sent messengers in poste, with commaundement that they should be loosed and come freely to his presence: wherby he de∣clared that he toke their troubles greeuously. It is also said, that the new gouernour sent letters to the kyng, written with the Ad∣miralles hand in straunge and vnknowen sypheringes, to his brother the Lieuetenaunt being absent, wyllyng hym to be in a redynes with a power of armed men to come and ayd hym, if the Gouernoure should proffer hym any violence. Wherof the go∣uernour hauing knowledge (as he sayth) beyng also aduertised that the Lieuetenaunt was gone to his brother before the men whiche he had prepared were in a redines, apprehended them both vnwares, before the multitude came togeather. What wyl folowe, tyme, the most true and prudent Iudge wyll declare. Thus fare ye well. ¶ The eygth booke of the fyrst Decade, to Cardinall Lodouike. The Ocean sea heretofore vn∣knowen.THe great, ryche, and plentifull Ocean sea, heretofore vnknowen, and nowe founde by Christophorus Colonus the Admiral, by thau∣toritie & furtherance of the Catholyke king, I haue presented vnto your honour (ryght noble Prince) like a golden chayne vnwork∣manly wrought: but you shal now receiue a pretious iewell to be appendaunt therto. Therefore among such as were pylottes or gouernours vnder the admyrall, and had dyligently marked the courses & dyfferences of the windes,
many had lycences graunted them of the kyng to seeke further at theyr owne charges, vpon condition to pay hym faythfully his portion, which is the fyfte part. But because amonge all other, one Petrus Alphonsus, called Nignus by his surname,The nauigati∣on of Petrus Alphonsus. sayled to∣warde the south with more prosperous fortune then any of the other, I thinke it best first to speake somewhat of his voyage. He therfore with only one shyp, well furnished at his owne char∣ges, after that he had his passeporte, with commaundement in no case to cast anker past fyftye leagues distant from anye place where the Admirall had touched, sayled fyrst to Paria, where the Admiral founde both the men and women so laden with cheines, garlandes, and braselettes of pearles, as we haue sayde before. Coastyng therfore along by the same shore, accordyng to the kings commaundement (yet leauing behynd hym the regions of Cumana and Manacapana) he came to the regions which thinha∣bitantes therof cal Curiana, where he found a hauen (as he saith) much lyke the port of Gades or Cales: into the which enteryng, he sawe a farre of certayne houses one the shore, and perceyued, when he drewe neere, that it was a village of only eyght houses. Proceading yet further for the space of three myles, he espied an other village well replenyshed with people, where there met hym fyftye naked men on a company, hauing with them a cer∣tayne ruler, who desyred Alphonsus to come to theyr coastes. He brought with hym at thys tyme, many haukes belles, pyn∣nes, nedels, braselettes, cheynes, garlandes, and rynges, with counterfet stones and glasses, and such other tryfelles, the which within the moment of an houre, he had exchaunged for fyfteene ounces of theyr pearles,Pearles for tryfles. which they wore aboute theyr neckes and armes. Then they yet more ernestly desyred hym to sayle to theyr coastes, promysyng hym that he shoulde there haue as many pearles as he woulde desyre. He condiscended to theyr request: and the day folowing,Great plentie of pearles. came to the place where they ap∣poynted hym: Lying there at anker, a great multitude of people resorted to hym, instantly requyring hym to come alande. But when he consydered the innumerable multitude of people which was there assembled, and he had only .xxxiii. men in his com∣pany, he durst not commit hym selfe to theyr handes, but gaue them to vnderstand by sygnes and tokens, that they shoulde
come to the shyp with their Canoas: for their boates (which the men of the iland cal Canoas) are made only of one whole peece of wood as in the Ilandes, yet more rude, and not so artificially as theyrs are: these they call Gallitas. These swarmed therfore to the shyp as faste as they might, bringyng with them greate plenty of pearles (which they cal Tenoras) exchanging the same for our marchaundies. He founde this people to be of gentyll nature, simple, and innocent, being conuersant with them in theyr houses, for the space of xx. dayes. Theyr houses are made of wood, couered with the leaues of date trees. Their meate for the moste parte, is the shelfyshes in the which the pearles are en∣gendered,Shel fyshes in which pearles are engendred. wherof their sea costes are full. They haue also greate plenty of wyld beastes, as hartes, wyld bores, and connies like vnto hares, both in coloure and bignesse, stocke doues also, and turtle doues: lykewyse geese and duckes, which they norishe in theyr houses as we doo. Peacockes flee aboute in maner in euery wood and groue, but they are not distinct with sundry co∣lours as ours are: for the cockes are like vnto the hennes. These people of Curiana are craftie hunters, and exceding cunning ar∣chers, so that they will not lyghtly misse any beaste or byrde that they shoote at. Our men consumed certayne dayes heare very plesauntely: duryng which time, whosoeuer brought them a peacocke, had for the same foure pinnes: he that brought a phea∣saunte,Theyr manner of bargayning. had two, and for a stocke doue, or turtle doue, one, and for a goose, a smale looking glasse, or a litle stone of glasse. Thus they bought and solde with profering and bydding, denying and refusing, as it had byn in a greate market. When pinnes were profered them, they asked what they shoulde do with them, be∣ing naked: But our men satisfied them with a craftie answere, declaring by tokens that they were very necessary,The vse of pynnes. to picke theyr teeth, and to pull thornes out of theyr fleshe. But aboue al thyn∣ges,Haukes belles in great estima∣tion. haukes belles were most esteemed among them, for theyr sound & faire colour, and woulde therfore geue much for one of them. Our men, lodging in their houses, heard in the nyght sea∣son horrible noyses & rorynges of wild beastes in the wooddes, whiche are full of exceding great and hygh trees of sundrye kindes:Roring of wild beastes. but the beastes of these woodes, are not noysome to men, for the people of the countrey goo daylye a huntyng
naked, with theyr bowes and arrowes, yet hath it not ben harde of, that any man hath ben slayne of any wylde beast. As many hartes or wylde bores as our men woulde desyre them to bryng, they woulde kyll in the woodes with their arrowes,Hartes and wylde bores. and not to fayle to bryng them. They lacke kyne, goates and sheepe. Theyr bread is made of rootes, as is theyrs of the Ilands. This nation, hath blacke heare, grosse and somwhat curlde, yet long also. They keepe theyr teeth very whyte, and for that purpose vse to cary a certaine herbe betwene theyr lyppes for the most part of the day, and to washe theyr mouthts when they cast it away. The women doo all theyr busynes at home in theyr how∣ses, and haue also the cure of tyllage of the grounde: but the men apply them selues to the warres and huntyng, to playe, syng∣yng and daunsyng. They haue sundry kyndes of water pottes, iugges, and drinkyng cuppes made of earth in other places about them, and brought thyther for exchaung of other thynges: For they vse fayres and markettes for the same purpose, and are greatly desyrous of such thynges, as are not brought forth or made in theyr countrey, as nature hath geuen a disposytion to al men, to desyre and be delyted with newe and strang thynges. Many of them had hangyng at theyr pearles the images of cer∣teine beastes and birdes, very artifitiously made of golde,Cunnyng ar∣tificers. but not pure: these also are brought them from other places for exchang of other thynges. The golde wherof they are made, is natiue, and of much lyke finenes to that wherof the florens are coyned.Base golde. The men of this countrey, inclose theyr priuie members in a gourde, cutte after the fashiō of a coddepice, or els couer the same with the shell of a tortoyse, tyed about theyr loynes with laces of gossampine cotton: In other places of that tract, they thrust the synew within the sheeth therof, and bynde the skinne fast with a string. The great wylde beastes wherof we spake before, and many other thynges which are not found in any of the Ilandes, testifie that this region is parte of ye continet or firme lande. But the chiefest coniecture wherby they argue the same, is,Tokens of the continent or firme lande. that by the coastes of that lande, from Paria towarde the west, they sayled about three. M. myles, findyng no signe or token of any ende. These people of Curiana (whiche some call Curtana) being de∣maunded where they had such plentie of golde, signified that it
was brought them from a region called Canchieta,The golden re∣gion of Can∣chieta. or Cauchieta, beyng distant from them sixe sunnes, that is, sixe dayes iourney westwarde: and that theyr images of golde were made in the same region. Whereupon our men directed theyr voyage thy∣ther immediatly, and aryued there at the Kalendes of No∣uember, in the yeere of Christe a thousande and fyue hun∣dred. The people of the countrey resorted to them without feare, bryngyng with them of the golde whiche we sayde to be natiue in that region. This people had also collers of pearles about theyr neckes, which were brought them from Curiana for exchaunge of theyr marchandises. None of them woulde ex∣chaunge anye of those thynges whiche they had out of other countreys: as neyther the Curians golde, nor the Canchietans pearles: yet among the Canchietans they founde but lytle golde redy geathered. They toke with them from thence certayne very fayre Marmasets or Munkeyes, and many Popyngayes of sun∣drye coloures. In the moneth of Nouember, the ayre was there most temperate, and nothyng colde. The guardens of the north pole were out of syght to both these people, they are so neare the Equinoctial.The Equinoc∣tial line. Of the degrees of the pole, they can geue none other accompte. These people are wel disposed men, of ho∣nest conditions, and nothyng suspitious, for almost al the nyght long they resorted to the shyppe with theyr boates, and went aboorde shyppe without feare, as dyd the Curians. They call pearles, Corixas. They are somewhat ielous, for when anye straungers come among them, they euer place theyr women be∣hynde them. In this region of Canchieta, the gossampine trees growe of them selues commonly in many places,Gossampine trees. as doo with vs elmes, wyllowes, and sallowes: and therefore they vse to make breeches of cotton, wherewith they couer theyr priuie partes in many other regions thereabout. When they had yet sayled on forwarde by the same coastes, there came forth against them about two thousande men, armed after theyr manner, for∣byddyng them to come alande. These people were so rude and sauage, that our men coulde by no meanes allure them to fami∣liaritie. Our men therefore, contented only with theyr pearles, returned backe ye same way they came, where they remained with the Curians continually for the space of .xx. dayes, & fylled theyr
bellies wel with good meate. And here it seemeth to me not farre from my purpose, to declare what chaunced vnto them in theyr returne when they came now within the sight of the coast of Pa∣ria. They happened therfore in the way, at Os Draconis, and the gulfes of Paria (wherof we spake before) to meete with a nauy of xviii. Canoas of Canibales, which went a rouing to hunt for men:Canibales in the gulfes of Paria. who assoone as they had espied our men, assailed their ship fierce∣ly, & without feare enclosed ye same, disturbing our men on euery side with their arrowes: but our men so feared them with theyr gunnes, that they fled immediatly, whō our men folowing with the shyp boate, tooke one of theyr Canoas, and in it only one Canibal (for the other had escaped) and with him another man bounde, who with teares runnyng downe his cheekes, and with gesture of his handes, eyes, and head, signified that sixe of his companions had ben cruelly cut in peeces, and eaten of that mis∣cheuous nation, and that he shoulde haue ben likewyse handled the day folowyng: wherefore they gaue hym power ouer the Canibal, to do with him what he would. Then with the Canibals owne clubbe,Death for death. he layde on hym al that he might dryue with hande and foote, grinning and fetting as it had ben a wyld bore, thin∣kyng that he had not yet sufficiently reuenged the death of his companions, when he had beaten out his braynes and guttes. When he was demaunded after what sort the Canibales were woont to inuade other countreys, he answered, that they euer vsed to carye with them in theyr Canoas, a great multitude of clubbes, the whiche, wheresoeuer they do lande,Howe the Ca∣nibales fortifie their campe. they pytch in the grounde, and encampe them selues within the compasse of the same, to lye the more safely in the nyght season. In Curiana they founde the head of a captayne of the Canibales, nayled ouer the doore of a certayne gouernour for a token of victorye, as it had ben the standerde or helmet taken from the enimie in battayle. In these coastes of Paria is a region called Haraia, in the which great plentie of salt is geathered after a strange sorte:Haraia. for the sea beyng there tossed with the power of the wyndes, dryueth the salte waters into a large playne by the sea syde, where, after∣warde when the sea waxeth calme, and the sunne begynneth to shine, the water is coniealed into most pure and whyte salte, wherewith innumerable shyypes myght be laden, yf men dyd
resort thether for the same before there fale any rayne: For the rayne melteth it, and causeth it to synke into the sande, and so by the poores of the earth, to returne to the place from whence it was dryuen. Other say, that the playne is not fylled from the sea, but of certeine sprynges whose water is more sharpe and salt then the water of the sea.Springes of salt water. Thinhabitantes do greatlye esteeme this bay of salt, whiche they vse, not only for theyr owne commo∣ditie, but also woorking the same into a square forme lyke vnto brickes, they sell it to strangers for exchaunge of other thynges whiche the lacke.The bodyes of prynces dryed and reserued. In this Region, they stretche and drye the dead bodies of theyr kinges and noble men, laying the same vpon a certayne frame of woodde, muche lyke vnto a hurdle or grediren, with a gentell fyre vnder the same, by lyttle and lyttle consumyng the fleshe, and keping the skynne hole with the bones inclosed therein. These dryed carcases, they haue in great reue∣rence, and honour them for theyr houshoulde and famylier gods. They say that in this place they sawe a man, & in an other place a woman, thus dryed and reserued. When they departed from Curiana, the .viii. day of the Ides of February, to returne to Spayne, they had threescore and .xvi. poundes weight (after .viii. vnces to the pounde) of pearles, which they bought for exchange of our thinges, amounting to the value of fyue shillinges. Depar∣ting therfore, they consumed threescore dayes in theyr iourney (although it were shorter then from Hispaniola) by reason of the continuall course of the sea in the west, which dyd not only great∣ly stey the shippe, but also somtymes dryue it backe. But at the length they came home so laden with pearles, that they were with euery maryner, in maner as common as chaffe. But the master of the shyppe, Petrus Alphonsus, being accused of his com∣panyons that he had stowlen a great multitude of pretious pear∣les, and defrauded the kyng of his portion whiche was the fifth parte, was taken of Fernando de Vega, a man of great lerning and experience, & gouernour of Gallecia, where they aryued, and was there kept in pryson a long tyme. But he styll denyeth that euer he deteyned any part of the pearles. Many of these pearles were as bygge as hasell nuttes,Orient pearles s bygge as asel nuts. and as oriente (as we call it) as they be of the East partes: Yet not of so great pryce, by rea∣son that the holes thereof are not so perfecte. When I my
selfe was present with the right honorable duke of Methyna, and was biddē to dynner with him, in the citie of Ciuile, they brought to hym aboue a hundred and twentie ounces of pearles to be solde, whiche surely dyd greatly delyte me with their fayrenes and brightnes. Some say, that Alphonsus had not these pearles in Curiana, being distant from Os Draconis more then a hundred & twentie leagues, but that they had them in the regions of Cu∣mana and Manacapana, nere vnto Os Draconis and the ilande of Margarita: for they deny that there is any pearles founde in Curiana. But sith the matter is yet in controuersie,The Ilande of Margarita. we wyl passe to other matters. Thus muche you haue, whereby you may con∣iecture, what commoditie in tyme to come may bee looked for from these newe landes of the west Ocean, whereas at the fyrst discouering, they shewe suche tokens of great ryches. Thus fare ye well. ¶ The .ix. booke of the fyrst Decade to Cardinal Lodoutke. VIncentiagnes Pinzonus, & also Aries Pinzo∣nus, his neuiew by his brother syde,The nauigati∣on of Vincenti∣us, and Aries Pinzonus. whiche accompanyed the Admiral Colonus in his fyrst vyage, & were by him appoynted to be maisters of two of the small shippes which the Spaniards call Carauelas, being moued by the great ryches & amplitude of the new landes, furnyshed of theyr owne charges foure Carauels, in the hauen of theyr owne countrey, which the Spanyardes cal Palos, bordering on the west Ocean. Hauing therfore the kings licence & passeport to depart, they loosed from the hauen, about the Ca∣lendes of December, in the yeere .1499. This hauen of Palos, is threescore & twelue myles distant from Gades, commonly called Cales, and .lxiiii. myles from Ciuile. All thinhabitantes of this towne, not one excepted, are greatly geuē to searching of the sea, and continually exercised in sayling. They also directed their vi∣age fyrst to the iland of Canarie by the ilands of Hesperides,The Ilandes of Canarie. Cabouerde. now called Cabouerde, which some cal Gorgodes Meducias. Sayling therfore directly toward the south from that ilande of Hesperides whiche the Portugales (beyng possessers of the same) cal Sancti
Iacobi, and departing from thence at the Ides of Ianuary, they folowed the southwest wynde,S. Iames Ilande. beyng in the myddest betwene the south and the west. When they supposed that they had sayled about three hundreth leagues by the same wynde, they say that they lost the syght of the Northe starre:The north pole out of sight. and were shortely after tossed with excedyng tempestes bothe of wynde and sea, and vex∣ed with intollerable heate: Yet sayled they on further (not with∣out great daunger) for the space of two hundred & fortie leagues, folowing yet the same wynd by the lost pole. Wherfore, whether habitable regions be vnder the Equinoctiall lyne or not, let these men and the oulde wryters, aswel Philosophers as poetes and cosmographers discusse.Habitable regi∣ons vnder the Equinoctial lyne. For these mē affirme it to be habitable, and meruelously replenished with people: and they, that it is vn∣habitable by reason of the sonne beames depending perpendicu∣larly or directlye ouer the same. Yet were there many of the olde wryters, whiche attempted to proue it habitable. These ma∣ryners being demaunded, if they saw the south pole, they answe∣red that they knew no starre there like vnto this pole, that might be decerued about the poynt: but that they sawe an other order of starres, and a certeyne thicke myst rysyng from the horizontall lyne, whiche greatly hyndered theyr syght. They contende also, that there is a great heape or rysyng in the myddest of the earth, whiche taketh away the syght of the south pole, vntyll they haue vtterly passed ouer the same: but they verely beleeue that they sawe other images of starres, muche differing from the situation of the starres of our hemispherie, or halfe circle of heauen. Howe so euer the matter be, as they informe vs, we certifie you. At the length, the seuenth day of the calendes of Februarye, the espied lande a farre of, and seeing the water of the sea to be trobelous, sounding with theyr plummet, they founde it to be .xvi▪ fathames deepe. Going a lande, and tarying there for the space of two dayes, they departed, bycause they sawe no people stering, al∣though they founde certeyne steppes of men by the sea syde. Thus grauing on the trees & the stones nere vnto the shore, the kynges name and theyrs, and the tyme of theyr commyng the∣ther, they departed. Not farre from this station, folowyng the fyers on the land by nyght, they founde a nation lying vnder
the open fyrmament, after the maner of warre. Our men thought it not best to trouble them vntyll the mornyng. There fore, at the rysyng of the sonne, fortie of our men well armed, wente towarde them: agaynst whom came forth .xxxii. of them, with bowes, slynges and dartes, euen redy to fyght. The o∣ther companye folowed them, armed after the same maner. Our men affirme that they were of hygher stature then eyther the Al∣maynes or Pannonians.People of high stature. They beheld our men with frownyng & threatenyng countenaunce: but our men thought it not good to fal to bickering with them, vncertayne whether it were for feare, or bycause they would not dryue them to flight. Wher∣fore they went about to allure them by faire meanes & rewards: but they refused all kynde of gentelnes, and stoode euer in a re∣dines to fight, declaring the same by signes and tokens. Thus our men resorted to theyr shyppes, and they to the place from whence they came, without any further busines. The same nyght about mydnyght, they fledde, & left the place voyde where they lay in the campe.A vagabounde kynde of men. Our men suppose them to be a vagabund and wandering nation, lyke vnto the Scythians, without houses or certeyne dwelling places, lyuing only with the fruites of the earth, hauing theyr wyues and chyldren folowing them. Suche as measured their footesteppes in the sande, affirme with great othes, that one of theyr feete is almost as long as two feete of our men of the meane sorte. Sayling on yet further,Giantes. they founde an other riuer, but not of deapth sufficient to beare the Carauels: they sent therefore the foure shippe boates to lande, full of ar∣med men to search the countrey. They espyed vppon a hygh hyll nere vnto the sea syde, a greate multitude of people, to whom our company sent foorth one man with certeyne of our thynges to allure them to exchange. And when he had cast a haukes bell towarde them, they cast downe a wedge of golde a cubit longe: the which as he stoped to take vp, they sodenly inclosed hym, and caryed hym away, But he was shortly after rescued by his companions, to some of their paynes: for they slue eyght of our men, & wounded many a farre of, with theyr arrowes, and dartes made of wood, hardened at the endes with fyre. After this they encompassed our shippe boates within the ryuer, and came rash∣ly within the reache of our men, laying holde on the boates
sydes, where they were thrust through, and hewen in peeces as it had ben sheepe,Desperate oldnesse. by reason they were naked. Yet woulde they not for al this geue ouer, but tooke from our men one of their boates, hauing no men in it: for the gouernour thereof being slayne with an arrowe, the other fledde and escaped. And thus they lefte this fierce and warlyke people, saylyng toward the north∣west, along by the same coastes, with sorowfull hartes for the death of theyr companyons. When they had sayled about .xl. leagues, they chaunced into a sea of suche freshe water, that they fylled theyr barelles and hoggesheades therewith.A sea of freshe water. Search∣ing the cause hereof, they vnderstoode that a vehement course of riuers discended with great vince from the toppes of certayne great hylles. They say also that there lyeth within the sea, ma∣nye fortunate and fruitfull Ilandes,Many fruitful Ilandes. and well inhabited, and that thinhabitantes of this tracte are men of meeke nature, and suche as doo not refuse straungers, yet lyttle profytable to them, because they haue no marchandyes for their purpose,Humane peo∣ple. as golde, or precious stones: for lacke whereof, they brought from thence thyrtie captiues to sell for slaues. Thinhabitantes call this re∣gion Mariatambal. The region of the east part of that ryuer, is called Camomorus, and that of the west part Paricora, in the mid∣lande whereof, thinhabitantes signifyed that there is great plen∣tie of golde: For, folowing this riuer directly toward the North (as the bending of the shore requyred) they recouered againe the syght of the north pole. All the coaste of this tracte, parteyneth to Paria,Regions of Paria. the which (as we sayd before) was fyrst found by Colonus hym selfe, and hath in maner in euery place great abundaunce of pearles.Gold & pearles They say that these coastes are adioynyng vnto, and all one with Os Draconis, and also borderyng vppon the regions of Cumana, Manacapana, Curiana, Cauchieta, and Cuchibachoa: Wherfore they thought it to be part of the firme lande of India, beyonde the riuer of Ganges. For the great & large compasse ther∣of, doth not permit that it shoulde be an ilande, albeit the whole earth vncouered with water, largely taken, may be called an I¦lande. From the poynt of that land where they lost the sight of the north pole, saylyng by a continuall tracte about three hun∣dred leagues towarde the west syde of Paria, they say that (almost in the mid way) they chaunced into a riuer called Maragnonum,
whiche they affirme to be of suche exceedyng breadth, that it might seeme incredible, yf the antiques dyd not make mention of the lyke. Beyng demaunded of me yf it were not salt water where it diuided the lande, they answeared that the water therof was very freshe and sweete, and that the further it ranne, to be so muche the fresher: also ful of Ilandes and wholsome fyshe: they dare auouche the breadth therof to be more then thirtie leagues. Yet yf we wel weigh and consyder the largenesse and widenesse of Boriostomea and Spiriostomea, the mouthes of the famous riuer of Ister (nowe called Danubius) and howe farre they violate or corrupt the salt water with their freshnesse, we shal ceasse to mar∣ueyle, although this other riuer be greater: for who can diminish the power of nature, but that it may make this bigger then the other, and another bygger then this? And I suppose this to be the ryuer whereof Colonus the Admirall made mention in the description of his voyage in these coastes. But we shal hereafter haue further knowledge hereof: let vs nowe therefore returne to the commodities of these regions.The commo∣dities of the re∣gions & Ilands about Paria. Brasile. They found in many Ilands about Paria, great wooddes of Brasile trees, and brought away with them three thousande poundes weyght thereof. They say that the Brasile of Hispaniola, is muche better then this to dye cloth with a more fayre and durable colour. From hence, folow∣ing the winds (which the Spaniards cal Northuest, and the Ita∣lians Graeco) they passed by many Ilandes very fruiteful, yet left desolate and wasted by reason of the crueltie of the Canibales: for they went alande in many places, they founde the ruines of many destroyed houses: yet in some places they founde men, but those exceedyng fearefull, fleeyng to the mountaynes, rockes, and wooddes at the syght of euery straunger or shyppe, & wan∣deryng without houses or certayne abydyng places, for feare of the Caniballes laying wayte and huntyng after them.Canibales. Here they found those great trees whiche of them selues in dyuers places bryng forth that fruite or spice, which the Apothecaries cal Cas∣sia Phistula, and that of no lesse goodnesse,Trees of Cassia fistula. then that which the phisitians minister to suche as be diseased with the ague, but it was not rype at theyr beyng there. They affirme that there are trees of suche bygnesse, that .xvi. men ioyning handes togeather, and standyng in compasse, can scarcely embrace some of them.
Among these trees is found that monstrous beaste with a snoute lyke a foxe,A monstrous beast. a tayle lyke a marmasette, eares lyke a bat, handes lyke a man, and feete lyke an ape, bearyng her whelpes aboute with her in an outwarde bellye much lyke vnto a great bagge or purse. The deade carkas of this beaste, you sawe with me, and turned it ouer and ouer with your owne handes, maruey∣lyng at that new belly, and wonderful prouision of nature. They say it is knowen by experience, that she neuer letteth her whel∣pes goo out of that purse, except it be ether to play, or to sucke, vntyll suche tyme that they be able to gette theyr lyuyng by them selues. They tooke thys beaste with her whelpes: But the whelpes dyed shortely after in the shyppes, Yet the damme liued certaine monethes: but at the length, not being able to a∣bide so great alteration of ayre, and change of meate, she died al∣so in the way. But of this beaste, we haue saidt enough. Let vs now therfore returne to the aucthours of these thinges. These two Pinzoni, the vncle and the neuiew, susteyned many greate troubles & horrible tempestes and perilles in this nauigation. For when they had nowe sailed by the coastes of Paria about syxe hundred leagues, & (as they supposed) beyond the citie of Cathay, and the costes of East India beyond the riuer of Ganges, there rose sodenly so fierce a tempest in the moneth of Iuly, that of the four Carauels which they had with them, two were drowned euen before theyr eyes: and the thyrd lying at anker, with lyke sodennes caried out of theyr syght throwgh the violence of the tempest: the fourth also lying at anker, was so shaken and broo∣sed, that all the seames therof were almost loosed: Yet came they to land out of this last shyp, but vtterly despayryng of the shyp. Wherfore consultyng with them selues what was best to bee donne in so extreeme a case, and how to prouyde them a safe dwellyng place in those Regions, beyng out of all hope how to depart from thence,Extreme reme∣die in a despe∣rate case. they determyned to slay all the in∣habytauntes of the countrey nere about them, least they with the other shoulde conspyre together to kyll them, but theyr for∣tune was better: For the Carauel which the tempest had caried away, was come to them agayne. This had in it .xviii. men: And the other that remayned, was saued and repayred. With these two therfore, they tooke theyr voyage directly to Spayne,
and thus being tossed with tempestes, and vexed with aduersities, they returned to theyr natyue countrey of Palos, to theyr wyues and chyldren, the day before the Calendes of October, with the losse of many of theyr deere frends & neighbours. They brought with them Cinamome and ginger: but not very good,Cinamome and Ginger. because they were not there fully seasoned with the heate of the sonne, before they brought them from thence. They brought also cer∣tayne pretious stones, which Baptista Elysius that excellent phi∣losopher, and your lordshyppes phisition, affirmeth to be true Topases. After these mens returne,Topases. other of theyr neighbours being moued therto by a certaine emulation, to proue yf theyr fortune wold be any better, lyke men of good corage,Men of noble courage. beyng no∣thing discomforted by the hard fortune of their neighboures, kno∣wing that it often times chaunceth, that that which is one mans vndoing, is an other mans making, attempted a newe voiage to∣ward the south by ye costes of Paria,Another voyage. folowyng the steps of Colonus the Admiral, who had fyrste discouered the same. They also brought with them great plentie of Cassia fistula, and founde that precious medicine called of the Spaniards Animae album,Animae album whose perfume is of most excellent effect to heale the reumes, murres, and heauines of the head. As touching this vyage, as yet I know no other newes that I thought woorthy to certifie you of, wher∣fore, I wyl nowe make an ende of this booke, because you put me so often in remembrance of your departure: Yet to accom∣plyshe the Decade, I wyl declare somewhat of the superstitions of Hispaniola.The superstiti∣ons of Hispa∣niola. The errours of the olde genti∣litie. You shall nowe therfore vnderstand the illusions wherewith the people of the Ilande haue ben seduced after the errours of the olde gentilitie, and wandered in the ignoraunce and blyndnesse of humane nature, corrupted by the disobedience of our fyrst parentes, whiche hath remayned in all nations vpon the face of the earth, except where it hath pleased GOD by the lyght of his spirite by his woorde, to powre vpon his electe the grace of renouation, by the lyght whereof the natural darke∣nesse receiueth some clearenesse as in a glasse, vntil imperfection shalbe abolished. Our men therefore were long in the Ilande of Hispaniola, before they knewe that the people thereof honoured any other thyng then the lyghtes of heauen, or had anye other religion: but when they had ben nowe long conuersaunt
with them, and by vnderstandyng their language, drew to a fur∣ther familiaritie, they had knowledge that they vsed diuers rites and superstitions: I haue therefore geathered these fewe thinges folowyng, out of a booke wrytten by one Ramonus an Heremite, whom Colonus had left with certayne kynges of the Ilande to instruct them in the Christian fayth. And because in manner their whole religion is none other thyng then idolatrie, I wil begyn at theyr idolles. It is therefore apparant by the images whi∣che they honour openly and commonly,Idolatrie and idolles. that there appeare vnto them in the nyght seasons, certayne phantasies and illusions of euil spirites, seducing them into many fonde and foolish errours: for they make certayne images of Gossampine cotton,Illusions of euil spirites. Images of gossampine catton. folded or wreathed after theyr manner, and hard stopped within. These images they make syttyng, muche lyke vnto the pyctures of spirites and deuyls which our paynters are accustomed to paynt vpon walles: but forasmuche as I mee selfe sent you foure of these images, you may better presently signifie vnto the kyng your vncle, what manner of thynges they are, and howe like vn∣to paynted deuylles, then I can expresse the same by wrytyng. These images, the inhabitantes call Zemes, whereof the leaste, made to the lykenesse of young deuyls, they bynde to their fore∣heades when they goe to the warres agaynst theyr enimies,Young deuyls. and for that purpose haue they those stringes hangyng at them which you see. Of these, they beleeue to obteyne rayne, yf rayne be lackyng, lykewyse fayre weather: for they thynke that these Zemes are the mediatours and messengers of the great god, whom they acknowledge to be only one, eternal, without ende, omnipotent, and inuisible. Thus euery king hath his particuler Zemes, whiche he honoureth. They cal the eternal god by these two names, Iocauna and Guamaonocon, as theyr predecessours taught them, affyrmyng that he hath a father called by these fiue names: that is, Attabeira, Mamona, Guacarapita, Liella, Guima∣zoa. Nowe shal you heare what they fable on the earth as tou∣ching the original of man There is in the Iland, a region called Caunana, where they fayne that manknyde came fyrst out of two caues of a mountayne: and that the byggest sorte of men came forth of the mouth of the byggest caue, and the least sort out of the least caue. The rocke in the which these caues are, they call
Canta. The greatest denne, they name Cazibaxagua, and the lesse, Amaiauna. They say, that before it was lawfull for men to come foorth of the caue,Fables muche lyke Ouide his transforma∣tions. the mouth of the caue was kept and wat∣ched nyghtly by a man whose name was Machochael: this Ma∣chochael, departyng somewhat farre from the caue, to the intent to see what things were abrode, was sodenly taken of the sunne, (whose syght he was forbidden) & was turned into a stone. They fayne the lyke of diuers other, that whereas they went foorth in the nyght season a fyshyng so farre from the caue, that they could not returne before the rysyng of the sunne (the whiche it was not lawful for them to beholde) they were transfourmed into Myro∣balane trees, which of them selues grow plentifully in the Iland. They say furthermore, that a certayne ruler called Vagoniona, sent one foorth of the caue to goe a fyshyng, who by like chaunce was turned into a Nyghtingale,The Nygh∣tyngale. because the sunne was rysen be∣fore he came agayne to the caue: and that yeerely about the same time that he was turned into a byrde, he doth in the nyght with a mournyng song bewayle his mysfortune, and call for the helpe of his maister Vagoniona: And this they thynke to be the cause why that byrd syngeth in the nyght season. But Vagoniona▪ beyng sore troubled in his mind for the losse of his familiar frend whom he loued so entirely, leauyng the men in the caue, brought foorth only the women with theyr suckyng chyldren, leauyng the women in one of the Ilands of that tracte, called Mathinino, and caryed the chyldren away with hym:The Ilande of Mathinino. which poore wretches oppressed with famine, faynted and remayned on the banke of a certayne riuer, where they were turned into frogges, and cryed toa, toa, that is, mamma, mamma, as chyldren are woont to crye for the mothers pappe.Children tur∣ned into Frogs And hereof they say it commeth that frogges vse to crye so pitifully in the spryng tyme of the yeere: And that men were scattered abrode in the caues of Hispaniola without the company of women. They say also, that where as Vagoniona himselfe was accustomed to wander in diuers places, and yet by a special grace neuer transfourmed, descended to a certayne fayre woman whom he sawe in the bottome of the sea,A special grace. and receiued of her certayne pibble stones of marble (which they cal Cibas) and also certayne yellowe and bright plates of latton, which they cal Guaninos. These thinges to this day are had in
great estimation among the kynges, as goodly iewelles, and most holy reliques.Holy reliques. But nowe (moste noble prynce) you shall heare a more pleasaunt fable. There is a certayne caue called Iouanaboina, in the territorie of a certayne kyng whose name is Machinnech:A holy caue. This caue they honour more religiously then dyd the Grekes in tyme paste, Corinth, Cyrrha, or Nysa, and haue adourned it with pyctures of a thousand fashions. In thentrance of this caue they haue two grauen Zemes, wherof the one is cal∣led Binthaitel, and the other Marohu. Beyng demaunded why they had this caue in so great reuerence, they answered earnestly, because the sunne and the moone came fyrst out of the same to geue lyght to the worlde:The original of the sunne and moone. they haue religious concourse to these caue, as we are accustomed to goe on Pylgrimage to Rome, or Uaticane, Compostella, or Hierusalem, as most holy & head places of our religion. They are also subiect to another kynde of superstition: for they thynke that dead folkes walke in the night, and eate the fruite called Guannaba,Walkyng spirites. vnknowen vnto vs, & some∣what like vnto a Quinse: affyrmyng also that they are cōuersant with lyuyng people, euen in theyr beddes, and to deceiue women in takyng vpon them the shape of men, shewyng them selues as though they woulde haue to do with them: but when the matter commeth to actual deede, sodaynely to vanishe away. If any do suspect that a dead body lyeth by him,A remedie a∣gayest walking spirites. whē he feeleth any strange thyng in the bed, they say he shalbe out of doubt by feelyng of the belly thereof: affyrmyng that the spirites of dead men may take vpon them al the members of mans body, sauing only the na∣uel. If therfore by the lacke of ye nauel he do perceiue that a dead body lyeth by him, the feelyng is immediatly resolued. They be∣leeue verily, that in the nyght, and oftentimes in theyr iourneys, and especiallye in common and high wayes, dead men do meete with the lyuyng: Agaynst whom, yf any man be stowte and out of feare, the fantasie vanysheth incontinentlye: but yf anye feare, the fantasye or vision dooth so assaulte hym and stryke hym with further feare, that manye are thereby astony∣shed, and haue the lymmes of theyr bodyes taken. The inhabi∣tauntes beyng demaunded of whom they had those vayne super∣stitions, they aunswered, that they were lefte them of theyr forefathers, as by discent of inheritaunce, and that they haue
had the same before the memorie of man, composed in certayne rymes and songues, whiche it was lawful for none to learne, but only the kynges sonnes, who committed the same to memorye, because they had neuer any knowledge of letters. These they syng before the people on certayne solemne and festiuall dayes, as most religious ceremonies: whyle in the meane tyme they play on a certaine instrument made of one whole peece of wood, somewhat holowe lyke a tymbrel. Theyr priestes and diuines (whom they cal Boitios) instructe them in these superstitions:Priestes and diuines. Phisitions. These priestes are also phisitions, deuysyng a thousande craftes and subtilties howe to deceiue the symple people whiche haue them in great reuerence: for they perswade them that the Zemes vse to speake with them familiarlye,Ignorance is norished with superstition. and tel them of thinges to come. And yf any haue ben sycke, and are recouered, they make them beleue that they obteyned theyr health of the Zemes. These Boitii bynde them selues to muche fastyng, and outwarde clean∣lynesse, and pourgynges, especially when they take vpon them the cure of any prince, for then they drynke the powder of a cer∣taine herbe, by whose qualitie they are driuen into a fury, at whi∣che time (as they say) they learne many thinges by reuelation of the Zemes. Then puttyng secretely in theyr mouthes,A powder of marueylous effect. eyther a stone, or a bone, or a peece of fleshe, they come to the sicke person, commaundyng al to depart out of that place, except one or two, whom it shal please the sycke man to appoynt: this done, they goe about hym three or foure tymes, greatly deformyng theyr faces, lyps, and northrils, with sundry fylthy gestures, blowing, breathyng, and suckyng the forehead, temples,A strange ma∣ner of curyng. and necke of the patient, whereby (they say) they drawe the euyl ayre from him, and sucke the disease out of his vaynes: then rubbyng hym about the shoulders, thyghes, and legges, and drawyng downe theyr handes close by his feete, holdyng them yet faste togeather, they runne to the doore beyng open, where they vn∣close and shake theyr handes, affyrmyng that they haue dryuen away the disease, and that the pacient shall shortly be perfectlye restored to health. After this, commyng behynde hym, he con∣ueigheth a peece of fleshe out of his owne mouth lyke a iugge∣ler, and sheweth it to the sycke man, saying, Beholde, you haue eaten to muche, you shal nowe be whole, because I haue
taken this from you. But yf he entende yet further to deceiue the patient,Angry gods. he perswadeth hym that his Zemes is angry, eyther be∣cause he hath not buylded hym a chappell, or not honoured him religiously, or not dedicated vnto hym a groue or garden. And if it so chaunce that the sycke person dye, his kynsfolks, by witch∣crafte,They make the dead to speake. enforce the dead to confesse whether he dyed by naturall desteny, or by the negligēce of the Boitius, in that he had not fasted as he shoulde haue done, or not ministred a conuenient medicine for the disease: so that if this phisition be founde fautie, they take reunge of hym. Of these stones or bones whiche these Boitii cary in theyr mouthes, yf the women can come by them, they keepe them religiously, beleeuyng them to be greatly effectuall to helpe women trauaylyng with chylde, and therefore honour them as they do theyr Zemes. For diuers of the inhabitantes ho∣nour Zemes of diuers fashions: some make them of wood, as they were admonyshed by certayne visions appearing vnto them in the woods: Other, whiche haue receiued aunswere of them among the rockes, make them of stone and marble. Some they make of rootes, to the similitude of suche as appeare to them when they are geatheryng the rootes called Ages, whereof they make theyr bread, as we haue sayd before. These Zemes they be∣leue to send plentie & fruitfulnes of those rootes, as the antiquitie beleued such fayries or spirites as they called Dryades,Fayries or spi∣rites of the gen∣tiles, much like to the papistes. Hamadry∣ades, Satyros, Panes, and Nereides, to haue the cure & prouidence of the sea, woods, sprynges, and fountaynes, assignyng to euerye thing their peculier goddes: Euen so do thinhabitantes of this Ilande attribute a Zemes to euery thyng, supposyng the same to geue eare to theyr inuocations. Wherefore, as often as the kyngs aske counsel of theyr Zemes as concernyng their warres, increase of fruites, or scarcenes, or health and sicknesse, they enter into the house dedicate to theyr Zemes, where, snuffing vp into theyr nosthryls the pouder of the herbe called Cohobba (wherwith the Boitii are dryuen into a furie) they say that immediatly they see the houses turned topsye turuie,The pouder of the herbe Co∣hobba. and men to walke with theyr heeles vpward, of such force is this pouder, vtterly to take away al sence. As soone as this madnesse ceasseth, he embraceth his knees with his armes, holdyng downe his head. And when he hath remayned thus a whyle astonyshed, he lyfteth vp his
head, as one that came newe out of sleepe: and thus lookyng vp toward heauen, fyrst he fumbleth certaine confounded woordes with hym selfe, then certayne of the nobilitie or cheefe gentle∣men that are about him (for none of the common people are ad∣mitted to these mysteries) with loude voyces geue tokens of re∣ioycing that he is returned to them from the speach of the Zemes,Secrete my∣steries. demaundyng of hym what he hath seene. Then he openyng his mouth, doateth that the Zemes spake to hym duryng the tyme of his traunce, declaryng that he had reuelations either concerning victorie or destruction, famine or plentie, health or syckenesse,Reuelations. or whatsoeuer happeneth fyrst on his tongue. Nowe (most noble Prince) what neede you hereafter to marueyle of the spirite of Apollo so shakyng his Sibylles with extreme furie:The spirite of Apollo. The Sibylles, you had thought that the superstitious antiquitie had peryshed. But nowe wheras I haue declared thus muche of the Zemes in gene∣ral, I thought it not good to let passe what is sayde of them in particuler. They say therefore that a certayne kyng called Gua∣maretus, had a Zemes whose name was Corochotum, who (they say) was oftentimes woont to descend from the hyghest place of the house where Guamaretus kept hym fast bound. They affirme, that the cause of this his breakyng of his bandes and departure, was eyther to hyde hym selfe, or to goe seeke for meate, or els for the acte of generation: and that sometymes beyng offended that the kyng Guamaretus had ben negligent and slacke in ho∣nouring hym, he was woont to lye hyd for certayne dayes. They say also, that in the kynges vyllage there are sometyme chyldren borne hauyng two crownes,Children with two crownes. whiche they suppose to be the chil∣dren of Corochotum the Zemes. They fayne likewyse, that Guama∣retus being ouercome of his enimies in battayle, and his village with the pallace consumed with fyre, Corochotus brake his bands, and was afterwarde founde a furlong of, safe and without hurte. He hath also another Zemes called Epileguanita, made of wood, in shape lyke a foure footed beast: who also is sayde,Wandering images. often tymes to haue gonne from the place where he is honou∣red, into the wooddes. As soone as they perceiue hym to be gone, a great multitude of them geather togeather to seeke him, with deuout prayers: and when they haue founde hym, bryng hym home religiously on theyr shoulders to the chappel dedica∣ted
vnto hym. But they complayne, that sence the commyng of the Christian men into the Iland, he fled for altogeather, and coulde neuer sence be founde, wherby they diuined the destruc∣tion of theyr countrey. They honoured an other Zemes in the ly∣kenes of a woman, on whom wayted two other lyke men, as they were mynisters to her.A woman Ze∣mes of great power. Mediatours. One of these, executed thoffice of a mediatour to the other Zemes, which are vnder the power and commaundement of this woman, to raise wyndes, cloudes, and rayne. The other is also at her commaundement a messenger to the other Zemes, which are ioyned with her in gouernaunce, to geather togeather the waters which fall from the hygh hylles to the valleies, that being loosed, they may with force bruste out in∣to greate floodes, and ouerflowe the countrey, yf the people do not geue due honoure to her Image. There remayneth yet one thing worthy to be noted, wherwith we will make an end of this booke. It is a thing well knowen, and yet freshe in memory a∣mong the inhabitantes of the iland, that there was somtime two kings (of the which one was the father of Guarionexius, of whom we made mention before) which were woont to absteyne fyue daies togeather continualy from meate & drinke, to know some∣what of their Zemes of thinges to come, and that for this fasting beyng acceptable to their Zemes,A marueylous illusion of the deuyll. they receyued answere of them, that within few yeeres there shoulde come to the ilande a nation of men couered with apparell, which should destroy al the custo∣mes and cerimonies of the iland, and eyther slay al theyr chyl∣dren, or bring them into seruitude. The common sort of the peo∣ple vnderstode this oracle to be ment of the Canibales, & ther∣fore when they had any knowledge of theyr comming, they euer fled, and were fully determined neuer more to aduenture the bat∣tayle with them. But when they saw that the Spanyardes had entered into the Ilande, consultyng among them selues of the matter, they concluded that this was the nation whiche was ment by thoracle. Wherin, theyr opinyon deceyued them not, for they are nowe all subiect to the Chrystians, all such beyng slayne as stobernely resysted:The idolles abolyshed. Nor yet remayneth there anye memorye of theyr Zemes, for they are all brought into Spayne, that we myght be certyfyed of theyr illusions of euyll spyrites and Idolles, the which you your selfe (most noble Prynce)
haue seene and felt when I was present with you. I let passe many thynges because you put me in remembrance that to mo∣rowe you take your iorney towarde your countrey, to bryng home the queene your aunt, whom you accompanyed hyther at the commaundement of kyng Frederike your vncle. Wher∣fore I byd you farewell for this time, desyryng you to remem∣ber your Martyr, whom you haue compelled in the name of the kyng your vncle, to geather these fewe thynges out of a large feelde of hystories. The tenth and last booke of the fyrst Decade, as a con∣clusion of the former bookes: wrytten to Inacus Iopez Mendocius, Countie of Tendilla, & viceroy of Granata. AT the fyrst begynning and newe attempte, when Colonus had taken vpon hym the en∣terpryse to searche the Ocean sea, I was earnestly moued and required by the letters of certaine of my frendes and noble men of Rome, to wryte those thinges as shoulde happen. For they whispered with great ad∣miration, that where as there were many newe landes founde, and nations which liued naked and after the lawe of nature, they could heare no certentie therof, being greatly desyrous of ye same. In this meane time had fortune ouerthrowne Ascanius (his bro∣ther Lodouike being cast out of Millane by the frenchmen) whose auctoritie would not suffer me to be idle,Millane in the handes of the french men, but euer to haue my pen in hand. To him I wrote the two first bookes of this decade, be∣side many other of my hid cōmentaries which you shal see short∣ly: but fortune dyd no lesse withdraw my minde from wryting, then disturbe Ascanius from power. As he was tossed with con∣trary stormes, and ceassed to perswade me: euen so slacked my feruentnesse to enquire any further, vntil the yere of Christ▪ 1500 when the Court remained at Granata where you are viceroy: At whiche tyme, Lodouike the Cardinal of Aragonie, neuiew to king Frederike by his brothers syde (beyng at Granata with the queene Parthenopea the sister of our Catholique kyng) brought me king Frederikes letters, whereby he exhorted me to finishe
the other bookes which folowed the two epystell bookes, which I wryte to Ascanius: For they both acknowledged that they had the copye of al that I wrytte to cardinall Ascanius. And al∣beit that euen then I was sicke (as you knowe) yet tooke I the burden vppon me, and applyed my selfe to wryting. I haue therfore chosen these fewe thynges, out of a greate heape of such as seemed to me most worthy to be noted among the large wrytynges of the aucthoures and searchers of the same. Wher∣fore, forasmuch as you haue endeuored to wrest out of my han∣des the whole example of all my woorkes, to adde the same to the innumerable volumes of your lybrarie, I thought it good nowe to make a breefe rehersall of those thynges which were done from that yeare of a thousand and fiue hundred, euen vnto this yeare which is the tenth from that:The history fo∣lowyng, con∣teyneth the actes of ten yeeres. For I entend to wryte more largely of these thynges heareafter, if god graunt me lyfe. I had written a whole booke by it selfe of the superstytions of the people of the iland, supposyng therwyth to haue accomply∣shed the whole Decade consisting of ten bookes. But I haue ad∣ded this to the tenth as a perpendyculer lyne, and as it were a backe guide or rerewarde to the other: So that you may knytte the fyrst tenth to the nynth, & impute this to occupye the place of the tenth to fyll vp the Decade. This order haue I appoyn∣ted, lest I shoulde be compelled often times to wryte ouer the whole worke, or send you the same defaced with blottes and in∣terlyning. But now let vs come to our purpose. The shyppe maisters and mariners ran ouer many coastes during these ten yeares: But euer folowed such as were fyrst found by Colonus. For rasyng continually alonge by the tract of Paria,Paria part of the fyrme lande of East India. which they beleue to be part of the firme land or continent of east India, some of them chaunced vppon certaine new landes towarde the east, and some towarde the west, in which they founde both gold and frankensence. For they brought from thence manye iewells and ouches of golde,Golde & Fran∣kencense. and greate plentie of frankensence, which they had of the people of those countreyes, partlye for exchaunge of some of our thynges, and partlye by force, ouer commyng them by warre. Yet in some places, although they be naked,The fiercenesse of the naked people. they ouercame our men, and slewe whole armyes. For they are exceedyng fyerce, and vse venemous arrowes, and
long staues lyke iauelens, made hard at the ende with fire. They founde many beastes, both creepyng and foure footed, much dyfferyng from ours, varyable and of sundrye shapes innume∣rable: yet not hurtfull, except Lions, Tigers, and Crocodiles. This I meane in sundry regions of that greate lande of Paria, but not in the ilandes: no not so muche as one, for all the beastes of the ilandes, are meeke and without hurte, except men, which (as wee haue sayde) are in many ilandes deuourers of mans fleshe. There are also dyuers kyndes of foules. And in many places battes of such bygnes, that they are equall with turtle doues. These battes, haue oftentymes assalted men in the night in theyr sleepe, and so bytten them with theyr venemous teeth, that they haue ben therby almost dryuen to madnes, in so much that they haue ben compelled to flee from such places, as from rauenous Harpies. In an other place, where certaine of them slept in the night season on the sands by the sea syde, a mon∣ster commyng out of the sea, came vpon one of them secretelye, and caryed hym away by the myddest out of the syght of his fe∣lowes, to whom he cryed in vayne for helpe,A man deuou∣red of a mon∣ster of the sea. vntyl the beast leapt into the sea with her pray. It was the kynges pleasure that they shoulde remayne in these landes, and buylde townes and fortres∣ses: whereunto they were so well wyllyng, that diuers profered them selues to take vpon them the subduyng of the lande, ma∣kyng great suite to the kyng that they myght be appoynted thereto. The coast of this tracte is exceedyng great and large,Note the large∣nesse of the new Ilandes. and the regions and landes thereof extende marueylous farre, so that they affirme the continent of these regions with the Ilan∣des about the same, to be thryse as bygge as al Europe, beside those landes that the Portugales haue founde southwarde, whi∣che are also exceedyng large. Therfore doubtlesse Spayne hath deserued great prayse in these our dayes, in that it hath made knowen vnto vs so many thousandes of Antipodes whiche lay hid before, and vnknowen to our forefathers:Antipodes. and hath thereby mi∣nistred so large matter to wryte of, to suche learned wyttes as are desyrous to set foorth knowledge to the commoditie of men: to whom I opened a way when I geathered these things rude∣lye togeather as you see: the whiche, neuerthelesse I truste you wil take in good part, aswell for that I can not adourne
my rudenesse with better vesture, as also that I neuer toke penne in hande to wryte lyke an hystoriographer, but only by epistles scribeled in haste, to satisfie them, from whose commaunde∣mentes I myght not drawe backe my foote. But nowe I haue digressed yenough, let vs nowe therefore returne to Hispaniola. Our men haue founde by experience, that the bread of the Ilande is of smal strength to suche as haue ben vsed to our bread made of wheate, and that theyr strengthes were muche decayed by vsyng of the same:The nature of the place, alte∣reth the formes and qualities of thynges. wherefore the kyng hath of late commaunded that wheate shoulde be sowen there in diuers places, and at sun∣dry tymes of the yeere: It groweth into holow reedes, with few eares, but those very bygge and fruitefull. They fynde the lyke softnesse and delicatenesse to be in hearbes, whiche growe there to the height of corne. Neat or cattel, become of bygger stature, and exceedyng fat, but theyr fleshe is more vnsauerie, and theyr bones (as they say) eyther without marow, or the same to be ve∣ry wateryshe: but of hogges and swyne, they affirme the contra∣ry, that they are more wholsome, and of better taste, by reason of certayne wylde fruites whiche they eate, beyng of much better nourishment then maste. There is almost none other kynde of fleshe commonly solde in the market. The multitude of hogges are exceedyngly encreased, and become wylde as soone as they are out of the swyneheardes keepyng. They haue suche plentie of beastes and foules,Plentie of beastes and foule. that they shal hereafter haue no neede to haue any brought from other places. The increase of al beastes grow bigger then the broode they came of, by reason of the rank∣nes of the pasture, although theyr feeding be only of grasse, with∣out eyther barley or other grayne. But we haue sayd yenough of Hispaniola. They haue nowe founde that Cuba (which of long tyme they thought to haue ben firme lande,Cuba is an Ilande. for the great length thereof) is an Ilande: yet is it no maruayle that the inhabitants them selues tolde our men when they searched the length ther∣of, that it was without ende. For this nation beyng naked, and content with a lytle, and with the limittes of theyr owne coun∣trey, is not greatly curious to knowe what theyr neyghbours doo, or the largenesse of theyr dominion, nor yet knewe they yf there were any other thyng vnder heauen, besyde that whi∣che they walked on with theyr feete. Cuha is from the East
into the West, muche longer then Hispaniola, and in breadth from the North to the South,The  of Cuba. muche lesse then they supposed at the fyrst: for it is very narowe in respect of the length, and is for the most part very fruitefull and pleasaunt. Eastwarde, not farre from Hispaniola, there lyeth an Iland lesse then Hispaniola more then by the halfe, whiche our men called Sancti Iohannis,The Ilande of Burichema, of S. Iohannis. Golde mynes. beyng in manner square, in this they founde exceedyng ryche golde mynes: but beyng nowe occupyed in the golde mynes of Hispaniola, they haue not yet sent labourers into the Iland. But the plentie and reuenue of golde of al other regions, geue place to Hispaniola, where they geue them selues in manner to none other thyng then to geather golde, of whiche worke this order is appointed. To euery such wittie and skilful man as is put in trust to be a surueyour or ouerseer of these workes, there is assigned one or more kings of the Iland, with their subiects. These kings accordyng to theyr league, come with theyr people at certayne tymes of the yeere, and resort euery of them to the golde myne to the whiche he is assigned, where they haue al manner of dyg∣ging or mining tooles delyuered them, and euery king with his men, haue a certayne rewarde alowed them for theyr labour. For when they depart from the mynes to sowyng of corne, and other tyllage (wherunto they are addict at certaine other tymes, lest theyr foode should faile them.) they receiue for their labour,Tyllage, one a ierkin, or a dublet, another a shyrt, another a cloke or a cap: for they nowe take pleasure in these thyngs, and goe no more na∣ked as they were woont to doo. And thus they vse the helpe and labour of the inhabitauntes, both for the tyllage of theyr ground, and in theyr golde mynes, as though they were theyr seruantes or bondemen. They beare this yoke of seruitude with an euyll wyl, but yet they beare it: they cal these hyred labourers, Ana∣borias: yet the kyng dooth not suffer that they shoulde be vsed as bondemen, and only at his pleasure, they are set at libertie, or appoynted to worke.At suche tyme as they are called togeather of theyr kynges to woorke (as souldiers or pyoners are assem∣bled of theyr centurions) many of them stele away to the moun∣taynes and wooddes, where they lye lurkyng,They abhorre labour. beyng con∣tent for that tyme to lyue with wylde fruites, rather then take the paynes to labour. They are docible and apte to learne,They are docible. and
haue nowe vtterly forgotten theyre olde superstitions. They beleue godly, and beare well in memory such thynges as they haue learned of our ayth.The kynges chyldren. Theyr kyngs children are brought vp with the chiefest of our men, and are instructed in letters and good maners, When they are growen to mans age, they sende them home to theyr countreyes to be example to other, and espe∣cially to gouerne the people, yf theyr fathers be dead, that they may the better set forth the Christian religion, and keepe theyr subiectes in loue and obedience. By reason wherof, they come now by faire meanes & gentel perswasions, to the mines which lye in two regions of the ilande,The two cheefe golde mynes of Hispaniola. about thyrtie myles dystaunt from the cytie of Dominica, wherof the on is called Sancti Christo∣phori: and the other beyng distant aboute fourscore and tenne myles, is called Cibaua, not farre from the cheefe hauen called Portus Regalis. These regions are very large, in the which in many places here and there, are founde somtyme euen in the vp∣per crust of the earth, and somtyme among the stones, certayne rounde pieces or plates of golde, sometime of smale quantytie, and in some places of great wayght: in so much that there hath byn founde rounde pieces of three hundred pounde weyght, and one of three thousande, three hundred and tenne pounde weyght, the whiche (as you harde) was sent whole to the kyng in that shyp in the which the gouernour Boadilla was commyng home into Spaine, the shyp with all the men beyng drowned by the way,A costly shyp∣wracke. by reason it was ouer laden with the weyght of gold & multitude of men, albeit, there were mo then a thousande per∣sons which saw and handeled the piece of gold. And wheras here I speake of a pounde, I do not meane the common pounde, but the summe of the ducate of gold, with the coyne called Triens, which is the third part of a pounde.Pesus. which they call Pesus. The summe of the weight hearof, the Spanyardes call Castelanum Aureum. All the gold that is digged in the mountaines of Cibaua and Port Regale, is caried to the tower of Conception, where shoppes with al thinges appertayning are redy furnished to fine it,The fynyng and distribu∣ting of gold. melt it, and caste it into wedges. That doone, they take the kynges portion therof, which is the fyfte parte, and so re∣store to euery man his owne which he gotte with his labour. But the gold which is founde in saynt Christophorus myne
and the regions there about, is caryed to the shoppes which are in the vyllage called Bonauentura. In these two shops, is moul∣ten yeerely aboue three hundred thousand pound wayght of gold.Three hundred thousād weight of gold molten yeerely in His∣paniola. Yf any man be knowen deceytfullye to keepe backe any por∣tion of golde, whereof he hath not made the kynges officers pri∣uie, he forfeyteth the same for a fyne. There chaunceth among them oftentymes many contentions and controuersies, the whi∣che vnlesse the magistrates of the Ilande do fynyshe, the case is remoued by appellation to the hygh counsayle of the court, from whose sentence it is not lawfull to appeale in al the dominions of Castyle. But let vs nowe returne to the newe landes,The newe landes. from whence we haue digressed. They are innumerable, diuers, and exceedyng fortunate. Wherefore the Spanyardes in these our dayes, and theyr noble enterpryses, do not geue place eyther to the factes of Saturnus, or Hercules, or anye other of the auncient prynces of famous memory, which were canonized among the goddes, called Heroes, for theyr searchyng of newe landes and regions, and bryngyng the same to better culture and ciuilitie. Oh God,Enlargyng of the Christian religion. The original of true nobilitie. howe large & farre shal our posteritie see the Christian religion extended? howe large a campe haue they now to wander in, whiche by the true nobilitie that is in them, or mooued by ver∣tue, wyll attempt eyther to deserue lyke prayse among men, or reputation of well doyng before God? What I conceiue in my mynde of these thynges, I am not able to expresse with penne or tongue. I wil now therfore so make an end of this perpendiculer conclusion of the whole Decade, as myndyng hereafter to search and geather euery thyng particulerly, that I may at further ley∣sure wryte the same more at large. For Colonus the Admiral, with foure ships, and a hundred, threescore, and ten men, appoyn∣ted by the kyng, discouered in the yeere of Christe .1520. the lande oueragaynst the West corner of Cuba, distant from the same about a hundred and thirtie leagues: in the myddest of whiche tracte, lyeth an Ilande called Guanassa.The Ilande of Guanassa. From hence he directed his voyage backwarde toward the East, by the shore of that coast, supposyng that he shoulde haue founde the coastes of Paria, but it chaunced otherwise. It is sayde also that Vincencius Agnes (of whom we haue spoken before) and one Iohannes Daiz (with diuers other,The voyage of Iohannes Diaz. of whose voyages I haue as yet no certayne
knowledge) haue ouerrunne those coastes: but yf God graunt me lyfe, I trust to knowe the trueth hereof, and to aduertise you of the same. Thus fare ye well. The ende of the fyrst Decade. The fyrst booke of the seconde Decade, to Leo Bishop of Rome, the tenth of that name, of the suppo∣sed continent or firme lande. SInce the tyme that Galeatius Butri∣garius of Bononie, and Iohannes Cur∣sius of Florence (most holy father) came to the Catholique kyng of Spayne, the one of your holinesse ambassage, and the other for the af∣fayres of his common wealth, I was euer for the moste parte in theyr companye, and for theyr ver∣tues and wysedome had them in great reuerence. And where∣as they were greatlye geuen to studie, and continuall reuol∣uing of diuers auctours, they chaunced vpon certayne bookes, negligently let slyppe out of my handes, entreatyng of the large landes and regions hytherto lying hyd, and almost West Antipodes, founde of late by the Spanyardes. Yet being allured and delyted with the newnesse and straungenesse of the matter,West Anti∣podes. although rudely adourned, they commended the same, therewith earnestly desyryng me in theyr owne names, and requiring me in the name of your holynesse, to adde hereunto al such thynges as were founde after that tyme, and to geue them a copie therof, to sende to your holynesse, that you myght thereby vnderstande, both howe great commodities is chaunced to the progenie of mankynde, as also encrease of the millitant congregation in these our dayes,The encrease of the Christian congregation. by the fortunate enterpryses of the kynges of Spayne. For lyke as rased and vnpaynted tables, are apte to receiue what fourmes soeuer are fyrst drawen thereon by the hande of the paynter, euen so these naked and simple peo∣ple, doo soone receyue the customes of our religion, and by conuersation of our men, shake of theyr fierce and natiue
barbarousnesse. I haue thought it good therfore to satisfie the request of these wyse men, espetially vsyng thaucthorytie of your name, wherunto not to haue obeyed, I shoulde esteeme my selfe to haue commytted a heynous offence. Wherfore I wyll nowe briefly rehearse in order, what hyd coastes the Spanyardes ouer∣ran, who were thaucthours therof, where they rested, what fur∣ther hope they brought, and finallye what greate thynges those tractes of landes do promyse in time to come. In the declaration of my decade of the ocean, which is nowe prynted and dyspersed throughout Chrystendome vnwares to me, I described howe Christophorus Colonus founde those ilandes wherof wee haue spo∣ken, and that turnyng from thence towarde the left hande south∣ward, he chaunced into greate regions of landes, and large seas, dystant from the Equinoctiall lyne, onely from fyue degrees to tenne:Of landes di∣stant from the Equinoctiall, from fyue de∣grees to ten. where he founde brode ryuers and exceeding hygh moun∣taynes couered with snowe, and harde by the sea bankes, where were manye commodious and quyet hauens. But Colonus being now departed out of this lyfe, the kyng beganne to take care, how those lands might be inhabited with Christian men,The death of Colonus. to thin∣crease of our fayth: Wheruppon he gaue lycence by his letters patentes to al such as would take the matter in hand, and espeti∣ally to two, wherof Diego Nicuesa was one,A generall licence. & the other was Al∣phonsus Fogeda. Wherfore about the Ides of December,The nauigati∣on of Alphon∣sus Fogeda. Alphon∣sus departing fyrst with three hundred souldiers from the ilande of Hispaniola (in the which we sayd the Spaniardes had builded a cytie, & planted theyr habitation) & saylyng in maner ful south, he came to one of the hauens found before, which Colonus named Portus carthaginis, both because of the iland standyng agaynste the course of the streame, and also that by reason of the largenesse of the place and bendyng sydes, it is much lyke to the hauen of Spayne called Carthago. The inhabytantes call the Ilande Codego, as the Spanyardes cal the Ilande of theyr hauen Scombria. This region is called of the inhabitantes Caramairi, in the whiche they affyrme both the men and women to bee of goodly stature, but naked.The region of Caramairi. The men haue theyr heare cutte rounde by theyr eares, but the women were it long, both the men and women are very good archers. Our men founde cer∣tayne trees in this prouince, which bore great plenty of sweete
apples, but hurtful, for they turne into woormes when they are eaten.Apples whiche turne into wor∣mes. A tree whose shadowe is hurtful. Especially the shadowe of the tree is contagious, for such as sleepe vnder it any tyme, haue theyr heades swolne, and lose their sight: but if they sleepe but a while, theyr sight commeth agayne after a fewe dayes. This porte is distant foure hundred, fyftie, & sixe myles from that port of Hispaniola whiche the Spa∣nyardes call Beata, in the whiche also they furnishe them selues when they prepare anye voyage to seeke other newe landes. When Fogeda had entred into the hauen, he enuaded, slue, and spoyled the people, whom he founde naked and scattered: for they were geuen him for a pray by the kynges letters patentes, because they had ben before tyme cruell agaynst the Christians, and coulde neuer be allured to permytte them quietlye to come within theyr dominions. Here they founde golde, but in no great quantitie, nor yet that pure: they make of it certayne brest plates and brooches whiche they weare for comelynesse. But Fogeda not content with these spoyles, vsyng certayne captiues, which he had taken before, for guydes, entred into a vyllage twelue myles dystant from the sea syde further into the lande, into the which they were fled when he fyrst enuaded. Here he found a na∣ked people,Warlyke people. but apte to warre: for they were armed with tar∣gettes, shieldes, long swoordes made of wood, and bowes with arrowes typt with bone, or hardened with fyre. As soone as they had espyed our men, they with theyr ghestes whō they had recei∣ceyued, assayled them with desperate myndes, beyng therto more earnestly prouoked, beholdyng the calamitie of these whiche fled vnto them, by the violence done to theyr women and chyldren, in the spoyle and slaughter. In this conflyct our men had the ouerthrowe: in the which, one Iohannes de Lacossa (being in auc∣thoritie next vnto Fogeda the captayne, and also the fyrste that geathered gold in the sandes of Vraba) was slaine with fiftie soul∣diers:Arrowes in∣fected with poyson. for these people infecte their arrowes with the deadlye poyson of a certayne herbe. The other with theyr captayne Fo∣geda beyng discomfited, fledde to the shyppes. Whyle they re∣mayned thus in the hauen of Carthago, sorowful and pensiue for the losse of theyr companions,The nauigati∣on of Diego Nicuesa. the other captayne Diego Nicue∣sa, (whom they left in Hispaniola, preparyng hym selfe towarde the voyage in the hauen Beata) came to them with fyue shippes,
and seuen hundred fourescore and fyfteene men. For the greater number of souldyers folowed Nicuesa, bothe because free lybertye was geuen them to choose which of the capytaynes them lyst, and also that by reason of his age, he was of greater aucthorytie: But esspetially because the rumoure was that Beragua being by the kyngs commission appoynted to Nicuesa,The regions of Vraba and Beragua. was rycher in golde then Vraba assygned to Alphonsus Fogeda. Therfore, at the arryual of Nicuesa, they consulted what was best to be doone: and determyned fyrste to reuenge the deathe of theyr felowes. Wheruppon, settyng theyr battayle in araye, they marched in the nyght towarde them whiche slue Cossa with his companyons. Thus stealyng on them vnwares in the laste watche of the nyght,The Spanyar∣des reuenge the death of theyr companions. and encompassyng the vyllage where they lay, consystyng of a hundred houses and more, hauyng also in it thryse as many of theyr neyghbours as of them selues, they set it on fyre, with diligent watche that none myght escape. And thus in short time they brought them and theyr houses to ashes, and made them paye the raunsome of blood with blood: for of a great multitude of men and women,A great slaugh∣ter. they spared only syxe chyldren, all other beyng destroyed with fyre or swoord, except fewe whiche escaped priuily, they learned by these reserued chyl∣dren, that Cossa and his felowes were cut in peeces, and eaten of them that slue them. By reason whereof, they suppose that these people of Camairi tooke theyr original of the Caribes, other∣wyse called Canibales.Canibales. Here they founde some golde among the ashes.The hunger of golde. For the hunger of golde dyd no lesse incourage our men to aduenture these peryls and labours, then dyd the possessyng of the landes. These thinges thus finished, and the death of Cossa and his felowes reuenged, they returned to the hauen. After this, Fogeda whiche came fyrst, fyrst lykewyse departyng with his armie to seeke Vraba, committed to his gouernaunce, sayled by an Ilande called Fortis, lying in the mydway betweene Vraba and the hauen of Carthago: into the whiche dessending,The Ilande Fortis. he founde it to be an Ilande of the Canibales, bryngyng with hym from thence two men and seuen women, for the residue escaped. Here he founde in the cotages of them that fledde, a hundred, foure∣score, and tenne drammes of golde,Wrought gold. caste and wrought in dy∣uers fourmes. Saylyng forwarde from hence, he came to the
East coastes of Vraba, whiche the inhabitauntes call Carihana, from whence the Caribes or Canibales of the Ilandes are sayd to haue theyr name and originall. Here he began to builde a for∣tresse, and a vyllage neere vnto the same, therein intendyng to place theyr fyrst habitation. Shortly after, beyng instructed by certayne captyues, that there was about twelue myles further within the lande, a certayne vyllage called Tirufi, hauyng in it a ryche golde myne, he determined to destroy the village, to the which when he came, he founde the inhabitantes redy to defende theyr ryght, and that so stoutlye, that encounteryng with them, he was repulsed with shame and domage: for these people also vse bowes and venemous arrowes. Within a fewe dayes after, beyng enforced for lacke of vittualles to inuade another village, he hym selfe was strycken in the thygh with an arrowe. Some of his felowes say, that he was thus wounded of one of the inha∣bitauntes whose wyfe he had ledde away captiue before. They say also that he had fyrst frendlye communed with Fogeda for re∣deeming of his wife, and had appoynted a day to bring a portion of golde for her raunsome, and that he came at the day assigned, not laden with golde, but armed with bowes and arrowes, with eyght other confederate with hym, which had ben before parta∣kers of the iniuries done to them fyrst at the hauen of Carthago, and afterward at the burnyng of the vyllage, in reuenge wher∣of, they had desperately consecrated them selues to death: But the matter beyng knowen, the captayne of this conspiracie was slayne of Fogeda his companions, and his wyfe deteyned in cap∣tiuitie. Fogeda also through the maliciousnesse of the venime, consumed and was dried vp by lytle & litle. While these things chaunced thus, they espied Nicuesa the other captayne, to whom Beragua the region of the West syde of Vraba was assigned to inhabite.Nicuesa. He gaue wynd to his sayles to take his voyage toward Beragua, the day after that Fogeda departed out of the hauen of Carthago. He with his armie that he brought with hym, coasted euer along by the shore, vntyll he came to the gulfe Coiba, whose kynges name is Careta.The gulfe Coiba. Here he founde theyr language to be in manner nothyng lyke vnto that of Hispaniola, or of the hauen of Carthago: whereby he perceyued that in this tracte, there are many languages differyng from theyr owne borderers. Nicuesa
departyng from Coiba, went to the prouince or Lieuetenaunt∣shyp of Fogeda his companion. Within a fewe dayes after, he hym selfe entryng into one of those marchaunt shyppes whi∣che the Spanyardes call Carauelas, commaunded that the big∣ger vessels should folow farre behinde. He tooke with hym two smal shyppes commonly called Bergandines or Brigandines. I haue thought it good in al the discourse of these bookes, to vse the common names of thinges, because I had rather be playne then curious, especially forasmuche as there do dayly aryse ma∣ny newe thynges vnknowen to the antiquitie, whereof they haue left no true names. After the departure of Nicuesa, there came a shyppe from Hispaniola to Fogeda, the captayne wherof, was one Barnardino de Calauera,Barnardino de Calauera. who had stolne the same from Hispaniola with threescore men, without leaue or aduice of the Admiral and the other gouernours. With the vyttualles which this shyppe brought, they refreshed them selues, and somewhat recouered theyr strengthes, muche weakened for lacke of meate. Fogeda his companions whyspered and muttered agaynst hym daylye more and more, that he fedde them foorth with vayne hope: for he had tolde them that he left Ancisus in Hispaniola (whom he chose by the kinges commission to be a iudge in causes, because he was learned in the law) to come shortly after him with a shyp laden with vyttualles, and that he marueyled that he was not come many dayes synce. And herein he sayd nothing but trueth: for when he departed, he left Ancisus halfe redye to folowe hym. But his felowes supposyng that al that he had sayde of Ancisus had ben fayned, some of them determined priuily to steale away the two Brigandines from Fogeda, and to returne to Hispaniola. But Fogeda hauyng knowledge hereof, preuented theyr deuice: for leauyng ye custodie of the fortresse with a certayne noble gen∣tleman called Francisco Pizarro, he him selfe thus wounded, with a fewe other in his companye, entred into the shyppe wherof we spake before, and sayled directly to Hispaniola, both to heale the wounde of his thygh, yf any remedie myght be found,Fogeda retur∣neth to Hispa∣niola. and also to knowe what was the cause of Ancisus tarying: leauyng hope with his felowes (whiche were nowe brought from three hun∣dred to threescore, partly by famine, and partly by warre) that he woulde returne within the space of .xv. dayes,Famine. prescribyng
also a condition to Pizarro and his companions, that it should not be imputed to them for treason, to depart from thence yf he came not agayne at the day appoynted, with vyttuales, and a newe supplye of men. These .xv. dayes beyng nowe past, wheras they coulde yet heare nothyng of Fogeda, and were dayly more and more oppressed with sharpe hunger, they entred into the two Brigandines which were left, and departed from that land. And as they were nowe saylyng on the mayne sea towarde His∣paniola, a tempest sodaynely arysyng, swalowed one of the Bri∣gandines with all that were therein. Some of theyr felowes af∣fyrme, that they playnely sawe a fyshe of huge greatnesse, swim∣myng about the Brigandine (for those seas bryng foorth great monsters) and that with a stroke of her tayle,A Brigandine drowned with the stroke of a fyshe. she broke the rud∣der of the shyppe in peeces, whiche faylyng, the Brigandine be∣ing driuen about by force of the tempest, was drowned not farre from the Iland called Fortis, lying betwene the coastes of the ha∣uen Carthago and Vraba. As they of the other Brigandine would haue landed in the Ilande, they were dryuen backe with the bowes and arrowes of the fierce barbarians. Proceeding there∣fore on theyr voyage, they mette by chaunce with Ancisus, be∣twene the hauen of Carthago,The region of Cuchibacoa. and the region of Cuchibacoa in the mouth of the riuer whiche the Spanyardes called Boium gatti, that is, the house of the catte, because they sawe a catte fyrste in that place: Boium, in the tongue of Hispaniola, is a house. Ancisus came with a shyppe laden with al thynges necessarie, both for meate, and drynke, and apparell, bryngyng also with hym an another Brigandine. This is he for whose commyng the cap∣tayne Fogeda looked for so long. He loosed anker from Hispani∣ola in the Ides of September: and ye fourth day after his depar∣ture, he espyed certayne hygh mountaynes, the whiche for the a∣bundance of snow which lieth there continually in the tops therof, the Spanyards called Serra Neuata,Serra Neuata. when Colonus the fyrst fyn∣der of those regions passed by the same. The fift day he sayled by Os Draconis▪Os Draconis. They which were in the Brigandine, tolde Ancisus that Fogeda was returned to Hispaniola: but Ancisus supposyng that they had fained that tale, commaunded them by thauctoritie of his commission to turne backe agayne. The Brigandiners o∣beyed & folowed him: yet made they humble suite vnto him that
he woulde graunt them that with his fauour they myght eyther goe agayne to Hispaniola, or that he hym selfe would bring them to Nicuesa: and that they woulde for his gentlenesse, declared to∣warde them in this behalfe, rewarde hym with two thousande drammes of golde: for they were ryche in golde,Riche in golde, and poore in bread. but poore in bread. But Ancisus assented to neyther of theyr requestes, af∣fyrmyng that he myght by no meanes goe any other way, then to Vraba the prouince assigned to Fogeda. Whereupon, by theyr conduct, he tooke his voyage directly towarde Vraba, But nowe let it not seeme tedious to your holynesse, to heare of one thyng woorthy to be remembred, whiche chaunced to this Lieuetenant Ancisus as he came thyther: for he also cast anker in the coastes of the region of Caramairi, whiche we sayde to be famous, by rea∣son of the hauen of Carthago, and of the goodly stature, strength, and beautie both of men and women beyng in the same. Here he sent certayne to goe alande on the shore both to fetch fresh water, & also to repayre the ship boate which was sore bruised. In this meane tyme, a great multitude of the people of the countrey, ar∣med after theyr manner, came about our men, as they were occu∣pyed about theyr busynesse, and stoode in a redynesse to fyght, for the space of three dayes continually, duryng whiche time, ney∣ther durst they set vpon our men, nor our men assaile them. Thus both parties keepyng theyr aray, stoode styll three whole dayes, the one gasyng on the other. Yet al this tyme our men applyed theyr woorke, placyng the shypwryghtes in the myddest of theyr armie. As they stoode thus amased, two of our company went to fyll theyr water pottes at the mouth of the ryuer neere vnto them both, where sodenly there came foorth agaynst them a cap∣tayne of the barbarians with tenne armed men, whiche inclosed them, and with terrible countenance bent theyr arrowes against them, but shot them not of. One of our men fledde, but the other remayned, callyng his felowe agayne, and rebukyng hym for his fearefulnesse. Then he spake to the barbarians in theyr owne language, whiche he had learned beyng conuersaunt with the captiues that were caryed from thence long before. They marueylyng to heare a stranger speake in theyr natiue tongue, put of theyr fiercenesse, and fell to frendly communication, de∣maundyng who were the captaynes of that company whiche
were aryued in theyr lande. He aunswered that they were strangers passing by, and that he marueyled why they would at∣tempt to driue them from theyr coastes, and disturbe their shyps: arguyng them of follie and crueltie, and further threatnyng their ruine and destruction, except they woulde vse them selues more frendely towarde them. For he aduertised them that there woulde shortlye come into theyr lande armed men, in number like vnto the sandes of the sea, and that to theyr vtter destruction, not only yf they resysted them not, but also except they receiued them, and entertayned them honourably. In the meane time, Ancisus was enfourmed that his men were deteyned: wherefore suspectyng some deceyte,The vse of tar∣gets agaynst venemous arrowes. he brought foorth all his target men, for feare of theyr venemous arrowes: and settyng them in battel araye, he marched forwarde towarde them whiche stayed his men. But he whiche communed with the barbarians, geuyng hym a signe with his hande to proceede no further, he stayed, and callyng to hym the other, he knewe that all was safe: for the bar∣barians profered hym peace, because they were not they whom they suspected them to haue ben, meanyng by Fogeda & Nicuesa, who had spoyled the vyllage standyng there by the sea syde, and caryed away many captiues, and also burnt another vyllage fur∣ther within the lande. And therefore (as they sayde) the cause of theyr commyng thyther, was to reuenge those iniuries, yf by any meanes they coulde, yet that they woulde not exercise theyr weapons agaynst the innocent:The barbari∣ans haue re∣spect to iustice. for they sayd, it was vngodly to fyght agaynst any, not beyng prouoked. Laying apart therefore theyr bowes and arrowes, they enterteyned our men gentelly, and gaue them great plentie of salted fyshe,Salted fyshe. and bread of theyr countrey, and filled theyr vessels with Syder made of their coun∣trey fruites and seedes, not inferior to wine in goodnesse. Thus Ancisus hauing entred into frendship,Wine of fruites and seedes. and made a league of peace with thinhabitantes of Caramairi, which were before sore prouo∣ked by other captaynes, he lanched from that lande, and directed his course to Vraba by the Ilande Fortis, hauing in his shippe a hundred and fyftie freshe men, whiche were substitute in the place of suche as were dead: also twelue Mares, and manye swine, and other beastes both males and females for encrease. Lykewyse,Artyllerie. fyftie peeces of ordinaunce, with great multi∣tude
of targettes, swoordes, iauelyns, and suche other weapons for the warres, but all this with euil speede, and in an euil houre: for as they were euen nowe entryng into the hauen, the gouer∣nour of the shyppe whiche sate at the helme, stroke the shyppe vpon the sandes,Ancisus shyp∣wracke. where it was so fast enclosed and beaten with the waues of the sea, that it opened in the myddest, and all lost that was therein, a thyng surelye miserable to beholde: for of all the vyttualles that they had, they saued only twelue barrelles of meale, with a fewe cheeses, and a lytle bysket bread, for al the beastes were drowned, and they them selues escaped hard∣ly and halfe naked, by helpe of the Brigandine and ship boate, carying with them only a fewe weapons. Thus they fell from one calamitie into another, beyng nowe more carefull for theyr lyues then for golde. Yet beyng brought alyue and in health to that lande whiche they so greatly desyred, they coulde do no lesse then to prouide for the susteynyng of theyr bodyes, because they coulde not lyue only by ayre: and whereas theyr owne fayled, they must needes lyue by other mens. Yet among these so many aduersities, one good chaunce offered it selfe vnto them: for they founde, not farre from the sea syde, a groue of Date trees, among the which, and also among the reeke or weedes of the marishes,A groue of date trees. they espyed a multitude of wylde bores, with whose fleshe they fed thē selues wel certayne dayes.Wylde bores. These they say to be lesse then ours, and with so short tayles, that they thought they had ben cut of. They differ also from ours in theyr feete: for theyr hinder feete are whole vndiuided, and also without any hoofe. But they affirme that they haue prooued by experience, theyr fleshe to be of better taste and more wholsome then ours. During this time, they fed also of Dates, and the rootes of young Date trees, whi∣che they eate likewise in Ciuile and Granata, where they call them Palmitos, of ye leaues wherof they make beesmes in Rome. Sometymes also they eate of the apples of that region, whiche haue the taste of pruines, and haue also stones in them,Apples of a strange kynd. and are but lytle and of redde colour: I suppose them to be of that kinde, wherof I ate in the citie of Alexandria in Egypt, in the moneth of Apryll, the trees whereof, the Iewes that dwell there, be∣yng learned in the lawe of Moses,Cedars of Libanus. affyrme to be the Cedars of Libanus, whiche beare olde fruites and newe all the yeere,
as doth the orange tree. These apples are good to be eaten, and haue a certayne sweetenesse myxte with a gentyll sharpnesse, as haue the fruites called Sorbes. Thinhabytantes plant these trees in theyr orchyardes and gardens, and noryshe them with greate diligence as we do cheries, peaches, and quinses. This tree in leaues, heyght, and trunke, is very lyke vnto the tree that bea∣reth the fruyte called Zizipha, which the Apothecaries call Iuiuba. But whereas now the wylde bores began to fayle them, they were agayne enforced to consulte and prouyde for the tyme to come: Whereuppon with theyr whole armye, they entered further into the land. The Canibales of this prouynce, are most expert archers. Ancisus had in his companye, a hundred men. They mette by the way with only three men of thinhabitantes,Men of despe∣rate boldenesse. naked, and armed with bowes & venomous arowes, who with∣out all feare, assayled our men fyercesly, wounded manye, and slue manye, and when they emptyed theyr quiuers, fledde as swyftely as the wynde: For (as we haue saide) they are exceding swyfte of foote by reason of theyr loose gooing from theyr chyl∣des age, they affyrme that they lette slyp no arrowe out of theyr bowes in vayne. Our men therfore returned the same way that they came, muche more vnfortunate then they were before, and consulted among them selues to leaue the land, especialy because the inhabytantes had ouerthrowne the fortresse which Fogeda buylded, and had burnt thyrtie houses of the vyllage, as soone as Pizarrus and his company lefte of Fogeda, and forsaken the land. By this occasion therfore, being dryuen to seeke further, they had intelligence that the west syde of that goulfe of Vraba,The gulfe of Vraba. was more fruitfull & better to inhabite. Wherfore, they sent the one halfe of theyr men thither with the brigandine, and left the other neere to the sea syde on the east part. This gulfe, is fourteene myles in breadth, and howe muche the further it entereth into the fyrme lande, it is so much the narower. Into the gulfe of Vraba, there fall many ryuers, but one (as they saye) more fortu∣nate then the ryuer of Nilus in Egypt.The great riuer of Darien. This ryuer is called Da∣rien, vpon the bankes whereof, being very fruitfull of trees and grasse, they entended to plante theyr newe colonye or habita∣tion. But the inhabytantes marueylyng at the brigandyne be∣ing bigger then theyr canoas, and specially at the sayles
therof, fyrst sent away theyr chyldren and weakesse sort of theyr people with theyr baggage and houshould stuffe, and assembled all suche togeather both men and women, as were meete for the warres. Thus beyng armed with weapons and desperate min∣des, they stoode in a redynesse to fyght, and taryed the comming of our men vpon a lytle hyll, as it were to take the aduauntage of the grounde: our men iudged them to be about fiue hundred in number. Then Ancisus the captayne of our men, and Lieue∣tenaunt in the steede of Fogeda, settyng his men in order of bat∣tayle aray, and with his whole company kneeling on his knees, they all made humble prayers to GOD for the victorie, and a vowe to the image of the blessed virgin whiche is honoured in Ciuile, by the name of Sancta Maria Antiqua, promysyng to sende her many golden gyftes, and a straunger of that countrey: also, to name the vyllage Sancta Maria Antiqua after her name: lykewyse to erecte a temple called by the same name, or at the least to dedicate the king of that prouince his pallace to that vse, if it should please her to assist them in this dangerous enter∣prise. This done, al the souldiers toke an oth,The souldiers make an othe. that no man should turne his backe to his enimies. Then ye captayne commaunding them to be in a redynesse with theyr targets and iauelyns, and the trumpetter to blowe the battayle, they fiercely assayled theyr enimies with a larome: but the naked barbarians, not long able to abyde the force of our men, were put to flight,The barbari∣ans are dryuen to flyght. with theyr kyng and captayne Cemaccus. Our men entred into the vyllage, where they founde plentie of meate, such as the people of the countrey vse, sufficient to asswage theyr present hunger, as bread made of rootes, with certayne fruites vnlyke vnto ours, whiche they reserue for store, as we doo Chestnuttes. Of these people, the men are vtterly naked, but the women, from the nauel downe∣warde are couered with a fyne cloth made of gossampine cot∣ton. This region is vtterly without any sharpenesse of wynter: for the mouth of this ryuer of Darien,The riuer of Darien, but vii. degrees from the Equi∣noctial lyne. is onlye eyght degrees distaunt from the Equinoctiall lyne, so that the common sorte of our men, scarcely perceyue any dyfference in length betweene the day and nyght all the whole yeere: but because they are ig∣noraunt in astronomie, they can perceyue no small dyfference. Therefore we neede not muche passe if the degree differ some∣what
from theyr opinion, forasmuche as the dyfference can not be great. The day after that they aryued at the lande, they say∣led along by the ryuer, where they founde a great thycket of reedes, continuyng for the space of a myle in length, supposing (as it chaunced in deede) that the borderers thereabout whiche had fled, had eyther lyen lurkyng there, or els to haue hid theyr stuffe among those reedes: Whereupon, armyng them selues with theyr targets, for feare of the people lying in ambushe, they searched the thycket diligently,Golde founde in a thycket of reedes. and founde it without men, but replenyshed with housholde stuffe and golde. They founde also a great multitude of shetes, made of the silke or cotton of the gos∣sampine tree: lykewyse diuers kyndes of vessels & tooles made of wood,Brest plates of golde. and many of earth: also many brest plates of golde, and ouches wrought after theyr manner, to the summe of a hundred & two pound weight: for they also take pleasure in the beautie of golde, and worke it very artificially, although it be not the pryce of thyngs among them as with vs. They haue it out of other re∣gions, for exchaunge of such thynges as theyr countrey bringeth forth:The golden regions are for the most part barren. for such regions as haue plentie of bread and gossampine, lacke golde, and suche as bryng forth golde, are for the most part rough with mountaynes and rockes, and therefore barren: and thus they exercise marchandies without the vse of money. Re∣ioysyng therefore with double gladnesse, aswel in that they sawe great lykenesse of golde, as also that fortune had offered them so fayre and fruiteful a countrey, they sent for theyr felowes whom they had left before in the East syde of the gulfe of Vraha. Yet some say, that the ayre is there vnwholsome, because that part of the region lyeth in a lowe valley, enuironed with mountaynes and maryshes. The seconde booke of the seconde Decade, of the sup∣posed continent. I Haue described to your holynesse where Fogeda with his companye (to whom the large tractes of Vraba was assigned to in∣habite) entended to fasten theyr foote. Let vs nowe therefore leaue them of Vraba for a whyle, and returne agayne to Nicuesa, to
whom the gouernaunce and Lieutenauntshyp of the moste large prouince of Beragua (beyng the West syde of the gulfe of Vraba) was appoynted. We haue declared howe Nicuesa, departyng with one Carauel and two Brigandines, from Vraba the iurisdic∣tion of his frend & companion Fogeda, directed his course West∣warde to Beragua, leauing the bygger shyppes somewhat behind hym, to folowe hym a farre of, but he tooke this deuice in an euyl houre, for he both lost his felowes in the nyght, and went past the mouth of the riuer Beragua, whiche he cheefely sought. One Lupus Olanus a Cantabrian,Lupus Olanus and gouernour of one of the great shyppes, had the conduct of one of the Brigandines: he commyng behynde, learned of the inhabitauntes, whiche was the way Eastwarde to the gulfe of Beragua, ouerpassed and left behynde of Nicuesa. Olanus therfore directyng his course toward the East, met with the other Brigandine, which had also wan∣dered out of the way by reason of the darkenes of the night. The gouernour of this Brigandine, was one Petrus de Vmbria.Petrus de Vmbria. Thus both beyng glad of theyr meetyng, they consulted what was best to be done, and whiche way they coulde coniecture theyr gouer∣nour had taken his voyage. After deliberation, they iudged that Nicuesa coulde no more lacke some to put hym in remembrance of Beragua, then they them selues were mindful hereof, hopyng also to fynde hym there. They sayled therefore towarde Beragua, where they founde within .xvi. myles distant, a ryuer whiche Co∣lonus named Lagartos, because it nourysheth great Lysards, whi∣che in the Spanishe tongue are called Lagartos.The ryuer Lagartos. These Lysards are hurtful both vnto man and beast, and in shape much like vnto the Crocodiles of the ryuer Nilus in Egypt. In this ryuer they founde theyr companions and felowes of theyr errour, lying at anker with the great shyppes, whiche folowed behynde by the gouernours commaundement. Here the whole assemblie be∣yng careful and disquieted by reason of the gouernours errour, after consultation, by the aduice of the captaynes of the Brigan∣dines, who had rased neere vnto the coastes of Beragua, they say∣led directly thyther. Beragua,The golden ryuer of Be∣ragua. in the language of the inhabitants of the same prouince, is as much to say, as the golden riuer. The region it selfe is also called by the same name, takyng name of the ryuer. In the mouth of this ryuer, the greatest vesselles
cast anker, and conueyghed all theyr victuales and other neces∣saries to lande with theyr shyp boates, and elected Lupus Olanus to be theyr gouernour in steede of Nicuesa whom they had loste. By thaduyce therfore of Olanus and the other vnder capytaines, that all hope of departure myght be taken from the souldyers which they had now brought thyther, and to make them the more wylling to inhabite that lande, they vtterly forsooke and caste of those shyppes beyng nowe rotten for age, and suffered them to be shaken and broosed of the surges of the sea. Yet of theyr soundeste plankes, wyth other newe, made of the trees of that Region (which they saye to be exceeding bigge and hygh) they framed a new carauell shortelye after, whiche they myght vse to serue for theyr necessitie. But Beragua was founde by the vnfor∣tunate destenye of Petrus de Vmbria,The enterpryse & death of Pe∣trus de Vmbria For hee, beyng a man of prompt wit and apt forwardnesse to attempte thinges (in which sometyme fortune will beare a stroke notwithstanding our pro∣uidence) tooke vppon hym thaduenture to searche the shore, to thintent to fynde a way for his felowes where they myght beste come aland. For this purpose, he chose hym .xii. maryners, and went aboorde the shyp boate whiche serued the greatest shyppes. The flowyng of the sea, raged and rored there, with a horryble whurling, as we reade of the daungerous place of Scylla in the sea of Cicilie,The daunge∣rous place of Scilla in the sea of Cicile. by reason of the houge & ragged rockes reaching into the sea, from whiche the waues rebounding with vyolence, make a great noyse and roughnesse on the water, which rough∣nesse or reflowing, the Spaniardes call Resacca, In these daun∣gers wretched Vmbria wresteled a while, but in short space, a waue of the sea almoste as bygge as a mountayne, reboundyng from the rockes, ouerwhelmed the boate, and deuoured the same with the men, euen in the sight of their felowes: So that of them all, only one escaped by reason he was expert in swimming. For getting holde of the corner of a rocke, and susteyning the rage of the sea vntyll the next day when it waxed caulme, and the shore was drye by the fall of the water, he escaped and resorted to his companye. But Vmbria with the other eleuen, were vtterlye caste awaye. The resydue of the companye, durst not committe them selues to the shyppe boates, but went alande with theyr brygantines. Where remayning a fewe dayes, and saylyng
along by the ryuer, they founde certayne vyllages of the inhabi∣tauntes, which they call Mumu. Here they began to builde a for∣tresse, and to sowe seedes after the manner of theyr countrey, in a certayne vale of fruiteful grounde, because in other places the region is barren. As these thyngs were thus doing in Beragua, one of theyr companye standing vpon the top of a high rocke of especiall, and lyftyng his eyes towarde the West, began to crye, Lynnen sayles, lynnen sayles. And the neerer it drewe to∣warde hym, he perceiued it to be a shyp boate, commyng with a lytle sayle: yet receiued they it with muche reioycing, for it was the fysher boate of Nicuesa his Carauel, and of capacitie to cary only fyue men, and had nowe but three in it, whiche had stolne it from Nicuesa, because he refused to geue credite to them that he had passed Beragua, and left it behinde him Eastwarde. For they seeyng Nicuesa and his felowes to consume daylye by famine, thought that they would prooue fortune with that boate, yf theyr chaunce myght be to fynde Beragua, as in deede it was. Debatyng therefore with theyr felowes of these matters, they declared how Nicuesa erred and lost the Carauel by tempest, and that he was nowe wanderyng among the maryshes of vnknow∣en coastes, full of miserie and in extreme penurie of all thynges,The miserable case of Nicuesa hauyng nowe lyued for the space of threescore and tenne dayes, only with herbes and rootes, & seldome with fruites of the coun∣trey, contented to drynke water, and yet that oftentymes fay∣lyng, because he was instant to trauayle Westwarde by foote, supposyng by that meanes to come to Beragua. Colonus the fyrst fynder of this mayne lande, had coasted along by this tracte, and named it Gracia Dei, but thinhabitantes cal it Cerabaro. Through this region, there runneth a riuer, whiche our men named Sancti Matthei, distant from the West syde of Beragua,The riuer of S. Matthei. about an hun∣dred and thyrtie myles. Here I let passe the name of this riuer, and of manye other places by the names whiche thinhabitantes vse, because our men are ignoraunt thereof. Thus Lupus Olanus the conductor of one of the shyps of Nicuesa, and nowe also vice Lieuetenaunt in his steede, after that he had receyued this information of the Maryners, sent thyther a Brigandine vnder theyr guydyng. These Maryners therefore, whiche came in the fyssher boate, founde Nicuesa, and brought hym to the
place where Olanus lay,The rigo∣cousnesse of Nicuesa. whom at his comming he cast in prison, and accused hym of treason, because he vsurped the aucthoritie of the Lieuetenauntshyp, and that for the desyre he had to beare rule and be in aucthoritie, he tooke no care of his errours: also that he behaued him selfe negligently, demaundyng furthermore of hym, what was the cause of his so long delay. Lykewyse he spake to al the vnder officers sharpely, and with a troubled mind, and within fewe dayes after, commaunded them to trusse vp theyr packes, and make them redy to depart. They desyred him to quyet hym selfe, and to forbeare them a whyle, vntyl they had reaped the corne that they had sowen, whiche woulde shortly be rype: for all kynde of corne waxeth rype there euery fourth mo∣neth after it is sowen.Corne waxeth rype euerye fourth moneth But he vtterly denyed to tarye anye whyt, but that he woulde foorthwith depart from that vnfortunate lande, and plucked vp by the rootes all that euer was brought into the gulfe of Beragua, and commaunded them to direct theyr course towarde the East. After they had sayled about the space of sixteene myles, a certaine young man, whose name was Gre∣gorie, a Genues borne, and of a chylde brought vp with Colonus, called to remembraunce that there was a hauen not farre from thence: and to prooue his sayinges true, he gaue his felowes these tokens, that is, that they shoulde fynde vpon the shore, an anker of a lost shyppe halfe couered with sande, and vnder a tree next vnto the hauen a spryng of cleare water. They came to the lande, founde the anker and the spryng, and commended the wytte and memorie of the young man, that he onlye among manye of the Maryners which had searched those coastes with Colonus,The commen∣dation of a young man brought vp with Colonus. Portus Bellus. bore the thyng so well in mynde. This hauen Colonus called Portus Bellus. Where as in this voyage for lacke of vyt∣tualles, they were sometymes enforced to goe alande, they were euyl entreated of thinhabitantes: by reason whereof, theyr strengthes were so weakened with hunger, that they were not able to keepe warre against naked men,Weakenesse of hunger. or scarcely to beare their harnesse on theyr backes: and therefore our men lost twentie of theyr companions, which were slayne with venemous arrowes. They consulted to leaue the one halfe of theyr felowes in the ha∣uen of Portus Bellus, & the other part Nicuesa toke with hym to∣warde the East, where about twentie and eyght myles from
Portus Bellus, he entended to buylde a fortresse harde by the sea syde, vpon the poynt or cape, whiche in tyme past Colonus named Marmor, but they were so feeble by reason of long hunger,Cape Mar∣mor. that theyr strength serued them not to susteyne suche labour, yet he erected a lytle towre, able to resyst the fyrst assaulte of the inha∣bitauntes: this towre he called Nomen Dei. From the tyme that he left Beragua, what in the iourney among the sandie playnes,Nomen Dei. then also for hunger while he builded the towre, of the fewe whi∣che remayned alyue, he lost two hundred. And thus by litle and lytle, the multitude of seuen hundred, fourescore, and fyue men, was brought nowe to scarcelye one hundred. Whyle Nicuesa lyued with these fewe miserable men, there arose a contention among them of Vraba, as concernyng the Lieuetenantshyppe: for one Vascus Nunnez, by the iudgement of al men, trustyng more to his strength then wit, styrred vp certayne light felowes agaynst Ancisus, saying that Ancisus had not the kyngs letters patentes for that office, and that it was not sufficient that he was aucthorised by Fogeda, and therefore forbode that he should execute the office of the Lieuetenauntshyp, and wylled them to choose certayne of theyr owne companye, by whose counsayle and aucthoritie they myght be gouerned. Thus being diuided into factions, by reason that Fogeda theyr captayne came not a∣gayne, whom they supposed to be nowe dead of his venemous wound, they contended whether it were best to substitute Nicue∣sa in his place. The wysest sort, suche as were familier with Ni∣cuesa, & could not beare the insolencie of Vascus Nunnez, thought it good that Nicuesa shoulde be sought out throughout all those coastes: for they had knowledge that he departed from Beragua, because of the barrennesse of the grounde, and that by the exam∣ple of Ancisus, and suche other as had made shypwracke, it were possible that he myght wander in some secrete place, and that they coulde not be quiet in theyr myndes, vntyl they knewe the certayntie whether he with his felowes were aliue or dead. But Vascus Nunnez, fearyng lest at the commyng of Nicuesa, he shoulde not be had in aucthoritie among his felowes, sayd they were mad men to thynke that Nicuesa lyued, and although he were alyue, yet that they had no neede of his helpe: for he auouched that there was none of his felowes, that were not
as meete to rule as Nicuesa. Whyle they were thus reasonyng to and fro,The nauigati∣on of Roderi∣cus Colmena∣ris. one Rodericus Colmenaris aryued in those coastes with two great shyppes, hauyng in them threescore freshe men, with great plentie of vyttualles and apparell. Of the nauigation of this Colmenaris, I entend to speake somewhat more. He therfore departed from the hauen of Hispaniola, called Beata (where they prepare and furnyshe them selues whiche make any voyage into these landes) about the Ides of October, in the yeere .1510. and landed the .ix. of Nouember in a region in the large prouince of Paria, founde by Colonus betwene the hauen Carthago, and the region of Cuchibachoa. In this voyage, what by the roughnesse of the sea, and fiercenesse of the barbarians, he suffered many in∣commodities: for when his freshe water fayled, he sayled to the mouth of a certayne riuer which thinhabitantes cal Gaira, beyng apt to receiue shippes. This riuer had his course from the toppe of an exceedyng hygh mountayne couered with snowe,An exceedyng high moun∣tayne couered with snowe. hygher then the whiche, al the companions of this captayne Rodericus say, that they neuer sawe: And that by good reason, yf it were couered with snowe in that region, which is not past ten degrees distant from the Equinoctial lyne. As they began to draw water out of theyr shyp boate, a certayne kyng made towarde them, ap∣parelled with vestures of gossampine cotton,Apparelled men. hauyng twentie noble men in his company apparelled also: which thyng seemed straunge to our men, and not seene before in those parties. The kynges apparell hong loose from his shoulders to his elbowes, and from the gyrdle downewarde, it was much lyke a womans kyrtle, reaching euen to his heeles. As he drewe neere towarde our men, he seemed freendly to admonyshe them to take none of the water of that ryuer, affyrmyng it to be vnwholsome for men, and shewed them that not farre from thence, there was a ryuer, of good water. They came to the ryuer, and endeuouryng to come neere the shore, they were driuen backe by tempest. Also the burbuling of the sand, declared the sea to be but shalow there. They were therefore enforced to returne to the fyrste ryuer where they myght safely cast anker. This kyng layde wayte for our men: for as they were fyllyng theyr barrelles, he set on them with about seuen hundred men (as our men iud∣ged) armed after theyr manner, although they were naked:
for only the kyng and his noble men were apparelled. They tooke away the shypboate, and broke it in manner to chips: so fiercely assaylyng our men with theyr venemous arrowes, that they slue of them fourtie and seuen,Spanyardes slayne with ve∣nemous ar∣rowes. before they coulde couer them selues with their targets. For that poyson is of such force, that albeit the woundes were not great, yet they dyed therof im∣mediatly, for they yet knewe no remedie agaynst this kynde of poyson, as they after learned of the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola: for this Ilande bryngeth foorth an hearbe which quencheth and mortifieth the violent poyson of the hearbe, wherwith theyr ar∣rowes are infected, so that it be ministred in tyme.A remedie a∣gaynst vene∣mous arrowes Yet of our companye whiche went for water, seuen escaped that conflycte, and hydde them selues in a hollowe tree, lurkyng there vntyll nyght, yet escaped they not the handes of theyr enimies: for the shyppe departed from thence in the nyght season, and left them there, supposyng that they had ben slayne. Thus by manye suche peryls and daungers (which I lyghtly ouerpasse, because I wyll not be tedious to your holynesse) he aryued at the length at the hauen of Vraba,The hauen of Vraba. and cast anker at the East syde thereof, from whence not long before, our men departed to the West syde, by reason of the barrennesse of that soyle. When he had continued a whyle in the hauen, and sawe no man styrryng, marueyled at the scilence of the places (for he supposed there to haue found his felowes) he could not coniecture what this should meane: and thereupon began to suspect that eyther they were dead, or that they had changed the place of theyr habitation. To knowe the certayntie hereof, he commaunded all the great ordi∣naunce, and other small gunnes whiche he had in his shyppes, to be charged, and fyers to be made in the night vpon the toppes of the rockes. Thus the fyers beyng kyndled, he commaunded al the gunnes to be shot of at one instant, by the horrible noyse whereof, the gulfe of Vraba was shaken, although it were .xxiiii. myles distant, for so brode is the gulfe. This noyse was hearde of theyr felowes in Dariena, and they aunsweared them agayne with mutual fyers. Wherefore, by the folowyng of these fyers, Colmenaris brought his shippes to the West syde. Here those wretched and miserable men of Dariena, whiche nowe through famyne and feeblenesse, helde theyr weerie soules in theyr teeth,
redy to depart from theyr bodyes, by reason of the calamities whiche befel vnto them after Ancisus shipwracke, lifting vp their handes to heauen, with the teares running downe theyr cheekes both for ioy and sorow, embraced Rodericus and his felowes with such kinde of reioycyng, as theyr present necessitie seemed to re∣quire: for whereas they were before his commyng, without vit∣tuals, and almost naked, he brought them abundance of meate, drinke, and apparel. It resteth now (most holy father) to declare what came of the dissention among them of Vraba, as concer∣ning the gouernance after the losse of theyr captaynes. The thirde booke of the seconde Decade, of the supposed continent. ALl the cheefe officers in Beragua, and suche as were most politike in counsayle, determi∣ned that Nicuesa should be sought out, yf by any meanes he coulde be founde. Wherup∣pon they tooke from Ancisus the gouer∣nour, refusyng the comming of Nicuesa, a Brigandine whiche he made of his owne charges: and agreed, agaynst both the wyl of Ancisus, and the maister of fence Vaschus Nunnez, that Nicuesa should be sought forth to take away the stryfe as touching the gouernment. They elected therefore Colmenaris (of whom we spake before) to take this matter in hande, willing him to make diligent searche for Nicuesa in those coastes where they supposed he erred: for they hearde that he had forsaken Beragua, the region of an vnfruiteful ground. They gaue him therfore commaundement to bring Ni∣cuesa with hym, and further to declare vnto him that he should do right good seruice to come thyther, in takyng away the occasion of theyr seditions. Colmenaris tooke the thyng vpon hym the more gladly, because Nicuesa was his very frende, supposyng his commyng with vittualles shoulde be no lesse thankefull to Nicuesa and his company, then it was to them of Vraba. Furni∣shyng therefore one of his owne shyppes which he brought with hym, and also the Brigandine taken from Ancisus, he frayghted
the same with part of the vittuals and other necessaries which he brought with hym before from Hispaniola to Vraba. Thus cour∣syng along by al the coastes and gulfes neere thereabout, at the length, at the poynt called Marmor, he founde Nicuesa, of al ly∣uyng men most infortunate,Nicuesa is founde in a miserable case. in manner dryed vp with extreme hunger, fylthy and horrible to beholde, with only threescore men in his company, left aliue of seuen hundred. They al seemed to him so miserable, that he no lesse lamented theyr case, then yf he had found them dead. But Colmenaris comforted his frend Nicue∣sa, and embracyng hym with teares and cheareful words, relee∣ued his spirites, and further encouraged hym with great hope of better fortune, declaryng also that his commyng was looked for, and greatlye desyred of all the good men of Vraba, for that they hoped that by his aucthoritie, theyr discorde and contention shoulde be finished. Nicuesa thanked his frende Colmenaris after suche sorte as his calamitie required. Thus they tooke shyp to∣geather, and sailed directly to Vraba. But so variable and vncon∣stant is the nature of man, that he soone groweth out of vse, be∣commeth insolent and vnmyndfull of benefites after to muche fe∣licitie: for Nicuesa after thus many teares and weepyngs,Insolencie oft muche felicitie. after diuers bewaylynges of his infortunate destenye, after so many thankesgeuyng, yea after that he had fallen downe to the ground and kyssed the feete of Colmenaris his sauiour, he began to quarel with hym before he came yet at Vraba, reprouing hym & them al for the alteration of the state of thynges in Vraba, and for the gea∣theryng of golde, affyrmyng that none of them ought to haue layde hande of anye golde without the aduice of hym or Fogeda his companyon. When these sayinges and suche lyke, came to the eares of them of Vraba, they so styrred vp the myndes of An∣cisus Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda, and also of Vaschus Nunnez of the contrary part, agaynst Nicuesa, that shortly after his aryuall with his threescore men, they commaunded hym with threat∣nyng to depart from thence: but this pleased not the better sort. Yet fearyng lest tumult should be among the people, whom Vaschus Nunnez had styrred to factions, the best part was fayne to geue place to ye greatest. This wretched man therfore Nicuesa thus drowned in miseries, was thrust into the Brigandine whi∣che he him selfe brought, and with him only seuenteene men, of
his threescore whiche remayned alyue. He tooke shippe in the Calendes of Marche, in the yeere .1511. intendyng to goe to Hispaniola to complayne of the rashnesse of Vaschus Nunnez and of the violence done to hym by Ancisus: But he entred into the Brigandine in an vnfortunate houre, for he was neuer seene after. They suppose that the Brigandine was drowned with al the men therein. And thus vnhappie Nicuesa fallyng headlong out of one misery into another,The death of Nicuesa. ended his life more miserably then he lyued. Nicuesa being thus vylely reiected, and theyr vyttuals consumed which Colmenaris brought them, falling in maner mad for hunger, they were enforced lyke rauening woolues seekyng theyr pray, to inuade suche as dwelt about theyr confynes. Vas∣chus Nunnez therfore, their new captaine of their owne election, assemblyng togeather a hundred and thirtie men, and settyng them in order of battayle after his swoordplayers fashion, puf∣fed vp with pryde, placed his souldiers as pleased hym, in the forewarde and rerewarde, and some, as partizens, about his owne person.Famine enfor∣seth them to fal to spaylyng. Careta kyng of Coiba. Thus assosiatyng with hym Colmenaris, he went to spoyle the kynges which were borderers therabout, and came fyrst to a region about that coast called Coiba (whereof we made mention before) imperiously and with cruell countenance com∣maundyng the kyng of the region, whose name was Careta (of whom they were neuer troubled as often as they passed by his dominions) to geue them vyttualles. But Careta denyed that he coulde geue them any at that tyme, alleagyng that he had often∣tymes ayded the Christians as they passed by those coastes, by reason whereof, his store was nowe consumed: also that by the meanes of the continuall warre whiche he kept euer from his childes age with a kyng whose name was Poncha, borderyng vpon his dominion, he and his familie were in great scarcenesse of al thynges. But Vaschus woulde admyt none of these excuses, and thereupon tooke Careta prisoner, spoyled his vyllage, and brought him bounde with his two wyues and chyldren,Kyng Careta is taken and spoyled. and all his familie to Dariena. With this kyng Careta, they found three of the felowes of Nicuesa, the which whē Nicuesa passed by those coastes to seeke Beragua, fearing punishment for theyr euil deser∣tes, stole away from the shippes lying at anker: And when the nauie departed, committed them selues to the mercie of Careta▪
who enterteyned them very frendly. They had nowe ben there eighteene monethes, and were therefore as vtterly naked as the people of the countrey. Duryng this tyme, the meate of thinha∣bitantes seemed vnto them delicate dishes & princely fare, espe∣cially because they enioyed the same without any stryfe for mine and thyne,Mine & thine the seedes of al myscheefe. whiche two thynges mooue and enforce men to suche harde shyftes and miseries, that in lyuyng they seeme not to lyue. Yet desyred they to returne to theyr olde cares, of suche force is education and naturall affection towarde them with whom we haue ben brought vp. The vyttuals which Vaschus brought from the vyllage of Careta, to his felowes left in Dariena, was rather somewhat to asswage theyr present hunger, then vtterly to take away theyr necessitie. But as touching Ancisus,Ancisus, Lieue∣tenant for Fo∣geda, is cast in pryson. beyng Lieue∣tenaunt for Fogeda, whether it were before these thyngs, or after, I knowe not: but this I am sure of, that after the reiecyng of Nicuesa, many occasions were sought against Ancisus by Vaschus and his factionaries. Howsoeuer it was, Ancisus was taken, and cast in pryson, and his goodes confiscate: the cause hereof was (as Vaschus alleaged) that Ancisus had his commission of the Lieuetenauntshyp of Fogeda only, whom they said to be now dead, and not of the kyng, saying that he woulde not obey anye man that was not put in offce by the kyng him selfe by his let∣ters patentes Yet at the request of the grauest sort, he was some∣what pacified, and dealt more gentelly with hym, hauyng some compassion on his calamities, and thereupon commaunded him to be loosed. Ancisus beyng at libertie,Ancisus taketh his voyage to Hispaniola. tooke shyppe to depart from thence to Hispaniola: but before he had hoysed vp his sayle, al the wisest sort resorted to him, humblye desyryng hym to re∣turne agayne, promysyng that they woulde doo their diligence, that Vaschus being reconciled, he myght be restored to his full aucthoritie of the Lieuetenauntshyp: but Ancisus refused to con∣sent to theyr request, and so departed. Yet some there were that murmured that God and his angels shewed this reuenge vpon Ancisus, because Nicuesa was reiected through his counsayle.The reueng of God. Howe so euer it be, the searchers of the newe landes fall head∣long into ruine by theyr owne follie,The inconue∣niences of dis∣corde. consumyng them selues with ciuile discorde, not weighing so great a matter, nor em∣ploying theyr best endeuour about the same, as the woorthy∣nesse
of the thyng requireth. In this meane tyme, they determi∣ned all with one agreement, to sende messengers into Hispaniola to the yong Admiral and viceroy, sonne and heyre to Christopho∣rus Colonus the fynder of these landes, and to the other gouer∣nours of the Ilande (from whom the newe landes receiue theyr ayde and lawes) to signifie vnto them what state they stoode in, and in what necessitie they liued, also what they had founde, and in what hope they were of greater thyngs, if they were furnished with plentie of vyttualles and other necessaries. For this pur∣pose they elected, at the assignement of Vaschus, one Valdiuia, be∣ing one of his faction, and instructed by hym agaynst Ancisus, and to be assystant with hym, they appoynted one Zamudius a Cantabrian, so that commaundement was geuen to Valdiuia to returne from Hispaniola with vittuals, & Zamudius was appoyn∣ted to take his voyage into Spayne to the kyng. They toke ship both togeather with Ancisus, hauyng in mind to certifie the king howe things were handled there, much otherwise then Zamudi∣us information. I mee selfe spake with both Ancisus & Zamudius at their comming to the court. Whyle they were occupied about these matters, those wretched men of Dariena loosed Careta the king of Coiba, vpon condition that he shoulde ayde them in their warres agaynst his enimie and theyrs,King Poncha. kyng Poncha, borderyng vpon his dominions. Careta made a league with them, promising that as they passed by his kingdome, he woulde geue them all things necessarie, & meete them with an armie of men, to goe for∣ward with them to the battaile against Poncha. Theyr weapons are neyther bowes nor venomed arrowes, as we sayde thinhabi∣tauntes to haue, whiche dwel eastward beyonde the gulfe. They fyght therefore at hande with long swordes (whiche they call Macanas) made of wood,Swordes of wood. because they haue no Iron. They vse also long staues lyke iauelyns, hardened at the endes with fyre, or typt with bone, also certayne slynges and dartes. Thus aftet the league made with Careta, both he and our men had certayne dayes appoynted them to tyll theyr grounde and sowe theyr seedes.Kyng Careta conspireth with the Spaniards agaynst kyng Poncha. This done, by the ayde of Careta, and by his conduction, they marched towarde the pallace of Poncha, who fled at theyr comming. They spoyled his vyllage, and mitigated theyr hunger with such vyttuals as they founde there: yet coulde they
not helpe theyr felowes therewith, by reason of the farre distance of the place, although they had great plentie: for the vyllage of Poncha was more then a hundred myles dystant from Dariena, whereas was also none other remedie, but that the same shoulde haue ben caryed on mens backes to the sea syde, beyng farre of, where they left theyr shyppes in the whiche they came to the vil∣lage of Careta. Here they founde certayne poundes weight of gold, grauen & wrought into sundry ouches. After the sackyng of this vyllage, they resorted toward the ships, intending to leaue the kynges of the inlande vntouched at this tyme, and to inuade only them which dwelt by the sea coastes. Not farre from Coiba, in the same tracte, there is a region named Comogra,The region of Comogra, di∣stant from Dariena .xxx. leagues. and the king thereof called Comogrus, after the same name. To this kyng they came fyrst next after the subuertion of Poncha, and founde his pallace situate in a fruiteful playne of .xii. leagues in breadth, at the rootes of the further syde of ye next mountaynes. Comogrus had in his courte a certaine noble man of neere consanguitie to kyng Careta, whiche had fled to Comogrus by reason of certayne dissentions which was betwene Careta & hym, these noble men, they cal Iura. This Iura therefore of Coiba, met our men by the way, and conciled Comogrus to them, because he was wel know∣en to our men,Kyng Como∣grus. from the tyme that Nicuesa passed fyrst by those coastes. Our men therfore went quietly to the pallace of Como∣grus, beyng distant from Dariena thirtie leagues by a plaine way about the mountaynes. This kyng Comogrus had seuen sonnes, young men, of comely fourme and stature, which he had by sundry wyues. His pallace was framed of postes or proppes made of trees fastened together after a strange sort,The kynges pallace. and of so strong buil∣ding, that it is of no lesse strength then walles of stone. They whiche measured the length of the floore thereof, founde it to be a hundred and fyftie paces, and in breadth, fourescore foote, be∣yng roofed and paued with marueylous arte. They founde his storehouse furnished with abundance of delicate vittuals, after the manner of theyr countrey, and his wyne seller replenished with great vesselles of earth and also of wood, fylled with their kinde of wine and syder, for they haue no grapes: but lyke as they make theyr bread of those three kindes of rootes called Iucca,Wine & syder. Agis, and Maizium (whereof we spake in the fyrst Decade) so
make they theyr wyne of the fruites of Date trees, and Syder of other fruites and seedes, as do the Almaynes, Fleminges, Eng∣lyshe men, & our Spanyardes which inhabite the mountaines, as the Vascons and Asturians: lykewyse in the mountaynes of the Alpes, the Noricians, Sweuians, and Heluecians, make cer∣tayne drynkes of barley, wheate, hoppes, and apples. They say also that with Comogrus they drunke wines of sundry tastes, both whyte and blacke.Blacke wine. But nowe you shal heare of a thyng more monstrous to beholde. Entryng therefore into the inner partes of the pallace, they were brought into a chamber hanged about with the carkasses of men, tyed with ropes of gossampine cot∣ton. Beyng demaunded what they meant by that superstition, they answered that those were the carcasses of the father, graund∣father, & great graundfather, with other the auncetours of theyr kyng Comogrus, declaryng that they had the same in great reue∣rence, and that they tooke it for a godly thyng to honour them religiously, and therefore apparelled euery of the same sumptu∣ously with gold and precious stones, according vnto theyr estate. After this sorte dyd the antiquitie honour theyr Penates, whiche they thought had the gouernance of theyr lyues.The carcasses of men dyed. Howe they drye these carcasses vpon certaine instrumentes made of wood, lyke vnto hurdells, with a soft fyre vnder the same, so that only the skinne remayneth to hold the bones togeather, we haue described in the former Decade. Of Comogrus his seuen sonnes, the el∣dest had an excellent natural wyt. He therefore thought it good to flatter and please this wanderyng kinde of men (our men I meane) liuing only by shiftes and spoyle, lest being offended, and seeking occasions against him & his familie, they should handle hym as they dyd other which sought no meanes how to gratifie them: Wherefore, he gaue Vaschus and Colmenaris foure thou∣sande ounces of golde artificially wrought, and also fiftie slaues, whiche he had taken in the warres: for suche, eyther they sell for exchaunge of other thynges, or otherwyse vse them as them listeth, for they haue not the vse of money. This golde with as muche more which they had in another place, our men weighed in the porche of Comogrus his palace, to separate the fift parte thereof,The distributi∣on of golde. whiche portion is due to the kynges Exchequer: for it is decreed, that the fyft part of both golde, pearles, and
precious stones, shoulde be assigned to the kynges treasurers, and the residue to be diuided among them selues by compositi∣on. Here as brabblyng and contention arose among our men about the diuidyng of golde, this eldest sonne of kyng Comogrus beyng present, whom we praysed for his wysedome, commyng somewhat with an angrye countenaunce towarde hym whiche helde the ballaunces, he stroke them with his fyste, and scatte∣red all the golde that was therein about the porche,Young Como∣grus his ora∣tion. sharpelye rebukyng them with woordes in this essecte. What is the matter, you Christian men, that you so greatly esteeme so lytle portion of golde more then your owne quietnesse, whiche neuer∣thelesse you entende to deface from these fayre ouches, and to melt the same into a rude masse. Yf your hunger of golde be so insatiable, that onlye for the desyre you haue thereto,The hunger of golde. you dis∣quiete so manye nations, and you your selues also susteyne so many calamities and incommodities, lyuyng lyke banished men out of your owne countrey, I wyll shewe you a region flow∣yng with golde,A region flow∣ing with golde. where you may satisfie your rauenyng ap∣petites: But you must attempt the thing with a greater power, for it standeth you in hand by force of armes to ouercome kings of great puissaunce, and rigorous defendours of theyr domini∣ons. For besyde other,Kyng Tuma∣nama. the great kyng Tumanama wyll come foorth agaynst you, whose kyngdome is most riche with golde, and distant from hence only syxe sunnes, that is, syxe dayes: for they number the dayes by the sunne. Furthermore, or euer you can come thither, you muste passe ouer the mountaynes inha∣bited of the cruell Canibales, a fierce kynde of men,Canibales. deuourers of mans fleshe, lyuyng without lawes, wanderyng, and with∣out Empire: for they also beyng desyrous of golde, haue subdued them vnder theyr dominion, whiche before inhabited the golde mynes of the mountaynes,The golde mines of the mountaynes. and vse them lyke bonde∣men, vsyng theyr labour in dyggyng and woorkyng their golde in plates and sundry images, lyke vnto these whiche you see here: for we do no more esteeme rude golde vnwrought, then we do cloddes of earth,Vnwrought golde not este∣med. before it be fourmed by the hande of the woorkeman to the similitude eyther of some vessell necessa∣rie for our vse, or some ouche beautifull to be worne. These thynges doo we receyue of them for exchaunge of other of
our thynges, as of prysoners taken in warre, whiche they buye to eate, or for sheetes and other thynges parteynyng to the fur∣niture of housholde, suche as they lacke whiche inhabite the mountaynes, and especially for vittualles, whereof they stande in great neede, by reason of the barrennes of the mountaines. This iourney therefore must be made open by force of men, and when you are passyng ouer these mountaynes (poyntyng with his fin∣ger towarde the south mountaynes) you shal see another sea, where they sayle with shyppes as bygge as yours (meanyng the Carauels) vsyng both sayles and ores as you doo, although the men be naked as we are: all the way that the water run∣neth from the mountaynes, and al that syde lying towarde the South,Abundance of golde. bryngeth foorth golde abundauntly. As he sayd these woordes, he poynted to the vesselles in whiche they vse to serue theyr meate, affyrmyng that kyng Tumanama, and all the other kyngs beyond the mountaynes,Housholde stuffe of golde. had such & al other theyr house∣hold stuffe of golde, and that there was no lesse plentie of gold a∣mong those people of the South, then of Iron with vs: for he knewe by relation of our men, whereof our swoordes and other weapons were made. Our captaynes marueylyng at the oration of the naked young man (for they had for interpreters those three men whiche had ben before a yeere and a halfe con∣uersaunt in the court of kyng Careta) pondered in theyr mindes, and earnestly consydered his sayinges, so that his rashnesse in scatteryng the golde out of the ballaunces, they turned to myrth and vrbanitie, commendyng his dooyng and saying therin. Then they asked hym frendly, vpon what certaine knowledge he spake those thynges, or what he thought best herein to be done, yf they should bring a greater supply of men? To this young Comogrus, staying a whyle with him selfe, as it were an Oratour preparing hym selfe to speake of some graue matter, and disposing his body to a iesture meete to perswade, spake thus in his mother tongue, Geue eare vnto me, O you Christians. Albeit that the greedie hunger of golde hath not yet vexed vs naked men, yet do we de∣stroy one another by reason of ambition and desyre to rule.Naked peo∣ple tormented with ambition. Hereof spryngeth mortal hatred among vs, and hereof commeth our destruction. Our predecessours kept warres, and so dyd Comogrus my father, with princes beyng borderers about him.
In the whiche warres, as we haue ouercome, so haue we ben ouercome, as doth appeare by the number of bondmen among vs, which we toke by the ouerthrowe of our enimies, of the whi∣che I haue geuen you fyftie. Lykewyse at another tyme, our ad∣uersaries hauyng the vpper hande agaynst vs, ledde awaye many of vs captiue, for suche is the chaunce of warre. Also, among our familiers (whereof a great number haue ben cap∣tiues with them) beholde here is one whiche of long time led a payneful lyfe in bondage vnder the yoke of that kyng beyonde the mountaynes, in whose kyngdome is such abundance of gold. Of hym, and suche other innumerable, and lykewyse by the re∣sort of free men on theyr side commyng to vs, and agayne of our men resortyng to them by safe conduct, these thynges haue ben euer as well knowen vnto vs, as our owne possessions: but that you may be the better assured hereof,A vehement perswasion. and be out of al sus∣pection that you shall not be deceiued, make me the guyde of this voyage, byndyng me fast, and keepyng me in safe custodie to be hanged on the next tree, yf you fynde my sayinges in anye poynt vntrue. Folowe my counsayle therefore, and sende for a thousande Christian men apt for the warres, by whose power we may, with also the men of warre of Comogrus my father, ar∣med after our manner, inuade the dominions of our enimies: where both you may be satisfied with golde, and we for our con∣ductyng and aydyng you in this enterpryse, shall thinke our selues abundantly rewarded, in that you shal helpe to deliuer vs from the iniuries and perpetuall feare of our enimies. After these woordes, this prudent young Comogrus helde his peace, and our men mooued with great hope and hunger of golde,A token of hunger. be∣gan agayne to swalowe downe theyr spyttle. The fourth booke of the seconde Decade, of the supposed continent. AFter that they had taryed here a fewe dayes, and baptised Comogrus, with all his familie, and named hym by the name of Charles, after the kyng of Spayne,Kyng Como∣grus is bapti∣sed with his familie. they returned to theyr felowes in Dariena, leauyng with hym the hope of the thou∣sande
souldiers, whiche his sonne required to passe ouer those mountaynes towarde the South sea. Thus entryng into the vyllage whiche they had chosen to inhabite, they had knowledge that Valdiuia was returned within sixe monethes after his de∣parture, but with no great plentie of vyttualles, because he brought but a smal shyppe: yet with hope that shortly after, there shoulde be sent them abundance of vyttualles, and a newe supplye of men. For young Colonus the Admiral, and viceroy of Hispaniola, and the other gouernours of the Ilande, acknowled∣ged that hytherto they had no respect to them of Dariena, because they supposed that Ancisus the Lieuetenaunt had safely arryued there with his shyppe laden with vyttualles: wylling them from hencefoorth to be of good cheare, and that they shoulde lacke no∣thyng hereafter, but that at this present tyme they had no bigger ship wherby they myght send them greater plentie of necessaries by Valdiuia. The vyttuals therfore which he brought, serued ra∣ther somwhat to mitigate theyr present necessitie, then to satisfie theyr lacke. Wherefore, within a fewe dayes after Valdiuia his returne, they fel agayne into lyke scarcenesse: especially foras∣muche as a great storme and tempest whiche came from the hygh mountaynes, with horrible thunder and lyghtnyng in the moneth of Nouember,Horrible thun∣der and lyght∣nyng in the moneth of Nouember. brought with it suche a floodde, that it partly caryed away, and partly drowned al the corne and seedes which they had sowen in the moneth of September, in a fruite∣full grounde before they went to kyng Comogrus. The seedes whiche they of Hispaniola call Maizium, and they of Vraba call Hobba, whereof they make theyr bread, whiche also we sayde to be rype thryse euery yeere, because those regions are not bytten with the sharpenesse of wynter by reason of theyr neerenesse to the Equinoctial lyne. It is also agreeable to the principles of natural philosophie, that this bread made of Maizius or Hobba, shoulde be more wholsome for the inhabitauntes of those coun∣treys then bread made of wheate, by reason that it is of easier digestion: for whereas colde is wantyng, the natural heate is not dryuen from the outwarde partes into the inwarde partes and precordials, whereby digestion is muche strengthened. Beyng therefore thus frustrate of the increase of theyr seedes, and the kynges neere about them, spoyled of both vyttualles
and golde, they were enforced to seeke theyr meate further of, and therwith to signyfie to the gouernours of Hispaniola with what great necessitie they were oppressed, and what they had learned of Comogrus as concernyng the Regions towarde the South, willyng them in consideration thereof, to aduertise the kyng to send them a thousande souldiers, by whose helpe they myght by force make waye through the mountaynes, diuidyng the sea on both sydes, if they coulde not bryng the same to passe quietly. The same Valdiuia was also sent on this message, cary∣ing with hym to the kynges treasurers (hauing theyr office of receipt in Hispaniola) three hundred poundes weyght of golde, after eyght ounces to the pounde, for the fyft portion due to the kynges excheker. This pound of eight ounces, the Spaniardes call Marcha, whiche in weight amounteth to fyftye peeces of golde called Castellani, but the Castilians call a pounde Pesum. We conclude therefore, that the summe hereof, was .xv. thou∣sand of those peeces of gold called Castellani. And thus is it appa∣rent by this accompt, that they receiued of the barbarous kinges, a thousande and fyue hundred poundes, of eyght ounces to the pounde: all the whiche they founde readye wrought in sundrye kyndes of ouches, as cheynes, braselets, tablets, and plates, both to hang before theyr brestes, and also at theyr eares, and nosethryls. Valdiuia therfore tooke shypping in the same Cara∣uell in the which he came last, and returned also before the thyrde day of the Ides of Ianuary, in the yeere of Christe M.D.XI. What chaunced to hym in this voyage, we wyll declare in place conuenient. But let vs now returne to them whiche remayned in Vraba. After the dismissyng of Valdiuia, beyng pricked for∣warde with outragious hunger, they determined to searche the inner partes of that gulfe in sundry places. The extreeme angle or poynt of the same gulfe is distant from the enterance thereof, about fourescore myles. This angle or corner, the Spaniardes call Culata. Vaschus hym selfe came to this poynt with a hundred men, coasting along by the gulfe with one brygandine and cer∣tayne of the boates of those regions, whiche the Urabians call Vru, lyke vnto them whiche thinhabitauntes of Hispaniola call Canoas. From this poynt, there falleth aryuer from the East in∣to the gulfe, ten times bigger then the ryuer of Dariena, which al∣so
so falleth into the same. Saylyng along by the ryuer about the space of thyrtie myles (for they cal it niene leagues) and some∣what enclynyng towarde the ryght hande Southwarde, they founde certayne vyllages of thinhabitauntes, the kyng whereof was called Dabaiba. Our men also were certified before, that Cemacchus the kyng of Dariena, whom they put to flyght in the battayle, fledde to this Dabaiba, but at the commyng of our men, Dabaiba also fledde. It is thought that he was admonyshed by Cemacchus, that he shoulde not abyde the brunte of our men. He folowed his counsayle, forsooke his villages, and left all thynges desolate: yet our men founde heapes of bowes and arrowes, al∣so muche housholde stuffe, and many fyshyng boates. But those maryshe groundes were neyther apt for sowyng of seedes, or plantyng of trees,Maryshe grounde. by reason whereof, they founde there fewe suche thynges as they desyred, that is, plentie of vyttualles: for the inhabitauntes of this region haue no bread, but such as they geat in other countreys neare about them by exchange for their fyshe, onlye to serue theyr owne necessitie: yet founde they in the houses of those whiche fledde, golde wrought and grauen, a∣mountyng to the summe of seuen thousande of those peeces, whi∣che we sayde to be called Castellani: also certaine Canoas, of the whiche they brought away two with them, and great plentie of theyr houshold stuffe, with certaine bundels of bowes & arrowes. They say, that from the maryshes of that riuer, there come cer∣tayne battes in the nyght season, as bygge as turtle doues, inua∣dyng men, and bytyng them with a deadly wounde, as some of them testifie whiche haue ben bytten of the same. I mee selfe communing with Ancisus the Lieuetenant whom they reiected, and among other thynges askyng hym of the venemous byting of these battes,Ancisus bitten of a Batte. he tolde me that he hym selfe was bytten by one of them on the heele, his foote lying vncouered in the nyght, by reason of the heate in sommer season, but that it hurte hym no more, then if he had ben bitten by any other beast not venemous. Other say, that the byting of some of them is venemous: yet that the same is healed incontinently, yf it be washed with water of the sea. Ancisus tolde me also, that the venemous woundes made by the Canibales arrowes infected with poyson, are hea∣led by washing with water of the sea, and also by cauterisyng
with whot irons, and that he had experience thereof in the regi∣on of Caribana, where many of his men were so wounded. They departed therefore from the poynt of the gulfe of Vraba, not wel contented, because they were not saden with victualles. In this theyr returne, there arose so great a tempest in that wyde gulfe, that they were enforced to cast into the sea al the houshold stuffe,A tempest. whiche they tooke from the poore wretches whiche liued only by fyshyng. The sea also swalowed vp the two boates that they tooke from them, wherewith the men were lykewyse drowned. The same tyme that Vaschus Nunnez attempted to searche the poynt of the gulfe towarde the south, euen then by agreement, dyd Rodericus Colmenaris take his voyage toward ye mountaines by the east, with threescore men, by the riuer of the other gulfe. About fourtie myles distant from the mouth of the other ryuer, (for they cal it twelue leagues) he founde certayne vyllages situ∣ate vpon the bankes of the ryuer, whose Chiui (that is) kyng, they cal Turui. With this kyng dyd Colmenaris yet remayne, when Vaschus after his returne to Dariena, saylyng by the same ryuer, came to hym. Here refreshyng theyr whole companye with the vittuals of this Turui, they departed from thence togeather.King Turui. O∣ther fourtie myles from hence, the ryuer encompasseth an Iland inhabited with fyshermen. In this, because they sawe great plen∣tie of trees whiche beare Cassia fistula, they named the Ilande Cannafistula. They found in it .lx. villages of ten cotages apeece.The Ilande of Cannafistula. On the ryght syde of the Ilande there runneth another riuer, whose chanel is of deapth sufficient to beare Brigandines. This riuer they called Riuum Nigrum, frō the mouth wherof, about .xv miles distant, they found a towne of fiue .C. houses seuered, whose Chebi (that is) kyng, was called Abenamachei. They al forsooke theyr houses, as soone as they heard of our mens commyng: but when they saw that our men pursued them, they turned againe, & ran vpon them with desperate mindes, as men driuen from their owne possessions. Theyr weapons are swoords of wood, & long staues lyke iauelins, hardened at the ende with fyre: but they vse neyther bowes nor arrowes, nor any other of the inhabitauntes of the West syde of the gulfe. The poore naked wretches were easyly dryuen to flyght with our weapons. As our men fo∣lowed them in the chase, they tooke the kyng Abenamachei, and
certaine of his noble men. A common souldier of ours, whom the kyng had wounded, commyng to hym when he was taken, cut of his arme at one stroke with his swoorde: but this was done vnawares to the captaynes. The number of the Christian men whiche were here, was about an hundred and fyftie: the one halfe whereof the captaynes left here, and they with the resi∣due rowed vp the riuer agayne, with twelue of the boates of those regions, whiche they cal Vru, as they of Hispaniola cal them Ca∣noas as we haue sayde. From the ryuer of Riuus Niger, and the Ilande of Cannafistula, for the space of threescore and ten myles, leauyng both on the right hande and on the left, many riuers fal∣ling into it bygger then it selfe, they entred into one, by the con∣ductyng of one of the naked inhabitauntes, beyng appoynted a guyde for that purpose. Uppon the banke of this ryuer next vnto the mouth of the same, there was a kyng called Abibeiba, who because the region was ful of maryshes, had his pallace buylded in the toppe of a hygh tree,King Abibeiba dwelleth in a tree. a new kind of buildyng, and seldome seene: but that lande bryngeth forth trees of such excee∣ding height, that among theyr branches a man may frame large houses: as we reade the lyke in diuers auctours, howe in many regions where the Ocean sea riseth and ouerfloweth the lande, the people were accustomed to flee to the hygh trees,The rysyng of the Ocean sea. and after the fall of the water, to take the fyshe left on the lande. This ma∣ner of buyldyng, is to lay beames crosse ouer the branches of the trees, fast bounde togeather, and thereupon to rayse theyr frame, strongly made agaynst wynde and weather. Our men suppose that they builde theyr houses in trees, by reason of the great floods and ouerflowyng of riuers, whiche oftentymes chaunce in those regions. These trees are of suche heyght, that the strength of no mans arme,Trees of mar∣ueilous height. is able to hurle a stone to the houses buylded therein. And therfore do I geue the better credit to Pli∣nie,Plinie. and other auctours, whiche write that the trees in some pla∣ces in India are so high by reason of the fruitefulnes of ye ground, abundance of water, and heate of the region, that no man is able to shoote ouer them with an arrowe: and by iudgement of all men,Fruitefull grounde. it is thought that there is no fruitefuller grounde vn∣der the sunne, then this is whereof we nowe entreate. Our men measuryng manye of these trees, founde them to be of
suche bignes, that seuen men, yea sometimes eight, holdyng hande in hande with theyr armes stretched foorth, were scarsely able to fathame them about: yet haue they theyr cellers in the grounde, well replenyshed with such wynes wherof we haue spoken before. For albeit that the vehemencie of the winde is not of power to cast downe those houses, or to breake the bran∣ches of the trees, yet are they tossed therewith, and swaye som∣what from syde to syde, by reason whereof, the wyne shoulde be muche troubled with moouing. All other necessarye thinges, they haue with them in the trees. When the kyng or any other of the noble men, dyne or suppe in these trees, theyr wyues are brought them from the cellers by theyr seruauntes, whiche by meanes of exercise, are accustomed with no lesse celerytie to runne vp and downe the staires adherente to the tree, then doo our wayting boyes vppon the playne grounde fetche vs what wee call for from the cobbarde besyde our dyning table. Our men therefore came to the tree of kyng Abibeiba, and by thinter∣pretoures called hym foorth to communication, geuing hym signes of peace, and thereuppon wylling hym to come downe. But he denyed that he woulde come out of his house, desy∣ring them to suffer hym to lyue after his fashion: but our men fell from fayre woordes to threatning, that except he woulde des∣cende with all his familie, they woulde eyther ouerthrowe the tree, or elles set it on fyre. When he had denied them agayne,Abibeiba, the kyng of the tree, yeeldeth to Vaschus. they fell to hewing the tree with theyr axes. Abibeiba seeing the chippes fall from the tree on euery syde, chaunged his purpose, and came downe with only two of his sonnes. Thus after they had entreated of peace, they communed of geatheryng of golde. Abibeiba aunsweared that he had no golde, and that he neuer had any neede therof, nor yet regarded it any more then stones.Golde no more esteemed then stones. But when they were instante vppon hym, he sayde vnto them, If you so greatly desyre golde, I wyll seeke for some in the next mountaynes, and bryng it vnto you: for it is plentifully engen∣dred in those mountaynes. Then he appoynted a daye when he woulde bring this golde. But Abebeiba came neyther at the day, nor after the day appointed. They departed therfore from thence well refreshed with his vittuals and wyne, but not with golde as they hoped: yet were they enfourmed the like by Abibeiba and
his ditionaries as concernyng the golde mynes and the Cani∣bales, as they hearde before of kyng Comogrus. Saylyng yet fur∣ther about thyrtie myles, they chaunced vpon certayne cotages of the Canibales,Canibales. but vtterly voyde without men or stuffe: for when they had knowledge that our men wandered in the prouin∣ces neere about them, they resorted to the mountaynes, carying all theyr goodes and stuffe with them. The fyfte booke of the seconde Decade, of the supposed continent. IN the meane tyme whyle these thynges were done along by the shores or bankes of the ryuer, a certayne Decurian, that is, a captayne ouer tenne, of the companye of those which Vaschus and Colmenaris had left for a garryson in Riuo Nigro, in the domini∣on of kyng Abinamachei, whether it were that he was compelled through hunger, or that his fatal day was nowe come, he attempted with his souldiers to searche the countreys neere thereabout, and entred into the vyllage of a king called Abraiba. This captaynes name was Raia, whom Abraiba slue with two of his felowes, but the residue fledde. Within a fewe dayes after, Abraiba hauyng compassion on the calamitie of his kynsman and neyghbour Abenamacheius, beyng driuen from his owne possessions (whose arme also we sayd before that one of the souldiers cut of at the riuer of Riuo Nigro) and now re∣maynyng with Abraiba, to whom he fled by stealth after he was taken, went to Abibeiba thinhabitour of the tree, who had nowe likewyse forsaken his countrey for feare of our men, and wande∣red in the desolate mountaynes and woods. When he had ther∣fore founde hym, he spake to hym in this effect, What thyng is this, oh vnfortunate Abibeiba? or what nation is this that so tor∣menteth vs, that we can not enioy our quiet libertie? howe long, howe long I say, shall we suffer theyr crueltie? were it not much better for vs to dye, then to abide suche iniuries and oppressions as you, as Abinamacheius our kinsman, as Cemacchus, as Careta, as Poncha, as I and other prynces of our order doo susteyne? Can anye thyng be more intollerable, then to see our wyues,
our chyldren, and our subiectes, to be ledde away captiues, and our goodes to be spoyled euen before our faces? I take the gods to witnesse, that I speake not so much for mine owne part, as I do for you, whose case I lament: for albeit they haue not yet touched me, neuertheles by thexample of other, I ought to thinke that my destructiō is not farre of.Men good ye∣nough yf they had iron. Let vs therfore (if we be men) trye our strength, & prooue our fortune agaynst them which haue dealt thus cruelly with Abenamacheius, and driuen him out of his countrey, let vs set on them with al our power, and vtterly de∣stroy them. And if we can not slay thē al, yet shal we make them afraide either to assayle vs agayne, or at the least diminishe their power: for whatsoeuer shal befall, nothyng can chaunce woorse vnto vs then that which we nowe suffer. When Abibeiba heard these words, & such otherlyke, he condescended to do in al things as Abraiba woulde require: whereupon they appoynted a day to bryng theyr conspiracie to passe, but the thyng chaunced not accordyng to their desyre: for of those whiche we sayd to haue passed to the Canibals, there returned by chaunce to Riuus Niger, the night before the day appoynted to woorke their feate, thirtie men, to the ayde of them whiche were left there, yf any sedition should rise as they suspected. Therfore at the dawning of the day, the confederate kyngs, with fyue hundreth of theyr ditionaries armed after theyr maner, besieged the village with a terrible a∣larome, knowyng nothing of the newe men whiche came thither the same nyght. Here our target men came foorth against them, and first assayled them a farre of with theyr arrowes, then with theyr pykes, and last with theyr swoordes: but the naked seelye soules, perceiuyng a greater number of theyr aduersaries then they looked for, were soone dryuen to flyght, and slayne for the most parte lyke scatteryng sheepe. The kynges escaped, they slue many, and tooke many captiues,Captiues. whiche they sent to Da∣riena, where they vsed them for labourers to tyll and sowe theyr grounde. These thynges thus happyly atchyued, and that pro∣uince quieted, they returned by the ryuer to Dariena, leauyng theyr thyrtie men for a garrison,A garryson of thirtie men. vnder the gouernance of one Fu∣ratado a captayne. This Furatado therfore, sent from Riuo Nigro, where he was appoynted gouernour .xx. of his felowes, and one woman, with .xxiiii. captiues, to Vaschus and his companye, in
one of the byggest Canoas of that prouince. As they rowed downe by the ryuer, there came foorth sodenly ouerthwart the ryuer agaynst them foure great Canoas,Eightene Spa∣nyardes slayne and drowned. which ouerthrewe theyr boate, and slue as many of them as they coulde come by, because they were vnprepared, suspecting no such thyng. Our men were all drowned and slaine, except two, which hid them selues among certeyne fagottes that swamme on the water, in the whiche they laye lurkyng, and so escaped to theyr felowes in Dariena: who by them beyng aduertysed hereof, beganne to cast theyr wyttes what this thyng myght meane, being no lesse solicitate for them selues, then meditatyng in what daunger theyr felowes had ben in Riuo Nigro, excepte by good fortune, those thirtie newe men whiche were sent to them, had come to the vyllage the nyght before the conspiracie shoulde haue ben wrought. Consultyng therefore what was best to be doone herein, at the length with diligent searchyng, they had intelligence that fyue kynges, that is to wytte,The kinges which conspi∣red the death of the Christians. Abibeiba the inhabitour of the tree, and Cemaccus dryuen from his vyllage which our men nowe possessed, Abraiba also and Abenamacheius, kynsemen, with Dabaiba the kyng of the fysher men, inhabyting the corner of the gulfe whiche we called Culata, were al assembled to conspire the Christian mens destruc∣tion at a daye assigned: whiche thyng had surely come to passe, if it had not ben otherwyse hyndered by Gods prouidence.A straunge chaunce. It is therefore ascrybed to a myracle, and truely not vnworthyly, if we waye howe chaunce detected and bewrayed the counsayle of these kynges. And because it is worthy to be heard, I wyll declare it in fewe woordes. Vascus Nunnez therefore, who ra∣ther by power then by election, vsurped the gouernance in Dari∣ena, beyng a maister of fence, and rather a rashe royster then a politike captaine (although fortune somtime fauoureth fooles) among many women whiche in diuers of these regions he had taken captiue, had one, which in fauour and beutie excelled all o∣ther. To this woman her brother often tymes resorted, who was also driuen out of his countrey with king Cemacchus,Women can keepe no coun∣sayle. with whom he was very familyer, and one of his cheefe gentelmen. Among other communication whiche he had with his syster whom he loued entierly, he vttered these woordes, My deare and welbelo∣ued syster, geue eare to my sayinges, and keepe most secretelye
that whiche I wyll declare vnto you, yf you desyre your owne wealth and myne, and the prosperitie of our countrey and kynse∣folkes. The insolencie and crueltie of these men whiche haue dryuen vs out of our possessions, is so intollerable, that the prin∣ces of the lande are determyned no longer to susteyne theyr op∣pressions. By the conducting therefore of fyue kynges (whiche he named in order) they haue prepared a hundred great Canoas,An armie of an hundred Canoas, and fyue. M. men. with fyue thousande men of warre by lande and by sea, with vi∣tuals also in the village of Tichiri, sufficient to mantayne suche an army: declaryng further, that the kynges by agreement, had diuyded among them the goodes and heades of our men, and therefore admonyshed her,Triumph be∣fore victorie. at the day appoynted by some occasion to conueigh her selfe out of the way, lest she shoulde be slayne in the confusion of the battayle: For the souldier victou∣rer, is not woont to spare any that commeth in his rase. And thus shewing his syster the day assigned to the slaughter, he de∣parted. But the young woman (for it is the swoorde that wo∣men feare,Affection cor∣rupteth true iudgement. and obserue more then the grauitie of Cato) whether it were for the loue or feare that she had to Vaschus, forgetting her parentes, her kynsfolkes, her countrey, and all her freendes, yea and al the kynges into whose throtes Vaschus had thruste his swoorde, she opened al the matter vnto hym, and concealed none of those thinges which her vndiscrete brother had declared to her. When Vaschus therfore had hearde the matter, he caused Fuluia, (for so had they named her) to sende for her brother, who came to her immediatly, was taken, & enforced to tel the whole circum∣stances of the matter: wherupon he playnely confessed, that king Cemacchus his lord and maister,The conspira∣cie of the kyngs is detected. sent those foure Canoas to the destruction of our men, and that these new conspiracies were at∣tempted by his counsaile: likewise that Cemacchus sought the destruction of Vaschus himselfe, when he sent him .xl. men, vnder pretence of frendshyp, to tyll and sowe his grounde, after the ma∣ner of the countrey, geuing them in cōmaundement to slay Vas∣chus at Marris, whither he resorted to comfort his labourers,Kyng Cemae∣chus conspi∣reth the death of Vaschus. as the maner is of al good husbandes, yet durst they at no time exe∣cute their lordes commaundement vpon hym, because Vaschus came neuer among them a foote or vnarmed, but was accusto∣med to ryde to them in harnesse with a iauelyn in his hande, and
a swoorde by his syde. Wherfore Cemacchus being frustrate of his particuler counsayle, tooke this last thing in hande, to his owne destruction and his neighbours:Vaschus pur∣sueth the kings with threescore and ten men. for the conspiracie be∣ing detected, Vascus called threescore and tenne souldiers, com∣maunding them to folowe hym, but declared nothing vnto them whither he went, or what he entended to do. He went forwarde therfore fyrst toward Cemacchus, which lay from hym only tenne myles: but he had knowledge that he was fledde to Dabaiba, the kyng of the maryshes of Culata. Yet searching his village, he founde a noble man, a ruler vnder hym, and also his kynsman, whom he tooke prysoner, with many other of his familiers and frendes both men and women. The same houre that he set for∣warde to seeke for Cemacchus, Rodericus Colmenaris rowed vp the ryuer with foure of theyr byggest Canoas, and threescore men, by the conduction of the maydes brother who brought hym to the village of Tichiri,Colmenaris sacketh the vyl∣lage of Tichiri. in ye which we said al their vittuals to remaine which were prepared for theyr armye. Colmenaris therfore sack∣ed the village, and possessed all their vittuals, and wine of sundry colours, likewise tooke the gouernour thereof prisoner, and hanged him on the tree in whiche he dwelt him selfe, commaun∣dyng hym to be shotte through with arrowes in the syght of thinhabitantes,Fyue rulers hanged & shot through with arrowes. and with hym foure other rulers to be hanged on gibbets, to the example of other rebelles. This punyshment thus executed vppon the conspiratours, stroke the hartes of all thinhabitantes of the prouince with such feare, that there is not nowe a man that dare styrre his fynger agaynst the wrath of our men. They lyue nowe therefore quietly, and the other kyngs by theyr example do the gladlyer lyue in subiection, with lesse of∣fence bearyng the yoke which they can by no meanes shake of. The syxte booke of the seconde Decade, of the supposed continent. THese thynges thus fynyshed, assembling al theyr company togeather, they determined with one consent, that a messenger shoulde foorthwith be sent to Hispaniola (from whence they haue theyr lawes and ayde) to declare the whole order of al these affayres,
fyrst to the Admiral and gouernour of the Ilande, and afterward to the Kyng of Spayne, and to perswade hym to sende those thousande men whiche young Comogrus sayde to be expedient to passe ouer the mountaynes, lying betwene them and the golden regions toward the South▪ Vaschus hym selfe dyd greatlye af∣fect this embassage: but neither would the residue of his felowes electe hym therto, nor his factionaries suffer hym to departe, aswell for that thereby they thought they should be left desolate, as also that they murmured, that if Vaschus should once go from them, he woulde neuer returne to suche turmoyles and calami∣ties, by the example of Valdiuia and Zamudius, who had ben now absent sence the moneth of Ianuary, in so much that they thought they woulde neuer come agayne: but the matter was other∣wyse then they tooke it, as I wyll shewe in his place, for they were perished. At the length after many scrutinies, they elected one Iohn Quicedus, a graue man, wel in yeeres,Iohan. Quice∣dus is sent to Spayne. and treasourer of the kynges Exchequer in those prouinces: they had conceiued a good opinion of this Quicedus, that all thynges shoulde be well brought to passe by his meanes, aswell for his wysdome, as also that they were in good hope of his return, because he had brought his wife with hym to those regions, whom he left with his fe∣lowes for a pledge of his comming againe. When they had thus elected Quicedus, they were againe of diuers opinions whom they might ioyne with him for assistance, affirming that it were a daungerous thing to committe so weightie a matter to one mans handes, not that they mistrusted Quicedus, but because the life of man is fraile, & the change of the ayre perillous, especially to them, hauyng now of long time ben accustomed to the tempe∣rature neere vnto the Equinoctial, if they should be compelled to returne to ye North, with alteration of ayre & diet. They thought it therfore good to appoynt a companion to Quicedus, that if by chaunce the one should faile, thother might remaine, & that if they both escaped, the king should geue ye better credit to the relation of both. After long consultation therfore, they chose Rodericus Col∣menaris, a man of good experience, of whom we haue oftentimes made mention: for from his youth he had trauailed ouer al Europe by lande and by sea, and was present at the doynges of al things in Italie agayn the Frenche men, of whose returne also, they
had no smal hope, because he had many farmes, and had tylled and sowne much grounde in Dariena, by the increase wherof, he myght get much gold by selling the same to his felowes. He left therfore the charge of al his affayres in Dariena with his partner Alphonsus Nunnez, a iudge of the lawe, who also was lyke to haue ben chosen procuratour of this voyage before Colmenaris, yf one had not put them in remembrance that he had a wife at Ma∣tritis,A wife is a hin∣deraunce. fearing lest being ouercome with her teares, he woulde no more returne. Colmenaris therfore, a free man, & at libertie, being associate assystant with Quicedus, they tooke shyppyng together in a Brigandine, the fourth day of the Calendes of Nouember, in the yeere of Christe .1512. In this voyage, beyng tossed with sundry tempestes, they were by the violence of the winde cast vp∣on the West coastes of that large Iland, which in the fyrst De∣cade we called Cuba, supposed to haue ben firme land. They were sore oppressed with hunger, for it was nowe three monethes synce they departed from theyr felowes: by reason whereof, they were enforced to take lande, to prooue what ayde they coulde get among the inhabitauntes. Theyr chaunce therefore was to arryue in that part of the Ilande, where Valdiuia was dryuen aland by tempest. But oh you wretched men of Dariena, tary for Valdiuia, whom you sent to prouide to helpe your necessities, prouyde for your selues rather, and trust not to them whose fortune ye knowe not.The death of aldiuia. For when he arryued in Cuba, the inhabi∣tantes slue hym with al his felowes, and left the Carauel wherin they were caryed, torne in peeces, and halfe  with sande on the shore, where Quicedus and Colmena  the frag∣mentes thereof, bewayled theyr felowes myfortune: but they founde none of theyr carcasses, supposyng that they were eyther drowned, or deuoured of the Canibales, which oftentimes make incursions into that Ilande to hunt for men. But at the length, by two of the Ilande men which they had taken, they had know∣ledge of Valdiuia his destruction, and that the inhabitauntes the more greedily attempted the same, for that they had heard by the babblyng of one of his felowes, that he had great plentie of golde:Hurt of lauysh∣nesse of the tongue. for they also take pleasure in the beautie of golde, whiche they fourme artificially into sundry ouches. Thus our men stric∣ken with pensiuenesse for the cruell destenie of theyr felowes,
and in vayne seekyng reuenge for theyr iniuries, determined to forsake that vnfortunate lande, departyng from those couetous naked barbarians, with more sorowe and necessitie then they were in before. Or euer they had passed the South syde of Cuba, they fel into a thousande mysfortunes, and had intelligence that Fogeda arryued therabout, leadyng a miserable lyfe,The calamities and death of Fogeda. tossed and turmoyled with tempestes, and vexed with a thousande perplexi∣ties: so that departyng from thence almost alone, his felowes beyng for the most part al consumed with maladies and famine, he came with much difficultie to Hispaniola,Maladies and famine. where he dyed by force of the poyson of his venemous wounde which he had re∣ceiued in Vraba as we haue sayde before. But Ancisus elected Lieutenant, sayled by al those coastes with much better fortune:The prospe∣rous voyage of Ancisus. for as he hym selfe tolde me, he founde prosperous wyndes in those parties, and was wel enterteyned of thinhabitantes of Cu∣ba, but this specially in the dominion of a certayne kyng whose name was Commendator: for wheras he desyred of the Christian men whiche passed by, to be baptised, demaundyng the name of the gouernour of the Ilande next vnto Hispaniola, beyng a noble man, and a knyght of the order of Galatraua, of whiche order,A king of Cuba baptised by the name of Com∣mendator. all are called Commendatores, this kings desyre was to be named af∣ter him. Kyng Commendator therefore frendly receiued Ancisus, & gaue him great abundance of al thinges necessarie. But what Ancisus learned of theyr religion during the tyme of his remay∣nyng there, I haue thought good to aduertise your holynesse. You shal therfore vnderstande, that certayne of our men saylyng by the coastes o , left with kyng Commendator a certayne poore Maryner beyng diseased, who in short space recoueryng his health, and hauyng nowe somewhat learned theyr language,A marueylous hystorie howe God wrought myracles by the simple faith of a Maryner. began to growe into great estimation with the kyng and his subiectes, insomuche that he was oftentimes the kynges Lieue∣tenant in his warres agaynst other princes his borderers. This mans fortune was so good, that al thynges prospered well that he tooke in hande: and albeit that he were not learned, yet was he a vertuous and well meanyng man, accordyng to his know∣ledge, and dyd religiouslye honour the blessed virgin, bearyng euer about with him her pycture fayre paynted vpon paper,Be not rashe in iudgement. and sowed in his apparel neere vnto his brest, signifiyng vnto the
kyng, that this holynes was the cause of al his victories: per¦swading him to doo the like, and to cast away all his Zemes, which were none other then the similitudes of euill spirites, most cruell enimies and deuourers of our soules, and to take vnto him the holy virgin and mother of God to be his patronesse, if he desyred all his affayres aswel in warre as in peace to succeede prosperously: also that the blessed virgyn woulde at no tyme fayle hym, but be euer redye to helpe him and his, if they woulde with deuout hartes call vppon her name. The maryner had soone perswaded the naked nation, and therevppon gaue the king (who demaunded the same) his pycture of the virgin, to whom he buylded and dedicated a chapell and an alter,A Chappell builded to the pycture of the virgin Marie. euer af∣ter contemning and reiecting his Zemes. Of these Zemes made of gossampine cotton, to the similitudes of spirites walking in the nyght, which they oftentimes see, and speake with them family∣erly, we haue spoken sufficiently in the nyenth booke of the first Decade. Furthermore, according to the institution of this ma∣ryner, when the sonne draweth towarde the fall, this king Com∣mendator with al his famyly, both men and women, resort daylye to the saide chapell of the virgin Marie, where kneeling on theyr knees, and reuerently bowing downe theyr heades, holdyng theyr hands ioyned together, they salute the image of the virgin with these woordes, Aue Maria, Aue Maria, for fewe of them can rehearse any more wordes of this prayer. At Ancisus his be∣ing there, they tooke hym and his felowes by the handes, and ledde them to this chapell with reioysing, saying that they woulde shewe them marueylous thinges. When they were en∣tred, they poynted with theyr fyngers to the Image of the vir∣gyn, al to be set and hanged about with ouches and iewels, and many earthen pottes, fylled some with sundry meates, and some with water, rounde about all the tabernacle: for these thinges they offer to the image in the steede of sacrifice,One superstiti∣tious religion turned into an other, holdeth stil many thin∣ges of the fyrst. according to theyr olde superstition towarde theyr Zemes. Being demaunded why they dyd thus, they answered, Lest the image should lacke meate, if perhaps it should be a hungred: for they most certainly beleue that images may hunger, and that they doo eate & drinke. But what ayde and helpe they confesse that they haue had of the godly power of this image, that is of the blessed virgyn, it is
a thing woorthy to be heard, and most assuredly to bee taken for a trueth: for by the report of our men, there is such feruent god∣ly loue and zeale in these simple men toward the holy virgin,Zeale without knowledge is neuer godly. that to them being in the daunger of warre agaynst theyr enimies, they doo in maner (yf I may so terme it) compel her to descende from heauen to helpe them in theyr necessities.Marke this blyndnesse. For such is the goodnes of God, that he hath left vnto men in maner a pryce whereby we may purchase hym with his holy angels & sayntes, that is to witte, burnyng loue, charitie, and zeale.This ignorance is to be lamen∣ted. Howe ther∣fore can the blessed virgin at any time be absent from them which call for her helpe with pure faith and feruent loue? Commendator him selfe, with al his noble men and gentelmen, doo testifie with one voyce, that in a fought battayle in the whiche this maryner was capitaine, bearing with him this picture of the virgin Ma∣rie, the Zemes of theyr enimies turned their backes,The deuil dis∣sembleth to keepe his in blyndnesse styll. and trem∣bled in the presence of the virgins image, and in the sight of them all: for euerye of them bryng theyr Zemes to the battaile, ho∣ping by theyr helpe to obteine the victorie. Yea they say further, that during the time of the battaile, they saw not only an Image, but a liuely woman clothed in fayre and white apparel, ayding them against theyr enimies: which thing also the enimies them selues acknowledged, confessyng that on the contrary part, she appeared to them shakyng a scepter in her hande with threate∣nyng countenance,A notable lye of a papistical heretike. whiche caused theyr hartes to shake and faint for feare: but after that this Maryner departed from them, being taken into a shyppe of certayne Christians passyng by those coastes, Commendator declared that he with al his subiectes, con∣tinually obserued his institutions: insomuch that beyng at con∣tention with another prince, whiche of theyr Zemes were most holy and of greatest power, the matter grewe to such extremitie, that they tryed it with hande strokes: and that in all these at∣temptes, the blessed virgin neuer fayled hym,One blasphe∣mie vpon a∣nother. but was euer pre∣sent in the brunt of the battayle, and gaue hym easie victorie with a smal power of men, against a maine armie of his enimies. Beyng demaunded with what woordes they cryed vpon the vir∣gin Mary when they assayled theyr enimies, they answered that they had learned no other wordes of the Maryners doctrine, but Sancta Maria adiuua nos. Sancta Maria adiuua nos. That is, holy
Marie helpe vs, holy Marie helpe vs, and this also in the Spa∣nishe tongue: for he had left these wordes in the mouthes of all men. Whyle they murthered and destroyed them selues thus on both sydes, they fell to entreatie of peace, and agreed to trye the matter, not hande to hande by combatte of certayne chosen for both parties, as the maner was among the Romanes and diuers other nations in the old tyme, or by any sleight or policie, but that two young men shoulde be chosen, for eche partie one, with theyr handes bounde faste behynde them in the playne fyelde, bothe parties beyng sworne to acknowledge that Zemes to be the better, which fyrst loosed the bandes of the young man which stoode bounde for the tryall of his religion. Thus diui∣dyng them selues, and placyng the sayd young men before them in the syght of them all, with theyr handes fast bounde by theyr enimies,The deuyll ap∣peareth in his lykenesse. the contrary parte called fyrst on theyr Zemes (that is the deuyl, to whose similitude theyr Images are made) who im∣mediately appeared in his lykenesse aboute the young man that stoode bounde in the defence of Satans kyngdome.What likenes? But as soone as Commendator with his companye cryed Sancta Maria adiuua nos, Sancta Maria adiuua nos, forthwith there ap∣peared a fayre virgin clothed in whyte, at whose presence the de∣uyl vanquished immediatly.A strange my∣racle not to be credited. But the virgin, hauing along rod in her hande, & putting the same on the bandes of the young man that stoode for Commendator, his handes were loosed immediatly in the syght of them all, and his bandes found about the handes of hym that stoode for the other partye,Another my∣racle. insomuch that they them selues founde hym double bounde. But for all this, were not the enimies satisfyed, quarelling that this thyng was done by some sleyght or deuise of man, & not by the power of the better Zemes. And thereuppon requyred, for thaduoydyng of all suspection, that there myght be eyght graue and sage men appoynted,Wise men. for eche side foure, which should bynde the men in the syght of them all, and also geue iudgement whether the thing were done with∣out craft or guyle. Oh pure simplicitie and constant fayth: oh golden and blessed confidence. Commendator and his familiers, doubted not to graunt theyr enimies theyr request, with lyke fayth wherewith the diseased woman obteyned health of the fluxe of her blood,Math. xiiii. This is ano∣ther matter. and wherby Peter feared not to walke on the
sea at the syght of his maister Christ. These young men therfore were bounde in the presence of these eight graue men, and were placed within theyr lystes in the syght of both parties. Thus vpon a signe geuen, when they called vpon theyr Zemes,The deuyl ap∣peareth againe there appeared in the sight of them al, a deuil with a long taile, a wide mouth, great teeth, and hornes, resemblyng the similitude of the image whiche the kyng beyng enimie to Commendator hono∣red for his Zemes. As the deuyl attempted to loose the bandes of his client, the blessed virgin was immediatly present as before at the cal of Commendator & his subiects, & with her rodde loosed the bandes of her supplyant,The virgin Mary in her owne person ouercommeth the deuyl. whiche were agayne likewyse founde fast tyed about the handes of hym that stoode for the contrarye part. The enimies therfore of Commendator, being stricken with great feare, and amased by reason of this great myracle, confes∣sed that the Zemes of the virgin was better then theyr Zemes: for the better proofe whereof, these pagans being borderers to Com∣mendator, whiche had euer before ben at continuall warre and en∣mitie with hym, when they had knowledge that Ancisus was ar∣ryued in those coastes, they sent Ambassadours vnto hym, to desire him to sende them priestes, of whom they might be bapti∣sed: wherupon he sent them two which he had there with hym at that present. They baptised in one day an hundred and thyrtie of thinhabitantes, sometime enimies to Commendator, but nowe his frendes, and ioyned with hym in aliance. All suche as came to be baptised, gaue the priestes of theyr owne liberalitie,The priestes rewarde. ei∣ther a cocke or a henne, but no capons, for they can not yet skill howe to carue theyr cocke chickens to make them capons.Why name you Capons? Also certayne salted fishes, and newe fyne cakes made of theyr bread: likewise certayne foules franked and made fatte. When the priestes resorted to the shyppes, syxe of these newe baptised men accompanyed them laden with vittuals, wherewith they ledde a ioyful Easter: for on the Sunday, two dayes before saynt La∣zarus day, they departed from Dariena, and touched at that tyme only the cape or angle of Cuba, neere vnto the East syde of His∣paniola. At the request of Commendator, Ancisus left with him one of his companye, to the intent to teache hym and his subiectes, with other his borderers, the salutation of the angell, whiche we cal the Aue Maria: for they thynke them selues to be so much
the more beloued of the blessed virgin, as they can rehearse the more woordes of that prayer. Thus Ancisus takyng his leaue of kyng Commendator,Ancisus voiage to Spayne. directed his course to Hispaniola, from which he was not farre. Shortly after, he tooke his voyage to Spayne, and came to Valladoleto to the kyng, to whom he made greeuous complaynt of the insolencie of Vaschus Nunnez, insomuche that by his procurement the kyng gaue sentence agaynst hym.Ancisus com∣playneth of Vaschus. Thus muche haue I thought good (most holy father) whereof to ad∣uertise your holynesse,Marke to whō this fayned myraculous storie was written. as concernyng the religion of these nati∣ons, not only as I haue ben enstructed of Ancisus (with whom I was dayly conuersaunt in the Court, and vsed hym familiarlye) but also as I was enfourmed of diuers other men of great auc∣thoritie, to the intent that your excellencie may vnderstande howe docible this kynd of men are, and with what facilitie they may be allured to embrace our religion: but this can not be done sodenly, yet we haue great cause to hope that in short time they wyl be al drawen by litle and litle, to the Euangelical lawe of Christe, to the great encrease of his flocke. But let vs nowe returne to the messengers or procuratours as concernyng the affayres of Dariena. The seuenth booke of the seconde Decade, of the sup∣posed continent. FRom Dariena to Hispaniola, is eyght dayes saylyng, and sometimes lesse with a prospe∣rous winde: yet Quicedus and Colmenaris the procuratours of Dariena, by reason of tempestes & contrary windes, could scarce∣ly sayle it in a hundred dayes. When they had taryed a fewe dayes in Hispaniola, and had declared the cause of the commyng to the Admirall and the other gouernours, they toke shipping in two marchant shippes, beyng redy furnyshed, whiche were also accustomed to sayle to and fro betweene Spayne and the Ilande of Hispaniola. They departed from Dariena (as we sayde before) the fourth day of the Calends of Nouember, in the yere of Christ .1512. and came not to the court before the Calendes of May in the yeere folowyng, beyng the yeere of Christ .1513. At theyr commyng to the court,
Iohannes Fonseca (to whom at the beginnyng the charge of these affayres was committed, whom also for his faythfull seruice to∣warde the kyng,The procura∣tours of Da∣riena are ho∣nourably re∣ceiued at the court. your holynesse created general Commissarie in the warres agaynst the Moores) receiued them honourably, as men commyng from the newe worlde, from naked nations, and landes vnknowen to other men. By the preferment therefore of the Byshop of Burges, Quicedus and Colmenaris were brought before the kyng, and declared theyr legacie in his presence. Suche newes and presentes as they brought, were dilectable to the kyng and his noble men, for the newnesse and strangenesse thereof. They also soiourned with me oftentymes. Theyr coun∣tenaunces do declare the intemperatnesse of the ayre and region of Dariena, for they are yelowe, lyke vnto them that haue the ye∣lowe gaundies, and also swolne: but they ascribe the cause here∣of, to the hunger whiche they susteyned in tymes past. I haue ben aduertised of the affayres of this newe worlde, not only by these procuratours of Dariena, and Ancisus, and Zamudius, but also by conference with Baccia the lawyer, who ran ouer a great part of those coastes: lykewyse by relation of Vincentius Annez▪ the patrone of the shyps, and Alphonsus Nignus, both being men of great experience, and wel trauailed in those parties, beside ma∣ny other, of whom we haue made mention in other places, for there came neuer any from thence to the court, but tooke great pleasure to certifie me of al thynges, eyther by worde of mouth or by wrytyng. Of many thynges therefore whiche I learned of them, I haue geathered such as to my iudgment seme most wor∣thy to satisfie them that take delyte in histories. But let vs nowe declare what folowed after the commyng of the procuratours of Dariena. Therfore, before theyr arryual, there was a rumor spred in the court, that the cheefe gouernours and Lieuetenantes Ni∣cuesa and Fogeda, also Iohannes de la Cossa (a man of such reputa∣tion,The great ma∣ster of the kings ships. that by the kinges letters patentes he was named the great maister of the kyngs shyppes) were al peryshed by mischaunce: and that those fewe whiche yet remayned alyue in Dariena, were at contention and discorde among them selues, so that they nei∣ther endeuoured theyr diligence to allure those symple na∣tions to our fayth, nor yet had regarde to searche the natures of those regions. In consyderation whereof, the kyng was de∣termined
to sende a newe captayne thyther, which should restore and set al thynges in good order, and put them out of aucthoritie whiche had vsurped the Empire of those prouinces without the kynges speciall commaundement. To this office, was one Pe∣trus Arias assigned,Petrus Arias is elected go∣uernour of Dariena. a man of great prowesse, and a citizen of Se∣goia, but when the procuratours of Dariena had publyshed in the courte howe great a matter it was, and of what moment, many laboured earnestly to the kyng, to take the office out of his handes: but the Bishop of Burges, beyng the kyngs cheefe chap∣layne, and one of the Commissioners appoynted by hym in these matters, beyng aduertised hereof, came immediatly to the king, and spake to hym in this effect: May it please your hyghnesse to vnderstande (most catholique prynce) that wheras Petrus A∣rias,The oration of the Byshop of Burges, in the defence of Pe∣trus Arias. a man of valiant courage and great seruice, hath offred him selfe to aduenture his life in your maiesties affaires, vnder vncer∣tayne hope of gayne, and most certayne peryls, yet that notwith∣standyng, some other haue ambiciously maliced his felicitie and preferment, laboring for the office wherto he is elected. It may please your grace herein, so to shew him your fauour, and permit hym to enioy his sayde office, as your maiestie do knowe hym to be a woorthy and meete man for the same, hauyng in tyme past had great experience of his prowesse and valyantnesse, as∣wel in behauyng him selfe, as orderyng his souldiers, as your hyghnesse may the better consyder, yf it shal please you to call to remembraunce his dooynges in the warres of Aphryca,The warres of Aphryca. where he shewed him selfe both a wise Captaine, and a valiant souldier. As concernyng his manners and vsages otherwayes, they are not vnknowen to your maiestie, vnder whose wyng he hath of a chylde ben brought vp in the Courte, and euer founde faythfull toward your highnesse. Wherfore, to declare my opinion, vn∣der your graces fauour (whom it hath pleased to appoynt me a Commissioner in these affayres) I thynke it were vngodly that he shoulde be put from his office at the suite of any other, especi∣ally beyng thereto mooued by ambition and couetousnesse, who perchaunce would prooue them selues to be the same men in the office, if they should obteyne it, as they now shew them selues in the ambitious desyryng of the same. When the Bishop had sayd these woordes, the kyng confirmed the election of Petrus Arias, in
more ample manner then before, wyllyng the byshop to appoynt hym a thousande and two hundred souldiers at his charges, ma∣kyng hym a warrant to the officers of his Exchequer, to delyuer hym money in prest for the same purpose. Petrus Arias therfore beyng thus put in office, and aucthorised by the kinges letters patentes vnder his brode seale, chose a great number of his souldiers in the court, and so departed from Valladoleto, about the Calends of October, in the yere .1513. and sayled first to Ciuile, beyng a very ryche citie, and wel replenished with people, where by the kynges magistrates, he was furnyshed with men and vyt∣tualles, and other necessaries parteynyng to so great a matter: for the kyng hath in this citie erected a house, seruyng only for the affayres of the Ocean,A house in Ci∣uile appoynted to the affayres of India. to the whiche al they that goe or come from the newe landes and Ilandes, resorte to geue accomptes, aswel what they cary thyther, as what they bryng from thence, that the kyng may be truely answered of his custome of the fyft part, both of golde and other thynges, as we haue sayde before. This house they cal the house of the Contractes of Indi. Pe∣trus Arias founde in Ciuile aboue two thousand young men,Perulariae. whi∣che made great suite to goe with hym, lykewyse no smal number of couetous olde men, of the whiche, many offered them selues to goe with him of their owne charges without the kings stipende. But lest the ships shoulde be pestered with to great a multitude, or lest vittuals shoulde fayle them, the libertie of free passage was restraynt. It was also decreed that no stranger myght passe without the kynges licence. Wherefore I doo not a lytle mar∣uayle at Aloisius Cadamustus a Uenetian, and wryter of the Por∣tugales voyages, that he was not ashamed to wryte thus of the Spanyardes nauigations: we went, we sawe, we dyd: whereas he neuer went, nor any Uenetian sawe, but he stole certayne an∣notations out the three first bookes of my fyrst Decade, wryt∣ten to Cardinal Ascanius & Arcimboldus, supposyng that I would neuer haue publyshed the same. It myght also happen that he came by the copie therof at the hand of some ambassadour of Ue∣nice, for I haue graunted the copie to many of them, & was not daungerous to forbyd them to communicate the same to other. Howe so euer it be, this honest man Aloisius Cadamustus feared not to chalenge vnto hym the fruite of another mans labour.
Of the inuentions of the Portugales (whiche surely are woon∣derful) whether he haue written that which he hath seene (as he saith) or likewise bereaued other men of the iust commendations of theyr trauayles,The Portu∣gales inuen∣tions. I wyl not iudge, but am content to let hym lyue after his manner. Among the company of these souldiers, there were none embarked but such as were licēced by the king, except a few Italians, Genues, who by frendshyp and suite were admitted for the Admiralles sake young Colonus, sonne and heyre to Christophorus Colonus,The nauigati∣on of Petrus Arias. the fyrst fynder of those landes. Petrus Arias therfore toke shipping in the riuer Betis (now called Gua∣dalqueuir) running by the citie of Ciuile, about the begynnyng of the yeere of Christ .1514. But he loosed anker in an euyl houre, for such a tempest folowed shortly after his departure,A shipwracke. that it rent in peeces two of his ships, and so tossed the other, that they were enforced to heaue ouerboorde part of theyr vyttualles to lyghten them. All suche as escaped, sayled backe agayne to the coastes of Spayne, where, beyng newly furnyshed and refreshed by the kyngs officers, they went forward on theyr voyage. The master Pylote of the gouernours shyp, was Iohannes Vesputius a Flo∣rentine, the neuiew of Americus Vesputius, who left him as it were by discent of inheritance,Americus Vesputius. thexperience of the Maryners facultie, and knowledge of the sea, carde, and compasse. But we were ad∣uertised of late by certayne whiche came from Hispaniola, that they had passed the Ocean with more prosperous winde: for this marchaunt shyppe commyng from Hispaniola, founde them lan∣ding at certaine Ilands neere therabout. But in the meane time, whyle my importunate callers on, Galeaceus Butrigarius, and Io∣hannes Cursius, men studious by al meanes to gratifie your holy∣nesse, ceassed not to put me in remembrance that they had one in a redines to depart into Italy, & taried only to cary with him vn∣to your holines these my fayre Nereides, although rudely decked, lest I shoulde bestow much tyme in vayne, I haue let passe many things, & wil reherse only such as seeme in my iudgement moste worthy memory, although somwhat disordered, as occasion hath serued. So it is therefore, that this Petrus Arias hath a wife na∣med Helisabetha Boadilla,A notable ex∣ample of a va∣liant woman. beyng niese by the brothers syde to the marques of Boadilla, whiche rendred the citie of Segouia to Fer∣nando and Helisabeth princes of Spayne, at suche time as the
Portugales inuaded the kingdome of Castile, by reason wherof, they were encouraged fyrst to resyst, and then with open warre to assayle and expulse the Portugales, for the great treasure whi∣che kyng Henry brother to queene Helisabeth had geathered to∣geather there. This marquesse, while she liued, did euer shewe a manly and stoute mynde, both in peace and warre, so that by her counsayle, many noble thinges were brought to good effecte in Castile: vnto this noble woman the wyfe of Petrus Arias was niese by her brothers syde. She, folowyng the magnanimitie of her aunt, perceiuyng her husband nowe furnyshyng hym selfe to depart to the vnknowen coastes of the newe worlde, and those large tractes of lande and sea, spake these wordes vnto hym: My most deare and welbeloued husbande,The wyfe of Petrus Arias. we ought not nowe to for∣geat that from our young yeeres we haue ben ioyned togeather with the yoke of holy matrimonie, to thintent that we shoulde so lyue togeather, and not asunder, duryng the tyme of our natural lyfe: wherefore for my part, to declare my affection herein, you shal vnderstande, that whither soeuer your fatall destenie shall dryue you, eyther by the furious waues of the great Ocean, or by the manyfolde and horrible daungers of the lande, I wyl sure∣ly beare you company: there can no peryll chaunce to me so terrible, nor any kynde of death so cruell, that shal not be muche easyer for me to abyde, then to liue so farre separate from you. It were muche better for me to dye, and eyther to be cast into the sea, to be deuoured of the fyshes, or on the lande to the Ca∣nibales, then with continual mournyng and bewaylyng, to liue in death, and dye lyuyng, whyle I consume in lookyng rather for my husbandes letters, then for hym selfe. This is my ful de∣termination, not rashly, nor presently excogitate, nor concei∣ued by the lyght phantasie of womans brayne, but with long deliberation and good aduisement. Nowe therefore choose to whether of these two you wyll assent, eyther to thruste your swoorde in my throte, or to graunt me my request. As for the children which god hath geuen vs as pledges of our inseparable loue (for they had foure sonnes, and as many daughters) shall not stay me a moment: let vs leaue vnto them such goodes and possessions as haue ben left vs by our parentes and freendes, whereby they may lyue among the woorshypfull of theyr order:
for other thynges I take no care. When this noble matrone of manly vertue had finished these woordes, her husbande seeyng the constant mynde of his wyfe, and her in a redynesse to do ac∣cordyng to her woordes, had no hart to denye her louyng petiti∣on, but embracing her in his armes, commended her intent, and consented to her request. She folowed hym therfore, as did Ipsicratea her Mithridates, with her heare hangyng loose about her shoulders: for she loued her husband, as dyd Halicarnassea of Caria hers, being dead, and as dyd Artemisia her Mausolus. We haue also had aduertisment since theyr departure, that she (beyng brought vp as it were amōg soft fethers) hath with no lesse stoute courage susteyned the roringes and rages of the Ocean, then dyd eyther her husbande, or any of the Maryners brought vp euen a∣mong the sourges of the sea. But to haue sayde thus muche here∣of, this shall suffise: let vs nowe speake of other thynges no lesse worthy memorie. Therfore, wheras in the first Decade we haue made mention of Vincentius Annez Pinzonus, ye shal vnderstand▪ that he accōpanied Christophorus Colonus the Admiral in his first voyage, and afterwarde made an other voyage of his owne char∣ges with only one shyppe. Agayne, the fyrst yeere after the de∣partyng of the Captaynes Nicuesa and Fogeda, he ran ouer those coastes from Hispaniola, and searched al the South syde of Cuba, from the East to the West, and sayled rounde about that Iland, whiche to that day, for the great length thereof, was thought to haue ben part of the continent or firme land, although some other say that they dyd the lyke. Vincentius Annez therefore, knowyng nowe by experience that Cuba was an Ilande, sayled on further, and found other landes Westwarde from Cuba, but suche as the Admiral had first touched. Wherfore, beyng in manner encom∣passed with this newe lande, turning his course towarde the left hande, and rasing the coastes of that lande by the East, ouerpas∣sing also the mouthes of the gulfes of Beragua, Vraba, and Cuchi∣bachoa, he arryued at the region whiche in the first Decade we called Paria and Os Draconis, and entred into the great gulfe of freshe water, which Colonus discouered, beyng replenyshed with great abundance of fyshe, and famous by reason of the multitude of Ilandes lying in the same, beyng distant Eastwarde from Curiana about an hundred and thirtie myles, in the which tracte,
are the regions of Cumana and Manacapana, whiche also in the sixt booke of the fyrst Decade we sayd to be regions of the large prouince of Paria,Plentie of pearles. where many affyrme to be the greatest plentie of the best pearles, and not in Curiana. The kynges of these re∣gions (whom they cal Chiacones, as they of Hispaniola cal them Cacici) beyng certified of the comming of our men, sent certayne spyes to enquire what new nation was arryued in theyr coastes, what they brought, and what they would haue, and in the meane tyme furnyshed a number of theyr Canoas (whiche they call Chi∣chos) with men armed after theyr manner: for they were not a lytle astonyshed to beholde our shippes with the sayles spread, whereas they vse no sayles, nor can vse but small ones yf they woulde, by reason of the narownesse of theyr Canoas. Swar∣myng therefore about the shyppe with theyr Canoas (whiche we may wel cal Monoxyla, because they are made of one whole tree) they feared not to shoote at our men, beyng yet within their shyppes, and keepyng them selues vnder the hatches, as safely as yf they had ben defended with stone walles. But when our men had shotte of certayne peeces of ordinaunce agaynst them, they were so discomfited with the noyse and slaughter thereof,The vse of gunnes. that they droue them selues to flyght. Being thus disparcled, our men chased them with the ship boate, toke many, and slue many. When the kynges heard the noyse of the gunnes, and were cer∣tified of the losse of theyr men, they sent ambassadours to Vincen∣tius Agnes to entreate of peace, fearyng the spoyle of theyr goodes, and destruction of theyr people, yf our men should come alande in theyr wrath and furie. They desyred peace therefore, as coulde be coniectured by theyr signes and poyntynges: for our men vnderstoode not one woord of theyr language. And for the better proofe that they desyred peace,Great abun∣dance of gold & frankencense▪ they presented our men with three thousande of those weyghtes of gold that the Spany∣ardes call Castellanum Aureum,Olibanum. whiche they commonly call Pe∣sum. Also a great barrel of wood ful of moste excellent mascu∣line Frankencense, weighing about two thousande and sixe hun∣dred poundes weight, after eight ounces to the pounde: where∣by they knewe that that lande brought foorth great plentie of Frankencense,Sabea is a coū∣trey in rabia, which bringeth foorth Fran∣kencense. for there is no entercourse of marchaundies betweene the inhabitauntes of Paria and the Sabeans, being so
farre distant, wheras also they of Paria knowe nothing without theyr owne coastes. With the golde and Frankencense whiche they presented to our men, they gaue them also a great multitude of theyr peacockes, both cockes and hennes, dead and alyue, as∣wel to satisfie theyr present necessitie, as also to carry with them into Spayne for encrease, lykewyse certayne carpettes, couer∣lettes, table clothes, and hangyngs, made of Gossampine silke, finely wrought after a strange deuice, with pleasant and variable colours, hauyng golden belles, and such other spangles and pen∣dauntes, as the Italians call Sonaglios, and the Spanyardes Cascaueles, hangyng at the purfles therof. They gaue them fur∣thermore speakyng popyngayes of sundry colours, as many as they woulde aske: for in Paria there is no lesse plentie of popyn∣gayes, then with vs of doues or sparows. Thinhabitants of these regions, both men & women, are apparelled with vestures made of gossampine cotton, the men to the knees, and the women to the calfe of the legge. The fashion of theyr apparel is simple and playne, muche lyke vnto the Turkes: but the mens is double, and quilted, like that which the Turkes vse in the warres. The princes of Paria are rulers but for one yeere: but theyr auctoritie is no lesse among the people both in peace and warre,Rulers for one yeere. then is thauctoritie of other kyngs in those regions. Their villages are builded in compasse,The great gulfe of Paria. along by the bankes of al that great gulfe. Fyue of theyr princes came to our men with theyr presentes, whose names I thought woorthy to be put in this historie, in re∣membrance of so notable a thing, Chiaconus Chiauaccha (that is, the prince of Chiauaccha, for they cal princes or kings Chiaconus) Chiaconus Pintiguanus, Chiaconus Chamailaba, Chiaconus Polomus▪ and Chiaconus Potto. The gulfe beyng first found of the Admiral Colonus, they cal Baia Natiuitatis, because he entred into the same in the day of ye natiuitie of Christ, but at that time he only passed by it without any further searchyng, and Baia in the Spanyshe tong, signifieth a gulfe. Whē Vincentius had thus made a league with these princes, folowyng his appoynted course, he founde many regions toward ye East, desolate by reason of diuers floods and ouerflowyngs of waters: also many standyng pooles in di∣uers places, and those of exceeding largenesse. He ceassed not to folowe this tracte, vntyl he came to the poynt or cape of that
most long lande. This poynt seemeth as though it would inuade the mount Atlas in Aphrica: for it prospecteth towarde that part of Aphrike, which the Portugales cal Caput bonae Sperantiae. The poynte or capes of the mount Atlas, are rough and sauage, neere vnto the sea. The cape of Bona Speranza, geathereth thyrtie and foure degrees of the South pole, called the pole Antartike, but that poynt only seuen degrees. I suppose this lande to be that, whiche I fynde in olde wryters of Cosmographie to be called the great Ilande Atlantike,The great I∣land Atlantike. without any further declaryng eyther of the situation, or of the nature thereof. The eight booke of the seconde Decade, of the supposed continent. WHen Iohn the king of Portugale liued, whiche was predecessour to him that nowe raigneth, there arose a great contention be∣tweene the Castilians and the Portugales,Contention be∣tweene the Ca∣stilians & Por∣tugales for the newe landes. as concernyng the dominion of these newe founde landes. The Portugales, because they were the fyrst that durst attempt to searche the Ocean sea synce the memorie of man, affirmed that al the nauigations of the Ocean, ought to parteyne to them on∣ly. The Castilians argued on the contrary part, that whatsoeuer God by the ministration of nature hath created on the earth, was at the begynnyng common among men, and that it is therefore lawful to euery man to possesse such lands as are voyde of Chri∣stian inhabitours. Whyle the matter was thus vncertaynelye debated, both parties agreed that the controuersie shoulde be de∣syded by the byshop of Rome, and plighted fayth to stande to his arbitrement. The kyngdome of Castile was at that tyme gouerned by that great queene Helisabeth with her husband: for the Realme of Castile was her dowrie. She also and the kyng of Portugale, were cosyn germanes of two systers, by reason whereof, the dissention was more easyly pacified. By the assent therfore of both parties, Alexander the bishop of Rome,The bishop of Rome diuideth the lande. the .vi. of that name, by thaucthoritie of his leaden bull, drewe a right lyne from the North to the South, an hundred leagues Westwarde,
without the paralels of those Ilandes whiche are called Caput Viride, or Cabouerde, within the compasse of this lyne (although some denye it) falleth the poynt of this lande whereof we haue spoken, whiche they cal Caput Sancti Augustini, otherwyse called Promontorium Sancti Augustini, that is, saint Augustines cape or poynt: and therefore it is not lawful for the Castilians to fasten foote in the begynnyng of that land. Vincentius Annez therefore departed from thence, beyng aduertised of the inhabitantes, that on the other syde of the hygh mountaynes towarde the South, lying before his eyes,The golden re∣giō of Ciamba. there was a region called Ciamba, whiche brought forth great plentie of golde. Of certayne captiues whi∣che he tooke in the gulfe of Paria (whiche certaynely parteyneth to the dominion of Castile) he brought some with him to Hispa∣niola, and left them with the young Admirall to learne our lan∣guage: but he hym selfe repayred to the court, to make earnest suite to the kyng, that by his fauour he myght be gouernour of the Iland of Sancti Iohannis (otherwise called Burichena, being di∣stant from Hispaniola only .xxv. leagues) because he was the fyrst finder of golde in that Ilande.The Ilande of S. Iohannis. Before Vincentius made suite for this office, one Don Christopher, a Portugale, the sonne of the countie of Camigna, was gouernour of the Iland, whom the Ca∣nibales of the other Ilandes slue, with al the Christian men that were in the same, except the Bishop and his familiers, whiche fled and shyfted for them selues, forsakyng the churche and al the ornamentes thereof: for your holynesse hath consecrated fiue by∣shops in these Ilands,Fyue byshops of the Ilande made by the bi∣shop of Rome. at the request of the most catholique king. In Sancto Dominico the chiefe citie of Hispaniola, Garsia de Padilla, a reguler Fryer of the order of saint Frauncis, is byshop. In the towne of Conception, doctor Petrus Xuares of Deza, and in the Ilande of saint Iohn or Burichena, Alphonsus Mansus a licenci∣ate, being both obseruantes of the institution of saint Peter. The fourth is Fryer Barnarde of Mesa, a man of noble parentage, borne in Toledo, a preacher, & bishop of the Ilande of Cuba. The fift is Iohannes Cabedus, a fryer preacher, whom your holynesse annoynted minister of Christe, to teache the Christian fayth a∣mong the inhabitantes of Dariena. The Canibales shal shortlye repent them, and the blood of our men shalbe reuenged, and that the sooner, because that shortly after they had commytted
this abominable slaughter of our men, they came agayne from theyr owne Ilande of Sancta crux (otherwise called Ay Ay) to the Ilande of Sancti Iohannis,The Canibales of the Iland of Sancta Crux. and slue a kyng whiche was a freende to our men, and ate hym, and al his family, vtterly subuertyng his village, vpon this occasion, that violating the law of hostage, he had slayne seuen Canibales whiche were left with hym by composition to make certayne Canoas, because the Ilande of Sancti Iohannis beareth greater trees, and apter for that purpose, then doth the Iland of Sancti crux, the cheefe habitatiō of the Ca∣nibales. These Canibales yet remaynyng in the Iland, certaine of our men saylyng from Hispaniola, chaunced vpon them. The thyng beyng vnderstoode by the interpretours, our men quarel∣ling with them, and calling them to accompt for that mischeuous deede, they immediatly directed theyr bowes and venemous ar∣rowes against them, and with cruell countenances threatned them to be quiet, lest it shoulde repent them of theyr commyng thyther. Our men fearyng theyr venemous arrowes (for they were not prepared to fyght) gaue them signes of peace. Beyng demaunded why they destroyed the vyllage, and where the king was with his familie, they answered, that they rased the vyllage, and cut the kyng with his familie in peeces, and ate them in the reuenge of theyr seuen woorkmen: and that they had made fag∣gottes of theyr bones, to cary them to the wiues and children of theyr slayne woorkemen, in wytnesse that the bodyes of theyr husbandes and parentes lay not vnreuenged, and therewith shewed the faggottes of bones to our men, who beyng astony∣shed at theyr fiercenesse and crueltie, were enforced to dissemble the matter, and holde theyr peace, quarellyng no further with them at that tyme. These and suche other thynges doo dayly chaunce, the whiche I do let passe, lest I should offende the eares of your holynesse with such blooddy narrations. Thus haue we sufficiently digressed from the regions of Beragua and Vraba, be∣yng the cheefest fundations of our purpose. We wyll now ther∣fore entreate somewhat of the largenesse and deapth of the ry∣uers of Vraba:The ryuers of Vraba. also declare both what they and the landes which they runne through do bryng foorth: lykewyse of the greatnesse of the lande from the East to the West, and of the breadth there∣of from the South to the North, and what theyr opinion and
hope is of thynges yet vnknowen in the same. We wil therefore begyn at the newe names, wherwith the Spanyardes haue na∣med these prouinces, synce they were vnder the dominions of the Christians. The nienth booke of the second Decade, of the supposed continent. BEragua therfore they called Castella Aure▪ that is, golden Castile, and Vraba they na∣med Andalusia noua, that is, newe Andalu∣sia. And lyke as of many Ilandes whiche they subdued, they chose Hispaniola for the cheefe place of theyr habitation: so in the large tracte of Paria, they appoynted theyr colonie or biding place in the two regions of Vraba and Beragua▪ that al suche as attempt any voyages in those coastes, may resort to them, as to safe portes to be refreshed when they are weerie or dryuen to necessitie. Al our seedes and plantes do now marueylously encrease in Vraba, lykewyse blades, settes, slippes, graffes, suger canes, and suche other as are brought from other places to those regions,The fruitful∣nesse of Vraba. as also beastes and foules, as we haue sayd before: O marueylous fruitefulnesse. Twentie dayes after the seede is sowen, they geather rype cucumbers, and such lyke, but Colwoortes, Beetes, Lettuse, Borage, are rype within the space often dayes. Gourdes, Melones, and Pompions, within the space of .xxviii. dayes.The fruiteful∣nes of Dariena Dariena hath many natiue trees and fruites, of diuers kinds, with sundry tastes, & holsome for the vse of men, of the which I haue thought it good to describe certaine of the best. They nouryshe a tree whiche they call Guaiana, that beareth a fruite muche resemblyng the kinde of Citrones which are commonly called Limones, of taste somwhat sharpe, myxt with sweetenes. They haue also abundance of nuts of pinetrees, and great plentie of Date trees, which beare fruites bigger then the Dates that are knowen to vs, but they are not apt to be eaten for theyr to much sowrenesse. Wilde & barren Date trees grow of them selues in sundry places, the branches wherof they vse for beesomes, and eate also the buddes of the same. Guarauana, being hygher and bygger then the orange tree, bryngeth foorth a great
fruite as bygge as pome Citrons. There is another tree much like to a chestnut tree, whose fruite is like to the bigger sorte of fygs, beyng holsome and of pleasant taste. Mameis, is another tree that bringeth forth fruite as bygge as an orange, in taste no∣thing inferior to the best kindes of Melones. Guananala, beareth a fruite lesse then any of the other, but of sweete sauour like spice, and of dilectable taste. Houos is another tree, whose fruite both in shape and taste is muche lyke to prunes, but somewhat bygger: they are surely perswaded that this is the Myrobalane tree. These growe so abundantly in Hispaniola, that the hogges are fedde with the fruite therof, as with mast among vs. The hogges like this kynde of feedyng so wel, that when these fruites waxe ripe, the swineheards can by no meanes keepe them out of the woods of these trees, by reason whereof, a great multitude of them are become wilde. They also affirme, that in Hispaniola swines flesh is of muche better taste and more wholsome then mutton:Swynes fleshe of better taste & more holsome then mutton, for it is not to be doubted, but that diuers kindes of meates doo en∣gender sundry tastes and qualities in such as are nourished ther∣with. The most puissant prince Ferdinandus, declared that he had eaten of another fruite brought from those landes, being full of scales, with keyes, much lyke a pineapple in fourme and colour, but in tendernes equal to melow pepons, and in taste exceedyng al garden fruites: for it is no tree, but an hearbe, much like vnto an archichoke, or Acantho: The king him selfe gaue the cheefest commendation to this. I haue eaten none of these fruits: for of a great number which they brought from thence, only one remay∣ned vncorrupted,Fruites putri∣fied on the sea. the other being putrified by reason of the long voyage. Al suche as haue eaten of them newly geathered in their natiue soyle, do marueylously commende theyr sweetenesse and pleasaunt taste. They dygge also out of the grounde certayne rootes growyng of them selues, whiche they call Betatas,Betatas. muche lyke vnto the nauie rootes of Millane, or the great puffes or mushromes of the earth. Howsoeuer they be dressed, eyther fryed or sodde, they geue place to no suche kynde of meate in pleasant tendernes. The skinne is somwhat tougher then eyther the nauies or mushromes, and of earthy colour, but the inner meate therof is very white: These are nourished in gardens, as we sayd of Iucca in the first Decade. They are also eaten rawe,
and haue the taste of rawe chestnuts, but are somewhat sweeter. We haue spoken sufficiently of trees, hearbes, and fruites, we wyl nowe therefore entreate of thynges sencitiue. The landes and desolate pastures of these regions, are inhabited and deuou∣red of wylde and terrible beastes,Lions and Tygers. as Lions, Tygers, and suche other monsters as we nowe knowe, and haue ben described of olde auctours in tyme past. But there is specially one beast en∣gendred here,A strange beast. in which nature hath endeuoured to shew her cun∣nyng: This beast is as bygge as an Oxe, armed with a long snoute lyke an Elephant, and yet no Elephant, of the colour of an oxe, and yet no oxe, with the hoofe of a horse, and yet no horse, with eares also muche lyke vnto an Elephant, but not so open, nor so much hangyng downe, yet muche wyder then the eares of any other beast. Of the beast which beareth her whelpes about with her in her second belly as in a purse (beyng knowen to none of the olde wryters) I haue spoken in the fyrst Decade, which I doubt not to haue come to the handes of your holynesse. Let vs nowe therefore declare what resteth of the flooddes and ryuers of Vraba.The ryuers of Vraba. The riuer of Dariena falleth into the gulfe of Vraba, with a narow chanel, scarcely able to beare the Canoas or Ligh∣ters of that prouince, and runneth by the village where they chose theyr dwellyng place, but the ryuer in the corner of the gulfe whiche we sayde that Vaschus passed by, they founde to be .xxiiii. furlonges in breadth (which they call a league) and of exceedyng deapth,A league is xxiiii. fur∣longes. as of two hundred cubits, fallyng into the gulfe by diuers mouthes. They say that this riuer falleth into the gulfe of Vraba, lyke as the ryuer Ister (otherwyse called Danubius, and Danowe) falleth into the sea Pontike,Danubius. and Nilus into the sea of Egypt, wherefore they named it Grandis, that is, great: whiche also they affyrme to nouryshe many and great Crocodiles, as the old wri∣ters testifie of Nilus,A Crocodile is muche lyke a Neute, but of exceedyng kygnesse. and especially as I haue learned by ex∣perience, hauyng sayled vp and downe the riuer of Nilus, when I was sent Ambassadour to the Souldane of Alcay, at the com∣maundement of the most catholique kyng. What I may there∣fore geather out of the wrytynges of so many learned aucthours as concernyng the riuer of Nilus, I knowe not: for they say that nature hath geuen two ryuers of that name to water the lande, whether they wyl them to spryng out of the mountaynes of the
moone or the sunne, or out of the tops of the rough mountaines of Ethiopia, affyrmyng one of the same to fall into the gulfe of E∣gypt toward the North, and the other into the south Ocean sea. What shal we say in this place? Of that Nilus in Egypt there is no doubt.The Portuga∣les nauigati∣ons. The Portugales also which sayle by the coastes of the Ethiopians called Nigritae, and by the kyngdome of Melin∣da, passyng vnder ye Equinoctial lyne, among theyr marueylous inuentions haue found another toward the South, and earnestly affirme the same to be also deriued from the mountaynes of the moone, and that it is another chanel of Nilus, because it bringeth forth Crocodiles, whereas it hath not ben read before time, that any other riuer nourished Crocodiles sauing only Nilus. This riuer the Portugales cal Senega. It runneth through the region of the Nigritas, beyng very fruiteful toward the North shore, but on the South syde sandie and rough. Crocodiles are also engen∣dred herein. What shal we then say of this thirde? yea I may wel say the fourth: for I suppose them also to be Crocodiles, whi∣che Colonus with his company found, armed with scales as hard as shelles, in the ryuer called Delagartos, wherof we haue made mention before. Shal we say that these ryuers of Dariena also and Vraba, haue theyr original from the mountaynes of the moone, wheras they spryng out of the next mountaynes, and can by no meanes haue the same original with Nilus in Egypt, or that in Nigrita, or els that in the kyngdome of Melinda, from whence so euer they are deryued, whereas these other (as we haue sayde) spring out of the next mountaynes, which diuide another South sea, with no great distance from the North Ocean. Wherefore, it appeareth by experience of such as haue trauailed the world in our tyme, that other waters besyde the riuer of Nilus in Egypt, may lykewyse bryng foorth Crocodiles. In the Maryshes also and fennes of the regions of Dariena, are founde great plen∣tie of Phesantes and Peacockes (but not of variable colours) with manye other kyndes of byrdes and foules vnlyke vnto ours, aswel apt to be eaten, as also to delyte the eares of men with pleasaunt noyse. But our Spanyardes, because they are ignoraunt in fowlyng, take but fewe. Also innumerable po∣pingayes of sundry kyndes are founde chattering in the groues of those fennie places. Of these there are some equall to Ca∣pons
in bygnesse, and some as lytle as sparowes. But of the di∣uersitie of popyngayes, we haue spoken sufficiently in the fyrste Decade: for in the rase of this large lande, Colonus hym selfe brought and sent to the courte a great number of euery kynde, the whiche it was lawfull for all the people to beholde, and are yet dayly brought in like manner. There remayneth yet one thyng moste woorthy to be put in hystorie,A philosophi∣cal discourse as concerning thoriginal of springes and ryuers. the whiche, I had ra∣ther to haue chaunced into the handes of Cicero or Liuie, then in∣to myne: for the thyng is so marueylous in my estimation, that I fynde my wytte more entangled in the discription hereof, then is sayde of the henne when she seeth her young chycken inwrap∣ped in towe or flaxe.The breadth of the lande at Vraba, from the North O∣cean to the South sea. The breadth of that lande from the North Ocean to the south sea, is only sixe dayes iourney, by relation of the inhabitauntes. The multitude therfore and greatnesse of the riuers on the one syde, and on the other syde the narownesse of the lande, bryng me into suche doubt howe it can come to passe, that in so lytle a space of three dayes iourney, measuryng from the high toppes of those mountaynes, I doo not vnderstande howe so many and so great ryuers may haue recourse vnto this North sea: for it is to be thought, that as many do flow toward thinhabitants of the south. These riuers of Vraba are but small, in comparison of many other in those coastes: for the Spany∣ardes say, that in the tyme of Colonus, they found and passed by an other riuer after this, whose gulfe fallyng into ye sea, they affirme to be litle lesse then a hundred myles in the fyrst coastes of Paria, as we haue sayde elsewhere: for they say, that it falleth from the toppes of high mountaynes with so swyft and furious a course, that by the violence and greatnesse thereof, it dryueth backe the sea, although it be rough & enforced with a contrary wynd. They al affirme lykewyse, that in al the large tracte therof, they felt no sowre or salt water, but that all the water was freeshe, sweete, and apt to be drunke. Thinhabitauntes call this ryuer Marag∣nonum, and the regions adiacent to the same, Mariatambal, Ca∣mamorus, and Paricora: besyde those riuers whiche I haue na∣med before, as Darien▪ Grandis, Dabaiba, Beragua, Sancti Mathei, Boius gatti, Delagartos, & Gaira, they which of late haue searched those coastes, haue founde many other. Deliberatyng there∣fore with me selfe, from whence these mountaynes, beyng so
narowe and neare vnto the sea on both sydes, haue suche great holowe caues or dennes of such capacitie, and from whence they are fylled, to cast foorth suche abundance of water: hereof also as∣kyng them the opinions of the inhabitauntes, they affirme them to be of diuers iudgementes herein, alleaging fyrst the greatnes of the mountaynes to be the cause, whiche they say to be verye high, whiche thyng also Colonus the first fynder thereof affirmeth to be true, addyng thereunto that the paradise of pleasure is in the tops of those mountaynes whiche appeare from the gulfe of Paria & Os Draconis, as he is fully perswaded. They agree there∣fore that there are great caues within these mountaynes, but it resteth to consyder from whence they are fylled. If therfore al the riuers of freshe waters, by the opinion of many, do so flowe out of the sea,The sea. as dryuen and compelled through the passages or pores of the earth, by the ponderous weyght of the sea it selfe, as we see them breake foorth of the sprynges, and directe theyr course to the sea agayne, then the thyng is lesse to be maruey∣led at here, then in other places: for we haue not read that in any other place, two suche seas haue enuironed any lande with so narowe lymyttes:The lande en∣closed with two seas. for it hath on the ryght syde the great Oce∣an, where the sunne goeth downe on the left hande, and another on the other syde where the sunne ryseth, nothyng inferiour to the fyrste in greatnesse, for they suppose it to be myxte and ioyned as al one with the sea of East India. This lande therfore beyng burdened with so great a weyght on the one syde, & on the other, (yf this opinion be of any value) is enforced to swalowe vp such deuoured waters, and agayne to cast foorth the same in open springes and streames. But yf we shall denye that the earth draweth humours of the sea, and agree that all fountaynes or sprynges are engendred of the conuersion or turnyng of ayre into water,Conuersion of ayre into wa∣ter in the ca∣ues of moun∣taynes. distilling within the holow places of the mountaines (as the most part thinke) we wyll geue place rather to thauctho∣ritie of them whiche stycke to those reasons, then that our sense is satisfied of the ful trueth thereof. Yet do I not repugne, that in some caues of mountaynes, water is turned into ayre: for I mee selfe haue seene, howe in the caues of manye mountaynes in Spayne, in manner showres of rayne do fall continuallye, and that the water geathered by this meanes, doth sende foorth
certayne riuers by the sydes of the mountaynes, wherewith all suche trees as are planted on the steepe or foote of the mountay∣nes, as vines, oliue trees, and suche other, are watered, and this especially in one place: as the right honorable Lodouike the Cardinal of Aragonie, most obsequious to your holynesse, and two other bishops of Italy, whereof the one is Siluius Pandonus, and the other an Archbishop (whose name and title I do not re∣member) can beare me witnesse: for when we were togeather at Granata, lately deliuered from the dominion of the Moores, and walked for our pastyme to certaine pleasant hilles (by the whiche there ranne a fayre ryuer)▪ while Cardinal Lodouike occupied hym selfe in shootyng at byrdes whiche were in the bushes neere vnto the ryuer, I & thother two bishops determined to clime the mountaynes, to searche the original and spryng of the ryuer: for we were not farre from the toppes thereof. Folowyng therfore the course of the ryuer, we founde a great caue, in which was a continual fal of water, as it had ben a showre of rayne, the wa∣ter whereof, fallyng into a trenche made with mans hande, en∣creaseth to a ryuer, and runneth downe by the sydes of the moun∣taynes. The lyke is also seene in this famous towne of Vallado∣leto (where we nowe soiourne) in a certaine greene close, not past a furlong distant from the walles of the towne. I graunt there∣fore, that in certayne places, by conuersion of the ayrie deawe in∣to water, within the caues of suche mountaynes, many springes and riuers are engendred: but I suppose that nature was not sol∣licitate to bryng foorth suche great floods by this so small indu∣strie. Two reasons therfore do sounde best to my iudgement: wherof the one is,The often fal of rayne and con∣tinuall spryng tyme. The Equinoc∣tiall. the often fal of rayne: the other, the continual autume or spryng tyme which is in those regions, being so neere vnto the Equinoctial, that the common people can perceiue no difference betweene the length of the day and the nyght through∣out all the yeere, where as these two seasons are more apt to en∣gender abundance of rayne, then eyther extreme wynter, or fer∣uent sommer. An other reason in effect much like vnto the fyrst, is this: If the sea be ful of pores, and that by the pores thereof, be∣ing opened by the south wyndes,The pores of the sea, and the south wynde. we shal consent that vapours are lyfted vp, whereof the watery cloudes are engendred, this lande must needes be moysted with moe showres then anye o∣ther,
yf it be as narowe as they say, and enuironed with two mayne seas collaterally beatyng on the same: howsoeuer it be, I can not but geue credite to the report of suche worthy men as haue recourse to those regions, and can no lesse then declare the same, albeit it may seeme incredible to some ignorant persons, not knowing the power of nature, to whom, Plinie was perswa∣ded, that nothing was impossible. We haue therefore thought it good to make this discourse by the way of argument, lest on the one syde, men of good learnyng and iudgement, and on the other syde, suche as are studious to finde occasions of quarel∣lyng in other mens wrytynges, shoulde iudge vs to be so vndis∣crete, lightly to geue credite to euery tale, not being consonant to reason: but of the force and great violence of those freshe wa∣ters, whiche repulsyng the sea, make so great a gulfe (as we haue sayde) I thynke the cause thereof to be the great multitude of floods and riuers, whiche beyng geathered togeather, make so great a poole, and not one ryuer, as they suppose. And foras∣much as the mountaines are exceeding high and steepe, I thinke the violence of the fall of the waters to be of suche force, that this conflict betweene the waters, is caused by thimpulsion of the poole, that the salt water can not enter into the gulfe. But here perhaps some wyll marueyle at me, why I should marueyle so muche hereat, speakyng vnto me scornefully, after this manner: Why doth he so marueyle at the great riuers of those regions? Hath not Italie his Eridanus,The fludde Eridanus. named the kyng of ryuers of the old wryters? Haue not other regions also the lyke? as we reade of Tanais, Ganges, and Danubius, which are sayde so to ouercome the sea, that freshe water may be drawen fourtie myles within the same. These men I would satisfie with this aunswere. The famous ryuer of Padus in Italie (whiche they nowe call Po, and was of the Greekes called Eridanus) hath the great moun∣taynes called Alpes, diuiding Fraunce, Germanie, and Panno∣nie, from Italie, lying at the backe therof, as it were bulwarkes agger, full of moysture, and with a long tracte receiuyng Tici∣nam, with innumerable other great ryuers, falleth into the sea Adriatike. The lyke is also to be vnderstoode of the other. But these ryuers (as our men were enfourmed by the kynges) fall into the Ocean sea with larger and fuller channels neere hande,
and some there are whiche affirme this lande to be very large in other places, although it be but narowe here. There commeth also to my remembraunce another cause, the whiche although it be of no great force, yet do I entende to wryte it. Perhaps therefore the length of the lande reachyng farre from the East to the West, if it be narowe, may be a helpe hereunto: for as we reade,The ryuer Alpheus. that the ryuer Alpheus passeth through the holowe places vnder the sea, from the citie of Elis in Peloponeso, and breaketh forth at the fountayne or spryng Arethusa in the Iland of Sicillia, so is it possible that these mountaines may haue such long caues parteynyng vnto them,Longe caues in the moun∣taines. that they may be the receptacles of the water passing through the landes beyng farre distant, and that the same waters commyng by so long a tracte, may in the way be greatly encreased, by the conuersion of ayre into water, as we haue sayde. Thus much haue I spoken freely, permitting both to them which do frendly interprete other mens dooyngs, and also to the malitious scorners, to take the thing euen as them lysteth, for hytherto I can make no further declaration hereof, but when the trueth shalbe better knowen, I wil do my diligence to commit the same to wrytyng. Nowe therfore, forasmuch as we haue spoken thus muche of the breadth of this lande, we en∣tende to describe the length and fourme of the same. The tenth booke of the seconde Decade, of the supposed continent. THat lande reacheth foorth into the sea, euen as doth Italy,The length and forme of the Iland. although not lyke the legge of a man, as it doth. But nowe I compare a Pigmean or a dwarfe, to a Giant: for that part thereof whiche the Spanyardes haue ouer runne, from the sayd East poynt which reacheth towarde the sea Atlantike, (the ende not beyng yet founde towarde the West) is more then eyght tymes longer then Italie. And by what reason I am mo∣ued to say eyght tymes, your holynesse shall vnderstande. From the tyme therefore that I fyrste determined to obeye theyr re∣questes, who wylled me fyrst in your name to wryte these
thinges in the Latine tongue, I did my endeuour that al things myght come foorth with due tryal and experience: whereupon I repayred to the Bishop of Burges, beyng the cheefe refuge of this nauigation. As we were therfore secretely togeather in one chamber, we had many instruments parteining to these affaires, as globes,Cardes of the sea. and many of those maps whiche are commonly called the shipmans cardes, or cardes of the sea. Of the which, one was drawen by the Portugales,The carde of Americus Vesputius. wherunto Americus Vesputius is said to haue put to his hande, beyng a man most expert in this fa∣cultie, and a Florentine borne, who also vnder the stipende of the Portugales, had sayled towarde the South pole many degrees beyonde the Equinoctiall. In this carde we founde the first front of this lande to be broder then the kynges of Vraba had per∣swaded our men of theyr mountaynes. To another, Colonus the Admiral, while he yet lyued, and searched those places,The carde of Colouns. had ge∣uen the beginning with his owne handes: whereunto Bartholo∣meus Colonus his brother and Lieuetenaunt had added his iudge∣ment, for he also had sayled about those coastes. Of the Spany∣ardes lykewyse, as many as thought them selues to haue anye knowledge what parteyned to measure the land & the sea, drewe certayne cardes in parchment as concernyng these nauigations. Of all other,The carde of Iohannes de la Cossa. they moste esteeme them whiche Iohannes de la Cossa the companion of Fogeda (whom we sayde to be slayne of the people of Caramairi in the hauen of Carthago) and another ex∣pert pylote called Andreas Moralis, had set foorth.The carde of Andreas mo∣ralis. And this as∣wel for the great experience which they both had (to whom these tractes were aswel knowen as the chambers of theyr owne hou∣ses) as also that they were thought to be cunninger in that part of Cosmographie, which teacheth the discription and measuring of the sea. Conferring therfore al these cardes togeather, in euery of the whiche was drawen a lyue, expressing not the myles, but leagues, after the maner of the Spanyardes, we tooke our com∣passes, & began to measure the sea coastes after this order.The maner of measuring the cardes. From that poynt or fronte whiche we sayde to be included within the lyue parteynyng to the Portugales iurisdiction, beyng drawen by the paralelles of the Ilandes of Cabouerde, but a hundred lea∣gues further towarde the West (whiche they haue nowe also searched on euery syde) we founde three hundred leagues to the
entraunce of the riuer Maragnonum: and from thence to Os Dra∣conis, seuen hundred leagues, but somwhat lesse by the discription of some, for they doo not agree in al poyntes exquisitely. The Spanyards wyl that a league conteyne foure myles by sea,A league. and but three by lande. From Os Draconis, to the cape or poynt of Cu∣chibacoa, whiche being passed, there is a gulfe on the left hande, we measured three hundred leagues in one Carde, & much there∣about in another. From this poynt of Cuchibacoa, to the region of Caramairi, in whiche is the hauen Carthago (whiche some cal Carthagena) we found about a hundred & seuentie leagues. From Caramairi to the Iland Fortis, fyftie leagues. From thence to the gulfes of Vraba, among the whiche is the vyllage called Sancta Maria Antiqua, where the Spanyards haue appoynted theyr ha∣bitation, only .xxxiii. leagues. From the ryuer of Vraba in the pro∣uince of Dariena, to ye riuer of Beragua, where Nicuesa had inten∣ded to haue fastened his foote, if God had not otherwyse decreed, we measured a hundred and thirtie leagues. From Beragua, to that riuer, which we said of Colonus to be called Sancti Matthei, in the which also Nicuesa loosing his Carauel, wandered in great calamities, we founde in our Cardes only a hundred and fourtie leagues: Yet many other whiche of late tyme haue come from these partes, haue described many mo leagues in this tract from the ryuer of Sancti Matthei, in whiche also they place diuers ry∣uers, as Aburema, with the Iland called Scutum Cateba, lying be∣fore it, whose kyngs name is Facies combusta. Likewise another ryuer called Zobraba, after that, Vrida, and then Duraba, in the which golde is founde. Furthermore, many goodly hauens, as Cerabaro and Hiebra, so called of the inhabitauntes. And thus yf your holynesse wyll conferre these numbers togeather, you shall fynde in this accompt, a thousand, fyue hundred, twentie and fiue leagues, which amount to fyue thousande & seuen hundred miles, from the poynt of Sancti Matthei, whiche they cal Sinum perdito∣rum, that is, The gulfe of ye lost men. But we may not leaue here: for after this, one Astur Ouetensis, otherwyse named Iohannes Di∣as de Solis,The nauigati∣on of Iohan∣nes Dias. borne in Nebrissa (whiche bryngeth foorth many lear∣ned men) sayling from this riuer towarde the West, ouerranne many coastes and leagues, but the middest of that shore bendeth towarde the North, and is not therefore directly placed in order
with the other, yet may we geather by a diameter or right lyne, about three hundred leagues. Hereby may you geather what is the length of this lande, but of the breadth, perhaps we shal here∣after haue further knowledge. Let vs nowe speake somewhat of the varietie of the degrees of the eleuation of the pole starres. This lande therefore,The eleuation of the pole. although it reache foorth from the East into the West, yet is it crooked, and hath the poynt bendyng so towarde the South, that it looseth the syght of the North pole, and is extended beyonde the Equinoctial lyne seuen degrees to∣warde the South pole: but the poynt hereof, parteyneth to the iurisdiction of the Portugales, as we haue sayde.The iurisdicti∣on of the Portugales, Leauing this poynt, and saylyng towarde Paria, the North starre is seene againe, & is so much the more lifted vp, in how much the region enclineth more towarde the West. The Spanyardes therfore haue diuers degrees of eleuations, vntyll they come to Dariena, being theyr cheefe station and dwelling place in those landes: for they haue forsaken Beragua, where they founde the North pole eleuate .viii. degrees, but from hence, the land doth so much bend towarde the North, that it is there in manner equal with the de∣grees of the strayghtes of Hercules pyllers,Hercules pyl∣lers. especially yf we measure certaine landes founde by them toward the North syde of Hispaniola, among the which there is an Iland about three .C. and .xxv. leagues frō Hispaniola, as they say which haue searched the same, named Boiuca, or Agnaneo,The Ilande Boiuca or Agnaneo. The renouati∣on of age. A water of mar∣ueilous vertue. in the which is a continuall spring of running water, of such marueilous vertue, that ye water thereof being drunke, perhaps with some diet, maketh olde men young agayne. And here must I make protestation to your ho∣nesse, not to thynke this to be sayde lyghtly or rashly, for they haue so spread this rumour for a trueth throughout al the courte, that not onlye al the people, but also many of them whom wyse∣dome or fortune hath diuided from the common sort, thynke it to be true: but yf you shal aske my opinion herein, I wyl answere, that I wyll not attribute so great power to nature, but that God hath no lesse reserued this prerogatiue to hym selft, then to searche the hartes of men, or to geue substaunce to priuation, (that is) beyng, to no beyng, except we shall beleeue the fa∣ble of Colchis of Eson renouate, to be as true as the wrytyn∣ges of Sibylla Erythrea. Albeit perhaps the scooles of Phisitions
and natural philosophers, wyll not muche stycke to affyrme, that by the vse of certayne secrete medicines and dyet, the accidentes of age (as they cal them) may be long hydden and deferred,The accidentes of age may be hydden. whi∣che they wyl to be vnderstoode by the renouation of age. And to haue sayde thus much of the length and breadth of these regions, and of the rough and hugious mountaynes, with theyr waterye caues, also of the diuers degrees of that lande, I thinke it suf∣ficient. But I thought it not good to let passe what chaunced to these miserable men among theyr generall calamities. I re∣member that when I was a chylde, me thought my bowelles grated, and that my spirites were marueylously troubled for very pitie, when I read in the poete Uirgyl, howe Achemenides was left of Vlysses vpon the sea bankes among ye giantes called Cyclo∣pes, where for the space of many dayes from the departyng of Vlysses, vntyl the comming of Eneas, he eate none other meate, but only berries and hawes.Extreme hun∣ger. But our vnfortunate Spanyards, whiche folowed Nicuesa to inhabite Beragua, would haue estee∣med hawes & berries for great delicates. What should I heare speake of the head of an asse bought for a great pryce,This was at the siege of Hie∣rusalem. and of such other extremities as men haue suffered in townes besieged? After that Nicuesa had determined to leaue Beragua for the bar∣rennesse of the soyle, he attempted to searche Portum Bellum, and then the coastes of the poynt called Marmor, yf he myght there fynde a place more fortunate to inhabite. In this meane tyme, so greeuous famine oppressed his souldiers, that they neyther ab∣steined frō eating of mangie dogges,Many dogges eaten. which they had with them, aswel for theyr defence as for huntyng (for in the warre agaynst the naked people, dogges stoode them in great steade) nor yet sometyme from the slaine inhabitauntes: for they found not there any fruitful trees, or plentie of foules, as in Dariena, but a barren ground, and not meete to be inhabited. Here certaine of the soul∣diers made a bargayne with one of their felowes for the pryce of a leane dogge,A mangie dog are solde. who also was almost dead for hunger: they gaue the owner of the dogge many of those peeces of gold which they cal Pesos, or golden Castellans. Thus agreeing of the pryce, they flayed the dogge to be eaten, and cast his mangie skinne, with the bones of the head hangyng thereto, among the bushes. The day folowyng, a certayne footeman of theyr companye, chaun∣ced
to fynde the skynne being nowe full of maggottes and stynk∣yng. He brought it home with hym, sodde it, and eate it. Many resorted to hym with theyr dysshes for the brothe of the sodde skynne, profering hym for euerye dysshefull a piece of golde.Broth of a mangie dogs skynne. An other founde two toades, and sodde them,Toades eaten. which a sycke man bought of hym for two fine shurtes, curiously wrought of lynnen intermyxed with golde. Certayne other wanderyng about to seeke for vittuals, found in a pathway in the myddest of a feelde, a dead man, of the inhabitantes, which had ben slaine of his owne company, and was nowe rotten and stynkyng. They drewe hym a syde, dismembred hym secretely, rosted hym,A dead man eaten. and ate hym, therewith asswagyng theyr hunger, as yf they had ben fedde with pheasauntes. One also, whiche departing from his companions in the nyght season, went a fyshyng among the reedes of the marysshes, lyued only with slyme or mudde for the space of certayne dayes, vntyl at the length creepyng, & almost deade, he founde the way to his felowes. And thus these mise∣rable men of Beragua, vexed with these and suche other affictions, were brought from the number of seuen hundreth, threescore and ten souldiers, scarsely to fourtie, beyng nowe also added to the company of them in Dariena. Fewe were slayne of thinhabi∣tauntes, but the resydue consumed by famine, breathed out theyr wery soules, openyng a way to the newe landes for suche as shal come after them, appeasyng the fury of the barbarous na∣tions, with the price of theyr blood. Consyderyng therfore, after these stormes,Note. with what ease other men shall ouerrunne and in∣habite these landes, in respect to the calamities that these men haue suffered, they shall seeme to goe to bryde feastes, where all thynges are redy prepared agaynst theyr commyng. But where Petrus Arias arryued with the kynges nauie and newe supply of men, to this houre I knowe no certantie.Petrus Arias whō the Spa∣nyards call Pedarias. What shal chaunce heareafter, I wyl make diligent inquisition, if I shal vnderstand this to be acceptable to your holynes. Thus I byd you farewel: from the courte of the most Catholyke kyng, the daye before the nones of December, in the yeere of Christ .1514.
The fyrst booke of the thyrde Decade, to the Bi∣shop of Rome Leo the tenth. I Was determined (most holye father) to haue closed vp the gates to this new world, supposyng that I had wandered farre ye∣nough in the coastes thereof, whyle in the meane time newe letters were brought me from thence, whiche caused me agayne to take my penne in hande: for I receiued let∣ters not only from certayne of mine acquayntance there, but also from Vaschus Nunnez,Vaschus Nun∣nez, gouernor of Dariena. whom we sayde by the confidence of his owne power with his confederates, to haue vsurped the go∣uernance of Dariena, after the reiecting of Nicuesa and Ancisus, Lieutenauntes. By his letter, wrytten after his warlyke maner, we vnderstande that he hath passed ouer the mountaynes, diui∣dyng the Ocean,The new south Ocean. knowen to vs, from the other mayne sea on the south side of this lande, hitherto vnknowen. His epistle is grea∣ter then that called Capreensis de Seiano. But we haue geathered out of that and other, only such things as we thought most wor∣thy to be noted. Vaschus so behaued hym selfe in these affayres, that he dyd not only pacifie the kynges displeasure conceiued a∣gaynst him, but also made hym so fauourable and gracious good lorde towarde hym, that he rewarded him and his companions with many honorable gyftes and priuileges for theyr attempts. Wherefore, I desyre your holynesse to encline your attentyue eares, & to consyder with a ioyful minde what they haue brought to passe in these great enterpryses: for this valiaunt nation (the Spanyardes I meane) haue not only with great paynes and in∣numerable daungers subdued,Commendati∣on of the Spa∣nyardes. to the Christian empire, infinite hundredes and legions, but also myrtades of men. Vaschus Nun∣nez therfore,A valiant mynd can not be ydle. whether it were that he was impacient of idlenes, (for a valiant mynde can not rest in one place, or be vnoccupyed) or lest any other shoulde preuent him in so great a matter (suspec∣tyng the newe gouernour Petrus Arias) or being mooued by both these causes, and especially for that the kyng had taken displea∣sure with hym for suche thynges as he had done before, tooke the aduenture vppon hym, with a fewe men to bryng that to
passe whiche the sonne of kyng Comogrus thought coulde hardly haue ben done with the ayde of a thousande men, whereof Petrus Arias was appoynted captaine for the same purpose. Assembling therfore certayne of the olde souldiers of Dariena, and manye of those whiche came lately from Hispaniola, allured by the fame of greater plentie of golde,Vaschus his voyage toward the golden mountaynes▪ he geathered an armie of a hundred fourescore and tenne men. Thus beyng furnyshed, and redye to take his voyage by sea, whyle the wynde serued hym, he depar∣ted from Dariena with one Brigandine, and ten of their boates whiche they call Canoas, as we haue sayde. Fyrst therfore arri∣uing in the dominion of Careta kyng of Coiba, and frende to the Christians, and leauyng his shyppe and boates there,Careta kyng of Coiba. he made his deuout prayers to almightie God, and therewith went for∣warde on his iourney by lande towarde the mountaynes. Here he fyrst entred into the region of kyng Poncha,King Poncha. who fledde at his commyng, as he had done before. But Vaschus sent messengers to hym by the conduct of certayne of Careta his men, promysing hym frendshyp & defence agaynst his enimies, with many other benefites. Poncha thus entised with fayre speache and frendlye profers, both of our men, and of the Caretans, came to our men gladly and wyllyngly, making a league of frendshyp with them. Vaschus enterteyned him very frendly, and perswaded him neuer thereafter to stande in feare. Thus they ioyned handes, embra∣sed, and gaue great gyftes the one to the other, to knytte vp the knotte of continuall amitie. Poncha gaue Vaschus a hundred and ten poundes weight of golde, of that pounde whiche the Spani∣ardes call Pesum. He had no greater plentie of golde at this tyme, by reason he was spoyled the yeere before, as we haue said. Vaschus to recompence one benefite with another, gaue him cer∣tayne of our thynges, as counterfayte rynges, Christal stones, copper chaynes, & bracelets, haukes belles, lookyng glasses, and suche other fine stuffe. These thynges they set muche by, & great∣ly esteeme: for suche thynges as are strange,Strange thin∣ges are coun∣ted precious. are euery where counted precious. He gaue also to Poncha certayne axes to fell trees, whiche he accepted as a pryncely gyfte, because they lacke Iron, and al other mettals except golde: by reason wherof,Lacke of Iron. they are enforced with great labour to cutte theyr trees to buylde theyr houses, and specially to make theyr boates holowe, with∣without
instrumentes of Iron, with certayne sharpe stones, whiche they fynde in the ryuers.A stone in the steede of Iron. Thus Vaschus, leauyng all thynges in safetie behinde hym, marched forwarde with his ar∣mie toward the mountaines, by the conduct of certaine guides and labourers which Poncha had geuen him, aswel to leade hym the way, as also to cary his baggages, and open the strayghtes through the desolate places and craggie rockes ful of the dennes of wylde beastes: for there is seldome any entercourse of buying and sellyng betweene these naked people, because they stande in neede of fewe thynges, and haue not the vse of money: but yf at any tyme they exercise any barteryng, they doo it but neere hande, exchangyng golde for houshold stuffe, with their confines, which somwhat esteme ye same for ornament when it is wrought. Other superfluities they vtterly contemne,Superflui∣ties hynder libertie. as hynderaunces of theyr sweete libertie, forasmuche as they are geuen only to play and idlenes. And for this cause ye high wayes which lye betwene theyr regions, are not muche worne with manye iourneyes, yet haue theyr scoutes certayne priuie markes, wherby they knowe the way the one to inuade the others dominions, and spoyle and infest them selues on both sydes with mutual incursions priuily in the nyght season. By the helpe therefore of theyr guides and laborers, with our Carpenters, he passed ouer the horrible moun∣taynes,Carpenters. and many great ryuers lying in the way, ouer the which he made brydges,Brydges. either with pyles or trunks of trees. And here doo I let passe many thynges whiche they suffered for lacke of necessaries, being also in maner ouercome with extreme labour, lest I shoulde be tedious in rehearsing thinges of small value. But I haue thought it good not to omyt suche dooynges as he had with the kynges by the way. Therefore or euer he came to the toppes of the high mountaynes, he entred into a region cal∣led Quarequa,The region of Quarequa. and mette with the king thereof called by the same name, with a great bande of men armed after theyr manner, as with bowes and arrowes, long and brode two handed swoordes made of wood, long staues hardened at the endes with fyre, dartes also and slynges. He came proudely and cruellye agaynst our men, and sent messengers to them to bydde them stande and proceede no further, demaundyng whyther they went, and what they had to doo there? Herewith he came
foorth and shewed hym selfe, beyng apparelled with al his no∣bilitie, but the other were al naked. Then approching towarde our men, he threatned thē, with a Lions countenance, to depart from thence, except they woulde be slayne euery mothers sonne. When our men denyed that they woulde goe backe, he assayled them fiercely, but the battayle was soone finished:kyng Quare∣qua is dryuen to flyght. Hargabusies. for assoone as they hearde the noyse of the hargabusies, they beleeued that our men caryed thunder and lyghtnyng about with them. Ma∣ny also beyng slayne and sore wounded with quarrels of crosse∣bowes, they turned theyr backes and fledde.Crossebowes Our men folowing them in the chase, hewed them in peeces, as the Butchers doo fleshe in the shambles, from one an arme, from another a legge, from hym a buttocke, from another a shoulder, and from some the necke from the bodye at one stroke. Thus, syxe hundred of them, with theyr kyng, were slayne lyke bruite beastes.vi.C. Barbari∣ans are slaine Vaschus founde the house of this kyng infected with moste abominable and vnnaturall lechery: for he founde the kynges brother, and many other young men in womens apparell, smoothe and effe∣minately decked, whiche by the report of suche as dwelt about hym, he abused with preposterous venus. Of these about the number of fourtie, he commaunded to be geuen for a pray to his dogges: for (as we haue sayd) the Spanyardes vse the helpe of dogges in theyr warres agaynst the naked people,The vse of dogges in the warre agaynst the naked Barbarians. whom they inuade as fiercely and rauenyngly, as yf they were wilde bores or Hartes: insomuche that our Spanyardes haue founde theyr dogges no lesse faythful to them in al dangers and enterprises, then dyd the Colophonians or Castabalences, whiche instituted whole armies of dogges, so made to serue in the warres, that be∣yng accustomed to place them in the forefronte of the bat∣tayles, they neuer shronke or gaue backe.Natural ha∣tred of vnna∣tural sinne. When the people had hearde of the seuere punyshment whiche our men had execu∣ted vpon that fylthy kynde of men, they resorted to them as it had ben to Hercules for refuge, by violence bryngyng with them all suche as they knewe to be infected with that pestilence, spyt∣tyng in theyr faces, and crying out to our men to take reuenge of them, and rydde them out of the worlde from among men, as contagious beastes. This stynkyng abomination had not yet entred among the people, but was exercised onlye
by the noble men and gentlemen. But the people lyftyng vp theyr handes & eyes toward heauen,I woulde al men were of this opinion. gaue tokens that God was greeuously offended with suche vyle deedes, affyrmyng this to be the cause of theyr so many thunderynges, lyghtnyng, and tem∣pestes, wherewith they are so often troubled, and of the ouer∣flowyng of waters which drowne theyr sets and fruites, whereof famyne and diuers diseases ensue, as they symply and faythfully beleue, although they knowe none other GOD then the sunne, whom only they honour, thinkyng that it doth both geue and take away, as it is pleased or offended: Yet are they very doci∣ble,The haruest is great, and the woorkemen but fewe. and easie to be allured to our customes and religion, if they had any teacher. In theyr language there is nothyng vnplea∣saunt to the eare, or harde to be pronounced, but that all theyr woordes may be wrytten with latine letters, as we sayde of the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola.Warlyke peo∣ple. It is a warlyke nation, and hath ben euer hytherto molestous to theyr borderers: but the region is not fortunate with fruiteful grounde, or plentie of golde. Yet is it full of great barren mountaynes,The higher, the colder. beyng somewhat colde by reason of their height, and therefore the noble men and gentle∣men are apparelled, but the common people liue content only with the benefites of nature. There is a region not past two dayes iourney distant from Quarequa, in whiche they founde on∣ly blacke Moores,A region of blacke Moores and those exceedyng fierce and cruel. They suppose that in tyme past certayne blacke Moores sayled thy∣ther out of Ethiopia to robbe, and that by shypwracke or some other chaunce, they were dryuen to those mountaynes. The in∣habitaunts of Quarequa lyue in continual warre and debate with these blacke men. Here Vaschus leauing in Quarequa many of his souldiers (which by reason they were not yet accustomed to such trauayles and hunger,Diseases of change of ayre and dyet. fel into diuers diseases) tooke with hym certayne guides of the Quarequatans, to conduct hym to the toppes of the mountaynes. From the pallace of kyng Poncha, to the prospect of the other south sea,The south sea. is only sixe dayes iourney, the which neuerthelesse, by reason of many hinderances & chaunces, and especially for lacke of vittuals, he coulde accomplishe in no lesse then .xxv. dayes. But at the length, the seuenth day of the Calendes of October, he behelde with woonderyng eyes the toppes of the hygh mountaynes, shewed vnto hym by the guides
of Quarequa, from the whiche he myght see the other sea so long looked for, and neuer seene before of any man commyng out of our worlde. Approching therfore to the toppes of the moun∣taynes, he commaunded his armye to stay, and went hym selfe alone to the toppe, as it were to take the fyrst possession thereof. Where, fallyng prostrate vppon the grounde,Prayer. and raysing hym selfe againe vpon his knees, as the maner of the Christians is to praye, lyftyng vp his eyes and handes towarde heauen, and di∣rectyng his face towarde the newe founde south sea, he powred foorth his humble and deuout prayers before almightie God, as a spirituall sacrifyce with thankes gyuing, that it pleased his diuine maiestie, to reserue vnto that day the victorie and prayse of so great a thyng vnto hym, beyng a man but of smal wyt and knowledge, of lytle experience, and base parentage.God rayseth the poore from the dounghyl When he had thus made his prayers after his warlike maner, he beckned with his hande to his companions, to come to hym, shewyng them the great mayne sea heretofore vnknowen to thinhabitants of Europe, Aphrike, and Asia. Here agayne he fell to his pray∣ers as before, desyring almyghtie God (and the blessed virgin) to fauour his beginnynges, and to geue hym good successe to sub∣due those landes, to the glory of his holy name, and encrease of his true religion. All his companions dyd lykewyse, and pray∣sed God with loude voyces for ioy. Then Vascus, with no lesse manlye corage then Hanniball of Carthage shewed his souldiers Italye, and the promontories of the Alpes,Hanniball of Carthage. exhorted his men to lyft vp theyr hartes, and to beholde the lande euen nowe vnder theyr feete, and the sea before theyr eyes, whiche shoulde bee vnto them a full and iust rewarde of theyr great laboures and tra∣uayles nowe ouerpassed. When he had sayde these woordes, he commaunded them to raise certaine heapes of stones, in the stede of alters, for a token of possession. They descendyng from the toppes of the mountaynes, least suche as myght come after hym shoulde argue hym of lying or falshood, he wrote the kyng of Castels name here and there, on barkes of the trees, both on the ryght hande and on the left, and raysed heapes of stones all the way that he went, vntyll he came to the region of the next kyng towarde the south, whose name was Chiapes. This kyng came foorth agaynst hym with a great multitude of men, threatnyng
and forbyddyng him not only to passe through his dominions,King Chiapes. but also to goe no further. Hereupon Vaschus set his battayle in aray,A battayle. and exhorted his men (beyng nowe but fewe) fiersly to assayle theyr enemies, and to esteeme them no better then dogges meate, as they shoulde be shortly. Placing therefore the hargabusiers and masties in the forefroont, they saluted kyng Chiapes and his men with such alarome,Chiapes is dri∣uen to flyght. that when they hard the noyse of the gunnes, saw the flames of fire, and smelt the sauour of brimstone (for the wynde blewe towardes them) they droue them selues to flyght, with such feare lest thunderboultes and lyghtnynges folowed them, that many fell downe to the ground, whom our men pursuing, fyrst keepyng theyr order, and after breakyng theyr aray, slue but fewe, and tooke ma∣nye captyue: For they determined to vse no extremitie, but to pacyfie those regions as quietly as they myght. Enteryng ther∣fore into the pallace of kyng Chiapes, Vaschus commaunded many of the captyues to be loosed,Vaschus sen∣deth for kyng Chiapes. wyllyng them to search out theyr kyng, and to exhort hym to come thither: and that in so doyng, he woulde be his frend, and profer hym peace, besyde many other benefites: But if he refused to come, it shoulde turne to the destruction of hym and his, and vtter subuertion of his countrey. And that they myght the more assuredly do this mes∣sage to Chiapes, he sent with them certayne of the guides whiche came with hym from Quarequa.Chiapes sub∣mitteth hym sele to Vas∣chus. Thus Chiapes, beyng persua∣ded aswell by the Quarequans, who coulde coniecture to what end the matter woulde come, by thexperience whiche they had seene in them selues and theyr kyng, as also by the reasons of his owne men, to whom Vaschus had made suche frendly pro∣mises in his behalfe, came foorth of the caues in the whiche he lurkd, and submitted hym selfe to Vaschus, who accepted hym frendly. They ioyned handes, embraced the one the other, made a perpetuall league of frendship, and gaue great rewardes on both sydes. Chiapes gaue Vaschus foure hundred poundes weyght of wrought golde, of those poundes whiche they call Pesos, and Vaschus recompenced hym agayne with certayne of our thynges. Thus beyng made frendes, they remayned to∣geather a fewe dayes, vntyll Vaschus souldiers were come, whi∣che he left behynde hym in Quarequa. Then callyng vnto hym
the guydes and labourers whiche came with hym from thence, he rewarded them liberally, and dismissed them with thankes. Shortly after, by the conduct of Chiapes hym selfe, and cer∣tayne of his men departyng from the toppes of the mountaynes, he came in the space of foure dayes to the bankes of the newe sea: where assemblyng al his men togeather, with the kynges scribes and notaries, they addicted all that mayne sea with all the landes adiacent thereunto, to the dominion and Empire of Castile. Here he left part of his souldiers with Chiapes, that he myght the easelier search those coastes. And takyng with hym niene of theyr lyghters made of one whole tree (whiche they call Culchas, as thinhabitantes of Hispaniola cal them Canoas) & also a bande of fourescore men, with certeyne of Chiapes men, he passed ouer a great riuer, and came to the regiō of a certeine king, whose name was Coquera. He attempted to resyst our men as dyd the other, and with lyke successe: for he was ouercome and put to flight. But Vaschus, who entended to winne him with gentelnes, sent certeyne Chiapeans to hym, to declare the great power of our men, howe inuincible they were, howe mercifull to such as submit them selues, also cruell and seuere to such as obstinatly withstand them: Promisyng hym furthermore, that by the frend∣ship of our men, he might be wel assured by thexample of other, not only to liue in peace and quietnes hym selfe, but also to be re∣uenged of the iniuries of his enimies: Wyllyng hym in conclu∣sion so to weigh the matter, that yf he refused this gentlenes pro∣fered vnto hym by so great a victourer, he should or it were long learne by feelyng, to repent hym to late of that peryll whiche he myght haue auoyded by hearyng. Coquera with these wordes and examples, shaken with great feare, came gladly with the mes∣sengers, bryngyng with him .650. Pesos of wrought golde, whiche he gaue vnto our men. Vaschus rewarded hym likewise, as we sayd before of Poncha. Coquera beyng thus pacified, they returned to the pallace of Chiapes, where, visityng theyr compa∣nions, and restyng there a whyle, Vaschus determined to search the next great gulfe, the whiche, from the furthest reachyng thereof into the lande of theyr countryes,A gulfe of three∣score myles. Saint Micha∣els gulfe. from the enteraunce of the mayne sea, they say to be threescore myles. This they named saint Michaels gulfe, whiche they say to be full of in∣habited
Ilandes and hugious rockes. Entryng therefore into the niene boates of Culchas, wherewith he passed ouer the ryuer before,The manly corage and godly zeale of Vaschus hauyng also with him the same companye of fourescore whole men, he went forwarde on his purpose, although he were greatly disswaded by Chiapes, who earnestly desyred him not to attempt that voyage at that tyme, affirming ye gulfe to be so tem∣pestious and stormie three monethes in the yeere, that the sea was there by no meanes nauigable, and that he had seene many Culchas deuoured of whirlepooles, euen before his eyes. But inuincible Vaschus, impacient of idlenesse, and voyde of all feare in Gods cause, aunswered, that God and his holy saintes would prosper his enterpryses in this case, forasmuche as the matter touched God, and the defence of the Christian religion, for the mayntenance wherof, it shoulde be necessarie to haue abun∣dance of ryches and treasure, as the sinewes of warre against the enimies of the fayth.Ryches are the synewes of warre The faythful∣nes of kyng Chiapes. Thus vsyng also the office both of an ora∣tour and preacher, and hauyng perswaded his companions, he lanched from the lande. But Chyapes, lest Vaschus shoulde any thyng doubt of his faythfulnesse towarde him, profered hym selfe to goe with hym whyther soeuer he went, and woulde by no meanes assent that Vaschus shoulde depart from his palace, but that he woulde bryng hym on the way, and take part of his for∣tune. Therfore, assoone as they were now entred into the maine sea, such sourges & conflyctes of water arose agaynst them, that they were at theyr wittes endes,A tempest on the sea. whither to turne them, or where to rest. Thus being tossed and amased with feare, the one looked on the other with pale & vnchearefull countenances, but especi∣ally Chiapes and his company, who had before tyme with theyr eyes seene the experience of those ieopardies, were greatly dis∣comforted (yet as God woulde) they escaped all, and landed at the next Ilande, where, makyng fast theyr boates, they rested there that nyght.The increa∣sing of the South sea. Here the water so encreased, that it almost ouerflowed the Ilande. They say also, that the South sea doth so in manner boyle and swel, that when it is at the hygh∣est, it doth couer many great rockes, whiche at the fal thereof, are seene farre aboue the water. But on the contrarye parte, all suche as inhabite the North sea, affyrme with one voyce, that it scarcelye ryseth at any tyme a cubite aboue the bankes,The Northe Ocean.
as they also confesse whiche inhabite the Ilande of Hispaniola, and other Ilandes situate in the same. The Ilande therefore be∣ing nowe drye by the fall of the water, they resorted to theyr boates, which they founde al ouerwhelmed, & ful of sande, and some sore bruised with great ryftes, and almost lost by reason theyr cables were broken: suche as were bruised, they tyed faste with theyr gyrdles, with slyppes of the barkes of trees, and with tough and long stalkes of certayne hearbes of the sea,Hard shyft in necessitie. stoppyng the ryftes or chynkes with grasse, according to the present neces∣sitie. Thus were they enforced to returne backe agayne, lyke vnto men that came from shypwracke, beyng almost consumed with hunger, because theyr vyttualles were vtterly destroyed by tempest. The inhabitauntes declared that there is hearde all the yeere horrible roring of the sea among those Ilandes, as of∣ten as it ryseth or falleth, but this most especially in those three monethes in the whiche it is most boystous, as Chiapes tolde Vaschus before, meanyng (as they coulde coniecture by his wor∣des) October, Nouember, and December: for he signified the present moone, & the two moones folowyng, countyng the mo∣nethes by the moones, whereas it was nowe October. Here therefore refreshing him selfe and his souldiers a whyle, and pas∣syng by one vnprofitable kyng, he came to another, whose name was Tumaccus, after the name of the region,The region Tumacca. beyng situate on that syde of the gulfe. This Tumaccus came foorth agaynst our men, as dyd the other, and with lyke fortune: for he was o∣uercome, dryuen to flyght, and many of his men slayne.Kyng Tumac∣cus is driuen to flyght. He him selfe was also sore wounded, but yet escaped. Vaschus sent cer∣tayne messengers of the Chiapians to hym, to returne, and not to be afrayde: but he coulde be nothing moued, neyther by pro∣mises, nor threatninges: yet when the messengers were instant, and ceassed not to threaten death to him and his familie, with the vtter desolation of his kyngdome, if he persisted in that obstina∣cie, at the length he sent his sonne with them, whom Vaschus honourably enterteynyng, apparellyng hym gorgiously, and geuyng him many gyftes, sent him to his father, wyllyng hym to perswade hym of the puissaunce, munificence, liberalitie, hu∣manitie, and clemencie of our men. Tumaccus beyng mooued by this gentlenesse declared towarde his sonne, came with hym
the thyrde day, bryngyng nothyng with hym at that tyme. But after that he knewe that our men desyred golde and pearles, he sent for syxe hundred and fourteene Pesos of golde, and two hundred and fourtie of the byggest and fayrest pearles,Golde and pearles. besyde a great number of the smallest sort. Our men marueyled at the byggenes and fayrenes of these pearles, although they were not perfectly whyte, because they take them not out of the sea mus∣cles, except they fyrst rost them, that they may the easelyer open them selfe,Muscles of the sea. and also that the fysshe may haue the better tast, whiche they esteeme for a delicate and princely dysshe, and set more therby, then by the pearles them selues. Of these thynges I was enfourmed of one Arbolantius, beyng one of Vaschus com∣panions, whom he sent to the kyng with many pearles, and cer∣tayne of those sea muscles. But when Tumaccus sawe that our men so greatly regarded the beautie of the pearles, he commaun∣ded certayne of his men to prepare them selues to go a fysshyng for pearles:Fyshyng for pearles. Who departing, came agayne within foure dayes, bringyng with them twelue pounde weight of orient pearles, af∣ter eight ounces to the pounde. Thus reioycing on both parties, they embrased, and made a league of continual frendshyp. Tumac∣cus thought hym selfe happie that he had presented our men with such thankefull gyftes, and was admitted to theyr frendshyp: and our men thinkyng them selues happie and blessed that they had founde such tokens of great ryches,The thyrst of golde. swalowed downe theyr spyttle for thyrst. At all these dooinges, kyng Chiapes was pre∣sent, as a wytnes and companion. He also reioyced not a litle, aswell that by his conductyng he sawe that our men shoulde bee satisfied of theyr desyre, as also that by this meanes he had de∣clared to the next kyng his borderer and enimie, what frendes he had of our men,Ambition a∣mong naked men. by whose ayde he myght lyue in quietnes, and be reuenged of his aduersarie, if neede shoulde so requyre. For (as we haue sayde) these naked kynges infest them selues with greeuous warres, onely for ambition and desyre to rule. Vaschus bosteth in his epistle, that he learned certayne marue∣lous secretes of Tumaccus hym selfe, as concernyng the great ryches of this lande, wherof (as he sayth) he would vtter nothyng at this present, forasmuche as Tumaccus tolde it hym in his eare. But he was enfourmed of both the kynges, that there is an
Ilande in that gulfe, greater then any of the other, hauyng in it but onely one kyng, and hym of so great power, that at suche tymes of the yeere as the sea is calme,A kyng of grea power. he inuadeth theyr domi∣nions with a great nauie of Culchas, spoylyng and cariyng away for a praye all that he meeteth. This Ilande is distant from these coastes, only twentie myles: So that the promontories or poyntes thereof, reachyng into the sea, may be seene from the hylles of this continent. In the sea neere about this Ilande, sea muscles are engendred, of such quantitie, that many of them are as brode as bucklers. In these are pearles founde (beyng the hartes of those shell fysshes) oftentymes as bygge as beanes,Byg pearles. somtymes bygger then Olyues,Cleopatra, queene of E∣gypt, resolued a pearle in vi∣neger & drunke it. Price fiue thousande pounde of our money. and suche as sumptuous Cleopa∣tra myght haue desyred. Although this Ilande be so neere to the shore of this firme lande, yet is the begynnyng thereof in the mayne sea, without the mouth of the gulfe. Vaschus beyng ioyful and mery with this rych communication, fantasyng nowe in maner nothing but princes treasures, beganne to speake fierce and cruell woordes against the tyrant of that Ilande, meanyng hereby to wynne the myndes of the other kynges, and bynde them to hym with a neerer bonde of frendeshyp. Yet therefore raylyng further on hym with spytefull and approbrious woords, he swore great othes, that he woulde forthwith inuade the I∣lande, spoylyng, destroying, burnyng, drownyng, and hang∣yng, sparyng neyther swoorde nor fyre, vntyll he had re∣uenged theyr iniuries: and therewith commaunded his Culchas to be in a redynes. But the two kynges, Chiapes and Tumaccus▪ exhorted hym frendly to deferre this enterprise, vntil a more qui∣et season, bycause that sea was nor nauigable without great dan∣ger, beyng nowe the begynnyng of Nouember: Wherein the kynges seemed to saye true. For as Vaschus hym selfe wryteth, great roring of the sea was heard among the Ilands of the gulfe, by reason of the ragyng and conflict of the water. Great ryuers also, descendyng from the toppes of the mountaynes the same tyme of the yeere, and ouerflowyng theyr bankes, dryuyng downe with theyr violence great rockes and trees, make a mar∣ueylous noyse. Lykewise the furie of the South and Northeast wyndes, associate with thunder and lyghtnyng at the same sea∣son, dyd greatly molest them. Whyle the wether was fayre,
they were vexed in the night with colde, and in the day tyme the heat of the Sonne troubled them, wherof it is no marueyle, for∣asmuche as they were neere vnto the Equinoctial line, although they make no mention of the eleuation of the pole, for in suche re∣gions, in the nyght the Moone and other colde planettes, but in the day the Sonne and other hotte planettes, doo cheefely exercyse theyr influence, although the antiquitie were of an other opinion, supposyng the Equinoctiall circle to bee vnha∣table and desolate, by reason of the heate of the Sonne, hauyng his course perpendiculerly or directly ouer the same, except a fewe of the contrary opinion, whose assertions the Portugales haue at these dayes by experience proued to be true: for they sayle yeerely to thinhabitantes of the south pole, beyng in maner Antpodes to the people called Hyperborei vnder the North pole, and exercise marchaundize with them. And here haue I named Antipodes, forasmuche as I am not ignorant that there hath ben men of singuler witte and great learnyng, whiche haue denyed that there is Antipodes, that is, suche as walke feete to feete. But it is most certaine, that it is not geuen to any one man to knowe all thynges, for euen they also were men, whose propertie is to erre, and be deceiued in many thynges. Neuerthelesse, the Por∣tugales of our tyme, haue sayled to the fyue and fyftie degree of the south pole:The starres a∣bout the south pole. where, compassyng about the poynt therof, they myght see throughout all the heauen about the same, certeyne shynnyng whyte cloudes here and there among the starres, lyke vnto them which are seene in the tract of heauen called Lactea via, that is, the mylke whyte way. They say, there is no notable starre neare about that pole, lyke vnto this of oures, which the common people thynke to be the pole of it selfe (called of the Italians Tramontana,A similitude de∣claryng Anti∣podes. and of the Spanyardes Nortes) but that the same falleth beneath the Ocean. Whē the Sonne descendeth from the myddest of the exiltree of the worlde from vs, it ryseth to them, as a payre of ballances, whose weyght enclinyng from the equall payse in the myddest towarde eyther of the sydes, causeth the one ende to ryse as much as the other falleth. When therfore it is Autumne with vs, it is spring tyme with them, and sommer with vs, when it is wynter with them. But it suffiseth to haue sayde thus much of strange matters. Let vs nowe there∣fore
returne to the historie, and to our men. The seconde booke of the thyrde Decade. VAschus by thaduice of king Chiapes and Tu∣maccus, determined to deferre his voyage to the sayde Ilande, vntyll the next spryng or sommer, at which tyme, Chiapes offered him selfe to accompany our men, and ayde them therin al that he myght. In this meane tyme, Vaschus had knowledge that these kynges had nettes and fysshyng places in certeyne stations of that sea neare vnto the shore where they were accustomed to fyshe for sea muscles, in the which pearles are engendred,The maner of of fyshyng for pearles. and that for this purpose they had certeyne dyuers or fysshers, exercised from theyr youth in swimmyng vnder the water. But they doo this onely at certeine tymes when the sea is calme, that they may the eassier come to ye place where these shel fishes are wont to lye: for the bygger that they are, so much lye they the deeper & neerer to ye bottome: but the lesser, as it were daughters to thother, are neerer the brimme of the water: likewise the least of al, as it were their nieses, are yet neerer to the superficial part therof. To them of the byggest fort whiche lye lowest, the fyshers descende the depth of three mens heyght, and somtyme foure, but to the daugh∣ters or nieses, as their succession, they descende only to the mydde thygh. Somtimes also, after that the sea hath ben disquieted with vehement tempestes, they fynde a great multitude of these fishes on the sandes, beyng dryuen to the shore by the violence of the water. The pearles of these, which are founde on the sande, are but lytle, the fyshe it selfe, is more pleasaunt in eatyng, then are our oysters, as our men report: But perhaps hunger, the sweete sause of all meates, caused our men so to thynke. Whether pearles be the hartes of sea muscles (as Aristotle supposed) or the byrth or spawne of their intrals (as Plinie thought) or whe∣ther they cleaue continually to the rockes, or wander by compa∣nies in the sea by the guyding of the eldest, whether euery fysshe bryng foorth one pearle or more, at one byrth, or at dyuers: also
whether they be fyled from the rockes wherunto they cleaue, or may be easely pulled away, or otherwyse fall of by them selues when they are come to theyr full grouth: Lykewyse whether pearles be harde within the shel, or soft, our men haue as yet no certayne experience, but I trust or it be long to knowe the trueth hereof: for our men are euen nowe in hand with the matter. Also, as soone as I shall be aduertised of the aryuall of Petrus Arias the captayne of our men,Petrus Arias. I wyll desire hym by my letters to make diligent search for these thynges, and certifie me therof in all poyntes. I knowe that he wyll not be slacke or omit any thyng herein, for he is my verye freende, and one that taketh great pleasure in consideryng the workes of nature. And surely it seemeth vnto me vndecent, that we shoulde with silence ouerslyp so great a thyng, which aswel in the olde tyme, as in our dayes, hath and yet doth, drawe both men and women to the immoderate desire of superfluous plea∣sure.Wanton and superfluous pleasures. Spayne therfore shalbe able hereafter with pearles to satisfie the greedy appetyte of such as in wanton pleasures are lyke vnto Cleopatra and Asopus: So that from hencefoorth we shall neyther enuie nor reuerence the nice fruitefulnesse of Stoi∣dum, or Taprobana, or the red sea. But let vs now returne to our purpose. Vaschus therfore determined with the fyshers of Chia∣pes, to proue what myght be doone in his fishe pooles or stations of sea muscles. Chiapes to shewe hym selfe obedient to Vaschus his request, although the sea were boysteous, commaunded thyrtie of his fyshers to prepare them selues, and to resort to the fishyng places. Vaschus sent onely sixe of his men with them, to beholde them from the sea bankes, but not to commit them selues to the daunger of the sea. The fishyng place was distant from the pallace of Chiapes about tenne myles.The fyshyng place of kyng Chiapes. They durst not aduenture to dyue to the bottome, by reason of the furie of the sea: Yet of the muscles whiche lye hyghest, and of such as were dryuen to the shore by the violence of the water, they brought syxe great fardelles in the space of a fewe dayes. The pearles of these were but lyttle, about the bygnesse of small fytches: yet verye fayre and beautifull, by reason that they were taken newely out of the fyshe, beyng yet rawe. And that they should not be reproued of lying, as
concernyng the bygnesse of these sea muscles, they sent many of them into Spayne to the kyng, with the pearles, the fyshe beyng taken out: We thynke veryly that there may in no place bygger be founde. These shel fyshes therefore beyng thus founde here in so many places in that sea, and gold in maner in euery house,Gold in maner in euery house. The rych trea∣sury of nature. doo argue the ryche treasurie of nature to be hydde in those coastes, forasmuche as great ryches haue ben founde, as it were in the litle fynger of a giauntes hande. What then may we thynke of the whole hande of the giaunt (for hytherto they haue onlye benne in hande with the confines of Vraba) when they shall haue throughlye searched all the coastes and secretes of the inner partes of all that large lande? But Vaschus contented with these signes, and ioyfull of his good successe in these enter∣pryses, determined by another way to returne to his felowes in Dariena, where also they haue golde mynes,The golde mynes of Dariena. about tenne myles from the vyllage. He gaue therefore kyng Chiapes leaue to de∣part, and to folowe hym no further, counsaylyng hym to conti∣nue faythful vnto the christian king his lord and maister. Thus embracing the one the other, & ioyning handes, Chiapes departed with teares, declaring the good minde which he bore to our men. Vaschus leauing his sicke men with Chiapes, went forward on his iourney with the residue, hauyng also with hym for guides three of Chiapes Maryners. He conueyghed his armie ouer a great riuer, into the dominion of a certayne king called Teaocha, who beyng aduertised of the commyng of our men,King Teaocha enterteyneth Vaschus frendly. of whose famous actes he had hearde muche before, was very glad thereof, and enterteyned them honourably, so that for a token of his frendly affection toward them, he gaue Vaschus twentie pounds weight of wrought golde, after eyght ounces to the pounde:Twenty pound weyght of wrought gold. also two hundred bygge pearles, but not fayre, by reason they were taken out of the muscles after they had ben sodden. After they had ioy∣ned hands, Vaschus recompenced him with certayne of our thin∣ges: lykewyse rewarding his guides the seruantes of Chiapes, he dismissed them with commendations to their lord. King Tea∣ocha, at the departure of our men from his pallace, dyd not only appoynt them guides to conduct them in the way, but also gaue them certayne slaues, in the steede of beastes to cary theyr vittu∣als, because they should passe through many desartes, barren and
rough mountaynes and terrible woods ful of Tigers and Lions.Desartes ful of wylde beastes. He sent also one of his sonnes with these slaues, lading them with salted and dried fishe, & bread of those regions, made of the rootes of Maizium and Iucca.Dryed fyshe. He also commaunded his sonne not to depart from our men, vntil he were licensed by Vaschus. By theyr conductyng therfore, Vaschus came to the dominion of an other kyng, whose name was Pacra, a cruel tyrant, feare∣full to the other kynges his borderers,Kyng Pacra a tyraunt. and of greater power then any of them. This tyrant, whether it were that his giltie conscience, for his mischeuous actes, put him in feare that our men woulde reuenge the same, or that he thought him selfe infe∣riour to resist them, fled at their comming. Vaschus writeth, that in these regions in the moneth of Nouember,Great heate in the moneth of Nouember. he was sore afflic∣ted with great heate and intollerable thirst, by reason that side of the mountaynes hath little water: Insomuche that they were in daunger to haue perished, but that certayne of thinhabitantes shewed them of a spring, which was in ye secret place of a wood, whither Vaschus with all speede sent two quicke & strong young men of his companions, with theyr gourdes, and such water vessels as Teaocha his men brought with them. Of thinhabi∣tantes, there durst none depart from theyr company, because the wyld beastes do sone inuade naked men: For in those mountai∣nes, and especially in the woods neare vnto the spring, they say that they are somtimes taken out of theyr houses in the night, ex∣cept they take good heede that the doores be well sparde.Hurt by wylde beastes. It shal not be from my purpose heere to declare a particuler chaunce, before I enter any further in this matter. They say therfore, that the last yeere the region of Dariena was no lesse infested and troubled with a fierse Tiger,A Tyger. Calidonia is a forrest in Scotlande. Nemea is a wood in Greece. then was Calidonia in tyme past with a wild Boore, and Nemea with a horrible Lion. For they affyrme that for the space of syxe whole monethes, there passed not one nyght without some hurt doone: so that it kyl∣led nyghtly eyther a Bullocke, a Mare, a Dogge, or a Hogge, and sometymes euen in the hygh wayes of the vyllage: For our men haue nowe great heardes of cattayle in those regions. They say also, that when this Tyger had whelpes, no man myght safelye goe foorth of his doores,Tigers whel∣pes. because shee spa∣red not men, yf shee mette fyrste with them. But at the
length, necessitie enforced them to inuent a policie howe they myght be reuenged of suche bloodshed. Searchyng therfore di∣lygently her footesteppes,Thus the E∣giptians take Crocodiles and folowyng the pathe whereby she was accustomed in the nyght season to wander out of her denne to seeke her praye, they made a great trenche or pyt in her walke, coueryng the same with hurdels, whereupon they caste parte of the earth, and dispearsed the resydue. The dogge Tyger chaunced fyrst into this pitfall,The dogge tyger taken. and fel vpon the poyntes of sharpe stakes, and such other engins as were of purpose fyxed in the bottome of the trench. Beyng thus wounded, he rored so terry∣bly, that it grated the bowels of suche as harde hym,The roryng of the tyger. and the wooddes and mountaynes neare about rebounded the noyse of the horryble crye. When they perceiued that he was layde fast, they resorted to the trenche, and slue hym with stones, dartes, and pykes. With his teethe and clawes he brake the dartes into a thousande chyppes. Beyng yet dead, he was fearefull to all such as behelde hym: what then thynke you he woulde haue doone beyng alyue and loose? One Iohannes Ledisma of Ciuile, a neare frende to Vascus, and one of the companions of his tra∣uayles,Tigers flesh eaten. tolde me that he hym selfe dyd eate of the fleshe of that Tyger, and that it was nothyng inferiour to beefe in good∣nes. Beyng demaunded howe they knewe it to be a Tyger, for∣asmuch as none of them had euer seene a Tyger: they answeared that they knewe it by the spottes, fiercenes, agilitie, and suche other markes and tokens wherby auncient writers haue descri∣bed the Tyger. For some of them had before tyme seene other spotted wylde beastes, as Libardes and Panthers. The dogge Tiger beyng thus kylled,The bithe tyger. they folowyng the trase of his steppes towarde the mountaynes, came to the denne where the bytche remayned with her two young suckyng whelpes. But she was not in the denne at their commyng.Tigers whel∣pes. They fyrst caryed away the whelpes with them. But afterwardes, fearyng lest they shoulde dye because they were young, entendyng when they were bygger to send them into Spaine, they put cheynes of iron about theyr neckes, and caryed them agayne to their denne: whi∣ther returnyng within a fewe dayes after, they founde the denne emptie, and they cheynes not remoued from theyr place. They suppose that the damme in her furye tore them in peeces,A straunge thyng. and
caryed them away, lest any shoulde haue the fruition of them. For they playnely affirme, that it was not possible that they shoulde be loosed from the chaynes alyue. The skynne of the dead Tyger stuffed with drye hearbes and straws, they sent to Hispaniola, to the Admiral, and other of the cheefe rulers, from whom the newe landes receiue their lawes and succour. It shall at this tyme suffise to haue written thus muche of the Ty∣gers, as I haue learned by report of them which both suteyned domage by their rauenyng, and also handled the skynne of that whiche was slayne.Kyng Pacra. Let vs nowe therfore returne to king Pacra, from whom we haue digressed. When Vaschus had entred into the houses forsaken of Pacra, he sent messengers to reconcile him, as he had doone the other kynges. At the first he refused to come: but after threatnynges he came, with three other kynges in his company. Vaschus writeth, that he neuer sawe a more monstru∣ous & defourmed creature, and that nature hath only geuen hym humane shape, and otherwyse to bee worse then a bruite beast, with maners accordyng to the liniamentes of his body. He a∣bused, with most abominable lechery, the daughters of foure kynges his borderers, from whom he had taken them by vio∣lence.Natural hatred of vice. Of the fylthy behauiour of Pacra, of his crueltie, and iniures doone by hym, many of the other kyngs made greeuous complayntes to Vaschus, as vnto a hygh Iudge, and iust reuen∣ger, most humbly beseechyng hym to see suche thynges punysh∣ed, forasmuche as they tooke hym for a man sent of God for that purpose. Herevppon Vaschus, aswell to wyn their good wylles, as also to shewe an example of terrour to such as vsed lyke fasshions, commaunded that this monstrous beast, with the other three kynges whiche were subiecte to hym,Foure Kynges deuoured of dogges. and of lyke conditions, shoulde be geuen for a pray to his fyghtyng dogges, and their torne carkases to bee burned. Of these dog∣ges whiche they vse in the warres,The vse of dogges in warre against naked men. they tell marueylous thyn∣ges: for they say, that they runne vppon thinhabitauntes, armed after their maner, with noo lesse fiercenes, then if they were Hartes or wylde Bores, if the Spaniardes doo but onely poynt towarde them with theyr fyngers: Insomuche that oftentymes they haue had no neede to dryue their ene∣myes to flyght with swoordes or arrowes, but haue doone
the same only with dogges, placed in the forefront of theyr bat∣tayle, and lettyng them slyppe with theyr watche woorde and priuie token: whereupon the barbarians strycken with feare, by reason of the cruell countenances of theyr masties, with theyr desperate boldenesse, and vnaccustomed howlyng and barkyng, haue disparckled at the first onsette, and brake theyr array. Yet it chaunceth otherwyse when they haue any conflycte agaynst the Canibales, and the people of Caramairi:The Canibales are expert ar∣chers. for these are fiercer and more warlyke men, also so expert archers, that they can moste certaynely direct theyr venemous arrowes agaynst the dogges, with suche seleritie as yf they were thunderboltes, by reason whereof, they sometymes kyll many of them. Thinhabi∣tauntes of these mountaynes doo not keepe warre with bowes and arrowes, but vse only Macanis, that is, certayne long and brode swoordes made of wood, also slynges, long pykes,Swoordes of wood. and dartes, hardened at the endes with fyre. Whyle kyng Pacra yet lyued, no man coulde knowe of hym, neyther by fayre meanes nor by fowle, where he had the golde whiche was founde in his house: for our men founde in his iewell house fiftie poundes weyght of golde. Beyng therfore demaunded where he had it,Fiftie pound weight of gold. he aunswered, that they which geathered the same in those moun∣taynes in his fathers dayes, were all dead, and that sence he was a chylde, he neuer esteemed golde more then stones: More then this they coulde not geat of hym. By this seuere punyshment executed vpon Pacra, Vaschus concyled vnto hym the myndes of all the other kynges of that prouince, and by this meanes it came to passe, that when he sent for the sycke men whiche he left behynde hym with kyng Chiapes, another kyng whiche was in the mydde way,Kyng Bono∣niama, frend to the christians. (whose name was Bononi∣ama) enterteyned them gentelly, and gaue them twentie pounde weight of pure wrought golde, besyde great plentie of vittualles. And not this onlye,Wrought gold. but also accompanyed them hym selfe, vntyll he had brought them safely from his pallace, into the dominion of Pacra, where takyng eche of them by the ryght handes, he delyuered them to Vaschus hym selfe, as a faythfull pledge committed to his charge, and there∣with spake to Vaschus in this effecte: Moste myghtie and valyaunt victourer, beholde, I heere delyuer vnto you,
your companions in suche plight as I receiued them: wishyng that I had ben aswell able to gyue them health,The oration of kyng Bononiama. as they were hartyly welcome to suche poore entertaynement as I was able to shewe them. For the fauoure and gentelnesse whiche I haue founde both in you and them,The sparke of the lawe of nature, is the lawe written in the hartes of men. he shall rewarde you whiche sendeth thunderyng and lyghtnyng to the destruction of mys∣cheuous men, and of his clemencye gyueth vnto good men plen∣tie of Iucca and Maizium in due season. As he spake these woordes, he lyfted vp his handes and eyes towarde the Sonne, whom they honour as God. Then he spake further to Vaschus, saying, In that you haue destroyed and slayne our violent and proude enemies, you haue brought peace and quietnesse to vs and our familyes, and bounde vs for euer to loue and obey you. You haue so ouercome and tamed wylde monsters, that we thynke you to bee sent from heauen, for the punyshe∣ment of euyll men, and defence of innocentes, that vnder the protection of your myghtie swoorde, we maye hereafter leade our lyues without feare, and with more quietnesse geue thankes to the geuer of all good thynges, for his mercie shewed vnto vs in this behalfe. When the interpretoure had tolde Vaschus that the kyng Bononiana had sayde these woordes, and suche lyke, Vaschus rendered hym lyke thankes for his humanitie de∣clared towarde our men, and rewarded hym as he had doone o∣ther in whom he founde lyke gentilnesse. Vaschus wryteth, that he learned manye thynges of this kyng as concernyng the great rychesse of these regions, but that he woulde at this pre∣sent speake nothing thereof, and rehearseth the same, as thinges lyke to haue good successe. What this implicate Hiperbole, or aduauncement meaneth, I do not well vnderstand, but he plain∣ly seemeth hereby to promise many great thynges. And suerly it is to be thought,Great plenty of golde. that accordyng to his hope, great riches may be loked for. For they came in maner into none of thinhabitaunts houses, but that they founde in them eyther bresteplates or curet∣tes of golde, or elles golden ouches, iewels, or garlandes to weare about their heades, neckes, or armes. I coniecture ther∣fore thus by a similitude of our houses:A symilitude for the profe of plentye of golde. If among vs any man of great power were moued with the desyre to haue great plen∣tie of Iron, and woulde enter into Italie with a mayne force, as
dyd the Gothes in tyme past, what abundance of Iron shoulde he haue in theyr houses, whereas he shoulde fynde in one place a fryingpan, in another a caldron, here a triuet, and there a spite, and these in manner in euery poore mans house, with suche other innumerable? whereby any man may coniecture, that iron is plentifully engendred in suche regions where they haue so great vse thereof. Our men also perceiued, that the inha∣bitauntes of these regions do no more esteeme golde then we do iron, nor yet so much, after they sawe to what vse iron serued vs. Thus much haue I thought good to write to your holynesse, of suche thynges as I haue geathered out of the letters of Vaschus Nunnez, and learned by woorde of mouth of suche as were his companions in these affayres. As we receiue them, so we geue them vnto you. Tyme, whiche reuealeth al secretes, shal hereafter minister larger argument of wrytyng. They coulde at this tyme do no great thyng in searchyng the golde mynes, for∣asmuche as of a hundred, fourescore, and tenne men, which Vas∣chus brought with him from Dariena, there remayned only three∣score and ten, or at the most fourescore, whose ayde he nowe vsed in these daungerous aduentures, leauing euer the crased men be∣hynde hym in the kynges houses all the way that he went, but they moste especially fel into sundry diseases, whiche came late∣ly from Hispaniola,Chaunge of dyet is daunge∣rous. for they were not able to abyde such calami∣ties, as to lyue only contented with the bread of those regions, and wylde hearbes, without salt, drynkyng none other then riuer water, and that oftentymes eyther lackyng, or vnholsome, where as before theyr stomackes had ben vsed to good meates. But the olde souldiers of Dariena, were hardened to abyde all sorowes, & exceedyng tollerable of labour, heate, hunger,Old souldiers. & wat∣chyng, insomuche that merily they make theyr boast, that they haue obserued a longer & sharper Lent then euer your holynesse enioyned: for they say, that for the space of foure whole yeeres,A long lent. they ate none other then hearbes and fruites, except nowe and then perhappes fyshe, and very seldome fleshe: yea, and that sometyme for lacke of all these, they haue not abhorred from mangie dogges and fylthy toades, as we haue sayde before. The olde souldiers of Dariena, I call those whiche fyrste folowed the captaynes Nicuesa and Fogeda, to inhabite the
lande, of the whiche nowe fewe were lyuyng. But let vs nowe omyt these thynges, and returne to Vaschus, the vyctourer of the mountaynes. The thyrde booke of the thyrde Decade. WHen Vaschus had remained thyrtie dayes in the palace of kyng Pacra, concilyng vnto him the mindes of the inhabitauntes, and prouidyng thynges necessarie for his com∣panions. As he departed frō thence, by the conduct of certayne of kyng Teaocha his men, and came to the banke of the riuer Co∣mogrus,Comogrus. wherof the region and kyng thereof, are named by the same name, he found the sydes of these mountaynes so rude and barren, that there was nothyng apt to be eaten but wilde rootes, and certayne vnpleasaunt fruites of trees. Two kynges beyng neere of blood, inhabited this vnfortunate region, which Vaschus ouerpassed with all speede,Two poore kynges. for feare of hunger. One of these poore kynges was named Cotochus, and the other Ciuriza. He tooke them both with him, to guyde hym the way, and dismissed Teaocha his men with vittuals and rewards. Thus for the space of three dayes,Desartes. he wandered through many desart woods, craggy mountaynes, & muddie marishes, ful of suche quamyres, that men are oftentimes swalowed vp in them, if they loke not ye more warely to their feete: also through places not frequented with re∣sort of men, and suche as nature had not yet opened to theyr vse, forasmuche as the inhabitauntes haue seldome entercourse be∣tweene them, but only by sundry incursions, the one to spoyle and destroy the other: beyng otherwyse contented to lyue onlye after the lawe of nature, without al worldly toyle for superflu∣ous pleasures. Thus entryng at the length into the territo∣rie of another kyng, whose name was Bechebea, they founde all thynges voyde and in scilence: for the kyng and his sub∣iectes were al fledde to the woods. When Vaschus sent messen∣gers to fetche hym, he dyd not onlye at the fyrst submit hym
selfe, but also promise his ayde, with all that he myght make: Protestyng furthermore, that he fledde not for feare that our men woulde doo them iniurie, but that he hyd hym selfe for verye shame and greefe of mynde, for that he was not able to receiue them honorablye, accordyng vnto theyr dignitie, be∣cause his store of vitayles was consumed. Yet in a token of obedience and frendeshyppe, he sent our men many vesselles of golde, desyring them to accepte them as the gifte of a frend,Vessels of golde. whose good wyll wanted not in greater thynges, if his abilitie were greater. By whiche woordes, the poore man seemed to insinuate that he had ben robbed, and otherwyse cruelly handled of his borderers, by reason whereof, our men were enforced to depart from thence more hungerly then they came. As they went forwarde therefore, they espyed certayne naked men commyng downe from a hyll towarde them. Vaschus commaunded his armye to stay, and sent his interpretours to them, to knowe what they woulde haue. Then one of them, to whom the other seemed to geue reuerence, spake in this effect. Our lorde and kyng Chiorisus, greeteth you well, wyllyng vs to declare that he harde of your puissaunce and vertue,kyng Chiori∣sus sendeth Vaschus xxx. dyshes of pure golde. whereby you haue subdued euyll men, and reuenged the wronges doone to innocentes: For the whiche your noble factes and iustyce, as he doth honour your fame, so woulde he thynke hym selfe most happie, if he myght receiue you into his palace. But, forasmuch as his fortune hath ben so euyll (as he imputeth it) that beyng out of your way, you haue ouerpassed hym, he hath sent you this golde, in token of his good wyll and frendshyppe toward you. And with these woordes he deliuered to Vaschus thirtie dishes of pure golde, addyng hereunto, that when so euer it shoulde please hym to take the paynes to come to theyr kyng, he shoulde receaue greater gyftes. He declared further, that a kyng whiche was their borderer and mortall enimie, was very ryche in golde, and that in subduyng of hym, they shoulde both obtayne great rychesse, and also delyuer them from dayly vex∣ations: whiche thyng myght easily be doone by their helpe, because they knewe the countrey. Vaschus put them in good comfort, and gaue them for rewarde certayne Iron axes,Axes of Iron more esteemed then any golde. whi∣che they more esteemed then great heapes of gold. For they haue
they haue lytle neede of golde, hauyng not the vse of pestife∣rous money: but he that may geat but one axe or hatchet, thyn∣keth hym selfe richer then euer was Crassus. For euen these na∣ked men, doo perceiue that an axe is necessarie for a thousande vses, and confesse that golde is desyred only for certayne vayne and effeminate pleasures, as a thyng whiche the lyfe of man may lacke without any inconuenience: for our gluttony and su∣perfluous sumptuousnesse hath not yet corrupted them. By rea∣son whereof, they take it for no shame to lacke cobordes of plate, whereas the pryde and wantonnesse of our tyme, doth in maner impute it to vs for ignominie, to be without that, whereof by nature we haue no neede. But theyr contentation with the benefites of nature, doth playnely declare, that men may leade a free and happye lyfe without tables, table clothes, carpets, napkyns, and towels, with such other innumerable, wherof they haue no vse, except perhaps the kynges furnysh theyr ta∣bles with a fewe golden vessels. But the common people driue away hunger with a peece of theyr bread in the one hand, and a peece of broyled fyshe, or some kynde of fruite in the other hand: for they eate flesh but seldome. When theyr fyngers are imbrued with any ounctuous meates, they wype them ey∣ther on the soles of theyr feete, or on theyr thyghes, ye and sometimes on the skyns of theyr priuie members, in the steede of a napkyn: and for this cause do they oftentymes washe them selues in the riuers. Our men therfore went forwarde laden with gold,Plenty of gold and scarcenesse of meate. but sore afflicted with hunger. Thus they came at the length to the dominion of kyng Pocchorrosa, who fled at their commyng. Here for the space of thyrtie dayes, they fylled their emptye bellies with bread of the rootes of Maizium. In the meane tyme, Vaschus sent for Pocchorrosa, who beyng allured with promises and fayre wordes, came and submmitted hym selfe, bryngyng with hym for a present fyfteene poundes weight of wrought golde, and a fewe slaues: Vaschus rewarded hym as he had doone other before. When he was mynded to de∣part, he was aduertised, that he shoulde passe through the domi∣nion of a certayne kyng, whose name was Tumanama. This is he whom the sonne of kyng Comogrus declared to be of so great power, and fearefull to all his borderers, and with whom
many of Comogrus familiars had ben captyue, but our men now perceyued that they measured his power by theyr owne: For theyr kynges are but gnattes (compared to Elephantes) in res∣pect to the power & policie of our men. Our men were also en∣fourmed by such as dwelt neare about Tumanama, that his regi∣on was not beyond the mountaynes as they supposed, nor yet so ryche in golde as young Comogrus had declared: Yet consul∣ted they of his subduing, whiche they thought they myght the easeliar bryng to passe, because Pocchorrosa was his mortal ene∣mie, who most gladly promised them his aduice and ayde here∣in. Vaschus therfore, leauyng his sicke men in the vyllage of Pocchorrosa, tooke with hym threescore of his most valyant soul∣diers, and declared vnto them, howe kyng Tumanama had often tymes spoken proude and threatnyng wordes agaynst them:A good po∣licie. Lykewyse that it nowe stood them in hand of necessitie to passe through his dominion, and that he thought it best to set vpon hym vnwares. The souldiers consented to his aduice, and exhorted hym to geue the aduenture, promising that they woulde folow hym, whyther soeuer he went. They determined therfore to goe two dayes iourney in one day, that Tumanama, not kno∣wyng of theyr sodayne commyng, myght haue no leysure to as∣semble an army: and the thyng came to passe euen as they had deuised. For in the first watche of the nyght, our men, with the Pocchorrosians, inuaded the village and pallace of Tumanama, where they tooke hym prysoner, suspectyng nothyng lesse. He had with hym two young men, whiche he abused vnnaturally, also fourescore women, whiche he had taken violently from di∣uers kynges: lykewyse, a great number of his gentlemen & subiectes were taken straglyng in other vyllages neere about his pallace. For theyr houses are not adherent togeather as ours be, because they are oftentymes troubled with vehe∣ment whirlewyndes, by reason of the sodayne chaunges and mo∣tions of the ayer, caused by the influence of the planettes,The cause of vehement windes neere the Equinoc∣ciall. in the equalitie of the day and nyght, beyng there in maner both of one length throughout all the yeere, forasmuch as they are neere vn∣to the Equinoctiall line, as we haue sayde before. Theyr hou∣ses are made of trees, couered, and after theyr maner thatched with the stalkes of certayne rough hearbes. To the pallace
of Tumanama, was only one house adherent, and that euen as bygge as the pallace it selfe. Eyther of these houses were in length a hundred and twentye paces, and in breadth fiftie paces, as our men measured them. In these two houses the kyng was accustomed to muster his men, as often as he prepared an ar∣my. When Tumanama therfore was thus taken captiue, with all his Sardanapanicall familie, the Pocchorrosians bragged and threatened hym, beyng now bound, that he shoulde shortly be hanged: the other kynges also his borderers, reioyced at his mysfortune. Whereby our men parceyued that Tumanama was no lesse troublesome to his neyghbours, then was Pacra to the kynges of the south syde of the mountaynes. Vaschus also the better to please them, threatened hym greeuouslye, but in deede entended no euyll towards hym.Vaschus his Wordes to King Tuma∣nama. He spake therfore sharply vnto hym with these woords: Thou shalt now suffer punishment thou cruell tyrant, for thy pryde and abhominations. Thou shalt knowe of what power the Christans are, whom thou hast so con∣temned, and threatned to drawe by the heare of theyr heades to the next ryuer, and there to drowne them, as thou hast oftentimes made thy vaunt among thy naked slaues: But thou thy selfe shalt fyrst feele that, whiche thou hast prepared for others. And heerewith commaunded hym to be taken vp: Neuerthelesse geuyng a pryuie token of pardon to them whiche layde handes on hym. Thus vnhappy Tumanama, fearyng and beleeuyng that Vaschus had ment in ernest as he commaunded, fell pro∣strate at his feete, and with teares desired pardon: Protesting that he neuer spake any suche wordes, but that perhaps his no∣ble men in theyr drunkennesse had so abused theyr tongues, whiche he coulde not rule: For theyr wynes, although they be not made of grapes, yet are they of force to make men drun∣ken. He declared furthermore, that the other kynges his bor∣derers had of malice surmised such lyes of hym, enuying his for∣tune, because he was of greater power then they, most humbly desyryng Vaschus,Oderuut quem metuunt. that as he tooke hym to be a iust victourer, so to geue no credite vnto theyr vniust and malicious com∣playntes: Addyng heereunto, that if it woulde please hym to pardon hym, not hauyng offended, he woulde bryng hym great plenty of golde. Thus laying his ryght hande on his breast,
he swore by the Sonne, that he euer loued and feared the Chri∣stians sence he fyrst hearde of theyr fame and victoryes: espe∣cyally when he harde say, that they had Michanas, that is, swor∣des sharper then theyrs, and suche as cutte in peeces all thinges that come in theyr wayes. Then directyng his eyes towarde Vaschus, who had his sworde in his hand, he spake thus, Who (except he were out of his witte) dare lyft vp his hande agaynst this sworde of yours, wherewith you are able with one strooke to cleaue a man from the head to the nauell? Let no man therfore perswade you (O most myghtye victourer) that euer such wordes proceeded out of my mouth. As Tumanama with tremblyng spake these wordes, therwith swalowyng downe the knot of death, Vaschus seemed by his teares to be moued to compassion, and speakyng to hym with chearfull countenance, commaunded hym to be loosed. This doone, he sent immediatly to his pallace for thyrtye poundes weyght of pure golde, artificyally wrought into sundry ouches,Xxx. pounde weight of wrought gold. whiche his wyues and concubines vsed to weare. Also the thyrde daye folowyng, his noble men and gentlemen,Threescore poundes weight of gold. sent threescore poun∣des weyght of gold for theyr fine and raunsome. Tumanama be∣yng demaunded where they had that gold: he answeared, that it was not geathered in his dominions, but that it was brought his auncestours from the riuer Comogrus towarde the south, But the Pocchorrosians and other his enemies sayde that he lyed, af∣firmyng that his kyngdome was ryche in golde. Tumanama on the contrary part, instantly protested that he neuer knewe any golde myne in all his dominions: yet denied not but that there hath sometymes been found certayne small graynes of golde, to the geathering whereof, he neuer had any regard, because they could not get it without great & long labour.They abhorrce labour. While these things were doing, the sicke men which Vaschus had left in the vyllage of Pocchorrosa, came to hym the .viii. day of the Calendes of Ia∣nuary, in the yeere of Christ .M.D.XIII. bryngyng with them certayne labourers from the kynges of the south, with sundrye instrumentes to dygge the grounde, and geather gold. Thus passing ouer the day of the natiuitie of Christ without bodylye labour, vpon Saynt Stephens day he brought certayne mi∣ners to the syde of a hyll, not farre distant from the pallace
of Tumanama, where (as he sayth) he perceyued by the coloure of the earth, that it was lyke to bryng foorth golde. When they had dygged a pyt,The coloure of the golden earth, and a tri∣all of the same. not past a hand breadth and a halfe, and syfted the earth thereof, they founde certayne small graynes of golde, no bygger then lintell seedes, amountyng to the weyght of twelue graynes, as they proued with theyr balances of assaie, before a notarie and wytnesse, that the better credite myght bee geuen thereto. Whereby they argued, that the rychenesse of that land was agreeable to the report of the borderers, although Vaschus coulde by no meanes cause Tumanama to confesse the same. They suppose that he nothyng esteemed so small a por∣tion: but other say, that he denyed his countrey to be fruiteful of golde, least by reason thereof, the desyre of golde myght intyse our men to inhabyte his kyngdome, as in deede the seely kyng was a prophet in so thynkyng. For they chose that and the region of Pocchorrosa to inhabite, and determyned to buylde townes in them both, if it should so please the kyng of Castile: aswel that they myght be baytyng places and vittailyng houses for suche as shoulde iourney towarde the south, as also that both the regions were fruiteful, and of good ground to beare fruites and trees. Intendyng nowe therefore to depart from thence, he tryed the earth by chaunce in an other place, where the co∣lour of the ground, with certayne shynyng stones, seemed to be a token of golde, where causyng a small pyt to be dygged, litle beneath the vpper crust of the earth, he founde so muche golde, as weyghed the peece of golde whiche the Spaniardes call Castellanum aureum,Tokens of great plentle of gold. and is commonly called Pesus, but not in one graine. Reioycyng at these tokens, in hope of great riches, he bad Tumanama to be of good comfort, promysyng hym that he woulde be his freende and defender, so that he troubled not any of the kynges, whiche were frendes to the Christians: He also perswaded hym to geather plentie of golde. Some say that he ledde away all Tumanama his women, and spoyled hym, least he shoulde rebell. Yet he delyuered his sonne to Vaschus, to be brought vp with our men, to learne theyr language and religion, that he myght heareafter the better vse his helpe, aswell in all thynges that he shoulde haue to doo with our men, as also more politikely rule, and obtayne the loue of his owne
subiectes. Vischus at this tyme fell into a vehement feuer, by reason of excesse of labour, immoderate watchyng, and hun∣ger, insomuche that departyng from thence, he was fayne to be borne vpon mens backes in sheetes of gossampyne cot∣ton: lykewyse also manye of his souldiers, which were soo weake, that they could nother go nor stande.Feeblenesse of hunger and watching. To this purpose they vsed the helpe of thinhabitantes, who shewed them selues in all thynges wyllyng and obedient. Also some of them whiche were somwhat feeble, and not able to trauayle, although not greeuously sycke, were led by the armes, vntyll they came to the dominion of kyng Comogrus, a great frende to the Chri∣stians, of whom we haue largely made mention before. At Vas∣chus commyng thyther, he founde that the olde kyng was dead, and his sonne (whom we so praysed for his wysedome) to reigne in his steade, and that he was baptised by the name of Charles. The palace of this Comogrus, is situate at the foote of a stiepe hyll well cultured, hauyng toward the south a playne of twelue leagues in breadth, and very fruitefull. This playne they call Zauana. Beyond this, are the great and hygh moun∣taynes, whiche diuide the two seas, whereof we haue spoken before. Out of the stiepe hylles, spryngeth the ryuer Comogrus, whiche runneth through the sayde playne to the hygh moun∣taynes, receauyng into his chanel by their valleys,The riuer Comogrus. all other ryuers, and so falleth into the south sea: It is distant from Da∣riena, about threescore and tenne leagues towarde the west. As our men therefore came to these parties, kyng Comogrus (other∣wyse called Charles by his christian name) met them ioyfully, and entertayned them honorably, geuyng them their fyll of pleasaunt meates and drynkes: He gaue also to Vaschus twentie pounde weight of wrought golde. Vaschus recompensed hym with thynges whiche he esteemed muche more, as axes, and sundry kyndes of carpenters tooles: also a souldiours cloke, and a fayre shurt, wrought with needle woorke. By these gyftes, Co∣mogrus thought hym selfe to be halfe a God among his borde∣rers. Vaschus at his departyng from hence, earnestly charged Comogrus, and the other kynges, to remayne faythful and obe∣dient to the christan kyng of Castile, if they desyred to lyue in peace and quietnesse, and that they shoulde heareafter more dili∣gently
apply them selues to the geatheryng of golde, to be sent to the great chrystian Tiba (that is) kyng: Declaryng fur∣ther, that by this meanes, they shoulde both get them and their posteritie a patrone and defender agaynst their enimyes, and also obtayne great abundaunce of our thynges. These af∣fayres thus happely atchiued, he went forward on his voyage to the palaice of kyng Poncha, where he found foure young men, which were come from Dariena, to certifie hym that there were certayne shyppes come from Hispaniola laden with vyttayles, and other necessaries.Vaschus retur∣neth to Dari∣ena. Wherfore takyng with hym twentie of his most lusty souldiers, he made hast to Dariena, with long ior∣neys: leauyng the residue behynd him, to folowe at theyr leysure. He writeth, that he came to Dariena the .xiiii. Ca. of Fe. An. 1514. The date of his letter is:The good for∣tune of Vaschus. From Darena, the .iiii. day of March. He writeth in the same letter, that he had many sore conflictes, & that he was yet neyther wounded, or lost any of his men in the battayle: and therefore in all his large letter, there is not one leafe without thankes geuyng to almyghty God for his delyue∣ry, and preseruation from so many imminent peryls. He attemp∣ted no enterprise, or toke in hand any voyage, without thinuoca∣tion of God and his holy sayntes. Thus was Vaschus Balboa of a vyolent Goliath, turned into Heliseus, and from Anteus to Hercules, the conquerour of monsters. Beyng therefore thus turned from a rashe royster, to a polytike and descrete capt∣tayne, he was iudged woorthy to be aduaunced to great honour: By reason whereof, he was both receiued into the kynges fauour,O flatteryng fortune, looke his death in the booke of the Iland lately found and thereupon created the generall or Lieuetenaunt of the kynges army in those Regions. Thus muche haue I geathered both by the letters of certayne my faythfull frendes beyng in Dariena, and also by woorde of mouth of suche as came lately from thence. If your holynes desyre to knowe what I thynke herein, suerly, by suche thynges as I haue seene, I be∣leeue these thynges to be true, euen so thorder and agreeyng of Vaschus and his companions warrelyke letters, seeme to confirme the same. The Spanyarde therefore shall not neede hereafter, with vndermynyng the earth with intollerable labour, to breake the bones of our mother,The earth is our generall mother. and enter many myles into her bowels, and with innumerable daungers cut in sunder
whole mountaynes, to make away to the courte of infernal Pluto, to bryng from thence wycked gold, the seede of innume∣rable mescheeues, without the whiche,The cout of infernal Pluto. notwithstandyng we may nowe scarcelye leade a happye lyfe, sith iniquitie hath so preuayled, and made vs slaues to that, whereof we are lordes by nature: The Spaniarde (I say) shall not neede with such tra∣uayles and difficultie, to dygge farre into the earth for gold, but shall fynde it plentifully, in maner in the vpper crust of the earth, or in the sandes of ryuers dryed vp by the heat of sommer, one∣ly wasshyng the earth softly from the same, and shall with lyke facilitie geather plentie of pearles. Certaynly the reuerent anti∣quitie (by all the Cosmographers assent) obteyned not so great a benefyte of nature, nor yet aspired to the knowledge hereof, by∣cause there came neuer man before out of our knowen worlde, to these vnknowen nations, at the least with a power of men by force of armes, in maner of conquest: wheras otherwyse nothyng can be gotton here, forasmuche as these nations are for the most part seuere defenders of theyr patrimonies, and cruell to straun∣gers, in no condition admitting them otherwise then by conquest, especially the fierce Canibales or Caribes. For these wylie hun∣ters of men, geue them selues to none other kynde of exercyse,Manhuntees. but onely to manhuntyng, and tyllage, after theyr maner. At the commyng therefore of our men into theyr regions, they looke as surely to haue them fall into their snares, as if they were hartes or wylde bores: and with no lesse confydence,The fyersness of the Cani∣bales. licke their lippes secretly, in hope of their praye. If they get the vpper hande, they eate them greedyly: if they mystrust them selues to be the weaker part, they trust to theyr feete, and flee swifter then the wynde. Agayne, yf the matter be tryed on the water, aswel the women as the men can dyue and swymme, as though they had ben euer brought vp and fedde in the water. It is no mar∣ueyle therefore, yf the large tract of these regions haue ben hither∣to vnknowen. But nowe sith it hath pleased God to discouer the same in our tyme, it shall become vs to shewe our naturall loue to mankynde, and duetie to God,Our duty to god, and natu∣rall loue to mankinde. to endeuour our selues to bryng them to ciuilitie and true religion, to thincrease of Christes flocke, to the confusion of Infidels and the Deuyll theyr father, who delyteth in our destruction, as he hath doone
doone from the begynnyng. By the good successe of thse fyrst fruites, our hope is that the Christian religion shall strh forth her armes very farre, whiche thyng shoulde the sooner come to passe, yf all men to theyr power, especially Christian princes (to whom it cheefely parteyneth) woulde put theyr handes to the plough of the lordes vineyarde:The office of Christian princes. The haruest is great. The haruest surely is great, but the woorkemen are but fewe. As we haue sayde at the begyn∣nyng, your holynesse shal hereafter nouryshe many myriades of broodes of chyckens vnder your wynges. But let vs nowe re∣turne to speake of Beragua, beyng the West syde of Vraba, and first found by Colonus the Admiral, then vnfortunately gouerned by Diego Nicuesa, and nowe left in maner desolate, with the other large regions of those prouinces, brought from theyr wylde and beastly rudenesse, to ciuilitie and true religion. The fourth booke of the thyrde Decade. I Was determined (moste holy father) to haue proceeded no further herein, but ye one fyery sparke, yet remaynyng in my minde, would not suffer me to ceasse. Whereas I haue therfore declared how Beragua was fyrst founde by Colonus, me thynke I should commit a haynous crime, if I shoulde de∣fraud the man of the due commendations of his trauayles, of his cares and troubles, and finally of the daungers & peryls whiche he susteyned in that nauigation. Therfore in the yeere of Christ 1502. in the .6. day of the Ides of May,The fourth nauigation of Colonus the Admiral. he hoysed vp his sayles, and departed from the Ilandes of Gades, with foure shyppes, of fyftie or threescore tunne a peece, with a hundred, threescore, and ten men, and came with prosperous wynde to the Ilandes of Canariae, within fyue dayes folowyng. From thence, arryuyng the .16. day at the Ilande of Dominica, being the cheefe habitati∣on of the Canibales, he saled from Dominica to Hispaniola in fiue other dayes. Thus within the space of .26. dayes, with pros∣perous wynde, and by the swyfte fall of the Ocean from the East to the West, he sayled from Spayne to Hispaniola, whiche
course is counted of the mariners, to be no lesse then a thousand and two hundred leagues. He taryed but a whyle in Hispaniola, whether it were wyllyngly,From Spaine to Hispaniola a thousande and two hundred leagues. or that he were so admonished of the Uice Roy. Directyng therefore his voyage from thence to∣ward the west, leauyng the Ilandes of Cuba and Iamaica on his ryght hand towarde the north, he wryteth that he chaunced vp∣pon an Ilande more southwarde then Iamaica, whiche thinha∣bitantes call Guanassa, so floryshyng and fruitefull, that it might seeme an earthlye Paradyse. Coastyng along by the shores of this Iland, he mette two of the Canoas, or boates of those prouinces, whiche were drawne with two naked slaues agaynst the streame. In these boates was caryed a ruler of the Iland, with his wyfe and chyldren, all naked. The slaues seeyng our men a lande, made signes to them with proud countenaunce in theyr maisters name, to stand out of the way, and threatned them, if they woulde not geue place.Simple people Their symplenes is such, that they neyther feared the multitude, or power of our men, or the greatnes and straungenes of our shyppes. They thought that our men woulde haue honoured theyr maister with lyke reuerence as they dyd. Our men had entelligence at the length, that this ruler was a great marchant,A great marchaunt. which came to the marte from other coastes of the Ilande: for they exercyse bying and sellyng by exchaunge with their confines. He had also with hym good store of suche ware as they stand in neede of, or take pleasure in: as laton belles, rasers, knyues, and hatchettes made of a certayne sharpe yellowe bryght stone, with handles of a strong kinde of wood: also many other necessary instrumentes, with kytchen stuffe, and vesselles for all necessary vses: lykewyse sheetes of gossampine cotton, wrought of sundrie colours. Our men toke hym prysoner, with al his family, but Colonus com∣maunded hym to be loosed shortly after, and the greatest part of his goodes to bee restored, to wynne his frendshyppe. Beyng here instructed of a land lying further toward the south, he tooke his voyage thyther. Therfore litle more then tenne myles distant from hence, he founde a large land, whiche thinhabitants called Quiriquetana, but he named it Ciamba. When he went a lande, and commaunded his chaplaine to say masse on the sea bankes, a great confluence of the naked inhabitantes flocked thi∣ther,
symply and without feare, bringyng with them plen∣ty of meate and freshe water,Gentle people. marueylyng at our men, as they had ben some straunge miracle. When they had presentted theyr giftes, they went somwhat backward, and made lowe curtesy after theyr maner, bowyng their heades and bodyes reuerently. He recompensed their gentilnes, rewardyng them with other of our thynges, as counters, braslettes, and garlands of glasse, and counterfet stones, lookyng glasses, needelles, and pynnes, with suche other trashe, whiche seemed vnto them pretious marchandize. In this great tracte, there are two re∣gions, whereof the one is called Tuia, and the other Maia. He writeth,The regions of Tuia & Maia. that all that lande is very fayre and holsome, by reason of the excellent temperatnesse of the ayre: And that it is inferiour to no land in fruitefull ground, beyng partly full of mountaynes, and partly large playnes: also replenyshed with many goodly trees, holsome hearbes, continuyng greene, and floryshyng al the whole yeere. It beareth also very many holly trees,Seuen kyndes of date trees. and pyneaple trees. Also .vii. kyndes of date trees, wher∣of some are fruitefull, and some baren. It bryngeth foorth like∣wyse of it selfe Pelgoras,Wilde vines. and wilde vines, laden with grapes, euen in the wooddes among other trees. He sayth furthermore, that there is such abundaunce of other pleasunt and profitable fruites, that they passe not of vines. Of one of those kindes of date trees, they make certayne long and brode swoordes, and dartes. These regions beare also gossampyne trees here and there commonly in the woods.Mirobalanes. Lykewise Mirobalanes of sundry kyndes, as those which the phisitians call Emblicos, and Chebulos: Maizium also, Iucca, Ages, and Battatas, lyke vnto those which we haue sayd before to be founde in other regions in these coastes. The same noorysheth also Lions, Tygers, Hartes, Roes, Goates, and dyuers other beastes.Byrdes and foules. Lykewyse sundry kyndes of byrdes and foules: among the whiche they keepe onely them to franke and feede, which are in colour, bygnes, and tast, muche lyke vnto our Pehennes.People of goodly stature. He sayth that thinhabitantes are of hygh and goodly stature, well lymmed and protioned, both men and women, coueryng theyr priuy partes with fyne breeches of gossampyne cotton, wrought with diuers colours. And that they may seeme the more comely and beautifull (as they take
it) they paynt theyr bodies redde and blacke, with the iuice of certayne apples,They poynt theyr bodyes. whiche they plant in theyr gardens for the same purpose. Some of them paynt theyr whole bodyes, some but part, and other some drawe the portitures of hearbes, floures, and knottes, euery one as seemeth best to his owne phantasie. Theyr language differeth vtterly, from theyrs of the Ilandes neere about them. From these regions, the wa∣ters of the sea ran with as full a course towards the West,The swyft course of the sea from the East to the West. as if it had byn the fail of a swift riuer. Neuerthelesse he determi∣ned to searche the East partes of this land, reuoluyng in his minde that the regions of Paria & Os draconis with other coastes founde before towards the East, shoulde be neere there about, as in deede they were. Departyng therfore from the large re∣gion of Quiriquetana, the .xiii. day of the calendes of September, when he had sayled thyrtie leagues, he found a ryuer, within the mouth wherof he drewe freshe water in the sea:Freshe water in the sea. where also the shore was so cleane without rockes, that he founde grounde e∣uery where, where he myght aptly cast anker. He writeth, that the swift course of the Ocean was so vehement and contrary, that in the space of fourtie dayes, he coulde scarcely sayle threescore and tenne leagues, and that with much dyfficultie, with many fetches and compassynges, fyndyng him selfe to be some tymes repulsed and dryuen farre backe by the violent course of the sea, when he woulde haue taken lande towarde the euening, leaste perhaps wanderyng in vnknowen coastes in the darcknesse of the nyght, he myght be in daunger of shypwracke. He wry∣teth, that in the space of eyght leagues, he found three great and fayre ryuers,Fayre ryuers. Great reedes. vpon the banckes whereof there grewe reedes bygger then a mannes thygh. In these riuers was also great plenty of fyshe, and great Tortoyses:Great Tor∣toyses. Lykewyse in many pla∣ces, multitudes of Crocodyles lying in the sande, and yanyng to take the heate of the sonne: besyde, dyuers other kyndes of beastes, wherunto he gaue no names. He sayeth also, that the soyle of that lande is verye diuers and variable, beyng some∣where stonye and full of rough and craggie promontories, or poyntes reachyng into the sea, and in other places as fruite∣full as may be. They haue also diuers kynges and rulers. In some places they call a kyng Cacicus: in other places
they call hym Quebi, and somewhere Tiba. Such as haue be∣haued them selues valyantlye in the warres agaynst theyr enemies, and haue theyr faces full of scarres, they call Cupras, and honour them as the antiquitie dyd the gods whiche they cal∣led Heroes, supposed to be the soules of suche men, as in theyr lyfe tyme excelled in vertue and noble actes. The common peo∣ple they call Chiui, and a man, they call Homem. When they say in theyr language, take man, they say Hoppa home. After this, he came to an other ryuer apt to beare great shippes, be∣fore the mouth whereof, lye foure small Ilandes, full of flory∣shyng and fruitfull trees:Quatuor tempora. these Ilandes he named Quatuor tem∣pora. From hence, sayling toward the East for the space of .xiii. leagues, styl against the violent course of the water, he found twelue other small Ilandes, in the which, because he founde a new kind of fruites, much like vnto our Lemonds, he called them Limonars. Wanderyng yet further the same way for the space of .xii. leagues, he founde a great hauen entryng into the lande, after the maner of a gulfe, the space of three leagues, and in maner as brode, into ye which fel a great riuer. Here was Nicuesa lost afterward, when he sought Beragua, by reason whereof, they called it Rio de los perdidos, that is, the ryuer of the lost men. Thus Colonus the Admiral, yet further continuyng his course agaynst the furye of the sea, founde manye hygh mountaynes, and horrible valleys, with dyuers ryuers and hauens, from all the which (as he sayth) proceeded sweete sauours, greatly recre∣atyng and comfortyng nature: Insomuche that in al this long tract, there was not one of his men diseased, vntyll he came to a region whiche thinhabitantes call Quicuris,The region of Quicuri. in the whiche is the hauen called Cariai, named Mirobalanus by the Admirall, by∣cause the Mirobalane trees are natiue in the regions thereabout. In this hauen of Cariai,The hauen of Cariai or Mi∣robalanus there came about two hundred of thin∣habitantes to the sea syde, with euerye of them three or foure dartes in theyr handes, yet of condition gentle yenough, and not refusyng straungers. Their commyng was for none other purpose, then to knowe what this newe nation meant, or what they brought with them. When our men had geuen them sygnes of peace, they came swymmyng to the shyppes, and de∣syred to barter with them by exchaunge. The Admiral, to
allure them to frendshyppe, geue them many of our thynges: But they refused them, suspecting some disceyt thereby, bycause he would not receiue theirs. They wrought all by sygnes:Ciuile and hu∣mane people for one vnderstoode not a woord of the others language. Suche gyftes as were sent them, they left on the shore, and woulde take no part thereof. They are of suche ciuilitie and humanitie, that they esteeme it more honorable to geue, then to take. They sent our men two young women, beyng virgines, of commen∣dable fauour, and goodly stature, sygnifying vnto them, that they myght take them away with them, if it were their pleasure. These women, after the maner of their countrey, were couered from their ancles somwhat aboue their priuye partes, with a certayne cloth made of gossampine cotton, but the men are all naked. The women vse to cut their heare: but the men let it growe on the hynder part of their heades, and cut it on the fore part. Their long heare, they bynde vp with fyllettes, and wynde it in sundry rowles, as our maydes are accustomed to do. The virgines whiche were sent to the Admirall, he decked in fayre apparell, and gaue them many gyftes, and sent them home agayne. But lykewyse all these rewardes and apparel they left vppon the shore, bycause our men had refused their giftes. Yet tooke he two men away with hym (and those very wyllyngly) that by learnyng the Spanyshe tongue, he myght afterward vse them for interpretours. He considered that the tractes of these coastes were not greatly troubled with vehement motions, or ouerflowynges of the sea, forasmuche as trees growe in the sea not farre from the shore, euen as they doo vppon the bankes of ryuers: the whiche thyng also other do affirme, whiche haue latelyer searched those coastes, declaryng that the sea ryseth and falleth but litle therabout. He sayth furthermore, that in the prospect of this land, there are trees engendred euen in the sea, which after that they are growen to any height,Trees growing in the sea after a strange sort. bend downe the toppes of theyr braunches into the ground: whiche em∣brasyng them, causeth other braunches to spring out of the same, and take roote in the earth, bryngyng foorth trees in theyr kynd successiuely, as dyd the fyrst root from whence they had theyr o∣ryginall, as do also the settes of vines, when onely both the endes thereof are put into the grounde.Plinie. Plinie in the twelfth
booke of his natural historie maketh mention of suche trees, describyng them to be on the lande, but not in the sea. The Admiral wryteth also, that the lyke beastes are engendred in the coastes of Cariai, as in other prouinces of these regions, and such as we haue spoken of before:A strange kynd of Monkeys. Yet that there is one founde here in nature muche differyng from the other. This beast is of the bygnesse of a great Monkey, but with a tayle much lon∣ger and bygger, it lyueth in the wooddes, and remoueth from tree to tree in this maner: Hangyng by the tayle vppon the braunche of a tree, and geatheryng strength by swaying her body twyse or thryse to and fro, she casteth her selfe from branche to branche, and so from tree to tree, as though she flewe. An ar∣cher of ours hurt one of them, who, perceiuyng her selfe to be wounded,A Monkey fyghteth with a man. leapt downe from the tree, and fiercely set on him whi∣che gaue her the wound, in so much that he was fayne to defend hym selfe with his swoorde. And thus by chaunce, cuttyng of one of her armes, he tooke her, and with much a do brought her to the shyppes, where within a while she waxed tame. Whyle she was thus kept and bounde with cheynes, certayne other of our hunters had chased a wylde Bore out of the maryshes neere vnto the sea syde: for hunger and desyre of fleshe, caused them to take double pleasure in huntyng. In this meane tyme other which remayned in the shyppes, goyng a lande to recreate them selues, tooke this Monkie with them, who, assoone as she had espyed the Bore, set vp her brystels, and made towarde him. The Bore lykewyse shooke his bristels,A conflyct be∣twene a Mon∣key and a wyld Bore. and whet his teeth. The Monkie furiously inuaded the Bore, wrappyng her tayle about his body, & with her arme, reserued of her victourer, helde him so fast about the throte, that he was suffocate. These people of Ca∣riai,The bodyes of kynges dryed and reserued. vse to drie the dead bodyes of theyr princes vppon hurdels, and so reserue them inuolued in the leaues of trees. As he went forwarde, about twentie leagues from Cariai, he founde a gulfe of suche largenes, that it contayned .xii. leagues in compasse, in the mouth of this gulfe was foure litle Ilandes, so neere togeather, that they made a safe hauen to enter into the gulfe: This gulfe is the hauen whiche we sayde before to be called Cerabaro of thinhabitantes. But they haue nowe learned, that only the land of the one syde therof, lying on the ryght hande
at the enteryng of the gulfe, is called by that name, but that on the left syde, is called Aburema. He sayth that all this gulfe is full of fruitefull Ilandes, wel replenished with goodly trees, and the grounde of the sea to be very cleane without rockes, and commodious to cast anker: lykewyse the sea of the gulfe to haue great abundance of fyshe, and the lande on both the sydes to bee inferyor to none in fruitfulnes. At his fyrst arryuyng, he espyed two of thinhabitantes, hauyng cheynes about theyr neckes, made of ouches (whiche they call Guauines) of base golde, artificially wrought in the fourmes of Eagles, and Lions, with dyuers other beastes, and foules. Of the two Cariaians whiche he brought with hym from Cariai, he was en∣fourmed that the regions of Cerabaro and Aburema were rych in golde, and that the people of Cariai, haue al theyr gold from thence for exchaunge of other of theyr thynges. They tolde hym also, that in the same regions there are fiue villages, not farre from the sea syde, whose inhabitants apply them selues onely to the gea∣thering of gold. The names of these villages are these, Chirara, Puren, Chitaza, Iureche, Aamea. All the men of the prouince of Cerabaro, go naked, & are painted with diuers colours. They take great pleasure in wearing garlandes of floures,Crownes of beastes clawes. and crownes made of the clawes of Lions & Tygers. The women couer only theyr priuie partes with a fyllet of gossampine cotton. Depart∣ing from hence, & coasting styll by the same shore for the space of xviii. leagues, he came to another ryuer, where he espyed about three hundred naked men in a company. When they sawe the shyppes drawe neare the lande, they cryed out aloude, with cruel countenaunces, shakyng theyr woodden swoordes, and hur∣lyng dartes, takyng also water in theyr mouthes, and spouting the same agaynst our men: whereby they seemed to insinuate, that they woulde receiue no condition of peace,Spytefull people. or haue ought to do with them. Here he commaunded certayne pieces of ordi∣naunce to be shot of cowarde them, yet so to ouershoote them, that none myght be hurt thereby: For he euer determined to deale quietly & peaceably with these newe nations. At the noyse therefore of the gunnes, and syght of the fyre, they fel downe to the grounde, and desyred peace.Guns make peace. Thus enteryng into fur∣ther frendshyp, they exchaunged theyr cheynes and ouches of
golde, for glasses, and haukes belles, and suche other marchan∣dies. They vse drummes or tymbrels made of the shelles of certaine sea fyshes, wherewith they encorage them selues in the warres. In this tract are these seuen ryuers, Acateba, Quareba, Zobroba,Seuen golden ryuers Aiaguitin, Vrida, Duribha, Beragua, in all the whiche, golde is founde. They defende them selues agaynst rayne and heat with certayne great leaues of trees, in the steade of clokes. Departyng from hence, he searched the coastes of Ebetere, and Embigar, into the whiche fall the goodly ryuers of Zohoran and Cubigar:Note wher the plentie of gold endeth And here ceasseth the plentie and fruitfulnes of gold, in the tract of fiftie leagues, or there about. From hence, only three leagues distant, is the rocke whiche in the vnfortunat discourse of Nicuesa we sayde was called of our men Pignonem, but of thin∣habitantes the Region is called Vibba. In this tract also, about fyre leagues from thence, is the hauen whiche Colonus called Portus Bellus (wherof we haue spoken before) in the region which thinhabitants cal Xaguaguara. This region is very populous, but they goe all naked. The kyng is paynted with blacke colours, but all the people with redde. The kyng and seuen of his noble men, had euery of them a litle plate of golde hangyng at theyr nosethrylles, downe vnto theyr lyppes: and this they take for a comely ornament. The men inclose theyr priuie mem∣bers in a shell, and the women couer theyrs with a fyllet of gos∣sampine cotton, tyed about theyr loynes. In theyr gardens they noryshe a fruite muche lyke the nut of a pine tree, the which (as we haue sayde in an other place) groweth on a shrubbe, muche lyke vnto an hartichoke, but the fruite is much softer, and meate for a kyng: also certayne trees whiche beare gourdes, whereof we haue spoken before: this tree they call Hibuero. In these coastes they met sometymes with Crocodiles lying on the sandes,Crocodiles of sweet sauour. the whiche when they fled, or tooke the water, they left a very sweete sauoure behynde them, sweeter then muske or Castoreum. When I was sent ambassadoure for the catho∣lyke kyng of Castile, to the Soltane of Babylon, or Alcayre in Egypt,Alcayr or Baby¦lon in Egypt. thinhabitantes neere vnto the ryuer of Nilus tolde me the lyke of theyr female Crocodiles, affyrmyng furthermore, that the fat or shewet of them, is equall in sweetnes with the pleasaunt gummes of Arabie. But the Admirall was nowe at
the length enforced of necessitie to depart from hence, aswell for that he was no longer able to abyde the contrarie and vio∣lent course of the water, as also that his shyppes were dayly more and more putrified, and eaten through with certayne wor∣mes,Shyppes eaten with wormes. which are engendred of the warmenesse of the water in al those tractes, neere vnto the Equinoctiall line. The Uene∣tians call these wormes Bissas. The same are also engendred in two hauens of the citie of Alexandria in Egypt,Alexandria in Egypt. and destroy the shyppes if they lye long at anker. They are a cubit in length, and somewhat more, not passing the quantitie of a fynger in big∣nesse. The Spanysh mariner calleth this pestilence Broma. Co∣lonus therfore, whom before the great monsters of the sea could not feare, now fearyng this Broma, being also sore vexed with the contrary fall of the sea, directed his course with the Ocean toward the west, and came first to the riuer Hiebra, distant only two leagues from the riuer of Beragua, because that was cōmodious to harborowe great shyps. This region is named after the riuer, and is called Beragua the lesse, because both the riuers are in the dominion of the kyng whiche inhabiteth the region of Beragua. But what chaunced vnto hym in this voyage on the ryght hand and on the left, let vs now declare. While therfore Co∣lonus the Admiral remayned yet in the riuer Hiebra, he sent Bar∣tholomeus Colonus his brother, and Liefetenaunt of Hispaniola, with the shyp boates, and threescore and eyght men, to the riuer of Beragua, where the kyng of the region, beyng naked,Howe the kyng of Beragua en∣tertayned the Lieuetenant. and paynted after the maner of the countrey, came towards them, with a great multitude of men waytyng on hym, but all vnarmed and without weapons, geuyng also signes of peace. When he approched neerer, and entred communication with our men, cer∣tayne of his gentlemen, neerest about his person, remembring the maiestie of a kyng, and that it stoode not with his honour to bargayne standyng, tooke a great stone out of the riuer, wash∣yng and rubbing it very decently, and so put it vnder hym,Their reuerēce to their kyng. with humble reuerence. The kyng thus sittyng, seemed with signes and tokens, to insinuate that it should be lawful for our men to search and viewe al the riuers within his dominion. Wherfore, the syxt day of the Ides of February, leauing his boates with certayne of his company, he went by land a foote, from the
bankes of Beragua, vntyll he came to the ryuer of Duraba, which he affirmeth to be rycher in gold then eyther Hiehra or Beragua: For gold is engendred in all ryuers of that land, insomuch that among the rootes of trees growing by the bankes of the ryuers, and among the stones left of the water, and also wheresoeuer they dygged a hole or pyt in the grounde, not past the deapth of a handefull and a halfe, they founde the earth, beyng taken out therof, myxte with golde: whereuppon he determyned to fasten his foote there, and to inhabit. Whiche thing the people of the countrey perceiuing, and smellyng what inconuenience and mis∣chiefe myght thereof ensue to their countrey, if they should par∣mit straungers to plant theyr inhabitations there, assembled a great armie, and with horrible outcryes assayled our men (who had now begun to build houses) so desperatly, that they were scarcely able for to abyde the fyrst brunt. These naked Barbarians at theyr fyrst approche, vsed onely slynges and dartes:Slynges and dartes. but when they came neerer to hande strokes, they fought with theyr woodden swoordes, whiche they cal Macha∣nas, as we haue sayde before. A man woulde not thynke what great malice and wrath was kyndled in theyr hartes agaynst our men, and with what desperate myndes they fought for the defence of theyr libertie, whiche they more esteeme then lyfe or riches:Libertie more esteemed then ryches. For they were now so voyde of al feare, and contemning death, that they neyther feared long bowes or crosse bowes, nor yet (which is moste to be marueyled) were any thyng discoura∣ged at the terrible noyse of the gunnes, shotte of from the shyppes. They retyred once: but shortly after encreasyng theyr number, they returned more fiercely then at the fyrste. They woulde haue ben contented to haue receiued our men frendly as straungers, but not as inhabitours. The more instant that our men were to remayne, so much the greater multitude of bor∣derers flocked togeather dayly, disturbyng them both nyght and day, sometymes on the one syde, and sometymes on the other. The shyppes lying at anker neare vnto the shore, warded them on the backe halfe:The Spanyar∣des are dryuen to flyght. but at the length they were fayne to forsake this lande, and returne backe the same way by the whiche they came. Thus with much difficultie & daunger they came to the I∣land of Iamaica, lying on the south side of Hispaniola & Cuba, with
theyr shyppes as full of holes as syues, and holes so eaten with wormes, as though they had been bored through with wymbles. The water entred so fast at the ryftes and holes, that yf they had not with the paynful labour of theyr handes emptied the same as fast, they were lyke to haue peryshed: where as yet by this meanes they arryued at Iamaica, although in manner halfe dead. But theyr calamitie ceassed not heere: For as fast as theyr shyppes leaked, theyr strength diminished, so that they were no longer able to keepe them from sinkyng.A miserable case. By reason whereof, fallyng into the handes of the Barbarians, and inclo∣sed without hope of departure, they led theyr lyues for the space of tenne monethes among the naked people, more miserablie then euer dyd Achemenides among the Giauntes, called Ci∣clopes, rather lyuyng, then beyng eyther contented or satisfied with the strange meates of that Ilande, and that onely at suche tymes as pleased the Barbarians to geue them part of theyrs. The deadly enmitie and malice whiche these barbarous kynges beare one agaynst an other, made greatly with our men: For at suche tymes as they attempted warre agaynst theyr borderers, they woulde sometymes geue our men part of theyr bread, to ayde them. But how miserable and wretched a thyng it is to liue onely with bread gotten by beggyng, your holynesse may easly coniecture: especially where al other accustomed foode is lack∣yng, as wyne, oyle, fleshe, butter, cheese, and mylke, wherwith the stomackes of our people of Europe haue euer been norish∣ed, euen from theyr cradels.Necessitie hath no lawe. Therfore as necessitie is subiect to no law: so doth it enforce men to attempt desperate aduentures, and those ye sooner, which by a certayne nobilitie of nature, do no further esteeme lyfe then it is ioyned with some felicitie.Howe farre life is to be estemed Bartho∣lomeus Colonus therfore, intendyng rather to prooue what God woulde do with hym and his companyons in these extremities, then any longer to abyde the same, commaunded Diegus Men∣dez his stewarde, with two guides of that Ilande, whom he had hyred with promises of great rewardes at theyr returne, to enter into one of theyr Canoas, and take theyr voyage to Hispa∣niola. Beyng thus tossed on the sea to and fro from rocke to rocke, by reason of the shortnesse and narownesse of the Ca∣noa, they arryued at the length at the last corner of Hispa∣niola,
beyng distant from Iamaica fourtie leagues. Here his guydes departyng from hym, returned agayne to Colonus, for the rewardes whiche he had promised them: but Diegus Mendez went on forward a foote, vntyll he came to the citie called Sanc∣tus Dominicus,Sanctus Domi∣nicus. beyng the chiefe & head citie of the Ilande. The offycers and rulers of Hispaniola, beyng enfourmed of the matter, appoynted hym two shyppes, wherewith he returned to his maister and companions. As he founde them, so came they to Hispaniola, very feeble, and in maner naked. What chaunced of them afterwarde, I knowe not as yet. Let vs now therefore leaue these particulers, and speake somwhat more of generals. In al those tracts, whiche we sayd here before to haue been founde by Colonus the Admiral, both he hym selfe writeth, and all his companions of that voyage confesse,Landes founde by Colonus. that the trees, hearbes, and fruites, are floryshyng and greene all the whole yeere, and the ayre so temperate & holesome, that of al his compa∣nie there neuer fel one man sycke,Themperat re∣gions and hol∣some ayre. nor yet were vexed eyther with extreme colde or heate, for the space of fyftie leagues, from the great hauen of Cerabaro, to the ryuers of Hiebra and Beragua. Thinhabitantes of Cerabaro, and the nations whiche are be∣twyxt that & the sayde ryuers, applie not them selues to the gea∣theryng of gold, but only at certayne tymes of the yeere, and are very expert and cunnyng herein, as are our myners of syluer and Iron.Expert miners They knowe by long experience in what places golde is most abundantly engendred: as by the colour of the water of the ryuers, and such as fall from the mountaynes, and also by the colour of the earth and stones. They beleeue a certayne godly nature to be in golde,A godly nature in golde. forasmuche as they neuer geather it, except they vse certayne religious expiations or purgyng, as to absteyne from women, and all kyndes of plea∣sures, and delicate meates and drinkes, during all the tyme that their golden haruest lasteth. They suppose that men do naturally liue and die as other beastes do,Golden haruest and therfore honour none other thyng as God: Yet do they pray to the Sonne, and honour it when it ryseth. But let vs nowe speake of the mountains, and si∣tuation of these landes.High and great mountaynes. From all the sea bankes of these regions, exceedyng great and hygh mountaynes are seene towarde the South, yet reaching by a continual tract from the East into the
west, by reason wherof, I suppose that the two great seas (wher∣of I haue spoken largely before) are deuided with these moun∣taynes, as it were with bulwarkes, least they shoulde ioyne and repugne, as Italie diuideth the sea called Tirrhenum,Tirrhenum is nowe called Tuscane. from the sea Adriatike, whiche is nowe commonly called the gulfe of Uenice. For whiche way so euer they sayled from the poynt cal∣led Promontorium, S. Augustini (whiche parteyneth to the Por∣tugales, and prospecteth against the sea Atlantike) euen vnto Vraba and the hauen Cerabaro, and to the furthest landes founde hitherto westward, they had euer great mountaynes in syght, both neere hande, and also farre of, in all that long rase. These mountaynes were in some place smooth, pleasaunt, and fruitfull, full of goodly trees and hearbes, and somwhere hygh, rough, ful of rockes, and barren, as chaunceth in the famous mountayne of Taurus in Asia, and also in dyuers coastes of our mountaynes of Apennini, & such other of like bygnesse. The rydgies also of these mountaynes are diuided with goodly and fayre valleys. That part of the mountaynes which includeth the limittes of Beragua,The moūtayns of Beragua higher then the cloudes. is thought to be hygher then the cloudes, insomuch that (as they say) the tops of them can seldome be seene for the multitude of thicke cloudes whiche are beneath the same. Colanus the Admi∣ral, the fyrst fynder of these regions, affirmeth that the toppes of the mountaines of Beragua, are more then fiftie myles in heyght.Mountaynes of fiftie myles heyght. He sayth furthermore, that in the same region at the rootes of the mountaynes the way is open to the south sea, & compareth it as it were betwene Uenice and Genua, or Ianua, as the Genues wyl haue it called, whiche fable that theyr citie was builded of Ianus.Ianus other∣wase called Iaphet the son of Noe. He affirmeth also, that this land reacheth forth toward the south, and that from hence it taketh the begynning of breadth: lyke as from the Alpes, out of the narowe thygh of Italie, we see the large and mayne landes of Fraunce, Germanie, and Pannonie, to the Sarmatians and Scithians, euen vnto the mountaynes and rockes of Riphea, and the frosen sea, and embrase therewith, as with a continuall bonde, al Thracia, and Grecia, with all that is included within the promontorie or poynt of Malea, and Hellespontus southwarde, and the sea Euzinus, and the marys∣shes of Meotis in Scithia northwarde. The Admiral supposeth, that on the left hande, in saylyng towarde the west, this
lande is ioyned to India, beyonde the ryuer of Ganges, and that on the ryght hande towarde the North,By this coniec∣ture, the way shoulde open to Cathai by the Hiperboreans. it is extended to the frosen sea, beyonde the Hyperboreans and the North pole: So that both the seas (that is to meane that south sea which we sayd to bee founde by Vaschus, and our Ocean) shoulde ioyne and meete in the corners of that lande, and that the waters of these seas do not onely inclose and compasse the same without diuision, as Europe is inclosed with the seas of Hellespontus, and Tanais with the frosen Ocean, and our sea of Tyrrhenum with the Spanyshe seas: But in my opinion, the vehement course of the Ocean toward the west, doth signifie the let that the sayd two seas shoulde not so ioyne togeather,Looke the na∣uigation of Ca∣bote. Deca. iii. lib. vi. but rather that that lande is adherent to the firme landes towarde the North, as we haue sayde before. It shall suffice to haue sayde thus muche of the length hereof: Let vs nowe therefore speake somwhat of the breadth of the same. We haue made mention before howe the south sea is diuided by narowe limittes from our Ocean, as it was proued by thexperience of Vaschus Nunnez and his com∣panions, which fyrst made open the way thyther. But as dyuers∣ly the mountaynes of our Alpes in Europe are somwhere na∣rowe, and in some place brode: euen so, by the lyke prouidence of nature, this land in some part therof reacheth farre in breadth, and is in other places coarcted with narowe limittes from sea to sea, with valleys also in some places, whereby men may passe from the one syde to the other. Where we haue described the regions of Vraba and Beragua to be situate, these seas are diui∣ded by small distaunce: Yet ought we to thynke the region, whiche the great ryuer of Maragnonus runneth through,The great riuer Maragnonus. to be very large, if we shall graunt Maragnonum to be a ryuer, and no sea, as the freshe waters of the same ought to perswade vs. For in suche narowe caues of the earth, there can be no swalowyng gulfes of suche bygnesse as to receiue or nooryshe so great a∣bundance of water. The lyke is also to be supposed of the great ryuer of Dabaiba,The great riuer Dabaiba, or sancti Iohan∣nes. whiche we sayde to be from the corner of the gulfe of Vraba, in some place of fourtie fathomes depth, and som∣where fiftie: also three myles in breadth, and so to fall into the sea. We must needes graunt, that the earth is brode there, by the which the ryuer passeth from the high mountaines of Dabaiba
from the East, and not from the west. They say that this ry∣uer consisteth and taketh his encrease of foure other ryuers, fal∣lyng from the mountaynes of Dabaiba.The riuers haue theyr in∣crease from the sprynges of the mountaynes. The ryuer of Nilus in E∣gypt. Our men call this ryuer Flumen. S. Iohannis. They say also that from hence it falleth into the gulfe of Vraba by seuen mouthes, as dooth the ryuer of Nilus into the sea of Egypt: Lykewyse that in the same region of Vraba, there are in some places narowe streyghtes, not passing fyfteene leagues, and the same to be sauage, and without any passage, by reason of dyuers maryshes and desolate wayes, whi∣che the Latines call Lamas,Maryshes and desolate wayes but the Spanyardes accordyng to theyr varietie call them Tremedales, Trampales, Cenegales, Sumi∣deros, & Zabondaderos. But before we passe any further, it shall not be greatly from our purpose to declare from whence these mountaynes of Dabaiba haue theyr name,A superstitious opinion of the originall of the mountaynes of Dabaiba. accordyng vnto than∣tiquities of thinhabitantes. They sayd that Dabaiba was a wo∣man, of great magnanimitie and wysedome among theyr predecessours in olde tyme, whom in her lyfe all thinhabi∣tantes of those prouinces dyd greatly reuerence, and beyng dead, gaue her diuine honour, and named the region after her name, beleeuyng that she sendeth thunder and lyghtnyng, to destroy the fruites of the earth yf she be angred, and to sende plentie if shee be well pleased. This superstition hath been per∣suaded them by a craftie kynde of men, vnder pretence of reli∣gion, to thintent that they myght enioy suche gyftes and offe∣ringes as were brought to the place where she was honoured. This is sufficient for this purpose. They say furthermore, that the maryshes of the narowe land, whereof we haue spoken, bring forth great plentie of Crocodiles, Dragons, Battes, and Gnats,Dragons and Crocodiles in the maryshes. beyng very hurtfull. Therefore whensoeuer they take any iour∣ney towarde the south, they go out of the way toward the moun∣taynes, and eschewe the regions neere vnto those perylous fennes or maryshes. Some thynke that there is a valley lying that way that the ryuer runneth, which our men cal Rio de los perdidos, that is, the ryuer of the lost men (so named by the mis∣fortune whiche there befell to Nicuesa and his company) and not farre distant from the hauen Cerabaro, whiche diuideth those mountaines toward the south.The hauen Cerabaro. But let vs now finishe this booke with a fewe other thinges woorthy to be noted. They say there∣fore,
that on the ryght hand and left hande from Dariena there are twentye ryuers,Twentie gol∣den ryuers. in all the whiche great plentye of gold is found. Beyng demaunded what was the cause why they brought no greater aboundance of golde from thence: they answeared, that they lacked miners, and that the men whiche they tooke with them from Spayne thyther, were not accustomed to labour, but for the most part brought vp in the warres. This land seemeth also to promise many precious stones:Precious stones. For besyde those which I sayde to be founde neere vnto Cariai and Sancta Martha, one Andreas Moralis, a pilot (who had trauayled those coastes with Iohannes de la Cossa whyle he yet lyued) had a precious Dia∣monde,A precious Di∣amond of ex∣ceeding bignes. whiche he bought of a naked young man in the region of Cumana, in the prouince of Paria. This stone was as long as two ioyntes of a mans myddle fynger, and as byg as the fyrst ioynt of the thumbe, beyng also paynted on euery syde, con∣sisting of eyght squares, perfectly fourmed by nature. They say that with this they made scarres in anuylles and hammers, and brake the teeth of fyles, the stone remayning vnperyshed. The young man of Cumana, wore this stone about his necke among other ouches, & solde it to Andreas Moralis for fyue of our coun∣terfect stones, made of glasse, of diuers colours, wherewith the ignorant young man was greatly delyted: They found also cer∣tayne Topases on ye shore.Topasis. But the estimation of gold was so farre entred into the heades of our men, that they had no regarde to stones. Also the most part of the Spanyardes, do laugh them to scorne which vse to weare many stones, specially such as are common, iudging it to be an effeminate thyng, and more meete for women then men. The noble men onely, when they celebrate solemne mariages, or set foorth any triumphes, weare cheynes of gold, beset with precious stones, and vse fayre apparel of silke, embrodered with golde, intermixt with pearles and precious stones, and not at other tymes. They thynke it no lesse effemi∣nate for men to smel of the sweete sauours of Arabie, and iudge hym to be infected with some kynde of fylthy lechery, in whom they smel the sauour of muske or Castoreum. But lyke as by one apple taken from a tree, we may perceiue the tree to be fruiteful, and by one fyshe taken in a ryuer, we may knowe that fyshe is ingendred in the same: euen so, by a litle gold, and by one stone,
we ought to consyder that this lande bringeth foorth great plen∣tie of golde, and precious stones. What they haue founde in the porte of Sancta Martha, in the region of Cariai, when the whole nauie passed thereby vnder the gouernaunce of Petrus Arias and his company, with certayne other of the kynges officers, I haue sufficiently declared in his place. To be short therefore, al thynges do so floryshe, growe, encrease, and prosper, that the last are euer better then the fyrst. And surely to declare my opinion herein, whatsoeuer hath heretofore ben discouered by the famous trauayles of Saturnus and Hercules, with suche other whom the antiquitie for their heroical factes honoured as gods, seemeth but litle and obscure, if it be compared to the Spanyar∣des victorious labours. Thus I bydde your holynesse farewell, desyryng you to certifie me howe you lyke these fyrst fruites of the Ocean, that beyng encouraged with your exhortations, I may the gladlyer, and with lesse tediousnesse, wryte suche thin∣ges as shall chaunce hereafter. The fyfth booke of the thyrde Decade. AL suche lyuyng creatures, as vnder the cyrcle of the moone bring foorth any thing, are accustomed by thinstincte of nature, as soone as they are delyuered of theyr byrth, eyther to close vp the matrice, or at the least to be quyet for a space: But our most fruitefull Ocean and newe worlde, engen∣dreth and bryngeth foorth dayly new byrthes, wherby men of great wyt, and especially such as are studious of new and mar∣ueylous thynges, may haue somewhat at hand wherwith to feed theyr myndes. Yf your holynesse do aske to what purpose is all this: ye shal vnderstand, that I had scarsly finished the historie of such thynges as chaunced to Vaschus Nunnez and his compa∣nie in theyr voyage to the south sea, when sodenly there came new letters from Petrus Arias the new gouernour, whom the kyng had appoynted the yeere before with an army of men and a nauy of shyps to sayle to these newe landes. He signified by his
letters, that he with his nauie and company arryued al safely. Furthermore, Iohannes Cabedus (whom your holinesse at the re∣quest of the most catholique kyng had created Bishop of that prouince of Dariena) and three other of the cheefe officers ioyned in commission to be his assystantes, as Alfonsus de Ponte, Diegus Marques, and Iohannes de Tauira, confyrmed the same letters, and subscribed them with theyr names. The nauigation there∣fore of Petrus Arias,The nauigati∣on of Petrus Arias. was in this maner. The day before the Ides of Apryl, in the yeere of Christe .1514. he hoysed vp his sayles, in the towne of saint Lucar de Barrameda, situate in the mouth of the ryuer Baetis, which the Spanyardes nowe cal Guadalchebir. The seuen Ilandes of Canaria are about foure hundred myles distant from the place where this riuer falleth into the sea. Some thynke that these are the Ilandes whiche the olde wryters dyd call the fortunate Ilandes:The Ilande of Canarie. but other thynke the contrary. The name of these Ilandes are these. The two that appeare fyrst in sight, are named Lanzelota and Fortisuentura. On the back∣halfe of these, lyeth Magna Canaria or Grancanaria. Beyond that is Teuerif and Gomera somewhat towarde the north from that Palma and Ferrea lye behynde, as it were a bulwarke to al the o∣ther. Petrus Arias therfore, arriued at Gomera the eyght day af∣ter his departure, with a nauie of seuenteene ships, & a thousand and fiue hundred men, although there were only a thousand and two hundred assigned hym by the kynges letters. It is sayd fur∣thermore, that he left behynde hym more then two thousande, very pensiue and sighing that they also myght not be receiued, proferyng them selues to goe at theyr owne charges. He taryed xvi. dayes in Gomera, to the intent to make prouision of fuel and freshe water,Prouision of freshe water and fuel. but cheefely to repayre his shyppes, beyng sore broosed with tempestes, and especially the gouernours shyppe, which had lost the rudder: For these Ilandes are a commodious restyng place for al suche as intende to attempt any nauigations in that maine sea. Departing from hence in the Nones of May, he sawe no more lande vntyll the thyrde day of Iune, at the whi∣che he arryued at Dominica an Ilande of the Canibales, being di∣stant from Gomera about eight hundred leagues. Here he remai∣ned foure dayes, makyng newe prouision of freshe water and fuell, duryng whiche tyme, he sawe no man, nor yet anye
steppes of men, but founde plenty of sea Crabbes and great Li∣sarts. From hence he sayled by the Ilandes of Matinina (other∣wyse called Madanino) Guadalupea and Galanta (otherwyse cal∣led Galana) of al which we haue spoken in the fyrst Decade. He passed also through the sea of hearbes or weedes, continu∣ing a long tract: Yet neyther he,The sea of hearbes. nor Colonus the Admiral (who fyrst found these Ilandes, and sayled through this sea of weedes) haue declared any reason how these weedes should come. Some thynke the sea to be verye muddye there, and that these weedes are engendred in the bottome thereof, and so beyng loosed, to ascende to the vppermost part of the water, as we see often∣tymes chaunce in certayne standyng pooles, and sometymes also in great ryuers. Other suppose that they are not engen∣dred there, but to be beaten from certayne rockes by the vio∣lence of the water in tempestes: And thus they leaue the mat∣ter in doubt. Neyther haue they yet any certayne experience whether they stycke fast and geue place to the shyppes, or wan∣der loose vpon the water: But it is to be thought, that they are engendred there, for otherwyse they shoulde be dryuen togea∣ther on heapes, by the impulsion of the shyppes, euen as a bea∣some geathereth the sweepynges of a house, and shoulde also let the course of the shyppes. The fourth day after that he depar∣ted from Dominica,These moun∣taines are cal∣led Montes Niuales, or Serra Neuata, Decade .ii. lib. 1. and .ii. the hyghe mountaynes couered with snowe (whereof we haue spoken in the seconde Decade) appeared vn∣to hym. They say that there the seas runne as swyftly towarde the west, as it were a ryuer fallyng from the toppes of hygh mountaynes, although they fayled not directly toward the west, but inclined somewhat to the south. From these mountaynes falleth the ryuer of Gaira, famous by the slaughter of our men, at such tyme as Rodericus Colmenares passed by those coastes, as we haue sayde before: Lykewyse many other fayre ryuers haue theyr original from the same mountaynes. This prouince (in the which is also the region of Caramairi) hath in it two notable hauens, of ye which our men named the one Carthago or Carthage∣na, and thother Sancta Martha, the region wherof thinhabitants call Saturma. The port of Sancta Martha,Mountaynes couered with snowe. is nerer to the moun∣taynes couered with snow, called Montes Niuales, for it is at the rootes of the same mountaines, but ye hauen of Carthago is more
westward, about fyftie leagues. He wryteth marueylous things of the hauen of Sancta Martha, whiche they also confirme that came lately from thence: Of the which young Vesputius is one, to whom Americus Vesputius his vncle (beyng a florentine borne) left the exact knowledge of the mariners facultie, as it were by inheritance after his death, for he was a very expert maister in the knowledge of his carde, his compasse, and the eleuation of the pole starre, with all that parteyneth therto. This young Ves∣putius was assigned by the kyng to be one of the maisters of the gouernours shyp, because he was cunnyng in iudging the de∣grees of the eleuation of the pole starre by the quadrant: For the charge of gouerning the rudder, was cheefly committed to one Iohannes Serranus a Spaniard, who had oftentymes ouer∣runne those coastes. Vesputius is my very familier frende, and a wittie young man, in whose company I take great pleasure, and therfore vse hym oftentymes for my ghest. He hath also made many voyages into these coastes, and diligentlye noted suche thynges as he hath seene. Petrus Arias therfore wryteth, and he confirmeth the same, that thinhabitantes of these regions tooke theyr originall of the Caribbes or Canibales, as appea∣red by the desperat fyersnesse and crueltie which they oftentimes shewed to our men when they passed by theyr coastes.The stoutnes of the Barbari∣ans. Suche stoutnesse and fortitude of mynde is naturallie engendred in these naked Barbarians, that they feared not to assayle our whole nauy, and to forbyd them to come a lande. They fyght with venemous arowes, as we haue sayde before. Parcey∣uyng that our men contemned theyr threatnynges, they ranne furyously into the sea,The Canibales fight in the water. euen vp to the breastes, nothyng fearyng eyther the bygnesse or multitude of our shyppes, but ceased not contynuallie, beyng thus in the water, to cast dartes, and to shoote theyr venemous arrowes as thycke as hayle: Inso∣much that our men had byn in great daunger, yf they had not bin defended by the cages or pauisses of the shippes, and their target∣tes: Yet were two of them wounded, which died shortely after. But this conflict continued so sharp, that at the length our men were enforced to shoote of theyr greatest pieces of ordinaunce with hayleshoote:The vse of gunnes. at the slaughter and terrible noyse wherof, the Barbarians beyng sore discomfited and shaken with feare,
thynkyng the same to be thunder and lyghtnyng, turned theyr backes, and fledde amayne. They greatly feare thunder,The generati∣on of thunder and lyghtning. because these regions are oftentimes vexed with thunder and lyght∣nynges, by reason of the hyghe mountaynes, and nearenesse of the same to the region of the ayre, wherein such fierie tempestes are engendred, whiche the philosophers call Meteora. And albeit that our men had nowe dryuen theyr enimies to flyght, and sawe them disparcled and out of order, yet doubted they, and were of diuers opinions, whether they shoulde pursue them, or not. On the one partie shame prycked them forwarde, and on the other syde, feare caused them to caste manye perylles, especi∣ally consyderyng the venemous arrowes whiche these Barba∣rians can direct so certaynely. To depart from them with a drye foote (as sayth the prouerbe) with so great a nauie, and suche an armye, they reputed it as a thyng greatly soundyng to theyr re∣proche and dishonour. At the length therefore, shame ouercom∣myng feare, they pursued them, and came to land with theyr ship boates. The gouernour of the nauie, & also Vesputius do wryte, that the hauen is no lesse then three leagues in compasse, beyng also safe without rockes, and the water therof so cleare, that a man may see pybble stones in the bottome twentie cubits deepe. They say lykewyse, that there falleth two fayre ryuers of freshe water into the hauen: but the same to be meeter to beare the Canoas of these prouinces, then any bygger vessels. It is a delectable thyng to heare what they tel of the plentie and varie∣tie, and also of the pleasaunt tast of the fyshes, aswell of these ry∣uers, as of the sea therabout: By reason wherof they found here manye fysher boates and nettes woonderfully wrought of the stalkes of certayne hearbes or weedes, dryed and tawed,Plentie of fysh. and wreathed with cords of spunne gossampyne cotton. For the peo∣ple of Caramairi, Gaira, and Saturma, are very cunnyng in fishe∣yng, and vse to sel fyshe to theyr borderers,Cunning fyshers. for exchaunge of such thynges as they lacke. When our men had thus chased the Barbarians from the sea coastes, and had now entred into theyr houses, they assayled them with newe skyrmishes, espetial∣ly when they sawe them fall to sacking and spoylyng, and theyr wyues and chyldren taken captyue. Their householde stuffe was made of great reedes, whiche growe on the sea ban∣kes,
and the stalkes of certayne hearbes beaten, and afterwarde made harde. The floores thereof were strewed with hearbes of sundry colours,Tapistrie. and the walles hanged with a kynde of tapstry, artificially made of gossampine cotton, and wrought with pic∣tures of Lions, Tygers, and Eagles. The doores of theyr houses and chambers were full of dyuers kyndes of shelles, han∣gyng loose by small cordes, that beyng shaken by the wynde, they myght make a certayne rattelyng, and also a whystelyng noyse, by geatheryng the wynde in theyr holowe places: for herein they haue great delyght, and impute this for a goodly or∣nament. Dyuers haue shewed me many wonderfull thynges of these regions,This is he whom Carda∣nus praiseth. especially one Conzalus Fernandus Ouiedus, beyng one of the magistrates appoynted in that office, which the Spa∣nyardes call Veedor, who hath also hytherto entred further into the lande then any other. He affirmeth, that he chaunced vppon the fragment of a Saphire, bygger then the egge of a goose, and that in certayne hylles where he trauayled with thirtie men,Precious stones. The Smaradge is the true Hmerode. Another kynde of Amber is founde in Whales. he founde many of the pretious stones called Smaragdes, Calcido∣nes, and Iaspers, besyde great peeces of Amber of the moun∣taines. He also, with diuers other, do affirme that in the houses of some of the Canibales of these regions, they found the like preci∣ous stones, set in gold, and inclosed in tapstry or arras (if it may so be called) wherewith they hang theyr houses. The same land bryngeth foorth also many wooddes of brasile trees,Golde and Brasile. Marchasites are flowres of mettals, by the colours where∣of, the kyndes of mettals are knowen. and great plentie of golde, in so much that in maner in al places they founde on the sea bankes, & on the shores, certayne marchasites in to∣ken of golde. Fernandus Ouiedus declareth furthermore, that in a certayne region called Zenu, lying fourescore and tenne myles from Dariena Eastwarde, they exercise a straunge kynde of mar∣chaundize: For in the houses of the inhabitantes, they founde great chestes and baskets, made of the twigges and leaues of cer∣tayne trees apte for that purpose, being all ful of Grassehoppers, Grylles, Crabbes, or Crefyshes, Snayles also, and Locustes, whiche destroye the fieldes of corne,These Locustes burne the corne with touching, and deuoure the residue. They are in India of three foote length. al well dryed and salted. Be∣yng demaunded why they reserued suche a multitude of these beastes: they answeared, that they kept them to be solde to theyr borderers, whiche dwell further within the lande, and that for the exchange of these pretious byrdes, and salted fyshes, they re∣ceiued
of them certayne strange thynges, wherein partly they take pleasure, and partly vse them for theyr necessary affayres. These people dwell not togeather, but scattered here and there. Thinhabitantes of Caramairi, seeme to dwel in an earthly Para∣dise, theyr region is so fayre and fruitefull, without outragious heate, or sharpe colde, with litle difference of the length of day and nyght throughout all the yeere. After that our men had thus dryuen the Barbarians to flyght, they entred into a valley, of two leagues in breadth, and three in length, extendyng to cer∣tayne fruitefull mountaynes, full of grasse, hearbes, and trees, at the rootes whereof, lye two other valleis towarde the ryght hande and the leaft, through eyther of the whiche runneth a fayre ryuer, wherof the ryuer of Caira is one, but vnto the o∣ther they haue yet geuen no name. In these valleys they found many fayre gardens, and pleasaunt feeldes, watered with tren∣ches, distributed in marueylous order,Gardens. with no lesse art then our Insubrians and Hetrurians vse to water their feeldes.Insubres are nowe called Lumbardes, and Hetruci, Tuscans. Theyr common meate, is Ages, Iucca, Maizium, Battata, with suche other rootes and fruites of trees, and also such fyshe as they vse in the Ilandes and other regions of these prouinces. They eate mans fleshe but seldome, because they meete not oftentymes with strangers, except they goe foorth of theyr one dominions with a mayne army, of purpose to hunt for men, when theyr rauenyng appetite pricketh them forwarde: For they abstayne from them selues, and eate none but suche as they take in the warres, or otherwyse by chaunce. But suerly it is a miserable thyng to heare howe many myriades of men these fylthy and vn∣naturall deuourers of mens fleshe haue consumed,One myriade, is ten thou∣sande. and lefte thou∣sandes of most fayre and fruitefull Ilandes and regions desolate without men: by reason whereof, our men founde so manye Ilandes, whiche for theyr fayrenes and fruitefulnesse myght seeme to be certayne earthly Paradyses, and yet were vtterly voyde of men. Hereby your holynesse may consider howe perni∣tious a kynde of men this is. We haue sayde before, that the I∣lande named Sancti Iohannis (which thinhabitants cal Burichena) is next to Hispaniola. It is sayde, that only the Canibales which dwel in the other Ilandes neere about this, as in the Ilande cal∣led Hayhay or Sansta Crucis, and in Guadalupea (otherwyse called
Queraqueiera, or Carucuiera) haue in our tyme violently taken out of the sayde Ilande of Sancti Iohannis, more then fyue thousande men to be eaten. But let it suffice thus muche to haue wandered by these monstrous bloodsuckers. We wyll nowe therfore speake somwhat of the rootes whereof they make theyr bread, forasmuche as the same shal hereafter be foode to Christian men, in steade of bread made of wheate, and in the steade of radyshe, with such other rootes as they haue been ac∣customed to eate in Europe. We haue oftentymes sayd before, that Iucca is a roote, whereof the best and most delicate bread is made, both in the firme lande of these regions, and also in the Ilandes: but howe it is tylled or husbanded, howe it groweth, and of how dyuers kyndes it is, I haue not yet declared. Ther∣fore,The manner of plantyng the roote Iucca. when they entende to plant this Iucca, they make a hole in the earth, knee deepe, and rayse a heape of the earth taken out of the same, fashionyng it lyke a square bedde, of niene foote breadth on euery syde, settyng twelue trunkes of these roots (be∣yng about a foote and a halfe long a peece) in euery of the sayd beddes, contaynyng three rootes of a syde, so layde a slope, that the endes of them ioyne in maner togeather in the center or mid∣dest of the bedde within the ground. Out of the ioyntes of the rootes, and spaces betwene the same, spryng the toppes and blades of newe rootes, whiche by litle and litle encreasyng, growe to the bygnes and length of a mans arme in the brawne, and oftentymes as bygge as the thygh: so that by the tyme of theyr full rypenes,Earth turned into rootes. in maner all the earth of the heape is con∣uerted into rootes. But they say that these rootes are not rype in lesse then a yeere and a halfe, and that the longer they are suf∣fered to grow, euen vntyl two yeeres complete, they are so much the better, and more perfecte to make bread thereof. When they are taken foorth of the earth,Howe bread is made of rootes they scrape them, and slyse them, with certayne sharpe stones, seruyng for the same purpose: And thus laying them betwene two great stones, or puttyng them in a sacke made of the stalkes of certaine tough hearbes and smal reedes, they presse them (as do we cheese or crabbes, to drawe out the iuice thereof) and so let them drye a daye before they eate them. The iuice or liquour they cast away: for (as we haue sayde) it is deadly poyson in the Ilandes. Yet is the iuice of
suche as growe in the firme land wholesome, yf it be sodde, as is the whey of our mylke. They say that there are many kyndes of this Iucca, wherof some are more pleasaunt and delicate then the other, and are therefore reserued as it were to make fyue Manchet for the kynges owne table: But the Gentlemen eate of the meaner sort, and the common people of the basest. The fi∣nest they call Cazabbi, whiche they make rounde lyke cakes, in certayne presses, before they seethe it, or bake it. They say furthermore, that there are lykewyse diuers kyndes of the rootes of Ages, and Battata. But they vse these rather as fruites, and dyshes of seruice, then to make bread thereof, as we vse Rapes, Radishes, Mushromes, Nauies, Persnippes, and suche lyke. In this case, they moste especiallye esteeme the best kynde of Battatas, which in pleasant taste and tendernesse, farre exceedeth our Mushromes. It shal suffise to haue sayd thus much of rootes: We wyl nowe therefore speake of another kynde of their bread. We declared before, that they haue a kynde of grayne or Pulse, muche lyke vnto Panicum, but with somewhat bygger graynes,Panicum is a grayne some∣what lyke mil: The Italians cal it Melica. which they beate into meale, vpon certaine great hollow stones, with the labour of theyr handes, when they lacke Iucca, and of this is made the more vulgar or common bread. It is sowen thryse a yeere, so that the fruitefulnesse of the ground may beare it, by reason of the equalitie of the tyme, whereof we haue spoken sufficiently before. In these regions they founde also the grayne of Maizium, and sundry kyndes of fruites of trees,He meaneth the equal length of day and nyght which is conti∣nualy in regi∣ons vnder the Equinoctiall line. diligentlye planted, and wel husbanded. The way betweene the regions of Caramairi and Saturma, is fayre, broode, and ryght foorth. They founde here also sundry kyndes of water pottes made of earth, of diuers colours, in the whiche they both fetche and keepe freshe water: Lykewyse sundry kyndes of iugges, god∣derdes, drynkyng cuppes, pottes, pannes, dyshes, and plat∣ters, artificially made. When the gouernour had geuen com∣maundement by proclamation, that the inhabitauntes should ey∣ther obey the Christian kyng, and embrace our religion, or els to depart out of theyr countrey: they answered with venemous arrowes. In this skyrmyshe, our men tooke some of them: whereof, clothyng the moste parte in fayre apparell, they sent them againe to their owne company: But leading the residue to
the shyppes, to thintent to shewe them the power and magnifi∣cence of the christians, that they might declare the same to theyr companions, therby to wynne their fauour, they appareled them lykewyse, and sent them after theyr felowes. They af∣fyrme, that in all the ryuers of these coast, they sawe great ar∣gumentes and tokens of golde. They founde here and there in their houses good store of Harts flesh, & Bores fleshe, wherwith they fedde them selues delicately. They also haue great plentie of sundry kyndes of byrdes, and foules, whereof they bryng vp many in their houses, some for necessarye foode, and other for dayntie dyshes, as we do Hennes and Partriches. Our men hereby coniecture, that the ayre of these regions is very holsome,Holsome ayre. forasmuche as slepyng all nyght vnder the fyrmament on the bankes of the ryuers, none of them were at any tyme offended with reumes or headache, by reason of any noysome humour, or vapour proceedyng from the earth, ayre, or water.Gossampine Cotton. Fethers. Our men furthermore founde there many great bo∣tomes of gossampyne cotton redy spunne, and fardelies of dy∣uers kyndes of fethers, whereof they make them selues crestes and plumes, after the maner of our men of armes: also certeine clokes, whiche they esteeme as most comely ornamentes. They founde lykewyse an innumerable multitude of bowes and ar∣rowes.Bowes and arrowes. Thinhabitants also of these regions, in some places vse to burne the carkases of their princes when they are dead, and to reserue their bones buryed with spyces in certayne hylles. In other places,Dead bodies reserued. they onely drye them, and imbawme them with spyces and sweete gummes, and so reserue them in sepulchers in theyr owne houses. Somewhere also, they dry them, spyce them, adourne them with precious iewelles, and ouches, and so reuerently place them in certayne tabernacles, made for the same purpose in theyr owne palaces. When our men had many of theyr tablets, braselettes, collers, and suche other ouches (whiche they call Guanines) they founde them rather to be made of laton then of golde:Gonzalus Oui∣dus sayeth, that they gylt marueylously with the iuce of a certayne hearbe. whereby they suppose that they haue vsed to exchaunge theyr ware with some craftie straungers, whiche brought them those counterfeyt ouches, to defraude them of theyr golde: For euen our men perceiued not the deceyte vntyll they came to the meltyng. Furthermore, certayne of our buyl∣ers
wanderyng a litle way from the sea coastes, chaunced to ynde certayne peeces of white marble: whereby they thynke,White marble. that in tyme past some straungers haue come to those landes, whiche haue dygged marble out of the mountaynes, and lefte those fragmentes on the playne. There our men lear∣ned that the ryuer Maragnonus descendeth from the moun∣taynes couered with snowe, called Montes Niuales,The great riuer Maragnonus. This ioyneth with the migh∣ty riuer called Flumen Ama∣zonum, founde of late. or Serra Ne∣uata, and the same to be encreased by many other ryuers, whiche fall into it throughout all the lowe and waterly regions, by the which it runneth with so long a tract from the sayd mountaynes into the sea, and this to be the cause of the greatnesse thereof. These thynges being thus brought to passe, the gouernour com∣maunded the trumpeter to blowe a retraite: Wheruppon they which were sent to lande (beyng fiue hundred in number) making a great shout for ioy of theyr victory, set them selues in order of battayle, and so keepyng theyr array, returned to the shyppes laden with spoyle of those prouinces, and shynyng in souldiers clokes of feathers,Clokes of fethers. with fayre plumes and crestes of vari∣able colours. In this meane tyme, hauyng repaired theyr shyppes, and furnyshed the same with all necessaries, they loosed anker the .xvi day of the Calendes of Iuly, directyng their course to the hauen of Carthagena, in the whiche voyage they destroyed and wasted certaine Ilandes of the Canibales, lying in the way, accordyng as they were commaunded by the kyng. But the swift course of the water deceiued both Iohannes Sarranus the chiefe Pilot of the gouernours shippe, and all the other,The swift course of the water. although they made their bost that they perfectly knewe the nature therof: For they affyrme, that in one night they were caried fourtie lea∣gues beyond their estimation.Fourtie lea∣gues in one nyght. The syxte booke of the thyrde Decade. HEere must we somewhat digresse frō Cos∣mography,Sundry opini∣ons why the sea runneth with so swyft course from the East into the West. & make a philosophical discourse to searche the secrete causes of nature. For whereas they all affirme with one consent, that ye sea runneth there from the east to the west, as swiftely as it were a ryuer fallyng from hygh mountaynes, I thought it not
good to let suche matter slyppe vntouched. The which whyle I consyder, I am drawen into no small ambiguitie and doubt, whyther those waters haue theyr course, whiche flowe with so continuall a tract in circuite from the East, as though they fledde to the west, neuer to returne, and yet neyther the west thereby any whit the more fylled, nor the East emptied. If we shall say that they fall to theyr centre (as is the nature of heauie thynges) and assigne the Equinoctiall line to bee the centre (as some affyrme) what centre shall we appoynt to be able to receiue so great abundance of water?The Equinoc∣tial line. Why al waters moue towarde the south or E∣quinoctial, read Cardanus ae subtilit liber ii. de elementis. Strayghtes. Or what circum∣ference shall be founde wet? They whiche haue searched those coastes, haue yet founde no lyke reason to be true. Many thynke that there shoulde bee certayne large straightes or en∣trances in the corner of that great lande, whiche we described to be eyght tymes bygger then Italye, and the corner there∣of to be full of gulfes, whereby they suppose that some straygh∣tes shoulde passe through the same, lying on the west syde of the Ilande of Cuba, and that the sayde strayghtes shoulde swa∣lowe vp those waters, and so conuey the same into the west, and from thence agayne into our East Ocean, or north seas, as some thynke.As by the strayght of Magelanus The north landes. Other wyll, that the gulfe of that great lande be closed vp, and the lande to reache farre towarde the north on the backe syde of Cuba, so that it embrace the north landes, whiche the frosen sea encompasseth vnder the north pole, and that all the lande of those coastes, shoulde ioyne togeather as one firme lande: Whereby they coniecture, that those waters shoulde be turned about by the obiecte or resistaunce of that land, so bendyng towarde the north, as we see the waters turned about in the crooked bankes of certayne ryuers. But this agreeth not in all poyntes. For they also whiche haue searched the frosen sea,The frosen sea. and sayled from thence into the west, do lykewyse affyrme, that those north seas flowe continually towarde the west, al∣though nothyng so swiftely. These north seas haue ben searched by one Sebastian Cabot,Sebastian Ca∣bot. a Uenetian borne, whom beyng yet but in maner an infant, his parentes caryed with them into Englande, hauyng occasion to resort thither for trade of mar∣chandize, as is the maner of the Uenetians, to leaue no part of the worlde vnsearched to obtaine rychesse. He therfore furnished
two shyppes in England at his owne charges: And fyrst with three hundreth men,The voyage of Sebastian Ca∣bot from Eng∣lande to the frosen sea. directed his course so farre towarde the north pole, that euen in the moneth of Iuly he founde monstrous heapes of Ise swymming on the sea, and in maner continuall day lyght: Yet sawe he the lande in that tract free from Ise, whiche had ben moulten by heat of the Sonne. Thus seeyng suche heapes of Ise before hym, he was enforced to turne his sayles, and folowe the west, so coastyng styll by the shore, that he was thereby brought so farre into the south, by reason of the lande bendyng so muche southwarde, that it was there almost equall in latitude with the sea called Fretum Herculeum, hauyng the north pole eleuate in maner in the same degree. He sayled lykewyse in this tract so farre towarde the west, that he had the Ilande of Cuba on his left hande, in maner in the same degree of longitude. As he traueyled by the coastes of this great lande (whiche he named Baccallaos) he sayth, that he founde the lyke course of the waters toward the west, but the same to runne more softly and gentelly, then the swifte waters whiche the Spany∣ardes founde in their nauigations southwarde. Wherefore, it is not onely more lyke to be true, but ought also of necessitie to be concluded, that betwene both the landes hitherto vnknowen, there shoulde be certayne great open places, wherby the waters should thus continually passe from the East into the west: whiche waters I suppose to be dryuen about the globe of the earth by the vncessaunt mouyng and impulsion of the heauens, and not to beswalowed vp and cast out agayne by the breathyng of De∣mogorgon,Demogorgon is the spirite of the earth. as some haue imagined, bycause they see the seas by increase & decrease, to flow & reflow. Sebastian Cabot hym selfe, named those landes Baccallaos, bycause that in the seas therabout he founde so great multitudes of certayne bygge fyshes, muche like vnto Tunnies (which thinhabitants cal Baccallaos) that they somtymes stayed his shyppes. He founde also the people of those regions couered with beastes skynnes:People couered with beastes skynnes. yet not without the vse of reason. He also sayth there is great plentie of Beares in those regions, whiche vse to eate fyshe: For plungeyng them selues into the water where they perceiue a multitude of these fyshes to lye, they fasten theyr clawes in theyr scales, and so drawe them to lande, and eate them: So that (as he sayth)
the Beares beyng thus satisfied with fyshe, are not noysome to men. He declareth further, that in many places of these regi∣ons, he sawe great plentie of laton among the inhabitauntes. Cabot is my very frend, whom I vse famlierlye, and delyte to haue hym sometymes keepe me company in my owne house: For beyng called out of Englande by the commaundement of the catholique kyng of Castile, after the death of Henry kyng of Englande, the seuenth of that name, he was made one of our counsayle and assistaunce as touching the affayres of the new Indies, lookyng dayly for shyppes to be furnished for hym to discouer this hyd secret of nature. This voyage is appoynted to be begunne in Marche in the yeere next folowyng, beyng the yeere of Christ .1516. What shall succeede, your holynesse shalbe aduertysed by my letters, yf God graunt me lyfe. Some of the Spaniardes denye that Cabot was the fyrst fynder of the lande of Bacallaos, and affirme that he went not so farre weste∣warde: But it shall suffice to haue sayde thus muche of the gulfes and strayghtes, and of Sebastian Cabot. Let vs nowe therfore returne to the Spaniardes. At this tyme, they let passe the hauen of Carthago vntouched,The Ilandes of the Cany∣bales. with al the Ilandes of the Ca∣nibales there aboute, whiche they named Insulas Sancti Bernar∣di, leauyng also behind theyr backes, al the region of Caramai∣ri. Heere by reason of a sodayne tempest, they were caste vpon the Ilande Fortis,The Ilande Fortis. beyng about fyftie leagues distant from the enteraunce of the gulfe of Vraba. In this Iland, they founde in the houses of thinhabitantes, many baskettes made of certayne great sea reedes,Salte. ful of salt. For this Iland hath in it many good∣ly salt bayes, by reason wherof they haue great plentie of salte, which they sell to other nations for such thyngs as they stande in neede of. Not farre from hence, a great Curlew, as bygge as a Storke,A strange thing came flying to the gouernours shyp, and suffered her selfe to be easely taken, whiche beyng carryed aboute among all the shyppes of the nauie, dyed shortly after: They sawe also a great multitude of the same kynde of foules on the shore a farre of. The gouernours shyppe, whiche we sayd to haue lost the rudder, beyng now sore broosed, and in maner vnprofytable, they left behynde, to folowe at leasure. The nauie arryued at Dariena the twelfth day of the Calendes of Iuly, and the go∣uernours
shyppe (beyng voyde of men) was dryuen alande in the same coastes within foure dayes after. The Spanyardes whiche now inhabited Dariena, with theyr Captayne and Lieue∣tenaunt Vaschus Nunnez Balboa (of whom we haue largelye made mention before) beyng certifyed of the arriuall of Petrus Arias and his companye, went foorth three myles to meete him,Howe Vaschus receiued the newe gouer∣nour. and receiued him honorably, and religiously with the psalme Te deum laudamus, geuyng thankes to god by whose safe conduct they were brought so prosperously thyther to al theyr comfortes. They receyued them gladly into theyr houses builded after the maner of those prouinces. I may wel cal these regions, Prouin∣ces, a Procul Victis (that is) such as are ouercome farre of, foras∣muche as our men do now inhabite the same, al the barbarous kynges and Idolatours beyng eiected. They entertayned them with such cheare as they were able to make them: as with the fruites of those regions, and new bread, both made of rootes, and the graine Maizium. Other delicates to make vp the feast, were of theyr own store, which they brought with them in theyr ships, as poudred flesh, salted fyshe, and bread made of wheat: for they brought with them many barrelles of wheate meale for the same purpose. Heere may your holynesse, not without iust cause of admiration, beholde a kynges nauye and great multitude of Christians, inhabiting not only the regions situate vnder the cyr∣cle of heauen, called Tropicus Cancri, but also in maner vnder the Equinoctiall line, contrary to the opinion of the olde wry∣ters, a fewe excepted.Habitable regi∣ons vnder the Equinoctiall line. But after that they are nowe mette togea∣ther, let vs further declare what they determined to do. Ther∣fore, the day after that ye nauie arriued, there assembled a compa∣ny of Spanyards thinhabitours of Dariena, to the nūber of foure hundred and fiftie men. Petrus Arias the gouernour of the nauy, and his companye, conferred with them both priuilie and open∣lye of certayne articles, whereof it was the kynges pleasure he shoulde enquire: and most especially as concernyng suche thynges wherof Vaschus the fyrst fynder and Admirall of the South sea, made mention in his large letter sent from Dariena to Spayne. In this inquisition they founde althyngs to be true whereof Vaschus had certified the king by his letters, and there∣vpon concluded, that in the dominions of Comogra, Pocchorrosa &
Tumanama at the assignement of Vaschus, certayne fortresses shoulde be erected foorthwith, to thintent there to plant theyr co∣lonie or habitation.Where the new gouernour planteth his ha∣bitation. To the better accomplyshment hereof, they sent immediatly one Iohannes Aiora, a noble young gentleman of Corduba, and vnder Lieuetenant, with foure hundred men, and foure Carauels, and one other lytle shyp. Thus departyng, he sayled fyrst directly to the hauen of Comogrus, distant from Darie∣na about twentie and fyue leagues, as they wryte in theyr last letters. From hence, he is appoynted to send a hundred and fyftie of his foure hundred, towarde the South, by a newe and ryghter way founde of late, by the whiche (as they say) it is not past twentie and syxe leagues from the pallace of kyng Comogrus to the entraunce of the gulfe of Sancti Michaelis. The residue of the foure hundred shal remayne there, to be an ayde and succour to al such as shall iorney to and fro. Those hundred and fyftie whiche are assigned to go southward, take with them for inter∣pretours certain of our men, which had learned the soothern lan∣guage of the bondmen which were geuen to Vaschus when he o∣uerranne those regions, and also certayne of the bondemen them selues which had nowe learned the Spanyshe tongue. They say that the hauen of Pocchorrosa is only seuen leagues distant from the hauen of Comogrus. In Pocchorrosa he is assigned to leaue fyftie men,A passinger shyp. with the lightest ship, which may be a passinger betwene them: that like as we vse post horses by land, so may they by this currant shyp, in short space certifie the Lieuetenaunt and thinhabitours of Dariena of such thynges as shal chaunce. They entend also to build houses in the region of Tumanama. The pal∣lace of king Tumanama, is distant frō Pocchorrosa about twenty leagues. Of these foure hundred men, beyng of the olde souldi∣ers of Dariena, & men of good experience, fyftie were appointed to be as it were Decurians,Decurians are officers deui∣ded into tennes &c. to guide and conduct the new men from place to place to do theyr affayres. When they had thus set all thynges in order, they thought it good to aduertyse the kyng hereof, and therwith to certyfye hym, that in those prouin∣ces there is a kyng named Dabaiba, whose dominion is verye ryche in gold: but the same to be yet vntouched by reason of his great power.The gold mi∣nes of Dabai∣ba. His kyngdome ioyneth to the second great ryuer, named Dabaiba after his name, whiche falleth into the
sea out of the corner of the gulfe of Vraba, as we haue largely de∣clared before. The common report is, that all the land of his dominions is ryche in gold. The pallace of kyng Dabaiba is fyftie leagues distant from Dariena. The inhabitantes saye, that from the pallace, the gold mynes reache to the borders on euery syde. Albeit our men haue also golde mynes not to be contemned, euen within three leagues of Dariena, in the whiche they geather golde in many places at this present: Yet do they affirme greater plentye to be in the mynes of Dabaiba. In the bookes of our fyrst fruites, written to your holynesse, we made mention of this Dabaiba, wherein our men were deceyued,An errour. and mystooke the matter: For where they founde the fyshermen of kyng Dabaiba in the marishes, they thought his region had been there also. They determined therfore to send to kyng Dabaiba, three hundred choyse young men, to be chosen out of the whole army, as most apt to the warres, and well furnyshed with all kyndes of armour and artyllerie, to the intent to go vn∣to hym, and wyll hym, eyther frendly and peaceably to permit them to inhabite part of his kyngdome, with the fruition of the golde mynes, or els to byd hym battayle, and dryue hym out of his countrey. In theyr letters, they oftentymes repeate this for an argument of great ryches to come, that they in a maner dygged the ground in no place, but found the earth myxt with sparkes and small graynes of golde. They haue also aduertised the kyng, that it shalbe commodious to place inhabitours in the hauen of Sancta Martha, in the region of Saturma,The region of Saturma. The Ilande of Dominica. that it may be a place of refuge for them that sayle from the Ilande of Domini∣ca, from the whiche (as they saye) it is but foure or fyue dayes saylyng to that hauen of the region of Saturma, and from the ha∣uen, but three dayes saylyng to Dariena. But this is to be vn∣derstoode in goyng, and not in returnyng. For the returnyng from thence is so laborious and difficulte,Difficult say∣lyng agaynst the course of the sea. by reason of the con∣trary course of the water, that they seeme as it were to ascende hyghe mountaynes, and stryue agaynste the power of Neptu∣nus. This swyft course of the sea towards the west, is not so vi∣olent to them whiche returne to Spayne from the Ilandes of Hispaniola and Cuba, although they also do labour agaynst the fall of the Ocean: The cause whereof is, that the sea is
heere very large, so that the waters haue theyr full scope. But in the tract of Paria, the waters are constrayned togeather by the bendyng sydes of that great land, and by the multitude of I∣landes lying agaynst it, as the lyke is seene in the strayghtes or narrow seas of Scicile, where the violent course of the waters cause the daungerous places of Scilla and Caribdis by reason of those narrowe seas which conteyne Ionium,The daunge∣rous straightes of Scylla and Charibdis. Libicum, and Tirrhe∣num. Colonus the fyrste fynder of these regions, hath left in wry∣tyng, that saylyng from the Ilande of Guanassa, and the prouin∣ces of Iaia, Maia, and Cerabaro, beyng regions of the west mar∣ches of Beragua, he founde the course of the water so vehement and furious agaynst the foreparte of his shyp, whyle he sayled from those coastes towarde the East, that he coulde at no time touche the grounde with his soundyng plummet, but that the contrary violence of the water woulde beare it vp from the bottome: He affyrmeth also, that he coulde neuer in one whole day, with a meetely good wynde, wynne one myle of the course of the water.The vehement course of the sea from the east to the west. And this is the cause why they are often∣tymes enforced to saile fyrst by the Ilandes of Cuba and Hispani∣ola, and so into the mayne sea towarde the North, when they returne to Spayne, that the North wyndes may further theyr voyage, whiche they can not bryng to passe by a direct course: But of the motions of the Ocean sea to and fro, this shal suffise. Let vs nowe therefore rehearse what they wryte of Dariena, and of theyr habitation there, whiche they cal Sancta Maria Antiqua, planted on the sea bankes of Dariena. The situation of the place, hath no natural munition or defence, and the ayre is more pestife∣rous then in Sardus. The Spanishe inhabitours are al pale and yelowe, lyke vnto them whiche haue the yelowe iaundies: which neuerthelesse commeth not of the nature of the region, as it is si∣tuate vnder the heauen. For in many regions beyng vnder the selfe same degree of latitude, hauing the pole of the same eleuati∣on, they fynd holsome & temperate ayre, in such places where as the earth bryngeth foorth fayre sprynges of water, or where hol∣some riuers runne by bankes of pure earth without mudde: but most especially where they inhabite the sides of the hyls, and not the valleys. But that habitation whiche is on the bankes of the ryuer of Dariena, is situate in a deepe valley, and enuironed
on euery syde with hygh hylles: By reason wherof, it receyueth the Sonne beames at noonetyde dyrectly parpendicular ouer theyr heades, and are therefore sore vexed by reflection of the beames, both before, behynde, and from the sydes. For it is the reflection of the sonne beames whiche causeth feruent heate,By what mea∣nes the Sonne beames are cause of fer∣uent heate. and not theyr accesse or neerenesse to the earth, forasmuche as they are not passyble in themselues, as doth manifestly appeare by the snowe lying contynually vnmoulten vpon certayne hygh mountaynes, as your holynesse knoweth ryght well. The sonne beames therfore fallyng on the mountaynes, are reflected down∣warde into the valley, by reason of the obiect of the declining sydes of the hylles, as it were the fall of a great round stone, rowled from the toppe of a mountayne. The valley therefore receyueth both those beames whiche fall directly thereon, and also those whiche are reflected downewarde from euery syde of the mountaynes. Theyr habitation therefore in Driena,The pernitious ayre of Da∣riena. is per∣nicious and vnholsome, onely of the particuler nature of the place, and not by the situation of the region as it is plased vnder the heauen, or neare to the sonne. The place is also contagious by the nature of the soyle, by reason it is compassed about with muddy and stynkyng marishes, the infection whereof is not a lytle encreased by the heate. The vyllage is selfe is in a marishe, and in maner a standyng puddle, where, of the droppes fallyng from the handes of the bondemen, whyle they water the paue∣mentes of theyr houses, Toades are engendred immediately,Toades and Flees engen∣dred of drops of water. as I my selfe saw in an other place the droppes of that water turne into flees in the sommer season. Furthermore, wheresoeuer they dygge the grounde the deapth of a handful and a halfe, there spryngeth out vnholsome and corrupt water, of the nature of the ryuer, whiche runneth through the deepe and muddye chanell of the valley, and so falleth into the sea: Nowe therfore they consult of remouyng theyr inhabitations. Necessitie caused them fyrst to fasten theyr foote heere,Necessitie hath no lawe. because that they whiche fyrst arryued in those landes, were oppressed with suche vr∣gent hunger, that they had no respect to chaunge the place, although they were thus vexed by the contagion of the soyle and heate of the Sonne, besyde the corrupt water, and in∣fectious ayre, by reason of venemous vapours, and exhalati∣ons
rysyng from the same. An other great incommoditie was, that the place was destitute of a commodious hauen, be∣yng three leagues distant from the mouth of the gulfe: The way is also rough and difficult to bryng vyttayles and other necessaries from the sea. But let vs nowe speake somewhat of other particuler thynges whiche chaunced. Therefore short∣ly after that they were arryued, there happened many thynges whereof they had no knowledge before. A certayne well learned phisition of Ciuile, whom partly the auctoritie of the Bishop of Dariena, and partly the desyre of golde, had allured to those landes, was so scarred with lyghtnyng in the nyght season, lying in bedde with his wyfe, that the house and all the stuffe therein beyng set on fyre and burnt,A house set on fyre with light∣nyng. he and his wyfe beyng both sore scorched, ranne foorth crying, and almost na∣ked, hardely escapyng the daunger of death. And an other tyme, as certayne of them stoode one the shore, a great Crocodile sodenly caryed away a masty of a yeere and a halfe olde,A dogge de∣uoured of a Crocodile. as a kyte shoulde haue snatched vp a chicken: and this euen in the presence of them all,Tanquam ca∣nis de Nilo. where the miserable dogge cryed in vayne for the helpe of his maister. In the nyght season they were tormented with the bytyng of Battes, which are there so noy∣some,The bytyng of Battes. that if they byte any man in his sleepe, they put hym in daunger of lyfe, onely with drawyng of blood: In so muche that some haue dyed thereof, fallyng as it were into a consump∣tion through the maliciousnesse of the venemous wounde. If these Battes chaunce to fynde a cocke or a henne abrode in the nyght season, they byte them by the combes, and so kyl them. They also whiche went last into these regions, do wryte, that the lande is troubled with Crocodiles, Lions, and Tygers: but that they haue nowe deuised artes aod ingens howe to take them.Lions and Tygers. Lykewyse that in the houses of theyr felowes, they founde the hydes and cases of suche Lions and Tygers as they had kylled. They wryte furthermore, that by reason of the rankenesse and fruitefulnesse of the grounde, kyne, swyne, and horses, doo maruelously increase in these regions, and growe to a muche bygger quantitie then they whiche were of the fyrst broode.Beastes waxe higher in theyr kynde. Of the exceedyng hyghnesse of the trees with theyr fruites, of the garden hearbes, fruites, plantes, and seedes,
whiche our men brought from Spayne, and sowed and set the same in these regions: lykewyse of the Hartes and other foure footed beastes both tame and wylde, also of dyuers kyndes of foules, byrdes, and fyshes, they wryte euen as we haue de∣clared in the decades before. Careta, the kyng of the region of Cioba, was with them for the space of three dayes: whom when they had frendly entertayned, and shewed hym the secrete places of theyr shyppes, their Horses also, with theyr trappers, bardes, and other furnimentes, besyde many other thynges whiche seemed straunge to hym, and had further delyted his mynde with the harmony of theyr musycal instrumentes, & geuen hym many rewardes, they dismyssed hym halfe amased with to muche admiration. He sygnifyed vnto them, that there are trees in that prouynce,Note. of the plankes whereof if shyppes were made, they shoulde be safe from the woormes of the sea, whiche they call Bromas.Broma or Bissa are wormes which destroy shyppes. Howe these woormes gnawe and corrode the shyppes, we haue declared before. Our shyppes are greatly troubled with this plague, if they lye long in the ha∣uens of these regions. But they affyrme that the wood of this tree is so bytter, that the woormes wyll not taste thereof. There is also an other tree peculyar to these landes,A venemous tree. whose leaues if they onely touche the bare in any place of a mans body, they cause great blysters, and those so malitious, that except the same be foorthwith healed with salte water or fastyng spyt∣tle, they do incontinently engender deadly paynes. They say lykewyse, that the sauour of the wood is present poyson, and that it can no whither be caried without daunger of lyfe.Perhaps their venemous ar∣rows are made of this wood. When thinhabitantes of the Ilande of Hispaniola had oftentymes at∣tempted to shake of the yoke of seruitude, and coulde neuer bryng the same to passe, neyther by open warre, nor yet by pri∣uie conspiracies, they were determined in the nyght season to haue kylled our men in theyr sleepe with the smoke of this wood: But when the Christian men had knowledge hereof, they compelled the poore wretches to confesse theyr intent, and punyshed the chiefe auctours of the deuice. They haue also a certayne hearbe with the sauour wherof they are preserued from the hurt of this venemous wood,A preseruatiue against poison. so that they may
beare it safely. Of these small thinges it shall suffyce to haue sayde thus much. They looke dayly for many greater thinges to certifie vs of from the Ilandes of the south sea:The Ilandes of the south sea. For at such tyme as the messenger whiche brought our letters departed from thence, Petrus Arias prepared an expedition to that ryche Iland which lyeth in the mouth of the gulfe called Sinus S. Michaelis,The rich Iland called Dites. and reacheth into the south sea, being also left vntouched of vas∣chus, by reason that the Sea was at that tyme of the yeere sore troubled with tempestes, as we haue further declared in Vaschus his vyage to the south. Wee looke therefore dayly for greater thinges then are hitherto paste: For they haue now taken in hande to subdue many other prouinces, which we suppose to be eyther very ryche, or to bryng foorth some straunge workes of nature. Iohannes Diaz Solisius of Nebrissa (of whom we haue made mention before) is sent by the froont of the cape or poynt of Sancti Augustini (which reacheth seuen degrees beyonde the Equinoctial lyne,Cap. sancti Augustini. Of the euill suc∣cesse of these vi∣ages, reade de∣cade, 3. Liber. 9. and parteyneth to the dominion of the Portu∣gales) to thintent to ouerrunne the south syde, from the backe halfe of Paria, Cumana, Cuquibacca, with the hauens of Cartbago, and Sancta Martha, of Dariena also, and Beragua, that more per∣fect and certayne knowledge may be had of those tractes. Fur∣thermore, one Iohannes Poncius was sent foorth with three ships, to destroye the Canibales,An expedition to destroy the Canibales. both in the lande and Ilandes there about: aswell that the nations of the more humane and innocent people may at the length lyue without feare of that pestiferous generation, as also the better and more safely to searche the se∣cretes and rychesse of those regions. Many other lykewyse were sent dyuers and sundry wayes, as Gasper Badaiocius to search the West parts, Franciscus Bexerra, to sayle by the corner of the gulf, and Valleius, to passe by the mouth or entraunce thereof to the Easte coastes of the gulf, to searche the secretes of that lande, in the which Fogeda with his company had of late begunne to plant their habitation, and had buylded a fortresse and a vyllage. Badai∣ocius departed fyrst from Dariena, with fourescore souldiours wel appoynted, whom Lodouicus Mercado folowed with fyftye: To Bezerra were also fourscore assigned, and threescore and tenne to Valleius.Looke decade .3. Lib. 9. Whether they shall arryue at safe and commodi∣ous hauens, or fall into vnfortunate stations, he onely knoweth
whose prouidence ruleth all: for as for vs men wee are inclu∣ded within the knowledge of thinges after they haue chaunced. Let vs now therefore come to other matters. The seuenth booke of the third decade. PEtrus Arias the gouernour of the suppo∣sed continent, was scarsly entred into the mayne sea with his nauye, onwarde on his vyage to Dariena, but I was aduertised that one Andreas Moralis a pilot,The nauigati∣ons of Andreas Moralis. who had oftentymes ouerrunne the coastes of these new seas, and the Ilandes of the same, was come to the court to sell such marchaundies as he brought with him from thence. This man had diligently searched the tracte of the supposed continent, and especially thinner regions of the Ilande of Hispaniola, whereunto he was appoynted by his bro∣ther Nicolaus Ouandus (the gouernour of the Ilande, and chiefe Commendator of the order of the knyghtes of Alcantara) by∣cause he was a wytty man, and more apt to search suche thinges then any other: so that with his owne handes he drewe faire cardes and tables of such regions as he discouered. Wherein as he hath been founde faythfull of such as haue since had better tryall hereof, so is he in most credite amongst the best sorte. He therefore resorted to me, as all they are accustomed to doe which returne from the Ocean. What I learned of him and dyuers o∣ther, of thinges heretofore vnknowen, I will now declare.A perticular de∣scription of the Ilande of His∣paniola. The beginnyng of this narration, shalbe the perticular description of the Ilande of Hispaniola, forasmuch as it is the heade, and as it were, ye principall marte of all the liberalitie of the Ocean, & hath a thousand & againe a thousand, faire, pleasant, beautiful,Nereides are nymphes of the sea, he meaneth Ilandes. Tethis the wyfe of Nep∣tunus & god∣desse of the sea. & ryche Nereides, which lye about it on euery syde, adournyng this their ladie & mother, as it were an other Tethis the wyfe of Neptunus, enuyroning her about, & attēding vpon her as their queene & pa∣tronesse.
But of these Nereiades (that is to saye, the Ilandes placed about her) we wyll speake more hereafter. Let vs in the meane tyme declare somewhat of the Ilande whiche our men named Margarita Diues (whiche the Spanyardes call De las perlas) beyng nowe well knowen, and lying in the south sea in the gulfe called Sinus Sancti Michaelis (that is) saint Mi∣chaels gulfe. This Ilande hath presently brought to our know∣ledge many straunge and woonderfull thynges, and promiseth no small hope of greater thynges in tyme to come. In this is founde great plentie of pearles,Great pearles. so fayre and great, that the sump∣tuous queene Cleopatra myght haue seemed to weare them in her crownes, chaynes, and braslettes. Of the shelfyshes where∣in these are engendered, we wyll speake somewhat more in thend of this narration.Hispaniola like vnto the earthy paradise But let vs nowe returne to Hispaniola, most lyke vnto the earthly paradyse. In the description hereof, we wyll begynne of the imposition of dyuers names, then of the fourme of the Ilande, temperate ayre, and beneficial heauen, and finally of the deuision of the regions. Therefore for the righ∣ter pronunciation of the names, your holynesse must vnderstande, that they are pronounced with thaccent, as you may knowe by the verge set ouer the heddes of the vowels, as in the name of the Ilande Matinino, where the accent is in the last vowell, and the lyke to be vnderstoode in all other names. They saye therefore, that the fyrst inhabitours of the Ilande were trans∣ported in theyr Canoas (that is,The fyrst inha∣bitours of His∣paniola. boates made of one whole peece of wood) from the Ilande of Matinino, beyng lyke banyshed men dryuen from thence by reason of certayne contrary factions and deuisyons among them selues, lyke as we reade howe Darda∣nus came from Corytho, and Teucrus from Creta into Asia, and that the region where they placed their habitation, was after∣ward called Troianum. The like we reade howe the Tyrians and Sidonians arriued with their nauie in Libya by the fabulous con∣duction of Dido. These Matinians in like maner being banyshed from their owne countrey, planted their fyrst habitation in that parte of the Iland of Hispaniola, which they call Cahonao, vppon the banke of the ryuer named Bahaboni as is redde in the begyn∣nyng of the Romanes that Eneas of Troy arryued in the region of Italy, called Latium, vppon the bankes of the ryuer of Tiber.
Within the mouth of the ryuer of Bahaboni, lyeth an Ilande, where it is sayde that thinhabitantes buylded theyr fyrst house, whiche they named Camoteia. This house they consecrated shortly after, and honoured the same reuerently, with continual gyftes and monumentes, euen vntyll the commyng of our men, lyke as the Christians haue euer religiously honoured Ierusalem the fountayne and originall of our fayth:Hierusalem. As also the Turkes attribute the lyke to the citie of Mecha in Araby, and the inhabitantes of the fortunate Ilandes (called the Ilandes of Canarie) to Tyrma, buylded vppon a hygh rocke,Mecha. The Ilandes of Canarie. from the whiche many were wont with ioyfull myndes and songes to cast them selues downe headlong, beyng perswaded by theyr priestes that the soules of all such as so dyed for the loue of Tyrma, shoulde thereby enioye eternall felicitie. The con∣querours of the Ilandes of Canarie, founde them yet remay∣nyng in that superstition euen vntyll our tyme, nor yet is the memory of theyr sacrifyces vtterly worne away: the rocke also reserueth the olde name vnto this daye. I haue also lear∣ned of late, that there yet remayneth in the Ilande some of the faction of Betanchor the Frencheman,Betanchor a frenchman. and fyrst that brought the Ilandes to good culture and ciuilitie, beyng thereto ly∣cenced by the kyng of Castile, as I haue sayde before. These do yet (for the most part) obserue both the language and maners of the Frenche men, although the heyres and successours of Betanchor, had solde the two subdued Ilandes to certayne men of Castile: Yet thinhabitours whiche succeded Betanchor, and buil∣ded them houses, and encreased their families there, do con∣tynue to this day, and lyue quietly and pleasauntly with the Spa∣nyardes, not greeued with the sharpe colde of Fraunce. But let vs nowe returne to thinhabitantes of Matinino and Hispaniola. The Iland of Hispaniola was first named by the first inhabitours Quizqueia, and then Haiti: and this not by chaunce,The first na∣mes of Hispa∣niola. or at the plea∣sure of suche as diuised these names, but of credulitie and beleefe of some great effecte. For Quizqueia, is as muche to say as, A great thyng, and that so great, that none may be greater. They interprete also, that Quizqueia sygnifieth, large, vniuer∣sall, or all, in lyke signification as the Greekes named theyr god called Pan, bycause that for ye greatnes therof, these simple soules
supposed it to bee the whole worlde: and that the Sonne beames gaue lyght to none other worlde, but onely to this Ilande, with the other adiacent about the same, and there∣vppon thought it most woorthy to be called great, as the great∣est of all other knowen to them. Haiti is as muche to saye by interpretation, as, rough, sharpe, or craggie. But by a fyguratiue speache called denomination (whereby the whole is named by part) they named the whole Ilande Haiti (that is) rough: Forasmuche as in many places the face of this Ilande is rough, by reason of the craggie mountaynes, horrible thicke wooddes, and terribly darke and deepe valleys, enuironed with great & high mountaynes, although it be in manye other places exceedyng beautifull and floryshyng. Heere must we somewhat digresse from thorder we are entred into. Perhappes your holy∣nesse wyll maruell by what meanes these symple men shoulde of so long continaunce beare in mynde suche principles, wher∣as they haue no knowledge of letters. So it is therefore, that from the begynnyng,Their maner of learnyng. theyr princes haue euer been accustomed to commit theyr children to the gouernaunce of their wise men, whiche they call Boitios, to be enstructed in knowledge, and to beare in memorie such thynges as they learne. They geue them selues chiefly to two thynges: As generally, to learne thoriginall and successe of thynges, and perticulerly, to rehearse the noble factes of theyr graundefathers, great graundefathers, and aun∣cestours,Ballets and rhymes. aswell in peace as in warre. These two thynges they haue of olde tyme composed in certayne myters and ballettes in theyr language. These rymes or ballettes, they call Areios. And as our mynstrelles are accustomed to syng to the Harpe or Lute, so do they in lyke maner syng these songes, and daunce to the same, playing on Timbrels made of shels of certaine fishes: These Tymbrels they call Maguei.Singyng and daunceyng. Songes of loue and mour∣nyng. They haue also songes and ballettes of loue, and other of lamentations and mournyng, some also to encourage them to the warres, with euery of them theyr tunes agreeable to the matter. They exercyse them selues muche in daunceyng, wherein they are very actyue, and of greater agilitie then our men, by reason they geue them selues to nothyng so muche, and are not hyndered with apparell, whiche is also the cause of theyr swiftenesse of foote. In theyr  lefte them of theyr auncestours, they haue prophecies
of the commyng of our men into theyr countrey.Prophesses. These they syng with mournyng, and as it were with gronyng, bewayle the losse of their libertie and seruitude.Note. For these prophesies make mention that there shoulde come into the Iland Maguaco∣chios, that is, men clothed in apparell, and armed with suche swoordes as shoulde cut a man in sunder at one stroke, vnder whose yoke their posteritie shoulde be subdued.Their familia∣ritie with spi∣rites. And here I do not maruell that theyr predecessours coulde prophecye of the ser∣uitude and bondage of their succession (if it be true that is sayd) of the familiaritie they haue with spirites, whiche appeare to them in the nyght, whereof we haue largely made mention in the nienth booke of the fyrst decade, where also we haue entreated of their Zemes (that is) their Idoles, and Images of deuylles whi∣che they honoured.The deuyl is driuen away by baptisme. But they saye that since these Zemes were taken away by the Christians, the spirites haue no more ap∣peared. Our men ascribe this to the signe of the crosse, wherwith they defende them selues from suche spirites: For they are nowe all cleansed and sanctified by the water of baptisme, whereby they haue renounced the deuyl, andare consecrated the holy members of Christ.Surueyers. They are vniuersally studious to knowe the boundes and limittes of their regions & kingdomes, and especially their Mitani (that is) noble men: so that euen they are not vtterly ignorant in the surueying of theyr landes. The common people haue none other care then of settyng, sowyng, and plantyng. They are most expert fyshers, by reason that throughout the whole yeere, they are accustomed dayly to plunge them selues in the ryuers, so that in maner they lyue no lesse in the water then on the lande. They are also geuen to huntyng: For (as I haue sayd before) they haue two kindes of foure footed beastes, whereof the one is, litle Cunnes, called Vtias, and other Ser∣pentes, named Iuannas, much lyke vnto Crocodils,Serpentes. A Crocodile is muche lyke to our Ewte or Lyserte. of eyght foote length, of most pleasaunte tast, and lyuyng on the lande. All the Ilandes nooryshe innumerable byrdes and foules: as Stockdoues, Duckes, Geese, Hearons, besyde no lesse num∣ber of Popingiais then Sparowes with vs. Euery kyng hath his subiectes diuided to sundrye affaires: as some to huntyng, other to fyshyng, & other some to husbandrye. But let vs nowe returne to speake further of the names. We haue sayde that
Quizqueia and Haiti, were the olde names of this Ilande. The whole Ilande was also called Cipanga,Cipanga. of the region of the moun∣taynes aboundyng with golde: lyke as our auncient poetes called all Italy Latium,Italy called Latium. of part thereof. Therefore as they called Ausonia and Hesperia, Italy: euen so by the names of Quizqueia, Haiti, and Cipanga, they vnderstode the whole Ilande of Hispaniola.Isabella. Our men dyd fyrst name it Isabella, of queene Helisabeth, whiche in the Spanyshe tounge is called Isabella, and so named it of the fyrst Colonie where they planted their ha∣bitation, vpon the banke neere vnto they sea on the North syde of the Ilande, as we haue further declared in the fyrst decade. But of the names, this shal suffyse. Let vs nowe therfore speake of the fourme of the Ilande.The fourme of the Ilande of Hispaniola. They whiche fyrst ouerran it, des∣cribed it vnto me to be lyke vnto the leafe of a Chestnut tree, with a gulfe towarde the west syde, lying open agaynst the Ilande of Cuba. But the expert shypmaistier Andreas Moralis, brought me the fourme thereof somewhat differyng from that. For from both the corners, as from the East angle and the West, he des∣cribed it to be indented & eaten with many great gulfes, and the corners to reache foorth very farre, and placeth manye large and safe hauens in the great gulfe on the East syde:A particuler carde of Hispa∣niola. But I trust short∣ly so to trauayle further herein, that a perfect carde of the perti∣cular description of Hispaniola may be sent vnto your holynesse. For they haue nowe drawne the Geographicall description ther∣of in cardes, euen as your holynesse hath seene the fourme and situation of Spayne and Italy, with theyr mountaynes, val∣leyes, riuers, cities, and colonies. Let vs therefore without sham∣fastnesse compare the Iland of Hispaniola to Italy, somtyme the head and queene of the whole worlde.Hispaniola compared to Itaie. For if we consyder the quantitie, it shalbee founde litle lesse, and muche more fruitefull. It reacheth from the East into the West, fyue hun∣dred and fourtie myles, accordyng to the computation of the later searchers, although the Admiral somewhat increased this number, as we haue sayde in the fyrst decade. It is in breadth somewhere almost three hundred myles, and in some places narower, where the corners are extended: But it is surely muche more blessed and fortunate then Italie,The tempra∣ture of Hispa∣niola. beyng for the most part thereof so temperate and floryshyng, that
it is neyther vexed with sharpe colde, nor afflicted with im∣moderate heare. It hath both the steyinges or conuersions of the Sonne (called Solstitia) in maner equall with the Equi∣noctial,The Equinoc∣tiall. with litle difference betwene the length of the day and the nyght throughout all the yeere. For on the south syde, the day ascendeth scarcely an houre in length aboue the nyght, or contrarywyse. But the difference is more on the north syde: Yet are there some regions in the Ilande in the whiche the colde is of some force.Cold acciden∣tal. and not by the situation of the region. But your holynesse must vnderstande this to be incident by reason of ye obiect or neerenes of the moun∣taynes, as we wyll more largely declare hereafter: Yet is not this colde so pearsyng or sharpe, that thinhabitantes are mo∣lested with snowe or bytyng frost. In other places,Perpetuall spring and sommer. the I∣lande enioyeth perpetuall spryng tyme, and is fortunate with continuall sommer and haruest. The trees floryshe there all the whole yeere, and the medowes continue alway greene. All thynges are exceedyng fortunate, and growe to great perfection. Howe wonderfully all garden hearbes and fruites do encrease,Maruelous fruitfullnesse. so that within the space of syxtene dayes after the seede is sowne, all hearbes of small steames, as lettisse, borage, radish, and suche other, come to theyr full rypenesse, and also howe hearbes of the bygger sort, as Gourdes, Melons, Cucumbers, Pompons, Si∣trons, and such other, come to theyr perfection in the space of thyrtie dayes, we haue sufficiently, declared elswhere. Of the beastes transported out of Spayne thyther,Beastes. we haue sayde howe they growe to a muche greater kynde:Oxen and swine of excee∣ding bignesse. insomuch that when they fall into communication of the oxen or kyne, they compare them in bygnesse to Elephantes, and swyne to Mules: but this somewhat by an excessiue kynde of speache. We haue also made mention howe theyr swynes fleshe is more sauourye and of farre better and of more pleasaunt tast, and more holsome then ours,Swine fed with Miroba∣lanes. by reason that they are fedde with the fruites of Mi∣robalane trees, and other pleasaunt and nourishing fruites of that countrey, whiche growe there of them selues, as do with vs Beeches, Holly, and Okes. Uines woulde also prosper there with marueylous encrease, if they had any regarde to the plan∣tyng thereof. The lyke encrease commeth of wheate, if it be sowen vpon the mountaines, where the cold is of some strength: but not
in the same playnes, by reason of to much fatnesse and ranknesse of the grounde. It is in maner incredible to heare, that an eare of wheate shoulde be bygger then a mans arme in the brawne, and more then a spanne in length, bearyng also more then a thousand graynes,An eare of wheat as bigge as a mans arme in the brawne. as they all confesse with one voyce, and earnestlye af∣fyrme the same with others. Yet they say that the bread of the I∣land called Cazabbi, made of the roote of Iucca, to be more hol∣some, because it is of easier digestion, and is cultured with lesse labour, and greater encrease. The residue of the tyme which they spend not in settyng and plantyng, they bestowe in geathering of golde. They haue nowe such plenty of foure footed beastes, that Horses and oxe hydes, with sheepe skynnes, and goate skynnes, and such other,Great plentie of cattayle. are brought from thence into Spayne: so that now the daughter in many thynges helpeth and succoureth her mother. Of the trees of brasyle, spyces, the grayne which colou∣reth scarlet in bright shyning red, mastix, gossampyne cotton, the precious metall called Electrum, and such other commodities of this Ilande, we haue spoken sufficiently before. What ther∣fore can chaunce more happye vnto man vppon the earth,Incommodi∣ties of intempe∣rate. regions then there to lyue where he neede not to be dryuen to close chaumbers with sharpe colde or fayntyng heate, nor yet in winter eyther to be laden with heauy apparrel, or to burne the shinnes with conti∣nual sittyng at the fyre, which thynges make men olde in short tyme, by resoluing the naturall heate, whereof a thousand di∣seases ensue.Holsome ayre and water. They also affirme the ayre to be very healthfull, and the waters and ryuers to be no lesse holsome, as they which haue their contynuall course through the earth of the golden mynes.Golde euery where. For there is in maner no ryuers, no mountaynes, and but fewe playnes, that are vtterly without golde. But let vs nowe at the length come to the particuler description of the in∣ner partes of this blessed Ilande. We haue before declared how it is in maner equally diuided with foure great ryuers, des∣cendyng from hygh mountaynes, whereof that whiche runneth towards the East, is called Iunna, as that towards the West is named Attibunicus, the thyrde is Nahiba or Haiba, which runneth Southward, the fourth is called Iache, & falleth toward the North. But this shypmaister hath brought an other des∣cription, obserued of the inhabitauntes from the beginnyng.
Let vs therfore diuide the whole Iland into fiue partes, cal∣lyng the regions of euery prouince by theyr olde names: and fi∣nally make mention of such thyngs as are worthy memory in euery of them. The beginning of the Ilande on the East syde, is conteyned in the prouince named Caizcimu, so named for that in theyr language Cimu signifieth the front or beginning of anye thyng. After this, foloweth the prouince of Huhabo, and then Caihabo, the fourth is Bainoa. Guaccaiarima conteyneth the west corner. But the last saue one, Bainoa is of larger boundes then the three other. Caizcimu reacheth from the fyrst front of the I∣land to the ryuer Hozama, which runneth by the citie of saint Dominicke. But towarde the North syde,The citie of S. Dominick. it is ended at the rough mountaynes of Haiti. Hubaho, is encluded within the mountaynes Haiti and the ryuer Iaciga. Caeiabo the thyrd pro∣uince, conteineth al that lyeth between Cubabo and Dahatio, euen vnto the mouth of the ryuer of Iaceha or Iache (one of the foure which diuide the Iland equally) & ascendeth to the moun∣taynes of Cibaua, where the greatest plenty of gold is found, out of the which also the ryuer Demahus spryngeth: and ioining with the sprynges of the ryuer of Naiba (beyng an other of the foure which diuideth the Iland toward the south sea) falleth to an o∣ther banke of the riuer of saint Dominick. Bainoa, beginneth at the confines of Caiabi, and reacheth euen vnto the Iland of Cahi∣ni, which lyeth neare vnto the sea bankes of the North syde of the Iland, where we sayde that they erected ye first colonie or habita∣tion. The prouince of Guaccaiarima, occupieth the remanent to∣ward the west: this they named Guaccaiarima,Of prouinces diuided into regions. because it is the extreeme or vttermost part of the Iland. For Iarima in theyr lan∣guage, signifieth the tayle or end of any thing, and Gua, is an ar∣ticle which they vse oftentimes in the names of things, and espe∣cially in the names of theyr kinges, as Guarionexius & Guaccana∣rillus. In the prouince of Cazium, are these regions, Higuei, Gua∣nama, Reyre, Xagua, Aramana, Arabo, Hazoa, Macorix, Caiacoa, Guaiagua, Baguauimabo, & the rough mountaines of Haiti. Here let vs speake somwhat of their aspirations, which they vse other∣wise then the Latines do. It is to be noted that there is no aspira∣tion in their vowels, which hath not the effect of a consonant. So that they pronounce theyr aspirations more vehemently then
we do the consonant .f. Yea, all suche wordes as in theyr tongue are aspirate, are pronounced with lyke breath and spirite as is f. sauyng that heerin the neather lippe is not moued to the vp∣permost teeth. With open mouthes and shakyng theyr breastes they breath out these aspirations,The pronunci∣ation of the He∣brues and Ara∣bians. The Moores and Arabians possessed Spayne. ha, he, hi, ho, hu, as the Hebru∣es and Arabians are accustomed to pronounce theyrs. I fynde also that the Spanyardes vse the lyke vehemencie in the aspira∣tions of those wordes which they haue receyued of the Moores & Arabians which possessed Spaine, and continued there many yeeres, as in these wordes Almohadda, which signifieth a pyllow or boulster, also Almohaza, that is a horse combe: with diuers such other wordes, which they speake in maner wt panting brea∣stes, and vehement spirite. I haue thought it good to rehearse these thyngs, because among the Latines it oftentimes so chaun∣ceth, that only the accent or aspiration, chaungeth the significati∣on of the worde, as hora, for an houre, and ora, for the plurale number of this worde os,How the aspi∣ration chaun∣geth the signi∣fication of woords. whiche signifieth the mouth: also ora, whiche signifieth regions or coastes. The lyke also chaunceth in ye diuersitie of ye accent, as occido I kil, & occido I fal: euen so in the language of these simple men, there are many thynges to be obserued. But let vs now returne to the discription. In the pro∣uince of Hubabo, are these regions, Xamana, Canabacoa, Cubabo, with many other,Diuers lan∣guages in the Iland. the names wherof I haue not yet learned. The prouince of Cubabo, conteyneth these regions, Migua and Caca∣cubana. The inhabitauntes of this region, haue a peculier lan∣guage much differing from the common language of the Iland, and are called Maioriexes. There is also an other region called Cubana, whose language differeth from the other. Lykewyse the region of Baiohagua, hath a diuers tongue. There are also o∣ther regions, as Dahabon, Cybaho, and Manababo. Cotoy is in the middle of the Iland. By this runneth the riuer Nizaus, and the mountaines called Mathaitin, Hazua, & Neibaymao, confine wt the same. In the prouince of Bainoa, are ye regions of Maguana, Iago∣haiucho, Baurucco, Dabaiagua, & Attibuni, so named of the riuer: also Caunoa, Buiaici, Dababonici, Maiaguariti, Atiei, Maccazina, Gua∣habba, Anniuici, Mariē, Guaricco, Amaguei, Xaragua, Yaguana, A∣zuei, Iacchi, Honorucco, Diaguo, Camaie, & Neibaimao. In Guaccaie∣rima ye last prouince, these regions are conteined Mauicarao, Gua∣bagua,
Taquenazabo, Nimaca, Baiona the lesse, Cabaini, Iamaici, Mana∣baxao, Zauana, Habacoa, and Ayquiora. But let vs entreate some∣what of the particulers of the regions. In the prouince of Caiz∣cimu, within the great gulfe of the beginning, there is a great caue in a hollow rocke vnder the roote of a high moūtayne, about two furlonges from the sea, the entry of this caue is not muche vnlyke the doores of a great temple, beyng very large, and tur∣ning many wayes. Andreas Moralis the shypmaister, at the commaundement of the gouernour, attempted to search the caue with the smalest vessels. He sayeth that by certayne priuie waies many ryuers haue concourse to this caue,Riuers denou∣red of caues. as it were a syncke or chanel. After thexperience hereof, they ceassed to marueyle whi∣ther other riuers ranne, which comming fourscore and ten miles were swalowed vp, so that they appeered no more, nor yet fell in∣to the sea by any knowen wayes. Nowe therefore they sup∣pose that ryuers swalowed vp by the hollowe places of that stony mountayne, fall into this caue. As the shypmaister entred in∣to the caue, his shyp was almost swalowed. For he sayth, that there are many whyrlepooles and rysinges or boylynges of the water, whiche make a violent conflict and horrible roryng, one encounteryng the other:Whirlepooles, and conflict of waters. also many huge holes and hollowe pla∣ces, so that what on the one syde with whirlpooles, and on the other syde with the boylyng of the water, his shyppe was long in maner tossed vp and downe like a ball. It greatlye repented hym that he had entred, yet knew he no way how to come foorth. He now wandred in darknesse, aswell for the obscurenesse of the caue into the which he was farre entred, as also that in it were thicke clouds,Cloudes in the caue. engendred of the moist vapours proceeding of the conflict of the waters, which continually fal with great violence into the caue on euery syde. He compareth the noyse of these waters,The Cataracts of Nilus. to the fal of the famous ryuer Nilus from the mountains of Ethiope, they were also deafe, that one coulde not heare what an other saide. But at the length with great daunger and feare, he came foorth of the caue, as it had been out of hell. About three∣score myles distant from the cheefe citie of sainct Dominicke, there are certayne hygh mountaynes,A standing poole in the top of a high mountayne. vpon the toppes where∣of is a lake or standing poole inaccessible, neuer yet seene of them which came latelye to the Ilande, both by reason of the rough∣roughnesse
of the mountaynes, and also for that there is no pathe or open way to the toppes of the same. But at the length the shypmaister beyng conducted thyther by one of the kynges, ascended to the toppes of the mountaynes, and came to the poole.Fearne and bramble bu∣shes, growe on∣ly in colde regi∣ons. He sayth that the colde is there of some force: and in token of wynter, he founde fearne and bramble bushes, whiche two growe only in colde regions. These mountaines, they call Ymizui Hibabaino. This poole is of freshe water three myles in compasse, and well replenyshed with diuers kyndes of fyshes. Many small riuers or brookes fall into it. It hath no passage out, bycause it is on euery syde enclosed with the toppes of moun∣taynes. But let vs nowe speake of an other poole, whiche may well be called a sea in the mydlande, and be compared to the Caspian or Hircanian sea in the fyrme lande of Asia, with cer∣tayne other lakes and pooles of freshe water.The Caspian and Hircanian sea. The eyght booke of the thyrde decade. THe prouince of Bainoa beyng thrise as bigge as the three fyrst, that is, Caizcimu, Vhabo, and Caibabo, includeth a valley named Cai∣ouani,A great lake of soure and salte water. in the whiche there is a lake of salt, sower, and bytter water, as we reade of the sea called Caspium, lying in the firme lande betwene Sarmatia and Hircania. We haue therefore named it Caspium, although it bee not in the region of Hircania. It hath manye swalowyng gulfes, by the whiche, both the water of the sea spryngeth into it, and also suche as fall into it from the mountaynes are swalowed vp. They thynke that the caues thereof,Sea Fysshes in lakes of the midlande. are so large and deepe, that great fyshes of the sea passe by the same into the lake. Among these fyshes, there is one called Tiburonus, whiche cut∣teth a man in sunder by the myddest at one snap with his teeth, and deuoureth hym.The deuouring Fyshe called Tiburonus. In the ryuer Hozama, runnyng by the cheefe citie of saint Dominicke, these Tiburoni do sometymes come from the sea, and deuoure many of thinhabitauntes: espe∣cially suche as do dayly ploonge them selues in the water, to thin∣tent
to keepe their bodyes very cleane. The ryuers whiche fall into the lake, are these. From the North syde Guanicabon:The ryuers that fall into the lake Caspi∣um. From the Southe, Xaccoei: from the East, Guannabo: And from the West, Occoa. They saye that these ryuers are great and continuall, and that besyde these, there are .xx. other small ryuers whiche fall into this Caspium. Also on the North syde within a furlong of the lake, there are aboue twoo hundreth springes,CC. springe within the space of a fur∣long. occupying lykewyse about a furlong in circu∣ite, the water wherof is colde in sommer, freshe also, and holsome to be drunke. These sprynges make a ryuer that can not bee wa∣ded ouer, which neare at hande ioynyng with the other, falleth into the lake. Here must we staye a whyle. The kyng of this region founde his wyfe praying in a Chapell buylded by the Christians within the precincte of his dominion,A myracle. and requyred her company to satisfie his fleshely lust. His wyfe reproued him, and put him in remembraunce to haue respecte to the holy place. The wordes which she spake to him were these, Teitoca, Teitoca, which is as muche to say, as, be quyet, be quyet.The Indian language. Techeta cynato guamechyna: That is, God will be greatly angry. Guamechyna, signifyeth God, Techeta greatly, Cynato angrye. But the husbande halyng her by the arme, sayde, Guaibba, that is, goe, Cynato macabuca guamechyna: That is, What is that to me if God be angry? And with these wordes as he profered her violence, sodeinly he became dumme and lame.A kyng striken dumme and lame by a my∣racle. Yet by this my∣racle being stryken with repentaunce, he euer after ledde a rely∣gious lyfe, insomuche that from thencefoorth he would neuer suffer the Chapell to bee swepte or decked with any other mans hande. By the same myracle, many of thinhabitauntes, and all the Christians being moued, resorted deuoutly to the Chapell. They take it in good parte that the kyng suffered the reuenge of that reproche. Let vs now returne to Caspium. That salte lake is tossed with stormes and tempestes, and oftentymes drowneth small shyppes or fyssher boates, and swaloweth them vp with the maryners: In so muche that it hath not been hearde of, that any man drowned by shyppewracke,Such as are drowned in the lake are not cast vp againe. euer plunged vp againe, or was caste on the shore, as commonly chaunceth of the dead bodyes of suche as are drowned in the sea. These tempestes, are the daintie banquets of the Tiburones.
This Caspium, is called Hagueigabon. In the myddest hereof, ly∣eth an Iland named Guarizacca, to the which they resort when they go a fishyng: but it is now cultured. There is in the same playne, an other lake next vnto this, whose water is myxte of salt and fresh,A lake of salt & freshe water. and is therfore neyther apt to be drunke, nor yet to be refused in vrgent necessitie: This conteyneth in length twen∣tie and fyue myles, and in breadth eyght myles, in some places also niene or ten. It receyueth many ryuers, which haue no passage out of the same, but are swalowed vp as in the other. Water spryngeth out of the sea into this also: but in no great quantitie, which is the cause that it is so commyxt. In the same prouince towards the west syde,A lake of freshe water. there is an other lake of freshe water, not farre distaunt from Caspius: this the inhabi∣tauntes call Iainagua. The same salte lake hath on the North syde thereof, an other named Guaccaa: this is but lytle, as not past three or foure myles in breadth, and one in length, the water of this may well be drunke. On the South syde of the salt lake, there lyeth an other named Babbareo, of three myles in length, and in maner rounde. The water of this is freshe, as of the two other. This lake, because it hath no passage out, nor yet any swalowyng gulfes, conueyeth the superfluous waters to the sea, if it be encreased with ye streames which fal sometymes more abundantly from the mountaynes: this is in the region of Xamana in the prouince of Bainoa. There is an other called Gu∣aniba, lying betwene the East and the South, neere vnto the syde of Caspius: this is ten myles in length, and almost round. There are furthermore many other small standyng pooles or lakes dis∣parsed here and there in the Iland,A lake of ten myles in length. whiche I wyll let passe, lest I shoulde be tedious in remaynyng to long in one thyng. I wyll therefore make an ende with this addition, that in all these great plentie of fyshe and foule is nouryshed. All these lakes lye in a large playne, the whiche from the East reacheth into the West a hundreth and twentie miles, being of breadth .xviii. miles where it is narowest,A playne of a hundred and twenty myles and .xxv. where it is largest. Lookyng toward the West, it hath collaterally on the left hande the moun∣taines of Daiguani, and on the ryght hande, the mountaines of Gaigua, so called of the name of ye vale it selfe. At the rootes of the
mountaynes of Caigua towarde the North syde, there lyeth an o∣ther vale much longer and larger then that before named: For it conteineth in length almost two hundreth myles,A plaine of two hundred myles in length. and in breadth thirtie where it is largest, and about .xx. where it is narowest. This vale in some parte thereof, is called Maguana, in an o∣ther place, Iguaniu, and els where, Hathathiei. And forasmuch as we haue here made mention of this parte of the vale named Ha∣thathiei, we will somewhat digresse from the discourse of this de∣scription, and entreate of a thing so straunge and marueilous, that the lyke hath not been hearde of. So it is therefore, that the kyng of this region named Caramatexius, taketh great pleasure in fyshing. Into his nettes chaunced a young fyshe, of the kynde of those huge monsters of the sea which thinhabitours call Ma∣nati, not founde I suppose in our seas,The maruey∣lous fyshe Manati. nor knowne to our men be∣fore this tyme. This fyshe is foure footed, and in shape lyke vnto a Tortoyse, although shee be not couered with a shell, but with scales, and those of such hardnesse, & couched in such order, that no arrow can hurte her. Her scales are beset & defended with a thou∣sande knobbes, her backe is playne, and her head vtterly lyke the head of an Oxe. She lyueth both in the water, & on the lande, shee is slowe of mouyng, of condition meeke, gentle, associable,A monster of the sea fedde with mans hande. and louing to mankynde, and of a marueilous sense or memorie, as are the Elephant and the Delphyn. The kyng norished this fysh certeine dayes at home with the bread of the countrey, made of the roote of Iucca & Panycke, & with such other rootes as men are accustomed to eate: For when shee was yet but young, hee cast her into a poole or lake neare vnto his palace, there to be fed with hande. This lake also receiueth waters, and casteth not the same foorth againe. It was in tyme paste called Guaurabo: but is now called the lake of Manati, after the name of this fyshe, which wandered safely in the same for the space of .xxv. yeeres, and grewe exceeding byg. Whatsoeuer is written of the Del∣phines of Baian or Arion, are muche inferior to the dooinges of this fyshe, whiche for her gentle nature they named Matum, that is, gentle, or noble. Therefore whensoeuer any of the kynges familyers, especially such as are knowne to her, resorte to the bankes of the lake, and call Matum, Matum,Matum. then she (as mynde∣full of such benefites as shee hath receyued of men) lifteth vp her
head, and commeth to the place whither shee is called, and there receyueth meate at the handes of such as feede her.A fyshe caryeth men ouer the lake. If any de∣sirous to passe ouer the lake, make signes and tokens of theyr in∣tent, shee boweth her selfe to them, therewith as it were gentel∣ly inuityng them to amount vppon her, and conueyeth them safely ouer. It hath been seene, that this monstrous fyshe hath at one tyme safely caryed ouer tenne men singing and playing.A marueilous thing. But if by chaunce when she lyfted vp her head shee espyed any of the Christian men, she would immediatly plunge downe againe into the water, and refuse to obey, bycause shee had once recey∣ued iniury at the handes of a certayne wanton young man a∣mong the Christians, who had cast a sharpe darte at her, al∣though shee were not hute, by reason of the hardenesse of her skynne, being rough, and full of scales and knobbes, as we haue sayde: Yet dyd shee beare in memorie thiniurie shee susteyned, with so gentle a reuenge requityng thingratitude of him, which had delt with her so vngentelly. From that day whensoeuer shee was called by any of her familiers, she would fyrst looke circum∣spectly about her, least any were present apparelled after the ma∣ner of the Christians. She would oftentymes play and wrestle vppon the banke with the kynges chamberlens, and especially with a young man whom the kyng fauoured well, being also ac∣customed to feede her. Shee would bee sometymes as plea∣saunt and full of play as it had been a moonkey or marmaset, and was of long tyme a great comfort and solace to the whole Iland: For no small confluence aswell of the Christians as of thinhabi∣tantes, had dayly concourse to beholde so straunge a myracle of nature, the contemplation whereof was no lesse pleasaunt then wonderfull. They say that the meate of this kynde of fyshe, is of good taste, and that many of them are engendred in the seas thereabout. But at the length, this pleasaunt playfelowe was loste,The ryuer Attibunicus. and caryed into the sea by the great ryuer Attibunicus, one of the foure which diuide the Ilande: For at that tyme there chauncd so terrible a tempest of wynde, and rayne, with suche floods ensuing, that the lyke hath not lightly been heard of. By reason of this tempest, the ryuer Attibunicus so ouerflowed the bankes, that it filled the whole vale, and myxt it self with all the o∣ther lakes: at which tyme also, this gentle Matum & pleasaunt
companyon, folowing the vehement course and fall of the floods, was thereby restored to his olde moother and natyue waters, and since that tyme neuer seene agayne. Thus hauyng digres∣sed sufficiently, let vs now come to the situation of the vale. It hath collateraly the mountaynes of Cibaua and Caiguam, which bryng it to the South sea. There is an other vale beyonde the mountaynes of Cibaua towarde the North, this is called the vale of Guarionexius, bycause that before the memorie of man,The great vale of Guarionexi∣us. the predicessours & auncestours of kyng Guarionexius, to whom it is descended by ryght of inheritaunce, were euer the Lordes of the whole vale. Of this kyng, wee haue spoken largely in the fyrst narration of the Ilande in the fyrst Decade. This vale is of length from the East to the West, a hundred and foure∣score myles, and of breadth from the South to the North, thir∣tie myles where it is narowest, and fiftie where it is brodest. It beginneth from the region Canobocoa by the prouinces of Hu∣habo and Caiabo, and endeth in the prouince of Bainoa, and the region of Mariena: it lyeth in the myddest betweene the moun∣taynes of Cibaua, and the mountaynes of Cahonai & Caxacubuna. There is no prouince nor any region, which is not notable by the maiestie of mountaynes, fruitfulnesse of vales, pleasauntnesse of hylles, and delectablenesse of playnes, with abundance of faire ryuers running through the same. There are no sides of moun∣taynes or hylles, no ryuers,Golde in all mountaynes▪ and golde and fyshe in all ry∣uers. which abound not with golde and de∣lycate fyshes, except only one ryuer, which from thoriginal there∣of, with the sprynges of the same breakyng foorth of the moun∣taynes, commeth out salt, and so continueth vntill it perysh: This ryuer is called Babuan, and runneth through the myddle of the re∣gion Maguana, in the prouince of Bainoa. They suppose that this ryuer hath made it selfe a way vnder the grounde,Salte bayes. by some passa∣ges of playster, or salte earth: for there are in the Ilande manye notable salte bayes, whereof we will speake more heereafter. Wee haue declared howe the Ilande is diuided by foure ryuers, and fyue prouinces. There is also an other particion, which is this, The whole Ilande consisteth of the toppes of foure moun∣taynes, whiche diuide it by the myddest from the East to the West: in all these is abundaunce of nooryshyng moysture, and great plentie of golde, of the caues also of the which, the waters
of all the riuers (into the which the caues emptie them selues) haue theyr originall and increase.The ryuers haue their in∣crease from the caues of the mountaynes. No hurtfull or rauening beast in the Ilande. There are lykewyse in them horryble dennes, obscure and darke vales, and myghtie rockes of stone. There was neuer any noysome beast founde in it, nor yet any rauenyng foure footed beast: no Lion, no Beare, no fierce Tigers, no crafie Foxes, nor deuouring Woolfes. All thinges are blessed and fortunate, and now more fortunate, for that so ma∣ny thousandes of men are receyued to bee the sheepe of Christes flocke, all theyr zemes and Images of deuylles being reiected and vtterly out of memorie.The aucthours excuse. If I chaunce now and then in the discourse of this narration to repeate one thing dyuers tymes, or otherwyse to make digression, I must desyre your holynesse therewith not to bee offended: For whyle I see, heare, and wryte these thinges, mee seemeth that I am heerewith so affec∣ted, that for very ioy I feele my mynde stirred as it were with the spirite of Apollo, as were the Sibilles, whereby I am en∣forced to repeate the same agayne: especially when I consider howe farre the amplitude of our religion spreadeth her wynges. Yet among these so many blessed and fortunate thinges, this one greeueth mee not a lyttle:By what mea∣nes the people of the Ilande are greatly consumed. that these simple poore men, neuer brought vp in labour, doe dayly peryshe with intollerabe tra∣uayle in the golde mynes, and are thereby brought to suche de∣speration, that many of them kyll them selues, hauyng no re∣garde to the procreation of chyldren: insomuche that women with chylde, perceyuing that they shall bryng foorth suche as shalbe slaues to the Christians, vse medecines to destroy theyr conception. And albeit that by the kynges letters patentes it was decreed that they should be set at libertie: yet are they con∣strayned to serue more then seemeth conuenient for free men. The number of the poore wretches is wonderfully extenuate, they were once reckened to bee aboue twelue hundred thousand heades: but what they are now, I abhorre to rehearse. We will therfore let this passe, and returne to the pleasures of Hispaniola. In the mountaynes of Cibaua,The pleasures of Hispaniola. which are in maner in the myd∣dest of the Ilande, in the prouince of Caiabo (where we sayde to bee the greatest plentie of natyue golde) there is a region named Cotobi,The region of Cotobi, situate in the cloudes. situate in the cloudes, enuironed with the toppes of hygh mountaynes, and well inhabited: it consisteth of a playne
of .xxv. myles in length, and .xv. in breadth. This playne is hygh∣er then the toppes of other mountaynes:A plaine in the toppes of mountaynes. so that these moun∣taynes may seeme to bee the chiefe progenitours of the other. This playne suffereth alterations of the foure tymes of the yere, as the Spring, Sommer, Autumne, and wynter.The hygher, the colder. Moderate colde in the mountaynes. Heere the hearbes waxe wythered, the trees loose theyr leaues, and the me∣dowes become hoare: the whiche thinges (as wee haue sayde) chaunce not in other places of the Ilande, where they haue onely the Spring and Autumne. The soyle of this playne bryngeth foorth fearne and bramble busshes, bearyng blacke berries, or wylde raspes, which two are tokens of colde regions: Yet is it a fayre region, for the colde thereof is not very sharpe, neyther doeth it afflicte thinhabitantes with frost or snowe. They argue the fruitfulnesse of the region by the fearne, whose stalkes or stea∣mes are bygger then a speare or Iauelyn. The sydes of those mountaynes are ryche in golde,Golde. yet is there none appoynted to dygge for the same, bycause it shalbe needefull to haue apparel∣led myners, and such as are vsed to labour: For thinhabitants lyuyng contented with little, are but tender,Thinhabi∣tantes of His∣paniola can a∣byde no labour nor colde. and can not there∣fore away with labour, or abyde any colde. There are two ryuers which runne through this region, and fall from the toppes of the present mountaynes: One of these is named Comoiayxa, whose course is towarde the West, and falleth into the chanell of Nai∣ba: the other is called Tirecotus, which runnyng towarde the East, ioyneth with the ryuer of Iunna.The Ilande of Creta or Can∣die, vnder the dominion of the Uenetians. In the Ilande of Creta (now called Candie) as I passed by in my legacie to the Sol∣dane of Alcayr or Babylon in Egypt, the Uenetians tolde mee, that there lay such a region in the toppes of the mountaynes of Ida, whiche they affirme to bee more fruitefull of wheate corne then any other region of the Ilande: But forasmuch as once the Cretences rebelled against the Uenetians, and by reason of the streight and narrow way to the toppes thereof, long defended the region with armes against thaucthoritie of the Senate, and at the length, being foreweryed with warres, rendred the same, the Senate commaunded that it should be left desarte, and the streightes of thentraunces to be stopped, least any should ascend to the region without their permission. Yet in the yeere of Christ M.D.ii. licence was graunted to the husbande men to tyll
and manure the region, on such condition, that no such as were apte to the warres myght enter into the same. There is also an other region in Hispaniola, named Cotoby, after the same name: this diuideth the boundes of the prouinces of Vbabo and Caiabo. It hath mountaynes, vales, and playnes: but bycause it is barren, it is not muche inhabited: Yet is it richest in golde, for the originall of the abundaunce of golde beginneth herein, in∣somuch that it is not geathered in small graines and sparkes, as in other places: but is founde whole, massie, and pure, among certaine softe stones,Pure and mas∣sie golde in the region of Co∣toby. The vaine of golde, is a ly∣uyng tree. These colours of floures are called Mar∣chasites. and in the vaynes of rockes, by breakyng the stones whereof, they folowe the vaynes of golde. They haue founde by experience, that the vayne of golde is a lyuing tree, and that the same by all wayes that it spreadeth and springeth from the roote by the softe pores and passages of the earth, put∣teth foorth branches, euen vnto the vppermost parte of the earth, and ceasseth not vntill it discouer it selfe vnto the open ayre: at which tyme, it sheweth foorth certaine beautifull colours in the steede of floures, rounde stones of golden earth in the steede of fruites, and thynne plates in steede of leaues. These are they which are disparcled throughout the whole Ilande by the course of the ryuers, eruptions of the springes out of the mountaynes, and violent falles of the flooddes: For they thincke that such graines are not engendred where they are geathered, especially on the drye land, but otherwise in the riuers. They say that the roote of the golden tree extendeth to the center of the earth, and there taketh norishment of increase:The roote of the golden tree. For the deeper yt they dygge, they fynde the trunkes thereof to be so much the greater, as farre as they may folowe it for abundaunce of water springing in the mountaines. Of the branches of this tree, they fynde some as small as a thread,The branches of the golden tree. Caues sustey∣ned with yyl∣lers of golde. & other as bygge as a mans fynger, accordyng to the largenesse or straightnesse of the ryftes and clyftes. They haue sometymes chaunced vpon whole caues, susteyned & borne vp as it were with golden pyllers, and this in the wayes by the which the branches ascende: the which beyng fylled with the substaunce of the trunke creepyng from beneath, the branche maketh it selfe waye by whiche it maye passe out. It is of∣tentymes diuided by encountryng with some kynde of harde stone:The stones of the golde mynes. Yet is it in other clyftes noorished by the exhalations
and vertue of the roote. But nowe perhaps you will aske mee what plentie of golde is brought from thence. You shall therfore vnderstand, that onely out of Hispaniola,What golde is brought yerely from Hispani∣ola into Spayn the summe of foure hun∣dred, and sometymes fyue hundred thousande ducates of golde is brought yeerely into Spayne: as may be geathered by the fyfth portion due to the kynges Excheker, which amounteth to the summe of a hundred and fourescore, or fourescore and tenne thousande Castellan  of golde, and sometymes more. What is to be thought of the Ilande of Cuba and Sancti Iohannis (other∣wise called Burichena) being both very rych in golde, we will de∣clare further hereafter: to haue sayde thus much of golde, it shall suffyse. We will now therefore speake somewhat of salt, where∣with wee may season and reserue suche thinges as are bought with golde. In a region of the prouince of Bainoa,Salt of the mountaynes, very harde and cleare. in the moun∣taynes of Daiaguo, about twelue myles distant from the salt lake, called Caspius, there are salte bayes in the mountaynes, in a ma∣ner as harde as stones, also clearer and whyter then cristall. There are lykewyse such salt bayes, which grow wonderfully in Laletania (now called Cataloma) in the territorie of the duke of Cadona, the chiefe ruler in that region: but suche as knowe them both, affyrme that these of Bainoa are most notable. They say al∣so,Salt as harde as stones. that this can not bee cleft without wedges and beetelles of I∣ron: But that of Laletana may easly bee broken, as I my selfe haue prooued. They therefore compare this to suche stones as may easily bee broken, and the other to marble. In the prouince of Caizimu, in the regions of Iguanama, Caiacoa, and Guariagua, there are springes whose waters are of marueylous nature,Springes of salt, freshe, and sower water. be∣ing in the superficiall or vppermost parte freshe, in the myddest myxte of salte and freshe, and in the lowest parte salte and soure. They thincke that the salt water of the sea issueth out softly, and the freshe to spryng out of the mountaynes: The one fal∣leth downe, and the other ryseth, and are not therefore so vni∣uersally myxte, whereby the one may vtterly corrupte thother. If any man laye his eare to the grounde neere to any of these sprynges, hee shall perceyue the grounde there to bee so hollow, that the reboundyng noyse of a horseman commyng,Hollow caues in the grounde. may bee hearde for the space of three myles, and a footeman one myle. In the last region toward the South, named Guaccaiarima, in the
lordship of Zauana, they say there are certaine wylde men, which lyue in the caues and dennes of the mountaynes,Certaine wyld men lyuing in caues and dennes. contented onely with wylde fruites: these men neuer vse the company of any o∣ther, nor will by any meanes become tame. They lyue without any certayne dwellyng places, and without tyllage or culturyng of the grounde, as wee reade of them which in olde tyme ly∣ued in the golden age. They say also that these men are with∣out any certayne language:Men without a certayne lan∣guage. They are sometymes seene, but our men haue yet layde handes on none of them. If at anye tyme they come to the syght of men, and perceyue any makyng towarde them, they flee swifter then a Harte: Yea, they af∣fyrme them to bee swifter then Grehoundes. What one of these solitarie wanderers dyd,Men as swift as Grehounds it is worth the hearyng. So it is, that our men hauyng granges adioyning neere vnto the thicke woods, certaine of them repaired thither in the moneth of Sep∣tember, in the yeere .M.D.xiiii. in the meane tyme, one of these wylde men came leapyng out of the wood,A wylde man runnech away with a chylde. & approchyng some∣what towarde them with smyling countenaunce, sodeinly snat∣ched vp a chylde of theyrs, being the sonne of the owner of the grange, which he begot of a woman of the Ilande: Hee ranne away with the chylde, and made signes to our men to folowe hym: Many folowed, aswell of our men, as of the naked inha∣bitantes, but all in vayne. Thus when the pleasaunt wande∣rer perceyued that the Christians ceassed to pursue hym, hee left the chylde in a crosse way by the which the swyneheardes were accustomed to dryue the swyne to theyr pasture. Shortly af∣ter, a swynehearde founde the chylde, and brought him home to his father, yet tormenting him selfe for sorowe, supposing that wylde man to haue been one of the kynde of the Canibales, and that his sonne was now deuoured. In the same Ilande they geather pytch,Pitch of the rocke. which sweateth out of the rockes, being muche harder and sourer then the pytche of the tree, and is therefore more commodious to calke or defende shyppes agaynst the woormes called Bromas, whereof wee haue spoken largelye before. This Ilande also bryngeth foorth pytche in two kyndes of trees,Pitch of two kyndes of trees The Pyne tree. as in the Pyne tree, and an other named Copeia. I neede not speake of the Pyne tree, bycause it is engendred and knowne in maner euery where. Let vs therefore speake somewhat of
the other tree called Copeia.The tree Copeia. Pitche is lykewyse geathered of it, as of the Pyne tree, although some say that it is geathered by distyllyng or droppyng of the wood when it is burnt. It is a straunge thyng to heareof the leafe thereof, and howe necessary prouision of nature is shewed in the same. It is to be thought that it is the tree, in the leaues whereof the Chaldeans (beyng the fyrst fynders of letters) expressed theyr myndes before the vse of paper was knowen. This leafe is a spanne in breadth,The leafe of a tree in the sted of paper. and almost rounde. Our men wryte in them with pynnes or nedles, or any suche instrumentes made of metall or wood, in maner as well as on paper. It is to be laughed at, what our men haue perswaded the people of the Ilande as touchyng this leafe. The symple soules beleeue,They beleeue that leaues do speake. A pretie storie. that at the commaundement of our men, leaues do speake and disclose secretes. They were brought to this credulitie by this meanes. One of our men dwel∣lyng in the citie of Dominica, the cheife of the Ilande, delyuered to his seruaunt (beyng a man borne in the Ilande) certayne rost∣ed Connies (whiche they call Vtias, beyng no bygger then myse) wyllyng him to cary the same to his frende, whiche dwelt further within the Ilande. This messenger, whether it were that he was thereto constrayned through hunger, or entysed by appetite, deuoured three of the Connies by the way. He to whom they were sent, wrote to his freende in a leafe howe many he receyued. When the maister had looked a whyle on the leafe in the presence of the seruaunt, he sayde thus vnto hym, Ah sonne, where is thy fayth? Coulde thy greedie ap∣petite preuayle so muche with thee, as to cause thee to eate the Connies committed to thy fidelitie? The poore wretche trem∣blyng and greatly amased, confessed his faulte, and therewith desyred his maister to tell hym howe he knewe the trueth there∣of. This leafe (quod he) whiche thou broughtest me, hath tolde me all. Then he further rehearsed vnto hym the houre of his commyng to his frende,Ignorance causeth ad∣miration. and lykewyse of his departyng when he retourned. And thus they meryly deceyue these seely soules, and keepe them vnder obedience: insomuche that they take our men for Goddes, at whose commaunde∣ment leaues do disclose suche thynges as they thynke most hyd and secrete. Both the sydes of the leafe receyueth the fourmes
of letters,The leafe wherein they wryte. euen as dooth our paper. It is thycker then double parchement, and marueylous tough. Whyle it is yet florysh∣yng and newe, it sheweth the letters whyte in greene, and when it is drye, it becommeth whyte and harde, lyke a table of wood, but the letters wexe yelowe: It dooth not corrupt or putrify, nor yet looseth the letters though it bee wet, nor by any other meanes, except it be burnt. There is an other tree named Xagua, the iuice of whose soure apple, beyng of a darke redde coloure, stayneth and coloureth whatsoeuer is touched therewith,A stronge co∣loure of the iuice of an apple. and that so fyrmely, that no washyng can take it away for the space of twentie dayes. When the apple is full rype, the iuice looseth that strength. The apple is eaten, and of good tast. There is an hearbe also, whose smoke (as we haue rehearsed the lyke before of a certayne wood) is deadly poyson. On a tyme when the kynges assembled to∣geather,An hearbe whose smoke is poyson. and conspired the destruction of our men, where as they durst not attempt thinterprise by open warre, theyr deuise was, priuilye to lay many bundels of those hearbes in a certayne house, whiche shortly after they intended to set on fyre, to thintent that our men, makyng hast to quench the same, myght take theyr death with the smoke thereof: But, theyr purposed prac∣tyse beyng bewrayed, the aucthours of the deuise were punyshed accordyngly. Nowe (most holy father) forasmuche as your holynesse wryteth, that whatsoeuer we haue wrytten of the newe worlde, dooth please you ryght well, we wyll rehearse certayne thynges out of order, but not greatly from our purpose. Of the settyng the rootes of Maizium, Ages, Iucca, Battatas, and such other, beyng their common foode, and of the vse of the same, we haue spoken sufficiently before: But by what meanes they were fyrst applyed to the commoditie of men, we haue not yet declared. We nowe therefore entende to entreate somewhat hereof.
The nienth booke of the thyrd Decade. THey say that the fyrst inhabitours lyued con∣tented with the rootes of Dates,The kyndes of fruites where∣with thinhabi∣tauntes lyued fyrst. and Ma∣gueans, which is an hearbe, much lyke vn∣to that which is commonly called Sen∣grene or Orpin: also the rootes of Guaie∣gans, which are rounde and great, muche lyke vnto puffes ye of earth or mushromes. They dyd lykewyse eate Guaieros, lyke vnto Persnips, Cibaios, lyke Nuttes, Cibaioes and Macoanes, like vnto Onions, with di∣uers other such rootes. They say that after many yeeres, a cer∣taine Boition, that is, a wyse old man, saw vppon the bankes syde a bush lyke vnto fenell, & transplanting the roote therof, brought it from wyldnesse to a better kynde, by nooryshing it in gardens. This was the begynning of Iucca, which at the fyrst was dead∣ly poison to al such as did eate therof rawe.Necessitie the mother of al artes. But for as muche as they parceyued it to be of pleasaunt tast, they determined many wayes to proue the vse therof, and at the length founde by experi∣ence, that beyng sodde, or fryed, it was lesse hurtful: by whiche meanes also, they came to the knowledge of the venome lying hyd in the iuise of the roote. Thus by drying, salting, seasoning, and otherwyse temperyng it, they brought it to theyr fyne bread,The fyne bread Cazab∣bi, made of the rootes of Iucca. whiche they call Cazabbi, more delectable and holsome to the sto∣macke of man then bread made of wheate, because it is of easyer digestion. The same is to be vnderstood of other rootes, and the grayne of Maizium, which they haue chosen for theyr chiefe meate among the seedes of nature,How Ceres fyrst founde wheate and barly in Egypt. as we reade howe Ceres the daughter of Saturnus, geathered wheate and barley (with suche other corne as are now most in vse among men) in Egypt, of cer∣tayne graynes taken out of the mudde dryuen from the moun∣taynes of Ethiopia by thincrease of the riuer Nilus, & left in the playne at such tyme as Nilus resorted agayne to his chanell. For the which fact, we reade that the antiquitie gaue diuine honour to Ceres, who fyrst nooryshed and increased suche chosen seedes.
There are innumerable kyndes of Ages, the varietie wherof, is knowen by theyr leaues and flowers. One kynde of these, is cal∣led Guanaguax,The rootes of Ages. this is white both within and without. An o∣ther named Guaraguei, is of violet colour without, and white within. The other kyndes of Ages, they call Zazaueios, these are redde without and white within. Squiuetes, are whyte within and without. Tunna, is altogeather of violet coloure. Hobos is yelowe both of skynne and inner substaunce. There is an other named Atibunieix, the skynne of this is of violet coloure, and the substaunce white. Aniguamar, hath his skynne also of violet co∣loure, and is white within. Guaccaracca, hath a white skynne, and the substaunce of violet colour. There are many other, which are not yet brought to vs. But I feare me lest in the rehearsall of of these.The aucthours excuse. I shal prouoke the spurres of malicious persons against me, which wyl scorne these our doynges, for that we haue wryt∣ten of many such small thynges, to a prince occupied in suche weyghtie affayres, as vnto your holynesse, vpon whose shoul∣ders resteth the burden of the whole Christian worlde. But I would aske of these malicious enuyers of other mens trauayles, whether Plinie and such other famous writers,Plinie. when they direc∣ted and decicated such thyngs to kynges and princes, entended only to profite them to whom they consecrated the fruite of theyr knowledge. They sometimes intermixt famous things with ob∣scure things, light with heauie, and great with small, that by the furtheraunce of princes, theyr vniuersall posteritie might enioye the fruition of the knowledge of thyngs. At other times also be∣yng entent about perticular things, and desirous of new things, they occupied them selues in searchyng of perticular tractes and coastes, with such thynges as nature brought foorth in the same, by this meanes to come the better to more absolute and vniuer∣sall knowledge. Let them therfore contemne our doyng, and we wyl laugh to scorne, not theyr ignoraunce and slouthfulnesse, but pernicious curiousnesse: and therewith hauyng pytie of theyr frowarde dispositions, wyll commit them to the vene∣mous Serpentes of whom enuye tooke his fyrst originall. It shall in the meane tyme abundauntly content vs, that these thynges doo please your holynesse, and that you do not dispyse our symple vestures, wherewith we haue onely weaued
togeather, and not adourned, geathered, and not described, such maruelous thynges, in the garnyshyng whereof, nature hath sufficiently shewed her cunnyng. Our desyre is none other here∣in, but for your sake to doo our endeuoure that these thynges may not peryshe: let euery man take hereof what lyketh hym best. Of the sheepe or Bullocke solde in the market, nothyng remayneth in the euenyng, because the shoulder pleaseth one, the legge an other, and the necke an other: yea some haue most phantasie to the bowels, and some to the feete. Thus hauyng yenough wandered, let vs returne to our purpose, and de∣clare with what woordes they salute the kynges chyldren when they are fyrst borne, and howe they applye the begynning of their liues to the end, and why their kinges are called by many names. Therefore when the kyng hath a sonne borne, suche as dwell neare about his pallace or village, repayre to the queenes cham∣ber, where one saluteth the newe borne chylde with one name, and an other with an other name.By what na∣mes they salute the kyngs chil∣dren when they are borne. The names and tytles of the Romane Emperours. God saue thee thou shynyng lampe, sayth one: An other calleth hym, bryght and cleare: Some name hym the victourer of his enimies: and other some, the puis∣saunt conquerour descended of blood royall, and bryghter then gold: with dyuers other suche vayne names. Therefore lyke as euery of the Roman emperours was called Adiabenicus, Par∣thicus, Armenicus, Dacicus, Gothicus, and Germanicus, according to the titles of their parentes and auncestours: euen so by thimpositi∣on of names inuented by other kinges, Beuchicus Anacacoa the lord of the region of Xaragua (of whom and of the wyse woman Anachaona his syster, we haue spoken largly in the first Decade) was called by all these names folowyng, Tureigua Hobin, whiche is asmuche to saye as, a kyng shynyng as bryght as laton, Starei, that is, bryght, Huibo, hyghnesse, Duiheynequen, a ryche flood. With all these names, and more then fourtie other suche, dooth kyng Beuchius magnifie hym selfe as often as he commaundeth any thing to be doone, or causeth any proclamation to be made in his name. If the cryer by negligence leaue out any of these names, the kyng thynketh it to sounde greatly to his contumely and reproche: The lyke is also of other.Howe they make theyr testamentes. Howe fondely they vse them selues in makyng theyr testamentes, we wyll nowe de∣clare. They leaue thinheritaunce of their kyngdomes to theldest
sonnes of theyr eldest systers. If she fayle, to theldest of the seconde syster, and so of the thyrde if the seconde also fayle: For they are out of doubte that those chyldren come of theyr blood, but the chyldren of theyr owne wyues, they counte to be not legitimate.So dyd great Alexander. If there remayne none of theyr systers chyldren, they leaue thinheritaunce to theyr brothers: and if they fayle, it descendeth to theyr owne sonnes. Last of all, if all these faile, they assigne it to the woorthiest, as to him that is of greatest power in all the Ilande, that he may defende theyr subiectes from their auncient enimies. They take as many wyues as them lysteth.The kynges wyues & con∣cubines are bu∣ryed with him. They suffer the best beloued of the kynges wyues and concubines to be buryed with hym. Anachaona the syster of Beuchius the kyng of Xaragua, being a woman of such wisedome and cunnyng, that in makyng of rhymes and balattes she was counted a prophetisse among the best, commaunded, that among all the wyues and concubines of the kyng her brother, the fayre∣est (whose name was Guanahattabenechina) shoulde be buried alyue with hym, and two of her waytyng maydes with her: She would surely haue appointed diuers other to that offyce, if she had not been otherwyse perswaded by the prayers of certayne fryers of saint Fraunces order,They burye theyr iewels with them. whiche chaunced then to be present. They saye that this Guanahattabenechina had none in all the Ilande comparable to her in beautie. She buryed with her all her iewels,A dreame of an other lyfe after this. and twentie of her best ornamentes. Their custome is, to place besyde euery of them in their sepultures, a cuppe full of water, & a portion of the fyne bread of Cazabbi. In Xaragua, the region of this kyng Beuchius,Where it ray∣neth but sel∣dome. and in Hazua, part of the regi∣on of Caiabo, also in the fayre vale of salt and freshe lakes, and lykewyse in the region of Yaquino in the prouince of Bainoa, it rayneth but seldome: In al these regions are fosses or trenches made of olde tyme, whereby they conueye the waters in order to water theyr fieldes, with no lesse art then do thinhabitours of newe Carthage, and of the kingdome of Murcien in Spartaria for the seldome fall of rayne. The region of Maguana, diuideth the prouince of Bainoa from Caiabo, and Zauana from Guaccaiarima. In the deepe vales, they are troubled with rayne more often then nedeth.Where it ray∣neth much. Also the confines of the chiefe citie, named saint Do∣minike, are moister thē is necessary. In other places, it raineth
moderatly. There are therfore in the Iland of Hispaniola,Variable moti∣ons of the Ele∣mentes. diuers and variable motions of the elementes, as we reade the lyke of many other regions. Of theyr colonies or mantions which the Spaniardes haue erected in this Iland,The colonies and villages whiche the Spaniardes haue builded. we haue spoken suffi∣ciently before. They haue since that tyme builded these villa∣ges, Portus platae, Portus Regalis, Lares, Villanoua, Azuam, and Salua terra. Hauing sayde thus much of the Iland of Hispaniola, the mother and lady of the other Ilandes, and as it were Tethys the most beautifull wyfe of Neptunus the god of the sea,The other I∣landes about Hispaniola. let vs nowe entreate somewhat of her Nymphes and fayre Nereides, which wayte vppon her, and adourne her on euery syde. We wyll therfore begyn at the nearest, called the newe Arethusa,The Iland of Arethusa. so named of the fountaine Arethusa in the Iland of Sicilie. This is famous by reason of a spring, but otherwyse vnprofitable. Our men named it of late Duas Arbores, because it hath onlye two trees growing in it: neere vnto the which is a fountayne that commeth from the Iland of Hispaniola, through the secrete passages of the earth vnder the sea, and breaketh foorth in this Inde,A spring run∣nyng vnder the sea from Hispa∣niola to Are∣thusa. as the ryuer Alpheus in Achaia runneth vnder the sea from the citie of Elde, and breaketh foorth in ye Iland of Sicilie in the fountayne Arethusa. That the fountayne of this newe Arethusa, hath his originall from the Ilande of Hispaniola, it is manifest heereby, that the water issuyng out of the fountayne, bryngeth with it the leaues of many trees whiche growe in Hi∣spaniola, and not in this Iland. They saye that the fountayne hath his originall from the ryuer Yiamiroa, in the region of Guac∣caiarima, confinyng with the lande of Zauana. This Ilande is not past a myle in circuite, and commodious for fishermen. Di∣rectly towards the East (as it were the porter keepyng the en∣trye to Tethys) lieth the Ilande of Sancti Iohannis (otherwyse cal∣led Burichena) whereof we haue spoken largely before:The Iland of Sancti Iohan∣nis. this a∣boundeth with gold, and in fruitefull soile is equall with her mo∣ther Hispaniola: in this are many colonies or mansions of Spa∣niardes, which apply them selues to geatheryng of golde. To∣wards the west on the North syde, great Cuba (for the longnesse thereof,The Ilande of Cuba. long supposed to be continent or fyrme lande) wardeth our Tethys on the backe halfe. This is much longer then Hispaniola, and from the East to the west, is diuiuided in the
middest with the circle called Tropicus Cancri. Hispaniola and the other lying on the South syde of this, are encluded almost in the mydde space betweene the sayde Tropike and the Equinoctiall line,Habitable regi∣ons vnder the Equinoctial. which many of the olde wryters supposed to be vnhabitable and defart, by reason of the feruent heate of the Sonne in that clyme, as they coniectured: but they were deceyued in theyr o∣pinion. They affirme that rycher golde mynes are founde in Cuba,The riche golde mine of Cuba. then in Hispaniola. They say also that euen now whyle I wryte these thynges, there is golde geathered togeather redy to the meltyng, amountyng to the quantitie of a hundred and foure∣score thousand Castellans of golde, an argument surely of great rychesse. Iamaica is more towards the South then these, and is a pleasaunt and fruitful Ilande,The Iland of Iamaica. of soyle apt for corne, graffes, and settes, it consisteth of onely one mountayne: the inhabitan∣tes are warrelyke men, and of good wyt, Colonus compared it to Scicilie in bygnesse. They whiche of late searched it more exactly, say that it is somewhat lesse, but not muche. It is thought to be without golde and precious stones, as the lyke was supposed of Cuba at the begynning. The Ilande of Guada∣lupea (fyrst named Caraqueira) lying on the South syde of Hispa∣niola,The Iland of Guadalupea. is foure degrees nearer the Equinoctiall. It is eaten and indented with two gulfes (as we reade of great Britanie, nowe called England, and Calidonia, nowe called Scotland) beyng in maner two Ilandes.England and Scotland It hath famous Portes. In this they founde that gumme whiche the Apothecaries call Animae Al∣bum,The gum cal∣led Anime album. whose fume is holsome agaynst reumes and heauinesse of the head. The tree whiche engendreth this gumme, beareth a fruite much like vnto a Date, beyng a spanne in length. When it is opened, it seemeth to conteyne a certayne sweete meale. As our husbandmen are accustomed to reserue Chestnuts,Dates. and such other harde fruites, all the winter, so do they the Dates of this tree, beyng muche lyke vnto a Fygge tree. They founde also in this Ilande,Pine trees. Pyne trees, of the best kynde, and such other dayntie dyshes of nature, whereof we haue spoken largelye before: Yea they thynke that the inhabitauntes of o∣ther Ilandes, had theyr seedes of so many pleasaunt fruites from hence.The Cani∣bales. For the Cambales, beyng a wylde and wande∣ryng people, and ouerrunnyng all the countreye about them,
to hunte for mans fleshe, were accustomed to bryng home with them whatsoeuer they founde straunge or profytable in anye place: They are intractable, and will admit no straungers. It shall therefore bee needefull to ouercome them with great power: For as well the women as men, are experte archers, and vse to inuenome theyr arrowes. When the men go foorth of the lande a man huntyng, the women manfully defend their coastes agaynst suche as attempt to inuade the same. And hereby I suppose it was thought,Whereby it was thought that there were Ilandes of women. that there were Ilandes in the Ocean, inhabited onely with women, as Colonus the Admiral him selfe perswaded mee, as I haue sayde in the fyrst Decade. This Ilande hath also fruitefull mountaynes and playnes, and notable ryuers. It nourysheth hony in trees, and in the caues of rockes, as in Palma one of the Ilandes of Canarie,Hony in trees and rockes. hony is geathered among the bryers and bramble bushes. About .xviii. myles Eastward from this Ilande, lyeth an Ilande which our men named Desiderata, beyng .xx. myles in circuite,The Ilande Desiderata. The Ilande Galanta. and verye fayre. Also about tenne myles from Guadalupea towarde the South, lyeth the Ilande of Galanta, beyng thirtie myles in circu∣ite, and plaine: It was so named for the neatenesse and beautiful∣nesse therof. Niene myles distant from Guadalupea towarde the East, there are sixe small Ilandes, named Todos Sanctos, or Bar∣bata: these are full of rockes, & barren,The Ilandes of Todos Sanctos, or Barbata. yet necessary to be knowen to such as vse to trauayle the seas of these coastes. Agayne, from Guadalupea .xxxv. myles towarde the North, there is an Ilande named Monsserratus, conteynyng in circuite fourtie myles, ha∣uyng also in it a mountayne of notable heyght.The Ilande Monsserratus The Ilande Antiqua. The Ilande na∣med Antiqua, distante from Guadalupea thirtie myles, is about fourtie myles in circuite. Diegus Colonus the sonne and heyre of Christiphorus Colonus, tolde me that his wyfe (whom he lefte in the Ilande of Hispaniola at his comming into Spayne to the courte) did wryte vnto him, that of late among the Ilandes of the Canibales, there is one founde which aboundeth with golde. On the lefte syde of Hispaniola towarde the South, neere vnto the hauen Beata, there lyeth an Ilande named Portus Bellus:The Ilande Portus Bellus Great Tortoy∣ses. The generati∣on of Tortoy∣ses. they tell marueilous thinges of the monsters of the sea about this I∣lande, and especially of the Tortoyses, for they say that they are bygger then great rounde targettes. At suche tyme as the
heate of nature moueth them to generation, they come foorth of the sea, and makyng a deepe pyt in the sande, they lay three or foure hundred egges therein. When they haue thus emp∣tied theyr bagge of conception, they put as muche of the sande agayne into the pyt, as may suffyse to couer the egges, and so resorte agayne to the sea, nothyng carefull of theyr succession. At the day appoynted of nature to the procreation of these beastes, there creepeth out a multitude of Tortoyses, as it were pyssemares swarmyng out of an ant hyll: and this onely by the heate of the Sunne, without any helpe of theyr parentes.The Egges of Tortoyses. They say that theyr egges are in maner as bygge as Geese egges. They also compare the fleshe of these Tor∣toyses, to bee equall with veale in taste. There are besyde these, innumerable Ilandes, the whiche they haue not yet sear∣ched,Innumerable Ilandes. nor yet is it greatly necessary to syft this meale so fyne∣ly. It may suffyse to vnderstande that there are large landes, and many regions, which shall heereafter receyue our nations, tounges, and maners, and therewith embrase our religion. The Troyans dyd not sodeinly replenyshe Asia, the Tyrians Libya,Troyans. Tyrians. Greekes. Phenitians. The North Ilandes. nor the Greekes and Phenices Spayne. As touchyng the Ilandes whiche lye on the North syde of Hispaniola, I haue let passe to speake: For albeit they are commodious for tyllage and fyshyng, yet are they lefte of the Spanyardes as poore and of small value. We will nowe therefore take our leaue of this olde Tethis, with her moyst and watery Nymphes, and receyue to our new acquayntance the beautifull lady of the South sea,The Ilandes of the south sea. rychly crowned with great pearles, the Ilande of Dites beyng ryche both in name and in treasure. In my Epistle booke which I sent vnto your holynesse this last yeere, I decla∣red howe Vaschus Nunnez Balboa, the Captayne of them which passed ouer the daungerous mountaynes toward the South sea, learned by report, that in the prospecte of those coastes there laye an Ilande aboundyng with pearles of the greatest sort, and that the kyng thereof was ryche,The Ilande of pearles. and of great power, infestyng with warres the other kynges his borderers, and especially Chiapes and Tumacchus: Wee declared further, howe at that tyme it was left vntouched by reason of the ragyng tempestes which troubled that South sea three monethes in the yeere. But
it is now better knowne to our men, who haue now also brought that fierce kyng to humanitie, and conuerted him from a cruell Tyger, to one of the meeke sheepe of Christes flocke,Wylde beastes must be tamed with the rod. sanctifyed with the water of baptisme, with all his family and kyngdome. It shall not therefore bee from our purpose to declare, by the go∣uernaunce of what captaines, or by what meanes these thinges were so happyly atchyued. The tenth booke of the thyrde Decade. AT the arryuall of Petrus Arias the newe gouernour of Dariena, he gaue commaunde∣ment that one Gasper Moralis should take in hande thexpedition to the Iland of Dites. He therfore tooke his vyage first to Chiapes and Tumacchus kings of the South,An expedition to the Ilande of Dites in the south sea. whom Vaschus before had conciled and left friends to the Christians. They friendly and magnifically enterteyned our men, who prepared them a nauie of the kyngs boates to passe ouer into this Ilande, which they call Dites,The Ilande of Margaritea. & not Margarita or Margaritea, although it abounde with pearles, which in the latin tonge are called Margaritae. For they first called an other by this name,Os Draconis, Paria. which lyeth next to the mouth of Os Draconis in the region of Paria, in the which also is found great plenty of pearles. Gasper brought with him onely .lx. armed men to the Ilande, for that hee could conuey ouer no greater number, by reason of the smalnesse and narownes of their boates or barkes, which they call Culchas, made of one whole peece of timber, as we haue sayd before. The kyng of ye Iland came foorth agaynst them fiercely,A conflict. wt cruell and threatning countenance, & with a great bande of armed men, cry∣ing in maner of a larome, & in token of the battaile, Guazzauara, Guazzauara, which is as much to say as, battayle against ye ene∣my, & is (as it were) a watch word to giue thonset: wherwith al∣so they threw their darts, for they haue not thuse of bowes. They were so obstinate & desperate, that they assailed our men wt foure Guazzauaras, that is, battayles. At the length our men with cer∣taine of Chiapes and Tumacchus men (being olde enemies to this kyng of the Ilande) got the vpper hande, by reason they assayled
the kyng sodeinly and vnawares. Yet was he determined to as∣semble a greater power, and once agayne to attempt the fortune of warre, but that he was otherwyse perswaded by the kynges his borderers, whiche counselled him to geue ouer, and submit him selfe, sometyme by thexample of them selues & other, threat∣nyng the destruction of his flooryshyng kyngdome, and other∣whyles declaryng vnto him the humanitie and gentlenesse of our men, by whose friendship hee might obteyne honour and quiet∣nesse to him and his: willyng him furthermore to consider, what chaunced vnto them which the yeere before resisted and aduentu∣red the hasarde of the battayle, as dyd these kynges, Poncha, Poc∣chorrosa, Quarequa, hiapes, and Tumacchus, with such other. By these persuasions, the kyng submitted him selfe, and came friend∣ly to our men, whom he conducted to his palace, which they say to bee marueylously adourned and princelyke.The kyng of the Ilande of Dites submit∣teth him selfe. The kynges pallace. A hundreth and ten pounde weight of pearles. As soone as they entred into the pallace, hee brought foorth a basket of curious workemanshyp, and full of pearles, which he gaue them. The summe of these pearles amounted to the weight of a hundred and ten poundes, after .viii. vnces to the pounde: being agayne re∣warded of our men, with such tryfles as they brought with them of purpose, as garlandes of Christall, and glasse, and other coun∣terfet stones of dyuers colours, with lookyng glasses also, and laton belles,Axes and hat∣chets more esteemed then golde. and especially two or three Iron hatchets (whiche they more esteeme then great heapes of golde) hee thought him selfe abuntdantly recompenced. They laugh our men to scorne, that they will depart with so great and necessarie a thing for any summe of golde: affyrmyng an axe or hatchet to bee profitable for many vses of men, and that golde serueth onely for wanton pleasures, and not to be greatly necessary. Beyng therefore ioy∣full and glad of the friendship of our men, he tooke the captayne by the hande, and brought him with certayne of his familiars to the hyghest towre of his palace, from whence they might pro∣specte the mayne sea: then castyng his eyes about him on e∣uery syde, and lookyng towarde the East, he sayde vnto them, Beholde, heere lyeth open before you the infinite sea, exten∣ded beyonde the sunne beames:The kynges wordes. then turnyng hym towarde the South and West, he signified vnto them that the lande which laye before their eyes, the toppes of whose great mountaynes
they myght see, was exceedyng large:Ilandes rych in golde and pearles. then commyng some∣what neerer, hee sayde, Beholde these Ilandes on the ryght hande and on the left, which all obey vnto our empyre, and are ryche, happye, and blessed, if you call those landes blessed whiche abounde with golde and pearle. We haue in this I∣lande litle plentie of golde: but the deepe places of all the seas a∣bout these Ilandes are full of pearles, whereof you shall re∣ceyue of mee as many as you will requyre, so that yee persist in the bonde of friendshyp which you haue begunne. I great∣ly desyre your friendshyp, and woulde gladly haue the fruiti∣on of your thinges, whiche I set muche more by then milli∣ons of pearles: You shall therefore haue no cause to doubt of any vnfaythfulnesse or breache of friendshyp on my behalfe. Our men gaue hym lyke friendly wordes, and encouraged him with many fayre promyses to doe as hee had sayde. When our men were now in a readynesse to depart, they couenaun∣ted with him to paye yeerely to the great kyng of Castyle a hundred pounde weyght of pearles.C. pounde weyght of pearles yeerely for a tribute. Hee gladly agreed to theyr request, and tooke it for no great thyng, nor yet thought him selfe any whit the more to become tributarie. With this kyng they founde suche plentie of Hartes and Cunnies, that our men, standyng in theyr houses,Plentie of Hartes and Cunnies. myght kyll as many as them lyst with their arrowes. They lyue heere very pleasauntly, ha∣uyng great plentie of all thinges necessary. This Iland is scarse∣ly sixe degrees distant from the Equinoctiall lyne. They haue the same maner of bread, made of rootes and the graine of Maxium, and wyne made of seedes and fruites, euen as they haue in the region of Comogra, and in other places,Wyne of fruits and seeds. aswell in the Ilandes, as in the firme lande. This kyng is now baptised, with all his family and subicctes. His desyre was, at his baptis∣me, to bee named Petrus Arias, after the name of the gouer∣nour. When our men departed,The kyng is baptised. he accompanied them to the sea syde, and furnyshed them with boates to returne to the continent. Our men diuided the pearles among them, reseruyng the fift portion to bee delyuered to thoffycers of the kynges Excheker in those parts.The fyft part of pearles due to the kyng. They say that these pearles were maruelous pre∣cious, faire, orient, & exceeding byg: insomuch that they brought many with them bygger then hasell nuttes.Byg pearles. Of what pryce & va∣lue
they myght bee, I consider by one pearle the which Paulus, predicessour to your holines,A pearle for a Pope. bought at the second hand of a mar∣chant of Uenice for foure & fourtie thousand ducates: Yet among those which were brought from this Ilād, there was one bought euen in Dariena, for a thousand & two hundred Castellans of gold: this was almost as byg as a meane walnut,An other pearle of great price. & came at yt length to the handes of Petrus Arias the gouernour, who gaue it to that noble and faythfull woman his wyfe, of whose maner of depar∣ture with her husbande, we haue made mention before. We must then needes thinke that this was very precious, whiche was bought so deare among such a multitude of pearles, where they were not bought by one at once, but by poundes, and at the least by ounces. It is also to be thought that the Uenecian marchaunt bought his for no great summe of money in the East partes: But he solde it the dearer,Nyse and su∣perfluous pleasures. for that he chaunced to lyue in those lasciui∣ous and wanton dayes, when men were giuen to such nyse and superfluous pleasures, and met with a marchant for his purpose. But let vs now speake somewhat of the shelfyshes, in the which pearles are engendred.Dyuers opini∣ons of the ge∣neration of pearles. It is not vnknowne to your holynesse, that Aristotle, and Plinie his folower, were of dyuers opini∣ons as concernyng the generation of pearles. But these In∣dians, and our men, rest onely in one assertion, not assentyng to them in any other: as, eyther that they wander in the sea, or, that they moue at any tyme after they are borne. They will therefore that there be certayne greene places, as it were mea∣dowes,Hearbes in the bottome of the sea. in the bottome of the sea, bringing foorth an hearbe much lyke vnto Tyme, and affyrme that they haue seene the same, and that they are engendred, noryshed, and growe therein, as wee see thincrease and succession of Oysters to grow about them selues: Also that these fyshes delyghteth not in the conuersation or com∣pany of the sea dogges, nor yet to bee contented with onely one, two, or three, or at the most foure pearles, affyrmyng that in the fyshyng places of the kyng of this Ilande, there was founde a hundred pearles in one fyshe, the whiche Cas∣par Moralis the captayne him selfe,A hundred pearles in one shell fyshe. and his companions, di∣ligently numbred: For it pleased the kyng at theyr beyng there, and in their presence, to commaunde his dyuers to goe a fyshyng for those kynde of fyshes. They compare the matri∣ces
of these fyshes, to the places of conception in Hennes,The matrice of the pearle fyshe. in the whiche theyr egges are engendred in great multitudes and clusters, and beleue that these fyshes bryng foorth theyr byrth in lyke maner. For the better proofe whereof, they say that they founde certayne pearles commyng foorth of their matri∣ces,The byrth of pearles. as beyng nowe come to the tyme of theyr full rypenesse, and moued by nature to come out of theyr moothers wombe, o∣penyng it selfe in tyme conuenient: lykewyse, that within a whyle after, they sawe other succeede in lyke maner. So that to conclude, they sawe some commyng foorth, and other some yet abydyng the tyme of theyr perfection: which beyng com∣plete, they also became loose, and opened the matrice. They perceyued the pearles to bee inclosed in the myddest of theyr bellyes, there to bee nourished and increase, as an infant sucking his moothers pappes within her wombe, before hee moue to come foorth of her priuie places. And if it chaunce any of these shelfyshes to bee founde scattered in the sande of the sea (as I my selfe haue seene Oysters disparcled on the shores in dyuers pla∣ces of the Ocean) they affyrme that they haue been violently dry∣uen thither from the bottome of the sea by force of tempestes, and not to haue wandered thither of them selues: But, that they be∣come whyte by the clearenesse of the mornyng deawe, or waxe yelowe in troubled weather, or otherwyse that they seeme to re∣ioyce in fayre weather and cleare ayre, or contrarywyse, to bee as it were astonyshed and dymme in thunder and tempestes, with suche other: the perfect knowledge hereof, is not to bee loo∣ked for at the handes of these vnlearned men, whiche handle the matter but grossely, and enquyre no further then occasion ser∣ueth. Yet doe they affyrme by thexperience and industrie of the dyuers, that the greatest pearles lye in the deepest places,Where the biggest, meane, and least pearls are engendred. they of the meane sort hygher, and the least hyghest of all, and neerer to the brymme of the water: And say therfore, that the greatest doe not wander, but that they are created, nouryshed, and increase in the deepest places of the sea, whyther fewe dyuers (and that but seeldome) dare aduenture to diue so deepe to geather them, aswell for feare of the sea crabbes, whiche wander among these pearle fyshes to feede of them,Sea crabbes. and for feare of other monsters of the sea, as also least their breath should fayle them in to long
remayning in the water: And this they say to bee the cause why the oldest (& therfore byggest) sea muscles inhabite ye deepest pla∣ces,The sea mus∣cles wherein pearles are en∣gendred. from whence they are not lightly moued by tempestes. Fur∣thermore, how much the bygger & older these fyshes are, they say that in their larger matrices, the greater number & bigger pear∣les are founde, & that for this cause there are fewer founde of the byggest sort. They thinke also, that when they first fall from their fyshes in the deepe places, they are deuoured of other fyshes, by∣cause they are not yet hearde. Againe, the smallest differ from the byggest in a certaine swelling or impostumation, which ye Spa∣niardes call a tympany: For they deny that to be a pearle which in olde muscles cleaueth faste to the shell, but that it is a wart, which being rased from the shell with a fyle, is rounde & bryght but onely of one syde, and not precious, being rather of the nature of the fyshe it selfe, then of a pearle. They confesse that they haue seene certayne of these muscles cleauyng on rockes, yet these but fewe, and nothyng woorth. It is also to bee thought, that the pearle fyshes or sea muscles which are founde in India, Ara∣bia, the redde sea, or Taprobana, are ruled in suche order as the aforenamed famous aucthours haue written: For their opini∣on herein is not vtterly to bee reiected, forasmuch as they were learned men, and trauayled long in the searchyng of these thin∣ges. But wee haue nowe spoken sufficiently of these sea fyshes, and of their egges, which the fonde nysenesse and wantonnesse of men haue made deerer then the egges of hennes or geese. Let vs therefore entreate somewhat of other perticular thinges, which are come to our knowledge of late. Wee haue elswhere largely described the mouthes of the gulfe of Vraba, with sundry and variable regions diuided with the manifolde gulfes of that sea: But as concernyng the West coastes, in the which our men haue buylded houses, and planted their habitations on the bankes of Dariena, I haue no newe matter to wryte. Yet as touchyng the East partes of the gulfe, I haue learned as fo∣loweth. They say that the vniuersall lande of the East region of the gulfe,The regions of the East syde of the gulfe of Vraba. from the corner thereof farre reachyng into the sea, and from the extreme or vttermoste mouth of the same, receyuyng the waters of the sea whiche fall into it, euen vn∣to Os Draconis and Paria, is by one generall name called Cari∣bana,
of the Caribes or Canibales whiche are founde in euery region in this tract:The region of Caribana. But from whence they had theyr per∣ticuler originall, and howe, leauyng theyr natiue soyle, they haue spredde theyr generation so farre, lyke a pestiferous con∣tagion, we wyll nowe declare.The original of the Cani∣bales. Therefore from the fyrst front reachyng foorth into the sea (in whose tract we sayde that Fogeda fastened his foote) towarde the corner, about niene myles distant, there lyeth a village of Caribana, named Futcraca:The villages of Caribana. three myles distant from this, is the village of Vraba, of the whiche it is thought that the whole gulfe toke his name, by∣cause this village was once the head of the kyngdome. About syxe myles from this, is Feti: Niene myles from Feti, is Zerema: And about twelue myles from this, Sorache. Our men founde all these villages full of people, al the whiche gyue them selues onely to manhuntyng:Manhunters. Insomuche that if they lacke enimies agaynst whom they may keepe warre, they exercise crueltie agaynst them selues, and eyther slaye the one the other, or els dryue the vanquyshed to flyght. Whereby it is apparant, that by these theyr continuall warres, and dryuyng the one the other out of theyr countreys, this infection hath gone so farre, not onely on the fyrme lande, but also into the Ilandes. I was also aduertised of an other thyng, the whiche to my iudgement seemeth woorthy to be put in memorye. One Coruales, a iudge in causes of lawe among the Spanyardes of Dariena, sayth, that on a tyme walkyng abrode with his booke in his hande, he met by the way with a fugityue, whiche had fledde from the great landes lying farre towarde the west, and remayned here with a Kyng with whom he was entertayned. When this man perceyued the lawyer lookyng on his booke, marueylyng thereat, he came runnyng vnto hym, and by interpretours of the kyng whom he serued, spake thus vnto hym,Bookes: Loke in the be∣gynnyng of the booke of the landes lately founde. Haue you al∣so bookes, wherein you may reserue thynges in perpetual me∣mory? and letters, whereby you may declare your mynde to suche as are absent? And herewith desyred that the booke myght be opened vnto hym, supposyng that he shoulde therein haue founde the letters of his owne countrey: But when he sawe them vnlyke, he sayde further, that in his countrey there were cities fortified with walles, and gouerned by lawes, and that the
people also vsed apparell: but of what religion they were, I dyd not learne. Yet had our men knowledge both by the woordes and signes of this fugitiue,Circumcised people. that they were circum∣cised. What nowe thynke you hereby (most holy father?) Or what do you diuine may come hereof, when tyme shall subdue all these vnder your throne? Let vs nowe entermyngle certayne small thynges among these great matters.What chaun∣ced to the Ca∣pitaynes whi∣che the gouer∣nour sent dy∣uers wayes. I haue not thought good to pretermit that which chaunced to Iohannes Solisius, who, to searche the South syde of the supposed continent, de∣parted with three shyppes from the port Ioppa (not farre distant from the Ilandes of Gades or Cales in the Ocean) the fourth day of the Ides of September, in the yeere .M.D.xv. or what suc∣cesse Iohannes Pontius had, whom the newe gouernour Petrus Arias appoynted to vanquyshe and destroy the Caribes or Cani∣bales,Looke decade iii. liber. vi. deuourers of mans fleshe: also to what ende the voyages of the other captaines came, which were sent foorth diuers waies at the same tyme, as Gonzalus Badaiocius, Franciscus Bezarra, and Valleius, Iohannes Solicius tooke the matter in hand in an euyll houre.The vioage of Iohannes So∣lisius. He sayled beyond the point of saint Augustine (which they cal Cabo. S. Augustini) toward the South side of the supposed con∣tinent beyond the Equinoctial line. For (as we haue said before) that poynt reacheth Southwarde to the seuenth degree of the South pole,Cab. S. Augu∣stini. called the pole Antartike. He proceeded in that vy∣age syxe hundred leagues, and found the lande from the poynt to extende so farre towarde the South beyonde the Equinoctial, that he came to the thirtieth degree of ye South pole. As he say∣led thus forwarde, hauyng nowe on his backe halfe the starres named Caput Draconis,Iohn Solisius is slayne of the Canibales. (that is, the Dragons head) and the regions of Paria lying northwarde from hym, & prospectyng to∣warde the pole Artyke, he chaunced to fall into the handes of the filthy Canibales: For these craftie foxes seemed to make signes of peace, when in theyr myndes they conceyued a hope of a dain∣tie banquet,The fyrcenes of the Canibales. & espying their enimies a farre of, began to swalowe theyr spettle, as their mouth watered for greedines of theyr pray. As vnhappy Solisius descended, with as many of his company as coulde ener into the boate of the byggest shyppe, sodenly a great multitude of thinhabitantes brust foorth vppon them, and lue them euery man with clubbes, euen in the syght of theyr
felowes. They caried away the boate, and in a moment broke it all to fytters, not one escaping. Theyr furie not thus satisfied, they cut the slayne men in peeces, euen vppon the shore, where theyr felowes myght behold this horrible spectacle from the sea. But they beyng stricken with feare through this example, durst not come foorth of their shyppes, or deuise how to reuenge the death of theyr Captayne and companyons. They departed therefore from these vnfortunate coastes, and by the way ladyng theyr shyppe with brasell, returned home agayne with losse,Brasyle. and heauie cheare. Of these thynges I was aduertised of late by theyr owne letters. What they haue els doone, I shall haue more perticular knowledge heereafter. Iohannes Pontius was al∣so repulsed by the Canibales in the Iland of Guadalupea,Iohannes Pontius is re∣pulsed by the Canibales. beyng one of the chiefe Ilandes of theyr habitation. For when they sawe our men a farre of on the sea, they lay in ambushe, sodenly to inuade them when they shoulde come alande. Our men sent foorth a fewe foote men, and with them theyr Laundresses to washe theyr shertes and sheetes: For from the Iland of Ferrea, beyng one of the Ilandes of Canarie (euen vnto this Iland, for the space of foure thousand and two hundred myles) they had seene no land, where they myght fynde any fresh water, foras∣muche as in all this large space the Ocean is without Ilandes. At theyr commyng therefore to lande, the Canibales assayled them, caried away the women, and put the men to suche distresse, that fewe of them escaped. By reason whereof, Pontius beyng greatly discomfited, durst not inuade the Cani∣bales, fearyng theyr venomed arrowes, which these naked man∣hunters can direct most certaynely. Thus good Pontius fayling of his purpose, was fayne to geue ouer the Canibales, whom (being safe & vnder the house roofe) he threatned to vanquish and destroy. Whyther he went from thence, or what new thyngs he founde, I haue as yet no further knowledge. By these mysfor∣tunes, Solisius lost his lyfe, & Pontius his honour. Let vs nowe speake of an other, whose enterpryse came to lyke purpose the same yeere. Iohannes Aiora, borne in the citie of Corduba,The voyage of Iohannes Aiora. Looke Decade iii. liber vi. a man of noble parentage, sent in steade of the Lieuetenant (as we haue saide) more couetous of gold, then careful of his charge, or desi∣rous of prayle for well deseruing, sought occasions of quarelyng
agaynst the kynges, and spoyled many, violentlye extortyng gold of them agaynst ryght & equitie: and further, handeled them so extremely, that of frendes they became most cruel enemies, insomuch that they ceassed not with desperat myndes,The lewde be∣hauiour of Iohn Aiora. by al mea∣nes they coulde, to slay our men openly or priuilie. By reason whereof it is come to passe, that where before they bartered quietly, exchanging ware for ware, they are nowe fayne to do all thynges by force of armes. When he had thus exacted a great quantitie of golde of them (as it is sayde) he fled priuilye, and tooke away a shyp with hym by stealth, as the common rumour goeth, nor yet hytherto haue we hard whyther he went, or where he is arryued. Some suspect that Petrus Arias the go∣uernour should consent to his departure, because this Iohannes Aiora, is brother to Gonsalus Aiora, the kynges historiographer, a man both learned, and expert in the discipline of warre, and so much the gouernours frend, that these two among a fewe, may be counted examples of rare amitie. I my selfe also am greatly bounde vnto them both, and haue long enioyed theyr frendshyp: yet shall I desire them both to pardon me in declaring my phan∣tasie heerein, that in al the turmoyles and tragical affayres of the Ocean, nothyng hath so muche displeased me, as the couetous∣nesse of this man, who hath so disturbed the pacifyed myndes of the kynges. Nowe among these troublous chaunces, let vs rehearse the variable fortune of Gonsalus Badaiocius,The variable fortune of Gon∣salus Badaio∣cius. and his fe∣lowes, whose prosperous begynninges, ended with vnfortunate successe. Gonsalus therfore in the moneth of May, in the yeere of Christ .1515. departed from Dariena with fourscore armed men, directing his voyage toward the South, and resting in no place vntyll he came to the region of Cerabaro, which our men named Gratia Dei,Cerabaro. De∣cade .iii.li.iiii. distaunt from Dariena about a hundred and fourscore myles: for they call it threescore leagues. He spent certaine daies heere in idlenesse: for he coulde neither by fayre meanes, nor by foule, allure the kyng of the region to come to hym. Whyle he lay thus idelly, there came to hym other fyftie men, sent from Dariena vnder the gouernaunce of captayne Lodouicus Mercado, who departed from Dariena in the calendes of May, to the in∣tent to searche the inner partes of those regions. When they met togeather, they determined, after consultation, to passe
ouer the mountaynes lying towarde the South, euen vnto the South sea lately founde. Beholde nowe a wonderfull thyng,The South sea. that in a lande of suche marueylous longitude in other places, they founde it here to be onely about fyftie myles distant to the South sea: for they count it .xvii. leagues, as the maner of the Spanyardes is to recken, and not by myles: Yet saye they that a league consysteth of three myles by lande,A league con∣tayneth foure myles by sea and but three by lande. and foure by sea, as we haue noted before. In the toppes of the mountaynes and turnyng of the waters, they founde a kyng named Iuana, whose kyngdome is also named Coiba, as is the region of king Careta, of whom we haue made mention els∣where. But for as muche as the region of this Iuana, is rycher in golde, they named it Coiba Dites, that is, Coiba the rych: For, wheresoeuer they dygged the grounde,The golden re∣gion Coiba Dites. Sande myxt with golde. whether it were on the drye lande, or in the wet chanelles of the ryuers, they founde the sande, whiche they cast foorth, myxt with golde. Iuana fledde at the commyng of our men, and coulde neuer be brought agayne. They spoyled all the countrey neare about his pa∣lace: yet had they but litle golde, for he had caryed all his stuffe with hym. Here they founde certayne slaues, marked in the faces after a straunge sorte:Howe theyr slaues are marked in the face. For with a sharpe prycke made eyther of bone, or els with a thorne, they make holes in theyr faces, and foorthwith sprinklyng a powder thereon, they moiste the pounced place with a certayne blacke or redde iuice, whose substaunce is of suche tenacitie and clamminesse, that it wyll neuer weare away: They brought these slaues away with them. They say that this iuice is of suche sharpenesse, and put∣teth them to suche payne, that for extreme doloure they haue no stomacke to theyr meate certayne dayes after. The kynges whi∣che take these slaues in theyr warres, vse theyr helpe in seekyng for golde, and in tyllage of the grounde, euen as doo our men. From the pallace of Iuana, folowyng the course of the water about tenne myles towarde the South, they entred into the domi∣nion of an other kyng, whom our men named the olde man, bycause he was olde, not passyng of his other name. In the region of this kyng also, they founde golde in all places,Golde. both on the lande, and in the ryuers. This region is very fayre, and fruitefull, and hath in it many famous ryuers. Departyng
from hence, in fyue dayes iourney they came to a lande lefte desolate: They suppose that this was destroyed by ciuile dis∣corde,A fruitefull re∣gion left deso∣late by ciuile discorde. forasmuche as it is for the most parte fruitefull, and yet not inhabited. The fyfth day, they sawe two men com∣myng a farre of: these were laden with bread of Maizium, whi∣che they caryed on theyr shoulders in sackes. Our men tooke them, and vnderstoode by them that there were two kynges in that tract, the one was named Periquete, who dwelt neere vnto the sea, the others name was Totonoga. This Totonoga was blynde, and dwelt in the continent. The two men which they met, were the fyshers of Totonoga, whom he had sent with certayne fardelles of fyshe to Periquete, and had agayne re∣ceyued bread of hym for exchaunge: For thus do they commu∣nicate theyr commodities one with an other by exchaunge, with∣out the vse of wycked mony. By the conductyng of these two men, they came to kyng Totonoga, dwellyng on the West syde of saint Michaels gulfe, in the South sea. They had of this kyng the summe of syxe thousand Castellans of golde, both rude,Syxe thousand Castellans of golde. and artifycially wrought. Among those groumes of rude or natyue golde, there was one founde of the weyght of two Cas∣tellans, whiche argued the plentifull rychenesse of the grounde. Folowyng the same coast by the sea syde towarde the West, they came to a kyng,kyng Tara∣curu. whose name was Taracuru, of whom they had golde, amountyng to the weyght of eyght thousande Pesos. We haue sayde before that Pesus is the weyght of a Caste∣lane, not coyned. From hence they went to the dominion of this kynges brother, named Pananome, who fledde at their com∣myng, and appeared no more afterwarde. They say that his kyngdome is ryche in golde. They spoyled his pallace in his absence. Syxe leagues from hence, they came to another king, named Tabor.Foure thou∣sand pesos of gold. Salte. From thence they came to the kyng of Cheru. He frendly entertained our men, and gaue them foure thousand Pesos of golde. He hath in his dominion many goodly salt bayes: the region also aboundeth with golde. About twelue myles from hence, they came to another king called Anata, of whom they had xv. thousande Pesos of golde, whiche he had gotton of the kynges his borderers, whom he had vanquished by warre. A great part of this gold was in rude fourme, bycause it was molten when he
set the kinges houses on fyre whom he spoyled. For they robbe and slay the one the other, sackyng & fyryng theyr villages,Theyr maner of warre. and wasting theyr countreyes. They keepe warre barbarously, and to vtter destruction, executyng extreeme crueltie agaynst them that haue the ouerthrowe, Gonsalus Badaiocius, with his felowes, wandred at libertie, vntyll they came to this kyng, and had gea∣thered great heapes of golde of other kynges. For, what in bra∣slettes, collers, earerynges, brest plates, helmettes, and certaine barres wherewith women beare vp theyr brestes, they had gea∣thered togeather in gold the summe of fourscore thousand Castel∣lans, which they had obtayned partly by exchange for our things where they founde the kynges theyr frendes, & otherwise by for∣cyble meanes where they founde the contrary. They had got∣ten also fourtie slaues, whose helpe they vsed both for cariage of their victualles and baggagies, in the steede of Moyles or other beastes of burden, & also to releeue such as were sick and forwee∣ried by reason of theyr long iourneies and hunger. After these prosperous voyages, they came by the dominion of kyng Scoria, to the palace of a kyng named Pariza, where (fearyng no suche thing) Pariza enclosed them with a great armie,Gonsalus Ba∣daiocius hath the ouerthrowe and is spoiled of great riches of gold. and assayled them straggelyng and vnwares, in such sort that they had no lea∣sure to put on theyr armure. He slue and wounded about fyftie, and put the resydue to flyght. They made suche hast, that they had no respect eyther to the golde they had geathered, or to theyr slaues, but left all behynde them. Those fewe that escaped, came to Dariena. The opinion of all wyse men, as concernyng the variable and inconstant chaunces of fortune in humane things were false,The inconstan∣cie of fortune. if all thynges shoulde haue happened vnto them pro∣sperously. For such is the nature of this blynde goddesse, that she oftentymes delyteth in the ouerthrowe of them whom she hath exalted, and taketh pleasure in confounding hygh thynges with lowe, and the contrary. We see this order to be imper∣mutable, that who so wyl apply hym selfe to geather rootes, shal sometymes meete with sweete Lyqueresse, and other whyles with sowre Cockle. Yet wo vnto Pariza: for he shall not long sleepe in rest. The gouernour him selfe was of late determined with three hunndred & fiftie choise souldiers to reuenge the death of our men: but where as he by chaunce fel sicke, his power went
forwarde vnder the conducting of his Lieuetenaunt Gaspar Spi∣nosa, a Iudge in cases of lawe in Dariena. At the same tyme o∣ther were sent foorth to the Iland of Dites, to exact the portion of pearles limited to the kyng for his tribute. What shal suc∣ceede, time wyl bring to our knowledge. The other two attemp∣ted thinhabitauntes beyond the gulfe Franciscus Bezerra,The expedition of Fraunces Bezarra aganst the Canibales. pas∣syng ouer the corner of the gulfe, & the mouthes of the riuer of Dabaiba, with two other captaines, and a hundred and fiftie soul∣diers wel appoynted, went to make warre vpon the Canibales, euen in Caribana theyr owne cheefest dominion, towards the vil∣lage of Turufy, wherof we haue made mention before in the commyng of Fogeda. They brought also with them diuers en∣gins of warre, as three peeces of ordinaunce, whose shot were bygger then egges:Gunnes. lykewyse fourtie archers, and .xxv. hagbut∣ters, to the entent to reach the Canibales a farre of, & to preuent theyr venomed arrowes: But what became of him & his compa∣ny, or where they arriued, we haue yet no perfect knoweledge. Certayne which came of late from Dariena to Spaine reported, that at theyr departure they of Dariena stoode in great feare lest they also were tossed with some misfortune. The other captaine Valleius obteyned the fore part of the gulfe,Valleius repul¦sed of his ene∣mies. but he passed ouer by an other way then did Bezerra, for he tooke the beginning of Caribana, & Bezarra the end: Valleius returned againe. But of the threescore and ten men which he conueighed ouer with hym, he left fourtie and eight slayne among the Canibales. These are the newes which they bryng that came last from Dariena. There came to me the day before the Ides of October in this yeere 1516. Rodericus Colmenares (of whom we haue made mention before) & one Franciscus Delapuente. This Franciscus was one of the vnder captaines of this band, whose cheefe captaine was Gon∣salus Badaiocius, who hardly escaped the handes of king Pariza. These two captaines therfore, Rodericus & Franciscus, who depar∣ted from Dariena immediatly after ye misfortune which befel to Ba∣daiocius & his company,The Ilands of the South sea. do both affirme, the one, that he hath hard,In this sea lye the Ilandes of Mollucca, most fruitfull of spyces. & the other, that he hath seene, that in the South sea there are diuers Ilandes lying westward from the Iland of Dites, and Sainct Michaels gulfe, in many of the which are trees engen∣dred & noorished, which bring foorth ye same arromatical fruites
as doeth the region of Collacutea. This lande of Collacutea, with the regions of Cochinus and Camemorus,Collacutea. are the chiefe marte pla∣ces from whence the Portugales haue their spices:Cochinus and Camemorus, from whence the Portugales haue their spy∣ces. And hereby doe they coniecture, that the lande where the fruitfulnesse of spice beginneth, should not be farre from thence, insomuche, that many of them which haue ouerrunne those coastes, do onely desire that leaue may be graunted them to searche further, and that they will of their owne charges frame and furnysh shyppes, and ad∣uenture the vyage to seeke those Ilandes and regions. They thinke it best that these shippes should be made and prepared,He meaneth by the streight of Magellanus. e∣uen in sainct Michaels gulfe, and not to attempt this vyage by sainct Augustines point, which way were both long and difficult, and full of a thousande daungers, and is sayde to reache beyonde the fourtieth degree of the pole Antartike. The same Francis∣cus, being partener of the trauayles and daungers of Gonsalus, saith, that in ouerrunning those landes, he founde great heardes of Hartes and wylde Bores,Howe they take Hartes and wylde Bores. and that he tooke many of them by an arte which thinhabitantes taught him: which was, to make pittes or trenches in their walkes, and to couer the same with boughes: By this meanes also they deceyue all other kyndes of wylde & foure footed beastes. But they take foules after ye same maner that we do: As stocke doues,Stocke doues. wt an other tame stocke doue brought vp in their houses. These they tye by a stryng, and suffer them to flee a litle among the trees: to the which as other birdes of their kynde resort, they kill them with their arrowes. Other∣wyse they take them with nettes,Theyr maner of foulyng. in a bare place purged from trees & bushes, & scattering certayne seedes round about yt place, in ye middest wherof they tye a tame foule or byrd, of the kynde of them which they desyre to take: In lyke maner doe they take Popingiayes and other foules. But they say that Popingiayes are so simple,Popingiayes are easily taken that a great multitude of them wyll flee euen into the tree in whose boughes the fouler sitteth, and swarme a∣bout the tame chatteryng Popingiay, sufferyng them selues to bee easily taken: For they are so without feare of the sight of the fouler, that they tary whyle he cast the snare about their neckes, the other beyng nothyng feared heereby, though they see him drawe them to him with the snare, and put them in the bagge which hee hath about him for the same purpose. There is an
other kynde of foulyng, heeretofore neuer hearde of, and pleasant to consider.A straunge kynde of fou∣lyng. Wee haue declared before howe that in certayne of the Ilandes, and especially in Hispaniola, there are dyuers lakes or standyng pooles: In some of these (being no deeper then men may wade ouer them) are seene great multitudes of wa∣ter foules: as well for that in the bottome of these lakes there growe many hearbes and weedes, as also that by reason of the heate of the Sunne, pearsyng to the naturall place of genera∣tion and conception, where being doubled in force by reflection, and preserued by moyster there, are engendred of the slyminesse of the earth and water, and by the prouidence of the vniuersall creator, innumerable little fyshes, with a thousand sundry kyndes of frogges, wormes, gnattes, flyes, and such other. The foules which vse these lakes,Fyshes and worms engen∣dred of slyme. Foules. are of dyuers kyndes: as Duckes, Geese, Swannes, sea Newes, Gulles, and such other. We haue sayde also, that in theyr Orchardes they noryshe a tree which beareth a kynde of great Gourdes.Gourdes of the tree. Of these Gourdes therfore, well stop∣ped least any water should enter in at theyr ryftes, & cause them to sinke, they cast many in the shalowe pooles, where, by theyr continuall wanderyng and waueryng with the motions of the wynde and water, they put the foules out of suspection & feare: the fouler in the meane tyme, disguising him selfe as it were with a visour, putteth a great gourde on his head, much lyke to a hel∣met, with two holes neere about his eyes, his face and whole head besyde being couered therewith: and thus entreth hee into the poole euen vnto the chynne. For being from theyr infancie exercised in swymmyng, and accustomed to the waters, they re∣fuse not to continue therein a long space: the foules thynking this Gourde to bee one of the other that swymme vppon the water, the fouler goeth softly to the place where hee seeth the greatest flocke of foules, and with waggyng his head, counterfeyting the mouyng of the waueryng Gourdes, draweth neare to the foules, where softly puttyng foorth his ryght hande, he sodain∣ly snatcheth one by the legges, and plungeth her into the wa∣ter, where hee putteth her into a bagge whiche hee hath with hym of purpose: The other foules supposyng that this dyued into the water of her owne motion to seeke for foode (as is theyr maner) are nothyng moued heereby, but goe forwarde on their
way as before, vntyll they also fall into the same snare. I haue heere for this cause entred into the declaration of theyr maner of huntyng and foulyng, that by these more pleasaunt narrati∣ons, I may somewhat mittigate and asswage the horrour con∣ceyued in your stomake by the former rehearsal of theyr blooddy actes and cruell maners. Let vs nowe therefore speake some∣what agayne of the newe and later opinions, as concernyng the swyft course of the sea towarde the West about the coastes of Paria, also of the maner of geatheryng of golde in the golde myne of Dariena, as I was aduertised of late: and with these two quiet and peaceable thinges,Later opinions of the swyft course of the Ocean toward the West. we will make an ende of the tragicall affayres of the Ocean, and therewith byd your holy∣nesse farewell. So it is therfore, that Andreas Moralis the pilot, and Ouiedus (of whom wee haue made mention before) repay∣red to mee, at my house in the towne of Matrite. As we met thus togeather, there arose a contention betweene them two, as concernyng this course of the Ocean. They both agree, that these landes and regions parteynyng to the dominion of Castile,The continent or fyrme lande. doe with one continual tract & perpetual bond, embrase as one whole firme lande or continent, all the mayne lande lying on the North side of Cuba, & the other Ilands, being also Northwest both from Cuba & Hispaniola: Yet as touching the course of the water, they varry in opinion. For Andreas wil that this violent course of wa∣ter be receiued in the lappe of the supposed continent, which ben∣deth so much, and extendeth so farre towarde the North, as wee haue sayde: and that by the obiect or resistance of the lande, so bending and crookyng, the water should as it were rebounde in compasse, and by force thereof bee driuen about the North syde of Cuba, and the other Ilands, excluded without ye circle cal∣led Tropicus Cancri, where the largenes of ye sea may receiue the waters falling from the narow streames, & therby represse that inordinate course, by reason that the sea is there very large and great. I can compare his meanyng to nothing more aptely, then to the swyft streame commyng foorth of a myll, and fallyng into the myll poole: For in all such places where waters runne with a violent fall through narowe chanelles, and are then receyued in large pooles, they are sodeynly disparcled, and theyr violence broken: So that whereas before they seemed of suche force as
to ouerthrowe all thinges beyng in theyr way, it can not then be perceyued which way they runne. The Admirall him selfe Diegus Colonus,The vyages of Diegus Colonus. sonne and heyre to Christiphorus Colonus, the fyrst fynder of these landes (who had nowe in commyng and go∣ing, foure tymes passed through these seas) being demaunded of me what he founde or perceyued in saylyng too and fro: answe∣red, that there was muche difficultie in returnyng the same way by the which they goe. But whereas they fyrst take the way by the mayne sea towarde the North, before they directe theyr course to Spayne,The viage from the new lands to Spain he sayth that in that tract hee felt the shyppe sometymes a lyttle dryuen backe by the contrary course of the water: Yet supposeth that this chaunceth onely by the ordinary flowyng and reflowyng of the sea, and the same not to bee enfor∣ced by the circumflection or course of the water, reboundyng in compasse as wee haue sayde: But thinketh rather, that this mayne lande or supposed continent, should somewhere bee o∣pen: and that the sayde open place, should bee as it were a gate, entrie, or streyght, diuyding the North partes of that lande from the South, by the which also the Ocean runnyng towarde the West, may by the rotation or impulsion of the heauens, bee dryuen about the whole earth. Ouiedus agreeth with Andreas Moralis as touchyng the continuall adherence and closenesse of the sayde continent: Yet neyther that the waters should so beate agaynst the bendyng backe of the West lande, or bee in such sort repulsed and driuen into the mayne sea: But sayth, that he hath diligently considered, that the waters runne from the deepest and myddest of the mayne sea, towarde the West: Also, that saylyng neere vnto the shore with small vessels, hee founde the same wa∣ters to returne againe towarde the East, so that in the same place they runne togeather with contrary course, as we oftentymes see the lyke to chaunce in ryuers,The contrary course of wa∣ters. where by the obiect of the bankes, dyuers whirlepooles and turnynges aryse in the water. By rea∣son whereof, if any chaffe, strawe, wood, or any other thyng of lyght substance be cast in any such places in ryuers, it foloweth, that all suche as runne with the water in the myddest of the cha∣nell, proceede well forwarde, but suche as fall into the bendyng gulfes and indented margentes of the crooked bankes, are caryed ouerthwart the chanell, and so wander about vntyll
they meete with the full and directe course of the ryuer. Thus haue we made you partener of suche thinges as they haue giuen vs, and written their dyuers opinions: We will then giue more certayne reason, when more certayne trueth shalbe knowne. We must in the meane tyme leane to opinions, vntill the day come appointed of God to reueale this secrete of nature,The poynt of the pole starre. with the per∣fect knowledge of the pointe of the pole starre. Hauyng sayde thus muche of the course of the Ocean, a briefe declaration of the golde mynes of Dariena, shall close vp our Decades, and make an ende of our trauayles. Wee haue sayde, that niene myles distant from Dariena,The golde mynes of Da∣riena, and the maner of gea∣theryng golde. are the sydes of the hylles and the drye playnes in the whiche golde is geathered, both on the drye lande, and also on the bankes, and in the chanelles of ryuers. Therefore to all suche as are wyllyng to geather golde, there is of ordinarie custome appointed to euery man by the suruoy∣ers of the mynes, a square plotte of grounde, conteynyng twelue pases, at the arbitrement of the chooser, so that it be not grounde alredy occupyed, or left of other. The portion of grounde be∣ing thus chosen (as it were assigned of the augures to buylde a temple) they inclose their slaues within the same, whose helpe the Christians vse in tyllyng of their grounde, and geatheryng of golde, as we haue sayde. These places appointed vnto them, they keepe as long as them lyst: and if they perceyue tokens of little golde, they requyre an other plot of grounde of twelue pa∣ses to be assigned them, leauyng the first in common:Our inclosers would leaue no such commens And this is thorder which the Spaniardes inhabiting Dariena obserue in geatheryng of golde. I suppose also, that they vse the lyke or∣der in other places: Howbeit, I haue not yet enquired so farre. It hath been prooued, that these twelue pases of grounde, haue yelded to their choosers the summe of fourescore Castellanes of golde.Auri sacra Fa∣mes. And thus leade they theyr lyues in fulfillyng the holy hun∣ger of golde. But the more they fyll their handes with fyndyng, the more increaseth theyr couetous desyre. The more woodde is layde to the fyre, the more furiously rageth the flame. Unsa∣ciable couetousnesse is no more diminished with increase of ry∣chesse, then is the drinesse of the dropsye satisfyed with drynke.The dropsie of couetousnesse. I let passe many thinges, whereof I intende to wryte more largely in tyme conuenient, if I shall in the meane season vn∣derstande
these to bee acceptable vnto your holynesse: my due∣tie and obseruaunce to whose aucthoritie, hath caused mee the gladlier to take this labour in hande. The prouidence of the eternall creatour of all thinges, graunt your holynesse many prosperous yeeres. Here endeth the three bookes of the Decades. Of Cuba, Hispaniola, and other Ilands in the VVest Indies seas: and of the maners of the inhabitauntes of the same. I Haue partlye declared before in my De∣cades, howe certaine fugitiues which came out of the large West landes,Looke Decade 3. Liber. 10. arriued in the confines of Dariena, and howe that maruei∣ling at the bookes of our men, they declared that they sometime dwelt in regions whose inhabitantes vsed such instruments, & were ruled by politike lawes:Cities fortifyed with walles. Also that they had cities fortified with walles, and faire pallaces, with streates well paued, & common places whither marchauntes resorte, as to the burse or streate: These landes, our men haue now founde. Therefore who were thauctors hereof, or what successe they had herein, who so desireth to knowe, with the conditions of straunge regions, and the ma∣ners of the people, let him giue diligent attendaunce to suche thinges as folow.The Ilande of Cuba or Fer∣nandina. Of the Ilande of Cuba (now called Fernandina, lying next vnto Hispaniola on the West syde, and yet somewhat so bending towarde the North, that the circle called Propicus Cancri diuideth it in the myddest, whereas Hispaniola is distant from the Tropike, and declinyng certayne degrees towarde the Equinoctiall line) we haue spoken somewhat before. In this I∣land of Fernandina, there are now sixe townes erected, wherof the chiefe is named Sanstiago, of S. Iames, the patrone of the Spa∣niards. In this, there is natiue gold found, both in ye mountaines
and ryuers: by reason wherof they are dayly occupied in geathe∣ring & digging the same. But shortly after that I had finished my sayd bookes,The Spani∣ards of Cuba attempt new vyages. three Spaniards yt were the most auncient citizens of Cuba, as Franciscus Fernandes of Corduba, Lupus Ocho, & Christo∣phorus Morantes, determined to seeke new lands, as the myndes of the Spaniards are euer vnquiet & giuen to attempt great en∣terprises. They furnished, at their owne charges, three of those shyppes which they call Carauels, and hauing first lycence of Di∣egus Velasquen the gouernour of the Ilande, they departed with a hundred and ten men from the West angle of Cuba:The West an∣gle of Cuba. For this an∣gle is most commodious to relieue shippes, & to make prouision for freshe water & fuell. Thus they sayled continually sixe dayes and a halfe betwene the west & the South, contented onely with the sight of the heauen & the water, during which tyme, they sup∣pose that they sayled not past threescore and sixe myles:Note. For they lay at anker all nyght, wheresoeuer the fallyng of the Sunne tooke the day lyght from them, least by wanderyng in vnknowen seas, they myght chaunce to bee cast vpp rockes or sandes: But at the length they chaunced vppon a great Ilande, named Iucatana, whose beginnyng thinhabitaunt call Eccampi.The Ilande of Iucatana. A great citie well buylded. Our men went to the citie, standyng on the sea syde, the which, for the bygnesse thereof, they named Cayrus, or Alcair, thinhabitauntes wherof enterteined them very friendly. When they were entred into the citie, they marueyled to beholde the houses buylded lyke Towres, magnificall temples, streates well paued, and great ex∣ercise of bying and sellyng by exchaunge of ware for ware.Temples. Their houses are either built of stone, or of bricke and lyme,Humane peo∣ple. and artifici∣ally wrought. To the first porches of theyr houses, and fyrst habi∣tations, they ascend by ten or twelue stayres: they are couered ei∣ther with tyles, slates, reades, or stalkes of certayne hearbes, they gratified the one the other with mutuall gyftes. The Bar∣barians gaue our men many brooches and iewelles of golde,Cunnyng arti∣fycers. very fayre, and of cunnyng workemanshyp: our men recom∣pensed them with vestures of sylke and wooll, counterfeyte stones, of coloured glasse and chrystall, Haukes belles of la∣ton, and suche other rewardes, whiche they greatly esteemed for the straungenesse of the same: they set nought by lookyng glasses, bycause they haue certayne stones muche bryghter.
This nation is apparelled after a thousande fashions, with ve∣stures made of gossampyne cotton or bombage,Apparelled people. of dyuers co∣loures. The women are couered from the girdle to the heele, ha∣uyng dyuers fasshions of vailes about their heades and brestes, with great cautell least any part of their legges or feete be seene: they resorte muche to their temples, vnto the whiche the chiefe rulers haue the wayes paued from their owne houses: they are Idolatours,Circumcised Idolaters. and circumcised, they occupie their maner of ex∣chaunging with muche fidelitie: they vse to adourne the heares of their heades. Being demaunded by thinperpretours, of whom they receyued theyr circumcision: they answered, that there once passed an exceedyng fayre man by their coastes, who left them that in token to remember him. Other say, that a man brigh∣ter then the Sunne, went among them, and executed that of∣fyce: but there is no certayntie heereof. When our men had remayned there certayne dayes, they seemed to bee molestous to thinhabitantes, accordyng to the common saying, The lon∣ger a ghest taryeth, the worse is his entertaynement: The which thyng our men perceyuyng, they made the more hast away. Be∣ing therefore prouided of all thinges necessary, they tooke theyr viage directly towarde the West, by the prouince which thinha∣bitauntes call Comi, and Maiam. They ouerpassed these regi∣ons, takyng onely freshe water and fuell in the same. The Bar∣barians, both men, women, and children, flocked to the sea syde, astonysshed greatly to beholde the huge bygnesse of the shyppes. Our men marueyled in maner no lesse to view their buyldinges, and especially their temples situate neare vnto the sea, and erec∣ted after the maner of towres. Thus at the length hauyng say∣led about a hundred and ten myles, they thought it good to lay Anker in a prouince named Campechium,Campechium. whose chiefe towne consisteth of three thousande houses.A towne of three thousand houses. Thinhabitantes came swim∣myng to the shippes, marueylyng exceedingly at the maner of saylyng, and at the sayles and other tackelynges: But when they hearde the thunder of the gunnes, sawe the smoke, and smelte the sauour of brimstone and fyre, they supposed that thunderbolts and lyghtnynges had been sent from God. The kyng recey∣ued our men honourably, and brought them into his pallace: where hee feasted them well, after his maner. They are accusto∣med
to eate fleshe, and haue great plentie of beastes and foules,Plentie of beastes and foules. as Peacockes, and other, whiche they francke and feede in theyr houses: also dyuers kyndes of wylde foules of the moun∣taynes, wooddes, and waters: lykewyse Partriches, Quailes, Turtle dooues, Duckes, and Geese. Of beastes, they haue Connies, Woolues, Lions, Tigers, Foxes, wylde Boores, Hartes, and Hares. After this banquet, the kyng with his trayne and famylie brought our men into a brode crosse way, where many streates do meete: In this, they shewed them as it were a great and high alter, buylded foure square of marble,Theyr Idoles and Idolatry. com∣pacte togeather partly with the tough cleye of Babilon called Bi∣tumem, and partly with small stones, it had on euery syde foure stayres: Upon the altare was an Image of a man made of mar∣ble, and fast by it the images of two beastes of vnknowen shape, which seemed as though they woulde with yanyng mouth haue torne in sunder the belly of the mans Image. On the other syde stoode a great Serpent, compact of the sayde tough cleye and small stones: This Serpent beyng in length .xlvii. foote, and of the bygnesse of a large Oxe, seemed to deuour a Lion of mar∣ble, and was al besparcled with freshe blood. Harde by the al∣tare, were three postes fastnes in the grounde, the which three o∣ther trauersed, and were susteyned with stones. In this place offenders were put to death, in token wherof they sawe innume∣rable arrowes stayned with blood, some scattred, some lying on heapes, & some broken: also a great number of mens bones, ly∣ing in a court or yarde neere vnto this funestal place, their houses are here also buylded of lyme and stone:Houses of lime and stone. They named this kyng Lazarus, because they arriued at this lande on saint Lazarus day. Departing from hence, and directing their course stil toward the West, for the space of .xv. myles,The prouince Aquanil. they came to a prouince named Aquanil, whose chiefe towne is called Mosco,Mosco. and the king therof Cupoton. He behelde our men with a frowarde countenaunce, and sought occasion to do thē some priuy mischiefe, while they sought for freshe water: For he made signes vnto them, that on the fur∣ther syde of the next hyl they should fynde sprynges of water, en∣tending to haue assailed them in that narowe passage: But by the colouring of theyr forheades (as they are accustomed in theyr warres) and by the bearing of theyr bowes & other weapons, our
men perceyued theyr wylynes, and refused to go any further: Yet a thousande of the Barbarians assayled them vnwares, and vnprepared:The Spany∣ardes are put to flyght, and many slayne. by reason whereof, they were put to flyght, and dyuers of them slayne in the chase. Many that fledde to∣warde the shyppes, were entangled in the mudde and maryshes neere vnto the shore: Twentie and two were slayne with ar∣rowes, and the resydue for the most part wounded. Franciscus Fernandes the gouernour of the nauie, receyued in this conflicte three and thirtie woundes, and in maner none escaped without hurt: If they had gone to the hylles whiche were appoynted them, they had ben slaine euery man. They therfore that escaped, returned to the Ilande of Fernardina, from whence they came, where they were receyued of theyr felowes with heauie cheare. But when Diegus Velasquen the gouernour of the Ilande, had in∣telligence hereof,An other expe∣dition. he immediatly furnyshed a newe nauie of foure Caraueles, with three hundreth men: Of this nauie he appointed Iohn Grisalua, his nephue, to be ye gouernour, & assigned for vnder captaynes, Alphons Auila, Frannces Montegio, and Peter Aluara∣do: For the pylot he assigned Antonie Alamino, who had the re∣giment of the fyrst nauie. They attempted the same viage a∣gayne, but declined somwhat more towarde the South, about threescore and tenne myles. Before they sawe any lande, they es∣pyed a towre a farre of, by the viewe whereof, they came to an Ilande named Cozumella, from the whiche they smelt sweete sa∣uours proceedyng with the wynde,The Ilande of Cozumella. Sweete sa∣uoures. A fruitefull Ilande. before they approched to the lande by the space of three myles. They founde the Ilande to be xlv. myles in circuitie, it is playne, and of maruelous fruite∣full soyle, there is also golde in it, but it is not engendred there, but brought thither from other regions: It aboundeth with hony, fruites, and hearbes, and hath also great plentie of foules, and foure footed beastes. Theyr order and maner of lyuyng, is in al thynges lyke vnto theyrs of Iucatana: lykewyse theyr houses, temples,Towres and temples. streates, and apparell. In many of theyr houses, are great poastes of marble, after the maner of our buyldyng. They found there, the fundations of certayne olde towres ruinate, and one especially with .xviii. stayres ascendyng to it, after the maner of solemne temples. They marueyled greatly at our shyppes and maner of saylyng. At the fyrst, they woulde admit no straun∣gers:
but shortly after, receiued them gentlye. Theyr cheife ruler (whom our men supposed to bee a priest) led them vp to the toppe of the towre, where they erected a banner, and addicted the Ilande to the dominion of the kyng of Castyle, namyng it Sancta Crux,Cozumella na∣med Scancta Crux, because they entred into the same in the nones of Maye, being then the feast of the holye crosse. They saye that it was called Cozumella▪ of kyng Cozumellaus, whose auncestours were the fyrst that inhabited the Ilande. In the towre they found many chambers furnished with Images, made both of earth and marble to the similitude of Beares:Idles lyke Beares. these they cal vpon with a houling and lamentable songue, perfuming them with sweete odours, and otherwyse honouring them as theyr domesticall goddes: they are also circumcised.Idolatry. The kyng was in fayre ap∣parell, made of gossampine cotton, curiously wrought: he was lame on the one foote, by reason that as he once exercised hym selfe in swymmyng, a deuouryng fyshe called Tuberon, byt of all the toes of one of his feete: he entreated our men very frendly, and made them great cheare. After they had been heere three dayes, they departed: and saylyng styll towards the West, they espied great mountaynes a farre of, but as they drewe neare,Gentle people. they perceyued it to be the Ilande of Iucatana, being distant from Cozumella only fyue myles. Directyng therfore theyr course towards the south syde of Iucatana,Iucanata but fyue myles from Cozumel∣la. they compassed it on that syde which lyeth nearest to be supposed continent: yet coulde they not saile round about it, by reason of the multitude of rocks, shalowe places, and shelfes of sande. Then Alaminus the pilot turned his sayles to the North syde, whereof he had better know∣ledge. Thus at the length, they came to the towne Campechium, and kyng Lazarus, with whom they had been that attempted the first voyage the yeere before. At the fyrst, they were gentlye receiued, and required to resort to the towne: but shortly after,The Barba∣rians make resistance. they repented that they had bydden them, and thereupon willed them to stay about a stones cast from the towne, and to proceede no further. When our men desired that they myght make pro∣uision for freshe water before theyr departure, they assigned them to a certayne well whiche they had left behynde them, declaring further, that it shoulde be lawfull for them to take water there, or els no where. Our men rested that nyght in the feelde
adioyning to the well: the whiche thyng the Barbarians sus∣pectyng, assembled an army of three thousand men, and encam∣ped not farre from them. Both partes passed a way the nyght without sleepe: they, fearyng lest our men shoulde breake into the towne: and our men, lest the Barbarians shoulde inuade them sodenly, on the one part with Trumpettes, and on the o∣ther syde with the noyse of Tymbrels, kept them styll wakyng that were disposed to sleepe. At the spryng of the day, the Bar∣barians approched to our mens campe, and called for the inter∣pretours of Cuba, whose language is much agreable vnto theirs. They had deuised to lyght a Torche of franckensence, and to place the same betweene both the armies, to the intent that yf our men dyd not depart before the Torche were consumed, to stand to theyr peryll. The Torche was wasted, and the mat∣ter came to hand strokes. They slue only one of our men with an arrowe,A conflict. because his Target failed him: but many were woun∣ded. After this conflict, our men resorted to theyr ordinaunce, whiche they had planted neere vnto the wel. When they had dis∣charged certayne peeces, the Barbarians fled backe into the towne, and our men were of fierse and greedie courrage to haue pursued them, but that Grisalua the gouernour would not suffer them. From thence they proceeded to the last ende of Iucatana, which they founde to reach more then two hundred myles from the East to the West.The length of Iucatana. Here they founde a commodious hauen, and named it Portus desideratus. From hence they sailed to other landes, & came to the region next to Iucatana Westward, which they doubt whether it be an Iland, or part of the fyrme lande, but thinke it rather to be annext to ye continēt: in this there is a gulfe, whiche they suppose to be incompassed with both the landes: but of this there is no certentie. The inhabitauntes call this region Caluacam,The region of Caluacam, or Oloan. or otherwise Oloan. They found here also a great riuer, whiche by his violent course and fall, driueth freshe water two myles into the sea: this they called Grisalua, after the name of the gouernour. The Barbarians marueylyng at the huge great∣nesse and mouing of our shyps,The riuer Grisalua. came swarmyng on the bankes of both sydes the riuer, to the number of syxe thousande men, armed with targettes and brest plates of golde, and  bowes and ar∣rowes, brode swoordes of heauie wood, and long iauelyns harde∣ned
at the endes with fyre. Thus standyng in battayle raye to defende theyr coastes, and with proude countenaunces for∣byddyng our men to come alande, both parties watched all that nyght in armes. In the dawne of they daye, our men es∣pyed about a hundred Canoas (whiche we haue sayde to bee theyr boates) full of armed men. Here also, the language of thinterpretours of Cuba agreed well yenough with theirs. When they had admitted the peace profered them by thinter∣pretours, al the Canoas staied, except one which approched to∣warde the shyppes. A certayne ruler that was in this Canoa, de∣maunded of our men what they sought in other mens landes. They answeared, Gold, and that for permutation of other ware, and not of gift, or violently. The Canoa returned, and the ruler certified the king hereof, who came gladly to the shippes. When he had saluted the gouernor, he called his chamberlaine vnto him, commaundyng hym to bryng his armur, and other ornamentes of gold, wherewith he armed Grisalua from the toppe of the head,Armur of gold. to the sole of the foote: insomuche that what so euer any man of armes, armed at all partes,Expert artifi∣cers. is among vs accustomed to weare of Iron or steele when he commeth into the fielde, all such kynde of furnitures made of golde, and wrought with woonderfull art, the kyng gaue to the gouernour. He recompenced hym with ves∣tures of sycke, cloth, lynnen, and other of our thynges. In the begynnyng of this Iucatana, when they sayled to Cozumella, they chaunced vpon a Canoa of fishermen, to the number of niene, fysh∣yng with hookes of golde: they tooke them all prysoners.Fyshe hokes of golde. One of them was knowen to this kyng, who promysed the day folow∣yng, to send the gouernour as much gold for his raunsome, as the man hym selfe waighed. But the gouernour denied that he could release hym, without the consent of his felowes, and therefore kept hym styll, to proue what he coulde further knowe of hym. Departyng from hence, and saylyng styll westwarde,The Ilandes of Sacrifice. they founde a great gulfe, in the which three small Ilandes were situ∣ate: Of these, they went to the byggest. But oh abhominable crueltie, oh most corrupted myndes of men,Chyldren sacri∣ficed to Idols. Theyr Idoles of marble. and diuilyshe im∣pietie. Let euery godly man close ye mouth of his stomake, lest he be disturbed. They offer young chyldren of both kyndes to their Idoles of marble & earth. Among their Idoles of marble, there
standeth a Lion, hauyng a hole through the necke, into the whiche they poure the blood of the miserable sacrifyce, that it may from thence runne downe into a syncke of marble. Let vs nowe declare with what ceremonies they sacrifice the blood of these poore wretches. They cut not theyr throtes, but open the very brestes of these seelye soules, and take out theyr hartes yet pantyng, with the hot blood whereof, they annoynt the lippes of theyr Idoles, and suffer the resydue to fall into the syncke: This doone, they burne the harte and bowels, sup∣posyng the smoke thereof to be acceptable to theyr goddes. Of theyr Idoles, one is made to the shape of a man, bowyng downe his head, and lookyng towarde the syncke of blood, as it were acceptyng the offeryng of the slayne sacrifyce. They eate the fleshe of the armes, thyghes, and legges, especially when they sacrifice an enimie taken in the warres. They founde a streame of coniealed blood, as though it had runne from a boo∣chery. For this mischeuous purpose, they bring these wretches from the next Ilandes. They sawe also innumerable heades, and trunkes of bodies thus mangled, besyde many other yet remai∣nyng whole, and couered with certayne mattes. Al the tractes of these regions abound with gold and pretious stodes. One of our men wandryng in the Ilande, chaunced to fynde two water pottes of alabaster,Golde and pre∣cious stones. artificially wrought, and full of litle stones of dyuers colours. They say also that they founde a stone of the value of two thousande Castellans of golde, which the sent to the gouernour.A stone of great price. This Iland they named the Iland of sacrifice. Thin∣habitauntes are circumcised. There are also other Ilands situate about this Coluacana, or Galuacam, the which are inhabited one∣ly with women, lyuing without the companye of men, after the maner of the Amazones. But they that ponder the matter more wysely,Ilandes of women. thynke them rather to be certayne women whiche haue vowed chastitie, and professed a solitarie life, as the Nunnes do with vs, or as the virgins called Vestales, or Bonae Deae, were ac∣customed to do among the gentiles in olde tyme. At certayne tymes of the yeere, men of the other Ilandes resorte vnto them, not for thintent of generation, but moued with pitie, to helpe them to dresse theyr gardens, and tyll theyr grounde. The reporte goeth lykewyse, that there are other Ilandes of cor∣rupt
women, to whom men resort for carnall copulation, and that they cut of one of the pappes of theyr women children, lest it shoulde hynder theyr shootyng: also that they keepe only the wo∣men children, and send away the men children. Our men there∣fore drewe neare to the shore of Coluacana, where they quietly ex∣ercised marchandies with thinhabitantes. The king gaue them a great Pot of golde: also braselettes, chaynes, brooches, with many other iewels, and all of golde.Golde. Our men agayne on the o∣ther part satisfied hym with such stuffe as they had done other be∣fore. Heere would they gladly haue planted a new colonie or ha∣bitation, but that the gouernour woulde not permit them, wher∣at they grudged not a litle. The houses and other edifices of this prouince, are builded lyke vnto Towres. It hath also fyfteene great townes in it. Of these they affyrme,Houses lyke Towres .xv. great townes in the prouince of Coluacana. Townes of .xx. thousand houses. that they haue seene some consistyng of more then twentie thousand houses, not ioy∣ning togeather, but disseuered with courtes and gardens. They haue also certayne large market places, encompassed with walles, and streates wel paued: likewise fornaces & ouens, made of lime and bricke: furthermore al sortes of handie craftes men, and very cunning artificers. This kynges name was Potan∣chanus, and the region is called Palmaria.The region of Palmaria. The towne where the kyng keepeth his court, conteyneth .xv. thousand houses. When they receyue any straungers, & make a league of frendship with them,A token of frendshyp. they are accustomed with a knyfe made of a sharp stone to let them selues blood in the tongue, hande, arme, or some other part of the bodie, and this euen in the syght of them whom they admit to frendship, in token that they are redy to shed theyr blood in theyr frendes causes. Theyr priestes professe a vertuous lyfe, and lyue vnmaried. What it is to haue do to wt women,Priestes. no man knoweth before he be maried. Fornication and adulterie (which seldome chaunceth among them) they count abhomination. The women are of marueilous chastitie. Euery noble man, after that he haue had one wife,Chastitie. may haue as many concubines as hym ly∣steth: but a maried woman taken in adulterie, is solde of her hus∣band, but this onely to the prince,The punish∣ment of adul∣terie. at whose handes it shal be law∣full for her kynsfolke to redeme her. It is not lawefull for suche as are not maried, to syt at the same table with them that are maried, or to eate of the same dyshe, or drynke of the same cup.Mariage is honoured.
In the moneth of August and September, they absteyne .xxxv. dayes, not onely from fleshe, whereof they haue great plentie, but also from fyshe,Fasting. and all other thynges that lyue by blood, and duryng these dayes, lyue onely with hearbes and fruites. They recken twentie dayes to the moneth, and twentie monethes to the yeere. Our men consumed certayne dayes heere very plea∣sauntly. When they departed, coasting stil by the same shore, they came to an other kyng, whom they named Ouandus. When he had intelligence that our men desired gold,Kyng Ouan∣dus. he brought foorth cer∣taine plats of molten gold. But when the gouernour signified vn∣to hym by the interpretours, that he desired great plentie of that metall, the day folowing he brought him a mans image of gold, beyng a cubite in length:Idoles, iewels and ouches of golde. also a fanne of golde, and an Idole of one of his domestical gods, of curious woorkmanship: likewyse garlandes of stones of sundrye colours, with many brest plates, brooches, and other kyndes of ornamentes, and all of golde. He gaue hym furthermore abundaunce of delicate meates, well salted, and powdred with spices. When he had required our men to come alande, he commaunded his seruauntes with all speede to prepare a great multitude of braunches of trees, and to wayte vppon our men to his pallace. As they went thus in order, some behynde, and some before, on both sydes, they see∣med so to shadow our men with bowes, as though they had gone in a continuall arbour. The kyng hym selfe hauyng a Septer in his hande, dyd set them in theyr arraye, and some tyme stryke suche as were negligent in bearyng theyr bowes. They she∣wed them selues obedient in all thynges, and with graue coun∣tenaunce humbled them selues to receyue his strypes. When he was demaunded where he had suche plentie of golde: he poynted with his fynger to the next mountaynes,Gold in moun∣taynes and ri∣uers. and to the ri∣uers descending from the same. They are so accustomed to the riuers, and exercised in swymmyng, that it is all one to them to lyue in the water and on the lande. When they desire togea∣ther golde,Theyr maner of geathering golde. they plunge them selues in the riuers, and bryng from the bottome therof both theyr handes full of sande, whiche syftyng from hande to hande, they geather out the graynes of golde. And by this meanes in the space of two houres, they fyll a reede as bygge as a mans fynger.Sweete sa∣uours. Of the sweete
sauours of these lands, many thinges might be spoken, the which bycause they make rather to theffeminatyng of the myndes of men, then for any necessary purpose, I haue thought best to o∣mit them. The kyng also gaue the gouernour a young virgine, of twelue yeeres of age, adourned with ryche and fayre iewelles. Of the stones whiche hee had of this kyng,A stone of great price, one was valued at two thousande Castellanes of golde. Thus at the length they departed from this kyng, laden with golde and precious stones. Grisalua the gouernour, sent one of the Carauelles to his vncle Diego Velasquen, gouernour of the Ilande of Cuba, with messen∣gers to delyuer him the golde, iewelles, and other ornaments, the resydue in the meane tyme styll folowed the tracte towarde the West. One of them in the whiche Frauncis Montegius the vnder gouernour was caryed sayled harde by the shore, and the other two kepte aloofe within prospecte of the lande. Thinhabitauntes of these coastes also, no lesse marueylyng at the shyppes then dyd the other, came with twelue Canoas to Montegius, desyryng him by thinterpretours to come a∣lande, promysyng in the name of theyr kyng, that hee should bee honourably entertayned. But Montegius answered, that hee coulde not assent to theyr request, bycause his compani∣ons were so farre from him: Yet dyd hee gyue them certayne of our thinges, straunge vnto them, and thankes for their gen∣tlenesse. Shortly after, espying a great towne, they directed their course thither. Thinhabitauntes prohibyted them to come alande, and came foorth agaynst them with bowes and quiuers full of arrowes, broad swoordes made of heauy wood, and Iaue∣lins hardned at the ende with fyre. They shot at our men a farre of, and our men discharged certayne peeces of ordinaunce a∣gainst them. The Barbarians astonished at the noyse of the gun∣nes fled amayne, and desyred peace. Here our mens vitayles be∣gan to fayle them, and theyr shyppes were broosed with long viages. Hauyng therefore founde and done these thinges whereof wee haue spoken, Grisalua returned to the Ilande of Eernandina well contented, but so were not his companions. We muste nowe diuerte somewhat from this matter,Other viages from Cuba o Fernandina. and speake of an other nauigation: and from thence will wee returne to these landes whiche our men haue founde. So it is therefore, that
Diegus Velasquen, the gouernour of the Ilande of Fernandina, a∣bout the same tyme that he had sent foorth this nauie of foure Ca∣rauelles, he prepared an other nauigation of onely one Carauell, and one brygantine, with fourtie and fyue men. These exercised violent handes against thinhabitauntes of those regions where they arryued, thynkyng that they myght forceably drawe them to the dyggyng of golde, bycause they were Caffranite Idola∣ters and circumcised. There are at the sea syde not farre from the supposed continent,Many Ilands betweene Cuba and the fyrme lande. many litle Ilandes, of most fortunate and fruitefull soyle, whereof three are thus named, Guanapan, Guan∣guan, and Quitilla. Out of one of these (which they named Sansta Marina) they violently caryed away three hundred men & wo∣men, which they thrust into the Carauell, and returned immedi∣atly to Fernandina, leauyng the brigantine with .xxv. of theyr felowes, to thintent to hunt for more men. The hauen where the Carauell fyrst arryued, is called Carenas, beyng distant from the angle of Cuba,Sanctiago the chiefe citie of Cuba. and the chiefe citie of Sanctiago, two hundred and fyftie myles: For this Ilande of Cuba, is very long, reachyng in length from the East to the West, and situate di∣rectly vnder the circle called Tropicus Cancri, as we haue sayd be∣fore. Nowe shall you heare howe fortune sought the reuenge of these poore wretches. Therfore as their keepers went aland, and few remained in the Carauel, they perceiuing occasion ministred whereby they myght recouer their libertie,The Barbari∣ans slep the Spaniardes with theyr own weapons sodeinly snatched vp our mens weapons, and slue sixe of them which yet remained in the Carauell, whyle the residue leapte into the sea. And by this meanes the Barbarians possessed the Carauell whiche they had soone learned to rule, and thus returned to their owne countreys. But they sayled fyrst to the nexte Ilande, where they burnt the Carauel, and caryed away the weapons with them. From hence they conueyed them selues to their owne countreys with the Ca∣noas of this Ilād. Here in lyke maner they priuily assailed them that were left with the brigantine, and slue many of them also: The residue that escaped, fledde to the brigantine, where they be∣wayled theyr felowes deathes, and counted theyr owne escape a victorie. On the shore not farre from the place where they suffered this misfortune, there is a tree, in the toppe whereof they set vp a crosse, and graued this inscription in the barke of
the tree, Vannuis Aldarieci. There is a ryuer named Darien, on the banke whereof standeth the chiefe citie of the supposed conti∣nent. The gouernour therefore hauyng intelligence heereof,The chiefe citie of the supposed continent. sent with all speede two shippes of warre well furnished, to the ayde of them that were left: but they were wyse to late. Yet folowing the viewe of the crosse, they came to the shore, and red the letters grauen on the tree, but durst not attempt fortune. Thus with all theyr hardie souldiers departyng from hence with dispayre, they sayled to the nexte Ilande, out of the whiche they caryed away by violence fyue hundred men and women, supposyng lyke∣wyse that they myght lawfully so doe, bycause they were Ido∣laters and circumcised: But the lyke chaunce happened vnto them when they landed at Eernandina. For the Barbarians,The Spany∣ardes are slaine againe with their owne weapons. e∣spying oportunitie, set vppon the Spanyardes in one of the shyppes with theyr owne weapons, and slue theyr keepers: the residue that escaped, castyng them selues into the sea, swamme to the next Carauell, and with theyr felowes assayled the Carauell that was taken from them. This conflicte was so sharpe, that for the space of foure houres, it was doubtfull whether parte should obteyne the victorie. The Barbarians both men and wo∣men fought very fiercely, aswell to recouer their libertie, as also to holde fast the praye which they had gotten: But in fine, the Spanyardes had the vpper hande, by reason they were more ex∣perte in handlyng of theyr weapons, & rulyng of their Carauell. The Barbarians beyng thus ouercome, leapt into the sea, but the Spanyardes tooke them agayne with the shyppe boates.The Barbari∣ans are slayne and put to flyght. About a hundred of the Barbarians perished, being partly drow∣ned, and partely slayne with the swoorde, and but fewe of the Spanyardes. These thinges thus pacified, the resydue of the Barbarians were caryed to the towne of Sanctiago, and condem∣ned to labour in the golde mynes. Shortly after they made out a newe viage to an other of the Ilandes,A multitude of Ilandes. which lye there about so thicke,Archipelagus▪ that they commonly call the number of them Archipe∣lagus, as they in our sea of Ionicum are called Symplegades.An other viage Here our men were cruelly handled, and as many of them as came a∣lande eyther slayne or wounded. This Ilande they named Florida, bycause they arryued there on Easter day, whiche the Spaniards call the floryshyng day of the resurrection. They say
also that in this tracte they sawe .xxvi. Ilandes, which Colonus had ouerpassed,xxvi. Ilandes about Hispani∣ola & Cuba. and the same so to lye about Hispaniola and Cu∣ba, as though they warded them from the furie of the Ocean. In many of these they founde natiue golde, of lyke goodnesse to that which is founde in Granatum. Thinhabitauntes also weare many iewelles,Images of golde. and haue many Images of theyr domesticall goddes, made both of golde artificially wrought, and also of wood gylted. Frauncis Cheregatus brought one of theyr Idols with him, wher∣by may bee considered of what wytte and aptnesse they are. It is a marueylous thyng to see what maner of rasers they haue, made of certayne yelowe stones,Rasers of stone. cleare and transparent lyke vnto chri∣stall, with these they shaue and carue, as though they were made of fyne steele: When the edges are blunt with long exercyse, they sharpen them not with a whetstone, or powder, or any other stone, but temper them onely with water. They haue also a thou∣sande kyndes of instrumentes or tooles,Instruments and tooles. and such other thinges of fyne deuice, which were to long to rehearse. Let vs there∣fore returne from whence wee haue digressed, as to Cozumella, Iucatana,Landes lyke vnto the earth∣ly Paradyse. Coluacana, or Olloa, being all landes lately founde, and so rych, fruitfull, and pleasaunt, that they may in maner bee com∣pared to the earthly Paradyse. Therefore, after that it was knowen to our men of howe great moment these tractes were, the Spaniards which inhabited the Ilande of Cuba, Annunstus being the gouernour of the Ilande, furnished a new nauie of ten Carauelles,An other vyage of ten Cara∣uels and fyue hundred men. and fyue hundred men, with two small brigantines, as it were in the steade of lyght horsemen, or forerunners, whose ayde they myght vse as scoutes, to search the wayes for daunger of rockes and shalow sandes or shelfes. They shipte also certayne horses as fyue stoned horses,Horses and mares. and .xxvi. mares, apt for the warres. For theyr generall gouernour and Admirall of the nauy, they elected Fernando Cortesius,Fernando Cortesius. who at yt tyme was ye chief ruler of the citie of Sanctiago. For vnder Capitaynes, they appoynted Alfons Portucareius, Francis Montegius, Alfons Auila, Alue∣rado Spatense, Iohn Velasquen, and Diegus Ordassus, They styll folowed the same wynde, from the last angle of Cuba towarde the West. Assoone as Francis Fernandes of Corduba, and then Iohn Grisalua came within prospecte of the Ilande of Sacrifyces (whereof wee haue made mention before) sodeinly a tempest of
contrary wynde prohibited them to take lande, and droue them backewarde to Cozumella, lying on the East syde of Iucatana:The Ilande of Cozumella. this Ilande hath onely one hauen, named sainct Iohns porte, and hath in it onely syxe townes: also none other water then in welles and cesternes, bycause it lacketh ryuers and sprynges by reason it is playne, conteynyng onely .xlv. myles in circuite. At the commyng of our men, thinhabitauntes fledde to the thicke woods, and forsooke theyr townes for feare: Our men entred into theyr houses, where they founde plentie of vittayles, and many ornamentes parteynyng to the furnyshyng of theyr hou∣ses, as hanginges and carpettes of dyuers colours, sheetes also of gossampine cotton (whiche they call Amaccas) and muche apparell. They haue furthermore innumerable bookes,Carpettes and sheetes. Innumerable bookes. of the which with many other thinges sent to our newe Empe∣rour, wee will speake more largely heereafter. The souldiers wandered about the Ilande, and viewed all thinges diligently, keepyng them selues styll in battayle raye, least they myght bee sodeinly inuaded. They founde but a fewe of thinhabitauntes, and onely one woman in theyr company. By thinterpretours of Cuba, and other which the Spaniardes tooke first from Iucatana, they perswaded the woman to call the kynges that were absent. They came gladly, and made a league of friendshyp with our men, whereby they were restored to theyr houses, and a great parte of their stuffe. They are circumcised Idolatours, and sacri∣fyce children of both kyndes to their Zemes,Circumcised Idolaters. which are the Ima∣ges of their familiar and domesticall spirites, whiche they ho∣nour as goddes. When I enquired of Alaminus the pilot, also of Francis Montegius, and Portucarerius, from whence they had the children they offered in sacrifyce: they answered,They Sacri∣fyce Children. that they bought them in the Ilandes thereabout, by exchaunge for golde and other of their trafycke: For in all this so large a space of land, the deuilyshe anxietie for the desyre of wicked money, hath not yet oppressed thinhabitauntes. They say the same also of the I∣landes lately founde, whereof two are named Destam and Sestam,The Ilandes of Destam and Sestam. whose inhabitants go naked, and for scarcenesse of children, sacri∣fice dogges, which they nouryshe aswell for that purpose, as also to eate, as wee doe Cunnies: these dogges are dumme,The sacrifice of dogges. & can not barke, hauing snoutes lyke vnto Foxes. Suche as they destinate
to eate, they gelde while they are whelpes, whereby they waxe very fat in the space of foure monethes. They reserue all the byt∣ches for increase, and but fewe dogges. Our men diswaded them from these superstitions, declaryng howe they were abhomina∣ble,They are soone perswaded to our religion. and detested of God. They were soone perswaded, and de∣syred a lawe which they myght folowe. Our men therfore decla∣red vnto them, that there was onely one God, which made hea∣uen and earth, the giuer of all good thinges, beyng of one in∣comprehensyble substaunce, vnder triplicitie of person. Assoone as they heard these wordes, they broke their Zemes, and pared, scraped, and washed the pauements and walles of their temples. Our men gaue them a paynted picture of the blessed virgine, which they placed reuerently in their temple,This people leauing one kynde of Ido∣latry be taught another. & about it a crosse, to be honoured in the remembraunce of God and man, and the saluation of mankynde. They erected also an other great crosse of wood in the toppe of the temple, whyther they oftentymes resorte togeather to honour the Image of the virgine. Thin∣habitauntes signifyed by thinterpretours, that in the Ilande of Iucatana, not farre from them, there were seuen Christians cap∣tiues, which in tyme past were driuen thither by tempest. The I∣lande of Cozumella, is onely fyue myles distant from Iucatana. The gouernour Cortesius being aduertised hereof, furnished two Carauels with fiftie men,An other viage willing them incōtinent to direct their viage thither, & to make search for these mē. They tooke wt them iii. interpretors of Cozumella (whose lāguage agreeth wt theirs) with letters to the Christians if any might be founde. He further declared vnto them, howe goodly a matter they should bryng to passe, if they coulde bryng away any of them: For hee no wayes doubted but that by their information, he should be fully certified of the commodities of all those tractes, & the maners of thinhabi∣tauntes. Thus they departed, with commaundement to returne within the space of six dayes. But when they had remayned there now .viii. dayes, & heard no word of their Cozumellane interpre∣tours, whom they had sent alande with the message and letters, our men returned to Cozumella without them, suspectyng that they were either slaine, or deteyned. And where as the whole na∣uie was now determined to depart from Cozumella, but that they were hyndered by contrary wynde, they sodeinly espied towarde
the west a Canoa commyng from Iucatana, and in it one of the Christian captiues (named Hieronimus Aquillaris) who had ly∣ued seuen yeeres in that Ilande:Aquillaris .vii. yeeres captiue in the Ilande of Iucatana. With what ioye they embrased the one the other, the chaunce may declare. They were no lesse desyrous to heare, then he to tell of the mysfortune which befell to him and his companions. And heere it shall not bee greatly from my purpose, briefely to rehearse howe the thing chaunced. In my Decades I haue made mention of a certayne noble man named Valdiuia, whom the Spanyardes which inhabited Darie∣na in the supposed continent of the gulf of Vraba,Valdiuia. sent to the Iland of Hispaniola to Colonus the Admirall and viceroy, with the resi∣due of the Senate and counsaile there (to whom parteyneth the redresse and orderyng of all thinges in these new landes) to sig∣nifie vnto them in what extreme necessitie and penurie they ly∣ued. Unhappy Valdiuia therefore, takyng this matter in hande in an euyll houre,The shipwrack of Valdiuia. was with a sodeine and violent whirle wynde dryuen vppon certayne quickesandes, in the prospecte of the I∣lande of Iamaica, lying on the South syde of Hispaniola and Cu∣ba. These blynde and swalowyng sandes, the Spaniardes call vypers, and that by good reason, bycause in them many shyppes are entangled,The quicke sandes called vypers. as the Lisertes are implycate in the tayles of the vypers. While the Carauell thus wresteled with the water, it was so burst in sunder, that Valdiuia with thirtie of his felowes could scarcely with much difficultie discende into the shyp boate: where without ores, and without sayles, they were caryed away by the violence of the water. For (as we haue sayd before in our Decades) the seas doe runne there continually with a violent course toward the West. They wandered thus .xiii. dayes,The course of the sea toward the West. not knowing whither they went, nor yet fyndyng any thing to eate. Famine consumed seuen of them, which were cast into the sea to feede the fyshes. The residue lykewyse, in maner consumed by famyne, and fallyng from one calamitie into an other, were dry∣uen to Iucatana, and fell into the handes of a cruell kyng, who slue Valdiuia the gouernour, with certayne of his felowes:Valdiuia is sacrificed to Idoles. and when he had fyrst sacrifyced them to his Zemes, shortly after hee ate them, with his friendes of that conspiracie. For they eate onely their enemies & straungers, & doe otherwise absteyne from mans fleshe. In this meane tyme, while Hieronimus Aquillaris,How Aquilla∣ris escaped.
with syxe of his felowes, were reserued to be sacrifyced the thyrde day, they brake theyr bandes, escaped the handes of that cruell Tyrant, and fledde to an other kyng beyng his enimy, who re∣ceyued them, yet onely as bondmen. It is a straunge thyng to heare of the moother of this Aquillaris: For as soone as shee hearde that her sonne was fallen into the handes of the na∣tions that eate mans fleshe, shee fell madde incontinent: so that whensoeuer after, shee sawe any meate roastyng at the fyre, or onely redy spytted to laye to the fyre, shee ceassed not to crye out in this maner, O mee most wretched moother, be∣holde the members of my sonne. But to returne to our purpose. When Aquillaris had now receyued the gouernours letter, sent by the Cozumellane messengers, hee declared to the kyng his maister (whose name was Taxmarus) what was theyr errande thither,Kyng Tax∣marus. and wherefore they were sent: vsyng in the meane tyme many large discourses, in expressyng the great power and mag∣nificence of theyr kyng, who had of late arryued in those coastes: also of theyr humanitie and gentlenesse towarde theyr friendes and such as submitted them selues to them, & againe their rigour and fiercenesse agaynst suche as stubbernly eyther contemned them, or denyed their requestes. With these wordes he brought Taxmarus into such feare, that the maister was now fayne to de∣syre his seruaunt so to handle the matter, that they myght quietly enter into his dominion as his friendes, and not as his enemies. Aquillaris promised in their behalfe yt they should not onely come in peace, but also to ayde him against his enemies if neede should so require. Whervppon he dismissed Aquillaris, & with him three of his familiers and companions. Thus they sayled togeather from Cozumella to Iucatana, to the ryuer which they had founde before in the fyrst viage thither, by the gouernance of Alaminus the pilot.The mouth of a ryuer stopped with sande. They founde the mouth of the ryuer stopped with sand, as we reade of the ryuer of Nilus in Egypte, when the wyndes (called Etesti) blow in summer, and especially in the canicular dayes. Therefore where as they could not enter into the ryuer with the biggest vesselles (although it be otherwyse apte to re∣ceyue great shyppes) the gouernour caused two hundred men to bee set alande with the Brigantines and shyppe boates, wyl∣lyng Aquillaris to offer peace to thinhabitauntes. They de∣maunded
what our men requyred. Aquillaris aunsweared, vit∣tayles. There was a longe space of sande by the syde of the towne, whyther they wylled them to resort, promysyng to bryng them vittayles thyther the day folowyng. Our men went, and they came, accordyng to theyr promisse, and brought with them eyght of theyr Hennes, beyng as bygge as Peacockes, of brownyshe coloure,Turky Hens. and not inferiour to Pea∣cockes in pleasaunt tast. They brought also as muche bread made of Maizium (whiche is a grayne not muche vnlyke vnto panyke) as woulde scarcely serue tenne hungry men, and here∣with desyred them to depart. But when they perceyued that our men made no hast away, immediately there came a great company of armed men towarde them, demaundyng what they had to do thus to wander in other mens landes. Our men made answeare by Aquillaris, that they desyred peace, vittayles, and golde, for exchange of other thynges. They answeared againe, that they woulde nother peace nor warre with them, but threatned them to auoyde the land, except they would be destroy∣ed euery man. Our men sayd that they woulde not depart, without sufficient vittayles to mayntayne their souldyers. They appoynted the day folowyng to bryng them more vittayles, but they broke promise: Yet perceyuing the seconde day that our men were encamped on the sande, and had reposed there that nyght, they brought them as much more vittayles, and com∣maunded them in the name of theyr kyng to departe. Our men sayde that they were desyrous to see the towne, and to haue yet more store of vittayles. The Barbarians denyed theyr request, and therewith departed, whisperyng and mutteryng among them selues. In the meane tyme our men were styll so oppressed with hunger, that they were enforced to seeke for meate. The gouernour therefore sent his vnder captaynes to lande with a hundred and fyftie men.A conflicte. As they went dispersed in dyuers com∣panyes about the villages of the countrey, the Barbarians met with one of theyr bandes, and put them to great distresse: But when theyr felowes, being not farre from them, hearde the noyse of theyr alarome, they came with al possible haste to theyr rescue. The gouernour on the other syde, placing his ordinaunce in the brygantines & shippe boates, approched to the shorre, with
the resydue of his souldiers. The Barbarians lykewyse, beyng redy furnyshed to the battayle, came runnyng to the sea syde, to disturbe them, that they shoulde not come alande, and with theyr arrowes wounded many a farre of vnprepared. The gouernoure discharged about .xx. peeces of ordinaunce agaynst them:The Barbari∣ans ar put to flyght. With the slaughter and terrible thunder wher∣of, and with the flame of the fyre, and smell of the brimstone, they were so astonied, and put to such feare, that they fled and dis∣parcled lyke wylde beastes: whom our men pursuing, entred in∣to the towne, which thinhabitantes forsoke in maner for feare of their owne men, whō they sawe so dismaide. On the banke of this ryuer there is a towne of such portentous biggnes as I dare not speake, but Alanimus the pilot, sayth that it contayneth in circuite fyue hundred myles, and that it consisteth of .xxv. thou∣sande houses:The great towne of Po∣tanchana or Victoria. A towne of xxv. thousande houses. Some make it somwhat lesse, but they all agree that it is exceedyng great and notable. The houses are diuided with gardens, and are buylded of lyme and stone, very artificiall, and of cunnyng woorkemanship. To theyr haules, chambers, parlers, or other places of habitation, they ascend by tenne or twelue stayres, and haue certayne spaces betwene euery house: so that it is not lawfull for any to lade his neygh∣bours wales with rafters or beames. Theyr houses are sepa∣rate one from an other by the space of three houses, and are for the most parte couered with reede and thatche, and many al∣so with slate or other stone. The Barbarians them selues con∣fessed that they were that day fourtie thousande men at the bat∣tayle,Gunnes and horses. which were vanquished of a fewe, by reason of the newe and vnknowen kynde of feyght with gunnes and horses. For the gouernour had vnbarked .xvi. horses, which were also at the bat∣tayle, and so fyercely assayled the Barbarians on the backehalfe, that they brake theyr array, and scattered them as it had ben flockes of sheepe, ouerthrowing, woūding, & killing them on eue∣ry syde: Which thing the seely wretches so imputed to a miracle, that they had not ye power to occupie their weapones. For wher∣as before they had neuer seene any horses,The men and the horse▪ thought to be one beast. they thought that ye man on horsebacke and the horse had ben all one beaste, as the antiquitie dyd fable of the monster Centaurus. Our men possessed the towne .xxii. dayes, where they made good cheare vnder couert,
whyle the owners of the houses lay vnder the fyrmament, and durst not assayle our men, who had placed them selues in the stroungest part of the towne, where some kept contynual watch (lest the Barbarians shoulde sodenly inuade them) whyle other gaue them selues to rest and sleepe. The inhabitauntes call this towne Potanchana: but our men for the victorie which they obteyned here, named it Victoria. It is a marueilous thyng to consider, the greatnesse, magnificence, & finenesse of the building of certayne palaces they haue in the countrey, to the which they resort somtymes for theyr solace and pastyme.Palaces of maruelous bygnes and well buylded. These are curi∣ously builded with many pleasaunt diuises, as galeries, solars turrettes, portals, gutters, with chambers boorded after the maner of our waynescot, and well floored. Foure of our Spa∣niardes went into one of them, of such greatnesse, that they wan∣dred in the same for the space of foure houres before they coulde fynde the way out. At the length by the interpretours, and cer∣tayne captiues, our men sent for the kyng, and suche rulers as were next vnder hym in aucthoritie, wyllyng them to submyt them selues, and to come into the towne vnarmed: geuyng the messengers further in commaundement, to certifie them that in theyr so doyng, they woulde commune with them as concerning conditions of peace, and restore them theyr towne. They came gladly, and entred euery man into his owne house, vpon conditi∣on, that they shoulde euer thereafter absteyne from such ceremo∣nies and horrible sacrifices of mans fleshe, to deuils, the mortal e∣nemies to mankinde, whose Images they honoured, & to direct the eyes of theyr myndes to Christ our God, ye maker of heauen and earth, who was borne into this worlde of a virgin,They receyue our religion. and suf∣fred death on the crosse for the redemption of mankynde, and fi∣nally to professe them selues subiectes to the Christian kyng of Spayne. They promised both, and were instructed as farre as the shortnesse of tyme woulde permit. Beyng thus restored, they recompensed our men with many rewardes, supposyng suche men to be sent from heauen, whiche beyng so fewe in num∣ber, durst attempt battayle agaynst so great a multitude. They gaue our men also certayne golde, and twentie slaues. Depar∣tyng therefore from hence, and coasting styll along by the same shore, they came agayne to the gulfe whiche Alaminus the
pilot founde before vnder Grisalua. This they named Bian Sanc∣ti Iohannis, that is, Saint Iohns gulfe, for Bian in the Spanishe tounge signifieth a gulfe. Heere the inhabitantes resorted to them peaceably. About a myle from the shore, was a towne of a thousand and fyue hundred houses situate vpon a hyll. They profered our men halfe the towne,A towne of a thousand and fyue hundred houses. if they would dwel with them for euer. This perhaps they dyd the rather, eyther fearyng the example of the inhabitantes of Potanchana, the fame whereof myght haue come to theyr eares, or els hopyng that vnder the shadowe of suche valiaunt men, they myght obteyne ayde and succour agaynst theyr enemies and borderers. For (as I haue sayde before) they destroy one an other with contynuall warre, for the desire to enlarge theyr dominions. Our men refused par∣petuall habitation, and accepted theyr frendly proffer for a tyme. As they came alande, the people folowed them on euerye syde with bowes in theyr handes, whiche they helde ouer our mens heades, to defend them from the rayne, as though they had wal∣ked in a continuall arbour. Heere they encamped. And lest the residue left in the shyps shoulde in the meane tyme waxe slouth∣full with Idlenesse,Another voi∣age of two bri∣gantines and fyftie men. the gouernour gaue commaundement to A∣laminus the pilot, and Francis Montegius, to searche the West partes of that land, while he releeued the weeried souldiers, and healed such as were wounded. To them that went forward on this viage, he assigned two brigantines with fyftie men. Un∣to this gulfe,Where the sea runneth swyft∣ly from the East to the West. the course of the water was gentle enough and mo∣derate: but when they had sailed a litle further toward the West, they founde the sea running with so swift a course, as if it were a great riuer fallyng from the toppes of hygh mountaynes, inso∣much that in a short space of tyme it caried them fiftie myles from theyr felowes. When they were now entred into this vio∣lent streame of water, they saw on their left hande a large plaine sea,A conflict be∣tweene the wa∣ters comming from the West and from the South. which met with the course of the other waters falling from the West. And lyke as two great riuers that runne contrarye waies, make a vehement conflict where they meete: so seemed the waters comming from the South, to resyst these waters, as e∣nemies that had entred into the ryght or possession of an other: On the contrary part, they sawe the lande reachyng farre both on the left hande and on the ryght. In this stryfe be∣twene
the waters, they were so tossed on both sydes, and en∣tangled with whirlepoles, that they long wrestled without hope of lyfe. At the length,A dangerous and payneful vyage. with muche difficultie turnyng the stemmes or forpartes of theyr shyppes agaynst the streame from whence they came, and labouryng all that they myght with theyr ores and sayles, they coulde scarsely ouercome the rage of the water, insomuche that were as they thought that they had in one nyght sayled two myles, they founde that they were dryuen backe foure myles: Yet at the length with gods helpe, they ouercame this daungerours conflycte. They spent xxii. dayes in this litle space of sea: And when they were nowe returned to theyr felowes,The lande of Coluacana. declared vnto them that that ende was the lande of Coluacana, whiche they adiudged to be part of the supposed continent. The lande whiche they sawe a farre of before theyr face,The lande of Baccalaos o Baccalearum. they suppose eyther to be annexed to our conti∣nent▪ or to be ioyned to the large North regions called Baccalaos, whereof we haue made mention in our Decades, in the voiage of Sebastian Cabote. This matter is yet doubtefull: but we trust it shall once be better knowen. While Alaminus and Mon∣tegius searched these secretes, the kyng of the prouince (whose name was Multoxumam) sent our men, by one of his chiefe officers (beyng also his Lieuetenaunt of the sayde towne) many ryche and goodly presentes of golde, syluer, and precious stones,Rych presentes of golde and pretious stones. set and wrought after a marueylous straunge deuice, and with no lesse cunnyng woorkemanshyp. Heere they determined to sende messengers to our newe Emperour, to knowe his plea∣sure, that they myght in this prouince plant a newe colonie or habitation: and this dyd they without the aduise of Diegus Velas∣quen the gouernour of the Iland of Cuba, or Fernandina, who fyrst sent them foorth, with commaundement to returne agayne after they had searched these regions, and obtayned plentie of golde. While they consulted herof, they were of diuers opinions: but the most part alleaged that in this case it was not requisite to make the gouernour of theyr counsayle, forasmuch as ye matter shoulde be referred to a higher Iudge, as to the king of Spaine hym self. When they were thus agreed, they receyued vittayles of the gentle king of the prouince,A newe colo∣nie. and assigned the place of their colonie twelue myles from the saide towne, in a fruiteful & holsome soile.
For theyr generall gouernoure, they elected Cortesius the gouer∣nour of the nauie, agaynst his wyll as some saye. For other ma∣gistrates to gouerne the citie which they intended to builde,This Cortesius hath written a booke of these thynges. he chose Portucarerius and Montegius, of whom we haue made men∣tion before: They chose also certayne messengers to send to the kyng by the conduction of Alaminus the pilot: Furthermore, foure of the princes of this prouince, offered them selues wyllyngly to go with our men into Spayne, to thintent to see our landes, and that kyng whose power is so great, and whose auctoritie reach∣eth so farre: They brought lykewyse two women with them, whiche serued and obeyed them in all thinges, after the maner of their countrey. The people of this nation is of browne or yelow∣yshe colour. Both the men and the women haue pendauntes of gold & pretious stones hanging at their eares: The men also bore theyr neather lippes full of holes, from the vppermost part of the lippe,They weare rynges and plates at theyr lyppes. euen vnto the neathermost part of the gumme. At these they hang certayne rynges, and plates of golde and syl∣uer, fastned to a smal and thynne plate, lying within betwene the lip & the gumme. At the biggest hole in the middest of the lippe, there hangeth a rounde plate of syluer, as brode as the coyne called a Carolyne, & as thicke as a mans finger. I do not remem∣ber that euer I sawe any thyng that seemed more fylthy in myne eye:The dyuers phantasies of men. Yet do they thynke that there is nothyng more comly vnder the circle of the moone, whereby we may see howe vainely mankynde wandereth in his owne blyndnesse. The Ethiopian thincketh the blacke colour to be fayrer then the white, and the white man thinketh otherwise. They that are powled, thynke that more decent then to weare a bushe, and they that weare beardes, iudge it a deformitie to be shauen. As appetite therfore moueth, and not as reason perswadeth, men runne after vanities, and euery prouince is ruled by theyr owne sense, as writeth saint Ierome. From whence they haue their gold, we haue spoken sufficiently before. But as our men mar∣ueyled where they had theyr syluer, they shewed them certayne high mountaines,Syluer. which are continually couered wt snowe, sauing that at certaine times of the yeere the only toppes are seene bare, bicause the snow is there molten, by reason of ye thicke and warme cloudes. The plaines therfore, or milde, softe, & pleasaunt moun∣taines,
seeme to bring foorth golde, and the rough craggie moun∣taynes with theyr colde valleyes, are the places where syluer is engendred. They haue also Laton,Note where golde and syl∣uer are engen∣dred. I thinke this Laton to be some kynde of pure Copper, or els Copper that holdeth golde. For La∣ton is an artifi∣cial metall, and hath no natu∣ral myne. Theyr bookes. whereof they make such Mases and Hammers as are vsed in the warres, dygging Mat∣tockes also, and Spades: for they haue neyther Iron nor steele. But let vs nowe speake of the presentes sent into Spayne to the kyng: and fyrst of the bookes. These procuratours therefore of the newe colonie of the prouince of Coluacana, among other their presentes, brought also a great number of bookes, the leaues whereof are made of the inner ryndes or barkes of trees, thinner then eyther that of the Elme or of ye Salowe: these they smeere or anoynt with the pitche of molten Bitumem, and whyle they be soft, extend them to what fourme them lysteth: When they bee cold and harde, they rubbe them ouer with a certayne playster. It is to be thought, that they beate the playster into fyne floure, and so temperyng it with some byndyng moysture, to make a crust therewith vppon the leaues, whereon they wryte with anye sharpe instrument, and blot the same agayne with a spunge or some suche other thyng, as marchaunt men and noble mens stewards are accustomed to do with their wryting tables made of the woodde of figge trees. The leaues of theyr bookes are not set in order after the maner of ours, but are extended many cu∣bittes in length. The matters whiche they write, are con∣teyned in square tables, not lose, but so bound togeather with the tough & flexible clay called Bitumem, that they seeme lyke woodden tables whiche had been vnder the handes of cun∣nyng Bookbynders. Which way so euer the booke lieth open, there are two leaues seene, and two sydes wrytten, with as ma∣ny lying vnder them, except the booke be vnfoulded in length, For vnder one leafe there are many leaues ioyned togeather. The fourmes of theyr letters are nothyng lyke vnto ours, but are muche more crooked and entangled, lyke vnto fyshhookes,Theyr letters. knottes, snares, starres, fyles, dyse, and suche other, muche lyke vnto the Egyptian letters, and wrytten in lines lyke vnto ours. Heere and there betweene the lines, are pictured the shapes of men, and diuers beastes, and especyally the Images of kynges, and other noble men: Whereby it is to be thought, that in such bookes, the factes of theyr kinges are conteined,What is con∣teyned in theyr bookes. as we see the lyke among vs, how our printers expresse the summe
of histories in pictures, that men may therby be the more allu∣red to bye suche bookes. The coueringes of theyr bookes are al∣so artificially wrought, and paynted. When they are shut, they seeme to differ nothing from ours in fourme. In these bookes are furthermore comprehended theyr lawes, rytes of ceremonies and sacrifyces, annotations of Astronomie, accomptes, compu∣tations of tymes, with the maner of graffyng, sowing, and other thynges parteynyng to husbandry. They begyn the yeere from the goyng downe of the seauen starres, called Vergiliae, or Ple∣iades, and count theyr monethes accordyng to the mones. They name a moneth, Tona, of the Moone, for in theyr language they call the Moone Tona. They recken the dayes by the sonnes: therefore as many dayes as they name, they saye, so manye sonnes, the Sonne in theyr tongue, is called Tonatico. They distribute the yeere (without any reason why) into twentie mo∣nethes,Temples richely adour∣ned. and the moneth into as many dayes. The temples whiche they frequent, they adourne with golden hangynges, and other ornamentes of golde and syluer, with precious stones intermyxt. At the spryng of the day, they perfume theyr tem∣ples with frankensence, and make theyr prayers before they take in hand any other busynesse.Prayer. But oh horrible crueltie: for the inhabitantes of al these tractes also, do sacrifice children to their Idoles, in lyke maner as we haue sayde before. At suche tyme as the seedes lye in the grounde,They sacrifice children and captiues. and when the corne begynneth to shewe foorth the eare, they destinate to theyr Zemes suche bondmen as they haue bought, or such captyues as they haue ta∣ken in the warres, which they sacrifice after that they haue made them great cheare, and decked them in precious apparell. Also before they sacrifice these poore wretches, they leade them about the towne, whyle al the people salute them humbly and reuerent∣ly,A wrong way to heauen. affyrmyng that in short space they shalbe receyued into the company of the gods. They honour theyr Zemes, with an o∣ther sharpe kynde of deuotion: for they let them selues blood, eyther in the tongue,Bloody gods. lips, eares, legges, thyghes, or brest, which they take in theyr handes, and hurle it vp towards heauen, so that with the fall thereof the pauement of the temple is all spar∣cled with blood, whereby they thynke that theyr goddes are well pleased.Villa Ricca. From the newe colonie (called Villa Ricca) niene
myles distant, there is a towne of .xv. thousande houses, whiche thinhabitauntes call Cemobal, but our men named it Siuilla. The kyng of this towne had fyue men which he reserued to be sacrify∣ced, whom when our men would haue delyuered,Siuilla Noua. the kyng made humble request to them, saying that if they tooke away such men as hee had consecrated to bee offered to the goddes, they should bryng vtter destruction to him and all his kyngdome: For if our sacrifyces (sayde hee) doe ceasse,The force of an old errour. our Zemes will take such displeasure with vs, that they will suffer our corne, graffes, and fruites, to bee consumed of wormes, scorched with drouth, destroyed with flooddes, or blasted with lyghtnyng. Our men perceyuyng his earnestnesse heerein, thought it best to choose the least euyll, perceyuyng that it was yet no tyme to disquiet theyr myndes, and therefore suffered them to exercyse their accustomed ceremonies. And although theyr priestes promise them immortall glorie, eternall felicitie, and perpe∣tuall conuersation with the goddes after the stormie dayes of this lyfe, yet doe they with heauy countenaunces giue eare to their promises, and had rather bee set at libertie. Their priestes are named Quines, in the plurall number,Theyr priests lyue chast. and Quin in the sin∣gular: they leade a pure and chast lyfe, and are honoured of the people with feare and reuerence. They make fagottes of the bones of their enemies which they haue taken in the warres,Faggotes of bones. and hang vp the same at the feete of theyr Zemes, as tokens of the victories obteyned by their fauour. To these they adde certaine titles and superscriptions, as testimonies of the same. This is straunge and woorthy to be noted, that when their children are a yeere olde, the priestes in their temples with deuout ceremo∣nies and murmuryng woordes, powre water in forme of a crosse vpon their heades with a cruet,A figure of baptisme. whereby they seeme to baptise them: Neyther doe they, as the Iewes and Turkes, thinke their temples polluted if any of a straunge religion bee present at their sacrifyces and other solemnities. We haue now spoken sufficiently of theyr bookes, temples, and superstitions:The presentes sent into Spayne to the kyng. Two Images of golde and siluer. Let vs nowe therefore come to the other presentes whiche were brought to the kyng. Among these, there were two broade and rounde plates (whiche some haue named the Images of the Sunne and Moone) the one of siluer, and the other of golde,
in largenesse and roundnesse muche lyke to the stones of hande∣mylles: yet but thynne, and in maner both of one circumference, that is .xxviii. spannes in circuite. That of golde is of the weyght of three thousande and viii. hundred Castellanes, where as we haue sayd before yt a Castellane is a coyne of golde which weygheth more then a Ducate by a trient, that is, the thyrde parte of a pounde. In the center of this, was the Image of a kyng of halfe a cubite long, syttyng in a trone, and apparel∣led to the knee lyke vnto a mawmet, with suche countenaunce as our paynters are wont to paynte fayries or sprites: about the Image, were the shapes of trees and floures, so that it seemed to sitte as though it had been in a feelde. The other of syluer, was made to the same similitude, beyng also in maner of the same weyght, and both of pure mettall. They brought lykewyse certayne graynes of rude golde (that is, suche as was neuer moten) about the bygnesse of Fytches, or the pulse called Lintels, in token of plentie of natiue golde: Also two cheynes of golde,Two cheynes of golde mar∣ueylously beset with precious stones and iewelles. whereof the one conteyned .viii. lynkes, in the which were set two hundred, threescore, and two fayre and cleare redde stones, and yet no rubies, furthermore a hundred fourescore and three greene stones, and yet no emerodes: Ne∣uerthelesse, these are in lyke estimation with them, as the other are with vs. At the edge of this cheyne, there hang .xxvii. gol∣den belles, hauyng betweene euery of them foure iewels of pre∣cious stones inclosed in golde, at euery of the which in lyke ma∣ner hang certayne spangles of golde. The other cheyne consi∣steth onely of foure golden lynkes, beset rounde about with a hundred and two redde stones, and a hundred threescore & twelue greene stones, with .xxvi. golden belles, curiously wrought and placed in comely order. In the very myddest of the cheyne, are ten great precious stones inclosed in gold, at the which also hang a hundred golden pendauntes, of cunnyng woorkemanshyppe. They brought furthermore twelue paire of lether buskynnes of diuers colours,Buskyns. some imbrodered with golde, and some with siluer, with plates and iewels of golde and precious stones inclosed, and at euery of them certayne golden belles: Also cer∣tayne myters,Myters. beset with precious stones of dyuers colours, a∣mong the whiche some are blewe lyke vnto Saphires. Of
crestes, girdles, and fannes made of feathers, I wot not what I should lay: but surely, if euer the wyttes and inuentions of men haue deserued honour or commendation in suche artes,How can we then call them beastly or Bar∣barous? these seeme most woorthy to bee had in admiration. I doe not mar∣ueile at golde and precious stones, but am in maner astonyshed to see the woorkemanshyp excell the substaunce: For I haue with woonderyng eyes behelde a thousande fourmes and simili∣tudes, of the whiche I am not able to wryte,If they had chaunged theyr golde for our Iron▪ they had not so soone been subdued. and in my iudge∣ment I neuer sawe any thyng whose beautie myght so allure the eyes of men. As they marueyled at the naturall beautie of the feathers of our peacockes and pheasantes, so dyd we no lesse marueyle at the artificiall beautie of suche thinges as they make of fethers and quilles, impaled with golde: For I sawe in many of theyr workes, all maner of natiue colours, euen in the quilles,Quylles. whereof they make such instrumentes. They brought also two helmettes,Helmets. garnyshed with precious stones of a whitishe blewe colour: One of these is edged with belles and plates of golde, and vnder euery bell two knobbes of golde: the other, besyde the stones wherewith it is couered, is lykewyse edged with .xxv. golden belles and knobbes, and hath on the crest a greene bird,A byrd. with the feete, byll, and eyes, of golde: Also foure speares, much lyke vnto troute speares, or yeele speares, the wood whereof is all couered with quilles of diuers colours,Speares. marueylously wrea∣thed with golden wyers, and plates intermyxte: Euery of these speares haue three pikes, whose edges or teeth are all of precious stones, made fast with wyers of golde. Of lyke workemanship they brought a great scepter,A scepter. beset with precious stones & belles of golde: also a brasele of golde, and shooes made of a Hartes skynne, sowed and imbrodered with golden wyers,A braselet. Shooes. with a whie sole beneath: Furthermore a glasse of a bryght blewe stone,Glasses. and an other of white, both enclosed in golde: Lykewyse a precious stone, of the kynde of them that are called Sphinges, inclosed in gold: Furthermore the head of a great Lisarte, two great shelles, two Duckes, the shapes of diuers other birds, foules, and fyshes,Bds, foules, and fyshes, of golde. A crowne of golde. and all of massie golde: Furthermore .xxiiii. rounde and square targettes, shieldes, and buckelers of golde, and fyue of syluer: Al∣so a triple crowne of plates and wyers o golde, marueylously wreathed with quilles and eathers of diuers colours, hauyng
on the front a plate of golde, on the which is grauen the Image of the Idole Zemes. About this Image, hang foure other plates, lyke crosses of golde, in the which are grauen the heades of di∣uers beastes, as Lions, Tigers, Woolues, and suche other. They brought also the similitudes of certayne beastes, made some of roddes or twygges,Images of beastes. and some of woodde, with the beastes owne skynnes thereon, and garnyshed with collers of laton belles: Lykewyse diuers sheetes, weaued of gossampyne cotton of sundry colours,Sheetes. whereof two are rychly frynged with golde and precious stones, and three other with quilles and fea∣thers intermyxte with gossampine cotton of sundry colours, and checkered lyke the panes of a chest boorde: Some are on the one side, of blacke, white, and redde colours, and on the other syde plaine, without any varietie: Other some are wrought in lyke maner with variable colours, with a wheele or circle of blacke in the myddest, intermyxte with shyning fethers, and sparkes of golde lyke starres: They brought also cloth of Aras or Uerdure, of marueylous workemanshyppe:Cloth of Arras Lykewyse a souldiers cloake, such as their princes weare in the warres, with certayne priuye coates of fence,A souldyers cloake. and sundry tirements parteynyng to their heads, with also many such other thinges, more beautiful to the eye then ryche or precious, whereof to entreate particulerly, it should be more tedious then profytable. I let passe heere also to speake of many particuler nauigations, and of the trauailes and daungers which they susteyned in the same, with the monsters and secretes of nature they sawe, which are all conteyned in the registers of our Senate of the affayres of India,Registers of thaffayres of India. out of the which I haue se∣lected these fewe annotations, such as seemed to mee most meete to bee published. Notwithstandyng these ryche and goodly pre∣sentes, yet were they that brought them, and also Coriesius the gouernour of the nauie, and aucthour of erecting their newe co∣lonie in those remote regions, adiudged by the Senate to haue done agaynst ryght and equitie,Thaucthoritie of the Lieuete∣naunt. in that they attempted the same without thaduice of the gouernour of the Iland of Cuba, who sent them foorth by the kyngs auctoritie, wheras they dyd other thin∣ges beside their commission, yea although they went to the kyng, not first knowing his pleasure whom the kyng had substitute his
Lieuetenaunt in that Ilande: insomuch that by his procuratour, he accused them before the Senate as fugitiue theeues and tray∣tours. They on ye other part alleaged, yt they had done the kyng better seruice then he, & that they had shewed sufficient obedience, in appeayng to the kyng as the hygher Iudge. But the gouer∣nour required by the vertue of his commission, & the kinges let∣ters pattents, yt they myght be beheaded for their disobedience a∣gainst him, whom they knewe to bee aucthorised by the kyng. They agayne replied, that they had not offended the kyng, but rather deserued rewarde for their great daungers and trauailes. Both the reward and punishment were deferred, and a day ap∣pointed when both parties should be heard. Let vs nowe there∣fore come to the Spanyardes of Dariena,The Spany∣ardes of Da∣riena. thinhabitours of the gulfe of Vraba, in the supposed continent. Wee haue sayde be∣fore, that Dariena is a ryuer runnyng towarde the West syde of the gulfe of Vraba: On the banke of this ryuer, the Spanyardes planted their first colonie or habitation, after they had vanquished kyng Chemaccus: this colonie they named Sancta Maria Antiqua, by reason of a vowe which they made to the virgine Marie in the tyme of the battaile against Chemaccus.Sansta Maria Antiqua. To these (as wee haue made mention in the ende of our Decades) was Petrus Arias sent with a thousand and two hundred men,Petrus Arias whom the Spanyardes name Pedia∣rias. This sea the Spanyardes call Mardelser. at the request of Vas∣chus Nunnez Balboa, who was then the gouernour of Dariena, and the first that found and discouered the large South sea heretofore vnknowne. We haue also declared, how at the arriuall of Petrus Arias the newe gouernour, hee diuided his armie into Centuri∣ons, that is, captaines ouer hundreds, whom hee sent foorth dy∣uers wayes. What tragedies folowed heereof, I will absolue in fewe wordes, bycause all are horrible and vnpleasaunt: For since we fynyshed our Decades, there hath been none other then kyl∣lyng, sleying, murderyng, and accusing. The kyng made Vaschus gouernour but duryng his pleasure. His courage was such,Contention be∣tweene Vas∣chus and Pe∣trus Arias. and his factes so notorious, that hee could not long abyde the hauty∣nes of Petrus Arias. To bee breefe, their fallyng out and dis∣corde, confounded all thinges. Iohn Cacedus the pulpit fryer of the order of sainct Frances, dyd his vttermost endeuour to make them friendes, promysyng vnto Vaschus, the daughter of Petrus Arias to wyfe: But no meanes could be founde how these
two, whiche bore the chiefe rule, myght bee brought to agree∣ment. At the length the matter grew to such extremitie, that Pe∣trus Arias fyndyng occasion of quarellyng agaynst Vaschus,Petrus Arias commaundeth that Vaschus be put to death. sent processe to the magistrates of the towne, whereby he commaun∣ded them to strangle Vaschus, and fyue other which were chiefe captaines vnder him, alleagyng that they and their confederates conspired to rebell in the South sea, and that Vaschus him selfe for that intent had buylded and furnished foure shippes, to search the south coastes of the supposed continent: also, that to his three hundred souldiers and companions which hee had with him, he should speake wordes of this effecte as foloweth. My friendes, and felowes of my long paynes and trauayles,Vaschus is accused. howe long shall wee bee subiecte to the commaundement of other, syth we haue bydden the brunt, and ouercome thinterprise for the whiche this newe gouernour was sent with so great a multitude? Who can any longer abyde his pryde and insolencie? Let vs there∣fore folowe these coastes whyther so euer fortune shall dryue vs, and among these so many pleasaunt and fruitfull prouinces of this large lande, let vs choose one, in the whiche wee maye with libertie spende that portion of our lyues which yet remay∣neth. Who can fynde vs, or shalbe able to profer vs violence? When these or the lyke wordes were declared to Petrus Arias, hee sent to the South partes for Vaschus, wyllyng him by the vertue of his commission to repayre to him foorthwith. Vaschus obeyed, and at his commyng was cast in pryson: yet constantly denying that euer hee entended any such thyng. Witnesses were brought agaynst him, and his wordes rehearsed from the begyn∣nyng: To conclude, hee was iudged woorthy death, and was put to execution.Vaschus is put to death. And this is the rewarde wherewith the blynde goddesse oftentymes recompenseth such as haue susteyned great trauayles and daungers, to bee hyghly in her fauour. Petrus Arias leauyng hys wyfe in Dariena,Petrus Arias. embarked him selfe in the shippes left of Vaschus, to thintent to search those coastes: But whether hee bee returned or not, wee haue yet no certayne knowledge. He hath also his fortune. Yet is there an other go∣uernour assigned,Lupus Sosa. whose name is Lupus Sosa, the viceroye of the Ilandes of Canarie. What stomake Petrus Arias may haue if he returne, let good men iudge. There was nothing done vnder
him woorthy glorie. Some thynke that hee was at the begin∣nyng to slacke and negligent in his office, and not seuere in cor∣rectyng errours and misorders. But we will leaue him, and re∣hearse somewhat whereof we haue been lately infourmed, as tou∣chyng the great and deepe ryuer of Dabaiba,The great ry∣uer of Dabai∣ba or Grandis. the whiche for the greatnesse and largenesse thereof, our men named Grandis, that is, great, as we haue noted in our Decades. This ryuer falleth into the furthest corner of the gulfe of Vraba by seuen portes or mouthes, as doth the ryuer of Nilus into the Egyptian sea,The gulfe of Vraba. whose large description you may also reade in our Decades. That the mountaynes on euery syde about this ryuer are ryche in golde, wee haue learned by thinformation of thinhabitauntes,The ryche mountaynes of Dabaiba. of whom wee made diligent inquisition. Vaschus, and besyde him other gouernours and Lieuetenauntes, haue fouretymes entred into this ryuer with theyr armies in battayle array, and with dy∣uers kyndes of shippes, fyrst for the space of fourtie myles, then fyftie, and at the last fourescore, and at an other tyme also ouer∣thwarte the ryuer. Oh shamefull chaunce, and detestable coward∣nesse of our men.Fierce & wac∣lyke people. A naked nation encountryng with them that had apparell, the armed against the vnarmed, had the ouerthrow in maner in all conflictes, and were either all slayne or wounded. They vse inuenomed arrowes, and are such experte archers, that if they espy any place of theyr enimie bare or vnarmed, they will not lyghtly fayle to stryke him there. They vse also many dartes,Dartes. which in the tyme of the battayle they hurle so thicke a farre of, that they take the lyght of the sunne from theyr enemies as it were with a cloude. They haue lykewise brode & long swoordes,Swoordes of heauy wood. made of a heauy and harde kynde of wood, wherewith they fight fiercely neare at hand. Vaschus him selfe receiued many woundes in encountryng with them. And thus by reason of the fierce∣nesse of these Barbarians, the ryuer of Dabaiba is yet left vn∣searched. Wee will nowe speake somewhat more of the Ilande of Hispaniola (which the Spanyardes call Spagnuola) the mo∣ther and chiefe of all other landes or Ilands wherof we entended to write. In it the Senate is now restored,Hispaniola. Ouiedus wry∣teth that there are now fyue monasteries. and fyue Iudges as∣signed to giue lawes to all thinhabitauntes of those tractes. But in short tyme, they shall ceasse geathering of gold, although there bee great plentie, by reason they shall lacke labourers and my∣ners,
forasmuch as thinhabitauntes whose helpe they vsed heere∣in, are brought to a small number, consumed partely by warre, and many more by famine that yeere that they dygged vp the rootes whereof they made theyr best bread, and lefte of sowyng their grayne of Maizium, which is their common foode, suppo∣sing hereby to haue dryuen our men out of the Ilande, who had vittayles sent them from Spayne.Newe and straunge disea∣ses. A great number of them al∣so dyed of new and straunge diseases, which in the yeere of Christ a thousande fyue hundred and eightiene, consumed them lyke rotten sheepe. And (to say the trueth) our mens vnsaciable desyre of golde, so oppressed these poore wretches with extreme labour and toyle, where as before they lyued pleasauntly and at libertie, gyuen onely to playes and pastymes, as daunsyng, fyshyng, foulyng, and huntyng of little Cunnies, that many of them peryshed euen for very anguyshe of mynde, the which (with theyr vnaccustomed labour) are thinges of them selues sufficient to engender many newe diseases. But the kyng and the Senate haue nowe determyned, that they bee reduced to a people, and to gyue them selues onely to increase, and tyllage of the grounde: and that onely suche as are bought or taken out of other regions, be appoynted to labour in the gold mynes. But it shall suffyse to haue sayde thus muche of the pestiferous hunger of golde: therfore I wil speake of other matters. It is a marueylous thyng to consider how all thinges increase and pros∣per in this Ilande.The suger of Hispaniola. There are nowe .xxviii. suger presses, where∣with great plentie of suger is made. The canes or reedes wherein the suger groweth, are bygger and hygher then in a∣ny other place, and are as bygge as a mans arme in the brawne, and hygher then the stature of a man, by the halfe. This is more wonderfull, that where as in Ualentia in Spayne (where a great quantitie of suger is made yeerely) where so euer they applye them selues to the great increase thereof,Suger of Va∣lentia. yet doeth euery roote bryng foorth not past fyue, or syxe, o at the most se∣uen of those reedes:A token of marueylous fruitfulnes. whereas in Hispaniola oe roote beareth twentie, and oftentymes thirtie. Foure footed beastes and cat∣tayle, are marueylously increased in this Ilande. And albeit that the rauenyng hunger of golde hath hitherto greatly hynde∣red our men from tyllage of the grounde, yet is there great plen∣tye
of wheate, whiche prospereth so well, that it yeeldeth some tyme a hundred folde,Wheat. and this especially on the hylles or rydges of the mountaynes prospectyng towarde the North: Uines doo also encrease here with no lesse fruitefulnesse.Vines. What shoulde I speake of the trees that beare Cassia fistula,Cassia Fis∣tula. brought fyrst into this Ilande from the other Ilandes neere vnto the supposed Continent, as we haue noted in our Decades? There is nowe suche plentie hereof, that after a fewe yeeres we shall haue a pounde of the pryce that we paye nowe for an ounce. Of the Brasyle, and Mirobalane trees, with other innume∣rable prerogatiues and benefytes which nature hath plen∣tifully geuen to this blessed Ilande,Brasyle. Myrobalanes. we haue spoken sufficiently in our Decades. Yet haue I thought good to repeate parte of the same, because I thynke that the wittes of many readers haue diuer∣ted from the weight of great affaires, to the recordation of such pleasaunt thynges: And yet do not such thin∣ges as are sauerie, engender tediousnesse, so that a pre∣tious matter be adiour∣ned with a pretious vesture.
A breefe rehearsal of the contentes of the bookes of the fyrst Decade, and so folowyng of all the other Decades. Folio. 8. IN the fyrst booke is declared howe Christophorus Colonus, otherwyse called Columbus, persuaded Fernando and Elizabeth princes of Spayne, to further his attempt in searchyng newe and vnknowen landes in the West Ocean. Also of the .vii. Ilandes of Canaria, by whom they were found and conquered. Howe Colonus founde the Ilandes of Hispaniola, and Cuba, and of the fierce people called Canibales or Caribes, which are ac∣customed to eate mans fleshe. Of the rootes called Ages, Iucca, and the grayne Maizìum, whereof the people of the Ilandes made theyr bread. Of the golde found in the sandes of ryuers, & of the Serpents which are without hurt: also of turtle doues, ducks, & popingaies. Of Mastix, and Aloe, with dyuers fruites and trees vn∣knowen to vs, and of the fruitefulnesse of the Ilande of Hispani∣ola, which the Spanyardes call Spagnuola. Of the seconde viage of Colonus into these regions, and howe he was furnished with .xvii. shyppes, and a thousande and two hundred souldiers, with all kynde of artillarie, artificers, and grayne to sowe: and of the tree from the which water droppeth continually into a trenche made by mans hande. The contentes of the seconde booke. Fol. 12. HOwe Colonus departing from the Ilandes of Canarie, sayled viii. hundred & twentie leagues in .xxi. daies, &, came to Domi∣nica an Iland of the Canibales: & of the fragrant sauoure of spices whiche proceded from the Ilandes. Of the Ilandes of Galanta or Galana and Guadalupea, and of the trees which beare that kynd of cotton which the Italians call Bombasine, and the Spanyardes Algadon. Of dyuers kyndes of Popingiayes, and of the Ilande of Matinino or Madanino, beyng inhabited onely with women: al∣so of dyuers other fruitefull Ilandes, and of a conflicte whiche the Spanyardes had with the Canibales.
Of certayne Ilandes in the whiche are seene the mynes of metals and precious stones, and of the fruitfull and populous Iland called Burichena, or Boriquen, or Insula. S. Iohannis. Howe all the Admirals men whiche at his fyrst viage he left in Hispaniola, were slaine in his absence by the rebellion of Guac∣canarillus, kyng of the region of Xamana: and of the free kynde of lyfe whiche they leade that haue not the vse of money. Of the seuen maydens which swam three miles in the sea, and of the maner of geathering of gold in the sands of riuers. The contentes of the thyrd booke. Fol. 17. A Particuler discription of the Iland of Hispaniola, whiche Colonus thynketh to be Ophir, from whence kyng Salomon had his great ryches of golde. Of the marueylous fruitfulnesse of Hispaniola, and of the su∣ger canes growyng there. Of the golden regions of Cipanga or Cibaua, & of the ryuers in whose sandes is founde great plentie of golde. Of certayne graynes of gold of exceeding great quantitie. Of wilde vines of plesaunt taste, and of grasse which in foure dayes groweth as hygh as wheate. Of the Ilande of Iohanna or Cuba, being the end of the East and the West, and of the fruitfull & populous Iland of Iamaica. How the Admirall thought that he had sayled about the low∣est Hemisphere or half circle of the earth, and of a secrete of Astronomie touching the same matter. Howe the Admirall gaue names to seuen hundred Ilandes, and passed by three thousand vnnamed. Of certaine serpentes like vnto Crocodiles of eight foote long, whose flesh is delicate to be eaten, and of certayne trees whiche beare Gourdes. Of the riuer whose water is very hotte, and of the huntyng fyshe which taketh other fyshes. Of great abundaunce of Tortoyses as bygge as targets, and of a fruitfull mountayne well inhabited. Of dogges of deformed shape and dumbe, and of white and thicke water. Of woods of Date trees, and Pyneapple trees, and of cer∣tayne people apparelled lyke whyte fryers.
Of certaine trees which beare spices, and of Cranes of ex∣ceedyng bygnesse. Of stocke doues of more pleasaunt taste then partriches. An oration of a barbarous gouernour as touching the im∣mortalitie of the soule: Also of the rewarde of vertue, and punish∣ment of vice. A similitude of the golden worlde, and of prouision with∣out care. Howe the Admirall fell sicke by reason of to muche watche∣yng, and of a sediion whiche rose among the Spaniardes in the Ilande of Hispaniola. The Contentes of the fourth booke. Fol. 25. HOw the Kynges of the Ilande of Hispaniola, were by the Spaniardes mysbehauiour prouoked to rebellion, and howe the Admirall sent for them. Howe kyng Counaboa the Lorde of the house of gold, that is, of the mountaines of Cibaua, conspired the Admirals death, and how he with his familie were taken prisoners. Of a great famine that chaunced in the Ilande of Hispaniola, and howe the Admirall builded certayne fortresses. Of a peece of rude gold wayghing twentie vnces, and of the myne of the rich metall called Elestrum. Of the mountayne in the whiche is founde great plentie of Amber and Orpement: and of the woodes of Brasyle trees. Howe the inhabitantes are put to theyr tribute, and how the nature of ye Region disposeth the maners of the people. How the brother of kyng Caunaboa came agaynst the Admi∣rall with an armie of fyue thousand naked men, and howe he was taken, and his armie put to flyght. Of the fruitfull vale Magona, in the sandes of whose ryuers is founde great plentie of golde: and of certayne whirlewindes and tempests. How the Admirall sent foorth his brother Bartholomeus Colo∣nus with an armie of men to searche the golde mynes, and of the Fosses which he founde to haue been dygged in old tyme. The Contentes of the .v. booke. Fol. 27. for 29. HOwe the Lieuetenaunt builded a fortresse in the golde mines, and prepared instrumentes for the purging and fi∣nyng
of the golde. Howe certayne shyppes laden with vittayles, came from Spayne: And howe the Lieuetenaunt sent the kynges whiche rebelled, with three hundred captiues into Spayne. Howe the Liefetenaunt remoued his habitation, and buylded a fortresse whiche he called saint Dominickes towre, also howe he passed ouer the ryuer Naiba, and entred into the wooddes of Brasyle trees. Howe the great kyng Beuchius Anacauchoa, frendelye en∣tertayned the Lieuetenaunt, and brought hym to his pallace, where the kynges wyues and concubines receyued hym honora∣bly with pompes and triumphes. Of the fortresses whiche were erected in Hispaniola, and howe the Lieuetenaunt exacted tribute of the kynges whiche re∣belled agayne. Howe the Lieuetenaunt set vppon the kynges vnwares in the nyght season, and tooke .xiiii. of them prysoners. Howe kyng Guarionexius, captayne of the conspiracie, was pardoned, and howe he persuaded the people to obedience. Howe kyng Beuchius Anacauchoa, sent messengers to the Lieuetenaunt to repayre to his pallace, where he founde .xxxii. kyngs redy with theyr tributes: And howe the queene Anacaona entysed hym to eate of the Serpentes fleshe. Howe the Serpentes fleshe is prepared to be eaten, and how delicate meate theyr egges are if they be sodden. Howe queene Anacauchoa, syster to kyng Beuchius Anacau∣choa, entertained ye Liefetenant, & gaue him much houshold stuffe, and many vessels of Hebene wodd artifically wrought & carued Howe kyng Anacauchoa and the queene his syster went a∣boorde the Lieuetenantes shyppe, and howe greatly they were amased to beholde the furniture therof. Howe Roldanus Xeminus a Spanyarde, rebelled in the Lieue∣tenauntes absence, by whose mysdemeanour also kyng Guario∣nexius was prouoked to a newe conspiracie, and with hym Ma∣iobanexius the kyng of the mountaynes. The contentes of the syxt booke. Foli. 35. THe thyrd viage of Colonus, & howe he diuerted from his accustomed rase by the Ilandes of Canarie to the Iland of
Madera, for feare of certayne frenche pirates and rotters. Of the .xiii. Ilandes whiche in olde tyme were called Hespe∣rides, and are nowe called the Ilandes of Caput Viride, or Cabo∣uerde. Also of the Tortoyses of the Ilande of Bonauista, where∣with the leper is healed. Howe the Admiral found contagious ayre and extreme heate neere the Equinoctial, where the north pole was eleuate onely fyue degrees, and howe saylyng from thence westwarde, he founde the starres placed in other order, and the sea rysyng as it were the backe of a mountayne. Howe the Admiral saylyng westwarde, and neuer passyng out of the clyme or paralels of Ethiope, founde a temperate Region, and people of goodly corporature: and what difference is betwene the natures of Regions beyng vnder one paralele and one eleuation of the pole. Of the Ilandes of Puta and Margarita, and of the swyfte course or fall of the Ocean from the East to the West. Of the gulfe called Os Draconis, and of the conflicte betwene the freshe water and the salte. Of a sea of freshe water, and a mountayne inhabited onely with Monkyes and Marmasettes. Of the fayre, ryche, and large region of Paria, and howe frendly thinhabitantes entreated the Admirall and his men. Also of pleasaunt wyne made of dyuers fruites, and of great abundaunce of pearles and golde. Of the regions of Cumana, Manacapana, & Curiana, being re∣giōs of ye large prouince of Paria, & of ye sea of hearbes or weeds. A certayne secrete as touchyng the pole starres, and the eleua∣tion of the same, also of the roundnesse of the earth. Of the mountaynes of Paria, in the toppes wherof Colonus ear∣nestly affirmeth the earthly paradise to be situate, and whether Paria be parte of the firme land or continent of India. The contentes of the .vii. booke. Fol. 39. HOwe Roldanus Xeminus with his confederates, accused the Admirall to the kyng, and howe he pourged hym selfe, and accused them. Howe kyng Guarionexius rebelled agayne, and with hym kyng Maiobannexius: also howe they with other kynges
came agaynst the Lieuetenaunt with an armie of eyght thou∣sande naked and paynted Ciguauians: also two rare examples of frendshyp and faythfulnesse in barbarous princes. Howe Colonus the Admirall and the Lieuetenant his brother were sent bound into Spayne, and newe officers appoynted in theyr places. The contentes of the eight booke. Fol. 43. THe nauigation of Petrus Alphonsus from Spayne to Paria, where in the region of Curiana, he had in short space .xv. ounces of pearles, & great plenty of victuals, for haukes belles, pinnes, lokyng glasses, and such other tryfles. Of certayne coniectures whereby Paria is thought to be part of the fyrme land, & of the golden region of Cauchieta, where in the moneth of Nouember the ayre is temperate and not colde. How Alphonsus had a conflict with the Canibales, and how they are accustomed to inuade other countreys. Of great abundaunce of salt in the region of Haraia, and how the dead bodies of theyr princes are dryed, reserued, and religi∣ously honoured. Howe Alphonsus at his returne to Spayne from Curiana, brought with him threscore & sixteene pounde weyght of pearles, whiche he bought for our tryfles, amountyng only to the value of fyue shillynges. The contentes of the nienth booke. Fol. 47. THe nauigation of Vincentius Pinzonus and Aries Pinzonus, and howe they sayled beyond the Equinoctiall line, lost the syght of the north starre, and founde the starres in other order. Howe Vincentius passing the Equinoctial toward the South pole, founde fierce and warlyke people of great stature, and of the sea of freshe water. Howe Vincentius directing his course towarde the North∣west from the Equinoctiall, recouered the syght of the North∣pole, and by the regions of Mariatambal, Camomorus, and Peri∣cora, came to the fayre and rych prouince of Paria, and to the re∣gions of Os draconis, Cumana, Manacapana, Curiana. &c. A coniecture that Paria (wherby is ment that mayne lande nowe called America) shoulde be part of the fyrme lande or con∣tinent
of India, beyonde the riuer of Ganges & no Iland, and of the exceeding great riuer Maragnonus replenished with Ilandes. Of Boriostomea and Spiriostomea, the mouthes of the famous ryuer of Dunabius called in old tyme Ister, and of the commodi∣ties of the regions and Ilandes about Paria: also of the woods of Brasile trees. Of many fruitfull Ilandes wasted and left desolate by reason of the Canibales crueltie, and of the trees of Cassia Fistula: also of other trees of exceeding bygnesse. The discription of a certayne monstruous beast, and howe Vincentius lost two of his shyps by tempest. Howe Vincentius at his returne to Spaine, brought with hym Cinamome, Ginger, and certayne precious stones called Topases: And of the nauigations of certayne other inhabi∣tantes of the towne of Palos. Of the precious medicine called Animae Album, and of the diuers superstitions of the inhabitauntes of Hispniola: also of theyr Idolatrie, and howe they honour the Images of deuylles, whiche they call Zemes. The Contentes of the tenth booke. Fol. 54. OF great plentie of gold, pearles, and frankensence, founde in the regions of Paria, and of innumerable beastes in shape differyng from ours. Howe the Spaniardes proffered them selues to conquere the new founde landes, beyng in largenesse thryse as great as Eu∣rope, besyde the South landes parteynyng to the Portingales, and howe the nature of the place altereth the fourmes and qua∣lities of thynges. Of the Ilande of Cuba, and of the golde mynes of the Ilande of Sancti Iohannis, otherwyse called Burichena, or Buchena. Also of the ryche gold mynes of Hispaniola, and of the order of workyng in the same. Of the two chiefe golde mynes of Hispaniola, and of a peece of golde weighing three thousande three hundred and ten pounde weyght. How the gold is fined and distributed▪ and howe that only in the melting shops of the two golden mines of Hispaniola, is mol∣ten yeerely aboue three hundred thousand pounde weight of gold.
Howe thenterpryses of the Spanyardes are not inferiour to thactes of Saturnus or Hercules, and howe the Admirall dis∣couered the lande ouer agaynst the West corner of Cuba, and the Ilande of Guanassa. The Contentes of the bookes of the seconde Decade. The contentes of the fyrst booke. Fol. 57. HOw after the death of Colonus the Admirall, the kyng gaue free lycence to all such as would attempt any vyages, and of the nauigations of Diego Nicuesa, and Alphonsus Fogeda. Of the Ilande Codego and the region of Caramairi, and of cer∣tayne sweete apples which turne into woormes when they are eaten, whose trees are also contagious. How Alphonsus Fogeda, the Lieuetenaunt of Vraba, encoūtring with the Barbarians, had the ouerthrowe, and howe in this con∣flicte fyftie of his men were slayne, with Iohannes de la Cossa their captayne. Howe Fogeda, and Nicuesa the Lieuetenaunt of Beragua, re∣uenged the death of theyr companyons, and howe Fogeda came to the Ilande Fortis and the region of Caribana, where he was re∣pulsed from the golde mynes by the fiercenesse of the Barbari∣ans, vsyng arrowes infected with poyson. Howe Fogeda was wounded in the thygh with a venemous arrowe, and his men almost consumed with famyne. Howe a Brigantyne was drowned with the stroke of a Fyshe: and of the nauigation of Ancisus from Hispaniola to Vraba. Of the lamentable shypwracke of Ancisus, and of the Date trees and wylde Bores which he founde. Of the fruites or apples of the trees called Cedars of Libane, which beare olde fruites and new all the yeere. Howe onely three of the Caniballes with their bowes and in∣uenomed arrowes assayled Ancisus with a hundred of his men, in which conflict they wounded and slue manyals, of their swift∣nesse of foote.
Of the great ryuer of Dariena, and howe Ancisus encountred with fyue hundred of thinhabitauntes of the gulfe of Vraba, and put them to flyght: also, how he founde great plentie of wrought golde and housholde stuffe in a thycket of reedes. The contentes of the second booke. Fol. 63. HOwe Nicuesa lost his felowes in the darke nyght, and went past the mouth of the ryuer Beragua which he sought, & howe the captaynes of the other shyppes consulted howe to fynde him: also, of the ryuer Lagartos in the which great Lisartes are found, much lyke vnto the Crocodiles of Nilus. Howe the captaynes forsooke theyr shyppes, that the souldy∣ers myght bee without hope of departure, and of the miserable chaunce of Petrus de Vmbria and his felowes. By what chaunce Nicuesa was founde, and of the calamities which he and his company susteyned: also, of the region of Gra∣cia Dei or Cerabaro, and of the ryuer of Sansti Matthei. Howe Nicuesa caused them to remoue theyr habitation from Beragua to point Marmor, where he buylded a fortresse, and how his men by warre and famyne, were consumed from seuen hun∣dred and odde, to scarsely one hundred. Howe one Vaschus Nunnez vsurped thaucthoritie of the Lieuetenauntshyp of Vraba in thabsence of Fogeda, and of the na∣uigation of Rodericus Colmenaris from Hispaniola to Vraba. Of the ryuer Baira discendyng from the toppe of a high moun∣tayne couered with snow, and how Rodericus Colmenaris in a con∣flicte agaynst the Barbarians, lost .xlvii. of his men, by reason of theyr inuenomed arrowes. Of the force of the poyson wherewith the Barbarians infecte theyr arrowes, and a remedie for the same: also, howe Colmenaris by gunshot and kyndlyng fyers on the high toppes of the rockes, came to the Spanyardes, left desolate in Dariena. The contentes of the thyrd booke. Fol. 67. HOwe Nicuesa was sought foorth to acquict the contentions of Vraba, and howe he was agayne reiected. Howe Vaschus Nunnez inuaded, tooke prysoners, and spoy∣led the kynges borderyng about the region of Vraba, and howe
Ancisus Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda was cast in pryson, and after∣warde set at libertie. Howe Ancisus tooke his viage from Vraba to Spayne, to ac∣cuse Vaschus, who also at the same tyme sent Valdiuia, aswell to speake in his defence, as also to certifie the kyng of their doyngs. Howe kyng Careta conspired with the Spanyardes agaynst kyng Poncha, whom they put to flyght, and spoyled his village. Howe kyng Comogrus friendly enterteyned the Spanyardes, and brought them to his pallace, where he shewed them the dryed carkases of his auncestours reserued, and sumptuously apparel∣led, and how the kynges elder sonne gaue Vaschus and Colmena∣ris foure thousande ounces of wrought golde, and fyftie slaues: also, a wyttie oration which he made to the Spanyardes, wherin he certifyed them of a countrey exceedyng rych in golde. &c. The contentes of the fourth booke. Fol. 72. OF horryble thunder & lyghtnyng in the moneth of Nouem∣ber, and of grayne which waxeth rype thryse a yeere: also, howe digestion is strengthened by outwarde colde. Howe Valdiuia is sent agayne into Hispaniola, to moue the go∣uernour and counsayle there to sende into Spayne to the kyng for a supplie of a thousande souldyers, to make way to the golden mountaynes, and howe he caryed with him the kynges portion, that is, the fyft part of golde and other thinges. Howe Vaschus inuaded the kynges inhabytyng the regions a∣bout the gulfe of Vraba, and howe he put kyng Dabaiba to flyght, in whose village hee founde wrought golde, amountyng to the weyght of seuen thousande Castellans. Of Battes as byg as Turtle dooues, which sometyme byte men in the nyght in theyr sleepe, whose byting is also venomous, but is healed with water of the sea, or by cauterization, as are al∣so the woundes of venomous arrowes. Of the Ilande of Cannafistula, and a towne of fyue hundred houses, whose kyng Abenamachei was taken, and his arme cutte of in the fyght. Of trees of exceedyng bygnesse and heyght, and howe kyng Abibeiba had his pallace in the toppe of a tree, from the which he was inforced to discend and entreate of peace.
The contentes of the fyfth booke. Fol. 75. HOwe kyng Abraiba slue a captayne of the Spanyardes, and caused the kynges to rebell: also, how they were put to flight, and many of theyr men slayne. Of fyue kynges which attempted a newe conspiracie with a hundred great Canoas, and fyue thousande men, and howe theyr intent was bewrayed by a woman, and preuented: also, howe Ro∣dericus Colmenaris sacked the village of Tichiri, & hung the kyng thereof, with foure of his chiefe rulers, and commaunded them to be shotte through with arrowes. The contentes of the sixt booke. Fol. 77. HOwe Vaschus with his confederates, sent Iohannes Quicedus and Colmenaris from Dariena to Hispaniola, and from thence to Spayne to the kyng, for a thousand men to passe ouer the moun∣taynes to the golden regions, and what miseries they susteyned in that viage: also of the death of Valdiuia, Zamudius, and Fogeda. Of the prosperous viage of Ancisus, and howe God wrought miracles by the simple fayth of a mariner: also, how God respec∣teth thinfancie of fayth for zeales sake, and howe one religion tur∣ned into another, holdeth styll many thinges of the fyrst. Howe many of the Barbarians were baptised by reason of the miracles, and howe they rewarded the priestes by whom they were baptised. Howe Ancisus shortly after his arryuall in Spayne, resorted to the court, and made his complaynt to the kyng of thinsolencie of Vaschus, wherevppon the kyng gaue sentence against him, and how apt the Barbarous nations are to embrase the Christian fayth. The contentes of the seuenth booke. Fol. 81. HOwe Quicedus and Colmenaris the procuratours of Dariena, were honourably enterteyned at the court, and brought to the kynges presence, and howe theyr complexion was chaunged by alteration of the ayre. Howe Petrus Arias, a noble man, was elected gouernour and Lieuetenaunt of Dariena, and howe other of the court laboured for the same office: also, howe the bishop of Burges spake to the kyng in his behalfe. Howe Petrus Arias had a thousande and two hundred soul∣dyers
appoynted him at the kynges charges, and of the kynges custome house in the citie of Ciuile, called the house of the con∣tractes of India. Howe a great number of Spanyardes profered them selues to goe at theyr owne charges, and of a restraint made that no straunger myght passe without the kyngs licence: also, how the aucthour reproueth Aloisius Cadamustus, a wryter of the Portu∣gales viages. Howe Petrus Arias shortly after his departure from Ciuile. lost two of his shyppes, and was dryuen backe agayne by tem∣pest, and howe beyng newly furnyshed, he passed the Ocean with more prosperous wyndes. The thyrd viage of Vincentius Pinzonus, and howe he came to the regions of Paria, where encountryng with thinhabitauntes, he put them fyrst to flyght, but after fallyng to intreatie of peace, they gaue him great plentie of golde, and abundaunce of mascu∣line frankensence, with dyuers other princely presentes. Of the great multitude of Popingiayes whiche are in the re∣gion of Paria, and howe thinhabitours are apparelled: also, of the fyue kynges that made a league of friendshyp with Vincen∣tius. Howe Vincentius sayled Eastwarde by the tracte of the regi∣on of Paria, vntyl he came to the poynt of that long lande, which the aucthour supposeth to be the great Ilande Atlantike,Cap. 5. Au∣gust. wherof the olde wryters make mention. The contentes of the .viii. booke. Fol. 86. A Contention betweene the Castilians and Portugales, as con∣cernyng the diuision of the new founde landes, and howe the controuersie was fynished by the bishop of Rome. Howe Don Christopher the gouernour of the Ilande of Sancti Iohannis, was slayne by the Caniballes, and the bishop put to flyght: also, of the other bishops of the Ilandes. Howe the Caniballes of the Ilande of Sancta Crux, slue and ate a kyng, with certayne of his men, beyng friendes to the Chri∣stians, and made faggottes of theyr bones, and howe quarellyng with our men, they put them to silence.
The contentes of the .ix. booke. Fol. 87. OF the marueylous fruitfulnesse of the regions of Beragua, Vraba, and Dariena, and of the dyuers kyndes of trees and fruites: also, of the pleasaunt taste of swynes fleshe, beyng fedde with the fruites of Mirobalane trees. Of Lions and Tygers, and other wylde beastes, and of a beast of straunge fourme. Of the ryuers of the gulfe of Vraba, as the ryuer of Dariena and Rio Grandis, and howe the great serpentes called Crocodiles, are founde in other ryuers besyde Nilus in Egypt: also, howe thaucthour of this booke was sent Ambassadour to the Soldane of Alcayr in Egypt. Of the Portugales nauigations, and of the ryuer Senega found by them to bee a chanell of Nilus: also, of the multitude of byrds and foules being in the maryshes of Dariena. A phylosophicall discourse of thoriginall and generation of sprynges and ryuers, and of the breadth of the lande diuydyng the North and South Ocean. Of the great ryuer Maragnonus, and of the earthly Paradyse, and how springs are engendred by cōuertion of ayre into water. Of the often fall of rayne vnder the Equinoctiall line, and of the pores of the sea opened by the South wyndes. Of the great ryuers of Tanais, Ganges, Danubius, and Erida∣nus, famous to the olde wryters, and howe certayne ryuers run∣nyng through the caues of the earth, breake foorth into spryngs a farre of. The contentes of the .x. booke. Fol. 91. HOwe the newe founde landes discouered by the Spanyards in the West Ocean, are eyght tymes bygger then Italie, be∣syde that which the Portugales possesse, and of the cardes of the sea drawen by Colonus and Americus Vesputius. The order of measuryng the lande, and howe a league con∣teyneth foure myles by sea, and but three by lande. The Nauigation of Iohannes Dias, and of the sundry eleuati∣ons of the pole starre. Of the Ilande of Boiuca or Agnaneo, and of the spryng whose water being drunke, causeth olde men to looke young. How Nicuesa and his souldyers were so oppressed with fa∣mine,
that they were driuen to eate mangie dogges, Toades, and dead men, and howe a broth made of a dogge skynne, was solde for many peeces of golde. The Contentes of the bookes of the thyrd Decade. The contentes of the fyrst booke. Fol. 94. OF the desperate aduenture and good fortune of Vaschus, and howe with a hundred fourescore and ten men, hee brought that to passe for the which Petrus Arias was sent with a thousand and two hundred freshe souldyers. Howe Iron serueth for more necessary vses then golde, and howe superfluities hynder libertie. Howe Vaschus in one conflicte slue sixe hundred Barbarians with theyr kynges, and howe he founde the house of kyng Qua∣requa infected with vnnaturall lechery, commaundyng that the kyng and fourtie such as he kept for that purpose, should bee gy∣uen for a pray to his dogges which he vsed to serue in the warres agaynst these naked people. Of a region of blacke Moores, and howe Vaschus came to the toppes of the mountaynes, where gyuyng thankes to God, hee behelde the newe South Ocean, neuer before seene nor knowne to men of our world. Howe Vaschus put kyng Chiapes to flyght, and after made a league of friendshyp with him, and how the kyng gaue him .iiii. hundred poundes weyght of wrought golde. Howe kyng Coquera was put to flyght, who also being recey∣ued to friendshyp, gaue Vaschus sixe hundred and fyftie poundes weyght of wrought golde. Of the gulfe called Sinus. S. Michaelis, beyng full of inhabited Ilandes, and of the manly courage and godly zeale of Vaschus: also, of the rysyng and fallyng of the South sea. Howe kyng Tumacchus beyng dryuen to flyght and after∣warde reconciled, gaue Vaschus sixe hundred and fourtiene pee∣ses of golde, and two hundred and fourtie of the greatest and fayrest pearles, and howe the kyng caused his men to fyshe for pearles.
Of the Ilande called Margaritea Diues, and of the abundance of fayre and great pearles founde therein. Of habitable regions vnder the Equinoctiall line, and of the Portugales nauigations to the Antipodes, inhabityng the fyue and fyftie degree of the South pole: also, a declaration of Anti∣podes, and of the starres about the South pole. The contentes of the seconde booke. Fol. 101. OF the maner of fyshyng for pearles, and of the three kyndes thereof: also, dyuers other questions concernyng pearles. Of the multitude of the shell fyshes wherein pearles are in∣gendred and founde in maner in all places in the South sea, and of abundaunce of golde founde almost in euery house: also, howe the treasurie of nature is in those coastes, and of the golde mynes of Dariena. Howe kyng Teaocha gaue Vaschus .xx. poundes weyght of wrought golde, and two hundred pearles: also, of desartes full of wylde beastes, and howe Vaschus was troubled with great heate in the moneth of Nouember. Howe a dogge Tyger was taken, and his whelpes tyed in cheynes and torne in peeces: also, how Vaschus gaue .iiii. kynges to his dogges to be deuoured. Of the vse of dogges in theyr warres, and of the fiercenesse of the Caniballes. How kyng Bononiana fauoured the Christians, & gaue Vaschus xx. pound weyght of wrought golde: also, his oration to Vaschus. A similitude prouyng great plentie of golde in the regions of the South sea, and of the trauayles which olde souldyers are able to susteyne. The contentes of the thyrd booke. Fol. 105. HOwe kyng Buchibuea submitted him selfe to Vaschus, & sent him certayne vesselles of golde: also, how kyng Chiorisus sent him .xxx. dyshes of pure golde. Howe Iron serueth for more necessary vses then golde: also, an example of the lyfe of our fyrst parentes. Howe kyng Pocchorrosa submitted hym selfe, and gaue Vaschus fyftiene pounde weyght of wrought golde: also, how Tumanama the great kyng of the golden regions towarde the South sea, is taken prysoner: lykewyse howe he gaue Vas∣chus
.xxx. pounde weyght of pure and wrought golde, and his noble men .lx. pounds weyght of golde. Of the cause of vehement wyndes neere vnto the Equinoctiall lyne, and of the coloure of the earth of the golden mynes. Of the large and fruitefull playne of Zauana, and of the ry∣uer Comogrus: also howe kyng Comogrus, baptised by the name of Charles, gaue Vaschus .xx. pounde weyght of wrought golde. Of the good fortune of Vaschus, and howe he was turned from Goliath to Elizeus, & from Anteus to Hercules, & with what facilitie the Spaniardes shall hereafter obtayne great plentie of golde and pearles. Of the Spanyardes conquestes, and fiercenesse of the Cani∣bales: also an exhortation to Christian princes to set forwarde Christes religion. The contentes of the fourth booke. Fol. 110. THe fourth viage of Colonus the Admiral from Spayne to Hispaniola, and to the other Ilandes and coastes of the firme lande: also of the floryshyng Ilande Guanassa. Of the seuen kyndes of Date trees, wylde vines, and Miro∣balanes: also of byrdes and foules. Of people of goodly stature whiche vse to paynt theyr bodyes, and of the swyfte course of the sea from the east to the west: also of freshe water in the sea. Of the large regions of Paria, Os Draconis, and Quiriquetana, and of great Tortoyses and reedes: also of the foure fruitefull I∣lands called Quatuor Tempora, and .xii. Ilands called Limonares. Of sweete sauoures and holsome ayre, and of the region Qui∣curi, and the hauen Cariai or Mirobalanus: also of certayne ciuil people. Of trees growyng in the sea after a straunge sort, and of a straunge kynde of Monkyes, whiche inuade men, and feyght with wylde Bores. Of the great gulfe of Cerabaro replenished with many fruite∣full Ilandes, and of the people whiche weare cheynes of golde made of ouches, wrought to the similitude of dyuers wylde beastes and foules. Of fyue villages whose inhabitauntes geue them selues one∣ly to geatheryng of golde, and are paynted, vsyng to weare
garlandes of Lions and Tygers clawes: also of seuen ryuers, in al the which is founde great plentie of golde, and where the plentie of gold ceasseth. Of certayne people whiche paynt theyr bodyes, and couer theyr priuie members with shelles, hauyng also plates of gold hangyng at theyr nosethrylles. Of certayne woormes, whiche beyng engendred in the seas neere about the Equinoctial, eate holes in the shyppes, and howe the Admirals shyppes were destroyed by them. Howe the king of Beragua entertayned the Lieuetenaunt, and of the great plentie of golde in the ryuer of Duraba, and in al the regions there about, also in rootes of trees and stones, and in maner in al ryuers. Howe the Lieuetenaunt and his company woulde haue erec∣ted a colonie besyde the ryuer of Beragua, & was repulsed by thin∣habitauntes. Howe the Admiral fel into the handes of the Barbarians of the Iland of Iamaica, where he liued miserably the space of tenne monethes, and by what chaunce he was saued and came to the Ilande of Hispaniola. Of holsome regions, temperate ayre, and continual spryng al the whole yeere: also of certayne people which honour golde religiously, duryng theyr golden haruest. Of the mountaynes of Beragua, beyng fyftie myles in length, and higher then the cloudes: also the discription of other moun∣taynes and regions thereabout, comparyng the same to Italy. Colonus his opinion as touchyng the supposed continent and ioynyng of the north and south Ocean: also of the breadth of the sayde continent or firme lande. Of the regions of Vraba & Beragua, and the great ryuer Ma∣ragnonus, and the ryuer of Dabaiba or Sancti Iohannis: also of cer∣tayne maryshes and desolate wayes, and of Dragons and Cro∣codiles engendred in the same. Of .xx. golden ryuers about Dariena, and of certayne preci∣ous stones, especially a Diamonde of marueylous byggnesse bought in the prouince of Paria. Of the heroical factes of the Spanyardes, and howe they contemne effeminate pleasures: also a similitude prouing great
plentie of golde and precious stones. The contentes of the fyft booke. Fol. 119. THe nauigation of Petrus Arias from Spayne to Hispaniola and Dariena, and of the Ilandes of Canarie: also of the Ilands of Madanino, Guadalupea, and Galanta. Of the sea of hearbes, & mountaynes couered with snow: also of the swyft course of the sea towards the West. Of the ryuer Gaira, the region Caramairi, and the port Cartha∣go, and Sancta Martha: also of Americus Vesputius, and his ex∣pert cunnyng in the knowledge of the carde, compasse, and qua∣drant. How the Canibales assayled Petrus Arias with his whole nauie, and shot of theyr venomous arrowes euen in the sea, also of theyr houses and housholde stuffe. How Gonsalus Ouiedus founde a Saphire bygger then a goose egge: also Emerodes, Calcidonies, Iaspers, and Amber of the mountaynes. Of woods of Brasyle trees, plentie of gold, and marcha∣sites of metals, founde in the regions of Caramairi, Gaira, and Saturma: also of a straunge kynde of marchaundies exercised a∣mong the people of Zunu. That the region of Caramairi is lyke to an earthy Paradise, & of the fruitfull mountaynes and pleasaunt gardens of the same. Of many goodly countreis made desolate by the fiercenesse of the Canibales, and of diuers kyndes of bread made of rootes: also of the maner of plantyng the roote of Iucca, whose iuise is deadly poyson in the Ilandes, and without hurt in the continent or fyrme lande. Of certayne golden ryuers, Hartes, wylde Boores, foules, gossampine, whyte marble, and holsome ayre: also of the great ryuer Maragnonus, discending from the mountaynes couered with snowe, called Serra Neuata. How Petrus Arias wasted certaine Ilands of the Canibales, & how by the swyft course of the sea, his shyps were caried in one night fourtie leagues beyonde thestimation of the best pilotes. The contentes of the sixt booke. Fol. 124. OF sundry opinions why the sea runnneth with so swyft a course from the East to the West, and of the great gulfe of
the North part of the fyrme lande. The viage of Sebastian Cabot, from England to the frosen sea▪ and howe beyng repulsed with Ise in the moneth of Iuly, he say∣led farre Westwarde. Of people apparelled with beastes skinnes, and how Beares take fyshes in the sea, and eate them. How Sebastian Cabot, after that he had discouered the lande of Baccallaos or Baccallearum, was called out of Englande into Spayne, where he was made one of the assistaunce of the coun∣sayle of the affayres of India, and of his second viage. Of the Ilande Fortis, and howe a great foule as bygge as a Storke lyghted in the gouernours shyp: also howe he arryued at Dariena with the kinges nauie. Howe Vaschus receyued the new gouernour, and of habita∣ble regions vnder the Equinoctiall. How Petrus Arias the new gouernour distributed his armie to conquere the South regions ryche in golde, and to erect new colonies in the same. Of the ryche golde mynes of Dabaiba, and of the expedition agaynst the kyng of that region. Of the violent course of the sea from the East to the West, and of the difficult saylyng agaynst the same. Of the pestiferous and vnholsome ayre of Sancta Maria An∣tiqua in Dariena, and how the Spaniardes were of necessitie en∣forced to plant theyr fyrst colonie and habitation there. The cause of the varietie of regions lying all vnder one de∣gree or paralel, and by what meanes the Sonne beames are cause of feruent heate. Of toades and flees engendred of droppes of water, and of a house set on fyre with lyghtnyng. Of a Dogge deuoured of a Crocodyle, and of venemous by∣ting of great Bats: also of Lions, Tigers, & other wilde beasts. How in these regions all foure footed beastes growe to a big∣ger quantitie then they which were of ye fyrst broode: also of cer∣tayne trees of whose planckes if shyps be made, they are safe from the wormes called Broma or Bissas. Of a tree whose wood is present poyson yf it be only borne a∣bout, and of an hearbe that is a preseruatiue agaynst the same.
Of the ryche Ilandes of the south sea, and of certayne expe∣ditions agaynst the Canibales. The contentes of the .vii. booke. Fol. 130. THe particuler description of the Ilande of Hispaniola, and of the ryche Iland called Margaritea Diues, lying in the South sea: also of the great abundaunce of bygge pearles founde in the same. Howe the auctoure compareth Hispaniola to the earthly Pa∣radyse, and howe it farre excelleth Italy in fertilitie and tem∣perate ayre. Of the fyrst inhabitours of Hispaniola, and of the Ilandes of Canarie. Howe thinhabitauntes of Hispaniola in theyr songues and rhymes had certayne prophesies that apparelled men shoulde come to theyr countrey, and bryng them into seruitude, and of theyr familiaritie with spirites: also howe those spirites haue no more appeared to them since they were baptised. Of theyr expertenesse in swymmyng, and of theyr delicate Serpentes, byrdes, foules, and Popingiays. Of the fourme and situation of Hispaniola neere the Equinocti∣all, and howe colde is in some place thereof accidentall, and not by the situation of the region. Of the Oxen and Swyne of exceedyng bygnesse, and of eares of wheat as bygge as a mans arme in the brawne: also howe the Swyne are fedde with Mirobalanes. &c. Of plentie of golde, Brasyle, Mastix, Gossampyne, Elec∣turum, & of thincommodities of intemperate regions. Of dyuers languages in the Ilande, and howe the prouinces are diuided into regions. Howe Andreas Moralis sayled into a daungerous and darke caue within the rocke of a mountayne, and of, whole ryuers de∣uoured of suche caues: also of the conflyct of the waters. Of a standyng poole in the toppe of an hygh mountayne: & how fearne and bramble bushes growe onely in colde regions The Contentes of the .viii. booke. Fol. 135. OF a great lake or standyng poole of sowre and salte water, and of the sea fyshes in the same in the myd lande of the I∣lande: also of deuouryng fyshes called Tiburoi.
Of the ryuers fallyng into the lakes, and of .CC. sprynges in the space of a furlong. A marueylous hystorye of a kyng stryken dumbe and lame by a myracle, and of the Indian language. Howe suche as are drowned in the lake, are neuer cast vp agayne, and of the Ilande Guarizacca in the myddest of a stand∣yng lake: also of a lake of freshe water, and an other of salte and freshe water. Of a large playne of two hundred myles in length, and an o∣ther of an hundred and twentie. Of the marueilous fyshe or monster of the sea, called Manati, or Matum, fedde with mans handes, and howe she caryeth men ouer the lake. Of the mountaynes, vales, hylles, playnes, and ryuers of Hispaniola, and howe golde is founde in all mountaynes, and golde and fyshe in all ryuers. Of salte bayes, and howe the ryuers haue theyr increase from the caues of the mountaynes: also howe there is no hurtefull beast in the Ilande. Of the pleasures of Hispaniola, and of the region of Cotohi wel inhabited, & situate in a plaine in the toppes of mountaynes reachyng to the cloudes. Of moderate colde in the mountaynes, and of fearne of mar∣ueylous bygnesse. Howe pure and massie golde is founde in the region of Cotoy or Cotohi, and that the vaine of gold is a lyuyng tree: also of the rootes, branches, and floures of the same, and howe certayne caues are susteyned with pyllers of golde. What gold is brought yeerely from Hispaniola into Spaine, and of the salte of the mountaines, being as hard as stones, and cleare as crystall: also sprynges of salte, freshe, & sowre water. Of certayne wylde men, lyuing in caues and dennes without any certaine language, and of their marueylous swiftnes a foote. Of pytche of the rocke, and two kyndes of trees, and of the leafe of a tree vsed in the steede of paper: also howe thinhabitants thynke that the Christians can make those leaues speake and dis∣close all secretes. Of a strong coloure made of the iuice of a certayne apple,
and of the hearbe whose smoke is poyson. The contentes of the nienth booke. Fol. 142. OF the kindes of fruites wherewith the inhabitauntes of His∣paniola lyued fyrst, and how they came to the knowledge of Iucca: also how Ceres fyrst founde Wheate and Barley in Egypt. Why theyr kynges are called by diuers names, and by what names they salute the kynges chyldren when they are borne. How they make theyr testamentes, and how certayne of the kynges wyues and concubines are buried with them. Of the variable motions of the elementes in Hispaniola, and where it rayneth but litle, and where muche. Of the colonies and villages that the Spaniardes haue buil∣ded in Hispaniola, and of the other Ilandes about the same. Of a spryng, whiche runnyng vnder the sea from Hispaniola, breaketh foorth in the Iland of Arethusa: also of the habitable regions vnder the Equinoctiall, and of the ryche golde mynes of the Ilande of Cuba. Of the Gumme called Animae Album, and of the Canibales, also wherby it was thought that there were Ilandes of women. Of hony founde in trees and rockes, and of the generation of great Tortoyses, and of theyr egges. The contentes of the tenth booke. Fol. 146. OF the expedition agaynst the kyng of the Ilande Dites, in the South sea, and howe after foure conflictes, submitting hym selfe, he gaue our men an hundred & ten pounde weyght of great pearles: also howe he agreed to paye yeerely a hundred pounde weyght of pearles for a tribute. Howe axes and hatchettes are more esteemed then golde, or pearles, and of great plentie of Hartes and Cunnies: also howe the kyng of Dites and his familie were baptised. Of pearles of great pryse, and howe Paule the Bishop of Rome bought a pearle for foure and fortie thousand ducades. Diuers opinions of the generation of pearles, and of a hun∣dred pearles founde in one shel fyshe: also of the birth of pearles. Of the regions of the East syde of the gulfe of Vraba, and of the originall of the Canibales.
Of certayne circumcised people which haue the knoweledge of letters and vse of bookes, and what chaunced of the captaynes which Petrus Arias sent foorth diuers wayes: also howe Iohn Solisius was slayne of the Canibales, and of theyr fiercenesse. Howe Iohn Pontius was repulsed of the Canibales, and of the lewde behauiour of Iohn Aiora. Of the variable fortune of Gonsalus Badaiocius, and howe af∣ter he had geathered great ryches of gold, he had the ouerthrow, and was spoyled of all. Of the golden region of Coiba Dites, and how theyr slaues are marked in the face. Of the Ilandes of the South sea, and of the regions from whence the Portingales fetche theyr spyces. Of a straunge kynde of fowlyng, and of the trees that beare Gourdes. Of the later opinions as touching the swift course of the Oce∣an towarde the West, and of the continent or fyrme lande: also of the viage from the newe landes to Spayne. Of the golde mynes of Dariena, and of the maner of geathe∣ryng of golde in the same: also of the dropsie of couetousnesse which is not satisfied with ryches. For the contentes of the booke of the Ilandes of the West Indies seas, reade the margent notes of the same. FINIS.
❧ Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus, of the west Indies. R. E. To the Reader. ALthough among dyuers which haue written of the Ocean and VVest Indies, there is none to be compa∣red to Peter Martyr of An∣gleria, in declaryng by phi∣losophicall discourses the secrete causes of naturall affectes, both as touchyng the lande, the sea, the starres, and other straunge workes of na∣ture: yet forasmuch as of later dayes those coun∣treys haue been better knowne and searched, and dyuers such particuler and notable thinges founde, as are conteyned in the histories of later writers, among the number of whom, Conzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus (whom learned Carda∣nus compareth to the ancient writers) is doubt∣lesse the chiefe, I haue therefore thought good to ioyne to the Decades of Peter Martyr, cer∣tayne notable thinges which I haue geathered out of his booke, intituled the Summarie or a∣bridgement of his generall hystorie of the west Indies, written in the firme lande of the same, in the citie of Sancti Maria Antiqua in Dariena (where he dwelt & was gouernor many yeeres) and dedicated to Themperours maiestie, as may appeare by the Epistle folowyng.
To the most hygh and myghtie prince Charles, the fyft o that name, Emperor of Rome, Kyng of Spaine, & of the two Cicilies, of both the sydes of the streyght of Faro, Kyng of Hierusalem and Hungarie, Duke of Burgonie, and Earle of Flaunders, Lord and inheritour of the firme lande and Ilandes of the VVest Ocean. &c. Gon∣zalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus, his most humble seruaunt, wysheth health and perpetu∣all felicitie. THe thinges which principally pre∣serue and mayntayne the workes of nature in the memories of men, are hystories and bookes composed of the same: among the whiche certes those are esteemed most true and au∣tentyke, which haue been wrytten by wyttie and expert men, well trauey∣led in the world, as faythfull witnes∣ses of such thinges as they haue partly seene, and been partly in∣formed by credible persons. Of this mynde and opinion was Plinie, who better then any other aucthor hath written in .xxxvii. bookes all that parteyneth to the naturall historie, conteyned all in one volume, dedicated to Vespasian Themperour: Wherin, as a prudent historiographer, he declareth such thinges as hee had heard, attributing the second authoritie to such as he had redde in aucthours that wrote before him: And thyrdly ioyned to the same hystorie, such thinges as he him selfe had seene, as most certayne testimonie. Whose example I folowyng, will in this my breefe summarie, reduce and represent to your maiesties memorie such thinges as I haue seene in your Empyre of the West Indies, aswell in the Ilandes as in the firme lande of the Ocean sea, where I haue serued now more then twelue yeeres in the place of surueyer of the golde mynes, by the commaundement of the Catholyke kyng Don Fernando, the fyft of that name, and graund∣father vnto your maiestie, to whom God gaue great fame and glorie: Since whose death also I haue lykewyse serued, and
trust whyle the rest of my lyfe yet remayneth, to serue your ma∣iestie, as shall please you to commaunde. As touchyng whiche thinges, and suche other lyke, I haue more largely written in an hystorie begun assoone as my age was rype to take such matters in hande: Wherein furthermore I haue made mention of suche thinges as haue chaunced in Spayne, from the yeere .1494. vn∣to this tyme: addyng also therevnto suche thinges woorthy me∣morie, as I haue obserued in other realmes and prouinces where I haue trauayled, and haue lykewyse particulerly wrytten the lyues and worthy actes of the catholyke Princes of famous me∣morie Don Ferdinando, and Lady Elizabeth his wyfe, to theyr last dayes. After whose fruition of heauenly Paradyse, I haue noted such thinges as haue chaunced in your most fortunate suc∣cession: not omittyng particulerly to wryte a large booke of suche thinges as haue seemed most woorthy to bee noted, as tou∣chyng your maiesties Indies. But forasmuch as that volume remayneth in the citie of San. Dominico, in the Ilande of His∣paniola, where I dwell, and am placed in housholde, with wyfe, chyldren, and famylie, I haue brought no more with me of that my writyng, then I beare in memorie, determynyng (notwith∣standyng) for your maiesties recreation, to make a breefe rehear∣sall of certayne notable thinges, wherof I haue more largely en∣treated in my sayd generall historie, and such as may seeme most woorthy to be redde of your maiestie: Of the which, although a great parte haue been written by other, who haue also seene the same, yet perhappes they are not so exactly and particulerly de∣scribed as of mee, forasmuche as in maner all that trauayle into these Indies haue greater respect to luker and gaynes, then dili∣gently to search the workes of nature, whervnto I haue ben euer naturally inclined, & haue therfore with all possible endeuour ap∣plyed myne eyes & intelligence to fynde the same. And this pre∣sent Summarie shall not be contrary or dyuers from my larger historie, wherein (as I haue sayde) I haue more amply declared these thinges: but shal onely more breefely expresse theffect there∣of, vntyl such tyme as God shall restore me to myne owne house, where I may accomplyshe and fynyshe my sayde generall hysto∣rie. Whervnto to gyue the fyrst principle, I say, that Don Chri∣stopher Colonus (as it is well knowen) beyng the fyrst Admirall of
this India, discouered the same in the dayes of the Catholyke kyng Don Ferdinando, and the lady Elizabeth his wyfe, graund∣father and graundmother vnto your maiestie, in the yeere .1491. and came to Barzalona in the yeere .1492. with the fyrst Indians, and other shewes and proofes of the great ryches and notice of this west Empire: The which gyft and benefite was suche, that it is vnto this day one of the greatest that euer any subiecte or seruaunt hath done for his prince or countrey, as is manifest to the whole worlde. And to say the trueth, this shall doubtlesse bee so commodious and profytable vnto the whole realme of Spayne, that I repute him no good Castilian or Spanyarde that doeth not recognise the same. And (as I haue sayde be∣fore) forasmuche as in my sayde generall historie I haue more largely intreated of these thinges, I intende at this present on∣ly briefely to rehearse certayne especiall thinges, the whiche surely are very fewe in respecte of the thousandes that myght be sayde in this behalfe. Fyrst therefore I will speake somewhat of the nauigation into these parties, then of the generation of the nations which are founde in the same, with theyr rytes, cu∣stomes▪ and ceremonies: also of beastes, foules, byrdes, woor∣mes, fyshes, seas, ryuers, sprynges, trees, plantes, hearbes, and dyuers other thinges, whiche are engendered both on the lande and in the water. And forasmuche as I am one of thorder and company of them that are appoynted to returne into these regions to serue your maiestie, if therefore the thinges contey∣ned in this booke shall not be distincte in suche order as I promi∣sed to perfourme in my greater woorke, I desyre your maiestie to haue no respect herevnto, but rather to consider the noueltie of such straunge thinges as I haue herein declared, whiche is the chiefe ende that moued mee to wryte: Protestyng, that in this Summarie I haue written the trueth of suche thinges as came to my remembraunce, whereof not onely I my selfe can testifie, but also dyuers other worthy and credible men, which haue been in those regions, and are now present in your maiesties courte. And thus it shall suffyse to haue sayde thus much vnto your ma∣iestie, in maner of a proheme vnto this present worke, whiche I most humbly desyre your maiestie as thankefully to accept, as I haue written it faythfully.
Of the ordinary nauigation from Spayne to the west Indies. THe nauigation which is commonly made from Spayne to the west In∣dia, is from Siuile, where your maie∣stie haue your house of contraction for those partes, with also your offy∣cers therevnto parteynyng, of whom the captaynes take theyr passeporte and lycence. The patrones of suche shippes as are appoynted to these vi∣ages, imbarke them selues at San Luca di Barameda, where the ri∣uer Cuadalchiber entreth into the Ocean sea, and from hence they folow their course toward the Ilands of Canarie. Of these seuen Ilandes, they commonly touche two, that is, eyther Grancanaria or Gomera: and here the shyppes are furnyshed with freshe wa∣ter, fuell, cheese, beefe, and suche other thinges, which may seeme requisite to bee added to suche as they bryng with them out of Spayne. From Spayne to these Ilandes, is commonly eyght dayes sayling, or little more or lesse, and when they are arryued there, they haue sayled two hundred and fyftie leagues, whiche make a thousand myles, accompting foure myles to a league, as is their maner to recken by sea. Departing from the sayd Ilands to folow their course, the shyppes tary .xxv. dayes, or a litle more or lesse, before they see the fyrst lande of the Ilandes that lye be∣fore that whiche they call La Spagnuola or Hispaniola, and the lande that is commonly fyrst seene, is one of these Ilandes which they call Ogni sancti Marigalante (or Galanta) La Desseada (other∣wise called Desiderata) Matanino, Dominica, Guadalupea, San Christoual, or some other of the Ilandes, wherof there are a great multitude lying about these aforesayde. Yet it sometymes so chaunceth, that the shyppes passe without the sight of any of the sayd Ilandes, or any other that are within that course, vntill they come to the Ilande of Sancti Iohannis, or Hispaniola, or Iamaica, or Cuba, which are before the other. It may also chaunce that they o∣uerpasse all these lykewyse, vntyll they fall vppon the coastes
of the firme lande. But this chaunceth when the pilot is not well practised in this nauigation, or not perfect in the true carde. But makyng this viage with experte maryners (whereof there is nowe great plentie) one of the sayde fyrst Ilandes shall euer bee knowen. And from the Ilandes of Canarie to one of the fyrst of these, the distaunce is niene hundred leagues by sayling, or more, and from hence to the citie of sainct Dominike, which is in the Iland of Hispaniola, is a hundred and fyftie leagues: so that from Spayne hitherto, is a thousande and three hundred leagues. Yet forasmuche as sometymes the nauigation proceedeth not so di∣rectly, but that it chaunceth to wander euer on the one syde or on the other, we may well say that they haue now sayled a thousand and fyue hundred leagues, and more. And if the nauigation bee slow, by reason of some hynderaunce, it commonly chaunceth to be fynished in xxxv. or .xl. dayes: and this happeneth for the most parte, not accomptyng the extremes, that is, eyther of them that haue slowe passage, or of them that arryue in very short tyme: for we ought to consyder that which chaunceth most commonly. The returne from those partes to Spayne, is not fynished with∣out longer tyme, as in the space of fiftie dayes, or a litle more or lesse. Neuerthelesse in this present yeere of .1525. there came foure shyppes from the Ilande of San Dominico, to sainct Luca in Spayne, in .xxv. dayes: But (as I haue sayde) we ought not to iudge of that which chaunceth seldome , but of that which hap∣peneth most ordinarily. This nauigation is very safe, and much vsed, euen vnto the sayde Iland. And from this to the firme land, the shyppes trauerse diuers wayes for the space of fyue, sixe, or seuen dayes saylyng, or more, accordyng to the partes or coastes whither they directe theyr viages, forasmuch as the sayde fyrme lande is very great and large, and many nauigations and viages are directed to dyuers partes of the same: Yet to the firme land, which is nearest to this Ilande, and lyeth directly agaynst San Dominico, the passage is finished in the tyme aforesayde. But it shalbe much better to remit all this to the carde of these nauiga∣tions, and the new Cosmographie, of the whiche no parte was knowne to Ptolome, or any other of the olde wryters.
Of two notable thinges as touching the west Indies, and of the great rychesse brought from thence into Spayne. AFter my vniuersall discription of the histo∣rie of the Indies, there commeth to my re∣membraunce two thinges chiefly to be no∣ted as touchyng Thempire of these West Indies, pertaining to the dominion of your maiestie: and these, besyde the other perti∣culars whereof I haue sufficiently spoken, are to be considered as thinges of great importaunce. Whereof, the one is the shortnesse of the way, & with what expedition your maiesties shyppes may passe beyonde the mayne firme lande of these Indies, into the new South sea, called Mare del Sur, lying beyond the same, & this to thintent to come to the Ilandes where the spices grow, beside the other innumerable rychesse of ye king∣domes & seigniories which confine with the said sea, where are so many people & nations of dyuers tongues & maners. The other thing, is to consider howe innumerable treasures are entred into Spayne by these Indies, aswell that which commeth dayly from thence, as also that is continually to be looked for, both of gold & pearle, & other marchaundies, which are first brought into this your realme of Spayne before they are seene of other nations, or traded into other realmes: Whereby not onely this your realme is greatly inriched, but also the benefite thereof redoundeth to the great profite of other countreys which are neare therevnto. A te∣stimonie of this, are the double ducades which your maiestie haue caused to bee coyned, and are dispearsed throughout the whole worlde: But after they are once passed out of this your realme, they neuer returne againe, because they are the best currant mo∣ney of the worlde. And therefore, if after they haue been in the handes of straungers, they chaunce to bee returned agayne into Spayne, they come disguised in an other habite, and are dimini∣shed of the goodnesse of theyr golde, with the stampe of your maiestie chaunged: So that if it were not for theyr suche de∣facynges in other realmes for the cause aforesayde, there should not bee founde so great quantitie of fyne golde of the coyne
of any prince in the world as of your maiesties: and the cause of all this, are your Indies. Of the mynes of golde, and the ma∣ner of workyng in them. THis particuler of the mynes of gold, is a thing greatly to bee noted, and I may much better speake hereof thē any other man, forasmuch as there are nowe .xii. yeeres past since I serued in the place of the surueier of ye melting shops partey∣ning to the gold mynes of ye firme land, and was the gouernour of the mynes of the Catholike kyng Don Ferdinando, after whose departure from this lyfe, I serued long in the same roome in the name of your maiestie: By reason wherof, I haue had great occasion to know how gold is found and wrought out of the mynes, and doe know ryght well yt this land is exceeding rych, hauing by my accompt, and by the labour of my Indians & slaues, geathered and fyned a great portion of the same, & may therfore the better affyrme this by testimony of sight. For I am well assured, that in no part of Castilia del oro, that is, golden Castile (otherwise called Beragua) no man coulde aske mee of the mynes of golde, but that I durst haue bounde my selfe to haue discouered them in the space of ten leagues of the countrey where it should haue been demaunded me, and the same to be very rych: for I was alowed all maner of charges to make search for the same. And although gold be found in maner euery where in these regions of golden Castile, yet ought we not in euery place to bestow the trauel & charge to geat it out, because it is of lesse quantitie and goodnesse in some place then in some. And the myne or veyne which ought to be folowed, ought to be in a place which may stand to saue much of ye charges of the labourers, and for the administration of other necessary thinges, that the charges may be recompenced with gaynes: for there is no doubt but that gold shalbe found more or lesse in euery place. And the golde whiche is founde in golden Castile, is very good, & of .xxii. caractes or better in fynesse. Furthermore, besyde this great quantitie of gold, which I haue sayd to be found in the
mynes, there is also from day to day found, or otherwyse gotton, great treasure of such wrought gold as hath ben in ye custodie of the subdued Indians & theyr kynges, aswel of such as they haue geuen for theyr fyne and raunsome, or otherwyse, as frendes to the Christians, besyde that whiche hath ben violently taken from the rebelles: but the greatest parte of the wrought golde whiche the Indians haue, is base, and holdeth somewhat of copper, of this they make braslettes and chaynes, and in the same they close theyr iewels whiche theyr women are accusto∣med to weare, & esteemed more then al the richesse of the worlde. The maner howe golde is geathered, is this, eyther of suche as is founde in Zauana, that is to saye in the playnes and ryuers of the champion countrey beyng without trees, whether the earth be with grasse or without, or of suche as is sometymes founde on the land without the ryuers in places where trees growe, so that to come by the same, it shalbe requisite to cut downe many and great trees. But after which so euer of these two maners it be founde, eyther in the ryuers or breaches of waters, or els in the earth, I wyl shewe howe it is founde in both these places, and howe it is separate and pourged. Therefore when the myne or veyne is discouered, this chaunceth by searchyng and pro∣uyng in such places as by certaine signes and tokens do appeare to skylful men apte for the generation of golde, and to holde golde: and when they haue found it, they folowe the myne, and labour it, whether it be in the ryuer, or in the playne, as I haue sayde. And if it be founde on the playne, fyrst they make the place very cleane where they entende to dygge, then they dygge eyght or tenne foote in length, and as muche in breadth: but they goe no deeper then a spanne or two, or more, as shal seeme best to the maister of the myne, dyggyng equally, then they washe all the earth whiche they haue taken out of the sayde space, and if herein they fynde any golde, they folowe it, and if not, they dygge a spanne deeper, and washe the earth as they dyd before: and if then also they fynde nothyng, they continue in diggyng and washyng ye earth as before, vntyl they come to the harde rocke or stone: and if in fine they fynde no golde there, they folowe no further to seeke golde in that place, but goe to an other part. And it is to be vnderstoode, that when they haue
founde the myne, they folowe it in dyggyng, in the same mea∣sure in leuell and deapth, vntyll they haue made an ende of all the myne whiche that place conteyneth, if it appeare to be riche. This myne ought to consyst of certayne feete or pases in length or breadth, accordyng to certayne orders determined, and with∣in that compasse of earth, it is not lawefull for any other to digge for golde: And where as endeth the myne of hym that fyrste founde the golde, immediatly it is lawfull for any other man that wyll, with a staffe to assigne hym selfe a place by the syde of the same, inclosing it with stakes or pales as his owne. These mines of Zauana (that is, such as are found in the plaines) ought euer to be sought neare to some ryuer or brooke, or spring of water, or dyke, or standyng poole, to thende that the golde may be washed, for the which purpose they vse the labour of certayne Indians, as they do other in dyggyng of the myne. And when they haue dygged out the myne, they fyll certayne trayes with that earth, whiche other Indians haue the charge immediatly to receyue at theyr handes, and to cary those trayes of earth to the water, where it may bee washed: Yet do not they that bryng it, washe it, but delyuer it to other, puttyng it out of theyr owne trayes into theyrs, whiche they haue redy in theyr handes to re∣ceyue it. These washers for the most part are the Indian wo∣men, because this woorke is of lesse paine and traueyle then any other. These women when they washe, are accustomed to syt by the water syde, with theyr legges in the water euen vp to the knees, or lesse, as the place serueth theyr purpose: and thus hold∣yng the trayes with earth in theyr handes by ye handles thereof, and puttyng the same into the water, they moue them rounde about, after the maner of syftyng, with a certayne aptnesse, in suche sorte that there entreth no more water into the trays then serueth theyr turne, and with the selfe same apte mouyng of theyr trays in the water, they euer auoyde the foule water with the earth out of the one syde of the vessell, and receyue in cleane water on the other syde thereof, so that by this meanes by litle and litle, the water washeth the earth as the lyghter substaunce of the trays, and the golde as the heauyer mat∣ter resteth in the bottome of the same, beyng rounde and holowe in the myddest lyke vnto a barbars basen: And when
all the earth is auoyded, and the gold geathered togeather in the bottome of the tray, they put it a part, and returne to take more earth, whiche they washe contynually as before. And thus they that labour in this woorke, do geather dayly suche portion of golde as shall please God to graunt to the Patrones of these In∣dians, and suche other as trauayle in the same. Furthermore it is to be noted, that for euery two Indians that washe, it is re∣quisite that two other serue them to bryng earth from the myne, and other two to breake the same small, and fyl theyr trayes ther∣with. Also besyde these labourers, it is necessarye that there be other people in the place where they woorke & rest in the night: these are suche as make theyr bread, and prouide for victuals, and other necessaries. So that to conclude, there are in al, fyue persons ordinarilie assigned to euery tray of washers. There is an other manner of workyng the mynes, in ryuers or brookes of runnyng waters: and this is, that in auoydyng the water of his course, after that the beddes of the ryuers are drye and vtterly emptied, they fynde golde among the breaches, clyftes, and ryftes of stones, and among all that is in the bot∣tome of the chanell, and where naturally the ryuer runneth of greatest force: So that it chaunceth sometyme, that when the bedde of the ryuer is good and ryche, they fynde in it great quan∣titie of gold. And therfore your Maiestie ought to vnderstand for a general rule, as it appeareth in fact, that all golde is engen∣dred in the toppes and hyghest places of the mountaynes, and in continuance of tyme is by litle and litle brought downe to the vales and playnes by shewres of rayne, and the falles of sprynges, ryuers, and brookes, hauyng theyr originall in the mountaynes, and discending from the same, notwithstan∣dyng it is oftentymes founde in the playnes farre from the mountaynes. But when it chaunceth to be founde in great quantitie, it is for the most part among the mountaynes, and in the ryuers, or theyr braunches, more then in any other part of the playne: and in these two maners it is commoly founde most abundantly. And for the better proofe that golde is engen∣dred on hygh, and is brought downe into the lowe places, I haue one great token therof, whiche causeth me to beleeue it for certayne: and this is, to consyder that coles neuer putrifie nor
corrupt vnder the grounde, if they be made of strong woodde. Wherby it chaunceth, that dyggyng the earth by the fouldes or indented places of the mountaynes, or on the sydes, & breakyng a myne in the earth where it had been broken before, and hauing nowe dygged one or two or three Poles in measure, the my∣ners founde certayne coles of wood vnder the same leuel where they founde golde, and this I say in the earth whiche was taken for a Uirgin, that is to saye, such as had not before been opened for any myne: the whiche coles coulde not naturally be engendred there, or enter in by any meanes, but when the super∣fitiall part of the earth was equal with the leuel where the coles were founde, it is like that the coles were left there by some occa∣sion of fyre, and that they fastened there in tyme, and that after∣warde in long continuance of tyme, they were by litle and litle couered with the earth, whiche the often shewres of rayne wash∣ed from the mountaynes, so that by the course of yeeres the earth ouergrewe the coles vnto the sayd leuell & measure, which had before tyme been the superfitial part of the earth, where the coles and golde were found togeather: whereby it may appeare that the golde was no more engendred there then were the coles, but brought thyther from the mountaynes by the falles of wa∣ters as we haue sayd, forasmuch as the mountaynes are the Ma∣trices and bowels of all ryche metals. Further and besyde this, I say that in howe muche more the golde is gone farre from the naturall place of his generation to the place where it is founde, it is so much the more purified and fined, and of a better caract, and the nearer that it is founde to his proper myne or veyne where it is engendred, it is so much the baser, fouler, and more crude, and of a baser alay and caract, and doth wast so muche the more in meltyng, and remayneth more brickle. Some∣tymes there are founde graines of golde of great quantitie, and of great weyght aboue the earth, and sometymes also vnder the earth: And the greatest of all other that was founde to this day in the Indies, was that whiche was lost in the sea about the Ilande Beata, whiche weyghed three thousande and two hundred Castellans of gold, which are in value foure thousand a hundred thyrtie and eyght ducades of golde, whiche weigh one Arroua and seuen pounde, or thyrtie and two pounde, after twelue oun∣ces
to the pounde,A marke, is a pounde of viii. ounces summa .xvi.li. weyght .viii. ounces, after xii. ounces to the .li. whiche make threescore and foure markes of golde. And I sawe in the yeere .1515. in the handes of My∣chel Passamonte treasurer to your maiestie, two graines, of the whiche one wayed seuen poundes, which are .xiiii. markes, and are in value about threescore and fyue ducades of golde euery marke: the other was of .x. markes, whiche are fyue poundes of lyke value, and of very good golde of .xxii. caractes, and better: There are also founde many other great graynes, al∣though not equall vnto these in bygnesse. And forasmuch as I haue spoken of gold, I haue thought good to declare somewhat howe the Indians can very excellently gylte suche vesselles of copper and base golde as they make: for they can geue them so fayre and floryshyng a coloure, that al the masse which they gylt, appeareth as though it were golde of .xxii. caractes, and better. This colour they geue with a certayne hearbe, as though it were wrought by ye art of any goldsmith of Spayne or Italie, and woulde of them bee esteemed as a thyng of great ryches, and a secrete maner of gyldyng. And for as muche as I haue spo∣ken sufficiently of the mynes of golde, I wyl nowe speake somewhat of copper, because I haue made mention thereof. This metal is founde in many of the Ilandes of the Indies, and also in the firme lande, and is founde dayly in great quantitie, holdyng somewhat of golde. But for the desyre that our men haue to golde, they nothyng esteeme the copper, although there myght great commoditie and profyt be had thereby, and also by other metals, whiche they nothyng regarde, except syluer, which is founde abundantly in that parte of the firme lande whi∣che is called newe Spaine. But of this it shal suffise to haue saide thus muche, because I haue more particulerly entreated of these thynges in my generall hystory of India. Of the maner of fyshyng for pearles. THe Indians exercise this kynde of fyshyng for the most part in ye coastes of the North in Cubagua and Cumana, and many of them which dwell in the houses of certayne parti∣cular lords in the Ilandes of San Dominico and Sancti Iohannis, resort to the Ilande of
Cubagua, for this purpose. Theyr custome is to go fyue, syxe, or seuen, or more in one of theyr Canoas or barkes, earely in the mornyng to some place in the sea thereabout, where it appeareth vnto them that there should be great plentie of those shell fyshes (which some call Muscles, and some Oysters) wherein pearles are engendred, & there they plunge them selues vnder the water, euen vnto the bottome, sauyng one that remayneth in the Canoa or boate, which he keepeth styll in one place as neare as he can, lookyng for theyr returne out of the water: And when one of them hath ben a good whyle vnder the water, he ryseth vp, and commeth swymmyng to the boate, entryng into the same, and leauyng there al the Oysters which he hath taken and brought with hym (for in these are the pearles found) and when he hath there rested hym selfe a whyle, and eaten part of the Oysters, he returneth agayne to the water, where he remayneth as long as he can endure, and then ryseth agayne, and swymmeth to the boate with his pray, where he resteth hym as before, and thus continueth course by course, as do all the other in lyke maner, be∣yng al most expert swymmers and dyuers: and when the night draweth neare, they returne to the Ilande to theyr houses, and present all the Oysters to the maister or stewarde of the house of theyr lorde, who hath the charge of the sayde Indians, and when he hath geuen them somewhat to eate, he layeth vp the Oysters in safe custodie, vntyll he haue a great quantitie therof, then he causeth the same fysher men to open them, and they fynd in euery of them pearles, other great or small, two, or three, or foure, and sometymes fyue or syxe, and many small graines, ac∣cordyng to the liberalitie of nature. They saue the pearles both smal and great whiche they haue founde, and eyther eate the Oysters if they wyl, or cast them away, hauyng so great quan∣titie thereof, that they in maner abhorre them. These Oysters are of harde fleshe, and not so pleasaunt in eatyng as are ours of Spayne. This Iland of Cubagua where this maner of fyshing is exercised, is in the North coaste, and is no bygger then the Ilande of Zeland. Oftentymes the sea increaseth greatly, and much more then ye fishers for pearles would, because where as the place is very deepe, a man can not naturally rest at the bottome,
by reason of the abundaunce of ayry substaunce whiche is in hym. as I haue oftentymes prooued. For although he may by vio∣lence and force discende to the bottome, yet are his feete lyfted vp agayne, so that he can contynue no tyme there: and there∣fore where the sea is very deepe, these Indian fyshers vse to tye two great stones about them with a cord, on euery syde one, by the weyght whereof they discende to the bottome, and remayne there vntyll them lysteth to ryse agayne, at whiche tyme they vnlose the stones, and ryse vp at theyr pleasure. But this theyr aptenesse and agilitie in swymmyng, is not the thyng that cau∣seth men most to marueyle: but rather to consyder howe ma∣ny of them can stande in the botome of the water for the space of one whole houre, and some more or lesse, accordyng as one is more apt heereunto then an other. An other thyng there is whiche seemeth to me very straunge: and this is, that where as I haue oftentimes demaunded of some of these Lordes of the Indians, yf the place where they are accustomed to fyshe for pearles, beyng but litle and narrowe, wyll not in short tyme be vtterly without Oysters, yf they consume them so fast. They all answered me, that although they be consumed in one part, yet if they goe a fyshyng in an other part, or an other coaste of the I∣lande, or at an other contrary wynde, and contynue fyshyng there also vntyll the Oysters be lykewyse consumed, and then returne agayne to the first place, or any other place where they fi∣shed before, and emptied the same in lyke maner, they finde them agayne as full of Oysters as though they had neuer been fyshed. Wherby we may iudge, that these Oysters eyther remoue from one place to an other, as do other fishes,Of this reade more largely in the decades. or els that they are en∣gendred and encrease in certaine ordinarie places. This Iland of Cumana & Cubagua, where they fyshe for these pearles, is in the twelfe degree of the part of the said coast which inclineth toward the North. Likewise pearles are founde and geathered in the South sea, called Mare del Sur, & the pearles of this sea are ve∣ry big, yet not so big as they of the Iland of pearles, called de las perlas, or Margaritea, which the Indians cal Terarequi, lying in the gulfe of Sainct Michael, where greater pearles are founde▪ and of greater pryce, then in any other coast of the North sea▪
in Cumana, or any other part. I speake this as a trewe testimo∣nie of syght, hauing been long in that South sea, and makyng curious inquisition to be certaynely enfourmed of al that partey∣neth to the fyshyng of pearles. From this Ilande of Terarequi, there was brought a pearle of the fashyon of a Peare, weighing thyrtie and one Caractes,By the compu∣tation of Ve∣nice, foure granes make a Caract. which Petrus Arias had among a thou∣sand and so many poundes weyght of other pearles, whiche he had when captayne Gaspar Morales (before Petrus Arias) pas∣sed to the sayde Ilande in the yeere .1515. whiche pearle was of great pryce. From the sayde Ilande also, came a great and very rounde pearle, which I brought out of the sea, this was as bygge as a smal pellet of a Stonebowe, and of the weyght of twentie and syx Caractes: I bought it in the citie of Panama, in the sea of Sur, and payde for it syx hundred and fyftie tymes the weyght therof of good golde, and had it three yeeres in my custo∣die, and after my returne into Spayne, sold it to the Earle of Nansao Marquesse of Zenete, great Chamberlayne to your Ma∣iestie, who gaue it to the Marquesse his wyfe, the Lady Mentia of Mendozza. I thynke veryly that this pearle was the greatest, fayrest, and roundest that hath been seene in those partes. For your maiestie ought to vnderstand, that in the coaste of the sea of Sur, there are founde a hundred great pearles rounde after the fa∣shyon of a Peare, to one that is perfectly rounde and great. This Ilande of Terarequi, which the Christians call the Ilande of pearles, and other call it the Ilande of Flowres, is founde in the eight degree on the South syde of the fyrme land, in the pro∣uince of golden Castyle, or Beragua, and these are the coasts of the fyrme lande, where pearles are founde euen vnto this day: I vnderstande also that there are pearles founde in the prouince and Ilandes of Cartagenia. And since your maiestie appoynted me a gouernour and captayne, I haue made further searche, and am aduertysed that pearles are founde in diuers other places, as about the Ilande of Codego, whiche lyeth agaynst the mouth of that port of the Ilande of Cartagenia, which the Indians cal Coro, the which Ilande and port are on the North syde, in the tenth degree of the coastes of the fyrme lande.
Of the familiaritie which certayne of the Indians haue with the deuyll, and howe they receyue answere of him of thinges to come. WHen the Indians begyn theyr battayle, or goe to any combat, or attempt any other great matter, they haue certayne elect men, whom they reuerendly esteeme, & call them Tequinas, which in theyr tounge is as much to say as maisters: notwithstandyng that they call euery man, that is cunnyng in any science, by the same name, as fyshers, foulers, hunters, or ma∣kers of nettes. These Tequinas therefore, they call the maisters of theyr aunsweres, because they speake with Tuyra, that is, the deuyll, and bryng them aunswere what he sayeth, eyther as tou∣chyng such thinges as they haue to doe, or shall chaunce to them the day folowyng, or many dayes to come. For the deuyll, beyng so auncient an Astronomer, knoweth the tymes of thinges, and seeth howe they are naturally directed and inclyned, and ma∣keth them beleeue that they come so to passe by his ordinaunce, as though he were the Lorde and mouer of all that is and shalbe, and that hee gyueth the day lyght, and rayne, causeth tempest, and ruleth the stations of tymes, gyuyng lyfe, or takyng away lyfe, at his pleasure: By reason whereof, the Indians be∣yng deceyued of hym, and seeyng also suche effectes to come certaynely to passe as hee hath tolde them before, beleeue hym in all other thinges, and honour him in many places with sa∣crifyces of the blood and lyues of men, and odoriferous spices: And when God disposeth the contrary to that whiche the deuyll hath spoken in oracle, whereby he is proued a lyer, he causeth the Tequinas to perswade the people that hee hath chaunged his mynd and sentence for some of their sinnes, or deuiseth some such lye as lyketh him best, beyng a skylful maister in such subtile and craftie deuises, to deceyue the simple and ignorant people, which hath small defence agaynst so mightie and craftie an aduersarie. And as they call the deuyll Tuyra, so doe they in many places call the Christians by the same name, thynkyng that they great∣ly honour them thereby, as in deede it is a name very fitte and
agreeable to many of them, hauyng layde aparte all honestie and vertue, lyuyng more lyke Dragons then men, among these symple people. Before thinhabitauntes of the Ilande of Hispaniola had recei∣ued the Christian fayth, there was among them a secte of men, whiche liued solitarily in the desartes and woods, & led theyr lyfe in silence and abstinence, more straightly then euer dyd the phy∣losophers of Pithagoras secte, absteinyng in lyke maner from the eatyng of all thinges that lyue by blood, contented onely with such fruites, hearbes, and rootes, as the desartes and woods my∣nistred vnto them to eate: The professours of this secte were cal∣led Piaces. They gaue them selues to the knowledge of naturall thinges, and vsed certaine secrete magicall operations and super∣stitions, whereby they had familiaritie with spirites, which they allured into theyr owne bodyes at such tymes as they would take vppon them to tell of thinges to come, whiche they dyd in ma∣ner as foloweth. When any of the kynges had occasion to call any of them out of the desartes for this purpose, theyr custome was to sende them a portion of theyr fyne bread of Cazabbi or Maizium, and with humble request and suite to desyre them to tell them of suche thinges as they woulde demaunde. After the request graunted, and the place and day appoynted, the Piaces commeth, with two of his disciples waytyng on hym, where∣of the one bryngeth with him a vessell of a secrete water, and the other a litle syluer bell. When he commeth to the place, he sitteth downe on a rounde seate made for hym of purpose, where hauyng his disciples, the one standyng on the one hande, and the other on the other, euen in the presence of the kyng and cer∣tayne of his nobles (for the common people are not admitted to these mysteries) and turnyng his face towarde the desarte, he begynneth his inchauntment, and calleth the spirite with loude voyce by certayne names, whiche no man vnderstandeth but hee and his disciples. After he hath done thus a whyle, if the spirite yet deferre his commyng, hee drynketh of the sayde water, and therewith waxeth hotte and furious, and inuerteth and turneth his inchauntment, and letteth him selfe blood with a thorne, mar∣ueilously turmoylyng him selfe, as wee reade of the furious Sy∣billes, not ceassyng vntyl the spirit be come: who at his comming
entreth into him, and ouerthroweth him, as it were a greyhound should ouerturne a Squerell, then for a space, hee seemeth to lye as though hee were in great payne, or in a rapte, woonderfully tormentyng him selfe, duryng whiche agonie, the other disciple shaketh the siluer bell continually. Thus when the agonie is past, and he lyeth quietly (yet without any sense or feelyng) the kyng, or some other in his stead, demaundeth of him what he desireth to know: and the spirit answereth by the mouth of the rapte Piaces, with a directe and perfecte answere to all poyntes: Insomuche that on a tyme certayne Spanyardes beyng present at these my∣steries with one of the kynges, and in the Spanyshe tounge de∣maundyng the Piaces of their shyppes which they looked for out of Spayne, the spirite answered in the Indian tounge, and tolde them what day and houre the shyppes departed from Spayne, how many they were, and what they brought, without fayling in any poynte. If he be also demaunded of the eclypse of the Sunne or Moone (which they greatly feare and abhorre) he giueth a per∣fect answere, and the lyke of tempestes, famin, plentie, warre or peace, and such other thinges. When all the demaundes are fini∣shed, his disciples call him aloude, ryngyng the siluer bell at his eare, and blowyng a certayne powder into his nosethrilles, whereby he is raysed as it were from a dead seape, beyng yet somewhat heauy headed and faynte a good whyle after. Thus beyng agayne rewarded of the kyng with more bread, hee de∣parteth agayne to the desartes with his disciples. But since the Christian fayth hath been dispearsed throughout the Ilande, these deuyllyshe practises haue ceassed, and they of the members of the deuyll, are made the members of Christ by baptisme, forsa∣kyng the deuyll and his workes, with the vayne curiositie of de∣syre of knowledge of thinges to come, whereof for the most parte it is better to be ignorant, then with vexation to know that which can not be auoyded. Furthermore, in many places of the firme lande, when any of the kynges dye, all his householde seruauntes, aswell women as men whiche haue continually serued him, kyll them selues, beleeuyng as they are taught by the deuyll Tuyra, that they whiche kyll them selues when the kyng dyeth, goe with him to heauen, and serue him in the same place and offyce as
they dyd before on the earth whyle hee lyued: and that all that refuse so to doe, when after they dye by theyr naturall death or otherwyse, theyr soules to dye with theyr bodyes, and to bee dissolued into ayre, and become nothyng, as doe the soules of Hogges, Byrdes, Fyshes, or other bruite beastes: and that on∣ly the other may enioy the priuiledge of immortalitie for euer, to serue the kyng in heauen. And of this false opinion commeth it, that they which sowe corne, or set rootes for the kynges bread, and geather the same, are accustomed to kyll them selues, that they may enioy this priuiledge in heauen, and for the same pur∣pose, cause a portion of the graine of Maizium, and a bundle of Iucca (whereof theyr bread is made) to be buryed with them in their graues, that the same may serue them in heauen, if per∣happes there should lacke seedes to sowe, and therefore they take this with them, to begyn withall, vntil Tuyra (who maketh them all these fayre promises) prouyde them of greater quantitie. This haue I my selfe seene in the toppe of the mountaynes of Guaturo, where hauing in pryson the kyng of that prouince (who rebelled from thbedience of your maiestie) and demaundyng of him to whom parteyned those sepultures or graues which I sawe in his house: hee answered, that they were of certayne Indians which slue them selues at the death of his father. And because they are oftentimes accustomed to bury great quantities of wrought gold with them, I caused twoo graues to be opened, wherein was no∣thyng founde but a vessell full of the graine of Maizium, & a bun∣dle of Iucca, as I haue sayde. And demaundyng the cause here∣of, of the kyng and the other Indians: they answered, that they that were buryed there, were the labourers of the grounde, and men skylfull in sowyng of seedes, and makyng of bread, and ser∣uauntes to the kynges father, and to the ende that their soules should not dye with theyr bodyes, they slue them selues at the death of the kyng theyr maister, to lyue with hym in heauen, and to the intent that they myght serue him there in the same offyce, they reserued that Maizium and Iucca, to sowe it in heauen. Wherevnto I aunswered them in this maner, Be∣holde howe your Tuyra deceyueth you, and howe all that hee teacheth you is false. You see howe in so long a tyme since they are dead, they haue not yet taken away this Maizium and Iucca,
which is nowe putrified and woorth nothyng, and not lyke to bee sowen in heauen. To this the kyng replyed, saying, in that they haue not taken it away, nor sowen it in heauen, the cause is, that they chaunced to fynde enough there, by reason whereof they had no neede of this. To this errour many thinges were sayd, which seemed of litle force to remoue him from his false opinion, and e∣specially any such as at that age are occupyed of the deuyl, whom they paynt of the selfe same fourme and colour, as hee appeareth vnto them in dyuers shapes and fourmes. They make also Ima∣ges of golde, copper, and wood, to the same similitudes, in terri∣ble shapes, and so variable, as the paynters are accustomed to paynt them at the feete of sainct Michaell tharchangell, or in any other place, where they paynte them of most horrible portiture. Lykewyse when the deuyll greatly intendeth to feare them, hee threatneth to sende them great tempestes, whiche they call Fura∣canas, or Haurachanas, and are so vehement, that they ouerthrow many houses, and great trees. And I haue seene in mountaynes, full of many and great trees, that for the space of three quarters of a league the mountayne hath been subuerted, and the trees o∣uerthrowen, and plucked out of the earth with the rootes: a thing doubtlesse so fearefull and terrible to beholde, that it may veryly appeare to bee done by the hande of the deuyll. And in this case the Christian men ought to consider with good reason,Doctrine not worthy for a christian man. that in all places where the holy sacrament is reserued, the sayde tempestes are no more so outragious, or so perilous as they were wont to bee. Of the temperature of the regions vnder or neare to the burnt lyne, called Torrida Zona, or the Equinoctiall, and of the dyuers seasons of the yeere. THe landes and regions that are neare about the clymes of the Equinoctiall lyne, are na∣turally hot, although they be otherwise tem∣perate by the diuine prouidence: & therfore such fleshe or fyshe as is taken and kylled in these regions, can not be preserued from pu∣trifaction, except it be rosted, sodden, or per∣boyld, the same day that it is kyld. And wheras I haue sayd, that
such regions are naturally hotte, and yet temperate by the proui∣dence of God, it is so in deede: and therefore not without cause the auncient aucthours were of opinion, that the burnt lyne, or Torrida zona, where passeth the lyne of the Equinoctiall, shoulde be vnhabitable, by reason the Sun hath greater dominion in that place, then in any other of the sphere, remaynyng continually be∣tweene the two tropykes of Cancer and Capricorne: For when in these regions the earth is opened or dygged from the superfi∣ciall parte thereof to the deapth of a mans heyght, it is founde temperate, and within this space the trees and plants fasten and spread their rootes, and no deeper, extendyng the same as farre in breadth in the grounde as doe theyr braunches in the ayre, and enter no deeper into the grounde then I haue sayde, because that beneath the deapth of the sayde space of a mans heyght the earth is very hotte, the vpper part beyng temperate and very moyst, aswell by reason of the abundaunce of water whiche falleth from heauen vpon that earth at certayne ordinarie seasons of the yeere, as also for the multitude of great ryuers, brookes, sprynges, and maryshes, whereby the myghtie and supreme Lord which made these landes, hath most prudently prouided for the preseruation of the same. There are also many rough and hygh mountaynes, with tem∣perate ayre, and pleasaunt, cleare, and moderate nyghtes: of the whiche particularitie the auncient wryters hauyng no certayne knowledge, affirmed the said burnt line or Torrida zona, or Equi∣noctiall, to be naturally vnhabitable. As touching which thing I am able to witnesse the contrary by testimonie of syght and fee∣lyng, as by most certayne senses, hauyng lyued many yeeres in these regions, by reason whereof better credite ought to be giuen to me, then to such as haue grounded their opininion onely vpon coniectures. And to speake further of the situation of these regi∣ons, you shall vnderstand that the coaste of the North sea, beyng in the gulfe of Vraba, and in the porte of Dariena, where the shyps arryue whiche come out of Spayne, is in the sixte degree and a halfe, and in the seuenth, and from sixe and a halfe, vnto eyght, ex∣cept a small poynt which entreth into the sea towarde the North. That poynt which of this lande and new parte of the worlde ly∣eth most towarde the East, is the cape of sainct Augustine, which
is in the eyght degree: So that the sayd gulfe of Vraba, is distant from the Equinoctiall lyne, from a hundred & twentie, to a hun∣dred and thirtie leagues, and three quarters of a league, after that accompte of .xvii. leagues and a halfe for euery degree from pole to pole: and thus for a litle more or lesse, goeth all the coast. By reason whereof, in the citie of Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena, and in all that course of the foresayde gulfe of Vraba, at all tymes of the yeere the dayes and nyghtes are in maner of equall length: and if there bee any difference betweene them by reason of this small distance from the Equinoctiall, it is so litle, that in .xxiiii. houres, makyng a naturall day, it can not bee perceyued but by the iudgement of speculatiue men, and suche as vnderstande the sphere: From hence the North starre is seene very lowe. And when the starres, whiche are called the guardens of the North starre, are vnder the Chariot, it can not be seene, because it is vn∣der the horizontall. And whereas I haue sayde before that it ray∣neth in these regions at certayne ordinarie tymes, it is so in deed: For it is wynter and summer there at contrary tymes to that which is in Spayne, where the greatest colde of frost and rayne is in December and Ianuary, and the greatest heate of sommer about saint Iohns day at Mydsommer, or in the moneth of Iu∣ly: But in golden Castile or Beragua, it is contrary, for the som∣mer and tyme of greatest drought & without rayne, is at Christ∣mas, and a moneth before, and a moneth after, & the tyme when it rayneth most, is about Mydsommer, and a moneth before, and a moneth after. And this season which they call wynter, is not for that it is any colder then, then at any other tyme of the yeere, or hotter at Christmas then at other seasons, the tyme in these regions being euer after one maner: but for that, that, in this tyme whiche they call wynter, the Sunne is hydde from theyr sightes, by reason of cloudes and rayne, more then at other times. Yet forasmuche as for the most part of the yeere they lyue in a cleare, open, and temperate ayre, they somewhat shrynke and feele a litle colde duryng the tyme of the sayde moyst and cloudy ayre, although it be not colde in deede, or at the least such colde as hath any sensible sharpenesse.
Of dyuers particuler thinges, as woormes, ser∣pentes, beastes, foules, trees. &c. MAny other thinges might be sayd, and much differyng from these wherof I haue spoken. But to lette passe the multitude of thinges whiche are as variable as the power of na∣ture is infinite, and to speake of such thinges as come chiefely to my remembraunce, as most worthie to be noted, I will first speake of certayne litle and troublous beastes, which may seeme to bee engendred of nature to molest & vexe men, to shewe them & giue them to vnderstand, how small and vyle a thing may offende and disquiet them, to thende that they may remember the principall end for the which they were created, that is, to know their maker and procurer of their saluation by the way whiche is open to all Christian men, and all other which will open the eyes of theyr vnderstandyng. And although the thinges whereof wee en∣tende nowe to speake, may seeme vyle and litle to be esteemed, yet are they worthy to bee noted and considered, to vnderstande the difference and variable workes of nature. So it is therefore, that whereas in many partes of the firme lande, by the whiche as well the Christians as Indians doe trauayle, there are suche maryshes and waters in the way, that they are fayne to go with∣out breeches among the hearbes and weedes, by reason whereof, certaine smal beasts or wormes (which they cal Garapates) much lyke vnto tykes, cleaue fast to their legges. These wormes are as litle as the pouder of beaten salt, and cleaue so fast, that they can by no meanes bee taken away, except the place bee noynted with oyle: and after that the legges be noynted a whyle with oyle, or the other partes where these litle tykes are fastened, they scrape the place with a knyfe, and so take them away. But the In∣dians whiche haue no oyle, smoke them, and burne them with fyre, and abyde great paynes in takyng them away by this meanes. Of other litle beastes whiche trouble men, and are engendred in theyr heades or other partes of theyr bodyes, I say that the Christian men which trauayle into these partes, haue them but seldome tymes, and that not past one or two, & this al∣so
very seldome: For passyng by the lyne of the Diameter where the compasse maketh difference of saylyng by the wynde called Greco, (that is, Northeast) and Magistral (that is, southwest) whiche is in the course of the Ilandes of Azori, they sayle but a litle way folowyng our viage by the west, but that all the lyse whiche the Christians cary with them, or are engendred in theyr heades, or other places of theyr bodyes, dye and vtterly consume by litle and litle, and are not engendred in India, except in the heades of litle chyldren in those partes, aswell among the chyldren of the Christians whiche are borne there, as also among the naturall Indians, who haue them commonly in theyr heades, and sometymes in other partes of theyr bodyes, and especially they of the prouince of Cueua, whiche is a region contaynyng more then a hundred leagues in length, and embraseth the one and the other coast of the North sea, and of the East. When these Indians are infected with this fylthynesse, they dresse and cleanse one an other: And they that exercyse this, are for the most part women, who eate all that they take, and haue herein suche dexteritie by reason of theyr exercise, that our men can not lyghtly attayne therunto. There is also another thyng greatly to be consydered: and this is, howe the Christian men, beyng there cleane from this fyl∣thynesse of India, aswell in theyr heades as the rest of theyr bo∣dyes, yet when they returne to come agayne into Europe, and begyn to arryue in that place of the Ocean sea where we sayde before that these lyse dyed and forsoke them, sodenly in theyr re∣passyng by the same clyme (as though these lyse had taryed for them in that place) they can by no meanes auoyde them for the space of certayne dayes, although they change theyr shertes two or three times in a day: These lise are at ye fyrst as litle as nittes, and growe by litle and litle, vntyl they be of the byggenesse that they are in Spayne. This haue I oftentymes prooued, ha∣uyng nowe foure tymes passed the Ocean sea by this viage. Besyde these wormes and vermyn whereof we haue spoken, there is another litle myschuous worme, whiche we may number among the kyndes of , this pestilence the Indi∣ans call Nigua, and is muche lesse then a flea: it pearseth the fleshe of a man, and so launeth or cutteth the same (whyle
in the meane tyme it can neyther be seene nor taken) that from some it hath cut of theyr handes, and from other theyr feete, vntyll the remedy was founde to annoynt the place with oyle, and scrape it with a rasor. In the firme lande in golden Castyle or Beragua,Vipers. there are many vipers lyke vnto them of Spayne: they that are bytten of them, dye in short space, for fewe lyue to the fourth day, except present remedy. Of these, some are of lesse kynde then other, and haue theyr tayle somewhat rounde, and leape in the ayre to assayle men, and for this cause, some call this kynde of vipers Tyro: theyr by∣tyng is most venomous, and for the most parte incurable. One of them chaunced to byte an Indian mayde whiche serued me in my house, to whom I caused the Surgians to mynister theyr ordinary cure, but they coulde do her no good, nor yet geat one droppe of blood out of her, but onely a yelowe water, so that she dyed the thyrde day for lacke of remedy, as the lyke hath chaunced to dyuers other: This mayde was of the age of .xiiii. yeeres, and spake the Spanyshe tongue as if she had been borne in Castyle: she sayde that the viper whiche byt her on the foote, was two spannes long, or litle lesse, and that to byte her, she lept in the ayre for the space of more then syxe pases, as I haue hearde the lyke of other credible persons. I haue also seene in the firme lande a kynde of adders,Adders. very small, and of seuen or eyght foote long: these are so redde, that in the nyght they appeare lyke burnyng cooles, and in the day seeme as redde as bloodde, these are also venomous, but not so muche as the vipers. There are other muche lesse, and shorter, and blac∣ker: these come out of the ryuers, and wander sometymes farre on the lande, and are lykewyse venomous. There are also o∣ther adders of a russet colour: these are somewhat bygger then the viper, and are hurtful and venomous. There are lykewyse an other sort of many colours, and very long: of these I sawe one in the yeere of Christ .1515. in the Iland of Hispaniola, neere vnto the sea coastes, at the foote of the mountaynes called Peder∣nales, when this adder was slayne, I measure her, and founde her to be more then .xx. foote long, & somwhat more then a mans fyst in byggnesse: and although she had three or foure deadly woundes with a swoorde, yet dyed she not, nor stonke the
same daye, insomuche that her blood contynued warme all that tyme. There are also in the Maryshes and desartes of the fyrme lande many other kyndes of Lysartes, Dragons,Dragons. and other diuers kyndes of Serpentes, whereof I entende not heere to speake muche, because I haue more particulerly entreated of these thynges in my generall historie of the West Indies. There are also Spyders of marueylous byggenesse,Spiders and I haue seene some with the bodye and legges bygger then a mans hande extended euery waye, and I once sawe one of suche byggenesse, that only her bodye was as bygge as a Spar∣rowe, and full of that Laune whereof they make theyr webbes: this was of a darke russet coloure, with eyes greater then the eyes of a Sparowe, they are venomous, and of terrible shape to heholde. There are also Scorpions, and dyuers other such venomous wormes. Whereby we may see, that where as na∣turall causes and influence of the planettes are of strongest acti∣uitie, they ceasse not to engender and bryng foorth both good and badde, accordyng to the dispotion of the matter, whiche they also doo partly dispose, as the philosophers affyrme. Fur∣thermore in the fyrme lande, there are many Toades, beyng ve∣ry noyous and hurtfull by reason of theyr great multitude, they are not venomous, they are seene in great abundaunce in Darie∣na, where they are so bygge that when they dye in the tyme of drouth, the bones of some of them (and especialy the rybbes) are of suche greatnesse, that they appeare to be the bones of Cattes, or of some other beastes of the same byggenesse. But as the waters diminishe, and the moysture consumeth in the tyme of drouth (as I haue sayde) they also consume therewith, vntyl the yeere next folowyng when the rayne and moysture encrease, at whiche tyme they are seene agayne. Neuerthelesse, at this pre∣sent there is no such quantitie of them, as was wont to be, by rea∣son that as the lande is better cultured by the Christians, aswell by the fellyng of wooddes and shrubbes, as also by the pasture of Kyne, Horses, and other beastes, so is it apparent that this poy∣son diminisheth daylye, whereby that region becommeth more holsome and pleasaunt: these Toades syng after three or foure sortes, for some of them syng pleasauntly, other lyke ours of Spayne, some also whystle, and other some make an
other maner of noyse: they are lykewyse of diuers coloures, as some greene, some russet or gray, and some almost blacke, but of all sortes they are great and fylthy, and noyous by reason of theyr great multitude, yet are they not venemous as I haue sayde. There are also a straunge kynde of Crabbes, whiche come foorth of certayne holes of the earth,Crabbes. that they them selues make: the head and bodie of these make one rounde thyng, muche lyke vnto the hood of a Faulkon, hauyng foure feete commyng out of the one syde, & as many out of the other: they haue also two mouthes, like vnto a payre of small Pinsers, the one bygger then the other, wherewith they byte, but doo no great hurt, because they are not venomous: theyr skynne and bodie is smooth, and thynne, as is the skynne of a man, sauyng that it is somewhat harder, theyr coloure is russet, or whyte, or blewe, and walke sydelong, they are very good to be eaten, insomuche that the Christians trauaylyng by the fyrme lande, haue been greatly nouryshed by them, because they are founde in maner euery where: in shape and fourme they are muche like vnto the Crabbe whiche we paynt for the signe Can∣cer, and like vnto those whiche are founde in Spayne in Anda∣lusia in the ryuer Guadalchiber, where it entreth into the sea, and in the sea coastes there about, sauyng that these are of the water, and the other of the lande: they are sometymes hurtfull, so that they that eate of them dye, but this chaunceth only when they haue eaten any venomous thyng, or of the venomous apples wherewith the Canible archers poyson theyr arrowes, whereof I wyll speake hereafter, and for this cause the Christians take heede how they eate of these Crabbes, yf they fynde them neare vnto the sayd apple trees. Furthermore in these Indies, aswel in the fyrme lande, as in the Ilandes, there is founde a kynde of Serpentes, whiche they call .Y. V. anas, whiche some cal Iuan∣nas,Serpentes cal∣led Iuanni. these are terrible and feareful to syght, and yet not hurtful, they are very delicate to be eaten, and it is not yet knowen whe∣ther they be beastes of the lande, or fyshes, because they lyue in the water, and wander in the wooddes, and on the lande: they haue foure feete, and are commonly bygger then Connies, and in some places bygger then Otters, with tayles lyke Ly∣sartes or Eutes: theyr skynne is spotted, and of the same
kynde of smothnesse or barenesse, although of dyuers colours: vpon the rydge of theyr backes, they haue many long prickes, theyr teeth are very sharpe, and especially theyr fanges or dogge teeth, theyr throtes are long and large, reachyng from theyr beardes to theyr breastes, of the lyke skynne to the resydue of theyr bodyes: they are dumbe, and haue no voyce, or make any noyse, or crye, although they bee kept tyed to the foote of a cheste, or any other thyng, for the space of .xx. or .xxv. dayes, without any thyng to eate or drynke, except they geue them nowe and then a litle of the bread of Cazabbi, or some suche other thyng: they haue foure feete, and theyr fore feete as long as a mans fynger, with clawes lyke the clawes of a byrde, but weaker, and suche as can not grasple or take holde of any thyng: they are muche better to bee eaten then to beholde, for fewe that see them, wyll haue desyre to eate of them, by reason of theyr horrible shape, except suche as haue ben accusto∣med to the beastes of these regions, whiche are more horrible and feareful, as this is not, but onely in apparence: theyr fleshe is of muche better tast then the fleshe of Connies, and more holsome, for it hurteth none but onely suche as haue had the frenche poxe, insomuche that if they haue been touched of that infirmitie, although they haue ben whole of long tyme, neuer∣thelesse they feele hurte, and complayne of the earyng of these Iuannas, as hath been oftentimes prooued by experience. There are founde in the fyrme lande certayne byrdes, so litle, that the whole body of one of them is no bygger then the toppe of the byggest fynger of a mans hande, and yet is the bare body with∣out the feathers not halfe so bygge: This byrde, besyde her li∣tlenesse, is of suche velocitie and swyftnesse in fleeyng, that who so seeth her fleeyng in the ayre, can not see her flap or beate her winges after any other sort then do the Dorres, or humble bees, or Beetels: so that there is no man that seeth her flee, that would thynke her to be any other then a Dorre: they make their nestes accordyng to the proportion of their bygnes, and I haue seene that one of these byrdes with her nest put in a payre of golde weights, altogeather hath waide no more then .2. Tomini, which are in poise .24. graines, with the feathers, with out the which she shoulde haue wayed somwhat lesse. And doubtlesse when I con∣sider
the fynenesse of the clawes & feete of these byrdes, I knowe not whereunto I may better lyken them, then to the litle byrdes whiche the lymners of bookes are accustomed to paynte on the margent of churche bookes, and other bookes of diuine seruice. Theyr feathers are of many fayre colours, as golden, yelowe, and greene, besyde other variable colours, theyr beake is very long for the proportion of theyr bodies, and as fyne and subtile as a sowyng nedle: they are very hardy, so that when they see a man clime ye tree where they haue their nests, they flee at his face, & stryke hym in the eyes, commyng, goyng, and returnyng with such swyftnes, that no man woulde lyghtly beleeue it, that hath not seene it: and certaynly these byrdes are so litle, that I durst not haue made mention hereof, if it were not that diuers other which haue seene them as wel as I can beare witnes of my say∣ing: they make their nestes of flockes and heare of cotton, wherof there is great plentie in these regions, and serueth wel for theyr purpose. But as touchyng the byrdes, foules, and beastes of these Indies, because they are innumerable, both litle and great, I intende not to speake muche heere, because I haue spoken more largely hereof in my generall hystorye of the Indies. There is an other kynde of beastes seene in the firme lande, whiche seemeth very strange and marueylous to the Christian men to beholde, and much differyng from al other beastes whi∣che haue ben seene in other partes of the world: these beastes are called Bardati, and are foure footed, hauyng their tayle and al the rest of theyr bodyes couered onely with a skynne lyke the coper∣ture of a barbed horse, or the checkered skinne of a Lisarte or Cro∣codile, of coloure betwene white and russet, inclynyng somwhat more to whyte. This beast is of fourme and shape muche lyke to a barbed horse, with his barbes and flankets in al poynts, and from vnder that which is the barbe and coperture, the taile com∣meth forth, and the feete in theyr place, the necke also & the eares in theyr partes, and in fyne al thynges in lyke sorte as in a bar∣bed courser: they are of the bygnesse of one of these common dogges, they are not hurtfull, they are fylthy, and haue theyr habitation in certaine hillockes of earth, where dygging with their feete, they make theyr dens very deepe, & the hoes thereof, in like maner as do Connies, they are very excellent to be eaten, &
are taken with nettes, and some also kylled with Crosbowes: they are likewise taken oftentymes when the husbandmen burne the stubble in sowyng tyme, or to renue the herbage for Kyne and other beastes. I haue oftentymes eaten of theyr flesh, which seemeth to me of better tast then Kyddes fleshe, and holsome to be eaten. And if these beastes had euer been seene in these partes of the worlde, where the fyrst barbed horses had theyr originall, no man woulde iudge but that the fourme and fashyon of the co∣perture of horses furnyshed for the warres, was fyrst deuised by the syght of these beastes. There is also in the fyrme lande an o∣ther beast, called Orso Formigaro, that is, the Ante beare. This beast in heare and coloure, is much lyke to the Beare of Spaine,Beres. and in maner of the same makyng, saue that he hath a muche lon∣ger snout, and is of euyll syght: they are oftentymes taken on∣ly with staues, without any other weapon, and are not hurtful, they are also taken with dogges, because they are not naturally armed, although they byte somewhat, they are founde for the most part about and neare to the hyllockes where are great a∣bundaunce of Antes. For in these regions is engendred a cer∣tayne kynde of Antes, very litle and blacke, in the feeldes and playnes where as growe no trees,Antes▪ where by the instinct of na∣ture these Antes separate them selues to engender farre from the wooddes for feare of these Beares, the which because they are fearefull, vyle, and vnarmed (as I haue sayde) they keepe euer in places full of trees, vntyll very famine and necessitie, or the great desire that they haue to feede on these Antes, cause them to come out of the woods to hunt for them: these Antes make a hil∣locke of earth to the heyght of a man, or somewhat more or lesse, and as byg as a great chest, & sometymes as byg as a Butte or a Hogshead, & as hard as a stone, so that they seeme as though they were stones, set vp to limit the endes & confines of certaine lands. Within these hillocks, made of most harde earth, are innu∣merable and infinite litle Antes, the whiche may be geathered by bushelles when the hyllocke is broken: the whiche when it is sometymes moysted by rayne, and then dryed agayne by the heate of the Sonne, it breaketh, and hath certayne small ryftes, as litle and subtyle as the edge of a knyfe, and it see∣meth that nature hath geuen sense to these Antes to fynde
suche a matter of earth, wherewith they may make the sayde hyl∣locke of suche hardnesse, that it may seeme a strong pauement made of lyme and stone: and whereas I haue proued and cau∣sed some of them to be broken, I haue founde them of such hard∣nesse, as yf I had not seene I could not haue beleeued, insomuch that they coulde scarcely be broken with pykes of Iron, so strong fortresses doo these litle beastes make for theyr sauegard against theyr aduersarie the Beare, who is chiefely nouryshed by them, and geuen them as an enimie, accordyng to the common pro∣uerbe whiche sayeth, Non e alcuna persona si libera, a chimanchi il suo Bargello, that is, there is no man so free, that hath not his per∣secutor or priuie enimie. And here when I consyder the mar∣ueilous prouidence whiche nature hath geuen to these litle bo∣dies, I cal to remembrance the wittie sentence of Plinie, where speakyng of such litle beastes, he sayeth thus, Why do we mar∣ueile at the Towrebearyng shoulders of Elephantes, and not rather where nature hath placed so many senses & such industrye in such litle bodies? Where is hearing, smelling, seeing, and fee∣lyng, yea, where are the vaynes and arteries (without which no beast can lyue or moue) in these so litle bodies, whereof some are so small that theyr whole bodies can scarsly be seene of our eyes: What shall we then saye of the partes of the same? Yet euen a∣mong these there are many of such sagasitie and industry, as the like is not seene in beastes of greater quantitie, no nor yet in man. &c. But to returne to the history. This enimie whiche na∣ture hath geuen to these litle beastes, vseth this maner to assayle them: When he resorteth to the hyllocke where the Antes lie hid as in theyr fortresse, he putteth his tongue to one of the ryftes whereof we haue spoken, being as subtile as the edge of a sword, and therewith contynuall lickyng, maketh the place moyst, the fome and froth of his mouth beyng of suche propertie, that by contynuall lickyng the place, it enlargeth the ryft in such sort by litle and litle, that at the length he easely putteth in his tongue, whiche he hath very long and thynne, and muche disproportio∣nate to his bodie, and when he hath thus made free passage for his tongue into the hyllocke, to put it easely in and out at his pleasure, then he thrusteth it into the hole as farre as he can reache, and so letteth it rest a good space, vntyll a great quan∣titie
of the Antes (whose nature reioyceth in heate and moyster) haue laden his tongue, and as many as he can conteyne in the ho∣lownesse thereof, at which tyme hee sodeynly draweth it into his mouth, and eateth them, and returneth agayne to the same prac∣tise immediatly, vntyll he haue eaten as many as him lysteth, or as long as he can reache any with his tongue. The fleshe of this beast, is filthy and vnsauery, but by reason of the extreme shyftes and necessitie that the Christian men were put to at theyr fyrst commyng into these partes, they were inforced to proue all thin∣ges, and so fell to the eatyng of these beastes: but when they had found more delycate meates, they fel into hatred with this. These Antes haue thappearance of the place of theyr entraunce into the hyllocke, vnder the grounde, and this at so litle a hole, that it coulde hardely be founde, if certayne of them were not seene to passe in and out: but by this way the Beares could haue no suche power to hurte them as aboue at the sayde ryftes, as I haue sayde. There is an other strange beast, whiche by a name of contrary effecte, the Spanyardes call Cagnuolo leggiero,A strange beast which seemeth a kind of Cameleon. that is, the lyght dogge, whereas it is one of the slowest beastes in the world, and so heauy and dull in mouyng, that it can scarse∣ty goe fyftie pases in a whole day: these beastes are in the firme lande, and are very strange to beholde for the disproporti∣on that they haue to all other beastes, they are about two spannes in length when they are growne to theyr full byggenesse, but when they are very young, they are somewhat more grosse then long: they haue foure subtile feete, and in euery of them foure clawes lyke vnto byrdes, and ioyned togeather, yet are nother theyr clawes or their feete able to susteyne theyr bodyes from the grounde, by reason whereof, and by the heauynesse of theyr bo∣dyes, they drawe theyr bellyes on the grounde: theyr neckes are hygh and streyght, and all equall lyke the pestle of a mor∣ter, which is altogeather equall euen vnto the toppe, without ma∣kyng any proportion or similitude of a head, or any dyfference except in the noddle, and in the toppes of theyr neckes: they haue very rounde faces muche lyke vnto Owles, and haue a marke of theyr owne heare after the maner of a cyrcle, which maketh theyr faces seeme somewhat more long then large: they haue small eyes and rounde, and nostrylles lyke vnto Munkeys:
they haue litle mouthes, and moue theyr eckes from one syde to an other, as though they were astonyshed: theyr chiefe desyre and delyghte is to cleaue and sticke fast vnto trees, or some other thyng whereby they may clyme aloft, and therefore for the most parte, these beastes are founde vppon trees, wherevnto cleauyng fast, they mount vp by litle and litle, staying them selues by theyr long clawes: the colour of theyr heare, is be∣tweene russet and whyte, and of the proper colour of the heare of a Wesell: they haue no tayles, and theyr voyce is much diffe∣ryng from other beastes, for they syng onely in the nyght, and that continually from tyme to tyme, syngyng euer syxe notes one hygher then an other, so fallyng with the same, that the first note is the hyghest, and the other in a baser tune, as if a man shoulde say La, sol, fa, mi, re, vt, so this beast sayeth, Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. And doubtlesse, it seemeth vnto mee, that as I haue sayde in the Chapter of the beast called Bardati, that those beastes myght bee the original and document to imbarbe horses: euen so, the fyrst inuention of musycke myght seeme by the hea∣ryng of this beast, to haue the fyrst principles of that science, ra∣ther then by any other thyng in the worlde. But now to returne to the hystorie. I say that in a shorte space after this beast hath song, and hath paused a whyle, shee returneth agayne to the selfe same song, and doeth this onely in the nyght, and not in the day: By reason whereof, and also because of her euyll sight, I thynke her to bee a nyght beast, and the friende of darkenesse. Sometymes the Christian men fynde these beastes, and bryng them home to theyr houses, where also they creepe all about with theyr naturall slownesse, insomuch that nother for threatnyng or pryckyng they will moue any faster then theyr naturall and ac∣customed pase. And if they fynde any trees, they creepe thither immediatly, and mount to the toppe of the hyghest braunche thereof, where they remayne continually for the space of eyght, or tenne, or twentie dayes, without eatyng of any thyng, as farre as any man can iudge. And whereas I my selfe haue kept them in my house, I coulde neuer perceyue other but that they lyue onely of ayre, and of the same opinion are in maner all men of those regions, because they haue neuer seene them eate a∣ny thyng, but euer turne theyr heades and mouthes towarde
that parte where the wynde bloweth most, whereby may be con∣sydered that they take most pleasure in the ayre. They byte not, nor yet can byte, hauyng very litle mouthes: they are not veno∣mous or noyous any way, but altogeather brutyshe, and vtterly vnprofitable, and without commoditie yet knowen to men, sa∣uyng onely to moue theyr myndes to contemplate the infynite power of God, who delyghteth in the varietie of creatures, wher∣by appeareth the power of his incomprehensible wysedome and maiestie, so farre to exceede the capacitie of mans vnderstanding. In these regions there are lykewyse founde certayne foules or byrdes, which the Indians call Alcatraz:Foules, and byrdes. these are muche byg∣ger then Geese,Alcatraz. the greatest parte of theyr feathers are of rus∣set colour, and in some partes yelowe, theyr bylles or beakes are of two spannes in length, and very large neare to the head, and growyng small towarde the poynte, they haue great and large throtes, and are muche lyke to a foule which I sawe in Flaun∣ders in Brusselles in your maiesties pallace, whiche the Fle∣mynges call Haina: And I remember that when your maie∣stie dyned one day in your great hall, there was brought to your maiesties presence a Cauderne of water with certayne fyshes alyue, whiche the sayde foule dyd eate vp whole, and I thynke veryly that that foule was a foule of the sea, because shee had feete lyke foules of the water, as haue also these Alcatrazi, which are lykewyse foules of the sea, and of suche greatnesse, that I haue seene a whole coate of a man put into the throates of one of them in Panama, in the yeere .1521. And forasmuche as in that coast of Panama,Panama, there passeth and fleeth a great multi∣tude of these Alcatrazi, beyng a thyng very notable, I wyll de∣clare the maner heereof, as not onely I, but also dyuers other nowe present in your maiesties courte haue often tymes seene. Your maiestie shall therefore vnderstande, that in this place (as I haue sayde before) the sea of Sur ryseth and falleth two leagues and more from syxe houres to syxe houres: so that when it increaseth, the water of the sea arryueth so neare to the houses of Panama, as doeth our sea (called Mare Mediteraneum) in Barzalona, or in Naples: and when the sayd increasing of the sea commeth, there commeth also therewith suche a multitude of the smal fishes called Sardines, that it is so marueilous a thing to
beholde, that no man would beleeue it that hath not seene it. In∣somuch that the Cacique (that is) the kyng of that lande, at such tyme as I dwelt there, was bounde dayly, as he was commaun∣ded by your maiesties gouernour, to bryng ordinarily three ca∣noas or barkes full of the sayde Sardynes, and to vnlade the same in the market place, whiche were afterwarde by the ru∣ler of the citie diuided among the Christian men, without any coste or charge to any of them: Insomuche that if the people had been a much greater multitude then they were, and as ma∣ny as are at this present in Toledo, or more, and had none other thyng to lyue by, they myght haue been sufficiently susteyned by these Sardynes, besyde the ouerplus which should haue re∣mayned. But to returne to the foules, whereof we haue spo∣ken. As the sea commeth, and the Sardynes with the same, euen so lykewyse come the sayde Alcatrazzi therewith, and flee continually ouer it, in such a multytude, that they appeare to co∣uer the vpper parte or floore of the water, and thus continue in mountyng and fallyng from the ayre to the water, and from the water to the ayre, duryng all the tyme of their fishing: and assoone as they haue taken any of these Sardines, they flee aboue the wa∣ters, and eate them incontinently, and sodeynly returne agayne to the water for more, continuing thus course by course without ceassyng▪ in lyke maner when the sea falleth, they folowe theyr fy∣shyng as I haue sayde. There goeth also in the company of these foules, an other kynde of foules, called Coda inforcata, (that is) the forked tayle, whereof I haue made mention before, & assoone as the Alcatraz mounteth from the water with her pray of the Sardynes, sodeynly this Coda inforcata gyueth her so many strokes, and so persecuteth her, that shee causeth her to let fall the Sardynes which shee hath in her mouth: the which assoone as they are falne, and before they yet touche the water, the Coda inforcata catcheth them euen in the fall, in suche sorte, that it is a great pleasure to beholde the combat betweene them all the day long. The number of these Alcatrazzi is suche, that the Christian men are accustomed to sende to certayne Ilandes and rockes which are neare about Panama, with theyr boates or bar∣kes to take these Alcatrazzi, whyle they are yet young, and can not flee, and kyll as many of them with staues as they will, vntyll
they haue therewith laden theyr Barkes or Canoas: these young ones are so fat and well fedde, that they can not bee eaten, and are taken for none other intent, but onely to make grease for candles to burne in the nyght, for the whiche purpose it serueth very well, and gyueth a cleare lyght, and burneth easily. After this maner, and for this purpose, innumerable of them are kyld: & yet it seemeth that the number of them that fyshe for Sardynes doe dayly increase. There are other foules called Passere sem∣pie, that is, simple sparowes:Passere sem∣pie. these are somewhat lesse then Seamewes, and haue theyr feete lyke vnto great Malardes, and stande in the water sometymes, and when the shyppes sayle fyftie or a hundred leagues about the Ilandes, these foules be∣holdyng the shyppes commyng towarde them, breake theyr flyght, and fall downe vpon the sayle yardes, mastes, and ca∣bles thereof, and are so simple and folyshe, that they tary vn∣tyll they may easily bee taken with mens handes, and were ther∣fore called of the maryners simple sparowes: they are blacke, and vppon theyr blacke, haue theyr head and shoulders of feathers of a darke russet colour: they are not good to bee eaten, although the maryners haue sometymes been inforced to eate them. There is an other kynde of byrdes in the firme land, which the Christians call Picuti, because they haue very great beakes, in respecte of the litlenesse of theyr bodyes,Picuti. for theyr beakes are very heauy, and waye more then theyr whole bodyes be∣syde: these byrdes are no bygger then Quayles, but haue a muche greater bushement of feathers, insomuche that theyr fea∣thers are more then theyr bodyes: theyr feathers are very fayre, and of many variable coloures, theyr beakes are a quarter of a yarde in length or more, and bendyng downe toward the earth, and three fyngers brode neare vnto the head: theyr tongues are very quylles, wherewith they make a great hyssyng: they make holes in trees with theyr beakes, in the which they make their neastes. And surely these byrdes are marueylous to beholde, for the great dyfference whiche they haue from all other byrdes that I haue seene, aswell for theyr tongues (which are quylles as I haue sayd) as also for the strangenesse of their sight, & dispro∣portion of their great beaste, in respect of the rest of their bodies. There are no byrdes found that prouide better for the safegard of
theyr young in the tyme of theyr breedyng, to be without daun∣ger of wylde cattes, that they enter not into theyr neastes to de∣stroy their egges or young, and this aswell by the strange maner of buyldyng their nestes, as also by theyr owne defence: and ther∣fore when they perceyue that the cattes approche towarde them, they enter into theyr nestes, and holdyng theyr beakes towarde the entraunce of the same, stande at theyr defence, and so vexe the cattes, that they cause them to leaue their enterpryse. There are also other byrdes or sparowes, which the Christians by con∣trary effecte call Matti,Folyshe spa∣rowes. that is fooles: Whereas neuerthelesse there is no byrde that sheweth more wyt and crafte in defendyng her young from peryl. These byrdes are litle, & in maner blacke, and somewhat bygger then our Thrushes, they haue certayne whyte feathers in theyr neckes, and the lyke sagasitie or sharpe∣nesse of sense as haue the byrdes or Pyes called Gazzuole, they sildome tymes lyght vppon the earth: they make theyr nestes in trees separated from other, because the wylde cattes (called Mammoni) are accustomed to leape from tree to tree, not dis∣cendyng to the grounde for feare of other beastes, except when they are enforced by thirst to come downe to drinke, at such times as they are sure not to bee molested, and for this cause doe not these byrdes make theyr nestes but in trees farre diuided from o∣ther, they make them of a cubite in length, or more, after the maner of bagges or litle sackes, large at the bottome, and grow∣yng narower and narower towarde the mouth, whereby they are fastened, hauyng the hole whereat they enter into the sacke, of suche byggenesse as may onely suffyce to receyue them. And to the ende that the cattes may not deuour theyr young, if they chaunce to mount vppon the trees where they haue theyr nestes, they vse an other craft, which is, to make theyr nestes in thicke braunches of trees, and to defende the same with sharpe and strong thornes, implicate and set in suche order, that no ma is able to make the lyke, so that the cattes can by no meanes put theyr legges into the hole of the neaste to take out the young byrdes, as well for the sharpenesse of the thornes, as also for the deapth of the nestes, in the bottome wherof, the young birds rest without daunger of their enimie: for some of theyr nestes beyng
three or foure spannes in length, the legge of the catte can not reache to the bottome thereof. They vse also an other pollicie, which is, to make many of theyr neastes in one tree, the which they doe for one of these two causes: that is, that eyther of theyr owne naturall disposition they are accustomed to goe in great multitudes, and reioyce in the company of theyr owne generati∣on, as doe the byrdes whiche wee call Stares, or els to the in∣tent that if it should so chaunce that the cattes shoulde clyme the trees where they make theyr neastes, they myght bee a greater company to resyst and molest the cattes, at whose approch they make a fearefull and terrible crye, whereby the cattes are put to flight. Furthermore, in the fyrme lande, and in the Ilandes, there are certayne byrdes called Piche, or Gazzuole,Cazzuole. somewhat lyke vnto those which we call Woodwalles, or Woodpeckes, beyng lesse then ours of Spayne: these are altogeather blacke, and goe hoppyng and leapyng, theyr beakes are also blacke, and of the same fashion as are the Popingiays beakes, they haue long tay∣les, and are somewhat bygger then Stares. There are other byrdes called Pintadelli,Pintadelli. which are lyke vnto certayne greene byr∣des, which the Italyans call Fringuelli, and are of seuen colours: these byrdes for feare of the cattes, are euer wont to make theyr neastes ouer the bankes of ryuers, or the sea, where the braunches of trees so reache ouer the water that with a litle weyght they may bowe downe to the water: theyr neastes are made so neare the toppes of the braunches, that when the cattes come thereon, the braunches bende towarde the water, and the cattes turne backe agayne for feare of fallyng: For al∣though no beast in the worlde bee more malicious then this, yet whereas the most parte of beastes are naturally inclyned to swymme, this catte hath no maner of aptenesse therevnto, and is therefore soone drowned or strangeled in the water, and by a priuie sense of nature feareth the danger which he can not escape. These byrdes make their nestes in such sort, that although they be wete and filled with water, yet doe they so sodeynly ryse vp a∣gayne, that the young byrdes are not thereby hurt or drowned. There are also many Nyghtyngales, and other byrdes which syng marueylouslye with great melodie and dyfference in
syngyng: these byrdes are of marueylous dyuers coloures the one from the other, some are altogeather yelow, and some other of so excellent, delectable, and hygh a colour, as it were a Rubye, other are also of dyuers and variable coloures, some of fewe co∣loures, and other some all of one colour, beyng all so fayre and beautifull, that in bryghtnesse and shynyng they excell all that are seene in Spayne, or Italy, or other prouinces of Europe? Many of these are taken with nettes, lyme twygges, and spryn∣ges of dyuers sortes.Great foules. Dyuers other sortes of great foules lyke vnto Eagles, and suche other as lyue of pray, are founde in the firme lande, of suche diuersitie, that it is in maner impossible to describe them all particulerly: and forasmuche as I haue more largely intreated hereof in my generall hystorie of the Indies, I thynke it not requysite heere to make anye further mention of the same. Of trees, fruites, and plantes. THere is both in the firme lande and the I∣lands,Cocus. a certayne tree called Cocus, beyng a kynde of Date trees, & hauyng their leaues of the selfe same greatnesse as haue the date trees which beare dates, but dyffer much in their growing, for the leaues of this Cocus growe out of the trunkes of the tree, as doe the fingers out of the hand, wreathing them selues one within an other, & so spreading abrode: these trees are hygh, & are founde in great plentie in the coast of the sea of Sur, in the prouince of Caci∣que Chiman. These date trees bring foorth a fruit after this sorte: being altogeather vnite as it groweth on the tree, it is of greater circumference then the head of a man, & from the superficial part to ye middest, which is the fruit, it is inuolued & couered with ma∣ny webs much lyke vnto those hirds of tow which they vse in An∣dalusia. Of this towe or web, the East Indians make a certayne kynd of cloth, of three or foure sortes, and cordes for the sayles of shyppes: but in these Indies of your maiestie, they passe not for these cordes, or this cloth that may be made of the fruite of Co∣cus, by reason of the great plentie that they haue of the bombage
or cotton of the gossampine trees. The fruite which is in the myddest of the sayde towe, is (as I haue sayde) as bygge as a mans fyst, and sometymes twyse as bygge, and more: It is in fourme lyke vnto a walnutte, or some other rounde thyng, somewhat more long then large, and very harde, the rynde or barke hereof, is as thycke as the cyrcle of letters of a ryall of plate, and within, there cleaueth fast to the rynde of the nutte a carnositie or substaunce of coornel, of the thyckenesse of halfe a fynger, or of the least fynger of the hande, and is very whyte, lyke vnto a fayre Almonde, and of better taste and more plea∣saunt. When this fruite is chewed, there remayne certayne crummes, as do the lyke of Almondes: Yet if it be swalowed downe, it is not vnpleasaunt. For although that after the iuice or moysture be gone downe the throte before the saide crummes be swalowed, the rest whiche is eaten, seeme somwhat sharpe or sower, yet doth it not so greatly offende ye tast, as to be cast away. Whyle this Cocus is yet freshe and newly taken from the tree, they vse not to eate of the said carnositie & fruite, but fyrst beating it very muche, and then straynyng it, they drawe a mylke there∣of, much better and sweeter then is the mylke of beastes, and of much substaunce, the whiche the Christian men of those regions put in the tortes or cakes which they make of the graine of Mai∣zium wherof they make theyr bread, or in other bread as we put bread in porrage: so that by reason of the sayde mylke of Cocus, the tortes are more excellent to be eaten without offence to the stomake: they are so pleasaunt to the taste, and leaue it aswell satisfyed as though it had been delyted with many delycate dy∣shes. But to proceede further, your maiestie shal vnderstande,I haue seene one of these fruites opened, the whiche when it was whole, if it were shaken the water was harde shogge therein as it were in a bot∣tle, but in tyme it consumed and was part∣ly congeled in¦to a sate sub∣staunce. that in the place of the stone or coornell, there is in the myddest of the sayde carnositie a voyde place, which neuerthelesse is full of a most cleare and excellent water, in suche quantitie as may fyll a great egge shell, or more, or lesse, accordyng to the bygge∣nesse of the Cacus, the whiche water suerly, is the most substan∣tiall, excellent, and precious to be drunke, that may be founde in the worlde: insomuch that in the moment when it passeth the palate of the mouth, and begynneth to go downe the throte, it seemeth that from the sole of the foote, to the crowne of the head, there is no parte of the bodye but that feeleth great
comforte thereby: as it is doutlesse one of the most excellent thynges that may be tasted vppon the earth, and suche as I am not able by wrytyng or tongue to expresse. And to pro∣ceede yet further, I say that when the meate of this fruite is taken from the vessell thereof, the vessell remayneth as fayre and neate as though it were pullyshed, and is without of co∣lour inclynyng towarde blacke, and shyneth or glystereth very fayre, and is within of no lesse dilicatenesse. Suche as haue accustomed to drynke in these vesselles, and haue been troubled with the disease called the frettyng of the guttes, say that they haue by experience founde it a marueylous remedie agaynst that disease, and that it breaketh the stone, and prouoketh vrine. This fruite was called Cocus, for this cause, that when it is taken from the place where it cleaueth fast to the tree, there are seene two holes, and aboue them two other natural holes, whiche alto∣geather do represent the gesture and figure of the cattes called Mammoni, that is, Munkeys, when they crye, which crye the Indians call Coca, but in very deede, this tree is a kinde of Date trees, and hath the same effecte to heale frettyng of the guttes, that Plinie descrybeth all kynds of Date trees to haue. There are furthermore in the firme lande, trees of suche byggenesse that I dare not speake therof,Great trees. but in place where I haue so ma∣ny wytnesses whiche haue seene the same as well as I. I saye therefore, that a league from Dariena or the citie of Sancta Maria Antiqua, there passeth a ryuer very large and deepe, which is cal∣led Cuti, ouer the which the Indians had layde a great tree, so trauersing the same, that it was in the steade of a bridge, the whi∣che I my selfe with dyuers other that are at this present in your maiesties court, haue oftentymes passed ouer. And forasmuche as the said tree had line long there, and by ye great weight therof was so shronke downewarde, and partly couered with water, that none coulde passe ouer it, but were wette to the knee, I beyng then in the yeere .1522. the official or Iustice in that citie at your maiesties appoyntment, caused an other great tree to be layde in that place, whiche in lyke maner trauersed the ryuer, and reached more then fyftie foote ouer the further syde: This tree was exceeding great, and rested aboue the water more then two cubytes, in the fall, it cast downe all such other trees as
were within the reache thereof, and discouered certayne vynes, whiche were so laden with blacke grapes of pleasaunt taste, that they satysfied more then fyftye persons whiche ate theyr fyl there∣of. This tree in the thyckest part therof, was more then syxteene spannes thycke, and was neuerthelesse but litle in respect of ma∣ny other trees whiche are founde in this prouince. For the In∣dians of the coaste and prouince of Cartagenia, make barkes or boates thereof (which they call Canoas,) of suche byggenesse, be∣yng all one whole tree, that some conteyne a hundred men, some a hundred and thirtie, and some more, hauyng neuerthelesse such voyde space within the same, that there is left sufficient roome to passe to and fro throughout all the Canoas. Some of these are so large, besyde the length, that they conteyne more then ten or twelue spannes in breadth, and sayle with two sayles, as with the maister sayle and the tryncket, which they make of very good cotton. The greatest trees that I haue seene in these partes, or in any other regions, was in the prouince of Guaturo, the kyng wherof rebellyng from the obedience of your maiestie, was pursued by me, and taken prisoner: at whiche tyme I with my companye, passed ouer a very hygh mountayne, full of great trees, in the top whereof, we founde one tree, whiche had three rootes, or rather diuisions of the roote aboue the earth, in fourme of a tryangle, or treuet,A marueylous tree. so that betweene euery foote of this tri∣angle or three feete, there was a space of twentie foote betwene euery foote, and this of such heyght aboue the earth, that a laden Car of those wherewith they are accustomed to bryng home corne in the tyme of haruest in the kyngdome of Toledo in Spayne▪ myght easely haue passed through euery of those par∣titions or wyndowes which were betweene the three feete of the sayd tree. From the earth vpwarde to the trunke of the tree, the open places of the diuisions betweene these three feete, were of suche eyght from the ground, that a footeman with a Iauelin was not able to reache the place where the sayde feete ioyned togeather in the trunke or bodye of the tree, whiche grewe of great heyght in one peece, and one whole bodie, or euer it spread in braunches, whiche it did not before it exceeded in heyght the Towre of Sainct Romane in the citie of Toledo: from whiche heyght and vpward, it spread very great and strong braunches.
Among certayne Spaniardes whiche clymed this tree, I my selfe was one, and when I was ascended to the place where it begunne to spreade the braunches, it was a marueilous thyng to beholde a great countrey of suche trees towarde the prouince of Abrayme. This tree was easy to clyme, by reason of certayne Besuchi, (whereof I haue spoken before) which grew wreathed about the tree, in suche sort that they seemed to make a scalyng Ladder. Euery of the forsayd three feete whiche bore the bodie of the tree, was twentie spannes in thickenesse, and where they ioyned all togeather aboute the Trunke or bodie of the tree, the principall Trunke was more then fourtie and fyue spannes in circuite. I named the mountayne where these trees growe, the mountayne of three footed trees. And this whiche I haue now declared, was seene of all the companie that was there with me when (as I haue sayde before) I tooke kyng Guaturo pryso∣ner in the yeere .1522. Many thynges more myght heere be spoken as touching this matter, as also howe there are many o∣ther excellent trees founde of diuers sortes and dyfference, as sweete Cedar trees, blacke Date trees, and many other, of the whiche some are so heauye that they cannot floote aboue the wa∣ter, but syncke immediatly to the bottome, and other agayne as lyght as a Corke. As touchyng all which thynges I haue writ∣ten more largely in my generall historie of the Indies. And for∣asmuche as at this present I haue entred to entreat of trees, be∣fore I passe any further to other thynges, I wyll declare the ma∣ner howe the Indians kindle fyre, only with wood and without fire,Kyndlyng of fyre without fyre. the maner wherof is this. They take a peece of wood, of two spannes in length, as bygge as the least fynger of a mans hand, or as an arrowe well pullyshed, and of a strong kynde of wood which they keepe only for this purpose: and where they entend to kyndle any fire, they take two other peeces of wood, of the dryest and lyghtest that they can fynde, and bynde them fast togeather one with an other, as close as two fyngers ioyned: in the myddest or betweene these, they put the poynt of the fyrst litle staffe made of harde and strong woodde, whiche they hold in theyr handes by the toppe thereof, and turne or rubbe it rounde about contynually in one place betweene the two pee∣ces of woodde which lye bounde togeather vppon the earth,
whiche by that vncessant rubbyng and chafyng, are in shorte space kyndeled, and take fyre.Putrified woodde shy∣nyng in the nyght. I haue also thought good heare to speake somewhat of suche thynges as come to my re∣membraunce of certayne trees whiche are founde in this lande, and sometyme also the lyke haue been seene in Spayne. These are certayne putrifyed trunkes, whiche haue lyne so long rottyng on the earth, that they are very whyte, and shyne in the nyght lyke burnyng fyrebrandes, and when the Spa∣nyardes fynde any of this woodde, and intende priuily in the nyght to make warre and inuade any prouince, when case so requyreth that it shalbe necessary to goe in the nyght, in such places where they knowe not the way, the formost Chri∣stian man whiche guydeth the way, associate with an Indian to directe hym therein, taketh a litle starre of the sayde woodde, whiche he putteth in his cappe, hangyng behynde on his shoul∣ders, by the lyght whereof he that foloweth next to hym, direc∣teth his iourney, who also in lyke maner beareth an other starre behynde hym, by the shynyng whereof the thyrde foloweth the same way, and in lyke maner do al the rest, so that by this meanes none are loste or stragle out of the way. And forasmuch as this lyght is not seene very farre, it is the better policie for the Christians, because they are not therby disclosed before they inuade theyr enimies. Furthermore as touchyng the natures of trees, one particuler thyng seemeth woorthy to be noted,Plinie. whereof Plinie maketh mention in his naturall hystorye, where he sayth that there are certayne trees whiche contynue euer greene, and neuer lose theyr leaues, as the Bay tree, the Cedar, the Orange tree, & the Oliue tree, with such other, of the whiche in altogeather he nameth not past fyue or syxe.Trees whiche continue euer greene. To this purpose, I say, that in the Ilandes of these Indies, and also in the fyrme lande, it is a thyng of muche difficultie to fynde two trees that lose or cast theyr leaues at any tyme: For al∣though I haue diligently searched to knowe the trueth hereof, yet haue I not seene any that lose theyr leaues, eyther of them whiche we haue brought out of Spayne into these regi∣ons, as Orange trees, Limons, Cedars, Palmes, or Date trees, and Pomegranate trees, or of any other in these regions, except onely Cassia, whiche loseth his leaues,Cassia. and hath a greater
thyng appropriate to it selfe onely: whiche is, that whereas all other trees and plantes of India spreade theyr rootes no deeper in the earth then the deapth of a mans heyght, or somewhat more, not descendyng any further into the grounde, by reason of the great heate whiche is founde beneath that deapth, yet dooth Cassia pearle further into the ground,A secrete thyng. vntyll it fynd water: whiche by the Phylosophers opinion shoulde be the cause of a thynne and watery radicall moysture to suche thynges as drawe theyr nouryshement thereof,Radycall moysture. as fat and vnctuous groundes with temperate heate, yelde a fast and firme moysture to suche thynges as growe in them, whiche is the cause that suche trees lose not theyr leaues, as the sayde thynne and wateryshe moy∣sture is cause of the contrarie, as appeareth by the sayde ef∣fecte whiche is seene onely in Cassia, and none other tree or plant in all these parties. Of Reedes or Canes. I Haue not thought it conuenient in the cha∣piture before, to speake of that wherof I in∣tend nowe to intreate, of reedes or canes, to thintent that I woulde not myngle them with plantes or trees, being thinges of them selues woorthy to be particulerly obserued. So it is therfore, that in the firme land there are many sorts of reedes, so that in many places they make their houses thereof, coueryng them with the toppes of the same, and makyng theyr walles of them in lyke maner, as I haue sayde be∣fore: and among these kyndes of reedes, there is one so great, that the canes therof are as bigge as a mans legge in ye knee, and three spanns in length from ioynt to ioynt, or more, insomuch that euery of them is of capacitie to contayne a litle bucket of water. In this kynde, there are founde some greater, and some lesse, of the whiche some they vse to make quyuers for arrowes. There is founde an other kynde, whiche suerly is marueylous, beyng litle bygger then a Iauelyn, the canes whereof are longer then two spannes: these reedes growe one farre from an other, as some tymes twentie or thirtie pases, and sometymes also two or three leagues: they growe in maner in all prouynces in the
Indies, and growe neere to very hyghe trees, whereunto they leane, and creepe vp to the toppes of theyr braunches, whiche they imbrase, and discende agayne downe to the earth. Theyr canes are full of most cleare water, without any maner of tast or sauour, eyther of the canes, or of any other thyng, and suche as yf it were taken out of the freshest spryng in the worlde, nor yet is it knowen that euer it hurt any that drunke therof. For it hath oftentymes so chaunced, that as the Christian men haue tra∣uayled in these regions in desolate wayes, where for lacke of wa∣ter they haue been in great daunger to die for thirst, they haue es∣caped that peryl by reason that they founde the sayd reedes, of the water of whose canes they haue drunke a great quantitie, with∣out any hurt thereof ensuing. Therfore when they fynde these in any place, they make water vessels of the canes thereof, and carry as many of them full of water as may suffice for one dayes iorney: and sometime they cary so many, that they take for euery man two or three quartes of water, which may serue them for many dayes, because it doth not corrupt, but remayneth styll freshe and good. There are also certayne plantes, whiche the Christians call Platani. These are as hygh as trees, and become as byg in the trunke as the knee of a man, or more.Platani. From the foote to the toppe, they beare certayne long and large leaues, beyng more then three spannes in largenesse, & about ten or twelue in length: the whiche when they are broken of the wynde, the stalke remai∣neth whole in the myddest. In the myddest of this plant, in the highest part therof, there groweth a cluster with fourtie or fyftie platans about it, euery of them beyng a spanne and a halfe in length, and as byg as a mans arme in the small, or more, or lesse, accordyng to the goodnesse of the soyle where they growe: they haue a rynde not very thycke, and easye to be broken, beyng within altogeather ful of a substaunce lyke vnto the mary of the bone of an Oxe, as it appeareth when ye rinde or barke is taken from the same. This cluster ought to be taken from the plant, when any one of the platans begin to appeare yelowe, at which tyme they take it, and hang it in theyr houses, where all the cluster waxeth rype, with all his platans. This cluster is a very good fruite, and when it is opened, and the rynde taken
of, there are founde within it many good drye Fygges, whiche beyng rosted,Fygges. or stewed in an Ouen, in a close pot, or some suche other thyng, are of pleasaunt tast, much lyke to the conserue of Hony: they putrifie not on the sea so soone as some other fruites do, but contynue fyfteene dayes and more, yf they be geathered somewhat greene: they seeme more delicate on the sea then on the land, not for that they any thing encrease in goodnesse on the sea, but because that whereas on the sea other thynges are lac∣kyng, whereof is plentie on the land, those meates seeme of best tast, whiche satisfie present necessitie. This trunke or spryg which bryngeth foorth the sayd cluster, is a whole yeere in grow∣ing and brynging foorth fruite, in which tyme it hath put foorth rounde about it ten or twelue sprygges, as bygge as the fyrst or principall, and multiplieth no lesse then the principall in bring∣ing foorth of clusters, with fruites lykewyse at theyr tyme, and also in bryngyng foorth other and many sprygges, as is sayde before. From the whiche sprygges or trunkes, as soone as the cluster of the fruite is taken away, the plant beginneth to drye and wyther, whiche then they take out of the grounde, because it doth none other then occupie it in vayne, and without profyte. They are so many, and do so marueylously encrease and multi∣plie, that it is a thyng in maner encredible. They are exceeding moyst, insomuch that when they are plucked vp from the place where they grow, there ishueth foorth a great quantitie of wa∣ter, aswel out of the plant, as out of the place where it grewe, in suche sort, that al the moysture of the earth farre about, myght seeme to be geathered togeather about the truncke or blocke of the sayd plant, with the fruites whereof, the Antes are so farre in loue, that they are seene in great multitudes in the braunches of the plantes: so that for the multitude thereof, it sometyme so chaunceth, that men are enforced to take away the plantes from theyr possession: these fruites are founde at al tymes of the yeere. There is also an other kinde of wilde plants that groweth in the feeldes, whiche I haue not seene but in the Ilande of Hispaniola, although they be founde in other Ilandes of the Indies:Tunas. these they call Tunas. They growe of a Thistle full of thornes, and bryng foorth a fruite muche lyke vnto great Figges, whiche haue a crowne lyke Medlers, and are
within of a hygh colour, with graynes and the rynde lyke vnto a fygge: they are of good taste, and grow abundantly in the fieldes in many places: They worke a strange effecte in suche as eate them, for if a man eate two, or three, or more, they cause his vrine to bee of the very colour of blood, which thyng chaunced once to my selfe. For on a tyme as I made water, and sawe the colour of my vrine, I entred into a great suspition of my lyfe, beyng so astonyshed for feare, that I thought the same had chaunced to mee vpon some other cause, insomuche that surely my imagina∣tion myght haue done mee hurte, but that they which were with mee dyd comforte mee immediatly, declaryng the cause thereof, as they knew by experience, beyng auncient inhabitours in those regions. There groweth also an other plant, which the people of the countrey call Bihaos: this putteth foorth certayne streight branches, and very brode leaues,Bihaos. which the Indians vse for dy∣uers purposes: For in some places they couer theyr houses with the leaues thereof, couched and layde after the maner of thetche, wherevnto it serueth very well: Sometymes also when it ray∣neth, they cast these ouer theyr heades, to defende them from the water. They make also certayne chestes, which they call Ha∣uas, weaued after a strange sorte,Hauas. and intermyxt with the leaues of this Bihaos. These chestes are wrought in such sorte, that al∣though it rayne vpon them, or they chaunce to fall into the water, yet are not suche thinges wet as are within them: they are made of the branches of the sayde Bihaos, with the leaues weaued to∣geather therewith: In these they keepe salte, and other subtile thinges. They vse them also for an other purpose, which is this: that fyndyng them in the fieldes at such tyme as they haue scarse∣nesse of vittayles, they dyg vp the rootes of these plantes while they are yet young, or eate the plant it selfe, in that parte where it is most tender, which is from a foote vnder the grounde, where it is as tender and whyte as a reede or bulrushe. And forasmuche as wee are nowe come to the ende of this narration, it commeth to my remembraunce to make mention of an other thyng, which is not farre from my purpose: and this is, howe the Indians doe slayne or dye cloath of bombage cotton, or any other thyng whiche they inende to dye, of dyuers colours, as blacke, tawny,Dying of cot∣ton. greene, blewe, yelow, and redde, which they doe with the barkes,
or ryndes, and leaues of certayne trees, which they know by ex∣perience to be good for this practise: and by this arte they make colours in suche perfection and excellencie, that no better can bee deuysed.A strange thyng. But this seemeth a strange thyng, that they doe all this in one selfe same vessell: So that when they haue caused the sayde ryndes and leaues to boyle togeather, they make in the same vessell without any chaunge (as I haue sayde) as many colours as them lysteth: Whiche thing I suppose to come to passe, by the disposition of the colour which they haue fyrst gy∣uen to the thyng that they intende to dye or colour, whether it bee threed, webbe, or cloth, or any thing that they intende to colour. Of venomous Apples, wherewith they poyson theyr arrowes. THe Apples wherewith the Indian Cani∣balles inuenome theyr arrowes, growe on certaine trees couered with many branches and leaues, being very greene, and grow∣ing thicke. They are laden with abundance of these euyll fruites, and haue their leaues lyke the leaues of a peare tree, but that they are lesse and rounder: the fruit is much lyke the muscadel peares of the Ilande of Sicilie or Naples in fourme and bygnesse, and are in some partes steyned with redde spottes, and of very sweet sauour: these trees for the most parte, growe euer by the sea coastes, and neere vnto the water, and are so fayre and of plea∣saunt sauour, that there is no man that seeth them, but will de∣syre to eate thereof,Note. insomuche that if it may bee spoken of any fruite yet growyng on the earth, I woulde say that this was the vnhappy fruite whereof our fyrst parentes Adam and Eue tasted, whereby they both lost theyr felicitie, and procured death to them and theyr posteritie. Of these fruites, and of the great Antes whose byting causeth swellyng, (whereof I haue spo∣ken elsewhere) and of the Eutes, or Lysartes, and vypers, and such other venomous thinges,Caniballes ar∣chers. the Canibals which are the cheefe
archers among the Indians,Wherwith they inuenome theyr arrowes. are accustomed to poyson theyr arrowes, wherewith they kyll all that they wounde: These ve∣nomes they mingle togeather, and make thereof a blacke masse or composition, whiche appeareth lyke vnto very blacke pytch. Of this poyson I caused a great quantitie to be burnt, in Sancta Maria Antiqua, in a place two leagues and more within the lande, with a great multitude of theyr inuenomed arrowes and other munition, with also the house wherein they were reserued: This was in the yeere .1514. at suche tyme as the army arry∣ued there with captayne Pedrarias da villa, at the commaunde∣ment of the Catholyke kyng Don Ferdinando.Petrus Arias. But to returne to the hystory. These Apples (as I haue sayde) growe neare vn∣to the sea. And whereas the Christians whiche serue your maie∣stie in these parties, suppose that there is no remedy so profyta∣ble for such as are wounded with these arrowes, as is the water of the sea, if the wound be much washed therwith, by which mea∣nes some haue escaped, although but fewe: yet to say the trueth, albeit the water of the sea haue a certaine caustike quality against poyson, it is not a sufficient remedy in this case,The water of the sea. nor yet to this day haue the Christians perceyued that of fyftie that haue been wounded, three haue recouered. But that your maiestie may the better consider the force of the venome of these trees, you shal fur∣ther vnderstand, that if a man doe but repose him selfe to sleepe a litle whyle vnder the shadow of the same, he hath his head & eyes so swolne when he ryseth, that the eye lyddes are ioyned with the cheekes, and if it chaunce one droppe or more of the deawe of the sayde tree to fall into the eye, it vtterly destroyeth the syght. The pestilent nature of this tree is suche, that it can not be declared in fewe wordes. Of these, there groweth great plentie in the gulfe of Vraba, towarde the North coast, on the West and East syde.The gulfe of Uraba. The wood of these trees when it burneth, maketh so great a stynke, that no man is able to abyde it, by reason it causeth so great a payne in the head. Among other trees whiche are in these Indies, aswell in the Ilandes, as in the firme lande, there is an other kynde whiche they call Xagua, whereof there is great plentie:Xagua. they are very hygh, and streyght, and fayre to beholde. Of these they vse to make ykes, and Iauelyns of dyuers lengthes and
bygnesse: they are of a fayre colour, betweene russet and whyte: this tree bryngeth foorth a great fruit as bygge as Papauer or Poppie, and muche lyke therevnto, it is very good to bee eaten when it is rype. Out of this they get a very cleare water, where∣with they washe their legges, and sometymes all theyr bodyes, when they feele theyr fleshe weery, faynt, or loose: the which wa∣ter, besyde that it hath a byndyng qualitie, it hath also this pro∣pertie, that whatsoeuer it toucheth, it steyneth it blacke by litle and litle, vntyll it bee as blacke as gete, which colour can not bee taken away in lesse space then tenne or twelue dayes: And if the nayle bee but touched therewith, it is so steyned that it can by no meanes bee taken away, vntyll it eyther fall of, or grow out, and bee clypped away by litle & litle, as I my selfe haue oftentymes seene by experience. There is an other kynde of trees which they call Hohi: these are very great and fayre,Hohi. Some thinke these to be mi∣robalanes. and cause holesome ayre where they growe, and a pleasaunt shadowe, and are founde in great aboun∣daunce: theyr fruit is very good, and of good tast and sauour, and much lyke vnto certayne damsons or prunes beyng litle and ye∣lowe, but theyr stone is very great, by reason whereof they haue but litle meate: theyr barke or rynde boyled in water, maketh a holesome bathe for the legges, because it byndeth and stayeth the loosenesse of the fleshe, so sensibly that it is a marueyle to consider. It is surely a holesome and excellent bathe agaynst suche faynt∣nesse, and is the best tree that may be founde in those parties to sleepe vnder: For it causeth no heauinesse of the head, as doe dy∣uers other trees, which thyng I speake, because the Christians are muche accustomed in those regions to lye in the fieldes. It is therefore a common practise among them, that wheresoeuer they fynde these trees, there they spreade theyr mattresses and beddes wherein they sleepe. Date trees.There are also a kynde of hygh Date trees, and full of thornes: the woodde of these is most excellent, beyng ve∣ry blacke, and shynyng, and so heauye that no parte thereof can swymme aboue the water, but synketh immediatly to the bottome. Of this woodde they make theyr arrowes and dar∣tes,Thinhabi∣tauntes of the sea of Sur. also Iauelyns, speares, and pykes: and I say pykes, because that in the coastes of the sea of Sur, beyonde Esquegua
and Vracha, the Indians vse great and long pykes, made of the wood of these Date trees. Of the same lykewyse they make club∣bes, and swoordes, and dyuers other weapons: Also vesselles and housholde stuffe of dyuers sortes, very fayre and commodi∣ous. Furthermore of this wood the Christians vse to make dyuers musicall instrumentes, as Claricymballes, Lutes, Git∣terns, and suche other, the which besyde theyr fayre shynyng co∣lour lyke vnto gete, are also of a good sounde, and very durable, by reason of the hardnesse of the wood. After that I haue sayde thus much of trees and plants, I haue thought good also to speake somewhat of hearbes.An hearbe that beareth cordes. You shal ther∣fore vnderstand, that in these Indies there is an hearbe much like vnto a yelow Lilie, about whose leaues there growe and creepe certayne cordes or lases, as the lyke is partly seene in the hearbe which we call lased sauery, but these of the Indies are much big∣ger, and longer, and so strong that they tye theyr hangyng beds thereby, whiche they call Hamacas, whereof we haue spoken elsewhere: these cordes they call Cabuia, and Henequen, whiche are all one thyng,Cabuia and Henequen. sauyng that Henequen is lesse and of a fyner substance, as it were line, and the other is grosser, lyke the weeke or twyst of hempe, and is imperfect in comparison to the other: they are of colour betweene whyte and yelow, lyke vnto abarne, and some also whyte. With Henequen, whiche is the most subtyle and fyne threede, the Indians sawe in sunder fetters, cheynes,A strange thing. or barres of Iron, in this maner: They moue the threed of Hene∣quen vppon the Iron which they intende to sawe or cutte, draw∣yng the one hande after the other as doe they that sawe, puttyng euer nowe and then a portion of fyne sande vppon the threede, or on the place or parte of the Iron, where they continue rubbyng the sayde threed, so that if the threed be worne, they take an other, and continue in theyr worke as before, vntyll they haue cutte in sunder the Iron, although it be neuer so bygge, and cut it as if it were a tender thyng, and easy to be sawne. And forasmuche as the leaues of trees may bee counted a∣mong hearbes,Leaues. I will heere speake somewhat of the qualitie of the leaues of certayne trees whiche are founde in the Ilande of Hispaniola. These trees are so full of thornes, that there is no tree or plant that seemeth more wylde and deformed: so that
I can not well determyne whether they be trees, or plantes: they haue certayne branches full of large and deformed leaues, which branches were fyrst leaues lyke vnto the other. As the branches made of these leaues grow foorth in length, there commeth other leaues of them: so that in fine it is a difficult thing to describe the fourme of these trees, except the same should be done by a payn∣ter, wherby the eye might conceyue that wherein the tongue fay∣leth in this behalfe. The leaues of this tree are of suche vertue, that beyng well beaten and spred vppon a cloth,A leafe of great vertue. after the maner of a playster, and so layde to a legge or arme that is broken in many peeces, it healeth it in fyftiene dayes, & maketh it as whole as though it had neuer been broken: Duryng the tyme of this o∣peration, it cleaueth so fast to the fleshe, that it can not without much difficultie be taken away, but assoone as it hath healed the sore, and wrought his operation, it looseth it selfe from the place where it was layde, as I my selfe, and dyuers other which haue proued it, know by experience. Of fyshes, and of the maner of fyshyng. IN the sea coastes of the firme lande, there are dyuers & sundry kyndes of fishes, muche differing in shape & fourme. And although it be impossible to speake of all, yet will I make mention of some. And first to begin at Sardines, you shall vnderstand that there is found a kinde of these fishes very large and with red tayles, being a very delicate fyshe. The best kyndes of o∣ther fishes are these, Moxarre, Diahace, Brettes, Dahaos, Thorne∣backes, & Salmons: All these, and dyuers other which I doe not now remember, are taken in great quantitie in ryuers. There are likewise taken very good Creuyshes. There are also found in the sea, certayne other fishes, as Soles, Mackerels, Turbuts, Pala∣mite, Lizze, Polpi, Chieppe, Xaibas, Locustes, Oysters, exceedyng great Tortoyses,Tiburons. Manates. & Tiburoni of marueilous bygnesse: also Mana∣tes, and Murene, and many other fyshes, which haue no nmes in our language, and these of suche diuersitie and quantitie, as can
not be expressed without large wrytyng and long tyme. But to let passe to intreate particulerly of the multitude of fyshes, I in∣tende to speake chiefely, and somewhat largely, of three sortes of most notable fyshes: whereof the fyrst is, the great Tortoyses, the seconde is called Tiburon, and the thyrd Manate. And to begin at the fyrst, I say that in the Ilande of Cuba,Great Tortoy∣ses. are found great Tor∣toyses (which are certayne shell fyshes) of suche byggenesse that tenne or fyfteene men are scarsely able to lyfte one of them out of the water, as I haue been infourmed of credible persons dwel∣lyng in the same Iland. But of that which I my selfe haue seene, I can testifie, that in the fyrme lande, in the village of Acla, there are of this sort some taken and kylled of suche byggenesse, that syxe men with muche difficultie coulde scarsely drawe them out of the water, and commonly the least sort of them are as much as two men may carry at a burden: that whiche I sawe lyfted vp by syxe men, had her shell a yarde and a quarter in length, and in breadth more then fyue yardes. The maner of takyng them, is this: It sometymes chaunceth that in theyr great nettes (whiche they call shoote nettes) there are founde certayne Tor∣toyses of the common sort, in great quantities, and when they come out of the sea, and bryng foorth theyr egges, and goe to∣geather by companyes from the sea, to feede on the lande, the Christians or Indians folowe theyr steppes which they fynde in the sande, and soone ouertake them, because they are very heauy and slowe in goyng, although they make all the hast they can to returne to the sea, assoone as they espie any bodie. When they that pursue them haue ouertaken them, they put a stake or staffe vnder theyr legges, and ouerturne them on theyr backes as they are yet runnyng, so that they can goe no further, nor yet ryse a∣gayne or turne, and thus they suffer them to lye styll whyle they folowe after the rest, which they ouerturne in lyke maner: and by this meanes take very many, at suche tymes as they come foorth of the sea as I haue sayde: This fyshe is very excellent and hol∣some to be eaten, and of good tast. The seconde of the three fyshes wherof I haue spoken, is the Tiburon: this is a very great fyshe, and very quycke and swyft in the water,Tiburons. and a cruell de∣uourer: these are oftentymes taken, aswell when the shippes are vnder sayle in the Ocean, as also when they lye at anker, or at
any other tyme, and especially the leaste kynde of these fyshes. When the shyppes are vnder sayle, the byggest sorte are taken after this maner. When the Tiburon seeth the shyppe saylyng, he foloweth it swymmyng behynde, the whiche thinges the mari∣ners seeyng, cast foorth all the fylth of the shyppe into the sea for the fyshe to eate, who neuerthelesse foloweth them with equall pase, although they make neuer suche haste with full wynde and sayles, and waloweth on euery syde and about the shyp, and thus foloweth it sometyme for the space of a hundred & fyftie leagues, and more, and when the mariners are disposed to take them, they cast downe by the sterne of the shyppe a hooke of Iron, as bygge as the byggest fynger of a mans hande, of three spannes in length, and crooked lyke a fyshehooke, with beardes accor∣dyng to the bygnesse thereof, and fastened to an Iron cheyne of fyue or syxe lynkes neare vnto the ende, and from thence tyed with a great rope, fastnyng also on the hooke for a bayte, a peece of some fyshe, or hogges fleshe, or some other flesh, or the bowels and intralles of an other Tiburon which they haue taken before, whiche may easily be done, for I haue seene niene taken in one day, and if they would haue taken more, they myght also. Thus when the Tiburon hath pleasauntly folowed the shyppe a long viage, at the length he swaloweth the bayte with the hooke, and aswell by his stryuyng to flee or escape, as also by the swyft pas∣sage of the shyppe, the hooke ouerthwarteth and catcheth holde of his chappes: the whiche fyshe when it is taken, it is of such huge byggenesse, that twelue or fyfteene men are scarsely able to drawe it out of the water, and lyft it into the shyppe, where one of the mariners gyueth it many knockes on the head with a club or beetle, vntyll hee haue slayne it: they are sometymes founde of tenne or twelue foote long, and of fyue, sixe, or seuen spannes in breadth, where they are brodest: they haue very great and wyde mouthes, to the proportion of the rest of theyr bodyes, and haue two rowes of teeth, the one somewhat separate from the other, of cruell shape, and standyng very thycke. When they haue slayne this fyshe, they cut the body thereof in small peeces, and put it to drye, hangyng it three or foure dayes at the cordes of the sayle clothes to drye in the wynde, and then eate it: It is doubtlesse a good fyshe, and of great commoditie to serue
the shyppes for vitalles for many dayes: the leaste of these fyshes are most holesome and tender, it hath a skynne muche lyke to the skynne of a Sole whereunto the sayd Tiburon is like in shape: Whiche I saye, because Plinie hath made mention of none of these three fyshes, among the number of them wher∣of he writeth in his natural hystorie.Plinie. These Tiburons come foorth of the sea, and enter into the ryuers, where they are no lesse perylous then great Lisartes or Crocodiles, wherof I haue spoken largely before: For they deuoure men, kyne, and horses, euen as do the Crocodiles:Crocodiles. they are very daungerous in cer∣tayne washyng places or pooles by the ryuers sydes, and where they haue deuoured at other tymes. Dyuers other fyshes both great and small, of sundry sortes and kyndes, are accustomed to folowe the shyppes goyng vnder sayle, of the whiche I wyll speake somwhat when I haue written of Manate, whiche is the thyrde of the three wherof I haue promised to entreate.Manates. Manate therefore, is a fyshe of the sea, of the byggest sorte, and muche greater then the Tiburon in length and breadth, and is very bruityshe and vyle, so that it appeareth in fourme lyke vnto one of those great vesselles made of goates skynnes, wherin they vse to cary newe wyne in Medina de Campo, or in Areualo: the head of this beast is lyke the head of an Oxe, with also like eyes, and hath in the place of armes, two great stumpes wherwith he swymmeth: It is a very gentle and tame beast, and commeth of∣tentimes out of the water to the next shore, where if he fynd any hearbes or grasse, he feedeth therof. Our men are accustomed to kyl many of these, and diuers other good fyshes, with their cros∣bowes, pursuing them in barkes or Canoas, because they swim in maner aboue the water: the which thyng when they see, they drawe them with a hooke tyde at a small corde, but somewhat strong: As the fyshe fleeth away, the archer letteth go, and pro∣longeth the corde by litle and litle, vntyll he haue let it go many fathams: at the ende of the corde, there is tyde a corke, or a peece of lyght woodde, and when the fyshe is gone a litle way, and hath coloured the water with his blood, and feeleth hym selfe to faynt and drawe towarde the ende of his lyfe, he resor∣teth to the shore, and the archer foloweth, geatheryng vp his corde, wherof whyle there yet remayne syxe or eyght fathams, or
somewhat more or lesse, he draweth it towarde the lande, and draweth the fyshe therewith by litle and litle, as the waues of the sea helpe hym to do it the more easly: then, with the helpe of the rest of his companie, he lyfteth this great beaste out of the water to the lande, beyng of suche byggenesse, that to con∣uey it from thence to the citie, it shalbe requisite to haue a carte with a good yoke of Oxen, and sometymes more, accordyng as these fyshes are of byggenesse, some being much greater then other some in the same kinde, as is seene of other beastes: Som∣tymes they lyft these fyshes into the Canoa or barke, without drawyng them to the lande as before, for as soone as they are slayne, they flote aboue the water: And I beleeue veryly that this fyshe is one of the best in the worlde to the tast, and the lyke∣est vnto fleshe, especially so lyke vnto beefe, that who so hath not seene it whole, can iudge it to be none other when he seeth it in peeces then very beefe or veale, and is certaynly so lyke vnto fleshe, that all the men in the world may herein be deceyued: the tast likewise, is like vnto the tast of very good veale, and lasteth long, yf it be powdred: so that in fine, the Base of these parts, is by no meanes lyke vnto this.The fyshe Manate. This Manate hath a certayne stone, or rather bone in his head within the brayne, whiche is of qualitie greatly appropriate agaynst the disease of the stone, if it be burnt and grounde into small powder, and taken fastyng in the morning when the paine is felte,A remedy a∣gaynst the stone. in such quantitie as may lye vppon a peny, with a draught of good whyte wyne: For be∣ing thus taken three or foure mornings, it acquieteth the greefe, as dyuers haue tolde me whiche haue proued it true, and I my selfe by testimonie of syght, do wytnesse that I haue seene this stone sought of dyuers for this effecte. There are also dyuers other fyshes as bygge as this Ma∣nate, among the whiche there is one called Vihuella. This fyshe beareth in the toppe of his head a swoorde,The swoorde fyshe. beyng on euery syde full of many sharpe teeth, this swoorde is natu∣rally very harde and strong, of foure or fyue spannes in length, and of proportion accordyng to the same byggenesse: and for this cause is this fyshe called Spada, that is, the swoorde fyshe. Of this kynde some are founde as litle as Sardines, and other so great, that two yokes of Oxen are scarsely able to drawe
them on a Cart. But whereas before I haue promised to speake of other fyshes, whiche are taken in these seas whyle the shyppes are vnder sayle, I wyll not forgeat to speake of the Tunnye, whiche is a great and good fyshe,Tunnye. and is oftentymes taken and kylde with trout speares, and hookes, cast in the water, when they play and swym about the shyppes. In lyke maner also are taken many Turbuts, whiche are very good fyshes as are lyghtly in all the sea. And here is to be noted,Turbut. that in the great Ocean sea, there is a strange thyng to be consydered, whiche all that haue been in the Indies affirme to be true:Note. And this is, that lyke as on the lande there are some prouinces fer∣tyle and fruitfull, and some barren, euen so doth the lyke chaunce in the sea: So that at some wyndes the shyppes sayle fyftie, or a hundred, or two hundred leagues and more, without takyng or seeyng of one fyshe: and agayne, in the selfe same Ocean in some places, all the water is seene tremble by the mouyng of the fyshes, where they are taken abundantly. It commeth further to my remembraunce to speake somewhat of the fleeyng of fyshes, whiche is doubtlesse a strange thyng to beholde,Fleeyng fyshes. and is after this maner. When the shyppes sayle by the great O∣cean, folowyng theyr viage, there ryseth sometymes on the one syde or on the other, many companies of certayne litle fyshes, of the whiche the byggest is no greater then a Sardyne, and so diminishe lesse and lesse from that quantitie, that ome of them are very litle: these are called Volatori, that is, fleeyng fyshes: they ryse by great companies and flockes, in suche multitudes that it is an astonyshment to behold them: Some∣times they ryse but litle from the water, & (as it chaunceth) con∣tinue one flyght for the space of an hundred paces, and sometimes more, or lesse, before they fall agayne into the sea, sometymes also they fall into the shyppes. And I remember, that on an euenyng when al the company in the shyp were on theyr knees, syngyng Salue regina in the hyghest part of the Castell of the poupe, and sayled with a full wynde, there passed by vs a flocke of these fleeyng fyshes, and came so neare vs, that many of them fell into the shyppe, among the whiche, two or three fel hard by me, whiche I tooke alyue in my hand, so that I myght well perceyue that they were as bygge as Sardines, and of the same
quantitie, hauyng two wynges or quilles growing out of theyr synnes, lyke vnto those wherewith all fyshes swym in ryuers: these wynges are as long as the fyshes them selues. As long as theyr wynges are moyst, they beare them vp in the ayre, but assoone as they are drye, they can contynue theyr flyght no further then as I haue sayde before, but fall immediatlye into the sea, and so ryse agayne, and flee as before from place to place. In the yeere a thousand, fyue hundred, and fyfteene, when I came fyrst to enfourme your Maiestie of the state of the thynges in India, and was the yeere folowyng in Flaun∣ders in the tyme of your most fortunate successe in these your kyngdomes of Aragonie and Castyle, whereas at that viage I sayled aboue the Ilande Bermuda, otherwyse called Garza, beyng the furthest of all the Ilandes that are founde at this daye in the worlde,The Iland of Bermuda and arryuyng there at the deapth of eyght yardes of water, and distaunt from the lande as farre as the shotte of a peece of Ordinaunce, I determyned to sende some of the shyp to lande, aswell to make searche of suche thynges as were there, as also to leaue in the Iland certayne Hogges for en∣crease. But the tyme not seruing my purpose by reason of con∣trary wynde, I coulde bryng my shyppes no nearer the Ilande, beyng twelue leagues in length, and syxe in breadth, and about thyrtie in circuite, lying in the three and thyrtieth degree of the North syde. Whyle I remayned heere, I saw a stryfe and com∣bat betweene these fleeing fyshes, and the fyshes named Gylt heades, & the foules called Seamewes, and Cormorantes, which surely seemed vnto me a thyng of as great pleasure and solace as coulde be deuised, while the Gylt heades swam on the brymme of the water, and sometymes lyfted theyr shoulders aboue the same, to rayse the fleeyng fyshes out of the water to dryue them to flyght, and folowe them swymmyng to the place where they fal, to take and eate them sodenly. Againe on the other side, the Seamewes and Cormorantes, take many of these flee∣yng fyshes,Not to hie for the Pye, nor to lowe for the Crowe. so that by this meanes they are neyther safe in the ayre, nor in the water. In the selfe same peryll and danger doo men lyue in this mortall lyfe, wherein is no certayne securitie, neyther in hyghe estate, nor in lowe. Which thyng surely ought to put vs in remembraunce of that blessed and safe restyng
place whiche God hath prepared for suche as loue hym, who shall acquiete and fynishe the trauailes of this troublous worlde, wherein are so many dangers, and bryng them to that eter∣nall lyfe where they shall fynde eternall securitie and rest. But to returne to the hystorye: these byrdes and foules whiche I sawe, were of the Ilande of Bermuda, neere vnto the whiche I sawe these fleeyng fyshes: for they coulde be of no other lande, forasmuche as they are not accustomed to wander farre from the coastes where they are bredde. Of thincrease and decrease (that is) rysyng and fallyng of our Ocean sea, and South sea, called the sea of Sur. I Wyll nowe speake of certayne thynges whiche are seene in the Prouince, or at the least in the citie of golden Castyle, other∣wyse called Beragua, and in the coastes of the North sea, & of the South sea,Beragua. called the sea of Sur, not omitting to note one syngu∣ler and marueylous thyng whiche I haue consydered of the Ocean sea, wherof hytherto no Cosmogra∣pher, Pilot, or Maryner, or any other, haue satisfyed me. I say therefore, as it is well knowen to your maiestie, and all such as haue knowledge of the Ocean sea, that this great Ocean casteth from it selfe the sea Mediterraneum by the mouth of the strayght of Gibilterra, in the which the water,The west Ocean. The sea Me∣diterraneum. from thend & fur∣thest part of that sea, euen vnto the mouth of the sayde strayght, eyther in the East toward the coaste commonly called Leuante, or in any other part of the sayde sea Mediterraneum, the sea doth not so fall nor increase, as reason woulde iudge for so great a sea, but increaseth very lite, and a small space: Neuerthelesse, with∣out the mouth of the trayght in the mayne Ocean, it increaseth and falleth very muche, and a great space of grounde, from syxe houres to syxe houres, as in all the coastes of Spayne, Britan, Flaunders, Garmanie, and England. The selfe same Oean sa in the firme lande newly founde, in the coastes of the same lying towarde the North, doth neyther ryse nor fall,Hispaniola. Cuba. nor lykewyse in the Ilandes of Hispaniola and Cuba, and al the o∣ther
Ilandes of the same lying towarde the north, for the space of three thousande leagues, but onely in lyke maner as dooth the sea Mediterraneum in Italy, which is in maner nothyng, in respecte to that increase and decrease whiche the sayde Ocean hath in the coastes of Spayne and Flaunders. But this is yet a greater thyng, that also the selfe same Ocean in the coastes of the sayde fyrme lande lying towarde the South, in the citie of Panama, and also in the coast of that lande whiche lyeth to∣warde the East and West from that citie, as in the Ilande of pearles or Margaritea, whiche the Indians call Tarrarequi, and also in Taboga and Otoque, and in all other Ilandes of the south sea of Sur, the water ryseth and falleth so muche, that when it falleth, it goeth in maner out of syght, whiche thyng I my selfe haue seene oftentymes. And here your maiestie may note an other thing, that from the north sea to the south sea, being of such difference the one from the other in rysyng and fallyng,The South sea. yet is the lande that deuideth them not past eyghteene or twentie leagues in breadth from coaste to coaste: So that both the sayde seas, beyng all one Ocean, this strange effecte is a thyng worthy greatly to be consydered of all suche as haue inclination and desyre to knowe the secrete woorkes of nature, wherein the infinite power and wysedome of God is seene to be suche, as may allure al good natures to reuerence and loue so diuine a maiestie. And whereas by ye demonstrations of learned men I am not satis∣fyed of the naturall cause hereof,The power and wysedome of God is sene in his crea∣tures. I content my selfe to knowe and beleeue, that he whiche hath made these thynges, dooth knowe this and many other, which he hath not graunted to the reason of man to comprehende, muche lesse to so base a wyt as myne is. They therefore that are of greater vnderstandyng, shall search the cause hereof for them and for me, forasmuche as I haue onely put the matter in question, as a wytnesse that haue seene thexperience of the thyng.
Of the strayght or narrowe passage of the land lying betweene the North and South sea, by the which spyces may much sooner and easlyer be brought from the Ilandes of Molucca into Spaine by the VVest Ocean, then by that way whereby the Portugales sayle into the East India. IT hath been an opinion among the Cosmo∣graphers and Pilottes of late tyme, and o∣ther whiche haue had practyse in thynges touchyng the sea, that there shoulde be a strayght of water passing from the North sea of the fyrme, into the South sea of Sur, which neuerthelesse hath not been seene nor founde to this day. And surely yf there be any such strayght, we that inhabite those partes do thynke the same should be rather of land then of water. For the fyrme land in some partes thereof is so strayght and narrowe, that the Indians say that from the mountaynes of the prouince of Esquegua or Vrraca (which are betweene the one sea and the other) if a man ascend to the top of the mountaines, and looke toward the North,Esquegua and Vrraca. he may see the wa∣ter of the North sea of the prouince of Beragua: & againe looking the contrary way, may on the other syde (towards the South) see the sea of Sur, and the prouinces which confine with it, as do the territories of the two Lordes or kynges of the sayde prouin∣ces of Vrraca and Esquegua. And I beleeue, that yf it be as the Indians say, of all that is hytherto knowen, this is the narrow∣est strayght of the fyrme land, whiche some affirme to be full of rough mountaynes. Yet do I take it for a better way, or soo short as is that whiche is made from the port called Nomen Dei (whiche is in the North sea) vnto the newe citie of Panama,Nomen Dei. Panama. be∣yng in the coast and on the bancke of the sea of Sur, whiche way is lykewyse very rough, full of thycke wooddes, mountay∣nes, ryuers, valleyes, and very difficult to passe through, and can not be done without great labour & trauaile. Some measure this way in this part, to be from sea to sea eighteene leagues, whiche I suppose to be rather twentie, not for that it is any more by measure, but because it is rough and difficult, as I haue
sayde, and as I haue founde it by experience, hauyng now twise passed that way by foote, countyng from the port and village of Nomen Dei, vnto the dominion of the Cacique of Iuanaga, other∣wyse called Capira, eyght leagues, and from thence to the ryuer of Chagre, other eyght leagues. So that at this riuer, beyng six∣teene leagues from the sayde port,The ryuer of Chagre. endeth the roughnesse of the way: then from hence to the marueilous brydge are two leagues, and beyonde that, other two, vnto the port of Panama: So that altogeather, in my iudgement, make twentie leagues. And yf therefore this nauigation may be founde in the South sea for the trade of spyces (as we trust in God) to be brought from thence to the sayde port of Panama (as is possible enough) they maye afterwarde easely passe to the North sea, notwithstandyng the difficultie of the way of the twentie leagues aforesayde. Which thyng I affirme, as a man wel trauayled in these regions, ha∣uyng twyse on my feete passed ouer this strayght in the yeere 1521. as I haue said. It is furthermore to be vnderstoode, that it is a marueilous facilitie to bryng spices by this way which I wil now declare. From Panama to the ryuer of Chagre, are foure leagues of good and fayre way, by the which cartes may passe at pleasure, by reason that the mountaines are but few and litle, and that the greatest part of these foure leagues is a playne grounde voyde of trees: and when the cartes are come to the sayde ryuer▪ the spyces may be caried in Barkes and pynnesses. For this riuer entreth into the North sea fyue or syxe leagues lower then the port of Nomen Dei, and emptieth it selfe in the sea neere vnto an Iland called Bastimento, where is a verye good and safe port. Your maiestie may now therfore consyder,The Ilande Bastimento. howe great a thyng▪ and what commoditie it may be to conuey spices this way, foras∣much as ye riuer of Chagre, hauing his originall only two leagues from the South sea, continueth his course, and emptieth it selfe into the other North sea. This riuer runneth fast, and is verye great, and so commodious for this purpose as may be thought or desired:The maruey∣lous brydge. the marueylous brydge made by the worke of nature, beyng two leagues beyond the sayde ryuer, & other two leagues on this syde the port of Panama, so lying in the mydde waye be∣tweene them both, as framed naturally in suche sort, that none which passe by this viage doth see any such brydge, or thinke that
there is any such buyldyng in that place, vntyll they be in the top thereof, in the way towarde Panama: But assoone as they are on the brydge, lookyng towarde the ryght hande, they see a litle ryuer vnder them, whiche hath his chanell distant from the feete of them that walke ouer it, the space of two speares length or more. The water of this ryuer is very shalowe, not passyng the deapth of a mans legge to the knee, and is in breadth betweene thyrtie and fourtie pases, and falleth into the ryuer of Chagre. To∣warde the ryght hand, standyng on this brydge, there is nothing seene but great trees. The largenesse of the brydge conteyneth fyfteene pases, and the length thereof about threescore or foure∣score pases: The arche is so made of most harde stone, that no man can beholde it without admiration, beyng made by the hygh and omnipotent creatour of all thinges. But to returne to speake somewhat more of the conueying of spices, I say, that when it shall please almyghtie God that this nauigation aforesayde shall be founde by the good fortune of your maiestie, and that the spy∣ces of the Ilandes of the South sea (whiche may also be other∣wyse called the Ocean of the East India, in the which are the I∣landes of Molucca) shalbe brought to the sayd coast and the port of Panama,The Ilandes of Molucca. and be conueyed from thence (as we haue sayde) by the fyrme lande with cartes vnto the ryuer of Chagre, and from thence into this our other sea of the North, from whence they may afterwarde be brought into Spayne,The commodi∣tie of this viage. I say that by this mea∣nes the viage shalbe shortned more then seuen thousand leagues, with muche lesse daunger then is by the viage nowe vsed by the way of Commendator of Aysa, captayne vnder your maiestie, who this present yeere attempted a viage to the place of the sayd spyces: and not only the way is thus muche shortned, but also a thyrd parte of the tyme is abbreuiate. To conclude therefore, if a∣ny had hytherto attempted this viage by the sea of Sur, to seeke the Ilandes of spyces, I am of firme opinion, that they shoulde haue been founde long since, as doubtlesse they may bee by the reasons of Cosmographie.
Howe thinges that are of one kynde, dyffer in fourme and qualitie, accordyng to the nature of the place where they are engendred or grow, and of the beastes called Tygers. IN the firme lande are founde many terrible beastes,Tigers. which some thinke to bee Tygers. Whiche thing neuerthelesse I dare not af∣firme, considering what aucthours do wryte of the lyghtnesse and agilitie of the Tyger, wheras this beast, being otherwyse in shape very like vnto a Tiger, is notwithstandyng very slowe. Yet true it is, that according to the marueiles of the worlde, and differences which naturall thinges haue in dyuers regions vnder heauen, and dyuers constellations of the same, vnder the which they are created,Plantes and hearbes. we see that some suche plantes and hearbes as are hurtfull in one countrey, are harmelesse and holsome in other regions.Birdes. And byrdes whiche in one prouince are of good taste, are in other so vnsauery that they may not bee eaten.Men. Men lykewyse whiche in some countreys are blacke, are in other places whyte: and yet are both these and they men. Euen so may it bee, that Tygers are lyght in some region, as they wryte, and may neuerthelesse be slow and heauy in these In∣dies of your maiestie,Sheepe. wherof we speake. The sheepe of Arabie drawe their tayles long and bigge on the ground,Bulles. and the Bulles of Egypt haue theyr heare growyng towarde theyr heades: yet are those sheepe, and these bulles. Men in some countreys are hardy and of good courage, and in other naturally fearefull and bruityshe. All these thinges, and many more, whiche may bee sayde to this purpose, are easie to bee proued, and woorthy to bee beleeued, of suche as haue read of the lyke in aucthours, or tra∣ueyled the worlde, whereby theyr owne sight may teache them the experience of these thinges whereof I speake. It is also ma∣nifest that Iucca,Iucca. whereof they make theyr bread in the Ilande of Hispaniola, is deadly poyson if it bee eaten greene with the iuse: and yet hath it no such propertie in the firme lande, where I haue eaten it many times, and found it to be a good fruit. The Bats of Spaine,Battes. although they bite, yet are they not venomous: but in the
firme land, many dye that are bytten of them. And in this fourme may so many thinges be sayd, that tyme shall not suffice to write, whereas my intent is only to prooue that this beast may bee a Tyger, or of ye kynd of Tygers, although it be not of such light∣nesse and swiftnesse as are they wherof Plinie & other aucthours speake,Plinie. discrybyng it to bee one of the swyftest beastes of the lande, and that the ryuer of Tigris for the swyft course thereof was called by that name. The fyrst Spanyardes whiche sawe this Tyger in the firme lande, dyd so name it.The Tiger. Of the kynde of these was that which Don Diego Columbo the Admirall sent your maiestie out of newe Spayne to Toledo. Theyr heades are lyke to the heades of Lions, or Lionesses, but greater: the rest of all theyr bodyes, and theyr legges, are full of blacke spottes one neere vnto an other, and diuided with a circumference or fryndge of redde colour, shewyng as it were a fayre woorke and correspondent picture, about their croopes or hynder partes, they haue these spottes byggest, and lesse and lesse towarde theyr bellies, legges, and heades. That which was brought to Toledo, was young, and but litle, and by my estimation of the age of three yeeres: but in the firme lande there are many founde of greater quantitie, for I haue seene some of three spans in height, and more then fiue in length. They are beastes of great force, with strong legges, and well armed with nayles and fanges, which wee call dogge teeth: they are so fierce, that in my iudge∣ment no reall Lion of the byggest sort is so strong or fierce. Of these, there are many found in the firme lande, which deuour ma∣ny of the Indians, & doe much hurt otherwyse: but since the com∣ming of the Christians, many haue been kyld with Crossebowes after this maner. Assoone as the archer hath knowledge of the haunt of any of these Tigers, he goeth searching their trase,The huntyng of Tigers. with his crossebow & with a litle hound or begle, and not with a grey∣hounde, because this beast would soone kyll any dog that would venter on him: When the hounde hath founde the Tyger, he runneth about him baying continually, and approcheth so neare him, snappyng and grynnyng, with so quycke fleeyng and re∣turnyng, that he heereby so molesteth this fierce beast, that hee driueth him to take the next tree, at the foote wherof he remaineth
styll baying, and the Tyger grynnyng and shewyng his teethe, whyle in the meane tyme the archer commeth neare, and .xii. or xiiii. pases of, stryketh him with the querell of his crossebowe in the brest, and fleeth incontinent, leauyng the Tyger in his tra∣uayle for lyfe and death, bytyng the tree and eatyng earth for fiercenesse: then within the space of two or three houres, or the day folowyng, the archer returneth thyther, and with his dogge fyndeth the place where he lyeth dead. In the yeere .1522. I with the other rulers and magistrates of the citie of Sancta Ma∣ria Antiqua in Dariena, tooke order in our counsayle, a rewarde of foure or fyue peeces of golde to bee giuen to euery man that kylled any of these Tygers:A rewarde for kyllyng of Ty∣gers. by reason whereof many were kyld in shorte space, both with crossebowes, and also with dyuers snares and ingens. But to conclude, I will not obstinately stand in opinion whether these beastes be Tygers or Panthers, or of the number of any other suche beastes of spotted heare, or also peraduenture some other newe beast vnknowen to the olde wry∣ters, as were many other whereof I haue spoken in this booke: Of whiche thyng I doe not greatly marueyle, forasmuche as vnto our tyme this great part of the worlde was vnknowen to the antiquitie, insomuche that none of the wryters of that age, nor yet Pcolome in his Cosmographie, or any other since him, haue made any mention heereof, vntyll the fyrst Admyrall Don Christopher Colonus discouered the same: A thing doubtlesse with∣out comparyson muche greater then that which is sayde of Her∣cules,Colonus com∣pared to Her∣cules. that he fyrst gaue the entrance of the sea Mediterraneum into the Ocean, whiche the Grekes coulde neuer doe before him.The pyllers of Hercules. The strayghtes of Gibilterra. And heereof ryseth the fable that the mountaynes of Cal∣pe and Abila (whiche are directly one agaynst an other in the strayght of Gibilterra, the one beyng in Spayne, and the other in Affryke) were ioyned togeather before they were opened by Hercules,Note. who erected those his pillers which your maiestie giue in token of prehemynence and lyke enterpryses, with likewise these his wordes Plus Vltra, wordes doubtlesse woorthy for so great and vnyuersall an Emperour,Plus Vltra. and not conuenient for any other Prynce:Howe farre the Emperours maiestie excel∣leth Hercules. forasmuche as your holy Catholyke ma∣iestie haue spredde them in so strange and remote regions, so many thousand leagues further then euer dyd Hercules. And cer∣teynly
syr, if there had been an Image of gold made in the praise and fame of Colonus, he had as well deserued it, as any of those men to whom for theyr noble enterpryse the antiquitie gaue di∣uine honour, if he had been in theyr tyme. But to returne to the matter whereof I began to speake: I neede say no more of the fourme of this beast, forasmuch as your Maiestie haue seene that whiche is yet alyue in Toledo. And surely the keeper of your ma∣iesties Lions, who hath taken vppon him the charge to tame this beast, myght better haue bestowed his paynes in an other thing that myght haue been more profytable for the safegarde of his lyfe, because this Tyger beyng yet but young, will dayly be stronger and fiercer, and increase in malyce. The Indians (and especially they of the firme lande in the prouince whiche the Ca∣tholyke Kyng Don Ferdinando commaunded to be called golden Castyle) call this beast Ochi. This thing is strange that chaunced of late:A Tyger made tame. that whereas the Tiger whereof we haue made menti∣on before, would haue kylde his keeper that then kept him in a cage, was in fewe dayes after made so tame, that he ledde her ty∣ed only with a small corde, and playde with her so familyarly, that I marueyled greatly to see it, yet not without certayne beleefe that this friendship wil not last long, without danger of life to the keeper, forasmuche as surely these beastes are not meete to bee among men, for theyr fiercenesse and cruell nature that can not bee tamed. Of the maners and customes of the Indians of the firme lande, and of theyr women. THe maners & customes of these Indians, are dyuers in diuers prouinces. Some of them take as many wiues as them list, and other lyue with one wyfe, whom they for∣sake not without consent of both parties, which chaunceth especially when they haue no chyldren.The Indian women. The nobilitie aswell men as women, repute it infamous to ioyne with any of base parētage or strangers, except Christians, whom they count noble men, by reason of their valiantnesse, although they put a difference be∣tweene the common sort & the other to whom they shewe obedi∣ence, counting it for a great matter & an honorable thyng, if they
bee beloued of any of them: insomuche that if they knowe any Christian man carnally, they keepe their fayth to him, so that hee bee not long absent farre from them, for theyr intent is not to be widowes, or to liue chast lyke religious women. Many of them haue this custome, that when they perceyue that they are with chylde, they take an hearbe wherwith they destroy that is concei∣ued: for they say that only well aged women should beare chyl∣dren, and that they wil not forbeare their pleasures, and defourme their bodies with bearyng of children, whereby theyr teates be∣come loose & hanging, which thing they greatly dispraise. When they are deliuered of theyr children, they goe to the ryuer & washe them, whiche done, theyr blood and purgation ceasseth im∣mediatly: And when after this they haue a fewe dayes abstey∣ned from the company of men, they become so strayght, as they say which haue had carnall familiaritie with them, that such as vse them, can not without much difficultie satisfie theyr appetite: They also whiche neuer had chyldren,The men of India. are euer as virgins. In some partes they weare certayne litle aperues rounde about them before and behynde, as low as to theyr knees and hammes, wherewith they couer theyr priuie partes, and are naked all their bodie besyde. The principall men beare theyr priuities in a ho∣low pype of golde, but the common sorte haue them inclosed in the shelles of certayne great welkes, and are besyde vtterly na∣ked: For they thinke it no more shame to haue theyr coddes seene, then any other parte of theyr bodies: and in many prouin∣ces both the men and women go vtterly naked, without any such couerture at all. In the prouince of Cueua they call a man Chuy, and a woman Ira, whiche name is not greatly disagreeable to many both of theyr women and of ours. These Indians gyue great honour and reuerence to theyr Cacique (that is) theyr kynges and rulers. The principall Cacique, hath twelue of his most strong Indians appointed to beare him,The kyng is borne on mens backes. when he remoueth to any place, or goeth abrode for his pleasure. Two of them cary him sitting vppon a long peece of wood, which is naturally as lyght as they can fynde, the other tenne folow next vnto him as footemen: they keepe continually a trottyng pase with him on their shoulders. When the two that cary him are weery, other two come in their places, without any disturbance or staye. And
thus if the way bee playne, they cary him in this maner for the space of .xv or .xx. leagues in one day. The Indians that are assig∣ned to this office, are for the most parte slaues, or Naboriti, that is, suche as are bounde to continuall seruice. I haue also no∣ted that when the Indians perceyue them selues to be troubled with to muche blood,Lettyng of blood. they let them selues blood in the calfes of theyr legges, and brawnes of theyr armes: this doe they with a very sharpe stone, and sometymes with the smal tooth of a Ui∣per, or with a sharpe reede or thorne. All the Indians are com∣monly without beardes,They haue no beardes. insomuch that it is in maner a marueile to see any of them eyther men or women to haue any downe or heare on theyr faces, or other partes of theyr bodies: Albeit I sawe the Cacique of the prouince of Catarapa, who had heare on his face and other partes of his bodie, as had also his wyfe in such places as women are accustomed to haue. This Cacique had a great part of his body paynted with a blacke colour, which neuer fadeth,They paynte their bodies. and is much lyke vnto that wherewith the Mores paynt them selues in Barbarie in token of nobilitie. But the Moores are paynted specially on their visage and throte, and certayne o∣ther partes. Lykewyse the principall Indians vse these payn∣tynges on theyr armes and brestes, but not on theyr visages, be∣cause among them the slaues are so marked. When the Indi∣ans of certayne prouinces goe to the battayle (especially the Ca∣niball archers) they cary certayne shelles of great welkes of the sea, which they blow, and make therewith great sound,The Canibals. much lyke the noyse of hornes: they cary also certayne Tymbrels, which they vse in the stead of Drummes: also very fayre plumes of fea∣thers, and certayne armure of golde,Armure of golde. especially great and rounde peeces on theyr brestes, and splintes on their armes. Lykewyse other peeces, which they put on theyr heades and other partes of theyr bodies:Their galant∣nesse in the Warres. For they esteeme nothyng so muche as to ap∣peare galant in the warres, and to goe in most comely order that they can deuyse, glysteryng with precious stones, Iewels, golde,Theyr Iuelles. and feathers. Of the least of these welkes or perewincles, they make certayne litle beades, of dyuers sortes and colours: they make also litle bracelets, which they myngle with gaudies of golde, these they rowle about theyr armes from the elbowe to the wrest of the hande. The lyke also doe they on theyr legges
from the knee to the soles of theyr feete, in token of nobilitie, es∣pecially theyr noble women in dyuers prouinces are accustomed to weare suche Iewelles, and haue theyr neckes in maner laden therewith: these beades and Iewelles, and suche other trynkets, they call Caquiras. Besyde these also, they weare certaine rynges of golde at theyr eares and nostrelles, whiche they bore full of holes on both sydes, so that the rynges hang vppon theyr lyp∣pes. Some of these Indians are poulde and rounded: albeit commonly both the men and women take it for a decent thyng to weare long heare, whiche the women weare to the myddest of theyr shoulders, & cut it equally, especially aboue their browes: this doe they with certayne harde stones, whiche they keepe for the same purpose. The pryncipall women, when theyr teates fall,Howe the wo∣men beare vp theyr teates, with barres of golde. or become loose, beare them vp with barres of gold, of the length of a spanne and a halfe, well wrought, and of suche byggenesse that some of them weygh more then twoo hundred Castelans or Ducades of golde: these barres haue holes at both the endes, whereat they tye two small cordes made of cotton at euery ende of the barres: One of these cordes goeth ouer the shoulder, and the other vnder the arme holes, where they tye both togeather, so that by this meanes the barre bea∣reth vp theyr teates. Some of these chiefe women goe to the battayle with theyr husbandes, or when they them selues are regentes in any prouinces, in the whiche they haue all thinges at commaundement, and execute the office of generall captaines, and cause them selues to bee caryed on mens backes, in lyke maner as doe the Caciques of whom I haue spoken before. These Indians of the firme lande are muche of the same stature and colour as are they of the Ilands:The stature & colour of the Indians. The Indians called Coro∣nati. they are for the most part of the colour of an olyue, if there be any other difference, it is more in bignesse then otherwise, & especially they that are called Coro∣nati, are stronger and bygger then any other that I haue seene in these parties,The Ilande of Giantes. except those of the Ilande of Giantes, which are on the South side of the Ilande of Hispaniola, neare vnto the coa∣stes of the firme land, and likewise certaine other which they call Iucatos, which are on the North syde. All which chiefly, although they bee no Giantes,Iucatos. yet are they doubtlesse the byggest of the Indians that are knowen to this day, & commonly bygger then
the Flemynges: and especially many of them, aswell women as men, are of very hygh stature, and are all archers both men and women. These Coronati inhabite thyrtie leagues in length by these coastes, from the poynt of Canoa to the great ryuer which they call Guadalchiber, neere vnto Sancta Maria de gratia. As I trauersed by those coastes, I fylled a butte of freshe water of that ryuer, syxe leagues in the sea from the mouth thereof where it falleth into the sea. They are called Coronati (that is crowned) because theyr heare is cutte rounde by theyr eares, and poulde lower a great compase about the crowne, much lyke the fryers of saint Augustines order. And because I haue spoken of theyr maner of wearyng theyr heare, heere com∣meth to my remembraunce a thyng which I haue oftentymes noted in these Indians: and this is, that they haue the bones of the sculles of theyr heades foure tymes thycker,The sculles of the Indians heades. and much stron∣ger then ours, so that in commyng to handstrokes with them, it shalbe requisite not to strike them on the heads with swoords, for so haue many swoordes been broken on theyr heades, with litle hurte doone. And to haue sayde thus much of theyr cu∣stomes and maners, it shall suffise for this tyme, because I haue more largly intreated herof in my general historie of the Indies: Yet haue I neyther there nor here spoken muche of that part of the firme lande whiche is called Noua Hispania (that is, newe Spayne,Newe Spaine. whereof the Iland of Iucatana is part) forasmuche as Ferdinando Cortesie hath written a large booke therof. Of the houses of these Indies, I haue spoken sufficiently els where: Yet haue I thought good to infourme your maiestie of ye build∣ing and houses which the Christians haue made in diuers places in the firme lande.The houses of the Christians in India. They buylde them nowe therefore with two solars or loftes, and with loopes and wyndowes to open and shutte: also with strong tymber, and very fayre boordes, in suche sorte, that any noble man may well and pleasauntly be lodged in some of them. And among other, I my selfe caused one to be builded in the citie of Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena,Dariena. which cost me more then a thousand and fiue hundred Castelans, beyng of such sort that I may well entertayne and commodiously lodge a∣ny Lord or noble man, reseruing also part for my selfe and my fa∣mylie: for in this may many householdes be kept, both aboue
and beneath. It hath also a fayre garden, with many Orange trees, both sweete and sowre: Cedars also, and Limons, of the which there is nowe great plentie in the houses of the Chri∣stians.Gardens. On one syde of the garden, there runneth a fayre riuer. The situation is very pleasaunt, with a good and holsome ayre, and a fayre prospecte about the ryuer. In fine, our trust is that in fewe yeeres al thinges in these regions shal growe to a better state, accordyng to the holy intention of your maiestie. Of the chiefe Ilandes Hispaniola and Cuba. THe Indians which at this present inhabite the Ilande of Hispaniola, are but fewe in number, and the Christians not so many as they ought to be, forasmuche as many of them that were in this Iland, are gone to o∣ther Ilandes, and to the fyrme lande. For beyng for the most parte young men vn∣maried,Men are desi∣rous of newe thynges. and desirous daily to see newe things, wherin mans na∣ture deliteth, they were not willing to continue long in one place, especially seeing daily other newe landes discouered, where they thought they might sooner fill their purses, by being present at the fyrst spoyle: Wherin neuerthelesse their hope deceiued many of them, and especially such as had houses & habitations in this I∣lande: For I certainly beleeue, confyrming my selfe herein with the iudgement of many other,The commodi∣ties of Hispa∣niola, Eng∣lande, and Sicilie. that if any one Prince had no more seignories then only this Ilande, it shoulde in short tyme be such, as not to geue place either to Sicilie or England, wheras euen at this present there is nothyng wherefore it shoulde malice theyr prosperitie, not beyng inferiour to them in any felicitie, that in maner the heauens can graunt to any lande: beyng furthermore suche as my inryche many prouinces and kyngdomes, by reason of many ryche golde mynes that are in it, of the beste golde that is founde to this day in the worlde,Golde mynes. and in greatest quantitie. In this Iland, nature of her selfe bryngeth foorth suche abundance of cotton,Cotton. that if it were wrought and mayn∣tayned, there shoulde be more and better then in any part of the world. There is so great plentie of excellent Cassia, that a great quantitie is brought from thence into Spaine,Cassia. from whence it is
caried to diuers partes of the worlde. It encreaseth so muche, that it is a marueylous thyng to consider. In this are many ryche shoppes where Suger is wrought, and that of suche per∣fectnesse and goodnesse, and in such quantitie,Suger. that shyps come laden therewith yeerely into Spayne. All such seedes, settes, or plantes,Plantes and hearbes. as are brought out of Spayne and planted in this I∣lande, become muche better, bygger, and of greater encrease then they are in any part of our Europe. And yf it chaunce o∣therwyse that sometymes they prosper not so well, the cause is that they which should tyl and husband the ground, & sowe and plant in due seasons, haue no respect heereunto, beyng impati∣ent whyle the wheat and vines waxe rype, beyng geuen to wan∣deryng and other affayres of present gaynes (as I haue sayde) as searchyng the golde mynes, fyshyng for pearles,Great thynges hyndred by res∣pect of present gaynes. and occupy∣ing marchaundies, with suche other trades, for the greedy folo∣wyng whereof, they neglect and contempne both sowyng and plantyng. Suche fruites as are brought out of Spayne, into this Iland, prosper marueylously, and waxe rype all tymes of the yeere, as hearbes of al sortes very good and pleasaunt to be eaten. Also many Pomgranates of the best kynde,Oranges. Pomegranats. and Oran∣ges both sweete and sowre: Lykewyse many fayre Limons and Cedars, and a great quantitie of all such as are of sharpe, sowre, and bytter tast. There are also many Fygge trees,Fygges all the yeere. Dates. which bryng foorth theyr fruite all the whole yeere. Lykewyse those kynde of Date trees that beare Dates, and diuers other trees and plan∣tes, which were brought out of Spayne thyther. Beastes do al∣so encrease in lyke abundaunce,Beastes. & especially the heardes of Ryne are so augmented both in quantitie and number, that there are now many patrons of cattaile that haue more then two thousand heades of Neate, and some three or foure thousande,Great heardes of cattayle. and some more. Besyde these, there are very many that haue heardes of foure or fyue hundred. And trueth it is, that this Iland hath bet∣ter pasture for suche cattayle then any other countrey in the worlde: also holsome and cleare water, and temperate ayre,Good pasture. by reason whereof the heardes of such beastes are much bygger, fat∣ter, and also of better tast then ours in Spayne,The effect of continuall and moderate heate. because of the ranke pasture, whose moisture is better digested in the hearbe or grasse by the continuall & temperate heate of the Sonne, wherby
beyng made more fat and vnctuous, it is of better and more sted∣fast nouryshment. For contynuall and temperate heate, doth not only drawe much moysture out of the earth,The cause of fat nourysh∣ment. to the nourysh∣ment of such thynges as growe and are engendred in that clime, but doth also by moderation preserue the same from resolution and putrifaction, digesting also and condensatyng or thycknyng the sayde moyst nouryshment into a gummie and vnctuous sub∣staunce,Beastes of long lyfe in regions about the E∣quinoctial line. Trees whose leaues do not wyther. as is seene in all suche thynges as growe in those regi∣ons: and this is the only naturall cause aswell that certayne great beastes and of long lyfe (as the Elephant & Rhinoceros, with suche other) are engendred only in the regions neare vnto the Equinoctiall, as also that the leaues of suche trees as growe there, do not wyther or fall, vntyll they be thrust out by other, accordyng to the verse of the poet whiche sayeth, Et nata pira pi∣ris, et ficus in ficubus extant, this is in effect, Peares growing vp∣on Peares, and Fygges vpon Fygges. Plinie also wryteth, that suche trees are neuer infected with the disease of trees that the Latines call Caries, whiche we may call the worme or can∣ker,The canker of the tree. beyng but a certayne putrifaction, by reason of a watrishe nouryshment not well consolidate. The same thyng hath been the cause that certayne Philosophers, considering aswell that man is the hottest and moystest beast that is (whiche is the best complexion) as also that men lyue longest in certayne partes of India neare the Equinoctiall (where yet to this day some liue to the age of an hundred and fyftie yeeres) were of opinion that yf mankynde had any beginning on the earth,Long lyued men in India. that place ought by good reason to be vnder or not farre from ye Equinoctial line, for the causes aforesayde. Some of the Diuines also vpon lyke con∣sideration,Paradise neare the Equinocti∣all line. haue thought it agreable that theyr Paradise shoulde be about the same, within ye precinct of those riuers which are na∣med in the booke of Genesis. But to let passe these thyngs, & to returne to the historie.Sheepe and Hogges. In this Iland furthermore are manye Sheepe, and a great number of Hogges, of the whiche (as also of the Ryne) many are become wylde, and lykewyse ma∣ny Dogges and Cattes,Dogges and Cattes become wylde. of those whiche were brought out of Spayne: These (and especially the Dogges) do much hurt a∣mong the cattayle, by reason of the negligence of the heardmen.
There are also many Horses, Mares, and Mules, and such other beastes as serue the vse of men in Spayne, and are muche greater then they of the fyrst broode brought thyther out of Spayne. Some places of the Ilande are inhabited,The situation of Hispaniola. although not so many as were requisite: Of the which I wyl say no more, but that al the regions of the Ilande are so well situate, that in the course of tyme all thynges shall come to greater perfection, by reason of the rychnesse & pleasauntnesse of the countrey, and fertilitie of the soyle. But nowe to speake somewhat of the principall and chiefe place of the Ilande, whiche is the citie of San Domenico: I saye, that as touchyng the buildinges, there is no citie in Spayne, so much for so much (no not Barsalona, which I haue oftentymes seene) that is to be preferred before this,The citi of San Domenico. ge∣nerally: For the houses of San Domenico, are for the most parte of stone, as are they of Barsalona, or of so strong & wel wrought earth, that it maketh a singuler and strong bynding. The situa∣tion is much better then that of Barsalona, by reason that the streates are much larger and plainer, and (without comparison) more directe and streyght foorth: For being builded nowe in our tyme, besyde the commoditie of the place of the fundation, the streetes were also directed with corde, compase, and measure, wherin it excelleth al the cities that I haue seene. It hath the sea so neere, that of one syde there is no more space betwene the sea and the citie then the walles, and this is about fiftie pases, where it is furthest of. On this syde, the waters of the sea beate vpon the natural stones and fayre coast: On the other part, hard by the side and at the foote of the houses, passeth the riuer Ozama, which is a marueilous port,The ryuer Ozama. wherin laden shippes rise very neere to the land, and in maner vnder the house windowes, and no fur∣ther from the mouth of the riuer where it entreth into ye sea, then is from the foote of the hil of Monyuia, to the monastery of saint Fraunces, or to the lodge of Barsalona. In the myddest of this space in the citie, is the fortresse and castle, vnder the which, and twentie pases distant from the same, passe the shyppes to aryse somewhat further in the same riuer. From the entraunce of the shippes vntyl they cast anker, they sayle no further from the hou∣ses of the citie then thyrtie or fourtie pases, because of this side of the citie the habitation is nere to the riuer.The Hauen. The port or hauen al∣so
is so fayre and commodious to defraight or vnlade shippes, as the like is founde but in fewe places of the worlde. The chym∣neis that are in this citie, are about syxe hundred in number, and such houses as I haue spoken of before: Of the which some are so fayre & large, that they may well receiue and lodge any lorde or noble man of Spaine with his traine & familie, and especially that which Don Diego Colon, viceroy vnder your maiestie, hath in this citie, is such that I knowe no man in Spayne that hath the lyke by a quarter in goodnesse, consydering all the commodities of the same. Lykewyse the situation thereof, as beyng aboue the sayde porte, and altogeather of stone, and hauyng many fayre and large roomes, with as goodly a prospect of the lande and sea as may be deuised, seemeth vnto me so magnificall and princelyke, that your maiestie may be as well lodged therin, as in any of the most exquisite buylded houses of Spayne. There is also a Cathedral church builded of late, where aswel ye Bishop accordyng to his dignitie,A cathadrall churche and monasteris in Hispaniola. as also the Canons are wel endewed. This church is wel builded of stone and lime, and of good woork∣manshyp. There are furthermore three monasteries, bearyng the name of saint Dominike, saint Fraunces, and saint Marie of Mercedes, the which are all well buylded, although not so curi∣ously as they of Spaine. But speakyng without preiudice of a∣ny other religious monasterie, your maiestie may be wel assu∣red, that in these three monasteries god is as wel serued, as in any other religious house, with men of holy lyuyng & vertuous exam∣ple. There is also a very good hospitall for the ayde and succour of poore people,An Hospitall which was founde by Michael Passamont, trea∣surer to your maiestie. To conclude, this citie from day to day increaseth in wealth and good order, aswel for that the saide Ad∣miral & viceroy, with the lorde Chauncelour and counsayle ap∣poynted there by your maiestie, haue theyr continuall abydyng heere, as also that the rychest men of the Ilande resort hyther for theyr most commodious habitation, and trade of suche mar∣chaundies as are eyther brought out of Spayne, or sent thyther from this Ilande, whiche nowe so aboundeth in many thynges, that it serueth Spayne with many commodities, as it were with vsury requityng suche benefytes as it fyrst receyued from thence. The people of this Ilande are commonly of somewhat
lesse stature then are the Spaniardes, and of a shynyng or cleare browne coloure: they haue wyues of theyr owne, and absteyne from theyr daughters, systers, and mothers: they haue large foreheades, long blacke heare, and no beardes or heare in anye other partes of theyr bodies, aswell men as women,The people. except very fewe, as perhaps scarsly one among a thousand. They goe as naked as they were borne, except that on the partes whiche may not with honestie be seene, they weare a certayne leafe as brode as a mans hande, which neuerthelesse is not kept close with such diligence, but that sometymes a man may see that they thynke sufficiently hyd. In this Iland are certayne Glowormes, that shyne in the nyght as do ours, but are much bygger,Glowormes. and geue a greater lyght: Insomuch that when the men of the Ilande goo any iorneys in the night, they beare some of these wormes made fast about theyr feete and head, in such sort that he that should see them a farre, & ignorant of the thing, would be greatly astonished thereat. By the lyght of these also, the women worke in theyr houses in the nyght. These wormes they cal Cieuas. Their light lasteth for the space of three dayes, and diminisheth as they be∣gin to drye vp. There is also a kynde of Crowes, whose breath stynketh in the mornyng, and is sweete in the after noone:Crowes stink∣yng & sweete. the excrement which they auoyde, is a lyuing worme. As touching other thynges of this Iland, whereof Peter Martyr hath more largely intreated in his Decades, I haue thought it superfluous to repeate the same agayne out of this historie of Gonzalus Fer∣dinandus, but haue heere gathered only such thynges as eyther are not touched of Peter Martir, or not so largely declared, as I haue done the lyke in all other notable thynges, which I haue collected out of this Summarie of Gonzalus. Of the Ilande of Cuba, and other. OF the Ilande of Cuba, and other,Sainct Iohn his Ilande▪ as the I∣landes of Sancti Iohannis, and Iamaica, the same way be sayde in maner in all thinges as before of Hispaniola,Iamaica. although not so largely. Yet in lesse quantitie do they bring foorth the lyke thynges, as golde, copper, cattayle, trees, plantes, fyshes, and suche other, of the whiche we haue spoken there.
In Cuba, is a certayne kynde of Partriches, beyng verye litle, with theyr feathers muche of the coloure of Turtle Dooues,Partriches. but are of muche better tast to be eaten: they are taken in great number, and beyng brought wylde into the houses, they be∣come as tame within the space of three or foure dayes as though they had been hatched there: they become exceedyng fat in short space, and are doubtlesse the most delicate and pleasaunt meate that euer I haue eaten. But to let passe many other thynges that myght be heere sayd, and to speake of two maruey∣lous thynges whiche are in this Ilande of Cuba: whereof the on is, that a valleye conteynyng two or three leagues in length betweene two mountaynes, is full of a kynde of verye harde stones,Pellettes for Gunnes wrought by na∣ture. of suche perfect roundenesse, and lyke vnto Pellettes of Gunnes, that no art can make better or more exactly pullished. Of these, some are as small as Pellettes for Handgunnes, and other so encreasyng bygger and bygger from that quantitie, that they maye serue for all sortes of Artyllarie, although they bee of byggenesse to receyue one or two or more Quintales of pou∣der, euery Quyntale conteynyng one hundred weyght, or of what other quantitie so euer they be. These Pellettes are founde throughout al the valley within the earth, as in a mine, whiche they dygge, and take out suche as they neede of al sortes. The other marueylous thyng of this Ilande is this: That farre from the sea,A fountayne of the pytche of Bitumen there ishueth out of a mountayne a certayne lycour, muche lyke the Cley of Babylon, called Bitumen, or lyke vnto pytche, in great quantitie, and suche as is very commodi∣ous for the calkyng of shyppes: this falleth continually from the rocke, and runneth into sea, in suche aboundaunce that it is seene flotyng aboue the water on euerye syde of the sea there a∣bout, as it is dryuen from place to place by the wynde or course of the water.Quintus Cur∣sius. Quintus Cursius wryteth in his historie, that great Alexander came to the citie of Memi, where is a great Caue or Denne, in the whiche is a spryng or fountayne that contynually auoydeth a great quantitie of Bitumen, in suche sort, that it is an easy thyng to beleeue that the stones of the walles of Babylon might be laid therewith,Bitumen of Babylon. according as the said auctour writeth. I haue seene this myne of Bitumen, not only in the I∣land of Cuba, but also such an other in new Spaine, whiche was
founde of late in the prouince of Panuco, where it is much better then the other of Cuba,Panuco. as I haue seene by experience in calkyng of shyppes. Of the lande of Baccalaos, called Terra Baccalearum, situ∣ate on the North syde of the firme lande. SHortly after that your maiestie came to the citie of Toledo, there arriued in the moneth of Nouember, Steuen Gomes the pilot, who the yeere before of .1524. by the commaun∣dement of your maiestie, sailed to ye North partes, and founde a great part of lande continuate from that which is called Bac∣calaos,Baccalaos. discoursyng toward the West to the .xl. and .xli. degree, from whence he brought certayne Indians (for so call we all the nations of the newe found landes) of the which he brought some with him from thence, who are yet in Toledo at this present,Indians. and of greater stature then other of the firme lande, as they are com∣monly: theyr coloure is muche lyke the other of the firme lande: they are great archers, and go couered with the skinnes of diuers beastes, both wylde and tame. In this lande are many excellent furres, as Marterns, Sables, and such other ryche furres,Ryche furres and syluer, of the which the sayd pilot brought some with him into Spayne: they haue syluer, and copper, & certayne other metals: they are Ido∣laters, and honour the Sonne and Moone,Idolaters. and are seduced with such superstition and errours as are they of the firme. And to haue wryten thus much it may suffice, of suche thynges as haue seemed to me most worthy to be noted in the Summarie of Gon∣zalus Ferdinandus, wrytten to Themperours maiestie. Particularly of newe Spayne, called Noua Hispania, or Mexico. NEwe Spayne, is that part of the continent or firme lande that lyeth West and South from the land of Florida: this was subdued to thempire of Castile by the ryght noble gentelman Ferdinando Cortese ye marquesse of the vale of Quaraca. In this lande are many prouinces, conteynyng in them in
maner innumerable cities, among which, that is the chiefe whi∣che the Indians cal Mexico, or Temixtitan, consystyng of more then fiue hundred thousand inhabitauntes:The citie of Mexico, or Te∣mixtitan. It standeth in the middest of a lake of salte water, as doth Uenece in the sea, the lake conteyneth fourtie Persian miles, called Parasange, euery one consysting of .xxx. furlonges, and more, as some say. In these regions is found great plentie of gold,Golde and syluer. syluer, & pretious stones, with innumerable other thynges, both necessary for the lyfe of man, & pleasant, as Silke, Bombasine cotton, Alame, Safferne, Woad,Sylke. Cotton. Alame. Woade. Suger. with diuers other thinges, wherwith cloth and Silke is dyed. There is also such abundaunce of suger, that certaine Spa∣nishe shippes are yeerely fraighted therwith, and bring the same into Smile, from whence it is caryed in maner to al partes of Christendome. Thinhabitantes of Mexico are subtile people, and vse much craft in theyr bargaining: they haue not the vse of gold and syluer mony, but vse in the steade thereof the halfe shelles of Almonds,Shelles for mony. which kind of Barbarous mony they cal Cacoa, or Ca∣canguate. In maner al kinds of corne are there very good cheape, especially barly and wheate. They haue great plentie of Hartes, wylde Bores,Corne. Beastes. Lions, Leopardes, and Tigers, whiche beastes wander in maner in euery place. The region is most commodi∣ous for haukyng and huntyng, for the great abundaunce it hath of beastes and foules:Haukyng and huntyng. But the people exercise al theyr cunnyng in makyng the images of their idolatry, and in painting. Theyr women are valiant,Payntyng. and sumptuous in theyr apparell, and other tyrementes:Womē sump∣tuously appa∣reled. for they so rychely frynge and beset the same with pearles, precious stones, and golde, that nothyng can be more excellent: they haue a kynde of paper greatly differyng from ours, in this they expresse their mindes by certayne figures, for they haue not otherwyse thuse of letters. The nation is desyrous of warre, and doth not long keepe the conditions of peace vn∣uiolated:A warlyke na∣tion. but delyteth rather in ciuile and most cruell battayle among them selues, then to liue in peace and quietnesse. Such as in the warres fal by any meanes into the handes of theyr eni∣mies, eyther by submyssion or otherwyse, are partly sacryfised to the Idoles, and the resydue geuen to the souldiers to be eaten, in lyke maner as we rewarde dogges and haukes with part of theyr pray.Captiues sa∣crificed to I∣doles. They haue innumerable Idoles, whiche euery one
maketh for his particuler god, after the phantasie of his owne brayne, and geueth therto diuine honour, albeit at this day they do by litle and litle leaue of theyr barbarous fyercenesse, & with our religion imbrace better maners: For they nowe professe the fayth of Christ, and in his name pray vnto God the Father. Of Peru. THe prouince called Peru, was also named Noua Castilia, by them that fyrst founde it. This region is the West part of America, and is situate in the longitude of .290. de∣grees, proceeding from the West to the East, and Southward begynneth fyue de∣grees beyonde the Equinoctiall line, and is extended very farre into the South. This is taken to be the rychest land in golde, siluer, pearles, precious stones, and spices,Peru is the rychest land that is know∣en. that euer was founde yet to this day. For gold is there in suche plentie that they make pyspots therof, and other vessels applied to fylthy vses. But this is more to be marueyled at, that in a citie called Collo was founde a house al couered with massie plates of gold. In theyr warres also theyr harnesse is of gold and siluer.A house coue∣red with golde. Theyr weapons are bowes, arrowes, slyngs, dartes, and pykes.Harnesse of golde. The inhabitauntes are warrelyke people, and of great agilitie. They haue cities defended with lawes and armes. The region is exceeding fruitfull, and yeldeth corne twyse in the yeere. It is so floryshyng with many fayre woods, mountaynes, ryuers,A fruitfull region. and other both pleasaunt & necessarie commodities, that it seemeth in a maner an earthly Paradise: it hath diuers kynds of beastes, and yet none hurtful, or of rauenyng kynde. Theyr sheepe are of suche heyght, that they vse them in steede of Horses:Great sheepe. some write that they are as bygge as the young Foles of Camelles, and that theyr wooll is verye softe and fyne: also that the Ewes bryng foorth Lambes twyse a yeere. The people are wyttie, and of gentle behauiour, cunnyng also in artes,The dutie of Christian Princes. faythfull of pro∣mise, and of maners not greatly to be discommended, saue only that they are ignorant of Christ, who neuerthelesse is now know∣en vnto them in many places, as our hope is he shalbe daylie
more and more, yf all Princes wyll herein put theyr helpyng handes to the plowe of our Lorde, and send labourers into his vineyarde. Of the great ryuer called Rio de la Plata (that is) the ryuer of siluer. THis ryuer reacheth very farre in length & breadth, and is called Vruai, in the Indian tongue.Paraue. Into this falleth an other riuer na∣med Paraue. The first that sayled into the riuer of Plata, was Iohn Dias Solis, whom the ryght noble kyng of Spaine Ferdinan∣dus made Admirall of these seas.Iohn Dias Solis. The Iland Martinus Gratias. In the ryuer lyeth an Ilande whiche Iohn Dias named Martinus Gra∣tias, because a pilot of his, so called, was buried there. This Ilande is situate in the myddest of the ryuer, and is distant from the mouth of the same about fourtie leagues. As the sayde Ad∣myrall attempted to expugne the Ilande, he was sodenly op∣pressed and slayne of the Indians that priuylye assayled hym. Wherewith neuerthelesse theyr barbarous crueltie was not sa∣tisfied vntyll they had torne hym in peeces, and deuoured hym: But many yeeres after, the Emperours Maiestie, and Kyng of Spayne Charles the fyfte, sent foorth Sebastian Cabot (a man of great courage & skylful in Cosmographie,The viage of Sebastian Ca∣bot to the riuer of Plata. Charlis. Ophir. Cipango. Cathay. and of no lesse ex∣perience as concernyng the Starres of the sea) with commaun∣dement to discouer and subdue the Indians of Tharsis, Ophir, Cipango, and Coi Cathai, Receyuyng therefore his commis∣sion, and proceedyng forwardes on his viage, he arriued by chaunce at this Ilande: the cause whereof was, that the prin∣cipall vessell was lost by shypwracke, and the men that saued theyr lyues by swymmyng were receyued into our shyppes. Perceyuyng therefore that by reason of this chaunce he coulde by no meanes perfourme his viage attempted, he entended to expugne the sayde Ilande, and thereupon to conueygh his vic∣tuals to land, to prepare his souldiers to the inuasion, to plant co∣lonies, & to erect fortresses by the riuers side, wherby the Spa∣niards might be defended from the violence of the Barbarians. But before he attempted this, he was aduertised that the Ilande was rich in gold & siluer. Which thing did so encorage him, that
without respecte of peryl he thought best to expugne it by one meanes or other, wherein his boldenesse tooke good effecte, as often tymes chaunceth in great affayres. Furthermore as touchyng the ryuer, Sebastian Cabote made relation, that he ne∣uer sawe any comparable vnto this in breadth and deapth: For whereas it falleth into the sea,The ryuer of Plata. it conteyneth .xxv. leagues in breadth. From the mouth of the ryuer, Cabote sailed vp the same into the lande for the space of three hundred and fiftie leagues, as he wryteth in his owne carde. That it is of great deapth, may hereby be consydered, that many great ryuers fall into it, so that the chanell can not be shalowe that conteyneth such aboundance of water, and suche plentie of good and great fyshes: For there is in maner no fyshe in the sea, that is not founde in this ryuer. Assoone as the Spanyardes were set alande, they made a proofe if the soyle were fruitefull to beare corne.Marueylous fruitefulnes. Takyng therefore fyftie graynes of wheate, and committyng the same to the earth in the moneth of September, they geathered thereof two thou∣sand and fiftie at December next folowyng: (wherin some being deceyued and mistakyng the thyng, haue written in the steade of two thousande and fiftie, fiftie thousande and two:Mountaynes conteynyng golde and syluer.) the lyke fer∣tilitie is there of all other grayne and pulse. Furthermore thin∣habitauntes declared, that not farre from that place, there are great and hygh mountaines, in the which is founde great plentie of golde: and no great distance from the same, to be other moun∣taynes no lesse fruitefull of syluer, and many other thinges, long to rehearse. Thinhabitauntes are paynefull men, and tyll the grounde diligently, wherein they take great pleasure, and haue therefore great plentie of bread of Maizium. There are sheepe of such byggenesse, that they compare them to young Camels or Asses, as some say: theyr wooll is very fine,Great sheepe. and nearest vnto the fynenesse of sylke. There are also beastes of diuers kyndes. A∣mong men there is this difference, that such as liue in the moun∣taynes, are whyte, and for the most part lyke vnto the men of our regions: but they that dwell aboue the ryuer (as though they tooke theyr colour thereof) are blackyshe, or purple,Theyr colour. of the coloure of fine Iron or Steele. This also chaunceth to many of them,Men with de∣formed legges. that theyr feete and legges are lyke the legges and feete of the foule called the Oystreche.
Of the landes of Laborador and Baccalaos, lying west and northwest from England, and be∣ing part of the firme lande of the VVest Indies. MAny haue traueyled to search the coaste of the lande of Laborador, aswell to thintent to knowe howe farre or whyther it reacheth, as also whether there be any passage by sea through the same into the sea of Sur and the Ilandes of Molucca, whiche are vnder the Equinoctiall lyne,The way to the Ilandes of Molucca by the north sea. thynkyng that the way thyther should greatly be shortened by this viage. The Spany∣ardes, as to whose ryght the sayde Ilandes of spices parteyne, dyd fyrst seeke to fynde the same by this way. The Portugales also hauyng the trade of spices in theyr handes,The Spany∣ardes. dyd trauayle to fynde the same, although hytherto neyther any suche passage is founde, or the ende of that lande. In the yeere a thousande and fiue hundreth, Gasper Cortesreales, made a viage thyther with two Carauelles,Gasper Cor∣tesreales. but found not the streight or passage he sought. At his being there, he named the Ilands that lye in the mouth of ye gulfe Quadrado, after his name Cortesreales, lying in the fyf∣tie degree, and more, & brought from that land about threescore men for slaues:Insula Cortes∣reales. He greatly marueyled to behold the huge quan∣titie of snowe & Ise, for the sea is there frosen exceedingly. Thin∣habitantes are men of good corporature,Snowe and Ise. although tawny lyke the Indies, and laborious: They paynt theyr bodyes, and weare braselettes and hoopes of syluer and copper: theyr apparell is made of the skynnes of Marternes, & dyuers other beastes, whi∣che they weare with the heare inwarde in winter,Furres. and outwarde in sommer. This apparell they gyrde to theyr bodyes with gyrdels made of cotton, or the fynewes of fyshes and beastes. They eate fyshe more then any other thyng, and especially Sal∣mons,Fyshe. although they haue foules and fruite. They make theyr houses of tymber, whereof they haue great plentie: and in the steade of tiles, couer them with the skinnes of fishes and beastes. It is sayde also that there are Gryfes in this lande, and that the Beares and many other beastes and foules are whyte.Gryfes. Beares. To this
and the Ilandes about the same, the Britons are accustomed to resort, as men of nature agreeable vnto them,The Britons. and borne vnder the same altitude and temperature. The Norwayes also sayled thyther with the pilot called Iohn Scoluo,Sebebastian Cabot. and the Englyshe men with Sebastian Cabot. The coaste of the lande of Baccallaos, is a great tract, and the greatest altitude thereof is .xlviii. degrees and a halfe. Sebastian Cabot was the first that brought any knowledge of this land.The lande of Baccallaos. For beyng in England in the dayes of kyng Henrye the seuenth, he furnyshed two shyps at his owne charges,The viage of Cabot in the dayes of king Henry the seuenth. or (as some say) at the kynges, whom he perswaded that a passage myght be founde to Cathay by the North seas, and that spyces myght be brought from thence sooner by that way then by the viage the Portuga∣les vse by the sea of Sur. He went also to knowe what maner of landes those Indies were to inhabite. He had with hym three hundred men, and directed his course by the tract of Islande, vp∣on the Cape of Laborador at fyftie and eight degrees, affirming that in the moneth of Iuly there was such cold, & heapes of Ise,Ise in Iuly. that he durst passe no further: also that the daies were very long, and in maner without nyght, and the nyghtes very cleare. Cer∣tayne it is, that at the threescore degrees, the longest day is of eighteene houres. But considering the cold, and the strangenesse of the vnknowen lande, he turned his course from thence to the West, folowing the coast of the land of Baccallaos vnto the thir∣tie & eight degrees, from whence he returned to Englande.Baccallaos. To conclude, the Britons and Danes, haue sayled to the Baccallaos, and Iaques Cartier a french man was there twise with three Galeons:Brytons. Danes. Iaques Car∣tyre. as one in the yeere .xxxiiii. and the other in the .xxxv. and chose the land to inhabite from the .xlv. degrees to the .li. beyng as good a land as Fraunce, and all thynges therin commune to suche as fyrst possesse the same. Of these landes, Iacobus Gastaldus wry∣teth thus. The new land of Baccallaos, is a colde region,The people of Baccallaos. whose inhabitauntes are Idolatours, and praye to the Sonne and Moone, and dyuers Idoles: they are whyte people, and ve∣rye rusticall, for they eate fleshe and fyshe and all other thynges rawe. Sometymes also they eate mans fleshe priuilie, so that theyr Cacique haue no knoweledge thereof. The apparrel of both the men and women, is made of Beares skynnes, although they
haue Sables and Marternes, not greatlye esteemed, because they are litle. Some of them go naked in sommer, and weare apparrell only in winter. The Britons and Frenchmen are ac∣customed to take fyshe in the coastes of these landes, where is founde great plentie of Tunnies, which thinhabitantes cal Bac∣callaos,Fyshing for Tunnies. Laborador, wherof the land was so named. Northward from the re∣gion of Baccallaos, is the lande of Laborador, all full of mountay∣nes and great woods, in which are many Beares & wild Bores. The inhabitantes are Idolatours, and warlyke people, apparel∣led as are they of Baccallaos. In al this new land, is neyther ci∣tie or castell, but they lyue in companies like heardes of beastes. The discouering of the land of Florida. THe gouernour of the Ilande of Boriouena▪ Iohn Ponce of Leon,Iohn Ponce. Water of great vertue, of this reade in the Decades. beyng discharged of his office, and very ryche, furnished & sent foorth two Carauels to seeke the Ilands of Boiuca, in the which the Indians affirmed to be a fountayne or spryng whose water is of vertue to make old men young. Whyle he trauayled syxe monethes, with outragious desire among ma∣ny Ilandes to fynde that he sought, and coulde fynde no token of any suche fountayne,Bemini, he entred into Bemini, and discouered the lande of Florida, in the yeere 1512. on Easter day, whiche the Spaniards cal the floryshing day of Pascba, wherby they named that lande Florida. And supposyng that great ryches myght be brought from thence, he returned into Spayne, and couenanted with king Ferdinando, as touchyng the trade: and by the interces∣sion of Nicolas de Ouando, and Peter Nunnez de Gusman, the kyng dyd not only make hym gouernour of Bemini and Florida, but also sent foorth with hym three shyppes from Sciuile to∣wards his second viage, in the yeere 1515. He touched in the Ilande of Guaccana, otherwyse called Guadalupea, and sent to lande certayne of his men with the Laundresses of the shyppes:Guaccana. whom the Canibales (lying in ambushe) assayled with theyr in∣uenomed arrowes,The Cani∣bales. and slaying the most part, caried away the women. With this euill beginning, Iohn Ponce departed from hence to Boriquen,Boriquen. and from thence to Florida, where he went
alande with his souldyers, to espie a place most commodious to inhabite and plant a colonie: But the Indians commyng foorth agaynst him to defende the entrance, assayled the Spanyardes fiercely, and slue and wounded many of them. At whiche con∣flicte also hee him selfe, beyng wounded with an arrowe, dyed shortly after in the Ilande of Cuba: and so endyng his lyfe, con∣sumed a great parte of the rychesse hee had before gotten at sainct Iohans of Boriquen. This Iohn Ponce had before sayled with Christopher Colon to the Ilande of Hispaniola in the yeere 1493.The death of Iohn Ponce. Hee was a gentle souldyer in the warres of this I∣lande, and captayne of the prouince of Higuei for Nicolas de O∣uando that conquested the same.The lande of Florida. The region of Florida is a poynt or cape of lande reachyng into the sea lyke vnto a tongue, beyng a famous and notorious place among the Indians, by reason of many Spanyardes that haue been slayne there. But where∣as by fame this Florida was esteemed a ryche lande, many va∣liant and noble men desyred the conquest thereof, among whom Ferdinando de Soto (who had before been a captayne in Peru,Ferdinando de Soto. and greatly inryched by the imprisonment of kyng Atabaliba) at∣tempted a viage thither with a good bande of men, and spent fyue yeeres in seekyng of golde mynes, supposyng that this land had been lyke vnto Peru. In fine, hee dyed there, and was the destruction and vndoyng of all that went with him,The valiant myndes of the Spanyardes. without inhabytyng that lande, in the whiche the conquestours had hytherto neuer good successe, forasmuche as these Indians are valiant archers, and strong & hardy men.The thyrd at∣tempt of the conquest of Florida. But the valiant myndes of the Spanyardes not discouraged by these misaduentures, af∣ter the death of Ferdinando Soto, many woorthie gentlemen desy∣red this conquest in the yeere .1544. among whom was Iulian Samano, and Peter de Abumada, beyng bretherne, and men of suf∣ficient abilitie for such an enterprise. But neyther the Emperour beyng then in Germanie, neyther the prince Don Philip his son, who gouerned all the kyngdomes of Castile and Aragonie, ney∣ther yet the counsayle of the Indies, would in any case agree to the conquest. Neuerthelesse, not vtterly contemnyng the matter,Certayne Fry∣ers attempt the conquest onely with wordes, but with euyll successe. which they were partly persuaded myght otherwyse be brought to passe, they sent thyther Fryer Luys, Cancell of Baluasiro, with other Fryers of the order of sainct Dominike, who offred them
selues to conuert the nations of that lande from theyr gentilitie to the fayth of Christ, and obedience to the Emperour, onely with wordes▪ The Fryer therefore going forwarde on his viage at the kynges charges, in the yeere .1549. went aland with foure other Fryers which he tooke with him, and certayne maryners, without harnesse or weapons: vnto whom as he began his prea∣chyng,The Fryers are slayne and eaten. many of the Indians of the sayde Florida resorted to the sea syde, where without gyuyng audience to his wordes, they ca∣ryed him away, with three other of his companyons, and dyd eate them, whereby they suffred martyrdome for the fayth of Christ: the residue that escaped, made hast to the shyppe, and kept them selues for confessours, as some say. Many that fauour the intent of the Fryers, doe nowe consider that by that meanes the Indi∣ans could not be brought to our friendshyp and religion: neuer∣thelesse, that if it could so haue been brought to passe, it had been better. There came of late from that shyppe, one that had been the page of Ferdinando de Soto,A newe kynde of disgradyng. who declared that the Indians hanged vp the skynnes, with the heades and crownes of the sayd Fryers in one of theyr Temples.
¶ FOR .M. CAP. FVRBY∣SHERS PASSAGE BY THE NORTHVVEST. OF CHINA IN CATHAYO, SITVATED IN THE EAST SYDE OF GREAT ASY. OF THE ILAND GIAPAN, AND OTHER LITLE ILES IN TTE EAST OCEAN, BY THE VVAY FROM CATHAYO TO THE MOLVCCAES. BY RICHARDE WILLES.
For .M. Captayne Furbishers passage by the Northwest. To the ryght honourable and vertuous Ladie, the Lady Anne, Countesse of VVarwyke. FOure famous wayes there be spoken of to those fruitfull and wealthie Ilandes, we doe vsually call Moluccaes, continually haunted for gayne, and dayly traueyled for ryches therein growyng. These Ilandes although they stand East from our Meridian, distant almost halfe the length of the world, in ex∣treame heate, vnder the Equinoctial lyne, possessed of Infidelles and Barbares: yet by our neyghbours great aboundaunce of wealth there is paynefully sought, in respect of the voyage deere∣ly bought, and from thence daungerously brought home vnto vs. Our neyghbours I call the Portugalles in comparison of the Molucchians for neerenesse vnto vs, for lyke situation west∣warde as we haue, for theyr vsuall trade with vs, for that the farre South asterlynges doe know this parte of Europe by no other name then Portugall, not greatly acquaynted as yet with the o∣ther nations thereof. Theyr voyage is well vnderstoode of all men,1. By the south∣east. and the Southeasterne way rounde about Affrike by the cape of Good hope, more spoken of, better knowen & traueyled than that it may seeme needefull to discourse thereof any further. The seconde way lyeth Southwest, betwyxt the West In∣die or South America,2. By the south∣west. and the South continent, through that narrow streicte where Magellanus first of all men that euer wee doe reade of, passed these later yeeres, leauyng therevnto therfore his name. This way no doubt the Spanyardes would commo∣diosly take, for that it lyeth neare vnto their dominions there, could the Easterne currant and leuant wyndes as easily suffer them to returne, as speedily therewith they may be carryed thy∣ther: for the which difficultie or rather impossibilitie of striuing agaynst the force both of wynde and streame, this passage is li∣tle or nothyng vsed, although it be very well knowen. The thyrd way by the Northeast, beyonde all Europe and Asie,3. By the north∣east. that woorthie and renowmed knight sir Hugh Willoughby
sought to his perill, enforced there to ende his lyfe for colde, con∣gealed and frosen to death. And truely this way consisteth rather in the imagination of Geographers, than allowable either in rea∣son, or approued by experience, as wel it may appeare by the dan∣gerous trending of the Scythish Cape set by Ortelius vnder the eight degree North,Ortel. tab. Asiae. 3. by the vnlykely saylyng in that Northerne sea alwayes cladde with Yse and Snow, or at the least continu∣ally pestred therewith, if happely it be at any tyme dissolued: be∣sydes bayes & shelfes, the water waxyng more shallow towardes the East, that we say nothyng of the foule mystes and darke fogs in the colde clime, of the litle power of the Sunne to cleare the ayre, of the vncomfortable nyghtes, so neare the Pole, fyue mo∣nethes long. A fourth way to goe vnto these aforesayde happy Ilandes Moluccae, Syr Humfrey Gilberte, a learned and valiant Knyght,4. By the Northwest. discourseth of at large in his new passage to Cathayo, and was at∣tempted the last yeere by your Ho. seruaunt. M Cap. Furbisher, presently takyng vpon him with his company fully to discouer the same, and is now, if I be not deceyued, ready for his voyage. The enterpryse of it selfe beyng vertuous, the facte must doubt∣lesse deserue hygh prayse, and whansoeuer it shall be finished, the fruites thereof can not be small: where vertue is guyde, there is fame a folower, and fortune a Companion. But the way is dan∣gerous, the passage doubtfull, the voyage not throughly knowen, and therfore gaynesayde by many, after this maner. Fyrst,Ob. 1. who can assure vs of any passage rather by the North∣west, than by the Northeast? doe not both wayes lye in equall distance from the North pole? stande not the North capes of eyther continent vnder lyke eleuation? Is not the Ocean sea be∣yonde America farther distant from our Meridian by .30. or .40. degrees West, than the extreame pointes of Cathayo Eastward, if Ortelius generall Carde of the world be true?In Theatro. In the Northeast that noble Knyght sir Hugh Willoughby perished for colde: and can you than promyse a passenger any better hap by the North∣west? who hath gone for triall sake, at any tyme, this way out of Europe to Cathayo? If you seeke the aduyse heerein of such as make profession in Cosmographie, Ptolome, the father of Geographie,Ob. 2. and his el∣dest
children, will answere by theyr Mappes with a negatiue, concludyng moste of the sea within the land, and makyng an end of the world northward, neare the .36. degree. The same opinion, whan learnyng chiefly florished, was receiued in the Romanes tyme, as by their Poetes wrytynges it may appeare: Et te colet vltima Thule, sayd Virgile, being of opinion, that Iseland was the extreme parte of the world habitable towarde the North. Ioseph Moletius an Italian, and Mercator a Germane, for knowledge men able to be compared with the best Geographers of our time, the one in his halfe Spheares of the whole worlde, the other in some of his great Globes, haue continued the West Indishe lande, euen to the North Pole, and consequently, cut of all pas∣sage by sea that way. The same Doctors, Mercator in other of his Globes and Mappes, Moletius in his sea carde, neuerthelesse doubting of so great continuance of the former continent, haue opened a goulph betwixt the West Indies and the extreme northerne lande: but suche a one, that ether is not to be traueyled for the causes in the first Obiection alleaged, or cleane shut vp from vs in Europe by Groenland: the South ende whereof Moletius maketh firme lande with America, the north parte continent with Lapponlande and Norway. Thyrdly, the greatest fauourers of this voyage, can not deny but that if any such passage be,Ob. 3. it lyeth subiect vnto Yse and snow for the most parte of the yeere, whereas it standeth in the edge of the frostie zone. Before the Sunne hath warmed the ayre, and dissolued the Yse, eche one well knoweth that there can bee no saylyng: the Yse once broken through the continuall abode, the Sunne maketh a certayne season in those partes: how shall it be possible for so weake a vessell as a shyppe is, to holde out amyd whole Ilandes, as it were, of Yse continually beatyng on eche syde, and at the mouth of that goulphe, issuyng downe fu∣riously from the North, safely to passe, whan whole mountaynes of Yse and Snow shalbe tombled downe vpon her. Ob. 4.Wel, graunt the west Indies not to continue continent vnto the Pole, graunt there be a passage betwyxt these two landes, let the goulph lye neare vs than commonly in cardes we fynde it set, namely, betwyxt the .61. & .64. degrees north, as Gemma Frisius in
his Mappes and Globes imagineth it, and so left by our coun∣triman Sebastian Cabote, in his table, the which my good Lorde your father hath at Cheynies, and so tryed this last yeere by your Honours seruaunt as hee reported, and his carde and compasse doe witnesse. Let the way bee voyde of all difficulties, yet doeth it not folowe that we haue free passage to Cathayo. For ex∣amples sake. You may trende all Norway, Finmarke, and Lappon∣lande, and than bow Southwarde to sainct Nicolas in Mosco∣uia: you may lykewyse in the Mediterranean sea fetche Constan∣tinople, and the mouth of Tanais: yet is there no passage by sea through Moscouia, into Pont Euxine, now called Mare Mag∣giore. Agayne, in the aforesayde Mediterranean sea, we sayle to Alexandria in Egypt, the Barbares bryng theyr pearle and spices from the Moluccaes vp the read sea and Arabian goulph to Sues, scarsely three dayes iourney from the aforesayde ha∣uen: yet haue we no way by sea, from Alexandria to the Mo∣luccaes, for that Isthmos or litle streicte of lande betwyxt the two seas. In lyke maner, although the northerne passage bee free at .61. degrees latitude, and the West Ocean beyonde America, vsually called Mar del zur, knowen to be open at .40. degrees eleuation, for the Ilande Giapan, yea .300. leagues nor∣therly aboue Giapan: yet may there bee lande to hynder the through passage that way by sea, as in the examples afore∣sayde it falleth out, Asia and America there beyng ioyned togeather in one continent. Ne can this opinion seeme alto∣geather friuolous vnto any one that diligently peruseth our Cosmographers doynges. Iosephus Moletius is of that mynde, not onely in his playne hemispheres of the worlde, but also in his sea carde. The French Geographers in lyke maner, bee of the same opinion, as by their Mappe cut out in fourme of a harte you may perceyue: as though the West Indyes were parte of Asie. Whiche sentence well agreeth with that olde conclusion in the scholes. Quidquid praeter Africam et Europam est, Asia est. Whatsoeuer land doeth neyther appertayne vnto Afrike nor to Europe, is parte of Asie.
5. Ob.Furthermore it were to small purpose to make so long, so paynefull, so doubtfull a voyage by such a new founde way, if in Cathayo you should neyther be suffred to lande for silkes and sil∣uer, nor able to fetche the Molucca spices and pearle for piracye in those seas. Of a lawe denying all Aliens to enter into China, and forbiddyng all the inhabiters vnder a great penaltie to let in any stranger into that countreys, shall you reade in the report of Galeotto Perera there imprisoned with other Portugalles: as also in the Giaponyshe letters, howe for that cause the woorthie traueyler Xauierus bargayned with a Barbarian Marchaunt for a great sum of Pepper to be brought into Cantan, a porte in Ca∣thayo. The great and daungerous piracie vsed in that seas, no man can be ignorant of, that listeth to reade the Giaponishe and East Indian historie. Ob. 6.Finally, all this great labour would bee lost, all these charges spent in vayne, if in the ende our traueylers myght not be able to returne agayne, and bryng safely home into theyr owne natyue countrey, that wealth and ryches, they in forreyne regions with aduenture of goodes, and daunger of theyr lyues, haue sought for. By the Northeast there is no way, the Southeast passage the Portugalles doe hold, as Lordes of that seas. At the Southwest Magellanus experience hath partly taught vs, and partly we are persuaded by reason, howe the Easterne currant stryketh so furi∣ously on that streicte, and falleth with such force into that narrow goulphe, that hardely any shyppe can returne that way, into our West Ocean, out of Mar del zur. The which, if it be true, as tru∣ly it is, than may we say, that the aforesayde Easterne currant or leuant course of waters continually folowyng after the heauenly motions, looseth not altogeather his force, but is doubled rather by an other currant from out the Northeast, in the passage be∣twyxt America and the North lande, whyther it is of necessitie carryed: hauyng none other way to maintaine it selfe in circular motion, and consequently the force and fury thereof to be no lesse in the streict of Ania, where it striketh South into Mar del zur, beyond America (if any such streicte of sea there be) than in Ma∣gellane frete both streictes beyng of lyke breadth: as in Belog∣nine Zalterius table of new France, and in Don Diego Hermano di Toledo his carde for nauigation in that region we doe fynde pre∣cisely
set downe. Neuerthelesse to approue that there lyeth a way to Cathayo at the Northwest, from out of Europe, we haue experyence, namely of three brethren that went that iourney, as Gemma Frisius recordeth, and left a name vnto that streicte, whereby nowe it is called Fretum trium Fratrum. We do reade againe of a Portugal that passed this streicte, of whom. M. Furbi∣sher speaketh, that was imprisoned therefore many yeeres in Lesbona, to veryfie the olde Spanyshe prouerbe, I suffer for do∣yng wel. Likewise An. Vrdaneta a fryer of Mexico came out of Mar del zur this way into Germanie: his Carde, for he was a great discouerer, made by his owne experience and trauayle in that voyage, hath been seene by gentelmen of good credite. Now yf the obseruation and remembrance of thyngs breedeth experience, and of experience proceedeth art, and the certeine knowledge we haue in al faculties, as ye best Philosophers that euer were do affyrme:Cic. i. de orat. Arist. pri. Metaph. truly the voyage of these aforesayd trauail∣lers that haue gone out of Europe into Mar del zur, and retur∣ned thence at the Northwest, doo moste euidently conclude that way to be nauigable, and that passage free. So much the more we are so to thynke, for that the fyrste principle and chiefe grounde in all Geographie, as great Ptolome sayth, is the histo∣rie of trauel, that is,Lib. i. Geog. Cap. 2. reportes made by trauaylers skylfull in Ge∣ometrie & Astronomie, of al suche thinges in their iourney as to Geographie do belong. It only then remaineth, that we now an∣sweare to those argumentes that seemed to make against this former conclusion. The fyrste obiection is of no force, that generall table of the worlde set foorth by Ortelius or Mercator, for it greatly skil∣leth not, being vnskylfully drawen for that poynt:Sol. i. as manifest∣ly it may appeare vnto any one that conferreth the same wih Gemma Frisius vniuersal mappe, with his round quartered carde▪ with his globe, with Sobastian Cabota his table, and Ortelius ge∣nerall Mappe alone, worthily preferred in this case before all Mercator and Ortelius other doinges: for that Cabota was not only a skilful sea man, but a long trauailer, & such a one as entred personally that streicte, sent by king Henry the seuenth to make this aforesayd discouery, as in his owne discourse of nauigation
you may reade in his carde drawen with his owne hande, the mouth of the northwesterne streict lieth neare the .318. Meridian, betwixt .61. and .64. degrees in eleuation, continuyng the same breadth about .10 degrees west, where it openeth southerly more and more, vntyll it come vnder the tropike of Cancer, and so runneth into Mar del zur, at the least .18. degrees more in breadth there, then it was where it fyrst began: otherwyse I coulde as well imagine this passage to be more vnlykely then the voyage to Moscouia, and more impossible then it for the farre situation and continuance thereof in ye frosty clime: as nowe I can affyrme it to be very possible and most lykely in compa∣rison thereof, for that it nether coasteth so farre north as the Moscouian passage doth, nether is this streicte so long as that, before it bowe downe southerly towardes the Sonne agayne. The seconde argument concludeth nothing.Sol. 2. Ptoleme knewe not what was aboue .16. degrees south beyonde the equinoctiall lyne, he was ignorant of all passages northwarde from the eleua∣tion of .63. he knewe no Ocean sea beyonde Asia, yet haue the Portugalles trended ye Cape of good hope at the south poynte of Afrike, and trauayled to Giapan an Ilande in the east Ocean, betwixt Asia & America: our marchants in ye time of king Edward the syxt discouered the Moscouian passage farther north then Thule, and shewed Groenlande not to be continent with Lappon∣lande, and Norway: the lyke our northwesterne trauaylers haue done, declaryng, by theyr nauigation that way, the ignorance of all Cosmographers that ether do ioyne Groenlande with Ameri∣ca, or continue the west Indies with that frosty region vnder the north pole. As for Virgil he sange accordingly to ye knowledge of men in his time, as an other Poete dyd of the hotte Zone. Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu. Imaginyng, as most men then dyd,Oued. 1. Meta. Zonam torridam, the hot Zone, to be altogeather dishabited for heat, though presently we knowe ma∣ny famous and worthy kingdomes and cities in that part of the earth, and the Iland of saint Thomas neare Aethiopia, and the welthy Ilands for the which chiefly al these voyages are taken in hande, to be inhabited euen vnder the equinoctial lyne. To answere the third obiection,Sol. 3. besides Cabota & al other trauay∣lers nauigations, ye only creadit of. M. Furbisher may suffise, who
lately through al these Ilands of Ise, and mountaines of snowe, passed that way, euen beyond the gulphe that tumbleth downe from the North, and in some places though he drewe one ynche thick Ise, as he returning in August dyd, came home safelye agayne. The fourth argument is altogeather friuolous & vayne,Sol. 4. for neyther is there any isthmos or streict of land betwixt America and Asia, ne can these two landes ioyntly be one continent. The fyrst part of my answere is manifestly allowed of by Homer,Lib. Geog. whom that excellent Geographer Strabo foloweth, yeldyng hym in this facultie the prise. The aucthour of that booke lykewyse  to Alexander, attributed vnto Aristotle, is of ye same opinion, that Homer and Strabo be of, in two or three places. Dionisius in  hath this verse.. . So dooth the Ocean sea runne rounde about the worlde: speakyng only of Europe, Africke, and Asie, as then Asie was trauayled & knowen. With these Doctoures may you ioyne Pomponius Mela, Cap. 2. lib. 1. Plinius lib. 2. Cap. 67. and Pius. 2. Cap. 2. in his description of Asie. All the whiche writers do no lesse confirme the whole Easterne side of Asie to be compassed about with sea, then Plato doth affirme in Timaeo, vnder the name Atlantide, the West Indies to be an Ilande, as in a speciall discourse thereof. R. Eden writeth, agreable vnto the sentence of Proclus, Marsilius Fiinus, and others. Out of Plato it is gathered that America is an Ilande. Homer, Strabo, Aristotle, Dionisius, Mela, Plinie, Pius 2. affirme the continent of Asie, Afrike, and Europe, to be enuironned with the Ocean. I may therefore boldly say, though later intelligences therof had we none at all, that Asie and the West Indies, be not tied togeather by any isthmos or streict of land, contrary to the opinion of some new Cosmographers, by whom doubtfully this matter hath been brought in controuersie. And thus muche for the first part of my aunswere vnto the fourth obiection. The second part,Lib. 2. Meteor. Cap. 1. namely that America & Asie cannot be one continent, may thus be prooued. . The most riuers take downe that way their course, where the earth is most holowe & deepe,
wryteth Aristotle: and the sea, sayth he in the same place, as it goeth farther, so is it founde deeper. Into what goulphe do the Moscouian ryuers Onega, Duina, Oby, and Rha, powre out their streames? Northwarde out of Moscouia into the sea. Whi∣che way dooth that sea stryke? The South is mayne lande, the Easterne coast waxeth more and more shalowe: from the North, ether naturally, because that part of the earth is higher Aristot. 2. met. c. 1. or of necessitie, for that the forcible influence of some Northerne Starres causeth the earth there to shake of the sea, as some Philosophers do thynke: or finally for the great store of waters engendred in that frostie and cold clyme, that the banckes are not able to holde them. Alber. in 2. Meteo. Cap. 6. From the North I say, contynually falleth downe great abun∣daunce of water. So that this Northeasterne currant must at the length abruptly owe toward vs South on the West syde of Fynmarke and Norwaye: or els stryke downe Southwest aboue Groneland, or betwixt Groneland and Iseland, into the Northwest streict we speake of, as of congruence it doth, yf you marke the situation of that region, and by the report of M. Furbisher, ex∣perience teacheth vs. And M. Furbisher the further he trauay∣led in the former passage, as he tolde me, the deeper alwayes he founde sea. Lay you now the sum hereof togeather. The riuers runne where the Chanels are most hollow, the sea in taking his course waxeth deeper, the sea waters fall continuallye from the North Southward, the Northeasterne currant striketh downe into the streict we speake of, & is there augmented with whole mountains of ise & snow, falling downe furiously out from ye land vnder ye North Pole. Where store of water is, there is it a thing impossible to want sea,Plin. lib. 2. Cap. 67. where sea not only doth not want, but waxeth deeper, ther can be discouered no land. Finally, whence I pray you came the contrary tyde, that M. Furbisher met withal after that he had sayled no small way in that passage, if there be any isthmos or streict of land betwixt the aforesaid Northwest∣sterne gulfe and Mar del Zur, to ioyne Asia and America togea∣ther? That conclusion frequented in scholes Quidquid preter &c. was ment of the partes of the worlde then knowen, and so is it of ryght to be vnderstoode. Sol. 5.The fifte obiection requireth for answere, wysedome, and po∣licie,
in the trauailer, to wyn the Barbares fauour by some good meanes: and so to arme & strengthen him selfe, that when he shal haue the repulse in one coast, he may safely trauaile to an other, commodiously taking his conuenient times, & discretly making choyse of them with whom he wyl throughly deale. To force a violent entrie, would for vs Englishe men be very hard, consy∣deryng the strength and valeour of so great a nation, farre di∣staunt from vs, and the attempt thereof myght bee most peril∣lous vnto the doers, vnlesse theyr part were verye good. Tou∣chyng theyr lawes agaynst strangers, you shall reade ne∣uerthelesse in the same relations of Galeotto Berara, that the Ca∣thaian kyng is woont to graunt free accesse vnto all forreiners that trade into his countrey for marchandyse, and a place of ly∣bertie for them to remaine in: as the Mores had, vntyll such time as they had brought the Loutea or Lieuetenaunt of that coaste to be a circumcised Saracene: wherefore some of them were put to the sworde, the rest were scattred abrode: at Fuquien, a great citie in China, certayne of them are yet this day to be seen. As for the Giapans, they be most desyrous to be acquaynted with strangers. The Portugals though they were straightly hand∣led there at the fyrst, yet in the ende they founde great fauoure at the prince his hands, insomuch that the Loutea or president that misused them, was therefore put to death. The rude Indish Ca∣noa halleth that seas, the Portugalles, the Saracenes, & Mores traueil continually vp & downe that reache from Giapan to Chi∣na, from China to Malacca, from Malacca to the Moluccaes: and shal an Englishmā, better appointed then any of them al (that I say no more of our nauie) feare to saile in that Ocean? What seas at al doo want piracie? what nauigation is there voyde of peril? To the last argument. Our traueylers neede not to seeke their returne by the northeast, ne shall they be constrayned,Sol. 6. except they lyst, ether to attempte Magellane streicte at the South∣west, or to be in daunger of the Portugalles for the Southeast: they may returne by the northwest, that same way they do go foorth, as experience hath shewed. The reason alleaged for proofe of the contrary, may be disproued after this maner. And fyrst, it may be called in controuersie, whether any currant con∣tinually be forced by the motion of Primum mobile, rounde about
the worlde, or no? for learned men do diuersely handle that que∣stion. The naturall course of all waters is downewarde, wher∣fore of congruence they fall that way where they fynde the earth most lowe and deepe: in respecte whereof, it was erst sayde, the seas to strike from the Northren landes Southerly. Uiolently the seas are tossed and troubled diuerse wayes with the wyndes,Luc. lib. 1. Pharsal. encreased and diminished by the course of the Moone, hoysed vp and downe through the sundrye operations of the Sonne and the Starres: finally some be of opinion, that the seas be car∣ried in part violently about ye world after the daily motion of the highest mouable heauen, in lyke maner as ye elementes of ayre and fyre, with the rest of the heauenly spheres are, from the east vnto the west. And this they do call theyr easterne currant, or leuant streame.VVhat the easterne cur∣rant is. Some suche currant may not be denied to be of great force in the hote Zone, for the nearenes thereof vnto the centre of the Sonne and blustryng easterne wyndes violently dryuing the seas westwarde: howbeit in the temperate climes, the Sonne beyng farther of, and the wyndes more diuerse, blowyng as muche from the north, the west, and south, as from the east, this rule doth not effectually withholde vs from trauey∣lyng eastwarde, ne be we kepte euer backe by the aforesayde Leuante wyndes and streame. But in Magellane streict we are violently driuen backe westwarde: Ergo through the North∣westerne streicte or Anian fret shall we not be able to returne eastwarde? it foloweth not. The fyrst, for that the northwesterne streict hath more sea rome at the least by one hundred Englyshe myles, then Magellane fret hath, the onely want wherof causeth all narrowe passages generally to be most violent. So woulde I say in Anian gulfe, if it were so narrowe as Don Diego and Zalterius haue paynted it out, any returne that way to be ful of difficulties, in respect of such streictnes therof, not for the neare∣nes of the Sonne, or easterne wyndes, violently forceing that way any leuant streame. But in that place there is more sea rome by many degrees, if the cardes of Cabota, and Gemma Fri∣sius, and that whiche Tramezine imprinted, be true. And hytherto reason see I none at all, but that I may as well geue credyt vnto theyr doynges, as to any of the rest. It must be Peregrinationis historia, that is, true reportes of skilful trauailers,
as Ptolome writeth, that in suche controuersies of Geographie must put vs out of double. Ortelius in his vniuersall tables,Lib. 1. Geog. Cap. 2. in his particuler Mappes of the west Indies, of all Asia, of the northren kyngdomes, of the easte Indies, Mercator in some of his globes, and generall mappes of the worlde, Moletius in his vniuersall table of the Globe diuided, in his sea carde, and particuler tables of the East Indies, Zalterius, and Don Di∣ego, with Fernando Bertely, and others, do so much dyffer both from Gemma Frisius and Cabota, among them selues, & in diuers places from them selues, concerning the diuers situation and sun∣drye limittes of America, that one may not so rashly, as truelye surmise, these men either to be ignorant in those pointes touching the aforesayd region, or that the mappes they haue geuen out vn∣to the world, were collected only by them, & neuer of their owne drawyng. M. Furbishers prosperous voyage, and happie re∣turne, wyl absolutely decide these controuersies, and certaynely determine where the whole passage lieth, how long it is, what breadth it carieth, how perilous, how prosperous the iorney is, and what commodities the paynfull trauayler can reape therby, what gaine the venterous marchant may looke for, what wealth, what honour, what fame wyll to our Englyshe nation thereof ensue. Thus muche, right honorable, my verye good Lady, of your question concernyng your seruantes voyage. If not so skylfully as I would, and was desirous fully to do, at the least as I could, & leasure suffered me, for the litle knowledge God hath lent me, yf it be any at all, in Cosmographie and Philosophie, and the small experience I haue in trauaile. Chosing rather in the cleare iudgement of your Ho. mynde to appeare rude and igno∣rant, and so to be seene vnto the multitude, then to be founde vnthankefull and carelesse in any thing your Ho. shoulde commaunde me. God preserue your Honour. At the Court the .xx. of Marche. Your Ho. most humbly at commaundement. Richard Willes.
To the right wor∣shipfull, my singuler good Mystres, M. Elizabeth Morisyn. OVr Indian readinges, our Asian lectures, our Geographical description of the whole world, wyll I end with certayne reportes of the pro∣uince China in Cathayo, and some intelli∣gences of the worthy Ilands lying therby in the East Ocean. The relation whereof, though at the first myght seeme briefly to be passed ouer, and in a fewe substantiall poyntes only to be touched, as in the rest of our discourses concernyng this facultie we haue done: Yet the worthynesse of matter herein conteyned, the order of ci∣uile gouerment, the maners & fashions of the inhabiters, the dis∣cription of that countrey, so wel gathered the noueltie thereof in our language, haue effectually moued me to doo the whole discourse into Englysh. Needlesse I graunt the labour is for you, that perfectly in so few Monethes, so few weekes, so fewe dayes, learned the Italian tongue, out of the whiche language this translation is made. The singular care you euer haue had of my well dooyng, and the speciall fauour I haue founde among your Honorable frendes for your sake, vvoulde not only not let me to play the negligent Poete in the fift Act, but compelled me to handle euen the last Scene more a∣bundantly: aswel to acknowledge your good skill both in Cosmogra∣phie and in forreine languages, as also to testifie vnto the world, the great benefites the which I haue receyued for vschering, as it were herein, so good, so wyse, so vertuous, so worshipfull a mystres. Nowe after all these learned exercises of your younger yeeres, God Almyghtie send you great good successe in your present affaires, with encrease of prosperitie and muche honour, as you dayly shall grow elder. At London the 21. of Feburary. 1576. Your seruaunt euer. R. Willes.
Reportes of the prouince China. Certayne reportes of the prouince China, learned through the Portugalles there imprisoned, and chiefly by the relation of Galeotto Perera, a gentleman of good credit, that lay prisoner in that countrey many yeeres. Done out of Italian into Englyshe, by R. W. THis land of China is parted into .13. shyres, the which sometymes were eche one a kyngdome by it selfe, but these many yeeres they haue been all subiect vnto one Kyng.Fuquien. Fuquien is made by the Portugalles the first shyre, bycause there their troubles began, and had occasion thereby to know the rest. In this shyre be viii. cities, but one principally more famous than others, called Fu∣quieo, the other seuen are reasonably great, the best knowen wher∣of vnto the Portugalles is Cinceo,Cinceo. in respect of a certayne hauen ioyning thervnto, whyther in tyme past they were wont for mer∣chandyse to resort. Cantan is the second shyre, not so great in quantitie, as well accoumpted of, both by the Kyng thereof,Cantan. and also by the Portu∣galles, for that it lyeth nearer vnto Malacca than any other part of China, and was fyrst discryed by the Portugalles before a∣ny other shyre in that prouince: this shyre hath in it seuen cities. Chequeam is the third shyre,Chequeam. the chiefest citie therein is Don∣chion, therein also standeth Liampo, with other thirtiene or four∣tiene Boroughes: countrey townes therein to to many to be spo∣ken of. The fourth shyre is called Xutiamfu,Xutiamfu. the principall citie ther∣of is great Pachin, where the Kyng is alwayes resident. In it are fyftiene other very great cities: of other townes therein, and Boroughes well walled and trenched about, I will say nothing. The fyft shyre hath name Chelim: the great citie Nanquin,Chelim. chiefe of other fyftiene cities was herein of auncient tyme, the
royall seate of the Chinish kynges. From this shyre, and from that aforesayde Chequeam forwarde, bare rule the other kynges, vntyll the whole region became one kyngdome. The sixt shyre beareth name Quianci, as also the principall ci∣tie thereof,Quianci. rather Quinzi wherein the fine claye to make vesselles is wrought. The Portugalles beyng ignorant of this countrey, and fyndyng great aboundaunce of that fine claye to be solde at Liampo, and that very good cheape, thought at the first that it had been made there, howbeit in fine, they perceiued that the standing of Quinzi more neare vnto Liampo than to Cinceo or Cantan, was the cause of so muche fine claye at Liampo: within the compasse of Quinci shyre be other .12. cities. The seuenth shyre is Quicin, the eight Quansi, the nienth Con∣fu, the tenth Vrnan, the eleuenth Sichiua. In the first hereof there be .16. cities, in the next fyftiene: howe many townes the other three haue, we are ignorant as yet, as also of the proper names of the .12. and .13. shyres, and the townes therein. This finally may be generally sayde heereof, that the grea∣ter shyres in China prouince, may be compared with mightie kyngdomes. In eche one of these shyres be set Ponchiassini and Anchias∣sini, before whom are handled the matters of other cities. There is also placed in eche one a Tutan, as you would say a gouernor, and a Chian, that is a visiter, as it were: whose office is to goe in circuit, and to see iustice exactly done. By these meanes so vp∣ryghtly thinges are ordered there, that it may bee worthely ac∣compted one of the best gouerned prouinces in all the world. Pachin. al. Pochang.The Kyng maketh alwayes his abode in the great citie Pachin, as muche to say in our language as by the name thereof I am aduertised, the towne of the kyngdome. This kyng∣dome is so large, that vnder fyue monethes you are not able to traueyle from the townes by the sea syde to the Court and backe agayne, no not vnder three monethes in poste at your vr∣gent businesse. The Posthorses in this countrey are litle of bodie, but swyfte of foote. Many doe traueyle the greater parte of this iourney by water in certayne lyght barkes, for the multitude of ryuers commodious for passage from one citie to an other.
The kyng, notwithstandyng the hugenesse of his kyngdome,Theyr mo∣nethes. hath such a care thereof, that euery Moone (by the Moones they recken their monethes) he is aduertised fully of whatsoeuer thing happeneth therein, by these meanes folowyng. The whole prouince beyng diuided into shyres, and eche shyre hauyng in it one chiefe and principall citie, wherevnto the matters of all the other cities, townes, and Boroughes, are brought: there are drawen, in euery chiefe citie aforesayde, intel∣ligences of suche thinges as doe monethly fall out, and be sent in writing to the Court. If happely in one moneth euery post is not able to goe so long a way, yet doeth there notwithstandyng once euery moneth arryue one poste out of the shyre. Who so commeth before the newe-Moone, stayeth for the deliuery of his letters vntyll the Moone be chaunged. Then lykewyse are dispatched other postes, backe into all the .13. shyres agayne. Before that we doe come to Cinceo we haue to passe through many places, and some of great importance. For this countrey is so well inhabited neare the sea syde, that you can not go one myle but you shall see some towne, Borough, or Hostry, the which are so abundantly prouided of all thinges, that in the cities & townes they liue ciuily. Neuertheles such as dwel abrode are very poore, for the multitude of them euery where so great, that out of a tree you shal see many tymes swarme a number of children, where a man would not haue thought to haue founde any one at all. From these places in number infinite, you shall come vnto two cities very populose, and beyng compared with Cinceo, not possibly to be discerned which is the greater of them. These ci∣ties are as well walled as any cities in all the worlde. As you come in to eyther of them, standeth so great and mightie a brydge, that the lyke thereof I haue neuer seene in Portugall nor els where. I heard one of my felowes say, that he told in one bridge .40. arches. The occasion wherfore these bridges are made so great, is for that the countrey is toward the sea very plaine and low, & ouerwhelmed euer as ye sea water encreaseth. The breadth of the bridges, although it bee well proportioned vnto the length therof, yet are they equally buylt, no higher in the middle than at eyther end, in such wyse that you may directly see from ye one end to the other, the sydes are wonderfully well engraue after the
maner of Rome workes. But that wee did most marueyle at, was therwithall the hugenesse of ye stones, the lyke wherof as we came in to the citie, we dyd see many set vp in places dishabited by the way, to no small charges of theyrs, howbeit to litle pur∣pose, whereas no body seeth them but such as doe come bye. The arches are not made after our fashion, vauted with sundry stones set togeather: but paued, as it were, whole stones reaching from one piller to an other, in suche wyse that they lye both for the ar∣ches heades, and galantly serue also for the hygh waye. I haue been astunned to beholde the hugenesse of these aforesayde stones, some of them are .xii. pases long and vpwarde, the least a .xi. good pases long, and an halfe. The wayes echewhere are galantly paued with fouresquare stone, except it be where for want of stone they vse to laye bricke: in this voyage wee traueyled ouer certayne hilles, where the wayes were pitched, and in many places no worse paued than in the playne grounde. This causeth vs to thinke, that in all the worlde there be no better workemen for buildinges, than the in∣inhabitantes of China. The countrey is so well inhabited, that no one foote of ground is left vntilled: small store of cattell haue we seene this way, we sawe onely certayne Oxen wherewithall the countrymen doe plough theyr grounde. One Oxe draweth the plough alone, not onely in this shyre, but in other places also, wherein is greater store of cattell. These countrymen by arte doe that in tyllage, which we are constrayned to doe by force. Here be solde the voy∣dinges of close stooles, although there wanteth not the dunge of beastes: & the excrements of man are good marchandise through∣out all China. The dungfermers seeke in euery streete by ex∣chaunge to buye this durtie ware for hearbes and wood. The cu∣stome is very good for keepyng the citie cleane. There is great aboundance of Hennes, Geese, Duckes, Swyne, and Goates, Wethers haue they none: the Hennes are solde by weight, and so are all other thinges. Two pounde of Hennes fleshe, Goose, or Ducke, is woorth two Foi of their money, that is, d. ob. sterling. Swines fleshe is solde at a peny the pounde. Beefe beareth the same pryce, for the scarcitie thereof, howbeit Northwarde from Fuquieo, & farther of from the sea coast, there is Beefe more plen∣tie
and solde better cheape, Beefe onely excepted, great aboun∣dance of all these viandes we haue had in all the cities we passed through. And if this countrey were lyke vnto India, the inhabi∣tantes whereof eate neyther Henne, beefe, nor porke, but keepe that onely for the Portugalles and Moores, they would be solde here for nothyng. But it so fallyng out, that the Chineans are the greatest eaters in all the world, they doe feede vppon all thinges, specially on porke, the fatter that is, vnto them the lesse lothsome. The highest price of these thinges aforesayde, I haue set downe, better cheape shall you sometymes buye them for the great plen∣tie thereof in this countrey. Frogges are solde at the same price that is made of Hennes, and are good meate amongst them, as also Dogges, Cattes, Rattes, Snakes, and all other vncleane meates. The cities be very gallant, specially neare vnto the gates, the which are marueylously great, & couered with Iron. The gate∣houses buylt on hygh with Towers, the lower parte thereof, is made of bricke and stone, proportionally with the walles, from the walles vpward, the buyldyng is of tymber, and many stories in it one aboue the other. The strength of theyr townes is in the mightie walles and ditches, artillerie haue they none. The streetes in Cinceo, and in all the rest of the cities we haue seene are very fayre, so large and so streight, that it is wonderfull to beholde. Theyr houses are buylte with tymber, the foundati∣ons onely excepted, the which are layde with stone, in eche syde of the streetes are paynteses or continuall porches for the mar∣chantes to walke vnder: the breadth of the streete is neuerthelesse suche, that in them .xv. men may ryde commodiously syde by side. As they ryde they must needes passe vnder many hygh arches of triumph that crosse ouer the streetes made of tymber, and carued diuersely, couered with tyle of fine claye: vnder these arches the Mercers doe vtter theyr smaller wares, and such as lyst to stande there, are defensed from rayne and the heate of the Sunne. The greater gentlemen haue these arches at their doores: although some of them be not so myghtyly buylt as the rest. I shall haue occasion to speake of a certayne order of gentle∣men that are called Loutea,Loutea. I will first therefore expounde what this worde signifieth. Loutea is as muche to say in our language
as Syr, and whan any of them calleth his name, he answereth Syr: and as we doe say, that the kyng hath made some gentle∣man, so say they, that there is made a Loutea. And for that amon∣gest them the degrees are diuers both in name and office, I will tell you onely of some principalles, beyng not able to aduertise you of all. The maner howe gentlemen are created Louteas, and doe come to that honour and title, is by the gyuyng of a broad gyrdle not like to the rest, & a cap, at the commaundement of the kyng. The name Loutea is more generall and common vnto moe, than equalitie of honour therby signified, agreeth withall. Such Lou∣teas that doe serue their prince in weightie matters for iustice, are created after triall made of their learning: but the other whiche serue in smaller affayres, as Capitaynes, Constables, Serge∣antes by lande and sea, Receyuers, and such lyke, wherof there be in euery citie, as also in this, very many, are made for fauour: the chiefe Louteas are serued kneelyng. The whole prouince China is diuided, as I haue sayde, into thirtiene shyres, in euery shyre at the least is one gouernour cal∣led there Tutan, in some shyres there be two. Chiefe in office nexte vnto them be certayne other named Chians, that is,Chian, al. Chaen. hygh Commissioners as you would say, or visiters, with full aucthoritie in suche wyse, that they doe call vnto an accompt the Tutanes them selues, but their aucthoritie lasteth not in any shyre longer than one yeere. Neuerthelesse in euery shyre beyng at the least seuen cities, yea, in some of them fyftiene or sixtiene, beside other Boroughes & townes not well to be numbred, these visiters, where they come, are so honoured and feared, as though they were some great princes. At the yeeres ende their circuit done, they come vnto that citie which is chiefe of others in the shyre, to doe iustice there: finally busiyng them selues in the sear∣chyng out of such as are to receyue the order of Louteas, whereof more shall be sayde in an other place. Ouer and besydes these officers, in the chiefe citie of eche one of these aforesayde thirtiene prouinces,Ponchiassi. is resident one Ponchiassi, Capitayne thereof, and Treasurer of all the kynges reuenues. This Magistrate maketh his abode in one of the foure grea∣test
houses that be in all these head cities. And although the prin∣cipall parte of his function be, to be Capitayne, to be Treasurer of the reuenues in that prouince, to sende these reuenues at ap∣poynted tymes to the Court: yet hath he notwithstandyng by his office also to meddle with matters apperteynyng vnto iu∣styce. In the seconde great house dwelleth an other Magistrate called Anchiassi, a great offycer also,Anchiassi. al. Hexasi. for he hath dealynges in all matters of iustice. Who although hee bee somewhat in∣ferior in dignitie vnto the Ponchiassi, yet for his great dea∣lynges and generall charge of iustice, whosoeuer seeth the af∣fayres of the one house and the other, myght iudge this Anchiassi to be the greater. Tuzi, an other officer so called, lyeth in the thyrd house, a ma∣gistrate of importance,Tuzi. specially in thinges belongyng vnto war∣fare, for thereof hath he charge. There is resident in the fourth house a fourth officer, bearyng name Taissu.Taissu. In this house is the principall pryson of all the ci∣tie. Eche one of these Magistrates aforesayde may both laye e∣uyll doers in pryson, and deliuer them out agayne, except the facte be heynous and of importance: in suche a case they can doe nothing, except they doe meete altogeather. And if the deede de∣serue death, all they togeather can not determine thereof, with∣out recourse made vnto the Chian wheresoeuer he bee, or to the Tutan: and eftsones it falleth out, that the case be referred vnto hygher power. In all cities, not onely chiefe in eche shyre, but in the rest also, are meanes founde to make Louteas. Many of them doe studie at the prince his charges, wherfore at the yeeres ende they resort vnto the head cities, whyther the Chians doe come, as it hath been earst sayde, as well to gyue these degrees, as to sit in iudgement ouer the prysoners. The Chians goe in circuit euery yeere, but suche as are to be chosen to the greatest offices, meete not but from three yeeres to three yeeres, and that in certayne large halles appoynted for them to be examined in. Many thynges are asked them, where∣vnto if they doe aunswere accordingly, and be found sufficient to take their degree, the Chian by and by graunteth it them:Licentiates. but the Cappe & gyrdle wherby they are knowen to be Louteas, they
weare not before that they be confirmed by the kyng. Theyr exa∣mination done,Doctors. and tryall made of them, such as haue taken their degree wont to be giuen them with all cerimonies, vse to banket and feast many dayes together (as the Chineans fashion is to end all their pleasures with eatyng and drinkyng) and so remayne chosen to doe the kyng seruice in matters of learnyng.Dutch lyke. The o∣ther examinates founde insufficient to proceede, are sent backe to their studie againe. Whose ignoraunce is perceiued to come of negligence & default, such a one is whipped, and sometymes sent to pryson, where wee lying that yeere whan this kynde of acte was, we found many thus punished, and demaundyng the cause therof, they sayde it was for that they knew not howe to answere vnto certayne thinges asked them. It is a worlde to see howe these Louteas are serued and feared, in suche wise, that in publyke assemblies at one shryke they gyue, all the seruitors belongyng vnto iustice, tremble thereat. At their being in these places, whan they lyst to moue, be it but euen to the gate, these seruitors do take them vp, and carry them in seates of beaten golde. After this sort are they borne whan they goe in the citie, eyther for their owne businesse abrode, or to see eche other at home. For the dignitie they haue, and office they doe beare, they be al accompanyed: the very meanest of them all that goeth in these seates is vshered by two men at the least, that cry vnto the people to gyue place, how∣beit, they neede it not, for that reuerence the common people hath vnto them. They haue also in theyr company certayne Serge∣antes, with their Maces eyther siluered, or altogeather siluer, some two, some foure, other six, other eight, conueniently for eche one his degree. The more principall and chiefe Louteas haue go∣ing orderly before these Sergeantes, many other with staues, and a great many catchpoules with roddes of Indishe canes, dragged on the grounde, so that the streetes beyng paued, you may heare a farre of as well the noyse of the roddes, as the voyce of the cryers. These felowes serue also to apprehende others, and the better to be knowen they weare liuery redde girdles, and in their cappes Pecockes feathers. Behynde these Louteas come such as doe beare certayne tables hanged at staues endes, where∣in is written in siluer letters the name, degree, and office of that Loutea, whom they folowe. In lyke maner they haue borne after
them hattes agreeable vnto theyr tytles: if the Loutea be meane, then hath he brought after hym but one hatte, and that may not be yealowe: but if he be of the better sorte, then may he haue two, three, or foure: the principall and chiefe Louteas, may haue all theyr hattes yealowe, the which among them is accompted great honour. The Loutea for warres, although he be but meane, may notwithstandyng haue yealowe hattes. The Tutanes and Chians, when they goe abrode, haue besydes all this before them ledde .3. or .4. horses with theyr garde in armor. Further∣more the Louteas, yea and all the people of China, are woonte to eate theyr meat syttyng on stooles at hygh tables as we do, and that very cleanly, although they vse nether table clothes nor nap∣kyns. Whatsoeuer is set downe vppon the boorde, is fyrst carued, before that it be brought in: they feede with two styckes, refraynyng from touchyng theyr meate with theyr handes, euen as we do with forkes, for ye which respect, they lesse do neede any table clothes. He is the nation onely ciuil at meate,We, that is the Italians and Spani∣ardes. but also in conuersation, and in courtesie they seeme to exceede all other. Likewise in theyr dealynges, after their maner, they are so ready, that they farre passe all other Gentyles and Moores: the grea∣ter states are so vayne, that they lyne theyr clothes with the best sylke that may be founde. The Louteas, are an idle generation, without all maner of exercises and pastymes, excepte it be eatyng and drynkyng. Somtymes they walke abrode in the fieldes, to make the souldyars shoot at prickes with theyr bowes, but theyr eatyng passeth: they wyll stande eatyng euen when the other do drawe to shoote. The pricke is a great blanket spread on certayne long poles, he that stryketh it, hath of the best man there standyng a peece of crymson taffata, the whiche is knyt about his head: in this sorte the wynners honoured, and the Lou∣teas with theyr bellyes full, returne home agayne. The inha∣bitantes of China, be very great Idolaters, all generally do worshyppe the heauens: and as we are woont to saye, God knoweth it: so saye they at euery worde, Tien Tautee, that is to saye, The heauens do knowe it. Some do worshyp the Sonne, and some the Moone, as they thynke good, for none are bounde more to one then to an other. In their temples, the which they do cal Meani, they haue a great altar in ye same place
as we haue, true it is that one may goe rounde about it. There set they vp the Image of a certayne Loutea of that countrey, whom they haue in great reuerence for certaine notable thinges he dyd.After the Dutch fation. At the ryght hande standeth the deuyl, muche more vglie paynted then we do vse to set hym out, whereunto great homage is done by suche as come into the temple to aske counsell, or to drawe lottes: this opinion they haue of hym, that he is malitious and able to do euyl. If you aske them what they do thynke of the soules departed, they wil answeare, that they be immortall, and that as soone as any one departeth out of this life, he becommeth a deuyl if he haue liued well in this worlde,Pithigorian lyke. if otherwyse, that the same deuyl chaungeth hym into a bufle, oxe, or dogge. Wher∣fore to this deuyl do they muche honour, to hym do they sacrifice, praying hym that he wyll make them lyke vnto hym selfe, and not lyke other beastes. They haue moreouer an other sorte of temples, wherein both vppon the altars and also on the walles do stande many Idoles well proportioned, but bare headed: These beare name Omithofon, accompted of them spirites, but suche as in heauen do nether good nor euyll, thought to be suche men and women, as haue chastlye lyued in this worlde in abstinence from fyshe and fleshe, fedde only with ryse & salates. Of that deuil they make some accompte, for these spirites they care litle or nothyng at all. Agayne they holde opinion that if a man do well in this lyfe, the heauens wyll geue hym many temporall blessynges, but if he do euyll, then shall he haue infirmi∣ties, diseases, troubles, and penurie, and all this without any knowledge of God. Finally, this people knoweth no other thing then to liue & die, yet because they be reasonable creatures, al seemed good vnto them we speake in our language, though it were not very sufficient: our maner of praying especially pleased them, and truely they are wel ynough disposed to receiue the knowledge of the trueth. Our lorde graunte for his mercie all thynges so to be disposed, that it may some tyme be brought to passe, that so great a nation as this is, peryshe not for wante of helpe. Our manner of praying so well lyked them, that in pryson importunately they besoughte vs to wryte for them
somewhat as concernyng heauen, the whiche we dyd to theyr contentation with suche reasons as we knewe, howbeit not very cunnyngly. As they do theyr Idolatry they laugh at them selues. If at any tyme this countrey myght be ioined in league with the kyngdome of Portugale, in such wyse that free accesse were had to deale with the people there, they might al be soone conuerted. The greatest fault we do fynd in them is Sodomie, a vice very common in the meaner sort, & nothing strange amongst the best. This sinne were it left of them, in all other thynges so well dis∣posed they be, that a good interpretour in a short space myght do there great good, yf, as I sayde, the countrey were ioyned in league with vs. Furthermore the Louteas, with al the people of China, are wont to solempnize the dayes of the newe and full Moones in visiting one eache other, and makyng great bankettes, for to that end, as I earst sayd, do tend all theyr pastymes, and spendyng theyr daies in pleasure. They are wont also to solempnize eache one his byrth daye, whereunto theyr kyndred and frendes do resorte of custome, with presentes of Iuelles or money, receyuyng a∣gayne for theyr rewarde good cheare. They keepe in lyke ma∣ner a general feast with great bankets that day theyr kyng was borne. But theyr most principall and greatest feast of al, and best cheare, is the fyrst day of theyr newe yeere, namely the fyrst day of the newe Moone of Februarye, so that theyr fyrst moneth is Marche, and they recken the tymes accordynglye, respect beyng had vnto the reigne of theyr Prynces: as when anye deede is wrytten, they date it thus, Made suche a daye of suche a Moone, and such a yeere of the reigne of suche a Kyng. And theyr auncient wrytynges beare date of the yeeres of this or that Kyng. Nowe wyll I speake of the maner the whiche the Chi∣neans doo obserue in dooyng Iustice, that it maye be knowen how farre these Gentyles doo herein exceede manye Christi∣ans, that be more bounden then they to deale iustly and in trueth. Because the Chinishe Kyng maketh his abode contynually in the Citie Pachyn, his kyngdome so great, the shyres so many, as tofore it hath been sayde: in it therefore the Gouernours and Rulers, muche lyke vnto our Shyryffes, be so appoynted
sodenly and speedely discharged agayne, that they haue no tyme to growe naught. Furthermore to keepe the state in more se∣curitie, the Louteas that gouerne one shyre, are chosen out of some other shyre distaunt farre of, where they must leaue theyr wyues, chyldren, and goodes, carryeng nothyng with them but them selues. True it is, that at theyr commyng thyther they do fynde in a redinesse all thynges necessarie, theyr house, fur∣niture, seruantes, and all other thynges in suche perfection and plentie, that they want nothyng. Thus the kyng is well serued without all feare of treason. In the principall cities of the shyres be foure cheefe Louteas, before whom are brought all matters of the inferiour townes, throughout the whole realme. Diuers other Louteas haue the maneagyng of iustice, and receyuyng of rentes, bounde to yeeld an accompte thereof vnto the greater officers. Other doo see that there be no euyll rule keept in the citie: eache one as it be∣houeth hym. Generally al these do impryson malefactours, cause them to be whypped & racked, hoysing them vp & downe by the armes with a corde, a thyng very vsuall there, and accompted no shame.The Italians call it the stra∣pad. These Louteas do vse great diligence in ye apprehending of theeues, so that it is a wonder to see a theefe escape away in any towne, citie, or village. Upon the sea neere vnto the shore many are taken, and looke euen as they are taken, so be they fyrst whypped, and afterward layd in prison, where shortly after they all dye for hunger and colde. At that tyme, when we were in pryson, there died of them aboue threscore and ten. Yf happely any one, hauyng the meanes to geat foode, do escape, he is set with the condemned persones, and prouided for as they be by the kyng, in such wyse as hereafter it shalbe sayde. Theyr whyps be certayne peeces of canes, cleft in the middle, in such sort that they seeme rather playne then sharpe. He that is to be whipped lieth grouelong on the ground. Upon his thighes the Hangman layeth on blowes myghtely with these canes, that the standers by tremble at theyr crueltie. Ten srypes drawe a great deale of blood, twentie or thyrtie spoyle the fleshe alto∣geather, fyftie or threescore wyll require long tyme to be hea∣led, and yf they come to the number of one hundred, then are they incurable.
The Louteas obserue moreouer this: when any man is brought before them to be examined, they aske hym openly in the hea∣ring of as many as be present, be ye offence neuer so great. Thus did they also behaue them selues with vs. For this cause amongst them can there be no false witnes, as dayly amongst vs it falleth out. This good commeth therof, that many being alwaies about the iudge to heare the euidence, and beare witnesse, the processe can not be falsifyed, as it happeneth sometymes with vs. The Mores, Gentiles, & Iewes, haue al their sundry othes, ye Mores doo sweare by theyr Mossafos, the Brachmans by theyr Fili, the rest likewise by the thynges they do worshyppe. The Chineans though they be wonte to sweare by heauen, by the Moone, by the Sunne, and by all theyr Idolles, in iudgement neuerthelesse they sweare not at all. If for some offence an othe be vsed of any one, by and by with the least euidence he is tormented, so be the wytnesses he bryngeth, if they tell not the truth, or do in any poynt disagree, except they be men of worshyppe and credyte, who are beleeued without any farther matter: the rest are made to confesse the trueth by force of tormentes and whyppes. Be∣sydes this order obserued of them in examinations, they do feare so muche theyr kyng, and he where he maketh his abode kee∣peth them so lowe, that they dare not once styrre. Agayne, these Louteas as great as they be, notwithstanding the multitude of Notaries they haue, not trusting any others, do write al great processes and matters of importance them selues. Moreouer one vertue they haue worthy of great prayse, and that is, being men so well regarded and accompted of as though they were princes, they be patient aboue measure in geuyng audience. We poore straungers brought before them myght saye what we woulde, as all to be lyes and falaces that they dyd wryte, ne dyd we stande before them with the vsuall cerimonies of that coun∣trey, yet dyd they beare with vs so patiently, that they caused vs to wonder, knowyng specially howe litle any aduocate or iudge is wonte in our countrey to beare with vs. For where so euer in any towne of Christendome shoulde be accused vn∣knowen men as we were, I knowe not what ende the very in∣nocentes cause woulde haue: but we in a Heathen countrey, ha∣uyng our great ennimies two of the chiefest men in a whole
towne, wantyng an interpreter, ignorant of that countrey lan∣guage, dyd in the ende see our great aduersaryes cast into pryson for our sake, and depriued of theyr offices and honoure for not doyng iustice, yea not to escape death, for as the rumor goeth, they shalbe beheadded. Somewhat is nowe to be sayde of the lawes that I haue been hable to knowe in this countrey, and fyrst, no thefte or murther, is at any tyme pardoned: adulterers are put in pryson, and the facte once proued, condemned to dye, the womans husbande must accuse them: this order is keapt with men and women found in that fault, but theeues and mur∣therers are inprisoned as I haue sayd, where they shortly dye for hunger and colde. If any one happely escape by brybyng the gayler to geue hym meate, his processe goeth farther, and com∣meth to the courte where he is condemned to dye. Sentence beyng geuen, the prysoner is brought in publyke with a terrible bande of men that laye hym in Irons hande and foote, with a boorde at his necke one handefull broade, in length reachyng downe to his knees,A pylle boorde. clefte in two partes, and with a hole one handefull downewarde in the table fyt for his necke, the whiche they enclose vp therein, naylyng the boorde fast togeather. one handefull of the boorde standeth vp behynde in the necke: the sentence and cause wherefore the fellon was condemned to dye, is wryten in that parte of the table that standeth before. This cerimonie ended, he is laid in a great prison in the compa∣nie of some other condemned persons, the which are found by the king as long as they do liue. The boord aforsaid so made, tormen∣teth the prysoners very much, keeping them both from rest, & eke lettyng them to eate commodyously, theyr handes beyng manecled in Irons vnder that bord, so yt in fine there is no reme∣dy but death. In ye chiefe cities of euery shire, as we haue erst said, there be foure principal houses, in ech of them a prison: but in one of them where the Taissu maketh his abode, there is a greater & a more principal prison thē in any of ye rest: & although in euery ci∣tie there be many, neuerthelesse in three of them remaine onely such as be condemned to die. Their death is much prolonged, for that ordinarily there is no execution doone but once a yeere, though many die for hunger and colde, as we haue seene in this prison. Execution is done in this maner. The Chian, to wyt the
hygh commissioner or Lord cheefe Iustice, at the yeeres ende go∣eth to the head citie, where he heareth agayne the causes of suche as be condempned. Many tymes he delyuereth some of them, de∣claryng that boord to haue been wrongfully put about theyr neckes: the visitation ended, he choseth out seuen or .viii. not many more or lesse, of the greatest malefactours, the whiche, to feare and keepe in awe the people, are brought into a great mar∣ket place, where al the great Louteas meete togeather, and after many cerimonies and superstitions, as the vse of the countrey is, are beheaded. This is done once a yeere: who so escapeth that day, may be sure that he shal not be put to death al that yeere folow∣yng, & so remayneth at the kynges charges in the greater prison. In that prison where we lay were al waies one hundred & moe of these condemned persons, besides them that lay in other prisons. These prisons wherin the condemned caytyfes do remayne are so strong, that it hath not been hard, that any prisoner in al China hath escaped out of pryson, for in deed it is a thyng impossible. The prisons are thus builded. Fyrst al the place is myghtelye walled about, the walles be very strong and hygh, the gate of no lesse force: within it three other gates, before you come where the prysoners do lye, there many great lodginges are to be seene of the Louteas, Notaries, Parthions, that is, such as do there kepe watch and ward day and nyght, the court large and paued, on the one syde wherof standeth a pryson, with two myghtie gates, wherin are kept such prisoners as haue committed enormious offences. This prison is so great, that in it are streates and Mar∣ket places wherein al thyngs necessarie are sold. Yea some pry∣soners liue by that kynde of trade, buyeng and selling, and letting out beds to hyre: some are dayly sent to pryson, some dayly deli∣uered, wherfore this place is neuer voyde of seuen or eyght hun∣dred men that go at libertie. Into one other pryson of condempned persons shall you goo at three yron gates, the court paued and vauted rounde about, & open aboue as it were a cloister. In this cloister be eight roomes with yron doores, and in eache of them a large Gallerie, wherein euery night the prisoners do lie at length, their feete in the stocks, theyr bodies hampered in huge woodden grates that kepe them frō sitting, so that they lie as it were in a cage, sleepe if they can: in the morning they are losed againe, that they may go into ye court.
Notwithstanding the strength of this pryson, it is kept with a garrison of men, part whereof watche within the house, part of them in the Court, some keepe about the pryson with lanterns and watchebelles answeryng one an other fyue tymes euerye nyght, and geuing warning so lowde, that the Loutea resting in a chamber not neare thereunto, may heere them. In these pry∣sons of condemned persons remayne some .15. other 20. yeeres imprisoned, not executed, for the loue of theyr honorable frendes that seeke to prolong theyr lyues. Many of these prysoners be shomakers, and haue from the king a certayne allowaunce of rise: some of them worke for the keeper, who suffereth them to goe at libertie without fetters and boordes, the better to worke. Howbeit when the Loutea calleth his checke rolle, & with the ke∣per vieweth them, they al weare theyr lyuereys, that is, boords at theyr neckes, yronned hand and foote. When any of these prysoners dieth, he is to be seene of the Loutea and Notaries, brought out at a gate so narrow, that there can but one be drawen out there at once. The prysoner beyng brought foorth, one of the aforesayde Parthians stryketh hym thryse on the head with an yron sledge, that doone, he is deliuered vnto his frendes, yf he haue any, otherwyse the kyng hyreth men to cary hym to his buriall in the fieldes. Thus adulterers and theeues are vsed. Such as be imprisoned for debt once knowen, lye there vntyl it be payed. The Taissu or Loutea calleth them many tymes before him by the vertue of his office, who vnderstanding the cause wherefore they doo not pay theyr debtes, appointeth them a certayne tyme to doe it, wtin the compasse wherof if they discharge not theyr debtes beyng debt∣ers in deede, then they be whipped & condemned to perpetual im∣prisonment: yf the creditours be many, & one is to be payd before an other, they do, contrary to our maner, pay him fyrst, of whom they last borowed, and so ordinarily the rest, in suche sort that the fyrst lender be the last receyuer. The same order is kept in pay∣ing legacies: the last named, receyueth his portion first. They accompt it nothyng to shew fauour to such a one as can doo the lyke agayne:Of like the first lenders be the more welthier. but to doo good to them that haue litle or nothing, that is worth thanks, therfore pay they the last before the first, for that their entent seemeth rather to be vertuous then gainful.
When I sayde that suche as bee committed to pryson for theft & murther, were iudged by the Court, I ment not them that were apprehended in the deed doyng, for they need no tryall, but are brought immediatly before the Tutan, who out of hand giueth sentence. Other not taken so openly, and doe neede tryall, are the malefactors put to execution once a yeere in the chiefe cities, to keepe in awe the people: or condempned, doe remayne in prison, lokyng for theyr day. Theeues being taken, are carryed to prison from one place to an other in a chest vpon mens shoulders, hyred therefore by the kyng, the Chest is sixe handfulles hygh, the pri∣soner sitteth therein vppon a benche, the couer of the chest is two boordes, amyd them both a pillerylyke hole, for the prisoner his necke, there sitteth he with his head without the chest, & the rest of his body within, not able to moue or turne his head this way or that way, nor to plucke it in: the necessities of nature he voy∣deth at a hole in the bottome of the chest, the meat hee eateth is put into his mouth by others. There abydeth he day and nyght duryng his whole iourney: if happely his porters stumble, or the chest doe iogge, or be set downe carelesly, it turneth to his great paynes that sitteth therein, all such motions beyng vnto him han∣gyng as it were. Thus were our companyons carryed from Cin∣ceo, seuen dayes iourney, neuer taking any rest as afterward they told vs, & theyr greatest griefe was to staye by the way: as soone as they came, beyng taken out of the chests, they were not able to stande on theyr feete, and two of them dyed shortly after. Whan we laye in prison at Fuquieo, we came many tymes a∣brode, and were brought to the pallaces of noble men,Fuquieo. to be seene of them and theyr wyues, for that they had neuer seene any Por∣tugall before. Many thinges they asked vs of our countrey, and our fashions, and dyd wryte euery thyng, for they be curious in nouelties aboue measure.Hereof to fore. The gentlemen shewe great curtesie vnto straungers, and so dyd we finde at their handes, and bycause that many tymes we were brought abrode into the citie, some∣what will I say of such thinges as I dyd see therein, beyng a gal∣lant citie, and chiefe in one of the thirtiene shyres aforesayde. The citie Fuquieo, is very great, and mightily walled with square stone both within and without, and as it may seeme by the breadth thereof, filled vp in the middle with earth, layde ouer
with bricke and couered with tyle, after the maner of porches or galeryes, that one myght dwell therein. The steyers they vse, are so easily made, that one may go them vp and down a horsebacke, as eftsoones they doe: the streetes are paued, as already it hath been sayde: there be a great number of Merchantes, euery one hath written in a great table at his doore such thinges as he hath to sell. In lyke maner euery artisane paynteth out his craft: the market places be large, great aboundance of all thinges there be to be solde. The citie standeth vppon water, many streames run through it, the bankes pitched, and so broade that they serue for streetes to the cities vse. Ouer the streames are sundry brydges both of tymber & stone, that beyng made leuell with the streetes, hynder not the passage of the Barges to and fro, the chanelles are so deepe. Where the streames come in and goe out of the citie, bee certayne arches in the wall, there goe in and out theyr Parai,Parai. that is a kynde of Barges they haue, and this onely the day tyme: at nyght these arches are closed vp with gates, so doe they shut vp all the gates of the citie. These streames and Barges doe ennoblyshe very muche the citie, and make it as it were to seeme an other Uenice. The buyldinges are euen, well made, hygh, not lofted, except it be some wherein merchandise is layde. It is a worlde to see howe great these cities are, and the cause is, for that the houses are buylt euen, as I haue sayde, and doe take a great deale of roome. One thyng we sawe in this citie that made vs all to wonder, and is woorthy to bee noted: Namely, ouer a porche at the commyng in to one of the afore∣sayde foure houses, the whiche the kyng hath in euery shyre for his gouernours as I haue erst sayde, standeth a Towre buylt vppon fourtie pyllers, eche one whereof is but one stone, eche one fourtie handfulles or spannes long: in breadth or compasse twelue, as many of vs dyd measure them. Besydes this, theyr greatnesse suche in one peece, that it myght seeme impossible to worke them: they bee moreouer cornerde, and in colour, length, and breadth so lyke, that the one nothyng dyffereth from the other. This thyng made vs all to wonder verye muche.
Wee are wont to call this countrey China, and the people Chineans, but as long as we were prisoners, not hearing amongst them at any tyme that name, I determined to learne howe they were called: and asked sometymes by them thereof, for that they vnderstoode vs not whan wee called them Chineans, I an∣swered them that all the inhabitantes of India named them Chi∣neans, wherefore I prayed them that they would tell mee, for what occasion they are so called, whether peraduenture any ci∣tie of theyrs bare that name. Heerevnto they alwayes answe∣red mee, to haue no suche name, nor euer to haue had. Than dyd I aske them what name the whole countrey beareth, and what they would answere beyng asked of other nations what countrymen they were? It was tolde me that of auncient tyme in this countrey had been many kynges, and though presently it were all vnder one, eche kyngdome neuerthelesse enioyed that name it fyrst had, these kyngdomes are the prouinces I spake of before. In conclusion they sayde, that the whole countrey is called Tamen, and the inhabitantes Tamegines,Tamen the proper name of China. so that this name China or Chineans, is not hearde of in that countrey. I doe thinke that the nearenesse of an other prouince thereabout called Cochin∣china, and the inhabitantes thereof Cochinesses, fyrst discouered before that China was, lying not farre from Malacca, dyd gyue occasion both to the one nation and to the other of that name Chi∣neans, as also the whole countrey to be named China. But their proper name is that aforesayde. I haue hearde moreouer that in the citie Nanquim remayneth a table of golde, and in it written a kyng his name, as a me∣mory of that residence the kyngs were wont to keepe there. This table standeth in a great pallace, couered alwayes, except it bee in some of theyr festiuall dayes, at what tyme they are wont to let it be seene: couered neuerthelesse as it is, all the nobilitie of the citie goeth of duetie to doe it euery day reuerence. The lyke is done in the head cities of all the other shyres in the pallaces of the Ponchiassini, wherein these aforesayde tables doe stande with the kyng his name written in them, although no reuerence be done thervnto but in solempne feastes.
I haue lykewyse vnderstoode that the citie Pachin, where the kyng maketh his abode,Pochang. al. is so great, that to goe from one syde to the other, besydes the Subarbes, the which are greater than the citie it selfe, it requyreth one whole day a horsebacke, going hack∣ney pase. In the Subarbes be many wealthy marchantes of all sortes. They tolde me furthermore that it was Moted about, and in the Motes great store of fyshe, wherof the kyng maketh great gaynes. Theyr enemiesIt was also tolde mee that the kyng of China had no kyng to wage battayle withall, besides the Tartares, with whom he had concluded a peace more than fourescore yeeres agoe. Neuerthe∣lesse theyr friendshyp was not so great, that the one nation might marry with the other. And demaunding with whom they marri∣ed,Maryage of the kynges children. they sayde, that in olde tyme the Chinish kynges, whan they would marry theyr daughters, accustomed to make a solempne feast, whervnto came all sorts of men. The daughter that was to be marryed, stoode in a place where shee myght see them all, and looke whom shee lyked best, him did shee chuse to husbande, and if happely he were of a base condition, hee became by and by a gentleman: but this custome hath been left long since. Nowe a dayes the kyng marryeth his daughters at his owne pleasure, with great men of the same kyngdome: the lyke order he obser∣ueth in the maryage of his sonnes. They haue moreouer one thing very good, and that whiche made vs all to marueyle at them beyng Gentiles: namely, that there be hospitalles in all theyr cities, alwayes full of people, we neuer sawe any poore body begge.He speaketh not here of all China, but of the cities, for in other places there be beg∣gers, as you haue seene al∣ready, swar∣myng out of trees. We therefore asked the cause of this: answered it was, that in euery citie there is a great cir∣cuit, wherein be many houses for poore people, for blinde, lame, old folke, not able to traueyle for age, nor hauyng any other mea∣nes to lyue. These folke haue in the aforesayde houses, euer plen∣tie of rice duryng theyr lyues, but nothyng els. Such as be recey∣ued into these houses, come in after this maner. Whan one is sicke, blinde, or lame, he maketh a supplication to the Ponchiassi, and prouyng that to be true he wryteth, he remayneth in the a∣foresayde great lodgyng as long as he lyueth: besides this they keepe in these places Swyne and Hennes, whereby the poore be releeued without goyng a beggyng.
I sayd before that China was full of ryuers, but now I mynde to confyrme the same anewe: for the farther we went into the countrey, the greater we found the ryuers. Sometymes we were so farre of from the sea, that where we came no sea fyshe had been seene, and salt was there very deere, of freshe water fyshe yet was there great aboundance, & that fysh very good: they keepe it good after this maner. Where the ryuers doe meete, and so passe into the sea, there lyeth great store of Boates, specially where no salte water commeth, and that in Marche and Apryll. These Boates are so many that it seemeth wonderfull, ne serue they for other than to take small fyshe. By the ryuers sydes they make leyres of fine and strong nettes, that lye three handfulles vnder water, and one aboue, to keepe and nourysh their fyshe in, vntyll suche tyme as other fyshers doe come with Boates, bryngyng for that purpose certayne great chestes lyned with paper, able to holde water, wherein they carry theyr fyshe vp and downe the ry∣uer, euery day renuyng the chest with freshe water, and sellyng theyr fyshe in euery citie, towne, and village, where they passe, vnto the people as they neede it: most of them haue nette leyres to keepe fyshe in alwayes for theyr prouision. Where the grea∣ter Boates can not passe any farther forwarde, they take lesser, and bycause the whole countrey is very well watred, there is so great plentie of dyuers sortes of fyshe, that it is wonderfull to see: assuredly we were amazed to beholde the maner of their prouisi∣on. Theyr fyshe is chiefly nourished with the dung of Bufles and Oxen, that greatly fatteth it. Although I sayde theyr fyshyng to be in March and Aprill at what tyme we sawe them doe it, ne∣uerthelesse they tolde vs that they fyshed at all tymes, for that v∣sually they doe feede on fyshe, wherfore it behoueth them to make theyr prouision continually. Whan we had passed Fuquien,He speaketh of Fuquien shyre. wee went into Quicin shyre, where the fine claye vessell is made, as I sayde before: and we came to a citie, the one syde whereof is built vppon the foote of a hyll, wherby passeth a ryuer nauigable: there we tooke Boate, and went by water towarde the sea: on ech syde of the ryuer we found many cities, townes, and villages, where∣in we sawe great store of marchandyse, but specially of fine clay: there dyd wee lande by the way to buye victualles and other ne∣cessaryes. Goyng downe this ryuer Southwarde, we were glad
that we drewe neare vnto a warmer countrey, from whence wee had been farre distant: this countrey we passed through in eyght dayes, for our iourney laye downe the streame. Before that I doe say any thyng of that shyre we came into, I will fyrst speake of the great citie of Quicin, wherin alwayes remaineth a Tutan, that is a gouernour, as you haue seene, though some Tutans doe go∣uerne two or three shyres. That Tutan that was condempned for our cause, of whom I spake before, was borne in this countrey, but he gouerned Foqui∣en shyre: nothing it auayled him to bee so great an officer. This countrey is so great, that in many places where we went, there had ben as yet no talke of his death, although he were executed a whole yeere before. At the citie Quanche whyther we came, the ri∣uer was so great that it seemed a sea,Aliis Cenchi. though it were so litle where we tooke water, that we needed smal boates. One day about .ix. of ye clocke, beginning to row neare the walles with the streame, we came at noone to a bridge made of many barges, ouerlinked all togeather with two mighty cheyns. There stayed we vntil it was late, but we saw not one go either vp theron or downe, except two Louteas yt about the going downe of ye sun, came & set them downe there, the one in one side, the other in the other side. Than was the bridge opened in many places, & barges both great & smal to the number of .600. began to passe: those that went vp the streame, at one place, such as came downe, at an other. Whā al had thus shot the bridge, than was it shut vp againe. We heare say that euery day they take this order in all principall places of merchandyse, for paying of ye custome vnto the king, specially for salt, wherof the greatest reuenews are made that the king hath in this countrey.The kynges reuenues. The passages of the bridge where it is opened, bee so neare the shore, that nothing can passe without touching the same. To stay the barges at their pleasure, that they go no farther forward, are vsed certayne yron instrumentes. The bridge consisteth of .112. barges, there stayed wee vntyll the euenyng that they were opened, lothesomely oppressed by the multitude of people that came to see vs, so many in number, that we were enforced to goe asyde from the banke vntyl such tyme as the bridge was opened: howbeit we were neuerthelesse thronged about wt many boates full of people. And though in other cities and places where wee
went, the people came so importunate vpon vs, that it was need∣full to withdraw our selues: yet were we heere much more mole∣sted for the number of people, and this bridge, the principal way out of the citie vnto an other place so well inhabited, that were it walled about, it myght bee compared to the citie. Whan we had shot the bridge, we kept along the citie vntill that it was nyght, than met we with an other ryuer that ioyned with this, we rowed vp that by the walles vntyll we came to an other bridge gallant∣ly made of barges, but lesser a great deale than that other bridge ouer the greater streame: heere stayed we that nyght, and other two dayes with more quiet, being out of the prease of the people. These riuers do meet without at one corner point of the citie. In either of them were so many barges great and small, that we all thought them at the least to be aboue three thousande: the greater number therof was in the lesser ryuer, where we were. Amongst the rest here lay certayne greater vessels, called in their language Parai, that serue for the Tutan,Parai. whan he taketh his voyage by o∣ther ryuers that ioyne with this, towards Pachin, where the king maketh his abode. For, as many tymes I haue erst sayd, all this countrey is full of riuers. Desirous to see those Parai we got into some of them, where we found some chambers set foorth with gil∣ded beds very richly, other furnished with tables and seates, & all other thinges so neate and in perfection, that it was wonderfull. Quiacim shyre, as farre as I can perceiue, lyeth vpon the south. On that syde we kept at our first entry thereinto, traueyling not far from the high mountaynes we saw there. Asking what peo∣ple dwelleth beyond those mountaynes, it was told me that they be theeues, & men of a strange language. And bycause that vnto sundry places neare this riuer, ye mountaynes do approch, whence the people issuing downe do many tymes great harme, this order is taken at ye entry into Quiacim shyre. To gard this riuer wher∣on continually go to & fro Parai great & small fraught with salt, fish poudred with pepper, and other necessaries for that countrey: they do lay in diuers places certain Parai, & great barges armed, wherin watch & warde is kept day & night in both sides of the ri∣uer, for the safetie of the passage, & securitie of suche Parai as doe remayne there, though the traueylers neuer go but many in com∣pany. In euery rode there be at the least thirtie, in some two hun∣dred men, as the passage requyreth.
This garde is kept vsually vntyll you come to the citie Onchio, where continually the Tutan of this shyre, and eke of Cantan, maketh his abode. From that citie vpwarde, where the ryuer waxeth more narrow, and the passage more daungerous, there be alwayes armed one hundred and fiftie Parai, to accompany o∣ther vesselles fraught with marchandyse, and all this at the king his charges. This seemed vnto me one of the strangest thinges I dyd see in this countrey. Whan we laye at Fuquien, we dyd see certayne Moores, who knewe so litle of theyr secte, that they could say nothyng els but that Machomet was a Moore, my father was a Moore, and I am a Moore, with some other wordes of theyr Alcorane, where∣withall, in abstinence from Swynes fleshe, they lyue vntyll the deuyll take them all. This whan I sawe, & beyng sure that in many Chinish cities the reliques of Machomet are kept, as soone as we came to the citie where these felowes be, I enfourmed my selfe of them, and learned the trueth. These Moores, as they tolde me, in tymes past came in great shippes fraught with marchandise from Pachin ward, to a Porte graunted vnto them by the kyng, as hee is wont to all them that traffike into this countrey, where they beyng arriued at a litle towne standyng in the hauens mouth, in tyme conuerted vnto their secte the greatest Loutea there. Whan that Loutea with all his family was become Moorysh, the rest began lykewyse to doe the same. In this part of China the people be at libertie, euery one to worshyp and folow what him lyketh best. Wherefore no body tooke heede thereto, vntyll such tyme as the Moores perceyuyng that many folowed them in superstition, and that the Loutea fa∣uoured them, they began to forbyd wholy the eatyng of Swines flesh. But all this countrymen and women, chosing rather to for∣sake father and mother, than to leaue of eatyng of porke, by no meanes would yelde to that proclamation. For besides the great desyre they all haue to eate that kynde of meate, many of them doe lyue thereby: and therefore the people complayned vnto the Magistrates, accusing the Moores of a conspiracy pretended be∣twixt them and the Loutea agaynst theyr kyng. In this countrey, as no suspicion, no not one trayterous worde is long borne with∣all: so was the kyng speedily aduertised thereof, who gaue com∣commaundement
out of hande that the aforesayde Loutea should be put to death, and with hym the Moores of most importance: the other to be layde fyrst in pryson, and afterwarde to be sent abrode into certayne cities, where they remayned perpetuall slaues vnto the kyng. To this citie came by happe men and women threescore and odde, who at this day are brought to fiue men and foure women, for it is nowe twentie yeeres agoe this happened. Theyr ofspryng passeth the number of .200. and they in this citie, as the rest in other cities, whyther they were sent, haue theyr Moscheas, wherunto they al resorte euery fryday to kepe theyr holydaye. But, as I thynke,That is theyr temples. that wyll no longer endure, then whiles they do lyue, that came from thence, for theyr posteritie is so confused, that they haue nothing of a Moore in them but abstinence from Swynes fleshe, and yet many of them do eate thereof priuilie. They tell me that theyr natiue countrey hath name Camarian, a fyrme lande, wherein be many kynges, and the Indishe countrey well knowen vnto them.It shoulde seeme by their voyage to be Cardandan in Ortelius. It may so be: for as sone as they dyd see our seruauntes (our ser∣uauntes were Preuzaretes) they iudged them to be Indians: many of theyr woordes sounded vppon the Persike tongue, but none of vs coulde vnderstand them. I asked them whether they conuerted any of the Chinishe nation vnto theyr secte: they an∣sweared me, that with much a do they conuerted the women with whom they do marry, yeldyng me no other cause thereof, but the difficultie they find in them to be brought from eating swines fleshe and drynking of wine. I am perswaded therfore, that if this countrey were in league with vs, forbyddyng them neyther of both, it would be an easy matter to draw them to our religion, from theyr superstition, wherat they them selues do laugth when they do their Idolatrie. I haue learned moreouer that the sea wherby these Moores that came to China, were woont to trauaile, is a very great gulfe,It seemeth they came vp the ri∣uer from the Caspian sea. that falleth into this countrey out from Tartaria and Persia, leauing on the other syde all the countrey of China, and lande of the Mogorites, drawyng alwayes towarde the south: and of all lykelyhood it is euen so, because that these Moores, the whiche we haue seene, be rather browne then white, wherby they shewe them selues to come from some warmer countrey then China is, neere to Pachin,At cacan. where the
ryuers are frosen in the wynter for colde, and many of them so ve∣hemently, that cartes may passe ouer them. We dyd see in this citie many Tartares, Mogorites, Bremes, and Laoynes,Ali. Auoins Tartares. both men & women. The Tartares are men very white, good horsemen and archers, confinyng with China on that side where Pachin standeth, separated from thence by great moun∣taines that are betwyxt these kingdomes. Ouer them be certaine wayes to passe, and for both sydes, Castelles continually keapte with souldiers:Mounte Vsont. in tyme past the Tartares were woont alwayes to haue warrs with the Chineans, but these fourescore yeeres past they were quiete, vntyll the seconde yeere of our imprysonment. The Mogorites be in lyke maner whyte,Mogorites. and heathen, we are aduertised that of one syde they border vppon these Tartares, and confine with the Persike Tartares on the other syde, whereof we sawe in them some tokens, as theyr maner of clothes, and that kynde of hat the Saracenes do weare. The Moores affirmed, that where the kyng lyeth, there be many Tartares and Mogori∣tes, that brought into China certayne blewes of great valewe: al we thought it to be Vanil of Cambaia woont to be sold at Ormus. So that this is the true situation of that countrey, not in the Northpartes, as many tymes I haue harde saye, confynyng with Germanie. As for the Bremes we haue seene in this citie Chenchi certaine men & women,Bremes. amongst whom there was one that came not long since, hauyng as yet her heare tyed vp after the Pegues fashion: this woman, and other moe with whom a blacke Moore damsell in our companye had conference, and dyd vnderstande them well ynough, had dwelte in Peghu. This newe come woman, imaginyng that we ment to make our abode in that citie, byd vs to be of good comforte, for that her countrey was not distant from thence aboue fiue dayes iourney, and that out of her coun∣trey there laye a hygh way for vs home into our owne. Beyng asked the way, she aunsweared that the fyrst three dayes the way lyeth ouer certayne great mountaynes and wyldernesse, afterwarde people to be mette withall agayne. Thence two
dayes iorney more to the Breames countrey. Wherfore I doo conclude, that Chenchi is one of the confynes of this kyngdome,Southwarde from Chenchi to the sea. seperated by certayne huge mountaynes, as it hath been already sayd, that lye out towardes the South. In the residue of these mountaynes standeth the prouince Sian, the Laoyns countrey, Cambaia, Chinapa, and Cochinchina.Auoins. This citie, cheefe of other syxteene, is situated in a pleasaunt playne, aboundyng in thynges necessarie, sea fysh only excepted,Chenchi. for it standeth farre from the sea: of freshe fyshe so muche store, that the market places are neuer emptie. The walles of this citie are very strong and hygh: one day dyd I see the Louteas thereof go vpon the walles, to take the viewe thereof, borne in theyr seates I spake of before, accompanied with a troupe of horsemen, that went two and two: It was tolde me they myght haue gone three and three. We haue seene moreouer, that with∣in this aforesayde citie the kyng hath moe than a thousand of his kynne lodged in great pallaces, in diuers partes of the citie: theyr gates be redde, and the entrye into theyr houses, that they may be knowen, for that is the kyng his colour. These gentle∣men, accordyng to theyr nearenesse in blood vnto the kyng, as soone as they be maried, receiue theyr place in honour: this place neither encreaseth nor diminisheth in any respect, as long as the kyng lyueth, the kyng appoynteth them theyr wyues and fami∣lie, allowyng them by the Moneth al thynges necessarie abun∣dantly, as he doth to his gouernours of shyres and cities, howe∣beit, not one of these hath as long as he lyueth, any charge or go∣uernment at al. They geue them selues to eatyng and drinkyng▪ and be for the most part burly men of bodie, insomuche that espi∣yng any one of them, whom we had not seene before, we myght knowe hym to be the kyng his cosyn. They be neuerthelesse very pleasaunt, courteous, and fayre conditioned: ne dyd we finde, al the time we were in that citie, so much honour and good entertaynement any where, as at theyr handes. They byd vs to theyr houses, to eate and drynke, and when they founde vs not, or were not wyllyng to go with them, they byd our seruantes, & slaues, causing them to syt down with the first. Notwithstanding the good lodging these gentlemen haue so commodious that they
want nothyng, yet are they in this bondage, that duryng lyfe they neuer goe abrode. The cause, as I dyd vnderstand, where∣fore the kyng so vseth his cousynes, is that none of them at a∣nye tyme may rebell agaynst hym: and thus he shutteth them vp in three or foure other cities. Most of them can play on the Lute: and to make that kynde of pastyme peculier vnto them only, all other in the cities where they do lyue be forbydden that instru∣ment, the Curtisans and blynde folke only excepted, who be mu∣sitions, and can play. This king furthermore for the greater securitie of his realme, and the auoydyng of tumultes, letteth not one in al his countrey to be called Lord, except he be of his blood. Many great estates and gouernours there be, that duryng theyr office are lodged Lordlyke, and do beare the port of myghtie Princes: but they be so many tymes displaced, and other placed a newe, that they haue not the whyle to become corrupt. True it is that duryng theyr office they be well prouided for, as afterwarde also lod∣ged at the kynges charges, and in pension as long as they liue, payde them Monethly in the cities where they dwel, by certaine officers appoynted for that purpose. The kyng then is a Lorde only, not one besydes hym as you haue seene, except it be suche as be of his blood. A Nephewe lykewyse of the kyng, the kyng his systers sonne, lyeth continually within the walles of the citie, in a strong pallace built Castelwyse, euen as his other cousins do, remaynyng alwayes within doores, serued by Eunuches, neuer dealyng with any matters. Their festiuall dayes, newe Moones, and ful Moones the magistrates make great bankets, & so do such as be of the king his blood. The king his Nephewe hath name Vanfuli, his pallace is walled about, the wall is not high, but foure square, and in circuit nothing inferiour to the walles of Goa,Goa is a citie of the Portu∣gales in East Indie. the outside is painted red, in euery square a gate, & ouer each gate a tower, made of timber excellently wel wrought: before the principal gate of the foure, that openeth into the high streat, no Loutea, be he neuer so great, may passe on horsbacke, or carried in his seat. Amydde this quadrangle standeth the pal∣lace where that gentleman lieth, doubtlesse worth the sight, although we came not in to see it. By report the roofes of the towers and house, are glased greene, the greater part of the
Quadrangle set with sauage trees, as Okes, Chestnuttes, Cypres, Pineapples, Cedars, and other suche lyke that we do wante, after the maner of a wood, wherin are keapt Stagges, Oxen, and other beastes, for that Lorde his recreation neuer go∣yng abrode, as I haue sayde. One preheminence this citie hath aboue the reste where we haue been, and it of ryght as we do thynke, that besydes the multitude of market places, wherein all thynges are to be solde, through euery streate continually are cryed all thynges necessarie, as fleshe of all sortes, freshe-fyshe, hearbes, oyle, vineger, meale, rise, in summa, al thinges so plentifully, that many houses neede no seruauntes, euery thing beyng brought to theyr doores. Most part of the merchantes remayne in the suburbes, for that ye cities are shut vp euery night as I haue sayde. The merchantes therefore the better to attende theyr businesse, do chuse rather to make theyr abode without in the suburbes, then within the citie. I haue seene in this ryuer a pretie kynde of fyshyng, not to be omitted in my opinion, and therefore wyll I set it downe. The kyng hath in many ryuers good store of barges full of sea crowes, that breede, are fedde, and do dye therein, in certayne cages, allowed monethly a cer∣tayne prouision of ryse. These barges the kyng bestoweth vp∣pon his greatest magistrates, geuyng to some two, to some three of them, as he thynketh good, to fyshe therewithall after this maner. At the houre appoynted to fyshe, all the barges are brought togeather in a circle, where the ryuer is shalowe, and the crowes, tyed togeather vnder the wynges, are let leape downe into the water, some vnder, some aboue, worth the lookyng vppon: eche one as he hath filled his bagge, goeth to his owne barge and emptieth it, whiche done, he retourneth to fyshe agayne. Thus hauyng taken good store of fyshe, they set the crowes at libertie, and do suffer them to fyshe for theyr owne pleasure. There were in that citie, where I was, twentie barges at the least of these aforesayde crowes· I wente almost euery day to see them, yet coulde I neuer be throughly satisfied to see so straunge a kynde of fyshyng.
¶ Of the Ilande Giapan, and other litle Isles in the East Ocean. By R. Wylles. THe extreme part of the knowen worlde vn∣to vs, is the noble Ilande Ciapan, written otherwyse Iapon and Iapan. This Iland standeth in the East Ocean, beyonde all Asie, betwixte Cathayo & the West Indies 36. degrees Northwarde from the aequi∣noctial line, in the same clime with the South part of Spayne and Portugall, distant from thence by sea .6000. leagues: the trauayle thyther, both for ciuile dis∣corde, great piracie, and often shipwrackes, very daungerous. This countrey is hylly, and pestred with snowe, wherefore it is nether so warme as Portugall, & yet very poore, as farre as we can learne, wantyng oyle, butter, cheese, mylke, egges, suger, honny, vyneger, saffarne, cynamome, and pepper. Barly branne the Ilanders do vse in steede of salte: medicinable thinges holsome for the body haue they none at al. Neuerthelesse in that Iland sundry fruites do grow, not much vnlike the fruites of Spayne: & great store of Syluer mynes are therin to be seene. The people tractable, ciuile, wyttye, courteous, without de∣ceyte, in vertue and honest conuersation exceedyng all other na∣tions lately discouered, but so muche standyng vppon theyr re∣putation, that theyr chiefe Idole may be thought honour. The contempte therof causeth among them much discord and debate, manslaughter and murther: euen for theyr reputation they do honour theyr parentes, keepe theyr promises, absteyne from adultery and robberyes, punyshing by death the least robbery done, holdyng for a prynciple, that whosoeuer stealeth a tryfle, wyll if he see occasion steale a greater thing. It may be thefte is so seuerely punished of them, for that the nation is oppressed with scarcitie of al thynges necessarye, and so poore, that euen for mi∣serie they strangle theyr owne chyldren, preferring death before want. These felowes do nether eate nor kyll any foule. They lyue chiefely by fyshe, hearbes, and fruites, so healthfully, that they dye very olde. Of Ryce and Wheate there is no great store.
No man is ashamed there of his pouertie, ne be theyr gentle∣men therfore lesse honored of the meaner people, ne wyl the poo∣rest gentleman there▪ matche his chylde with the baser sort for a∣ny gayne, so muche they do make more accompt of gentry then of wealth. The greatest delyght they haue, is in armorie, eache boy at fourteene yeeres of age, be he borne gentle or otherwyse, hath his swoorde and dagger: very good archers they be, con∣tempnyng all other nations in comparison of theyr manhood and prowesse, puttyng not vp one iniurie, be it neuer so small in worde or deede, among them selues. They feede moderately, but they drynke largely. The vse of vines they knowe not theyr drinke they make of Ryce, vtterly they do abhorre dyse, and all games, accomptyng nothyng more vyle in a man, then to geue hym selfe vnto those thynges, that make vs greedie and desirous to get other mens goodes. If at any time they do sweare, for that seldome they are wont to do, they sweare by the Sunne: many of them are taught good letters, wherfore they may so much the soo∣ner be brought vnto Christianitie. Eche one is contented with one wyse: they be all desirous to learne, and naturally enclined vnto honestie and curtesie: godly talke they lysten vnto wylling∣lye, especially when they vnderstand it throughlye.Theyr go∣uernement. Theyr go∣uerment consisteth of three estates. The fyrst place is due vnto the hygh priest, by whose lawes and decrees, al publique and priuate matters, apparteynyng vnto religion, are decided. The sectes of theyr cleargie men, whom they do call Bonzi, be of no estimation or aucthoritie, except the high priest by letters patent do confyrme the same: he confyrmeth and alloweth of theyr Tun∣di, who be as it were Byshops, although in many places they are nominated by sundrye Princes. These Tundi, are greatly honoured of all sortes:Tundi. they do geue benefices vnto inferiour mi∣nisters, and doo graunt licences for many thynges, as to eate fleshe vppon those daies they go in Pilgrimage to theyr Idoles, with suche lyke priuileges. Finallye, this hygh priest, wont to be chosen in China, for his wisdome and learnyng: made in Giapan, for his gentry and byrth: hath so large a Dominion, and reuenewes so great, that eftsones he beardeth the pety Kinges, and Princes there.
Theyr seconde principall Magistrate, in theyr language Vo, is the cheefe Herehaught, made by succession and byrth, hono∣red as a God. This gentleman neuer toucheth the grounde with his foote without forfaytyng of his office, he neuer goeth abrode out of his house, nor is at all tymes to be seene. At home he is ey∣ther carried about in a lytter, or els he goeth in woodden Chop∣pines a foote hygh from the grounde: commonly he sitteth in his Chayre with a swoord in one syde, and a bowe and arrowes in the other, next his body he weareth blacke, his outwarde gar∣ment is redde, all shadowed ouer with Cipresse, at his cap hang certayne Lambeaux much lyke vnto a Bishops Myter, his fore∣head is paynted whyte and red, he eateth his meate in earthen Dishes. This Herehaught determineth in all Giapan the diuers tytles of honour, whereof in that Iland is great plentie, eache one perticularly knowen by his badge, commonly seene in sea∣lyng vp theyr letters, and dayly altered accordyng to theyr de∣grees. About this Vo euery noble man hath his Soliciter, for the nation is so desirous of prayse and honour, that they stryue a∣mong them selues who may brybe hym best. By these meanes the Herehaught groweth so ryche, that although he haue ney∣ther lande nor any reuenewes otherwyse, yet may he be accomp∣ted the wealthyest man in al Giapan. For three causes this great Magistrate may loose his office: first, if he touch the ground with his foote, as it hath been alreadie sayd: next, if he kyl anye body: thyrdlye, yf he be founde an enemie vnto peace and quietnesse, howebeit neyther of these aforesayde causes is sufficient to put hym to death. Theyr thyrd cheefe officer is a Iudge, his office is to take vp & to end matters in controuersie, to determine of warres & peace, that which he thynketh ryght, to punyshe rebelles, wherein he may commaunde the noble men to assist hym vpon paine of for∣fettyng theyr goodes: neuerthelesse at all tymes he is not obey∣ed, for that many matters are ended rather by might and armes, than determined by law. Other controuersies are decided either in the Temporal Court, as it seemeth good vnto the Princes, or in the Spiritual consistorie before the Tundi. Rebelles are executed in this maner, especially yf they be noble men,P. 231. or officers. The kyng, looke what daye he geueth
sentence agaynst any one, the same day the partie, wheresoeuer he be, is aduertised thereof, and the day tolde him of his executi∣on. The condempned person asketh of the messenger where that it may be lawfull for him to kyll him selfe: the which thing whan the kyng doeth graunt, the partie takyng it for an honour, put∣teth on his best apparell, and launcyng his body a crosse from the brest downe all the belly, murdreth him selfe. This kynde of death they take to be without infamy, ne doe their children, for theyr fathers crime so punished, lose theyr goods. But if the king reserue them to be executed by the Hangman, than flocketh hee togeather his children, his seruantes, and friendes home to his house, to preserue his lyfe by force. The kyng committeth the fet∣chyng of him out vnto his chiefe Iudge, who first setteth vppon him with bow and arrowes, & afterward with pykes & swoords, vntyll the rebell and all his family be slayne, to theyr perpetuall ignominie and shame. The Indyshe wryters make mention of sundry great cities in this Iland, as Cangoxima a Hauen towne in the South parte therof, and Meaco distant from thence .300. leagues northward, the royall seat of the kyng, and most wealthy of all other townes in that Ilande. The people thereabout is very noble, and theyr language the best Iaponishe. In Meaco are sayde to be nienetie thousande houses inhabited and vpwarde, a famous Uniuersitie, and in it fyue principall Colledges, besydes closes and cloysters of Bonzi, Leguixil, and Hamacata, that is, Priestes, Monkes, and Nunnes. Other fyue notable Uniuersities there be in Giapan, namely, Coia, Negru, Homi, Frenoi, and Bandu. The fyrst foure haue in them at the least .3500. schollers: in the fyft are many moe. For Bandu prouince is very great, and possessed by sixe princes, fyue whereof are vassalles vnto the sixt, yet he him selfe subiecte vnto the Iaponish kyng, vsually called the great king of Meaco: lesser scholes there be many in diuers places of this Ilande. And thus muche specially concernyng this glorious I∣lande, among so many barbarous nations and rude regions, haue I geathered together in one summe, out of sundry letters written from thence into Europe, by no lesse faithful reporters thā famous traueylers. For confirmation whereof, as also for the knowledge of other thinges not conteyned in the premisses, the curious rea∣ders
may peruse these foure volumes of Indishe matters writ∣ten long agoe in Italian, and of late compendiously made latin, by Petrus Maffeius my olde acquaynted friend, entitulyng the same, De rebus Iaponicis. One whole letter out of the fyft booke thereof, specially entreatyng of that countrey, haue I done into Englyshe word for word, in suche wyse as foloweth. Aloisius Froes▪ to his companyons in Iesus Christ, that remayne in China and Indie. THe last yeere, deare brethren, I wrote vnto you from Firan∣do, howe Cosmus Turrianus had appoynted me to traueyle to Meaco, to help Gaspar Vilela, for that there the haruest was great, the labourers fewe, and that I should haue for my companyon in that iourney Aloisius Almeida It seemeth now my parte, hauing by the helpe of God ended so long a voyage, to signifie vnto you by letter suche thinges specially as I myght thinke you woulde most delyght to knowe. And because at the begynnyng Almeida and I so parted the whole labour of wrytyng letters betwixt vs, that he should speake of our voyage, and suche thinges as happe∣ned therein, I should make relation of the Meachians estate, and wryte what I could well learne of the Giapans maners and con∣ditions: settyng asyde all discourses of our voyage, that whiche standeth me vppon I wil discharge in this Epistle, that you con∣sideryng howe artificially, how cunningly, vnder the pretexte of religion that craftie aduersary of mankynde, leadeth and draweth vnto perdition the Giaponish myndes, blynded with many super∣stitions and cerimonies, may the more pitie this nation. The inhabiters of Giapan, as men that neuer had greatly to doe with other nations, in their Geography diuided the whole world into three partes, Giapan, Sian, and China. And albeit the Giapans receyued out of Sian, and China, their superstitions and cerimonies, yet doe they neuerthelesse contemne all other nati∣ons in comparison of them selues, & standyng in their owne con∣ceite doe far preferre them selues before all other sortes of people in wisedome and policie. Touching the situation of the countrey, & nature of the soyle, vnto the thinges eftsones erft written, this one thing wil I adde: in these Ilandes the sommer to be most hot, the winter extreame colde. In the kyngdome of Canga, as we call it, falleth so muche
snow, that the houses being buried in it, ye inhabiters keepe with∣in doores certaine moneths of the yeere, hauing no way to come foorth except they breake vp the tiles. Whirlewyndes most ve∣hement, Earthquakes so common, that the Giapans dreade suche kinde of feares litle or nothing at all. The countrey is full of sil∣uer mines, otherwyse barren, not so much by fault of nature, as through the slouthfulnes of the inhabiters: howebeit Oxen they keepe, & that for tillage sake onely. The ayre is wholsome, ye wa∣ters good, the people very fayre & well bodied: bare headed com∣monly they go, procuring baldnes with sorow & teares, eftsoones rooting vp wt pinsars al the heare of their heads as it groweth, ex∣cept it be a litle behind, the which they knot and keepe with al di∣ligence. Euen from their chyldehood they weare daggers and swoords, the which they vse to lay vnder their pillows whan they goe to bedde: in shew curteous and affable: in deede haughty and proude. They delight most in warlyke affayres, and their grea∣test studie is armes. Mennes apparell dyuersly coloured, is worne downe halfe the legges, and to the elbowes: womens at∣tyre made hansomely, lyke vnto a vayle, is somewhat longer: all maner of dysyng and theft they doe eschue. The merchant, although he bee wealthie, is not accompted of. Gentlemen, be they neuer so poore, retayne theyr place: most precysely they stande vppon theyr honour and woorthynesse, cerimoniously stryuyng among them selues in curtesies and fayre speaches. Wherein if any one happely bee lesse carefull than hee should bee, euen for a trifle many tymes hee getteth euyll will. Want, though it trouble most of them, so muche they doe deteste, that poore men cruelly takyng pietie of theyr infantes newly borne, especially gyrles, doe many tymes with theyr owne feete stran∣gle them. Noble men, and other lykewyse of meaner calling, ge∣nerally haue but one wyfe a peece, by whom although they haue issue, yet for a trifle they diuorse themselues from their wiues, and the wiues also sometimes from their husbands, to marry with o∣thers. After ye seconde degree, coosins may there lawfully marry. Adoption of other mens children is much vsed among them. In great townes most men and women can write and reade. This nation feedeth sparely, theyr vsuall meate is ryse and salattes, and neare the sea syde fyshe. They feast one an
other many tymes, wherein they vse great diligence, especially i drinkyng one to an other, insomuch that the better sorte, least they myght rudely commit some fault therin, doe vse to reade certaine bookes written of dueties and cerimonies apperteynyng vnto bankettes. To be delicate and fine, they put theyr meat into their mouthes with litle forkes, accompting it great rudenes to touch it with theyr fingers: wynter and sommer they drynke water as hot as they may possible abyde it. Theyr houses are in daunger of fyre, but finely made, and cleane, layde all ouer with straw pal∣lettes, wherevppon they doe both sit in steede of stooles, and lye in theyr clothes, with billets vnder theyr heades. For feare of de∣filyng these pallettes, they goe eyther barefoote within doores, or weare strawe pantofles on theyr buskynnes whan they come a∣broade, the which they laye asyde at theyr returne home agayne. Gentlemen for the most parte doe passe the nyght in banketting, musike, and vayne discourses, they sleepe the day tyme. In Mea∣co and Sacaio there is good store of beddes, but they be very litle, and may be compared vnto our pues. In bryngyng vp theyr children they vse wordes onely to re∣buke them, admonishyng as diligently and aduisedly boyes of six or seuen yeeres age, as though they were olde men. They are gi∣uen very much to entertayne strangers, of whom most curiously they loue to aske euen in trifles what forreyne nations doe, and theyr fashions. Suche argumentes and reasons as be manifest, and are made playne with examples, doe greatly persuade them. They detest all kynde of theft, whosoeuer is taken in that faulte may be slayne freely of any body. No publike prisons, no com∣mon gayles, no ordinary Iusticers: priuately eche householder hath the hearyng of matters at home in his owne house, and the punishyng of greater crymes that deserue death without delaye. Thus vsually the people is kept in awe and feare. About foure hundred yeeres agoe (as in theyr olde recordes we fynde) all Giapan was subiecte vnto one Emperor, whose royall seate was Meaco, in the Giaponishe language called Cubucama. But the nobilitie rebellyng agaynst him, by litle and litle haue taken away the greatest parte of his dominion, howbeit his title continually remayneth, and the residue in some respect doe make great accompt of him stil, acknowledging him for theyr superior.
Thus the Empyre of Giapan, in tymes past but one alone, is now diuided into sixtie sixe kyngdomes, the onely cause of ciuile warres continually in that Iland, to no small hynderaunce of the Gospell, whilest the kynges that dwell neare togeather inuade one an other, eche one couetyng to make his kyngdome greater. Furthermore in the citie Meaco is the pallace of the high priest, whom that nation honoureth as a God, he hath in his house .366. Idolles, one whereof by course is euery nyght set by his syde for a watcheman. He is thought of the common people so holy, that it may not be lawfull for him to goe vppon the earth: if happely he doe set one foote to the grounde, he looseth his office. He is not serued very sumptuously, he is maynteined by almes.But his almes are very good. The heads and beards of his ministers are shauen, they haue name Cangues, and theyr aucthoritie is great throughout all Giapan. The Cubu∣cama vseth them for Embassadours to decide controuersies be∣twixte princes, and to ende theyr warres, whereof they are wont to make very great gayne. It is now two yeeres since, or there a∣bout, that one of them came to Bungo, to entreat of peace betwixt the kyng thereof, and the kyng of Amanguzzo. This Agent fa∣uouring the kyng of Bungo his cause more than the other, brought to passe that the foresayde kyng of Bungo should keepe two king∣domes, the which he had taken in warres from the king of Aman∣guzzo. Wherefore he had for his rewarde of the kyng of Bungo aboue thirtie thousande Ducattes. And thus farre heereof. I come now to other superstitions and ceremonies, that you may see, deare brethren, that whiche I sayde in the beginnyng, howe surlye the deuyll hath deceyued the Giaponishe nation, and howe diligent and ready they be to obey and worshyp him. And first, all remembrance and knowledge not onely of Christ our re∣deemer, but also of that one God the maker of all thinges, is cleane extinguished, & vtterly abolished out of the Giapans hartes. Moreouer theyr superstitious sectes are many, wheras it is law∣full for eche one to folow that which lyketh him best: but the prin∣cipall sectes are two, namely the Amidans and Xacaians. Wher∣fore in this countrey shall you see many monasteryes, not onely of Bonzii men, but also of Bonziae women diuersly attyred, for some doe weare whyte vnder, and blacke vpper garments, other goe apparelled in ashe colour, & theyr Idole hath name Denichi:
from these the Amidanes differ very muche. Agayne the men Bonzii for the most parte dwell in sumptuous houses, and haue great reuenues. These felowes are chast by commaundement, marry they may not vnder payne of death. In the mydst of theyr Temple is erected an Aulter, whereon standeth a wodden Idole of Amida, naked from the gyrdle vpwarde, with holes in his eares, after the maner of Italian Gentlewomen, sittyng on a woodden rose, goodly to beholde. They haue great libraries, and halles for them all to dyne and suppe togeather, and belles wherewith they are certayne houres called to prayers. In the euenyng the Superintendent gyueth eche one a theame for me∣ditation. After mydnyght before the Aulter in theyr Temple they doe say Mattens as it were out of Xaca his last booke, one quier one verse, the other quier an other. Early in the mornyng eche one gyueth him selfe to meditation one houre: they shaue theyr heades and beardes. Theyr Cloysters be very large, and within the precincte thereof, Chappelles of the Fo∣toquiens, for by that name some of the Giapanish Sainctes are called: theyr holydayes yeerely be very many. Most of these Bonzii be Gentlemen, for that the Giaponish nobilitie, charged with many children, vse to make most of them Bonzii, not be∣ing able to leaue for eche one a patrymony good ynough. The Bonzii most couetously bent, know all the wayes howe to come by money. They sell vnto the people many scroles of paper, by the helpe whereof the common people thinketh it selfe war∣ranted from all power of the deuylles. They borowe lyke∣wyse money to bee repayde with great vsury in an other world, gyuyng by Obligation vnto the lender an assuraunce thereof, the whiche departyng out of this lyfe hee may carry with him to hell. There is an other great company of suche as are called I∣nambuxu,Inambuxu. with curlde and staryng heare. They make profession to fynde out agayne thinges either lost or stolen, after this sorte. They set before them a chylde, whom the deuyll inuadeth, cal∣led vp thither by charmes: of that chylde than doe they aske that which they are desirous to know. These mens prayers both good and bad are thought greatly to preuayle, insomuch that both their blessinges and theyr curses
they sell vnto the people. The Nouices of this order, before they be admitted, goe togeather two or three thousande in a com∣pany, vp a certayne high mountayne to do pennance there, three∣score dayes voluntarily punishyng them selues. In this tyme the deuyl sheweth him selfe vnto them in sundry shapes: and they, lyke young graduates, admitted as it were felowes into some certayne company, are set foorth with whyte tasselles hanging about theyr neckes, and blacke Bonettes that scarsely couer any more than the crowne of theyr heades. Thus attyred they range abrode in all Giapan, to set out them selues and their cun∣nyng to sale, eche one beatyng his basen hee carryeth alwayes about with him, to gyue notice of theyr commyng in all townes where they passe. There is also an other sorte called Genguis, that make pro∣fession to shewe by southsaying where stolen thinges are,Genguis. and who were the theeues. These dwel in the toppe of an high moun∣tayne, blacke in face for the continuall heate of the sunne, for the colde, wyndes, and raynes they doe continually endure. They marry but in theyr owne tribe and lyne: the reporte goeth that they bee horned beastes. They clyme vp most hygh rockes and hylles, and goe ouer very great ryuers by the onely arte of the deuyll, who to bryng those wretches the more into errour, byddeth them to goe vp a certayne hygh mountayne, where they stande myserably gazing and earnestly lookyng for him as long as the deuyll appoynteth them. At the length at noone∣tyde, or in the euenyng, commeth that deuil, whom they call Ami∣da, among them to shewe him selfe vnto them: this shew breedeth in the braynes and hartes of men suche a kynde of superstition, that it can by no meanes be rooted out of them afterwarde. The deuyll was wont also in an other mountaine to shewe him selfe vnto the Giaponish nation. Who so was more desirous than other, to go to heauen and to enioy Paradyse, thyther went he to see that syght, and hauyng seene the deuyll, folowed hym, so by the deuyll persuaded, into a denne vntyll hee came to a deepe pytte. Into this pytte the deuyll was wont to leape, & to take with him his worshypper whom he there murdred. This deceit was thus perceyued. An olde man blynded with this superstiti∣on, was by his sonne dissuaded from thence, but all in vayne.
Wherefore his sonne folowed him priuely into that denne with his bowe and arrowes, where the deuyll gallantly appeared vn∣to him in the shape of a man. Whilest the olde man falleth downe to worshyp the deuyll, his sonne speedily shootyng an arrow at the spirite so appearyng, stroke a Foxe in steede of a man, so so∣deynly was that shape altered. This old man his sonne trackyng the Foxe so runnyng away, came to that pit wherof I spake, and in the bottome thereof he founde many bones of dead men, decey∣ued by the deuyll after that sorte in tyme past. Thus deliuered hee his father from present death, and all other from so pestilent an opinion. There is furthermore a place bearyng name Coia, very famous for the multitude of Abbeyes the Bonzii haue therin. The begin∣ner and founder whereof is thought to be one Combendaxis a sut∣tle craftie felowe, that gotte the name of holynesse by cunnyng speache, although the lawes and ordinances he made were alto∣geather deuilishe: he is sayde to haue founde out the Giapanishe letters vsed at this day. In his later yeeres this Sim suttle bury∣ed him selfe in a fouresquare graue, foure cubites deepe, seuerely forbyddyng it to be opened, for that than he dyed not, but rested his body, wearyed with continuall businesse, vntyll many thou∣sande thousandes of yeeres were passed, after the whiche tyme a great learned man named Mirozu should come into Giapan, and than would he ryse vp out of his graue agayne. About his tumbe many lampes are lyghted, sent thyther out of dyuers prouinces, for that the people is persuaded, that whosoeuer is liberall and beneficiall towardes the beautifying of that monument, shall not onely encrease in wealth in this worlde, but in the lyfe to come be safe through Combendaxis helpe. Suche as gyue them selues to worship him, liue in those Monasteries or Abbayes, with shauen heads, as though they had forsaken all secular matters, wheras in deede they wallow in all sortes of wickednesse and lust. In these houses, the which are many (as I sayde) in number, doe remaine 6000. Bonzii, or thereabout, besydes the multitude of laye men: women be restrayned from thence vppon payne of death. An other company of Bonzii dwelleth at Fatonochaiti. They teache a great multitude of children all trickes and sleightes of guyle and theft: whom they doe fynde to be of great towardnesse, those
doe they instruct in all the petigrues of princes, and fashions of the nobilitie, in chiualry, & eloquence, and so send them abrode in∣to other prouinces, attyred lyke young princes, to this ende, that faynyng them selues to be nobly borne, they may with great summes of money, borowed vnder the colour and pretence of no∣bilitie, returne agayne. Wherefore this place is so infamous in all Giapan, that if any schollar of that order bee happely taken abrode, hee incontinently dyeth for it. Neuerthelesse these cou∣syners leaue not dayly to vse theyr wonted wickednesse and knauery. North from Giapan, three hundred leagues out of Meaco, ly∣eth a great countrey of sauage men, clothed in beastes skynnes, rough bodyed, with huge beardes, and monstruous muchaches, the which they hold vp with litle forkes as they drynke. These people are great drinkers of wyne, fierce in warres, and much feared of the Giapans: beyng hurte in fight, they washe theyr woundes with salte water, other surgery haue they none. In theyr brestes they are sayde to carry lookyng glasses: their swor∣des they tye to theyr heades, in suche wyse, that the handle doe rest vppon their shoulders. Seruice and cerimonies haue they none at all, onely they are wont to woorshyppe heauen. To Aquita, a great towne in that Giaponishe kyngdome, we call Ge∣uano, they muche resort for merchandyse, and the Aquitanes lyke∣wyse doe traueyle into theyr countrey, howebeit not often, for that there many of them are slayne by the inhabiters. Muche more concernyng this matter I had to wryte,The Giapo∣nish Funerals. but to auoyde tediousnesse, I will come to speake of the Giapans mad∣nesse agayne, who most desirous of vayne glory, doe thynke than specially to geat immortall fame, whan they procure them selues to bee most sumptuously and solempnely buryed. theyr buryalles and obsequies in the citie Meaco, are done after this maner. About one houre before the dead body be brought foorth, a great multitude of his friendes, apparelled in theyr best aray, go before vnto the fyre, with them goe theyr kyns women, and such as bee of theyr acquayntaunce, clothed in whyte (for that is the mournyng colour there) with a chaungeable coloured vayle on theyr heades. Eche woman hath with her also, accordyng to her abilitie, all her famely trymmed vp in whyte silke mc∣cado:
the better sorte and wealthier women goe in litters of Cae∣dar, artificially wrought, and richly dressed. In the seconde place marcheth a great company of footemen sumptuously apparelled. Than a far of commeth one of these Bonzii, maister of the cerimo∣nies for that superstition, brauely clad in silkes & golde, in a large & high lytter excellently wel wrought, accompanied with .30. o∣ther Bonzii, or thereabout, wearing hattes, linnen albes, and fyne blacke vpper garments. Than attired in ashe colour (for this co∣lour also is mourning) with a long torch of pineaple, sheweth the dead body the way vnto the fyre, least it either stumble, or igno∣rantly goe out of the way. Welneare .200. Bonzii folow him sin∣ging the name of that deuill the which the partie deceassed chiefly did woorship by his life tyme, and therwithall a very great basen is beaten, euen to the place of fire, in steed of a bel. Than folow two great paper baskets hanged open at staues endes, full of paper roses diuersly coloured: such as beare them, doe march but slow∣ly, shaking euer now & than their staues, that the aforesaid floures may fall downe by litle & litle, as it were droppes of rayne, and be whirled about with the wynd. This shoure say they is an argu∣ment that the soule of the dead man is gone to Paradyse. After all this, eight beardles Bonzii orderly two and two dragge after them on the ground long speares, the pointes backewarde, with flagges of one cubite a peece, wherin the name also of that Idole is written. Than he there carried te Lanternes trimmed with the former inscription, ouercast with a fine vayle, and candelles burning in them. Besides this, two young men clothed in ashe co∣lour, beare pineaple torches, not lighted, of three foote length, the which torches serue to kindle the fyre wherein the dead corpes is to be burnt. In the same colour folow many other that weare on the crownes of their heades fayre, litle, threesquare, blacke lethren caps, tied fast vnder their chins (for yt is honorable amōgst them) with papers on their heads, wherin the name of ye deuyll, I spake of, is written. And to make it the more solempne, after commeth a man with a table one cubite long▪ one foote broad, couered with a very fine whyte vayle, in both sides wherof is written in golden letters the aforesaid name. At the length by foure men is brought foorth the corpes sitting in a gorgeous lyter, clothed in whyte, hanging downe his head, and holding his handes togeather lyke
one that prayed: to the rest of his apparell may you adde an vp∣per gowne of paper, written full of that booke the which his God is sayd to haue made, whan he liued in the world, by whose helpe and merites commonly they doe thinke to bee saued. The dead man his children come next after him most gallantly set foorth, the yongest wherof carrieth lykewyse a pineaple torch to kyndle the fyre. Last of all foloweth a great number of people in suche cannes as erst spake of. Whan they are al come to the place appointed for the obsequie, all the Bonzii with the whole multitude, for the space of one hour, beating pannes & basens with great clamors, cal vpon the name of that deuill, the which being ended, the obsequie is done in this maner. In the midst of a great quadrangle, rayled about, hanged with course lynnen, and agreeably vnto the foure partes of the world, made with foure gates to goe in and out at, is digged a hole: in the hole is layde good store of wood, whereon is raysed gallantly a waued roofe, before that stande two tables furnished with diuers kyndes of meates, especially dry figges, Pomegra∣nates, and tartes good store, but neyther fyshe nor fleshe: vpon one of them standeth also a chaffre with coles, and in it sweete wood to make perfumes. Whan all this is ready, the corde wherewith the lytter was carried, is throwen by a long rope into the fyre: as many as are present stryue to take the rope in their handes, vsing theyr aforesayd clamors, which done, they goe in procession as it were rounde about the quadrangle thryse. Than setting the lytter on the wood buylte vp ready for the fyre, that Bonzius who than is maister of the cerimonies, sayeth a verse that no bodie there vnderstandeth, whyrlyng thryse about ouer his head a torche lyghted, to signifie thereby that the soule of the dead man had neyther any begynnyng, ne shall haue at any tyme an ende, and throweth away the torche. Two of the dead man his children, or of his neare kynne, take it vp agayne, and standyng one at the East syde of the lytter, the other at the West, doe for honour and reuerence, reache it to eche o∣ther thryse ouer the dead corpes, and so cast it into the pyle of wood: by and by they throwe in oyle, sweete wood, and other perfumes, accordyngly as they haue plentie, and so with a great flame bryng the corpes to ashes: his chyldren in the meane
whyle pyng sweete wood into the Chaffer at the table, with doores, doe solempnely and religiously woorshyp their father as a Sainct: which being done, the Bonzii are payde eche one in his degree. The maister of the cerimonies hath for his part fyue ducates, sometimes ten, sometimes .xx. the rest haue ten Iulies a peece, or els a certayne number of other presentes called Caxae. The meate that was ordeyned, as soone as the dead corpes friendes and all the Bonzii are gone, is left for such as serued at the obsequie, for the poore, and impotent lazares. The next day returne to the place of obsequie the dead man his children, his kynread, and friendes, who geatheryng vp his asshes, bones, and teeth, doe put them in a gylded potte, and so carry them home, to be set vp in the same pot couered with cloth, in the mydst of theyr houses. Many Bonzii returne lykewise to these priuate funeralles, and so doe they agayne the seuenth day. than carry they out the asshes to bee buryed in a place ap∣poynted, laying therevppon a fouresquare stone, wherein is written in great letters, drawen all the length of the stone ouer, the name of that deuyll the which the dead man woorshypped by his lyfe tyme. Euery day afterwarde his children resorte vnto that graue, with roses and warme water, that the deade corpes thirst not. Nor the seuenth day onely, but the seuenth moneth, and yeere, within theyr owne houses they renue this obsequie, to no small commodities and gayne of the Bonzii: great ryche men doe spende in these theyr funeralles .3000. ducates, or there about, the meaner sorte two or three hundred. Suche as for pouertie be not able to go to that charges, are in the nyght time, darkelong without all pompe & ceremonies, buryed in a dunghil. They haue an other kynde of buriall, especially neare the sea syde, for them that bee not yet deade. These felowes are such, as hauyng religiously with much deuotion worshipped Amida, now desirous to see him, doe slaye them selues. And first they go certaine dayes begging almes, the which they thrust into theyr sleeues, than preache they in publyke a sermon vnto the people, declaring what they mynd to doe, with the great good lykyng of all suche as doe heare them: for euery body wondreth at such a kynd of holynesse. Than take they hookes to cut downe
bryers and thornes that myght hinder them in theyr way to hea∣uen, and so imbarke them selues in a newe vessell, tying great stones about their neckes, armes, loynes, thighes, and feete: thus they launchyng out into the mayne sea, be eyther drowned there, theyr shyppe bouged for that purpose, or els doe cast them selues ouer boorde headlong into the sea. The emptie barke is out of hande set a fyre, for honour sake, by theyr friendes that folowe them in an other boate of their owne, thynkyng it blasphemie that any mortal creature should afterward once touche the barke that had been so religiously halowed. Truely whan we went to Meaco, eyght dayes before we came to the Isle of Hiu, at Fore towne, sixe men and two women so dy∣ed. To all suche as dye so, the people erecteth a Chappell, and to eche of them a pyllar and a pole made of pinaple, for a perpetu∣all monument: hangyng vp many shreddes of paper in stickes all the roofe ouer, with many verses set downe in the walles, in commendation of that blessed company. Wherefore vnto this place both day and nyght many come very superstitiously in pyl∣grimage. It happened euen then as Aloisius Almeida & I went to Christen a chyld, we traueyled that way, at what time foure or fiue olde women came foorth out of the aforesaide Chappel with beades in theyr handes (for in this pointe also the deuyll counter∣fayteth Christianitie) who partly scorned at vs for folly, partly frowned and taunted at our small deuotion, for passing by that holy monument, without any reuerence or woorshyp done there∣vnto at all. It remayneth nowe we speake two or three woordes of those Sermons the Bonzii are wont to make, not so many as ours in number, but assuredly very wel prouided for. The Pulpit is erec∣ted in a great Temple with a silke Canapie ouer it, therein stan∣deth a costly seate, before the seate a table with a bel & a booke. At the houre of sermon, eche secte of the Giapans resorteth to theyr owne doctors in diuers Temples. Up goeth the doctor into the Pulpit, and beyng set downe, after that he hath Lordlyke looked him about, signifieth silence with his bell, and so readeth a fewe woordes out of that booke we spake of, the which he expoundeth afterwarde more at large. These preachers be for the most parte eloquent, and apte to drawe with their speach the myndes of their
hearers. Wherefore to this ende chiefly, suche is theyr greedy∣nesse, tendeth all theyr talke, that the people be brought vnder the colour of godlinesse to enryche theyr monasteries, promysing to eche one so much the more happinesse in the lyfe to come, howe much the greater costes & charges they be at in church matters & obsequies: notwithstanding this multitude of superstitious sects and companyes, and the diuersities therof amongst them selues: yet in this principally all theyr superintendentes doe traueyle, so to persuade theyr Nouices in their owne tales and lyes, that they thinke nothing els trueth, nothing els sure to come by euerlasting saluation, nothing els woorth the hearyng. Whervnto they adde other subtilties, as in going, grauitie: in countenance, apparel, and in all other outward shewe, comelynesse. Wherby the Gia∣panes myndes are so noussed in wicked opinions, and doe con∣ceyue thereby such trust and hope of euerlasting saluation, that not onely at home, but also abrode in euery corner of the towne, continually almost they runne ouer their beades, humbly asking of Amida and Xaca wealth, honour, good health, and euerlastyng ioyes. Thus than, deare brethren, may you thinke howe greatly they neede the helpe of God, that eyther doe bring the Gospel in∣to this countrey, or receiuing it brought vnto them, do forsake I∣dolatry, & ioyne them selues with Christ, being assalted by so ma∣ny snares of the deuil, troubled with the dayly dissuasions of their Bonzii, and finally so iniuriously, so hardely, so sharpely vexed of their kindread and friendes, that except the grace of God obtey∣ned by the sacrifices and prayers of the Catholike church do help vs, it can not be chosen, but that the fayth and constancie of many, if not of all, in these first beginninges of our churches, will great∣ly be put in ieopardie. So much the more it standeth you vppon, that so earnestly long for the health of soules, to commende speci∣ally these Giaponish flockes vnto our Lorde. Wee came to Sacaio, the .xxviii. of Ianuary. Aloy∣sius Almeida first for businesse, but afterwarde let by sickenesse, stayed there some whyle, but I parting the next day from thence, came thirtiene leagues of, to Meaco the last of Ianuary. Of my commyng all the Christians tooke great comfort, but specially Gasper Vilela, who in six yeeres had seene none of our company at Meaco: his yeeres are not yet fourtie, but his gray heares shewe
him to bee seuentie, so vehemently is his litle body afflicted and worne with extreme colde. He speaketh Giapanish so skilfully af∣ter the phrase of Meaco (the which for the renowne of this peo∣ple, and royall seat of the kyng is best accompted of) that he doth both confesse & preach in that language. Certayne godly bookes also he hath done into that speach, not omitting to translate other as leasure suffreth him. To make an end, our Lord for his good∣nesse vouchsafe to preserue vs all continually, and to giue vs ayde both ryghtly to interprete his wil, and well to do the same. From Meaco the .xix. of February. 1565. Other suche lyke matter is handled both in other his letters, and also in the Epistles written by his companyons, to be seene at large in the aforesayde volume. Amongst the rest this seemed in my iudgement one of the principall, and therefore the rather I tooke vppon me to doe it into Englyshe. Of the Isles beyond Giapan, in the way from China to the Moluccaes. AMongst other Isles in the Asian sea, be∣twixt Cantan a Chinishe hauen in Cathayo, and the Moluccaes, muche spoken of in the Indish histories, & paynted out in Mappes, Ainan and Santlianum, are very famous. Ainan standeth nienetiene degrees on this syde of the Equinoctial lyne neare Chi∣na,Ainan. from whence the Chinishe nation haue theyr prouision for shppyng and other necessaryes requisite for theyr Nauie. There stayed Balthasar Gagus, a great traueyler, fiue monethes, who de∣scribeth that place after this maner. Ainan is a goodly countrey, full of Indishe fruites, and all kynde of victualles, besydes great store of Iuelles and pearle, well inhabited, the owns buylte of stone, the people rude in conditions, apparelled  diuersly coloured rugges, with two Oxe hornes, as it  made of fyne cypres hangyng downe about theyr
and a payre of sharpe cyzers at theyr foreheades. The cause wherefore they goe in suche attyre, I could not vnderstande, except it be for that they doe counterfaite the deuyll in the fourme of a bruite beast, offeryng to him vp them selues. Santianum, is an Isle neare vnto the hauen Cantan, in the con∣fines lykewyse of China,Santianum. famous for the death of that woorthie traueyler, and godly professour, and paynefull doctor of the In∣dyshe nation, in matters concernyng religion, Francis Xauier, who after great labours, many iniuries, and calamities infinite suffred with much pacience, singular ioye and gladnesse of mynd, departed in a cabben made of bowes and rushes vppon a desarte mountayne, no lesse voyde of all worldly commodities, than en∣dued with all spirituall blessinges, out of this lyfe, the seconde day of December, the yeere of our Lorde .1552. after that many thousandes of these Easterlynges were brought by him to the knowledge of Christ. Of this holy man, his perticular ver∣tues, and specially traueyle, and wonderfull workes in that region, of other many litle Isles, yet not so li∣tle but that they may ryght well be writ∣ten of at leasure, all the later histories of the Indyshe regions are full. FINIS.
Of the Northeast frostie Seas, and kyngdoms lying that way, declared by the Duke of Moscouia his ambassadour, to a learned Gentle∣man of Italie, named Galeatius Butrigarius: likewise of the viages of that worthie old man Sebastian Cabote, sometymes gouernour of the companie of the Merchantes of Cathay, in the Citie of London. IT is doubtlesse a marueilous thyng to con∣syder what changes and alterations were caused in all the Romane Empyre by the Gothes and Vandales,The Romane Empyre. and other Barbari∣ans into Italy. For by their inuations were extinguyshed all artes and sciences, and all trades of Merchandies that were vsed in dyuers partes of the worlde. The desolation and ignoraunce whiche insued hereof,4. hundreth yeeres of ig∣noraunce. continued as it were a cloude of perpe∣tuall darkenesse among men for the space of foure hundred yeeres and more, insomuche that none durst aduenture to goe any whyther out of theyr owne natiue countreys: whereas before the incursions of the sayde Barbarians,East India well knowen in olde time. when the Ro∣mane Empyre floryshed, they myght safely passe the seas to all partes of East India, whiche was at that tyme as well knowen and frequented, as it is nowe by the nauigations of the Por∣tugales. And that this is true, it is manifest by that whiche Strabo wrytteth, who was in the tyme of Augustus and Ti∣berius.Strabo. For speakyng of the greatnesse and ryches of the ci∣tie of Alexandria in Egypt (gouerned then as a prouince of the Romanes) he wryteth thus. This onely place of Egypt,The great ry∣chesse of Egypt. is apte to receyue all thynges that come by sea, by reason of the commoditie of the hauen, and lykewyse all suche thynges as are brought by lande, by reason of the ryuer of Nilus,The citie of Alexandria. whereby they may bee easely conueyed to Alexandria, beyng
by these commodities the rychest citie of merchauntes that is in the worlde. The reuenues of Egypt are so great, that Marcus Tullius sayth in one of his orations,Marueylous rychesse. that kyng Ptolo∣meus, surnamed Auleta, the father of queene Cleopatra, had of reuenues twelue thousande and fyue hundred talentes, whiche are seuen millions and a halfe of golde. If therefore this kyng had so great reuenues when Egypt was gouerned of so fewe and so negligently,The gouer∣naunce and reuenues of the Romanes. Trogloditica. and India. The gulfe of Arabia. what myght it then be woorth to the Romanes, by whom it was gouerned with great diligence, and theyr trade of merchandies greatly increased by the traffike of Trogloditica and India? wheras in tyme past there coulde hard∣ly be founde .xx. shyppes togeather that durst enter into the gulfe of Arabie, or shewe theyr prowesse without the mouth of the same. But at this present, great nauies sayle togeather into India, and to the furthest partes of Ethiope, from whence are brought many rich and pretious merchandies into Egypt,Ethiope. and are caried from thence into other countreys. And by this meanes are the cu∣stomes redoubled,Rych customs. aswel by such thynges as are brought thither, as also by suche as are caryed from thence, forasmuche as great customes aryse of thinges of great value.The rychesse whiche were brought in olde time from India and the redde sea. And that by this voy∣age infinite and pretious merchaundies were brought from the redde sea and India, and those of dyuers other sortes then are knowen in our tyme, it appeareth by the fourth volume of the ciuile lawe, wherein is described the commission of Thempe∣rours,The commisi∣on of Thempe∣rours Marcus and Como∣dus. Marcus and Commodus, with the rehearsall of al such stuffe and merchandies, wherof custome shoulde be payde in the redde sea, by suche as had the same in fee farme, as were payde the customes of all other prouinces partaynyng to the Romane Empyre: and they are these folowyng. Cinamome. Long pepper. Whyte pepper. Cloues. Costus. Cancomo. Spikenarde. Cassia. Sweete perfumes Xilocassia. Myr. Amome. Ginger. Malabatrum. Ammoniac. Galbane. Lasser. Agarike.
Gumme of Arabie. Cardamome. Xilocinamome. Carpesio. Sylkes of diuers sortes. Lynnen cloth. Skynnes and Furres of Par∣thia and Babylon. Iuorie. Wood of Heben. Pretious stones. Pearles. Iewelles of Sardonica. Ceraunia. Calamus Aromaticus. Berille. Cilindro. Slaues. Cloth of Sarmatia. The sylke called Metaxa. Uestures of sylke. Died cloth, and sylke. Carbasei. Sylke threede. Gelded men. Popingayes. Lions of India. Leopardes. Panthers. Purple. Also that iuyce or lyquour whiche is geathered of wooll, and of the heare of the Indians. By these woordes it doeth appeare, that in olde tyme the said nauigation by the way of the red sea, was wel knowen, & muche frequented, & perhaps more then it is at this present:The great ri∣ches the kings of Egypt had by customes. Insomuch that the ancient kynges of Egypt, consyderyng the great profite of the customes they had by the viages of the red sea, and wylling to make the same more easie & commodious, attempted to make a fosse or chanel, which should begin in the last part of the said sea, where was a citie named Arsinoe (which perhappes is that that is nowe called Sues) and shoulde haue reached to a branch of the riuer of Nilus, named Pelusio,The noble en∣terpryses of the kings of Egypt Arsinoe. Damiata. Pelusio. whiche emptieth it selfe in our sea towarde the East, about the citie of Damiata. They determined also to make three causeys or hygh wayes by land, which shoulde passe from the sayd branch to the citie of Arsinoe: but they founde this too difficult to bryng to passe. In fine, king Ptolomeus surna∣named Philadelphus, ordeyned another way, as to sayle vppon Nilus, agaynst the course of the riuer, vnto the citie of Copto,Nilus. Copto. and from thence to passe by a desart countrey, vntyl they come a∣boue the red sea, to a citie named Berenice, or Miosormo,Berenice. where they imbarked al their merchandise and wares for India, Ethiope, and Arabie, as appeareth by the wrytyng first of Strabo (who wryteth that he was in Egypt) and then by Plinie, who was in
the tyme of Domitian. Strabo also, speaking of the saide fosse or trenche whiche was made towarde the redde sea,A nauigable trenche made from Egypt to the red sea. wryteth thus, There is a trenche that goeth towarde the red sea, & the gulfe of Arabie,Lacus amari. and to the citie of Arsinoe, whiche some call Cleopatrida, and passeth by the lakes named Amari (that is) bytter, because in deede they were fyrste bytter: but after that this trenche was made, and the ryuer entred in, they became sweete, and are at this present ful of foules of the water, by reason of their pleasant∣nesse. This trenche was fyrste begunne by king Sesostre, before the battaile of Troy.King Sesostre. Some say that it was begunne by king Psammiticus, while he was a childe, and that by reason of his death it was left imperfect:King Psammi∣ticus. Kyng Darius. also, that afterwarde, king Darius succeeded in the same enterprise, who woulde haue finished it, but yet brought it not to the ende, because he was enfourmed that the redde sea was higher then Egypt, and that if this lande (diui∣ding both the seas) were opened, all Egypt shoulde be drow∣ned thereby.Kyng Ptolo∣meus. King Ptolomeus woulde in deede haue finished it, but yet left it shut at the head, that he myght, when he woulde, sayle to the other sea, and returne without peryll. Here is the citie of Arsinoe,The citie Heroum. and neare vnto that, the citie called Heroum, in the vt∣termost parte of the gulfe of Arabie, towarde Egypt, with many portes and habitations. Plinie likewise, speaking of this trenche, sayth,What Plinie writeth of the nauigable trenche. In the furthest part of the gulfe of Arabie, is a porte called Danco, from whence they determined to bryng a nauigable trenche vnto the riuer of Nilus, whereas is the firste Delta. Be∣tweene the saide sea and Nilus, there is a streict of lande of the length of .lxii. miles. The firste that attempted this thing, was Sesostre king of Egypt, & after him Darius king of the Persians, whom Ptolomeus folowed, who made a trenche a hundred foote large, and thirtie foote deepe, being .CCC. miles in length,The largenesse and length of the trenche. vnto the lakes named Amari, and durst proceede no fur∣ther for feare of inundation, hauing knowledge that the red sea was higher by three cubites then all the countrey of Egypt. Other say that this was not the cause: but, that he doubted that yf he shoulde haue let the sea come any further, all the wa∣ter of Nilus shoulde haue been thereby corrupted, whiche onely ministreth drynke to all Egypt. But notwithstanding, all these thinges aforesayde, all this viage is frequented by lande
from Egypt to the redde sea,The viage by land from Egypt to the red sea. in whiche passage are three Cau∣seyes or hygh wayes. The fyrst begynneth at the mouth of Nilus, named Pelutio: All whiche way is by the sandes, inso∣muche that if there were not certayne hygh Reedes fyxt in the earth, to shew the ryght way, the Causey could not be found, by reason the wynde euer couereth it with sand. The seconde Cau∣sey is two myles from the mountayne Cassius: And this also in the ende of threescore myles, commeth vpon the way or Causey of Pelusius, inhabited with certayne Arabians, called Antei. The thyrde begynneth at Gerro, named Adipson: and passeth by the same Arabians, for the space of threescore miles, somewhat short∣ter, but full of rough mountaynes, and great scarcenesse of wa∣ter. Al these Causeyes, leade the way to the citie of Arsinoe, buil∣ded by Ptolomeus Philadelphus in the gulfe Carandra by the redde sea.What kyng Ptolomeus discouered. This Ptolomeus was the fyrst that searched all that part of the red sea, whiche is called Trogloditica. Of this trench, descri∣bed of Strabo and Plinie, there are seene certeyne tokens remay∣nyng at this present, as they do affyrme whiche haue been at Sues beyonde the citie of Alcayr,Alcayre. otherwyse called Babylon in Egypt. But the merchauntes that of later dayes trauayle this viage by lande, ryde through the drye and barren desartes, on Camels, both by day and by nyght, directyng theyr waye by the starres and compasse, as do mariners on the sea, and carying with them water sufficient for many dayes iorneys.The viage to East India fre∣quented in olde tyme. The customes and maners of the Indians. The places of Arabie, and India, named of Strabo and Plinie, are the selfe same where the Portugales practyse theyr trade at this day, as the maners and customes of the Indians doo yet declare: for euen at this present their women vse to burne them selues alyue with the dead bodyes of their husbandes. Whiche thyng (as wryteth Strabo in his .xv. booke) they dyd in olde time by a lawe, for this consyderation, that sometyme being in loue with other, they forsooke or poysoned their husbandes. And for as muche as accordyng to this custome, the olde Poet Propertius (who ly∣ued about an hundred yeeres before the incarnation of Christ) hath in his booke made mention of the contention that was a∣mong the Indian women, whiche of them shoulde be burned a∣liue with theyr husbandes, I haue thought good to subscribe his verses, whiche are these.
Faelix Eois lex funeris vna maritis, Quos aurora suis rubra colorat equis. Namque vbi mortifero iacta est fax vltima lecto, Vxorum fusis stat pia turba comis, Et certamen habent lethi, quae viua sequatur Coniugium, pudor est non licuisse mori. Ardent victrices, & flammae pectora praebent. Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris. As touchyng these viages both by sea and by lande to East India and Cathay, many thinges are wrytten very largly by di∣uers autours, which I omit, because they parteyne not so much vnto vs as doth the viage attempted to Cathay by the north seas,The voyage to Cathay. and the coastes of Moscouia, discouered in our tyme by the viage of that excellent young man Rychard Chaunceller, no lesse lear∣ned in al mathematicall sciences,Rycharde Chaunceler. then an expert pilotte, in the yeere of our Lorde .1554. As concernyng this viage, I haue thought good to declare ye communication which was betweene the sayd learned man Galeatius Butrigarius, and that great phi∣losopher and noble gentleman of Italie named Hieronimus Fra∣castor, as I fynd written in the Italian histories of nauigations. As they were therefore conferryng in matters of learnyng,A learned des∣course of dy∣uers voyages. and reasoning of the science of Cosmographie, the saide learned man, hauyng in his hand an instrument of Astronomie, declared with a large oration howe much the worlde was bound to the kinges of Portugale, rehearsing the noble factes done by them in India, and what landes and Ilandes they had discouered,The voyages of the Portu∣gales. The worlde hangyng in the ayre. What is kno∣wen of the lo∣wer hemisphe∣rie. The lande of Brasile. Peru. The charg and dutie of Chri∣stian princes. Note. and howe by theyr nauigations they made the whole worlde to hang in the ayre. He further declared of what partes of the ball, the earth re∣mayned yet vndiscouered: and sayde, that of the landes of the in∣ferior hemispherie, or halfe compase of the ball towarde the pole Antartike, there was nothyng knowen but that litle of the coaste of Brasilia, vnto the streyght of Magellanus: also a part of Peru: also a litle aboue Affrike towarde the cape of Bona Speranza. Also that he marueyled without measure, that this thyng was no better consydered of Christian Princes, to whom God hath deputed this charge, hauyng euer on theyr counsail men of great learning, which may infourme them of this thing, being so marueylous and noble, wherby they may obtayne
glory and fame by vertue, and be imputed among men as gods, by better demerites then euer were Hercules & great Alexander, who traueyled onely into India:Hercules and Alexander. and that by makyng the men of this our Hemispherie knowen to them of the other halfe com∣passe of the ball beneathe vs, they myght by the tytle of this enterpryse, without comparison, farre excell all the noble factes that euer were doone by Iulius Caesar, or any other of the Ro∣mane Emperours. Whiche thyng they myght easily bryng to passe, by assigning colonies to inhabite diuers places of that He∣mispherie, in lyke maner as dyd the Romanes in prouinces newly subdued: whereby they myght not onely atteyne great riches, but also enlarge the Christian fayth and Empire, to the glory of God, and confusion of infidels. After this,The colonies of the Romans in regions sub∣dued. he spake of the Ilande of Saint Laurence, called in olde tyme Madagasear, whiche is greater then the realme of Castile and Portugale, and reacheth from the .xii degree towarde the Pole Antartike, vnto the .xxvi. degree and a halfe, lying Northeast from the cape of Bona Speranza, and partly vnder the lyne of Tropicus Capricorni, beyng wel inhabited, and of temperate ayre,The great I∣lande of Saynct Laurence or Madagascar. with abundance of all thynges necessary for the lyfe of man, and one of the moste excellent Ilandes that is founde this day in the worlde: And that neuerthelesse there is nothing knowen thereof, except onely a fewe small Hauens by the sea syde, as the lyke ignoraunce remayneth of the greatest part of the Ilandes of Taprobana, Giaua, the more and the lesse, and infinite other.The Ilands of Taprobana or Giaua. Plinie. Then begyn∣nyng to speake of the partes of our Pole, he caused the bookes of Plinie to be brought hym, where diligently ponderyng the lxvii. Chapter of the seconde booke, he founde where he rehear∣seth the historie of Cornelius Nepos, by these woordes:The historie of Cornelius Ne∣pos. That in his tyme one Eudorus escapyng the handes of kyng Lathyro, departed from the gulfe of Arabie, and came by sea to the Ilande of Calese: Declaryng further, that whereas this narra∣tion was manye yeeres reputed for a fable, was nowe in our tyme, by the vertue of the Portugales, knowen to be true: And that lykewyse the same Cornelius Nepos reciteth, that at the tyme when Quintus Metellus Celer was Proconsul or Lieue∣ant for the Romanes in Fraunce,Shyps of In∣dia driuen into the sea of Ger∣manie. the kyng of Sueuia gaue hym certayne Indians, whiche saylyng out of India for merchan∣dies,
were by tempest dryuen to the coastes of Germanie. When he had redde these wordes, he proceeded, saying that the same thyng myght be verified nowe in our tyme, if the princes which confine vppon that sea woulde endeuoure theyr industry and di∣ligence to bryng it to passe:An enterprise wherby Prin∣ces may ob∣tayne true fame and glory. Cathay disco∣uered by Mar∣cus Paulus. and that there coulde not any na∣uigation be imagined so commodious and profitable to all Chri∣stendom as this way might be, if by this voiage should be found open to India, to come to the rych countrey of Cathay, whiche was discouered nowe two hundred yeeres since by Marcus Pau∣lus. Then takyng the globe in his hande, he made demon∣stration that this voyage shoulde bee very shorte, in respect of that which the Portugales nowe folowe, and also of that which the Spanyardes may attempt, to the Ilandes of Molucca. He declared furthermore, that the citie of Lubyke, beyng ryche and of great power,The citie of Lubyke. and situate vppon the sea of Germanie, and also accustomed with continual nauigations to trauayle the sea of Norway and Gothlande, and lykewyse the ryght noble kyng of Polonie,The kyng of Polonie. whose dominions, with his realme of Lituania, extende to the saide sea, shoulde be apte to discouer this secrete: But that aboue al other, the Duke of Moscouia, should per∣fourme the same,The Duke of Moscouia. with greater commoditie, & more facilitie then any other Prince. And here staying a while, he began to speake againe, and said. Nowe, forasmuch as we are come to this passe, me thinke it should seeme a great discurtesie if I should not shew you al that I knowe as touching this viage, whereof I greatly mused with my selfe many yeeres by occasion of the woordes of Plinie. Wheras therfore, beyng a young man, I was in Ger∣manie in the citie of Augusta, it so chaunced that in those dayes there came thither an ambassadour of the Duke of Moscouia,An ambassa∣dour from the Duke of Mos∣couia. a man singulerly learned both in the Greeke tongue & the Latine, and of good experience in worldely thynges, hauing been sent to dyuers places by the sayde Prince, and one of his counsayle. Of whose learnyng beyng aduertised, I sought his acquayntaunce, and talkyng with hym one daye of these Indians, dryuen by fortune to the coastes of Germanie, and of the viage that myght be discouered by the North sea to the Ilandes of spices, I perceyued that at the fyrst he marueyled exceedyngly, as at a thyng that he coulde neuer haue imagined. But restyng a
whyle in maner astonyshed in his secrete phantasie, hee tooke great pleasure therein, and sayde: forasmuch as the Portugales haue now compassed about all the South partes,The woordes of the Ambas∣sadour of Moscouia. supposed in old tyme to bee inaccessable by reason of great heate, why should we not certaynely thynke that the lyke may bee done about this parte of the North, without feare of colde, especially to men borne and brought vp in that clime: Yet proceedyng further, he sayde, that if his Prince and maister had men that would ani∣mate him to discouer this vyage, there was no Prince in Chri∣stendome that myght doe it with more facilitie. Then calling for a Mappe, in which was the discription of Moscouia,The way from Moscouia to the North O∣cean & Cathay and the prouinces subiect to the same, hee declared that from the citie of Moscouia or Mosca, goyng towarde the Northeast for the space of .lx. myles, they come to the ryuer of Volochda,Volochda, Vstiug. Iug. Succana. Duina. Colmogor. The North Ocean. and afterwarde by that, and folowyng the course thereof, to the citie of Vstiug, so called, bycause the ryuer of Iug falleth into the ryuer of Succana, where they lose theyr owne names, and make the great ryuer Duina, and by that, leauyng on the ryght hande the citie of Colmo∣gor, they sayle vnto the North Ocean. The which way, although it bee a long tracte, as more then .800. myles, neuerthelesse he sayd that in sommer it myght commodiously be sayled. And that whereas it falleth into the sea,Great woods. there are infinite woods of goodly trees, apte to make shyppes, and the place so conuenient for this purpose, that shypwryghtes and other skylfull woorkemen for all thinges heerevnto apperteynyng, may easily come out of Germanie: also, that the men which are vsed to traueyle the sea of Germanie about the coastes of Gothlande,Gothlande, should bee best and most apte to attempt this enterpryse, bycause they are in∣durate to abyde colde, hunger, and labour. He sayde further∣more, that in the court of his Prince,The Mosco∣uites haue knowledge of the great Cam of Cathay. Permia. Pescora. Catena mundi Obdora, Vecchiadoro, Obo. they haue muche know∣ledge of the great Cam of Cathay, by reason of the continuall warres they haue with the Tartars, of whom the greatest parte gyue obedience to the sayd great Cam, as to theyr chiefe Empe∣rour. He made also demonstration in the sayde carde by the Northeast, that being past the prouince of Permia, and the ryuer Pescora (which falleth into the North sea) & certeine mountaines named Catena Mundi, there is thentraunce into the prouince of Obdora, whereas is Vecchiadoro, and the ryuer Obo, whiche also
falleth into the sayde sea, and it is the furthest border of Thempyre of the Prince of Moscouia. The sayde ryuer hath his originall in a great lake called Chethai,The lake Che∣thay The Tartars. which is the fyrst habita∣cion of the Tartars, that paye tribute to the great Cane. And from this lake for the space of two moneths vyage (as they were credybly informed by certayne Tartares taken in the warres) is the most noble citie of Cambalu,The citie of Cambalu. beyng one of the chiefest in the dominion of the great Cane, whom some call the great Cham. He also affyrmed, that if shyppes should be made on the coastes of the sayde sea,Note this se∣crete. and sayle on the backe halfe of the coast thereof (which he knew by many relations made to his Prince, to reach infinitely towarde the Northeast) they should doubtlesse in fo∣lowyng the same,Difficult tra∣ueylyng in Moscouia. easily discouer that countrey. Unto these woordes he added, that although there were great difficultie in Moscouia, by reason that the way to the sayde sea is full of thicke woods and waters, whiche in the sommer make great mary∣shes, and impossible to be traueyled, aswell for lacke of victuals, whiche can not there be founde, not for certayne dayes, but for the space of certayne monethes, the place beyng desolate with∣out inhabitauntes: neuerthelesse he sayde, that if there were with his Prince, onely two Spanyardes or Portugales, to whom the charge of this viage should be committed,Commendati∣on of the Spa∣nyardes and Portugales. he no wayes doub∣ted but that they would folowe it, and fynde it, forasmuch as with great ingeniousnesse and inestimable pacience, these nations haue ouercome much greater difficulties then are these, whiche are but litle in comparison to those that they haue ouerpassed, and doe ouerpasse in all their viages to India. He proceeded, decla∣ryng that not many yeeres since, there came to the courte of his Prince,The hystorie of Paulus Cen∣turio. his reade more at large in the booke of Paulus Io∣mus. Malice may doe more with some then vertue. The Caspian sea. Riga. an Ambassadour from pope Leo, named maister Paulo Centurione, a Genuese, vnder dyuers pretenses. But the princy∣pall occasion of his commyng, was, bycause hee had conceyued great indignation and hatred agaynst the Portugales: And ther∣fore intended to proue if he could open any vyage by land, wher∣by spyces myght be brought from India by the lande of Tar∣taria, or by the sea Caspium (otherwyse called Hircanum) to Mos∣couia, and from thence to be brought in shyppes by the ryuer Riga, which runnyng by the countrey of Liuonia, falleth into the sea of Germanie: And that his Prince gaue eare vnto him, and
caused the sayde vyage to be attempted by certaine noble men of Lordo, of the Tartars confinyng next vnto him.The Tartars of Lordo, But the warres which were then betweene them, and the great desartes which they should of necessitie ouerpasse,Desartes. The vyage by the North sea. made them leaue of theyr enterpryse: whiche if it had ben purposed by the coastes of this our North sea, it might haue been easily fynyshed. The sayde Ambassadour continued his narration, saying that no man ought to doubt of that sea, but that it may be sayled sixe monethes in the yeere, forasmuche as the dayes are then very long in that clime, and hot, by reason of continuall reuerberation of the bea∣mes of the Sunne, and shorte nyghtes:The woorthi∣nesse of this vyage. And that this thing were as well woorthie to bee prooued, as anye other nauigation, whereby many partes of the worlde, heeretofore vnknowen, haue been discouered and brought to ciuilitie. And heere makyng an ende of this talke, he sayde: Let vs now omyt this parte of Mos∣couia with his colde, and speake somewhat of that parte of the newe worlde, in whiche is the lande of Brytons,The vyages of the French∣men to the lande of Bac∣calaos. called Terra Bri∣tonum, and Baccaleos, or Terra Baccalearum, where in the yeere .1534. and .1535. Iaques Cartiar, in two vyages made with three great French Gallies, founde the great and large countreys na∣med Canada, Ochelaga, and Sanguenai:Pleasaunt countreys. New France. Apostrophe to to the Christi∣an Princes. which reach from the .xlv. to the .51. degree, beyng well inhabited, and pleasaunt countreys, and named by him Noua Francia. And here staying a while, and lyftyng vp his handes, he sayde, Oh what doe the Christian prin∣ces meane, that in suche landes discouered, they doe not assigne certayne colonies to inhabite the same, to bryng those people (whom God hath so blessed with naturall giftes) to better ciuili∣tie, and to embrase our religion, then the whiche, nothing can bee more acceptable to God? The sayd regions also, beyng so fayre and fruitfull, with plentie of all sortes of corne, hearbes, fruites,Great ryuers. wood, fyshes, beastes, metals, and ryuers of suche greatnesse that shyppes may sayle more then .180. myles vpon one of them, beyng on both sydes infinitely inhabited:A thyng woor∣thy to be sear∣ched. And to cause the go∣uernours of the sayde colonies to searche whether that lande to∣warde the North, named Terra de Laborador, doe ioyne as one firme lande with Norway: Or whether there bee any streight or open place of sea, as is most lyke there should be, forasmuch as it is to bee thought that the sayde Indians, dryuen by fortune
about the coastes of Norway, came by that streight or sea, to the coastes of Germanie,The way to Cathay and the Ilandes of Molucca by the Northwest. A notable en∣terpryse. The noble en∣terprise of An∣tonie di Men∣doza, viceroy of Mexico. and by the sayde streight to sayle north∣west, to discouer the landes and countreys of Cathay, and from thence to sayle to the Ilandes of Molucca, and these surely should bee enterpryses able to make men immortall. The which thing, that ryght woorthie Gentleman maister Antony di Mendoza consideryng, by the singular vertue and magnanimitie that is in him, attempted to put this thyng in practyse. For being vi∣ceroy of the countrey of Mexico (so named of the great citie Mexico, otherwyse called Temistitan, now called new Spayne, beyng in the .xx. degree aboue the Equinoctiall, and parte of the sayde firme lande) he sent certeyne of his Captaines by lande, and also a nauie of shyppes by sea,The discoue∣ryng of the Northwest partes. to search this secrete. And I re∣member that when I was in Flaunders in Themperours court, I saw his letter wrytten in the yeere .1541. and dated from Mex∣ico: wherein was declared howe towarde the Northwest, he had founde the kyngdome of Sette Citta (that is) seuen Cities, wher∣as is that, called Ciuola, by the reuerende father Marco da Niza: and howe beyonde the sayde kyngdome yet further towarde the Northwest, Captayne Francesco Vasques of Coronado, hauing ouerpassed great desartes,Shyppes say∣lyng from Ca∣thay by the North Hyper∣boream sea, to the coastes of the Northwest parte of the lande of Bac∣caleos. Cathay. came to the sea syde, where he founde certaine shyppes which sayled by that sea with merchandies, and had in theyr banner vppon the prooes of theyr shyppes, certayne foules made of golde and siluer, which they of Mexico call Alca∣trazzi, and that theyr mariners shewed by signes that they were xxx. dayes saylyng, in commyng to that hauen: whereby he vn∣derstoode that these shyppes could be of none other countrey then of Cathay, forasmuch as it is situate on the contrary parte of the sayde lande discouered. The sayd maister Antonie wrote further∣more, that by the opinion of men well practised, there was disco∣uered so great a space of that countrey vnto the sayde sea, that it passed .950. leagues,The sea from newe Fraunce or Tarra Bri∣tonum to Ca∣thay. whiche make .2850. myles. And doubt∣lesse if the Frenche men, in this theyr newe Fraunce, would haue passed by lande toward the sayd Northwest and by North, they should also haue founde the sea whereby they myght haue sayled to Cathay. But aboue all thynges, this seemed vnto me most woorthie of commendation,A notable booke. that the sayde maister An∣tonie wrote in his letter, that he had made a booke of al the natu∣rall
and marueylous thinges whiche they founde in searchyng those countreys, with also the measures of landes, and altytudes of de∣grees: A worke doubtlesse which sheweth a princely and magni∣ficall mynd, wherby we may conceiue that if God had giuen him the charge of the other hemispherie, he would or now haue made it better knowen to vs. The which thing I suppose no man doth greatly esteeme at this tyme:A great and glorious en∣terprise. beyng neuerthelesse the greatest and most glorious enterpryse that may be imagined. And heere makyng a certayne pause, and turnyng him selfe towarde vs, hee sayde, Doe you not vnderstande to this pur∣pose, howe to passe to India towarde the Northwest wynde, as dyd of late a citizen of Uenece, so valiant a man,Sebastian Ca∣bote the grand pylot of the West Indies. and so well prac∣tised in all thinges perteynyng to nauigations, and the science of Cosmographie, that at this present hee hath not his lyke in Spayne, insomuche that for his vertues hee is preferred aboue all other pylottes that sayle to the West Indies, who may not passe thyther without his lycence, and is therefore called Piloto Maggiore (that is) the graunde pylote. And when we sayde that wee knewe him not, hee proceeded, saying, that beyng certayne yeeres in the citie of Siuile, and desirous to haue some knowledge of the nauigations of the Spanyardes, it was tolde him that there was in the citie a valiant man, a Ueneci∣an borne, named Sebastian Cabote, who had the charge of those thinges, beyng an expert man in that science,Commendati∣on of Sebasti∣an Cabote. Sebastian Ca∣bote tolde me that he was borne in Bry∣stow▪ & that at .iiii yeeres olde he was carryed with his father to Venice, and so returned a∣gayne into England with his father af∣ter certayne yeeres: where∣by he was thought to haue ben borne in Venice. and one that could make cardes for the sea with his owne hande: and that by this reporte, seekyng his acquayntaunce, hee founde him a very gentle person, who enterteyned him friendly, and shewed him many thinges, and among other a large Mappe of the worlde, with certayne perticular nauigations, aswell of the Portugales as of the Spanyardes: and that hee spake further vnto him, in this effecte. When my father departed from Uenece, ma∣ny yeeres since, to dwell in Englande, to folowe the trade of merchandyes, hee tooke mee with him to the citie of London, whyle I was very young, yet hauing neuerthelesse some know∣ledge of letters of humanitie, and of the sphere. And when my fa∣ther dyed, in that tyme when newes were brought that Don Chri∣stopher Colonus Genuese, had discouered the coasts of India, wher∣of was great talke in all the court of kyng Henry the seuenth,
who then reigned: insomuche that all men with great admira∣tion affirmed it to be a thing more diuine then humane, to sayle by the West into the East where spyces growe, by a way that was neuer knowen before. By which fame and report, there increased in my harte a great flame of desyre to attempte some notable thyng. And vnderstandyng by reason of the sphere, that if I should sayle by the way of the Northwest wynde, I should by a shorter tracte come to India,The fyrst vy∣age of Sebasti∣an Cabote. I therevppon cau∣sed the kyng to bee aduertised of my diuise: who immediately commaunded two Carauels to be furnyshed with all thinges ap∣perteynyng to the vyage, which was as farre as I remember, in the yeere .1496. in the begynnyng of sommer. Beginning there∣fore to sayle toward Northwest, not thinking to fynde any other lande then that of Cathay, and from thence to turne toward In∣dia. But after certayne dayes, I founde that the lande ranne towarde the North, which was to me a great displeasure. Ne∣uerthelesse, saylyng along by the coast, to see if I could fynde any gulfe that turned, I founde the lande styll continent to the .56. degree vnder our pole: And seeyng that there the coast turned toward the East, dispayring to fynde the passage, I turned backe agayne, and sayled downe by the coast of that lande towarde the Equinoctiall (euer with intent to fynde the sayde passage to In∣dia) and came to that parte of this firme lande whiche is nowe called Florida.The lande of Florida. Where, my victualles faylyng, I departed from thence, and returned into Englande, where I founde great tumultes among the people, and preparance for warres in Scot∣lande: by reason whereof, there was no more consideration had to this vyage. Whervppon I went into Spayne, to the Catho∣lyke kyng, and queene Elizabeth: who beyng aduertised what I had done,The seconde vyage of Ca∣bote to the land of Brasile, and Rio della Plata, enterteyned mee, and at theyr charges furnyshed certayne shyppes wherewith they caused mee to sayle to disco∣uer the coastes of Brasile, where I founde an exceedyng great and large ryuer, named at this present Rio della Plata (that is) the ryuer of siluer, into the whiche I sayled, and folowed it into the firme lande more then sixe hundred leagues, fyndyng it eue∣ry where very fayre and inhabited with infinite people,Cabote tolde me that in a re∣gion within this ryuer he sowed .50. graynes of wheate in Sep∣tember, and geathered ther∣of .50. thou∣sande in De∣cember, as wri∣teth also Fran∣cisco Lopes. whiche with admiration came runnyng dayly to our shyppes. Into this ryuer, runne so many other riuers, that it is in maner incredible.
After this, I made many other vyages, whiche I now permyt. And wexyng olde, I gyue my selfe to rest from suche traueyles, bycause there are nowe many young and lusty Pylotes and ma∣riners of good experience, by whose forwardnesse I doe reioyce in the fruites of my labours, and rest with the charge of this of∣fice as you see. And this is as muche as I haue vnderstoode of maister Sebastian Cabote, as I haue geathered out of dyuers na∣uigations written in the Italian tongue. And whereas I haue before made mention howe Moscouia was in our tyme discouered by Richarde Chanceler in his vi∣age towarde Cathay,The viage to Moscouia. by the direction and information of the sayd maister Sebastian, who long before had this secrete in his mynd, I shall not neede heere to describe that viage, forasmuche as the same is largely and faythfully written in the Latine tongue by that learned young man Clement Adams, schoolemaister to the Queenes Henshemen, as he receyued it at the mouth of the sayd Richard Chanceler. Neuerthelesse,The hystory of Moscouia. I haue thought good heere to speake somewhat of Moscouia, as I haue redde in the booke of Iohn Faber, written in the Latine tongue, to the ryght noble Prince Ferdinando, Archeduke of Austria, and Infant of Spaine, of the maners and religion of the Moscouites, as he was part∣ly instructed by the Ambassadours of the Duke of Moscouie, sent into Spayne to Themperours maiestie, in the yeere .1525. He wryteth therefore as foloweth. I thynke it fyrst conuenient to speake somewhat of the name of this region whereby it is called at this day,The dyuers names of Moscouia. and howe it was called in olde tyme. Conferryng therefore the moste auncient of the Greeke and Latine monumentes with the histo∣ryes of later tyme, I perceyue it to bee a thyng whiche requi∣reth no small iudgement of wytte and learnyng. For we see in howe shorte tyme the names of thinges are chaunged, as are also the maners of men. I fynde therefore that those peo∣ple whom at this day wee commonly call Moscouites, were in tyme past (as wynesseth Plinie) called Roxolani,Roxolani, Rosolan, Ruthem. whom ne∣uerthelesse by chaungyng one letter, Ptolome in his eyght table of Europe, calleth Rosolanos, as doeth also Strabo. They were also many yeeres called Rutheni, and are that peo∣ple whiche sometyme fought manfully agaynst the Captaynes
of Methridates, as Strabo writeth. They were called Moscouites, of the chiefe citie of all the prouince,The ryuer Mosco. named Moscouia or Mosca: or (as Volaterane sayeth) of the ryuer Mosco. They were some∣tyme gouerned by Duke Iohn, whose wyfe was Helena, of the lynage of Themperours of Constantinople, of the noble fame∣lie of the Palcologi. Beyonde these Roxolanos, Strabo sayeth there is no lande inhabited. These Ruthenians therfore or Moscouites, are people of the Northeast parte of the worlde from vs, and are determined with the limittes of the great ryuer Boristhenes of Scithia:The ryuer Bo∣risthenes. on the one syde with the Lituanians and Polonians, and on the other syde with the Tartars, who ceasse not to vexe them with continuall warres and incursions:Themperour of Cathay. Especially the great Emperour Cham of Cathay, the chiefe Prince of the Tartars, resydent by the sea syde in Taurico Chersoneso, mo∣lesteth them with sore warres. They are towarde the North syde inclosed with the frosen sea, the lande of whose coastes be∣yng very large,The frosen sea. perteyneth in maner all to the dominion of the Duke of Moscouie. The sea is it whiche the olde wryters call Lacus Cronicus, so named of the Greeke woord Cronos, which the Latines call Saturnus,Lacus Cro∣micus. Saturnus. whom they fayne to be an olde man, of complexion colde and slowe, and thereby name all suche thinges as are colde and slowe, Cronica, as by lyke reason they dyd this North sea, which beyng in maner euer frosen, is slow and cold, and in maner immoueable. And for lyke consideration (as sayth Plinie) Heathens nameth it in the Scithian tongue,Amaltheum. Amalthe∣um, which woord signifieth as much as congealed or frosen. But that I wander not farre from my purpose: Thempyre and do∣minion of the Duke of Moscouie,The dominion of the Duke of Moscouia. reacheth so farre, that it com∣prehendeth certayne partes of Asia, and also of Europe. The citie of Moscouia or Mosco, is counted twyse as byg as Colonia Agrippina,The citie of Moscouia. The chiefe ci∣ties of Mos∣couia. as they faythfully reporte which know both. Unto this they haue also an other, not vnequall in bygnesse, called Fla∣dimer. Also Blescouia, Nouogradia, Smolne, and Otifer, all which, theyr Ambassadours affyrme to be of princely and magnificall buyldynges, and strongly defended with walles both of bricke and square stone. Of these, Blescouia is strongest, and enui∣roned with three walles. Other whiche they haue innumera∣ble, are not so famous as are these wherof this Duke of Moscouie
and Emperoure of Russia taketh thinscription of his title. For euen at this present, when so euer,The Duke of Moscouia & Emperour of Russia. The duke of Moscouia his tytle. eyther by his ambassadours or his letters, he doth signifie hym selfe to be Emperour of Moscouie, he is accustomed to vse this title, Basilius by the grace of God Emperour of al Russia, and great Duke of Flada∣mer, Moscouie, Nouigrade, Blascouia, Smolne, and Otifer. &c. And this is the tytle whereby the sayde ambassadours saluted your maiestie in the name of great Basilius when they began theyr oration. This prince of Moscouie, hath vnder hym prynces of many prouinces, and those of great power:Duke Basi∣lius. Of the whiche, that olde whyte bearded man, whom this Emperour of the Ruthians, sent for his ambassadoure to Themperours ma∣iestie into Spaine, is not one of the least. For euen he,Theyr power. when ne∣cessitie of warre requireth, is accustomed to make for his Em∣perour a bande of .xxx. thousand horsemen.Theyr obedi∣ence to theyr prynce. But this is to their singular commendation, that they are so obedient to theyr prince in all thynges, that beyng sommoned by hym by neuer so meane an heralde, they obey incontinent, as if it were to god, thynke∣ing nothing more glorious then to die in ye quarel of theyr prince.Theyr warres & conquestes. By reason of which obedience, they are able, in short tyme, to as∣semble an army of two or three hundred thousande men against theyr enimies, eyther the Tartares, or the great Cham: And haue hereby obtayned great victories and triumphes, aswell agaynst the Turks, as the Tartars, by the exceeding multitude of theyr horsemen, and continual experience in warres. At such time as Themperour Maximilian made a league with them, they kept warre against the kyng of Polonie. They vse not onely bowes and dartes, after the maner of the Parthians, but haue also the vse of gunnes as we haue. And to be briefe,Gunnes. Only the Mos∣couites haue not felt the commodis of peace. only the Moscouites may seeme that nation which hath not felte the commodities of peace: Insomuch that if theyr region were not strongly defen∣ded by the nature of the place, beyng impreignable, it had or now been oftentymes conquered. Theyr language agreeth muche with the tongue of ye Bohemians, Croatians, and Sclauons:Theyr lan∣guage. so that the Sclauon doth playnely vnderstande the Moscouite, although the Moscouian tongue be a more rude and hard phrase of speach. The historiographers wryte that the Sclauous tongue tooke the name of the confusion whiche was in Babell in the tyme
of that stoute hunter Nemroth, of whom mention is made in the Genesis. But I can not enough marueyle at this thyng, that whereas betweene Dalmatia (nowe called Sclauonia) and Moscouia,Dalmatia. both the Pannonies are situate, yet this notwithstan∣dyng,Pannonia. Hungarie. the Hungarians tongue nothyng agreeth with the Mos∣couites. Whereby we may coniecture that these nations were sometymes diuided by legions, and that they came out of Dal∣matia thyther:Their original. whiche thyng also Volateranus affirmeth, saying that the language of the Ruthenians (whiche are the Moscoui∣tes) is Semidalmatica (that is, halfe Sclauone) Howe so euer it be, this is certaine,The Sclauion tongue reach∣eth farre. that the Bohemians, Croatians, Sclauons, & Mosco∣uites, agree in language, as we perceiued by thinterpretours whi∣che your maiestie had then in your courte. For whereas the sayd interpretours were borne among the Croatians & Sclauons, and none of them had euer been in Moscouia, or before that tyme had any conuersation with them, yet dyd they well vn∣derstande the ambassadours woordes. There are in Mos∣uia, wooddes of exceedyng byggenesse, in the whiche blacke woolues and whyte beares are hunted. The cause whereof may bee thextreme colde of the North,Great woods, white beares and blacke woolues. Abundance of hony and waxe. whiche doth greatly alter the complextions of beastes, and is the mother of white∣nesse, as the Philosophers affirme. They haue also great plentie of Bees, wherby they haue such abundaunce of hony and waxe, that it is with them of smale price. When the commoditie of theyr countrey is neglected by reason of long warres, their chiefe aduauntage wherby they haue all thynges necessarie towarde theyr lyuyng, is the gaynes whiche they haue by theyr ryche furres,Rych furres. as Sables, Marternes, Luzernes, most white Armins, and such other, whiche they sell to merchauntes of dyuers coun∣treys. They bye and sell with simple fayth of woordes, exchaun∣gyng ware for ware,Theyr maner of bargayning. without any curious bondes or cautels. And albeit they haue the vse of both golde and syluer mynes, yet do they for the moste part exchaunge theyr furres for fruites,Rude & wylde people. and other things necessarie to mainteine their life. There are also some people vnder the dominion of this Emperour, which haue neither wyne nor wheate, but lyue only by fleshe and mylke,Tartares. as do the wylde Tartars theyr borderers, which dwell in wods by the coastes of the frosen sea. These people are bruitishe,
and lyue in maner lyke wylde beastes. But they of the citie of Mosca and Nouigrade, and other cities, are ciuile people,Ciuile people in cities. and a∣gree with vs in eatyng of fyshe and fleshe, although theyr maner of coquerye is in many thynges differyng from ours. Volaterane wryteth that the Ruthenians vse money vncoyned.Theyr money. And enqui∣ryng further, I was infourmed that the money of Hungary is much currant with them. But this is cheeflye to be considered, that they embrace the Christian fayth,They embrase the Christian faith which they receyued of the Apostles. whiche they affirme to haue been preached to them fyrst by Sainct Andrewe the Apo∣stle, and brother to Simon Peter. Suche doctrine also as vnder Constantine the great, in the yeere .CCC.xviii. was concluded in the fyrst generall counsayle holden in the citie of Nicene in Be∣thynia, and there determined by .CCC.xviii. Byshops,The counsayle of Nicene. Basilius Magnus. Chrisostomus. and al∣so suche as hath been wrytten and taught by the Greeke Doc∣tours Basilius Magnus and Chisostomus, they beleeue to be so ho∣ly, fyrme, and syncere, that they thynke it no more lawfull one heare to transgresse or go backe from the same, then from the Gospell of Christ. For theyr constancie and modestie is suche, that no man dare call those thynges into question whiche haue once been decised by holy fathers in theyr general counsailes.Their constan∣cie in theyr re∣ligion. They do therfore with a more constant mynde perseuer in theyr first faith, which they receiued of Sainct Andrew thapostle, and his successoure and holy fathers, then do many of vs, beyng diui∣ded into scismes and sectes, which thing neuer chaunceth among them. But if any difficultie chaunce to rise as touching the faith or custome of religion,The bishops de∣fine controuer∣sies in religion. all is referred to the Archebyshop and o∣ther byshops, as to be defined by theyr spirite: not permittyng any iudgement to the inconstant and ignoraunt people. Their Archbishop is resident in the citie of Mosca, where also the Em∣perour keepeth his court. They haue lykewyse diuers other Byshops: as one in Nouigradia,Theyr bishops. where also Isodorus was By∣shop vnder pope Eugebius. They haue an other in Rosciuia, an other in Sustali, an other in Otifeti: also in Smolne, in Resan, in Cl∣mum, and in Volut, all whiche haue theyr Dioces. They ac∣knoweledge theyr Archebyshop as the cheefe.The Archbi∣shop. The patriarke of constantino∣ple. Before the patri∣arche of Constantinople was oppressed by the tiranny of the Turkes, this Archebyshop recognised hym as his superi∣our: Insomuche that this Duke of Moscouia, and Empe∣perour
of Russia, not vnmyndeful hereof, but a diligent obseruer of his accustomed religion, doth at this daye yeerely sende a cer∣tayne stypend, in maner of almes, to the Patriarche of Constan∣tinople,A notable ex∣ample of a Chri∣stian Prince. that he may with more quiet mynde looke for the ende of this his Egyptian seruitude, vntyl it shal please almightie God to restore hym to his former churche and aucthoritie. For he iudg∣eth it much impietie, if he shoulde nowe forsake hym whose pre∣dicessours haue ruled and gouerned so many churches, and of whom the fayth and religion of so many regions and prouinces haue depended. But to speake briefly of theyr religion, they agree in manye thynges with vs, and in some thynges folow the Greekes. They haue Munkes and religious men.Theyr religion. Not farre from the citie of Mosca, they haue a great Monasterie, in the whiche are three hundred Munkes, lyuyng vnder the rule of Basilius Magnus, in the which is also the sepulchre of S. Sergius the Abbot. They ob∣serue theyr vowe of chastitie,A monasterie of ccc. Munkes. whiche none may breake that haue once professed. Yet such as haue maried Uirgins of good fame, may be admitted to thorder of priesthood, but may neuer be a Munke.Priestes. The priestes and Byshops whiche are admitted to or∣ders vnmaried, may neuer after be maried: nor yet such as haue wiues, marry agayne when they are dead, but liue in perpetual chastitie. Such as commit adulterie or fornication, are greuous∣ly punished by the Bishops, and depriued of the benefices. They celebrate masse after the maner of the Greekes,Masse. whiche differeth from ours in diuers thyngs, as in fermented bread, after the ma∣ner of the Greekes. They put in the Chalice as muche water as red wine,A misterie. which water they vse to heate, because (not without a great mysterie) there ishued foorth of the syde of our Lord, both blood and water, which we ought by good reason to thynke was not without heat: for els should it scarcely haue been iudged for a miracle.The primatiue churche. In fine, they affirme that al theyr customes and rites are according to the institutions of the primitiue church, and the doctrine of Basilius Magnus, and Chrisostomus. In this thyng they differ greatly from vs,A strange custome. that they minister the communion to young chyldren of three yeeres of age, which they do with fer∣mented bread dypt in a sponefull of wine, and geue it to them for the bodye and blood of Christ.
A briefe description of Moscouia, after the later writers, as Sebastian Munster, and Iacobus Gastaldus. THe prouince of Moscouia, is so named of the ryuer Mosco, whiche passeth by the metrapolitane citie of Moscouia, called Mosca by the name of the ryuer Mosco. This prouince was called of the olde wri∣ters, Sarmatia Asiatica.Sarmatia Asiatica. The borderers or confines to the Moscouians on the one syde towarde the East, are the Tartars, called Nogai, and the Scianbanians, with the Zagatians. Towarde the West, the prouinces of Liuonia and Lituania. Towarde the South, the ryuer of Tanais, and the people confining with the riuer of Volga,The Scythian Ocean. called of the olde wryters Rha. And towarde the North, the Ocean sea, called the Scythian sea, and the region of Lapponia. Moscouia is in maner all playne, and full of maryshes, wooddes, and many very great ryuers, whereof the ryuer of Volga is the principall. Some call this Ledil, as the olde authours named it Rha. It begynneth at the great lake called Lacus Albus (that is) the white lake, and runneth into the sea of Bachau,The ryuer of Volga. Lacus albus. named of the auncient wryters, the sea Caspium or Hircanum. Under the domininon of Moscouia, are certayne regions and Duke∣domes: as Alba Russia (that is whyte Russia).The Caspian sea. Also Colmogora, Plescouia, Basrida, Nouogradia, with also manie places of the Tar∣tars, whiche are subiecte to the Duke of Moscouia. The chiefe cities of Moscouia, are Mosca, Plescouia, Nouogradia, Colmogora, Otogeria, Viatra, Smolenser, Percaslauia, Cologna, Volodemaria, Roslauia, and Cassam. The people of Moscouia are Christians,Theyr chiefe cities. and haue great abundaunce of hony and waxe: also rych furres, as Sables, Marternes, Foynes, and dyuers other. All the Tartars whiche inhabite towarde the East beyonde the ryuer of Volga, haue no dwellyng places, nor yet cities or Castles,The wylde. Tartars. but cary about with them certayne cartes or wagens couered with beastes hydes, vnder the whiche they reste, as we do in our houses.
They remoue togeather in great companyes, whiche they call Hordas.Hordas. They are warlyke people, and good horsemen, and are all Macometistes. Sebastian Munster in his booke of Uniuersall Cosmogra∣phie, wryteth that the citie of Mosca or Moscouia conteyneth in circuite .xiiii. myles, and that it is twyse as bygge as the citie of Praga in Bohemie.The bygnes of the citie of Moscouia. Of the countrey of Moscouia, besyde other prouinces subiecte to the same, he wryteth thus: It extendeth in largenesse foure hundreth myles, and is ryche in syluer. It is lawful for no man to go out of the realme,Syluer. The region of Moscouia. or come in, without the Dukes letters. It is playne without mountaynes, and full of woodds and marishes. The beastes there, by reason of the colde, are lesse then in other countreys more southwarde.Beastes. In the mid∣dest of the citie of Mosca, beyng situate in a playne, there is a Castell with .xvii. towres, and three bulwarkes, so strong & fayre, that the lyke are scarsely seene in any other place.A fayre and stronge castel in the citie of Mosca. There are also in the Castell .xvi churches, and three very large courtes, in the whiche the noble men of the courte haue theyr lodgynges. The Dukes pallaice is buylded after the maner of the Italian buyldyng,The Dukes pallaice. Theyr drynke. and very fayre, but not great. Theyr drynke is mede and beere, as is the maner of the most part of the people that in∣habite the North partes of the woorlde. They are exceedyngly geuen to droonkennesse.They are ge∣uen to drun∣kennesse. Yet (as some saye) the princes of the lande are prohibit on payne of death to absteine from suche strong drinkes as are of force to inebriate, except at certayne times when licence is graunted them, as twise or thrise in the yeere. They plowe the ground with horses, and plowes of wood. Theyr corne and other grayne,Corne and grayne. by reason of long colde, do sel∣dome waxe rype on the ground, by reason wherof they are some∣times inforced to rype & drye them in their stooues and hot hou∣ses,Stoues. and then grynd them. They lacke wyne and oyle. Moscouia is extended vnto Iurham and Corelia which are in Scithia. The famous ryuer of Tanais, the Moscouites call Don, hauyng his sprynges and originall in Moscouia in the Dukedome of Rezense.The famous ryuer of Ta∣nais. It ryseth out of a ground that is playne, baren, muddy, full of maryshes and wooddes. And where it proceedeth to∣ward the East to the mountaynes of Scythia and Tartarie, it ben∣deth to the south: and commyng to the maryshes of Meotis,
it falleth into them. The riuer of Volga (sometyme called Rha,The marishes of Meotis. Volga. Ocha. and now called of the Tartars Edell) runneth towards the North certaine myles, to whom is ioyned the riuer Occa or Ocha, flow∣ing out of Moscouia, and then bendyng into the South, and en∣creased with many other riuers, falleth into the sea Euximum, which diuideth Europe and Asia.The sea Euxi∣num. The wood or forrest called Hircania silua, occupieth a small portion of Moscouia: Yet is it somewhere inhabited,The forest of Hircania. and by the long labour of men, made thynner and barer of trees. In that part that lieth toward Prusia, is a kinde of great & fierce Bulles, called Vri or Brisonts, as writeth Paulus Iouius. There are al∣so Alces, much lyke vnto Hartes, with long snowtes of flesh,Vri. Alces. and long legges without any bowyng of theyr houx or pasternes. These beastes the Moscouites cal Lozzi, and the Almaines, Hele∣nes.They trauayle in winter on sleades. The iorney that is betweene Vlna of Lituania by Smolence to Mosca, is trauayled in winter on sleades, by the snow congeled by long frost, and made very slypperie and compact lyke Ise, by reason of much wearyng and treadyng, by meanes whereof this viage is perfourmed with incredible celeritie. But in the Sommer, the playne countreyes can not be ouercome without difficult labour: For when the snow beginneth to be disolued by contynuall heate, it causeth marishes and quamyres inextricable and daungerous both for horse and man, were it not for certaine Causeis made of timber with in maner infinite labour.Causeys of tymber. The regi∣on of Moscouia (as I haue said) beareth neither Uines nor Oliue trees, nor yet any other trees that beare any apples or fruites of very pleasant and sweete sauour or tast, except Cherry trees,Trees and fruites. for∣asmuch as al tender fruites and trees, are burnt of the cold blasts of the North wynde. Yet do the fieldes beare al kyndes of corne, as wheate, and the grayne called Siligo,Corne and graynes. whereof the fynest kynde of breade is made: also Mylle, and Panycke, whiche the Italians call Melica: Lykewyse al kyndes of pulse, as Beanes, Peason, Tares, and such other. But theyr cheefe haruest consi∣steth of Honye and Waxe,Hony in wods and trees. forasmuch as the whole region is re∣plenished with fruitefull Bees, which make most sweete Hony, not in the husband mens hyues, but euen in hollow trees. And hereby commeth it to passe, that both in the wooddes and sha∣lowed launes, are seene many swarmes of Bees hangyng on
the bowes of trees, so that it shall not be necessarie to call them togeather, or charme them with the sound of Basens. There are oftentymes founde great masses of Hony combes, conserued in trees of the olde Hony forsaken of bees, forasmuche as the hus∣bandmen can not seeke euery tree in so great and large woods: Insomuche that in the stockes or bodies of exceedyng great and hollowe trees, are sometymes founde great pooles or lakes of Hony. Demetrius thambassadour of the Duke of Moscouia, whom he sent to the Bishop of Rome not many yeeres since, made rela∣tion that a husbandman of the countrey,Lakes or pooles of Hony. not farre from the place where he remayned, seekyng in the woods for Hony, descended into a great hollowe tree full of Honye, into the which he slypt vp to the breast,A man almost drowned in hony. and lyued there only with Hony for the space of two dayes, calling in vaine for helpe in that desart of woodds: and that in fine dispayryng of helpe, he escaped by a maruey∣lous chaunce,A merueylous chaunce. beyng drawen out by a great Beare that descen∣ded into the tree, with her loynes downewarde after the maner of men. For when the man (as present necessitie and oportuni∣tie serued) perceyued the Beare to be within his reache, he so∣denly clasped her about the loynes with his armes, and with a terrible crye prouoked the beast to enforce her strength to leape out of the tree, and therewith to drawe hym out, as it chaun∣ced in deede. These regions abounde with Beares, whiche euery where seeke both Honye and Bees, not only herewith to fyll theyr bellyes,Beares feede of hony & bees. but also to helpe theyr syght: For theyr eyes are oftentymes dulled, and theyr mouthes wounded of the Bees: both which greefes are eased by eatyng of Honye. They haue weakest heades, as Lions haue strongest: Inso∣muche that when (beyng thereto enforced) they cast them sel∣ues downe headlong from any rockes, they couer theyr heades with theyr feete, and lye for a tyme astonyshed, and halfe deade with knockes. They walke sometymes on two feete, and spoyle trees,Beares inuade Bulles. backewarde. Sometyme also they inuade Bulles, and so hang on them with all theyr feete, that they weerye them with weight.The Beares byrth. The Beare (as sayeth Plinie) bringeth foorth her byrth the thirtie day, and often tymes two. Theyr birth is a cer∣taine white masse of flesh without fourme, and litle bigger then a mouse, without eyes, and without heare, with only the nayles or
clawes commyng foorth: but the damme with continuall lyc∣kyng, by litle and litle figureth the informe byrth. When she en∣treth into the denne which shee hath chosen,The Beares denne. shee creepeth thy∣ther with her belly vpwarde, least the place should be founde by the steppes of her feete. And beyng there deliuered of her byrth, remaineth in the same place for the space of .xiiii. dayes, immoue∣able as wryteth Aristotle. They lyue without meat .xl. dayes,Beares lyue without meate xl. dayes. and for that tyme susteyne them selues only by lyckyng and suc∣kyng theyr ryght foote. At the length chaunsing to finde meate, they fyll them selues so full, that they remedy that surfeyte by vomyte, which they prouoke by eatyng of Antes. Theyr byrth is oppressed with so heauy a sleepe for the space of .xiiii. dayes,The sleape of Beares. that it can not be raysed eyther with prickyng or woundes, and in the meane tyme growe exceedyng fatte. After fourtiene dayes they wake from sleepe, and begyn to lycke and sucke the soles of theyr fore feete, and lyue thereby for a space: Nor yet is it apparent that they lyue by any other meate, vntyll the spring tyme of the yeere. At whiche tyme begynnyng to runne a∣brode, they feede of the tender buddes and young sprygges or braunches of trees, and other hearbes correspondent to theyr lyppes. Before fiue hundred yeeres,The religion of the Mosco∣uites. the Moscouites honoured the Goddes of the Gentyles: And then fyrst receyued the Christian fayth when the Byshoppes of Grecia began to discent from the church of the Latines: and therefore receyued the rites of the Greekes. They minister the sacrament with fermented breade vnder both kyndes: And thinke that the soules of dead men are not helped with the suffragies of priestes, nor yet by the deuo∣tion of theyr friendes or kynsfolke: Also that the place of Pur∣gatorie is a fable. In the tyme of the diuine seruice, the hysto∣rie of the myracles of Christ, and the Epistles of sainct Paule are rehearsed out of the Pulpitte. Beyonde Moscouia, are many people which they call Scythians,The Scythians subiect to the Duke of Mos∣couia. and are partely sub∣iecte to the Prince of Moscouia. These are they which Duke Iuan subdued, as are the people of Perm, Baskird, Cezriremis∣sa, Iuhra, Corela, and Permska. These people were Idolatours before the Duke compelled them to baptisme, & appointed a by∣shop ouer them named Steuen, whom the Barbarians after the
departure of the Duke, flayed alyue, and slue. But the Duke re∣turnyng shortly after, afflicted them sore, and assigned them a newe byshop. It is here also to be noted, that the olde Cosmographers fay∣ned, that in these regions towarde the North pole, there should be certayne great mountaynes, which they called Ripheos and Hy∣perboreos, which neuerthelesse are not founde in nature. It is also a fable,It was then an opinion that all ryuers sprong out of mountaynes. The fruitfull region of Col∣mogora. The great ry∣uer Diuidna. that the ryuers of Tanais & Volham doe spring out of hygh mountaynes, whereas it is apparent that both these ryuers, and many other, haue theyr originall in the playnes. Next to Moscouia, is the fruitful region of Colmogora, through the whiche runneth the ryuer of Diuidna, beyng the greatest that is knowen in the North partes of the worlde. This ry∣uer increaseth at certayne tymes of the yeere, as doeth the ryuer of Nilus in Egypt, ouerfloweth the fieldes rounde about, and with aboundaunce of fatte moysture, resisteth the coldnesse of the ayre. Wheate sowne in the grounde, groweth aboundauntly without ploughyng:Wheate with∣out plowing. and fearyng the newe iniurie of the proude ryuer, springeth, groweth, and rypeth, with wonderfull celeritie of hastyng nature. The ryuer of Iuga. Vstiuga.Into the ryuer of Diuidna runneth the ryuer of Iuga: And in the very angle or corner where they meete, is a famous marte towne named Vstiuga, beyng a hundred and fyftie myles distant from the chiefe citie of Mosca. To this marte towne, from the higher countreis, are sent the precious furres of Marternes, Sa∣bles,Furres. Woolues, & such other, which are exchaunged for dyuers o∣ther kyndes of wares & marchandies. Hytherto Munsterus. And forasmuche as many doe marueyle that such plentie of hony should bee in so coole a countrey,The naturall cause of much hony in colde regions. Gummes and spyces in hoote countreys. I haue thought good to declare the reason and naturall cause heereof. It is there∣fore to be considered, that lyke as spices, gums, and odoriferous fruites are engendred in hotte regions, by continuall heate du∣ryng all the whole yeere, without impression of the mortifying qualitie of colde, whereby all thynges are constrayned as they are dilated by heate, euen so in colde and moyst regions (whose moysture is thynner and more wateryshe then in hot regions) are floures engendred more aboundauntly,Floures in colde regions. as caused by impres∣sion of lesse and faynter heate, woorkyng in thynne matter of
wateryshe moysture, lesse concocte then the matter of gummes and spyces, and other vncuous fruites and trees growyng in hot regions. For although (as Munster sayeth here before) the re∣gion of Moscoa beareth neyther vines or Oliues, or any other fruitee of sweete sauour, by reason of the coldnesse thereof, neuer∣thelesse,Floures of trees. forasmuch as floures (wherof hony is chiefly geathered) may in sommer season growe aboundantly in the playnes, mary∣shes, & woode, not onely on the ground, but also on trees in colde regions, it is agreeable to good reason, that great plentie of ho∣ny should be in suche regions as abounde with floures, which are brought foorth with the fyrst degree of heate, and fyrst ap∣proche of the sunne, as appeareth in the spryng tyme, not only by the spryngyng of floures in fieldes and Gardeynes, but also of blossomes of trees spryngyng before the leaues or fruite,Blossomes of trees. as the lyghter and thynner matter fyrst drawne out with the lowest and least degree of heate:An example of the degrees of heate. as the lyke is seene in the arte of styllyng, whereby all thynne and lyght moystures are lyf∣ted vp by the fyrst degree of the fyre: and the heauyest and thyc∣kest moystures are drawne out with more vehement fyre. As we may therefore in this case compare the generation of floures to the heat of May, the generation of gummes to the heat of Iune,The generati∣on of floures by moderate heate. and spyces to the heate of Iuly: Euen so, in suche colde regions whose summer agreeth rather with the temperate heate & moy∣sture of May, then with thextreme heate of the other monethes, that heate is more apte to bring foorth aboundance of floures, as thinges caused by moderate heate, as playnly appeareth by their tast and sauour, in which is no sharpe qualitie of heate, eyther by∣ting the tongue, or offendyng the head, as is in spices, gums, and fruites of hotte regions. And as in colde and playne regions, mo∣derate heate, with aboundance of moisture,Long dayes and shorce nyghtes. are causes of the gene∣ration of floures (as I haue sayde) so lykewyse the length of the dayes and shortnesse and warmenesse of the nyghtes in sommer season, in such colde regions, is a great helpe herevnto. Carda∣nus writeth in his booke De Plantis,Bramble and fearne. that bramble & fearne growe not but in colde regions, as doeth wheate in temperate regions: and that spices and hot seedes, can not growe in colde regions, forasmuch as beyng of thynne substaunce,Spyces. they should soone bee mortified & extinct by excessiue colde. For (as he sayeth) nothing
can concocte, rype, and attenuate the substance of fruites without the helpe of ayre, agreeable to the natures of such thinges as are brought foorth in the same, although it may doe this in rootes. But in maner all floures are of sweete sauour,The sauour of floures. forasmuch as the moysture that is in them, being thynne and but litle, is by meane heate soone and easily concocte or made rype. Suche also as are soone rye, are soone rotten, accordyng to the prouerbe. What Plinie wryteth of hony.Plinie, although in the .xi. booke of his naturall hystorie. Cap. viii. he wryteth that hony is geathered of the floures of all trees and settes or plantes, except sorell and the hearbe called Cheno∣pode (which some call Goose foote) yet he affirmeth that it des∣cendeth from the ayre: for in the .xii. Chapter of the same booke, he wryteth thus. Sirius is o∣therwyse called Canicula, that is, the Dogge, of whom the ca∣nicular dayes haue theyr name.This commeth from the ayre at the rysing of certayne starres, and especially at the rysyng of Sirius, and not before the rysyng of Vergiliae (which are the seuen starres called Pleia∣des) in the spryng of the day. For then at the mornyng spryng, the leaues of trees are founde moist with a fatte dewe: Inso∣muche that suche as haue been abrode vnder the firmament at that tyme, haue theyr apparell annoynted with lyquour, and the heare of theyr head clammy. And whether this bee the swette of heauen,What is hony. or as it were a certayne spettyll of the starres, eyther the iuise of the ayre purgyng it selfe, I woulde it were pure, lquide, & simple of his owne nature, as it first falleth from aboue.Howe hony is corrupted. But now descendyng so farre, and infected, not only with suche vncleane vapours and exhalations, as it meeteth with by the way, but afterwarde also corrupted by the leaues of trees, hearbes, and floures of sundry tastes and qualities, and lykewyse aswell in stomackes of the bees (for they vomite it at their mou∣thes) as also by long reseruyng the same in Hiues, it neuerthe∣lesse reteyneth a great parte of the heauenly nature &c.ony of great quantitie in North regions Agayne in the xiiii. Chapter of the same booke he wryteth, that in cer∣tayne regions towarde the North, as in some places of Ger∣manie, hony is founde in suche quantitie, that there haue been seene hony combes of eyght foote long, and blacke in the holow parte. By the which woordes of Plinie, and by the principles of naturall philosophie, it doeth appeare that aboundaunce of hony should chiefly be engendred in suche regions, where the heate of
sommer is temperate and continuall, as well by nyght as by day, as it is not in hot regions, where the nyghtes be long and colde,Hot nyghtes in colde re∣gions. A simiitude. as is declared in the Decades. For lyke as suche thinges as are fyned by continuall heate, mouyng, and circulation, are hynde∣red by refrigeration or colde (as appeareth in the arte of styllyng and hatchyng of egges) euen so by the action of temperate and continuall heate, without interposition of contrarie and mortify∣ing qualitie, crude thinges are in shorte tyme made rype, sower made sweete, thicke made thinne, heauie made lyght, grosse made subtyle, harde made softe, dead made lyuyng, and in fine, bodyes made spirites,Naturall heat doeth subtyle and digest all thinges. as manifestly appeareth in the maruey∣lous woorke of dygestion of lyuyng beastes, whereby the finest parte of theyr nouryshment is turned into blood, and the finest of that blood conuerted into spirites, as the lyke is also seene in the nouryshment of trees, plantes, and hearbes, & all other thinges that growe on the grounde, all which are moued, digested, sub∣tiliate, attenuate, ryped, and made sweete by the action of this continuall heate whereof I haue spoken. To conclude therefore, if hony be eyther the swette of the starres, or the iuise of the ayre purgyng it selfe (as Plinie wryteth) or otherwyse engendred of subtyle and fine vapours rysing from the earth,Subtyle va∣pours digested by heate. and concocte or digested in the ayre by the sayde continuall and moderate heate, it may seeme by good reason that the same should be engendred in sommer season more aboundantly in colde regions then in hot, for the causes aforesayde.Colde regions. And that it may by aucthoritie and rea∣son more manifestly appeare, both that the heate of sommer in colde regions is continuall (as I haue sayde) and also that the colde in wynter is not there so intollerable to thinhabitauntes of those regions as other doe thynke, I haue thought good for the better declaration hereof, to adde herevnto what I haue geathe∣red out of the booke of Ziglerus,Ziglerus. wrytten of the Northe regi∣ons.
Of the North regions, and of the moderate and continual heate in colde regions, aswell in the nyght as in the day in sommer season: Also howe those regions are habitable to thinhabitauntes of the same, contrary to the opinion of the olde wryters. OF this matter, Ziglerus in his booke of the North regions in the description of Scondia,Ziglerus. wryteth as foloweth. We will intreate of this matter, not as putting the same in question as did the olde writers, nor geathering iudgement deducted of reasons in way of argument, forasmuche as we are already more certayne by hystorie that these cold regi∣ons are inhabited. We will first therfore shew by natural reason, and by consideration of the sphere, declare howe by the helpe of man and arte, colde regions are inhabited without domage or de∣struction of lyuyng beastes: And will first speake of the qualitie of sommer,The qualitie of sommer in colde regions. declaryng howe it is there augmented. Yet intend I not to comprehende all that may be sayde in this matter, but on∣ly rehearse suche reasons and similitudes as are most apparent and easie to be vnderstoode. In such regions therefore, as are extended from the burnt lyne or Equinoctiall towarde the North,The course of the Sunne. as much as the sunne ryseth higher ouer them, so much are they the more burnt with heat, as Affrica, bycause it ryseth highest ouer them, as they are nearest to the Equinoctial: & tarying with them so much the shorter tyme, causeth shorter dayes, with longer & colder nyghtes, to restore the domage of the day past, by reason of the moisture consumed by vapour.Vapours. But in such regions ouer the which the sun ryseth lower (as in Sarmatia) it remayneth there the longer in the day,Short and warme nyghts and causeth so much the shorter and warmer nyghtes, as reteynyng warme vapours of the day past, which vapours helpe the woorke of the day. I speake as I haue founde by experience, sayth Vpsa∣liesis: For I haue felte the sommer nyghtes scarsely tollerable for heate in Gothlande,Gothlande. whereas I felte them colde in Rome. This benefite of the increase of the day doeth augment so much the more in colde regions, as they are nearer the poles: and
ceaseth not vntyll it come directly ouer the center or poynte of the axes or axceltree of the worlde, where the sunne beyng, at the hyghest in sommer, is eleuate about .xxiiii. degrees:One day of .vi. monethes. In which re∣gions, one continuall day consisteth of .vi. monethes from the spryng tyme, by the standyng of the sunne (called Solflitium) in the signe of Cancer, to Autumne. The Sunne therfore, with∣out any offence of the nyght,Howe the som∣mer is increa∣sed in colde re∣gions. gyueth his influence vppon those landes with heate that neuer ceaseth duryng that tyme, which maketh to the great increase of sommer, by reason of continu∣aunce. Wee haue now therefore thought good to geather, by a certayne coniecture, howe greatly we thynke the sommer to be increased heereby. We haue before declared howe hygh the sunne is eleuate ouer the regions that are vnder the poles at the staye of the sunne: And so many partes is it eleuate in Rome at the staye of the sunne in wynter (that is) at the shortest day in the yeere. But here,Rome. in the myd wynter, the sunne at noonetyde is beneficiall, and bryngeth foorth floures, Roses, and Iefloures. I haue geathered some in winter in the moneth of December, not procured at home by hu∣mane arte, but growyng in open Gardens in maner in euery bed vnder the bare heauen, brought foorth only by the sunne. But this benignitie of the sunne,Colde nyghtes in hot regions. continueth not past fyue houres in the naturall day, forasmuch as the operation thereof is extinct by the coldenesse of the nyght folowyng. But if this benefite myght be receyued without hinderaunce of the nyght, as it is vnder the poles, and so continue many monethes in hot regions vnto wyn∣ter, it should surely bring foorth many wonderful thinges, if moy∣sture fayled not. And by this condition thus propounded,The Romane wynter. we may well conceyue that the Romane wynter, although it be not hotte, yet to be equall in heate to the full spryng tyme in the same citie, during the tyme of the sayd fyue houres. And thus by a similitude of the height of the sunne vnder both places, and of the knowen qualitie of the Romane heauen, and by the accesse of the sunne to such places where the longest day continueth certayne moneths, we may geather that sommer, in places vnder the pole, is lyke vnto and equall with the full Romane spryng. But the more difficult question,Our night of vi. monethes. is of the tyme of the .vi. monethes in the whiche the Sunne leaueth those regions,
and goeth by the contrary or ouerthwarte circle toward the south in wynter. For they say that at that tyme, those regions are deformed with horrible darkenesse,Obiections. and nyghtes not increased, whiche may be the cause that beastes can not seeke theyr foode: And that also the colde should then bee intollerable. By which double euyls all thynges constrayned should dye, so that no beast were able to abyde the iniuryes of wynter and famyne insuyng thereof: but that all beastes should peryshe before the sommer folowyng, when they should bryng foorth theyr broode or succes∣sion: and that for these causes, the sayde colde clyme should bee perpetually desolate and vnhabitable. To all which obiections, we answere in this maner. As touchyng the nyghtes not increased, I say, that it was not conuenient to assume that for any reason. For not as the Sunne falleth,The twy∣lightes. so sodeynly commeth the darke nyght: but that the euenyng doeth substitute and prolong the day long after, as also the day spryng or dawnyng of the day, gyueth a certayne lyght before the rysing of the Sunne: After the which, the re∣sidue of the nyght that receyueth no lyght by the sayde euenyng and mornyng twilightes, is accomplyshed by the lyght of the Moone,The lyght of the Moone. so that the nyghtes are sildome vnaugmented. Let this bee an example prooued by our temperate regions, whereby we may vnderstande the condition of the nyght vnder the pole: Therefore euen there also the twilightes helpe the nyght a long tyme,The nyght vnder the pole. as we will more presently demonstrate. It is approoued by the Astronomers, that the Sunne descendyng from the high∣est halfe sphere by eightiene paralels of the vnder horizon, ma∣keth an ende of the twilight, so that at the length the darke night succeedeth:A demonstra∣tion. And that the Sunne approchyng, and rysing a∣boue the hyghest halfe sphere by as many paralels, doeth dy∣minyshe the nyght and increase the twylyght. Agayne, by the position or placyng of the sphere vnder the pole, the same is the horizontall that is the Equinoctiall. Those paralelles therefore that are paralelles to the horizontall lyne, are also pa∣ralelles to the Equinoctiall. So that the Sunne descendyng there vnder the horizon, doeth not bryng darke nyghtes to those regions, vntyll it come to the paralels distant .xviii. partes from the Equinoctiall.
Duryng the tyme of these sayde syxe monethes of darke∣nesse vnder the pole, the nyght is destitute of the benefite of the Sunne and the sayde twylyghtes, onely for the space of three monethes, in the whiche the Sunne goeth and returneth by the portion of the ouerthwarte circle. But yet neyther this tyme of three monethes is without remedy from heauen. For the Moone with her full globe increased in lyght, hath accesse at that tyme, and illuminateth the monethes lackyng lyght, euery one by them selues, halfe the course of the moneth:The Moone. by whose benefite it commeth to passe that the nyght, named as vnaugmented, possesseth those regions no longer then one mo∣neth and a halfe, neyther that continually or all at one tyme: but this also diuided into three sortes of shorter nyghtes, of the whiche euery one endureth for the space of two weekes, and are illuminate of the Moone accordyngly. And this is the rea∣son conceyued of the power of the sphere, whereby we testifie that the sommers and nyghtes vnder the pole are tollerable to ly∣uyng beastes. But we wyll nowe declare by other remedies of nature and arte, that this colde so greatly feared, is more remisse and tollerable then our opinion: so that,Remedies of nature & art. compared to the nature of suche beastes as lyue there, it may be abydden. And there is no doubte but there are autours of more antiquitie then that age in the whiche any thyng was exactly knowen or discouered of the North regions.The olde writers per∣suaded by con∣iecture. The olde wryters there∣fore persuaded onely by naked coniecture, dyd geather what they myght determyne of those places: Or rather, by the estimation of heauen, the whiche, because they felte it to bee hardely tollerable to them selues, and lesse to men borne in the clyme of Egypt and Grecia, tooke thereby an argument of the whole habitable earth. The hystorie of Strabo is knowen, that a potte of brasse,A brasen potte broken with frost. whiche was broken in sunder with frosen water, was brought from Pontus, and shewed in Delphis in to∣ken of a greeuous wynter. Here therefore, they that so great∣ly feared the wynter (suche as chaunceth to the earth vnder the xlviii. paralele) and therefore consecrated that broken potte to the temple of Appollo: what coulde suche men truely define vppon regions so farre without that paralele, whether they
were inhabited or not? But suche as folowed these, beyng con∣tented with thinuentions of the olde autours, and borne in ma∣ner vnder the same qualitie of heauen, persysted wyllyngly in the same opinion, with more confidence then consideration of the thynges whereof we nowe intreate: so lyghtly was that opinion receyued as touchyng the vnhabitable clime vnder the poles. But we with better confidence and faith (forasmuche as we are not instructed with coniectures) intend to stande against the sentence of the olde autours, affirmyng the North regions within the colde clime to be inhabited with herrynges,Fyshes of the North seas. coddes, haddockes, and brettes, tunnyes, and other great fyshes, with thinfinite number whereof, tables are furnyshed through a great parte of Europe: All whiche are taken in the North sea exten∣ded beyonde our knoweledge. This sea at certayne tymes of the yeere,The North sea. poureth foorth his plentifulnes, or rather driueth foorth his increase to seeke newe mansions, and are here taken in theyr passage. Furthermore also, euen the mouthes of the riuer of Ti∣ber receiued a fyshe as a newe gest sent from the north sea: this swamme twise through Fraunce, and twise through Spayne, ouerpassed the Ligurion and Tuscan sea, to communicate her selfe to the citie of Rome. The lakes also and ryuers of those re∣gions are replenyshed with fyshe: insomuch that no power of colde is able to extinguyshe thincrease of the yeere folowing, and the succession reparable so many hundred yeeres. And I plaine∣ly thinke, that if it should of necessitie folowe, that one of these two elementes, the earth and the water, should be destructiue to lyuyng creatures,The qualitie of water. the water shoulde chiefely haue wrought this effecte. But this is founde so tractable, that in the depe wynter, both that increase is brought foorth, and fyshing is also exercised. The lande is lykewise inhabited with like plentifulnesse. But that we wander not to farre,The land. let the fayth hereof rest in thexpo∣sition folowing, wherin we intend to declare howe by the power of nature and industry of man, this commoditie may come to passe.The diuine prouidence in moderatyng the elementes. Therefore as touchyng nature, we suppose that the di∣uine prouidence hath made nothyng vncommunicable, but to haue geuen suche order to all thynges, wherby euery thyng may be tollerable to the next. The extremities of the elementes con∣sent with theyr next. The ayre is grosse about the earth and
water: but thynne and hot about the fyre. By this prouidence of nature, the vttermost sea is very salt.The nature of the sea. And salt (as witnesseth Plinie) yeldeth the fattnesse of Oyle. But Oyle, by a certayne natyue heate, is of propertie agreeable to fyre. The sea then, beyng al of such qualitie,Salt. powreth foorth it selfe farre vpon thex∣treeme landes, whereby by reason of the saltnesse thereof, it mo∣ueth and stirreth vp generatiue heate,Generatyue heate. as by fatnesse it nori∣sheth the fecunditie of thynges generate. It geueth this fruite∣fulnesse to the earth at certayne floods, although the earth also it selfe haue in his inner bowels the same lyuely and norish∣ing heate, wherby not only the Dennes, Caues, and hollow pla∣ces, but also spryngs of water are made warme:Outward colde is cause of in∣warde heate. & this so much the more, in how muche the wynter is more vehement. This thyng doth more appeare by this example, that the mountaines of Norway and Swethlande are fruitfull of metales, in the which,Metals. siluer and copper are concoct and molten into veines▪ which can scarcely by done in fornaces. By this reason also, the vapoures and hot exhalations pearsyng the earth and the waters,Vapoures and exhalations. and through both those natures breathyng foorth into the ayre, tem∣perateth the qualitie of heauen, & maketh it tollerable to beasts, as witnesseth the huge bygnesse of the Whales in those seas,Whales. with the strength of body, and long lyfe of such beastes as lyue on the land: which thyng coulde not be,Beastes. except all thyngs were there commodiously norished by the benefite of the heauen and the ayre. For nothyng that in the tyme of encrease is hyndred by any iniurie, or that is euyl fedde al the tyme it lyueth, can pro∣sper wel. Neyther are such thynges as liue there,Hereby may be considered the cause of the death of our men that sayle directly to Guinea. offended with theyr natural wynter, as though an Egiptian or Ethiopian were sodenly conueighed into those cold regions. For they were in long tyme, by litle and litle, brought fyrst acquaynted with the nature of that heauen, as maye be prooued both by the lyfe of man, and by the hystorie of holy scripture They that were led from Mesopatamia, and that famous Tower of Babilon towards the North partes of the worlde, in the fyrst dispertion of nati∣ons, did not immediately passe to the extreme boundes,No passage from our extre∣mitie, to an o∣ther, but by a meane. but plan∣ted theyr habitations first vnder a myddle heauen, between both, as in Thracia, and Pontus, where theyr posteritie was accu∣stomed the better to susteyne the rigour of Scythia and Ta∣nais,
as he that commeth from winter to sommer, may the bet∣ter after abyde yse and snow, beyng fyrst hardened thereto by the frostes of Autumne. In lyke maner mortal men, accustomed to beare the hardnesse of places next vnto them, were thereby at the length more confirmed to sustayne the extremities. And here also, if any sharpnesse remaine that may seeme intollerable, nature hath so prouided for the same, with other remedies. For the land and sea, hath geuen vnto beastes, deepe and large Ca∣ues,Caues and Dennes. Dennes, and other hollowe places, and secreete corners in mountaynes and rockes, both on the land and by sea banckes, in the which are euer conteyned warme vapoures, so muche the more intent and vehement, in how much they are the more constrayned by extreeme cold. Nature hath also geuen valleyes, diuerted and defended from the North windes.Valleis. She hath lyke∣wyse couered beastes with heare, so muche the thycker, in how much the vehemencie of cold is greater: by reason wherof the best and richest furres are brought from those regions, as Sables, whose pryce is growne to great excesse,The best furres. Sables. next vnto gold and pre∣cious stones, and are esteemed princely ornamentes. The beasts that beare these furres, are hunted cheefelye in winter (whiche thyng is more strange) because their heare is then thicker and cleaueth faster to the skin. How greeuous then shal we thinke the wynter to be there,Beastes that lye hyd in wynter. where this litle beast liueth so wel, and where the hunters may search the Dennes and hauntes of such beastes through the woods and snow? But such beastes, the condition of whose bodies is so tender that they are not able to abide thiniu∣rie of the cold, either lye hyd in winter, or change their habitati∣on, as do certaine beasts also in our clime. Nature hath further∣more geuen remedie to man, both by art and industry to defende him selfe both abrode and at home. Abrode with a thicke vesture, and the same well dowbeled. At home, with large fyers on Harthes, Chymneyes, and in Stooues for the daye, with close Chaumbers, and Couches, soft and warme Beddes for the nyght: by whiche remedies they mittigate the wynters, which seeme rigorous to straungers,All beasts haue the nature of the place where they are engen∣dred. although they are to thinhabitan∣tes more tollerable then our opinion, as in deede by the fyrst na∣turall mixture or composition of theyr bodies, such thyngs are a∣greeable to them, as seeme very hard to other. The Lion in Affrik
and the beare in Sarmatia, are fierce, as in theyr present strength and vigoure: but translated into a contrary heauen, are of lesse strength and courage. The foule called Ciconia (which some thynke to be the Storke) doth not tary the wynter: yet do the Cranes come at that tyme. The Scythian wyll accuse the Ro∣mane heauen as inducyng feuers, whereas neuerthelesse there is none more holsome. Such as haue been tenderly brought vp, if they come suddeynely into the campe, can not away with hunger, watchyng, heate, passages through ryuers, battayles,What exercise may do. sieges, and assaultes: But the olde souldier, exercised in the warres, vseth these as meditations of the fielde, as hardened therto by long experience. He that hath been accustomed to the shadowe of the citie, and wyll attempte the saying of the poet Uirgil, Nudus ara, sero nudus, that is, naked and bare, without house and home, shal to his peryl make an end of the verse, Habe∣bis frigora febram (that is) he shal haue the colde ague. Suche thynges therfore as seeme hard vnto vs,Vse maketh masteries. beyng accustomed by litle and litle, become more tollerable: Insomuch that this exer∣cise of sufferaunce by such degrees, doth oftentimes growe to pro∣digious effectes, farre beyond our expectation. And thus we seeme to haue made sufficient demonstration, by heauen, nature, and art, wherby it may appeare, that no part of the land or sea is denied to liuing creatures. The reader may also perceiue howe large matter of reasons and examples may be opened for the de∣claryng of our opinion, wherin we rest. Let therfore thauctoritie of the auntient auctours geue place, and the consent of the newe writers agree to this history, not as nowe at the length compre∣hended (wheras before many hundred yeeres Germanie and Scondia had entercouse of merchandies not seuered by the large gulfe of Gothia) but as nowe by our commentaries brought to lyght: and hauyng sayde thus muche in maner of a preface,Scondia. we wyll nowe proceede to wryte of the North regions. Schondia. SCondia, Schondania, or Schondenmarchia, is as muche to saye as fayre Dania, or fayre Denmarke. Plinie in one place, nameth it Scandia, and in an other Scandinauia,Scone is fayre in the duch tongue. if there be no faute in thexemples.
It was named Schondia, by reason of the fayrenesse and fruite∣fulnesse thereof. And this aswell for that in beneficiall heauen, fertilitie of grounde,The fertilitie of Schondia. commoditie of hauens and marte townes, abundaunce of ryuers and fyshe, plentie of beastes, great quan∣titie of metall, as golde, syluer, copper, and leade, diligent cul∣turyng the grounde, with townes and cities well nhabited and gouerned by ciuile lawes, it geueth place to none other fortunate region. This was in maner vnknowen to the olde Greekes and Latins, as may appeare by this argument, that with one consent they affirmed, that in these north regions the colde Zone or clime, was condemned to perpetuall snowe, intollerable to al lyuyng creatures. For fewe of them haue made mention here∣of as to be inhabited. Among whom Plinie, as one of the chiefe, saith in his fourth booke, that Schondania is of vnknowen bigge∣nesse: and onely that portion thereof to be knowen, which is in∣habited with the nation of the Hilleuiones in fiftie villages: Nei∣ther yet is Eningia lesse in opinion. Other more auncient then Plinie,He meaneth Diodorus Siculus haue placed most fortunate regions, with men of long lyfe (which the Greekes call Macrobios) and of most innocent behauour vnder the tracte of those landes: and that there came from thence to Delphos, certayne religious virgines, with vowes and giftes consecrated to Apollo: And furthermore, that that na∣tion obserued this institution, vntyll the saide virgins were viola∣ted of them, of whom they were receiued as straungers. These are most cleare testimonies of Antiquitie, both of the greatnesse of Schondia, and the people that inhabite the same, although they were since vnknowen:Thinuasions of the Gothes. as lykewyse the Gothes departyng from these North landes, although they obteyned Thempire of the regions about the maryshes of Meotis, and the coastes of the sea Euxinus, with the realme of Denmarke (wherof that is thought to be a portion whiche is nowe called Transiluania) and the bankes of the ryuer of Danubius,Transiluania. and in fine, inuaded the Ro∣mane Empire, yet were not the regions well knowen from whence they tooke theyr originall. Therefore lyke as part of the olde wryters are vnsufficient witnesses, to testifie of our nar∣rations as touchyng these landes vnknowen to them: Euen so the other parte whiche excluded the same as vnhabitable, are to be conuinced, leaste theyr authoritie, beyng admitted, shoulde
engender opinions not agreeable or conuenient to the nature of places. Sigismundus Liberus, in his commentaries of Moscouia, writeth thus. Scandia or Scondia, is no Ilande (as some haue thought) but part of the continent or firme land of Suetia, which by a long tract reacheth to Cothland: and that nowe the kyng of Denmarke possesseth a great part thereof. But whereas the writers of these thynges haue made Scondia greater then Suetia, and that the Gothes and Lumbardes came from thence,The Gothes & Lumbardes. they seeme in my opinion to comprehend these three kyngdomes as it were in one bodie, only vnder the name of Scondia, foras∣much as then, that part of land that lyeth betweene the sea Bal∣theun: (which floweth by the coastes of Finlandia) and the frosen sea, was vnknowen: and that by reason of so manye maryshes, innumerable riuers, and intemperatenesse of heauen, it is yet rude, vncultured, and litle knowen. Which thyng hath been the cause that some iudged al that was called by the name of Scondia, to be one great Iland. Gronelande. GRonelande is interpreted greene land, so cal∣led for the great encrease and fruitfulnesse of pasture. By reason whereof,Fruitfull pasture. what great plentie of cattaile there is, it may hereby appere, that at such time as shippes may passe thither, they set foorth great heapes of Cheese and Butter to be solde, whereby we coniecture that the lande is not rough with barren mountaynes. It hath two Cathedrall Churches vnder the Ordination of Ni∣drosia. To one of these, was of late yeeres a Byshop appoynted, only by the title of a Suffragane, in consideration that while the Metropolitane doth neglect the direction of religion for the di∣stance of the place, and difficult nauigation,Religion neg∣lecte. the people is in ma∣ner falne to gentilitie, being of them selues of moueable wittes, & geuen to magicall artes. For it is sayd that they (as also the peo∣ple of Laponia) do rayse tempestes on the sea with magicall in∣chauntmentes,Inchaunte. and bryng such shyps into daunger as they en∣tend to spoyle. They vse litle ships made of Leather, and safe a∣gaynst the brusing of the sea and rockes, and with them assaile o∣ther shyps. Peter Martir of Angleria, writeth in his Decades
of the Spanysh nauigations that Sebastian Cabot, saylyng from England continually towarde the North,The viage of Sebastian Ca∣bot to the fro∣sen sea. folowed that course so farre, that he chaunced vpon great flakes of yse in the Moo∣neth of Iuly: and that diuertyng from thence, he folowed the coast by the shore bendyng toward the South, vntyll he came to the clyme of the Iland of Hispaniola, aboue Cuba, an Ilande of the Canibales. Which narration hath geuen me occasion to ex∣tende Groneland beyond the promontorie or cape of Huitsarch,Gronelande. to the contynent or fyrme lande of Lapponia, aboue the castell of Wardhus:Wardhus. whiche thyng I dyd the rather, for that the reuerende Archebyshop of Nidrosia, constantly affirmed that the sea ben∣deth there into the fourme of a crooked Elbowe. It agreeth here∣with also, that the Lapones consent with them in the lyke Ma∣gicall practises,Lapponia and Gronelande. and do neyther embrace the Christian religion, nor refuse it: wherby I haue thought this lykenesse of customes to be betweene them, because they ioyne togeather in one conti∣nent. The distance lykewyse, seemeth not to disagree. For bee∣tweene both these people, the distance is not full two hundred Schoeni, euery one beyng a space of ground conteining threescore furlonges,Schoeni. which make seauen myles, & a halfe. It furthermore agreeth with this coniecture that Cabot chaunced into such yse. And albeit, as touching the Moneth of Iuly, I wyll contend it is not well rehearsed,Cabot tolde me that this ise is of fresh water & not of the sea. no although he had sailed vnder the poole, for such reasons as we haue declared before to the contrary: neuerthe∣lesse, that at some tyme he sailed by yse, this testifieth in that he sayled not by the mayne sea, but in places neare vnto the land, comprehending & embrasing the sea in fourme of a gulfe, where∣as for the same cause the gulfe of Gothland is frosen, because it is streyght and narrow▪A commixtion of salt water & fresh. in the which also the litle quantitie of salte water is ouercome by the abundance of fresh water of many and great ryuers that fall into the gulfe. But betweene Norway and Island,The sea be∣tween Norway and Island. the sea is not frosen, for the contrary cause, forasmuch as the power of freshe water is there ouercome of the abundance of the salte water. There is a fame (but of vncertayne auctho∣ritie) that the Spaniardes sayle at this present to Gronelande, and to an other lande, whiche they call Terra Viridis, that is, the greene lande,Terra Viridis. bringyng from thence suche wares as are founde in Gronelande. Towards the North▪ it reacheth to the
vnknowen land vnder the pole, from whence also the theeues and robbers of the Pigmei come into this lande.Pigmei. Which is an argument that the regions vnder the pole are inhabited, & almost enuironed with the sea, as are they whiche the Cosmographers call Chersonnesi, or Peninsulae (that is) almost Ilandes. The description of Gronlande. The description of the East syde, which ly∣eth towarde Norway. Wardhus Castle. 54.   70. 30. Towarde the North. 53. 30. 71. 30. The fyrst extention. 40.   71. 40. The second extention. 28.   72.   Huitsarch promont. 22.   67.   The extention. 5.   61. 45. It is continued from thence by the coastes of the lande of Bac∣callaos.Baccallaos. 356. 60.     Towarde the West and North, it is termined with an vn∣knowen ende of landes and seas.         Islande. ISlande is interpreted the land of Ise,Islande called Thyle. and is called of the olde wryters Thyle. It is extended betweene the South and the North, almost two hundred schoenes in longitude.Schoene is lx. furlonges. It is for the most parte full of mountaynes, and vncultured. But in the playnes it hath such fruitfull pastures, that they are fayne some∣tymes to dryue the beastes from theyr feedyng, least they should be suffocate with to much fatnesse. This Ilande is famous by the strange myracles of nature,Myracles of nature in Islande. of the whiche Saxo Grammaticus in his hystorie of Denmarke, and Olanus Gothus, in his description of the North landes, doe make mention. There are in it three mountaynes of marueylous height,Three maruey∣lous moun∣taynes. the toppes whereof are co∣uered with perpetuall snowe: but the nether partes of them, are of lyke nature to the mountayne Etna, in the Ilande of Sici∣lie, boylyng with continuall flames of fyre, and castyng foorth brymstone. One of these is named Helga,Helga. and the other Mons Crucis (that is) the mounte of the crosse. The thyrd is named Hecla, whose flames neyther consume flaxe or tow, matters most apte to take fyre, nor yet are quenched with water.Hecla. And with
lyke force as the shot of great artillerie is driuen foorth by vio∣lence of fyre, euen so by the commixtion and repugnance of fyre, colde, and brymstone, great stones are heere throwne into the ayre. Neare vnto these mountaynes are three chynkes or open places in the earth, of huge bygnesse, and such depth (especially at the mount Hecla) that no sight can attayne thereto. But to such as looke into them,Straunge vi∣sions. there first appeare men as though they were drowned, and yet breathyng foorth theyr soules: who beyng ex∣horted by theyr friendes to resorte to theyr owne, they answere with mournyng voyce and greeuous sighes, that they must de∣parte from thence to the mount Hecla, and therewith sodaynely vanyshe out of sight.Ise. He floweth about the Ilande for the space of seuen or eight monethes, makyng by runnyng togeather a certayne miserable waylyng and gronyng noyse, not vnlyke the voyce of man. Thinhabitauntes thynke, that in this Ise and the mount Hecla, are the places where the euyll soules of theyr peo∣ple are tormented. If any man take a great portion of this Ise, and keepe it as diligently as may be in a close vessell or cofer,A straunge thyng. the same doeth so vanyshe at the tyme when the other Ise about the Ilande dissolueth, that not so much as one droppe of water or Ise can thereof be founde. Not farre from these mountaynes reachyng towarde the sea coastes,Foure spryngs o contrary nature. are foure sprynges of water, of most dyuers and con∣trary nature. The fyrst, by reason of his perpetuall and feruent heate, sodaynely turneth all bodyes, that are cast therein, into stones, reseruyng neuerthelesse theyr fyrst forme and shape. The seconde, is of intollerable coldnesse. The thyrd, is sweeter then hony, and most pleasaunt to quench thyrst. The fourth, is playne poyson, pestilent, and deadly. There is furthermore in these sprynges suche aboundaunce of brymstone,Aboundaunce of brymstone. that a thousande pounde weight thereof is bought for litle, as for the tenth parte of a ducate.Dryed fyshe. Theyr chiefe wares, are dryed fyshe, as Soles, May∣dens, Playces, Salpas, Stockefyshes, and such other, whiche they exchange for wheat, and such other thinges as are brought thyther from Lubecke, Hamborowe, and Amsterdam. For they haue oftentymes such scarsenesse of corne,Scarsenesse of corne. that they vse dryed fysh in the steade of bread, although in sommer the Iland so florysheth with greene and fruitfull medowes, that they are fayne somtimes
to dryue theyr beastes from pasture, least they should suffocate for to much fatnesse, as I haue sayde before. They make very good butter, and apte to be vsed in matters of phisicke. There are found diuers kindes of good Haukes, as Faulcons, Gerfaulcons,Haukes. Lan∣ners, and Sperhaukes: Also Rauens, Crowes, Beares, Hares, and Foxes, both white and blacke. They haue most swift horses,White Ra∣uens. and such as run .xxx. miles continually without rest or baite. They haue many churches:Houses of Whales bones & houses builded of the bones of Whales and other great fyshes.The nauigati∣on to Islande. The nauigation is not open to this Iland but in sommer season: and that only for the space of foure mo∣nethes, by reason of the colde and Ise whereby the passage is stopped. If any stryfe or debate aryse on the sea among the mari∣ners for the commoditie of the hauen, the gouernour of the place, although he haue knowledge thereof, yet doeth he not punyshe them, forasmuche as it apperteyneth not to his office to decerne such thinges as are done on the sea, but only on the lande. Ships are there oftentymes in great peryll, by reason of Whales,Whales. & such other monsters of the sea, except the Mariners take good heede, and keepe them far from the shyps with the noyse of Drummes, and emptie barrels cast into the sea. There are many Mynstrels and other that play on instruments,One thyng seruyng for contrary vses. with the sweete noyse wher∣of, they vse to allure foules and fyshes to their nettes and snares. Many also, lye lurkyng in caues and dennes, to auoyd the sharp∣nesse of cold, as the Affricanes doe the lyke to defend them selues from the heate. On the top of a certaine mountayne called Weys∣zarch, (lying betweene Island and Gruntland, or Greonland) is erected a shypmans quadrant of marueylous bygnesse,A shypmans quadrant. made by two Pirates, named Pinnigt and Pothorst, in fauour of suche as sayle by those coastes, that they may thereby auoyde the daunge∣rous places lying towarde Greonland. The myddest of the Ilande. 7 0 65 30. The citie Harsol. &c. 7 40 60 42. Laponia. THe region of Laponia, was so named of the people that inhabite it. For the Germanes call all suche La∣pones, as are simple or vnapte to thinges. This
people is of small stature, and of suche agilitie of bodie, that hauyng theyr quyuers of arrowes gerte to them,People of great agilitie. and theyr bowes in theyr handes, they can with a leape cast themselues through a circle or hope of the diameter of a cubite. They fight on foote, armed with bowes and arrowes after the ma∣ner of the Tartars. They are exercised in hurlyng the darte, and shootyng, from theyr youth: insomuche that they gyue theyr chyldren no meate vntyll they hyt the marke they shoote at, as dyd in olde tyme thynhabitauntes of the Ilandes called Baleares. They vse to make theyr apparell streight and close to theyr bodyes,A strange ap∣parell. that it hynder not theyr woorke. Theyr wynter vestures are made of the whole skynnes of Seales or Beares, artificially wrought, and made supple. These they tye with a knotte aboue theyr heads, leauyng onely two holes open to looke through, and haue all the residue of theyr bodyes couered, as though they were sowed in sackes, but that this beyng adopted to all partes of theyr bodyes, is so made for commoditie, and not for a punyshment, as the Romanes were accustomed to sow pa∣ricides in sackes of leather with a Cocke,The cause of an olde errour. an Ape, and a Ser∣pent, and so to hurle them alyue altogeather into the ryuer of Tyber. And heereby I thynke it came to passe, that in olde tyme it was rashly beleeued, that in these regions there were men with rough & heary bodyes like wylde beastes, as parte made relation through ignoraunce, parte also takyng pleasure in rehearsall of suche thinges as are straunge to the hearers. The Lapones defended by this arte and industry, goe abrode and withstand the sharpenesse of wynter and the North wyndes, with all the iniuryes of heauen. They haue no houses, but certayne Ta∣bernacles lyke tentes or hales, wherewith they passe from place to place,So doe the Tartars. and chaunge their mansions. Some of them lyue after the maner of the people of Sarmatia, called in olde tyme Amaxobii, which vsed waynes in the steade of houses. They are much gi∣uen to huntyng,Plentie of wylde beastes. and haue suche plentie of wylde beastes, that they kyll them in maner in euery place. It is not lawfull for a woman to goe foorth of the tent, at that doore by the which her husbande went out on huntyng the same day, nor yet to touche with her hande any parte of the beast that is taken, vn∣tyll
her husbande reache her on the spytte suche a portion of fleshe as he thynketh good. They tyll not the grounde. The region nourysheth no kynde of Serpentes:No Serpents. yet are there great and noysome Gnattes. They take fyshe in great plentie:Great Gnats. by the commoditie whereof, they lyue after the maner of the Ethiopians, called Ichthiophagi. For as these drye theyr fyshe with feruent heate, so doe they drye them with colde, and grynde or stampe them to pouder as small as meale or floure. They haue suche aboundaunce of these fyshes,Aboundaunce of fyshe. that they hourd great plentie thereof in certeyne store houses, to carry them vnto other landes neare about them, as Northbothnia, and whyte Russia. Theyr shyppes are not made with nayles,Shyps with∣out nayles. but are tyde togeather and made fast with cordes and wythes. With these they sayle by the swyft ryuers betweene the mountaynes of Laponia, beyng naked in sommer that they may the better swymme in the tyme of perill, and geather togeather such wa∣res as are in daunger to be lost by shypwracke. Parte of them exercyse handie craftes, as imbroderyng and weauyng of cloth, interlaced with golde and syluer. Suche as haue deui∣sed any necessary Arte,Science ho∣noured. or doe increase and amende the inuenti∣ons of other, are openly honoured, and rewarded with a ve∣sture, in the which is imbrodered an argument or token of the thyng they deuised. And this remayneth to the posteritie of theyr famelie, in token of theyr desartes. They frame shyppes, buylde houses, and make dyuers sortes of housholde stuffe arti∣ficially, and transporte them to other places neare about. They buye and sell both for exchaunge of wares, and for money. And this only by consent of both parties, without communication:Bargen without woordes. yet not for lacke of wytte, or for rudenesse of maners, but bycause they haue a peculiar language vnknowen to theyr borderers. It is a valiant nation, and lyued long free, and susteyned the warres of Norway and Suetia, vntyll at the length they submitted them selues, and payde ryche furres for theyr tribute. They chose them selues a gouernour, whom they cal a kyng: But the kyng of Sue∣tia, gyueth him aucthoritie and administration. Neuerthelesse, the people in theyr suites and doubtful causes, resorte to Suetia to haue theyr matters decised.
In theyr iourneys, they goe not to any Inne, nor yet enter in∣to any house, but lye all nyght vnder the firmament. They haue no horses,No horses. A beast of mar∣ueylous strength and swyftnesse. but in the steade of them, they tame certayne wylde beastes which they call Reen, beyng of the iust bygnesse of a Mle, with rough heare lyke an Asse, clouen feete, and braun∣ched hornes lyke a Harte, but lower and with fewer antlettes. They will not abyde to be rydden. But when theyr peytrels or drawyng collers are put on them, and they so ioyned to the Chariotte or steade, they runne in the space of .xxiiii. houres, a hundred and fyftie myles, or .xxx. Schoenos, the whiche space they affyrme to chaunge the horizon thryse,What Schoe∣nus is, looke in Gronlande. that is, thryse to come to the furthest signe or marke that they see a far of. Which doubtlesse is a token both of the marueylous swyftnesse & great strength of these beastes,The chaunge of the horizon. beyng able to continue runnyng for so great a space, in the meane whyle also spendyng some tyme in feedyng. I suppose that this thyng was somewhat knowen to the olde wryters, although receyued in maner by an obscure and doubtfull fame:The olde auc∣thours called all the North people Scy∣thyans. For they also wryte that certayne Scythians doe ryde on Hartes. They neyther folow the Christian religion, nor yet refuse it, or are offended therewith as are the Iewes: but doe sometymes receyue it fauourably, to gratifie the princes to whom they obey. And that no more of them imbrase the Christian fayth, the faulte is somewhat to be imputed to the Byshoppes and Prelates that haue eyther reiected this cure & charge of instructyng the nation,smus la∣teth this  fyrst  de rati∣ne contionan di▪ where he speaketh of the people, cal∣led Pilapii. or suffered the fayth of Christ to bee suffocate, euen in the fyrst spryng. For vnder the pretence of religion, they would haue aduaunced theyr owne reuenues, and ouerburdened the people by an intollerable example, none otherwyse here then in all Chri∣stendome, which thyng is doubtlesse the cause of most greeuous defections. I heard Iohn, a byshop of Gothlande, say thus: We that gouerne the churche of Vpsalia, and haue vnder our dio∣cesse a great parte of that nation, lyke as it is not conuenient to declare many thinges of our vigilance and attendaunce o∣uer the flocke committed to our charge, euen so absteynyng from myscheeuous couetousnesse, whereby religion is abused for luker, we doe in all places our diligent endeuour, that wee minister none occasion, whereby this nation, as offended by our
sinnes, may be the lesse wyllyng to embrase the Christian fayth. This is the state of the religion among the Lapones: although of theyr owne institution and custome receyued of theyr predi∣cessours, they are Idolatours,Idolatrie. honouryng that lyuyng thyng that they meete fyrst in the mornyng, for the God of that day, and diuinyng thereby theyr good lucke or euyll. They also erecte Images of stone vppon the mountaynes, whiche they e∣steeme as Goddes, attributyng to them diuine honour. They solemne mariages, and begyn the same with fyre and flynt,A mysterie of mariage in fyre and flynt. as with a mysterie so aptely applyed to the Image of stone, as if it had been receyued from the myddest of Grecia. For in that they adhibite a mysterie to fyre, as they doe not this alone (foras∣much as the Romanes obserued the same custome) euen so are they herein partly to be commended, in that they vse the ceremo∣nies of so noble a people. The mysterie of the flinte is no lesse to be praysed, both forasmuch as this is domesticall philosophie, and hath also a neare affinitie and signification to these solemni∣ties. For as the flynt hath in it fyre lying hyd, whiche appeareth not but by mouyng & force: so is there a secrete lyfe in both kynds of man and woman, which by mutuall coniunction commeth foorth to a lyuyng byrth.Experte in∣chaunters. They are furthermore experte in∣chaunters. They tye three knottes on a stryng hangyng at a whyp. When they lose one of these, they rayse tollerable wynds: When they lose an other, the wynde is more vehement: but by losyng the thyrd, they rayse playne tempestes, as in olde tyme they were accustomed to rayse thunder and lyghtnyng. This arte doe they vse agaynst such as sayle by theyr coastes, and staye or moue the ryuers and seas more or lesse, as they lyst to shew fauour or displeasure. They make also of leade certayne shorte magicall dartes of the quantitie and length of a fynger.Magicall dartes. These they throwe agaynst such, of whom they desyre to bee reuenged, to places neuer so farre distant. They are sometymes so vexed with the canker on theyr armes or legges,The canker. that in the space of three dayes they dye through the vehemencie of the payne. The Sunne falleth very lowe in these regions:One nyght of three moneths. and prolongeth one continuall nyght for the space of three monethes in wynter, du∣ryng whiche tyme they haue none other lyght but lyke vnto the twilight of eueninges & morninges. This is very cleare, but con∣tinueth
but fewe houres, and is lyke the bryght shynyng of the Moone. Therefore that day that the Sunne returneth to the he∣mispherie, they keepe holy day, and make great myrth with so∣lemne festiuitie. And these are the maners of this nation, not so brutyshe or saluage, as woorthy therefore to be called Lapones for theyr vnaptenesse or simplicitie, as when they lyued vnder theyr owne Empyre, and vsed no familiaritie or entercourse with other nations, & knew not the commoditie of their owne thinges, neyther the pryce and estimation of theyr furres in our regions,Riche furres. by reason whereof, they solde great plentie of them for some of our wares of small value. The boundes or limittes of Laponia (beyng the extreme land of Scondia knowen towarde the North pole) are extended to∣warde this parte of the North, to the world yet vnknowen to vs: And furthermore towarde the same parte of the vttermost sea, ac∣cordyng to this description. The fyrst coast. 70 72. The coast folowyng. 80 7. That that yet foloweth. 90 70. Plentie of sea fyshe.From the fyshyng places and store houses of this sea, they carry foorth to Nordbothnia, and whyte Russia, landes confinyng to them, great plentie of fyshe. Whereby we may coniecture that this sea is extended on euery syde towarde the North. Towarde the West, it is limitted with the most inwarde gulfe at the Ca∣stle of Wardhus,Wardhus. at the degree .54 70 30. Towarde the South, it is limitted by a lyne drawen from thence vnto the degree .90 69. Norwegia, or Norway. NOrdway, is as muche to say, as the Northway. This was sometyme a floryshyng kyngdome, whose domi∣nion comprehended Denmarke, Friselande, and the Ilandes farre about, vntyll the domesticall Empyre was gouerned by the succession of inheritaunce. In the meane tyme whyle this gouernance ceassed for lacke of due issue, it was instituted by consent of the nobilitie, that the kynges should be admitted by election: supposing that they would with more equitie execute that office, forasmuche as they were placed in
the same by suche auctoritie, and not by obteynyng the kyng∣dome by fortune and newe aduauncement. But it came so to passe, that as euery of them excelleth in rychesse, ambition, and fauoure by consangiuitie, so were they in greater hope to obteine the kyngdome: and were by this meanes diuided into factions,Kyngdomes destroyed by factions. attemptyng also occations to inuade foraigne realmes, whereby they myght strenghten theyr parties. It is therefore at this pre∣sent vnder the dominion of the Danes,The Danes. who do not onely exact in∣tollerable tributes, but also bryng al theyr ryches and commodi∣ties into Denmarke, constitutyng the continuance of theyr go∣uernaunce in thinfirmitie and pouertie of the subiectes: whiche exemple,The defant of princes. some other princes do folowe at this day in the Christi∣an Empire. For after that the princes had forsaken such vertues as should haue shyned in them, as to be Patres patriae (that is) the fathers of their countreys, and that in the place hereof, onely the proude countenaunce of dominion remayned, whiche opened licentiousnesse to thiniurie of the subiectes: this folowed thereof, that whereas the Danes by this occasion had no further trust or ayde in the loue of the people, they prouided,An exemple of tyrannie. for thindempnitie of theyr owne estate, by forcible extenuatyng the goods and power of them whom they desired to keepe in subiection. This is the fortune of Norway, whose edefices, townes, and cities can not defende theyr auncient amplitude and dignitie: neyther is there any hope of repayryng theyr state. For there are no consultati∣ons admitted for the redresse of the common welth: No man dare shewe his aduice, or attempte any thyng, vncertayne of the myndes and consent of other. To this difficultie is added the qualitie of the place: For the Danes haue in theyr power al the nauigations of Norway, wherby it may exercise no trade by sea, neyther cary forth wares to other places:The myserable state of Norway. So that in fine it may seeme most vnfortunate, as lackyng the fauoure of heauen, the sea, and the lande. From hence is brought into all Europe a fyshe of the kyndes of them whiche we call haddockes or hakes,Stockfyshe. indurate and dried with cold, and beaten with clubbes or stockes, by reason whereof the Germans call them stockefyshe. The takyng of these, is most commended in Ianuarie, that they may be sufficiently dryed and hardened with colde: For suche as are taken in the more temperate monethes, do corrupt and
putrifie, and are not meete to be caryed forth. The description of the west coaste, with the part thereof lying most towarde the north. Wardhus (that is) the watche house, or watche towre 54.70.30. It is a stronge Castell or fortresse appoynted to the Lapones. The coaste folowyng, .48.50.70 Matthkur. &c. All the coast from hence, and the places neere about vnto the degree .45.69. beyng sometyme lefte desolate by the sedition and destruction of Norway, the Lapones chose for their habitations, as comming to amore beneficial heauen.The Lapones. From ye castel of Ward∣hus, vnto the degree .40.30.64.10. al the coast in the spring tyme is daungerous to passe,Shyppes in daunger by reason of whales. by reason of whales, of such huge bygge∣nesse, that some of them growe to an hundred cubites: for these fyshes at that tyme of the yeere resort togeather for generation. Such shyppes as chaunce to fall eyther vppon theyr bodies, or into suche whyrlepooles as they make by theyr vehement mo∣tions, are in great peryll. The remedie to auoyde this daun∣ger,Castoreum. is to power into the sea Castoreum (that is) oyle made of the stones of the beaste called the Beuor, myngeled with water: For with this, the whole hearde of whales vanysheth suddeynely to the bottome of the sea: They make a terrible roryng, and haue two breathyng places in the hyghest part of theyr forheads,The roryng of whales. standyng foorth ryght a cubite in length, and are brode at the endes, beyng couered with a skynne, through the whiche they blowe waters lyke showers or stormes of raine. The prickes of theyr backes, are founde conteynyng three els in circuite, and euery knotte betwene them of one ell. They are at the leaste of .lx. cubites in length, and are salted and kept in store houses.whales salted and reserued. The greatest are vnprofitable to bee eaten, by reason of theyr ranke and vnsauery taste, whiche can not be qualified. Nidrosia standyng vppon the south syde of the sea banke, was the chiefe citie and Metropolitane churche throughout all Norway,The citie of Nidrosia. Iselande, Gronlande, and the Ilandes there about. This citie was noble at the fyrst vnder the floryshyng Empire of Norway, conteynyng in circuite .xxiiii. paryshes,
but it is now brought in maner to a village, and is called in the Germane tongue Truthaim, as the house of the Dryides. There remayneth at this day a Cathedrall churche in token of the auncient felicitie,A magnificiall churche beyng such that in bygnesse and workman∣shyp of wrought stone, the lyke is not in all Christendome. The greeses or compasse about the Altar, was destroyed by fyre, and repared at the same time that we wrote this historie. The charge of the reparation, was esteemed to be seuen thousand crownes: by which small portion, an estimate may be made of the excellen∣cie of the whole Churche. The tract of all the sea coastes of Norway is very quiet and meeke, the sea is not frosen, the snowes endure not long. This lande hath also a peculiar pestilence, which they call Leem or Lemmer. This is a litle foure footed beaste,Noysome beasts of vn∣knowen gene∣ration. about the bygge∣nesse of a Ratte, with a spotted skynne: these fall vppon the grounde at certayne tempestes and soddeyne showres, not yet knowen from whence they come, as whether they are brought by the wyndes from remote Ilandes, or otherwyse engendred of thycke and feculent clowdes. But this is well knowen, that as soone as they fall downe, greene grasse and hearbes are found in theyr bowels not yet digested. They consume al greene thyngs, as do Locustes: and such as they only byte, wyther and dye. This pestilence lyueth as long as it doth not tast of the grasse newely sproong. They come togeather by flockes, as do Swalows: and at an ordinarie time, either die by heapes, with great infection of the land (as by whose corruption ye aire is made pestiferous, and molesteth the Noruegians with swymmyng in the head and the Iaundies) or are consumed of other beastes na∣med Lefrat. Towards the East, it is included within the lyne that is drawen by the mountaynes, whose endes or vttermoste boundes, they are, that lye toward the South, aboue the mouthes of the riuer Trolhetta: but that part that lieth toward the North, passeth by the castel of Wardhus,Wardhus. The vnknowen land of the Lapons. and is extended to the vnknow∣en lande of the Lapones. The Lake called Mos, and the Ilande of Hosfuen in the myddest therof, is in the degree .45 30 61. In this Lake appeareth a straunge monster: whiche is, a serpent of huge byggenesse.A serpent of huge bignesse. And as to all other places of
the worlde, blasing starres do portend thalteration and chaunge of thynges: so doth this to Norway. It was seene of late (in the yeere of Christ .1522. appearyng farre aboue the water, row∣lyng lyke a great pyller, and was, by coniecture farre of, estee∣med to be of fyftie cubites in length. Shortly after folowed the reiectyng of Christiernus kyng of Denmarke. Suche other mon∣strous thyngs are sayd to be seene in diuers places of the world.God warneth vs by signes of thyngs to come. And doubtlesse except we should thynke that the diuine proui∣dence, hauyng mercy vpon mortall men, and hereby warnyng them of theyr offences, doth send such strange thynges (as also blasing starres, and armies fyghtyng in the ayre, with suche o∣ther portentous monsters, whereof no causes can be founde by naturall thynges) we myght els suspect that such syghtes were but imaginations of the sense of man deceyued. On the East syde, are exceedyng rough mountaynes, which admit no passage to Suetia. The sea betweene Norway and the Ilandes, is called Tialleslund, Euripus, or the streyghtes. The Iland of Lofoth, whose middest .42 67 10. Langanas, whose middest .41 67 Vastrall, whose middest .41 30 67 30. The sea betwene these three Ilands, is called Muscostrom (that is) boyling. At the flowing of the sea, it is swalowed into the Caues,The streightes or boyling sea. and is blowne out agayne at the reflowing, with no lesse violence then the streames of ryuers fall from mountaines. This sea is nauigable, vntyl it be lower then the mouthes of the rockes. Such as chaunce into it out of due time, are caried head∣long into Whyrpooles. The fragmentes of the lost shyps, are seldome cast vp agayne. But when they are cast vp, they are so brused and fretted against the rockes,Dangerous places in the sea. that they seeme to be ouer∣growne with hoare. This is the power of nature, passing the fabilous Simpleiades & the fearful Malea, with the dangerous places of Silla and Caribdis, and all other miracles that nature hath wrought in any other sea hytherto knowen to man. The Ilands about Norway, are of such fruitful pasture, that they bryng not theyr beastes into the stables before the moneth of Nouember,Fruitfull Ilands about Norway. and do in many places wynter them abrode.
Suecia, or Suethlande. SVecia, is a kyngdome ryche in Golde, Syluer, Copper, Leade, Iron, fruite, cattayle,Golde and syluer. and exceedyng increase of fyshe, of the ryuers, lakes, and the sea, and hath no lesse plentie of such wylde beastes as are taken with huntyng. Towarde the West, it is ended with the mountaynes of Nor∣way from the Castel of Wardhus vnto thende .51.63.40 Towarde the South,Wardhus castell. with the line from this ende vnto the de∣grees 53.30.61. And from thence vnto the degrees.61.60.30. Aboue the gulfe of Suecia, towarde the north,The gulfe of Suecia. with the south end of Lapponia from the castel of Wardhus vnto the ende .62.70. Towarde the East, it is ended with the line from this ende vn∣to the degree .63.69. &c. Stokholme the chiefe citie .64.61.The citie of Stokholme. This is the chiefe mart towne of Suecia, and is strongly defen∣ded by art and nature. It is situate in maryshes, after the maner of Uenice: and was therfore called Stokholme, forasmuch as be∣yng placed in the water, the fundation is fortified with stockes or piles. The sea entreth ino it with two armes or branches, of such largenesse and depth, that shyps of great burden and with maine sayles may enter by the same with theyr ful fraight. This suffered of late yeeres greeuous spoile and destruction, to the sin∣gular exemple of cruel hostilitie: and such, as the lyke hath not been lyghtly shewed to any other citie, receiued by league and composion. In al the tract from Stokholme to the lake aboue the ryuer of Dalekarle,Golde in colde regions. Fyshe. whiche is in the degree .56 30 63 50. are mountaynes fruiteful of good syluer, copper, and lead. They get great ryches by the salmons and plentie of other fyshes whi∣che they take in certayne great lakes. The dukedome of Agermannia occupieth the north syde to the confines of Laponia. This tract is ful of wods,The beaste called Vros or Elg. in the which they hunt the beastes called Vros or Bisontes, which in theyr tongue they call Elg, (that is) wylde Asses. These are of such heyght, that the hyghest part of theyr backes are equal with the measure of a man, holdyng vp his armes as hygh as he may reach &c. Vpsalia the chiefe citie .62.62.30. here is bu∣ryed the body of saint Henricus kyng and martyr.Vpsalia. Copperdalia (that is) the copper valley,Copperdalia. is a Dukedome
southwarde from the Dukedom of Iemptia. Under this, is the valyant nation of the people called Dalekarly. Oplandia,Oplandia. is a Dukedome and the nauil or myddest of Scondia. The citie of Pircho, on the North syde of the lake of Meler▪ was once a great citie, and able to arme .xiiii. thousande men to the warres: but is nowe brought to a vyllage. All the tracte of Oplandia, hath mynes of Syluer, Copper, and Steele. Of the Ilandes and rockes that lye about Suecia, the myddest is .67.30.61.30. These were called of the olde writers Done, the reason of which name remayneth vnto this daye:Byrdes. For there are in these innu∣merable multitudes of byrdes, insomuch that thinhabitauntes of the next coast, sayle thyther in the moneth of May, whyle the byrdes syt on theyr egges:Egges reser∣ued in salte. which they steale, and reserue them in salt for a long tyme. Bothnia. BOthnia is so named of the pretious furres of all sortes that are caryed from thence into foraigne regions: For by these and theyr fyshyng,Precious furres. they haue great commoditie. Sal∣mons of the best sort are taken in these seas, & are great riches among these nations.Fyshe. Bothnia is diuided into two partes, as Northbothnia, & South Bothnia, called Ostrobothhia. Northboth∣nia, is termined with the South ende of the Lapones, vnto the ende .78.30.69 Towarde the East, it is termined with this ende, and vnto the degree .78.30.68.20. Towarde the West, with the line terminyng the East syde of Suecia. And towarde the South, with the residue of the gulfe of Suecia, from thende that hath degrees .63.69. Ostrobothnia, towarde the East is termined from the sayde ende of the most East coast. And towarde the South, with a line extended by the mountaynes from this ende vnto the degree .71 66 Towarde the North and West, with part of the gulfe of Suecia, &c.
Gothia or Gothlande. GOthia, is by interpretation good. For the holy name of God, is in the Germane tongue Goth (that is) Good. At what tyme the Gothes vpon a generall consent sent foorth theyr ofspring or sucession to seeke new seates or countreys to inhabite,Thinuasions of the Gothes. and when they possessed the coastes of Meotis and Asia, none of the olde wryters haue made mention as farre as I know. But they haue been knowen since the tyme that the Romanes dilated theyr Empire by Illirium (now called Slauonie) vnto the ryuer of Danubius, and were also famous from the time of Cesar Dictator, and Octauianus Augustus,The warre of the gothes a∣gaynst the Ro∣manes. by rea∣son of their great warres at Danubius, being the vtermost bound of Thempire. Neuerthelesse, in that renowme what Gothia was, vnder what part of heauen it was scituate, or of whom the Gothes tooke their original, it hath been vnknowen almost to this age. This is termined toward the North, with the South ende of Suetia, and towarde the West,The boundes of gothland. with the other mountaynes of Norway, whiche continue from the boundes of Suetia, to the mouthes of the ryuers of Trolheta. &c. It hath many goodly Townes, Cities, Castles, Mines.The citie of Visba. &c. The citie of Visba, being in the degree .61.30.54.15. was an ancient and famous mart Towne, as is Genua in Italie at this day: but afterward being afflicted by ye incursions of the Pirates of the Danes and Moscouites, it was left desolate.Danes and Moscouites. There remayne to this day certayne ruines, whiche testifie the auncient nobilitie. In this place were the firste stations of the Gothes that possessed Meotis. It is at this day of fruiteful soyle, and famous by ma∣ny goodly and strong Castles & Monasteries. There is (among other) a Monasterie of the order of Saint Benedict, in the whi∣che is a librarie of about two thousande bookes of old auctors.A librarie of two thousand bookes. About the yeere of Christe fourescore and eyght, the Gothes, vnto whom resorted a great multitude of other people of these North partes of the worlde, as from Lionia, Prusia, Russia, and Tartaria, with diuers other countreyes,The gothes in∣uaded Europe, and destroyed Rome. makyng them diuers Kynges and Captaynes, dyd depopulate and bryng in subiec∣tion the more part of Europe, inuaded Italie, destroied Rome, inha∣bited that parte of Italie nowe called Lumbardie, and lykewyse subdued the Realmes of Castile and Aragonie. Their warres con∣tinued aboue three hundred yeeres.
Finland, and Eningia. FInlandia, is as much to saye as a fayre land, or fyne lande, so named for the fertilitie of the grounde. Plinie seemeth to call it Finnonia: for he saieth, that about the coastes of Finland▪ are many Ilands without names, of the which there lyeth one before Scithia called Pannonia. The gulfe called Sinus Finnonicus▪ is so named at this day of the land of Finnonia.Pannonia falsly taken for Finnonia. Finnonia confi∣neth with Scithia, and runneth without all Tanais, (that is to say) without the lymittes of Europe to the confines of Asia. But that the name of Einlande seemeth not to agree hereunto, the cause is, that this place of Plinie is corrupted, as are many other in this aucthour. So that from the name of Finnonia, or Phin∣nonia, it was a lykely errour to call it Pannonia, forasmuche as these wordes doo not greatly differ in wrytyng and sounde: so that the counterfect name was soone put in the place of the true name, by hym that knew Pannonia and read that name before, be∣yng also ignorant of Phinnonia. Eningia.Eningia had in olde tyme the tytle of a kyngdome, it is of such largenesse, but hath now only the title of an inferiour go∣uernour, beyng vnder the dominion of the Slauons▪ and vsyng the same tongue. In religion, it obserued the rytes of the Gree∣kes of late yeeres, when it was vnder the gouernance of the Moscouites: But it is at this present vnder the kyng of Suecia, & obserueth thinstitutions of the Occidentall churche. Spanyshe wynes are brought thither in great plentie,Spanishe wines. which the people vse meryly and cheerefully. It is termined on the North side by the South lyne of Ostrobothnia, and is extended by the mountaynes. Toward the West, it is termined with the sea of Finnonia, accor∣dyng to this description, and hath degrees .71 66. &c. Of the difference of regions, and causes of great cities, after the description of Hieronimus Cardanus. Liber .xi. De Subtilitate. THere is an other difference of regions caused of cold and heate. For suche as are neare vnto the poles, are vexed with to muche colde: and suche as are vnder the line where the Sunne is of greatest force, are oppressed with heate. Suche as are in the middest betweene both, are nearest vnto temperatenesse. Under the pole, it is impossible
that there should be populous cities, bycause the lande is barren, and the caryage or conueyaunce of fruites, victualles, and other necessaryes, is incommodious. By reason whereof, it is necessa∣rie that the inhabitauntes of such regions lyue euer in continuall wanderyng from place to place, or els in small vyllages. Suche as inhabite temperate regions, haue meane cities, aswell for that they haue more commodious conueyaunce for necessaryes, as also that they may dwel better and more safely togeather then in vyllages, by reason of fortifying their townes with walles, and exercising of artes and occupations, wherby the one may the bet∣ter helpe the other. Yet that olde Rome (beyng in a temperate region) was of such incredible bygnesse, the cause was, that it ob∣teyned the Empyre of the worlde, by reason whereof, all nations had confluence thyther, and not the greatnesse of the walles. But it is necessarie that the greatest cities be in hotte regions: fyrst, for that in such regions, part of the soile is either barren if it lacke water, or els most fruitfull if it abounde with water. And for this inequalitie, when they fynde any place meete to susteyne a mul∣titude, it foloweth of necessitie that great cities be builded in such places, by reason of great concourse of people resortyng to the same. An other great cause is, that whereas in such regions, mar∣chauntes come very farre to such commodious places, they passe through many desarte and perillous regions: So that it shalbe necessary for theyr better securitie, to come in great companyes, as it were great armies. And therefore whereas such a societie is once knyt togeather in a commodious place, it should bee great hynderance aswell to the inhabitants as to marchauntes, if they should wander in incommodious places. And by this confluence, both of such as dwell neare to such places, and also of strangers and such as dwell farre of, it is necessary that in continuaunce of tyme, small townes become great cities, as are these: Quinsai, Singui, Cambalu, Memphis, Cairus, or Alcair, otherwyse called Ba∣bilon in Egypt. But if here any will obiecte Constantinople (in olde tyme called Bizantium) beyng in a temperate region, al∣though it be not to be compared to such cities as are more then lx. myles in circuite, yet doe we answere herevnto, that the Tur∣kes Empyre is the cause of the greatnesse hereof, as we sayde before of Rome.
The historie written in the latine tongue by Paulus Ionius, byshop of Nuceria in Italie, of the legation or ambassade of great Basilius Prince of Moscouia, to Pope Clement the .vij. of that name: In which is conteyned the de∣scription of Moscouia, with the regions con∣finyng about the same, euen vnto the great and rych Empire of Cathay. I Intend first briefly to describe the situation of the region which we plainely see to haue ben litle knowen to Strabo & Ptoleme, & then to proceede in rehearsing the maners, cu∣stomes, & religion of the people: and this in maner in the like simple stile and phrase of speach, as the same was declared vnto vs by Demetrius the Ambassadour,Demetrius the ambassa∣dour of Mos∣couia. a man not ignorant in the latin ton∣gue, as from his youth brought vp in Liuonia, where he learned the first rudiments of letters, and being growne to mans age, ex∣ecuted thoffice of an Ambassadour into diuers Christian prouin∣ces. For whereas by reason of his approued faithfulnesse & indu∣strie, he had before ben sent as Oratour to the kynges of Suecia and Denmarke, & the great maister of Prussia, hee was at the last sent to Themperour Maximilian, in whose court (being repleny∣shed with all sortes of men) while he was cnuersant, if any thing of barbarous maners yet remayned in so docible & quiet a nature, the same was put away by frming him selfe to better ciuilitie. The cause of his legacie or ambassade, was giuen by Paulus Cen∣turio a Genuese,Paulus Cen∣turio. who when he had receiued letters commendatory of pope Leo the tenth, & came to Moscouia for the trade of mar∣chaundies, of his owne mynde conferred with the familiars of Duke Basilius, as touching the conformation of the rites of both churches. He furthermore of great magnanimitie, and in maner outragious desire,Spices brought from India to Moscouia. sought ow by a new and incredible viage, spi∣ces might be brought from India. For while before hee had exer∣cised the trade of marchandies in Syria, Egypt, & Pontus, he knewe by fame that spices myght be conueighed from the further India vp the riuer Indus,The ryuer Indus. against the course of the same, and from thence
by a small vyage by land passing ouer the mountaines of Paropa∣nisus, to be caried to the ryuer Oxus in Bactria, which hauing his originall amost from the same mountaynes from whence Indus doth spryng, and violently carying with it many other ryuers,Oxus or Hoxi∣na, a ryuer of Asia, runneth through the de∣sartes of Sy∣thia. The sea Hirca∣num is now called mare A∣bacuke, or ma∣re de Sala. Citrachan or Astracan. Sarmatia is that great countrey wher∣in is conteyned Russia. Lo∣ma, and Tar∣taria, and the North and East parte of Polonia. Agaynst the Portugales. The trade of spices in olde tyme. falleth into the sea Hircanum or Caspium, at the porte called Stra∣ua. And he arnestly affirmed that from Straua, is an easie & safe nauigation vnto the marte towne of Citrachan or Astrachan, and the mouh of the ryuer Volga, and from thence uer against the course of the ryuers, as Volga, Occha, and Mescho, vnto the citte Mosch, and from thence by lande to Riga. and into the sea of , and all the West regions. For he was vehement∣ly, and more then of equitie, accensed and prouoked by the iniuries of the Portugales, who hauyng by force of armes subdued a great parte of India, and possessed all the marte townes, ta∣kyng wholly into theyr handes all the trade of spyces to bryng the same into Spayne, and neuerthelesse to sell them at a more greeuus an intollerable price to the people of Europe then e∣uer was heard of before: And furthermore kepte the coastes of the Indian sea so straightly with continuall nauies, that those trades are thereby left of, which were before exercised by the gulfe of Persia, and towarde the ryuer of Euphrates, and also by the streightes of the sea of Arabia, and the ryuer Nilus, and in fin by our sea: by which trade all Asia and Europe was aboun∣dantly satisfied, and better cheape then hath been since the Por∣tugales had the trade in theyr handes, with so many incommodi∣ties of such long viages,Spices corrup∣ted. whereby the spyces are so corrupted by thinfection of the pompe and other filthinesse of the shyppes, that theyr naturall sauour, taste, and qualitie, aswell heereby, as by theyr long reseruyng in the shoppes, sellers, and warehouses in Lusheburne, vanysheth and resolueth, so that reseruyng euer the freshest and newest, they sell only the woorst and most cor∣rupted. But Paulus, although in all places he earnestly and vehe∣mently argued of these thinges, and styrred great malice and ha∣tred agaynst the Portugales, affyrmyng that not only thereby the customes and reuenues of princes should be much greater, if that vyage might be discouered, but also that spyces myght bee better cheape bought at the handes of the Moscouites: yet could e nothyng auayle in this suite, forasmuche as Duke Basilius
thought it not good to make open, or disclose vnto a straunger and vnknowen man, those regions which gyue enterance to the sea Caspium,The Caspian sea. and the kyngdomes of Persia. Paulus therefore excludyng all hope of further traueyle, and become nowe of a marchaunte an Ambassadour, brought Basilius letters (Pope Leo beyng now departed) to Adrian his successour,Basilius wrot to Pope Adri∣ane. in the which he declared, with honourable and reuerende woordes, his good will and fauourable mynde towarde the Byshoppe of Rome. For a fewe yeeres before, Basilius (then keepyng warres a∣gaynst the Polones, at suche tyme as the generall counsayle was celebrate at Laterane) requyred by Iohn, Kyng of Den∣marke (the father of Christierne, who was of late expulsed from his kyngdome) that safe passage myght be graunted to the Am∣bassadours of Moscouia, to goe to Rome. But whereas it so chaunced, that kyng Iohn and Pope Iulius dyed both in one day, whereby he lacked a conuenient sequester or solicitour, he omitted his consultation as touchyng that legacie.Warre be∣twene the Polones and Moscouites. After this, the warre waxed hotte betweene him and Sigismunde the kyng of Polonie: who obteynyng the victorie agaynst the Moscouites at Boristhene, supplications were decreed in Rome for the o∣uerthrowe and vanquyshyng the enemyes of the Christian fayth, whiche thyng greatly elienated both kyng Basilius him selfe, and all that nation from the Byshoppe of Rome. But when Adrian the .vi. departed from this lyfe, and lefte Paulus now readie to his seconde vyage,The seconde viage of Pau∣lus to Mosco∣uia. his successour Clement the .vii. perceyuyng that Paulus styll furiously reuolued and tossed in his vnquyet mynde that vyage towarde the East, sent him agayne with letters to Moscouia, by the whiche with propense and friendly persuasions, hee exhorted Basilius to acknowledge the maiestie of the Romane churche,The Pope prswdeth Basilius to ac∣knowledge the Romane churche. and to make a perpe∣tuall league and agreement in matters of religion, which thyng should bee not only for the health of his soule, but also greatly to the increase of his honour: And further promysed, that by the holy aucthoritie of his office, he would make him a kyng, and gyue him kyngly ornamentes, if reiectyng the doctrine of the Greeke, hee would confourme himselfe to the aucthoritie of the Romane churche.
But Paulus, who with more prosperous iourneyes then great vauntage, had from his youth traueyled a great parte of the worlde, although hee were nowe aged, and sore vexed with the strangurie, came with a prosperous and speedy iourney to Moscouia, where he was gentelly receyued of Basilius, and remayned in his Courte for the space of twoo monethes. But in fine, mistrustyng his owne strength, and deterred by the difficultie of so great a iourney, when he had vtterly put away all his imaginations and hope of this trade to India, returned to Rome with Demetrius the Ambassadour of Basilius, before we yet thought that he had been in Moscouia. The Byshoppe commaunded that Demetrius should bee lodged in the most magnificent and princely parte of the houses of Va∣ticane, the rooffes of whose edifies are gylted and embowed, and the chambers rychly furnyshed with silken beddes and cloth of Arresse: Wyllyng furthermore that he should be honoura∣bly receyued, and vestured with silke. He also assigned Fran∣ciscus Cheregatus,Demetrius in∣tertaynement at Rome. the Byshoppe of Aprutium (a man that had often tymes been Ambassadour to dyuers regions) to accompa∣ny him, and shewe him the order and rytes of our religion, with the monumentes and maners of the citie. Furthermore, when Demetrius had certayne dayes rested and recreated him selfe, wa∣shing away the fylth he had gathered by reason of the long viage, then apparelled with a fayre vesture, after the maner of his coun∣trey, he was brought to the byshops presence, whom he honoured kneelyng, with great humilitie and reuerence (as is the maner) and therwith presented vnto his holinesse certeyne furres of Sa∣bles in his owne name, and in the name of his prince, and also delyuered the letters of Basilius, which they before,Demetrius is brought to the Popes pre∣sence. and then the Illyrian or Slauon interpretour, Nicolaus Siccensis, translated in∣to the Latine tongue, in this effecte as foloweth.
To Pope Clement, shepard and teacher of the Romane church,Basilius let∣ters to Pope Clement. great Basilius by the grace of God, lord, Emperour, and dominatour of all Russia, and great Duke of Volodema∣ria, Moscouia, Nouogradia, Plescouia, Smolenta, Ifferia, Iugoria, Periunia, Vetcha, Bolgaria, &c. Dominator & great prince of No∣uogradia, in the lower countrey: also of Ceruigouia, Razania, Vo∣lotchia, Rezeuia, Belchia, Rostouia, Iarostauia, Belozeria, Vdoria, Ob∣doria, & Condiuia, &c. You sent vnto vs Paulus Centurio, a citi∣zen of Genua, with letters, whereby you doe exhort vs to ioyne in power & counsayle with you, & other Princes of Christendome, against the enemies of the christian fayth: & that a free passage & redy way may bee opened for both your Ambassadours & ours, to come & go to & fro, wher∣by by mutual dutie and indeuour on both parties, we may haue knowledge of the state of thinges parteynyng to the wealth of vs both. VVe certes, as we haue hytherto happe∣ly by the ayde and helpe of almightie God constantly and earnestly resisted the cruell & wicked enemies of the chri∣stian faith, so are we determined to doe hereafter: and are likewise redy to consent with other christian princes, & to graunt free passage into our dominions. In considerati∣on wherof, we haue sent vnto you our faithful seruant De∣metrius Erasmus, with these our letters: & with him haue re∣mitted Paulus Centurio, desiring you also shortly to dismisse Demetrius, with safegard and indemnitie vnto the borders of our dominions. And we wil likewise do the same, if you send your Ambassadour with Demetrius, whereby both by communication and letters, we may be better certified of thorder and administration of such things as you require: so that being aduertised of the mindes and intent of all o∣ther christian princes, we may also consult what is best to be done herein. Thus fare ye wel. Giuen in our dominiō in our citie of Moscouia, in the yeere from the creation of the world .vii. thousand and .300. the third day of Aprill. But Demetrius, as he is experte in diuine and humane thinges, and especially of holy scripture, seemed to haue secrete commaun∣dement of greater matters, whiche we thinke he will shortly de∣clare to the senate in priuate consultations. For he is now deliue∣red
of the feuer, into the which he fell by change of ayre, and hath so recouered his strength & natiue colour, that being a man of .lx. yeeres of age, he was not only present at the Popes masse, cele∣brated with great solemnitie in the honour of S. Cosmus & Dami∣an, but came also into the Senate,Cardinall. Campegius. at such tyme as Cardinal Cam∣pegius, commyng first from the legacie of Pannonia, was receiued of the Pope & all the nobilitie of the court: And furthermore also viewed the Temples of the holy citie,The ruynes of Rome. with the ruines of the Ro∣mane magnificence, and with woondring eyes beheld the lamen∣table decay of the auncient buildinges. So that we thinke that shortly after he hath declared his message, he shal return to Mos∣couia, with the byshop of Scarense the Popes legate, not vnrecom∣pensed with iust rewardes at the handes of his holinesse. The name of the Moscouites is nowe newe,The descripti∣on of Mos∣couia. although the Poete Lucane maketh mention of the Moschos confynyng with the Sarmatians: and Plinie also placeth the Moschos at the sprynges of the great ryuer of Phasis, in the region of Col∣chos, aboue the sea Euxinus, towarde the East.The Aultars of great Alex∣ander. Theyr region hath very large boundes, and is extended from the Aultars of great Alexander about the sprynges of Tanais, to the extreme landes and North Ocean, in maner vnder the North starres, called charles wayne, or the great Beare, beyng for the most parte playne, & of fruitfull pasture, but in sommer in many pla∣ces full of marishes. For whereas all that lande is repleny∣shed with many and great ryuers, which are greatly increased by the wynter, snowe, and Ise, resolued by the heate of the sunne, the playnes and fieldes are thereby ouerflowen with marishes,Marishes in sommer. and all iourneys incombred with continuall waters and myrie slabbynesse, vntyll by the benefite of the newe wynter the ry∣uers and marishes be frosen agayne, and giue safe passage to the sleades that are accustomed to iourney by the same. The wood or forest of Hercynia (and not Hyrcania,The forest of Hercynia. as is red in some false copies) occupyeth a great parte of Moscouia, and is heere and there inhabited, with houses builded therein, and so made thinner by the long labour of men, that it doeth not now shewe that hor∣rour of thicke & impenetrable woods and landes, as many thinke it to haue. But beyng replenished with many wylde beastes,Wylde beastes. is so far extended through Moscouia, with a continuall tract betweene
the East and the North, towarde the Scythian Ocean, that by the infinite greatnesse thereof,The Scythian Ocean. it hath deluded the hope of suche as haue curiously searched the ende of the same. In that parte that reacheth towarde Prussia,The beastes called Vri, or Bisontes. are founde the great and fierce beastes called Vri, or Bisontes, of the kynde of Bules: Also, Alces lyke vnto Hartes, which the Moscouites call Lozzi, and are called of the Germaynes Helenes.Helenes. On the East syde of Moscouia are the Scythians, which are at this day called Tartars,Of the Scy∣thians and Tartars. Amaxouii. a wandryng nation, and at all ages fa∣mous in warres. In the stead of houses they vse wagons, couered with beastes hydes, whereby they were in olde tyme called A∣maxouii. For cities and townes, they vse great tentes and pauili∣ons, not defended with trenches or walles of tymber or stone, but inclosed with an innumerable multitude of archers on horsbacke. The Tartars are diuided by companyes, which they call Hordas, which worde in theyr tongue signifieth a consentyng company of people,Horda. geathered together in forme of a citie. Euery Horda is gouerned by an Emperour, whom eyther his parentage or war∣lyke prowes hath promoted to that dignitie. For they oftentimes keepe warre with theyr borderers, and contende ambiciously and fiercely for dominion.The large do∣minion of the Tartars. Cathay. It doeth hereby appeare, that they con∣sist of innumerable Hordas, in that the Tartars possesse the most large desartes, euen vnto the famous citie of Cathay, in the furdest Ocean in the East. They also that are nearest to the Moscouites, are knowen by theyr trade of marchaundies, and often incursi∣ons. In Europe, neare vnto the place called Dromon Achillis, in Taurica Chersoneso,The Tartars of Europe. are the Tartars called Precopites, the daugh∣ter of whose prince, Selymus the Emperour of the Turkes tooke to wyfe. These are most infest to the Polones, and waste the regions on euery syde, betweene the ryuers of Boristhenes and Tanais. They that in the same Taurica possesse Caffam, a co∣lonie of the Ligurians (called in olde tyme Theodosia) doe both in religion and all other thinges agree with the Turkes. But the Tartars that inhabite the regions of Asia, betweene Tanais and Volga,The Tartars of Asia are sub∣iecte to the Duke of Mos∣couia. are subiect to Basilius the kyng of the Moscouites, and choose them a gouernour at his assignement. Among these, the Cremii afflicted with ciuile seditions, where as heeretofore they were ryche and of great power, haue of late yeeres lost theyr
dominion and dignitie. The Tartars that are beyonde the riuer of Volga, do religiously obserue the frendship of the Moscouites,The Tartars beyonde the ri∣uer of Volga. and professe them selues to be theyr subiectes. Beyond the Cas∣sanites, towarde the North, are the Sciambani, rych in heardes of cattaylle, and consistyng of a great multitude of men. After these, are Nogai,Nogai. Sigismundus calleth them Nogayri. whiche obteyne at this day the chiefe fame of ryches and warly affayres. Theyr Horda, although it be most ample, yet hath it no Emperour, but is gouerned by the wysedome and vertue of the most auncient & valiant men, after the maner of the common wealth of Uenece. Beyonde the Nogais, somewhat to∣warde the South & the Caspian sea, the noblest nation of the Tar∣tars, called Zagathai, inhabite townes buylded of stone,The noblest nation of the Tartars. The ryuer Taxartes. and haue an exceedyng great and fayre citie, called Samarcanda, whiche Iaxartes, the great ryuer of Sogdiana, runneth through, and passyng from thence about a hundred myles, falleth into the Caspian sea. With these people in our dayes, Ismael the Sophi and kyng of Persia, hath oftentymes kepte warre,Ismael the Sophi kyng of Persia. with doubt∣full successe. Insomuche that fearyng the greatnesse of theyr power, whiche he resysted with all that he myght, he lefte Arme∣nia and Taurisium the chiefe citie of the kyngdome, for a praye to Selimus the victourer of one wyng of the battayle. From the citie of Samarcanda,The citie of Samarcanda. descended Tamburlanes the myghty Emperour of the Tartars, whom some call Tanberlanis: But Demetrius sayth that he shoulde be called Themircuthlu. This is he that about the yeere of Christ M.CCC.xcviii. subdued almost all the Easte partes of the worlde: And lastly,Tanburlanes, the myghtie Emperour of the Tartars. The conque∣stes of Tam∣burlanes. with an in∣numerable multitude of men, inuaded the Turkes dominions, with whom Baiasetes Ottomanus theyr kyng, (and father to the great grandfather of this Solyman that nowe lyueth) meetyng at Ancira in the confines or marches of Galatia and Bythinia, gaue hym a sore battayle, in the whiche fell on the Turkes part .20000 men, and Baiasetes hym selfe was taken prisoner, whom Tamburlanes caused to be locked in an Iron cage,Baiasetes. and so caryed hym about with hym through all Asia, which he also con∣quered with a terryble army. He conquered all the landes be∣twene Tanais and Nilus, and in fine vanquished in battayle the great Soltane of Egypte, whom he chased beyonde Nilus, and tooke also the citie of Damascus.
From the region of these Tartars called Zagathei, is brought great plentie of sylken apparell to the Moscouites. But the Tartares that inhabite the mydlande or inner regions,This apparell they haue of the Persians. bryng none other wares then trucks or droues of swift runnyng horses, and clokes made of whyte feltes: also hales or tentes, to with∣stande the iniuries of colde and rayne. These they make very artificially, & apt for the purpose. Thei receiue againe of the Mos∣couites, coates of cloth, and Syluer monie, conteynyng all o∣ther bodyly ornamentes,The Tartars trafficke with the Mosco∣uites. and the furnyture of superfluous hous∣holde stuffe. For beyng defended agaynst the violence of we∣ther and tempestes, onely with such apparel and couerture wher∣of we haue spoken, they trust onely to theyr arrowes, which they shoote aswell backwarde flying, as when they assayle theyr eni∣mies face to face: Albeit, when they determined to inuade Eu∣rope, theyr princes and captaynes had helmets, coates of fence, and hooked swoordes,The Tartars of the South syde of Mosco∣uia. whiche they bought of the Persians. To∣warde the South, the boundes of Moscouia are termined by the same Tartars whiche possesse the playne regions neere vnto the Caspian sea, aboue the maryshes of Meotis in Asia, and about the ryuers of Boristhenes and Tanais in part of Europe. The people called Roxolani, Gete, and Bastarne, inhabited these re∣gions in olde tyme, of whom I thynke the name of Russia tooke originall.Gete and Rox∣olani. Russia. For they call part of Lituania, Russia the lower, wher∣as Moscouia it selfe is called whyte Russia. Lituania therefore, lyeth on the Northwest syde of Moscouia. But toward the full West,Moscouia called whyte Russia. Lituania. Prussia. Liuonia. Denmarke. Norway. Suecia. The people of Laponia. the mayne landes of Prussia and Liuonia are ioyned to the confines or marches of Moscouia, wher the Sarmatian sea break∣yng foorth of the streightes of Cmbrica Chersonesus (nowe cal∣led Denmarke) is bended with a crooked gulfe towarde the North. But in the furthest bankes of that Ocean, where the large kyngdomes of Norway and Suecia are ioyned to the con∣tinent, and almost enuironed with the sea, are the people called Lapones: a nation exceedyng rude, suspitious, and feare∣full, flying and astonyshed at the syght of all straungers and shyppes. They knowe neyther fruites nor apples, nor yet any benignitie eyther of heauen or earth. They prouide them meate onely with shootyng, and are appareled with skynnes of wylde beastes. They dwell in caues fylled with drye leaues, and in
holow trees, cnosumed within eyther by fyre, or rotten for age. Such as dwell neare the sea syde, fyshe more luckelye then cun∣nyngly, and in the stead of fruites, reserue in store fyshes dryed with smoke. They are of small stature of bodie, with flat visa∣gies, pale and wannie coloure, and very swyft of foote. Theyr wyttes or dispositions, are not knowen to the Moscouites theyr borderers, who thynke it therefore a madnesse to assayle them with a smal power, and iudge it neyther profitable nor glorious, with great armies to inuade a poore & beggerly nation. They ex∣change the most white furres, which we cal Armelines,Armeline fur∣res. for other wares, of diuers sortes: Yet so, that they flye the syght and com∣panie of all merchantes.Bargaynyng without wor∣des. For comparyng and laying theyr wa∣res togeather, and leauyng theyr furres in a mydde place, they bargayne with simple fayth, with absent and vnknowen men. Some men of great credite and aucthoritie, do testifie that in a region beyond the Lapones, betwene the West and the North,The dark regi∣on by this dark region and pig∣mei, is the way to Chathay by the North sea. oppressed with perpetuall darknesse, is the nation of the people called Pigmei, who being growen to theyr ful grought, do scarce∣ly excede the stature of our chyldren of ten yeeres of age. It is a fearefull kynde of men, and expresse theyr wordes in suche chat∣teryng sort, that they seeme to be so muche the more lyke vnto Apes, in howe muche they differ in sense and stature from men of iust heyght. Toward the North, innumerable people are subiect to the Empire of the Moscouites.The Scythian Ocean. Theyr regions extend to the Scythi¦an Ocean for the space of almost three monethes iorney. Next vnto Moscouia, is the region of Colmogora,The region of Colmogora. The ryuer of diuidna. aboun∣dyng with fruites. Through this runneth the ryuer of Diuid∣na, beyng one of the greatest that is knowen in the North partes, and gaue the name to an other lesse ryuer, which brea∣keth foorth into the sea Baltheum. This encreasyng at cer∣tayne tymes of the yeere, as dooth the ryuer Nilus, ouerflow∣eth the feeldes and playnes, and with his fatte and nourishyng moysture, doth marueylouslye resist the iniuries of heauen, and the sharp blastes of the North wynde. When it riseth by rea∣son of molten snow, and great showres of rayne, it falleth into the Ocean by vnknowen nations, and with so large a Trenche, lyke vnto a great sea, that it can not be sayled ouer
in one day with a prosperous wynde. But when the waters are fallen, they leaue here and there large and fruitfull Ilands: For corne there cast on the grounde, groweth without anye helpe of the Plowe, and with meruaylous celeritie of hasting nature, fea∣ryng the newe iniurie of the proude ryuer, doth both spryng and rype in short space. Into the riuer Diuidna, runneth the ryuer Iuga: and in the corner where they ioyne togeather,The ryuer of Iuga or Iug. Vstiuga. is the famous Marte Towne called Vstiuga, distant from the cheefe citie Mosca .vi. hundred myles. Note that whereas Paulus Iouius wryteth here that the ryuer of Diuidna, otherwyse called Duina,The riuer of Diuidna of Duina. runneth through the region of Colmogor, it is to bee vnderstood that there are two ryuers of that name, the one on the Northeast side of Moscouia, toward the frosen sea, & the other on the Southwest syde, fal∣lyng into the sea Baltheum, or the gulfe of Finnonia, by the citie of Riga in Liuo∣nia. And forasmuche as the true knowledge of these and certayne other is very necessarie for all such as shal trade into Moscouia, or other regions in those coastes by the North sea, I haue thought good to make further declaration hereof, as I haue founde in the historie of Moscouia, most faythfully and larg∣ly wrytten by Sigismundus Liberus, who was twyse sent Embassadour into Mos∣couia, as fyrst by Maximilian the Emperour, and then agayne by Ferdinando kyng of Hungarie and Boheme. This haue I done the rather, for that in al the mappes that I haue seene of Moscouia, there is no mention made of the riuer of Duina, that runneth through the region of Colmogor, and by the citie of the same name, although the prouince of Duina, be in all cardes placed Northwarde from the ryuer of Vstiug or Succana, which is the same Duina, wherof we now speake, and whereof Paulus Iouius wryteth, although it be not so named but from the angle or corner,The riuer of Suchana. where ioynyng with the ryuer of Iug and Succa∣na, it runneth Northwarde towards the citie of Colmogor: and from thence falleth into the North or frosen sea, as shall hereafter more playnely appeare by the wordes of Sigismundus, that the one of these be not taken for the other, beyng so farre distant,The frosen sea. that great errour myght ensue by mistaking the same, especially because this whereof Paulus Iouius writeth, is not by name expressed in the cardes, but only in the other, wherby the errour myght be the greater. Of that therfore that runneth by the confines of Liuonia, and the citie of Riga, Sigismundus writeth in this maner. The Lake of Duina, is distant from the sprynges of Boristhenes, almost ten myles, and as many from the marishe of Fronovvo. From it a ryuer of the same name towarde the West, distant from Vuilna twentie myles, runneth from thence toward the North, where by Riga, the cheefe citie of Liuonia, it falleth into the Germane sea, whiche the Moscouites call Vuarezkoie morie. It runneth by Vuitepso, Polotzo, and Dunenburg, and not by Plescouia, as one hath wrytten. This riuer, beyng for the moste part nauigable, the Liuons call Duna. Of the other Duina, whereof Poulus Iouious speaketh, he wrytteth as foloweth.
The prouince of Duina and the ryuer of the same name, is so named from the place where the ryuers of Suchana and Iug meetyng togeather,Duina and Suchana. make one ryuer so called. For Duina in the Moscouites tongue, signifieth two. This ryuer by the space of two hundred myles, entreth into the North Oce∣an, on that part where the sayde sea runneth by the coastes of Suecia and Norway, and diuideth Engreonland from the vnknowen lande. This prouince situate in the full North, perteyned in tyme past to the segniorie of Nouogorode. From Moscouia to the mouthes of Duina, are numbred .CCC. myles: Albeit as I haue sayde, in the regions that are beyonde Volga,Greonlande or Engreonland. the accompt of the iourney can not be wel obserued, by reason of many maryshes, ryuers, and very great wooddes that lye in the way. Yet are we led by coniecture to thynke it to be scarsely two hundred myles: forasmuch as from Moscouia to Vuolochda, from Vuolochda to Vstiug somewhat into th East, and laste of al, from Vstiug by the ryuer Duina, is the ryght passage to the North sea. This region, besyde the Castel of Colmogor and the citie of Duina,Vnderstande myles of Ger∣many, that is leagues. situate almost in the mydde way betwene the sprynges and mouthes of the ryuer, and the Castell of Pinega standyng in the very mouthes of Duina, is vtterly without townes and Castels: Yet hath it many vyllages which are farre in sunder, by reason of the barennesse of the soyle. &c. In an other place he wryteth, that Suchana and Iug, after they are ioyned togeather in one, loose theyr fyrst names, and make the ryuer Duina. &c. But let vs nowe returne to the hystorie of Paulus Iouius. Unto Vstiuga, from the Permians, Pecerrians, Inugrians, Vgolicans, and Pinnegians, people inhabytyng the North and Northest prouinces,Rych furres. are brought the precious furres of Mar∣terns and Sables, also the cases of Woulfes and Foxes both whyte and blacke: And lykewyse the skynnes of the beastes called Ceruari Lupi (that is) harte Woolfes, beyng engendred eyther of a Woolfe and a Hynde, or a Hart and a bitch Woolfe.Lupi Ceruarii. These furres and skynnes, they echaunge for dyuers other wares. The best kynde of Sables, and of the inest heare, wherewith nowe the vestures of princes are lyued,Sables. and the ten∣der neckes of delicate dames are couered, with the expresse simili∣tude of the lyuyng beast, are brought by the Permians and Pecer∣rians, whiche they them selues also receyue at the handes of other that inhabite the regions neere vnto the North Ocean. The Permians and Pecerrians, a litle before our tyme, dyd sacrifice to Iols, after the maner of the Gentyles: but do nowe acknoweledge Christe theyr God. The passage to the Inugrians, and Vgolicans, is by certayne rough mountaynes,The moun∣tayns called Hiperborei. whiche perhappes are they that in olde tyme were called
Hiperborei. In the toppes of these, are founde the best kyndes of Falcons: whereof one kynde (called Herodium) is white, with spotted fethers.Haukes of di∣uers kyndes. There are also Ierfalcons, Sakers, and Peregrines, whiche were vnknowen to the ancient princes in theyr excessiue and nise pleasures. Beyonde those people whom I last named (beyng all try∣butaries to the kynges of Moscouia) are other nations, the last of men, not knowen by any voyages of the Moscouites, foras∣muche as none of them haue passed to the Ocean,The passage from Mosco∣uia to Cathay. and are there∣fore knowen onely by the fabulous narrations of merchauntes. Yet it is apparante that the ryuer Diuidna or Duina, drawe∣yng with it innumerable other ryuers, runnneth with a vehe∣ment course towarde the North, and that the sea is there ex∣ceedyng large: so that saylyng by the coaste of the ryght hande, shyppes may haue passage from thence to Cathay, as it is thought by most lykely coniecture,Cathay. except there lye some lande in the way. For the region of Cathay perteyneth to thextreme and furthest partes of the Easte, situate almost in the para∣lel of Thracia,Maister Eliot calleth Cathay the region of Sinarum. and knowen to the Portugales in India when they sayled neere thereunto by the regions of Sinara and Mala∣cha to Aurea Chersonesus, and brought from thence certayne vestures made of Sables skynnes, by whiche onely argument it is apparente that the citie of Cathay is not farre from the coastes of Scithia. But when Demetrius was demaunded whether eyther by the monuments of letters, or by fame lefte them of theyr pre∣dicessours,The Gothes subuerted the romane Empire. they had any knowledge of the Gothes, who nowe more then a thousande yeeres since, subuerted Thempire of the Romane Emperours, and defaced the citie of Rome: He answe∣red, that both the nation of the Gothes of the name of king Totila theyr chiefe captayne,The north re∣gion conspi∣red against the Romans. was of famous memorie among them: And that dyuers nations of the North regions conspired to that expedition, and especially the Moscouites: Also that that armie in∣creased of the confluence of the Barbarous Liuons and wandryng Tartars: But that they were all called Gothes, forasmuche as the Gothes that inhabited Scondania and Iselande, were the auctours of that inuasion.Moscouia.
And with these boundes are the Moscouites inclosed on eue∣ry syde, whom we thynke to be those people that Ptolome called Modocas: but haue doubtlesse at this day theyr name of the ry∣uer Mosco, which runneth through the cheefe citie Mosca, na∣med also after the same. This is the most famous citie in Mosco∣uia, aswell for the situation thereof,The citie of Mosca. beyng in maner in the myd∣dest of the region, as also for the commodious oportunitie of ri∣uers, multitude of houses, and strong fence of so fayre and good∣ly a Castell. For the citie is extended with a long tract of buil∣dynges by the bankes of the ryuer for the space of fyue myles. The houses are made all of tymber, and are diuided into Par∣lours, Chambers, and Rytchyns, of large roomes: yet neyther of vnseemely heyght, or to lowe, but of decent measure and pro∣portion.Richard Chaunceler told me that these masts are smo what hollow on the one syde, & that the whole syde of the next entereth into ye same, whereby they lye very close. For they haue great trees apt for the purpose brought from the forest of Hercinia: Of the which, made perfectly round lyke ye mastes of shyps, and so layd one vpon an other, that they ioyne at the endes in ryght angles, where beyng made very fast and sure, they frame theyr houses therof, of meruaylous strength with smal charges, and in verye short tyme. In maner all the houses haue pryuate gardens, aswel for pleasure as commoditie of hearbes, wherby the circuite of the dispersed citie appeareth very great. Al the wardes or quarters of the citie, haue their pecu∣liar Chappels. But in the cheefest and highest place therof, is the Church of our Lady, of ample and goodly workemanshyppe, whiche Aristoteles of Bononie, a man of singular knowledge and experience in Architecture, builded more then threescore yeeres since. At the very head of the citie, a litle ryuer, called Neglinia which dryueth many corne mylles,The castel of Mosca. entereth into the ryuer Mos∣cus, and maketh almost an Ilande, in whose end is the Castel, with many strong towers and bulwarkes, builded very fayre by the deuice of Italian Architecturs that are the maisters of the kynges woorkes. In the fieldes about the citie, is an incredible multitude of Hares, and Roe Buckes, the which,White Hares and Roe buc∣kes. it is lawful for no man to chase or pursue with dogges or nettes, except only cer∣tayne of the kyngs familiars, and straunge Ambassadours, to whom he geueth licence by speciall commaundement. Almost three partes of the citie is inuironed with two riuers, and the resi∣due with a large Mote, that receiueth plentie of water from the
sayde ryuers. The citie is also defended on the other syde with an other ryuer named Iausa, whiche falleth also into Moscus a litle beneath the citie. Furthermore, Moscus runnyng towards the South, falleth into the riuer Ocha or Occa, muche greater then it selfe at the towne Columna:The ryuer Ocha. and not very farre from thence, Ocha it selfe, encreased with other ryues, vnladeth his strea∣mes in the famous ryuer Volga, where at the place where they ioyne,Volga. Nouogradia. is situate the citie of Nouogradia the lesse, so named in respect of the greater citie of that name, from whence was brought the fyrst colonie of the lesse citie. Volga, called in olde tyme Rha,Rha. hath his originall of the great marishes, named the whyte Lakes. These are aboue Moscouia, betweene the North and the West,The white Lakes. and send foorth from them almost all the ryuers that are dispersed into diuers regions on euery syde, as we see of the Alpes, from whose toppes and sprynges descend the waters, of whose concourse the ryuers of Rhene, Po, and Rodanum, haue theyr encrease. For these maryshes, in the steade of mountaines full of sprynges, minister abundant moysture, forasmuche as no mountaynes are yet founde in that region by the long trauayles of men, insomuche that many that haue been studious of the old Cosmographie,The Riphean & Hiperborcan mountaynes. suppose the Riphean and Hiperborean, mountai∣nes so often mentioned of the auncient wryters, to be fabulous. From these maryshes therfore, the riuers of Duina, Ocha, Mos∣cus, Volga, Tanais, and Boristhenes, haue theyr oryginall. The Tartares call Volga Edel:Tanais and Borysthenes. Tanais they call Don: And Bori∣stehenes, is at this tyme called Neper. This, a litle beneath Taurica, runneth into the sea Euxinus. Tanais is receyued of the maryshes of Meotis at the noble Marte Towne Azoum.The sea Eux∣inus. But Volga, leauyng the citie of Mosca towardes the South, and runnyng with a large circuite, and great Wyndynges, and Creekes fyrst towardes the East, then to the West, and last∣lye to the South,The Caspian sea. Astrachan. Media. Armenia. Persia. falleth with a full streame into the Caspian or Hircan sea. Aboue the mouth of this, is a citie of the Tartars called Citrachan, whiche some call Astrachan, where Martes are kept by the Merchauntes of Media, Armenia, and Persia. On the further bancke of Volga, there is a towne of the Tartars called Casan,Casan. of the whiche the Horda of the Casanite Tartars tooke theyr name. It is distant from the mouth of Volga
and the Caspian sea .500. myles. Aboue Casan .150. myles, at the entraunce of the ryuer Sura, Basilius that now reigneth, buylded a towne called Surcium, to thintent that in those desartes,Sura. Surcium. the mar∣chantes and traueylers which certifie the gouernours of the mar∣ches of the doinges of the Tartars, and the maners of that vnqui∣et nation, may haue a afe mansion among theyr customers. The Emperours of Moscouia at dyuers tymes, eyther mo∣ued thereto by occasion of thinges present, or for the desyre they had to nobilitate newe and obscure places, haue kepte the seat of theyr court and Empyre in dyuers cities. For Nouogrodia,Nouogrodia. which lyeth toward the West, and the Lyuon sea, not many yeeres past, was the head citie of Moscouia, and obteyned euer the chiefe dig∣nitie, by reason of the incredible number of houses and edifies, with the oportunitie of the large lake replenyshed with fyshe, and also for the fame of the most auncient & venerable Temple, which more then foure hundred yeeres since, was dedicated to Sancta Sophia, Christ the sonne of God,The Temple of Sancta Sophia. accordyng to the custome of the Emperours of Bizantium, nowe called Constantinople. Nouogrodia, is oppressed in maner with continuall wynter, and darkenesse of long nyghtes. For it hath the pole Artike ele∣uate aboue the Horizon threescore and foure degrees:The eleuation o the pole at Nouogrodia, & Moscouia. Heate by rea∣son of shorte nyghtes. and is fur∣ther from the Equinoctiall then Moscouia, by almost six degrees. By which dyfference of heauen, it is sayde, that at the sommer steye of the Sunne, it is burnt with continuall heate, by reason of the shorte nyghtes. The citie also of Volodemaria,The citie of Vo∣lodemaria. beyng more then twoo hun∣dred myles distant from Mosca towarde the Easte, had the name of the chiefe citie and kynges towne, whyther the seate of the Empyre was translated by the valiaunt Emperours for necessarie considerations, that suche ayde, furniture, and requisites, as appertayne to the warres, myght be neare at hande, at suche tyme as they keepe continuall warre agaynst the Tartars theyr borderers. For it is situate without Vol∣ga, on the bankes of the ryuer Clesma, whiche falleth into Volga. But Moscha,The citie of Moscha. aswell for those gyftes and commodi∣ties whereof we haue spoken, as also that it is situate in the myddest of the most frequented place of all the region and Em∣pyre, and defended with the ryuer and Castell, hath in compa∣ryson
to other cities been thought most woorthie to be esteemed for the chiefe. Moscha is distant from Nouogrodia fyue hundred myles:Ottoferia. Volga. and almost in the myd way is the citie of Ottoferia (other∣wyse called Otwer, or Tuwer) vppon the ryuer of Volga. This ry∣uer, neare vnto the fountaynes and sprynges of the same, not yet increased by receyuyng so many other ryuers, runneth but slow∣ly and gentelly, and passeth from thence to Nouogrodia, through many woods and desolate playnes. Furthermore from Nouo∣grodia to Riga,Riga. the nexte porte of the Sarmatian sea, is the iourney of a thousande myles, litle more or lesse. This tract is thought to be more commodious then the other, bycause it hath many townes,The citie of Plescouia. and the citie of Plescouia in the way, beyng imbrased with two ryuers. From Riga (perteynyng to the dominion of the great maister of the warres of the Liuons) to the citie of Lu∣becke,The citie of Lubecke. a porte of Germanie, in the gulfe of Cymbrica Chersonesus (now called Denmarke) are numbred about a thousande myles of daungerous saylyng. From Rome to Moscouia.From Rome to the citie of Moscha, the distance is know∣en to bee two thousande and sixe hundred myles, by the nearest way, passyng by Rauenna, Taruisium, the Alpes of Carnica: Al∣so Villacum, Noricum, and Vienna of Pannouie: and from thence (passyng ouer the ryuer of Danubius) to Olmutium of the Maro∣uians, and to Cracouia the chiefe citie of Polonie, are compted .xi. hundred myles. From Cracouia to Vilna, the head citie of Li∣thuania, are compted fyue hundred myles: and as many from that citie to Smolenzko, situate beyonde Boristhenes, from whence to Moscha, are compted sixe hundred myles. The iourney from Vilna by Smolenzko to Moscha, is traueyled in wynter with ex∣pedite sleades,Wynter tra∣uayle by Ise and snow. and incredible celeritie vppon the snowes, harde∣ned with long frost, and compacte lyke Ise, by reason of muche wearyng. But in sommer, the playnes can not bee ouerpas∣sed but by difficulte and laborious trauayle. For when the snowes by the continuall heate of the Sunne begyn to melte and dissolue,Maryshes in sommer. they cause great maryshes and quamyres, able to intangle both horse and man, were it not that wayes are made through the same, with brydges and causes of wood, and almost infinite labour. Other writers deny this.In all the region of Moscouia, there is no vayne or mine
of golde or syluer, or any other common metall, except Iron, ney∣ther yet is there any token of precious stones: and therefore they buye all those thinges of straungers. Neuerthelesse, this iniurie of nature is recompensed with aboundance of rich furres,Rych furres. whose price, by the wanton nysenesse of men, is growen to suche excesse, that the furres parteynyng to one sorte of apparell,The price of furres. are now solde for a thousande crownes. But the tyme hath been that these haue been bought better cheape, when the furthest nations of the North, being ignorant of our nyse finenesse, and breathyng desyre towarde effeminate and superfluous pleasures, exchaun∣ged the same with muche simplicitie, oftentymes for trifles and thinges of small value: Insomuche that commonly the Permians and Pecerrians,How many Sa∣bles skynnes for an Axe. were accustomed to giue so many skinnes of Sa∣bles for an Iron Axe or Hatchet, as being tyed harde togeather, the marchantes of Moscouia could drawe through the hole where the hafte or handle entereth into the same. But the Moscouites sende into all partes of Europe the best kynde of flaxe to make lynnen cloth, and hempe for ropes: Also many Oxe hydes,Flaxe. Oxe hydes. Waxe. and exceedyng great masses of waxe. They proudely deny,But truely. that the Romane churche obteyneth the principate and preeminent aucthoritie of all other. They so abhorre the nation of the Iewes,They abhorre the Iewes. that they detest the memorie of them, and will in no condition admyt them to dwell within theyr dominions: esteemyng them as wycked and mis∣chieuous people, that haue of late taught the Turkes to make gunnes.Theyr bookes and religion. Beside the bookes that they haue of the ancient Greeke doctours, they haue also the commentaries and homelies of saint Ambrose, Augustine, Ierome, & Gregorie, translated into the Illyrian or Slauon tongue, which agreeth with theyrs: For they vse both the Slauon tongue and letters, as doe also the Sclauons, Dalmates, Bohemes, Pollones, and Lithuanes.The Slauon tongue spred further then any other. This tongue is spredde further then any other at this day: For it is familiar at Constantinople, in the court of the Emperours of the Turks, and was of late hearde in Egypte among the Mamalukes, in the court of the Soltane of Alcayre, otherwyse called Memphis, or Babilon in Egypt. A great number of bookes of holy scrip∣ture are translated into this tongue by the industrie of Sainct Ierome and Cyrillus. Furthermore, besyde the hystories of
their owne countreys, they haue also bookes, conteyning the facts of great Alexander,Sainct Ierome was borne in Dalmatia, now called Scla∣uonia. and the Romane Emperours, and lykewyse of Marcus Antonius, & Cleopatra. They haue no maner of know∣ledge of philosophie, Astronomie, or speculatiue phisicke, with other liberal sciences: But such are taken for Phisitians, as pro∣fesse that they haue oftentymes obserued the vertue and qualitie of some vnknowen hearbe. Howe they number the yeeres.They number the yeeres, not from the byrth of Christ, but from the begynnyng of the world. And this they begin to accompt, not from the moneth of Ianuary, but from September. They haue fewe and simple lawes throughout all the kyng∣dome,Fewe and sim∣ple lawes. made by the equitie and conscience of theyr prynces, and approued by the consent of wyse and good men, and are therfore greatly for the wealth and quyetnesse of the people, forasmuche as it is not lawfull to peruerte them with any interpretations or cauillations of lawyers or Atturneys. They punysh theeues, ro∣uers, priuie pyckers, and murtherers. When they examyne ma∣lefactours, they powre a great quantitie of cold water vpon such as they suspecte, whiche they say to be an intollerable kynde of torment. But sometymes they manacle suche as are stubborne, and will not confesse apparent crymes. Theyr youth is exercised in dyuers kyndes of games and playes,The exercise of youth. resemblyng the warres, whereby they both practise pol∣licie, and increase theyr strength. They vse runnyng both on horsebacke and a foote. Also runnyng at the tylt, wrestlyng, and especially shootyng.Shootyng. For they gyue rewardes to such as ex∣cell therein. The Moscouites are vniuersally of meane stature, yet ve∣ry square set,The corpora∣ture of the Moscouites. and myghtyly brawned. They haue all grey eyes, long beardes, shorte legges, and bygge bellyes. They ryde very shorte, and shoote backewarde very cunnyngly, euen as they flye.Theyr fare. At home in theyr houses, theyr fare is rather plen∣tifull then deyntie: For theyr tables are furnyshed for a small pryce, with all suche kyndes of meates as may bee de∣syred of suche as are gyuen to most excessiue gluttony. Hennes and Duckes are bought for litle syluer pence the peece. There is incredible plentie of beastes and cattayle, both great and small. The fleshe of beefe that is kylled in the myddest of
wynter, is so coniealed and frosen,Fleshe preser∣ued long, by reason of colde. Haukyng and huntyng. that it putrifieth not for the space of two monethes. Theyr best and most delicate dyshes, are gotten by huntyng and haukyng, as with vs: For they take all sortes of wylde beastes with Houndes, and dyuers kyndes of nettes. And with Faulcons and Erens, or Eagles, of a mar∣ueylous kynde, which the region of Pecerra bryngeth foorth vn∣to them, they take not onely Fesantes and wylde Duckes, but also Cranes and wylde Swannes. They take also a foule of darke colour, about the bygnesse of a Goose, with redde ouer∣browes, whose fleshe in taste passeth the pleasauntnesse of Phe∣sauntes: These in the Moscouites tongue are called Tetrao, whiche I suppose to be the same that Plinie calleth Erythratao, knowen to the people of the Alpes, and especially to the Rheti∣ans which inhabite the landes about the sprynges of the ryuer Abdua.Plentie of fyshe. The ryuer of Volga ministreth vnto them great fy∣shes, and of pleasaunt taste, especially Sturgions, or rather a kynde of fyshe lyke vnto Sturgions: which in the wynter sea∣son beyng inclosed in Ise, are long reserued freshe and vncor∣rupte. Of other kyndes of fyshes,Fyshe long re∣serued in Ise. they take in maner an in∣credible multitude in the whyte lakes whereof we haue spoken before. And whereas they vtterly lacke natyue wynes,Wyne. they vse such as are brought from other places. And this only in certeyne feastes and holy mysteryes,Maluasie. especially the pleasaunt Maluasies of the Ilande of Creta, now called Candy, are had in most honour: and vsed eyther as medicines, or for a shewe of excessiue aboun∣daunce, forasmuch as it is in maner a miracle that wines brought from Candy by the streightes of Hercules pyllers,All the North parte of the fyrme lande was called Scythia, and the people Scy∣thians. and the I∣landes of Gades, and tossed with such fluddes of the inclosed O∣cean, should be droonke among the Scythian snowes in theyr natiue puritie and pleasauntnesse. The common people drinke meade, made of hony & hoppes sodden togeather, whiche they keepe long in pitched barrelles, where the goodnesse increaseth with age. They vse also beere and ale, as doe the Germanes and Polones. They are accustomed for delicatenesse in sommer,Drynke coo∣led with Ise. to coole theyr beere and meade with putting Ise therein, which the noble men reserue in theyr sellars in great quantitie for the same purpose.Wyne of Cher∣ryes. Some there are that de∣light greatly in the iuise that is pressed out of Cherries before
they be full rype, which they affyrme to haue the colour of cleare and ruddy wyne, with a very pleasaunt taste. Theyr wyues & women, are not with them in such honour as they are in other nations:Theyr women. for they vse them in maner in the place of seruants. The noble women & gentelwomen, do diligently ob∣serue their walkes, and haue an eye to their chastitie. They are sildome bydden foorth to any feastes: neyther are permitted to re∣sorte to churches farre of, or to walke abrode without some great consideration. But the common sorte of women, are easily and for a small price allured to lechery, euen of straungers: by reason whereof, the Gentlemen doe litle or nothyng esteeme them. Iohn the father of kyng Basilius, dyed more then .xx. yeeres since.Thomas Pa∣leologus. He maryed Sophia, the daughter of Thomas Paleologus, who reigned far in Peloponnesus (now called Morea) & was bro∣ther to Themperour of Constantinople: She was then at Rome when Thomas her father was driuen out of Grecia by the Turks.The conquest of the Turkes in Grecia. Of her were fiue children borne, as Basilius him selfe, George, De∣metrius, Symeon, and Andreas. Basilius tooke to wife Salomonia, the daughter of George Soborouius, a man of singuler fidelitie & wise∣dome, and one of his counsayle: the excellent vertues of whiche woman, only barennesse obscured. When the Princes of Moscouia deliberate to marry, their custome is to haue choyse of all the vyrgins in the realme,Howe the prin∣ces choose theyr wyues. and to cause suche as are of most fayre and beautifull vysage and personage, with maners and vertues accordyng, to bee brought before them: Whiche afterwarde they commyt to certayne faythfull men, and graue matrones to be further viewed, inso∣muche that they leaue no parte of them vnsearched. Of these, shee whom the Prince most lyketh, is pronounced woorthie to bee his wyfe, not without great and carefull expectation of theyr parentes, lyuyng for that tyme betweene hope and feare. The other virgins also whiche stoode in election, and conten∣ded in beautie and integritie of maners, are oftentymes the same day, to gratifie the Prince, marryed to his noble men, Gentel∣men, and Captaynes: wherby it sometymes commeth to passe, that whyle the Princes contemne the lynage of royall descent, suche as are borne of humble parentage, are exalted to the de∣gree of princely estate, in lyke maner as the Emperours of the
Turkes were accustomed to be chosen, by comelynesse of perso∣nage, and warly prowesse. Basilius was vnder the age of fourtie and seuen yeeres,Duke Basi∣lius. of com∣ly personage, singular vertue, & princely qualities, by all meanes studious for the prosperitie & commodities of his subiectes: fur∣thermore, in beneuolence, liberalitie, and good successe in his do∣inges, to be preferred before his progenitours. For when he had vi. yeeres kepte warre with the Lyuons, that moued .lxxii. confe∣therate cities to the cause of that warre, he obteyned the victorie, & departed wt few conditions of peace, rather giuen then accepted. Also at the beginning of his reigne, he put the Polones to flight,War betweene the Polones and Mosco∣uites. and tooke prisoner Constantine, the Captayne of the Ruthens, whom he brought to Moscouia tyed in chaynes: But shortly af∣ter, at the ryuer of Boristhenes, aboue the citie of Orsa, he him selfe was ouercome in a great battayle, by the same Constantine whom he had dismissed: Yet so, that the towne of Smolenzko, which the Moscouites possessed before, and was newe woon by the Polones, should styll parteyne to the dominions of Basi∣lius. But agaynst the Tartars,War betweene the Mosco∣uites and Tar∣tars. and especially the Tartars of Europe, called the Precopites, the Moscouites haue oftentymes kepte warre with good successe, in reuenge of the iniuryes done to them by theyr incursions. Basilius is accustomed to bryng to the fielde more then a hun∣dred and fiftie thousande horsemen, deuided into three bandes,The Mosco∣uites army. and folowyng the banners or ensignes of theyr Captaynes in order of battayle. On the banner of the kynges wyng, is figured the Image of Iosue the Captayne of the Hebrues,Their banner. at whose prayer the Sunne prolonged the day, and stayed his course, as witnesse the hystories of holy scripture. Armies of footemen are in maner to no vse in those great wyldernesses, aswell for theyr apparel be∣ing loose and long, as also for the custome of theyr enemies, who in their warres trust rather to the swyftnesse of their light horses, then to trye the matter in a pyght fielde. Theyr horses are of lesse then meane stature:Their horses and horsemen. but very strong and swyfte. Theyr horsemen are armed with pykes, Ryuettes, Mases of yron, and arrowes. Fewe haue hooked swoordes. Theyr bodyes are defended with rounde Targets,Theyr armure. after the maner of the Turkes of Asia, or with bendyng and
cornarde Targettes after the maner of the Greekes: Also with coates of mayle, Brygantines, and sharpe Helmets. Basilius dyd furthermore instytute a bande of Hargabusiers on horsebacke,Hargabusiers. and caused many great brasen peeces to be made by the worke∣manshyp of certayne Italians:Gunnes. and the same with theyr stockes and wheeles to be placed in the Castle of Mosca. The kyng him selfe with princely magnificence and singular familiaritie (wherwith neuerthelesse no parte of the maiestie of a kyng is violate) is accustomed to dyne openly with his noble men,The Prince dy∣neth openly. & strange Ambassadours in his owne chamber of presence, where is seene a marueylous quantitie of siluer & gylt plate, stan∣dyng vpon two great and high cubbardes in the same chamber.Sigismundus sayth that much of this is golde. He hath not about him any other garde for the custody of his per∣son, sauing only his accustomed familie. For watch and warde is diligently kept of the faithful multitude of the citizens: Insomuch that euery warde or quarter of the citie is inclosed with gates,The custodie of of the citie. rayles, and barres: neyther is it lawfull for any man rashely to walke in the citie in the nyght, or without lyght. All the coure consisteth of noble men,The Dukes courte. Gentlemen, and choyse souldyers, which are called out of euery region by theyr townes and vyllages, and commaunded to wayte course by course at certayne monethes appoynted. Furthermore when warre is proclaymed, all the ar∣mie is collected both of the olde souldyers, and by musteryng of newe in all prouinces. For the Lieuetenantes and Captaynes of the army, are accustomed in al cities to muster the youth, & to ad∣myt to the order of souldyers such as they thinke able to serue the turne. Theyr wages is payde them of the common treasury of e∣uery prouince,Souldyers wa∣ges of the com∣mon treasury. whiche is geathered, and partly payde also, in the tyme of peace, although it be but litle. But such as are assigned to the warres, are free from all tributes, and inioye certayne other priuilegies, whereby they may the more gladly and cheerfully serue theyr kyng, and defende theyr countrey. For in the tyme of warre, occasion is mynistred to shewe true vertue and man∣hood, where in so great and necessarie an institution, euery man accordyng to his approued actiuitie and ingenious forwarde∣nesse, may obtayne the fortune eyther of perpetuall honour, or ignominie.
Vix olim vlla fides referrentibus horrida regna Moschorum, & Ponti, res glacialis erat. Nunc Iouio autore, illa oculis lustramus, et vrbes, Et nemora, et montes cernimus et fluuios. Moschouiam, monumenta Ioui, tua culta reuoluens, Caepi alios mundos credere Democriti. Other notable thinges as concernyng Moscouia, geathered out of the bookes of Sigismundus Liberus. Note that when he sayth myles, he meaneth leagues. FRom whence Russia had the name, there are dyuers opinions.Russia. Some thynke that it was so named of one Russus the sonne or neuiew of Lech the kyng of the Polons. O∣ther affirme that it was so called of a cer∣tayne olde towne, named Russus, not farre from Nouogoroda or Nouogradia the more. Some also thynke that it was so called of the browne coloure of the nation.The browne coloure of the Russes. But the Moscouians confute all these opinions as vntrue, affirmyng that this nation was in olde tyme called Rosseia, as a nation dispersed, as the name it selfe doth declare. For Rosseia in the Ruthens tongue, doth signifie dispersed,Russeia. or scattered. The whiche thyng to be true, dyuers other people commyxt with thinhabitauntes, and dyuers prouinces lying here and there betwene diuers parts of Russia do plainly declare. But whence soeuer they tooke theyr name, doubtlesse all the people that vse the Slauon tongue, and professe the fayth of Christ,The Slauon tongue sprea∣deth farre. after the maner of the Greekes (called in theyr common language Russi, and in the Latin tongue Rutheni) are increased to such a multitude, that they haue eyther expulsed all the nations that lye betwene them, or drawne them to theyr maner of lyuing, in somuche that they are nowe called all Rutheni, by one common name. Furthermore the Slauon tongue (whiche at this daye is somewhat corruptly called Sclauon) runneth exceedyng farre, as vsed of the Dalmates, Bossuenser, Croatians, Istrians,
and by along tracte of the sea Adriatike vnto Forum Iulij: Of the Caruians also, whom the Venetians call Charsos: and lyke∣wyse of the Carniolans and Carinthians, vnto the ryuer Drauus: Furthermore of the Stirians within Gretzium, and by Muera vnto Danubius, and from thence of the Misians, Seruians, Bulga∣rians, and other inhabityng, euen vnto Constantinople: Further∣more of the Bohemians, Lusacians, Silesians, Morauians, and thinhabitauntes neere vnto the ryuer Vagus in the kyngdome of Hungarie: The Polones also, and the Ruthenians, whose Empire reacheth very farre: lykewyse the Circasians and Quinquemontanians, vnto Pontus: and is from thence vsed in the North partes of Germanie, among the remnant of the Van∣dales inhabityng here and there.Vandales. All whiche nations, although they acknowledge them selues to bee Sclauons, yet the Ger∣mans takyng the denomination onely of the Vandales, call all them that vse the Slauon tongue, Vuenden, or Vuinden, or Vuindysh. Of the Princes that nowe reigne in Russia, the chiefe is the great Duke of Moscouia,The princes of Russia. who possesseth the greatest part there∣of. The seconde is the great Duke of Lithuania: and the thyrde the kyng of Polonie, who nowe obteyneth the dominion of Polonie and Lithuania. In aucthoritie and dominion ouer his subiectes, the prince of Moscouie passeth all the monarkes of the worlde:The Duke of Moscouia. For he depri∣ueth all his noble men and gentelmen of all theyr holdes and mu∣nitions at his pleasure. He trusteth not his owne brethren, but oppresseth all with lyke seruitude: Insomuch that whom so euer he commaundeth either to remaine with him in the courte, or to go to the warres, or sendeth on ambassage, they are com∣pelled to be at theyr owne charges, except the young gentelmen the sonnes of the Boiarons, that is, the noble men of the lowest de∣gree. He vsurpeth this aucthoritie aswell ouer the spiritualtie as the temporaltie, constituting what him listeth of the goods and lyfe of all men. Of his counsellers there is not one that dare dis∣sent from hym in any thyng. They openly confesse, that the wyl of theyr prince is the will of God: and therfore call hym the key bearer and chamberlen of God, & beleeue hym to be the executor of Gods will. By reason wherof, the prince hym selfe, when any peticion is made to hym for the deliuerie of any captiue, is ac∣accustomed
to answere, when God commaundeth, he shalbe de∣liuered. Lykewyse when any asketh a question of an vncertaine or doubtful thyng, theyr custome is to answere thus: God know∣eth, and the great Prince. It is vncertayne whether the crueltie and fyrcenesse of the nation do require so tyrannous a Prince, or whether by the tiranny of the Prince, the nation is made so fierce and cruell. Basilius the Sonne of Iohn, was the fyrst that tooke vppon hym the name and title of a kyng, in this maner. The great lord Basilius, by the grace of God, kyng and lorde of all Russia, and the great Duke of Vuolodimaria, Moscouia, Nouogradia. &c. Furthermore,Why the Duke of Moscouia was called an Emperour. wheras nowe this Prince is called Empe∣rour, I haue thought good to shewe the title and cause of this er∣rour. Note therfore that Czar in the Ruthens tongue, signifieth a kyng, whereas in the language of the Slauons, Pollons, Bohemes, and other, the same worde Czar, signifieth Cesar, by whiche name the Emperours haue been commonly called. For both they, and the Slauons that are vnder the kyngdome of Hungarie, call a kyng by an other name: as some Crall, other Kyrall, and some Korall: but thynke that only an Emperour is called Czar. Whereby it came to passe that the Ruthene or Moscouite inter∣pretours, hearyng theyr Prince to be so called of strange nati∣ons, began them selues also to name hym an Emperour, & thnk the name of Czar to be more worthy then the name of a kyng, although they signifie all one thyng. But who so wyll reade all theyr histories and bookes of holy scripture, shall fynde that a kyng is called Czar, and an Emperour Kessar. By the lyke er∣rour the Emperour of the Turkes is called Czar,The great Turke. who neuerthe∣lesse of antiquitie vsed no hygher tytle then the name of a kyng, expressed by this worde Czar. And hereof the Turkes of Europe that vse the Slauon tongue, call the citie of Constantinople Czar∣gard, (that is) the kyngs citie. Some call the Prince of Moscouie the whyte kyng, which I thynke to proceede of the whyte Cappes,The whyte kyng. or other tyre∣mentes they weare on theyr heades, lyke as they call the kyng of Pertia Kisilpassa (that is) redde head. He vseth the tytle of a kyng when he wryteth or sendeth to Rome,The Duke of Moscouia his tytle. the Emperour, the Pope, the Kyng of Suetia and Denmarke, the
great maister of Prusia and Liuonia, and also to the great Turke, as I haue been credibly enfourmed: but he is not called kyng of any of them, except perhaps of the Liuons. Yet by reason of his later conquestes, some haue thought hym worthy the name of a kyng, or rather of an Emperour, because he hath kyngs vn∣der his Empire. To the kyng of Polone, he vseth this title: The great lorde Basilius by the grace of God, lord of al Russia, and great Duke of Vuolodimeria, Moscouia, Nouogradia. &c. leauyng out the title of a kyng. For none of them vouchsafeth to receyue the letters of the other augmented with any newe title, as I knewe by experience at my beyng in Moscouia, at which time Sigismun∣dus the kyng of Polone sent hym his letters augmented with the title of the Duke of Moscouia, wherwith he was not a litle offended. They glory in theyr histories that before Vuolodimeria and Olha,Russia baptised by Sainct An∣drewe the Apostle. the land of Russia was baptised and blessed of Sainct An∣drewe the Apostle of Christ, affirmyng that he came from Gre∣cia to the mouthes of the ryuer Boristhenes: and that he sayled vp the ryuer to the mountaynes where as is nowe Chiouia: and that there he blessed all the lande and placed his crosse, prophe∣syng also that the grace of God shoulde be great there, and that there shoulde be many churches of Christian men: Lykewyse, that he afterward came to the sprynges of Boristhenes, vnto the great Lake Vuolok, and by the ryuer Louat descended into the Lake Ilmer: from whence by the ryuer Vuolcon, whiche run∣neth out of the same Lake, he came to Nouogradia: and passed from thence by the same ryuer to the Lake Ladoga, and the ryuer Heua, and so vnto the sea whiche they call Vuarezkoia, beyng the same that we call the Germane sea, betweene Vuinlandia or Finlandia and Liuonia, by the whiche he sayled to Rome, and was at the last crucified for Christ his Gospell in Peloponne∣sus by the tirranie of Agus Antipater, as theyr cronacles make mention. The Prince euery seconde or thyrde yeere causeth a must∣er to bee taken of the Sonnes of the Boiorons,The Mosco∣uites warres. and taketh an accompte booth of theyr number, and howe manye Horses and men euery of them is able to make: and then appoynteth
a certayne stypende to suche as are able further to beare theyr owne charges in the warres. They haue seldome any rest or quietnesse: For they eyther keepe warre with the Lithuanians, Liuonians, Suetians, or Tartars of Casan. Or if it so chaunce that the prince keepe no warre, yet doth he yeerely appoynte garry∣sons of .xx. thousande men in places about Tanais and Occa, to represse the incursions and robberyes of the European Tartars, called Precopites. As in other matters,Dyuers ma∣ners of dyuers people in the warres. euen so in the order of warrefare there is great diuersitie among men. For the Moscouian as soone as he beginneth to flye, thinketh of none other succoure, but putteth all his confidence therin. Beyng pursued or taken of his enimie, he neyther defendeth hym selfe, nor desireth pardon. The Tartar cast of from his horse, spoyled of all his armure and weapones, and also sore wounded, defendeth hym selfe with handes, feete, and teethe, and by all meanes he may, vntyll his strength and spirite fayle hym. The Turke, when he seeth hym selfe destitute of all helpe and hope to escape, doth humbly desyre pardon, castyng away his weapons and armure, and reaching forth to the victourer his handes ioyned togeather to be bounde, hopyng by captiuitie to saue his lyfe. The Moscouites in placeyng theyr armie, chuse them a large playne, where the best of them pytch theyr tentes,The Mosco∣uites army. and the other make them certaine arbours of bowes fyxt in the grounde, ben∣dyng togeather the toppes thereof, which they couer with theyr clokes to defende them selues, theyr bowes, arrowes, saddels, and other theyr necessaries from rayne. They put foorth theyr horses to pasture, and for that cause haue theyr tentes so farre in sunder, which they fortifie neither with cartes or trenches, or any other impedyment, except perhappes the place be defended by nature, as with wooddes, ryuers, and maryshes. It may perhappes seeme straunge,Howe he main∣tayneth his army. howe he mayntayneth hym and his so longe with so small an armye as I haue sayde. I wyll nowe therefore briefely declare theyr sparyng and frugalitie. He that hath syxe or sometymes more horses, vseth one of them as a packe horse to beare all theyr necessa∣ryes.
He hath also in a bagge of two or three spannes long, the flower or meale of the graine called mille, and .viii. or .x. pounds weyght of Swines fleshe poudred. He hath lykewyse a bagge of salte, myxt with pepper, if he be rych. Furthermore euery man caryeth with hym a hatchet, a fyre boxe, and a brasen pote: so that if they chaunce to come to any place where they can fynde no fruites, Garlyke, Onyons, or fleshe, they kyndle a fyre, and fyll theyr pottes with water, whereunto they put a spoonefull of meale, with a quantitie of salt, and make pottage therof, wher∣with the maister and all his seruauntes lyue contented. But if the maister bee very hungrye, he eateth all alone, and the seruauntes are sometymes enforced to fast for the space of two or three dayes. And if the maister intende to fare somewhat more delycately, then he addeth thereto a litle portion of Swynes fleshe. I speake not this of the best of them, but of such as are of the meane sort. The gouernours and captaynes of the armie, do sometymes bydde the poorer sorte to theyr tables: where they feede them selues so well, that they fast two or three dayes after. When they haue fruites, Garlyke, and Onyons, they can well forbeare all other meates. Proceedyng forwarde to the battayle, they put more confidence in theyr multitude, and with what great armies they assayle theyr enimies, then eyther in the strength and valyauntnesse of theyr souldiers, or in well instructyng theyr armie, and fight better a farre of, then at hand: and therfore study howe to circumuent or inclose theyr enimies, and to assayle them on the backe halfe. They haue many trum∣petters,Instrumentes of warre. the which while they blow al at once, after theyr maner, make a maruelous straunge noyse. They haue also another kynde of instrumentes which they call Szurna: these they blow without ceassyng for the space of an houre togeather, so temperyng the same, and holdyng in the wynde whyle they draw more,The Mosco∣uites and Tartars ap∣parell. that the noyse seemeth continually without intermission. They vse all one maner of apparell: as longe coates without pleyghtes, and with narrowe sleeues, after the ma∣ner of the Hungarians. These the Christians vse to butten on the ryght syde: and the Tartars (vseyng the lyke) butten them on the lefte syde. They weare redde and short buskyns that reache not to theyr knees, and haue the soles thereof de∣fended
with plates of Iron. In maner all theyr shyrtes are wrought with diuers coloures about the necke, and haue the Collars and Ruffes beset with litle round Baules like Beades, of Syluer, or gylted Copper, and some tyme Pearles also. They gyrd them selues beneath the bellie, euen as low as theyr pryuie members, that they may seeme more burlye, which they greatly esteeme, as doo at this daye the Spanyardes, Italians, and Almanes. The prouince of Moscouia is neyther very large nor fruitful,The prouince of Moscouia. forasmuch as the fertilitie is hindred with sandye ground, which either with to much drynesse or moysture killeth the corne. Fur∣thermore immoderate and sharpe vntemperatenesse of the ayre, whyle the colde of the wynter ouercommeth the heate of the Sunne, sometymes doth not suffer the corne to rype. For the colde is there sometymes so extreame,Extreame colde. that lyke as with vs in so∣mer by reason of heate, euen so there by extreame cold, the earth hath many great chinckes or breaches. Water also cast into the ayre, and spytle fallyng from ones mouth, are frosen before they touche the grounde. I my selfe, when I came thither in the yeere 1526. sawe the braunches of fruitfull trees wythered by the colde of the wynter be fore, whiche was so extreame, that many of theyr wagoners and carriers (whom they call Gonecz) were found frosen to death in theyr sleades. There were some that at the same tyme leadyng and dryuing theyr cattayle from the next villages to Moscouia, died by the way with their beastes, through the extremitie of the colde. Furthermore the same yeere many players that were accustomed to wander about the coun∣trey with daunsing Beares, were found dead in the high wayes. Wilde Beares also, enforced therto by famine, left the woods, and ran here and there into diuers villages and houses: at whose commyng whyle the men of the countrey forsooke theyr houses and fledde into the fieldes, many of them peryshed through the vehemencie of the cold. Agayne it sometymes so chaunceth that in Sommer the heate is as extreame:Extreame heate in cold regions. as in the yeere .1525. in the whiche almost all kyndes of pulse and grayne were scorch∣ed and burnt, and suche a darth of corne folowed that drought, that that which before was bought for three Dengas, was after∣ward solde for twentie or thyrtie. Furthermore also, ma∣ny
villages, woods, and stackes of corne, were set on fyre by the extreame heate: the smoke wherof so fylled the region, that the eyes of many were sore hurt therby. There arose also as it were a darke and thycke myst without smoke, whiche so molested the eyes, that many lost theyr syght therby. They sow and nouryshe the seedes of Melons with great diligence in certayne raysed beddes myxt with doung, wherby they fynde a remedie both a∣gaynst extreame cold and heat. For if the heat exceede, they make certayne ryftes in the beds, as it were breathyng places, lest the seedes shoulde be suffocate with to much heate. And if the cold be extreame, it is tempered with the heate of the mucke or doung. Theyr beastes are much lesse then ours, yet not all without hornes,Litle beastes. as one hath wrytten: For I haue there seene Oxen, Kine, Goates, and Rammes, al with hornes. The citie of Moscouia or Mosca.Not farre from the citie of Mosca, are certayne monasteries, whiche a farre of, seeme lyke vnto a citie. They say that in this citie is an incredible number of houses: and that the syxt yeere before my commyng thyther, the prince caused them to be num∣bred, and found them to be more then one and fourtie thousand & fyue hundred houses. The citie is very large and wyde, and also very slabby and myrye: by reason wherof, it hath many brid∣ges and causeyes. The ayre of the region is so holsome, that beyond the spryngs of Tanais,Holsome ayre. especially towards the North, and a great part al∣so towards the East, the pestilence hath not been hearde of synce the memorye of man: Yet haue they sometymes a disease in theyr bowelles and heades, not much vnlyke vnto the pestilence. This disease they call a heate: wherwith such as are taken, dye within fewe dayes. Some write that Iohn the Duke of Moscouia, and Sonne of Basilius,A ryche spoyle. vnder the pretence of religion, sacked & spoyled the citie of Nouogradia, and caried with hym from thence to Moscouia three hundred sleades laden with gold, syluer, and precious sto∣nes, of the gooddes of the Archbishop, the merchauntes, citisins, and strangers.The Iland of Solowki. Solowki is an Ilande situate in the North sea, eyght leagues from the continent betweene Duina and the pro∣uince of Corela. Howe farre it is distaunt from Moscouia, can not be well knowen, by reason of many Fennes. Marishes,
wooddes, and desolate places lying in the way. Albeit, some say that it is not three hundred leagues from Moscouia, and twoo hundred from Bieloiesero.Bieloiesero. In this Ilande is made great plentie of salte: and it hath in it a monasterie, into the which it is not lawfull for any woman or virgin to enter. There is also great fyshyng for herryng. They say that heere the Sunne at the sommer Equinoctiall,The length of the day. shyneth continually ex∣cept two houres. Demetriowe, is a citie with a Castell, distante from Moscouia xii. leagues, declinyng from the West somewhat towarde the north. By this runneth the riuer Lachroma, that runneth into the ryuer of Sest. Sest also receyueth the ryuer Dubna, which vnladeth it selfe in Volga. And by the commoditie of thus many ryuers, many ryche marchaundies are brought without great labour or difficultie from the Caspian sea, by the ryuer Volga to Moscouia,The trade from Moscouia to the Caspian sea. Bieloiesero or the whyte lakes. and dyuers other prouinces and cities about the same. Bieloiesero, a citie with a Castell, is situate at a lake of the same name. For Bieloiesero in the Moscouites tongue, signi∣fieth a whyte lake. The citie standeth not in the lake, as some haue sayde. Yet is it so enuironed with maryshes, that it may seeme to be inexpugnable: In consideration wherof, the princes of Moscouia are accustomed to keepe theyr treasure there. Bielo∣iesero is from Moscouia, a hundred leagues, and as muche from Nouogradia the great. The lake it selfe, is .xii. leagues in length, and as much in breadth, and hath (as they say) three hundred ry∣uers falling into it. The inhabitauntes of this place, haue a pecu∣lyar language, although now in maner all speake the Moscouites tongue. The longest day here in the sommer Equinoctial, is sayd to consist of .xix. houres. A man of great name and credit tolde mee, that at the begynnyng of the spryng,Diuersitie of temperamēt in small distance. when the trees be∣gan nowe to bee greene, he went in poste from Moscouia to Bieloiesero: and passyng ouer the ryuer Volga, founde the regi∣on there so couered with Ise and snow, that hee was fayne to dispatche the residue of his iourney on steades. And although the wynter be longer there, yet doe the fruites waxe rype and are geathered euen at the same tyme that they are in Moscouia. Within an arrowe shotte of the lake, there is an other lake that bringeth foorth brymstone:A lake of brym∣stone. which a certayne riuer running out of
the same, carrieth with it in great quantitie, flotyng aboue the water lyke a scomme, yet through the ignoraunce of the people, they haue no commoditie thereby. Exchange of furres for other ware.The people that inhabite the regions, lying farre North, and East from Moscouia, exchange their furres for apparel, Kniues, needles, Spoones, Hatchets, and suche other necessary wares: for they haue not the vse of golde and syluer. The description of the regions, people, and riuers, lying North and East from Moscouia: as the way from Moscouia to the riuer Petzora, and the prouince Iugaria, or Iuhra, and from thence to the riuer Obi. Likewyse the description of other countreys and regions, euen vnto thempire of the great Cham of Cathay. THE dominion of the prince of Moscouia, reacheth farre towarde the East & North, vnto the places whiche we wyll nowe de∣scribe.The dominion of the duke of Moscouia. As concernyng whiche thyng, I translated a booke that was presented vnto me in the Moscouites tongue, & haue here made a breefe rehearsal of the same, I wyl first therfore describe the iourney from Moscouia to Petzora, and so to Iugaria and Obi.Volochda. werste. Vstiug. From Moscouia to the citie of Vuolochda, are numbred fyftie werstes, one werst conteynyng almoste the space of an Italian myle. From Vuolochda to Vstiug, toward the ryght hande, descending with the course of the riuer of Vuolochda and Suchana with whom it ioyneth, are compted fyue hundred werstes, where within two werstes of the towne called Strelze, and hard by the citie of Vstiug, Suchana ioyneth: Iug which run∣neth from the South, from whose mouth, vnto the sprynges of the same, are numbred fyue hundred werstes. Note that whereas here before the aucthor numbreth but fyftie werstes from Moscouia to Vuolochda, it seemeth that the place is corrupted by the Prin∣ters mistakyng one woorde for an other, as, Quinquaginta, whiche is fyftie, for Quingenta, whiche is fyue hundred. For the distance is no lesse from Moscouia to Vuolochda, then is from Vuolochda to Vstiug, whiche is fyue hundred werstes.
But Suchana and Iug, after they ioyne togeather,Suchana. Iug. So cal∣led of his swift and pleasant streame. lose their first names, and make both one riuer, named Dwina, by the which, the passage to the citie of Colmogor conteineth fyue hundred werstes, from whence in the space of sixe dayes iourney, Dwina entreth into the North Ocean at syxe mouthes: and the greatest parte of this iourney consysteth by Nauigation: for by lande from Vuo∣lochda vnto Colmogor, passyng ouer the ryuer Vuaga, are a thou∣sande werstes. Not farre from Colmogor, the riuer Pienega, run∣nyng from the East on the ryght hand, for the space of seuen hun∣dred wersts, falleth into Dwina.Pienega. From Dwina by the riuer Piene∣ga, by the space of two hundred werstes, they come to a place cal∣led Nicolai, from whence within halfe a werst,Nicolai. shyppes haue pas∣sage into the riuer Kuluio,Kuluio. whiche hath his originall from a lake of the same name towarde the North, from whose sprynges is eight dayes viage to the mouth of the same, where it entreth into the Ocean. Sayling by the coastes of the ryght hande of the sea, they passe by the regions of Stanuwische, Calunczscho, and Apnu:The regions by the North sea. And sayling about the promontorie or cape of Chorogoski, Nosz, Stanuwische, Camenckh, and Tolstickh, they come at the length into the riuer Mezen, and from thence in the space of syxe dayes, to a village of the same name, standing in the mouth of the riuer Pieza,Pieza. by the whiche agayne ascendyng towarde the left hande and Sommer East, they come to the riuer Piescoia:Piescoia. from whence sayling for the space of fyue werstes, they come into two lakes, in the whiche are seene two wayes▪ whereof one on the ryght syde, goeth to the riuer Rubicho, by the whiche they passe to the riuer Czircho. Other, by an other and shorter way,Rubicho. bryng their shyppes from the lake directly into Czircho: from whence,Czircho. excepte they be hyndered by tempest, they come in the space of three weekes to the riuer and mouth of Czilma, flowyng into the great riuer Petzora,Czilma. Petzora. whiche in that place is two werstes in breadth. Saylyng from hence, they come in the space of syxe dayes to the Towne & castle of Pustoosero, neare vnto the which,Pustoosero. Petzora entreth into the North Ocean at syxe mouthes. The inhabitantes of this place, are men of simple wyt: they receyued the fayth of Christ, and were baptised in the yeere .M.D.xviii.
From the mouth of Czilma vnto the mouth of the ryuer Vssa, goyng by Petzora,Vssa. is one moneths vyage. Vssa hath his springes in the mountaine Poyas Semnoi, being on the left hand toward the sommer East, & springeth out of a great stone of the same moun∣tayne,Cingulus mundi. called Camen Bolschoi. From the sprynges of Vssa to the mouthes of the same, are numbered more then a thousande Werstes. Furthermore, Petzora runneth from this south winter parte, from whence ascending from the mouthes of Vssa, vnto the mouthes of the ryuer Stzuchogora, is three weekes vyage. They that described this vyage, sayde that they rested betweene the mouthes of the ryuers of Stzuchogora and Potzscheriema,Stzuchogora. and lefte theyr victualles there whiche they brought with them from Russia.Potzscherie∣ma. Beyond the ryuers of Petzora and Stzuchogora towarde the mountayne Camenipoias,Camenipoias. and the sea with the Ilandes there about, and the Castell of Pustoosero, are dyuers and innumerable nations,Samoged. whiche by one cōmon name are called Samoged (that is) such as eate them selues.Foules and beastes. They haue great increase of foules, byrdes, and dyuers kyndes of beastes: as Sables, Marternes, Beuers, Otters, Hermelines, Squirrels: and in the Ocean the beast called Mors: Also Uesse, whyte Beares, Wolues, Hares, Equiwoduani, great Whales, and fysh called Semfi, with dyuers other.Wylde people. The people of these nations come not to Moscouia: For they are wylde, and flee the company and societie of other men. From the mouthes of Stzuchogora, saylyng vp the ryuer vnto Poiassa,Poiassa. Artawische, Cameni, and Poiassa the greater, is three weekes vyage. Furthermore, the ascendyng to the mounte Camen, is three dayes iourney: from the which, des∣cendyng,Camen. Artawischa. Sibut. Lepin. they come to the ryuer Artawischa, and from thence to the ryuer Sibut, from whence they passe to the Castell of Lepin, and from Lepin to the ryuer Sossa. The people that inhabite the region by this ryuer, are called Vuogolici. Lea∣uyng Sossa on the ryght hande,Sossa. Obi. Kitaisko. they come to the great ry∣uer Obi, that spryngeth out of the lake Kitaisko, the whiche with all the haste they coulde make, they coulde scarcelye passe ouer in one day, the ryuer beyng of suche breadth that it reacheth fourescore Werstes. The people also that dwell a∣bout this ryuer,Vuogolici. are called Vuogolici and Vgritzschi. From
the Castle of Obca, ascendyng by the ryuer of Oby, vnto the ryuer Irtische, into the which Sossa entereth, is three monethes iourney. In these places are two Castles named Ierom and Tumen,Irtische. Ierom. Tumen. kepte by certayne Lordes called Knesi Iuhorski, being tributaries to the great Duke of Moscouia, as they say. Heere are dyuers kyndes of beastes and furres. From the mouth of the ryuer Irtische to the Castle of Grusti∣na, is two monethes iourney: from whence to the lake Kitai,Grustina. Kitai. by the ryuer Oby (which I sayde to haue his springes in this lake) is more then three monethes iourney. From this lake come ma∣ny blacke men, lackyng the vse of common speech.Blacke men without speech. They bryng with them dyuers wares, and especially pearles and precious stones, which they sell to the people called Grustintzi and Serpo∣nowtzi. These haue theyr name of the Castle Serponow,Serponow. Lucomorya. situate in the mountaynes of Lucomorya, beyonde the ryuer Obi. They say that to the men of Lucomorya, chaunceth a marueylous thing and incredible: For they affyrme,Men that yeerely dye and reuyue. that they dye yeerely at the .xxvii. day of Nouember, beyng the feast of Sainct George among the Moscouites: and that at the nexte spryng about the .xxiiii. day of Aprill, they reuyue agayne as doe Frogges. With these also, the people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi,A straunge trade of mar∣chaundies. exer∣cise a newe and straunge kynde of trade: For when the accusto∣med tyme of theyr dying, or rather of sleapyng, approcheth, they leaue theyr wares in certayne places appoynted, which the Gru∣stintzi and Serponowtzi carry away, leauyng other wares of e∣quall value in theyr places: which if the dead men at the tyme of theyr reuyuyng perceyue to be of vnequall pryce, they requyre theyr owne agayne: by reason whereof, much stryfe and fighting is betweene them. From the ryuer of Obi descendyng towarde the lefte hande,Obi. Calami, are the people called Calami, whiche came thyther from Obiowa and Pogosa. Beneath Obi, about Aurea Anus (that is, the golden olde wyfe) are the ryuers Sossa, Beres, Vua, & Danadim,Ryuers▪ all which spryng out of the mountaynes Camen, Bolschega, Poiassa, and the rockes ioynyng to the same. All the nations that inhabite from these ryuers to Aurea Anus, are subiecte to the prince of Moscouia.
Aurea Anus.Aurea Anus. called in the Moscouites tongue, Slata Baba, is an idol,Obdora. at the mouthes of Obi in the prouince of Obdora, standyng on the furthest banke towarde the sea. Along by the bankes of Obi, and the riuers neare there about, are here and there many castles and fortresses: all the lordes whereof, are subiect to the prince of Moscouia, as they say. They say also, or rather fable, that the idoll called Aurea Anus, is an image lyke vnto an olde wyfe, ha∣uyng a chylde in her lappe, and that there is nowe seene another infant, whiche they say to be her nephewe: Also, that there are certayne instrumentes that make a continuall sounde lyke the noyse of Trumpettes, the whiche, yf it so be, I thynke it to be by reason of the wynde, blowing continually into the holowe places of those instrumentes. Cossin.The riuer Cossin falleth out of the mountaynes into Lucomoria: In the mouth of this is a castle, whither from the springes of the great riuer Cossin,Cassima. is two monethes viage. Furthermore, from the springes of the same riuer, the riuer Cassima hath his original, whiche runnyng through Lucomoria,Tachnin. falleth into the great riuer Tachnin, beyonde the whiche (as is sayde) dwel men of prodigi∣ous shape, of whom, some are ouergrowen with heare lyke wilde beastes,People of mō∣strous shape. other haue heades lyke dogges, and their faces in their brestes, without neckes, and with long handes also, and without feete.A fyshe lyke a man. Plinie writeth of the lyke fysh. There is lykewyse in the ryuer Tachnin, a certayne fysh, with head, eyes, nose, mouth, handes, feete, and other mem∣bers vtterly of humane shape, and yet without anye voyce, and pleasant to be eaten, as are other fyshes. All that I haue hytherto rehearsed, I haue translated out of the sayde iourney whiche was delyuered me in the Moscouites tongue: In the whiche, perhappes some thynges may seeme fabulous, and in maner incredible, as of the dombe men, and the dead, reuiuyng, the Aurea Anus also, and the monstrous shapes of men, with the fyshe of humane fourme: whereof, although I haue made diligent inquisition, yet coulde I knowe nothyng certayne of anye that had seene the same with their eyes: neuer∣thelesse, to geue further occasion to other to searche the trueth of these thynges, I haue thought good to make mention hereof. Noss in the Moscouites tongue signifieth a Nose, and there∣fore they cal all capes or poyntes, that reache into the sea, by the
same name. The mountaynes about the riuer of Petzora,Mountaynes. are called Sem∣noi Poyas, or Cingulus mundi, that is, the gyrdle of the worlde, or of the earth. Kithai is a lake, of whom the great Cane of Cathay,The great Chane of Cathay. whom the Moscouians call Ezar Kithaiski, hath his name: For Chan in the Tartars language signifieth, A Kyng. The places of Lucomoria, neare vnto the sea, are saluage, ful of woods, and inhabited without anye houses. And albeit, that the aucthor of this iourney, sayde,Lucomoria. that manye nations of Lucomoria are subiecte to the prince of Moscouia, yet for as muche as the kyngdome of Tumen is neare therevnto,Tumen. whose prince is a Tar∣tar, and named in their tongue, Tumenski Czar, that is, a king in Tumen, and hath of late doone great domage to the prince of Moscouia: it is moste lyke that these nations shoulde rather be subiect vnto hym. Neare vnto the riuer Petzora (whereof mention is made in this iourney) is the citie and castle of Papin, or Papinowgorod,Petzora. Papin. whose inhabitantes are named Papini, and haue a priuate lan∣guage, differyng from the Moscouites.Hygh moun∣taynes, suppo∣sed to be Hyper¦borei and Rhi∣phei. Beyonde this ryuer are exceedyng hygh mountaynes, reachyng euen vnto the bankes, whose rydges or toppes, by reason of continuall wyndes, are in maner vtterly barren without grasse or fruites. And although in diuers places they haue diuers names, yet are they common∣lye called Cingulus mundi, that is, the worlde. In these moun∣taynes doo Ierfalcons breede, whereof I haue spoken before. There growe also Cedar trees, among the whiche are founde the best and blackest kynde of Sables: and onely these moun∣taynes are seene in all the dominions of the prince of Moscouia, whiche perhappes are the same that the olde wryters call Rhipheos, or Hyperboreos, so named of the Greeke woorde, Hyper, that is, Under, and Boreas, that is, the North: for by reason they are couered with continual snowe and frost, they can not without great difficultie be trauayled, and reache so farre in∣to the North, that they make the vnknowen land of Engreonland. The Duke of Moscouia, Basilius the sonne of Iohn,Engreonland. sent on a tyme two of his captaynes, named Simeon Pheodorowitz Kurb∣ski, and Knes Peter Vschatoi, to searche the places beyonde
these mountaynes, and to subdue the nations thereabout. Kurbski was yet alyue at my beyng in Moscouia, and declared vnto mee that he spent .xvii. dayes in ascending the mountayne, and yet could not come to the toppe therof, which in theyr tongue is cal∣led Stolp (that is) a pyller.Stolp. This mountayne is extended into the Ocean vnto the mouthes of the ryuers of Dwina and Petzora. But now hauyng spoken thus much of the sayde iourney, I will returne to the dominions of Moscouia, with other regions lying Eastwarde and South from the same, toward the myghtie Em∣pyre of Cathay.Cathay. But I will fyrst speake somewhat briefly of the prouince of Rezan, and the famous ryuer of Tanais. The fruitfull prouince of Rezan. Iaroslaw.The prouince of Rezan, situate betweene the ryuers of Occa and Tanais, hath a citie buylded of wood, not far from the banke of Occa: there was in it a Castle named Iaroslaw, whereof there now remayneth nothing but tokens of the olde ruine. Not farre from that citie, the ryuer Occa maketh an Ilande named Strub, which was somtyme a great Dukedome, whose prince was sub∣iecte to none other. This prouince of Rezan, is more fruitful then any other of the prouinces of Moscouia: Insomuche that in this (as they say) euery grayne of wheate bringeth foorth twoo, and sometymes more eares: whose stalkes or strawes grow so thicke that horses can scarsly goe through them, or Quayles flee out of them.Hony. There is great plentie of hony, fyshes, foules, byrdes, and wylde beastes. The fruites also doe farre exceede the fruites of Moscouia. The people are bolde and warlyke men. Of the famous ryuer of Tanais. FRom Moscouia vnto the Castle of Iaros∣law, and beyonde for the space of almost xxiiii. leagues, runneth the ryuer of Tanais, at a place called Donco, where the mar∣chauntes that trade to Asoph,Donco. Asoph. Capha. Constanti∣nople. Capha, and Constantinople, fraight theyr shyppes: and this for the most parte in Autumpe, beyng a rayney tyme of the yeere. For Tanais heere at other tymes of the yeere, doeth not so abounde with water, as to beare
shyppes of any burden. This famous ryuer of Tanais, dy∣uydeth Europe from Asia,Tanais diui∣deth Europe from Asia. The sprynges of Tanais. and hath his orygynall or sprynges almost .viii. leagues from the citie of Tulla, towarde the South, inclynyng somewhat towarde the East, and not out of the Ri∣phean mountaynes, as some haue writen: But out of a great lake named Iwanwosero (that is) the lake of Iohn,A great lake. beyng in length and bredth about .1500. Werstes, in a wood which some call Okonitzkilles, and other name it Iepipbanoulies. And out of this lake, spryng the two great ryuers of Schat and Tanais. Schat towarde the West receyuyng into it the ryuer of Vppa,The ryuer Schat. runneth into the riuer of Occa betwene the West and the North: But Tanais at the fyrst runneth directly East, and continueth his course betwene the kyngdomes of Casan and Astrachan with∣in syxe or seuen leagues of Volga,Casan. Astrachan. and from thence bendyng towarde the South, maketh the fennes or maryshes of Meotis.Meotis. Tulla. Furthermore, nexte vnto his sprynges, is the citie of Tulla: and vppon the banke of the ryuer, almost three leagues aboue the mouthes of the same, is the citie of Asoph, whiche was fyrst called Tanais. Foure dayes iorney aboue this, is a towne called Achas, situate harde by the same ryuer, whiche the Mos∣couites call Don.Achas. Fruitefull regi∣ons about Tanais. I can not sufficiently prayse this ryuer for the exceedyng abundaunce of good fyshes, and fayrenesse of the regions on both sydes the bankes, with plentie of holesome hearbes and sweete rootes, besyde dyuers and many fruitefull trees, growyng in suche coomly order as though they had been set of purpose in gardens or orchardes. There is also in maner euery where such plentie of wylde beastes,Plentie of wyld beastes. that they may easely be slayne with arrowes: Insomuch that such as trauaile by those regions, shall stande in neede of none other thyng to mayntayne theyr lyfe, but only fyre and salte. In these partes,Fyre and salt. is no obserua∣tion of myles, but of dayes iorneys. But as farre as I coulde coniecture, from the fountaynes or sprynges of Tanais,Where Tanais is fyrst nauiga∣ble. vnto the mouthes of the same, iorneying by lande, are almost fourescore leagues. And sayling from Donco (from whence I sayde that Tanais was fyrst nauigable) in scarsely .xx. dayes voyage, they come to the citie of Asoph, tributarie to the Turkes:Asoph. which is (as they say) fyue dayes iorney from the streight of Taurica, other∣wyse called Precop. In this citie is a famous marte towne,
vnto the whiche resort many merchauntes of dyuers nations, and from dyuers partes of the worlde.The marte of Asoph. For, that all nations may the gladlyer haue recourse thyther, free lybertie of bying and sellyng is graunted vnto all:Libertie allu∣reth straungers. and that without the citie euery man may freely vse his owne and accustomed maner of lyuyng, without punyshement. The altars of Alexander and Cesar.Of the alters of great Alexander and Iulius Cesar, whiche many wryters make mention of in this place, or of theyr ruines, I coulde haue no certayne knoweledge of thinhabitauntes or any other that had oftentymes trayuayled these places. Fur∣thermore, the souldyers whiche the prince of Moscouia mayn∣tayneth there yeerely to oppresse thincursions of the Tartars, be∣ing of me demaunded herof, answeared yt they neuer saw or heard of any such thing. Neuerthelesse they said, that about ye mouths of Tanais the lesse, foure dayes iorney from Asoph, neere vnto a place called Sewerski, by the holy mountaynes, they sawe cer∣tayne images of stone and marble.The holy mountaynes. Tanais the lesse. Tanais the lesse, hath his springes in the Dukedome of Sewerski, whereof it is called Donetz Sewerski, and falleth into Tanais, three dayes iorney a∣boue Asoph. But such as iorney from Moscouia to Asoph by lande,From Mosco∣uia to Asoph. they, passyng ouer Tanais about the olde and ruinate towne of Donco, do somwhat turne from the South to the East: In the which place, if a ryght line be drawne from the mouthes of Tanais to the sprynges of the same,Moscouia in Asia and not in Europe. Moscouia shalbe founde to be in Asia, and not in Europe. More directly from Moscouia to Cathay. THe great and large prouince of Permia, is distant from Moscouia two hundred and fyf∣tie,The prouince of Permia. or (as some sai) three hundred leagues, di∣rectly betwene the East and North: and hath a citie of the same name by the ryuer Vischora, which runneth .x. leagues beneth Camam. The iorney by land can scarsely be trauailed thither but in winter,Maryshes in sommer. by reasō of mani riuers, marishes▪ and fens. But in sommer, this iorney is dispatched with more fa∣cilitie in boates or smal ships by Vuolochda Vstiug, and the ryuer
Vitzechda, which runneth into Duina .xii. leagues from Vstiug. But they that go from Permia to Vstiug,Duina. Vstiug, must sayle vp the ryuer Vischora agaynst the course of the streame: and passyng ouer certayne ryuers, sometymes also conueying theyr boates into other ryuers by land, they come at the length to Vstiug, three hundred leagues distant from the citie of Permia. There is smal vse of bread in this prouince.Tribute Furres and Horses. For theyr yeerely tribute, they pay to the Prince furres and horses. They haue a priuate language, and letters of theyr owne, which one Stephen a Byshop (who confirmed them yet waueryng in the fayth) did inuent. For before, beyng yet infantes in the faith of Christ, they slewe and fleyde an other Byshop that was appoynted to in∣struct them. This Stephen afterward when Demetrius the sonne of Iohn reygned, was taken for a Sainct among the Ruhens. Of these people there yet remayne many Idolatours here and there in the woods,Munkes and Heremites. whom the Munkes and Heremites that go thyther, do not cease to conuert from theyr vaine errour. In the winter they iorney to Artach, as they do in many places of Rus∣sia. Artach,Patentes. are certaine long patentes of wood of almost six hand∣fulles in length, which they make fast to theyr feete with Lat∣chets, and therwith perfourme theyr iorneis with great celeritie.Marcus Pan∣lus wryteth that these doggs are almost as byg as Asses: & that they vse six to one sleade. They vse for this purpose great Dogges in the steade of other beastes, with the which they carry theyr fardels on sleades, as o∣ther do with Hartes in other places, as we wyl further declare hereafter. They say that the prouince toward the East confineth with the prouince called Tumen, parteining to the Tartars. The situation of the prouince of Iugaria, is apparent by that which we haue sayd before.Iugaria. The Moscouites call it Iuhra with an aspiration: and call the people Iuhrici. This is that Iugaria from whence the Hungarians came in tyme past, possessed Pannonia,Hungaria. Pannonia. Attila. and vnder the conduct of At∣tila, subdued many prouinces of Europe: wherein the Mos∣couites doo greatly glorye, that a nation subiect to them, inua∣ded and wasted a great part of Europe. Georgius Paruus, a Greeke borne, and a man of reputation with the Prince of Moscouia, wyllyng to ascribe to the ryght of his Prince the great Dukedome of Lithuania, and the kyngdome of Polo∣nie▪ with certayne other Dominions, tolde me that the Iuhga∣rici
or Iuhgarie, beyng subiects to the great Duke of Moscouia, came foorth of theyr owne countrey, and fyrst inhabited the regi∣ons about the Fennes of Meotis,The hygher or  called Autria. Polonie. and then Pannonie. which was afterward called Hungarie, by the ryuer of Danubius: Also that in fine they possessed the region of Morauia, so named of the ry∣uer: and lykewyse Pollonie, so called of Polle, whiche signifieth a playne. Furthermore that Buda was so called after the name of the brother of Attila.Buda. They say also that the Iuhgarie vse the same tongue that do the Hungarians: the whiche whether it be true or not, I do not know. For although I haue made diligent inquisition to knowe the trueth hereof, yet could I fynde no man of that region with whom my seruaunt, beyng expert in the Hungarian tongue, might speake. They also pay furres for theyr tributes to the Prince of Moscouia.Furres. Pearles, & pre∣cious stones. And albeit that pearles and precious stones, are brought from thence to Moscouia, yet are they not geathered in theyr Ocean, but in other places: especially about the coast of the Ocean, neare vnto the mouthes of Duina. The prouince of Sibier, confineth with Permia, and Vuiathka: the whiche,Sibier. whether it haue anye castels or cities, I do not yet certaynely knowe: In this, the ryuer Iaick hath his originall, and falleth into the Caspian sea. They say that this region is de∣sart, because it lyeth so neare the Tartars: or that yf it be in any part inhabited,Aspreolos, I thynke to bee Marternes: yet some thinke them to be Squirels, Ges∣nerus wryteth that the kinges of the Tartars, haue their tentes couered without with the skimes of Lions: & with∣in, with the skynnes of Sables and Ermines. the same to be possessed of the Tartar Schichma∣mai. Thinhabitantes haue a peculiar language: and haue theyr cheefe gaynes by the furres of Marternes, whiche in fairnesse and greatnesse, excel al the furres of that kynd that are found in any other prouinces. Yet could I haue no greate plentie of them in Moscouia at my beyng there. Note that long after the wrytyng of this historie, at Richard Chaunceler his fyrst bryng in Moscouia, Duke Iohn Vasiliuiche that nowe reygneth, subdu∣ed all the Tartars with theyr regions and prouinces, euen vnto the great citie and mart towne of Astrachan & the Caspian sea. At the same tyme also, there was in the Dukes Court an ambassadour that came from this prouince of Sibier, who declared that his father had been sent Ambassadour to the great Chan of Cathay, and that the great citie of Cambalu, where the great Chan kepeth his Court in wynter, was in maner distroyed by Nigromancie and Magicall Artes, wherein the Cathyans are very expert as wryteth Marcus Paulus Venetus. There was also at the same tyme thambassadour of the kyng of Pertia called the great Sophie. This Ambassadour was apparelled al in Scarlet, and spake muche to the Duke in the behalfe of our men, of whose kyngdome and trade he was not ignorant.
The people called Czeremisse,Czeremisse. dwell in the wooddes beneth Nouogradia the lower. They haue a peculiar language, and are of the secte of Machumet. They were sometyme subiecte to the kyng of Casan: but the greater part of them are nowe subiecte to the prince of Moscouia. Many of them at my beyng there, were brought to Moscouia, as suspected of rebellion. This na∣tion doth inhabite a large region without houses from Vuiathka and Vuolochda, to the ryuer of Rama. All the nation,Habitation without hou∣ses. aswell wo∣men as men, are very swifte of foote, and expert archers: wherin they so delyght, that theyr bowes are in maner neuer out of their handes: and geue theyr chyldren no meate vntyll they hyt the marke they shoote at. Two leagues distaunt from Nouogradia the lower, were many houses to the similitud of a citie or towne, where they were accustomed to make salte.Salte. These a fewe yeeres since beyng burnt of the Tartars, were restored by the commaundement of the prince. Mordwa, are people inhabytyng by the ryuer of Volga on the south banke beneth Nouogradia the lower, and are in al thinges lyke vnto the Czeremisses, but that they haue more houses. And here endeth Thempire of the Moscouites. Note here that Matthias of Michou, in his booke of Sarmatia Asiatica, writeth that the dominion of the Duke of Moscouia reacheth from the northwest to the southeast fyue hundred myles of Germanie, whiche are more then leagues: For they affirme that a German myle is more then three Englishe myles. Of the Tartars. WE will nowe adde hereunto somewhat of the people confinyng with the Moscouites towarde the East:The Tartars of Casan. of the which the Tartars of Casan are the fyrst. But before we speake of them perticularly, we will fyrst rehearse somewhat of theyr maners and customes in general. The Tartars are diuided into companies, which they cal Hor∣das,Horda. of the whiche the Horda of the Sauolhenses is the chiefe in fame and multitude: For it is sayde that the other Hordas had theyr ofspring and originall of this. And albeit that euery Hor∣da hath his peculiar name, as the Sauolhenses, Precropenses, and Nahais, with dyuers other, beyng all Machumetans, yet do they take it euyll, and count it reproche to be called Turkes: but wyll them selues to be called Besermani, by the which name also the Turkes desyre to be called.Besermani.
And as the Tartares inhabite many prouinces reachyng far on euery syde, euen so in maners and order of lyuyng do they not agree in all thynges.The stature of the Tartars. They are men of meane stature, with brode and fatte faces, holowe eyde, with rough and thycke beardes, and poulde heades. Onely the noble men haue long heare, and that exceedyng blacke, whiche they wreath on both sydes theyr eares. They are strong of body, and stoute of mind, prone to leacherye, and that vnnaturall. They eate the fleshe of Horses, Camelles, and other beastes, except Hogges, from whiche they absteyne by a lawe.They absteine from hogges fleshe. Abstinence. They can so abyde fasting and hunger, that they sometyme forbeare meate and sleepe for the space of foure dayes, occupied neuerthelesse about their necessa∣ry affayres. Agayne, when they get any thyng to deuoure, they ingorge them selues beyonde measure,Voracitie. and with that surfect in maner recompence theyr former abstinence. And beyng thus op∣pressed with laboure and meate, they sleepe continually for the space of three or foure dayes, without doyng any maner of worke or laboure: duryng which tyme the Liuons and Moscouites, into whose dominions they are accustomed to make their incursions, assayle them vnwares, thus oppressed with meate and sleepe, ly∣ing scattered here and there out of order without watch or ward. Also if when they ryde, they be molested with hunger and thyrst, they vse to lette theyr horses blood,So do the Turkes. and with drynkyng the same, satisfye theyr present necessitie, and affirme theyr horses to be the better thereby. And because they all wander in vnknowen places,Iorneing by the pole starre. they vse to dyrect theyr iorneys by thaspect of the starres, and especially of the pole starre, which in theyr tongue they call Selesnikoll,Mares milke. (that is) an Iron nayle. They greatly delyght in Mares mylke, and beleeue that it maketh men strong and fatte. They eate hearbes very much, and especyally such as growe a∣bout Tanais.Horse fleshe eaten. Fewe of them vse salt. When theyr kynges dis∣tribute any vytayles among them, they are accustomed to geue one horse or cowe to fourtie men. Of the slayne beaste, the bowells and tripes are reserued for the chiefe men and captains.Clenly. These they heate at the fyre, vntil they may shake out the doong, and then deuoure them gredyly. They sucke and lycke, not only theyr fingers imbrued with fat, but also theyr kniues, & styckes wherwith they scrape the doong from the guttes.
The heades of horses are counted delicate dyshes with them, as are Boores heades with vs,Horse heades deyntie meates The Tartars horses. and are reserued only for the cheef men. Theyr horses (whereof they haue great aboundance) are but small, and with short necks: but very strong, and such as can well away with labour and hunger. These they feede with the braunches and barkes or ryndes of trees, and the rootes of hear∣bes and weedes, wherby they accustome them to hard feedyng, and exercyse them to contynuall labour: by reason whereof (as say the Moscouites) theyr horses are swyfter and more durable then any other: these kynde of horses, they call Pachmat. They haue none other saddels and styrrops then of wood,Saddels and styrrops of wood. except such as they eyther bye of the Christians, or take from them by vio∣lence. Lest theyr horse backes shoulde be hurt with theyr sad∣delles, they vnderlay them with grasse and leaues of trees. They also passe ouer riuers on horsbacke. But yf when they flee, they feare the pursuyng of theyr enemies, then castyng awaye theyr saddels, apparrell, and all other impedimentes, reseruyng only theyr armour and weapons, they flee amayne, and with great celeritie. Their women vse the same kinde of apparrel that do the men, without any difference,The Tartars women. except that they couer theyr heades with lynnen vayles, & vse lynnen hose much like vnto mariners slops. When theyr queenes come a brode, they are accustomed to co∣uer theyr faces. The other multitude of the common sort that ly∣ueth here and there in the fieldes, haue theyr apparrell made of sheepes skynnes, which they change not vntyll they be worne & torne in fytters. They tarrye not long in one place, iudgyng it a great miserie so to do. Insomuch that when they are angry with their chyldren, the greatest curse that they can geue them, is that they may remayne perpetually in one place,The Tartars curse. & drawe the styntch of theyr owne fylthynesse as do the Christians. When they haue consumed the pasture in one place, they go to an other with their droues of cattaile, and theyr wiues and chyldren, whom they euer carry about with them in Wagons: albeit the Tartars that dwell in cities and townes, vse an other order of lyuyng. If they be inclosed with any daungerous warre,No iustice among the Tartars. they place theyr wyues, chyldren, and olde folkes, in the sauest places. There is no Iustice among them. For yf any man stande in
neede of any thyng, he may without punishement take it a waye from an other. If any complayne to the Iudge of the violence and wrong doone vnto hym, the offender denieth not the crime, but sayeth that he coulde not lacke that thyng. Then the Iudge is wont to geue this sentence: If thou also shalt haue neade of any thyng, do the lyke to other. Some say they do not steale: But whether they steale or not, let other iudge. They are surely a theeuyshe kynde of people,The Tartas are theeues and poore. and very poore, lyuyng on∣ly by robbyng of other, and stealyng away other mens cattayle, and violently also carrying away the men them selues, whom eyther they sell to the Turkes, or proffer them to be redeemed by ransome,They reioyce in spoylyng. reseruyng only the young wenches. They seldome assault cities or castels, but burne and waste townes and villa∣ges: Insomuch that they so please them selues herein, that they thynke they haue so muche the more enlarged theyr Empire, in howe muche they haue wasted and made desolate many prouin∣ces. And although they be most impacient of rest and quiet∣nesse, yet do they not kyll or destroy one an other, except theyr kynges be at dissention betweene them selues. If any man be slayne in any fray or quarrell, and the autchours of the mischefe be taken, only theyr horse, harnesse, weapons, and apparrell, are taken from them, and they dismissed. So that the murde∣rer by the losse of a vyle Horse or a Bowe, is discharged of the Iudge with these woordes: Get thee hence, and goe about thy businesse. They haue no vse of gold and syluer, except only a few merchauntes: but exercyse exchaunge of ware for ware. And yf it so chaunce that by sellyng of suche thynges as they haue stolne, they get anye money of theyr borderers, they bye there∣with certayne apparrell and other necessaries of the Moscouites. The regions of theyr habitations (the feelde Tartars I meane) are not lymitted with any boundes or borders.The feelde Tartars. There was on a tyme a certayne fatte Tarter taken prysoner of the Mosco∣uites:A meery tale. to whom, when the Prince sayde, howe art thou so fat thou dogge, syth thou hast not to eate? the Tartar aunswered, Why should not I haue to eate, syth I possesse so large a lande from the East to the West, whereby I may be abundant∣ly nouryshed? But thou mayest rather seeme to lacke, syth thou inhabytest so small a portion of the woorlde, and dooest
dayly stryue for the same. Casan is a kyngdome, also a citie and a castle of the same name, scituate by the riuer Volga, on the further banke,Casan. almoste threescore and tenne leagues beneath Nouogradia the lower. Along by the course of Volga towarde the East and South, it is termined with desart feeldes: towarde the Sommer East, it confineth with the Tartars, called Schibanski▪ and Kosatzki. The kyng of this prouince is able to make an armie of thyrtie thousande men, especially footmen, of the which,The kynge of Casan. the Czeremisse and Czubaschi are moste expert Archers.Archers. Waryners. The Czubaschi are al∣so cunnyng Mariners. The citie of Casan is threescore leagues distant from the principall castle Vuiathka. Furthermore, Casan in the Tartars language, signifieth a brasen pot boylyng.The towne Tartars. These Tartars are more ciuill then the other, for they dwell in houses, tyl the grounde, and exercise the trade of marchandies: They were of late subdued by Basilius the great Duke of Moscouia▪ and had their Kyng assigned them at his arbitrement: But shortlye after they rebelled agayne, and associate with other Tartars, inuaded the region of Moscouia,Moscouia in∣uaded by the Tartars. spoyled and wasted many cities and townes, and ledde away innumerable captiues, euen from the citie of Moscouia, which they possessed for a tyme,The prince of Moscouia tributary to the Tartars. and had vtterly destroyed the same, yf it had not been for the va∣leauntnesse of the Almaine Gunnners, whiche kept the castle with great ordinaunce. They also put Duke Basilius to flyght, and caused hym to make a letter of his owne hand to Machmet∣girei theyr Kyng, to acknowledge hym selfe for a perpetuall tri∣butarie to them: wherevpon they dissolued the siege, and gaue the Moscouites free libertie to redeeme their captiues & goods, and so departed. But Basilius not long able to abyde this con∣tumelie and dishonour,Duke Basilius army agaynst the Tartars. after that he had put to death suche as by flying at the first encountryng were the cause of this ouerthrow: assembled an armie of an hundred and fourescore thousande men shortly after, in the yeere .1523. and sent forwarde his armie, vnder the conduct of his Lieuetenant, and therewith an Heralde at armes to bydde battell to Machmetgirei the Kyng of Casan, with woordes in this effecte. The last yeere, lyke a theefe and robber, without byddyng of battel, thou dyddest priuily oppresse
mee, wherefore I nowe chalenge thee, once agayne to proue the fortune of warre, if thou mystruste not thyne owne pow∣er. To this the Kyng answered, that there were manye wayes open for him to inuade Moscouia: and that the warres haue no lesse respecte to the commoditie of tyme and place, then of armure or strength: and that hee would take the aduaun∣tage thereof, when and where it should seeme best to him, and not to other. With whiche woordes Basilius beyng greatly accensed, and burnyng with desyre of reuenge, inuaded the king∣dome of Casan: whose Kyng beyng stryken with sodayne feare at the approche of so terrible an army, assigned the go∣uernaunce of his kyngdome to the yong Kyng of Taurica his Nuie, whyle he him selfe went to requyre ayde of the Em∣perour of the Turkes.The kyng of Casan submit∣teth hym selfe. But in ine, the Kyng of Casan sub∣mytted him selfe vppon certayne conditions of peace, which the Moscouites dyd the gladlyer accept for that tyme, because their victualles fayled them to mayneteyne so great a multitude. But whereas Duke Basilius him selfe was not present at this last expedition, hee greatly suspected Palitzki the Lieuetenant of the army to bee corrupted with brybes, to proceede no fur∣ther. In this meane tyme, the Kyng of Casan sent Ambassa∣dours to Basilius to intreate of peace, whom I sawe in the Dukes courte at my beyng there: but I coulde perceyue no hope of peace to be betweene them. For euen then, Basilius to endomage the Casans,The Iland of marchauntes translated the marte to Nouogra∣dia, whiche before was accustomed to be kepte in the Ilande of marchauntes, neare vnto the citie of Casan: Commaunding also vnder payne of greeuous punyshement, that none of his subiectes shoulde resorte to the Ilande of marchauntes: thyn∣kyng that this translation of the marte shoulde greatly haue endomaged the Casans: and that only by takyng away their trade of salte (which they were accustomed to buye of the Mos∣couites at that marte) they should haue been compelled to sub∣myssion. But the Moscouites them selues felte no lesse incon∣uenience heereby then dyd the Casans, by reason of the dearth and scarsenesse that folowed heereof, of all suche thinges as the Tartars were accustomed to bryng thyther by the ryuer of
Volga, from the Caspian sea,The Caspian sea. Persia. Armenia. Astrachan. the kyngdomes of Persia and Arme∣nia, and the marte towne of Astrachan: especially the great num∣ber of most excellent fyshes that are taken in Volga, both on the hyther and further syde of Casan. But hauyng sayde thus muche of the warres betweene the prince of Moscouia and the Tartars of Casan, we will nowe pro∣ceede to speake somewhat of the other Tartars, inhabiting the re∣gions towarde the Southeast, and the Caspian sea. Next beyond the Tartars of Casan,The Tartars neare to the Caspian sea. Nogai. are the Tartars called Na∣gai or Nogai, which inhabite the regions beyonde Volga, about the Caspian sea at the ryuer Iaick, runnyng out of the prouince of Sibier. These haue no kynges but Dukes. In our tyme, three bre∣thren deuydyng the prouinces equally betweene them,The possessi∣on of three bretherne. possessed those Dukedomes. The first of them named Schidack, possesseth the citie of Scharaitzick, beyonde the ryuer of Rha or Volga, to∣ward the East, with the region confinyng with the ryuer Iaick. The seconde called Cossum, enioyeth all the lande that lyeth be∣tweene the ryuers of Kaman, Iaick, and Volga. The third brother named Schichmamai, possesseth parte of the prouince of Sibier, and all the region about the same. Schichmamai, is as much to say by interpretation, as holy or myghtie. And in maner all these regions are ful of woods, except that that lieth toward Scharaitz, which consisteth of playnes and fieldes. Betweene the riuers of Volga and Iaick, about the Caspian sea, there sometimes inhabited the kinges called Sawolhenses.The kynges called Sawol∣henses. De∣metrius Danielis (a man among these Barbarians of singular faith & grauitie) tolde vs of a marueylous & in maner incredible thing, that is seene among these Tartars. And that his father be∣ing sent by the prince of Moscouia to the kyng of Sawolhense, saw while he was in that legacie, a certaine seede in that Iland some∣what lesse & rounder then the seeds of Melones: Of the which be∣ing hyd in the ground, there groweth a fruite or plante very lyke a Lambe, of the height of fiue spannes: and is therefore called in theyr tongue Boranetz, whiche signifieth a litle Lambe.A maruelous frute lyke a lambe. For it hath the head, eyes, eares, and all other partes like vnto a Lambe newly eyued: with also a very thyn skyn, wherewith dyuers of the inhabitauntes of those regions are accustomed to lyue theyr cappes and hattes, and other tyrements for theyr heades.
Many also confirmed in our presence, that they had seene these skynnes. He saide furthermore, that that plant (yf it may be cal∣led a plant) hath blood, and no fleshe, but hath in the steade of fleshe, a certayne substaunce lyke vnto the fleshe of Creuishes. The hooffes also are not of horne, as are the Lambes, but couered with heare in the same fourme. The roote cleaueth to the nauyl or myddest of the belly: the plant or fruite lyueth vntil al the grasse & hearbes growing about it, being eaten, the roote wythereth for lacke of nouryshment. They say that it is very sweete to be eaten, and is therfore greatly desyred, and sought for of the Woolues, and other rauenyng beastes. And albeit I esteeme all that is sayde of this plant to be fabulous, yet foras∣muche as it hath been tolde me of credible persons, I haue thought good to make mention hereof. Of this strange fruite Mandeuile maketh mention, where in the .lxxxiiii. Chapter of his Booke,Wandeuile. he wryteth thus: Nowe shal I say of some landes, countreys, and Isles that are beyonde the lande of Cathay: therefore whoso goeth from Cathay to India the hygh and the lowe, he shall goe through a Kyngdome that men call Cadissen, and is a great lande. There groweth a manner of fruite, as it were Gourdes, and when it is rype, mn cut it a∣sunder, and fynde therein a beast, as it were of fleshe, bone, and blood, as it were a litle Lambe, without wooll, and men eate that beast, and the fruite also, whiche is a great marueyle: neuerthelesse, I sayde vnto them, that I helde that for no marueyle, for I sayde, that in my countrey are trees that beare fruite,Barnacles of the Orkeneys. that become byrdes fleeing, which are good to be eaten, and that that falleth into the water, lyueth, and that that falleth on the earth, dyeth: And they had great mar∣ueyle of this. &c. From the prince of Schidacke, proceedyng twentye dayes iourney towarde the East, are the people which the Moscouites cal Iurgenci,Barack Sol∣tan. Cathay. whose prynce is Barack Soltan, brother to the great Chan of Cathay. In tenne dayes iourney from Barack Soltan, they come to Bebeid Chan. And this is that great Chan of Cathay.
Names of dignities among the Tartars, are these, Chan, sig∣nifieth a Kyng: Soltan, the sonne of a Kyng: Bij, a Duke: Mursa, the sonne of a Duke: Olboud, a noble man, or counseller: Olboa∣dulu, the sonne of a noble man: Seid, the hygh priest: Ksi, a pri∣uate person. The names of offices, are these, Vlan, the seconde dignitie to the Kyng: for the Kynges of the Tartars haue foure principal men, whose counsell they vse in all their weyghtie affayres: Of these, the firste is called Schirni: the seconde, Barni: the thyrde, Gargni: the fourth, Tzipsan. And to haue sayde thus muche of the Tartars, it shal suffise. Marcus Paulus wryteth, that the great Chan is called Chan Cublai, that is, the great Kyng of Kynges, as the great Turcke wryteth hym selfe in lyke ma∣ner, as I sawe in a letter wrytten by hym of late in the citie of Ragusa, in the whiche he vseth this subscription. Soltan Soliman desclim Cham Signore de Signori en sempiterno. The Nauigation by the frosen Sea. AT my beyng in Moscouia, when I was sent thyther by king Ferdinando, my lorde and maister, it so chaunced, that Georgius Istoma, the Duke of Moscouia his Interpreter, a man of great experience, who had before learned the latine tongue in the court of Iohn king of Denmarke, was there present at the same tyme. He, in the yeere of Christe .1496. beyng sent of his prince with maister Dauid, a Scotte borne, and then Ambassadour for the kyng of Denmarke (whom also I knewe there at my firste legacie) made me a breefe information of al the order of his iourney: the which,
forasmuch as it may seeme difficult and laborious, as wel for the distance as daungerous places, I haue thought good to describe the same as I receyued it at his mouth. Fyrst, he sayde that beyng sent of his prince with the sayde Dauid, they came fyrst to Nouogradia the great. And whereas at that tyme the kyngdome of Suecia reuolted from the Kyng of Denmarke,Nouogradia. Suecia vnder the kyng of Denmarke. & also the Duke of Moscouia was at discention with the Suetians, by reason whereof they could not passe by the most accustomed way, for the tumultes of warre, they attempted theyr iourney by an other way, longer, but safer, and came fyrst from Nouogradia to the mouthes of the ryuer of Dwina and Potiwlo,Dwina. Potiwlo. by a very diffcult and paynfull iourney: For hee sayd that this iour∣ney, which can not be to muche detested for such labours and tra∣ueyles, continueth for the space of three hundred leagues. In fine, takyng foure small shyppes or barkes at the mouthes of Dwi∣na, they sayled by the coast on the right hand of the Ocean, where they sawe certayne hygh and rough mountaynes:Hygh moun∣taynes neare the north Ocean. and at the length saylyng .xvi. leagues, and passyng a great gulfe, folow∣ed the coast on the lefte hande: and leauyng on the right hande the large sea whiche hath the name of the ryuer Petzora (as haue also the mountaynes adiacent to the same) they came to the people of Finlappia:Finlappia. who, although they dwell here & there in low cottagies by the sea syde, and leade in maner a beastly lyfe, yet are they more meeke and tractable then the wylde Lappians.The wylde Lappians. He sayde that these also are tributaries to the prince of Moscouia. Then leauing the lande of the Lappians, and saylyng fourescore leagues, they came to the region of Nortpoden, vnder the domini∣on of the kyng of Suecia.The region of Nortpoden This the Moscouites call Kaienska Sem∣la, and the people Kaieni. Departyng from hence, and saylyng a∣long by the coast of a wyndyng and bendyng shore reachyng to∣warde the ryght hande, they came to a promontorie or cape, cal∣led the Holy nose,The cape called the holy nose. A whyrlpoole o swalowing goulfe. being a great stone reachyng farre into the sea, to the similitude of a nose: vnder the which is seene a caue with a whyrlepoole, which swaloweth the sea euery syxe houres: and castyng foorth the same agayne with terryble roaryng and vio∣lence, causeth the sayde whyrlepoole. Some call this the Na∣uell of the sea: and other name it Charibdis. He affyrmeth that
the violence of this swalowing gulfe is such,Such whyrle¦pooles, are cauled vipers that it draweth into it, inuolueth, and swaloweth vp shyppes, & all other thinges that come neare it, and that they were neuer in greater danger. For the whirlepoole so sodeynely and violently drue vnto it the shyp or barke wherein they were carryed, that with the helpe of Ores and great labour they hardly escaped. When they had thus ouerpassed the holy nose, they came to a certayne stony mountaine, which they should needes compasse about: but being there stayed with contrary windes for the space of certaine dayes, the pylot of the shyp spake vnto them in this effect: This stone (sayeth he) that you see, is called Semes:The stone called Semes. the whiche except wee please with some gyfte, we shall not passe by without great dan∣ger.Superstition But the Pylot beyng reproued of Istoma for his vayne su∣perstition, helde his peace. And when they had ben deteined there by tempest for the space of foure dayes, at the length the tempest ceassed, and they went forward on theyr viage with a prosperous wynde. Then the pylot spake vnto them agayne, saying: You de∣spised my admonition of pleasing the Semes, and scorned the same as vayne and superstitious: but if I had not priuilie in the night ascended a rocke and pleased the Semes, we should surely haue had no passage. Being demaunded what he offered to the Se∣mes,Sacrifice to the stone Semes. The cape Motka. The castel of wardhus. hee sayde that he poured butter myxt with otemeale vpon the stone which we sawe reach foorth into the sea. As they sayled further, they came to an other cape named Motka, whiche was almost enuironed with the sea, lyke an Ilande, in whose extreme pointe, is situate the Castel of Barthus, which some call Wardhus, (that is) a house of defence or fortresse: For the kynges of Norway haue there a garrison of men to defend theyr marches. He sayde furthermore, that that cape reacheth so farre into the sea, that they could scarsely compasse it in eyght dayes. By which tarying leaste they should be hyndered, they caryed on theyr shoulders with great labour, theyr barkes and fardelles ouer a streyght of lande conteynyng halfe a league in breadth. From hence they sayled to the region of the wylde Lappones, called Dikillappones, to a place named Dront,The region of the wylde Lappones. Dront. beyng .200. leagues distant from Dwina, toward the North. And thus far as he sayth, doth the prince of Moscouia exacte tribute. Furthermore, leauing
their Barkes here, they furnyshed the residue of their iourney on Sleades.Iourneying on Sleades. He further declared, that there were heards of Hartes, as are with vs of Oxen, which in the Noruegians tongue are cal∣led Rhn,How the Harts draw Sleades. beyng somewhat bygger then our Hartes. These the Lappones vse in this maner: They ioyne them to Sleades made lyke fysher Boates, as we put horses to the Cart, the man in the Sleade is tyed fast by the feete, lest he fal out by the swift course of the Hartes. In his leaft hande he holdeth a coller or reigne, wherewith he moderateth the course of the Hartes: and in the ryght hand a pyked staffe, wherwith he may susteyne the Sleade from fallyng, yf it chaunce to decline too muche on anye parte. And he tolde me,Twentye lea∣gues in one day that by this meanes he trauayled .xx. leagues in one day, and then dismyssed the Hart, who by hym selfe retur∣ned to his owne maister and accustomed stable.The citie of Berges in Norway. This iourney thus finished, they came to Berges a citie of Noruegia, or Norway, situate directlye towarde the North, betweene the mountaynes, and went from thence to Denmarke on horsbacke. At Dront and Berges the day is sayde to be .xxii. houres long in the Sommer Equinoctial. Blasius, an other of the prince of Moscouia his In∣terpreters, who a fewe yeeres before was sent of his prynce into Spayne to the Emperour, declared vnto vs an other and shorter way of his iourney:A shorter iourney. for he sayde, that when he was sent from Moscouia to Iohn the kyng of Denmarke, he came firste on foote vnto Rostowe,Rostowe. Pereaslaw. Castromow. and takyng shyppe there, came to Perea∣slaw: and from Pereaslaw, by the riuer Volga, to Castromow: and that from thence, goyng seuen werstes by lande, he came to a litle ryuer, saylyng by the whiche, when firste he came to Vuolochda,Vuolochda. Sucana. Dwina. Hafnia Koppenhagen. then to Suchana, and Dwina, and in fiue, to the citie of Berges in Norway, ouerpassyng in this viage al the perylles and labours that Istoma rehearsed before, he came at length to Hafnia the cheefe citie of Denmarke, whiche the Germanes call Koppenhagen: but in their returnyng home, they both confesse that they came to Moscouia by Liuonia, and that they were a yeere in this viage:Liuonia. albeit Georgius Istoma sayde, that halfe the parte of that tyme he was hyndered by tempestes, and inforced to carrye long in manye places by the way,Werst is al∣most an Ita∣lian myle. yet they both lykewyse constantly affyrme, that in this iourney ey∣ther of them trauayled a thousande, threescore, and ten werstes,
(that is) three hundred and fourtie leagues. Furthermore also Demetrius, who of late was sent ambassadour from the prince of Moscouia to the Byshop of Rome, (by whose relation also Paulus Iouius wrote his description of Moscouia) confirmed all these thynges to be true.Paulus Io∣uius. All they beyng demaunded of me of the congeled or frosen sea, made none other answere, but that in places neere vnto that sea,Ryuers fallyng into the frosen sea. they sawe many and great ry∣uers, by whose vehemente course and abundant flowyng, the seas are dryuen farre from the shore: and that the sayde water of the ryuers is frosen with the sea a good space from the lande, as in Liuonia and other partes of Suecia. For although by the vehe∣mencie of the wyndes, the Ise is broken in the sea, yet doth this chaunce seldome or neuer in ryuers,wynde. Ise. except by some innundation or fluode the Ise geathered togeather be lyfted vp and broken. For the flakes or pieces of Ise caryed into the sea by force of the ryuers, do flote aboue the water in maner all the whole yeere, and are agayne so vehemently frosen togeather, that a man may there sometymes see great heapes of the Ise of manie yeeres, as doth appeare by suche pieces as are dryuen to the shore by the wynde. I haue also been credybly informed by faythfull men,Ise of many yeres. that the sea Baltheum (otherwyse called the gulfe of Liuonia) is oftentymes frosen in many places. They say furthermore,The sea Balthe¦um. that in that region whiche is inhabited of the wylde Lappones, the Sunne in the sommer Equinoctiall doth not fall for the space of .xl. dayes:Where the Sunne falleth not in .xl. days. yet that the body thereof is so hydden with a darke myste or cloude three houres, that the beames do not appeare: neuerthelesse to geue such light during that time, that the dark∣nesse hyndereth not theyr woorke. The Moscouites make theyr boste that these wylde Lappones are tributaries to theyr prynce. Whereat I do not greatly marueyle, forasmuch as they haue none other neere vnto them, that may demaund tribute of them.The wyld Lap∣pones are tribu∣tares to the Moscouites. Furres and fyshe. Theyr tribute is onely furres and fyshe, hauyng in maner none other thyng greatly commodious. And albeit they lacke bread, salte, and other intysementes of gluttony, and lyue onely with fyshe and wylde beastes, yet are they exceedyng prone to lechery. They are suche expert archers, that if in theyr hun∣tyng they espye any beastes,Expert archers whose skynnes they desyre to saue vnperyshed, they wyll not lyghtly mysse to hytte hym
in the nosethrylles. When they go foorth on huntyng, they are accustomed to leaue at home with theyr wyues suche mer∣chauntes or straungers as they haue receyued into theyr hou∣ses: So that if at theyr returne, they perceyue theyr wyues through the companye of the strangers to be merier and more iocunde then the were woonte to be,Good felow∣shyp. they geue the straungers some present. But if they fynde it otherwyse, they thrust them foorth of the doores with woordes of reproche. But nowe by the companye they haue with strangers that resort thyther for gaynes, they begyn to leaue theyr natiue barbarousnesse. They gladly admytte merchauntes,Necessarie wares. because they bryng them apparell of grose cloth: also hatchettes, needels, spones, knyues, drynk∣yng cuppes, earthen and brasen pottes, with such other necessa∣rie wares: So that they vse now to eate sodden and rosted meate, and do embrase more ciuile maners. Their owne apparell is made of the skinnes of diuers beastes sowed togeather. And in this apparel they somtimes come to Moscouia. Yet fewe of them haue cappes or hosen, which they vse to make of hartes skynnes. They haue not the vse of golde or syluer mony: but vse only bar∣teryng of ware for ware.No vse of mony. And being ignorant of other langua∣ges besyde theyr owne, they seeme among straungers to be in maner dombe. Theyr cotages are couered onely with the barkes of trees.Theyr cota∣ges. They haue no certaine resting habitation: But when they haue consumed the fishe and wild beastes in one place, they remoue to an other. Furthermore also the saide ambassa∣dours of the prince of Moscouia declared, that in the same partes they sawe certayne hygh mountaynes,Mountaynes continually burnyng. continually casting foorth flames of fyre, as doth the mountayne of Etna in the Ilande of Sicilia: and that euen in Norway many mountaynes are fallen downe and burnt in maner to ashes with such continuall flames. Which thyng some consideryng, fayne the fyre of Purgatorie to be there. And as concernyng these mountaynes of Norway, when I was sent ambassadour to Christierne king of Denmarke, I was enfourmed the lyke by the gouernours of Norway, who chaunced at that tyme to be present there. About the mouthes of the ryuer Petzora that are towarde the ryght hande from the mouthes of Duina,The ryuer Petzora. are sayde to be dyuers and great beastes in the Ocean: and among other, a
certayne great beast as byg as an Oxe, which the inhabitauntes call Mors. This beast hath short feete lyke a Beuer or an Ot∣ter, with a breast somewhat hygh and brode,The beast cal∣led Mors. for the proportion of the residue of his body, and two long and great teeth growe∣yng out of the vpper iawe. These beastes for rest and encrease, do sometymes leaue the Ocean, and by great heardes ascend the mountaynes: where, before they geue them selues to profounde sleepe (whereunto they are naturaly enclined) they appoynt one of theyr number as it were a watch man,The proui∣dence of na∣ture. as do Cranes for the securitie of the rest. Which yf he chaunce to sleepe, or to be slaine of the hunters, the residue may easly be taken. But yf the watch∣man geue warnyng with roryng (as the maner is) immediate∣ly the whole hearde awakened thereby, sodaynely put theyr hin∣der feete to theyr teeth, and so fallyng from the mountaine with great celeritie as it were on a sleade, they cast them selues head∣long into the Ocean: where also they rest and sleepe for a while vpon the heapes of yse. The hunters pursue these beastes onlye for theyr teeth: Of the whiche the Moscouites, Tartars, and espe∣cially the Turkes, make haftes for swordes and daggers very ar∣tificially: and vse these rather for ornament, then to geue the greater stroke for the weyght or heauynesse thereof, as some fa∣ble. Also among the Turkes, Moscouites, and Tartars, these teeth are solde by weyght, and are called the teeth of fyshes. The frosen sea reacheth farre and wyde beyonde Duina, to Petzcora, and vnto the mouthes of the great ryuer Obi:The frosen sea. beyonde the whiche they say to be the region of Engreonland,Engreonland or greonland. vnknow∣en and seperate from the trade and conuersation of our men, by reason of hygh mountaynes couered, and colde with perpetuall snow, and the sea no lesse incumbred with continuall yse, which hindereth nauigations, and maketh them daunge∣rous, as they say.
Exemplar Epistolae seu Literarum Missiuarum, quas illustrissimus Princeps Eduardus, eius nominis Sextus, Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Rex, mi∣sit ad Principes Septentrionalem, ac Orientalem, mundi plagam inhabitantes iuxta mare glaciale, nec non In∣diam Orientalem. Anno Domini. 1553. Regni sui Anno septimo, et vl∣timo. EDuardus sextus, Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Rex. &c. Omnibus Regibus et principibus ac Dominis, et cunctis Iudi∣cibus terrae, et Ducibus eius, quibuscunque est excellens aliqua dignitas in ea, cunctis in locis quae sunt sub vniuerso caelo: Pax, tranquillitas, & honor vobis, terris, et regionibus vestris quae impe∣rio vestro subiacent, cuiquae vestrum quemadmodum conuenit ei. Propterea quod indidit Deus Opt. Max. hominibus prae cunctis a∣lijs viuentibus, cor & desiderium tale, vt appetat quisquae cum alijs societatem inire, amare, et vicissim amari, beneficijs afficere, et mu∣tua accipere beneficia studeat, ideo cuiquae pro facultate sua hoc desi∣derium in omnibus quidem hominibus beneficijs fouere et conseruare conuenit, in illis autem maxime, qui hoc desiderio adducti, a remotis etiam regionibus ad eos veniunt. Quo enim longius iter, eius rei gratia ingressi sunt, eo ardentius in eis hoc desiderium fuisse declararunt. Insuper etiam ad hoc, nos patrum maiorum{que} nostrorum exempla inuitant, qui semper humanissime susceperunt et benignissime tracta∣uerunt illos, qui tum a locis propinquis, tum a remotis, eos amice ad∣ibant, eorum se protectioni commendantes. Quod si omnibus id pre∣stare aequum est, certe mercatoribus imprimis prestari debet, qui per vniuersum orbem discurrunt, mare circumlustrantes et aridam, vt res bonas et vtiles que Dei beneficio in regione eorum inueniuntur, ad remotissimas regiones et regna adferant, atquae inde viuissim re∣ferant, quod suae regioni vtile ibi repererint: vt et populi ad quos e∣unt, non destituantur commodis, quae non profert illis terra eorum, & ipsi sint participes rerum, quibus illi abundant. Nam Deus caeli et ter∣rae, humano generi maxime consulens, nosuit vt omnia in quauis re∣gione inuenirentur, quo regio ope alterius regionis indigeret, et gens ab alio gente commodum aliquod expectaret, ac ita stabiliretur
amicitia inter omnes, singulique omnibus benefacere quererent, Hoc itaque ineundae ac stabiliendae amicitiae desiderio moti viri quidam regni nostri, iter in remotas maritimas regiones instituerunt, vt inter nostros et illos populos, viam mercibus inferendis et eferendis aperi∣rent, nosque rogauerunt vt id illis concederemus. Qui petitioni illorum annuentes, concessimus viro honorabili et forti, Hugoni Wi∣libeo, et alijs qui com eo sunt seruis nostris fidis et charis, vt pro sua voluntate, in regiones eis prius incognitas eant, quesituri ea quibus nos caremus, et adducant illis ex nostris terris, id quod illi carent. At∣que ita illis et nobis commodum inde accedat, sitque amicitia perpe∣tua, et foedus indissolubile inter illos et nos, dum permittent illi nos ac∣cipere de rebus, quibus super abundant in regnis suis, et nos concede∣mus illis ex regnis nostris res, quibus destituuntur. Rogamus itaque vos Reges et principes, & omnes quibus aliqua est potestas in terra, vt viris istis nostris, transitum permittatis per regiones vestras. Non enim tangent quicquam ex rebus vestris inuitis vbis. Cogitate quòd homines et ipsi sunt. Et si qua re caruerint, oramus pro vestra beneficencia, eam vos illis tribuatis, accipientes vicissim ab eis, quod poterunt rependere vobis. Ita vos gerite erga eos, quemadmodum cuperetis vt nos, et subditi nostri, nos gereremus erga seruos vestros, si quando transierint per regiones nostras. Atque promittimus vobis per Deum omnium quae coelo, terra et mari continentur, perque vitam nostrum, et tranquillitatem regnorum nostrorum, nos pari beni∣gnitate seruos vestros accepturos, si ad regna nostra aliquando vene∣rint. At{que} a nobis et subditis nostris, ac si nati fuissēt in regnis nostris ita benignè tractabuntur, vt rependamus vobis benignitatem, quam nostris exhibueritis. Postquam vos Reges, Principes. &c. rogauimus vt humanitate et beneficentia omni prosequamini seruos nostros nobis charos, oramus omnipotentem Deum nostrum, vt vobis diuturnam vitam largiatur, et pacem que nullam habeat finem. Scriptum Lon∣dini, quae ciuitas est regni nostri. Anno. 5515. a creato mundo, mense Iiar .xiiii. die mensis, anno septimo regni nostri.
The copy of the letters missiue whiche the ryght noble prince Edwarde the .vi. sent to the Kynges, Princes, and other potentates inhabityng the Northest partes of the worlde to warde the myghty Empire of Cathay, at such tyme as syr Hugh VVilloby knyght and Richard Chaun∣celer, with theyr company, attempted theyr voyage thyther in the yeere of Christ .1553. and the .vii. and last yeere of his reigne. EDwarde the syxt by the grace of God, king of England, Fraunce and Ireland. &c. To all Kynges, Princes, Rulers, Iudges, and Gouernours of the earth, and all other hauyng any excellent dignitie on the same in all places vnder the vniuersall heauen: Peace, tranquilitie, and honour, be vnto you, and your landes and regions whiche are vnder your domi∣nions, and to euery of you, as is conuenient. Forasmuche as the great and almyghtie God hath geuen vnto mankynde, aboue all other lyuing creatures, such a hart and desyre, that euery man desyreth to ioyne frendeshyp with other, to loue and be loued, also to geue and receyue mutuall benefites: it is therefore the duetie of all men, accordyng to theyr power, to mayntayne and increase this desyre in euery man, with well de∣seruing to all men, and especially to shewe this good affection to such, as beyng moued with this desyre, come vnto them from farre countreis. For in howe much the longer voyage they haue attempted for this intent, so much the more do they thereby de∣clare that this desyre hath ben ardent in them. Furthermore also, thexemples of our fathers and predicessours do inuite vs herevn∣to, forasmuch as they haue euer gentelly and louyngly intreated such as of frendely mynde came to them, aswell from countreys neere hand, as far remote, commending them selues to their pro∣tection. And if it be ryght and equitie to shewe such humanitie towarde all men, doubtlesse the same ought chiefely to be shewed to merchauntes, who wanderyng about the worlde, search both the lande and the sea, to cary suche good and profitable thynges as are founde in theyr countreys, to remote regions and kyng∣domes,
and agayne to bryng from the same, suche thynges as they fynde there commodious for theyr owne countreys: both aswell that the people, to whom they goe, may not be destitute of suche commodities as theyr countreys bryng not foorth to them, as that also they may be partakers of suche thynges wher∣of they abounde. For god of heauen and earth, greatly prouy∣dyng for mankynd, would not that al thinges should bee founde in one region, to thende that one should haue neede of an other, that by this meanes frendshyp myght be establyshed among all men, and euery one seeke to gratifie all. For the establyshing and furtheraunce of whiche vniuersall amitie, certayne men of our realme, moued hereunto by the sayde desire, haue instituted and taken vpon them a viage by sea into farre countreys, to the intent that betweene our people and them, a way be opened to bryng in, and carry out merchandizes, desiryng vs to further theyr enterpryse. Who assentyng to theyr petition, haue licen∣ced the ryght valiaunt and worthy sir Hugh Wylloby Knyght, and other our trusty and faythful seruantes which are with him, accordyng to theyr desire, to go to countreys to them heretofore vnknowen, aswell to seeke suche thynges as we lacke, as also to carry vnto them from our regions, suche thynges as they lacke. So that hereby not only commoditie may ensue both to them and to vs, but also an indissoluble and perpetuall league of frendshyp be establyshed betweene vs both, whyle they permit vs to take of theyr thyngs, such whereof they haue aboundaunce in theyr regions, and we agayne graunt them suche thynges of ours whereof they are destitute. We therfore desire you Kyngs and Princes, and all other to whom there is any power on the earth, to permit vnto these our seruantes, free passage by your regions and dominions: for they shall not touche any thyng of yours vnwylling vnto you. Consider you that they also are men. If therefore they shall stande in neede of any thyng, we desire you of all humanitie, and for the nobilitie whiche is in you, to ayde and helpe them with suche thynges as they lacke, recey∣uyng agayne of them suche thynges as they shalbe able to geue you in recompence. Shew your selues so towards them, as you would that we and our subiectes should shew our selues towards your seruantes, if at any time they shall passe by our regions.
Thus doyng, we promise you by the God of all thyngs that are conteyned in heauen, earth, and the sea, and by the lyfe and tranquilitie of our kyngdomes, that we wyll with lyke huma∣nitie accept your seruantes if at any tyme they shall come to our kyngdomes, where they shall as frendly and gently be entertay∣ned, as if they were borne in our dominions, that we may hereby recompence the fauour and benignitie which you haue shewed to our men. Thus after we haue desired you Kynges and Prin∣ces. &c. With all humanitie and fauour, to entertayne our wel∣beloued seruantes, we wyll pray our almyghtie God to graunt you long lyfe, & peace, which neuer shall haue end. Wrytten in London whiche is the cheefe citie of our kyngdome: in the yeere from the creation of the worlde 5515. in the moneth of Iiar,Iiar, I would reade Mair, that is in the Sarasen lan∣guage, mixt of Turkish & E∣giptian, Febru∣ary, interpreted by them the moneth to set shyps to the sea. the four∣teene day of the moneth, and seuenth yeere of our reigne. This letter was wrytten also in Greeke, and diuers other languages.
The voyages of Persia, traueiled by the merchauntes of London, of the com∣pany and felowshyp of Moscouia. In the yeeres .1561. 1567. 1568. IT shall not heere be needefull to wryte any thyng of the way from hence to Moscouia by sea, vnto the porte of Saincte Nicolas, where our merchantes haue a house of their trafique, for as muche as the same is alre∣dy well knowen. And therefore it shall suffice for the description of this voyage, to shewe the way from Sainct Nicolas in Moscouia vnto Persia, as our men traueyled by the regions of Moscouia vnto the Cas∣pian sea, and by that sea into Media and Persia, vnto the courte of the great Sophie Kyng of Persia, and many other realmes and kyngdomes subiecte vnto the same, as heereafter shall bee more particularly declared, with suche breuitie as the tyme and matter now requireth. Forasmuch as many thinges myght bee written touchyng this voyage, and the merchauntes trafique in these regions, whiche for many great considerations ought not to be publyshed or put in prynt: and therefore touchyng on∣ly those thinges, it shall suffice to the reader to vnderstande the description of the regions, with the maners and customes of the people of those countreys, after the maner of a Geographicall historie, partely to delight and content the desyre of suche as take pleasure in the knowledge of straunge thinges and coun∣treys, whereby the mynde of man increaseth in wisedome and knowledge, both in humane affayres, and also of the marueylous and manyfolde workes of god & nature, that thereby God may be glorified and sanctified in all his workes, in the spirites of all good and vertuous men which delight in the same. And wher∣as in the description of this voyage, I may seeme to haue kepte no due order of wrytyng, I shal desire the reader to haue me excu∣sed, for that I coulde not orderly haue any information of them that came from Persia: but was fayne to geather certayne notes
only by communication and conference with them at sundrye tymes, with fewe woordes as occasion serued. But now to en∣ter into the voyage. From the merchauntes house at the porte of Sainct Nico∣las in Moscouia, they traueyle vp the ryuers of Duina and Sa∣chana, vntyll they come vnto the citie of Vologda, (where also the merchantes haue an other house) a thousande werstes or Rus myles, or myles of Russia, whiche may bee about seuen hundred Englyshe myles. Then from Vologda ouerlande, to the citie of Yeraslaue, which lyeth on the ryuer Volga, a hundred and foure∣score Rus myles.A werst is theyr myle, and is three quarters of an Englyshe myle. At this citie of Yeraslaue, the merchantes lande theyr goods for Persia, and buylded theyr shyppes there vppon the sayde ryuer, at a place named Vstwicki Zelesnoy, about a hun∣dred myles from Yeraslaue. So traueylyng from thence downe the ryuer Volga, vntyll they come to Astracan, a forte of the Em∣perour of Moscouia, lying threescore myles from the Caspian sea. Uppon Volga lyeth a great towne of merchaundies, named Co∣strum, and beyonde that a strong Castell of bricke, named His Nouogorod, standyng vppon a hyll. And from thence, vppon an arme of the same ryuer, lyeth a great fortresse named Cazan, which the Moscouite woon from the Tartars, Nogais being their chiefe and principall holde: and therewith conquered the whole countrey of Cazan, or the Tartars Cazamites, conteynyng two thousande myles. From Cazan vpon the sayde ryuer, the Mos∣couite hath in his subiection the one syde of the ryuer, and the Tartars, called Crimes, haue the other syde. But they dare not passe ouer the ryuer, by reason that the Moscouite keepeth many Garisons on the ryuer, and in certayne Ilandes of the ryuer from place to place, as occasion serueth: So that the ryuer is kept quietly, notwithstandyng the conflicte that happened to Bani∣ster outward, by reason of the Turkes souldiers that would haue spoyled his shyppes: which neuerthelesse defended them selues manfully, and slue two hundred of the Turkes. For the Turke sent thyther an arme of .xl. thousande Turkes and Tartars, to recouer Astracan from the Moscouite: but they were enfor∣ced to breake vp theyr Campe for lacke of victualles and other necessaries, especially bycause the wynter drue neare, and the Moscouite prepared a great army against them.
From Astracan, downe the sayde ryuer, to the Caspian sea, is the distance of threscore myles. From the enterance into the Caspian sea, in two or three dayes saylyng with a good wynde, crosse ouer that sea from the North to the South, they come to the realme of Media, arryuing at a porte named Bilbil, ente∣ryng into a small ryuer that falleth into the Caspian sea, and pas∣sing from thence by lande with Camels, in three dayes iourney, they come to a citie of Sharuan or Media, named Shamaki.Media nowe called Shar∣uan. And from thence in .xviii. dayes iourney by Camelles, they come to the great and famous citie of Tauris, or Teueris, being the grea∣test citie of Persia, for trade of merchandies. This citie is estee∣med almost twyse as byg as London, and for the most parte is buylded of rawe brickes, not burnt, but only dryed and hardened in the sunne: the doores of the houses be very lowe and litle. The Sophie in tyme paste remayned chiefly in this citie: But after that the region about this citie was inuaded by the Turkes, he went further into the countrey, and buylded a towne named Cas∣bin, which before .xx. yeeres was but a village, where he now kee∣peth his courte, being .xiii. dayes iourney from Shamaki, by horse, and .xx. dayes by Camelles. Note, that neare vnto this syde of the Caspian sea, dwell the Tartars called Nogais and Shalcauis. Also certayne Arabians, and Christians named Armenians.Armenians. Christians. The Caspian sea is otherwise cal∣led Mare de Baccan: and may seeme so to be called, by reason of a towne by the sea syde, named Bacco.
Certayne extractes of the voyage of maister Antony Ienkinson into Persia, in the yeere .1561. IN the yeere .1561. maister Antonie Ien∣kinson was sent as Ambassadour into Per∣sia, with the Queenes maiesties letters, in the Latine, Italian, and Hebrue tongue, to the great Sophie or kyng of Persia, to entreate of commodities of merchaundies whiche myght bee betweene her maiesties merchantes and them, vppon certayne priuileges and free pas∣sage to bee graunted vnto her merchauntes both by the Empe∣rour of Moscouia and the Sophi of Persia, as hereafter shall appeare, where we will wryte of the sayde priuileges. Mai∣ster Ienkinson at his first commyng, founde some difficultie to obtayne the Emperours licence to goe into Persia: but at the length by friendshyp made, hee gaue him both licence to goe, and also gaue him letters commendatorie vnto the Sophie, and committed also to him certayne affayres of his to doe there. And after certayne banquettes, and honourable enterteynment, accompanied him with an Ambassadour of Persia, who had been long in his Courte. Therefore saylyng ouer the Cas∣pian sea, they arryued on the West syde thereof. Not farre from thence is a towne named Darbent, where is a very strong Castell of stone made by Alexander Magnus,A marueylous long wall buil∣ded by great Alexander. and a wall of the length of thirtiene dayes iourney, whice he made when he kepte warres agaynst the Persians and Medians, that the inhabitauntes of that countrey then newly conquered, shoulde neyther lyghtly flee, nor his enemyes inuade them. This Darbent, is now vnder the dominion of the Sophie, and in the latitude of .41. degrees. From Darbent to Bilbec, or Bilbil, the porte and harborowe where they discharge theyr goods, is halfe a dayes saylyng.
And from thence to Sharuan is ten dayes iourney: This towne standeth in a valley, & is in the countrey of Media: in the whiche towne also, remayneth the Soltan or gouernour of Media, vnder the Sophie. In the meane tyme, the Kyng of Media, named Abdalica, cosen vnto the Sophie, came thyther,The magnifi∣cence of Abda∣laca kyng of Media. and honourably enter∣teyned maister Ienkinson and the Englyshe merchauntes which were with him, and made them a great banquet, causyng maister Ienkinson (who was then rychely apparelled in silke, veluet, and scarlet, as became an Ambassadour for the Queenes maiestie) to sit downe somewhat farre from him. The Kyng him selfe dyd sitte in a very ryche Pauilion wrought with silke and golde, of the length of sixtiene fatham, or therea∣bout, placed on a hylles syde, hauyng before him a goodly foun∣tayne of fayre running water, wherof he and his nobilitie dronke. He was rychly apparelled with long garments of silke, and cloth of golde, brodered with pearle and pretious stones. Uppon his head, he had a Cappe with a sharpe ende of halfe a yarde long, standyng vpryght, of ryche cloth of golde, wrapped about with a piece of Indian silke of twentie yardes long, wrought with golde. On the lefte syde of his Tollepan (so is the cappe called) was a plume of feathers set in a troonke of golde, rych∣ly inameled and set with precious stones. At his eares, he wore earerynges, with pendantes of golde and stones a handful long, with two great Rubies of great value in the endes therof. All the grounde within his Pauilion, was couered with Carpettes, and vnder him selfe was spred a square Carpet wrought with siluer and golde, and therevppon were layde two sutable Cussi∣ons. Thus the kyng and his noble men satte in his Pauilion with theyr legges acrosse, as doe Taylers: Yet commaunded stooles to be gyuen to our men, bycause they coulde not sitte so: then caused meate to be sette before them, and made them a banquet of a hundred dyshes of meate, and as many of fruites and conserues. After the banquet, he caused them to goe with him a huntyng and hauking, in the which they killed certayne beastes and Cranes.Haukyng and huntyng. Maister Ienkinson founde so much fauour with this kyng, that at his departyng, he commended him to the So∣phie with his letters, and also wrote in his fauour to his sonne,
being then in the Sophies courte. So that after his commyng thyther, by his meanes, he came at the length to the presence and speache of the Sophie: whiche otherwyse he should haue done very hardly,The Turkes Ambassadours resist maister Ienkinson. by reason of the Turkes Ambassadours which then were there, and resisted his affayres, with many persuasions to the Sophie, and other of his nobilitie, agaynst the Christians, as mortall enemies both to the Turkes and Persians, and theyr religion. And whereas a whyle before, a perpetuall peace and amitie was concluded betweene the Turke and the Sophie, the Ambassadours woulde persuade him that his friendshyp with the Christians, or contracte with them touchyng any affaires, and especially suche as myght be preiudiciall to the Turke, or any of his subiectes, myght engender newe suspitions and oc∣casions of breache of the lae concluded peace, with many suche other surmised accusations. Wherevppon the Sophie stayde, and prolonged the tyme, before he woulde admit maister Ien∣kinson to his speache. At the length when by the friendshyp and fauour of Kyng Abdalaca and his sonne, with other friendes made in the courte, the tyme was appoynted that maister Ien∣kinson shoulde be heade, there was one that came to him with∣out the courte gate, before he lyght from his horse on the ground, and gaue him a payre of shooes sent from the Sophie,Great holinesse in shooes. suche as he him selfe was wonte to weare in the nyght when he ryseth to pray, willyng him to put them on his feete, for that it was not otherwyse lawfull for him beyng a Gawar or Caffer (that is a mysbeleeuer) to treade vppon that holy grounde. When hee came to his presence, he demaunded of him of what countrey of Frankes he was,Christians cal∣led Frankes. meanyng by Frankes Christians: For they call all Christians Frankes (that is Frenche men) as we commonly call all Mahumetans, Turkes, although there bee many Mahumetans of other nations besyde Turkes. He an∣swered, that he was a Christian of the best Frankes of the coun∣trey of Englande: declaryng further vnto him, the cause of his commyng thyther, to be for the great commoditie of him and his subiectes by the way of merchandies, as myght further appeare by the letters directed vnto his maiestie from the Queene of Englande his Prince, and the Emperour of Mos∣couia. Muche more talke had he with maister Ienkinson, not
here to be written: but by reason of the Turkes Ambassa∣dours, at this present, was no great thyng done heerein to the preferment of the merchantes affayres. Yet he commaunded that maister Ienkinson shoulde be honourably vsed, and sent him certayne ryche apparell. At this tyme was also in the Sophies courte the sonne of the Kyng of the Georgians, a Chri∣stian Sismatike as they are nowe called. The same tyme also,The Turkes sonne behea∣ded. a sonne of the Turkes (who had before attempted some∣what agaynst his father, and fledde to the Sophie) was by him at the Turkes request deteyned in prison: And vppon the late conclusion of peace, the Turke required the Sophie to send him his head: which hee graunted, and sent it him by the sayd Ambassa∣dours. This voyage of mai∣ster Ienkinson, was in the yeere .1561.
Here foloweth such informations as was gyuen mee by maister Geferie Ducate, principall Agent of the merchante, for the last voyage into Persia, in the yeere of our Lord▪ 1568. beginning in the dominion of the Sophie, at the citie of Shamaki in Media, bycause the beginning of the voyage from Moscouia hytherto, is declared heere before. SHamaki is the fayrest towne in all Media, and the chiefest commoditie of that coun∣trey is rawe silke, and the greatest plentie thereof, is at a towne three dayes iourney from Shamaki, called Arashe: and within three dayes iourney of Arashe, is a countrey named Groysine, whose inhabitauntes are Christians,Christians. & are thought to be they, which are otherwise called Georgians:Georgians. there is also much silke to be solde. The chiefe towne of that countrey is called Zeghaui, from whence is carryed yeere∣ly into Persia, an incredible quantitie of hasell Nuttes, all of one sorte and goodnesse,Hasell Nuttes. and as good and thyn shaled as are our Fyl∣berdes. Of these are caryed yeerely the quantitie of 4000. Camelles laden. Of the name of the Sophie of Persia, and why he is called the Shaugh, and of other customes. THe Kyng of Persia (whom here we call the great Sophi) is not there so called, but is cal∣led the Shaugh. It were there daunge∣rous to call him by the name of Sophi, by∣cause that Sophi in the Persian tongue, is a begger: and it were as much as to call him, the great begger.
He lyeth at a towne called Casbin,Casbin. whiche is situat in a goodly fertile valley, of three or foure dayes iorney in length. The towne is but euyll buylded, and for the most part all of brycke, not hardened with fyre, but onely dryed at the Sunne, as is the most part of the buyldyng of all Persia. The kyng hath not come out of the compasse of his owne house in .xxxiii. or .xxxiiii. yeeres, whereof the cause is not knowen, but as they saye, it is vppon a superstition of certayne prophesies, to whiche they are greatly addicted: he is nowe about foure∣score yeeres of age, and very lustie. And to keepe hym the more lustye, he hath foure wyues alwayes, and about three hun∣dred concubynes. And once in the yeere,The kynges Concubines. he hath all the fayre maydens and wyues, that may bee founde a great way about, brought vnto hym, whom he diligently peruseth, feelyng them in all partes, takyng suche as he lyketh, and puttyng away some of them which he hath kept before. And with them that he putteth away, he gratifieth some suche as hath doone hym the best seruice. And if he chaunce to take any mans wyfe, her husbande is very glad thereof, and in recompence of her, oftentymes he geueth the husbande one of his olde store, whom he thankfully receyueth. If any straunger, beyng a Christian, shall come before hym,How straun∣gers are vsed. he must put on a newe payre of showes made in that countrey, and from the place where he entereth, there is dygged as it were a causye all the way, vntyll he come to the place where he shall talke with the kyng, who standeth al∣wayes aboue in a gallerye when he talketh with any strangers: and when the stranger is departed, then is the causye cast downe, and the grounde made euen agayne.
Of the religion of the Persians. THeyr religion is all one with the Turkes, sauyng that they dyffer who was the ryght successor of Mahumet. The Turkes saye that it was one Homer and his sonne Vsman. But the Persians saye, that it was one Mortus Ali, whiche they woulde proue in this maner. They say there was a counsayle called to decide the matter who shoulde be the successour:Haly, and after they had called vppon Mahumet to reuele vnto them his wyll and pleasure therein,A goodly and well grounded religion. there came among them a litle lizarde, who declared that it was Mahumetes pleasure that Mortus Ali should be his successour. This Martus Ali was a valiant man, and slewe Homer the Turkes prophet: He had a swoorde that he fought withall, with the whiche he conquered all his enimies, and kylled as many as he stroake. When Mortus Ali dyed, there came a holy prophet, who gaue them warnyng that short∣ly there woulde come a whyte Camell, vppon the which he char∣ged them to lay the body and swoorde of Mortus Ali, and to suffer the Camell to carye it whether he woulde. The whiche beyng perfourmed, the sayde whyte Camell caryed the swoorde and body of Mortus Ali vnto the sea syde, and the Camell go∣yng a good way into the sea, was with the swoorde and bodye of Mortus Ali taken vp into heauen, for whose returne they haue long looked for in Persia. And for this cause, the kyng al∣wayes keepeth a horse redye sadled for hym, and also of late kepte for hym one of his owne daughters to be his wyfe, but she dyed in the yeere of our Lorde .1573. And saye further∣more, that yf he come not shortly, they shalbe of our beleefe: much lyke the Iewes, lookyng for theyr Messias to come and reigne a∣mong
them, lyke a worldly kyng for euer, and deliuer them from the captiuitie which they are nowe in among the Christians, Turkes, and Gentyles. The Saugh, or Kyng of Persia, is nothyng in strength and power comparable vnto the Turke: for although he hath a great Dominion, yet is it nothyng to be compared with the Turkes: neyther hath he any great Ordinaunce of Gunnes, or Harke∣buses. Notwithstandyng, his eldest sonne Ismael, about twen∣tie and fyue yeeres past, fought a great battayle with the Turke, and sleue of his armye about an hundred thousande men, who after his returne, was by his father cast into pryson, and there continueth vntyl this daye: for his father the Shaugh, had hym in suspition that he would haue put hym downe, and haue taken the regiment vppon hym selfe. Theyr opinion of Christ, is that he was an holy man,Theyr opinion of Christ. and a great Prophet, but not lyke vnto Mahumet: saying that Mahumet was the last Prophet, by whom all thynges were finished, and was therefore the greatest. To proue that Christ was not Goddes sonne, they saye that God had neuer wyfe, and therefore coulde haue no sonne or chyldren. They goe on pylgrymage from the furthest part of Persia, vnto Mecha in A∣rabia, and by the way they visite also the sepulchre of Christ at Ierusalem, whiche they nowe call Couche Kalye. The most part of Spyces whiche commeth into Persia, is brought from the Iland of Ormus, situate in the gulfe of Persia, called Sinus Persicus, betweene the mayne lande of Persia and Arabia. &c. The Portugales touche at Ormus both in theyr vi∣age to East India, and homewarde agayne, and from thence bryng all suche Spyces as is occupied in Persia and the regions there about: for of Pepper they bryng verye small quantitie, and that at a verye deare pryse. The Turkes of∣tentymes bryng Pepper from Mecha in Arabia, whiche they sell as good cheape as that which is brought from Ormus. Sylkes are brought from noo place, but are wrought all in theyr owne countrey. Ormus, is within two myles of the mayne lande of Persia, and the Portugales fetche theyr freshe water there, for the whiche they paye trybute to the Shaugh or kyng of Persia.
Within Persia, they haue neyther golde nor syluer mynes, yet haue they coyned money,Theyr money. both of golde and syluer, and also other small moneys of Copper. There is brought into Persia an incredible summe of Duche Dolours, which for the most part is there employed in rawe sylke. They haue few bookes, and lesse learnyng, and are for the most part very brutyshe in all kynde of good sciences,Theyr bookes and learnyng. sauing in some kynde of sylke workes, and in suche thynges as parteyne to the furniture of Horses, in the which they are passyng good. Theyr lawes are, as is theyr religion, wicked and detestable. And yf any man offend the Prince,Such was the lawe of the Macedons for Treason. he punysheth it extreamely, not only in the person that offendeth, but also in his chyldren, and in as many as are of his kynne. Theft and murder are often punished, yet none otherwyse then pleaseth hym that is ruler in the place where the offence is committed, and as the party offen∣dyng is able to make frendes, or with money to redeeme his offence. There is often tymes great mutenye among the people in great townes,Dissention for religion. whiche of Mortus Ali sonnes was greatest: Insomuche that sometymes in the towne two or three thousand people are togeather by the eares for the same, as I haue seene in the towne of Shamaky and Ardaruill, and also in the great citie of Teueris, where I haue seene a man comming from feigh∣tyng, in a brauerie bryngyng in his hande foure or fyue mens heades, carrying them by the heare of the head: for although they shaue theyr heades most commonly twyse a weeke,Shauing. yet leaue they a tuft of heare vpon the crowne, about two foote long. I haue enquired why they leaue that tuft of heare vppon theyr heades. They answere, that thereby they may easlyer be ca∣ryed vp into heauen, when they are dead. For theyr religion, they haue certayne priestes, who are ap∣parelled lyke vnto other men. They vse euerye mornyng and afternoone, to go vp to thetoppes of theyr churches, and tell there a great tale of Mahumet and Mortus Ali: and other prea∣chyng haue they none.Theyr pryestes, and preaching. Theyr Lent. Their Lent is after Christmas, not in ab∣stinence from flesh only, but from al meates & drynkes, vntill the day be of the skye: but then they eate sometimes the whole night.
And although it be against theyr relygion to drynke wyne, yet at nyght they wyll take great excesse thereof, and bee dronken.Abstinence frō wyne, but not from drun∣kennes. Theyr lent begynneth at the newe Moone, and they do not enter into it vntyll they haue seene the same: Neyther yet doth theyr lent ende, vntill they haue seene the next new Moone, although the same through close weather shoulde not be seene in long tyme. They haue among them certayne holy men, whom they call Setes,Theyr saintes and holy men. counted holy for that they or any of theyr auncestours haue been on pilgrimage at Mecha in Arabia, for whosoeuer goeth thyther on pilgrimage to visite the sepulchre of Mahumet, both he and all his posteritie, are euer after called Setes,Pilgrimage. and counted for holy men, and haue no lesse opinion of them selues. And if a man contrarye one of these, he wyll saye that he is a sayncte, and therefore ought to be beloued: and that he can not lye, although he lye neuer so shamefully. Thus a man may be to holy, and no pryde is greater then spirituall pride, of a mynde puffed vp with his owne opinion of holynesse. These Setes do vse to shaue theyr headdes all ouer, sauyng on the sydes a litle aboue the temples, the whiche they leaue vnshauen, and vse to brayde the same as women do theyr heare, and weare it as long as it wyll growe. Euery mornyng they vse to worshyppe God, Mahumet, and Mortus Ali, and in praying turne them selues towarde the South, because Mecha lyeth that way from them.Theyr prayer and worshiping of God and Mahumet, When they be in trauayle on the way, many of them wyll (as soone as the Sunne ryseth) lyght from theyr horses, turnyng them selues to the South, and wyll laye theyr gownes before them, with theyr swoordes and beades, and so standyng vpryght, worshyp to the South: And many tymes in theyr prayers kneele downe and kysse theyr beades, or somewhat els that lyeth before them. The men or women do neuer go to make water,Washyng and outward clen∣lenesse. but they vse to take with them a pote with a spout, and after they haue made water, they flashe some water vppon theyr pryuie partes, and thus do the women aswell as the men: and this is a matter of great religion among them, and in making of water, the men do cowre downe as well as the women.
When they earnestly affirme a matter, they wyll sweare by God,Their swearing Mahumet, or Mortus Ali, and sometymes by all at ones: as thus in theyr owne language, saying, Olla Mahumet Ali. But if he sweare by the Shaughes head, in saying Shaug∣ham basshe, you may then beleeue hym if you wyll. The Shaugh keepeth a great magnificence in his courte: and although sometymes in a moneth or syxe weekes,The kynges magnificence. none of his nobilitie or counsayle can see hym, yet go they dayly to the courte, and tary there a certayne tyme, vntyll they haue knowen his pleasure whether he wyll commaund them any thyng or not. He is watched euery nyght with a thousand of his men, whiche are called his Curshes, who are they that he vseth to sende into the countreys about his greatest affayres.Pursiuantes. When he sendeth any of them (if it be to the greatest of any of his nobilitie) he wyll obeye them, although the messenger shoulde beate any of them to death. The Shaugh occupieth hym selfe alwayes two dayes in the weeke in his Bathestoue,The kynges companie with his wyues and concubines. and when he is disposed to go thither, he taketh with hym fyue or syxe of his concubines, more or lesse, and one day they consume in washyng, rubbyng, and bathyng hym, and the other day in paryng his nayles, and other matters. The greatest part of his lyfe, he spendeth amongst his wyues and concubines. He hath nowe reigned about fyftie and foure yeeres,A very Sar∣danapalus. and is therefore counted a very holy man, as they euer esteeme theyr kynges, if they haue reigned fyftie yeeres or more: for they measure the fauoure of God by a mans prosperitie, or his displeasure by a mans misfortune or aduersitie. The great Turke hath this Shaugh in great reuerence, because he hath reigned kyng so long tyme. I haue sayde before that he hath foure wyues, and as many concubynes as hym lysteth: and if he chaunce to haue any chyl∣dren by any of his concubines,The succession of the kyng∣dome. and be mynded that any of those chyldren shall inherite after hym, then when one of his wyues dyeth, the concubine whom he so fauoureth, he maketh one of his wyues, and the chylde whom he so loueth best, he ordayneth to be kyng after hym. Mariage.What I hearde of the maner of theyr mariages, for offending
of honest consciences and chaste eares, I may not commit to wrytyng: their fastyng I haue declared before. They vse Circumcision vnto chyldren of seuen yeeres of age, as doo the Turkes.Circumcison. Theyr houses (as I haue sayde) are for the most part made of Brycke, not burned, but only dryed in the Sunne:Theyr houses & maner of eate∣yng. In theyr houses they haue but litle furniture of housholde stuffe, except it be theyr Carpets, and some Copper worke: for all theyr Ket∣tles and Dyshes wherein they eate, are of Copper. They eate on the grounde, sittyng on Carpets crosse legged as do tay∣lers. There is no man so symple but he sytteth on a Carpet bet∣ter or worse, and the whole house or roome wherein he sytteth, is wholy couered with Carpets. Theyr houses are all with flatte roofes, couered with earth: and in the sommer tyme, they lye vp∣on them all nyght. They haue many bonde seruauntes both men and women▪ Bond men and bond women,Bond men & bond women. is one of the best kinde of merchan∣dies that any man may bryng. When they bye anye maydes or young women, they vse to feele them in all partes, as with vs men do horses: when one hath bought a young woman,Women bougth & solde, and let to hire. yf he lyke her, he wyll keepe her for his owne vse as long as hym ly∣steth, and then selleth her to an other, who doth the like with her. So that one woman is sometymes solde in the space of foure or fyue yeeres, twelue, or twentie tymes. If a man keepe a bonde woman for his owne vse, and yf he fynde her to be false to hym, and geue her body to any other, he may kyll her yf he wyll. When a merchant or trauailer commeth to any towne where he entendeth to tarry any time, he hyreth a woman, or sometimes two or three duryng his abode there. And when he commeth to an other towne, he doth the lyke in the same also: for there they vse to put out theyr women to hyre, as wee doo here hackneye Horses. There is a verye great ryuer whiche runneth through the playne of Iauat, whiche falleth into the Caspian sea, by a towne called Backo, neare vnto whiche towne is a strange thyng to be∣holde.Abundance of Oyle ishuing out of the ground. For there ishueth out of the grounde a marueilous quan∣titie of Oyle, which Oyle they fetch from the vttermost boundes of al Persia: it serueth all the countrey to burne in theyr houses.
This Oyle is blacke, and is called Nefte: they vse to cary it throughout all the countrey vpon Kyne and Asses, of which you shal oftentymes meete, with foure or fyue hundred in a com∣pany. There is also by the sayde towne of Backo, an other kinde of Oyle whiche is whyte and very precious: and is supposed to be the same that here is called Petroleum.Oleum Petro∣leum. There is also not farre from Shamaky, a thyng lyke vnto Tarre, and ishueth out of the grounde, whereof we haue made the proofe, that in our shyps it serueth well in the steade of Tarre.Two sortes of Kyne. In Persia are Kyne of two sortes, the one lyke vnto ours in these partes, the other are marueylous euil fauoured, with great bones, and very leane, and but little heare vppon them: theyr milk is walowish sweete: they are like vnto them which are spo∣ken of in the scripture, which in the dreame of Pharao signifi∣ed the seuen deare yeeres: for a leaner or more euill fauoured beast, can no man see. In the countrey of Sheruan (sometyme called Media) if you chaunce to lye in the fieldes neare vnto any village, as soone as the twylyght begynneth, you shall haue about you two or three hundred Foxes,Foxes in great plentie. whiche make a marueylous wawelyng or how∣lyng: and yf you looke not well to your victuales, it shall scape them hardly but they wyll haue part with you. The Caspian sea, doth neyther ebbe nor flowe, except some∣tymes by rage of wynde it swelleth vp very hygh: the water is very salt. Howbeit, the quantitie of water that falleth out of the great ryuer of Volga, maketh the water freshe at the least twentie leagues into the sea. The Caspian sea is marueylous full of fyshe, but no kynde of monstrous fysh, as farre as I coulde vn∣derstande, yet hath it sundry sortes of fyshes whiche are not in these parties of the worlde. The Mutton there is good, and the Sheepe great, ha∣uyng verye great rumpes with much fat vppon them. Ryse and Mut∣ton, is theyr cheefe victuale.
Of the Empire of the Persians, and of theyr originall. THe kyngdome or Empire of the Persians,Abraham Otilius. as it was in auncient tyme most famous, euen so is it at these dayes, mightie & glori∣ous, comprehendyng many great & large regions. For all the tracte of Asia, which is betweene the riuer of Tigris, the gulfe of Persia, and the Indian sea (sometime called the sea Indus) and the ryuer Iaxartes (at this day called Chefell) euen vnto the Caspian sea, is at this day vnder the dominion of the Sophie of Persia. Of the originall of the Sophies, thus writeth Caelius Curio in his Saracenicall historie. In the yeere of our Lord .1369. was a certayne Prince among the Persians, who possessed the towne of Ardenelim, his name was Sophi: & glorified him selfe to discende of the rase and progenie of Alis Muamedis, by Musan Cazin his Neuie. He, after the death of Calyfa, the Soltan of Babilon, and the contrary faction which the Turkes defended, suppressed also of the Tartars, began more boldly and freely to professe his opi∣nion and sentence of theyr religion. And bycause that Ocemus the sonne of Alis, (from whom he glorified him selfe to descend) had twelue children, willyng to adde to them of his secte a certayne signe, whereby they myght be knowen from other, ordeyned that they that would embrace his secte and profession, should were on their heads a high cappe of purple vnder a vele, wherwith all the Turkes inuolue theyr heades, and in theyr language call it Tuli∣bante, hauing in the middest of it .xii. plumes or shappe toppes. After his death, succeeded his sonne Guines: who in all the East partes obteyned so great opinion of wisedome and holinesse, that most famous Tamerlanes, Emperour of the Parthians (who be∣fore had taken Bayazetes kyng of the Turkes) made a iourney into Persia, to visit him as a most holy man,Tamerlanes. Thamurlanes. Tamburlanes. or Tamurth∣lam. of whom Guines had so much fauour, that he obteyned of him the libertie of .xxx. thou∣sande Captiues which he brought with him, whom also Guines addicted to his faction: and his sonne Secaidar vsed them in his
warres. For with these, after the death of Guines, he made warre to certayne people of Scythia,Georgians Christians. named Georgians, his borderers, beyng Christians, & afflicted them very greeuously. Thus much of the originall of the Sophie of Persia: they keepe continually warres with the Turkes for the religion of Mahumet.Contention for religion be∣tweene Turkes and Persians. For the Sophians or Persians, folowe one maner of interpretation of Mahumettes religion, and the Turkes an other: the which in∣terpretations neuerthelesse are so differyng one from the other, that the one of them esteemeth the other for heretikes. The Per∣sians are of liberall nature,Persians. of muche ciuilitie and curtesie, greatly esteeming artes and sciences: they acknowledge a certaine wor∣thinesse or nobilitie among men, wherin they differ much from the Turkes,Turkes. which make no difference betweene slaues and wor∣thier men or Gentelmen. Of the Region of Persia, and the maners of the Per∣sians:Anno. do. 1280. Marcus Paulus Venetus, writeth thus. Cap. xix. Lib. 1. PErsia is a great and large prouince, & was once noble and of great fame, but nowe de∣vastate and ouerrun by the Tartars, it is of lesse dignitie, & the ancient renoume there∣of greatly diminished, and the name de∣uided into the prouinces confine or adiacent vnto it. So that now the prouince of Persia (as it is diuided) conteyneth eight kingdomes: whereof the first is named Chasum, the seconde Churdistam, the third Loc, the fourth Cielstam, the fyft, Instanich, the sixte, Zerazi, the seuenth, Socham, and the eight, Timochaim, in the confines of Persia. There are very fayre and goodly horses of great price, insomuch that some∣tymes one is solde for .200. pounds of Turon. Merchants bring them to the cities of Chisi and Curmosa, situate on the sea side, and sell them into India. Also Asses be there very fayre and great, in∣somuch that sometymes one is solde for .xxx. pounde weight of sil∣uer. The people is of euyll disposition, quarellous, theeues, and murderers: and robbe and kyll merchantes by the way, except they goe in great companyes. Yet in the cities, they are of bet∣er
maners, and of more humanitie: also very excellent artificers in woorkes of gold, silke, Embroderie, needle woorke, and suche lyke. They haue aboundance of bombasine, wheate, barlye, myll, wyne also, and fruites, but in religion, they are Mahumetans. Of the kyngdome of the Persians, Haithon in his booke de Tartaris. Cap. vii. writeth as foloweth. THe kyngdome of the Persians, is diuided chiefly into two partes, whiche make one kyngdome, bicause they are both subiecte to the dominion of one kyng. The first parte of Persia, beginneth in the East, from the con∣fines of the kingdome of Turquestan, and is extended toward the West, to the great ry∣uer of Phison,Phison is thought to be Ganges. which is the chiefe among the foure floodes which run out of earthly Paradyse. Towarde the North, it is extended to the Caspian sea, and towarde the South, vnto the desartes of India. The region is in maner all playne: in the middest where∣of, are two very great and riche cities, the one is named Boctara, and the other Seonorgant. The Persians haue a language proper to them selues: they vse merchandies and tyllage of the grounde, and among them selues lyue in peace: In tyme paste they were Idolatours, and honoured fyre chiefly for God. But after that the secte of the Mahumetans occupied the dominion of those landes, they became vniuersally Saracens,Sarasins (that is) Mahume∣tans. beleeuing the deuilishe doc∣trine of Mahumet. The other parte of Persia, beginneth from the riuer Phison, and is extended Westward vnto the confines of the kyngdomes of Media, and partely also of Armenia the greater. Toward the North, it is extended vnto the Caspian sea, on the South syde, it confineth with a certaine prouince of the kingdom of Media, and in this prouince are two great cities, one named Nesabor, and the other Sachen, whiche in secte and maners, are lyke vnto the other.
Of Persia, and of dyuers cities therof, & other notable thinges reade heereafter, the thirde booke of the voyage of Lodouicus Vartomannus. Also, the first booke of the same voyage. Cap. 12. of Mahumet and his fellowes: where you may see the diffe∣rence in religion betweene the Turkes and Persians, beyng both Mahumetans. The name of the Sophie, Thomas Shaugh, and why he is so called. THe Persians doe not call theyr kyng by the name of Sophie, but this name Sophie, is giuen him by other nations: for of his owne people, he is called Tho∣mas Shaugh, whiche is, Thomas the ru∣ler, Soltan, or gouernour: for Shaugh, is not the name of a kyng, but of an of∣fice. For a kyng in theyr language, is called Pachet, but no Prince is called by this name, before hee haue reigned by seuen discentes: but he that nowe reygneth, is but only of fyue discentes, and is therefore called only Shaugh, which is a name of office. He hath foure wyues and .xii. sonnes, and hath kepte one of his sonnes in prison many yeeres, for a great ouerthrowe whiche he gaue the Turke in the warres, although he tooke the same for acceptall seruice, and a noble exployt. Yet forasmuch as by that facte, he obteyned great renoume of a valiant and warlyke man, he began him selfe to haue him in suspition, least the glorie of that enterprise myght encourage him to attempt somewhat a∣gaynst his father, as oftentymes the Turkes sonnes haue rebel∣led agaynst theyr fathers yet liuyng, and displaced them of their dignitie.
Of the kyngdome of Ormus, confine to Persia, and of the trafique betweene them. Also of the citie and Ilande of Ormus or Armusium. ORmus is a great kyngdome,Abraham Ortelius. and hath a pe∣culiar Kyng, tributorie to the kyng of Por∣tugale. This kyngdome conteyneth all the sea coastes of Arabia, in the gulfe of Persia, from the mouth of the riuer of Euphrates, vn∣till the Cape of Razalguati, and also parte of the kingdome of Persia, whiche is adiacent vnto the streight of Bazora, called Fretum Bazorae, and in maner all the Ilandes of the gulfe of Persia, called Sinus Persicus. The Metrapolis or chiefe citie of the kingdome of Ormus, is the citie of Ormus, situate in an Iland named Geru, being one of the famost martes of these partes of the world. The Iland is within the gulf of Persia, not far within the streight of Bazora. This streight of Bazora, other haue named the streight of Ormus, being betweene Arabia Foelix, and the region of Persia. The region of Ormus is well peopled, & hath many goodly places & cities. The gulfe is not euery where nauigable, by reason of many shelues and lowe places. Within foure dayes sayling of Ormus, are the Ilandes of Baharen, where are found the fayrest orientall pearls of the world. Ormus vseth trafique of merchandies with Adem & Cambaia, and with the kingdomes of Decan & Goa, & with the portes of Narsin∣ga & Malabar. The chiefe merchandies brought from thence, are horses of Arabia & Persia, pearles, salt peter, brimstone, silke, Tu∣tia, Alume, also Alume of Alexandria or Borace, Utriol, or Cop∣porose, salt in great quantitie, siluer, Muske, Ambar, wheate, ma∣ny dryed fruites, Ryse, & many other prouisions of vittailes, and other thinges to be eaten. For these, they returne pepper, cloues, Cinamon, Ginger, and diuers other sorts of spices and drugges, which are dispersed into sundry regions of Persia and Arabia, and also into Aden where there is great plentie. But if they be deare in Ormus, it is not possible that they should be caryed to Cair, to come into Italie. Theyr returne, is with Ryse, as much as
they can haue, white cloth, & Iron. Theyr horses are of maruey∣lous great price in the kyngdomes of Goa, Decan, and Narsinga, and therefore yeerely the merchantes of Ormus bryng many thi∣ther, and yet sometyme one horse is there at the price of vii. hun∣dred of those peeces of golde, which they call Saraffos. The best are of Arabia, the seconde of Persia, and the woorst of Cambaia. Of the Sophie and kyngdome of Persia, after the later writers. PErsia is one of the greatest and most famous Prouinces of the worlde. It toucheth not the sea, but at the gulfe of Ormus. On the syde of Cambaia, it confineth with the people named Motagues, on the syde of Arabia, with the gulfe of Ormus, on the syde of the firme lande, with the mountaynes of Deli, and on the side of Carmania,Babilon of Chaldea, and not of Egypt. and in maner by the confines of Babylon, it extendeth towarde India: it hath many kingdomes and cities subiecte vnto it. The people of Persia, are called Azemini. It con∣teyneth foure principall prouinces, which are these: Coraconi, Gi∣nali, Tauris, Xitarim. In the which also are these foure most fa∣mous cities:Tauris or Teueris. That is Tauris, Siras, Samarcante, Coraconi: They are valiant and warlyke men, & of great estimation. They of Sa∣marcante, haue in auncient tyme been Christians. Tauris and Si∣ras, are cities as famous among them, as is with vs Paris in France: they are men of great ciuilitie and curtesie. The wo∣men of Siras, are of commendable beautie and behauour, very neate and delicate, and thereof commeth a prouerbe among the Mahumetans, that Mahumet would neuer goe to Siras, least if he had tasted the pleasures of those women, he should neuer af∣ter his death haue gone to Paradyse. The kyng of Persia is cal∣led Siech Ismael, whom the Italians call Gualizador, or Sophi. His chiefe mansion place or court,Ismael, they pronounce Smael. is at Tauris, or Teueris, which is distant from Ormus fiftie dayes iourney with Camelles. He is called the great Mahumetan of the order of the red bonet (that is) of the secte of Hali, which our men that came late from Persia, call Mortus Ali,Mortus Ali. wherof we haue spoken more before. The region of
Persia, hath all sortes of domesticall or tame beastes, suche as are in our countreys. It hath furthermore, Lions, Onces, and Ti∣gers, the people are muche giuen to pleasures and sportes, and are honourably apparelled, delighting greatly in perfumes and sweete sauours: they haue many wyues, and commit the keeping or charge of them to enuches or gelded men: who for that seruice,Enukes or gel∣ded men. are oftentymes preferred to great promotion, yet are they very ielous of theyr wyues. Notwithstanding, both the Persians, and also their neighbours of Ormus, are detestable Sodomites. In tyme paste many great and valiant personages, as Cyrus, Darius, Assuerus, and great Alexander, haue inuaded Persia. It is not ba∣ren as some haue written, but hath aboundance of all sortes of victualles, and pleasures, and thinges necessarie for the lyfe of man. The trafique of Persia, with other countreys. IN the region of Persia, are many sortes of merchandies, wherewith they vse great tra∣fique in the countreys of Armenia, Turchia, and in the citie of Cair or Alcayr. From the lande of Siras, is brought great aboundance of silke, whereof is made an infinite quanti∣tie of all sortes of silken cloathes, and fine chamolettes of diuers colours: also great aboundance of roche Alume, Uitrioll, Alcoffare. Likewise many horses, victualles, Turques stones, wax, hony, butter. &c. Also great peeces of tape∣strie of diuers sortes & workes, clothes of sundry colours, veluets both high and lowe after theyr maner: Likewyse cloth of golde of sundry sortes: Pauilions, and great aboundance of armure. From the other syde of the mountaynes by the way of Siam, are brought Muske, Aloes, Reubarbe, Lignum aloes, Camphora, &c. All these thinges, and many other, are caryed to Ormus: for the which, the returne is, great quantitie of Pepper, and other spices and drugges: for the Persians vse much spices with their meats, and especially Pepper.
Of the Gulfe of Persia, or Sinus Persicus. THe region and lande of Persia, is situate be∣tweene two ryuers, whiche fall not into the Ocean sea, but into the gulfe of Persia: the which gulfe hath on euery syde many good∣ly countreys well inhabited. The gulfe con∣teyneth in largenesse .lx. myles, and is naui∣gable with great Barkes, and is sometimes troubled with great tempestes. There is taken great abundance of fishe, which being salted or dryed, is carryed into all partes of Persia. The gulfe is also very long, and conteyneth from Ormus to the ende, lx. dayes iourney with Camelles. 1 Articles of the Priuileges whiche the Sophie of Per∣sia graunted to the Englyshe merchantes. These articles were sent vnto the company of merchants from Mosko, by maister Ienkinson, graunted in the names of these persons. Syr VVilliam Garret, Syr VVilliam Chester, gouernours. Syr Thomas Lodge, Maister Antonie Ienkinson, Maister Thomas Nicolls, and Arthur Edwardes, merchantes of London: as also in the names of the whole companie. 2 FYrst, it is graunted that you shall paye no maner of cu∣stomes or tolles any kynd of wayes, now nor in time com∣myng vnto his heires after him. And that all Englyshe mer∣chantes now present, or hereafter, may passe and repasse into all places of his dominions, and other countreys adioyning to him, in the trade of merchaundies, to buye and sell all maner of com∣modities, with all maner of persons. 3 Item that in all places, where any of our merchantes shalbe chiefe gouernours, rulers, and Iustices, to take heede vnto the Englishe merchantes, and be their ayde, and punishe them that shall doe them any wrong or hurte. 4 Item that suche debtes as shalbe owyng by any maner of person, iustice to be done on the partie, and to see all Englishe merchantes payde at the day.
5 Item that no maner of person of what estate or degree they be of, so hardie to take any kynde of wares, or any gyftes, with∣out the Englyshe merchantes good willes. 6 Item if by chaunce medley, any of the merchauntes or seruauntes (as God forbyd) shoulde kyll any of his subiectes, no partes of theyr goods to be touched or medled withal, neither no person but the offender, and being any of the mer∣chaunts, not to suffer without the princes knowledge & advice. 7 Item that all such debtes as shalbe oweyng, to be payde to any of the merchauntes in the absence of the other, be the partie dead or alyue. 8 Item that no person returne any kynde of wares backe a∣gayne, beyng once bought or solde. 9 Item that when God shall sende the merchauntes goods to shore, presently his people to helpe them alande with them. The prosperous vyage of Arthur Edwardes into Persia, and of the fauoure that he found with the Sophy, and also what conference he had with that prynce. WHen he came fyrst to the Sophies presence, brynging his interpretour with hym, and standyng farre of, the Sophie (syttyng in a seate royall with a great number of his no∣ble men about hym) badde him come neere, and that thrise, vntyl he came so neere him that he myght haue touched hym with his hand. Then the fyrst demaund that he asked hym, was from what countrey he came: he answeared, that he came from Eng∣lande. Then asked he of his noble men, who knew any such coun∣trey. But when Edwards sawe that none of them had any intel∣ligence of that name, he named it Inghilterra,Londro. as the Italians cal England. Then one of the noble men sayde Londro,London. meanyng therby London, which name is better knowen in far countreys out of Christendome, then is the name of Englande. When Ed∣wardes harde hym name Londro, he sayd that that was the name of the chiefe citie of Englande, as was Teueris, of the chiefe citie of Persia. He asked hym many thynges more, as of the
realme of Englande, marueylyng that it shoulde be an I∣land, of so great rychesse and power, as Edwardes declared vnto hym, of the ryches and abundaunce of our merchaundies, as he further vnderstode by our trafique in Moscouia and other coun∣treys. He demaunded also many thynges of the Queenes maiestie, and of the customes and lawes of the realme: saying oftentymes in his owne language, Bara colla (that is to saye) wel said. He asked also many thinges of kyng Philip, and of his warres agaynst the Turke at Malta. Then demaunded of hym what was the chiefe cause of his resorte into his realme. And beyng certified that it was for the trade of merchaundies, he asked what kynde of merchaundies he coulde bryng thyther. Such (sayde he) as the Venetian merchauntes, which dwellyng in our countrey in the citie of Londro, sende to Uenes, and from thence into Turkie by Halepo and Tripoli in Sorya, from whence, as by the seconde and thyrde handes, with great charges of many customes and other thynges thereunto parteyning, they are at the length brought into your countrey and cities of Persia. What merchaundies are those, sayd the Sophie? Edwardes answeared, that they were great abundaunce of fine carseis, of brode clothes, of all sortes and coloures, as scarlettes, violettes, and other of the fynest cloth of all the worlde.The Venetians trafique in England. Also that the Venetians brought out of Englande, not onely such clothes redie made, but further∣more great plentie of fyne wool to myngle with their wools, of the which they coulde not otherwise make fyne cloth: Affirming that there went out of Englande yeerely that wayes,English cloths, carses & fyne wool. aboue two hundred thousande carseis, and as manye brode clothes, besyde fine wool and other merchaundies, besyde also the great abun∣daunce of like clothes, yt which were caried into Spaine, Barba∣rie, and diuers other countreys. The Sophie then asked hym by what meanes such merchaundies myght be brought into Persia. Ryght well Sir (sayde he) by the way of Moscouia, with more safetie and in much shorter tyme then the Venetians can bryng them, fyrst from Englande to Uenes, and from thence into Persia, by the way of Turkye. And therefore if it shall please your maiestie to graunt vs free passage into al your dominions, with such priuileges as may apperteyne to the safegard of our
lyues, goodes, and merchandies, we wyl furnysh your coun∣treys with al such merchandies, & other commodities, in shorter tyme, and better cheape then you may haue the same at the Turkes handes. This talke and muche more was between the Sophie and Edwardes for the space of two houres, all whiche thynges lyked hym so well, that shortly after he graunted to the sayde Arthur Edwardes two other priuileges, for the trade of merchandies into Presia, all wrytten in Azure and golde let∣ters, and deliuered vnto the lorde keeper of the Sophie his great seale. The lorde keeper was named Coche Califaye, who sayde that when the Shaughe (that is the kyng or prince) dyd sytte to seale any letters, that priuilege shoulde be sealed and deliue∣red to Laurence Chapman. In this priuilege is one principal article for seruantes or merchantes: That yf the Agent do per∣ceyue that vpon theyr naughtie doynges, they woulde become Busor men,Busor men, be they that for∣sake theyr faith, and receyue the religion of Mahumet. that then the Agent whersoeuer he shall fynde anye such seruant or seruantes, to take them, and put them in pryson: and no person to keepe them, or maynteyne them. This article was graunted in respect of a custome among the Persians, being Mahumetanes: whose maner is frendly to receyue and wel en∣tertayne, both with giftes & lyuyng, all suche Christians as for∣sakyng theyr religion, wyl become of the religion of the Persians. Insomuch that before this priuilege was graunted, there was great occasion of naughtie seruantes to deceyue and robbe theyr maisters: that vnder the coloure of professyng that religion, they might liue among them in such safetie, that you might haue no law agaynst them, eyther to punysh them, or to recouer your goodes at theyr handes, or els where. For before the Sophie (whom they say to be a marueylous wyse and gracious prince) seemed to fauour our nation, and to graunt them such priuileges, the people abused them very much, and so hated them that they would not touche them, but reuiled them, callyng them Cafars & Gawars, which is, infydels, or misbeleeuers. But after they saw how greatly the prince fauoured them, they had them afterward in great reuerence, and would kysse theyr handes, and vse them very frendly. For before, they tooke it for no wrong to rob them, defraud them, beare false witnesse against them, & such merchan∣dies as they had bought or sold, make them take it againe, and
chaunge it as often as them listed. And yf any straunger by chaunce had kylled one of them, they woulde haue the lyfe of two for one slayne, and for the debtes of any straunger, woulde take the goodes of any other of the same nation, with many o∣ther such lyke abuses, in maner vnknowen to the Prince, before the complayntes of our men made vnto hym for reformation of such abuses: which were the cause that no merchant strangers of contrary religion, durst come into his dominions with theyr commodities: which myght be greatly to the profite of hym and his subiectes. The Articles. 10 Item that the merchantes haue free lybertye, as in theyr fyrst priuilege, to go vnto Gylian, and all other places of his dominions, now or hereafter when occasion shalbe geuen. 11 Item yf by misfortune any of theyr ships should breake, or fal vpon any part of his dominions on the sea coast, his subiec∣tes to help with al speede to saue the goodes, & to be deliuered to any of the sayd merchants that liueth: or otherwyse to be kept in safetie vntyl any of them come to demaund them. 12 Item yf any of the sayd merchants depart this lyfe in any citie or towne, or on the hygh way, his gouernours there to see theyr goodes safely kept, and to be deliuered to any other of them that shal demaund them. 13 Item the sayde merchants to take such camell men as they them selues wyl, beyng countrey people: and that no Kyssell Bayshe do let or hynder them,Kyssell Bashe are the gentle∣men that weare red cappes. And the sayde owners of the camels, to be bounde to answere them such goodes as they shall receyue at theyr handes: and the camell men to stande to the losses of theyr camels or horses. 14 Item more, that the sayde carryars do demaunde no more of them, then theyr agreement was to pay them.
15 Item more, if they be at a pryce with any carryours, and geuen earnest, the Camell men to see they keepe theyr pro∣messe. 16 Item if any of the sayd merchauntes be in feare to trauaile, to geue them one or more to go with them, and see them in saftie with theyr goods to the place they wyll go vnto. 17 Item in all places, to say, in all cities, townes, or villa∣ges on the hygh way, his subiectes to geue them honest rooume, and vittayles for theyr mony. 18 Item the sayde merchauntes may in any place where they shall thynke best, buylde or bye any house or houses to theyr owne vses: And no person to molest or trouble them, and to stande in any Carauan where they wyll, or shal thinke good. THe commodities whiche the merchauntes may haue by this trade into Persia, are thought to be great,The commodi∣tie which Eng∣lishe merchants may haue by the trade into Persia. and may in tyme perhappes be greater then the Portugalles trade into the East Indies, forasmuch as by the way of Persia into Englande, the returne may be made euery yeere once, wheras the Portugalles make the returne from Calecut but once in two yeeres, by a long and daungerous vyage all by sea: for whereas the citie and I∣lande of Ormus, lying in the goulfe of Persia, is the most famous marte towne of all East India, whyther all the merchaundies of India are brought, the same may in shorter time, and more safely, be brought by land & ryuers through Persia, euen vnto the Caspian sea, and from thence by the countreys of Russia or Moscouia by ryuers, euen vnto the citie of Yeraslaue, and from thence by lande a hundred and fourescore myles to Vologda: and from thence agayne al by water, euen vnto England. The merchaundies whiche be had out of Persia for the re∣turne of wares, are sylke of all sortes and colours, both rawe and wrought: Also all maner of spices and drugges, Pearles and precious stones: likewyse carpettes of dyuers sortes, with di∣uers other ryche merchaundies, whereof you may reade more here before in the Chapter entituled, Of the trafique of Per∣sia with other countreys. It was tolde me of them that came
last from Persia, that there is more sylke brought into some one citie of Persia, then is of cloth brought into the citie of London. Also that one village of Armenia, named Gilgat, doth carie yeere∣ly fyue hundred, and sometyme a thousande mules laden with sylke to Halepo in Sorya of Turkye, beyng foure dayes iorney of Tripoli, where the Uenetians haue their continuall abidyng, and send from thence sylkes, which they returne for English carses, and other clothes, into al partes of Christendome. The maner howe the Christians become Busor men, and forsake their religion. I Haue noted here before, that if any Christian wyll become a Busor man, that is, one that hath forsaken his fayth, and be a Mahumetan of their religion, they geue him many giftes, and somtyme also a liuyng. The maner is, that when the deuil is entred into his hart to forsake his fayth, he resorteth to the Soltan or gouernoure of the towne, to whom he maketh protestation of his diuilyshe purpose. The gouernoure appoynteth hym a horse, and one to ryde before hym on an other horse, bearyng a swoorde in his hande, and the Busor man bearyng an arowe in his hand, and rydeth in the citie, cursyng his father and mother: and if euer after he returne to his owne religion, he is giltie of death, as is signified by the swoorde borne before hym. A young man, a seruaunt of one of our merchauntes, because he woulde not abyde the correction of his maister for his faultes, was myn∣ded to forsake his fayth. But (as God woulde) he fell sodaynely sicke and dyed, before he gaue hym selfe to the deuil. If he had be∣come a Busor man, he had greatly troubled the merchauntes, for if he woulde then haue sayd that halfe their goods had ben his, they would haue geuen credite vnto hym. For the auoydyng of whiche inconuenience, it was graunted in the priuileges that no Busor man &c. as there appeareth. In Persia in diuers places, oxen and kine beare the tentes and housholde stuffe of the poore men of the countrey,Oxen and kyne beare burdens. which haue nei∣ther Camelles nor horses.
Of the tree whiche beareth Bombasine cotton. or Gossampine IN Persia is great abundance of Bombasine cotton, and very fyne, this groweth on a certayne litle tree or bryer, not past the height of a mans waste, or litle more: the tree hath a slen∣der stalk, like vnto a brier, or to a carnation gyleflour, with very many braunches, bearyng on euery braunch a fruite, or ra∣ther a codde, growyng in round fourme, conteynyng in it the cot∣ton: and when this budde or codde commeth to the bygnesse of a wallnut, it openeth and sheweth foorth the cotton, which grow∣eth styll in bygnesse vntyll it be lyke a fleece of wooll as byg as a mans fyst, and beginneth to be loose: and then they geather it as it were the rype fruite. The seedes of these trees, are as byg as peason, and are blacke, and somewhat flatte, and not rounde: they sowe them in plowed grounde, where they growe in the fieldes in great aboundance in many countreys in Persia, and di∣uers other regions. The writing of the Persians. ARthur Edwardes shewed me a letter of the Sophie, writ∣ten in theyr letters backward, subsigned with the handes both of the Sophie & his secretarye. The Sophies subscrip∣tion, was only one word (his name I suppose of Shaugh) wrytten in golden letters vpon red paper. The whole letter was also wrytten on the same peece of red paper, beyng long and nar∣rowe, about the length of a foote, and not past three inches brode. The priuate signet of the Sophie, was a rounde prynted marke, about the byggenesse of a Ryall, only prynted vpon the same paper, without any waxe or other seale: the letters seeme so myshapen and disordered, that a man woulde thynke it were somewhat scribled in maner at aduentures. Yet they say that almost euery letter with his pricke or circumflexe, signifieth a whole worde. Insomuch that in a peece of paper as bygge as a mans hand, theyr wryting doth conteyne as much as doth ours almost in a sheete of paper.
¶ The two viages made out of Englande into Guinea in Affricke, at the charges of certayne merchantes aduenturers of the citie of Lon∣don, in the yeere of our Lord▪ 1553. BEing desired by certayne of my freendes, to make some mention of these viages, that some memory thereof myght remayne to our posteritie, yf eyther iniquitie of tyme, con∣sumyng all thynges, or ignoranuce creepyng in by bar∣barousnesse and contempt of knowledge, shoulde hereafter bu∣ry in obliuion so worthy attempts, so much the greatlyer to be esteemed, as before neuer enterprysed by Englyshe men, or at the least so frequented, as at this present they are, and may be, to the great commoditie of our merchantes, yf the same be not hyndred by the ambition of such,Ambision. as for the conquesting of fourtie or fyftie myles here & there, and erectyng of certayne fortresses, or rather blockehouses among naked people, thynke them selues worthy to be lordes of halfe the world, enuying that other shoulde enioy the commodities, which they them selues can not wholy possesse. And although suche as haue been at charges in the discoueryng and conquestyng of suche landes, ought by good reason to haue certayne priuileges, preheminences, and tributes for the same, yet (to speake vnder correction) it may seeme somewhat rigo∣rous, and agaynst good reason and conscience, or rather against the charitie that ought to be among Christian men, that such as violentlye inuade the dominions of other, shoulde not permit o∣ther frendly to vse the trade of merchandies, in places neerer, or seldome frequented of them, whereby theyr trade is not hyndred in such places, where they them selues haue at theyr owne electi∣on appointed the martes of theyr trafficke. But forasmuch as at this present, it is not my entent to accuse or defend, approue or improue, I wil ceasse to speake any further hereof, & proceade to the discription of the first viage, as breefely and faithfully as I was aduertised of the same, by the information of such credible persons, as made diligent inquisition to know the trueth hereof, as much as shalbe requisite, omittyng to speake of many parti∣ticuler
thinges, not greatly necessarie to bee knowen: whiche neuerthelesse, with also the exacte course of the nauigation, shall be more fully declared in the seconde vyage. And if herein fa∣uour or friendshyp shall perhappes cause some to thynke that some haue been sharpely touched, let them laye a parte fauour and friendshyp, and gyue place to trueth, that honest men may receyue prayse for well doyng, and lende persons reproche, as the iust stipende of theyr euyll desartes, whereby other may bee de∣terred to doe the lyke, and vertuous men encouraged to proceede in honest attemptes. But that these vyages may be more playnely vnderstoode of all men, I haue thought good for this purpose, before I in∣treate hereof, to make a breefe description of Affrica,Africa. beyng that great parte of the worlde, on whose Weste syde begyn∣neth the coaste of Guinea at Cabo Verde, about the twelue de∣grees in latitude, on this syde the Equinoctiall line,The coast of Guinea. and two degrees in longitude from the measuryng lyne, so runnyng from the North to the South, and by East in some places with∣in .v.iiii. and .iii. degrees and a halfe within the Equinoctiall, and so foorth in maner direcly East and by North, for the space of xxxvi. degrees, or there about, in longitude from the West to the East, as shall more playnely appeare in the description of the seconde vyage. A breefe description of Affrike. IN Affrica the lesse are these kyngdomes: the kingdome of Tunes & Constantina,Tunes. which is at this day vnder Tunes, and also the regi∣on of Bugia, Tripoli, and Ezzah.Bugia. Tripoli. This part of Afrike is very baren by reason of the great desartes,Numidia. as the desartes of Numidia & Bar∣cha The principall portes of the kingdome of Tunes are these: Goletta, Bizerta, Potofarnia, Boua, and Stora. The chiefe cities of Tunes, are Constantina, and Boua, with diuers other. Under this kyngdome are many Ilands, as Zerbi,Ilandes of Tunes. Malta. Lampa∣dola, Pantalarea, Limoso, Beit, Gamelaro, and Malta, where at this present is the great maister of the Rodes. Under the South of this kyngdome, are the great desartes of Libia.The desartes of Libia. All the nations
in this Africa the lesse, are of the secte of Mahumet, & a rusticall people, lyuyng scattered in villages. The best of this parte of A∣frike,Barbarie. is Barbaria, lying on the coast of the sea Mediterraneum. Mauritania.Mauritania (now called Barbaria) is diuided into two partes, as Mauritania Tingitania, and Cesariensis. Mauritania Tingita∣nia, is nowe called the kyngdome of Fes, and the kyngdome of Marrocko.The kinkdoms of Fes and marrocko. The principall citie of Fes, is called Fessa: and the chiefe citie of Marrocko, is named Marrocko. Mauritania Cesariensis, is at this daye called the kyng∣dome of Tremisen,Tremisen. with also the citie called Tremisen or Te∣lensin. This region is full of desartes, and reacheth to the sea Mediterraneum, to the citie of Oram, with the porte of Massa∣quiber.Oram. Massaquiber. The kyngdome of Fes reacheth vnto the Ocean sea, from the West to the citie of Argilla: and the porte of the sayde kyng∣dome is called Salla.Salla. The kyngdome of Marrocko is also extended aboue the Oce∣an sea, vnto the citie of Azamor and Azafi, which are aboue the Ocean sea towarde the West of the sayde kyngdome.Azamor. In Mau∣ritania Tingitania (that is to say, in the two kyngdomes of Fes and Marrocko) are,The Ilandes of Canarie. in the sea, the Ilandes of Canarie, called in olde tyme the fortunate Ilandes. Towarde the South of this re∣gion,Guinea. is the kyngdome of Guinea, with Senega, Iaiofo, Gambra, and many other regions of the blacke Moores,Ethiopians. called Ethiopians or Negros, all whiche are watered with the ryuer Negro, called in olde tyme Niger. In the sayde regions are no cities, but only certayne lowe cotages made of boughes of trees, plastered with chauke, and couered with strawe: In these regions are also very great desartes. Marrocko.The kyngdome of Marrocko hath vnder it these seuen kyng∣doms: Hea, Sus, Guzula, the territory of Marrocko, Duchala, Haz∣chora,Fes. and Telde. The kyngdome of Fes hath as many: as Fes, Temesne, Azgar, Elabath, Errifi, Garet, and Elcauz. The kyng∣dome of Tremisen hath these regions:Tremisen. Tremisen, Tenez, and El∣gazaet,Guinea. all which are Machometistes. But all the regions of Gui∣nea are pure Gentyles and Idolatours, without profession of any religion, or other knowledge of God, then by the lawe of nature. Africa the great.Africa the great, is one of the three partes of the worlde,
knowen in olde tyme, and seuered from Asia, on the East by the ryuer Nilus, on the West, from Europe by the pillers of Her∣cules. The hyther parte is now called Barbarie, and the people Moores. The inner parte is called Libia and Ethiopia.Affricke the leasse. Afrike the lesse, is in this wyse bounded: On the West it hath Numidia: On the East Cyrenaica: On the North, the sea called Mediterra∣neum. In this countrey was the noble citie of Carthage.Carthage. In the East side of Africke, beneath the redde sea, dwelleth the great and myghtie Emperour and Christian kyng Prester Iohn,Prester Iohn. well knowen to the Portugales in theyr vyages to Cali∣cut. His dominions reache very farre on euery syde: and hath vnder hym many other kynges both Chrystian and heathen that pay hym tribute. This mightie prince is called Dauid Them∣perour of Ethiopia. Some wryte, that the kyng of Portugale sendeth hym yeerely .viii. shyppes laden with marchaundies. His kingdome confineth with the redde sea, and reacheth farre into Afrike toward Egypte and Barbarie.Cape de Buo∣na Speranza. The sea of sande. Alcair. Southwarde it con∣fineth with the sea towarde the cape de Buona Speranza: and on the other syde with the sea of sande, called Mare de Sabione, a very dangerous sea, lying betweene the great citie of Alcayer, or Cairo in Egypt, and the countrey of Ethiopia: In the whiche way are many vnhabitable desarts, cōtinuing for the space of fiue dayes iorney. And they affirme, that if the sayd Christian Empe∣rour were not hyndered by those desartes (in the whiche is great lacke of victualles, and especially of water) he woulde or nowe haue inuaded the kingdome of Egypt, and the citie of Alcayer. The cheefe citie of Ethiopia, where this great Emperour is re∣sident, is called Amacaiz, being a faire citie, whose inhabitantes are of the colour of an Olyue. There are also many other ci∣ties, as the citie of Saua vpon the ryuer of Nilus, where Them∣perour is accustomed to remayne in the sommer season. There is lykewyse a great citie named Barbaregaf, and Ascon, from whence it is sayde that the Queene of Saba came to Hierusa∣lem to heare the wysedome of Salomon.From whence the queene of Saba came. This citie is but lit∣tle, yet very fayre, and one of the chiefe cities in Ethiope. In the sayde kyngdome is a prouince called Manicongni,Manicongni. whose kyng is a Moore, and tributarie to Themperour of Ethiope. In this prouince are manie exceedyng hygh mountaynes, vp∣pon
the which is sayde to be the earthly Paradyse:The earthly Paradice. The trees of the Sunne and Moone. and some say that there are the trees of the Sunne and Moone, whereof the antiquitie maketh mention: yet that none can passe thyther, by reason of great desartes of a hundred dayes iourney. Also beyond these mountaynes, is the cape of Bona Speranza. And to haue sayde thus much of Afrike it may suffice. The first vyage to Guiena. IN the yeere of our Lord .1553. the .xii. day of August, sayled from Porchmouth two good∣ly shyppes,The Primrose. The Lion. The Moone. the Primrose and the Lion, with a pynnesse called the Moone, being all well furnished aswel with men of the lustiest sorte, to the number of seuen score, as also with or∣dinaunce and vyttayles, requisite to such a vi∣age: hauyng also two Captaynes, the one a stranger, called An∣toniades Pinteado, a Portugale, borne in a towne named the porte of Portugale,Pinteado. a wyse, discreete, and sober man, who for his cun∣nyng in saylyng, beyng as well an experte pylot as politike Cap∣tayne, was sometyme in great fauour with the kyng of Portu∣gale, and to whom the coastes of Brasile and Guinea, were com∣mytted to be kepte from the Frenchmen,Brasile. Guinea. to whom he was a ter∣rour on the sea in those partes, and was furthermore a Gentel∣man of the kyng his maisters house. But as fortune in maner ne∣uer fauoureth but flattereth,The flatteryng of fortune. neuer promiseth but deceiueth, neuer rayseth but casteth downe agayne, and as great wealth and fa∣uour hath alwayes companions emulation and enuie, he was after many aduersities and quarels made agaynst him, inforced to come into Englande: where in this golden vyage he was euil matched with an vnequal companion, and vnlyke matche of most sundrie qualities and conditions, with vertues fewe or none a∣dourned. Thus departed these noble shyppes vnder sayle on their vyage. But first Captayne Wyndam, puttyng foorth of his shyp at Porchmouth, a kynseman of one of the head merchants, and shewyng herein a muster of the tragicall partes he had con∣ceyued in his brayne, and with suche small begynnynges nou∣ryshed so monstrous a byrth, that more happie, yea and blessed
was that young man being lefte behynde,The Ilandes of Madera. then if he had been ta∣ken with them, as some doe wishe he had done the lyke by theyrs. Thus sayled they on their vyage, vntyl they came to the Ilandes of Madera, where they tooke in certayne wynes for the store of their shippes, and payde for them as they agreed of the price. At these Ilandes they met with a great Galion of the kyng of Por∣tugale, ful of men and ordinance:A galeon of the kyng of Por∣tugale. yet such as could not haue pre∣uayled if it had attempted to withstande or resist our shippes, for the which cause it was set foorth, not only to let and interrupte these our shippes of their purposed viage, but all other that should attempte the lyke: yet chiefly to frustrate our vyage. For the Kyng of Portugale was sinisterly informed that our shyppes were armed to his castell of Mina in these parties,The Castell of Mina. whereas no∣thyng lesse was ment. After that our shyppes departed from the Ilandes of Ma∣dera forwarde on theyr vyage, began this woorthie Captayne Pinteados sorowe, as a man tormented with the company of a terrible Hydra, who hytherto flattered with him, and made him a fayre countenaunce and shewe of loue. Then dyd he take vppon him to commaund all alone, settyng nought both by Cap∣tayne Pinteado, with the reste of the merchante factours: some∣tymes with opprobrious woordes, and sometymes with threat∣nynges, most shamefully abusing them, taking from Pinteado the seruice of the boyes & certaine mariners that were assigned him by the order and direction of the woorshipfull merchauntes, and leauyng him as a common mariner, whiche is the greatest de∣spite and greefe that can be to a Portugale or Spanyarde, to be diminishte theyr honour, which they esteeme aboue all riches. Thus saylyng forwarde on theyr vyage, they came to the Ilands of Canarie,The Ilandes of Canarie. The Ilande of S. Nicolas. continuing theyr course from thence vntyll they ar∣ryued at the Ilande of Saincte Nicolas, where they vyttay∣led them selues with freshe meate, of the fleshe of wylde Goates, whereof is great plentie in that Ilande, and in maner of no∣thing els. From hence folowyng on theyr course, and tary∣ing heere and there at the desarte Ilandes in the way, bycause they would not come to tymely to the countrey of Guinea for the heate,Guinea. and tarying somewhat to long (for what can be well mynistred in a common wealth, where inequalitie with tyran∣nie
will rule alone) they came at the length to the fyrst lande of the countrey of Guinea,The ryuer of Sesto. where they fell with the great ryuer of Sesto, where they myght for theyr merchandies haue laden their shyppes with the graynes of that countrey,Graynes. whiche is a very hot fruite, and muche lyke vnto a fygge as it groweth on the tree. For as the fygges are full of small seedes, so is the sayde fruite full of graynes, which are lose within the codde, hauyng in the myddest thereof a hole on euery syde. This kynde of spyce is much vsed in colde countreys, and may there be solde for great aduantage, for exchaunge of other wares. But our men by the persuasion or rather inforcement of this tragicall Captaine, not regardyng, and settyng lyght by that commodite, in compa∣rison to the fine golde they thirsted,The thirst of golde. sayled an hundred leagues further, vntyll they came to the golden lande: where not attemp∣tyng to come neare the Castell parteynyng to the kyng of Por∣tugale,The Castell of Mina. which was within the ryuer of Mina, made sale of theyr wre onely on this syde and beyond it, for the golde of that coun∣trey,The quantitie of golde. to the quantitie of an hundred and fyftie poundes weyght, there beyng in case that they myght haue dispatched all theyr ware for golde, if the vntame brayne of Wyndam had or could haue gyuen eare to the counsayle and experience of Pinteado. For when that Wyndam, not satisfied with the golde whiche he had (and more might haue had if he had taried about the Mina) com∣maundyng the sayde Pinteado (for so he tooke vppon him) to leade the shyppes to Benin,Benin. beyng vnder the Equinoctiall lyne, and a hundred and fyftie leagues beyonde the Mina, where he looked to haue theyr shyppes laden with pepper: and beyng counsayled of the sayde Pinteado,Pepper. consideryng the late tyme of the yeere, for that tyme to goe no further, but to make sale of their wares suche as they had for golde, whereby they myght haue ben great gayners. But Wyndam not assentyng herevnto, fell into a sodayne rage,Furie admit∣teth no coun∣sayle. reuilyng the sayde Pinteado, callyng him Iewe, with other opprobrious woordes, saying, This horson Iewe hath promysed to bryng vs to suche places as are not, or as he can not bryng vs vnto: but if he doe not, I will cut of his eares, and nayle them to the mast. Pinteado gaue the foresayde coun∣sayle to goe no further, for the safegarde of the men & theyr liues, whiche they shoulde put in daunger if they came to late, for
the rossia whiche is theyr wynter,The Rossia. Rottyng heate. not for colde but for smothe∣ryng heate, with close and cloudie ayre, and storming wether, of suche putrifying qualitie, that it rotted the coates of theyr backes: or els for commyng to soone for the scorching heate of the sunne,Scorchyng heate. whiche caused them to lynger in the way. But of force, and not of wyll, brought he the shyppes before the ryuer of Benin: where rydyng at an Anker,Benin. sent theyr pinnesse vp into the riuer fyftie or threescore leagues, from whence certayne of the mer∣chauntes with Captayne Pinteado, Francisco a Portugale,Francisco. Nicolas Lam∣berte. Nico∣las Lambert Gentelman, and other merchauntes, were conduc∣ted to the courte where the kyng remayned, ten leagues from the ryuer syde: whyther when they came, they were brought with a great company to the presence of the Kyng,The kyng of Banin his courte. who being a blacke Moore (although not so blacke as the reste) sat in a great houge hal, long and wyde, the walles made of earth, without windowes, the roofe of thynne boordes, open in sundry places, lyke vnto lo∣uers, to let in the ayre. And here to speake of the great reuerence they gyue to theyr kyng,Reuerence towarde the kyng. being suche that if we would gyue as muche to our sauiour Christ, we should remoue from our heades many plagues which we dayly deserue for our contempte and impietie. So it is therfore, that when his noble men are in his presence, they neuer looke him in the face, but sit couryng, as wee vppon our knees, so they vppon theyr buttockes, with theyr elbowes vp∣pon theyr knees, and theyr handes before theyr faces, not looking vp vntyll the Kyng commaunde them. And when they are commyng towarde the Kyng, as farre as they doe see him, doe they shewe suche reuerence, syttyng on the grounde with theyr faces couered as before. Likewise when they departe from him, they turne not theyr backes towarde him, but goe creeping back∣warde with lyke reuerence. And nowe to speake somewhat of the communication that was betweene the Kyng and our men,The commu∣nication be∣tweene the kyng of Benin and our men. you shall fyrst vnder∣stande that hee him selfe coulde speake the Portugale tongue, whiche he had learned of a chylde. Therefore after that he had commaunded our men to stande vp, and demaunded of them the cause of theyr commyng into that countrey, they aunswe∣red by Pinteado, that they were merchauntes, traueylyng in∣to
those parties for the commodities of his countrey, for exchange of wares whiche they had brought from theyr countreys, beyng such as should bee no lesse commodious for him and his people. The Kyng then hauyng of olde lying in a certayne store house thirtie or fourtie kyntalles of pepper (euery kyntall beyng an hundred weyght) wyllyng them to looke vppon the same,Pepper. and a∣gayne to bryng him a sight of suche merchaundies as they had brought with them. And therevppon sent with the Captaine and the merchauntes, certayne of his men to conducte them to the waters syde, with other to bryng the ware from the pinnesse to the courte. Who when they were returned and the wares seene, the kyng grewe to this ende with the merchantes,The kynges gentelnesse to∣warde our men. to prouyde in thirtie dayes the ladyng of all theyr shyppes with pepper. And in case theyr merchaundies would not extende to the value of so muche pepper, he promised to credite them to theyr next returne: and therevppon sent the countrey rounde about to geather pep∣per, causing the same to be brought to the courte: So that with∣in the space of thirtie dayes they had geathered fourescore tunne of pepper. In the meane season, our men partly hauyng no rule of them selues,The disorder and death of our men. but eatyng without measure of the fruites of the coun∣trey, and drinkyng the wyne of the Palme trees that droppeth in the nyght from the cutte branches of the same, and in suche extreeme heate runnyng continually into the water, not vsed be∣fore to suche sodayne and vehement alterations (then the which nothyng is more daungerous) were thereby brought into swel∣lynges and agues: insomuche that the later tyme of the yeere comming on, caused them to dye sometimes .iii. & somtimes .iiii. or .v. in a day. Then Windam perceiuing the time of the .xxx. dayes to be expired, & his men dying so fast, sent to the courte in poste to captaine Pinteado, and the rest, to come away, and to tary no lon∣ger. But Pinteado, with the rest, wrote backe to him againe, certi∣fying him of the great quantitie of pepper they had alredy gea∣thered, and looked dayly for much more: Desiring him further∣more to remember the great praise and name they should wyn, if they came home prosperously, and what shame of the contrarie. With which answere Wyndam not satisfied, and many of their men dying dayly, willed and commaunded them againe either to
come away furthwith, or els threatened to leaue them behynde. When Pinteado hearde this aunsweare, thynkyng to persuade hym with reason, tooke his way from the courte towarde the shyppes, beyng conducted thyther with men by the kynges com∣maundement. In the meane season Windam all rageyng, brake vp Pintea∣dos Cabin, brake open his chestes, spoyled such prouision of colde stylled waters and suckettes as he had prouided for his health, and lefte hym nothing, neither of his instrumentes to saile by, nor yet of his apparell: and in the meane tyme fallyng sycke hym selfe, dyed also. Whose death Pinteado, commyng abrode,The death of wyndan. Pinteado euyll vsed of the ma∣ryners. la∣mented as muche as if he had ben the deerest frende he had in the worlde. But certayne of the maryners and other officers dyd spette in his face, some callyng hym Iewe, saying that he had brought them thyther to kyll them: and some drawyng theyr swoordes at hym, makyng a shewe to slay hym. Then he, percey∣uyng that they would needes away, desyred them to tary, that he myght fetch the rest of the merchauntes that were lefte at the courte. But they woulde not graunt his request. Then desyred he them to geue hym the shyppe boate, with as muche of an olde sayle as myght serue for the same, promisyng them therewith to bryng Nicolas Lambert and the rest into England: But al was in vayne. Then wrote he a letter to the courte to the merchants,This Lambart was a Lōdener borne, whose fa∣ther had been Lorde mayre of London, and this Lambart sometyme a knyght of the rodes, one as he was vnmaried, so he liued in the feare of God, and was the fyrst of that or∣der that forsoke the Pope, and clae to Gods holy worde. The death of Pinteado. informyng them of all the matter, and promisyng them if God would lende hym lyfe to returne with al hast to fetch them. And thus was Pinteado kept a bordeshyppe agaynst his wyll, thrust among the boyes of the shyppe, not vsed lyke a man, nor yet like an honest boy, but glad to fynde fauour at the cookes hande. Then departed they, leauing one of theyr shyppes behynd them, which they sonke for lacke of men to cary her. After this, within syxe or seuen dayes saylyng, dyed also Penteado, for very pensiue∣nesse and thought that stroke hym to the hart: A man worthy to serue any prynce, and most vilely vsed. And of seuenscore men came home to Plymmowth scarsely fourtie, and of them ma∣ny dyed. And that no man shoulde suspect these wordes whiche I haue sayd in commendation of Pinteado, to be spoken vppon fauour otherwyse then truth, I haue thought good to ad hereun∣to the coppie of the letters which the kyng of Portugale and the
infant his brother wrote vnto hym, to reconcyle hym, at suche tyme as vppon the kyng his maisters displeasure (and not for any other cryme or offence, as may appeare by the sayde letters) he was only for pouertie inforced to come into Englande, where he fyrst persuaded our merchauntes to attempt the sayde vyages to Guinea. But as the kyng of Portugale to late repented hym that he had so punyshed Pinteado, vppon malicious informations of suche as enuied the mans good fortune, euen so may it hereby appeare, that in some cases, euen Lions them selues, may either be hyndred by the contempt, or ayded by the helpe of the poore myse, accordyng vnto the fable of Esope. The copie of Antoni Anes Pinteado his letters patentes, wherby the king of Portugale made him knyght of his house, after al his troubles and imprisonment, which, by wrong information made to the king, he had susteined of long time, being at the last deliuered, his cause knowen and manifested to the kyng by a grey fryer the kynges confessour. I The kyng do geue you to vnderstande lorde Frances Desseosa, one of my counsaile, and o∣uerseer of my house, that in consideration of the good seruice which Antonie Anes Pintea∣do, the sonne of Iohn Anes, dwellyng in the towne called the porte, hath done vnto me, my wyl and pleasure is, to make him knight of mi house,Seuen hundred reis are .x. s. Alcayre is halfe a bushell. alowing to him in pension seuē hundred reis moneth∣ly, and euery day one alcayre of barly, as long as he keepeth a horse, and to be payde accordyng to the ordinaunce of my house. Prouydyng alwayes that he shal receyue but one mariage gifte: And this also in such condition, that the tyme which is excepted in our ordinaunce, forbiddyng such men to marry for gettyng suche chyldren as myght succeede them in this alowance, which is syxe yeeres after the makyng of this patent, shalbe fyrst ex∣pired before he do mary. I therfore commaund you to cause this to be entred in the booke called the Matricola of our housholde, vnder the title of knyghtes. And when it is so entred, let the clarke of ye Matricola, for the certaintie thereof, wryte on the
backsyde of this Aluala, or patent, the number of the leafe wher∣in this our graunt is entered. Which doone, let him returne this writing vnto the said Anthonie Anes Pinteado for his warrant. I Diego Henriques haue wrytten this in Almarin the twenty and two day of September, in the yeere of our Lorde .1551. And this beneuolence the kyng gaue vnto Anthonie Anes Pintea∣do the twentie and fyue day of Iuly this present yeere. Rey. The secretaries declaration written vnder the kynges graunt. YOur Maiestie hath vouchsafed, in respect & consideration of the good seruice of Antho∣nie Anes Pinteado, dwellyng in the port, and sonne of Iohn Anes, to make hym knyght of your house, with ordinarie allowance, of se∣uen hundred Reys pension by the moneth, and one Alcayr of Barley by the day, as long as he kepeth a Horse: and to be payde accordyng to the or∣dinance of your house, with condition that he shall haue but one mariage gyft: and that not within the space of .vi. yeeres after the makyng of these letters patentes. The secretaries note. En∣tered in the booke of the Matricola. Fol. 683. Francisco de Siquera. The coppie of the letter of Don Lewes the infant, and bro∣ther to the kyng of Portugale: sent into Eng∣land to Anthonie Anes Pinteado. ANthonie Anes Pinteado, I the infant bro∣ther to the kyng, haue me hartely commen∣ded vnto you. Peter Gonsalues is gone to seeke you, desiring to bryng you home a∣gaine into your countrey. And for that pur∣pose, hath with hym a safe conduct for you, graunted by the kyng, that thereby you maye freelye and without all feare come home. And all∣though the weather be foule and stormye, yet fayle not to come: For in the tyme that his Maiestie hath geuen you, you maye
do many thynges to your contentation and gratyfiyng the king, whereof I woulde be ryght glad: and to bryng the same to passe, wyll do all that lyeth in me for your profite. But forasmuche as Peter Gonsalues wyl make further declaration hereof vnto you, I say no more at this present. Wrytten in Luxburne the eyght day of December. Anno. M.D.LII. The infant Don Lewes. AL these forsayde wrytynges I sawe vnder seale, in the house of my frende Nicholas Liese, with whom Pinteado left them, at his vnfortunate departyng to Guinea. But not∣withstandyng all these freendly letters and fayre promises, Pinteado durst not attempt to goe home, neyther to keepe company with the Portugales his countrey men, without the presence of other: forasmuch as he had secrete admonitions that they enten∣ded to sley hym, yf tyme and place myght haue serued theyr wic∣ked entent. The second viage to Guinea. AS in the fyrst viage I haue declared rather the order of the historie, then the course of the nauigation, wherof at that time I could haue no perfect information: so in the dis∣cription of this seconde viage, my cheefe in∣tent hath been to  the course of the same, accordyng to the obseruation and or∣dinary custome of the maryners, and as I receyued it at the handes of an expert Pilot, beyng one of the cheefe in this viage, who also with his owne handes wrote a briefe declaration of the same, as he founde and tryed al thynges, not by coniecture, but by the art of saylyng, and instrumentes parteynyng to the mari∣ners facultie. Not therefore assumyng to my selfe the commen∣dations due vnto other, neyther so bolde as in any part to change or otherwyse dispose the order of this viage, so well obserued by
arte and experyence, I haue thought good to set foorth the same, in suche sort and phrase of speache as is commonly vsed among them, and as I receyued it of the sayd pilot, as I haue said. Take it therefore as foloweth. In the yeere of our lorde .1554. the .11. daye of October, we departed the ryuer of Temmes with three goodly shyppes, the one called the Trinitie, a ship of the burden of seuenscore tun, the other called ye Barthelmew, a shyppe of the burden of .lxxxx. the thyrd was the Iohn Euangelist, a shyp of seuenscore tunne. With the sayde shyppes and two pynnesses (whereof the one was drowned in the coast of Englande) we went forwarde on our vyage, and stayed at Douer .xiiii. dayes. We stayed also at Rye three or foure dayes. Moreouer last of all we touched at Darthmouth. The fyrst day of Nouember at .ix of the clocke at nyght, de∣partyng from the coaste of Englande, we sette of the stert, bea∣ryng southwest al that nyght in the sea, and the next day all day, and the next nyght after, vntyl the thyrde day of the sayde moneth about noone, makyng our way good, dyd runne .60. leagues. Item from .xii. of the clocke the thyrde daye, tyll .xii. of the clocke the .iiii. day of the sayde moneth, makyng our way good southest, dyd runne euery three houres two leagues, which a∣mounteth to .xvi. leagues the whole. Item from .xi. of the clocke the .iiii. day, to .xii. of the clocke the .v. day, running southwest in the sea, dyd runne .xii. leagues. Item runnyng from .xii. of the clocke the .v day, vntyll .xii. of the cloke the .vi. day, runnyng southeast, dyd runne xviii. leagues. And so from .xii. of the clocke the .vi. day, vntyll .xii. of the clocke the .vii. day, runnyng southsouthwest, dyd runne euery houre .ii. leagues, which amount to .xlviii. leagues the whole. Item from .xii. of the clocke the .vii. day, tyll .iii. of the clocke the .viii. day, southsouthwest runnyng in the sea, dyd runne .xxx. leagues. Item from three of the clocke the .viii. day, vntill .iii. of the clocke the .ix. day, runnyng southsouthwest, dyd runne .xxx. leagues. Item from .iii. of the clocke the .ix. day, tyll .iii. of the clocke
the .x. daye, dyd southsoutheast in runnyng in the sea the summe of .xxiiii. leagues. Also from .iii. of the clocke the .x. day, vntyll .xii of the clocke the .xi. daye, dyd runne southsouthwest the summe of .xii. leagues, and from .xii. of the clocke, tyll .vi of the sayde daye, dyd runne vi. leagues. Running south and by west in the sea, from .vi. of the clocke the xi. day, til .vi. of the clocke the xii. day, dyd runne .xxxvi. leagues. From .vi. of the clocke at after noone the .xii. daye, tyll .vi. of the clocke the .xiii. daye at after noone, dyd runne .xiii. leagues. Item from .vi. of the clocke the .xiii. daye, tyll .vi. of the clocke the .xiiii. day at after noone, we were becalmed, that we coulde lye southwest with a sayle. And the .xv. daye in the mornyng, the wynd came to the East and Eastnortheast. The .xvii. daye in the mornyng,The Ile of Madera. we had syght of the Ile of Madera, whiche doth ryse to hym that commeth in the northnortheast part vpryght lande in the west part of it, and very hygh: and to the south∣southeast a lowe long lande, and a long poynt, with a saddle tho∣rough the myddest of it, standeth in the .xxxii. degrees: and in the west part, many sprynges of water runnyng downe from the mountayne, and many whyte fieldes lyke vnto corne fieldes, and some whyte houses to the southeast parte of it: and the toppe of the mountayne sheweth very ragged if you may see it, and in the northeast part there is a byght or bay as though it were a harborowe: Also in the sayd part, there is a rocke a litle distance from the shore, and ouer the sayde byght, you shall see a great gap in the mountayne. The .xix. day at .xii. of the clocke, we had syght of the Ile of Palmes and Teneriffa and the Canaries.The Ile of palmes. Teneriffa. The Canaries. The Ile of Palme riseth round, and lyeth southeast and northwest, and the northwest part is lowest. In the south, is a round hyll ouer the head land, and an other round hyll aboue that in the land. There is betwene the Southeast part of the Ile of Madera and the northwest part of the Ile of Palme .lvii. leagues.From Madera to the Ile of Palmes. This Ile of Palme lyeth in the .xxix. degrees. And our course from Madera to the Ile of Palme was south, & south and by west, so that we had sight of Te∣neriffa & of the Canaries. The southeast part of the Ile of Palme, and the northnortheast of Teneriffa, lieth southeast and northwest,
and betweene them is twentie leagues. Teneriffa and the great Canarie, called Grancanaria, and the West part of Fortisuentura, standeth in .xxvii. degrees and a halfe. Gomera,Grancanaria. Fortisuentura. The Iland of Gomera. is a fayre Iland and very ragged, and lyeth West Southwest of Teneriffa. And who so euer wyll come betweene them two Ilandes, must come South and by East, and in the South part of Gomera is a towne and a good rode in the sayde parte of the Ilande: and it standeth in twentie and seuen degrees and three terces. Teneriffa is an hygh land, & a great hygh pycke, lyke a suger loafe:Teneriffa. Snowe. and vp∣on the said picke is snow throughout al the whole yeere. And by reason of that pycke it may be knowen aboue al other Ilandes, and there we were becalmed the .xx. day of Nouember, from syxe of the clocke in the mornyng, vntyl foure of the clocke at after noone. Betweene Gomera, and Cape de las Barbas. THe .xxii. day of Nouember, vnder the Tropyke of Cancer, the Sunne goeth downe West and by South.The coast of Barbarie. Cape blanke. Upon the coast of Barbarie .xxv. leagues by North Cape blanke at three leagues of the mayne, there is .xv. fadome, and good shelly grounde, & sand among, and no streames, and two small Ilandes standyng in the .xxii. degrees & a terce. From Gomera to Cape de las Barbas is an hundred leagues, and our course was South and by East. The sayde Cape standeth in xxii. and a halfe: and all that coast is flatte .xvi. or xvii. fadome deepe. Uii. or .viii, leagues of frm the ryuer de Oro to cape de las Barbas,The ryuer of de Oro. there vse many Spanyardes and Portugales to trade for fyshyng, duryng the moneth af Nouember: and al that coast is very lowe landes. Also we went from cape de las Barbas south¦southwest, and southwest and by south, tyl we brought our selues in .xx. degrees and a halfe, reckonyng our selues .vii. leagues of: and that was the least sholes of cape Blanke. Then we went South, vntil we brought our selues in thyrtene degrees, reckonyng our selues twentie and fyue leagues of. And in fyfteene degrees, we did reare the crossiers,The Crosers or crosse sarres▪ and we myght haue reared them sooner if we had loked for them: They are not ryght a Crosse in the moneth of Nouember, by reason of the
nyghtes are short there. Neuerthelesse we had the syght of them the .xxix. day of the sayde moneth at nyght. The fyrst of December out thyrteene degrees, we set our course South and by East, vntyl the fourth day of December at twelue of the clocke the same day. Then we were in niene de∣grees and a terce, reckonyng our selues thyrtye leagues of the sholes of the ryuer called Ria Grande,Rio Grande. beyng West Southwest of them: the whiche sholes be thyrtie leagues long. The fourth of December▪ we began to set our course South∣east, we beyng in syxe degrees and a halfe. The nienth day of December we set our course East South∣east: the fourteenth day of the sayde moneth, we set our course East, we beyng in fyue degrees and a halfe, reckonyng our sel∣ues thyrtie and syxe leagues from the coast of Guinea. The .xix. of the sayde moneth, we set our course East and by North,Cape Mensu∣rado. The ryuer of Sesto. reckoning our selues .xvii. leagues distant from Cape Mensurado, the sayde Cape beyng East. Northeast of vs, and the ryuer of Sesto beyng East. The .xxi. day of the sayde moneth, we fel with Cape Mensu∣rado to the Southeast, about two leagues of. This Cape may be easely knowen, by reason the rysyng of it is like a Porpose head. Also toward the Southeast there are three trees, whereof the Eastermost tree is the hyghest, and the myddlemost is lyke a hie stacke, and the Southermost lyke vnto a Gibet: and vppon the mayne, are foure or fyue hygh hylles rysyng one after an other lyke rounde hoommockes or hyllockes. And the Southeast of the three trees, is three trees lyke a brandierwyse: and all the coast along is whyte sand. The sayde Cape standeth within a li∣tle in syxe degrees. The .xxii. of December, we came to the ryuer of Sesto, and remayned there vntyll the .xxix. day of the sayde moneth. Here we thought it best to send before vs the pynnesse to the ryuer of Dulce, called Rio Dulce, that they myght haue the begynnyng of the market before the commyng of the Iohn. At the ryuer of Sesto, we had a Tunne of graynes. This ri∣uer standeth in .vi. degrees,The ryuer of Sesto. Rio Dulce. lackyng a terce. From the ryuer of Sesto to Rio Dulce, is .xxv. leagues. Rio Dulce standeth in fyue de∣grees and a halfe. The ryuer of Sesto is easye to be knowen, by
reason there is a ledge of rockes on the Southeast parte of the Rode. And at the entryng into the hauen, are fyue or sixe trees that beare no leaues. This is a good harborowe, but very narow at the entrance into the ryuer. There is also a rocke in the hauens mouth ryght as you enter. And all that coast betweene Cape de Monte, and cape de las Palmas, lyeth Southeast and by East,Cape de monte. Northwest and by West, being three leagues of the shore, And you shall haue in some places rockes two leagues of: and that betweene the riuer of Sesto and cape de las Palmas.Cape de las Palmas. Betweene the ryuer of Sesto & the ryuer Dulce. is .xxv. leagues: and the high lande that is betweene them both, is called Cakeado,The land of Cakeado. being eight leagues from the ryuer of Sesto. And to the South∣eastwarde of him, is a place called Shawgro, and an other called Shyawe or Shauo, where you may get freshe water.Shauo. Of this Shy∣awe, lyeth a redge of rockes: and to the Southeastwarde, lyeth a hedlande called Croke. Betweene Cakeado and Croke,Croke. is .ix. or ten leagues. To the Southeastwarde of, is a harborowe called saint Vincent: Ryght ouer agaynst sainct Vincent,Sainct Vin∣centes har∣borowe. is a rocke vnder the water, two leagues and a halfe of the shore. To the Southeast∣warde of that rocke you shall see an Ilande about three or foure leagues of: this Ilande is not paste a league of the shore. To the East Southeast of the Ilande, is a rocke that lyeth aboue the water, and by that rocke goeth in the ryuer of Dulce,The riuer Dulce. which you shall know by the sayde ryuer and rocke. The Northwest syde of the hauen, is flatte sande, and the Southeast syde thereof, is lyke an Ilande, and a bare platte without any trees, and so is it not in any other place. In the Rode, you shall ryde in xiii. or .xiiii. fadomes, good owes and sande, beyng the markes of the Rode to bryng the I∣lande and the Northeast lande togeather, and here we Ankered the last of December. The third day of Ianuary, we came from the riuer of Dulce. Note that cape de las Palmas, is a fayre high lande,Cape de las Palmas. but some lowe places thereof by the water syde looke lyke redde cliffes with whyte strakes lyke wayes, a cable length a peece, & this is to the East parte of the cape. This cape is the Southermost lande in all the coast of Guinea,The coast of Guinea. and standeth in foure degrees and a terce.
The coast from Cape de las palmas to Cape Trepoyntes, or the tres Puntas, is fayre and cleare without rocke or other daun∣ger. Twentie and fyue leagues from Cape de las Palmas, the lande is hygher then in any place, vntyl we come to Cape Trepoyntes. And about ten leagues before you come to Cape Trepoyntes, the land ryseth styll hygher and hygher, vntyl you come to Cape Tre∣poyntes. Also before you come to the sayde Cape, after other fyue leagues to the Northwest part of it, there is certayne broken grounde, with two great rockes, and within them in the byght of a bay,The castell of Arra. is a castel called Arra, parteining to the kyng of Portu∣gale. You shal know it by the sayd rockes that lye of it: for there is none suche from Cape de las Palmas to cape Trepoyntes. This coast lyeth East & by North, West & by South. From Cape de las Palmas to the sayd castel, is fourscore and fyfteene leagues. And the coast lyeth from the sayd castel to the westermost point of the Trepoyntes, Southeast and by South, Northwest and by North. Also the westermost poynt of the Trepoyntes, is a low land, lying halfe a myle out in the sea: and vppon the innermoste necke to the land ward, is a tuft of trees, & there we arryued the eleuenth day of Ianuary. The towne of Samma.The twelf day of Ianuary, we came to a towne called Sam∣ma or Samua, beyng .viii. leagues from Cape Trepoyntes toward East Northeast. Betweene Cape Trepoyntes and the towne of Samua, is a great ledge of rockes a great way out in the sea. We continued foure dayes at that towne: & the captayne therof would needs haue a pledge a shore.The pledge was syr Iohn yok his neuew. But when they receiued the pledge, they kept him still, & would trafficke no more, but shot of theyr ordinance at vs. They haue two or three peeces of ordinance and no more. The .xvi. day of the sayde mooneth, we made recko∣nyng to come to a place called Cape Corea,Cape Corea. where captayne Don Ihon dwelleth, whose men entertayned vs frendly. This Cape Corea, is foure leagues Eastwarde of the castell of Mina, o∣ther wyse called La mina or Castello de mina,The castell of mina partey∣nyng to the kyng of Portu∣gale. where we arryued the .xviii. day of the moneth. Here we made sayle of all our cloth, sauing two or three packes. The .xxvi. day of the same moneth we weighed anker, and departed from thence to the Trinitie, whiche was .vii. leagues
Eastwarde of vs, where she solde her wares. Then they of the Trinitie wylled vs to go Eastwarde of that .viii or .ix. leagues, to sell part of theyr wares, in a place called Perecow,Perecowe. Perecowe grands. and an other place named Perecow Grande, beyng the eastermost place of both these, whiche you shall knowe by a great rounde hyll neere vnto it, named Monte Rodondo, lying westward from it,Monte rodon∣d. and by the water syde are many hygh palme trees. From hence dyd we set forth homewarde the .xiii. day of February, and plyed vp alongest tyll we came within .vii or .viii. leagues to Cape Tre∣pointes. About .viii. of the clocke the .xv. day at afternoone, we dyd cast about to seawarde: and beware of the currantes,The currantes for they wyl deceiue you sore. Whosoeuer shall come from the coaste of Mina homewarde,From Mina homewarde. let hym be sure to make his way good west, vntyl he recken hym selfe as farre as Cape de las Pal∣mas, where the currant setteth alwayes to the eastwarde. And within .xx. leagues eastwarde of Cape de las Palmas, is a ryuer called De los Potos, where you may haue freshe water and balasse enough,Rio de los Po∣tos. Iuerye. and plentie of Iuery or Elephantes teeth. This ryuer standeth in foure degrees, and almost two terces. And when you reckon your selfe as farre shotte as Cape de las Palmas, beyng in a degree, or a degree and a halfe,Cabe de las Palmes. you may go west, & west by north, vntyl you come in three degrees: and then you may go west northwest, and northwest and by west, vntyll you come in fyue degrees, and then northwest. And in the .vi. degrees, we met northerly wyndes, and great rooflyng of tydes. And as we coulde iudge, the currantes went to the north northwest. Furthermore betweene Cape de Monte and Cape verde, go great currantes which deceiue many men.Currantes. The .xxii. daye of Apryll, we were in .viii. degrees and two terces: and so we ranne to the northwest, hauyng the wynde at northeast and east northeast, and sometymes at east, vntyll we were at .xviii. degrees and a terce, whiche was on Maye daye. And so from .xviii. and two terces, we had the wynde at east and east northeast, and sometymes at east south∣east: and then we reckened the Ilandes of Cape Verde easte southeast of vs, we iudgyng our selues to bee .xlviii. lea∣gues of. And in .xx. and .xxi. degrees, we had the wynde more easterly to the southwarde then before. And so we ran
to the Northwest & north northwest, and sometymes north & by west and north, vntyll we came into .xxxi. degrees, where we rec∣koned our selues a hundred and fourescore leagues southwest, and by south of the Iland de Flore or de los Flores,The Ilede Flora. and there wee met with the wynd at south southeast, and set our course northeast. In .xxiii. degrees, we had the wynde at the South and south∣west, and then we set our course north northeast, and so we ranne to .xl. degrees, and then we set our course northeast, the wynde be∣ing at the southwest, and hauyng the Ile de Flore East of vs, and xvii. leagues of. In .xli. degrees, we met with the wynde at Northeast, and so we ranne northwestwarde, then we met with the wynde at the west northwest, and at the west within .vi. leagues, runnyng to∣warde the northwest, and then we cast about, and laye northeast, vntyll we came in .xlii. degrees, where wee set our course East northeast,The Ile of Coruo. iudgyng the Ile of Coruo south and by west of vs, and xxxvi. leagues distant from vs. A remembrance that the .xxi day of May, we communed with Iohn Rafe, and he thought it best to goe northeast, and iudged him selfe .xxv. leagues Eastwarde to the Ile de Flore, and in .xxxix. degrees and a halfe. Where they lost the sight of the North starre. Howe the com∣passe doeth varie.Note that in the fourth day of September, vnder niene de∣grees, we lost the sight of the north starre. Note also, that in the .xlv. degrees, the compasse is varied .viii. degrees to the West. Item, in .xl. degrees, the compasse dyd vary .xv. degrees in the whole. Item, in .xxx. degrees and a halfe, the compasse is varyed .v. degrees to the West. Be it also in memorie, that two or three dayes before we came to cape Trepointes, the pynnesse went alongest the shore, thin∣kyng to sell some of our wares, and so we came to Anker three or foure leagues west and by south of the cape Trepointes, where we lefte the Trinitie. Then our pynnesse came aboorde with all our men: the Pynnesse also tooke in more wares. They tolde me moreouer that they would goe to a place where the Prymrose was,The Primrose. and had receyued muche golde at the first vyage to these parties,
and tolde me furthermore that it was a good place: but I fea∣ryng a brigantine that was then vppon the coast, dyd wey and fo∣low them, & left the Trinitie about foure leagues of from vs, and there we rode agaynst that towne foure dayes: so that Martine by his owne desire, and assent of some of the Commissioners that were in the pinnesse, went a shore to the towne, and there Iohn Berin went to trafique from vs, being three myles of trafcking at an other towne. The towne is called Samma or Samua, for Sam∣ma and Sammaterra, are the names of the two first townes,The towne of Samma. where we did traficke for golde, to the Northeast of cape Trepoints.Golde. Hetherto continueth the course of the vyage, as it was descri∣bed by the sayd Pylot. Now therfore I wil speake somewhat of the countrey and people, and of such thinges as are brought from thence. They brought from thence at the last vyage,Golde foure hundred weight. Graynes. foure hundred pound weight and odde of gold, of .xxii. Carrattes and one graine in finenesse: also .xxxvi. buttes of graynes, and about two hun∣dred and fyftie Elephantes teeth of all quantities. Of these, I sawe and measured some of .ix. spannes in length,Eleuantes teeth. as they were crooked. Some of them were as bygge as a mans thygh aboue the knee, and weyed about foure score and tenne pounde weight a peece. They say that some one hath been seene of a hundred and .xxv. pounde weyght. Other there were which they call the teeth of calues, of one or two or three yeeres, whereof some were a foote and a halfe, some two foote, and some three, or more, ac∣cordyng to the age of the beast. These great teeth or tuskes, growe in the vpper iawe downewarde, and not in the nether iawe vpwarde, wherin the paynters and arras woorkers are de∣ceyued. At this laste vyage was brought from Guinea the head of an Elephante, of suche huge bygnesse,The head of an Elephant. that only the bones or crauewe thereof, besyde the nether iawe and great tuskes, weyghed about two hundred weyght, and was as muche as I coulde well lyfte from the grounde: insomuche that con∣sideryng also heerewith the weyght of two suche great teethe, the nether iawes with the lesse teeth, the tongue, the great han∣gyng eares, the bygge and long snoute or troonke, with all the fleshe, braynes, and skynne, with all other partes belongyng to the whole head, in my iudgement it could wey little lesse then
fyue hundred weight. This head dyuers haue seene in the house of the woorthie merchant syr Andrewe Iudde, where also I saw it, and beheld it, not onely with my bodyly eyes, but much more with the eyes of my mynde and spirite, considered by the woorke, the cunnyng and wysedome of the workemaister:The contem∣plations of Gods workes. without which consideration, the sight of suche straunge and wonderfull thinges may rather seeme curiosities, then profitable contemplations. The Elephante (whiche some call an Oliphante) is the big∣gest of all foure footed beastes,The description and properties of the Elephant his forelegges are longer then his hynder, he hath ankles in the lower parte of his hynder leg∣ges, and fyue toes on his feete vndiuided, his snoute or troonke is so long, and in suche fourme, that it is to him in the steede of a hande: for hee neyther eateth nor drynketh but by bryngyng his troonke to his mouth, therewith hee helpeth vp his maister or keeper, therwith he ouerthroweth trees. Besyde his two great tuskes, he hath on euery syde of his mouth foure teethe, where∣with he eateth and gryndeth his meate: eyther of these teeth, are almost a spanne in length, as they growe along in the iawe, and are about two inches in heyght, and almost as much in thick∣nesse. The tuskes of the Male are greater then of the Fe∣male: his tongue is very litle, and so farre in his mouth, that it can not be seene: of all beastes they are most gentle and tracta∣ble, for by many sundry wayes they are taught, and doe vn∣derstande: insomuche that they learne to doe due honour to a Kyng, and are of quicke sense and sharpenesse of wyt. When the Male hath once seasoned the Female, he neuer after tou∣cheth her. The Male Elephante lyueth two hundred yeeres, or at the least one hundred and twentie: the Female almost as long, but the floure of theyr age, is but .lx. yeeres, as some wryte. They can not suffer wynter or colde: they loue ryuers, and wil often goe into them vp to the snoute, wherewith they blow and snuffe, and playe in the water: but swymme they can not for the weyght of theyr bodyes. Plinie and Solinie wryte, that they vse none adulterie. If they happen to meete with a man in wyldernesse beyng out of the way, gentelly they will goe be∣fore him, and bryng him into the playne waye. Ioyned in battayle, they haue no small respecte vnto them that be woun∣ded: for they bryng them that are hurte or weary into the mid∣dle
of the army to be defended: they are made tame by drinking the iuise of barley. They haue continual war agaynst Dragons, which desire theyr blood, bycause it is very colde:Debate be∣tweene the Ele∣phant and the Dragon. and therfore the Dragon lying awayte as the Elephant passeth by, wyndeth his tayle (being of exceeding length) about the hynder legges of the Elephant, and so steying him, thrusteth his head into his troonke and exhausteth his breath, or els byteth him in the eare, where∣vnto he can not reache with his troonke, and when the Elephant waxeth faynte, he falleth downe on the Serpent, beyng nowe full of blood, and with the poyse of his body breaketh him: so that his owne blood with the blood of the Elephant, runneth out of him myngeled togeather, which beyng colde, is congealed into that substance which the Apothecaries call Sanguis Draco∣nis, (that is) Dragons blood, otherwyse called Cinnabaris,Sanguis Dra∣conis. al∣though there be an other kynde of Cinnabaris,Cinnabaris. commonly called cinoper or vermilion, which the painters vse in certaine colours. They are also of three kyndes, as of the maryshes, the plaines, and the mountaynes, no lesse differyng in conditions.Three kyndes of Elephantes. Philostra∣tus writeth, that as much as the Elephant of Libia in bygnesse passeth the horse of Nysea, so muche doeth the Elephantes of India exceede them of Libia: for of the Elephantes of India, some haue been seene of the heyght of .ix. cubites: the other doe so greatly feare these, that they dare not abyde the sight of them. Of the Indian Elephantes, only the Males haue tuskes, but of them of Ethiopia and Libia, both kyndes are tusked: they are of dyuers heyghtes, as of .xii.xiii. and .xiiii. dordantes, euery do∣drant benig a measure of niene ynches. Some wryte that an Ele∣phant is bygger then three wylde Oxen or Buffes. They of In∣dia are blacke, or of the colour of a Mouse, but they of Ethiope or Guinea, are browne: the hyde or skynne of them all, is very harde, and without heare or brystels: theyr eares are two dodrantes brode, and theyr eyes very litle. Our men sawe one drynkyng at a ryuer in Guinea, as they sayled into the lande. Of other properties and conditions of the Elephant, as of theyr marueylous docilicie, of theyr fyght and vse in the war∣res, of theyr generation and chastitie, when they were fyrste seene in the theaters and tryumphes of the Romans, howe they are taken and tamed, and when they caste theyr tuskes,
with the vse of the same in medicine, who so desireth to know, let him reade Plinie, in the .viii. booke of his natural hystorie. He al∣so writeth in his xii. booke, that in olde tyme they made many goodly woorkes of Iuery or Elephants teeth:Woorkes of Iuery. as tables, tressels, postes of houses, rayles, lattesses for wyndowes, Images of their goddes, and dyuers other thinges of Iuery, both coloured and vncoloured, & intermyxt with sundry kyndes of precious woods, as at this day are made certayne Chayres, Lutes, and Uirgi∣nalles. They had suche plentie thereof in olde tyme, that (as far as I remember) Iosephus wryteth, that one of the gates of Hierusalem was called Porta Eburnea, (that is) the Iuery gate. The whytenesse thereof was so muche esteemed, that it was thought to represent the naturall fayrenesse of mans skynne: in∣somuche that such as went about to set foorth (or rather corrupt) naturall beautie with colours and payntyng, were reprooued by this prouerbe, Ebur atramento candefacere, that is, to make Iuery whyte with ynke. The Poettes also, describyng the fayre neckes of beautifull virgins, call them Eburnea colla, that is, I∣uery neckes. And to haue sayde thus muche of Elephantes and Iuery, it may suffice. Now therfore I wil speake somewhat of the people and theyr maners,The people of Africa. and maner of lyuyng, with also an other briefe descrip∣tion of Africa. It is to vnderstande, that the people which nowe inhabite the regions of the coast of Guinea, and the myd partes of Africa, as Libia the inner, and Nubia, with diuers other great and large regions about the same, were in olde tyme called Ethiopes and Nigrite, which we now call Moores, Moorens, or Negros, a people of beastly lyuyng, without a God, lawe, religion, or com∣mon wealth, and so scorched and vexed with the heate of the sun, that in many places they curse it when it ryseth. Of the regions and people about the inner Libia (called Libia Interior) Gemma Phrysius writeth thus.Libia Interior. Libia Interior, is very large and desolate, in the whiche are many horrible Wyldernesses and mountaynes, replenished with dyuers kyndes of wylde and monstrous beastes and Ser∣pentes. Fyrst from Mauritania or Barbarie towarde the South is Getulia,Getulia. a rough and saluage region, whose inhabitauntes are wylde and wanderyng people. After these folowe the
people called Melanogetuli and Pharusii, whiche wander in the wyldernesse, carying with them great gourdes of water. The Ethiophians, called Nigrite, occupie a great part of Aphrica,Ethiopes. Nigrite. and are extended to the West Ocean. Southwarde also they reach to the ryuer Nigritis, whose nature agreeth with the ryuer of Nilus,The ryuer Ni∣gritis or Se∣nega. forasmuch as it is increased and diminished at the same tyme, and bryngeth foorth the lyke beastes as the Crocodile. By reason whereof, I thynke this to be the same ryuer whiche the Portugales call Senega: For this ryuer is also of the same nature. It is furthermore marueylous and very strange that is sayde of this ryuer: And this is, that on the one syde thereof,A strāge thyng thinhabitauntes are of hyghe stature and blacke, and on the o∣ther syde, of browne or tawnie coloure, and lowe stature, whiche thyng also our men confyrme to be true. There are also other people of Libia called Garamantes, whose women are common:Garamantes. for they contracte no matrimonie, neyther haue respecte to chastitie. After these are the nations of the people called Pyrei, Sathiodaphnite, Odrangi, Mimaces, Lynxamate, Dolopes, Agangine,People of Libia. Leuce Ethiopes, Xilicei Ethiopes, Calcei Ethiopes, and Nubi. These haue the same situation in Ptolomie that they nowe geue to the kyngdome of Nubia. Here are certayne Christians vnder the dominion of the great Emperour of Ethiopia, cal∣led Prester Iohn. From these towarde the west,Prester Iohn. is a great nation of people called Aphricerones, whose region (as farre as may bee geathered by coniecture) is the same that is nowe called Regnum Orguene,Regnum Or∣guene. confinyng vppon the east partes of Guinea. From hence Westwarde, and somewhat towarde the North, are the kyngdomes of Gambra and Budomel,Gambra. not farre from the ryuer of Senega. And from hence towarde the inlande regions, and along by the sea coast, are the regions of Ginoia or Guinea, which we commonly call Gynnee. On the West syde of these regions towarde the Ocean,Guinea or Cap. Perde. The Portu∣gales nauiga∣tions to Bra∣sile. is the cape or poynt called Gabouerde, or Caput viride (that is) the greene cape, to the whiche the Portugales fyrst directe theyr course when they sayle to America or the lande of Brasile. Then departyng from hence, they turne to the ryght hande towarde the quarter of the wynde called Garbino, whiche is betwene the west and the south. But to speake somewhat more of Ethiopia.Ethiopia. Although
there are many nations of people so named, yet is Ethiopia chiefely diuided into two partes, whereof the one is called E∣thiopia vnder Egypte,The Ilande of Meroe. a great and ryche region. To this par∣teyneth the Ilande of Meroe, imbrased rounde about with the streames of the ryuer Nilus. In this Ilande women reigned in olde tyme.The queene of Saba. Iosephus writeth, that it was somtyme called Sabea: and that the queene of Saba came from thence to Hierusalem, to beare the wysedome of Salomon. From hence towarde the East, reigneth the sayde Christian Emperour Prester Iohn, whom some call Papa Iohannes,Prester Iohn Emperour of Ethiopia. and other saye that he is called Pean Iuan (that is) great Iohn, whose Empire reacheth farre beyonde Nilus, and is extended to the coastes of the redde sea and Indian sea. The myddle of the region is almost in the .66. degrees of longitude, and .xii. degrees of latitude. About this region inhabite the people called Clodu,People of the east syde of Africa. Risophagi, Babilonij, Axiunite, Molili, and Molibe. After these is the region called Trogloditica, whose inhabitauntes dwell in caues and dennes: for these are theyr houses,Ephiophagi. and the flesh of serpents theyr meate, as writeth Plinie, and Diodorus Siculus. They haue no speache, but rather a grynnyng and chatteryng.People with∣out heades. There are also people without heades, called Blemines, hauyng theyr eyes and mouth in theyr breste. Lykewyse Strucophagi, and naked Ganphasantes: Satyrs also, which haue nothyng of men but onely shape. More∣ouer Oripei, great hunters. Mennones also, and the region of Smyrnophora,Myrre. Azania. which bringeth forth myrre. After these is the regiō of Azania, in the which many Elephantes are founde. A great part of the other regions of Afrike that are beyond the Equinoc∣tiall line,Regnum Melinde. are nowe ascrybed to the kyngdome of Melinde, whose inhabitauntes are accustomed to traffike with the nations of A∣rabie, and theyr kyng is ioyned in frendshyp with the kyng of Portugale, and payeth tribute to Prester Iohn. The other Ethiope, called Ethiopia Interior (that is) the inner Ethiope, is not yet knowne for the greatnesse thereof, but one∣ly by the sea coastes:Ethiopia In∣terior. yet is it described in this maner. Fyrst from the Equinoctiall towarde the South, is a great region of Ethiopians, which bryngeth foorth whyte Elephantes, Ti∣gers,Whyte Ele∣phantes. and the beastes called Rhinocerontes. Also a region that bryngeth foorth plentie of Cinamome, lying betwene the
braunches of Nilus. Also the kyngdome of Habech or Habasia, a region of Christien men,Habasia. lying both on this syde and beyonde Nilus. Here are also the Ethiopians, called Ichthiophagi (that is) suche as lyue only by fyshe,Ichthiophagi. & were sometymes subdued by the warres of great Alexander. Furthermore the Ethiopians cal∣led Rhapsii, and Anthropophagi,An thropopha∣gi. that are accustomed to mans fleshe, inhabite the regions neare vnto the mountaynes called Montes Lunae, (that is) the mountaynes of the Moone.Montes Lunae. Gaza∣tia, is vnder the Tropyke of Capricorne. After this,Gazatia, foloweth the front of Affrike, the Cape of Buena Speranza, or Caput Bonae Spei, (that is) the Cape of good hope,Cape bonae Spei. by the which they passe that sayle from Spaine to Calicut. But by what names the Capes and gulfes are called, forasmuche as the same are in euery globe and carde, it were here superfluous to rehearse them. Some wryte that Affrica was so named by the Grecians, be∣cause it is without colde. For the Greeke letter Alpha, or A,Aphrica with∣out cold. signifieth priuation, voyde, or without: and Phrice, signifieth colde. For in deede although in the steade of wynter, they haue a cloudy and tempestious season, yet is it not colde,The wynter of Africa. but rather smootheryng hotte, with also hotte shewres of rayne, and some∣where suche scorchyng wyndes, that what by one meanes and other, they seeme at certayne tymes to lyue as it were in forna∣ces, and in maner alredy halfe way in Purgatorie or hell Gem∣ma Phrisius wryteth, that in certayne partes of Affrica,Flames of fyre & noyse in the ayre. (as in Atlas the greater) the ayre in the nyght season is seene shynyng, with many strange fyers and flames rysyng in maner as hyghe as the Moone: and that in the element are sometyme hearde as it were the sounde of pypes, trumpettes, and drommes: Which noises may perhaps be caused by the vehement and sundry mo∣tions of suche fyrye exhalations in the ayre, as we see the lyke in many experiences wrought by fyre, ayre, & winde. The holow∣nesse also, & diuers reflexions and breaking of the cloudes,The myddle region of the ayre is cold. may be great causes hereof, beside the vehement cold of the middle region of the ayre, wherby the said fyrie exhalations, ascendyng thither, are sodenly strycken backe with great force: For euen commen and dayly experience teacheth vs, by the whyssyng of a burning Torche, what noyse fyre maketh in the ayre,The stryfe of elementes. & much more where it stryueth when it is inclosed with ayre, as appeareth in gunnes,
and as the like is seene in only aire enclosed, as in Orgen pipes, and such other instrumentes that go by winde. For wynd (as say the Philosophers) is none other then aire vehemently moued,Wynde. as we see in a payre of bellowes, and such other. Some of our men of good credit that were in this last viage to Guinea, affirme ernestly that in the night season they felt a sen∣sible heate to come from the beames of the Moone. The which thyng,The heate of the Moone. although it be strange and insensible to vs that inhabite colde regions, yet doth it stand with good reason that it may so be, forasmuche as the nature of starres and planettes (as wry∣teth Plinie) consisteth of fyre,The nature of the starres. and conteyneth in it a spirite of life▪ which can not be without heate. And that the Moone geueth heate vppon the earth, the Pro∣phet Dauid seemeth to confirme in his .Cxxi. Psalme, where speakyng of such men as are defended from euils by goddes pro∣tection, he sayeth thus: Per diem Sol non exuret te, nec Luna per noctem. That is to say, In the day the Sunne shall not burne thee, nor the Moone by nyght. They say furthermore that in certayne places of the sea, they saw certayne streames of water,Spoutes of water falling out of the aire. which they call spoutes, fallyng out of the ayre into the sea, and that some of these are as byg as the great pyllers of Churches: Insomuch that sometymes they fall into shyps, and put them in great daunger of drownyng. Some phantasye that these should be the Caractes of Heauen,Carractes of heauen. whiche were all opened at Noes fludde. But I thynke them rather to be such fluxions and eruptions as Aristotle in his booke de Mundo saith, to chaunce in the sea. For speakyng of suche strange thynges as are seene often tymes in the sea, he wryteth thus. Oftentymes also euen in the sea are seene euaporati∣ons of fyre, and suche eruptions and breakyng foorth of springs, that the mouthes of ryuers are opened, Whyrlepooles, and fluxions are caused of such other vehement motions,Vehement mo∣tions in the sea. not only in the myddest of the sea, but also in creekes and streyghtes. At cer∣tayne tymes also, a great quantitie of water is sodenly lyfted vp and carryed about with the Moone. &c. By whiche woordes of Aristotle it doth appeare that suche waters may bee lyfted vp in one place at one tyme, and sodenlye fall downe in an other place at an other tyme. And hereunto perhappes parteyneth
it that Rychard Chaunceller tolde me that he harde Sebastian Cabot reporte, that (as farre as I remenber) eyther about the coastes of Brasile or Rio de Plata,A straunge thyng. his shyppe or pumesse was suddaynly lyfted from the sea, and cast vppon lande, I wotte not howe farre. The whiche thyng, and suche other lyke wonder∣full and straunge woorkes of nature whyle I consyder, and call to rememberaunce the narownesse of mans vnderstandyng and knowledge, in comparyson of her myghtie power,The power of nature. I can but ceasse to marueyle and confesse with Plinie, that nothyng is to her impossible, the leaste parte of whose power is not yet knowen to men. Many thynges more our men sawe and con∣sydered in this vyage, worthy to be noted, whereof I haue thought good to put some in memorie, that the reader may aswell take pleasure in the varietie of thynges, as knowledge of the historie. Among other thynges therefore touchyng the maners and nature of the people, this may seeme straunge, that theyr princes and noble men vse to pounce and rase theyr skinnes with pretie knottes in dyuers formes, as it were branched damaske,They rase theyr skynnes. thynkyng that to be a decent ornament. And albeit they go in maner all naked, yet are many of them,Fyne iewelles. and especially their wo∣men, in maner laden with collars, braslettes, hoopes, and chaines, eyther of golde, copper, or Iuery. I my selfe haue one of theyr braselettes of Iuery,A braslet. waying two pound and .vi. ounces of Troy weyght, whiche make .xxxviii. ounces: this one of theyr wo∣men dyd weare vpon her arme. It is made of one whole peece of the byggest part of the tooth, turned and somewhat carued, with a hole in the myddest, wherein they put theyr handes to weare it on theyr arme. Some haue of euery arme one, and as many on theyr legges, wherwith some of them are so galded, that although they are in maner made lame therby, yet wyl they by no meanes leaue them of. Some weare also on theyr legges great shackels of bryght copper, which they thynke to be no lesse comely.Shackels. They weare also collars, braslettes, garlandes, and gyrdels, of cer∣tayne blewe stones lyke beades. Lykewyse some of theyr wo∣men weare on theyr bare armes certayne foresleeues, made of the plates of beaten golde. On theyr fingers also they weare ringes,Rynges. made of golden wyres, with a knotte or wreathe, lyke vnto that which chyldren make in a ryng of a ryshe. Among other thinges
of gold that our men bought of them for exchange of their wares, were certayne dogges chaynes and collers.Dogs chaines of golde. They are very ware people in theyr bargaynyng, and wyll not lose one sparke of golde of any value. They vse weyghtes and measures, and are very circumspect in occupying the same. They that shall haue to do with them, must vse them gentelly: for they wyl not traffike or bryng in any wares if they be euyll vsed. At the fyrst vyage that our men had into these parties, it so chaunced, that at theyr departure from the fyrst place where they dyd trafike, one of them eyther stole a muske catte, or tooke her away by force,A musk cat. not mystrustyng that that shoulde haue hyndred theyr bargaynyng in an other place whyther they intended to go. But for all the hast they coulde make with full sayles, the fame of theyr mysusage so preuented them, that the people of that place also, offended thereby, would bryng in no wares: Insomuche that they were inforced eyther to restore the cat, or pay for her at theyr price, before they coulde trafike there. Theyr houses are made of foure postes or trees, and couered with bowes.Their houses. Theyr common feedyng is of rootes, and suche fyshes as they take,Their feeding whereof they haue great plentie. There are also such sleeing fyshes as are seene in the sea of the West Indies. Our men salted of theyr fyshes, hopyng to prouide store thereof: but they wolde take no salte,Fleyng fyshes. and must therefore be eaten foorthwith as some saye. Howe be it, other affirme that if they be salted imme∣diatly after they be taken, they wyll last vncorrupted .x. or .xii. dayes. But this is more straunge, that part of such flesh as they caryed with them out of England,A strange thyng. and putrifyed there, became sweete againe at their returne to the clime of temperate regions. They vse also a strange makyng of bread, in this maner. They grynde betweene two stones with theyr handes as muche corne as they thynke may suffice theyr famylie,Their bread. and when they haue thus brought it to floure, they put thereto a certayne quan∣titie of water, and make therof very thin dough, which they stick vpon some post of theyr houses, where it is baked by the heate of the Sun: So that when the maister of the house or any of his fa∣mely wyll eate thereof, they take it downe, and eate it.
They haue very fayre wheate,Theyr wheats. the eare whereof is two hande∣fulles in length, and as bygge as a great Bulrush, and almost foure inches about where it is byggest. The stemme or straw, seemeth to be almost as byg as the litle fynger of a mans hande, or litle lesse. The graynes of this wheate are as byg as our pea∣son, rounde also, and very whyte, and somewhat shynyng, lyke pearles that haue lost theyr colour. Almost all the substance of them turneth into floure, and maketh litle branne or none. I told in one eare two hundred and threescore graynes. The eare is inclosed in three blades longer then it selfe, and of two ynches broade a peece. And by this fruitfulnesse the Sunne seemeth partly to recompence such greefes and molestations as they o∣therwyse receyue by the feruent heate thereof.The Sunne. It is doubtlesse a worthy contemplation to consider the contrary effectes of the Sunne: or rather the contrary passions of suche thynges as re∣ceyue the influence of his beames, eyther to theyr hurt or bene∣fyte. Theyr drynke is eyther water, or the iuise that droppeth from the cut branches of the barren Date trees, called Palmites.Theyr drynke. For eyther they hang great gourdes at the sayde branches eue∣ry euenyng, and let them so hang al night, or els they set them on the ground vnder the trees, that the droppes may fall therein, They say that this kynde of drynke is in taste muche like vnto whey, but somewhat sweeter, and more pleasaunt. They cut the branches euery euening, because they are seared vp in the day by the heate of the Sunne. They haue also great Beanes as bygge as chestnuts, and very hard with a shel in the steade of a huske. Many thynges more myght be sayde of the maners of the peo∣ple, and of the woonders and monstruous thynges that are en∣gendred in Africke. But it shall suffice to haue sayde thus much of suche thynges as our men partly sawe, and partlye brought with them. And whereas before speakyng of the fruite of graynes, I described the same to haue holes by the syde (as in deede it is,Graynes▪ as it is brought hither) yet was I afterward enfourmed, that those holes were made to pt strynges or twygges throughe the fruite, thereby to hang them vp to drye at the Sunne. They growe not past a foote and a halfe, or two foote from the grounde, and are as red as blood when they are geathered.
The graynes them selues, are called of the physitions, Grana Paradisi. Shelles that cleaue to shyps.At theyr commyng home, the keeles of theyr shyppes were marueylously ouergrowen with certayne shelles of two inches length and more, as thycke as they coulde stande, and of suche byggenesse that a man may put his thumme in the mouthes of them. They certaynely affirme that in these there groweth a certayne slymy substaunce, whiche at the length slyppyng out of the shell and fallyng in the sea, becommeth those foules which we cal Barnacles. The lyke shelles haue been seene in shyppes returnyng from Iselande,Barnacles. but these shels were not past halfe an inche in length. Of the other that came from Guinea, I saw the Prymrose lying in the Docke, and in maner couered with the sayd shelles, which in my iudgement shoulde greatly hynder her saylyng. Theyr shyppes were also in many places eaten with the wormes called Bromas or Bissas,Bromas. whereof mention is made in the Decades. These creepe betweene the plankes, whiche they eate through in many places. A secrete.Among other thynges that chaunced to them in this viage, this is worthy to be noted, that whereas they sayled thyther in seuen weekes, they coulde returne in no lesse space then twentie weekes. The cause whereof they say to be this: That about the coast of Cabo Verde, the wind is euer at the East, by reason wher∣of they were enforced to sayle farre out of theyr course into the mayne Ocean, to fynde the wynde at the West to bryng them home.The death of our men. There died of our men at this last viage about twentie and foure, whereof many died at theyr returne into the clyme of the colde regions, as betweene the Ilandes of Soria and Englande. They brought with them certayne blacke slaues, wherof some were tall and strong men, & coulde well agree with our meates and drynkes. The colde and moyst ayre doth somewhat offend them. Yet doubtelesse men that are borne in hotte regions, may better abyde cold,Colde may be better abiden then heate. then men that are borne in colde regions may abyde heate, forasmuche as vehement heate resolueth the radicall moysture of mens bodies, as colde constrayneth and pre∣serueth the same. This is also to be considered as a secrete woorke of nature, that throughout all Affricke vnder the Equinoctiall line, and
neare about the same, on both sydes, the regions are extreeme hotte, and the people very blacke. Whereas contrarily such regi∣ons of the West Indies as are vnder the same lyne, are very temperate, and the people neyther blacke, nor with curlde and shorte wooll on theyr heades, as haue they of Affrike, but of the colour of an Olyue, with long and blacke heare on their heades: the cause of whiche varietie is declared in dyuers places in the Decades. It is also woorthie to be noted that some of them that were at this vyage tolde me: That is, that they ouertooke the course of the Sunne, so that they had it North from them at noone, the xiiii. day of Marche. And to haue sayde thus muche of these vya∣ges, it may suffice. Of the Dooues of the Ilande of Madera. CAdamastus wryteth, that before the Portu∣gales came to this Ilande, it was ouer∣growen with trees, and vnhabited, yet were there many beastes, and great plentie of Dooues, which were vtterly without feare of men, bycause they had neuer seene any men before, nor yet were accustomed to bee put in feare: insomuche that they stoode styll whyle snares were put about theyr neckes with long roddes and poles: the whiche thyng he sayeth, he hath also seene in other Ilandes. There are many ryche men in this Ilande, and great aboundance of fleshe, bycause the whole Ilande is in maner one gardeyne.
Of the Ilande of Sainct Thomas, vnder the Equinoctiall line. THe chiefest occupation and liuing of the in∣habitantes of this Ilande, is the making of suger, which they sell yeerely to the shippes that come for it out of Spaine and Portu∣gale, laden with buttes of meale and floure, also wyne, oyle, cheese, lether, swoordes, cuppes of glasse, beades, certeyne scaruels of the fine white earth called Porcellana, of the whiche are made the earthen dishes of the woorke of Maiolica. And if it were not that suche victualles and prouisions were brought them out of Spaine and Portugale, the whyte merchantes which dwell in that Ilande (parteynyng to the dominion of the kyng of Portu∣gale) should not be able to lyue there, forasmuch as they are not accustomed to eate such meates as doe the Ethiopians or Negros. And therefore the Portugales which inhabite this Ilande, haue certayne blacke slaues of Guinea, Benin, and Manicongo, whiche they set to tyll and labour the grounde, and make suger. Among these whyte inhabitauntes, there are many riche men, which haue 150. or .200. and some .300. blacke slaues of men and women, to tyll the grounde, and doe other laborious woorkes. This Ilande was discouered a hundred yeeres since, by the nauigations of the Portugales, and was vnknowen to the olde writers. It lyeth in the great gulfe of Affrike, in the .30. degree of longitude from the West to the East, & is in maner rounde. It is of largenesse from syde to syde .lx. Italian myles, (that is to say) one degree. The horizontall line of the Ilande passeth by the two poles, Artike, and Antartike, and hath euer the day equall with the nyght, with∣out any sensible difference, whether the Sunne be in Cancer or in Capricorne. The starre of the pole Artike, is there inuisible: but the wardens are seene somewhat to moue about: & the starres called the Crosse are seene very hygh. Of this Ilande, with the other landes and Ilandes lying betweene Portugale and the same, a certeyne pylotte of Portugale hath written a goodly vy∣age to Conte Rimondo. FINIS.
The Nauigation and vyages of Lewes Vertomannus, Gentelman of the citie of Rome, to the regions of Arabia, Egypte, Persia, Syria, Ethiopia, and East India, both within and without the ryuer of Ganges. &c. In the yeere of our Lorde .1503. Conteynyng many notable and straunge thinges, both hystoricall and naturall. Translated out of Latine into Englyshe, by Richarde Eden. In the yeere of our Lord .1576.
The Preface of the Authour. THere haue ben many before me, who to know the miracles of the worlde, haue with diligent studie read dyuers Authours which haue written of such thinges. But other giuing more cre∣dite to the lyuely voyce, haue been more desirous to know the same by relation of such as haue traueyled in those countreys, & seene such thinges whereof they make relation, for that in many bookes, geathered of vncertaine aucthoritie, are myxt false thinges with true. Other there are so greatly desirous to know the trueth of these thinges, that they can in no wyse be satisfied, vntyll by theyr owne expe∣rience they haue founde the trueth, by voyages and peregrinati∣ons into straunge countreys and people, to know theyr maners, fashions, and customes, with dyuers thinges there to be seene: wherein, the only readyng of bookes, could not satisfie their thirst of suche knowledge, but rather increased the same, in so much that they feared not with losse of goods and daunger of lyfe to attempte great vyages to dyuers countreys, with witnesse of theyr eyes to see that they so greatly desired to knowe. The whiche thyng among other chaunced vnto me also. For as often as in the bookes of hystories and Cosmographie, I read of such marueylous thinges whereof they make menti∣on (especially of thinges in the East partes of the world) there was nothyng that coulde pacifie my vnquiet mynde, vntyll I had with myne eyes seene the trueth thereof. I knowe that some there are indued with hygh knowledge, mountyng vnto the heauens, whiche will contempne these our writinges, as base and humble, bycause we doe not here, after their maner, with high and subtile inquisition intreate of the motions and dispositi∣ons of the starres, and gyue reason of theyr woorkyng on the earth, with their motions, retrogradations, directions, mutati∣ons, epicicles, reuolutions, inclinations, diuinations, reflexions,
and suche other parteynyng to the science of Astrologie: which certeynely we doe not condempne, but greatly prayse. But mea∣suryng vs with our owne foote, we will leaue that heauie burden of heauen to the strong shoulders of Atlas and Hercules: and only creepyng vppon the earth, in our owne person beholde the situations of landes and regions, with the maners and customes of men, and variable fourmes, shapes, natures, and propriettes of beastes, fruites, and trees, especially suche as are among the Arabians, Persians, Indians, and Ethiopians. And whereas in the searchyng of these thinges, we haue (thanked be God) satisfied our desire, we thinke neuerthelesse that we haue done little, ex∣cepte we should communicate to other, such thinges as we haue seene and had experience of, that they lykewyse by the readyng thereof, may take pleasure, for whose sakes we haue written this long and dangerous discourse, of thinges which we haue seene in dyuers regions and sectes of men, desiryng nothyng more then that the trueth may be knowen to them that desyre the same. But what incommodities and troubles chaunced vnto me in these viages, as hunger, thirst, colde, heate, warres, captiuitie, terrours, and dyuers other suche daungers, I will declare by the way in theyr due pla∣ces.
The first Chapter, of the nauigation from Venice to Alexandria in Egypte. IF any man shall demaunde of me the cause of this my vyage, certeynely I can shewe no better reason then is the ardent desire of knowledge, which hath moued many other to see the worlde and miracles of God ther∣in. And forasmuch as other knowen partes of the world, haue heretofore ben sufficient∣ly traueyled of other, I was determyned to visite and describe suche partes as here before haue not been sufficiently knowen: and therefore with the grace of God, and callyng vppon his ho∣ly name to prosper our enterprise, departyng from Uenice with prosperous wyndes, in fewe dayes we arryued at the citie of Alexandria in Egypte: where the desyre we had to knowe thinges more straunge and further of, would not permit vs to tarrie long. And therefore departyng from thence, and saylyng vp the ryuer of Nilus, we came to the citie of new Ba∣bylon, commonly called Cayrus or Alcayr. The same was also called Memphis in tyme past.Of the citie named Babylon, or Alcayr, a citie of Nilus in Egypt. Cap. 2. WHen we arryued there, I marueyled more then I am able to say: yet when I ap∣proched so neare the citie that I myght wel see into it, it seemed to me much inferior to the reporte and fame that was thereof: for the greatnesse thereof, seemed nothyng a∣greeable to the bruite, and appeared no more in circuite then the citie of Rome, although muche more peopled, and better inhabited. But the large fieldes of the sub∣urbes haue deceyued many, beyng dispersed with in maner in∣numerable villages, whiche some haue thought to haue been
part of the citie, whiche is nothyng so. For those villages and di∣spersed houses, are two or three myles from the citie, and round about it on euery syde. Neyther is it here needefull to spende muche tyme in declaryng of theyr maners, or religion, forasmuch as it is well knowen, that all the inhabitantes of those regions are Mahumetans, and Mamalukes,Mamalukes. Mahume∣tans. whiche are suche Chri∣stians as haue forsaken theyr fayth, to serue the Mahumetans and Turkes: Although commonly they that serued the Soltan of Babylon in tyme past, before the Soltan was ouercome by the Turke, were called Mamaluchi, as they that serue the Turke, are called Ienetzari.Ienezzari. But these Mamaluke Mahume∣tans, are subiecte to the Soltan of Syria. Of the cities of Berynto, Tripoli, and Antioch. Cap. 3. THe riches, fayrenesse, and magnificence of Babylon aforesayde, and the straunge souldiers Mamalukes, as things know∣en, we will now pretermit. Therfore de∣partyng from Babylon, and returnyng to Alexandria, where we agayne ente∣red into our sea, we came to Berynto, a citie on the sea coast of Syria Phoenicia,Syria Phoeni∣cia. where we spent many dayes. This is inhabited of Mahume∣tans, and plentifull of all thinges. The sea beateth on the walles of the towne: it is not compassed with walles, but on the West syde towarde the sea. Here founde we nothyng memorable, but only an olde place ruinate, where they say that Sainct George deliuered the kynges daughter from a cruell Dragon,Sainct George and the Dra∣gon. whiche he slue, and restored her to her father. Departyng from hence, we sayled to Tripoli. This is a citie of Sria, Eastwarde from Berynto two dayes saylyng.Tripoli. The inhabitauntes are subiecte to the Lieuetenant or gouernour of Syria, and are Mahumetans. The soile is very fertile, and for the great trafique of merchaun∣dies, incredibly aboundeth with all thinges. Departyng from thence, we came to the citie Comagen of Syria,Alepo or Antioch. commonly called Alepo, and named of our men Antioch.
It is a goodly citie, situate vnder the mount Taurus, and is sub¦iecte to the Lieuetenant or Soltan of Babilon.The mount Taurus. The mount Olympus. There be the scales or ladders (for so they call them) of the Turkes and Syri∣ans, for it is neare the mount of Olympus. It is a famous marte towne of the Azamians and Persians.Azamia. The Azamians, are people of Mesopotamia,Mesapota∣mia. neare vnto the Persians, & of the religion of Ma∣humet. From thence, is the iourney to the Turkes and Syrians, and especially of them that come from the part of Mesopotamia,Persia named Azamia. Of the cities of Aman and Menin. Cap. 4. DEpartyng from thence, we came to Dama∣sco,Damasco. in ten dayes iourney. But before you come there, in the myd way, is a citie na∣med Aman, where is great aboundaunce of gossampine or cotton wooll, and all maner of pleasant fruites. Goyng a little from Damasco, the space of sixe myles, is a citie named Menin, situate on the declinyng of a mountayne. It is inhabited of Christians of the Greeke profession, who also o∣baye to the gouernour of Damasco. There are seene two fayre Temples, which (as the inhabitantes reporte) were buil∣ded by Helena,Sainct Helene the mother of Constantine the Emperour. the mother of the Emperour Constantine. There are all kyndes of fruites, and goodly Grapes, and Gardens watered with continuall sprynges. Departyng from thence, we came to the citie of Damasco.
Of the citie of Damasco. Chap. 5. IT is in maner incredible, and passeth all be∣leefe, to thinke howe fayre the citie of Damas∣co is, and how fertile is the soyle. And there∣fore allured by the marueilous beautie of the citie, I remayned there many dayes, that learnyng theyr language, I myght knowe the maners of the people. The inhabitants are Mahumetans and Mamalukes, with also many Christians,Christians Greekes. lyuyng after the maner of the Greekes. By the way, it shall not be from my purpose to speake of theyr Hexarchatus: the whiche (as we haue sayde) is subiect to the Lieuetenaunt,Hexarchatus is a principate or gouerment. vice∣roye, or gouernoure of Syria, whiche some call Sorya. There is a very stronge fortresse or Castell, whiche a certayne E∣thruscan, borne in the citie of Florence, buylded at his owne charges, while he was there ye chiefe Hexarchatus or gouernour, as appeareth by the flower of a Lilie there grauen in marble, be∣yng the armes of the citie of Florence. The citie is compassed with a deepe fosse or diche, with foure goodly high towres. They passe the dyche with a hangyng brydge, whiche is lyfted vp or lette downe at theyr pleasure. There is all kynde of great artillerie and munition, with also a garde of fyftie Mamalukes, whiche dayly assyste the gouernoure or captayne of the castell, and receyue theyr stipende of the gouernoure or viceroye of Syria.The Soltan of Syrya. Fortune seemed to geue the Hexarchatus or principate to the sayde Florentine, whiche we wyll declare as we haue hearde of thinhabitauntes. They saye that poyson was once geuen to the Soltan of Syria: and when he sought for remedie, he chaunced to be healed by the sayde Florentine, whiche was one of the companye of the Mamalukes. After whiche good fortune, he grewe dayely in fauoure with the sayde Prince, who for rewarde gaue hym that citie: where
also the sayde Florentine buylded a Castel, and dyed: whom to this daye the Citisens honour for a sainte, for sauyng the lyfe of theyr prince: after whose death, the gouerment returned to the Syrians. They saye furthermore that the Soltan is well be∣loued of his lordes and princes, for that he easely graunteth them principates and gouernementes: yet with condition to paye yeerely many thousandes of those peeces of gold which they call Saraphos. They that denye to paye the summe agreed of, ar in daunger of imminent death. Of the chiefe noble men or gouernoures .x. or .xii. euer assiste the Prince. And when it pleaseth hym to extorte a certayne summe of golde of his noble men or merchauntes (for they vse great tyrannye and op∣pression by the iniuries and thefte of the Mamalukes agaynst the Mahumetans) the Prince geueth two letters to the captaine of the Castell.A strange ma∣ner to demaund a subside. In the one is contayned, that with an oration he inuite to the Castell suche as pleaseth hym. In the other is declared the mynde of the Prynce, what he demaundeth of his subiectes. When the letters be read, withal expedition they accomplishe his commaundement, be it ryght or wrong, with∣out respecte. This meanes the Prynce inuented to extorte mony. Yet sometymes it commeth to passe, that the noble men are of suche strength, that they wyll not come when they are commaunded, knowyng that the tyrant wyl offer them violence. And therefore oftentymes when they knowe that the captayne of the Castell wyll call them, they flee into the dominions of the Turke. This haue we geathered as touchyng theyr ma∣ners, we haue also obserued, that the watchemen in the towres, do not geue warnyng to the garde with lyuely voyce, but with drommes, the one answearyng the other by course. But if a∣ny of the watchemen be so sleepye, that in the moment of an houre he aunsweare not to the sounde of the watche, he is imme∣diatly committed to prison for one whole yeere.
Of suche thynges as are seene in the citie of Damasco. Cap. 6. AFter that I haue declared the maners of the Princes of Damasco, it seemeth agree∣able to speake of some suche thynges as I haue seene there. And therefore to speake fyrst of the excellencie and beautie of the ci∣tie, it is certaynely marueylously wel peo∣pled, and greatly frequented, and also mar∣ueylous ryche. It is of goodly buildyng, and exceedeth in abun∣dance and fruitfulnesse of all thynges, and especiallye of all kynde of victuales, flesh, corne, and fruites, as freshe damesenne grapes all the whole yeere: also Pomegranets, Oranges, Ly∣mons, and excellent Olyue trees. Lykewyse Roses, both white and red, the fayrest that euer I sawe: and all kyndes of sweete apples, yet peares and peaches very vnsauery. The cause wherof, they say to be to much moysture. A goodly and cleare riuer runneth about the citie: & therfore in maner in euery house are seene fountaynes of curious worke embossed and grauen. Theyr houses outwardly are not very beautyfull, but inward∣ly marueylously adourned with variable woorkes of the stone called Ophis, or serpentine Marble. Within the towne are ma∣ny temples or churches, which they call Moscheas. But that which is most beautyfull of all other,Theyr church∣es. is buylded after the maner of Sainct Peters church in Rome, if you respect the greatnesse, exceptyng this, that in the myddle is no roofe or couerture, but is all open: but about the rest of the temple, it is altogeather vaulted. There they obserue religiously the bodye of the holy Prophet Zacharie.The bodie of the Prophet Zacharias. The temple hath also foure great double gates of metal, very fayre, and many goodly fountaynes within it. There are yet seene the ruins of many decaed houses, which were once inhabited by the Christians. Those houses they cal Canonicas, and are of woorke both carued and imbossed.
There is also to be seene the place where (as they say) our saui∣our Christ spake to Sainct Paule these woordes,The place of the conuersion of Sainct Paule. Paule, Paule, why doest thou persecute me. &c. This place is without the ci∣tie about a myle. There are buried the Christians that die in the citie. There is seene also the Tower in whiche Sainct Paule was commit∣ted to pryson,The prison of Sainct Paule. and ioyneth to the wall of the citie. But that place of the Tower where Paule was brought foorth by the Angell, the Mahumetans do not attempt to close vp: Saying, that yf it be closed ouer nyght, they fynde it open agayne in the morning. I saw also there, those houses in the whiche (as they say) Cain slue his brother Abell.The place wher Cain slue Abel. These are on the other part of the citie a myle of, in a certayne valley, yet on the syde of a hyll. But let vs nowe returne to the stranger Solgiers, which they call Ma∣maluchos, and to speake somewhat howe licenciously they lyue in that citie. Of the Mamalukes of Damasco. Cap. 7. THe Mamalukes therefore, are that kynde of men, which haue forsaken our fayth, and as slaues are bought by the gouerner of Syria. They are very actiue, & brought vp both in learnyng and warlike discipline, vntil they come to great perfection.The Mama∣lukes wages. As wel the litle as ye great, without respect, receiue stipend of the gouernour: which for euery moneth amounteth to syxe of those peeces of gold which they call Saraphos, besyde the meate and drynke of them selues and theyr seruantes, and also prouisi∣on for theyr horses. And the more valiaunt they be, & of greater actiuitie, they are hyred for the greater wages. They walke not in the citie but by two or three togeather, for it is counted dis∣honour for any of them to walke without a companion. And if by the waye they chaunce to meete with two or three women (for they lay wayte to tarry for them about suche houses whyther they know the women resort) lycence is graunted them,Howe the Ma∣malukes abuse women. as they by chaunce fyrst meete with them, to bryng them into certaine tauerns, where they abuse them. When the Mamalukes attempt
to descouer theyr faces (for they go with theyr faces couered) they striue with them because they wyll not be knowen. But when the Mamalukes persyste wantonly to discouer them, they saye thus vnto them, Is it not enough for you that you haue abused our bodyes as pleaseth you, but that you wyl also discouer our faces? Then the Mamalukes suffer them to departe. But sometyme it chaunceth, that when they thynke to prostitute the daughter of some gentelmen or noble men, they committee the facte with theyr owne wyues: whiche thyng chaunced whilest I was there. The women beautifie and garnishe them selues as muche as any. They vse sylken apparell,The women of Damasco. and couer them with cloth of gosampine, in maner as fyne as sylke. They weare white buskyns, and shooes of red or purple coloure. They garnyshe theyr heades with many iewelles and earerynges, and weare rynges and braslettes. They mary as often as them lysteth: for when they are weary of theyr fyrst maryage, they go to the chiefe presse of their religion (whom they call Cady) and make request to hym to be diuorsed from theyr fyrste maryage. This diuorsment in theyr language is called Tala∣carè: whiche graunted by the hygh Priest or Byshop, they be∣gyn newe maryages.Chaunge of husbandes and wyues. The lyke lybertie is also graunted to the husbandes. Some thynke that the Mahumetans haue fyue or syxe wyues togeather, which I haue not obserued: but as farre as I coulde perceyue they haue but two or three.The Mahu∣metans wiues. They eate openly, specially in the martes or fayres, and there dresse they all theyr meates. They eate horses, Cammelles, Bufles, Gotes, and suche other beastes. They haue great a∣bundaunce of freshe cheese. They that sell mylke, dryue about with them xl. or .l. Gotes,Gotes mylke. whiche they bryng into the houses of them that wyll bye mylke, euen vp into theyr chambers, al∣though they be three roofes hygh, and there mylke them, to haue it freshe and newe. These Gotes haue theyr eares a spanne long, many voders or pappes, and are very fruitefull: There is great abundaunce of mussheromes, for sometymes there are seene .xx. or .xxx. Cammelles laden with mussheromes,Mussheromes. Asia the lesse nowe named Natolia or Turchia. and yet in the space of three dayes they are all solde. They are brought from the mountaynes of Armenia, and from Asia the lesse, whiche is nowe called Turchia or Natolia, or Anatolia.
The Mahumetans vse long vestures and loose, both of sylke and cloth. The most part vse hose of gossampine cloth, and whyte shooes. When any of the Mahumetans by chaunce mee∣teth with any of the Mamalukes, although the Mahumetan be the woorthyer person, yet geueth he place and reuerence to the Mamaluke, who otherwyse woulde geue hym the Bastonado, and beate hym with a staffe. The Christians also keepe there many ware houses of merchaundies,Christians of Damasco. where they haue dyuers sortes of sylkes and veluet: but the Christians are there euyll entreated of the Mahumetans. The iorney from Damasco to Mecha, and of the maners of the Arabians. Chap. 8. AFter that I haue largely spoken of Damas∣co, I wyll proceede to the rest of my vyage. Therfore in the yeere of our lorde .1503. the eight daye of the moneth of Apryll, when I had hyred certayne Cammelles (which they call Carauanas) to go to Mecha, and beyng then ignorant of the customes and maners of them in whose companye I shoulde go,Carauana, a companie of Cameles. I entred familiaritie and frendshyppe with a certayne captayne Mamaluke, of them that had forsaken our fayth,Mamaluchi renegadi. with whom beyng agreed of the price, he prepared me apparell lyke vnto that whiche the Mamalukes vse to weare, and geuyng me also a good horse, ac∣companyed me with the other Mamalukes. This (as I haue sayde) I obtayned with great cost, and many gyftes whiche I gaue hym. Thus enteryng to the iorney, after the space of three dayes, we came to a certayne place named Mezaris, where we remayned three dayes,Mezaris. that the merchauntes which were in our company myght prouide thynges necessarie, as specially Ca∣mels, and dyuers other thynges. There is a certayne Prince whom they cal Zambei,The prince Zambei in Arabia. of great power in the countrey of Arabia: he had three brethren and foure chyldren. He norysheth fourtie thousand horses, ten thousand mares, & foure thousand Camels.
The countrey where he keepeth the heardes of these beastes, is large, of two dayes iorney. This Prince Zambei, is of so great power, that he keepeth warre with the Soltan of Babylon, the go∣uernour of Damasco, and the prince of Ierusalem al at once. In the tyme of haruest and geatheryng of fruites,The Prince of Ierusalem. he is geuen who∣ly to praye and robbyng, and with great subtiltie decey∣ueth the Arabians:A Prince a theefe. for when they thynke hym to be a myle or two of, he is with them sodenly betymes in the mornyng: and inuadyng theyr landes, carryeth away theyr fruites, Wheate, and Barlye, euen as he fyndeth it in the sackes: and so lyueth contynually day and nyght with suche incursions. When his Mares be weeried with continuall runnyng, he resteth a whyle:Mares. and to refreshe them, geueth them Camelles mylke to drynke, to coole them after theyr great labour. Those Mares are of such marueylous swyftnesse, that when I presently sawe them, they seemed rather to flee then to runne.The Arabians lyue by robbe∣ry. Note also that these Ara∣bians ryde on horses only couered with certayne clothes or mat∣tes, and weare none other vesture then only an inwarde coate, or peticoate: for weapon, they vse a certayne long Dart of Ree∣des, of the length of ten or twelue cubites, poynted with Iron (after the maner of Iauelyns) and frynged with sylke. When they attempt any incursyons, they marche in suche order, that they seeme to go in troupes: they are of despicable and litle sta∣ture, and of coloure betweene yealowe and blacke, which some call Oliuastro. They haue the voyces of women, and the heare of theyr head long and blacke, and layde out at large. They are of greater multitude then a man woulde beleeue, and are among them selues at contynuall stryfe and warre. They inha∣bite the mountaynes, and haue certayne tymes appoynted to robberye: for this purpose they obserue especially the tyme, when they are certayne of the passage of the Pylgryms and o∣ther that iorney that way to Mecha, then lyke theeues they lye in the way and robbe them. When they make these theeuysh inuasions, they bryng with them theyr wyues, chyldren, fami∣lies, and all the goodes they haue. Theyr houses they put vpon the Camelles, for other houses haue they none,Houses  on Camels backs. Tentes and pa∣uilions▪ but lyue onlye in tentes and pauylyons as do our Souldiers.
Suche tabernacles are made of blacke wooll, and that rough and fylthy. But to returne to our viage. The eleuenth day of A∣pril, departed from Mezaris a company of Camels (which com∣panie they call the Carauana) to the number of .xxxv. thousand, with fourtie thousand men. But we were no more then three∣score persons, of whom the Mamalukes had taken the charge to guyde and garde vs,This for feare of the Arabi∣ans. and the Carauana of our companie, whiche the Mamalukes diuided into three partes, as some in the fronte, other in the myddest of the army, and other in a wyng after the maner of a halfe Moone, inclosyng the whole armie: for in this order march the peregrines which iorney in these regions, as hereafter we wyll further declare. But you shall fyrst vnder∣stand that Damasco is from Mecha fourtie dayes and fourtie nyghtes iorney.From Damas∣co to Mecha. Departyng therefore from Mezaris, we con∣tinued our iorney that day, vntyll the .xxii. houre of the day. Then our Captayne and guide Agmirus, after he had geuen the watch woorde and signe, commaunded that euerye man shoulde rest and remayne in the place where the signe shoulde be geuen them. Therefore as soone as they hearde the signe by the sound of a Trumpet, they stayed, and after they had vnburdened theyr Camels, spent there two houres to victual them selues and theyr beastes:Perhaps with the sounde of a Horne of Trumpet. then the Captayne geuyng a newe signe, chargyng theyr Camelles agayne, they departed speedyly from thence. Euery Camell hath at one feedyng fyue Barly loaues, rawe and not baked, as bygge as a Pomegranate. Takyng Horse, they continued that iorney the daye and nyght folowyng, vntyll xxii. houres of the day, and at that houre they obserue the order whiche we haue spoken of herebefore. Euery eyght daye they drawe water by dyggyng the grounde or sande: by the way neuerthelesse somewhere are founde Welles and Se∣sternes.Water. Also euery eyght daye, they rest theyr Camelles two dayes to recouer theyr strength. The Camelles are laden with incredible Burdens,The Burden of the Camelles. and double charge: that is to meane, the burden of two great Mules. They drynke but once in three dayes.
Of the strength and valiantnesse of the Mamalukes. Cap. 9. WHen they tary and rest them at the waters aforesayde, they are euer enforced to conflict with a great multitude of the Arabians: but the battayle is for the most parte without bloodshed. For although we haue often tymes fought with them, yet was there on∣ly one man slayne on our parte: for these A∣rabians are so weake and feeble, that threescore Mamalukes,The feeblenesse of the Arabi∣ans. Pagans. haue often put to the worst fyftie thousande Arabians. For these feelde Arabians, whiche are called Pagani, are not in strength or force of armes to be compared to the Mamalukes, of whose actiuitie I haue seene great experience: among the whiche this is one.The actiuitie of the Mama∣lukes. A certayne Mamaluke layde an Apple vppon the head of his seruant, & at the distance of about .xii. or .xiiii. pases, stroke it of from his head. I sawe lykewyse an other, who ryding on a sadled horse with full course (for they vse saddles as we doe) tooke of the saddle from the horse styll runnyng: and for a space bearyng it on his head, put it agayne on the horse, styll continu∣ing his full course. Of the cities of Sodoma and Go∣morrha. Cap. 10. PAssyng the iourney of twelue dayes, we came to the playne or valley of Sodoma and Gomorrha, where we founde it to be true that is written in holy scripture: for there yet remayne the ruynes of the destroyed citie, as witnesse of Gods wrath. We may affyrme that there are three cities, and eche of them situate on the declining of three hylles: and the ru∣ines doe appeare about the heyght of three or foure cubites. There is yet seene, I wotte neare what, lyke blood, or rather
lyke redde waxe myxte with earth. It is easie to beleeue that those men were infected with most horrible vices, as testifieth the baren, drye, filthie, and vnholsome region, vtterly without water.Manna, tur∣ned in bitter plagues. Those people were once fedde with Manna: but when they abused the gyft of God, they were sore plagued. Depar∣tyng twentie myles from these cities, about thirtie of our com∣pany peryshed for lacke of water,Lacke of wa∣ter. and dyuers other were ouer∣whelmed with sande. Goyng somewhat further forewarde, we founde a little mountayne, at the foote whereof we founde wa∣ter, and therefore made our abode there. The day folowyng early in the mornyng, came vnto vs xxiiii▪ thousande Arabi∣ans,Water deerely bought. So did Abra∣ham with the Philistians. askyng money for the water which we had taken. We an∣swered that we would paye nothyng, bycause it was gyuen vs by the goodnesse of God. Immediatly we came to hand strokes. We geatheryng our selues togeather on the sayde mountayne, as in the safest place, vsed our Camelles in the steede of a bul∣warke, and placed the merchauntes in the myddest of the ar∣my (that is) in the myddest of the Camelles, whyle we fought manfully on euery syde.So doeth the Turke his ar∣my. The battayle continued so long, that water fayled both vs and our enemies in the space of two dayes. The Arabians compassed about the mountayne, crying and threatenyng that they would breake in among the Camelles: at the length to make an ende of the conflicte, our Captayne as∣semblyng the merchauntes, commaunded a thousande and two hundred peeces of golde to be giuen to the Arabians: who when they had receyued the money, sayde that the summe of ten thou∣sande peeces of golde should not satisfie them for the water which we had drawen. Whereby we perceyued that they began fur∣ther to quarell with vs, and to demaunde some other thing then money. Wherevppon incontinent our Captayne gaue com∣maundement, that whosoeuer in all our companie were able to beare armes, should not mount vppon the Camelles, but should with all expedition prepare them selues to fyght. The day folowyng in the mornyng, sendyng the Camelles before, and inclosyng our army, beyng about three hundred in num∣ber, we met with the enemies, and gaue the onset. In this conflicte, we lost only a man and a woman, and had none other domage: we slue of the Arabians a thousande and fyue hun∣dred.
Whereof you neede not marueyle, if you consyder that they are vnarmed, and weare only a thynne loose vesture, and are besyde almost naked: theyr horses also beyng as euyll furnished, and without saddles, or other furniture. Of a mountayne inhabited with Iewes, and of the citie of Medinathalhabi, where Mahumet was buried. Cap. 11. IN the space of eyght dayes, we came to a mountayne whiche conteyneth in circuite ten or twelue myles. This is inhabited with Iewes, to the number of fyue thou∣sande, or thereabout.Iewes Pig∣met. They are of very lit∣tle stature, as of the heyght of fyue or sixe spannes, and some muche lesse. They haue small voyces lyke women, and of blacke colour, yet some blac∣ker then other: They feede of none other meate then Goates fleshe. They are circumcised, and deny not them selues to bee Iewes. If by chaunce any Mahumetan come into their handes, they slay him alyue. At the foote of the mountayne, we founde a certayne hole, out of the whiche flowed aboundaunce of wa∣ter. By fyndyng this oportunitie, we laded sixtiene thousand Ca∣mels: which thyng greatly offended the Iewes. They wandred in that mountayne, scattered lyke wylde Goates or Prickettes, yet durst they not come downe, partly for feare, and partly for hatred agaynst the Mahumetans. Beneath the mountayne, are seene seuen or eyght thorne trees, very fayre, and in them we founde a payre of Turtle Doues, which seemed to vs in maner a miracle, hauyng before made so long iourneyes, and sawe neyther beast nor foule. Then proceedyng two dayes iourney, we came to a certayne citie named Medinathalhabi:The citie of Medinathal∣habi. foure myles from the sayd citie, we founde a well. Heere the Carauana (that is, the whole hearde of the Camelles) rested.
And remayning here one day, we washed our selues, and chaun∣ged our shertes, the more freshely to enter into the citie: it is well peopled, and conteyneth about three hundred houses, the walles are lyke bulwarkes of earth, and the houses both of stone and bricke. The soile about the citie, is vtterly barren, except that about two myles from the citie, are seene about fyftie palme trees that beare Dates. There, by a certayne garden, runneth a course of water fallyng into a lower playne, where also passin∣gers are accustomed to water theyr Camelles. And heere o∣portunitie nowe serueth to confute the opinion of them whiche thynke that the Arke or Toombe of wicked Mahumet in Me∣cha,The Toombe or Sepulchre of Mahumet. to hang in the ayre, not borne vp with any thyng. As tou∣chyng which thyng. I am vtterly of an other opinion, and af∣firme this neyther to be true, nor to haue any lykenesse of trueth, as I presently behelde these thynges, and sawe the place where Mahumet is buried,Mahumet was not buried in Mecha. in the sayde citie of Medinathalhabi: for we taryed there three dayes, to come to the true knowledge of all these thynges. When wee were desirous to enter into theyr Temple (which they call Meschita, and all other churches by the same name) we coulde not be suffered to enter, without a com∣panion, little or great. They takyng vs by the hande, brought vs to the place where they saye Mahumet is buried. Of the Temple or Chapell, and Sepulchre of Mahumet, and of his felowes. Cap. 12. HIs Temple is vaulted, and is a hundred pases in length, and fourescore in breadth: the entry into it, is by two gates: from the sydes, it is couered with three vaultes, it is borne vp with iiii. hundred columnes or pil∣lers of white brick, there are seene hanging lampes about the number of .3. thousande.
From the other part of the Temple in the first place of the Mes∣chita, is seene a Tower of the circuite of fyue pases, vaulted on euery syde, and couered with a cloth of silke, and is borne vp with a grate of copper curiously wrought, and distant from it two pases: and of them that goe thyther, is seene as it were through a lattesse. Towarde the lefte hande, is the way to the Tower, and when you come thyther, you must enter by a narower gate. On euery side of those gates or doores, are seene many bookes in maner of a Librarie,Mahumets Librarie. on the one syde .xx. and on the other syde xxv. These contayne the filthie traditions and lyfe of Mahumet and his fellowes: within the sayde gate, is seene a Sepulchre (that is) a digged place, where they say Mahumet is buried and his felowes, which are these, Nabi, Bubacar, Othomar, Aumar,Nomothetae Turcarum. and Fatoma: But Mahumet was theyr chiefe Captayne, and an Arabian borne. Hali, was sonne in lawe to Mahumet,This Hali, our men that haue been in Persia, call Mortus Hali, That is, Saint Hali. Discorde and sectes of religi∣on among the Mahume∣tans, Turkes, and Persians. for he tooke to wyfe his daughter Fatoma. Bubacar, is he who they say was exalted to the dignitie of a chiefe counseller and great go∣uernour, although he came not to the hygh degree of an Apostle or prophet, as dyd Mahumet. Othomar and Aumar, were chiefe Captaynes of the army of Mahumet. Euery of these haue their proper bookes of theyr factes and traditions. And hereof pro∣ceedeth the great dissention and discorde of religion and maners among this kynde of filthie men, whyle some confirme one doc∣trine, and some an other, by reason of theyr diuers sectes of pa∣trons, Doctours, and saintes, as they call them. By this meanes, are they marueylously diuided among them selues,Note. and lyke beastes kyll them selues, for such quarelles of dyuers opinions, and all false.Such come, such caffe. Not only a∣mong Turkes and , Sed. This also is the chiefe cause of warre betweene the Sophie of Persia and the great Turke, beyng neuerthelesse both Mahumetans, and lyue in mortall hatred one agaynst the other, for the mayntenaunce of theyr sectes, Sainctes, and Apostles, whyle euery of them thynketh theyr owne to bee best.
Of the Secte of Mahumet. Cap. 13. NOw will we speake of the maners and sect of Mahumet. Understande therefore, that in the highest part of the Tower aforesayd, is an open rounde place. Now shall you vn∣derstande what crafte they vsed to deceyue our Carauana. The first euenyng that we came thyther to see the Sepulchre of Ma∣humet, our Captaine sent for the chiefe priest of the Temple to come to him: and when he came, declared vnto him that the only cause of his commyng thyther, was to visite the Sepulchre and bodie of Nabi,Nabi▪ i the  of Ma∣humet. A great price for vil mar∣chandies. by which woord, is signified the Prophet Mahu∣met: and that he vnderstoode that the price to be admitted to the sight of these mysteries, should be foure thousande Saraphes of golde. Also that he had no parentes, neyther brothers, sisters, kinsefolkes, chyldren, or wyues, neyther that he came thyther to buye merchaundies, as spices, or Baccar, or Nardus, or any ma∣ner of precious Iewelles: but only for very zeale of religion and saluation of his soule, and was therefore greatly desirous to see the bodie of the Prophet.Suche people suche priest. To whom the priest of the Temple (they call them Side) with countenance lyke one that were di∣straught, made aunswere in this maner, Darest thou with those eyes with the which thou hast committed so many horrible sinnes, desyre to see him by whose sight God hath created hea∣uen and earth?My lorde bi∣shop of Mecha To whom agayne our Captayne aunswered thus, My Lorde, you haue sayde truely: neuerthelesse I pray you that I may fynde so much fauour with you, that I may see the Prophet: whom when I haue seene, I will immedi∣ately thrust out myne eyes. The Side aunswered, O Prince, I will open all thynges vnto thee. So it is, that no man can denye but that our Prophet dyed heere, who if he would myght haue dyed at Mecha:It semeth that they know not where he was buryed. But to shewe in him selfe a token of humilitie, and thereby to gyue vs example to fo∣lowe
him, was willyng rather heere then elsewhere to de∣parte out of this worlde, and was incontinent of Angelles borne into heauen, and there receyued as equall with them.The deuyll he was. Then our Captayne sayde to him, Where is Iesus Christus the sonne of Marie? To whom the Side answered, At the feete of Mahumet. Then sayde our Captayne agayne:Thri at the feete of Ma∣humet. It suffyceth, it suffyceth, I will knowe no more. After this, our Captayne commyng out of the Temple, and turnyng him to vs, sayd, See (I pray you) for what goodly stuffe I would haue payde three thousande Saraphes of golde? The same daye at euenyng, at almost three a clocke of the nyght, ten or twelue of the Elders of the secte of Mahumet entred into our Carauana, whiche remayned not paste a stone cast from the gate of the citie. These ranne hyther and thyther, crying lyke madde men, with these wordes, Mahumet the messenger and Apostle of God, shall ryse agayne. O Prophet, O God,Mahumet shal ryse▪ &c. with Iuda. Ma∣humet shall ryse agayne, haue mercy on vs God. Our Cap∣tayne and we all raysed with this crye, tooke weapon with all expedition, suspectyng that the Arabians were come to robbe our Carauana: We asked what was the cause of that exclama∣tion, and what they cryed? for they cryed as doe the Christi∣ans, when sodeynly any marueylous thyng chaunceth. The Elders answered,False miracles to confirme false religion. Sawe you not the lyghtnyng whiche shone out of the Sepulchre of the Prophet Mahumet. Our Cap∣tayne answered, that he sawe nothyng, and we also beyng de∣maunded, answered in lyke maner. Then sayde one of the olde men, Are you slaues? That is to say, bought men: mea∣nyng thereby Mamalukes. Then sayde our Captayne, We are in deede Mamalukes. Then agayne the olde man sayde,Neophiti. Yu my Lordes, can not see heauenly thinges, as beyng Neophi∣ti, (that is) newly come to the fayth, and not yet confirmed in our religion. To this our Captayne answered agayne,Sic ne respon∣des pontifii. O you madde and insensae beastes, I had thought to haue gi∣uen you three thousande peeces of golde, but now, O you dogges, and progenie of dogges, I will gyue you nothyng. It is therefore to bee vnderstoode, that none other shynyng came out of the Sepulchre, then a certayne flame which the priests caused to come out of the open place of the Towre spoken
of here before, whereby they would haue deceyued vs. And ther∣fore our Captaine commaunded that thereafter none of vs should enter into the Temple. Of this also we haue most true experi∣ence,The able that Mahumets Toombe han∣geth in the ayre. and most certaynely assure you, that there is neyther I∣ron or steele, or the Magnes stone that should so make the toombe of Mahumet to hange in the ayre, as some haue falsely imagi∣ned: neyther is there any mountayne nearer then foure myles: we remayned here three dayes to refreshe our company. To this citie, victualles and all kynde of corne is brought from A∣rabia Foelix, and Babylon or Alcayr, and also from Ethiope, by the redde sea, whiche is from this citie but foure dayes iour∣ney. The iourney to Mecha. Cap. 14. AFter that we were satisfied, or rather wea∣ryed, with the filthinesse and lothesomenesse of the trumperyes, deceites, trifles, and hy∣pocrises of the religion of Mahumet, we determyned to goe forward on our iourney: and that by guiding of a pylot, who myght directe our course with the mariners boxe or compasse,Iourney on the lande by carde and com∣passe as on the sea. with also the carde of the sea, euen as is vsed in saylyng on the sea. And thus bendyng our iourney to the West, we founde a very fayre well or fountayne, from the which flowed great aboundance of water. The inhabitantes affyrme that Sainct Marke the Euangelist was the aucthour of this foun∣tayne by a miracle of God,The fountaine of Sainct Marke the Euangelist. when that region was in maner bur∣ned with incredible drynesse. Here we and our beastes were satisfied with drynke. I may not here omit to speake of the sea of sande, and of the daungers thereof. This was founde of vs before we came to the mountayne of the Iewes.The sea of sande. In this sea of sand we traueiled the iourney of three dayes and nightes:Mare fabu∣losum. this is a great brode plaine, all couered with white sande, in maner as small as floure: If by euyll fortune it so chaunce that anye
trauaile that way southward, if in the meane time the wind come to the north, they are ouerwhelmed with sande. And although they shoulde haue prosperous wynde, yet are they so inuolued with sande, that they scatter out of the way, and can scarsely see the one the other .x. pases of. And therefore thinhabitans tra∣uaylyng this way, are inclosed in cages of woodde, borne with Camels, and lyue in them, so passyng the iorney guided by pilots with maryners compasse and card, euen as on the sea, as we haue sayde. In this iorney also many peryshe for thirst, and many for drynkyng to muche, when they fynde suche good waters. In these sandes is founde Momia, whiche is the fleshe of such men as are drowned in these sandes, and there dryed by the heate of the Sunne:Momia. So that those bodyes are preserued from putrifaction by the drynesse of the sand: and therefore that drye fleshe is esteemed medicinable. Albeit there is an other kynde of more pretious Momia, which is ye dryed and embalmed bodies of kynges and princes,Momia of kynges bodies embalmed. whiche of long tyme haue been preserued drye without corruption. When the wynde bloweth from the northeast, thē the sand riseth, & is driuen against a certaine moun∣tayne which is an arme of the mount Sinai. There we found cer∣tayne pyllers artificially wrought, whiche they call Ianuan.Mont Sinai. On the lefte hande of the sayde mountayne, in the toppe or rydge thereof, is a denne, and the entrie into it, is by an Iron gate.The den where Mahumet li∣ued in contem∣plation. Some fayne that in that place Mahumet lyued in contempla∣tion. Here we heard a certayne horrible noyse and crye: for pas∣syng the sayde mountayne, we were in so great daunger, that we thought neuer to haue escaped. Departyng therefore from the fountayne, we continued our iorney for the space of .x. dayes: And twyse in the way fought with fyftie thousande Arabians, and so at the length came to the citie of Mecha, where al thinges were troubled by reason of the warres betweene two brethren,Mecha, The kingdome of Mecha. contendyng whiche of them shoulde possesse the kyngedome of Mecha.
Of the fourme and situation of the citie of Mecha: and why the Mahumetans resort thyther. Cap. 15. NOwe the tyme requireth to speake some∣what of the famous citie of Mecha, or Mec∣ca, what it is, howe it is situate, and by whom it is gouerned.Mecha, whi∣che Abraham Otelius cal∣leth Mecca. The citie is very fayre and well inhabited, and contayneth in rounde fourme syxe thousande houses, as well buylded as ours, and some that cost three or foure thousande peeces of golde: it hath no walles. About two furlongs from the citie is a mount, where the way is cutte out, whiche leadeth to a playne beneath. It is on euery syde fortified with mountains, in the stead of walles or bulwarks, and hath foure entries. The gouernour is a Soltan, and one of the foure brethren of the progenie of Mahumet, and is subiect to the Soltan of Babylon,The Soltan of Mecha. of whom we haue spoken before: His other three brethren be at continuall warre with hym. The xviii. daye of Maye, we entred into the citie by the north syde: then by a declynyng way, we came into a playne. On the south syde are two mountaynes, the one very neere the other, di∣stant onely by a litle valley, which is the way that leadeth to the gate of Mecha. On the east syde, is an open place betweene two mountaynes, lyke vnto a valley, and is the waye to the moun∣tayne where they sacrifice to the Patriarkes Abraham & Isaac. This mountayne is from the citie about .x. or xii myles,Sacrifice to Abraham and Isaac. and of the heyght of three stones cast: it is of stone as harde as mar∣ble, yet no marble. In the toppe of the mountaine, is a Temple or Meschita, made after their fashion, and hath three wayes to enter into it. At the foote of the mountayne are two cesterns, which conserue waters without corruption: of these, the one is reserued to minister water to the Camels of the Carauana of Babylon or Alcayr, and the other, for them of Damasco. It is rayne water, and is deriued far of.
But to returne to speake of the citie: for as touchyng the maner of sacrifice which they vse at the foote of the mountayne, wee wyll speake hereafter. Entryng therefore into the citie, wee founde there the Carauana of Memphis, or Babylon, which preuented vs eyght dayes, and came not the waye that wee came. This Carauana conteyned threescore and foure thou∣sande Camelles, and a hundred Mamalukes to guyde them. And here ought you to consyder, that by the opinion of all men, this citie is greatly cursed of God,Mecha cur∣sed of god. as appeareth by the great barrennesse thereof, for it is destitute of all maner of fruites and corne. It is scorched with drynesse for lacke of water, and therefore the water is there growen to suche pryce,Water very deare. that you can not for twelue pence buye as muche water as wyll satys∣fie your thyrst for one day. Nowe therefore I wyll declare what prouision they haue for victuales. The most part is brought them from the citie of Babylon, otherwyse named Memphis, Cayrus, or Alcayr, a citie of the ryuer of Nilus in Egypt,The ryuer Nilus. as we haue sayde before, and is brought by the red sea (called Mare Erythreum) from a certayne port named Gida,The red sea. distaunt from Mecha fourtie myles. The rest of theyr prouisions, is brought from Arabia Faelix (that is) the happye or blessed Arabia: so named for the fruitfulnesse thereof,Arabia Faelix, in respect of the other two Arabiaes, called Petrea & Diserta, that is, stonye and desart. They haue also muche corne from Ethyopia. Here we found a marueylous number of straungers and peregrynes,Many pyl∣grymes and strangers at Mecha. or Pylgryms: Of the whiche, some came from Syria, some from Persia, and other from both the East Indiaes, (that is to say) both India within the ryuer of Ganges, and also the other India without the same ryuer. I neuer sawe in anye place greater abundaunce and frequentation of people, forasmuche as I could perceyue by tarrying there the space of .xx. dayes. These people resort thyther for diuers causes, as some for mer∣chandies, some to obserue theyr vowe of Pylgrymage,Why so many nations  to Mecha. and other to haue pardon for theyr sinnes: as touchyng the whiche we wyll speake more hereafter,
Of the merchandies of Mecha. Cap. 16. FRom India the greater, which is both with∣in & without the ryuer of Ganges, they haue pearles, precious stones, and plentie of spyces: and especially from that citie of the greater India, which is named Bangel∣la, they haue muche gossampyne cloth and sylke. They haue also spyces from Ethio∣pia: and therefore we must needes confesse that this citie is a famous mart of many ryche thynges, whereof there is great plentie. Of the Pardons or Indulgences of Mecha. Cap. 17. LEt vs now returne to speake of the pardons of pilgryms, for the which so many strange nations resort thither. In the myddest of the citie,The temple of Mecha. is a Temple, in fashyon lyke vnto the Collossus of Rome, the Amphitheatrum I meane, lyke vnto a stage, yet not of mar∣ble or hewed stones, but of burnt bryckes: For this temple, lyke vnto an Amphitheater, hath fourescore and ten, or an hundred gates, and is vaulted. The entrance, is by a discent of twelue stayers or degrees on euery part: in the church porche, are solde only iewels and precious stones. In the entry the gylted walles shyne on euery syde with imcomparable splen∣dour. In the lower part of the temple (that is vnder the vaulted places) is seene a marueylous multitude of men: For there are fyue or syxe thousand men that sell none other thyng then sweete oyntmentes, and especially a certayne odoriferous and most sweete pouder, wherewith dead bodyes are embalmed. And from hence, all maner of sweete sauours are carried in maner into the countreys of all the Mahumetans. It passeth all beleefe to thynke of the exceedyng sweetenesse of these sauours, farre sur∣mounting
the shoppes of the Apothecaries. The .xxiii. daye of Maye, the pardones began to be graunted in the Temple, and in what maner we wyll nowe declare. The Temple in the myd∣dest is open, without any inclosyng,A Turret in the Temple of Mecha. and in the myddest also ther∣of, is a Turret, of the largnesse of syxe pases in cercuitie, and in∣uolued or hanged with cloth or tapestry of sylke, and passeth not the heyght of a man. They enter into the turret by a gate of syluer, and is on euery syde besette with vesselles full of balme.A gate of siluer. On the day of Pentecost, licence is graunted to al men to se these thynges. The inhabitantes affyrme, that balme or balsame, to be parte of the treasure of the Soltan that is Lorde of Mecha. At euery vaulte of the turret, is fastened a rounde circle of Iron,Balsame or balme. lyke to the ryng of a doore. The .xxiii. day of Maye, a great multitude of people beganne earely in the mornyng before day, seuen tymes to walke about the Turret, kyssyng euery corner thereof, oftentymes feelyng and handdelyng them. From this Turret, about tenne or twelue pases, is an other Turret, like a Chappell buylded after our maner.A chappel with a well in it, in the Temple. This hath three or foure entryes: in the myddest thereof is a well of threescore and tenne cubites deepe: the water of this Well is infected with salt Peter or salniter. Eyght men are therevnto appoynted to drawe water for all the people: and when a multitude of peo∣ple haue seuen tymes gone rounde about the fyrst Turret, they come to this well: and touchyng the mouth or brym there∣of, they saye thus, Be it in the honour of God, God pardon me,A straunge baptisme for remission of synnes. and forgeue me my synnes. When these woordes are sayde, they that drawe the water, powre three buckettes of water on the headdes of euery one of them that stand neere about the well, and washe them all wette from the headde to the foote, al∣though they be apparelled with sylke. Then theyr dotyng fooles dreame that they are cleane from all theyr synnes,Good meaning sufficeth not. and that their synnes are forgeuen them. They saye furthermore, that the fyrst Turret, wherof we haue spoken, was the fyrst house that euer Abraham buylded: and therefore, whyle they are yet all wette of the sayd washyng, they go to the mountayne,The house of Abraham. Sacrifice to Abraham. where (as we haue sayde before) they are accustomed to sacrifice to Abra∣ham.
And remaining there two daies, they make the said sacrifice to Abraham at the foote of the mountayne. The maner of Sacrificyng at Mecha. Cap. 18. FOrasmuche as for the most parte, noble spi∣rites are delyted with nouelties of great and straunge thynges, therefore to satisfie their expectation, I wyll describe theyr maner of sacrifycyng. Therefore, when they intend to sacrifice, some of them kyl three sheepe, some foure, and some tenne: So that the but∣cherie sometyme so floweth with blood,Sacrifice of sheepe. that in one sacrifice are slayne aboue three thousande sheepe. They are slayne at the rysyng of the Sunne, and shortly after are distributed to the poore for Gods sake: for I sawe there a great and confounded multitude of poore people, as to the number of .xxx. thousande. These make many and long dyches in the feeldes, where they keepe fyre with Camels doong, and rost or seeth the fleshe that is geuen them, and eate it euen there. I beleue that these poore people come thither rather for hunger then for deuotion:Religion for pouertie. which I thinke by this coniectur, that great abundance of cucumbers are brought thyther from Arabia Faelix, whiche they eate, castyng a∣way the parynges without their houses or tabernacles, where a multitude of the sayde poore people geather them euen out of the myre and sande, and eate them, and are so greedie of these parynges, that they fyght who may geather most. The daye folowing, their Cadi (which are in place with them as with vs the preachers of gods worde) ascended into a hygh mountayne,Cadi, a prea∣cher. to preache to the people that remayned beneath: and preached to them in theyr language the space of an houre. The summe of his sermon was,A goodly ser∣mon. that with teares they shoulde bewayle theyr sinnes, and beate their brestes, with sighes and lamentation. And the preacher hym selfe with loude voyce, spake these woordes, O Abraham beloued of god, O Isaac chosen of god, and his frend. aye to god for the people of Nabi. When these woordes were sayde,Soldiers trou∣ble the word of God. sodenly were heard lamenting voyces. When the sermon was done, a rumor was spredde that a great armye of Ara∣bians, to the number of twentie thousande, were commyng.
With whiche newes, they that kept the Caraunas beyng greatly feared, with all speede, lyke madde men, fledde into the citie of Mecha, and we agayne hearyng newes of the Arabians approche, fledde also into the citie. But whyle wee were in the mydwaye betweene the mountayne and Mecha▪ we came by a despicable wal, of the breadth of foure cubites: The people passyng by this wall, had couered the waye with stones, the cause whereof, they saye to be this:Where Abra∣ham sacrifyced his sonne Isaac. When Abra∣ham was commaunded to sacrifice his sonne, he wylled his sonne Isaac to folowe hym to the place where he should execute the commaundement of God. As Isaac went to folow his fa∣ther, there appeared to hym in the way a Deuyl,The Diuell ap∣peareth to Isaac. in lykenesse of a fayre and freendly person, not farre from the sayde wall, and asked hym freendlye whyther he went. Isaac answered that he went to his father who tarryed for hym. To this the enimie of mankynde answered, that it was best for hym to tarrye, and yf that he went anye further, his father woulde sacrifice hym. But Isaac nothyng feareyng this aduertise∣ment of the Deuyl, went foreward, that his father on hym myght execute the commaundement of God: and with this an∣swere (as they saye) the Deuyll departed. Yet as I∣saac went forwarde, the Diuell appeared to hym agayne in the lykenesse of an other frendlye person, and forbade hym as before. Then Isaac takyng vp a stone in that place,Isaac wound∣ed the Deuyll in the forehead. huride it at the Deuyl, and wounded hym in the forehead: In witnesse and remembraunce whereof, the people passyng that waye, when they come neare the wall, are accustomed to cast stones agaynst it, and from thence go into the citie. As we went this way, the ayre was in maner darkened with a multitude of stocke Doues. They saye that these Doues,Stocke doues of the progenie of the Doue whiche spake in Mahumets eare. are of the pro∣genie of the Doue that spake in the eare of Mahumet, in lyke∣nesse of the Holye Ghost. These are seene euery where, as in the villages, houses, tauernes, and graniers of corne and ryse, and are so tame, that one can scharsely dryue them a way. Too take them or kyll them, is esteemed a thyng worthy death: and therfore a certayne pensyon is geuen to nouryshe them in the Temple.
Of the Vnicorns of the temple of Mecha▪ whiche are not seene in any other place. Cap. 19. ON the other part of the temple are parkes or places inclosed, where are seene two Unicorns, named of the Greekes Mono∣cerotae,Monoceros. and are there shewed to the people for a myracle, and not without good rea∣son, for the seldomenesse and strange natu∣re.The Vnicor∣nes. The one of them, which is much hygh∣er then the other, yet not muche vnlyke to a colte of thyrtye monethes of age, in the forehead groweth only one horne, in ma∣ner ryght foorth,The Vnicorns horne. of the length of three cubites. The other is much younger, of the age of one yeere, and lyke a young colte: the horne of this, is of the length of foure handfuls. This beast is of the coloure of a horse of weesell coloure, and hath the head lyke an Hart, but no long necke, a thynne mane hangyng onlye on the one syde: theyr legges are thyn and slender, lyke a fawne or hynde: the hoofes of the fore feete are diuided in two, much like the feete of a Goat, the outwarde part of the hynder feete is very full of heare. This beast doubtlesse seemeth wylde and fierce, yet tempereth that fiercenesse with a certaine comelinesse. These Unicornes one gaue to the Soltan of Mecha▪ as a most pre∣cious and rare gyfte. They were sent hym out of Ethiope by a kyng of that countrey, who desired by that present to gratifie the Soltan of Mecha. Of diuers thynges which chaunced to me in Mecha: And of Zida, a port of Mecha. Cap. 20. IT may seeme good here to make mention of certayne thynges, in the which is seene sharpenesse of witte in case of vrgent ne∣cessitie, which hath no lawe, as sayeth the prouerbe: for I was dryuen to the poynt howe I myght priuely escape from Me∣cha. Therefore whereas my Captayne gaue me charge to buy certaine thyngs, as I was in the market
place, a certayne Mamaluke knewe me to be a Christian. And therefore in his owne language, spake vnto me these woordes, Inte mename: That is, whence arte thou? To whom I answe∣red that I was a Mahumetan. But he sayde, Thou sayest not truely. I sayde agayne, By the head of Mahumet, I am a Ma∣humetan. Then he sayde agayne, Come home to my house. I folowed him willingly. When we were there, he began to speake to me in the Italian tongue, and asked me agayne from whence I was, affyrmyng that he knewe me, and that I was no Mahu∣metan: Also that he had been sometyme in Genua and Venice. And that his woordes myght be the better beleeued, rehearsed many thinges whiche testified that he sayde trueth. When I vnderstoode this, I confessed freely that I was a Romane, but professed to the fayth of Mahumet in the citie of Babylon, and there made one of the Mamalukes. Whereof he seemed greatly to reioyce, and therefore vsed me honourably. But be∣cause my desyre was yet to goe further, I asked the Mahume∣tan whether that citie of Mecha was so famous as all the world spake of it:Why Mecha is not so much frequented as in tyme paste. and inquired of him where was the great aboun∣daunce of pearles, precious stones, spices, and other rich mer∣chandies that the bruite went of to be in that citie. And all my talke was to the ende to grope the mynde of the Mahumetan, that I might know the cause why such thinges were not brought thyther as in tyme paste. But to auoyde all suspition, I durst here make no mention of the dominion which the Kyng of Por∣tugale had in the most parte of that Ocean,The dominion of the Kyng of Portugale in the East partes and of the gulfes of the redde sea and Persia. Then he began with more attentyue mynde, in order to declare vnto me the cause why that marte was not so greatly frequented as it had been before, and layde the on∣ly faulte therof in the kyng of Portugale. But when he had made mention of the Kyng, I began of purpose to detracte his fame, least the Mahumetan might thinke that I reioyced that the Chri∣stians came thyther for merchandies. When he perceyued that I was of profession an enemy to the Christians, he had me yet in greater estimation, and proceeded to tell me many thynges more. When I was well instructed in all thinges, I spake vnto him friendly these woordes in the Mahumets language, Mena∣ha Menalhabi: That is to say, I pray you assist mee.Hipocrisie. He asked
me wherein. To helpe me (sayde I) howe I may secretly de∣parte hence. Confirmyng by great othes, that I would goe to those Kinges that were most enemies to the Christians: Affir∣myng furthermore, that I knewe certayne secretes greatly to be esteemed, whiche if they were knowen to the sayde kynges, I doubted not but that in shorte tyme I shoulde bee sent for from Mecha. Astonyshed at these woordes, he sayde vnto mee, I pray you what arte or secrete doe you knowe? I an∣swered, that I would gyue place to no man in makyng of all maner of Gunnes and artillerie. Then sayde hee, Praysed be Mahumet who sent thee hyther, to do him and his Saintes good seruice: and willed me to remayne secretly in his house with his wyfe, and requyred me earnestly to obtayne leaue of our Cap∣tayne, that vnder his name he myght leade from Mecha fiftiene Camelles laden with spices,Paying of cu∣stome to the Soltan. without paying any custome: for they ordinarily paye to the Soltan thirtie Saraphes of golde, for transportyng of such merchandies for the charge of so many Camelles. I put him in good hope of his request, although he would aske for a hundred, affyrmyng that that myght easily be obteyned by the priuileges of the Mamalukes, and therefore de∣sired him that I myght safely remayne in his house. Then no∣thyng doubtyng to obtayne his request, he greatly reioyced, and talkyng with me yet more freely, gaue me further instructions, and counsayled me to repayre to a certayne Kyng of the greater India,The realme of Decham in India. in the kyngdome and realme of Decham, whereof we will speake hereafter. Therfore the day before the Carauana depar∣ted from Mecha, he willed me to lye hydde in the most secrete parte of his house. The day folowyng, early in the mornyng, the trumpetter of the Carauana gaue warning to all the Mamalukes to make readie their horses, to directe their iourney toward Syria, with proclamation of death to all that shoulde refuse so to doe. When I hearde the sounde of the Trumpet, and was aduertised of the streight commaundement, I was marueylously troubled in mynde, and with heauy countenaunce desired the Mahume∣tans wyfe not to bewraye me, and with earnest prayer commit∣ted myselfe to the mercie of God. On the Tuesday folowyng, our Carauana departed from Mecha, and I remayned in the Mahumetans house with his wyfe, but he folowed the Carauana.
Yet before he departed, he gaue commaundement to his wyfe to bryng me to the Carauana, which should departe from Zida the porte of Mecha, to goe into India. This porte is distant from Mecha .xl miles. Whilest I laye thus hyd in the Mahumetans house, I can not expresse how friendly his wife vsed me. This al∣so furthered my good interteynement, that there was in the house a fayre young mayde, the Niese of the Mahumetan, who was greatly in loue with me. But at that tyme, in the myddest of those troubles and feare,Affliction coo∣leth lechery. the fyre of Uenus was almost ex∣tincte in mee: and therefore with daliaunce of fayre woordes and promises, I styll kepte my selfe in her fauour. There∣fore the Fryday folowyng, about noone tyde I departed, folowyng the Carauana of India. And about mydnyght, we came to a certayne village of the Arabians, and there remay∣ned the rest of that nyght, and the nexte day tyll noone. From hence we went forwarde on our iourney towarde Zida,The citie of Zida. and came thyther in the silence of the nyght. This citie hath no walles, yet fayre houses, somewhat after the buyldyng of Italie. Heere is great aboundaunce of all kynde of merchan∣dies, by reason of resorte in maner of all nations thyther, ex∣cepte Iewes and Christians, to whom it is not lawfull to come thyther. Assoone as I entered into the citie, I went to their Temple or Meschita, where I sawe a great multitude of poore people, as about the number of .xxv. thousande,Poore Pil∣gryms that came from Mecha. atten∣dyng a certayne Pilot who should bryng them into their coun∣trey. Heere I suffered muche trouble and affliction, beyng enforced to hyde my selfe among these poore folkes, faynyng my selfe very sicke, to the ende that none should be inquisityue what I was, whence I came, or whyther I would. The Lord of this citie is the Soltan of Babylon, brother to the Soltan of Mecha, who is his subiecte. The inhabitauntes are Mahume∣tans. The soyle is vnfruitfull, and lacketh freshe water. The sea beateth agaynst the towne. There is neuerthelesse aboundance of all thinges: but brought thyther from other places, as from Babylon of Nilus, Arabia Foelix, and dyuers other places. The heate is here so great, that men are in maner dryed vp there∣with. And therefore there is euer a great number of sicke folkes. The citie conteyneth about fyue hundred houses.
After fyftiene dayes were past, I couenaunted with a pilot, who was ready to departe from thence into Persia,From Arabia to Persia. and agreed of the price, to goe with him. There laye at Anker in the hauen almost a hundred Brigantines and Foistes, with diuers boates and bar∣kes of sundry sortes, both with Ores and without Ores. Therefore after three dayes, gyuyng wynde to our sayles, we entred into the redde sea,The red sea. otherwyse named Mare Erythraeum. Of the red sea, and why it can not be sayled in the nyght. Cap. 21. IT is well knowen to wyse men that this sea is not red, as some haue imagined, but is of the colour of other seas. We continu∣ed therefore our vyage vntyll the goyng downe of the Sunne. For this sea, is naui∣gable only in the day tyme: and therefore in the nightes, the maryners rest them, vn∣tyll they come to the Ilande named Chameran, from whence they proceede forwarde more safely. Why this sea can not be sayled in the nyght, they say the cause to be, that there are many daungerous sandes, rockes, and shelues: and therefore that it is needefull of diligent and long prospecte, from the toppe Castell of the shyppe, to foresee the dangerous places.
The seconde booke, entreating of Arabia Foelix, That is, the happie or blessed Arabia. Of the citie of Gezan, and the fruitfulnesse thereof. Cap. 1. FOrasmuche as hytherto wee haue spoken somewhat of the maners of the people and cities of Arabia Foelix, it may nowe seeme conuenient to finishe the reste of our vyage with such thinges as we haue seene in the sayde countrey of Arabia.The citie of Gezan. Therefore after sixe dayes saylyng, we came to a citie na∣med Gezan. It hath a commodious porte, and very fayre, where we found about fourtie and fyue Brigantines and Foistes of dy∣uers regions. The citie is harde by the sea syde, and the Prince thereof, is a Mahumetan. The soile is fruitful, lyke vnto Ita∣lie: It beareth Pomegranates, Quinses, Peaches, Apples of Assyria, Pepons, Melons, Oranges, Gourdes, and dyuers o∣ther fruites: Also Roses, and sundry sortes of floures, the fayrest that euer I sawe: It seemeth an earthly Paradyse. The moste parte of the inhabitauntes go naked▪ In other thinges, they lyue after the maner of the Mahumetans. There is also great abun∣dance of fleshe, wheate, barley, the grayne of whyte Millet or Hirse (whiche they call Dora) whereof they make very sweete bread. Of certayne people named Ban∣duin. Cap. 2. DEparting from the citie of Gezan, the space of .v. dayes, sayling towarde the lefte hande, hauyng euer the coast of the lande in sight, we came to the sight of certayne hou∣ses, where about .xiiii. of vs went alande, hopyng to haue had some victuals of the inhabitans. But we lost our labour, for in the steede of victuals, they cast stones at vs with stinges. They were about a hundred that fought with our men for the space of
an houre. Of them were slayne .xxiiii. The rest were dryuen to flyght, they were naked, and had none other weapons then slyn∣ges. After theyr flyght, we brought away with vs certayne hens and Calues very good. Shortly after a great multitude of the inhabitauntes shewed them selues to the number of fyue or syxe hundred: but we departed with our praye, and returned to the shyppes. Of an Ilande of the red sea, named Camaran. Cap. 3. THe same day saylyng forwarde, we came to an Iland na∣med Camaran, which conteyneth ten myles in circuite. In it is a towne of two hundred houses, the inhabitantes are Mahumetans: it hath aboundaunce of freshe water and fleshe, and the fayrest salte that euer I sawe. The porte is eight myles from the continent, it is subiecte to the Soltan of Ama∣nian of Arabia Foelix. After we had remayned here two dayes, we tooke our way towarde the mouth of the red sea in the space of two dayes saylyng: This sea may here be sayled both day and nyght. For (as we haue sayde before) from this Ilande vnto the porte of Zida, the red sea is not safely nauigable by nyght. When we came to the mouth of the sea, we seemed to be in ma∣ner inclosed, for that the mouth of the sea is there very streyght, and no more then three myles ouer. Towarde the right hande, the continent lande is seene of the heyght of ten pases: the soile seemeth rude and not cultured. At the lefte hande of the sayde mouth, ryseth a very hygh hyll of stone. In the myddest of the mouth, is a litle Ilande vnhabited, named Bebmendo, and is to∣warde the lefte hande to them that sayle to Zeila: But they that goe to Aden, must keepe the way to the lefte hande. All this way, we had euer the lande in our sight, from Bebmendo to Aden, in the space of two dayes and a halfe.
Of the citie of Aden, and of their maners and customes towarde straun∣gers. Cap. 4. I Doe not remember that I haue seene any citie better forti∣fied then this: It standeth on a soyle not much vnequall,Of the citie of Aden looke. Cap. 13. it is walled on two sydes: The reste is inclosed with mountaynes, hauyng on them fyue fortresses. The citie conteyneth sixe thousande houses. Theyr exercise of bying and sellyng,Bying and sel∣lyng by nyght. begyn∣neth the seconde houre of the nyght, by reason of extreeme heate in the day tyme. A stone cast from the citie, is a mountayne, hauyng on it a fortresse. The shyppes lye neare the foote of the mountayne: it is certaynely a very goodly citie, and the fay∣rest of all the cities of Arabia Foelix. To this, as to the chiefe marte, the merchauntes of India, Ethiopia, and Persia, haue re∣course by sea, and they also that resorte to Mecha. Assoone as our Brigantines came into the hauen, immediately the custo∣mers and searchers came aborde, demaundyng what we were, from whence we came, what merchaundies we brought, and howe many men were in euery Brigantine. Beyng aduertised of these thinges, immediately they tooke away our maste, sayles, and other tackelynges of our shyp∣pes, that we should not departe without paying of custome. The day after our arryuyng there, the Mahumetans tooke mee, and put shackles on my legges,The Aucthour taken and put in prison. whiche came by occasi∣on of a certayne Idolatour who cryed after mee, saying, O Christian Dogge, borne of Dogges.Picade the Moonke wri∣teth that Chri∣stians are founde in all regions sauing in Arabia and Egypt, where they are most hated. When the Mahu∣metans hearde the name of a Christian, incontinent they layde handes on mee, and brought mee to the Lieuetenaunt of the Soltan of that place, who assemblyng his counsayle, asked their opinion if I should bee put to death as a spye of the Christians. The Soltan him selfe was out of the citie, and therefore his Lieuetenaunt, who had yet neuer adiudged any man to death, thought it not good to gyue sentence agaynst mee, before the
Soltan should be aduertised hereof. And therefore I escaped this present daunger, and remayned in custodie fiftie and fyue dayes, with an Iron of eightiene pounde weyght hangyng at my feete. The seconde day after I was taken, many Mahu∣metans in great rage resorted to him, whose office was to make inquisition of treason. These a fewe dayes before, by swym∣myng hardly escaped the handes of the Portugales, with the losse of theyr Foistes and Barkes, and therefore desired greatly to bee reuenged of the Christians: affyrmyng with outragious crye, that I was a spye of the Portugales. But God fayled not to assyst me. For the maister of the prison, perceyuing the out∣rage of the Mahumetans, and fearyng that they would offer me violence, made fast the gates of the prison. After that fyue and fiftie dayes were paste, the Soltan commaunded that I should be brought before him: and so, set vppon a Camel with my shackles, I came in eight dayes iourney to the place where the Soltan laye, and was brought to his presence in a citie na∣med Rhada: for there the Soltan had assembled an army of thirtie thousande men, to make warre agaynst the Soltan of the citie of Sana, whiche is three dayes iourney from Rhada, and situate partly on the declining of a hyll, and partly in a playne, very fayre to be seene, well peopled, and hauyng plentie of all thinges. When I came before the Soltan, he began to aske me what I was. I answered that I was a Roman, professed a Mamaluke in Babylon of Alcayr, and that of religious mynd to discharge my conscience of a vowe whiche I had made to see the bodie of Nabi the holy Prophet, I came to the citie of Me∣dinathalhabi, where they say he is buried: and that in all cities and countreys by the way, I hearde honourable reporte of his greatnesse, wisedome, and singuler vertue, and therefore ceassed not vntyll I entred his dominions, moste desirous to see his face, yeldyng thankes to God, and Nabi, that it was nowe my chaunce to be presented before him: trustyng that the equitie of his wisedome, would thereby consyder that I was no spye of the Christians, but a true Mahumetan, and his seruant and slaue. Then sayde the Soltan, oordes of them that profsse the re∣ligion of Ma∣humet. Saye, Leila illala Mahumet resullala: whiche woordes I coulde neuer well pronounce, eyther that it pleased not God, or that for feare and scruple
of conscience, I durst not. Therefore when hee sawe mee holde my peace, he committed me agayne to pryson, commaun∣dyng that I shoulde be straightly looked vnto, where .xvi. men of the citie were appoynted, euery daye foure, to watche me by course. So that for the space of thre monethes, I had not ye fruiti∣on of heauē, during which miserable time, me diet was euery day a lofe of myllet, so litle that seuen of them woulde not haue satis∣fyed my hunger for one daye: But if I myght haue had my fyll of water, I woulde haue thought my selfe happie. Within three dayes after the Soltan marched with his army of thyrtie thousande footemen (as we haue sayde) and three thousande horsemen, to beseege the citie of Sana. These horsemen were borne of Christian parentes, and blacke like the Ethiopians,Soldiers horse∣men of Christi∣an Ethiopians of the dominiō of Presbiter Iohannes. Abbyssini, vn∣der Prester Iohn. and whyle they were yet very young, were bought in the kyng∣dome of Prester Iohn, named in Latine Presbyter Iohannes, or rather Preciosus Iohannes. These Christian Ethiopians, are also named Abbyssini. They are brought vp in discipline of warre, as are the Mamalukes and Ienetzares of the Turkes. This Soltan hath them in great estimation, for they are the gard of his owne person, and therefore haue greater wages, and are in number fourescore thousande.A gard of foure¦score thousand blacke men. They couer theyr bodie with a sindon, like vnto a cloke or cape, putting out onely one arme, and are besyde naked without any other apparell. In the warres they vse rounde targettes, made of bufles hydes,Targettes. with certayne litle barres of Iron to strengthen them. These targets are payn∣ted very fayre with sundrye colours, and very commodious to resyste dartes, and are in largenesse as muche as the mouth of a barell: the handle is made of woodde, as bygge as they may well holde in theyr handes, and made fast with nayles. They vse dartes, and shorte brode swoordes. At other tymes, they vse also vestures of lynnen cloth of sundry coloures. Also of gossampine or Xylon, otherwyse also named bombasine. In the warres, euery man beareth with hym a slyng, which he casteth,Slynges. fyrst shakyng it often about his head. When they come to .xl. or .l. yeeres of age, they make them hornes, by wreathyng ye heare of their heds, so bearyng two hornes lyke young Gotes. When they procede to the warres, fyue thousande Camels folowe the army, all laden with ropes of bombasine.
How the women of Arabia, are great∣ly in loue with whyte men, Cap. 5. AFter the army was departed, I was incontinent com∣mytted to pryson, as I haue sayde. Harde by the pry∣sone was a long entrie in maner of a cloyster, where som∣tyme we were permitted to walke. Ye shall further vn∣derstande, that in the Soltans place remayned one of his three wyues, with twelue young maydes to wayte vppon her, very fayre and comely, after theyr maner, and of coloure inclinyng to blacke. The fauoure that they bore me, helped me very much, for I with two other,Counterfet madnesse. beyng in the same pryson, agreed that one of vs should counterfytte him selfe to be mad, that by this deuice, one of vs myght helpe an other. In fine, it was my lotte to take vppon me the mad mans part, and therefore stoode me in hande to do suche follies as pertayne to madnesse. Also the opinion whiche they haue of mad folkes, made greatly for my purpose: for they take mad men to be holy, and therefore suf∣fered me to run more at large, vntyll the Eremites had geuen iudgement whether I weare holy, or ragyng mad, as appeareth heareafter. But the fyrst three dayes in which I began to shew my madnesse, weryed me so muche, that I was neuer so tyred with laboure or greeued with payne, for the boyes and rascall people sometyme to the number of .xl. or .l. hurled stones at me almost without ceassing, while in the meane time againe I paid some of them home with lyke wages. The boyes cryed euer after me, callyng me mad man. And to shewe it the more, I caryed alwayes stones with me in my shyrt, for other apparel had I none. The queene hearyng of my follies, looked often∣tymes out of the wyndowes to see me, more for a secrete loue she bore me, then for the pleasure she tooke in my follyes, as af∣terwarde appeared.
Therefore on a tyme, when some of them, muche madder then I, played the knaues with me in the syght of the queene (whose secrete fauour towardes me I somewhat perceyued) that my maddenesse myght seeme more manifest, I cast of my shyrt, and went to the place before the wyndowes, where the queene myght see me all naked: wherein I perceyued she tooke great pleasure. For she euer founde some occasion that I myght not goe out of her syght: and would sometymes, with all her damo∣selles waytyng on her, spende almost the whole daye in behol∣dyng me: and in the meane season diuers tymes sent me se∣cretlye muche good meate by her maydens, and when she saw the boyes or other do me any hurt, she badde me kyll them, and spare not, reuylyng them also, and callyng them dogges and beastes. In the pallace was nouryshed a great fatt sheepe: for there are some of such exceedyng bygnesse, that only the tayle wayeth .xi. or .xii. pounde weyght.Sheepe with exceedyng great tayles. Under the coloure of mad∣nesse, I layd hand on this sheepe, saying, Leila illala Mahumet resullala: which wordes the Soltan before, when I was brought to his presence, wyllyd me to say, to proue whether I were a Mahumetan or a professed Mamaluke. But the beast answe∣ryng nothyng, I asked hym yf he were a Mahumetan, Iewe,A Sheepe made a mahu∣metan. or Christian. And wyllyng to make hym a Mahumetan, I re∣hearsed agayne the sayde woordes Leila illala Mahumet resulla∣la, (that is to saye) there is one God, and Mahumet his cheefe Prophet: whiche are the wordes which they speake in profes∣syng theyr fayth. But when the beast yet answered nothyng, I broke his legges with a staffe. The queene tooke great plea∣sure in these my madde follyes, and commaunded the fleshe of the sheepe to be geuen me to eate: I neuer ate meate with more pleasure, or better appetite. Also three dayes after,Hunger ma∣keth appetite. I lykewyse kylled an Asse that was wont to bryng water into the pallace, because he refused to be a Mahumetan, and to say those woordes. The same tyme also I handeled a Iewe so euyll, that I had al∣most kylled hym, one in the meane tyme callyng me Christi∣an dogge, dogge borne. With which words beyng very angry, I cast many stones at him: but he againe hurlyng at me, gaue me a stroke on the brest, and an other on the syde, which greeued me very sore.
And because I coulde not folowe hym by reason of my shackles, I returned to the pryson, and stopped the doore with a heape of stones, and there lyued in great payne for the space of two daies without meate or drynke: And therefore the queene and other thought me to be dead, but the doore was opened by the queenes commaundement. Then these dogges derydyng me, gaue me stones in the steede of bread, and peeces of whyte marble, saying that it was suger: other gaue me clusters of Grapes full of sand. But partly that they should not suspect that I counter∣feyted madnesse, I ate the Grapes as they gaue me them. When the bruite was spred that I lyued two dayes & nyghtes without meate and drynke:Madnesse ta∣ken for holy∣nesse. some began to suspect that I was a holy man, and some that I was starke madde. And thus being diuided into diuers opinions, they consulted to send for cer∣tayne men,Heremytes. Mahume∣tans. of whom they haue such opinion of holynesse, as we haue of Heremytes: these dwell in the mountaynes, and leade a contemplatyue lyfe. When they came vnto me, to geue theyr iudgement what maner of man I was, certayne merchantes asked them yf I were a holy man, or a madde man. These were also of diuers opinions, some affyrmyng one thyng, and some another. Whyle they were yet debatyng this matter, for the space of an houre, I pyssed in my handes, and hurlde it in theyr faces: whereby they agreed that I was no Sainct, but a mad man. The queene seyng all this at the wyndowe, laughed well thereat among her maydens, and sayd thus to them, By the goodnesse of God, and by the head of Mahumet, this is a good man. The day folowyng, when in the mornyng I founde hym a sleepe that had so sore hurt me with stones, I tooke hym by the heare of the head with both handes, and with my knee so pounched hym on the stomacke, and battered his face, that I left hym all blooddy, and half dead. Which thyng the queene seeing, cryed vnto me saying, kyll the beast, kyll the dogge: wherupon, he ran his way, and came no more in syght. When the Presi∣dent of the citie heard that the queene fauoured me, & toke plea∣sure in my mad sport, thynkyng also that I was not mad, com∣maunded that I shoulde goe at lybertie within the pallace, only wearyng my shackles: Yet euery nyght was I put in an other pryson in the lower part of the pallace, and so remayned styl in
the courte for the space of .xx. dayes. In the meane tyme, the queene wylled me to go a huntyng with her, whiche I refu∣sed not, and at my returne, I fained me to be sicke for weerinesse. So continuyng for the space of eyght dayes, vnder the coloure of sickenes, the queene often sent to me to know how I did. After this, fyndyng oportunitie,A holy vowe. I declared to the queene that I had made a vow to God and Mahumet to visite a certaine holy man in the citie of Aden, and desyred her to geue me leaue to go thy∣ther. Whereunto she consented: and commaunded immediatly a Cammell and .xxv. Sarraphes of golde to be delyuered me. Therfore ye day folowyng, I tooke my iorney, and in the space of eyght dayes, came to the citie of Aden: and shortly after my commyng, vysited the man of whom was so great reporte of ho∣lynesse, and whom the people honoured for a saint.A holy saint. And this onely, because he had euer lyued in great pouertie, and without the company of women. And heare are seene many other such: But doubtlesse all suche lose theyr laboure, beyng out of the fayth of Christ. When I had perfourmed my vowe, I fayned that I had recouered health by myracle of that holy man, and certified the queene thereof, desyryng that I myght tarye there a whyle, to visyte lykewise certayne other men in that countrey, of whom was the lyke fame of holynesse: whiche excuse I deui∣sed, because the fleete of India woulde not yet depart from thence for the space of a moneth. In the meane tyme I secretly agreed with a certayne captayne of that nauie to goe with hym into In∣dia,The fleete of India. and made hym many fayre promisses to rewarde hym larg∣ly. He answeared, that he woulde not go into India before he had fyrst ben in Persia: wherunto I agreed. Of the cities of Lagi and Aiaz in Arabia Felix: And of the martes of Aiaz and the towne of Dante. Cap. 7. THe daye folowyng, mountyng vppon a Camell, and makyng a iorney of .xxv. myles, I came to a certayne citie mamed Lagi, situate in a great playne, well peopled, hauyng abundaunce of Oliues, and fleshe, with also great
plentie of corne, after our maner: but no vines, and great scarse∣nesse of woodde. The inhabitauntes are vnciuile and rusticall people, of the nation of vagabunde and feelde Arabians, and therfore but poore. Departing frō hence one dai iorney, I came to an other citie named Aiaz, situate vppon two hylles, with a great plaine betweene them, and hath in it a notable fountayne, & therfore diuers nations resort thither as to a famous mart. The inhabitauntes are Mahumetans, and yet greatly differyng in opinion of theyr religion:Strife and ha∣tred for religiō and all worth nought. insomuche that therefore they be at great enimitie one agaynst the other, and keepe sore warre. The cause whereof they saye to be this: That the people of the north mountayne, maynteyne the fayth and secte of Mahumet and his felowes, of whom we haue spoken before: but the o∣ther of the South mountayne affyrme, that fayth shoulde be geuen onely to Mahumet and Haly,Mortus Hali, as the Persi¦ans call hym. saying the other to be false prophetes. But let vs nowe returne to the marte. Almost all maner of spices are brought hyther. The region bryngeth foorth sylke and bombassine: also diuers goodly fruites, and vynes. On the toppe of both the hylles, are very strong fortresses, two dayes iorney from thence is the citie of Dante, well fortified both by arte and nature, situate in the toppe of a very great mountaine. Of Almacharan, a citie of Arabia Faelix, and of the fruitefulnesse thereof. Cap. 8. DEpartyng from Dantè, we came to the citie of Almacha∣ran, in two dayes iorney. This is situate on a very hygh mountayne, and declynyng, and difficulte to ascende, as of the heyght of seuen myles, and the way so narow, that onely two men can passe togeather. In the toppe, is a playne of incredible largenesse, very fruiteful, with plentie of all thynges to the vse of man. And therefore I thynke it to be inexpugna∣ble & inaccessible: hauyng also so great abundaunce of water, that one fountaine may suffice for a hundred thousand men. And ther∣fore they saye that the Soltan here hydeth his treasure, because he was borne in this citie.
Here also euer remayneth one of his wyues. The ayre is mar∣ueylous temperate and holsome, and the citie seconde to none in all respectes: the colour of the inhabitantes is rather encly∣nyng to whyte, then any other colour.As muche gold as wyll lade a hundred Ca∣mels. And to speake that I haue seene, the Soltan reserueth here as much golde, as wyll lade a hundred Camels. Of Reame a citie of Arabia Faelix, and the temperatenesse thereof. Cap. 9. THis citie is distaunt two dayes iorney from Almacaran. The colour of the inhabitantes is enclinyng to blacke: they are great merchantes. The soyle is fruitfull of all thynges sauyng wood: it conteyneth in circuite two thousande houses: on the one syde is a mountayne hauyng on it a very strong fortresse. Here I saw a certayne kinde of sheepe hauyng theyr tayles of fortie and foure pounde weyght,A sheepes tayle of .44. pounde weyght. and are without hornes, and also so marueylous fat, that they can scarce∣ly goe for fatnesse. There be lykewyse certayne grapes with∣out graynes, the sweetest that euer I eate, and al maner of suche fruites, as I haue spoken of before.Grapes with∣out graynes. It is of marueylous tem∣peratenesse, as witnesseth the long lyfe of men, for I haue spo∣ken with many of them that haue passed the age of a hundred and fyue and twentie yeeres,Men of long lyfe in tempe∣rate ayre. & yet verye lusty and wel complex∣ioned. They goe for the most part naked, wearyng only shyrts, or other loose and thynne apparell, lyke Mantelles, puttyng out one Arme all bare. Almoste all the Arabians make them Hornes with wreathyng of theyr owne heare, and that they thynke very comely. Of Sana a citie of Arabia Faelix. Cap. 10. DEpartyng from thence three dayes iorney, I came to a citie named Sana, situate vppon a verye hyghe mountayne, verye strong by Arte and Nature. The Soltan besyeged this, with a great armye of foure∣score
thousande men for the space of three monethes, but coulde neuer wynne it.An armye of fourescore thousand men. Yet it was at the last rendered by composition. The walles are of eyghteene cubites heyght, and twentie in breadth, insomuch that eyght Camels in order may wel marche vpon them.Strong walles. The region is very fruitefull and muche lyke vn∣to ours, and hath plentie of water. A Soltan is Lorde of the citie: hee hath twelue sonnes, of the whiche one is named Mahumet, who by a certayne naturall tyrannye and madnesse, delyteth to eate mans fleeshe,Anthopopha∣gus. and therfore secretly kylleth many to eate them. He is of large and strong body, of foure cubites hygh, and of the coloure inclinyng to ashes. The soyle beareth certayne spyces not farre from the citie. It conteyneth about foure thousand houses. The houses are of fayre buyldyng, and geue no place to ours. The citie is so large, that it contey∣neth within the walles, fieldes, gardens, and medowes. Of Taessa, Zibith, and Damar. great cities of Arabia Eaelix. Cap. 11. AFter three dayes iorney, I came to a citie named Taessa, sytuate vppon a mountayne, and verye fayre to syght: it hath plentie of all delices, and especially of marueylous fayre Roses,Roses. whereof they make Rose water. It is an auncient citie, and hath in it a Temple buylded after the fashi∣on of the churche of Sancta Maria Rotunda in Rome. The hou∣ses are very fayre, and shewe yet the monumentes of antiquitie: innumerable merchantes resort hyther for the trafficke of sun∣dry merchandies. In apparrell they are lyke vnto other, and of darkyshe ashe coloure of skynne, enclynyng to blacke. Three dayes iorney from thence, I came to an other citie named Zi∣bith, very fayre and good, distaunt from the redde sea onlye halfe a dayes iorney: there is great abundance of merchandies by reason of the nearenesse of the sea. It aboundeth with many goodly thynges, and especially with most white Suger, and sundrye kyndes of pleasant fruites.Suger. It is sytuate in a very large playne within two mountaynes: it lacketh walles, and is one of the cheefest martes for all sortes of spyces. The inhabitants are of the colour of them aforesaide. From hence in one dayes
iorney, I came to the citie of Damar: it is in a fruitefull soyle, and hath great exercise of merchandise. The inhabitants are Mahu∣metans, in apparrell and colourlyke vnto the other. Of the Soltan of the aforesayde cities, and why he is named Sechamir. Cap. 12. THese cities whereof we haue spoken here a litle before, are subiect to a Soltan of Arabia Faelix, named Sechamir.The Soltan of Arabia felix. Secha (by interpretation) signifieth holy, and Amir, a Prince, named the holy Prince, because he abhorreth sheddyng of mans blood.A pitiful pagan. At the tyme of my beyng there in pryson, he nouryshed syxteene thousand poore men, and cap∣tiues in pryson condemned to death, allowyng to euery of them dayly for theyr diet, syxe of theyr pence of the smallest valure,A great fami∣lye. and at home in his pallace entertayneth as many blacke slaues. Of Monkeys and Marmasettes, and other beastes, noysome to men. Cap. 13. DEpartyng from hence, I returned to the citie of Aden in three dayes iorney: in the midde waye,Of Aden reade the fourth cap. I founde an exceedyng hygh and large mountayne, where is great pentie of wylde beastes, and especially of Monkeys, whiche runne about the mountayne euery where. There are al∣so many Lions, very noysome to men: and therefore it is not safe to iorney that way, but when a multitude of men goe togeather,Monkeys and Lions. at the least to the number of a hundred. I passed this way with a great companie, and yet were we in daunger of the Lions, and other wylde beastes which folowed vs:Danger of wilde beasts. for we were sometimes constrayned to fyght with them with dartes, slyngs, and bowes, vsyng also the helpe of dogges, and yet escaped hardly. When I came to the citie, I fayned my selfe sicke: and in the day tyme lurked in the temple, and went foorth only in the night to speake with the pilot of the shyp (of whom I haue made mention be∣fore) and obteyned of hym a foist or barke to depart thence secretly.
Of certayne places of Ethio∣pia. Cap. 14. IN the syxt chapter here before, I haue made mention howe departing from the queene I went to the citie of Aden, where I couenaunted with a certayne pilot to goe with hym into India, and that he woulde not go thyther before he had fyrst made a viage into Persia, and that at my fyrst beyng in the ci∣tie of Aden, he coulde not yet for the space of a moneth depart from thence: Duryng whiche tyme, I traueyled the regions and cityes, whereof I haue spoken, vnto this my returne to A∣den. Nowe therfore accordyng to our agreement to trauayle di∣uers countreys and regions, committing our selues to the sea, we were by inconstant fortune and sundry tempestes,Tempest. deterred from that viage: for whereas we were nowe syxe dayes sailyng on our waye to Persia,The viage to Persia. Ethiope. a sodayne contrary tempeste droue vs out of our waye, and cast vs on the coast of Ethiope. Our barkes were laden with rubricke (that is,Rubricke. a certayne redde earth) which is vsed to dye cloth: for yeerely from the citie of Aden, departe fyfteene or twentie shyps laden with rubricke, which is brought out of Arabia Faelix. Beyng therefore thus tossed with stormes, we were dryuen into a port, named Zeila: where we remayned fyue dayes to see the citie, and tarrye vntyll the sea were more quiet. Of the citie Zeila in Ethiopia, and the great fruitfulnesse therof: and of certayne straunge beastes seene there. Cap. 15. IN this citie, is great freequentation of merchandies, as in a most famous mart.Golde. Iuery. Blacke slaues. There is marueylous abundance of gold and Iuerye, and an innumerable number of blacke slaues, solde for a small pryce: these are taken in warre by the Ma∣humetan Mores, out of Ethyopia, of the kyngdome of Presbi∣ter
Iohannes, or Preciosus Iohannes,Presbiter Io∣hannes, kyng of Iacobins & Abyssins. Iustice & good lawes. whiche some also call the kyng of Iacobins or Abyssins, beyng a Christian: and are cari∣ed away from thence into Persia, Arabia Faelix, Babylonia of Nilus or Alcair, and Mecha. In this citie iustice and good lawes are obserued: the soyle beareth Wheate, and hath abun∣daunce of flesh, and diuers other commodious thynges. It hath also Oyle, not of Olyues, but of some other thyng, I knowe not what. There is also plentie of Hony and Waxe: there are lykewyse certayne sheepe,Sheepe with great tayles, hauyng theyr tayles of the weyght of syxeteene pounde, and exceedyng fatte, the head and necke are blacke, and all the rest whyte. There are also sheepe altogea∣ther whyte, hauyng tayles of a cubite long, hangyng downe lyke a great cluster of grapes: and haue also great lappes of skynne hangyng from theyr throtes, as haue Bulles and Oxen,Palearia. hangyng downe almost to the grounde.Kyne with Hartes hornes. There are also certaine Kyne with hornes lyke vnto Hartes hornes, these are wylde: and when they bee taken, are geuen to the Soltan of that citie as a kyngly present. I sawe there also certayne Kyne,Kyne with on∣ly one horne▪ hauyng on∣ly one horne in the middest of the forehead, as hath the Unicorne, and about a spanne of length, but the horne bendeth backwarde: they are of bryght shynyng red colour. But they that haue Har∣tes hornes, are enclynyng to blacke colour. Conye is there good cheepe. The citie hath an innumerable multitude of merchants: the walles are greatly decayed, and the hauen rude and despica∣ble. The kyng or Soltan of the citie is a Mahumetan, and enter∣tayneth in wages a great multitude of foote men and horse∣men. They are greatly geuen to warres, and weare onlye one loose syngle vesture, as we haue sayde before of other. They are of darke ashye colour, enclining to blacke. In the warres, they are vnarmed: and are of the sect of Mahumet. Of Barbara, an Ilande of Ethiope. Cap. 16. AFter that the tempestes were appeased, wee gaue wynde to our sayles, and in shorte tyme arry∣ued at an Ilande named Barbara, the Prince whereof is a Mahumetan. The Ilande is not great,
but fruitfull and well peopled: it hath abundance of flesh. The inhabitants are of colour enclynyng to blacke. Al theyr ryches, is in heardes of cattayle. We remayned here but one day, and departyng from hence, sayled into Persia. The thyrde booke entreateth of Persia: and of certayne townes and partes of Persia. Cap. 1. WHen we had sayled the space of twelue dayes, we aryued at a citie called Diuobanderrumi,Diuobander∣rumi. (that is to say) the holy porte of Turkes. It is but a litle way from the continent: when the sea ryseth with hye tydes, it is an Iland enuironed with water, but at a lowe fludde, or decrease of the sea, one may go thyther by land: it is subiect to the Soltan of Cambaia. The Gouernour is named Menacheas: It is a marte of great merchandies.The Soltan of Cambaia. There dwell about it foure hundred merchants of Turky: it is well walled round about, and defended with al sorts of engins. They haue barkes and brygan∣tines somewhat lesse then ours: we remained here two daies. Departyng from hence,Goa. we came to an other citie named Goa, in the space of three dayes iorney: this also aboundeth with mer∣chandies, and is a mart greatly frequented. The soyle is fruite∣full, with plentie of all thynges necessary: the inhabitantes are Mahumetans. Neare vnto this, are two other fayre cities and portes,Giulfar. Meschet. named Giulfar and Meschet. Of the Iland and citie of Ormus, or Ar∣musium: and of an Iland of Per∣sia where pearles are found. Cap. 2. PRoceedyng on our viage, we came to a citie named Ormus,Ormus. Pearles. verye fayre. This is seconde to none in good∣lye situation, and plentie of pearles: it is in an I∣lande dystaunt from the continent twelue myles: It hathe great scarcenesse of freshe water and corne,
From other regions, is brought thyther all victualles that nou∣ryshe the inhabitauntes. Three dayes saylyng from thence, are geathered those muscles which bryng foorth the fayrest and byg∣gest pearles: they are taken as I will nowe declare.Fyshyng for Pearles. There are certayne men that get theyr lyuing by fyshyng. These hauing small Boates, cast into the sea a great stone, fastened to a corde, and this on both sydes of the Boate, to make it as stedfast and immoueable as a shyppe lying at an Anker. The Boate thus stayed as it were with weyght and balance, an other appoyn∣ted to that purpose, casteth into the sea a corde with a stone hangyng at it. In the myddest of the Boate an other hauing a sacke hangyng on his shoulder before and behynde,Dyuers vnder the water. and a stone hangyng at his feete, hurleth him selfe into the sea, and swim∣meth vnder the water euen vnto the bottome of the sea, for the deapth of fyftiene pases or more, and there remayneth vntyll he haue geathered the pearle Muscles, which he putteth in his sacke, then he casteth away the stone that weyghed him downe, and commeth vp by the corde. There are seene sometyme almost three hundred shyppes, and other kynde of vessels, which come thyther from many places and countreys. The Sol∣tan of the citie, is a Mahumetan. There are aboue foure hun∣dred merchauntes and factours remaynyng here continually, for the trafike of merchandies whiche come from diuers other regi∣ons, as silke, pearles, precious stones, spices, and suche lyke. They lyue with Ryse for the moste parte, for they haue none other corne. Of the citie named Eri in Chorazani, a re∣gion of Persia, and of the riches ther∣of: Also of Reubarbarum. Cap. 3. DEpartyng from Ormus, I went into Persia: And after ten dayes iourney, I came to a certayne citie named Eri. The name of the region is Chorazani,Chorazani or Chorashan. by which signi∣fication we may also name it Flaminia. The Kyng of the region, dwelleth in the citie: It is fruitefull and plentifull almost of all thinges. There is seene so great aboundaunce
of sylke, that you may in one daye bye as muche as may suffice to lade three thousande Cameles.Great abun∣daunce of silke. Corne is there neuer deare, by reason of the great abundaunce. There is great plentie of Rubarbe, as I geather by this coniecture, that syxe pounde of Rubarbe,Plentie of corne. Rubarbe of smal price. after our pounde of .xii. vnces to the pounde, are solde for one croune of golde. The citie conteyneth in circuite about seuen thousande houses. They are of the secte of Mahumet. Departyng from hence twentie dayes iorney, I obserued that the continent region or firme lande, farre from the sea syde, is very well inhabited with many good townes and vyllages. Of the ryuer thought to be Euphrates. And of Castoreum. Cap. 4. IN this iorney I came to a certayne great ryuer, whiche in the inhabitantes language euen at this daye is named Eufra, which I veryly thynke to be Euphrates,The riuen Eu∣phrates. consideryng also the large capacitie thereof. Proceedyng therefore on my ior∣ney by the ryuer towarde the left hande, I came in the space of three dayes to an other citie,Schira. named Schyra. This hath onely one prynce, and he a Persian Mahumetan, and subiecte to none other.Precious stons The stone E∣ranon▪ A Tur∣ques. Here are founde all sortes of precious stones, and es∣pecially the stone Eranon, whiche delyuereth men from witche∣craftes, madnesse, and fearefulnesse, proceedyng of melan∣colie. It is the stone commonly called the Turquesse. They are brought in great abundaunce from a citie named Balascam,Balascam. where is also great plentie of Castoreum, and sundrye kyndes of coloures.Castoreum. And heere I notifie vnto you, why there is found litle true Castoreum among vs, because it is adulcerate by the Persi∣ans before it come to our handes, for these people are greatly geuen to the counterfettyng of suche thynges, as I saw by expe∣rience before myne eyes: for willyng on a time to proue the odori∣ferous strength of pure Castoreum,The profe of true Castoreū. I sawe certayne, that had ex∣perience hereof, do in this maner. They tooke the bladder of Castoreum, and foure of them one after an other, put it to their noses to smell.
The fauour of it was so strong, that it made theyr noses bleede: and by this profe, they knew it to be pure Castoreum, & not coun∣terfect. I asked the Persian whether Castoreum (as other the lyke vngments or drugges) would sone loose his strength. He answered, that the strength of that sauour myght be preserued the space of ten yerees, yf it were not counterfect.Comendation of the Persi∣ans. The Persians are very courteous and gentle people, lyberall and gratious one to an other, and fauorable to strangers: and this I speake as I haue founde and seene by experyence. Duryng the tyme that I was there, I founde a certayne Persian merchant, who the yeere before knewe me in the citie of Mecha: he was borne in the citie of Eri in Corozain. As soone as he saw me, he spake to me in this maner, Lodouicke, what God or fortune hath sent thee in∣to these countreyes? Art not thou he whom not long sence I knewe in Mecha? To whom I answered, I am certaynely the same, and am now come hyther for the great desire that I haue to see the worlde. Praysed be God, sayd he, that I haue nowe found a companion of my iorney, that is taken with the same desire that I haue: and therfore for the space of fyfteene dayes we remayned togeather in a citie named Squilaz.Squila. He exhorted me not to depart from hym, but that we should togea∣ther, by his guydyng, trauayle the cheefe partes of the world. Enteryng therefore on our iorney, we came fyrst to a place named Sainct Bragant.Sainct Bra∣gant. Of the citie of Sainct Bragant, bygger then Babylon. And of the kyng of Persia, named the Sophie. Cap. 5. THey saye that the citie of Sainct Bragant, is bygger then Babylon: the kyng of the citie, is a Mahumetan. The merchantes saye that when it pleaseth hym, he as∣sembleth an armie of threescore thousande Horsemen.An armie of threescore thousand horse∣men. The people are of colour enclinyng to whytenesse, and verye warrelyke men. This we say only by enformation of other: for we coulde not safely passe anye further, by reason of the great warres which the Sophie then made agaynst those Mahumetans,War betweene the Sophie of Persia and the Turke, for their religion. which are of the sect and religon of Bubachar, Othomar, & Omar▪
These were the felowes of Mahumet, as we haue written be∣fore of Mahumet and his felowes.The Turkes holde of Ma∣humet and his felowes. The Persians abhorre these as heretikes and false doctours, although they them selues also be Mahumetans of an other secte, whiche is of Mahumet and Hali,The Persians hold of Mahu∣met and Hali, or Mortus Hali. whose doctrine they embrace and esteeme for most perfect and true religion. Here therefore the sayde Persian, my good friende, and ioyfull companion of my iourney, sayde thus vnto mee, That thou mayest vnderstande (Lodouike) the vnfayned good will that I beare thee, and the desyre I haue that our friend∣shyp may be knyt with indissoluble bandes,A sure friend in necessitie. and thereby to assure thee that I will not fayle thee in thy necessitie, I haue a Nyese named Samis, whom I wil gyue thee to wyfe. Samis in theyr tongue, signifieth the Sunne (for shee deserued so to be called for her singuler beautie) and sayde furthermore, that he dyd not tra∣uayle the worlde for lacke of any thyng, but only for his pleasure and desyre of knowledge. And therefore passyng no further, by reason of the warres (as we haue sayde) we returned to the citie of Eri, where he enterteyned mee in his house honourably: and shewyng mee his Nyese, instauntly desyred mee to take her to wyfe. But I, hauyng my mynde otherwyse desti∣nate, would not seeme to contemne his so friend∣ly a profer, but deferred it to a more conue∣nient tyme. Therefore departyng from thence, within eight dayes after, we returned to Ormus, and sayled from thence into India, arryuing there at a certayne porte na∣med Cheo.Cheo.
Here foloweth the fourth booke, which entreateth of India, and of the cities and other notable thynges seene there. Of the citie of Cambaia in India, most fruite∣full in maner of all thinges. Cap. 1. FOrasmuche as in the begynnyng of this woorke we promised that we would declare all thynges briefely, we intende nowe heere to speake onely of thynges whiche may seeme most woorthye to be knowen. En∣tryng therefore into India, we came to a certaine porte, which the great and famous ryuer Indus passeth by, and is not far from the citie of Cambaia.The ryuer In∣dus. The citie of Cambaia. It is situate three myles within the lande, towarde the South. The Brigantines or Foystes can haue no accesse to it, excepte the fludde ryse hygher then commonly it is woont to do, which sometymes ouerfloweth the lande the space of foure myles. But heere the fluddes haue contrarye courses of increasyng, for heere they increase in the wane of the Moone,Note the in∣crese of ryuers contrarye to ours. but with vs in the full Moone. The citie is walled after our maner, and aboundeth with al necessarie thynges, especially with wheate, and al sorts of holesome and pleasaunt fruites. There are also certayne kyndes of spyces, the names whereof I knowe not. It hath also abun∣daunce of gossampine or bombassine cotton. Merchaunts bryng from thence yeerely so much bombassine and silke,xl. shippes ladē with sylke and bombasine. that somtime they lade fourtie or fyftie shyps to cary into other countreys. In this region is also a mountayne where the Onyx stone, common∣ly called Corneola, is founde: and not farre from thence also an other mountaine, where the Calcedony and Diamant are found. The maners of the people of the citie of Cambaia: and of the Soltan thereof. Cap. 2. THe Soltan of Cambaia, at my beyng there, was named Maca∣mut, and had raygned fourtie yeeres, after he had expulsed
the kyng of Gugerat. They thynke it not lawefull to kyll any lyuyng beaste to eate,Pithagorici. or to eate fleshe. They are no Mahume∣tans, neyther Idolaters, and therefore I beleeue that if they were baptised,Good people. they were not far from the way of saluation, for they obserue the exquisite rule of iustice, doyng no worse to other, then they woulde to be done to them. As touchyng theyr ap∣parell, some of them go naked, and other couer onely theyr pri∣uities. On theyr heades, they weare fyllettes of purple colour. They them selues are of darke yelowe coloure, commonly called Leonell coloure. This Soltan maynteyneth an army of .xx. thou∣sande horsemen.They may see me the suc∣cessours of Darius and Pous. Euery mornyng resort to his pallace, fyftie men, syttyng on Elephantes. Their office is, with all reuerence to salute the king or Soltan, the Elephantes also kneelyng downe. In the mornyng assoone as the kyng waketh, is hearde a great noyse of Drummes, Tambartes, Tymbrelles, Waytes, and also Trumpettes,The great pompe of the kyng of Cambaia. with dyuers other musicall instruments, in reioycyng that the kyng lyueth. The lyke do they whyle he is at dinner: and then also the men sytting on the Elephantes, make hym the lyke reuerence as before. We wyll in due place speake of the wytte,Elephantes. customes, and docilitie of these beastes. The Soltan of this citie, hath his vpper lyppe so grosse, that it is a monstrous thyng to beholde:Monstruos great lyppes. Insomuche that sometyme he beareth it vp with a fillet, as women do the heare of theyr heades: his bearde is whyte and long, euen vnto the nauell. He is so accustomed to poyson from his infancie,A straunge his∣torie of a kyng accustomed to eate poyson. that he dayly eateth some to keepe it in vse. And although he hym selfe feele no hurte thereof by reason of custome, yet doth he thereby so impoyson hym selfe, that he is poyson to other: for when he is disposed to put any of his noble men to death, he causeth hym to be brought to his presence, and to stande naked before hym. Incontinent he eateth certayne fruites (whiche they call Chofolos) lyke vnto Nuttemegges: and eateth also the leaues of certayne hearbes, whiche they call Tambolos,A venomus kyng. addyng also thereto the pouder of beaten oyster shelles. And a whyle chawyng al these togeather in his mouth, he spitteth it vpon hym whom he desyreth to kyll, who being sparkled therwith, dyeth, by force of the poyson with∣in the space of halfe an houre. He entertaineth about foure thou∣sand concubines: for when soeuer he hath lyue with any of them,
shee with whom he hath lyen, dyeth the daye folowing, be∣yng by hym impoysoned.Belyke he get∣teth no chyl∣dren. And therefore when he changeth his shyrt or other apparrel, no man dare weare it: and for this cause he hath great change of apparrell. My companion enquired di∣ligently of the merchants by what meanes he was of so veno∣mous nature? They answered, that the Soltan his father brought him so vp of a childe with poison by litle and litle, with preserua∣tiues so accustomyng hym thereto. But let vs nowe returne to speake of the maners of the people: For the most part they weare but only one syngle vesture, and are very warrelyke men: also greatly geuen to merchandies. The fruitfulnesse and plentiful∣nesse of the region can not be spoken.Great fruitful∣nesse & abun∣dance of mer∣chandies. It is frequented almost of al nations. Therfore from this citie, and from an other (wher∣of we wyll speake hereafter) diuers and innumerable sortes of merchandies, are transported to almost all the regions of the worlde, and especially to the Turkes, Syrians, Arabians, Indians: also to diuers regions of Affricke and Ethiopia: principally ex∣ceedyng abundance of sylke and Bombasyne,Plentie of sylke. and therefore is this Soltan marueylous rych. He keepeth in maner contynuall warre with the kyng of Ioga, whose realme is fyfteene dayes iorney from Cambaia, and reacheth very farre euery waye.The kyng of Ioga, an Ido∣latour. This kyng mayntayneth an armie of .xxx. thousand fyghtyng men: he and all his people are Idolatours. He lyueth in contynual progresse,Continuall progresse. with a mightie trayne at the charges of the people: and contynually carrieth about with hym foure thou∣sand tentes and pauilions: also his wyfe, chyldren, concubines, & slaues, furthermore, foure or fiue of most couragious horses:Wyues and concubines. like∣wyse muskattes, moonkeys, Parrottes, Leopardes, & haukes. And in this order he walketh almost ouer all India. The kynges apparell, is a double gotes skinne, one coueryng his brest, and the other his backe, with the hearysyde outward: he is of we∣sel colour, enclining to blackenesse,The colour of the Indians. as are the most part of these Indians, beyng in maner scorched with heate of the Sunne. They weare al earerings, precious stones, and iewels of sundry forts: some couer theyr body with a single, light, & thinne vesture, puttyng out one arme naked. The kyng and certaine of his no∣ble men, paynt their faces with certaine sweete gommes & spi∣ces: and some also other partes of their bodies. They are ledde with many vayne superstitions: for some professe neuer to lye on
the grounde, some to lyue in continual silence, as though they were speechelesse, hauing two or three appointed by signes to serue them meate and drynke. They haue all hornes hangyng about theyr neckes: and there∣fore when they come to any citie,Hornes. they blowe theyr hornes all at once, to make the inhabitantes afrayde, as do they that with vs keepe Crowes or Rookes out of the corne. Then commyng to talke with the citizens, they demaund victuales, and what so∣euer other thynges they stande in neede of. Whyle the kyng any tyme resteth a whyle in one place, almost all the whole ar∣mye gardyng his person about his pauylion, fyue or syxe hun∣dred in the meane tyme raunge abroade togeather to geat what they can.Wanderyng nations. Feelde men. They tarry not past three dayes in one place, but are euer wanderyng after the maner of the vagabunde Egyptians, Arabians, & Tartars. The region is not fruiteful, but rough, with craggie mountaines. The houses of the citie are despicable: the citie is also without walles. This kyng is enemie to the Sol∣tan of Machamir, & vexeth hym greatly with diuers incursions. Of the citie of Ceull, and the maner of the people. Cap. 3. DEpartyng from Cambia, in twelue dayes iorney I came to a citie named Ceull: the land that lieth betweene them both, is called Guzerat. The kyng of this citie, is an Idolatour:Guzerat. they are of darke yealowe colour, or Lion tawnye: some were suche slender apparrell as they whom wee haue spoken of before: other are naked, coueryng onlye theyr pryuyties. They are prompt to the warres, and vse swordes, bowes, dartes, slynges, and rounde targettes. They haue engines to beat downe walles, & to make great slaughter in an armie: the citie hath walles, and is distant from the sea but three myles. A fayre ryuer runneth by the citie, by the whiche much merchandies is brought thyther. The soyle beareth al∣most all maner of fruites, except Uynes, Walnuttes, and Chest∣nuttes. It hath also Wheate, Barlie, and other kyndes of corne. Here is made great plentie of Bombasyne cloth. They are such Idolatours as are they of Calecut,Idolatours. of whom we wyl speake here∣after: yet are there in the citie many merchants Mahumetans. They exercise iustice. The kyng entertayneth but a small armie.
There are many horses and kyne. Two dayes iorney from hence, is a citie named Dabuly,Dabuly. hauyng a great ryuer runnyng by it. It hath walles after the maner of ours. The soyle is fruiteful, and the citie beautifull. There are innumerable mer∣chauntes Mahumetans. The kyng is an Idolater, and hath an armye of .xxx. thousande men.Idolaters. They are in maners lyke vnto the other, and of the same colour. Of Goga, an Ilande of India. Cap. 4. DEpartyng from hence, I came to the Iland of Goga, not past a myle destant from the continent. This payeth yeerely trybute to the kyng of Dechan a thousand peeces of golde, of the value of the Saraphes of Babylon,Tribute. hauyng on the one syde the Image of the dyuell, and on the other syde, certayne vnknowen caractes. Uppon the sea coaste of one syde of this Ilande,Coyne. is a towne buylded after the ma∣ners of ours. The gouernour is a certayne Captayne of soldi∣ers named Sauain:Mamalukes. he hath in his regiment foure hundred Ma∣malukes, and is also a Mamaluke hym selfe: and therefore when he fyndeth any whyte men, he entertayneth them frendly,white men. and geueth them stypende of twentie Saraphes of golde euery moneth. But he fyrst maketh profe of their strength and valiant∣nesse by wrestlyng: and if they be not founde meete for the warres, he putteth them to handy craftes. This Captayne with onely his foure hundred Mamalukes, greatly vexeth the kyng of Narsinga. Departyng from hence, in eyght dayes ior∣ney by lande, I came to the citie of Dechan. Of Dechan, a very fayre citie of India. Cap. 5. THe kyng or Soltan of Dechan, is a Mahumetan, of whom the foresayde captayne Mamaluke is entred in wages. This citie is beautifull in syght, and the soyle very fruite∣full and plentifull in maner of all thynges necessarie.
The kyng is accompted a Mamaluke, and with hym .xxxv. thousande men of his dominion of horsemen and footemen. The citie is beautified with a marueylous fayre pallace,A fayre palace. and the pallace adourned with many fayre roomes, for before you come to the kynges chamber, you must passe by .xliiii. other cham∣bers, for the sollers of the chambers are so orderly disposed, that one chamber styll geueth entrye into an other, vntyll you come to the last. The citie is compassed with a wal, after the maner of the Christians.Great pompe and magnifi∣cence. The houses are not vncomely. The kyng vseth incredible pompe, and regal magnificence. They that wayte vppon his person weare vppon theyr shooes or starpins Rubies and Diamondes, and such other precious stones. What ouches and iewelles they weare in theyr earynges and Condalijs, Carkenettes colours, let wittie men iudge, comparyng the feete to the more noble partes of the bodie. Sixe miles from the citie is a mountayne where Diamondes are digged.Where Dia∣muntes are founde. It is compassed with a wall, and kept with a Garrison. The region hath plentie of all thynges. The people are Mahumetans. Theyr apparel for the most part is of sylke: or at the least the sherte or inmost vesture. They weare also thyne buskynnes: and hose lyke gre∣gascos or maryners slops.Womens fa∣ces couered. Theyr women, after the maner of the women of Damasco, haue theyr faces couered. The kyng keepeth in maner continual war with ye king of Narsinga. The most part of his souldiers are strangers,White men. enterteyned for wages. They are white men: but the inhabitantes, of the coloure of the other Indi∣ans. The kyng is marueylous ryche, and liberall. He hath also a great nauie of shyps.The kyng of Decham, hateth the Christians. He hateth the Christians as much as any other. Thus hauyng traueled this part of the region, I toke my iorney towarde a citie named Bathacala, fyue dayes iorney from Dechan.The citie Ba∣thacala. The inhabitantes are Idolaters, except certayne Mahu∣metan merchaunts, which resort thither for marchandise. It hath abundaunce of Ryse, Sugar, Fygges, Walnuttes, Wheate, Corne, and many other fruites and rootes vnknowen to vs. They haues Beeues, Kyne, Bulfes, Sheepe, Goates, and dyuers other beastes, but no Horses, Mules, or Asses.
Of certayne other goodly cities of India. Cap. 6. DEpartyng from hence, I tooke my iorney towarde a citie named Centacola, one dayes iorney from Bathacala. The prince of this citie is no lord of great richesse. There is neuerthelesse abundaunce of fleshe, Ryse,Centacola. and other suche fruites as growe in India: many Mahumetans resort hy∣ther for merchaundies. The kyng is an Idolater, and of Lion tawny colour. They go starke naked,Idolatars. Barthacal. and weare nothyng on theyr heades. This prince is subiecte to the kyng of Bartha∣cal. Departyng from hence two dayes iorney, I came to an Ilande named Onor, whose kyng is an Idolater,The Ilande of Onor. and serueth the deuyll, and is subiect to the kyng of Narsinga: He is very gentle and familier, he maynteyneth eyght foystes, which make excursi∣ons and lyue by rouyng and pyracie.A kyng a pirate. Naked men. He is in great frendshyppe with the kyng of Portugale. The inhabitantes couer their pri∣uities with a sindone, and are besyde all naked. The soyle bea∣reth plentie of Ryse, as in other partes of India.Ryse. Beastes. There are in maner al kyndes of beastes, as wylde Bores, Harts, Wolues, Lions, & sundry kinds of birdes and foules vnlike vnto ours, Pe∣cockes also and Parrottes.Byrdes and foules. It hath innumerable Kyne of shy∣nyng yelowe coloure: also sheepe exceedyng fatte. There is so great abundaunce of flowers and Roses, that they fayle not in wynter. There can not be a more temperate ayre:Flowers all the yeere longe▪ and therfore they lyue muche longer then we do. Not far from this citie, is an other citie named Mangolor: from whence,Longe lyfe. Myngolor. about the num∣ber of .lx. shyppes departe yeerely laded with Ryse. The in∣habitantes are partly Idolaters, and partly Mahumetans. Their maner of lyuing and apparell, is as we haue sayd before.Ryse. Of Canonor and Narsinga, great cities of India. Cap. 7. DEpartyng from hence, we directed our iorney toward the citie of Canonor, beyng a very goodly citie.Afterwarde he became frende to the Portu∣gales. Heere the kyng of Portugale hath a very strong towne. The kyng of the citie is an Idolater, and no great frend to the kyng of Portugale.
The citie hath a porte, whyther are brought the horses of Persia: but the custome for horses is exceedyng great. Departyng from hence, and entryng further into the lande, we came to the citie of Narsinga, where many Mahumetan merchauntes do dwel. The soyle beareth neyther wheate, nor vynes, or fewe other fruites, except Oranges and Gourdes.ranges. They eate no breade: but lyue with ryse, fyshe, and suche walnuttes as the countrey bea∣reth. In maners and Idolatrye, they are lyke vnto them of Calecut,Ryse. of whiche we wyll speake heareafter. There is founde plentie of spyces, as Ginger, Pepper, Myrobalans, Cardanum, Cassia,Spyces. and dyuers suche other. Also many and dyuers kindes of fruites vnlyke vnto ours, and muche sweeter. The region is in maner inaccessible for many dennes and diches made by force.Straunge fruites. The kyng hath an army of fyftie thousande gentelmen, whiche they call Heros. In the warres they vse swoordes, rounde Tar∣gettes,An army of fyftie thousand gentelmen. Gunnes. or Buklers, Lances, Dartes, Bowes, Slynges: and begyn nowe also to vse Gunnes. They go naked, coueryng one∣ly their priuities, except when they go to the warres. They vse no horses, Mules, Asses, or those Camels whiche we common∣ly call Dromedaries.Dromedares. Elephantes. They vse onely Elephantes, yet not to fyght in the battayle. Great merchaundise is vsed in the citie: for thyther resorte from dyuers countres two hundred shyppes yeerely. Departyng from the kyngdome of Narsinga, in .xv. dayes iorney towarde the East, we came at the length to a citie named Bisinagar. Of the fruiteful citie of Bisinagar in the kyngdome of Narsinga. Cap. 8. THe citie of Bisinager is vnder the dominion of the kyng of Narsinga, and subiect to hym. The citie is very large and well walled, situate on the syde of a hyll, and eyght myles in circuite.A triple wall. It is compassed with a triple wall, and is a famous mart of all sortes of ryche merchaundise. The soyle is marueylous fruitefull, and hath whatsoeuer pertayneth to delicates and pleasures. There is no lande more commodi∣ous for haukyng and huntyng,Hawkyng and huntyng. for it hath large playnes, and goodly woods: a man would saye it were an earthly Paradyse.
The kyng and people are Idolaters. He is a Prince of great power, he hath an army of foure thousande horsemen. And yet is it to be noted, the price of a good horse there,An army of foure thousand horsemen. to be no lesse then foure or fyue hundred of those peeces of golde whiche they call Pardais: And sometyme it so chaunceth that a horse is solde for eight hundred of those peeces of golde.Horses of great price. The cause of which great price is, that they are brought out of other countreys: and that they haue no Mares, being forbydden by the commaundement of the kynges, streightly chargyng the portes to be kepte, least any Mares should be brought into the countrey.Foure hundred Elephantes. Hee hath also foure hundred Elephantes to serue in the warres: and likewyse as many Camelles, of the kynde of those swyfte runnyng Ca∣melles which be commonly called Dromadarii.Dromedary Camelles. And here me see∣meth good oportunitie to say somewhat of the docilitie, agilitie, and wyt of Elephantes, as we haue promised. Of the docilitie, agilitie, and wit of Elephantes. Cap. 9. THe Elephant, of all foure footed beastes, and nexte vnto man, is most wittie and docible, and not farre from hu∣mane sence, and surmounteth all other beasts in strength. When the Indians bring them to the warres,Howe the Ele∣phantes are prepared to the warres. they put great packesaddelles on their backes, suche as in Italie they vse for the great Mules. These packesaddelles, they gyrde vnder theyr bellyes with two chaynes of Iron. Uppon the saddelles, they place on euery syde a litle house, or if you will, rather call them Turrettes, or Cagies, made of wood: euery Turret con∣teyneth three men. Betweene the two Turrettes, sitteth an In∣dian on the backe of the beast, and speaketh to him in his owne language, whiche the beast vnderstandeth and obeyeth: for it is certaine that no other beast approcheth so neare to the vnderstan∣dyng of man. Seuen men therefore are thus placed vppon one Elephant when they goe to the wars,Seuen men fyght vpon one Elephant. and all armed with coates of fence, Targets, Bowes, Launces, Dartes, and Slynges. Al∣so the trunke or snoute of the Elephant (which of the Latines is called Promuscis, or Proboscis, and of some,Howe the Ele∣phant is armed the hande of the Ele∣phant) is armed, and hath a swoord fastened to it of the length of two cubites, very strong, and of a handfull in breadth. And thus
furnished, they proceede to the battayle. When it is requisite to goe forewarde, or backewarde, the gouernour sittyng aboue, gyueth them an instruction with such voyces as they are accusto∣med vnto:The Elephant vnderstandeth the voyce of his keeper. for sometyme he sayth thus to the beast, Stryke here, stryke there, forbeare here, goe forewarde there, turne this way, and that way. All which woordes he vnderstandeth and obeyeth without spurre or brydell. But where it so chaunceth that by ca∣sting of fyre,The Elephant can not abyde fyre. they are with feare dryuen to flyght, they can by no meanes be stayed. And therfore these people haue many subtile deuises howe they may feare them with fyre, which this beast, by the sense of nature, feareth aboue all thinges, and therefore flyeth in maner at the sight of fyre. And to speake somewhat of theyr strength, as I haue seene by experience, I remember that when I was in the citie of Canonor,The strength of the Elephant certayne Mahumetans drue a shyp aland, turnyng the shyp, after the maner of the Christians, with the fore ende towarde the lande, and laying vnder it three rowling beames. Then three Elephantes commodiously appli∣ed, drawyng with great force, and bendyng downe theyr heades to the ground, brought the shyp to lande. But many haue thought that the Elephantes haue no ioyntes in theyr legges, and that therefore they could not bende theyr legges: which thyng doubt∣lesse is false,The Elephants haue ioyntes in their legges. for they haue ioyntes as haue other beastes, but in the lowest parte of theyr legges. The Females are more fierce then the Males, and much stronger to beare burdens. Sometime they are taken with furie or madnesse, and testifie the same by dis∣ordinate runnyng here and there. One Elephant exceedeth the bygnesse of three Bufles, & not vnlyke of heare. They haue eyes lyke swyne, & the snout or trunke very long, wherwith they put meate and drinke into their mouth: and therefore may it well be called the hande of the Elephant.The hande of the Elephant. The mouth is vnder the throte, much lyke the mouth of a Sowe, and the trunke is holowe, and can therwith holde fast stickes or slaues, and them rule as it were with a hande. I sawe also the trunke of a tree ouerthrowen by an Elephant, which xxiiii. men attempting, could not doe. The two great teeth or tuskes,The teeth of the Elephant is Iuery. are placed in the highest iawe. Ech of their eares, are two handfuls byg, whether the beast be of the bygger or lesse kinde. The feete are like vnto such round thicke trenchers of wood as he commonly vsed. The foote conteineth fyue hoofes,
in roundnesse like vnto great Oysters. The tayle is lyke to the tayle of a Bufle, foure handfull long, and of thyn heare. The Fe∣males are also bigger then the Males, they are of sundry bignes,The bygnesse of the Elephant for some are of .xiii. handfuls high, and other of .xiiii. handfuls, and some also haue been seene of sixtiene handfuls. They goe slowly, and walowing, and therfore some that haue not ben vsed to them, are moued to vomite euen as it were on the sea. Yet is it a plea∣sure to ryde on the young Elephantes, bicause they goe softly like ambeling Mules. When you mount on them, they stoope & bend their knees, that you may easily ascende. They are neuer bryde∣led, neyther vse theyr keepers any halters to gouerne them. Of the ingendering of Elephantes, and of the magnificence & riches of the king of Narsinga. Cap. 10. WHen they ingender, they resorte to the medowes or woods,The naturall shamefastnesse of Elephantes for by a certaine naturall shamefastnesse they doe it not but in secrete places: Although some Auc∣thours haue written that Elephants engender back∣ward. Some take it for a great present to giue the king the mem∣ber or pissell of an Elephant,The pissell of an Elephant. whiche perhappes they doe for the exceedyng great price of Elephantes: For some are solde there for fyue hundred peeces of golde, and some (as they say) for two thousande: which peraduenture, is not for theyr greatnesses of bodie, but rather for certayne properties, wyt, & docilitie, where∣in some farre exceede other, euen as among men.Men of lesse. vnderstandyng then Ele∣phantes. The riches of the kyng of Narsinga. And I dare well say that I haue seene some men much inferior to Elephants in wyt and sense. Therefore the kyng of Narsinga, in riches and dominion, farre exceedeth all kynges that euer I haue seene or hearde of. The citie in situation and fayrenesse, representeth the citie of Milane, except only that it is in a declining place, and lesse equal. Other kingdoms which are subiect to this, lye round about it, as the kyngdome of Ausonia & Venice lye about Milane.A great tribute by the day. Their Bramini (so are the priestes named) tolde me yt the king receiueth
dayly of that citie for tribute or reuenue, the summe of twelue thousandes of those peeces of golde whiche they call Pardios. He maynteyneth an army of many thousandes of men, for he liueth in continuall warre with his borderers.Idolaters. He is an Idolatour, and honoureth the deuyl, euen as doth the kyng of Calecut. They that are of the rychest sorte, vse a slender inwarde apparell or peticote, not very long, and bynde theyr heades with a phillet or broade bande, of sundry colours, after the maner of the Mahumetans. The common sorte, couer only theyr priuities, and are besyde all naked. The kyng weareth a Cappe of cloth of golde, of two handfulles long: when he goeth to warre, he weareth a vesture of bombasine,A riche cloke. and thereon a cloke adourned with plates of gold, hauyng the borderer garde besette with all sortes of precious stones and Iewelles.The magnifi∣cence of the kyng of Nar∣singa. His horse with the furniture, is estee∣med to bee woorth as muche as one of our cities, by reason of innumerable Iewelles of great price. When he goeth a hun∣tyng, three other kynges beare him company, whose office is to be euer neare him, and guyde him. When he maketh any iourney, or rydeth abrode, he is accompanyed with six thousand horsemen: And therefore it is manifeste that not only for these thynges whereof we haue spoken, but also for dyuers other of lyke magnificence, hee is one of the greatest Kynges in the worlde.Coyne of golde and siluer. He coyneth money and peeces of golde named Par∣dios. Also other siluer money of lesse value, whiche they call Fano, conteynyng the value of sixtiene of the smallest money of copper. Traueylers may here goe safely through all his domi∣nions,Daunger of Lyons. if they can auoyde the daunger of the Lions. Of theyr dyet and order of lyuyng, I will speake more largely where oc∣casion shall serue to wryte of Calecut.The kyng of Narsinga, friend to the kyng of Por∣tugale. This kyng of Narsinga, is a great friende to the Christians, and is in great amitie with the kyng of Portugale: and besyde him, hee knoweth none o∣ther Christian Prince: and therefore the Portugales are here friendly and honourably vsed. When I had remayned in this citie many dayes, I returned to the citie of Canonor. And after I had remayned there three dayes, I entered fur∣ther into the lande,The citie of Trompata. and came to a citie named Trompata, about twelue myles from Canonor.
The inhabitauntes are Idolatours. It is neare vnto the sea, and therefore there are seene many merchantes Mahumetans. They lyue moderately, & haue in maner none other ryches then nuttes of India, but there are very fayre trees to make shyppes. There are in the citie aboue fiftiene thousande Mahumetans,Mahume∣tans. although the Kyng be an Idolatour. Departyng from hence,Pandara. I came to the citie of Pandara:Capagot. and from thence passyng by the citie of Capagot, I came at the length to the famous citie of Calecut.Calecut. And to be breefe, I haue here ouerpassed to speake largely of many other people and kyngdomes, as are these, Chianul, Dabul, Bathe∣calo, Onouè, Bangolor, Cauonor, Cuchin, Cacilon, and Calonue, which I haue done, to the ende that I may entreat more largely of Ca∣lecut, as the chiefest, and as it were the head and metropolitane of all the cities of India.The kyng of Calecut, a God on the earth. For it is certayne that the Kyng of Ca∣lecut in royall maiestie exceedeth all the kynges of the East, and is therefore in theyr language called Samory, that is to say, God on the earth. The fyfth booke of East India, and fyrst of the famous citie of Calecut. Cap. 1. THe citie of Calecut,The citie of Calecut. is situate vppon the continent or firme lande, and the sea beateth vppon the houses of the citie. There is no porte: but on the South syde about a myle from the citie, is a ryuer which runneth into the Ocean sea by a narow mouth. This runneth by many braunches into the playne feeldes, and is of the inhabitantes by diuers trenches dispearsed to water the grounde. It is not past the depth of three or foure foote of water. The course of it bendeth towarde the citie, and runneth into it. The citie is not compassed with walles, but conteyneth in circuite sixe thousande houses, not adherent or ioynyng togeather after the maner of ours,Houses diui∣ded. but by a certayne space distant one from the other, eyther for feare of fyre, or by ignorance of the builders. It is a myle of length. The houses are despicable,Uery lowe houses. as no hygher from the grounde then a man on horsebacke, and are for the most parte couered with boughes of trees, in the steede of tiles or other coueryng. The cause where∣of they say to bee, that in digging the grounde fyue or sixe hand∣full
depth, water immediately issueth foorth. And therefore they can laye no deeper foundations to beare the weyght of any grea∣ter buyldynges. The houses of merchandyse, or warehouses, are solde for fyftiene or twentie peeces of golde.Houses of small price. But the common houses, are of no greater price then two peeces of golde at the most, and some for lesse. Of the kyng of Calecut, and of their Idolatrie. Cap. 2. Idolatry and seruyng of the deuyll. One God.THe kyng of Calecut and his people, are gyuen to Idola∣trie and seruyng of the deuyll: yet deny they not but that there is one great God, maker of heauen and earth, and fyrst and chiefe cause of all thinges:Pseudoplato∣nici. But they adde there∣vnto a fable, saying that God coulde take no pleasure of his principate or dominion, if hee him selfe shoulde take vppon him the gouernement of the worlde, and therefore that he gaue the vicarage of that gouernance to the deuyll,The deuyll Prince of this worlde. who (they say) was sent from heauen for that purpose, and to iudge the worlde, ren∣deryng vnto men well or euyll, accordyng to theyr deseruyng. This deuyll they name Deumo: But the great God him selfe, they call I amerani.Deumo, quasi The kyng hath a Chapel in his Pallace, where he honoureth this Deumo:Daemon. The Chapell of the deuyll. the Chapell is open on euery syde the breadth of a vaulte of two pases, and is no hygher from the grounde then three pases. The entraunce is by a doore of wood, garnished with carued woorke, conteynyng the dyuers monstruous fourmes and shapes of deuylles. In the myddest of the Chapell,The deuyls chayre of ma∣iestie. Difference be∣tweene the Po∣pes crowne and the deuylles. A well fauou∣red Prince. is a seate of maiestie made of copper, with also a deuyll of copper sittyng in it. This deuyll hath on his head a crowne, after the maner of the byshop of Rome, but this hath o∣uerplus foure hornes, his mouth gapyng, with foure nota∣ble teeth, a deformed nose, louryng and grymme eyes, a threa∣tenyng looke, crooked handes lyke a fleshe hooke, and feete not much vnlyke the feete of a Cocke: A monster doubtlesse horrible and fearefull to beholde. In euery corner of the Chapell sit such deuylles of shining copper, as though they were of flamyng fyre, deuouryng soules miserably. These soules are about the byg∣nesse
of halfe a finger, and some litle bigger.The deuylles ordinary dyet and detie meate. He putteth one soule in his mouth with the ryght hande, and with the lefte hande ta∣keth an other from beneath. Euery mornyng the priestes (whom they call Bramini) washe the Idoll with rose water,Bramini. and perfume him with sweete sauours, and lying prostrate on the grounde,Brachmani. pray vnto him. They sacrifice vnto him once a weeke. Theyr maner of sacrifice is this,The maner of sacrifice to the deuyll. They haue a little cubbarde lyke vnto an Altar, three handfulles hygh, foure handfuls brode, and fyue handfuls long: this cubbard they strawe with all maner of floures and sweete pouders. Then hauyng a great Chafingdyshe, or the lyke vessell of siluer, full of burnyng coles,Gallus Escu∣lapio. they put the blood of the Cocke thereon, and also cast thereon innumerable sweete sa∣uours: In the meane tyme also with sensours in theyr handes, they goe rounde about the Altar, makyng perfume with franken∣sence, ringyng a little siluer bell all the whyle of the sacrifice. They kyll the Cocke with a siluer knyfe, and the knyfe also be∣ing rayed with blood, they put often in the fyre, that no parte of the blood be lost. Sometyme hauyng the knyfe in theyr hande, they make certayne straunge gestures, much lyke to those which the masters offense vse in giuyng or auoyding of strokes. They neuer ceasse puttyng to more coles and spices or perfumes, vntyl all the blood of the Cocke be burnt. The priest that offereth the blood of the Cocke,A goodly priest the deuylles Chaplen. hath his armes and feete garnyshed with sil∣uer plates and pendantes, in such sorte, that whyle hee moueth, they make a certayne noyse, much lyke vnto sonettes or Haukes belles. He hath on his brest a certayne bosse,A counterfeete Aaron. conteynyng I know not what secrete figure, which may seeme to be the secrete caract or signe of some mysterie. The sacrifice being finished, he taketh both his handes full of wheate,Offeryng of wheate. and goeth from the Alter backe∣ward lyke a Creuice, neuer mouyng his eyes from the Alter, vn∣tyll he come to a certayne tree: where openyng his handes, hee casteth the wheate on the tree. Then holdyng his handes aboue his head, he returneth to the Alter, and taketh away all that is thereon.
Of the maner which the kyng vseth at his meate. Cap. 3. THe Kyng doeth not sit downe to his meate, before foure of the priestes offer it to the deuyl, in this maner. Lifting theyr handes aboue theyr heades, with also many other fantasticall gesticulations, and murmuryng voyces, they offer the meate to the deuyl,The deuyll is serued before the Kyng. & spende long tyme in those ceremo∣nyes, to the end that the kyng should eate no meat that is not first offered to the deuyll. They offer the meate in a tray of wood, and therin laye it vppon the brode leaues of a certayne tree. His meat is Ryse, and dyuers other thinges, as fruite, fleshe, and fyshe. He sitteth on the grounde without cloth or Carpet. The priestes in the meane tyme stande rounde about him,Chaplens of honour. but approcheth no nearer then foure or fyue pases, obseruyng diligently the kinges woordes. When the kyng hath lefte eatyng, the priestes carry away all that is lefte,I thinke the Priestes take parte with the Crowes. and in a certayne place thereto appointed, offer it to certayne Crowes, which they keepe for the same pur∣pose: And therefore being vsed to be thus fedde, geather togea∣ther at a signe gyuen them, and eate vp the meate. These crowes are therefore of them esteemed holy:Crowes estee∣med holy. and therefore it is not law∣full for any man to take them, or hurte them. Of the Priestes of Calecut, called Bramini▪ Cap. 4. THese Bramini, are in place with them, as are the chiefe priestes or byshoppes with vs.The priestes euer prouide for them selues. Therefore when the king shall marrie, he lyeth not with his wyfe before shee be de∣floured by the Archbyshop, yet taketh he not this vppon him without rewarde:A goodly office for a byshop. for the kyng gyueth him for his labour fiftie peeces of golde. Only the kyng of Calecut keepeth this custome.
Of the dyuers sortes of Idolaters in the citie of Calecut. Cap. 5. THe chiefest Idolaters, and of the greatest dignitie, are the Bramini. They of the seconde order, are named Naeri:Priestes and gentelmen. And in the same place with them, as are with gentel∣men, whose office is when they go abrode to beare swoordes, targettes, bowes, launces, and other weapons. The thyrde order consysteth of mecanike or handie craftes men. In the fourth place, are vitaylers, and suche as make prouision of fyshe and fleshe. Next vnto these, are they that geather Pepper, Wyne, Walnuttes, and suche other fruites and spices. The last and basest sort, (named Neraui) are they that sowe and gea∣ther Ryse. These, as the inferiour tribe of men,Poore men haue no soules are in such sub∣iection to the Bramini and Naeri, that in payne of death they may approche no nearer vnto them then .l. pases. And there∣fore they lye lurkyng in certayne shadowes and darke places, and maryshes, lest they shoulde suddenly chaunce to meete with them. Wherefore when they come abrode, that they may be hearde a farre of, they crye with loude voice I wotte neare what, that they may be hearde of the sayde Bramini and Naeri, least be∣yng soddenly betrapped, they shoulde be put to death. Of the apparell of the kyng, queene, and Inhabi∣tantes of the citie of Calecut. And of their maner of feedyng. Cap. 6. THe apparell of the kyng and queene, is litle or nothyng differyng from the other Idolaters:They are not troubled with garderobes, or makyng them redye mornyng and euenyng. among the whiche the Mahumetans (as strangers) are not to be accompted. They couer onely theyr priuie partes with bombasine cloth or sylke, and are besyde all naked, barefooted also, and beareheadded. But the Mahumetans weare single apparell, reachyng only vnto the nauel. The women are apparelled euen as are the men, sauyng onely that they lette theyr heare growe very longe. The kyng and nobilitie of the citie, eate no fleshe, except they fyrst aske counsayle of the Priestes.
But the common people may eate what fleshe they wyll, excepte the fleshe of Kyne. Bin they of the basest sorte, named Nira∣ni and Poliar, may eate onely fyshes dryed at the Sunne. Of theyr custome after the death of the kyng. Cap. 7. AFter the death of the kyng, if he haue any male chyldren lyuyng, or brethren, or brothers chyldren, they succeede not in the kyngdome: For of auncient lawe and custome, the septer pertayneth to the kynges systers sonnes,The kynges children succeed not to inherite the kyngdome. of whiche if there be none, it commeth to the next of the blood: And this, for none other cause (as they saye) but that the priestes haue defloured the queene. When the kyng goeth abrode or on huntyng,What paynes the priestes take for theyr liuyng, and what seruice they do the kyng. the priestes, be they neuer so young, keepe the queene at home, and remayne neere about her: For there is nothyng more acceptable to the kyng, then that the priestes shoulde so keepe companye with the queene. And therefore the kyng may well thynke that the chyldren borne of her, are not to be numbred amongst his chyldren, and therefore taketh the chyldren of his systers, to be neerest of his blood, and ryght inheritours to the crowne.Bastordes. When the kyng is dead, all his subiectes, by cuttyng theyr beardes and shauyng theyr headdes, testifie how greeuous∣ly they take his death.Moornyng for the death of the kyng. Yet hearein they vse not all one fashion, for some cutte onely part of the heare of theyr chynne, and some parte of the heare of theyr head, and other all: and so euery man as he doth phantasie. Duryng the tyme that they celebrate the funerals of the kyng, they that lyue by fyshyng, forbeare fysh∣yng for the space of eyght dayes. And when any of the kynges wyues dye, they obserue the lyke ceremonyes as for the death of the kyng.Chastitie and abstinence. The kyng sometyme, by a certayne supersticion, absteyneth from venery, or the company of women, for the space of a yeere: and lykewyse forbeareth to eate certayne leaues, whiche they call Betolas,Meates that moue to echerie. beyng the leaues of Assyrian apples: whiche they vse not onely for dilicates, but also because theyr propertie is to moue men greatly to wanton lustes.
For the same purpose also they eate a certayne fruite, named Coffolo, somewhat lyke vnto Dates. Of theyr chaungyng of wyues. Cap. 8. THe gentelmen & merchauntes, to shew great curtesie and frendshyp one to the other, vse somtime to chaunge wiues,Great frend∣shyppe. and therein vse this maner of speache: My freende, we haue nowe of long tyme lyued togeather as faythfull frendes, and therefore for the laste accomplyshement of our frendeshyppe, if it so please thee, lette vs chaunge wyues. Con∣tent sayth the other, for I beare thee euen as good wyll. The wyues refuse not to agree to the condition herein also, to please theyr husbandes. Then the one bryngeth his wyfe to the other, saying: Woman, this man shall hereafter be thy husbande. The other sayth the lyke to his wyfe also. Thus all partes be∣yng agreed, they depart with frendly embrasyng: But the chyldren remayne with the fyrst husbande. These Idolatars haue also diuers other customes: For among some of them, one woman is maryed to seuen husbandes, of the whiche euery of them hath his nyght by course appoynted to lye with her: And when she hath brought foorth a chylde, she may geue it or father it to whiche of them she lysteth: Who may in no case refuse it. The maner of feedyng of the common people, of the Idolatars, and of theyr Iustice. Cap. 8. Diogenistae. LYing along on the grounde they eate theyr meate out of a traye of copper: For spoones, they vse certayne leaues of trees. Theyr meate commonly, is Ryse, fyshe, spices, and fruites, of the commoner sort. The labouryng men or ruder sorte, eate so fylthyly,The punyshe∣ment of mur∣therers. that puttyng theyr foule handes in the potte, they take out ryse by handfuls, and so thrust it in theyr mouthes. They vse this kynde of Iustice for homicide. Where any hath slayne a man, he is thus punyshed.
They haue a kynde of galows made in maner of a double crosse, where whyle the murtherer is tyed fast, one thrusteth a stake through his bodye,Beatyng. where the poore wretche so hangeth vntyl he be dead: But they that wounde or hurt any man, redeeme the faulte for mony payde to the kyng. They that are in debte, are thus enforced to paye the same.A straunge ma∣ner to demaūd debte. The creditour fyrst demaun∣deth his monye: and if it be founde that the debitour breake pro∣mysse, then he to whom the mony is owyng, goeth to one of the kynges scriueners (whiche are sayde to be a hundred) and before hym makyng dewe proofe of the debte, receiueth of hym a greene wande of a tree, with aucthoritie to prosecute his debi∣tour vntil he haue found hym, where when he hath arrested him, with these woordes (go no further before thou paye me) thryse rehearsed, he sayth furthermore thus: I charge thee by the head of Bramini, and by the head of the kyng, not to sturre from this place before thou paye me. There is no shyfte but eyther to paye incontinent, or there to loose his lyfe. But if he be found alone,Death for debte. and escape after the sayd woords, he is euer after ad∣iudged a rebell, and therefore shall it be lawefull for any man to kyll hym whersoeuer he is founde, within the kynges domi∣nions. Of the honoring of Idolles. Cap. 9. WHen they praye to theyr Idolles, in the mornyng before the Sunne ryse,Outward clen∣lynesse. they resorte to the pooles or ryuers to washe them: And so at their com∣myng home to theyr houses (where they keepe theyr Idolles) they touch nothyng before they praye to the I∣dolles prostrate on the grounde secreatly: while they praye, they make certayne deuylyshe gesticulations lyke mad men, so mar∣uelously defourmyng theyr faces, eyes, and mouthes, that no man can beholde it without horrour: and thus contynue their prayer a quarter of an houre. When the tyme of eatyng appro∣cheth, they may not fal to theyr vittayles, before some one of the gentlemen haue dressed it, and set it in order. But this custome is obserued onely among the gentelmen, or noble men. The women haue none other charge or care, then to dresse and beau∣tifie
them selues, for their husbandes vse not to haue to do with them before they be curyously washed, and perfumed with sun∣drye sweete sauours. When the women go abrode,Clenly women. it is mar∣ueilous to beholde howe they are behanged with iewels and pre∣tious stones, on theyr eares, armes, and legges. Of theyr maner of warre. Cap. 10. THey haue in the citie certayne maisters of fence, that teach them how to vse the swoord, the target, the launce,Maisters of fence. and suche other weapons. When the kyng proceedeth to the warres,The kynges army. he is furnyshed with an armie of a hundred thousande footemen, for of horsemen there is no vse, but onely Elephantes: For the kyng hym selfe rydeth on an Elephant. They that are next to the kyng, weare about theyr headdes, fyl∣lettes or bandes of sylke, of crymisyn or scarlet colour. Theyr weapons are certayne crooked swoordes, targets, launces,Their wea∣pons. The kynges ensigne. and bowes. The kynges ensigne, is a certaine thyng made of bowes of trees, implicate round like the couering of a tub, borne vp on a reede. This is borne so that ye shadow therof may couer the king from the heate of the Sunne: and is in their tongue, called Somler. When both the armies approche within three arrowe shoote, the kyng sendeth his Braminos into the tentes of his enimies,The priestes▪ are haroldes. A chalenge to cumbatte. in ma∣ner of haroldes to chalenge a hundred of them to come foorth (if they dare) to combat agaynst a hundred of his Naeres, which be∣fore we said to be his gentelmen and chiefe strength of his army: which message done, both sydes prepare them selues to the bat∣tayle, and in the midway, fyrst a hundred fyght with a hundred. The whiche if they shoulde feyght continually for the space of three dayes, woulde neuer stryke with the poynt, but with the edge of the swoorde, and for the most parte at the head,A great bat∣tayle and litle bloodshed▪ and sel∣dome at the legges. But when fyue or syxe are slayne, inconti∣nent the Bramini on both partes make an ende of the fyght: and by theyr commaundement the retreate is sounded on both partes. Then agayne the Bramini (whiche are the chiefe priestes as we haue sayde) on both sydes, speake vnto the kynges, and aske them if they wyll any more. And thus for the most parte make they an ende of the quarell and battayle, without great slaughter of men.
The kyng sometymes rydeth on an Elephant, and sometymes also is borne by his noble men, named Naeri. When he procee∣deth,Minstrells. there folowe hym a great multitude of mynstrels, makyng a great noyse, with Tymberels, Tamberets, and suche other instrumentes. The stypende of the Naeri is foure Carlines▪ euery moneth in peace, and syxe in tyme of warre: these haue theyr teeth very blacke,Blacke teeth. by eatyng of a certayne hearbe, whiche they much vse. When any of these are slayne, their bodies are bur∣ned,The dead gen∣telmen are burnt, but the poore men are buryed. with great pompe, and many superstitions, and also theyr ashes reserued: but the common sort are buryed, in diuers ma∣ners, for some are buried in their houses, some in their gardens, and other in feeldes, medowes, or wooddes. They coyne mony here,Coyned mony. as in ye citie of Narsinga. When I was there, there was in ye citie merchants of almost all partes of the East, and especially a great number of Mahumetans,Merchauntes resorte to Calecut. and many also of the region of Melacha, and Bangella: other also of Tarnassari, Pego, and Ciri∣omandel: some lykewyse of the Ilandes of Zeylan, and Sumatra, whiche is Taprobana: other of Cholon, Caicolon, and Bathecala: and almost innumerable other, of nations whose names are bet∣ter knowen to vs, as Persians, Arabians, Syrians, Turkes, and Ethiopians, and also many of the kyngdome of Narsinga, stran∣gers of so many nations, were in the citie of Calecut whyle I remayned there. Understand furthermore, that the Idolators vse not to sayl on the sea, but that is appoynted to the Mahume∣tans, as meeter men for that purpose. And there is in the citie of Calecut more then fyfteene thousande Mahumetans,Mahume∣tans of Calecut. whiche were borne in the same citie. Of their Shippes, and maner of saylyng on the sea. Cap. 11. THeyr Shippes are made no lesse then may suffise for the burden of foure or fyue hundred Tonne,Theyr shippes. & all open with∣out any couerture. In the ioyntes of their Shippes they put no Lowe, but ioyne the plankes so artificially, that they holde out water very well: yet do they pytche the ioyntes, and make them fast with nayles of Iron. They do not forbeare Towe for lacke therof, for they haue great plentie of Hempe and Flaxe. They haue plankes or boordes and postes of diuers sortes, for they haue as good wood and better then we. Theyr
sayles are of Bombasine cloth, and doubled in the neather part, whereby they geather more wynde, and swell therewith, lyke a bagge: and in this they passe vs, vsyng but only syngle sayles. They vse ankers of marble, of the length of eyght spannes,Ankers of mar∣ble, on euery syde two. and on euery syde twoo: these they hang in the sea by double ropes, and besyde these, haue none other ankers. They haue certayne appoynted tymes and seasons of saylyng: for some tymes serue best for one coast, and some other, for other coastes and viages. The changes and also contrarietie of tymes, is there greatly to be consydered:Seasons of the yeere, contrarie to ours. for when with vs al thynges for heate are almost scorched, then haue they large shewres, as in the monethes of May, Iune, and Iuly. Their shippes are of diuers quantities, as with vs, and therfore also of diuers names. They haue one sort of vessels made of one whole pece of wood, like a trough,Dyuers fashi∣ons of shippes and other vessells. veri long, sharpe, and narowe: in these they vse both sayles and ores, and are therfore swyfter then our Galleys or Foystes. The Pi∣rates vse these very much. The best of their shippes are made in an Ilande named Porcai, not farre from Calecut. Of the Court or Palace of the kyng of Calecut. Cap. 12. THe Palace of the kyng of Calecut conteyneth no lesse then a myle in circuite,A goodly palaice. the wall is not hygh, the buyldyng is fayre, with beames or poses wel ioynyng the frame, and curiously wrought and carued with the figures & shapes of deuyls on euery syde. Why the walles be no hygher,Images of the deuyll to gar∣nysh the kinges palaice. we haue declared before, where we haue spoken of the lowe buyldyng of the houses of the citie: the cause wherof (as we haue saide) is the vnstable grounde, so ful of water, that they can dygge no deapth to lay fundation to beare hygher buyldynges. But what pearles and precious stones the kyng weareth vpon hym, can not be ex∣pressed for the greatnesse of the thyng:The ryche iew∣els which the king weareth. for doubtlesse it exceedeth all estimation. Although at the tyme of my beyng there, he was not geuen to ioyfulnesse, but lyued in greefe of mynde, aswel for the warres which the kyng of Portugale made agaynst hym,The kyng of Portugales warres agaynst the kyng of Calecut. The frenche Poxe among precious iewells. as also that he was diseased with the Frenche poxe, which had now entred into his throte: neuerthelesse, his eares, armes, handes, legges, and feete, were so beautyfully and rychly garnyshed with all sortes of iewels and precious stones, that it can not be spo∣ken.
His treasure is esteemed so vnmeasurable,Unestimable treasure. that it can not be conteyned in two wonderful great cellars or warehouses. This treasure consysteth of precious stones, plates of golde, and also so muche coyned golde as may suffice to lade a hundred Mles, as theyr Bramini reporte, to whom it is best knowen. They saye also that this treasure was geathered and reserued by twelue kynges whiche were before hym, and that in his trea∣surye is a cofr of three spannes in length, and two in breadth, ful of only pretious stones, of price inestimable. Of the spices of Calecut. Cap. 13. Pepper.PEpper is geathered in the feeldes about the subarbes, and also in certayne places within the citie. The stalke of pepper is very weake, and lyke vnto vines, which can not beare it selfe,The pepper tree. without the helpe of a stake or proppe, and is muche lyke vnto an Iuie, and in lyke maner creepeth and embraceth suche trees as are neere vnto it. This tree (or rather bushe) is dispearsed into sundry branches, of the length of two or three spannes, and hath the leaues lyke vnto the leaues of an Assyrian apple, but that these are somewhat thycker and fatter. On euery twigge hange syxe clusters,Clusters of pepper. no bygger then Dates, and lyke vnto clusters of litle grapes, and of the coloure of vnripe grapes, but growe thycker. They are geathered in the moneth of October, and Nouember, inclynyng yet to greene colour, and are so layde on mattes, and set in the Sunne to drye, where in the space of three dayes, they become blacke, as they are brought hyther. The fruitefulnesse of these, proceedeth onely of the sym∣ple goodnesse of the soyle, without helpe of loppyng or pruning. This region beareth also Gynger,Genger. whiche is doubtlesse a roote, and is sometyme dygged of the weight of .xii. vnces, it entreth no deeper into the grounde then three or foure handefuls. When they dygge it out, they leaue the knotte or ioynt of the roote in the pitte, and couer it agayne with earth, as a seede for more a∣gaynst the nexte yeere. It is founde in an equall soyle, as are the Myrabolanes: yet is the earth where it groweth, of ve∣ry redde coloure. The stalke, is muche lyke the stalke of a young peare tree.
Of the fruites of Calecut. Cap. 14. IF I should describe all the sortes of straunge fruites that are seene there, it would rather require a volume,Fruites vnlyke ours. then a breefe re∣hersall of them particulerly: For they haue not only many greatly differing from ours in fourme, sauour, and tast, but al∣so those of the kynde of such as we haue, differ in maner no lesse. Whereby may the naturall Philosopher consider howe those thinges which are all of one kynde,A philosophical consideration of the difference of thinges of one kynde. differ accordyng vnto the na∣ture of the soile and diuers situation vnder the heauens. By which natural cause, & alteration, some fruites and seedes, by transplan∣ting into a better soile, become more perfect in their kind, as big∣ger, fayrer, sweeter, and more fruitfull: As also contrariwise, the contrary, by transplantyng into a worse soile, or colder region: which diuersitie is seene, not only in plantes and hearbes, but also in beastes, and euen in man kynde. It is very strange to con∣sider howe diuersly trees beare theyr fruites and seedes, as some in one parte of the tree, and some in an other. There is in Calecut a fruite which they name Iaceros: the body of the tree, is of the bignesse of a Peare tree:A great fruite growyng out of the body of the tree. the fruite is of the length of two hand∣fuls and a halfe, & as byg as the thygh of a man. The fruit grow∣eth out of the body of the tree vnder the branches, and some euen in the very myddest of the tree, and other yet lower also. The co∣lour is greene, and in fourme, in maner lyke vnto a Pyne apple, but with lesse graines or knobbes: when it is rype, it becommeth blacke. It is geathered in the moneth of December.Rype fruites in December. A fruite of sun∣dry tastes. It hath the taste of a Pepon, and the sauour somewhat like Castoreum. It see∣meth in eatyng to gyue dyuers and sundry pleasant tastes: as sometyme the taste of a Peache, sometyme of a Pomegranate, and leaueth at the ende a taste so sweete, that you would thynke it to be newe hony combes. Under the skynne, it is lyke vnto a Peache. And within the body conteineth an other frui,One fruite within an other not much vnlyke softe Chestnuttes, and beyng rosted, hath the same taste, and is therefore certaynely one of the goodlyest fruites that I knowe. I wil here, to be breefe, omit to speake muche of their Nuttes, and Walnuttes, Almons, Prunes, Peaches, Quinces, Gourdes, Melons, and suche other fruites knowen to vs, and
yet much more pleasaunt and fayrer then are ours. There is one fruite woorthie to be knowen, which they call Apolanda. The tree groweth to the height of a man,A tree with ve∣ry brode leaues. it beareth not past foure or fiue leaues hangyng by certayne slyppes, euery leafe is able well to couer a man from rayne, and the heate of the sunne: In the myd∣dest of the leafe,A very goodly fruite. riseth a twyg or stalke, lyke the stalke of a beane, which bringeth out floures and also fruites of a handfull long, and of the bignesse of a mans arme: these fruites are geathered vnrype,Two hundred fruites on eue∣ry slyppe. bycause they become rype in keepyng. Euery slyp bea∣reth about two hundred fruites, a thyng certaynely wherein is greatly seene the fruitfulnesse of nature. They touche one an o∣ther, and cluster togeather. They are of yelowe colour, and haue a verry thyn codde, and are in eatyng delicate and holesome. There are three sortes of this kynde of fruite, of the which one is of euyll taste, and therefore not so muche esteemed. It is yet more straunge,A tree that ne∣uer beareth fruit but once. that this tree beareth fruite but once, yet when it dyeth, there ryse about the roote thereof fyftie or threescore young slyppes, whiche renue the lyfe of theyr parent, that he dye not without succession. The gardeners or graffers transplante these in other places,Fruites and floures geathe∣red at all tymes of the yeere. for within the space of one yeere they bring foorth fruite. They are geathered in great aboundance almost all the whole yeere, and are therefore very good cheape, and of small pryce, as twentie for a penny. The same soyle bea∣reth lykewyse innumerable and most fayre and sweete floures all the yeere long, and especially Roses, both white, redde, and yelowe. Of a most fruitfull tree of all the world. Cap. 15. THere is also an other tree, most woorthie to be knowen, the which in fruitfulnesse, and sweetnesse of the fruit, pas∣seth all the trees of the worlde.This tree in the west India, is called Coc∣cus. It beareth certaine fruites lyke vnto great Dates or Nuttes, & generally bringeth foorth tenne commodities: For it beareth wood moste apte to nourishe fyre,Ten commodi∣ties of one tree. and Nuttes very pleasant to be eaten, also cordes or ropes which may well serue for saylers: Lykewyse very fyne
cloth, which when it is coloured, sheweth lyke silke: The wood is the best that may be founde to make coles, it yeldeth also wine and odoriferous water: Furthermore also, oyle, and suger. The boughes of the tree, are commodious to couer houses in place of tyles or thetche: for by reason of the closenesse and fatnesse of the leaues, they keepe out the rayne very well. The fruite of this tree (as we haue sayde) is in forme lyke vnto great Dates or Nuttes. One tree beareth about two hundred of those fruites.Nux Indica. Takyng away the first ryme, they put it in the fyre,They are as big as a mans fyt, and some byg∣ger. where it bur∣neth quickly and with great flame. The seconde fruite vnder the sayde first ryme, is muche lyke vnto bombasine or silke, and is lyke vnto flaxe when it is wrought. Of the floures, they make a certayne kynde of cloth, not vnlyke silke. The towe or refuse of the first flaxe, they spinne and make thereof a grosser cloth, and small ropes or cordes: & of the smallest, wreathed togeather, they make greater ropes, which may serue for shippes. That parte of the Nut which is vnder the third ryme, conteyneth also a substaunce apte to make coles. The last ryme, includeth the substance or cor∣nell of the Nutte, very delicate to be eaten. This ryme or barke, is of the thicknesse of a mans litle finger.Very sweete and cleare wa∣ter within a Nutte. As the Nutte groweth in bignesse, so doeth also the water conteyned therein. So that the Nutte commyng to his full rypenesse and bygnesse, the wa∣ter occupieth the inner parte: and sometyme is founde so much water in the Nutte, that you may take out of euery Nutte two or three cuppes of water, very sweete to be droonke, and as cleere as Rose water, of the which also bing thickened by seethyng, is made very fatte oile. The Nutte likewise it selfe,Oile made of water. is of very plea∣sant taste. They suffer but one parte of the tree to bring foorth fruite: For on the other parte or syde, they cutte and wounde the tree in diuers places euery morning and euening,Wyne of cutte branches of a tree. and powre in∣to the wounded places a certayne liquor, which draweth out of the tree a ioise, which falleth into vesselles placed to receyue it, and so receyue they euery day and nyght in euery vessell, a cuppe of most precious liquor, which sometymes also they seeth at the fyre, putting euer more vnto it, vntill it come to the strength of Aqua vitae, and troubleth the brayne both in sauour and dryn∣kyng, as doeth most strong wyne. On an other braunche of the same tree, they geather lykewyse suger, but not very sweete.
The tree beareth fruite continually: for there are seene on it both the olde and drye fruites of the season paste,A tree that bea∣reth fruite con∣tinually all the whole yeere. & also greene fruites of the newe spring. It beareth not before the fifth yeere. These trees are founde in the space or distaunce of about two hundred myles. They are so greatly esteemed, that in the myddest of most cruellest warres, it is not lawfull for any man to hurt them, euen in the landes of theyr enemies. They lyue but to the age of .xxv. yeeres. They prosper best in sandy grounde, and are set or plan∣ted as are Walnuttes. This region hath also other fruites wher∣of they make good oyle.Oile. Howe they sowe Ryse. Cap. 16. Ploughing of the grounde.THey tyll the ground and plough it with Oxen as we doe: when the tyme approcheth to sowe Ryse, they testifie the ioyfulnesse of that day with all sortes of instrumentes, sin∣ging & dauncing. And in the way of their good speed, that all thinges may prosper the better (as they beleeue) they disguise ten men in apparell,A daunce of de∣uylles. to the similitude of the three deuylles, and daunce about them with all the noyse of theyr instrumentes.Solem suum o∣riri facit super bonos et malos. &c. And thus celebratyng the festiuall day, they pray the deuylles good grace to sende them plentie of Ryse. Howe theyr Phisitians visite sicke folkes. Cap. 17. WHen any merchaunt of the Idolaters is sore gree∣ued with any disease, and in maner neare vnto death, then certaine of them, which they take for phisitians, called to visite the patient in this extremitie, come thyther in the silence of the nyght,The deuyll a Phisitian. apparelled lyke the deuyll (as is aforesayde) carying fyre stickes in theyr mouthes and handes. And there, with a madde crye and howlyng, and with the iangelyng of certayne instrumentes, maketh so horrible a noyse in the eares of the sicke man, that it were enough to make a whole man sicke.Such a Phisiti∣an such phisicke And this is all the remedy and comfort which their Phisitians bring to their sicke men, whiche is none other, then in the article of death to present vnto them the similitude of him whom they (worse then deuylles) honour for gods vicare:
Eyther meanyng perhappes by this meanes, to call agayne the sicke man almost dead.A remedie  surfetyng. When the inhabitantes haue so ingor∣ged them selues with to muche meate, that they be sicke in theyr stomake, they take the pouder of the rootes of ginger, and ma∣kyng it in fourme of a sirupe, with puttyng some liquor vnto it, drinke it all vp, and within three dayes recouer theyr health. Of theyr Exchaungers, bankers, and Brokers. Cap. 18. THeir exchaungers and bankers, haue weyghtes and ba∣lances so little, that the boxe,Fyne weightes and balances. with the weightes and all that parteineth therto, passeth not the weight of an ounce, and are made so iuste, that the weight of a heare will cast them. When they will trye true golde from false, or base from fyne, they vse the touche stone, as we doe, but haue this more then we: They haue a ball composed (I know not whereof) and lyke vnto waxe, and when they haue first rubbed the golde on the touche, they rubbe likewyse the touche on the sayd ball, where then the spottes of the golde remayne, and thereby they knowe a more exacte proofe of the finenesse or basenesse of the gold.A straunge ex∣periment to know the fyne golde from base. When the sayde ball is full of gold, they melt it in the fyre, & geather the gold which it had imbibed. These exchangers are but grosse wit∣ted men, and ignorant of the arte which they professe. In buying and selling of merchandies, they vse this maner. They haue a bro∣ker, whose helpe they vse in these affayres.Proxeneta. Therefore when the merchauntes come thyther, then the broker,A superstitious maner of buy∣ing and selling. hauyng with him a vayle or scarfe, taketh the seller by the ryght hande, and couereth it with the vaile. Then doth the merchant number on his fingers, from one vnto a hundred thousand, priuily & secretly, & then the seller also with lyke numbryng of his fingers and ioyntes, vntyll he come to the number of the price of his merchandies. Then the broker goeth agayne to the buyer, and coueryng his handes with the vayle in lyke maner, and numbryng of his fingers, certifieth him howe muche the seller demaundeth for his ware, then the buyer agayne, by feelyng and numbryng the brokers fingers, sig∣nifieth what he will gyue the seller for his merchaundies. And
thus the broker goeth to and fro, shewyng both theyr meanyng with silence vntyll they be agreed. They sell theyr cloth by mea∣sure: but theyr spices and Iewelles by weyght. Of the inhabitantes of Poliar and Hiraua, and how they nourysh their children. Cap. 19. THe women weane theyr children when they come to the age of three monethes, and afterward nourysh them with Goates milke:Litle payne or cost for nour∣sing of children. and when in the morning they haue giuen them milke, they tomble them in the sandes all foule & fil∣thie, where they let them lye all the day, and are so scorched of the Sunne, that farre of they seeme like Bufles Calues, I neuer sawe more deformed or filthie creatures: at euenyng, theyr mothers gyue them milke agayne. By this kinde of wylde bringing vp, they become men of marueylous dexteritie in swift∣nesse of runnyng,Funambuli. and other thinges of great agilitie, as to walke vppon ropes, swymmyng, leapyng, vaultyng, and such lyke. Of foure footed beastes, foules, and birdes of Calecut. Cap. 20. THere are many beastes and kyndes of birdes, as Lions, wilde Bores, Hartes, Hyndes, Bufles, Kyne, Goates, and Elephantes: yet not all engendred there, but brought thyther partly from other places.Popingayes or Parottes. There are also parottes of sundry colours, as greene, purple, & other mixte colours. There is such multitude of them, that there are men appointed to keepe them from the Ryse in the fieldes, as we vse to keepe Crowes from the corne.A great noyse of birdes. They are marueylous crying and chattering, and of small price, as one solde for two pense, or halfe a souse. There are many other birdes much vnlyke to ours, which euery mor∣nyng and euenyng make so great a noyse & sweete singing, that nothing can be more pleasant or delectable to heare, and therfore the inhabitantes lyue in great pleasure, and in maner as it were in an earthly Paradyse,An earthly Pa∣radyse. Continuall spring, and tem∣perate ayre. in continuall spryng and florishyng of floures, hearbes, & trees, all the yeere long: besyde also the good∣ly and holsome temperatenesse of the ayre, being neither extreme
hotte nor colde, but in maner in temperature of continuall spring tyme. That region hath also Monkeys,Monkeys doe much hurte. which are there of small price. These are very hurtfull to husbandmen, and such as liue by tillage of the grounde: for they clyme the trees of those goodly Indian Nuts & precious fruite, wherof we haue spoken here be∣fore, of the which they make wyne, which these beastes do spill, and cast downe the vesselles that are made faste there to receyue the sayde liquor of wyne. Of certayne Serpentes which are seene in Calecut. Cap. 21. THere are certayne Serpentes, of suche bignesse, that they are equal to swine, theyr heads are much greater then the heads of Bores: they are foure footed,Crocodiles without poison. and of the length of foure cubites, and are engendred in marishes. The inha∣bitantes say that they are without poison, and doe not otherwyse hurt, then by byting. There are furthermore three kindes of Ser∣pentes: of the which, some are of so strong poison, that if they drawe neuer so litle blood, present death foloweth,Three kyndes of Serpentes. whiche thing chaunced oftentymes whilest I was there Of these kindes of ser∣pentes, some are of the bignesse of an Aspe, & many much bigger. Of these there are a very great number. The cause wherof (they say) is this: That the kyng of Calecut,Serpentes su∣perstitiously kepte and nou∣rished. of a certaine foolishe su∣perstition, maketh so great accompt of these Serpentes, that he causeth litle houses or cottages to be made for them, beleeuyng that they haue vertue against ouer much raine & ouerflowing of riuers, and therfore if a man kill any of them, he is punished with death, as though he had killed a man:Death for kyl∣lyng a Serpent or a Cowe. and the like punishment is also for him that killeth a cowe. They greatly esteeme these Ser∣pents, bicause (as they say) they came from heauen, and therfore they take them for heauenly spirites, which they affirme, for that only with touching, they bring present death. And this is ye cause that there are many serpentes, being thus permitted by the com∣maundement of the king. These serpents know the Idolaters in∣habitants from Mahumetans or other strangers,Bycause they goe naked. and wil sooner venture vppon them. When I was there, I came into a house where eight men laye dead and greatly swolne, whiche the day before were killed by these serpents, yet doe they esteeme it for good lucke, when going abrode, they meete with any of them.Superstition.
Of the lightes and Lampes which are seene in the Pallace of the kyng of Calecut. Cap. 22. IN the kynges Courte or Pallace, are diuers mansions, and very many chambers, and therefore in the euenyng when it waxeth darke, there are seene innumerable burning Lampes. Goodly candel∣stickes of laton.In the hall of the pallace, are seene ten or twelue candelstickes of laton, very fayre, and of cunnyng workemanshyp, muche lyke vnto goodly fountaynes, and of the heyght of a man. In eche of them are dyuers vesselles, and in euery vessel three candels light, of two spannes length,Polyxines et Polychni. and great plentie of oyle. In the first ves∣sell, are many Lampes made of cordes of bombasine cotten. In the myddle part, is seene a narower vessel, also full of lampes and lightes. In the lowest vessell also the like number of lightes. But in an other vessel in the toppe of all the candelsticke,Innumerable lyghtes and Lampes. are in maner innumerable lightes, mainteyned with oyle, and haue matches of bombasine cotton.The deuyll ser∣ueth in the kynges cham∣ber. At the angles or corners of these candelsticks, are the Images of deuils, whiche also holde the lightes that are in the kinges presence. When any of the kinges blood dyeth, hee sendeth for all the Bramini or priestes of his realme, & commaund them to mourne for the space of a yeere.Mourning the space of a yeere. At theyr commyng, hee banqueteth them three dayes togeather, and at theyr departyng, giueth eche of them fyue peeces of golde. Of the great multitude of Idolaters which resort to Calecut, for pardon of their sinnes. Cap. 23. The Temple of sacrifyce to Idolles.NOt farre from the citie of Calecut, is a certayne churche or Temple, compassed about with water, lyke an Iland, builded after an auncient fashion, hauing a double order of pillars, much lyke the Temple of sainct Iohn De Fon∣te in the citie of Rome. In the middest of the Temple, is an Altar of stone, where the people sacrifice to Idolles. Betweene the pil∣lars on hygh, is a Boate of the length of two pases, and full of oyle.Trees behan∣ged with Lam∣pes. Also rounde about the Temple, are many trees with an innumerable multitude of Lampes & lightes hanging on them:
The temple also it selfe, is as ful of lyghtes. The .xxv. day of De∣cember, resorteth thyther an infinite multitude of people, from all partes, euen for the distance of .xv. dayes iorney, and especially of the priestes, to whom parteyneth the order of sacrificeyng: But they do not sacrifice vnto theyr Idolles before they washe them selues in the water whiche is about the Temple.Washyng be∣fore sacrifice. When the priestes assende to the place whereas is the boate fylled with oyle (as we haue said) they spryncle the people with the sayd oile, but annoynte onely their heads: Who beyng so annoynted,Holy oyle in the steade of ho∣ly water. may then proceede to the sacrifice. On the one syde of the altar, where they sacrifice, is seene a most horrible fourme of a deuyl, to whom the people, prostrate on the grounde, praye vnto, and then depart to theyr houses and countreys.Sacrifice to the deuyll for for∣geuenesse of synnes. By this meanes they beleeue that all theyr synnes are quite forgeuen them, and therefore for the space of three dayes, they lyue there in safegarde, as if it were in Sanctuarie: and for that tyme, is it not lawfull for any man to arrest or trouble an other for what so euer quarell.Sanctuary. Large is the way that lea∣deth to perdi∣tion. &c. Certainely I neuer saw in any place a greater multitude of people assem∣bled, except in the citie of Mecha. The syxt booke contaynyng the voyage of India. Of the Cities of Caicolon, and Colon. Cap. 1. MY faythfull companyon Cociazenor the Per∣sian (of whom I haue made mention here before) consyderyng that by the meanes of warres and imminent daungers, there was nowe no place for merchaundies, espe∣cially for that the Portugales had made sore warres and great slaughter in the citie of Calecut,The kyng of Portugals warres in the citie of Calecut. by occasion that the inhabitantes of the citie had con∣spired with the Mahumetans for the murther of eight and fourtie Portugales (whiche was done at my beyng there) I thought it best in tyme to depart from thence. This facte so greatly moued the kyng of Portugale to reuenge, that he hath since that tyme kepte hostile warres agaynst them, and greatly consumed them,
and defaced their citie. We therfore departyng from thence by a very fayre ryuer,Caicolon. came to a citie named Caicolon, distaunte from the citie of Calecut fiftie leagues: the inhabitantes are idolaters. There is great aboundaunce of merchaundies, and great fre∣quentation of merchauntes: the soyle beareth plentie of the best kynde of pepper.Pepper. The kyng of the citie is not very rych. In ap∣parel and maners, they differ litle from them of Calecut. Heere we founde certayne merchantes,Christians of the profession of saint Thomas. Christians, named of the pro∣fession of saint Thomas the Apostle. They obserue the fastyng of fourtie dayes, as we do, and beleeue in the death and resurrec∣tion of Christ, as we do, and therfore celebrate Easter after our maner, and obserue other solemnities of our religion, after the maner of the Greekes. They are commonly named by the names of Iohn, Iames, Matthias, and Thomas. Departyng from thence, in the space of three dayes iorney we came to an other citie,Colon. named Colon, about twentie myles distant from the aforesayde.An armie of .xx. thousande hors∣men. The kyng is an idolater, and a prince of great pow∣er, hauyng euer an armie of twentie thousande horsemen: there is a very fayre port. Neare to the sea syde the soyle beareth no corne, yet great aboundance of fruite and pepper, as in the citie of Calecut: but by reason of the warres we remayned no longer heere. Not farre from hence, we sawe men fyshe for pearles, in maner as we haue sayde before of the citie and Ilande of Ormus.Pearles. Of Cyromandel, a citie of India. Cap. 2. THe citie of Cyromandel is by the sea syde, and distant from the citie of Colon seuen dayes saylyng. The citie is very large, but without walles: it is subiecte to the kyng of Narsinga,Zeilon. and is within the syght of the Iland of Zaylon. After that you are past the poynt of Comerin,Comerin. the soyle beareth plentie of Ryse. This citie is in the way to diuers great regions and cities: It is inhabited with innumerable Mahumetan mer∣chantes, resortyng thyther from many countreys. There are no spyces, but aboundaunce of fruite, as in Calecut.
I founde there certayne Christians, who affyrme that the bodye of saint Thomas the Apostle is there in a certayne place, about twelue myles from this citie,The bodie of Thomas the Apostle. and also that there are certayne Christians whiche relygiously obserue the holy body: and that the Christians are euyll vsed, because of the warres whiche the kyng of Portugall hath made agaynst the people of these coun∣treys.The kyng of Narsinga frende to the Portugalls. Also that the Christians are sometyme murthered secret∣ly, lest it shoulde be knowen to the kyng of Narsinga, who is in amitie and frendshyppe with the kyng of Portugall, and greatly fauoureth the Christians. The cause whereof (as they saye) is also partly by reason of a certayne myracle, whiche was this.A miracle at the sepulchre of S. Thomas. The Christians on a tyme had a great conflicte with the Mahumetans, where one of the Christians beyng sore wounded on his arme, resorted incontinent to the sepulchre of saint Tho∣mas, where makyng his prayers, & touchyng the holy place, his arme was immediatly healed. Whereupon (as they saye) the kyng of Narsinga euer after greatly fauoured the Christians. Here my companion solde muche of his wares. But by reason of the warres betweene the kynges of Narsinga and Ternaseri, we determined to depart from hence. And therefore saylyng o∣uer a gulfe of .xx. leagues with great daunger, we arriued at an Iland named Zailon, very large, as containing in circuite a thou∣sande myles. Of the Ilande of Zailon, and the precious stones founde there. Cap. 3 IN this Ilande are foure kynges of great dominion, by reason of the largenesse of the Ilande.Foure kynges in one Iland. But because of the warres a∣mong them at my beyng there, I coulde not tarye long to haue particular knowledge of the region and maners of the people. There are in the Ilande many Elephantes. There is also a very long mountayne, at the foote whereof,Elephantes. Rubie stones, are founde many precious stones, named Piropi, commonly called Rubines, or Rubies. The merchauntes iewelers, come by them by this meanes.
Fyrst, goyng to the kyng, they bye of hym a certayne measure of that grounde where suche stones are founde, of the largenesse of a cubite euery way. The price of this, is fyue pieeces of gold: yet with suche condition, that in dyggyng the grounde, there is euer one present for the kyng, to the ende that if in dyggyng be founde any of those precious stones exceedyng the weyght of x. Caractes,Precious stones. the same to be reserued for the kyng. And the rest that are founde vnder that wayght, to apparteyne to the mer∣chaunt. Not farre from the sayde mountayne, are founde diuers other sortes of precious stones, as Iasynthes, Saphires, To∣pases, and suche lyke. Harde by the mountayne, runneth a great ryuer. The soyle bryngeth foorth the sweetest fruites that euer I sawe, especially cloues, and apples of Assiria, of excee∣dyng sweetnesse, and all other, as in Calecut. Of the tree of Cinamome in the Iland of Zaylon. Cap. 4. THe tree of Cinamome is not much vnlike a Baye tree, es∣pecially the leaues, it beareth berryes as doth the Baye tree, but lesse, and whyte: It is doubtlesse therefore none other then the barke of a tree, and is geathered in this maner.Howe Cina∣mome is gea∣thered. Euery thyrde yeere they cutte the branches of the tree. Of this, is great plentie in the sayde Ilande. When it is fyrste geathered it is not yet so sweete, but a moneth after when it wax∣eth drye. A certayne Mahumetan merchaunt of the Ilande, tolde my companyon, that there in the top of a hygh mountayne is a certayne denne, whyther the inhabitantes of the countrey re∣sort to praye, in memorye of our fyrst father Adam, who (they saye) after he had synned by breakyng the commaundement of God,A denne where Adam lyued in penance. lyued in that place in continuall penitence. Whiche thing they affyrme by this coniecture, that there is yet seene the print of the steppes of his feete, of the length of almost two spannes. The inhabitants are subiect to the kyng of Narsinga, and paye hym tribute.Temperate re∣gions vnder the Equinoc∣tiall lyne. The region is of temperate ayre, although it be situate in maner vnder the Equinoctiall lyne. The people are of darke tawny colour. Theyr apparell, are certayne single
clokes of bombasine cloth, whiche they weare, bearyng euer the ryght arme out all naked, as is the maner of all the Indians. They are no warrelyke men, neyther haue they the vse of Iron. Here my companyon solde to the kyng muche Saffran and Coralles.Saffran and Corall. Of Paleachet, a citie of India. Cap. 5. DEpartyng from the Ilande of Zailon, in three dayes say∣lyng we came to a citie named Paleachet, subiecte to the kyng of Narsinga. It is a famous marte of ryche mer∣chaundies, and especially of iewels and precious stones, brought thyther from Zailon and Pego. There is also great plentie of spices. There dwell in the citie many Mahumetan merchauntes, where we beyng receiued in one of theyr houses, tolde hym from whence we came, and what merchaundies we brought, as Saffran, and Coralles, whereof he was very glad. The citie hath great scarsnesse of corne, but plentie of Ryse: and in other fruitefulnesse of the soyle and maner of the people, much lyke vnto Calecut. But because they were at dissention with the kyng of Tarnassari, and prepared warres agaynst hym, we departed from thence, and in .xiii. dayes saylyng, arryued at the citie of Tarnassari, a hundred myles distant. Of Tarnassari, a citie of India. Cap. 6. THis citie is not farre from the sea, and situate on a meetly equall grounde, well walled, hauyng also a famous porte, and a very fayre ryuer runnyng on the North syde of the citie. The kyng is an Idolatour, and a prince of great power. He keepeth continuall warre with the kyngs of Nar∣singa and Bangella. He bryngeth to the feelde a hundred Ele∣phantes, of the fayrest and byggest that euer I sawe.Elephants. He hath an armie of an hundred thousand pencionarie footmen,An armie of a hundred thou∣sende footmen. & as many horsemen. Theyr weapons are swoordes, rounde targettes, peltes, bowes, dartes, and iauelins of great and long reedes.
They are also armed with iackes made of bombasine cotton, wrought very harde, and closely couched. Theyr houses are walled, and continent in order as ours are. The region bryng∣eth foorth wheate, bombasine, sylke, of sundrye kindes of colours, Brasile, and sundrye kyndes of fruites, muche lyke vnto ours. Also apples of Assiria, Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Gourdes, Cucumbers.Fruites. &c. Of the wylde and tame beastes of the citie of Tarnassary. Cap. 7. THis region bryngeth foorth many beastes both wyld and tame. The tame beastes, are Oxen, Kyne, Sheepe, Gotes, Hogges, Hartes, and Hyndes. The wylde beastes,Wylde beastes. are Lions, Wolues, Cattes of the mountayne, and also Muskecattes. In the feeldes are many Peacockes, and those kynde of Egles whiche we call Falcons.Peacockes. Falcons. Popingayes. Popingays also or Parrottes, marueylous fayre, of the which some are white, and other of seuen colours. There is lykewyse great plentie of Hares, and Partriges, and diuers other sortes of great byrdes liuyng by praye,A great and fayre foule. muche bygger then Eagles: for of the vpper parte of their beckes, they make hafes for swoordes. The becke is of yelowe colour, distincte with crimsine, very fayre and beau∣tifull to be seene. But the byrde is blacke and purple, with cer∣tayne whyte feathers intermyxt. There are also the byggest Hennes and Cockes that euer I sawe:Cocke fyght∣ing. and therefore thinhabi∣tants and Mahumetans which dwell there, take muche pleasure in Cockefyght, and laye great wagers in that kynde of sporte. I haue seene them fyghte for the space of syxe houres, and yet sometymes they kyll one an other at the fyrst stroke. There are certayne Gotes farre exceedyng ours in byggenesse,Fruitefull Gotes. and muche fayrer: these are so fruitefull, that at one byrth they bryng forth foure young kyddes. There is so great abundaunce of beastes, that twelue weathers are sold for one peece of golde to the value of a crowne or pistole. There are also certayne weathers or rammes with hornes lyke vnto buckes hornes,Rammes with buckes hornes. and are muche bygger and fyercer then ours.
Theyr Buffles are not so fayre as ours. The region hath also a∣bundaunce of fyshe, very bygge and good, and of small price. These people eate all maner of beastes, excepte Kyne. They eate on the grounde without carpet or other cloth: yet haue they vessells of woodde artificially made. Theyr drynke is water and suger: theyr beddes are raysed from the grounde, after the maner of ours. Theyr couche is of bombasine cotton, and the couerynges of sylke. Theyr apparell, is a cloke or mantell of bombasine or sylke, with one arme out, all bare. But some of the merchauntes, weare inner vestures or shirtes of sylke or bom∣basine cloth. They go all barefooted, except the priestes, whiche weare on theyr heads certayne rayles or crestes of two spannes long, with a knotte on the crowne lyke vnto an Acorne, and sparkled with golde. They delyght also in earinges: but weare neyther rynges nor braslettes. The colour of the in∣habitantes inclyneth to whyte, for the temperature of the cli∣mate or ayre, is colder then at Calecut. Theyr maner of tyllage, and geatheryng of fruite, is lyke vnto ours. Of the maner which the kyng of Tarnassarie vseth, when he permitteth his wyfe to be defloured of white men. Cap. 8. THis kyng vseth not to geue his wyfe to the priestes to be defloured, as doth the kyng of Calecut, but committeth this facte to whyte men, as to the Christians or Mahu∣metans, for he wyll not suffer the Idolaters to do this. The inhabitantes lykewyse haue not to do carnally with theyr wyues, before some whyte man, of what so euer nation, haue fyrst the breakyng of them. The maner of burnyng dead bodyes in the citie of Tarnassary. Cap. 9. WHen the kyng or any of the priestes or gentlemen dye, their bodies are burnt in a great fyre made of a pile of wood: then all the whyle they sacrifice vnto the deuyll. Their asshes are reserued in cer∣tayne pottes of the earth of Samos, and buryed in theyr houses.
They sacrifice in ye shadows of trees as do they of Calecut. Whilst the bodyes are burnyng, they cast in the fyre all maner of sweete sauoures, as Aloes, Myrre, Frankensence, Storax, Sandals, Corall, and innumerable suche other sweete gummes, spices, and trees. These make the fyre muche greater, encreasyng the flame by reason of theyr gummositie: in the meane tyme also they neuer ceasse to make a great noyse with Trumpettes, Pipes,Canonisyng of saintes. Drummes, Tambarells, and suche other instruments, not muche vnlyke the ceremonies which in olde tyme were vsed among the gentiles in canonisyng theyr saintes. Furthermore, duryng these funeralls, there are .xv. or .xx. disguised lyke deuyls, whiche continually walke rounde about the fyre, with many strange gesticulations, after the maner of reioycyng. The wyfe also of the burned kyng or priest, standeth by the tyre alone, without the companye of any other woman, lamentyng and beatyng her breast. These ceremonies are done the seconde watche of the nyght. Within fyfteene dayes after, the wyfe bid∣deth to a banquette all her husbandes kynsfolkes,The wyfe bur∣neth her selfe after the death of her husband. and when they come at a daye appoynted, they go al to the place where her husbande was burnt, and at the same houre of the nyght: then commeth foorth the wyfe, garnyshed with all her iewells and best apparell, vsyng therein the helpe of all her kynsfolkes. In the same place is made a pytte, no deeper then may serue to re∣ceiue the woman: This pytte, is sette about with reedes, and the reedes are couered with a cloth of sylke, that the pytte may not be seene. In the meane tyme also a fyre is made in the pyt, with sundry sorts of sweet woods: & the wife, after that her gestes haue well banqueted, eateth very muche of a certayne meate whiche they call Betola, whiche troubleth her mynde as though she were halfe madde or drunken. In the meane whyle, a great company of suche theyr musitions as we haue spoken of before, apparelled like deuyls,Daunsyng deuylles. with burnyng stickes in theyr mouthes, daunce fyrst about the pytte, and then make sacrifice to the great deuyl Deumo. The wyfe also in ye meane season runneth vp and downe lyke a madde body,Sacrifice to the deuyll. with countenaunces of dauncyng and reioycyng. Then turnyng her to them that are disguised lyke deuyls, she commendeth her selfe to theyr deuoute prayers,
desiryng them for her to make intercession to the great Deumo, that after this transitorie lyfe, it may please him to receyue her into the company of his Angelles. After the ceremonies are fy∣nished, shee taketh her leaue of all her kynsfolkes, whiche stande rounde about her, and neare vnto the pitte,The hygh way to hell. then with sodaine out∣rage and a loude crye liftyng vp her handes, she hurleth her selfe into the burnyng pit, which done, her kynsfolkes, standing neare vnto the fyre, couer her with litle fagottes of sweete wood, hur∣lyng also thereon much pitche, that the bodie may the sooner be consumed: and except the wyfe shoulde doe this after the death of her husbande,Great respecte of fame and ho∣nestie. she should euer after be esteemed an euyll wo∣man, be hated of all men, and in fine, in danger to be slayne both of her owne kynsfolkes and her husbandes, and therefore shee goeth to it the more willingly. The kyng him selfe is present at these pompes: which are not commonly vsed for all men, but only for the kynges, priestes, and noble men. Of the iustice which the inhabitantes of Tarnassari obserue. Cap. 10. IF any kyll a man, he is adiudged to death, as in the citie of Calecut. Of giuyng and receyuyng, iustice is ministred, as proofe may be made by writing or witnesse.Writyng. They wryte in parchement lyke vnto ours, and not in barkes of trees as doe they of Calecut. When they contende for any thyng, they resorte to the gouernour of the citie, to whom the kyng hath giuen full aucthoritie of iurisdiction: and if any merchaunt straunger dye there without children, he may make no inheritour, but all his goods is due to the kyng: when the kyng is dead, his chyldren succeede in the kyngdome. When the inhabitantes dye, theyr goods are equally diuided among theyr children.
Howe the Mahumetans are buried in the citie of Tarnassari. Cap. 11. WHen any of the Mahumetan merchantes dye, they are embaulmed with many spices and sweete gum∣mes, and theyr bodies put in Coffins of wood: with chiefe regarde that theyr heades lye towarde the ci∣tie of Mecha,Mecha. which is from thence Northwarde. Of the dyuers sortes of theyr shyppes or other vesselles. Cap. 12. THey haue Brigantines very shalowe, and with flatte bot∣toms, which drawe but small depth of water. Some al∣so vse Foistes, hauyng two or double forepartes, and two Mastes, and are open without any couerture. There is an other kynde of shyppes of burden: Of the which, some beare the burden of a thousande tunnes. In these they carry Botes and other smaller vesselles, to the citie of Melacha, when they goe for spices. Of Bangella, a great and riche citie of India, and of the great power of the kyng. Cap. 13. IT is now tyme to speake further of our viage, and of our pro∣ceedyng therein. Therefore packyng vp our wares, and commityng vs to the sea, we came in twelue dayes saylyng to a citie named Bangella,The citie of Bangella. distant from Tarnassari seuen hun∣dred myles. This citie in fruitfulnesse and plentifulnesse of all thinges, may in maner contende with any citie in the worlde. The kyngdome and dominion of this citie is exceedyng large. The kyng hath an army of two hundred thousande footemen and horsemen Mahumetans,An army of two hundred thousand men. and is of so great power, that he keepeth sore warres with the kyng of Narsinga. The region is so plentifull in all thynges, that there lacketh nothyng that may serue to the necessarie vses or pleasures of men: for there
are in maner all sortes of beastes, good and holesome fruites, and plentie of corne: Spices also of all sortes.Spices and silke. Lykewyse of bomba∣sine and silke, so exceedyng great aboundance, that in these thin∣ges, I thinke there is none other region comparable with this, and therefore here are very many riche merchantes.Riche merchan∣tes. For euery yeere departe from hence, fyftie shyppes laden with clothe of bombasine and silke, into the cities and countreys of Turchia, Syria, Arabia, Persia, Ethiopia, and India. There are also many merchaunt straungers,Precious stones. whiche buye precious stones of the in∣habitauntes. Of certayne Christian merchauntes, which exercise merchandies there. Cap. 14. HEre we founde many Christian merchantes which were borne in the citie of Sarnau, as they tolde vs.Christians. They re∣sorte thyther, as to a great marte, with cloth of silke,Lignum Aloes. and wood of Aloes, & Laser,Laserpitium. which yeldeth the sweete gumme named Laserpitium, commonly called Belzoi,Belzoi. beyng a kynde of myrre. They bryng also Castoreum,Castoreum. and diuers other sweete sa∣uours. The sayde Christians tolde vs also,Christian Prin∣ces vnder the great Cham of Cathay. that there be in that kyngdome, many Christian Princes, subiect to the great Cham, of the citie of Cathai. The apparell of these Christians, was Chamlet, loose and very full of pleytes, and lyned with bomba∣sine cloth. On theyr heads they weare certayne coppen or sharpe poynted cappes, of two handfull hygh, of scarlet colour. They are white men. They acknowledge one God in Trinitie, & are baptised after our maner. They beleeue the doctrine of the Apo∣stles and Euangelistes. They wryte backewarde, after the ma∣ner of the Armenians. They celebrate the birth and buriall of Christ, and obserue fastyng the fourtie dayes of Lent as we doe. They celebrate also certayne sainctes dayes. They vse no shooes, but weare loose hose of silke, garnished with dyuers Iewels. On theyr fingers they weare Ringes, with stones of incomparable splendour. At meate, they vse no table, but eate lying on the grounde, and feede of all sortes of fleshe.
They affyrmed also, that there are certayne Christian kynges (whiche they call Rumi) of great power,Christian Prin∣ces neare the Turkes domi∣nions. confinyng or bor∣deryng on the dominions of the great Turke. When these Chri∣stians had seene the precious merchaundies of my companion, and specially a great braunche of Corall,Corall of great pryce. they earnestly desired him, to goe with them to a certayne citie, where they promised him that by theyr procurement he shoulde sell his ware at great auantage,Rubies. if he would buye Rubie stones, and that he might ther∣by easily geat aboue tenne thousande peeces of golde: Affirming that those kynde of stones were of muche greater value in Tur∣key. Wherevnto my companion answered, that he woulde goe with them if they would departe in shorte space. We will (sayde they) departe euen to morow: for here is a Foist whiche depar∣teth hence to morowe,Pego. and taketh her viage to the citie of Pego, whyther we desyre to bryng you. My companion consented the rather to his request, bicause he was aduertised that he should fynde there certayne Persians, his countrey men. Therefore with this good companie departyng from the citie of Bangella, and saylyng ouer a great gulfe lying on the South syde, wee came at the length to the citie of Pego, a thousande myles di∣staunt from Bangella. Of Pego, a famous citie of In∣dia. Cap. 15. THe citie of Pego, is not farre from the sea, and is situate vppon the continent or fyrme lande. A very fayre ryuer runneth by the citie, by the which merchandies are caried to and fro.Idolaters. The kyng of the citie, is an Idolater. The inhabitauntes, in apparell, liuyng, and maners, are lyke vnto them of Tarnassari: but of whiter colour, as in a colder region, somewhat lyke vnto ours.White men. The citie is walled, and the houses well buylded, and very fayre, of stone and lyme. The kyng hath a myghtie armie both of footemen and horsemen, and hath in his armie Pensionarie Christians, borne euen in the same re∣gion.Christians.
Theyr wages, is euery moneth sixe of those peeces of golde which they cal Pardaios, & is payde them out of the Kynges trea∣sury. They haue abundance of corne and flesh, as in Calecut. Here are but fewe Elephantes, yet other beastes and foules, as in Ca∣lecut. Here are also trees for buyldyng, and to make shyppes, the fayrest that euer I sawe: Also exceedyng great Reedes,Great Reed▪ as byg as the bodie of a grosse man, or a tubbe. Here are likewyse siuit Cattes, or Muske Cattes, and of small pryce,Muske catte▪ as three for one peece of golde. There are fewe merchandyes in this citie, except precious stones, and specially Rubies:Precious stones and spices. which ne∣uerthelesse are brought thyther from an other citie named Ca∣pela, beyng towarde the East thirtie dayes iourney,Capela. where are also founde precious stones named Smaragdes or Emeraldes.Smaragdes or Emeraldes. When we arryued at Pego, the kyng was absent fyue & twen∣tie dayes iourney, in a place where he kepte warre agaynst the kyng of Aua. But shortly after, he returned with great try∣umphe for the victorie which he had agaynst his enemie. Of the munificence, humilitie, and great richesse of the Kyng of Pe∣go. Cap. 16. THis kyng vseth not suche pompes and magnificence as doeth the kyng of Calecut: But is of suche humanitie and affabilitie, that a chylde may come to his presence and speake with him, being neuerthelesse very ryche. It is in maner incredible to speake of the ryche Iewelles,Great riches of Iewelles and precious stones precious stones, pearles, and especially Rubies, which he weareth, sur∣mounting in value any great citie. His fingers be full of Ringes, and his armes all full of braselettes of golde, all beset and moste gloriously shinyng with suche precious stones: His legges also and feete beyng garnyshed in lyke maner. His eares lykewyse are so laded with suche Iewelles, that they hang downe halfe a handfull. The splendour or shinyng of these Iewelles is so great, that if one see the king in the darke night,A kyng shinyng with earthly starres. he shineth in maner as it were the beames of the sunne. At good oportunitie the Christi∣an merchantes spake to the kyng, and certified him that my com∣panion had brought sundry merchaundies of great estimation.
The kyng answered, that they shoulde come to him the day fo∣lowyng,The kyng sacri∣fyceth to the deuyll. bycause that, that present day, he shoulde sacrifice to the deuyll. Therefore the nexte day he sent for vs, willyng that my companion should bryng with him suche merchandies as he had. The which the kyng toke great pleasure to behold, and not without good cause: for among other thinges, there were two great branches of corrall,Corall. of such bignesse and fayrenesse, as no man there had euer seene the lyke. The kyng astonished at these thinges, asked the Christians what men we were. They answe∣red that we were Persians. Then sayde the kyng to his inter∣pretour, Aske them if they will here make sale of theyr merchan∣dies. To whom then my companion sayde thus, Most honorable Prince, all these are yours, take them, and vse them at your plea∣sure. Then sayde the kyng agayne, These two yeeres paste I haue kepte continuall warre with the kyng of Aua, and therfore my treasure of money is consumed: But if you will bargaine by the way of exchaunge, for precious stones, and especially Ru∣bies, I will so deale with you, that it shall not repent you. Then sayde my companion to the Christians: I pray you gyue the kyng to vnderstande,The kyng and the merchant contende of li∣beralitie. that I desire none other thyng then the beneuolence of his highnesse, and therefore that I desire him to take of my merchaundies what lyketh him best, and that without money, or permutation of any other thing. When the kyng hearde this,Commendati∣on of the Per∣sians. he answered, that he had hearde by reporte that the Persians were very curtuous and liberall men, and that he neuer knewe so liberall a man as this was, and swore by the head of the deuyll, that by this occasion he would proue which of them two should be most liberall, and therefore callyng vnto him a Page of his chamber,A casket full of Rubies. commaunded him to fetche a casket of precious stones. This casket was of the breadth of a spanne and a halfe, euery way square, and full of Rubies: hauyng also within it sundry receptacles or boxes, where the stones were sorted in order. When he had opened the casket, he commaun∣ded it to be set before the Persian, willing him to take of those precious stones as many as he would. But my companion the Persian, yet more moued to liberalitie by this the Kinges mu∣nificence, spake to the kyng these woordes, O most honoura∣ble Prince, I perceyue your beneuolence to be suche towarde
me, that I sweare by the holy head of Mahumet, and all the my∣steries of his religion, wherevnto I am professed, that I freely and gladly gyue vnto you all my merchaundies: For I doe not trauayle about the worlde for gaynes of richesse, but rather of de∣syre to see the worlde. In the which thereto, I neuer founde any thyng wherein I so greatly reioyced, as in the beneuolence and fauour which your maiestie hath shewed me. The kyng answe∣red, Wylt thou yet contende with mee in liberalitie? And with those woordes, tooke out of the casket, (of euery boxe some) as many Rubies as he coulde holde in his hande, & with this re∣warde (whiche was two hundred Rubies) shewed his kyngly munificence and beneuolence towarde the Persian, saying vnto him, Take these, I pray thee, for thou shalt not refuse them. He gaue also to eche of the Christians two Rubies, whiche were woorth a thousand crownes to be solde: but those which he gaue the Persian, were esteemed woorth a hundred thousand crownes.A Princely gyfte. This kyng therefore doubtlesse in munificence passeth all the kynges of the worlde, and in maner no lesse in richesse: for he re∣ceyueth yeerely of his subiectes two hundred thousand peeces of golde. This region bryngeth foorth all sortes of colours,Colours. and great plentie of bombasine and silke: but these great riches, the kyng consumeth on his souldiers. Not long after, newes were brought that the kyng of Aua was commyng with a myghtie force, whom the kyng in maner with an innumerable army went to resist. Here also in certayne places we sawe women burned, aftr the maner of Tarnassari. Of the citie of Melacha, and the great ryuer of Gaza. Cap. 17. VVIthin two dayes after, taking ship, we sailed westwarde towarde the citie of Melacha, and arryued there in eight dayes saylyng. Not farre from this citie, is a famous ryuer named Gaza, the largest that euer I sawe, conteynyng
xxv. myles in breadth. On the other syde, is seene a very great Ilande,A ryuer of .xxv. myles brode. The Ilande of Sumetra or Taprobana. whiche they call Sumetra, and is of olde writers named Traprobana. The inhabitauntes say that it conteyneth in circuite fyue hundred myles. When wee came to the citie of Melacha (which some call Melcha) we were incontinent commaunded to come to the Soltan, being a Mahumetan, and subiecte to the great Soltan of Chini,Chini or Chi∣na. and payeth him tribute. Of whiche tri∣bute, they say the cause is, that more then fourescore yeeres past, that citie was buylded by the kyng of Chini, for none other cause, then only for the commoditie of the hauen, being doubtlesse one of the fayrest in that Ocean, and therefore it is lykely that many shyppes should resorte thyther for merchandies. The region is not euery where fruitefull, yet hath it sufficient of wheate and fleshe, and but little wood. They haue plentie of foules, as in Ca∣lecut: but the Popingays are much fayrer. There is also founde Sandalum,Popingayes. Sandalum, Tyn. and Tynne. Lykewyse Elephantes, horses, sheepe, kyne, Pardalles, Bufles, Peacockes, and many other beastes, and foules. They haue but fewe fruites, and therefore there is no merchandies to be solde but spices and silke.Spices and silke. The people are of blackyshe ashe colour. Theyr apparell is like to the Mahume∣tans of the citie Memphis, otherwise named Cayr, Alchayr, or Ba∣bylon of Nilus. They haue very large foreheades, rounde eyes, and flatte noses. It is dangerous there to goe abrode in the night, the inhabitantes are so giuen to murder and robbery,Vnruly people. for they kill one another lyke dogges, and therefore the merchantes remayne in their shyppes all the nyght. The people are fierce, of euyll con∣dition, and vnruly, for they will obey to no gouernour, being al∣togeather giuen to sedition and rebellion,Anarchia. and therefore say vnto theyr gouernours, that they will forsake the countrey, if they stryue to bynde them to order, whiche they say the more boldly, bycause they are neare vnto the sea, and may easily departe into other places. For these causes, we spent no long tyme here: but hyring a Brigantine, we sayled to the Ilande of Sumatra, where in fewe dayes saylyng, we arryued at a citie of the Ilande named Pyder, distaunt about fourescore myles from the continent or firme lande.
Of the Ilande of Sumatra, or Taprobana. Cap. 18. WE haue sayd here before that the Ilande of Suma∣tra, conteyneth in circuite fyue hundred myles.The Ilande of Samatra or Samotra. The citie where we fyrst arryued in the Iland, is named Pider, hauyng a very fayre port. I beleeue veryly this Ilande to be Taprobana, as also most autours do a∣gree. It is gouerned by foure kynges, and all Idolaters, in fashions, apparell, and maner of lyuyng,Foure kynges in one Iland. not muche differyng from the kyng of Tarnassari. The women burne them selues after the death of theyr husbandes, as do they of whom we haue spoken before. They are of whityshe coloure,Women burns them selues. with large for∣heades, rounde eyes, and of brasyll colour. They weare theyr heare long, and haue very brode and flatte noses, and are of des∣picable stature. Iustice is there well obserued. Their mony is of golde, syluer, and tynne. The golde coyne,Iustice. Coyned mony of golde, syluer, and tynne. Elephantes. hath on the one syde, the grauen head of a deuyl: and on the other syde, a wagon or charrette drawen with Elephantes. The syluer mony hath the lyke coyne: tenne of these, are valued for one of golde. But of the tynne coyne .xxv. make the value of one of golde. Here are seene more Elephantes, bygger, and fayrer then in any other place that I haue been. This people hath no experience of warres, but are geuen altogeather to gaynes and merchandies. They are hospitable, and enterteyne strangers frendly. Of an other kynde of Pepper. Also of sylke, and the precious gumme called Laser∣pitium, or Belzoe. Cap. 19. IN the sayde Iland is a kynde of long Pepper in great abun∣dance. Pepper in theyr language, is called Molaga,Long Pepper. & is much longer & whiter then that which is brought hither: yet lighter & hotter: it is sold there not by weight, but bi measure as wheat with vs. It is there in so great abundaunce, that there is caryed from hence yeerely twentie shyppes laden with Pepper. This is caryed to Cathay, and is there well solde,Cathay or Ca∣tai a colde re∣gion. by reason of the cold∣nesse
of the region. The tree that beareth this kynde of pepper, hath a greater body, and larger and fatter leaues, then the pep∣per tree of Calecut.Sylke of the trees. This Ilande beareth also plentie of sylke, whiche for the most parte, is made after our maner. There is an other sorte, which the trees bryng foorth of them selues in the wooddes and feeldes, without menage or dressyng: but this is woorse then the other. Here also groweth the Laser tree, whiche bryngeth forth the precious gumme named Laserpitium or Belzoe,Laserpitium or Belzoe. as the inhabitantes and merchauntes tolde vs: but because I haue not seene it, I wyll speake no more of it. Of three sortes of the tree of Aloes. Cap. 20. FOrasmuch as varietie delighteth, and the wel disposed mind can neuer be satiate with contemplation of the marueylous and sundry woorkes of God in nature, therfore that the rea∣der may take the more pleasure, or at the least feele lesse te∣diousnesse in the reading of these thyngs, I haue thought good to wryte somewhat more of suche thynges as I haue seene. You shall therefore vnderstande, that there is no great plentie of true Aloes or Laserpitium brought to vs,Litle true Aloes or Laserpitium. because it is brought hyther from the furthest partes of the worlde. Understande further∣more, that there are three kyndes or sortes of Aloes, greatly dif∣feryng in goodnesse. The perfectest, they call Calampat, whiche the aforesaide Ilande bryngeth not forth: But it is brought from the citie of Sarnau,Sarnau. not farre from the place where the sayde Aloes Calampat is engendred, as the Christian merchauntes or compa∣nions tolde vs. There is an other kynde of Aloes, named Iuba (or Luba) brought hyther by this ryuer, I knowe not from whence. The thyrd kynd, is named Bochor. The saide Christian merchants tolde vs also, that none of the fyrst and best kynde of Aloes is brought vnto vs, because it commeth from the kyng∣domes of Cathay, Chini, Macym, Sarnau, and Grauay, countreys muche rycher then ours,Cathay, and o∣ther rych coun∣treys. hauyng muche greater abundance of golde, and kynges of greater power and rychesse then are ours: And also that the sayde kynges take great pleasure in such kynd of sweete sauoures, and vse them muche more then our princes
do: So that by this meanes, the true kynde of Aloes is woorth euen in the citie of Sarnau, tenne crownes the pounde weyght. Howe the gummes of Aloes and Laser∣pitium, are proued. Cap. 21. WE came by certaine experience to the knowledge of the two sweete gummes of Aloes and Laserpitium, as we were taught by the sayd Christian merchants our companyons: For one of them had a certayne portion of them both, and had of that best sorte of Aloes, named Calampat, about the quantitie of two ounces: Of the which, my companion takyng a peece in his hande, and holdyng it fast and close for the space that one may thryse saye the Psalme of Mise∣rere mei Deus, the Aloes thereby beyng heat,Aloes of very sweete sauour. at the openyng of his hande gaue a sauoure of incredible sweetenesse, and suche as I neuer felte of any other thyng. He tooke also of the common Laserpitium or Belzoe, the quantitie of a Walnutte,The proofe of Laserpitium. and agayne halfe a pounde of that whiche commeth from the citie of Sarnau, to compare the one to the other: And so puttyng them both in sundry chafyng dyshes, with burnyng coles in a close chamber, that whiche was of the byggnesse of a Walnutte, in sweete sa∣uour far exceeded the other which was halfe a pounde in weight, and woulde doubtlesse so haue done though it had ben of two pounde weight. In this region is also founde Lacca, or Lacta, wherewith is made a shynyng redde colour.Lacca, mer∣chantes waxe. It is the gumme of a tree, not muche vnlyke our Walnutte tree. There are also sundrye kindes of beastes, suche as we haue. Of diuers merchantes in the Ilande of Sumatra, or Taprobana. Cap. 22. IN the sayde citie of Pyder, in the Ilande of Sumatra, I sawe many curious workes, very artificially wrought, as fyne Co∣phines or baskets, garnished with golde, solde for two crow∣nes the peece: I sawe also there in one streate fyue hundred
exchangers: there are so many bankers. Hither, as to a famous mart, resort innumerable merchantes. The inhabitantes weare Mantels of sylke, and Syndone, made of Bombasine. The re∣gion hath plentie of wood, and trees, very commodious to make such shippes as they cal Gunchos,Shyppes of a straunge fashi∣on. hauyng three mastes, two fore partes, and also two sternes or gouernals on both sydes. When they sayle in the Ocean, and haue nowe geuen wynde to the sayles, yf afterwarde it shalbe needefull to haue more sayles, not changyng the fyrst, they go backward without turnyng the ship, and vsyng only one mast.Swymmers. They are most expert swymmers, and haue skyll to make fyre in an instant. Theyr houses are of stone, and very lowe. In the place af couerynges or tyles, they vse the skynnes or hydes of a fyshe,Great hydes of fyshes. called Tartaruca, founde in that sea of India. I saw so hugious a hyde of this monster, that it wayed a hundred & three poundes. I sawe there also great teeth of Ele∣phantes,Great teeth of Elephantes. Great Ser∣pentes. as one waying three hundred & thirtie pounde weight. Lykewise Serpentes of incredible bygnesse, and muche bygger then in Calecut. Here our companions, the Christian merchants, for affayres they had to do other wayes, woulde haue taken their leaue of vs. Then my companion the Persian spake vnto them in this maner: Although (my frendes) I am not your countrey∣man (yet beyng all brethren, and the chyldren of Adam) I take God to witnesse that I loue you as yf you were myne owne bre∣thren, begotten of the same parentes: and therfore, consyderyng how frendly we haue kept company togeather so long tyme, I assure you I can not, without great greefe of mynde, beare your departyng from vs. And although you woulde depart from me, wyll you nowe forsake this my companion, a man of your fayth and religion? Then sayde the Christians, Howe hath this man, beyng no Persian, receyued our fayth? Then sayde my compa∣nion, Truely he is now a Persian, and was once bought at Ie∣rusalem.The name of Hierusalem in reuerence. When the Christians hearde the holy name of Ierusa∣lem, they lyfted vp theyr handes to heauen, and prostratyng them selues on the grounde, kyssed it thryse: then rysyng, they asked him of what age I was, when I was brought from Ierusalem. Of the age of fyfteene yeeres sayde my companion. Then sayde they agayne, He may then remember his countrey. Then aun∣swered my companion, He dooth remember it in deede, and I
haue taken great pleasure of suche thynges as he hath tolde me of his countrye. Then sayde the merchauntes, Although of long time we haue desyred to returne to our countrey, beyng more then three hundred myles hence, neuerthelesse at your request we wil beare you company to the place whyther you desyre to go. Pre∣paryng therefore all thynges parteynyng to the voyage, we tooke shyppyng, and in .xv. dayes saylyng, came to an Ilande named Bandan. Of the Ilande of Bandan, where Nutte∣megs and Mace are founde. Cap. 23. IN this voyage to the Ilande of Bandan we founde about .xx. Ilandes, some inhabited, and some desarte. This Ilande is very saluage, barren, and very lowe,Anarchia. and conteyneth a hun∣dred myles in circuite. It hath neyther kyng nor gouernour, but is inhabited with a rascall and beastly kynde of men, lyuyng without lawe, order, or gouerment. They haue lowe houses,Lawlesse peo∣ple. or rather cotages of wood, rysyng but litle from the ground. Their apparell is onely a sherte. They go bareheadded and barefooted, with theyr heare hangyng downe, and haue brode and rounde forheaddes. They are of coloure inclynyng to whyte, and of des∣picable stature. They are Idolaters, and woorse then are the in∣habitantes of Calecut, called Poliar, and Hyrana. They are also of dull wytte and litle strength, and in kynde of lyuyng altogea∣ther beastly. The soyle beareth no fruites, excepte onely Nutte∣megges: the bodye of the Nuttemegge tree, is lyke to the bo∣dye of a Peache tree, and hath lyke branches and leaues,Idolaters. The Nutte∣megge tree. Mace. but the leaues are somewhat narower. Before these Nuttes come to rypenesse, the Mace florysheth lyke vnto a redde rose: but when the Nutte waxeth rype, the Mace closeth it selfe and em∣braseth the Nutte and shel, and are so geathered togeather with∣out order or distribution, by scamblyng, catche that catche may,All thynges common. for yt al things are there common. The tree yeeldeth fruite of his owne fruitefulnesse, without graffyng or cuttyng, or any other art. These Nuttes are solde by weyght,Nuttemegges of small price. and .xxvi. pounde weyght, is solde for the value of three souses (that is) halfe a
Carline, of such money as is vsed in Calecut. This people hath none other order of iustice,The lawe of nature. then by the lawe of nature, and ther∣fore they lyue without such contentions as proceede of thyne and myne. When we had been heere three dayes, my companion asked the Christian merchantes, where was the region whiche brought foorth Cloues? They aunswered, That Cloues were founde in an Ilande named Monoch, sixe dayes saylyng from thence. Therfore proceedyng on our voyage, we came thyther in the space of seuen dayes. These Ilandes of spyces, are called Moluccdae, and in them is seene the rare byrde named Manucodiata, or paradisea.Of the Ilande of Monoch, where Cloues growe. Cap. 24. THis Ilande is very narowe, yet in length exceedeth the Ilande of Bandan. The inhabitauntes are much worse then they of Bandan: for, were it not only for mans shape, they should in maner differ nothyng from beastes. Their colour is whyter, and the region colder. This Ilande bryngeth foorth Cloues, as do also many other litle and desolate Ilandes lying about it.The Cloue tree. The body of this tree, is not muche vnlyke the Boxe tree, and hath leaues lyke vnto the Cinamome tree, but rounder, and almost lyke the Bay leafe. When they waxe rype, the inhabitauntes beate them downe with reedes, laying fyrst mattes vnder the trees. The grounde is sandie, and the region so low vnder the Horizon, that the North starre can not be seene there. They sell Cloues for the double price that Nutmegs are solde,Cloues dearer then Nutmegs. & sel them by measure: for they are vtterly without know∣ledge of weyghtes. Of the Iland of Bornei. Cap. 25. AS we were togeather talkyng of our voyages, the Chri∣stian merchantes spake vnto me in this maner. Our dear∣ly beloued freende, forasmuch as by the grace of God, we are come thus farre in safetie, yf it please you, we wyl go see one of the fayrest Ilandes in the worlde, and very ryche, and suche as I beleeue you neuer sawe:The Ilande of Gyaua. but we must fyrst go to an other Iland named Bornei, for there shal we haue bygger vessels: for we must needes passe a deepe and rough sea.Bornei▪ Then sayde my companion, Do as shall please you, for we are contented to go
with you. Therefore hyryng a greater Foyst, we di∣rected our iorney to that Ilande both by daye and nyght, sayling alway southwarde: By the way we passed foorth the tyme with pleasant talke. The merchaunt men asked me many thynges of the ceremonyes and solemnities of the Christian religion vsed a∣mong vs:Veronica or Vernacle. And when I made mention of the Veronica (com∣monly called the Uernacle of the face of Chryst) and of the heads of Peter and Paule the chiefest of the Apostles,The headdes of Peter and Paule. and also of ma∣ny other saintes, they aduertysed me secretly, that if I woulde go with them, I shoulde become a great man for the knowledge of suche great thynges. But beyng deterred by the greatnesse of the iorney, & fearyng that then I should neuer haue come home, I refused to go with them. At the length we came to the Iland of Bornei, distant from Monoch about two hundred myles, and is somewhat bygger,The Ilande of Bornei. Idolaters. but muche lower beneath the Horizon or Equinoctiall. The inhabitantes are Idolaters, of sharpe wyt, and maner of lyuyng not greatly to be discommended. Their colour inclyneth more to whytenesse. They weare not all one maner of apparell, for some weare shirtes of bombasine cloth, o∣ther mantells of chamlet, and other also sharpe cappes of red coloure. They obserue iustice and good order. This Ilande yeeldeth yeerely great abundaunce of Camphora, which they sayd to be the gumme of a tree: but I dare not affyrme it,Camphora. because I haue not seene it. Here my companyon hyred a lyght shyppe or barke for a hundred peeces of golde. Of the obseruations vsed in the nauigation to the Iland of Giaua. Cap. 26. AFter that we had made prouision of vittayles sufficient for the voyage, we directed our iorney to the Ilande of Gya∣ua, and came thyther in the space of fyue dayes, saylyng e∣uer towarde the south. Our Pilot vsed the maryners boxe or compasse, with also the lode stone and sea carde,The north star. after the ma∣ner of ours. Therefore when my companyon sawe that the Sep∣tentrions or north starres coulde not be seene there, he asked the Christians how they could sayle on that sea without they guide of the north star? & asked also, by what other star they were guided?
The Pilote aunswered, that the inhabitantes of these regions obserue principally fyue starres,The starres a∣bout the pole Antartike. and also one other starre, oppo∣site or directlye contrary to the Septentrions or North starres, whereby they gouerned their viages in these regions:The lode stone serueth in the south regions beyonde the E∣quinoctiall line. and sayd, that he also vsed the lode stone, because it euer mooueth to the North: and sayde furthermore, that on the other syde of that I∣lande, is a certayne people, whiche in saylyng obserue certayne starres, contrary to the Septentrions, for that the sayde people are Antipodes to them of Europa Sarmatiae, and that they inhabite as colde a region and climat,Antipodes. and as neare vnto the pole Antar∣tike, as is manifest by the shortnesse of the day, beyng but foure houres long in their wynter: of whiche talke we tooke great pleasure. Of the Ilande of Gyaua, and the maners of the people. Cap. 27. THerfore proceedyng on our iourney fyue dayes saylyng, we came to the sayde Ilande, beyng very great & large, and hauyng in it many kyngdomes, and kynges, beyng all Idolaters,Idolaters. and of diuers maners of lyuyng: for some of them honor Idolles, after the maner of Calecut: some also ho∣nor the Sonne, and some the Moone: other take Kyne for their Idolles: and some, the fyrst thyng that they meete in the mor∣nyng,The Image of the deuyll. take for the Idol of that day: other also honor the picture or similitude of the deuyll. This Ilande bryngeth foorth sylke, whiche groweth of it selfe in the wooddes,Sylke of trees, Smaragdes. Golde. Copper. and also the fayrest Smaragdes or Emeraldes that are in the world: there is like∣wyse plentie of Golde, and Copper. The soyle is fruitefull of Corne, and all sortes of fruites, as in the citie of Calecut. There is great abundance of fleshe of all sortes, as with vs. The inha∣bitantes are faythfull,Whyte men good people. and true dealyng people: they are of the ame colour and stature that we bee, but haue larger forheades, very great eyes, and of brasyll or redde colour, and flatte noses, wearyng theyr heare long. There is a great multitude of foules and birdes,Byrdes and foules. but vnlyke vnto ours, except Peacockes, Turtle dooue, and Crowes. They greatly obserue iustice, and good or∣der. For theyr apparel they vse mantels, or clokes, of Bombasine cloth, or sylke, or Chamlet, euer wearyng out one arme. They vse no coates of fence, or armure, because they haue no warres:
but when they traueyle on the sea, they vse bowes,Impoysoned arrowes. and impoy∣soned arrowes made of Reedes. They vse also certayne long and holowe staues (which we call Trunkes) through the which af∣ter our maner, they blowe little arrowes,Trunkes. so infected with poy∣son, that if they rayse neuer so little blood, death foloweth incon∣tinent. They haue no Gunnes or other ingines. They eate all sortes of fleshe, fyshe, and fruites: yet some feede of one kynde of meate, and other of other, as them listeth. Of theyr cruell maners in selling their parentes to the Anthropophagi to be eaten. Cap. 28.Anthropo∣phagi eate mans fleshe. In the West India, they are called Cani∣balles. THe inhabitantes of the sayd Ilande (they I meane which feede of fleshe) when they see theyr parentes so feeble by age, that they serue for no vse, but are tedious both to them selues and other, they bryng them to the market or fayre, and sell them to the Anthropophagi, which vse to eate mans fleshe. They that buye them, kyll them out of hande & eate them. Like∣wyse when any young person among them, falleth into any suche sickenesse,A straunge pittie. that by the iudgement of theyr wyse men he can not escape, to the ende that he should not vnprofitably lynger in paynes, his brethren and kyns folkes sell hym to the Anthropo∣phagi. When my companion, beyng deterted with these cruell maners, shewed in countenance that he detested this horrible in∣humanitie, a certayne merchaunt of the inhabitantes sayde thus vnto hym: O Persians, no sacrifice can redeeme your sinnes,Rather to but∣chers then woormes. in that you giue so fayre fleshe to the woormes to be eaten. Ther∣fore abhorryng these beastly maners, we returned to our shyppe, not intendyng any longer to tarry there. Of the strange course of the sunne in the Iland of Gyaua. Cap. 29. WHyle we remayned here, the Christian merchantes, euer desirous to shewe vs new and strange thinges, whiche we myght declare at our returne into our countreys, sayde thus vnto vs, My friendes, make reporte in your countrey of a straunge thyng whiche I will
nowe shewe you. Beholde (sayde they) the place of the Sunne in the South at hygh noone, and thereby consider howe farre this region is from your countrey. We then behelde the Sunne to runne toward the ryght hand: and agayne, to shewe or marke a sphere, about two handfuls brode, towarde the lefte hand, which doubtlesse seemed to vs very straunge. And this (as they saye) is euer seene in the moneth of Iuly. But I nowe scarsely beare this in mynd, for I there forgot euen the names of our monthes. But this is certayne, that in this region, the tymes and seasons of the yeeres are lyke vnto ours, and of lyke temperature of heat and colde. Here my companion bought two fayre Emeraldes for a thousande peeces of golde,Emeraldes of great price. Gelded chil∣dren. and also two gelded children for two hundred peeces of golde: for heere are certayne merchantes that buy none other ware, then such gelded children. Of our returne from the Ilande of Gyaua. Cap. 30. AFter that we had remayned heere fyftiene dayes, wery of the maners of the inhabitantes, and of the coldnesse of the countrey that tyme of the yeere, we determyned to pro∣ceede no further: for this cause also, that there remay∣ned in maner none other region woorthie to be seene, and there∣fore hyring a lyght shyp, we departed from thence, sayling East∣warde for the space of fyftiene dayes, and came at the length to the citie of Melacha, where remayning three dayes, we tooke our leaue of our companions the Christian merchauntes, with friendly embrasinges, and sorowfull myndes. Which departure (I take God to witnesse) greeued me so sore, that if I had been a single man without wyfe and children, I would neuer haue for∣saken suche friendly men. We therefore departed, and they re∣mayned there, saying that they would shortly returne to the ci∣tie of Sana:Sana. and we takyng a Foist, returned to the citie of Cyro∣mandel.Seuen thou∣sande Ilandes. Malacha or Melacha. By the way, the gouernour of the shyp tolde vs, that about the Ilandes of Gyaua and Taprobana, there are aboue se∣uen thousande little Ilandes. When we arryued at Melacha▪
my companion bought as muche spices, sweete sauours, and silke, as cost him fyue thousande peeces of golde: But we came not to the citie of Gyromandel in lesse space then fyftiene dayes saylyng. There we vnladed our Foist, and after we had remay∣ned there twentie dayes, hyring an other Foist, we came at the length to the citie of Colon, where we founde .xxii. Christians,Colon. Portugales. of the realme of Portugale. And fearyng that they would take me for some espion, I began to imagine howe I myght depart from thence: But seeyng that they were so fewe in number, I chaun∣ged my purpose, especially for that there were many merchaunt Mahumetans whiche knewe that I had been at Mecha, to see the bodie of Mahumet. But within the space of twelue dayes, we came to Calecut by the ryuer. Agayne of the citie of Calecut after our re∣turne thyther. Cap. 31. AFter so many long and daungerous peregrinations and viages, in the whiche we haue been partly satisfied of our desyre, and partly weeryed by many suche occasions of in∣conueniences as chaunce in the way (as they can well con∣sider that haue been vsed to suche long iourneyes) we determy∣ned to proceede no further, but to thynke only of our safe returne into our natiue countrey, and therefore I will breefely declare what chaunced to me in the way: the rather that other men, ta∣kyng example by my traueyles, may knowe the better howe to gouerne them selues in the lyke, if lyke ardent affection shal moue them to take suche viages in hande, as I am sure noble spi∣rites of many valiant men will moue them thereto. There∣fore enteryng into the citie of Calecut,Two Christi∣ans of Milan in Calecut. we founde there two Chri∣stians, borne in the citie of Milan, the one named Iohn Maria, and the other Peter Antonie. These were Iewellers, and came from Portugale with the kinges licence to buye precious stones. When I had founde these men, I reioyced more then I am a∣ble to expresse: for we went naked after the maner of the inhabi∣tantes. At our fyrst meetyng, seeyng them to bee whyte men,
I asked them if they were Christians. They sayde, yea. Then sayde I, that I was also a Christian, by the grace of God. Then takyng me by the hande, they brought me to theyr house, where for ioye of our meetyng, we could scarsely satisfie our selues with teares, embrasynges, and kyssyng: for it seemed nowe to mee a straunge thyng to heare men speake myne owne lan∣guage, or to speake it my selfe. Shortly after, I asked them if they were in fauour with the kyng of Calecut. We are (sayde they) in great fauour with him, and very familier. Then againe I asked them what they were mynded to doe. We desyre (sayde they) to returne to our countrey, but we knowe not the meanes howe. Then sayde I, Returne the same way that you came. Naye (sayde they) that may not bee: for we are fledde from the Portugales,The Christians haue made a rodde for their owne arsse. bycause we haue made many peeces of great or∣dinaunce, and other Gunnes for the Kyng of Calecut, and therefore we haue good cause to feare, and nowe especially, for that the nauie of Portugale will shortly be heere.The Nauie of Portugale. I an∣swered, that if I myght escape to the citie of Canonor, I doubted not but that I would geat theyr pardon of the gouernour of the Nauie. There is small hope thereof (sayde they) we are so famous and well knowen to many other kynges in the way whiche fauour the Portugales, and laye wayte to take vs, for wee haue made more then foure hundred Gunnes, little and great, and therefore wee are out of all hope to escape that way. In whiche theyr talke, I perceyued howe fearefull a thyng is a giltie conscience, and called to remembraunce the say∣ing of the Poet. Multa malè timeo, quia feci multa proteruè. That is, I feare muche euyll, bycause I haue done muche euyll. For they had not only made many suche peeces of artillerie for the in∣fidelles, to the great domage of Christians, and contempte of the holy name of Christ and his religion, but had also taught the Idolatours both the makyng and vse of them. And at my beyng there, I sawe them gyue a modell or moulde to cer∣tayne Idolatours, whereby they myght make brasen peeces, of suche bygnesse,A great peece of ordinaunce. that one may receyue the charge of a hun∣dred and fyue Tankardes (Cantaros) of pouder.
At the same tyme also, there was a Iewe,A Iewe that made Gunnes and shyppes, was drowned. which had made a ve∣ry fayre Brigantine, and foure great peeces of artillerie of Iron. But god shortly after gaue him his due reward: for when he went to washe him in the ryuer, he was drowned. But to returne to our sayde Christians. God is my witnesse howe earnestly I per∣suaded them, neuer thereafter to make any more artillerie or Gunnes, to the great contempt and indignation of God, and de∣triment of our holy fayth. When I had sayde these woordes, the teares fell from the eyes of Peter Antonie.Repentaunce. But Iohn Maria (who perhappes had not so great desire to returne to his countrey) said that it was all one to him, to dye there, or in the citie of Rome:Predestina∣tion. and that God knewe what he had decreed of him. Within two dayes after, I returned to my companion, who marueyled where I had been, fearing lest I had ben eyther sicke, or departed. I tolde him that I was all nyght in the Temple, lest he should sus∣pecte my great familiaritie with the Christians. Of the commyng of the Portugale shippes, to the citie of Canonor. Cap. 32. VVHyle I remayned here in the lodging of my com∣panion, there came to him two Persian merchants from the citie of Canonor, saying that they had som euyll newes to tell him: wherwith seemyng to be somewhat troubled, he asked what was the matter? There are come (sayde they) twelue shyppes of Portugale, which we haue seene with our eyes. Then sayde he, What maner of men are those? They are (sayd the Persians) Christians, armed with har∣nesse of shining Iron,A fortresse of the Portugales in the citie of Canonor. and haue builded an inexpugnable fortresse in the citie of Canonor. My companion hearyng those woordes, turned to me, and sayde, Lodouicke, what maner of men are the Portugales? To whom I answered, that they were a nation of mischeeuous people, gyuen to none other thyng then piracie and robbyng on the sea. He was not so sorie to heare this, as I was glad of theyr commyng.
How I playde the Phisitian, and counterfect holinesse, lest by my colour I should be taken for a spye for the Por∣tugales, before I could come to their ships. Cap. 33. Hipocrisie.AFter the rumor was spred of the Portugales arryuyng, I began to thinke what was best to be done, and thought no∣thyng more safe and easie among this people, then to geat some opinion of holinesse by hipocrisie, and therefore all the day tyme, I lurked in the Temple, liuyng without meate, as all the people thought: but in the nyght, I ate fleshe in the house of Peter Antonie, and Iohn Maria. And by this meanes, none had other opinion of me,A Sainct by hipocrisie. but that I was a Sainct, and therfore might after a fewe dayes goe abrode in the citie without suspition: and to helpe the matter withall, it chaunced in the meane tyme, that a certaine rich Mahumetan of the citie of Calecut was very sicke▪ hauing his belly so bounde, that he could not  of nature. And bycause he was a  my companion, and his disease , he asked me if I had any skyll in phisicke? I sayde, that my father was a Phisitian, and that I had learned many things of him by experience. Then I pray you (sayd he) do what you can to helpe this my friend. We went therfore togea∣ther to the sicke man, whom my companion asked where he felt him selfe most greeued. In my head (sayde he) and my stomake, hauyng also my belly so sore bounde, that I can not goe to the stoole. Then my companion agayne in his presence, desired me to consider his infirmitie, and take vpon me to minister vnto him some medicine. My companion had tolde me before, that he was a great eater and drinker. Therefore, takyng him by the hande, and feelyng his pulse, I sayde that his stomacke and bowelles were full of choler, by reason of surfetyng, and therefore that it shoulde be good for him to take a glister. Then sayde the sicke man, Doe what you wil, I wil abyde your order. Then made I a glister of egges,A glister. salt, and suger, adding also butter and certayne hearbes, such as came first to my memorie vpon the sodayne, and in the space of a day and nyght, I gaue him fyue glisters, but all in vayne: for besyde the paynes which he endured, he was rather woorse then better, insomuche that it repented me of myne enter¦prise:
But it was nowe best to set a good face on the matter, and attempte an other way,A straunge mi∣nistring of a glister. but the laste errour was woorse then the first. Yet still putting him in good hope, I vsed him thus. I made him lye grouelyng on his belly, & then tying cordes on his feete, I raysed vp the hynder partes of his body, so that he rested only vppon his brest and handes, and as he laye, ministred a glyster vnto him, and let him so hang for the space of hallfe an houre. My companion beholding this straunge kynde of practise, sayde vnto me, Lodouike, is this the maner of mynistring to sicke folkes in your countrey? It is, sayde I, yet neuer but in case of extre∣mitie. Then smylyng, he sayde, I beleeue it will heale him one way or an other. In the meane tyme the miserable man cryed, saying in his language, It is enough, it is enough, for my soule now departeth. We comforted him, desiryng him to haue pati∣ence yet a whyle. In maner immediately after, his belly was losed, and auoyded matter as if it had been out of a gutter.More good happe then cunnyng. Then when wee had let downe his bodie, hee auoyded as muche as myght almost fyll a payle, and shortly after, the payne of his head and stomake, and also the feuer, ceassed: whereof we were all very glad. And by this aduenturous cure, I began to bee in great credite among them, by the meanes also of my counterfect holinesse, and therefore whereas he would haue giuen me tenne peeces of golde, I would take but only two, and gaue them al∣so incontinent to the poore.Sely soules. These sely soules beleeued so much in my hypocrisie (which I shewed no lesse in countenaunce and grauitie, forbearyng also openly to eate fleshe) that well was he that myght haue me in his house, or kysse my handes and feete. The reporte also of my companion, affyrmyng that he mette with me first at Mecha, where I was to see the bodie of the holy Prophet Mahumet, encreased greatly (and specially a∣mong the Mahumetans) the opinion they had conceiued of my holinesse. But in the meane tyme, secretly in the darke nyght, I resorted priuily to the aforesayde Christians, by whom beyng aduertised that twelue of the Portugale shyppes were nowe arryued at Canonor, I considered that nowe woulde bee good oportunitie to escape: And therefore remaynyng there yet seuen dayes, I learned all that I coulde of
the preparations which the kyng of Calecut and his people made against the Portugales, both touching his army, artillerie, and o∣ther thinges parteynyng to the warres. But before I come to speake of my maner of departing, it wil here not be from the pur∣pose, to declare howe the Mahumetans call the people to theyr churches, and of theyr maner of praying. Howe the Mahumetan priestes call the people to theyr Churches. Cap. 34. THeyr priestes and other ministers of the Temple (of the which there is a great number) obserue this maner to call the people to the church. Certayne of these ascende to the highest Tower of the Temple, where first blowing three or foure brasen Trumpets,Trumpettes in the steede of belles. in the steede of belles, they crye to the people with a loude voyce, to resorte to the Temple to prayers. Then stopping one eare with their finger, they say in theyr owne language these woordes: Alla u eccubar. That is to say, God is great.Not all thac say, Lord, Lord. &c. Some of them say that he is rysen. And againe, God is great: Come to the Temple of the great God, Come to pray to the great God: God is great, God is great, God was, God is, Mahumet the messenger of God shal ryse. They inuited me also to the Temple, and desired me to pray to God for the Mahumetans, whiche I dyd outwardly, but of much other meanyng then they dyd. Of the maner of praying among the Mahumetans. Cap. 35. THey haue certaine dayly and vsuall prayers, as we haue, in the which they call God their father,God the father. The virgin Marie. and vouchsafe to name the virgin Marie, full of grace. They pray not be∣fore they haue ben washed. Then standing in order, after the priest hath prayed, they pray also in their own language. Here to my companion, I fayned my selfe sicke, & founde diuers other occasions to depart from thence, and to go to Canonor. Well sayd he, It shall not be long ere I come thyther to you, & in the meane tyme, with my letters I will commend you there to a friend and countrey man of myne, a riche merchant, who for my sake shall giue you good intertaynement.
VVhat subtiltie I vsed to depart from Calecut, to go to the Portugales. Cap. 36. THe daye before I departed from thence, I made the sayd Christians priuie of my intente. In the meane tyme my companyon ioyned me in company with two other Per∣sian merchauntes, whiche were mynded also to go to Ca∣nonor:Merchantes of Calecut. for there was in the citie of Calecut many merchauntes of Persia, Syria, and Turchia. Therefore the fyrst day of Decem∣ber, I, with the other two Persians, hyryng a lyght shyppe, gaue wynde to our sayles to proceede on our voyage. But see what chaunced suddenly, we had scarsely sayled as farre as a man may shoote an arrowe, but foure of the inhabitantes of the order of them whiche they call Naeros (of whom we haue spoken before) cryed to the gouernour of the shyp to drawe neare the lande in the kynges name.Noeros are gentlemen of the kynges garde. When they vnderstode who we were, they asked why they caryed me away without makyng the kyng priuie thereto? Then sayde the Persians, This Ma∣humetan that is heere with vs, is a holy man, and goeth in our company to the citie of Canonor. They aunsweared, that they knewe me to be a man that had wrought myracles. Neuerthe∣lesse, that because I could speake the language of ye Portugalles, it was to be suspected least I should bewraye theyr secretes to them, and tell them of the nauie and armye whiche the kyng pre∣pared agaynst the Portugales, and therefore commaunded the gouernour of the shyppe to cary vs no further. He obeyed theyr commaundement, and left vs on the shore. Then sayde one of the Persians, Let vs returne to Calecut. To whom I aunsweared, Take heede what you do, for so shall you be in danger to loose all your sylkes if it be knowen that you haue payde no custome to the kyng. Then sayde the other Persian, What then (by your aduise) is it best for vs to do? I aunswered, that it was best for vs to go somewhat further by the shore, vntyl we myght fynde some barke: whereunto they agreed. Therfore we, and our slaues laden with our fardells, went so .xii. myles along by the shore. But what feare I was in, in the meane season, I commytte to wyse men to iudge. But as God would,
we founde there a poore fysher man with a boate, with whom we agreed to bryng vs to Canonor, where we arryued late in the euenyng. Incontinent we went to the merchaunt Persian, to whom I had letters of commendation from my companyon. The tenour of the letters was, that he shoulde receyue me into his house, and enterteyne me frendly, vntil his commyng: Also that whatsoeuer frendeshyp he shewed vnto me, he woulde as∣scribe it to be done vnto hym selfe: Furthermore, that I was a holy man, and ioyned with hym in neere amitie and frendeshyp. When the merchaunt had redde the letters, he layde his hand on his head, and sayde vnto me, By this head you are welcome to me, and shall be here in safetie, and caused a good supper to be prepared for vs. After supper, the Persians sayde vnto me, Lette vs go walke to the sea syde. I agreed: and in short tyme we came to the place where the Portugales shyps laye at anker. I am not able to expresse the secrete ioye whiche I felte in my selfe at the syght of these shyppes. In the way, I marked well the place where the Portugales had buylded their fortresse, de∣termynyng to come thyther the nexte daye. Howe I fledde to the Portugales from the citie of Canonor. Cap. 37. THe daye folowing, when I sawe best oportunitie, I went towarde the fortresse of the Portugales: and by the way, meetyng with two Portugales, in the Spanyshe tongue I asked them where was the fortresse of the Portugales. Then sayde they to me, Art thou a Christian? I am (sayde I) by the grace of God. Then sayde they agayne, From whence commest thou? From the citie of Calecut sayde I. Then come with vs (sayde they) for we wyll bryng thee to the gouernour. This gouernour was one maister Laurentius, sonne to the Uice∣roye. So I went with them to the fortresse, whiche is not past foure furlonges from the citie. At the tyme of our commyng, the gouernour had not yet dined.The Gouer∣noure of Por∣tugales for∣tresse. When I came to his presence, I fel downe on my knees, and prayed hym with al humilitie for Chri∣stes sake, to whom I was consecrated by baptisme, to haue com∣passion vpon me, and to delyuer me from the hands of those infi∣dell dogges. When it was nowe noysed in the citie that I was
escaped to the Christians, there beganne a sturre and mutinie, in maner of a tumulte. Whiche when the gouernour vnderstoode, commaūded al his Captaines, souldiers, & other officers, to pla their artilerie, & order all thynges in redynesse, least the , sudden rage should attempte any thing agaynst the  al thynges were pacified in shorte tyme. Then , takyng me by the hande, brought me into , and there demaunded of me, what the kyng  of Cale∣cut imagined or deuised to do ? I infour∣med hym of all thynges, as , hauyng diligently searched to vnderstand all . When the gouernour was thus by me  secretes, he appoynted a galley to bryng , who was then in the citie of Cusin. The  the gallie, was named Iohannes Seranus▪ When  saw me, he receiued me very fauourably. I  also of al thynges: Saying furthermore vnto hym,The Viceroy of the kyng of Portugall in India.  myght by his fauoure obteyne pardon and assurance for  sayde two Italians, Peter Antonie and Iohn Maria, which  made artillarie for the infidel princes, I woulde procure that they shoulde returne to the Christians, and do them ryght good seruice, and that I was well assured, that they dyd that by constraint: Also yt they desyred none other thing then safe conduct and mony for theyr charges. He was glad of this, and graunted my request. Whereuppon within three dayes after, he sent me with letters to his sonne, the gouernour in the citie of Canonor, with commaundement to deliuer me as muche mony as shoulde suffice for the charges of the Christian exploratours or espions of the citie of Calecut. I went therefore incontinent to Canonor, where I agreed with one of the idolatours (who for pouertie had gaged his wife & children) to cary letters to Calecut to Iohn Ma∣ria and Peter Antonie. The content of which letters was, that the Uiceroye had graunted them pardon and safe conducte, and al∣so mony for theyr charges: Aduertisyng them to make none pri∣uie of this thyng, and especially to beware least it shoulde be knowen to theyr slaues or concubines (For eche of them had a concubine, a child,Concubine and slaues. & a slaue) Furthermore to leaue al their goods behynd them, except thynges of great price, as mony & iewelles:
For they had a very fayre Diamond of the weyght of .xxxii. ca∣ractes, esteemed to be woorth .xxxv. thousande crownes. They had also a pearle of the weyght of .xxiiii. caractes. Furthermore,  thousande rubies: of the whiche, some were of the weyght , and some of one and a halfe. They had also .lxiiii.  garnyshed with many iewelles:Beware of co∣uetousnesse. lykewyse in redye  and fyue hundred peeces of golde. But see  much couetousnesse. Whyle they thought to haue  all, and theyr lyues therewith: For not contentyng  with the aforesayde ryches, they woulde needes also  (notwithstandyng the ad∣uertisement we had geuen  Gunnes, three Munkeis, two Muskecattes, and two of  wherwith precious stones are polyshed. All whiche  the onely cause of theyr death; For whereas so many  not be se∣cretly conueyed, one of theyr slaues   of Calecut heereof, who at the fyrst woulde scarsely   for the good opinion he had conceyued of them: Yet sent foure  his garde (of them whiche are called Naery) to  true. But the slaue, perceyuyng that the kyng woulde  fa∣uourably with them, went to the hygh priest or Bishop of the fayth of the Mahumetans (whom they call Cady) and tolde hym all that before he had tolde the kyng of Calecut:The Byshop of the Mahume∣tans. Addyng more∣ouer, that the sayde Christians had disclosed theyr secretes to the Portugales. When the Bishop vnderstode these thynges, he called a counsayle of all the Mahumetan merchauntes, wyllyng them,The Mahu∣metans conspi∣re the death of the Christians. of the common treasurie, to geue a hundred peeces of golde to the kyng of Gioghi (who was then at Calecut) and to speake to hym in this maner. It is not vnknowen to you (most noble prince) howe a fewe yeeres past, when your maiestie came hither, we receiued you with more honorable enterteinement then we are nowe able to do: The cause whereof, is no lacke of good wyl or knowledge of our deuetie towarde your hyghnesse,An Oration. but rather the great and manyfolde iniuries and oppressions whiche we haue susteyned, and do dayely susteyne by our mortal enimies the Christians, whereof we haue, at this present, example of two Christian traytors of this citie, whiche haue disclosed to the Portugales al our secretes, and therefore we make most humble
petition vnto you to take of vs a hundred peeces of golde, to com∣maund them to be slayne. When the kyng of Gioghi hearde these woords, he consented to theyr petition, and forthwith appoynted two hundred men to commyt the murder: And that they might be the lesse suspected of the Christians, meanyng soddenly to kyll them in theyr house, came by tenne and tenne as though they came to demaunde theyr accustomed rewarde. But when the Christians sawe so great a company assembled about theyr house, they suspected that they sought somewhat elles then theyr rewarde or offeryng, and therefore incontinent takyng theyr weapons, they fought so manfully at the wyndowes and doores of theyr house, that they slue syxe men and woounded fourtie. But at the length, some of ye Gioghi, shot at them certaine iron arrowes out of crosse bowes, with the which they were both slayne,The death of Iohn Maria and Peter An∣tonye. the one beyng sore wounded in the head, & the other in the bodie. As soone as they sawe them fall downe, they cutte theyr throtes: and takyng the hotte blood in the palmes of theyr handes, drunke it vp, with contumelious woordes agaynst the Christians. After this murder, the concubine of Iohn Maria came to Canonor, with her young sonne, whom I bought of her for eyght peeces of golde: and causyng hym to be baptysed, named hym Laurence, because it was saint Laurence daye: But within a yeere after,The frenche poxe. he dyed of the frenche poxe, whiche disease had then dispersed al∣most through all the worlde. For I haue seene many infected with it foure hundred myles beyonde Calecut. They call it Pua. And they affyrme that this disease was neuer seene there past xvii. yeeres before. It is there more greeuous and outragious then with vs. Of the Nauie of the citie of Calecut, and of the memora∣ble conflicte betwene the Christians and Mahumetans. In the whiche the Portugales with incredible valiantnesse gaue theyr enimies the ouerthrowe. And howe the kyng of Canonor reioyced at their vic∣torie. Cap. 38. IN the yeere of our Lorde .1506. the fourth daye of March, woorde was brought vs of the death of the sayde Christians.The nauie of the kyng of Ca∣lecut agaynst the Portugals▪ The same daye, from the cities of Calecut, Pauan, Capagot, Pan∣daram, & Trompatam, departed a great nauie of two hundred and
eyght shippes, of the whiche fourescore and foure were great shippes, or shippes of burden, and the rest were dryuen with Ores,The Mahu∣metan soldiers. after the maner of Foystes, whiche they call Parao. The Nauie was manned with in maner innumerable Mahume∣tans, shewyng themselues very braue in apparel of purple sylke and Bombasine, with also theyr hygh and sharpe cappes, after theyr maner, of the same colour, lyned with sylke: wearyng also on theyr armes many bracelettes, and on theyr handes hadde gloues, embrodered & garnyshed with diuers kyndes of workes: for weapons, they had Turky bowes, swoordes, launces, peltes, and all sortes of gunnes, after our maner. When we sawe theyr Nauie proceedyng in order, and well instructed, it seemed farre of lyke a wood, the mastes presentyng the similitude of trees: Whiche thyng seemed so litle to deterre vs, that we were in sure beleefe, that our God and Christe woulde geue vs the victorie a∣gaynst the blasphemers of his holy name, the Idolatours and Sarasens, old enemies of our religion. And therfore the valiant knight and gouernour, the sonne of the honorable lord Don Fran∣cisco Dalmeda, viceroy of India, who had there the supreame go∣uernement of twelue shippes, with the assistaunce of the Admi∣rall of the Nauie, when he sawe the great force of the enemie, myndfull of his accustomed vertue,The oration of the gouernour to the Christian soldiers. with sounde of trumpet as∣sembled all the souldiers, and spake to them in this maner. My deare frendes, and brethren in one God, and one fayth of Iesus Christe, nowe is the tyme come when you ought to remember, that as Iesus Christe spared not, neyther feared to gyue his pre∣cious body to death for our sakes: euen so, except we wyl shewe our selues most vnkynde, and vnworthy so great grace of God, it shalbe our dueties to spende our liues in the defence of his glo∣rie, and our holy fayth, assuring our selues of the victorie against these dogges, hateful to God, & progenie of the deuyl. Now ther∣fore fyghtyng in his name, & vnder the banner of his holy crosse, shew your selues manfull & valiant: for nowe is in you the pow∣wer to geat eternal fame, in mainteyning the quarel of our saui∣our. Therefore with me, lyftyng vp your hartes to God, & your armes with force & courage, let vs gyue the onset on these dogs. When the gouernour had sayd these wordes, the priest went vp to the hyghest part of the ship, & holdyng in his hand ye picture of
Christ nayled on the crosse, shewed it vnto the souldiers, exhor∣tyng them to remember the commaundementes of God, and the holy fayth and baptisme whereby they were consecrated to God, puttyng no doubt in the forgeuenesse of theyr sinnes, dying in so godly a quarell: and then blessyng them, with inuocation of the name of God, he pronounced the sentence of absolution and for∣geuenesse of theyr sinnes. The exhortation of the priest, so moued the hartes of all men, that the teares ranne from our eyes for ioy & great desire we had to die in ye quarel. In the meane time the na∣uye of the Mahumetans made sayle towarde vs.The nauie of the Mahume∣tans. The same daye our Admirall with two Foystes made towarde them, & passyng betweene two of theyr greatest shyps, discharged his ordinance on both sydes: whiche the Admyrall dyd, to proue the strength of those shyppes, which they chiefely esteeme,The Admirall of the Chri∣stians. and trust most vn∣to: But this daye was nothyng done woorth ye memorye. The day folowyng, the Mahumetans with full sayles drewe neare the citie of Canonor, and sent vs woorde by a messenger, that if we woulde permytte them to go whither they woulde, they woulde not haue to do with vs. Our Admirall answeared, that the Christians coulde not so forgette the periurie of the Mahu∣metans,The quarel and occasion of the warre. in violatyng theyr faith and promyse made by common consent, when they woulde not suffer the Christians to passe that way, but contrary to theyr fayth and promyse slue .xlvii. Chri∣stians, and robbed them of foure thousande peeces of golde: and therefore badde them passe further if they durst, and they shoulde well knowe of what reputation and spirite the Christians are. Then sayde the Mahumetans, Mahumet wyll defende vs, and confounde the Christians: and with those woordes, assaulted vs all at once with incredible furie,The Mahu∣metans geue the onset. thynkyng to haue passed through, hauyng no further to sayle then .x. myles from the shore. But our Admiral of purpose suffered the enimies to come nearer vntyl they were ryght oueragainst ye citie of Canonor, mea∣nyng there to set on them with all his force, that the kyng of Ca∣nonor beholdyng the conflicte, myght be witnesse of the valiant∣nesse of the Christians. Then when the trumpetter of the Ad∣mirals ship sounded the battayle, and gaue the signe, incontinent he assaulted two of theyr greatest shyppes.
Heere I am not able to expresse the exceedyng noyse of theyr Drummes, Trumpets, Tambarels, and other such innumera∣ble,The valyant∣nesse of the Ad∣mirall. which they vse in this case. The Admiral hym selfe, in ma∣ner contemnyng all theyr meane shippes, passed through theyr nauie, and inuaded one of theyr greatest shippes, castyng theron chaynes and grasples, to fyght with them at hande strokes: but they cast of the chaynes thryse, yet the fourth tyme the chaynes tooke such holde, that the Christians entred into the ship, where they made such hauocke and slaughter, that all the Mahumetans of that shippe (which were sixe hundred in number) were slayne,A great slaugh∣ter of the ma∣humetans. insomuche that there was not one left alyue to tell newes. The Admirall encouraged by this victorie, inuaded another of theyr great shippes, whiche had chayned it selfe with a Foyst of the Christians, where was also a great conflict, in the whiche were slayne aboue fyue hundred Mahumetans, and theyr ship sunke. The Mahumetans discouraged by this defeate, assaulted our twelue Foystes with al theyr force, and caryed them away. But heere the manhood and valiantnesse of Iohn Seranus, the captaine of the Galley,The valiant∣nesse of Iohn Seranus. shewed itselfe, who only with one Gally made suche a slaughter among the Mahumetans, that it may seeme incredible: for he so fiercely inuaded them that had caryed away the Foystes, that he recouered them all, & sunke two other of the Mahumetan shippes. In these warres, God of his grace so prospered the Christians, that few of them were slayne, but ma∣ny wounded.Fewe Chri∣ans slayne. The conflict continued from mornyng, vntyl the darkenesse of the nyght made an ende of the battayle. I may not heere forgeat to speake of the marueylous aduenture and God∣ly zeale of Simon Martin, captayne of one of our shippes: For it so chaunced, that the Brigantine in the which I was, depar∣tyng somewhat from our nauie, gaue occasion to our enemies to pursue vs, for incontinent foure of the Mahumetan shippes as∣sayled vs, and put vs to much trouble, insomuch that .xv. Ma∣humetans had nowe entred into our Brigantine, and we were constrayned to flee to the Poupe, as to the safest place: But the valiant captayne Simon Martin, seyng the daunger that we were in,The valiant∣nesse of Simon Martin. and that the Mahumetans were entred into our Brigantine, leapt into it fiercely, and callyng vpon the name of Iesus Christ, fought so valiauntly, that he slue sixe of the Mahumetans: wher∣by
we, beyng incouraged, assisted hym in such sort, that the Ma∣humetans cast them selues into the sea, where some were drow∣ned, & som escaped by swimmyng. Therfore when the Mahume∣tans knewe yt the Christians had the victorie, they sent .iiii. other Foistes to helpe the first. But when the captayne of our Brigan∣tine sawe this, he tooke certayne emptie Tubbes,A Stratageme. in the whiche gunne pouder had ben kepte before, and stoppyng them with flaxe, placed them in such sort, that they seemed far of, like peeces of great artillerie: then laying a little gun pouder by the flaxe, and holding a fyre sticke in his hand, as though he would put fire to the Gunne, the Mahumetans thinking that it had ben a gunne in deede, were thereby put in such feare, that they departed.Tenne Ma∣humetan shyps soonke with the shot of great ar∣tillerie. The Admirall yet further pursuing the enemyes, gaue them an other great ouerthrow, and tooke seuen of theyr Foistes, laden with all sortes of merchandies, and soonke tenne other with the shotte of great artillerie, of the whiche one was laden with Elephantes. Therfore when the Mahumetans sawe the sea now almost coue∣red with the bodies of their slaine men, and their chiefe shippes some taken, some soonke, & some spoiled, were out of all hope to recouer, & therfore saued them selues by fleeing.The Christians had the victorie But the Christi∣ans, seeing yet hope of further victorie, and the Mahumetans so discouraged, thought it not best to leaue them so, but rather vp∣pon such prosperous successe, to take the oportunitie, and vtterly to destroy them: & therfore the Admiral, seeing his men ioyfull of the victorie, and desirous to pursue the enemie, folowed the Ma∣humetans, and gaue them a newe battayle,An other great conflicte. whiche lasted all day and all nyght, whilest the Christians in the nyght tyme slue them euen in theyr fleeing, & soonke almost all their shippes. In the meane tyme certayne of our Foistes sawe a shyppe of bur∣den of the enemie, wanderyng out of the way, and made sayle thyther with all hast.The Mahu∣metans slayne in swimming. But the enemies in short space seeing them selues ouermatched, hurled all their cariages into the sea, and tru∣sting to swimmyng (wherein they are most experte) caste them selues after. But our men folowed them euen to the shore, with launces, crosbowes, & stones, so killing them as they swamme, that the sea was coloured and polluted with their blood.The Mahu∣metans experte in swimmyng. Yet by swimming many escaped, by estimation about the number of two hundred, for they are in youth so brought vp in swimming, that
they swamme in the sea almost twentie myles, oftentymes so diuyng vnder the water, and remaynyng there so long, that they deceyued our syght: for sometymes we thought that they were soonke, and sometyme agayne seeyng them flote on the wa∣ter, it so troubled our sense, that we thought we had seene some phantasie or vision: but they were in maner all destroyed by one mischaunce or an other, and especially a great number in the great shyppes which were soonke by shot of the great artillerie. The day folowyng, the Admirall sent certayne Brigantines and Gallies to the shore, to number the dead bodies, whiche the sea had caste vp: they were founde to be about three thousande, be∣syde them also which the sea had deuoured.The kyng of Canonor. The kyng of Canonor, beholdyng all these thynges, was greatly in loue with the Chri∣stians, and commended their valiauntnesse and vertue, and not vnwoorthily:The valiant∣nesse of the Portugales. For to speake that I haue seene, I haue ben in ma∣ny sore warres, yet neuer sawe I more valiant men, then the Por∣tugales here shewed them selues to be. But when we thought that we had nowe made an ende of these Tragidies,The death of the kyng of Ca∣nonor. we had in maner a woorse to begyn: For it so chaunced, that in fewe dayes after, the kyng of Canonor, who fauoured vs, dyed: In whose place succeeded an other mor∣tall enemie to the Christians, and friende to the kyng of Cale∣cut, by whose helpe and rychesse, hee was aduaunced to the kyngdome of Canonor. He therefore assembled his power to make newe warre agaynst the Christians,A newe expedi∣tion against the Christians. with great expediti∣on and haste, bycause he supposed that a great parte of theyr mu∣nitions was nowe wasted, and they also sore weeryed, and for the most parte wounded. And to further his attempte, the kyng of Calecut sent him xxiiii. peeces of great artillerie. This warre beganne the seuenth day of Aprill,Long warres. and continued vntyll the .xx. of August, before all thinges were pacified. It were heere to long to declare howe in these warres also the Christians be∣haued them selues manfully agaynst the Mahumetans,Great oddes. The Mahu∣metans artil∣lerie. which neuer encountred with them fewer then fyue or sixe and twen∣tie thousande in number, hauyng also with them a hundred and fourtie peeces of artillerie, and were armed after the maner of the inhabitauntes of Calecut: but the Christians with har∣nesse
after our maner. These Infidelles vse this order in theyr warres. They di∣uide theyr army into many wynges,The order of the Mahume∣tans Campe. euery wyng conteynyng the number of two or three thousande men, and only one wyng proceedeth to the battayle, the reste attendyng what ende or success they haue, before they attempt any further. But whi∣lest these wynges are nowe marchyng to ioyne in battayle, it passeth all imagination to thynke, with howe great a noyse of innumerall musicall instrumentes, after theyr maner,Instrumentes. they fill the eares of all the army, to encourage them to fyght, while in the meane season also, a great number runneth before the army with marueylous flames of artificiall fyres: and in fine, gyue the onsette with suche outragious furie and outcry,Outragious out crye. that two thousande of them were able to feare tenne thousande that had no experience of these thynges. But see the goodnesse of God, who neuer forsaketh them that beleeue faythfully in his holy religion. Euen nowe in the extremitie of these troubles, our men beyng in maner ouercharged with the multitude of theyr enemyes, and long warres,The arryuyng of a newe Na∣uie of Portu∣gales. sodayne newes was brought that a newe nauie of Portugales was arryued at Canonor by the conducte of the valiant knyght Don Tristan dè Cugna: Whom we immediately aduertysed with howe greeuous warres wee were oppressed. Who incontinent sent vs, in certayne Barkes, three hundred valiaunt Souldiours, well armed with harnesse, after the maner of the Christians. When wee sawe these, we recouered our spirites, in suche sorte, that if our Admirall woulde haue permitted, we woulde haue burnte the citie of Canonor.The Mahu∣metans seeke to make peace with the Chri∣stians. But when the Mahumetans vnderstoode the newe succours that we had, all discouraged in mynde, they sought all meanes to make peace with the Christians, and assygned one named Mamalmaricar, a man of great ryches and wyse∣dome among them, to bee intermediatour, and to make the conditions of peace. Hee therefore vnder safe conducte, came to vs to common of the matter. We tolde him, that we coulde make no peace without the consent of the Uiceroye, who was then in the citie of Cucin. The Admirall thought it beste not to contempne the conditions of peace, for
for that duryng the tyme of the warres, they coulde not sende theyr shyppes laden with merchaundies into Portugale, and therefore by the consent of the Uiceroye,The peace con∣cluded. the peace was con∣cluded. But nowe, to myngle some delight with these sorowes, you shal heare a pleasant fable woorthie to be put in memorie.A pleasaunt fable. There∣fore all thinges beyng pacified, as I walked in the citie of Ca∣nonor, I met with certayne merchantes Idolatours, with whom I was acquaynted before the warres, who in theyr language sayde thus vnto me, Are you our friende? Yea sayde I. Then we pray you in the way of friendship,Sainct Christo∣pher, the Chri∣stian Giant. shewe vs that Christian which is muche hygher and stronger then any other of the Christians, and kylled in maner euery day about twentie of the Mahume∣tans, and resisted the dartes of fiftie Naeros (these are of the garde) and escaped without hurte? I answered, that that Chri∣stian was not nowe in the citie, but was gone to Cucin to the Uiceroye. But when I better considered the matter, I sayde thus vnto them, Are you my friendes? Yea, we are, sayde they. Then sayde I, That souldier that fought so valiauntly in the battayle, was no Portugale. Then sayde they: Of what countrey was he then? I answered agayne, that he was the God of the Portugales, and the great God of all the world. Then sayde they, Uerily you speake the trueth. For we heard the Ma∣humetans say,The enemyes confesse that God gaue the victorie. that it was not the Portugales, but the Portu∣gales God, that gaue them the ouerthrowe, and therefore we thynke your God to bee better then theyrs, although we know him not: And by this meanes it was bruied ouer all the coun∣trey, that the Mahumetans were ouercome rather by the assis∣taunce of God, then by the strength of men. For these people are very simple and ignoraunt,Simple and ig∣norant people. and astonyshed in maner at eue∣ry thyng. For some when they sawe one of our compa∣ny hauyng a little bell in his hande, and hearde the noyse of the bell when he moued his hand, and no noyse when he set it downe, they tooke it for a myracle, saying one to an other: doubtlesse theyr God is the greatest God,Messis multa, sed operarii pauci. &c. for when they touche the bell, it speaketh, and when they touche it not, it sayeth nothyng. They tooke pleasure and admiration to beholde the solemni∣ties of the Masse.The Masse.
And when the priest lyfted vp the holy bread or host, I sayde vn∣to them, beholde here the God of the Portugales, and of all the worlde. Then sayde they, You say truly: but we can not per∣ceyue it. This haue I sayde,No more can wyser men then they. that you may hereby knowe what simple and ignorant people these are: yet are they very great in∣chaunters, and can inchaunte Serpentes, whose poyson is so strong, that they kyll only with touchyng.Inchaunters, and of great a∣gilitie. They are also of in∣credible agilitie, and therefore excell in vautyng, leapyng, run∣nyng, swymmyng, tumblyng, walkyng on ropes, and such other exercises of lyghtnesse and agilitie. The seuenth booke, entreating of the viage or Naui∣gation of Ethiopia. Cap. 1. THey that will take vppon them to wryte any hystorie, had neede to beare well in memorie what they haue promysed and taken in hande, lest for theyr paynes and well mea∣nyng, they be rewarde with shame and rebuke, and ther∣fore whereas in the beginnyng of this booke, I promysed to wryte of the Nauigation of Ethiope, I will with the description of this viage, make an ende of my long traueyle, and speake of such thinges as I sawe there by the way, in my returne from In∣dia into my long desired countrey, in the company of the Por∣tugales. Of diuers and many Ilandes of Ethiope. Cap. 2. THerefore the seuenth day of December, we directed our iourney towarde Ethiope, trauersing fyrst the great gulfe, and saylyng foure hundred myles, came to an Ilande na∣med Monzambrich,The Ilande of Monzam∣brich. vnder the dominion of the kyng of Portugale. But before we arryued there, we sawe by the way many townes parteining to the Portugales, and also many strong fortresses in the kyngdomes of Melinda and Mombaza.Melinda. The kyng of Portugale,The kyng of Portugales do∣minion in Ethiopia. hath also certayne fortresses in Monzam∣brich and Zaphala.
But if I should here speake of the memorable factes of the vali∣ant knyght Tristan dè Cugna,The conquestes of Tristan dè Cugna. at his returne from India, I should take in hande a thyng farre aboue my reache: beyng suche, as de∣serue rather the commendations of Homer & Uirgil, for he inua∣ded and subdued the great cities of Gogia, Pati, and Craua, with al∣so the goodly Ilande of Sacutara,Sacutara. where the kyng of Portugale hath erected certayne fortresses, and omit also to speake of ma∣ny other Ilandes whiche we sawe in the way: as the Ilande of Cumeris,Cumeris. and sixe other which beare plentie of ginger, suger, & dy∣uers other goodly fruites, and abundance of fleshe: also the most fruitfull Iland of Pende,Pendè. likewise subiect to the kyng of Portugale. Of the Ilande of Monzambrich, and the inha∣bitantes thereof. Cap. 3. THis Ilande (as we haue sayde) is subiecte to the kyng of Portugale,Zaphala. as is also Zaphala. From the Ilande of Mon∣zambrich,Golde. is brought much golde and oyle, but is brought thyther from the firme lande. The Ilande is not byg, and is inhabited with blacke Mahumetans,Blacke Mahu∣metans. lyuyng in maner in necessitie of all thinges, yet hath it a commodious porte. They haue no corne but that is brought from the continent, where also we went alande to see the countrey, where we sawe nothyng but a vagabunde and rascall kynde of blacke men,Trogloditae. Ethiopes. coue∣ryng only theyr priuities with leaues of trees, and are besyde naked, and the women in lyke maner. Theyr lyppes are two fingers thicke, theyr foreheades very large, theyr teeth great, and as white as snow. They are fearefull at the sight of euery thyng, and especially when they see armed men. Therefore see∣ing theyr fearefulnesse, & knowing them to be without weapons that can doe any great hurte, only sixe of vs well armed▪ bearyng also with vs Hargabuses, and hauyng in our companie a blacke slaue that somewhat knewe the countrey, we began to enter fur∣ther into the lande: and when we had gone forwarde one dayes iourney, we founde many heardes of Elephantes. Here the slaue that was our guyde,Heardes of Elephantes. Elephantes are afrayde of fyre. gaue vs counsayle to take fyrebrandes in our handes, bycause these beastes feare fyre aboue all thinges.
But we once chaunced to fynde three Female Elephants, which had very lately brought foorth theyr Calues, and therefore feared not the fyre: but without all feare, folowed vs so farre, that we were fayne to flee to a mountayne to saue vs from the beastes. When we had entred about tenne myles into the land, we found a certayne denne on the syde of a mountayne, where some of the blacke inhabitauntes lurked. These spake so confoundedly and chatteringly lyke Apes,An Apyshe language. that I am not able to expresse theyr ma∣ner of speeche: Yet to goe the nearest thereto that I can, theyr speach is lykest to the euyll fauored voyce which the Muleters of Sicilia vse when they dryue theyr Mules: and suche maner of blabberyng vse these people in theyr speache. Heere the Pilot of the shyppe asked vs if wee woulde buye any kyne, saying, that here we should haue them good cheape. But we, thinking that eyther he had mocked vs, or that agreeing with the inha∣bitauntes (whom he knewe before) he woulde haue deceyued vs of our money and wares, sayde that we had no money. Then sayde he vnto vs, These people desire nothyng lesse then mo∣ney, hauyng muche more plentie of golde then we haue, which is founde not farre hence. Then sayde we to him, What desyre they then? They loue (sayde he) despicable thynges,Rych merchan∣dies for golde. and of small value: as pynnes, knyues, sysers, lookyng Glasses, Haukes belles, bagges, or boxes, to keepe theyr golde in, cop∣per Rynges, iangelinges to hang at theyr Tymberelles, bosses, laces, broches, copper chaynes, carkenettes, braselettes, and suche other tryfles to trymme theyr wyues and children. We aunswered, that we were content to gyue them suche wares for theyr kyne, if they woulde bryng them to the nexte moun∣tayne. Then sayde our Pilot agayne, They will bryng them with vs to the mountayne: but no further in any conditi∣on: Therefore speake what you will gyue. Then one of our companions sayde, that he had a bosse of grauen copper, and also a little bell. But I, bycause I had no suche merchaundies, yet beyng desirous to eate fleshe, sayde that I woulde sell one of my shertes for kyne. Then sayde the Pilot, Let mee alone with the matter. Then callyng vnto him fyue or sixe of the Inhabitauntes, he shewed them our goodly Iewelles, and de∣maunded for them three hundred kyne.
But the inhabitantes, not muche differyng from beastes, made signes that they would gyue only fyftiene.Kyne very good cheape. In fyne, we agreed, yet suspectyng some deceite, neuerthelesse they kept theyr pro∣myse, and sent vs fyftiene kyne by two of theyr companions. We were scarsely departed, but we hearde a noyse and tumulte in theyr dennes,Trogloditae. and were partly afrayde lest these Troglodites woulde folowe vs, and therefore leauyng our kyne, we tooke vs to our weapons. But they made signes vnto vs to feare no∣thyng. Then our pilot tolde vs, that their tumulte was only which of them should haue the bosse of copper Then recouering our kyne, we droue them forward to the toppe of the mountaine, and there dismissed the two blacke slaues that came with them. Whyle wee were thus driuyng our kyne by the syde of a little wood, we met agayne with the Elephantes, whereof beyng in great feare, we forsooke our kyne, and trusted to our feete. Therefore departyng from hence, we returned to the Ilande, where makyng prouision for our vyage, we sayled towarde the Cape,Cabo dè Buena Speranza. The Ilande of Sainct Lau∣rence or Madagascar. called Caput Bonae Spei, passyng the Ilande of Saincte Laurence (otherwyse named Madagascar) beyng fourescore leagues distant from the nearest continent or firme land. I sup∣pose that in shorte tyme the kyng of Portugale will be Lorde of this Ilande: For hauyng nowe burned and destroyed ma∣ny villages and townes of the Ilande, his name is fearefull a∣mong them. And as farre as I can coniecture by my peregri∣nations of the worlde (especially of India and Ethiopia) I thynke that the kyng of Portugale,The kyng of Portugale. if hee continue as he hath begunne, is lyke to bee the rychest kyng in the worlde, and doubtlesse not vnwoorthily for the dignitie and godly zeale of so noble a prince,The Christian religion sprea∣dth in India. as by whose meanes the Christian fayth is day∣ly greatly increased. For it is certayne that in India, and e∣specially in the citie of Cucin, where the Uiceroye remayneth, euery holy day, tenne or twelue Idolaters or Mahumetans are professed to our religion, whereby we may conceyue good hope, that in tyme our fayth shall there bee greatly enlarged by the grace of God, who hath there gyuen suche supernaturall victo∣ries to the Christians, and therefore all professers of Christes holy name, ought to pray to almyghtie God to assyst hym in so godly an enterprise.
Of the Cape called Caput Boneae Spei. That is, the Cape of good hope. Cap. 4. DEpartyng from the Cape named Caput Bonae Spei, when we had nowe sayled aboute two hundred myles,Tempest. there rose suddenly a tempest with contrarye wynde. The cause whereof was, that we had on the lefte hande the Ilande of Saint Laurence, and many other litle Ilandes, from whence bloweth for the most part a great gale of wynde. And therefore for the space of seuen dayes, beyng here daungerously tossed to and fro by the rages of the sea and wynde, at the length we escaped, by the grace of God. But proceedyng about two hundred leagues, a newe tempest rysyng so scattred our shyppes in the space of syxe dayes, that we mette not togeather agayne vntyll we arryued at Luxburne in Portugale. I was in the shyppe of Barthelmewe, a Florentine, citizen of Lux∣burne. The shyppe was named Saint Uincent,An exceedyng great shyppe and great rych∣es of spyces. a vessell of ex∣ceedyng capacitie, & laden with seuen thousande tonnes of all sortes of spyces. In the way, we passed also by an other Iland, named the Iland of saint Helen, where we sawe certayne fyshes of suche enorme and monstrous byggenesse,Great Whale fyshes. that one of them was as bygge as a great house. When they ryse aboue the water, they yane or gape so wyde, that ye vpper iawe couereth al the forehead, as it were a souldier in shynyng harnesse. Agayne when they swymme on the brymme of the water, the forhead is seene the breadth of three great paces. And when they swymme in the sea, they so trouble the water, and come so neare the shyps, that we were fayne to discharge al our artillarye to dryue them a∣way. Shortly after we founde an Ilande,The Ilande of Ascention. named the Ilande of Ascention, where we sawe many fowles, about the byggnesse of our Duckes, so symple, without suspicion or feare, that we tooke them with our handes: but shortly after they were taken, they shewed an incredible fiercenesse. I thynke veryly that they neuer sawe any man before, they so behelde vs before they
were taken, and were as styll as if they had ben astonyshed: For in that Ilande we sawe no lyuyng creature, saue onely innumera∣ble fyshes, and the sayd byrdes. After we had passed this Ilande many dayes sayling, as though we were nowe come to our owne worlde, the North starre, and guardions of our maryners, ap∣peared vnto vs. And here oportunitie serueth well, to confute the opinion of them that thynke that men maye not sayle in re∣gions subiect to the pole Antartike or south pole, by the guide of the north starre.Saylyng by the north starre in regiōs beneath the Equinocti∣all lyne. For it is certayne, that the Portugales sayle by the guyde of the north starres, although they be vtterly out of syght by the eleuation of the pole Antartike. Yet do they sometymes refreshe the vertue of the needle, with the stone whiche euer naturally respecteth the north pole. A fewe dayes after, we arryued at the fayre region, where are seene many I∣landes, named the Ilandes of Astures, so named for the multitude of those Egles whiche we commonly call Astures. These I∣landes are diuersely named: for some are named Pici, Martij, some, Dè Coruo: also De Floribus, Sancti Georgij, Gratiosa, and Feial. Departyng from hence, we came to the Ilande of Tertiera, where we remayned two dayes. All these Ilandes are maruey∣lous fruitefull, and haue plentie of all thynges necessary for mans lyfe. Departyng from hence, in seuen dayes saylyng, we came to ye goodly citie of Luxburne, or Vlisbona in Portugale. A my commyng thyther, I was brought to the kynges presence, whose handes kissing with most humble reuerence, I thanked his maiestie for the great fauour I had found at the hands of his sub∣iectes and officers in India. He entertayned me most gratious∣ly in his courte, vntyll I had infourmed hym of all thynges whi∣che I had obserued in my voyage to India. A fewe dayes after, I shewed his hyghnesse the letters patentes whereby his Lieue∣tenante the Uiceroye of India, gaue me the order of knyghthod, desyryng his maiestie to confyrme the same by his great seale: which my petion, he immediatly graunted. And thus departing from thence with the kynges pasporte and safe conducte, at the length after these my long and great trauayles and dangers, I came to my long desyred and natiue countrey, the citie of Rome, by the grace of God, to whom be all honour and glory. FINIS.
Of the hygher East India, called India Tercera, or Treciera. IN this India, whiche the portugales call Tercera, are very great kyngdomes: as the kyngdomes of Beugala, Pegu, Berma, Eran∣cangui, Dausian, Capelam, and the great kyngdome of Malacha, called of the olde wryters Aurea Chersonesus,Malacha. whose chiefe citie is also called Malacha, and was in olde tyme named Tachola. Under this kyngdome are infinite I∣landes called Maluche, whereof the principall are these, Iaua the greater, Iaua the lesse, Polagua, Mendana, Cuba, Cailon,Tachola. The Ilandes of Malucha. Hu∣ban, Bur, Tenado, Anbon, and Gilolo, with infinite other. On the Southwest part from Malacha, is the great Ilande of Samotra, called in olde tyme Taprobana,The Alande of Samotra. in the whiche are the kyng∣domes of Pedir, Biraen, Pazer, Ardagni, and Ham. This I∣land, & al the other called Maluche, bring foorth great quantitie of Cloues, Cinamome, Nuttemegges, Maces, and all other kyndes of spyces, except Pepper,Spices. whiche groweth in the pro∣uince of Calecut, and the Ilande of Ceilam. All these sortes of spi∣ces are caryed to Malacha to be solde. But the greatest part of them is caryed to Cathay and China:Calecut. Ceilam. Cathay. China. and from thence to the North partes of Tartarie. This kyngdome of China, is very great, and was in olde tyme called Sina. Here is founde great plentie of precious stones. The people are very subtile and ryche. They are al apparelled eyther in sylke or cloth, or vestures of other woorkemanshyppe, and are of good ciuilitie. They do not gladly permit the Portugales or other straungers to tra∣ficke in theyr kyngdome:Pretious stones. Sylke. whose most famous place vpon the sea syde, is named Cantan, and the sea Machiam, called of the olde wryters, the sea of Sina.Cantan.
Of the prices of precious stones and Spices, with theyr weightes and measures, as they are accustomed to be solde both of the Moores and the gentyles: And of the places where they growe. FOrasmuche as in dyuers places of this historie, mention is made of precious stones, I haue thought good to declare somewhat aswell of theyr prices, as of the places of theyr generation, that we may not vtterly be ignorante of the thynges whiche we so greately esteeme, and buie so deare. Of the Rubie. THe Rubies growe in India, and are founde for the most parte in a ryuer named Pegu. These are of the best kynde and finest, which they of the lande of Malabor cal Nunpu∣clo, and are well solde, if they be fayre and cleane without spottes. The Indians, to knowe theyr finenesse, put them vpon theyr tongues, comptyng that to be best that is couldest and most harde. And to see theyr finenesse: they take them vp with a peece of waxe by the sharpest poynt, and lookyng agaynst the lyght, espie in them euery small spot or flake. They are also founde in certayne depe fosses or pittes, whiche are made in mountaynes that are beyonde the sayde ryuer. They are scou∣red and made cleane in the countrey of Pegu: yet can they not square and polyshe them, but for this purpose sende them to di∣uers other countreis, & especially to Palcacate, Narsinga, Calecut, and the region of Malabor, where are many cunnyng Lapidaries. And to geue you intelligence of the value of these stones, ye shall vnderstande that this woorde Fanan, signifieth a weyght, somewhat more then two of our Carattes: and .xi. Fanans and a quarter, is one Mitigal: and .vi Mitigals and a halfe, make one vnce. This Fanan,One caratte is iiii. graynes▪ is also a kynde of mony whiche is in value one ryall of syluer, and therefore after this accompte I say that. Eyght fine Rubies of the weyght of one Fanan (which are in all, about two carattes) are in value. Fanan .x.Which is one crowne of golde. Foure Rubies that wey one Fanan, are worth. Fanan .xx. Two that wey one Fanan. Fanan .xl.
One that weyeth three quarters of one Fanan. Fanan .30. One that weyeth one Fanan. Fanan .50. One that weyeth one Fanan and a quarter. Fanan .65. One that weyeth one Fanan and a halfe. Fanan .100. One that weyeth one Fanan and three quarters. Fanan .150. One that weyeth two Fanans. Fanan .200. One that weyeth two Fanans and a quarter. Fanan .250. One that weyeth two Fanans and a halfe. Fanan .300. One that weyeth two Fanans and three quarters. Fanan .350. Of three Fanans. Fanan ▪400. Of three and a quarter. Fanan .500. Of three and a halfe. Fanan .550. Of three and three quarters. Fanan .600. Of three and three quarters and a halfe. Fanan .630. Of foure Fanans. Fanan .660. Of foure and a quarter. Fanan .700. Of foure and a halfe. Fanan .800. Of fyue Fanans. Fanan .1000 Of fyue and a halfe. Fanan .1200 Of sixe Fanans, which are about twelue Carats. Fanan .1500 which make a hundred and fyftie crownes of golde. And these are commonly the prices of perfect Rubies. But suche as are not perfect, and haue any spottes in them, or are not of good co∣lour, are of lesse price, accordyng to the arbitriment and estima∣tion of the buyer. Of the Rubies which growe in the Iland of Zeilam. IN the Ilande of Zeilam, beyng in the seconde India, are founde many Rubies, whiche the Indians name Manecas, the greatest part wherof do not arryue to the perfection of the other aforesayde in colour, because they are redde, as though they were washed, and of fleshy colour, yet are they very colde and harde. The perfectest of them are greatlye esteemed among the people of the Ilande, and are reserued onlye for the kyng hym selfe, yf they be of any great quantitie. When his Iewellers fynde any bygge peece of this Rocke of the best kynde, they put it in fyre for the space of certayne houres: whiche yf it come out of the fyre vncorrupte, it becommeth
of the colour of a burnyng cole, and was therefore called of the Greekes, Anthrax, whiche signifyeth a burnyng cole. The same that the greekes call Anthrax, the Latines call Carbunculus▪ These they greatly esteeme. When the kyng of Narsinga can get any of them, he causeth a fyne hole to be bored in the vnder∣most part of them, to the myddest, and suffereth none of them to passe out of his realme, especially if they haue ben tryed by the sayde proofe. These are of greater value then the other of Pegu, if they be in theyr naturall perfection and cleanenesse. Of these, one that wayeth a Carratte (whiche is halfe a Fanan) is woorth in Calecut. Fanan .30Which are .iii. crownes of golde. One of two Carattes. Fanan .65 Of three Carattes. Fanan .150 Of three Carattes and a halfe Fanan .200 Of foure Carattes. Fanan .300 Of foure Carattes and a halfe. Fanan .350 Of fyue Carattes. Fanan .400 Of fyue Carattes and a halfe. Fanan .450 Of syxe Carattes. Fanan .530 Of syxe Carattes and a halfe. Fanan .560 Of seuen Carattes. Fanan .630 Of seuen Carattes and a halfe. Fanan .660 One of .viii. Carattes, that hath ben well prooued in the fyre, is woorth Fanan .800 Of .viii. Carattes and a halfe. Fanan .900 One suche of tenne Carattes. Fanan .1300 One of .x. Carattes and a halfe. Fanan ▪1600 Of .xii. Carattes. Fanan .2000 Of .xiiii. Carattes. Fanan 3000 Of .xvi. Carattes. Fanan 6000 Of the kynd of Rubies. called Spinelle. THere is also founde an other kynde of Rubies, which we call Spinelle, and the Indians, Caropus. They growe in the selfe same countrey of Pegu where as are the fyne Rubies, & are found in the mountaines in the vpper crust
or floure of the earth. These are not so fine, nor of so good colour as are the true Rubies, but haue somewhat the colour of a Gra∣nate, which we commonly call a Garnet: yet of these, suche as are perfect in theyr colour, are of value halfe lesse then true Ru∣bies. Of the Rubies called Balassi. BAlassi are of the kyndes of Rubies, but are not so hard: their colour is somewhat lyke a Rose, and some are in maner whyte: they growe in Balassia, whiche is a region within the firme lande, aboue Pegu and Bengala, and are brought from thence by merchants of the Moores to Calecut, where they are wrought and pullyshed, and are solde of the same price that are Spinel. Of the Diamondes of the old myne. THese Diamondes are founde in the first India, in a kyng∣dome of the Moores named Decan, from whence they are brought to other regions. There are also founde other Diamondes, whiche are not so good, but somewhat whyte, and are called Diamondes of the newe myne, whiche is in the kyngdome of Narsinga. They of the olde myne are not pullyshed in India, but in other places. There are made lyke∣wyse in India other false Diamondes, of Rubies, Topases, and whyte Saphires, whiche appeare to be fyne, and are also founde in the Ilande of Zeilam: these stones differ in none other, sauyng that they haue lost theyr natural colour. Of these, some are found that haue halfe the colour of Rubies, & other of Saphires, other also of the colour of a Topase, other haue al these colours myng∣led togeather. They bore a fine hole in these through the middes, whereby they appeare lyke the eyes of a Catte. Of the whytest, they make many small Diamondes, whiche can not be knowen from the true, sauyng by touchyng, of such as are skylful in that practise. They are solde by a poyse or wayght, whiche they call Mangiar, whiche weyeth two Tarre, and two thirdes, whiche amount to two thirdes, or third partes of one Carat: for foure Tarres wey one Fanan, which is about two Carattes. Eyght Diamondes that wey one Mangiar, whiche is two third partes of a Carat, are in value Fanan ▪xxx. whiche are three crownes of golde.
Sixe Diamundes that weigh one Mangiar. Fanan .40. Foure that weigh one Mangiar. Fanan .60. Two that weigh one Mangiar. Fanan .80. One that weygheth one Mangiar. Fanan .100. One of one Mangiar and a quarter. Fanan .165. One of one Mangiar and a halfe. Fanan .180. Of one Mangiar and three quarters. Fanan .220. Of two Mangiars. Fanan .320. Of two Mangiars and a quarter. Fanan .360. Of two Mangiars and a halfe. Fanan .380. Of two Mangiars & three quarters full perfect. Fanan .420. Of three Mangiars of lyke perfection. Fanan .450. Of three Mangiars and a halfe. Fanan .480. Of foure Mangiars. Fanan .550. Of fyue Mangiars. Fanan .750. Of sixe Mangiars. Fanan .800. Of seuen Mangiars. Fanan .1200. Of eight Mangiars. Fanan .1400. And thus they proceede, increasyng the price, as they increase in weyght. Of Saphires. IN the Ilande of Zeilam, are founde the beste and moste true Saphires, being very hard and fine, and of the colour of Azure. They are of price as foloweth.A Marcell, is a siluer coyne of Venice, of .xi. vnes .iii.d. with , wherof .x. make an ounce. One that weigheth one Caratte, is of value. which are about two Marcels of siluer. Fanan .2. One of the weyght of two Carattes. Fanan .5. Of three Carattes. Fanan .10. Of foure Carattes. Fanan .15. Of fyue Carattes. Fanan .18. Of sixe Carattes. Fanan .28. Of seuen Carattes. Fanan .35. Of eight Carattes. Fanan .50. Of niene Carattes. Fanan .60 Of tenne Carattes. Fanan .65. Of eleuen Carattes. Fanan .70. Of twelue Carattes. Fanan .75. Of .xiii. Carattes in all perfection of colour. Fanan .115.
Of .xiiii. Carattes. Fanan .160. Of .xv. Carattes. Fanan .180. Of .xvi. Carattes. Fanan .200. Of .xviii. Carattes. Fanan .250. One that weigheth a Mitigall, which is .xi. Fanans and a quar∣ter, that is about .xxiii. Carattes. Fanan .350. Lykewyse in the Ilande of Zeilam, is founde an other sorte of Saphires, which they call Quinigelinam. These are not so strong, of darker colour, and of much lesse value then are the other of the best kynd, wherof one is woorth thirtiene of these of equal poyse. Also in the kyngdome of Narsinga, in a mountayne aboue Ba∣canor and Mangalor, is found an other sorte of Saphires, more ten∣der and of woorse colour, which they call Cinganloam. These are somewhat whyte, and of small value: So that the most perfecte of this kynde, weighing .xx Carattes, is not woorth one Ducate. Theyr colour is inclynyng somewhat to yelowe. There is lyke∣wyse founde an other kynde of Saphires, vppon the sea coastes of the kyngdome of Calecut, in a place named Capucar. These the Indians call Carahatonilam. They are of a darke Azure colour, not shynyng but in the cleare ayre. They are also tender & brickle, and of small estimation among the Indians. They seeme on the one syd lyke glasse. Of Topasies. THe naturall Topasies growe in the Iland of Zeilam, and are named of the Indians Purceragua. It is a harde and fine stone, and of equall estimation with the Rubie & the Saphire, bycause all these three are of one kynde. The per∣fecte colour of this, is yelowe, lyke vnto fine beaten gold, and if it be perfecte and cleane, whether it be great or litle, it is woorth in Calecut as much fine gold as it weigheth. But if it be not perfect, it is woorth the weight of golde the Fanan, which is lesse by the halfe. And if it be in maner whyte, it is woorth much lesse. And of these, are small Diamundes counterfecte. Of Turquesses. TUrquesses are founde in Exer, a place of Siech Ismaell. Theyr Mine is a drye earth, that is founde vppon a blacke
stone, which the Moores take of in small peeces, and carry them to the Ilande of Ormus, from whence they are brought to diuers partes of the worlde by sea and by lande. The Indians call them Perose. They are soft stones, of small weight, and not much colde: & to know that they are good & true, in the day they shal appeare of the very colour of the Turquesse, and in the nyght, by the light, they shall appeare greene. They that are not so perfecte, doe not so chaunge theyr colour to the sight. If these stones be cleane and of fine colour, they haue vnderneth, in the bottome, a blacke stone, vppon the which they growe. And if any little vayne ryse vp∣pon the sayde stone, it shall be the better. And to know more cer∣tainely that they are true Turquesses, they put on the toppes of them, a little quicke lyme, tempered with water, after the maner of an oyntment. So that if the quicke lime appeare coloured, they are iudged perfect, and are of value as foloweth. One that weigheth one Caratte, is worth in Malabar. Fanan .15 One of two Carattes. Fanan .40. Of foure Carattes. Fanan .90. Of sixe Carattes. Fanan .150. Of eight Carattes. Fanan .200. Of ten Carattes. Fanan .300. Of twelue Carattes. Fanan .450. Of fourtiene Carattes. Fanan .550. Of greater then these they make none accompte, bycause they are lyghter peeces and of greater circuite. These of the byggest sorte the Moores carrie into the kyngdome of Guzerath. Of Iacinthes. IAcinthes, growe in the Ilande of Zeilam. They are tender stones, and yelowe. They are best that are of deepest colour. The greatest parte of these, haue in them certayne pimples or burbuls, which diminyshe theyr fayrenesse. And they that are in theyr perfection cleaue from this deformitie, are neuerthe∣lesse of small value: For in Calecut where they are polyshed, they that weygh one Fanan, are woorth no more then halfe a Fanan. And they of .xviii. Fanans, are not woorth .xvi. Fanans.
There are also found other stones lyke vnto cattes eyes, as Chrisolytes, & Amethystes, which they do not much esteeme, bicause they are of small value, as also the stones called Giagonze. Of Smaragdes or Emeraldes. SMaragdes growe in the countrey of Babylon, where the Indians cal the sea Dieguan. They grow also in other parts of India. They are stones of fayre greene colour, and are light and tender. Of these stones, many are counterfect. But lookyng on them curiously towarde the lyght, the counterfectes shewe certayne burbuls, as doeth glasse: but in the true, there is no suche seene, but rather there appeareth to the eye, a cer∣tayne verdour, shynyng lyke the beames of the Sunne: and be∣ing rubbed vppon the touche stone, they leaue the colour of cop∣per. And the Smaragde of this forte, is the best and most true, and is in value in Calecut, as muche as a Diamunde, and somewhat more: And this not by weyght, but by greatnesse, bycause the Diamunde quantitie for quantitie, is of greater weyght then the Smaragde. There is lykewyse founde an other kynde of Smarag∣des, which are greene stones, but not so muche esteemed. Ne∣uerthelesse, the Indians reserue these to set them foorth with o∣ther precious stones. They leaue not any greene colour vppon the touche. Of dyuers kindes of Spices, where they growe, what they are woorth in Calecut, and why∣ther they are carried from thence. Of Pepper. FYrst in all the kyngdome of Malabor and Calecut, Pepper groweth, and is sold in Ca∣lecut by euery CC. Bahars, fine, for .CCxxx. Fanans, euery Fanan (as I haue sayde) be∣ing in value one ryall of place of Spayne, which is as muche as one Marcell of siluer
in Uenice. Bahar, weigheth foure Cantares of the olde weyght of Portugale, by the which they sell all spices in Lisbona. Cantare is in Uenice .Cxii. pounde weyght, of the grosse pounde (beyng xviii. ounces) and of the subtyle pounde .Clxxviii. So that the sayde .712. poundes of Uenice subtile, will cost about .xx. frenche crownes of gold: which amount to about two Marchetti (which make one penny) the pounde. They paye also to the kyng of Ca∣lecut for custome .xii. Fanans, euery Bahar by the lode. They that buye them, are accustomed to bryng them to Cambaia, Persia, A∣den, and Mecha, and from thence to Alcayr and Alexandria. Now they paye custome to the kyng of Portugale after the rate of 6562. Maruedies the Bahar, which are .193. Fanans. Maruedies are Spanyshe coynes, wherof sixe goe to a penny. This do they, partly bycause there arryueth no more so great diuersitie of mer∣chauntes to buye them, and partly by the agreement whiche the sayd kyng of Portugale made with those kynges, & the Moores, and merchauntes of the countrey of Malabar. Much pepper groweth lykewyse in the Ilande of Sumatra, neare vnto Malaca, which is fayrer and bigger then that of Ma∣labar, but not so good and strong. This is brought from Benga∣la to China, and some part to Mecha, priuylie and by stealth, vnwares to the Portugales, whiche would not otherwyse suffer them to passe. It is woorth in Sumatra, from .iiii.C. vnto .vii.C. Maruedies the Canter of Portugale, of the newe weight. And from the new to the olde weight in Portugale, the difference is two ounces in the pounde weight: For the olde pounde consisteth of .xiiii. ounces, and the newe pounde of xvi. ounces. Of Cloues. CLoues growe in the Ilandes of Molucca, from whence they are brought to Malacha, and then to Calecut, and the countrey of Malabar. They are woorth in Calecut euery Bahar (which is .712. poundes, of the subtile pound of Uenice) from .500. to .600. Fanans (which are about fyf∣tie frenche crownes) whiche are in value about twelue Mar∣chetti the pounde weyght, and beyng cleane from stalkes & hus∣kes are in value .700. Fanans. To carry them from thence into
other regions, they paye for pasporte. xviii. Fanans the Bahar, which is woorth in Malacca from .x. to .xiiii. Ducades, according to the rate and custome of the merchauntes. Of Cinamome. CInamome of the beste sorte, groweth in the Ilande of Zeilam, and in the countrey of Malabar groweth the woorst. That of the best kynde, is of small price in Zeilam, But in Calecut (if it be choyse and freshe) it is woorth 300. Fanans the Bahar, which are about fyue Marchetti the pounde. Of Ginger, called Beledi. GInger Beledi, groweth on euery side about Calecut, from sixe to ntene myles, and is woorth the Bahar .xl. Fanans, and sometymes fyftie, which is lesse then one Marchetto the pounde. They bryng it from the mountaynes, and out of the countrey, to the citie, where they sell it by retayle to the In∣dian merchauntes, who geather it togeather in great quantitie, and keepe it to such tyme as the Moores shippes arryue there, to whom they sell it, by the price of .xc. Fanans, to .Cx. which is lesse then two Marchetti the pounde, bycause the weight is greater. Of Ginger Mechino. GInger Mechino groweth, begynnyng from the moun∣taine of Deli, vnto Canonor. It is small, and not so whyte nor so good as the other. It is woorth the Bahar in Cano∣nor, about .60. Fanans, whiche is about one Marchetto the pounde. They paye for the Bahar sixe Fanans in money for the custome. It is solde vncleansed or vnpurged. Of greene Ginger in conserues. IN Bengala is founde great plentie of Ginger Beledi, of the which they make muche Ginger in conserues with Suger, and carrie it in stone pottes from Martabani, to bee solde in the countrey of Malabar, and is woorth the Farazuola (which
is .xxii. poundes and sixe vnces) after the rate of .xiiii.xv. or .xvi. Fanans. That that is freshe and made in conserues, is woorth in Calecut .xxv. Fanans the farazuola, bycause Suger is deare there. Greene Ginger to put in conserues, is woorth in Calecut three quarters of one Fanan the farazuola, which is about two pounds for one Marchetto. Of the Apothecaries drugges, and of what price they are in Calecut and Malabar. LAcca of Martabani, if it be of the beste, is woorth the fa∣razuola, which is .xxii. pounde weyght and sixe ounces of Portugale, after sixtiene ounces the pound (which is about fourtie pound weight of the subtile pounde of Uenice) and is in value eightiene Fanans: which are eightiene Marcels of sil∣uer. For one Fanan, is in value about one Marcell of siluer. Lacca of the countrey, is woorth the farazuola. Fanan. 12 Borace that is good and in great peeces, is woorth the farazuola. Fanan .30 to .40. & 50. Camphire that is grosse in cakes, is woorth the fara∣zuola. Fanan .70. to .80 Camphire to annoynt Idoles, * * * Camphire for theyr children to eate, is woorth the My∣tigall. Fanan .3. Aguila is woorth the farazuola. Fanan .300. to .400. Lignum aloe, blacke, heauy, and fine, is woorth. Fanan .1000. Muske of the best, is woorth the ounce Fanan .36. Beniamin of the best, is woorth the farazuola. Fanan .65. Tamarindi being new, are woorth the faraz. Fanan .4. Calamus Aromaticus, the farazuola. Fanan .12. Endego to dye silke, true and good, the farazuola. Fanan .30. Mirre, the farazuola. Fanan .18. to .20. Frankensense good and in graynes, is woorth the fara∣zuola. Fanan .15. Frankensense in paste of the basest sorte, the faraz. Fanan .3. Ambracan or Amber grease that is good, is woorth the Metigall. Fanan .2. to .3. Mirabolanes in conserue of suger, the faraz. Fanan .16. to .25
Cassia, freshe and good, the farazuola. Fanan one and a halfe. Redde Sanders, the farazuola. Fanan .5. to .6. Whyte Sanders and Citrine, whiche growe in the Ilande of Timor, the farazuola. Fanan .40. to .60. Spikenarde, freshe and good, the faraz. Fanan .30. to 40. Nuttemegges, whiche come from the Ilande of Bandan, where the Bahar is woorth from .viii. to ten Fanans, (whiche importe vi. poundes weyght to the Marchetto) are woorth in Calecut, the faraz. Fanan .10. to .12. Mace which is brought from the Ilande of Bandan, where the Bahar is woorth fyftiene Fanans (which import about one Mar∣chetto, the pounde are woorth in Calecut, the farazu∣ola. Fanan .25. to .30 Turbithes, are woorth the farazuola. Fanan .13 Woormeseede of the best kynde, called Semenzana, is woorth the farazuola. Fanan .18. Zerumba, the farazuola. Fanan .2. Zedoaria, the farazuola. Fanan .1. Gumme Serapine, the farazuola. Fanan .20. Aloe Cicotrine, the farazuola. Fanan .18. Cardamome in graynes, the farazuola. Fanan .20. Reubarbe groweth abundantly in the countrey of Malabar, and that whiche commeth from China by Malacha, is woorth the farazuola. Fanan 40. to .50. Mirabolani Emblici, the farazuola. Fanan .2. Mirabolani Belirici, the farazuola. Fanan one & a halfe. Mirabolani citrini & Chebuli, which are all of one sorte. Fanan .2. Mirabolani Indi, which are of the same Citrine trees. Fanan .3. Tutia, the farazuola. Fanan .30. Cububes, which growe in the Ilande of Iaua or Giaua, are there of small price, and solde by measure without weyght. Opium, which is brought from the citie of Aden where it is made, is woorth in Calecut the faraz. Fanan .280. to 320. Opium of an other sorte, whiche is made in Cambaia, is woorth the farazuola. Fanan .200. to .250.
Of the weyghtes of Portugale and India: And howe they agreee. THe pounde of the olde weight, conteyneth .xiiii. vnces. The pounde of the newe weyght conteyneth .xvi. vnces. Eight Cantares of the olde weyght, make .vii. of the newe. And euery newe Cantare, is of .C.xxviii. poundes, after xvi. vnces to the pounde. Euery olde Cantare, conteyneth thre quarters and an halfe of the newe Cantare: And is of .C.xxviii. poundes, after .xiiii. vnces the pounde. One Farazuoles, is .xxii. poundes of .xiiii. vnces, and .vi. vnces more, with two fyfte partes. Twentie Farazuoles, are one Bahar. One Bahar is .iiii. Cantares of the olde weight of Portugale. All the Spices and drugges, and al suche other thynges as come from India, are solde in Portugale by the olde weyght and all the rest by the newe weyght. Herby maie we wel consider, that as we ought to reioyce and geue God thankes for the abundaunce of all these thinges, which he causeth the earth so plentifully to bryng foorth to our vse, so maye we lament the abuse of men, whose couetousnesse causeth great dearth and scarsenesse in the myddest of abundaunce: here∣in no lesse offendyng the lawe of nature, then do such as by witch∣crafte do entermingle poyson with thynges created for the health of man, or by inchauntment corrupt the seedes in the grounde: yea rather, as the vnnaturall mother, who destroyeth the chylde whom she hath long nuryshed.
Of the voyage made by the Spany∣ardes round about the world. THe voyage made by the Spanyardes rounde about the worlde, is one of the greatest and most marueylous thynges that haue ben knowen to our tyme. And although in many thynges we excel our ancient predecessours, in this especially we so far exceed al their inuentions, that ye like hath not heretofore ben knowen to this day.Don Peter Martyr. This viage was written particulerly by Don Peter Mar∣tyr of Angleria, being one of ye counsaile of themperours Indies, to whom also was commytted ye writing of the hystorie & examinati∣on of al such as returned from thence into Spaine to ye citie of Si∣uile,Rome sacked. in the yeere .1522. But sendyng it to Rome to be printed, in that miserable tyme when the citie was sacked, it was lost, and not founde vnto this daye, or any memorie remaynyng thereof, sauyng such as some that read the same haue borne in mynde. And among other notable thynges by hym wrytten as touchyng that voyage,A daye lost in three yeeres & one moneth. that is one, that the Spanyardes hauyng sayled about three yeeres and one moneth, and the most of them notyng the dayes, daye by daye (as is the maner of al them that sayle by the Ocean, they found when they were returned to Spaine, yt they had lost one daye: So that at theyr arryuall at the porte of Si∣uile, beyng the seuenth daye of September, was by theyr ac∣compt but the syxte daye. And whereas Don Peter Martyr de∣clared ye strange effect of this thyng to a certayne excellent man, who for his singuler learnyng was greatly aduaunced to honour in his common wealth, and made Themperours ambassadour: this woorthy gentleman, who was also a great Philosopher & A∣stronomer, answered, that it coulde not otherwyse chaunce vnto them, hauyng sayled three yeeres continually, euer folowyng the Sunne towarde the West: and sayde furthermore, that they of olde tyme obserued, that all suche as sayled behynd the Sunne towarde the West, dyd greatly lengthen the daye. And albeit that the sayde booke of Peter Martyr is peryshed, yet hath not
fortune permytted that the memorie of so woorthy and maruey∣lous an enterpryse shoulde vtterly be extincte:It is now found with one master Harold, a prebend in wyndsor. Antonie Piga∣fetta. forasmuche as a certayne noble gentelman of the citie of Vincenza in Italie, cal∣led master Antonie Pigafetta (who beyng one of the companie of that voyage, and after his returne into Spayne in the shyppe Victoria, was made knyght of the Rhodes) wrote a particular and large booke thereof, whiche he gaue to Themperours Ma∣iestie, and sent a copie of the same into Fraunce, to the lady Re∣gent, mother vnto the French king, who committed it to an excel∣lent philosopher, called master Iacobus Faber,Iacobus Faber. hauing long studied in Italy, wyllyng hym to translate it into the Frenche tongue. This booke therefore was printed fyrst in the Frenche tongue, and then in the Italian, with also an epistle to the Cardinall of Salsepurge as touchyng the same voyage, written by Maximilian Transiluane secretarie to Themperours Maiestie, in the yeere 1522. And doubtlesse among all the cities of Italie,Maximilian Transiluane. the citie of Vincenza may herein muche glorie, that besyde the auncient nobilitie, and many excellent and rare wyttes whiche it hath brought foorth, aswell in learnyng as discipline of warre, it hath also had so woorthy and valiaunt a gentleman as was the sayde master Antonie Pigafetta, who hauyng compassed about the ball or globe of the worlde, hath lykewyse described that voyage par∣ticularly. For the whiche his so noble and wonderfull an enter∣prise so happily atchiued,The rewarde of noble enterprise if the same had ben done in the olde tyme, when Thempyre of the Greekes and Romans floryshed, he shoulde doubtlesse haue ben rewarded with an Image of mar∣ble or gold, erected in a place of honour, in perpetuall memorie, and for a singular example of his vertue to the posteritie. In fine, this may we boldly affyrme,The antiquitie had no such knowledge of the world as we haue. that the antiquitie had neuer such knowledge of the worlde, whiche the Sunne compasseth a∣bout in .xxiiii. houres, as we haue at this present, by the industrie of men of this our age. But before I speake any thyng of the vyage, I haue thought it good fyrst to adde hereunto the Epistle of Maximilian Transiluane, which he wrote to the Cardinall of Salsepurge, as a preface to his sayde booke.
¶ The Epistle of Maximilian Transiluane, secretarie to the Emperours Maiestie: written to the ryght honorable and reuerende lorde, the lord Cardinal of Salepurge, of the marueylous and woonderfull nauigation made by the Spanyardes rounde about the worlde in the yeere of Christ .M.D.xix. IN these dayes (my most honorable and re∣uerend lord) returned one of those fiue ships, whiche, the yeere before Themperours be∣yng at Saragosa in Spaine, were at his ma∣iesties commaundement sent to the newe worlde,The Ilandes of Molucca. heretofore vnknowen vnto vs, to seeke the Ilandes of spices. For albeit the Portugales bryng vs great quantitie of Spyces from that part of East India, whiche in olde tyme was called Aurea Chersonesus (where is nowe thought to be the great rych citie of Malaccha) yet in East India growe none of those Spyces,Aurea Cherso∣nesus. except Pepper.Malaccha. For other Spyces, as Sinamome, Cloues, Nutte∣megs,Spices. and Mase (whiche is the huske that couereth the shell of the Nut) are brought from other farre countreys, and from Ilandes scarsely knowen by theyr names: from the whiche I∣landes they are brought in shyppes or barkes made without any Iron tooles, and tyed togeather with cordes of Date trees, with rounde sayles lykewyse made of the small twigges of the bran∣ches of Date trees weaued togeather. These barkes they call Giuche: with the whiche barkes and sayles, they make theyr viage with only one wynde in the stearne, or contrarywyse. Ney∣ther yet is it a thyng greatly to be marueiled at, that these Ilands where the Spices growe, haue ben vnknowen so many worldes past vnto our tyme,The Ilandes of Spices vn∣knowen in olde tyme. forasmuch as all suche thynges as vnto this daye haue ben wrytten of old autours of the places where spices growe, are all fabulous and false: Insomuch that the countreys where they affyrme them to growe, are nowe certaynely founde to be further from the place where they growe in deede, then we are from them. For lettyng passe many other thynges that are wrytten, I wyll speake more of this which Herodotus (otherwise a famous auctoure) affirmeth, that Sinamome is founde in the
toppes of the nestes of certayne byrdes and foules that bryng it from farre countreys, and especially the Phenyx, the whiche I knowe no man that euer hath seene. But Plinie,The Phenix. Plinie. who might more certaynely affyrme thinges by reason that before his tyme many thynges were knowen and discouered by the nauigations of great Alexander and other, sayth,The nauigati∣ons of great Alexander. Ethiope. Trogloditi. that Sinamome groweth in that part of Ethiope which the people inhabit called Trogloditi. Neuerthelesse it is now found that Sinamome groweth very far from all Ethiope, & now much further from the Trogloditi, which dwel in caues vnder the ground. But to our men which are now returned from those partes and the Ilandes of spices,The nauigati∣on about the worlde. hauyng al∣so good knowledge of Ethiope, it was necessarie to passe far be∣yond Ethiope before they come to these Ilands, and to compasse about the whole worlde, and many tymes vnder the greatest cir∣cumference of heauen. The which nauigations made by them, beyng the most marueylous thyng that euer was done by man vppon the earth sence the fyrst creation of the worlde, and neuer founde before, or knowen, or attempted by any other, I haue de∣liberated faythfully to wryte to your honorable lordeshyppe, and to declare the whole successe thereof. As touchyng which matter, I haue with all diligence made inquisition to knowe the trueth, aswell by relation of the Captayne of that shyppe, as also by con∣ference with euery of the maryners that returned with hym. All whiche, gaue the sefe same information both to Themperours Maiestie, and diuers other: And this with such faythfulnesse and sinceritie, that not onely they are iudged of all men to haue decla∣red the trueth in all thynges, but haue thereby also geuen vs cer∣taine knowledge, that al that hath hitherto ben sayd or wrytten of olde autours as touchyng these thynges, are false and fabulous. For who wyl beleeue that men are founde with onely one legge.The olde au∣tours. Or with suche feete whose shadowe couereth theyr bodyes? Or men of a cubite heyght, and other suche lyke, beyng rather mon∣sters then men? Of the whiche, neyther the Spanyardes,Monsters. The wages of the Spanyards and Portu∣gales. who in our tyme saylyng by the Ocean sea, haue discouered all the costes of the lande towarde the West both vnder and aboue the Equinoctiall, nor the Portugales, who compassyng about all Affryke, hath passed by all the East, and lykewyse discouered all those costes vnto the great gulfe called Sinus Magnus, nor yet the
Spaniardes in this theyr last nauigation, in the which they com∣passed about the whole earth, dyd neuer in any of theyr viages wryte of such monsters: which doubtlesse they would not haue o∣mytted, if they myght haue had certayne knowledge thereof. But nowe intendyng to speake of the whole worlde, I wyll not be long in my preface, but begyn my narration as foloweth. ¶ A briefe declaration of the viage or nauigation made about the worlde. Geathered out of a large booke written hereof by master Antoni Pigafetta Vincentine, knyght of the Rhodes, and one of the companie of that vyage in the which Ferdinando Magalianes a Portugale (whom some call Magellanus) was generall captayne of the nauie. ALthough Sebastian Munster in his vniuer∣sall Cosmographie in the fyfth booke of the landes of the greater Asia (which I transla∣ted into Englyshe about .24. yeeres sence) hath wrytten of the vyage of Magellanus,Sebastian Munster. declaryng therein how the Spanyardes by the West, and the Portugales by the East, sayling to the Ilandes of Molucca, compassed the whole globe of the worlde betweene them,The Ilandes of Molucca. yet haue I heere thought it good to make a breefe repeticion of this vyage, addyng hereunto dyuers notable thynges which were not touched of Munster, as I haue geathered them out of the bookes of Antoni Pigafetta, and Tran∣siluanus, wrytyng of the same vyage. For albeit in deede it was a strange and woonderfull thyng that the Spanyardes and Por∣tugales compassed the whole circumference of the worlde be∣tweene them, yet is it more marueylous, that the same was done with one ship, & one companie of men, as did the Spanyardes in this viage, who keeping their continual course by the west, retur∣ned into Spaine by the east: a thing doubtlesse so much more woonderful and strange, then if they had returned from the halfe circumference by the same way they went, in how muche they were ignorant in the vyage neuer attempted before, besyde
the thousande daungers and perylles whiche they were daylye lyke to fal into, aswell by wandryng in vnknowen coastes, as al∣so by fallyng into the handes of the Portugales,Controuersie betweene the Spanyardes and Portu∣gales. by whose domi∣nions in the East they shoulde needes passe of necessitie, not tru∣styng to their gentlenesse for the controuersie whiche had been long betweene them for the Ilandes of Molucca. I wyl therfore (as I haue sayde) make a briefe rehearsal of this viage, from the begynnyng to the endyng, omittyng neuerthelesse many nota∣ble thynges, whiche are more largely described in the bookes of Maximilianus Transiluanus, and Antonius Pigafetta. The tenth day of August,Ferdinando Magalianes. in the yeere of our Lord .1519. Ferdi∣nando Magalianes▪ departed from the port of Siuile in Spayne, with a nauie of fyue shippes, and 237. men, wel furnished with all thynges necessary. And saylyng first downe by the ryuer of Guadalchiber, which runneth from the sayd port into the sea, they came first to a place named Giouan Dulpharaz, where are many villages of the Moores: and from thence, arryued at a castle of the duke of Medina Sidonia, where is the port from whiche they enter into the sea, & to the cape saint Vincent,The Cape of saint Vicent. beyng distant from the Equinoctial .37. degrees, and from the sayd port .10. leagues, and is from thence to Siuile betweene 17. and 20. leagues. Heere they remayned certayne dayes, to make newe prouision of such thinges as they lacked. Departyng from hence the 20. day of September,The Ilandes of Canarie. they arryued the 26. day of the same moneth at one of the Ilandes of Canarie, called Tenerife, beyng 25. de∣grees aboue the Equinostial. In one of these Ilandes is none other water but that is continually engendred of a cloude,Water engen∣dred of a clude. which appeareth dayly at noone tyde, as though it descended from hea∣uen, and compasseth about a certayne great tree, from whose branches distylleth great aboundaunce of water, and falleth in streames from the roote of the same, into certaine trenches and cesternes, made and placed to receyue it. This water serueth sufficiently all the inhabitauntes and cattayle of the Iland.The Iland of S. Thomas. The lyke thyng is also seene in the Ilande of saint Thomas, lying di∣rectly vnder the Equinoctial line. The thirde day of October, about mydnyght, the captayne commaunded them to lyght fyre brandes, and to hoyse vp theyr sayles, directyng theyr course towarde the South, saylyng
saylyng betwene Capo Verde of Affrike, and the Ilandes lying about the same,Capo verde. beyng from the Equinoctial fourteene degrees & a halfe. They sayled thus many dayes in the syght of the coast of Guinea of Ethiope,Guinea in Ethiope. where is the mountayne called Serra Liona, be∣ing eyght degrees aboue the Equinoctial. In this coast they had no maner of contrary wynde, but a great calme, and fayre wea∣ther, for the space of threescore and ten dayes, in the whiche they came vnder the Equinoctial line. In this viage they sawe many strange Fyshes,Fyshes and monsters of the sea. The fyre of. S. Helene and S. Nicolas. A tempest. & monsters of the Sea, besyde another strange thyng whiche appeared vnto them: For there appeared in their shippes certayne flames of fyre, burnyng very cleare, whiche they cal saint Helen, & saint Nicholas: these appeared as though they had been vpon the mast of the shippes, in suche clearenesse, that they tooke away theyr syght for the space of a quarter of an houre, by reason wherof they so wandred out of theyr course, and were dispearsed in sunder, that they in maner dispayred to meete agayne: but (as God would) the sea and tempest beyng quieted, they came safely to their determined course. And before I speake any further of the viage,The natural cause of suche fyres as fall in the shyppes. I haue heere thought good to say some∣what of these strange fyers, whiche some ignorant folke thynke to be spirites, or suche other phantasies, wheras they are but na∣turall thynges, proceedyng of naturall causes, and engendred of certayne exhalations. Of these therfore, the great Philosopher of our tyme Hieronimus Cardanus, in his second booke De Subtili∣tate, wryteth in this maner.Cardanus. There are two maner of fyers en∣gendred of exhalations, wherof the one is hurtful, the other with∣out hurt. That which is hurtfull, is fyre in deede, engendred of malicious and venemous vapours, whiche in successe of tyme take fyre, as apt matters to be kyndled. The other kynde is no true fyre, but lyke the matter that is in such olde putri∣fied wood,Two kyndes of fiers engendred of exhalations. as geueth the shynyng of fyre, without the substaunce or qualitie therof. Of the kynde of true fyre, is the Fyreball or Starre, commonly called saint Helen, which is sometyme seene about the mastes of shippes,True fyre and false fyre. beyng of such fyerie nature, that it sometyme melteth brasen vessels, and is a token of drownyng, forasmuch as this chaunceth only in great tempestes: for the va∣pour or exhalation wherof this fyre is engendred, can not be dry∣uen togeather or compact in fourme of fyre, but of a grosse va∣pour,
and by a great power of wynde, and is therefore a token of imminent perill: As on the contrary parte, the lyke fyres called in olde tyme Castor and Pollux,Castor and Pollux. The lightes of Sainct Peter and Sainct Nicolas. and nowe named the two lightes of Sainct Peter and Sainct Nicolas, which for the most parte fall on the cables of the shyppes, leapyng from one to an other, with a certayne flutteryng noyse lyke byrdes, are a token of se∣curitie, and of the tempest ouerpassed: For they are but vapours cleauyng to the cables, which in successe of tyme, the fyre passing from one to an other, appeare in the similitude of a lyght candel. They are a token of securitie, bycause they are litle, not slowe or grosse, whereby they myght haue ioyned altogeather in one, and been thereby more malicious, and lasted longer, whereas beyng many and but little, they are the sooner consumed. Hytherto Cardanus. But let vs nowe returne to the vyage. When they had sayled paste the Equinoctiall lyne,They lost the sight of the North starre. The Ilande of Brasile. The South pole. they loste the sight of the North starre, and sayled by the southwest, vntyll they came to a lande named the lande of Bressil, whiche some call Brasilia, beyng .xxii. degrees and a halfe towarde the south pole or pole Antartike. This lande is continuate and one firme lande with the cape of saint Augustine, whiche is .viii. degrees from the Equinoctiall. In this lande they were refreshed with many good fruites of innumerable kyndes, and founde here also very good suger canes, and diuers kindes of beasts and other thinges,Suger. which I omit for breuitie. They entered into this hauen on saint Lucies day: where the Sunne being theyr Zenith (that is, the poynte of heauen directly ouer theyr heades) they felte greater heate that day, then when they were vnder the Equinoctial lyne. This lande of Brasile is very large and great,The greatnesse of the lande of Brasile. and bygger then all Spayne, Portugale, Fraunce, and Italie, and is most abun∣daunt in all thinges. The people of this countrey pray to no ma∣ner of thyng: but lyue by the instincte of nature, and to the age of C.xx. and .C.xl. yeeres. Both the men and women goe naked, and dwell in certayne long houses. They are very docible, and soone allured to the Christian fayth. Thirtiene dayes after that they arryued at the sayde porte, they departed from this lande, and sayled to the xxxiiii. degree and a halfe towarde the pole Antartike, where they founde a great ryuer of freshe water, and certayne Caniballes.Caniballes. Of these
they sawe one out of theyr shyppes,Giantes. of stature as byg as a Giant, hauing a voice like a Bull. Our men pursued them, but they were so swyfte of foote that they coulde not ouertake them. About the mouth of this riuer,Insulae gem∣marum. Cap. S. Marie. are seuen Ilandes, in the byggest whereof they founde certayne precious stones, and called it the cape of sainct Marie. The Spanyardes thought that by this ryuer they myght haue passed into the South sea, but they were deceyued in theyr opinion: For there was none other passage then by the riuer, which is .xvii. leagues large in the mouth. Thus folowing this coaste by the tracte of the lande towarde the pole Antartike,The pole An∣tartike. Geese. Sea woolues. they came to a place where were two Ilandes replenished with Geese and Wolues of the sea, which some thinke to be those fy∣shes that we call Pikes. These were in such number, that in an houre all the fyue shyppes might haue ben laden with Geese, be∣ing all of blacke colour, and such as can not flee. They liue of fish, and are so fatte, that they could scarsely flay them. They haue no feathers, but a certayne downe, and theyr bylles lyke Rauens bylles. These Woolues of the sea are of dyuers colours, and of the bygnesse of Calues, with theyr heades of golden colour. Here were they in great danger by tempest: But as soone as the three fyres, called sainct Helen, sainct Nycolas, and saint Clare, ap∣peared vppon the cables of the shyppes, sodaynely the tempeste and furie of the wyndes ceassed. Departyng from hence, they sayled to the .49. degree and a halfe vnder the pole Antartike:The .xlix. de∣gree of the South pole. where beyng wyntered, they were inforced to remayne there for the space of two monethes, all which tyme they sawe no man, excepte that one day by chaunce they espyed a man of the stature of a Giant,Giantes. who came to the hauen daunsing and singyng, and shortly after seemed to cast dust ouer his head. The Captayne sent one of his men to the shore with the shyppe Boate, who made the lyke signe of peace. The which thyng the Giant see∣yng, was out of feare, and came with the Captaynes seruaunt to his presence into a little Ilande. When he sawe the Cap∣tayne with certayne of his company about him, he was great∣ly amased, and made signes, holdyng vp his hande to heauen, signifying thereby that our men came from thence.The bygnesse of the Giantes. This Gi∣ant was so byg, that the head of one of our men of a meane sta∣ture, came but to his waste. He was of good corporature, & well
made in all partes of his bodie, with a large visage painted with diuers colours, but for the most parte yelow Uppon his cheekes were paynted two Hartes, and red circles about his eyes. The heare of his head was coloured whyte, and his apparell was the skynne of a beast sowde togeather. This beast as (seemed vnto vs) had a large head, and great eares lyke vnto a Mule, with the body of a Camell, and tayle of a horse. The feete of the Giant were foulded in the sayde skynne, after the maner of shooes. He had in his hande a bygge and shorte bowe, the stryng whereof was made of a sinewe of that beaste. He had also a bundell of long arrows made of Reedes, feathered after the maner of ours, typte with sharpe stones in the steade of Iron heades. The Cap∣tayne caused him to eate and drynke, & gaue him many thinges, and among other a great lookyng glasse: In the which as soone as he sawe his owne lykenesse, was sodaynly afrayde, and started backe with suche violence, that hee ouerthrewe two that stoode nearest about him. When the Captayne had thus gyuen him certayne Haukes belles, and other great belles, with also a loo∣kyng glasse, a combe, and a payre of beades of glasse, he sent him to lande with foure of his owne men well armed. Shortly after, they sawe an other Giant of somewhat greater stature,An other Giant. with his bowe and arrowes in his hande. As hee drewe neare vnto our men, he layde his hande on his head, and poynted vp towarde heauen, and our men dyd the lyke. The Captayne sent his shyppe Boate to bryng him to a litle Ilande beyng in the Hauen. This Giant was very tractable and pleasaunte. He soong and daunsed, and in his daunsing lefte the print of his feete on the grounde. He remayned long with our men, who named him Iohan. He coulde well speake and playnely pro∣nounce these woordes, Iesus, Aue Maria, Iohannes, euen as we doe, but with a bygger voyce. The Captayne gaue him a shert of linnen cloth, & a coate of white woollen cloth: also a cappe, a combe, a looking glasse, with diuers such other thinges, and so sent him to his company. The day folowing, he resorted agayne to the shyppes, and brought with him one of those great beastes, which he gaue the Captayne. But after that day, they neuer saw him more, supposing him to be slayne of his owne company, for the conuersation he had with our men.
After other .xv. dayes were past, there came foure other Giantes without any weapons,Foure other Giantes. but had hyd theyr bowes and arrowes in certaine bushes. The Captaine retayned two of these, which were youngest and beste made. He tooke them by a deceite, in this ma∣ner,Two Giantes are taken by a pollicie. that giuing them knyues, sheares, looking glasses, belles, beades of Crystall, & suche other trifles, he so filled theyr handes that they coulde holde no more: then caused two payre of shac∣kels of Iron to be put on theyr legges, makyng signes that he would also giue them those chaynes: which they lyked very wel, bycause they were made of bright and shining metall And wher∣as they could not carry them bycause theyr handes were full, the other Giantes would haue caryed them: but the captaine would not suffer them. When they felte the shackels faste about theyr legges, they began to doubt: but the Captayne dyd put them in comfort, and bad them stande still. In fine, when they sawe howe they were deceiued, they roared lyke bulles, & cryed vppon theyr great deuill Setebos,The deuyll Setebos. to helpe them. Being thus taken, they were immediately seperate and put in sundry shippes. They could ne∣uer bynde the handes of the other two, yet was one of them with much difficultie ouerthrowen by .ix. of our men, & his hands boūd: but he sodeinly loosed him selfe and fled, as did also the other that came with them. In their fleeing, they shot of their arrowes and slue one of our men. They say that when any of them dye, there appeare x. or .xii deuils,Deuyls ap∣peare to the Gi∣antes when they dye. leaping and daunsing about the bodie of the dead, and seeme to haue their bodies paynted with diuers co∣lours, and that among other, there is one seene bigger then the residue, who maketh great mirth & reioysing. This great deuyll they call Setebos, and call the lesse Cheleule. One of these Giantes which they tooke, declared by signes that he had seene deuylles with two hornes aboue their heades, with long heare downe to theyr feete: and that they caste foorth fyre at theyr throates both before and behynde. The Captayne named these people Pata∣goni.Patagoni. The most parte of them weare the skynnes of such beastes whereof I haue spoken before: and haue no houses of continu∣ance, but make certayne cotages, which they couer with the sayd skynnes, and carry them from place to place. They lyue of raw fleshe, and a certayne sweete roote, which they call Capar. One of these whiche they had in theyr shyppes, dyd eate at one
meale a baskette of Bysket,The Giantes feeding. and droonke a bowle of water at a draught. They remayned fyue monethes in this porte of Sainct Iu∣lian,They conspire against theyr Captayne. where certayne of the vnder captaynes conspiryng the death of theyr Generall, were hanged and quartered: among whom the Treasurer Luigo of Mendozza was one. Certayne of the other conspiratours, he lefte in the sayde lande of Patogoni. Departyng from hence, to the .52. degree towarde the pole Antartike, lackyng a thirde parte, they founde a ryuer of freshe water and good fyshe. Theyr shyppes were here in great daunger. They remayned two monethes in this porte, where they made newe prouision of freshe water, fuell, and fyshe. Here the Captayne caused all his men to bee confessed.Confession. Approching to the .52. degrees, they found the straight now called the straight of Magellanus,The straight of Magellanus. beyng in some place a hundred and ten leagues in length, and in breadth somewhere very large, and in other pla∣ces little more then halfe a league in breadth. On both the sides of this straight, are great and hygh mountaynes couered with snowe, beyonde the which, is the enteraunce into the sea of Sur.The South sea. This enteraunce the Captayne named Mare Pacificum. Heere one of the shippes stole away priuilie, and returned into Spaine:Mare pacifi∣cum. In this was one of the Giantes, who dyed assoone as he felte the heate that is about the Equinoctiall lyne.The Giants di∣ed for heate. When the Captaine Magalianes was paste the straight, and sawe the way open to the other mayne sea, he was so glad thereof, that for ioye the teares fell from his eyes, and named the poynt of the lande from whence he first sawe that sea, Capo Desiderato. Supposing that the shyppe which stole away had been lost,Capo Deside∣rato. they erected a crosse vpon the top of a hygh hil, to directe their course in the straight, if it were theyr chaunce to come that way. They founde that in this straight in the moneth of October,Short nightes in the moneth of October. the nyght was not past foure houres long. They founde in this straight at euery three myles, a safe hauen, and excellent water to drynke: wood also, and fyshe, and great plentie of good hearbes. They thinke that there is not a fayrer straight in the worlde. Here also they sawe certaine flee∣ing fyshes.Fleeing fyshes. The Giantes language. The other Giant which remayned with them in the shyppe, named breade Capar: water, Oli, redde cloth, Cherecai, red colour, Cheiche, blacke colour, Amel: And spoke all his wordes
in the throate. On a tyme, as one made a crosse before him, and kyssed it, shewyng it vnto him, he sodaynely cryed Setebos, and declared by signes, that if they made any more crosses, Setebos would enter into his bodie, and make him brust. But when in fine he sawe no hurte come thereof, he tooke the crosse, and imbrased and kyssed it oftentymes, desiryng that he myght be a Christian before his death:The Giant is baptised. He was therefore baptysed, and named Paule. Departyng out of this straight into the sea called Mare Pac fi∣cum, the .xxviii. day of Nouember, in the yeere .1520. they say∣led three monethes and twentie dayes before they sawe any land,Three moneths saylyng with∣out the sight of lande. Extreme fa∣myne. and hauyng in this tyme consumed all theyr Bysket and other victualles, they fell into suche necessitie, that they were inforced to eate the pouder that remayned thereof, beyng nowe full of woormes, and stynkyng lyke pysse by reason of the salte water. Theyr freshe water was also putrified and become yelowe. They dyd eate skynnes and peeces of leather, whiche were foulded a∣bout certayne great ropes of the shyppes: but these skynnes be∣yng made very harde by reason of the Sunne, rayne, and wynde, they hung them by a corde in the sea, for the space of foure or fiue dayes, to mollifie them, and sodde them, and ate them. By rea∣son of this famyne and vncleane feedyng,Diseases of famyne. some of their gummes grewe so ouer theyr teethe, that they dyed miserably for hunger. And by this occasion dyed menetiene men, and also the Giaunt, with an Indian of the lande of Brasile, otherwyse called Terra de papagalli, that is, the lande of Popingayes. Beside these that dyed .xxv or .xxx. were so sicke, that they were not able to doe any seruice with theyr handes or armes for feeblenesse: So that there was in maner none without some disease. In these three mo∣nethes and xx. dayes, they sayled foure thousande leagues in one gulfe, by the sayde sea called Pacificum, (that is) peaceable, which may well be so called, forasmuch as in all this tyme, hauyng no sight of any lande, they had no misfortune of wynde or any other tempest. During this tyme also, they discouered only two little Ilandes vnhabited, where they sawe nothing but birdes & trees, and therefore named them infortunate Ilandes,Vnfortunate Ilandes. being one from the other about two hundred leagues distant. The first of these Ilandes is from the Equinoctiall towarde the pole Antartike xv. degrees, and the other fiue. Their sayling was in such sorte, that
they sayled dayly betweene l.lx. to .lxx. leagues. So that in fine,What they say∣led dayly. if God of his mercy had not gyuen them good weather, it was necessary that in this so great a sea, they should all haue dyed for hunger. Which neuerthelesse they escaped so hardly, that it may be doubted whether euer the lyke viage may be attempted with so good successe. They considered in this Nauigation that the pole Antartike, hath no notable starre, after the sorte of the pole Artike. But they sawe many starres geathered togeather,The starres a∣bout the South pole. which are lyke two cloudes, one separate a little from an other, & some∣what darke in the myddest. Betweene these, are two starres, not very byg, nor much shynyng, which moue a little: and these two are the pole Antartike.The needle of the compase. The needell of their compasse varied som∣what, and turned euer towarde the pole Artike, neuerthelesse, had no suche force, as when it is in these partes of the pole Artike: Insomuch that it was necessarie to helpe the needle with the lode stone (commonly called the Adamant) before they coulde sayle therewith, bycause it moued not,The lode stone. as it doeth when it is in these our partes. When they were in the myddest of the gulfe, they sawe a crosse of fyue cleare starres, directly towarde the Weste, and of equall distance the one from the other.
The order of the starres about the pole An∣tartike, some haue figured in this maner. A. The pole Antartike. B. The Crosse. In these dayes they sayled betweene the West and South, so farre that they approched to the Equinoctiall lyne,The Equinoc∣tiall line. and were in longitude from the place from whence they first departed, a hundred and twentie degrees. In this course they sayled by two Ilandes of exceedyng heyght, whereof the one named Ci∣panghu, is twentie degrees from the pole Antartike:The Ilands of Cipanghu and Sumbdit. and the o∣ther named Sumbdit, fyftiene degrees. When they were paste the Equinoctiall line, they sayled betweene the West & Southwest, at the quarter of the West, towarde the Southwest more then a C. leagues, changing their sayles to the quarter of the southwest, vntyll they came to the thirtiene degrees aboue the Equinoctiall towarde the pole Artyke, intending as much as were possible, to
approch to the Cape called of the olde writers Cattigara: the whiche is not founde as the olde Cosmographers haue discribed it, but is towarde the north about .xii. degrees, as they afterward vnderstoode. When they had thus sayled .lxx. leagues of this voyage in the xii. degree aboue the Equinoctiall, and .C.xlvi. degrees of lon∣gitude (as I haue sayde) the syxt daye of March they discouered a litle Ilande towarde the northwest, and two other towarde the southwest: but the one was hygher and bygger then the other. In the byggest of these, the generall captayne woulde haue rested hym selfe a whyle, but he coulde not, by reason the people of these Ilandes resorted continually to the shyppes with theyr Canoas, and stole nowe one thyng & nowe an other, in suche sorte that our men coulde take no rest: and therefore demaunded of the captaine that they myght stryke theyr sayles to bryng the shyppes to lande. But the captayne beyng prouoked to anger, went aland with fourtie armed men, and burnt about fyftie of theyr houses, with many of theyr Canoas, and slue also about seuen men, and recouered a shyppe boate whiche the Barbarians had stolne, and so departed, folowyng his voyage. The Captayne named these Ilandes Insulae Latronum, that is, the Ilandes of theeues.Insulae Latro∣num. When our men had so wounded some of them with arrowes, that they were stryken through both sydes, they pulled foorth the arrowes, not ceassyng to maruayle at them, tyll they fell downe dead: And yet coulde not the other so depart, but styll folowed ye ships with more then two hundred of their boates, approching as nere to the shyppes as they coulde, and proferryng our men certayne fishes. As the shyps passed with ful sayle in the middest of theyr boates, they sawe in some of them certayne women, la∣mentyng and tearyng theyr heare, whiche our men thought they dyd for the death of theyr husbandes. As farre as they coulde perceyue, these people lyue at theyr owne lybertie, without any ruler or gouernour. They go naked,People with long heare. and haue blacke beards and blacke heare on theyr heades, whiche they weare long downe to their wastes. They are of the same stature that we are, and well made, of colour like vnto an Oliue. Their women are wel fauo∣red, with blacke & thycke heare on theyr heades, reachyng to the grounde. The men colour theyr teeth redde and blacke, which
they esteeme a comely thyng. They annoynt theyr bodyes and heare with they oyle of Cocus. Theyr boates are some all blacke, some white, and some redde, and haue sayles made of the brode leaues of Date trees, sowed togeather. In the steade of a rud∣der, they vse a certayne brode boorde, with a staffe in the top, and may when they wyll, make the sterne the fore castell, or the fore∣castell the sterne. They sayle so swyftely, that they seeme a farre of, lyke Delphyns, swymmyng aboue the water. The tenth daye of Marche, in the yeere .1521. they wente alande vppon a litle Ilande named Zamal .xxx. leagues dy∣stant from the Ilande of theeues.The Ilande of zamall. Because this Ilande was not inhabited, they rested here a while, where the captayne caused a pauilion to be pitched for the sycke & crased men, and a hogge to be kylled. The .xviii. daye of Marche, they sawe a boate with nyne men commyng towarde them, shewyng them selues ioyfull and reioysyng of theyr commyng. They brought many presentes with them, and seemed to be people of muche humanitie. They gaue the Captayne a great fyshe, and a great vessell of the wyne of those Date trees whiche beare the fruite Cocus.Wyne of Date trees. They made also signes, that within the space of foure dayes, they woulde bryng Ryse, and dyuers foules and beastes, as they dyd in deede. This Cocus is a fruit of certayne Date trees,The maruilous fruite Cocus. whereof they make bread, wyne, oyle, and vineger. They make wyne in this ma∣ner. They cutte a bygge branche of the tree, and hange thereat a reede as bygge as a mans legge, into the whiche droppeth a sweete licoure from the tree, like vnto whyte wyne, somwhat tart, and let the reede continue there from mornyng tyl euenyng, and from euenyng to mornyng. The fruite of this tree called Cocus, is as bygge as the head of a man, or more. The fyrst rynde of this, is greene, and of the thyckenesse of two fyngers, hauyng in it certayne threedes whereof they make cordes, with the whiche they tye theyr boates. Under this rynde, there is a thycke shell, which they burne and make pouder therof, and vse it as a remedy for certayne diseases. Under this shell, is a white substance lyke the carnel of a Nut, being a fynger in thycknesse, which they eate with fleshe and fyshe, as we do bread. It hath the taste of an Almonde, and is vsed in the steade of bread, when it is dryed.
In the myddest of this carnell, is a cleare and sweete water, beyng very holsome and cordiale. This water sometyme con∣iealeth and lyeth within the shell lyke an egge. When they in∣tende to make oyle hereof, the laye it to putrifie in water, and boyle it vntyll it be lyke oyle or liquide butter. When they in∣tende to make vineger, they suffer onely the water to putrifie, and then set it to the Sunne, where it becommeth vineger, lyke vnto that which is made of whyte wyne. And when they mingle the carnell with the water whiche is in the myddest of the fruite, and strayne it through a cloth, they make a mylke thereof, lyke vnto Goates mylke. These Date trees are lyke vnto them that beare Dates, but are not so full of knottes. With the iuice of two of these Date trees, a whole familie of tenne persons may be mentayned with wyne, vsyng one .viii. dayes, and the other, other .viii. dayes: for they shoulde els be dryed and wythered. These trees continue for the space of a hundred yeeres. This Ilande where they founde this humane and gentle people,The Iland of zuluan. is called Zuluan, and is not very bygge. About this Ilande they founde many other Ilandes,The sea called Archipelago di san Lazaro. and therefore named this sea Archi∣pelago di San Lazaro, that is, the great sea of saint Lazarus, be∣yng tenne degrees aboue the Equinoctiall towarde our pole, and C.lxi. from the place from whence they departed. The people of this Ilande are Caphranita (that is Gentiles. They go naked,Gentiles. sauyng that they couer theyr priuie partes with a cloth made of the rynd of a certaine tree. The chiefest men, haue about theyr heades a sylken cloth of needle woorke. They are grosse and brode set, and of the coloure of an Olyue. They annoynt theyr bodies with the oyle of Cocus, to defende them agaynst the heate of the Sunne, and drynesse of the wynde. The .xxv. daye of Marche, they departed from hence, and directed theyr course beteweene the West and southwest, and sayled betweene foure Ilandes, named Cenalo, Huinanghan, Hibusson, and Abarien▪ &c. The .xxviii. daye of Marche,Foure Ilands. they came to the Ilande of Buthuan, where they were honorably entertayned of the Kyng and the Prynce his sonne,The Iland of Buthuan. who gaue them muche golde and spices. The Captayne gaue the Kyng a vesture of red cloth, and an other of yelowe, made after the Turkyshe fasshion, and also a redde cappe: and gaue lykewyse to other that came
with hym certayne knyues, glasses, and beades of Crystall. After that the Captayne had shewed the Kyng the secretes of his shyp, and suche merchaundies as he had therein, he caused a peece of ordinaunce sodenly to be shotte of, whereat the kyng was greatly amased, vntyl the Captayne comforted hym. Then the Captayne commaunded one of his men to be armed from the head to the foote, and caused three other to stryke hym with theyr swoordes, whereat the kyng marueyled greatly, and sayde to thinterpretour (who was a slaue borne in Malacha) that one of those armed men was able to encounter with a hundred of his men. But he marueyled much more, when the Captayne tolde hym by thinterpretoure, howe he founde the strayght by the com∣passe and lode stone, and howe many dayes they were without syght of any lande. Then askyng lycence to depart, the Cap∣taine sent two of his men with hym, of yt which Antonie Pigafetta was one. When the kyng sawe Antonie Pigafetta wryte the names of many thynges, and afterwarde rehearsed them againe, he marueyled yet more, makyng sygnes that such men descen∣ded from heauen. The kyng brought them fyrst to his pallace, where he interteyned them honorably, and gaue them many gyftes, as dyd also the Prince in his pallace, beyng in an other Ilande named Caleghan.The Ilande of Caleghan. As they syfted a certeyne myne of earth in the kynges Iland, they founde peeces of golde, some as bygge as Nuttes, and o∣ther as bygge as Egges. All the kynges vesselles were of gold, and his house well furnyshed. In al the whole nation there was no man of comelyer personage then the kyng:Plenty of gold. he had his heare long downe to his shulders, and very blacke, with a vaile of sylke rouled about his head,The kyng of Buthuan. and two great rynges of golde hangyng at his eares. He had about his myddle, a cloth wrought of cot∣ten and sylke, impaled with golde, and reachyng downe to his knees. On his one syd, he had a long daggar with a hafte of gold, and the sheathe of a fayre kynde of carued woodde. He had on e∣uery finger three rynges of golde, and had his bodie annoynted with oyle of storax and Beniamin. The natural coloure of his face was lyke vnto the coloure of an Oliue: and all his body be∣syde paynted with diuers colours. The kynges name was Raia Colambu, and the prince was called Raia Siagu.
The last day of Marche, neare vnto Easter, the Captayne cau∣sed his priest to say Masse, and sent to the kyng by the interpre∣tour, that his comming a land at that tyme was not to dyne with hym, but only to heare Masse. The Captayne came aland, with fyftie of his men, in theyr best apparel, without weapons or har∣nesse, and all the residue well armed. Before the boates came to lande, he caused sixe peeces of ordinaunce to be shot of, in token of peace, and so came alande, where the two kynges imbrased hym, and accompanied hym to the place appoynted for Masse to be sayde, not farre from the sea syde. Somewhat before the begynnyng of Masse, the Captayne sprynkled the kynges with Damaske water. When the priest was at myd Masse, at the of∣fertorie, the kinges profered them selues to go to kysse the crosse with the Captayne, but offered nothyng. At the tyme of sacryng, when the priest lyfted vp the body of Christe, and the Christians kneeled downe and helde vp theyr handes ioyned togeather, the kynges dyd the lyke also, with great reuerence. In the meane tyme, whyle certayne of the Christians were at the Communi∣on, a handgunne was shot of, to signifie vnto them that were in the shippes to discharge al theyr ordinaunce. When Masse was finished,A combatte. the Captayne caused certayne of his men to put on their harnesse, and to make a cumbat with theyr naked swoordes, whereat the kynges tooke great pleasure. This doone, the Cap∣tayne caused a crosse to be brought foorth, with nayles, and a crowne of thornes, geuyng commaundement to all his men to gyue reuerence therevnto, and signifying to the kynges, by the interpreter, that that banner was gyuen hym by the Emperour his lorde and maister, with commaundement to leaue the same in all places where he came, to the great commoditie and profyte of al such as woulde reuerendly receyue it, as an assured token of frendship, and that he woulde therfore leaue it there, aswel to ac∣complishe his lordes commaundement, as also that yf at any tyme any ships of Christians shoulde chaunce to come that way, myght by seyng that crosse, perceyue that our men had been wel enterteyned there, and would therfore not only absteine from do∣ing them any hurt or displeasure, but also helpe to ayde them a∣gainst their enemies: and that therefore it shoulde be requisite to erect that crosse vppon the toppe of the hyghest mountayne that
myght be seene from the sea on euery syde, also to pray vnto it re∣uerently: and that in so doyng, they should not be hurt with thun∣der, lyghtnyng, and tempestes. When the kynges hearde these wordes, they gaue the captaine great thankes, promisyng glad∣ly to obserue and fulfyl al such thynges as he required. Then the Captaine demaunded, whether they were Moores or Gentiles: They aunswered,Moores and Gentiles. that they had none other kinde of religion, but that lyftyng vp theyr handes ioyned togeather, and theyr faces towarde heauen, they called vpon theyr God Abba. Which aun∣swere lyked the Captayne very well, because the Gentiles are sooned perswaded to our fayth then the Moores. Departyng from hence, they came to the Ilandes of Zeilon, Zubut,Mani Ilands. Messana, and Calaghan, by the conduct of certayne Pi∣lots of the sayde kynges. Of these, Zubut is the best, and hath the trade of best trafique.The Iland of Messana. In the Ilande of Messana they founde Dogges, Cattes, Hogges, Hennes, Goates, Ryse, Gynger, Cocus, Myll, Panicke, Barly, Fygges, Oranges, Waxe, and Golde, in great quantitie. This Ilande is aboue the Equinoctial towarde our pole niene degrees, & two thirde partes, and 162. degrees from the place from whence they departed. They re∣mayned in this Ilande for the space of eyght dayes, and then di∣rected their viage toward the Northwest, and passed betweene these fyue Ilandes, Zeilon, Bohol, Canghu, Barbai, and Catighan. In this Iland of Catighan are certayne great Battes, as bygge as Eagles,Battes as byg as Eagles. of the whiche they tooke one: they are good to be ea∣ten, and of taste much lyke a Henne. There are also Stocke Doues, Turtle Doues, Popingays, & certaine fowles as big as Hennes:Fowles with hornes. these fowles haue litle hornes, & lay great egges, whi∣che they couer a cubit deapth in the sand, by the heate wherof, & vertue of the Sonne, they are hatched, & the young birdes crepe out of the sand by themselues.Egges hatched in sande. From the Iland of Messana to Ca∣tinghan, are 20. leagues saylyng toward the West. And because the kyng of Messana coulde not folowe the shippes, they taryed for him about the Ilandes of Polo, Ticobon, and Fozon, where the Captayne toke hym into his shippe, with certayne of his princi∣pal men,The Ilande of zubut. and so folowed theyr viage toward the Ilande of Zubut, which is about fyftie leagues distant from Catighan. The seuenth day of Apryll, about noone, they entred into the
port of Zubut: And passing by many villages and habitations in trees, they came to the citie, where the Captayne gaue com∣maundement to the maryners to stryke theyr sayles, and to set them selues in order in maner of battayle raye, causyng all the ordinaunce to be shotte of, wherewith all the people were put in great feare. After this, the Captayne sent an ambassadour with thinterpretoure to the kyng of Zubut. When they approched neere to the citie, they found the kyng with a great company of men sore astonyed at the noyse of the gunnes. But thinterpretour aduertised them, that it was the custome of our men, in all suche places where they come, to dis∣charge theyr ordinaunce in token of frendshyppe, and to honour the lord of the citie. With which wordes the kyng and his com∣panye were well quieted. After this, the interpretour declared that his master was the Captayne of the shyppes of the greatest Prince in the worlde, and that they went to discouer the Ilandes of Molucca: And further, that hearyng of his good name and fame by the report of the kyng of Messana, they determyned to visite him, & to haue vittailes for exchange of their merchaundies. The kyng answered, that he was wel content therewith, and that they were hartyly welcome: Neuerthelesse, that it was a custom in that place, that al such shyps as entered into that hauen, should pay tribute: And that there were not many dayes past, sence a shyp laden with golde and slaues dyd so paye. In token whereof, he caused to come before hym certayne merchauntes of that com∣pany which yet remayned with hym.A shyppe laden with gold and slaues. To this thinterpretour an∣sweared, that forasmuche as his lorde was the Captayne of so myghtie a Prince, he neuer payde tribute to any kyng in the worlde, and would not nowe begyn: Wyllyng hym to take this for a resolute answeare, that if he woulde accepte the peace that was profered him, he shoulde enioy it, and if he rather desyred warre, he should haue his handes ful. When thinterpretour had sayde these woordes, one of the sayde merchauntes (who was a Moore) spake to the kyng in this maner Catacaia Chitae: that is, Take heede syr:Calecut. Malacha. For these men are they that haue conquered Calecut, Malacha, and all the greater India, and are of suche power, that if you intreate them otherwyse then wel, you may to late knowe what they are able to do, more then they haue done
at Calecut and Malaca. When thinterpretoure hearde these woordes, he sayde, that the kyng his Lorde was of much greater puissaunce and more dominions, and lorde of more shyppes then was the kyng of Portugale: declaryng further that he was kyng of Spayne, and Emperour of all Christendome. Addyng hereunto, that if he woulde not be his frende, he woulde hereafter sende thyther suche a power of armed men as shoulde destroy his countrey. The Moore conferred al these woordes with the king, who sayde that he woulde further deliberate with his counsayle, and geue them a full aunsweare the daye folowyng. In the meane tyme he sent them certayne vyttayles and wyne. When all these thynges were declared to the kyng of Messana, who was the chiefest thereabout next vnto him, and lord of many Ilandes, he went a lande and repayred to the kyng of Zubut, and declared vnto hym the great humanitie and curtesie of the generall Cap∣tayne. Shortly after, the Captayne sente certayne of his men with thinterpretour to the kyng of Zubut, to knowe his pleasure, and what aunsweare he woulde make them. As they went to∣warde the courte, they met the kyng commyng in the streate, ac∣companyed with many of his chiefe men. He caused our men to syt downe by hym, and demaunded of them if there were any more then one Captayne in theyr companie: and whether it were theyr request that he should paye tribute to Themperour. They aunsweared, that they desyred none other thyng, but that they myght exercise merchaundies with them, and to barter ware for ware. The kyng made aunsweare, that he was well content therewith:Sheaddyng of blood is a token of frendshyp. wyllyng the Captayne, in token of frendshyp, to sende hym a litle blood of his ryght arme, affyrmyng that he woulde do the lyke &c. After this, the kyng of Messana, with the kyng of Zubut his neuie (who was the prince) and certayne other of his gentel∣men,The kyng of zu∣but is baptised. came to the shippes, and brought the Captayne many good∣ly presentes. They entred into great amitie, and had large communication of many thynges. The Captayne persuaded them to the Christian fayth: whiche they gladly embrased, and tooke such pleasure in hearyng the articles of our beliefe, that the teares fell from theyr eyes for ioye. They were baptised, and shortly after all the people of the Ilande. They esteeme nothing more precious then drynkyng glasses of Uenice woorke.
When they came to the citie, they founde the kyng in his Pal∣lace sitting vppon a floore or storie made of the leaues of Date trees, wrought after a curious deuise, lyke a certayne kynde of mattes. He had vppon his body none other apparell but only a cloth of Bombasine cotton, hangyng before his priuie partes.The kyng of Zabut his ap∣parell. On his head, he had a vayle of needle worke, and about his necke a chayne of great price. At his eares, hung two Rynges of gold, wherein were inclosed many precious stones. He was but of small stature, but somewhat grosse, and had the residue of his body paynted with dyuers colours, whereof some were lyke vn∣to flamyng fyre. Before him, he had two vesselles made of the fine earth called Porcellana, with sodden egges. Also foure ves∣selles of Porcellana full of wyne made of Date trees, and couered with many odoriferous hearbes. The Prince brought them to his house, where he had foure daughters,Well fauoured women. very wel fauoured and whyte, lyke ours. Hee caused them to daunce all naked, and therewith to sing, and playe on certayne Tymbrelles made of metall. At this tyme it so chaunced, that one of the Spanyardes dyed in one of the shyppes, and when certayne of theyr compa∣ny desired the kyng to gyue them leaue to burie him on the land: he answered, that forasmuche as he and all his, were at the commaundement of theyr kyng and maister, howe muche more ought the grounde so to bee? They greatly marueyled at the ceremonies parteynyng to the maner of our funeralles, and ho∣noured the crosses whiche were set at both the endes the graue. They lyue with iustice, and vse weightes and measures. Their houses are made of Tymber and sawne boordes, and are so buil∣ded aboue the grounde vppon proppes and pyles, that they as∣cende to the same by certayne stayers. Under theyr houses, they keepe theyr Hogges and Hennes. When they came to barteryng, they gaue golde, Ryse,Barteryng. Hog∣ges, Hennes, and dyuers other thynges for some of our tryfles of small value. They gaue tenne Pesos of golde for sixtiene poundes weyght of Iron. One Pesus is in value a ducate and a halfe. The Sunday folowyng,Pesus what it is. the kyng was baptysed with great solemnitie: at which tyme, the Captayne admonyshed him before, not to be afrayde at the shootyng of of the ordinance, bycause it was theyr custome so to doe at such solemne feastes.
After this,They breake theyr Idolles and erecte the Crosse. the Captayne caused them to breake all theyr Idoles, and to set vp the crosse in dyuers places, praying to the same both mornyng and euenyng kneelyng on theyr knees, and hol∣dyng vp theyr handes ioyned togeather. The kyng in his bap∣tisme was named Charles, after the Emperours name, and the Prince, Ferdinando, after the name of his maiesties brother. The kyng of Messana was named Iohn, & the Moore Christopher. To all other they gaue suche names as are commonly vsed in Christendome.Fyue hundred men baptised. And thus before masse was begunne, were fyue hundred men baptised. When masse was finyshed, the Cap∣tayne inuited the Kyng to dyne with him in his shyppe, and at his commyng, caused the ordinaunce to be discharged. The Queene was also baptised,The Queene of Zabut. with fourtie of her gentlewomen, and her daughter the princes wyfe. The Queene was very young and fayre, hauyng her bodie couered with a whyte cloth. Her lyppes were redde, and she had on her head a Hatte, on the toppe wherof was a triple crowne, much lyke the Popes: this crowne and the Hat, were made of the leaues of Date trees. Within the space of eyght dayes, the inhabitantes of the Ilande were bapti∣sed, excepte one village of Idolatours, who would not herein o∣bey the kynges commaundement. Wherevppon the Captayne sent certayne of his men thyther, who burnt the towne, and erec∣ted a crosse in that place, bycause the people of the vyllage were Gentyles (that is) Idolaters. But if they had been Moores (that is, Machumetistes) they woulde haue erected a pyller of stone, bycause the Moores are more stubberne and harder to be conuerted then are the gentiles. When the Queene came to the place where she should heare masse, shee came foorth with great pompe and solemnitie,The Queenes apparell. hauyng going before her three young da∣mosels, and three men with their Cappes in their hands, whom she folowed apparelled in whyte and blacke, with a great vayle of silke vppon her head, fringed about with golde, which couered her hatte, and hung downe to her shoulders: She had also a great trayne of women folowyng her, beyng all barefooted and naked, excepte that vppon theyr heades and priuie partes they wore certayne vayles of silke, and had theyr heare spredde. Before the kyng of Zubut was baptised, he was named Raia Humabuon. When the Captayne demaunded of him why all
the Idolles in the Ilande were not burnt accordyng to his pro∣myse, he answered, that they esteemed them no more as goddes, but only made sacrifice to them for the Princes brother, who was very sicke, and as noble and wittie a man as was in the Ilande. The Captayne answered, that if he would burne all his Idoles, and beleeue faythfully in Christ, and be baptised, he should bee immediately restored to health, and that he would els giue them leaue to stryke of his head. By these woordes and persuasions of the Captayne, he conceyued suche hope of health, that after he was baptised hee felte no mare greefe of his disease. And this was a manifeste myracle wrought in our tyme,A miracle. whereby diuers Infidelles were conuerted to our fayth, and theyr Idolles de∣stroyed, and also theyr Altars ouerthrowen on the which they were accustomed to eate the sacrificed fleshe. The people of the Ilande paye the kyng a portion of victualles for theyr tribute by all theyr cities and vyllages. Not farre from this Ilande of Zubut, is the Ilande of Ma∣than,The Ilande of Mathan. whose inhabitantes vse marueylous ceremonies in theyr sacrifices to the sonne, and burying the dead. They weare ringes of golde about their priuie members. The Iland is gouerned by two Princes, whereof the one is named Zula, and the other Cila∣pulapu. And whereas this Cilapulapu refused to paye tribute to the kyng of Spayne, the Captayne went agaynst him in his owne person with .60. of his men, armed with coates of mayle and Helmets. Cilapulapu diuided his army into three battayles, hauyng in euery battayle two thousand & fyftie men, with armed bowes, arrowes, dartes, and Iauelins hardened at the poyntes with fyre. This continued long and sharpe. But the Captayne being a valiaunt man,The Captayne Magellanus is slayne. and preasing him selfe in the brunte of the battaile, was sore wounded and slaine, forasmuche as the most of the Barbarians directed all their force agaynst him. Besyde the Captayne, were slayne of our men about .viii. or .ix. Of the Bar∣barians, were .xv. slayne, & many sore wounded. After the death of the Captayne, they chose two other in his place, of the which one was Odoardo Barbessa a Portugale, and the other Iohn Serrano▪ who was shortly after betrayde by the interpretour, and taken prisoner with dyuers other. Certaine dayes before the captaines death, they had knowledge
of the Ilandes of Molucca, whiche they chiefely sought. Depar∣tyng therefore from the Ilande of Mathan, they sayled farre, and came to the Cape of an other Ilande named Bohol.The Ilande of Bohol. They burnt one of theyr shyppes. In the myddest of this mayne sea (which they named Archipelagus) they consulted to burne the shyppe named Conception, bycause they were nowe fewe in number, and to furnyshe the other two shyp∣pes with the artillerie thereof. Thus directyng theyr course to∣warde Southwest, they came to an other Ilande named Paui∣loghon,Blacke men. where they founde blacke men, lyke vnto the Sarasins. Shortly after, they arryued at an other great Ilande, whose kyng, named Raia Calauar, intreated them very friendly in all thynges, as dyd the kyng of Massana. This Ilande is ryche in golde,The Ilande of Chippit. and hath plentie of Rysse, Gynger, Hogges, Goates, Hennes, and dyuers other thynges: It is named Chippit, and is viii. degrees aboue the Equinoctiall lyne towarde our pole, and in longitude from the place from whence they first departed .170. degrees, and about .50. leagues from Zubut. The Ilande of Caghaian.Departyng from hence, they came to an other Ilande, named Caghaian, beyng .40. leagues from Chippit, as they sayled be∣tweene the Weste and Southwest. This Ilande is very great, and in maner vnhabited. The people are Moores, and were ba∣nished out of the Ilande of Burnei, which some call Porne. From this Ilande about .xxv. leagues betweene the Weste and Northweste, they founde a marueylous fruitfull Ilande na∣med Pulaoan,The Ilande of Pulaoan. beyng towarde our pole aboue the Equinoctiall niene degrees and a thirde parte, and .C.lxxix. degrees and a thirde parte in longitude from the place of their departyng. From this Ilande .x. leagues towarde the Southwest, they sawe an other Ilande,The Ilande of Burnei or Porne. whiche seemed to them sometymes to mount as they sayled by the coastes thereof. As they were ente∣ring into the port, there arose a boystuous & dark tempest, which ceassed assoone as the fyres of the three saintes (whereof we haue spoken before) appeared vpon the cables. From the beginning of this Iland to the porte, are fyue leagues. This Ilande is great and ryche,A great citie. and the chiefe citie thereof conteyneth .xxv. thousande houses. The Kyng enterteyned our men very friendly, and sent them, besyde many other presentes, two Elephantes, trapped with silke,Elephantes. to bryng them to his Pallace that brought
the presentes which the Captaynes sent him. He hath a mag∣nificall Courte, and a great garde, also a multitude of concu∣bynes. He is a Moore, and is named Raia Siripada. He is a kyng of great power, and hath vnder him many other kynges, Ilands, and cities. This Ilande of Burnei, is aboue the Equinoctiall to∣warde our pole, fyue degrees and a quarter, and in longitude from the place of theyr departyng .C.lxxvi. degrees, and two third partes. Departyng from Burnei, they came to an Ilande called Cim∣bulon, beyng .viii. degrees aboue the Equinoctiall lyne.The Ilande of Cimbulon. Heere they remayned .xl. dayes, to calke theyr shyppes, and furnysh them with freshe water and fuell, which was to them great payne and trauayle, bycause they were in maner all bare footed, their shooes (and in maner their other apparel) being worne, by reason of the long vyage. In the woods of this Iland, they found a tree,Leaues of trees which seeme to lyue. whose leaues as soone as they fall on the ground, doe sturre and remoue from place to place, as though they were alyue: they are muche lyke the leaues of a Mulbery tree, and haue on euery syde as it were two short & blunt feete. When they are cut or broken, there is no blood seene come foorth of them: Yet when any of them are touched, they sodaynly moue and starte away. Antoni Pigafetta kept one of them in a platter for the space of .viii. dayes, and euer when he touched it, it ranne rounde about the platter. He suppo∣seth that they lyue only by ayre. Departyng from hence, they directed theyr course by the West quarter towarde the Southeast, to fynde the Ilandes of Molucca, and sayled not farre from certayne mountaynes, where they founde the sea full of great weedes and hearbes.A sea full of weedes. From hence, they came to the Ilandes of Zolo and Taghima, in the which are founde pearles of exceedyng bygnesse.Pearles. Folowyng theyr course towarde the Northeast, they came to a great citie named Mangdando, lying aboue the Ilandes of Butbuan and Calaghan, where they tooke a Canoa of certayne of the inhabitantes: by whom beyng infourmed of the Ilandes of Molucca, they lefte theyr course towarde the Northeast, and folowed the Southeast, neare vnto a Cape of the Ilande of Bu∣thuan: they were aduertised for certentie, that on the bankes of a certayne ryuer, there dwelt men ouergrowen with heare,Men ouer∣growen with heare. and
of hygh stature. Folowyng styll theyr course by the Southeast, and passyng by many small Ilandes,The Ilandes of Molucca. they came to the Ilandes of Molucca, the sixte day of Nouember, and the .xxvii. moneth after their de∣parture out of Spayne. Beyng therefore ioyfull, and gyuyng thankes vnto God, they discharged all theyr ordinaunce. In the coaste of all these Ilandes, euen vnto the Ilandes of Molucca, soundyng with theyr plummet, they founde the deapth of the sea to be no lesse then a hundred and two yardes, which is contra∣ry to the saying of the Portugales,The Portu∣gales are repro∣ued. who affyrme that no shyppe can passe that way without great daunger, by reason of the sha∣lownesse and rockes or shelues, and for the darkenesse which the cloudes cause in the heauen. All which things they fayned, to the intent that none other should haue knowledge of theyr viages. The eyght day of Nouember, in the yeere 1521. before the rysing of the Sunne, they entered into the porte of the Ilande of Tidore,Tidore one of the Ilandes of Molucca. beyng one of the chiefe Ilandes of Molucca, where they were honorably interteyned of the kyng, who declared that he had long before seene a signe in heauen, that certayne shyppes shoulde come from a farre countrey to the Ilandes of Molucca: And that whereas for the better certificate thereof,A vision in the Planettes. he considered the stations of the Moone, he sawe therein the commyng of our shyppes, and that we were the men whom he seemed to see in the same. Wherevppon he profered him selfe to enter into league of friendshyp with the kyng of Spayne, and to accepte our men as his brethren and chyldren, wyllyng them to come alande as into theyr owne houses: Also, that for theyr commyng, that Ilande shoulde no more bee called Tidore, but Castile, for the great loue whiche he bore to theyr Kyng, whom he reputed as his Lorde and maister. This Kyng is a Moore, and is named Raia Sultan, Mauzor. The Ilandes of Molucca, are fyue in number, and are thus named,The fyue I∣landes of Mo∣lucca. Tarenate, Tidore, Mutir, Macchian, and Bacchian. Of these, Tarenate is the cheefest. Tarenate.Directly agaynst the Ilande of Tidore, there is an other great Ilande,The Ilande of Gilolo. named Gilolo, inhabited of Moores and Gentiles. The Moores haue two Kynges,Moores and Gentyles. of the whiche one hath sixe hundred chyldren, and the other sixe hundred and fyftie. The
Gentyles keepe not so many women as doe the Moores, nor yet lyue in suche superstitions. They pray to the first thyng that they meete in the mornyng when they goe foorth of theyr hou∣ses, and honour that as theyr God for that day. The Kyng of the Gentyles is very ryche in golde. In the sayde Ilande of Gilolo,Golde. Water in Reedes. are Reedes as byg as a mans legge, and full of cleare water hol∣some to be drunke. The .xii. day of Nouember, the kyng of Tidore appoyn∣ted our men a warehouse in the citie, where they myght sell theyr merchaundies. Theyr maner of exchaunge was in this sorte.Theyr maner of barteryng. For tenne yardes of good redde cloth, they had one Babar of Cloues, which amounteth to foure Cantari and six pound weight: And one Cantar is a hundred pounde weyght. For .xv. yardes of cloth somewhat woorse then the other, they receyued in Cambie, one Bahar. For .xxxv. drynkyng cuppes of glasse, they had one Bahar. For .xvii. Cathyls of quicke siluer, one Bahar. They came dayly to the shyppes with many of theyr Barkes full of Goates, Hennes, fygges of a spanne long, also the fruite called Cocus, with dyuers other kyndes of victualles, in suche quantitie that it was a marueylous thyng to beholde.Water of a straunge qualitie. They furnyshed also theyr shyppes with freshe water, which is hotte as it issueth out of the spryng, but is very colde when it hath stoode a whyle in an other place. It spryngeth from the mountaynes on the which the cloue trees growe. They sawe a cloude ryse in maner dayly, whiche compasseth about the sayde mountaynes. The kyng of the Ilande of Bacchian,Byrdes of a straunge fourme. sent the kyng of Spaine two dead byrdes of straunge fourme. They were of the bygnesse of Turtle Dooues, with little heades and long bylles: also long and small legges, and no wynges, but in the steede thereof cer∣tayne long feathers of diuers colours, and tayles lyke Turtle Dooues: all the other feathers are of one colour, much lyke vn∣to tawny, excepte those of the wynges: they flee not but when the wynde bloweth. These Moores are of opinion that these byrdes come from the heauenly Paradyse, and therefore call them Manuccodiata, that is, the byrdes of God. When they were determyned to departe from the Ilandes of Molucca, certayne kynges of the Ilandes accompanied them
with theyr Canoas, and conducted them to an Ilande called Mare, where they refreshed theyr shyppes with freshe water and fuell. The kynges sent the Emperours maiestie many pre∣sentes: and embrasing our men, departed with the teares in theyr eyes, and our men for theyr laste farewell, shot of all their ordinance. When in the Ilande of Mare, they perceyued that one of theyr shyppes leaked and tooke water very sore,They leaue one of theyr shippes behinde them. wher∣by they were inforced to tarrie there three dayes: But seeyng that they coulde fynde no remedie for the same, but in long tyme, they determined to leaue it, gyuyng order that if afterwarde it coulde bee repayred, they should returne into Spayne as well as they could. The Ilandes of Molucca. In all the Ilandes of Molucca is founde Cloues, Ginger, bread of the roote of Sagu, Ryse, Goates, sheepe, Hennes, Fig∣ges, Almondes, sweete Pomegranates and sowre, Oranges, Lemondes,Hony of flyes. and hony, which is made of certayne flyes lesse then Antes: Also canes of suger, oyle of Cocus, Mellons, Gourdes, and a marueylous colde fruite whiche they name Camulicai, and dyuers other fruites.Popingayes. Furthermore, whyte and red Popingayes, and other of variable colours. It is not paste fiftie yeeres since the Moores fyrst inhabited any of these Ilandes, whiche were before inhabited only with Gentiles. The Ilande of Tidore.The Ilande of Tidore, is aboue the Equinoctiall line toward our pole about .27. minutes, and in longitude from the place from whence they departed .171. degrees, and from the Archi∣pelagus, in the which is the Ilande of Zamal, whiche our men na∣med the Ilande of theeues .ix. degrees and a halfe, and runneth to the quarter of South Southwest, and North Northeast. Te∣renate,Terenate. is vnder the Equinoctiall lyne foure minutes, vnder the pole Antartike.Mutir. Mutir, is directly vnder the Equinoctiall lyne. Macchian is .xv. minutes towarde the pole Antartike, and Bac∣chian one degree.Macchian. These Ilands are lyke iiii. sharpe mountaines, except Macchian,Bacchian. which is not sharpe. The biggest of all these, is Bacchian. Departyng from the Ilande of Mare, and directyng theyr course toward the Southwest, with only .xlvi. men in theyr shyppe, and .xiii. Indians, they passed by the Ilandes of Chaco∣uan,Many Ilands Lagoma, Sico, Gioghi, Caphi, Sulacho, Lumatola, Tentum, Buu, Ambon, Budia, Celaruri, Benaia, Ambalao, Bandon, Zorobua,
Zolot, Noceuamor, Galian, and Mallua, with dyuers other Ilands both great and small, of Moores, Gentiles, and Canibales.The Iland of Mallua. Our men remayned .xv. dayes in the Ilande of Mallua, to re∣payre theyr shyppe in certayne places where it tooke water. All the feeldes of this Ilande is full of long and rounde Pepper, and is situate towarde the pole Antartike vnder the Equinoctial line .viii. degrees and a halfe,Pepper. and is in the longitude of .169. degrees and .40. minutes. The Pilot, whiche our men brought out of the Ilandes of Molucca,Litle men with long eares. tolde them that not farre from thence was an Ilande named Arucetto, in the whiche are men and women not past a cu∣bite in heyght, hauyng eares of suche byggenesse, that they lye vppon one, and couer them with the other. But our men would not sayle thyther, both because the wynde and course of the sea was agaynst them, and also for that they gaue no credite to his reporte. The .xxv. daye of Ianuarie in the yeere .1522. they departed from Mallua, and the day folowyng,The Ilande of Timor. arryued at a great Ilande named Timor, beyng fyue leagues distant from Mallua betweene the south and southwest. In this Ilande is found the wood of whyte Saunders and Gynger,White Saun∣ders and Gyn∣ger. and dyuers kyndes of fruites. Also sundry kyndes of beastes, and plentie of vittaile and golde. They of the Ilandes of Giaua, Molucca, and Lozon, resorte to this Iland for Saunders. The inhabitantes are gen∣tyles.The dyuell ap∣peareth. They saye that when they go to cutte the wood of Saun∣ders, the deuyl appeareth to them in dyuers fourmes, and asketh them what they haue neede of: And that after this vision, many of them are long sicke. In al ye Ilands of this Archipelagus,Saint Iob his disease. rayneth the disease of saint Iob (whiche we call the frenche poxe) more then in any other place in the worlde. Farre from this Ilande betweene the west and northwest, they came to an Ilande named Eude, in the whiche groweth great plentie of Sinamome.Cinamome, The Ilandes of Giana. In this tracte are founde many I∣landes, lying in order as it were one directly behynde an other e∣uen vnto the Iland of the greater Giaua, named Giaua maior,Malaccha. and vnto the cape of Malacha, beyng in East India. Giaua the lesse, is as bygge as the Ilande of Madera, and is but halfe a league distant from Giaua maior. Here they were informed that aboue Giaua maior towarde the north, is a great gulfe called the gulfe
of China, in the whiche are trees of exceedyng byggnesse, inhabi∣ted with foules of such greatnesse,The great gulfe of China. that they cary great beastes in the ayre. The fruites of these trees are as byg as Cucummers. The cape of Malacha, is one degree and a halfe aboue the E∣quinoctiall line toward the pole Artike.The cape of Malacha. On the east syde of this cape, runneth a very long coast, in the which are many regions & cities, wherof some are called by these names, Cingaporla, whi∣che is the cape.The names of many regions. Also Pahan, Calantan, Patani, Braalin, Benu, Lon∣gon, and Odia, wherin is the citie in the whiche dwelleth the kyng of Sian named Zacabedera. Theyr cities are buylded as ours are, and subiect to the kyng of Sian. After the realme of Sian, are the regions of Iamgoma,Rubarbe. and Campaa, where Reubarbe groweth, of the whiche are diuers opinions, some supposyng it to be a roote, and other a putrified tree, affyrming that if it were not putrified, it should not haue so great a sauour. They call it Calama. Next vnto this, is founde the great China, whose kyng is thought to be the greatest prince in the worlde,The great kyng of China. and is named Santoa Raia. Fur∣thermore, all that is written hereafter of this kyng and these re∣gions, they learned by thinformation of a Moore that was in the Iland of Timor. He affirmed that the sayd kyng hath threescore and tenne crowned kynges vnder his empyre, and hath a port in the sea named Canthan, and two principall cities named Nau∣chin and Connulaha, where he remaineth hym selfe, and hath euer foure of his chiefe princes lying about his palace on euery syde, towarde the east, west, north, and south, geuyng dilygent atten∣daunce what is done in euery of theyr quarters.The greater India. All the princes of the greater India (called India Maior) and of that whereof I haue spoken before, are obedient to this kyng. And in token that they are true subiectes, they keepe in theyr palaces, which are in the myddest of theyr cities,The beast called Linx. the beast called Linx, beyng fayrer then a Lion, and is the great kynges signet, whiche all such as intende to go to China, beare with them sealed in waxe, or on a peece of Iuerye, for theyr safe conducte, without the whiche they may not enter into the hauen. When any of his kynges rebell or are disobedient, he cau∣seth them to be flayen, and salted, and dryed at the Sunne, then to be stuffed with chaffe,The punish∣ment of rebels. and set vp on some hygh thyng in the myddest of the chiefe streate of the citie, where al the people may
see it. He neuer suffereth his owne person to be openly seene to any man: But when his noble men of the courte are desyrous to see hym,The kyng is not seene but at a glasse. he commeth downe from his palace into a ryche paui∣lion, accompanyed with syxe of his principall concubines, appa∣relled with lyke vestures as he hym selfe is. All this way he is not seene, by reason of the pauilion. When he hath passed through the pauylyon, he entereth into a Serpent, named Nagha, be∣yng the most marueylous and ryche woorke of the worlde,A thyng of strange worke∣manshyp. and placed in the greatest courte of the palace. When the kyng entereth into this with the women, to the intent that he may not be knowen among them, he causeth the sayde noble men one∣ly to looke in at a glasse whiche is in the breste of the Serpent, where they see the kyng among the women, but can not discerne whiche is he. He ioyneth in maryage with his syster, that the blood royall be not myxte with any other.The kyng ma∣rieth his syster. His palace. His palace is en∣uironed with seuen large walles, the one beyng farre distant from the other, and hath in euery suche circuite tenne thousand men for the garryson of his palace,A marueylous garde. who haue theyr waytyng dayes appoynted them course by eourse, with fresshe men in theyr places, and thus keepe theyr watche continually both day and nyght. In this palace are .lxxix. haules, in the whiche is an in∣finite number of women that serue the kyng,Women serue the kyng. hauyng euer lyght torches in theyr handes for the greater magnificence. He that woulde see all the palace, shoulde spende a whole daye therein. Among other, there are foure principal haules,Foure marue∣lous haulles. where somtimes the kyng geueth audience to his noble men. Of these, one is couered both aboue and beneath with metall, an other all ouer with syluer, the thyrde with golde, and the fourth with pearles & precious stones. These people of China, are whyte men, appare∣led as we are, and eate theyr meate on tables as we do. They haue the crosse in some estimation,The people of China. but knowe not the cause whye. Beyonde the coaste of China, are dyuers other nations and people, as Cheneby, where Pearles and Sinamonie are founde: also the people named Lickij, where reigneth the great kyng of Mien, hauyng vnder hym .xxii. kynges, and is subiecte to the kyng of China. Here is also founde the great citie of Cathay▪The great kyng of Mien. Cathay. in the East, and dyuers other nations in the sayde fyrme lande, of the which some are bruityshe, and beastiall, whiche vse to kyll
and eate theyr parentes when they be olde, thynkyng thereby that they shall reuyue in them: All these people are Gentyles. The .xi. daye of February in the yeere .1522. they departed from the Ilande of Timos, and were ingulfed by chaunce in the great sea called Lantchidol,The sea of Lantchidol. and tooke theyr course betweene the west and southwest, leauyng the north coastes on theyr ryght hande, fearyng least if they shoulde sayle towarde the firme land, they myght be seene of the Portugales,Malacha. who are of great power in Malacha:The Iland of Sumetra. and therefore dyrected theyr course without the I∣lande of Sumatra, called in olde tyme Taprobana, leauyng also on theyr ryght hand,Pegu. Bangala. Calecut. Canonor. Coa. Cambala. Ormus. East India. Cap. de Buona Speranza. vppon the fyrme lande, the prouinces and regions of Pegu, Bengala, Calecut, Canonor, Coa, Cambaia, the gulfe of the Iland of Ormus, and all the coastes of the greater In∣dia. And more safely to passe the cape of Buona Speranza, beyng aboue Affrike, they sayled about .xlii. degrees towarde the pole Antartike, & remayned seuen weekes about that cape, with ma∣ny fetches compassyng the wynde with theyr sayles continually alofte, because they had a west and northwest wynde in the proos of theyr shyppe, whiche woulde not suffer them to passe. The cape of Buona Speranza, is toward the pole Antartike, beneath the Equinoctiall line .34. degrees and a halfe, and .1600. leagues from the cape of Malacha, and is the greatest and most daungerous cape that is founde at this daye in all the worlde. When they had by these peryls ouerpassed this cape, certaine of them, aswell for lacke of vyttayles, as also by reason of sycke∣nesse, were mynded to sayle to a hauen of the Portugales named Monzambique, aboue Affryke: But the other answeared, that they woulde rather dye,The port of Monzambi∣que. then go to any other place then directly to Spayne. They folowed theyr course therefore, saylyng toward the Southwest, two monethes continually without touchyng at any port, in whiche tyme there dyed about .xxi. of theyr com∣pany, whom they cast into the sea. And suerly if God of his in∣finite mercie had not preserued the residue in tyme, they had all dyed of famyn. In fine, beyng inforced of necessitie, and halfe of theyr compa∣nye dead, they sayled to one of the Ilandes of Capo verde, called Insula Sansti Iacobi, that is, sainte Iames Ilande, parteynyng to the kyng of Portugale. Where, as soone as they arryued,
they sent certayne a lande in the shyppe boate for vittayles, de∣claryng to the Portugales with all loue and fauour what necessi∣tie they were dryuen to, and what miseries and trauayles they had susteyned, infourmyng them furthermore of theyr maruey∣lous voyage, and such thynges as they had seene in both the East and West India, with suche other gentle woordes,The ingrati∣tude of the Por∣tugales. whereby they obteyned certayne measures of Ryse. But when afterward xiii. of them returned for more Ryse, they were deteyned: Wher∣uppon the rest whiche remayned in the shyppe, fearyng the lyke chaunce, departed with full sayles, and the .vii. day of Septem∣ber with the helpe of God entred into the hauen of San Lucar neere vnto Siuile,The port of S. Lucar neere vnto Siuile. where dischargyng all theyr ordinaunce for ioy, they wente immediatly to the great churche in theyr shiertes, and barefooted, with a torche before them, to geue thankes to al∣myghty God, who had brought them safe to theyr owne country, and restored them to theyr wyues and chyldren. As touching the ende of this voyage, Transiluanus wryteth somewhat more largely, as foloweth. The other shyppe whiche they left behynde them to be repa∣red, returned afterwarde by the Archipelagus afore sayde,What became of the other shyppe. Dariena. and by the great sea to the coastes of the fyrme of the West India, and arryued at a region of the same beyng agaynst Dariena, where the South sea of Sur is separate but by a litle space of lande from the west Ocean, in the which are the Ilands of Hispaniola & Cuba, and other Ilandes of the Spanyardes. The other shyppe whi∣che returned into Spayne by compassyng about the whole bowle of the world by the coastes of East India and Affrike, departing from the Ilande of Tidore,The Cape of Cattigara. and saylyng euer on this syde the E∣quinoctial, dyd not fynde the cape of Cattigara, being about Asia, and (by the description of Ptolome) reachyng many degrees be∣yonde the Equinoctiall: But hauyng sayled many dayes by the mayne sea, they came to the cape of Buona Speranza and from thence to the Ilandes of Capo verde, where theyr shyppe, beyng soore broosed by reason of the long voyage, leaked and tooke wa∣ter, in suche sorte that the maryners, beyng nowe but fewe in number,The voyage, hardly perfor∣med. and those also weake and feeble by reason of long sicke∣nesse & hunger, were not able both to drie the pompe continually, and otherwyse gouerne the shyppe, and were therefore of ne∣cessitie
inforced to go alande at the Ilande of saint Iames, to bye them certayne slaues to helpe them.They bye slaues for lacke of helpe. But beyng destitute of mony, accordyng to the custome of the maryners, they profered them cloues for theyr slaues. The whiche thyng when it came to the eares of the Portugale that was Captayne of that Ilande, he cast .xiii. of them in prison: Whereby the resydue that re∣mayned in the shyppe (beyng nowe but .xviii. in number) were put in such feare, that they departed immediatly without rescuing theyr felowes, & sailed continually both by day & by night by the coastes of Afrike, & came in fine to Spaine yt .vi. day of Septem∣ber in the yeere of our lorde .1522. and arryued at the port nere vnto Siuile the .xvi. moneth after they departed from the Iland of Tidore. Maryners doubtlesse more woorthy to be celebrate with eternall memory then they whiche in olde tyme were called Argonauti,Maryners woorthy im∣mortal fame. that sayled with Iason to wyn the golden fleese in the region of Cholchis & the ryuer of Phasis in the great sea of Pontus. And the shyppe it selfe, more worthy to be placed among the starres, then that olde Argo, whiche departyng out of Grecia, sayled to the ende of that great sea. For this our marueylous shyppe, takyng her voyage from the straightes of Gibelterra, and saylyng by the great Ocean towarde the South and pole Antar∣tike, and turnyng from thence to the West, folowed that course so farre, that passyng vnder the great circumference of the world, she came into the East, and from thence agayne into the West, not by returnyng backewarde, but styll sayling forward, so com∣passing about the ball of the worlde vnder the whole circumfe∣rence of heauen, vntyll she were myraculously restored to her na∣tiue region of Spayne, and house of Siuile.
¶ The debate and stryfe betweene the Spanyardes and Portugales, for the Diuision of the Indies, and the trade of Spyces, and also for the Ilandes of Mo∣lucca, which some call Malucas. VVrit∣ten in the Spanishe tongue by Fran∣cisco Lopes de Gomara. THe Emperours maiestie was very glad that the Malucas and Ilandes of the Spycery were discouered, and that he myght passe vnto them through his owne countreys, without any pre∣iudice or hurt to the Portugales: and because al∣so that Almanzor, Lusfu, and Corala, whiche were the lordes of the Spycerie, shewed them selues to be his freendes,Iohn Seba∣stian. and be∣came tributaries to hym. He also gaue certayne gyftes and re∣wardes to Iohn Sebastian for his great paynes and good seruice, forasmuche as he craued a rewarde for the good newes that the Ilandes of the Malucas, and other Ilandes rycher and greater then they, were found to be in his part of those countreys which parteyned vnto hym, accordyng to the Popes Bull. And hereby it came to passe, that there was great contention and stryfe be∣tweene the Spanyardes and the Portugales, about the Spycery, and the diuision of the Indies, by reason of the returne of Iohn Sebastian, and the information whiche he gaue thereof: who also affirmed, that the Portugales had neuer any entraunce before that tyme into those Ilandes. Hereupon the counsayle for the In∣dies aduertised the Emperour to maynteyne his fleete for those partes, and to take the trade of Spyces into his owne hande,The trade of spices partei∣neth to Them∣perour. forasmuche as it was his owne of duetie, aswell for that those Ilandes fell on his part, as also that he had nowe found passage and way through his West Indies into those regions: and fi∣nally, to consyder that he shoulde thereby obteyne and geat to hym selfe great reuenues, besyde the inrychyng of his subiectes and realmes, and that with small cost and charge. The Emperour, beyng thus aduertised of the trueth, tooke it for good counsayle, & commaunded all thynges herevnto appertey∣nyng to be furnyshed accordyngly. In this meane tyme,Iohn kyng of Portugale. when kyng Iohn of Portugale had knowledge what the Emperour
determined to do, and the speedy haste his counsayle made for the perfourmaunce hereof, and of the commyng home of Iohn Sebastian of Cane, with thinformation he made, what of stoutnes of mynde, and what for griefe, was puffed vp with anger, as were also the reste of the Portugales, stormyng as though they would haue plucked downe the skye with theyr handes, not a li∣tle fearyng lest they should lose the trade of Spices, yf the Spa∣nyardes should once put in theyr foote. Whereupon the kyng immediatly made supplication to the Emperour, not to set for∣ward any shippes, vntyll it were determined to whether of them those Ilandes shoulde belong: and that he would not so much en∣domage hym, as to cause hym to lose the trade of Spyces, which was so cominodious and profitable to hym:The trade of Spices. and finally, to auoide the occasion of murder and bloodshed, whiche were lyke to ensue therof, yf the Spanyardes and Portugales shippes shoulde meete togeather. The Emperour, although he knewe that al this was but to make delayes, and prolongyng of tyme, yet was he glad to haue it tryed by iustice, for the better iustification of his cause and ryght. In fine, both parties were agreed to appoynt learned men,The controuer∣sie determined by Cosmogra∣phers and Pilots. Cosmographers and Pilottes, whiche shoulde determine the controuersie betweene them: promisyng on both parties to abyde and stande to the sentence & determination made by those persons, appoynted and sworne to iudge indifferently. The Repartition and diuision of the Indies and newe world, betweene the Spaniardes and the Portugales. THis matter concernyng the trade of Spi∣ces, and the new worlde of the Indies, by reason of the great ryches therof, was of great importaunce, and very difficult to be limitted, and drawen forth by lines. By rea∣son wherof, it was necessary and conuenient to seeke wyse and worshipfull men, experte in Nauigations,The arbytrers on the Empe∣rours syde. in Cosmographie, and the Mathematical sci∣ences. The Emperour for his syde chose and named, for Iudges of the possession, the Licentiate Acuna, one of the kynges coun∣sayle, also the Licentiate Barrientos, of the counsayl of the orders,
the licentiate Petro Manuel, Auditor of the courte of the Chaun∣cerie in Valladolith. For Iudges of the propertie, he chose Don Fernando Colono, the sonne of Christopher Colonus: Also Doctor Sancho Salaya, Peter Ruiz of Villegas, Fryer Thomas Duran, Simon of Alcazaua, and Iohn Sebastian of Cano. His aduocate and Atturney, he made the licentiate Iohn Rodriguez of Pisa: and for his fyscall Doctour Ribera, and his Secretarie, Barthalo∣me Ruiz of Castaneda. He also appoynted that Sebastian Cabote,Sebastian Cabote. Steuen Gomes, Nunnio Gracia, Diego Riuero, beyng all experte Pilottes, and cunnyng in makyng cardes for the sea, should bee present, and bryng foorth theyr Globes and Mappes,Instruments of Cosmogra∣phie. The Ilandes of Maluca. with other instrumentes necessarie to declare the situation of the Ilandes of the Malucas, about the which was al the contention & strife. But order was taken, that they should shew theyr myndes on neyther syde, nor enter into the company of the other, but when they were called. All these, and dyuers other, went togeather to a towne called Badaioz: and as many Portugales came to Elbes,The Arbitrers on the Portu∣gales syde. or rather more. For they brought with them two Fiscalles and two Aduocates. The principall of them, was the licentiate An∣tonie de Asseuedo, Diego Lopes of Sequeyra, the Clarke of the weyghtes and receptes, who had before been gouernour in In∣dia. Also Peralfonso of Melo, Clarke, Simon of Tauira, with dyuers other, whose names I knowe not. Before they mette to∣geather, the one parte remaynyng at Badaioz, and the other in Elbes, there was muche adoe among them, before they coulde agree vppon the place where they should meete,The place where they mette. and who should speake fyrst: For the Portugales doe greatly weygh such circum∣stances. At the laste, they concluded to meete togeather at Caya, a litle ryuer which diuideth Castile from Portugale, stan∣dyng in the myd way betweene Badaioz and Elbes. And when they were assembled togeather one day at Badaioz, and an other day at Elbes, and saluted the one the other, both parties were sworne that they should proceede and speake accordyng to truth,The order of theyr proces. iustice, and equitie. The Portugales refused Simon de Alcaza∣ua, bycause he was a Portugale, and Fryer Thomas Duran, bycause he had sometyme ben Preacher to theyr Kyng: So that Simon was by consent put out of the company, in whose roome was placed maister Antonie of Alcaraz. Yet fell they not
to reasonyng the matter, vntyll the Fryer was put out. They were many dayes in beholdyng Globes, Mappes, and Cardes of the sea, and hearyng what myght be sayde, both sydes allea∣gyng for the ryght whiche they pretended.The Portu∣gales. But the Portugales standyng in vayne contention, sayde very angerly, The Ilandes of Maluca, wherevppon theyr meetyng and reasonyng was at that present, fell on theyr parte, and was of theyr conquest: and that they both had been there, and had them in theyr possession before Iohn Sebastian had euer seene them:Contention for drawyng the lyne of the di∣uision. Lykewyse that the lyne should be drawen from the Iland of Bonauista, or the Ilande called de la Sal, whiche are the most Easterly Ilandes from Ca∣bouerde, and not from the Ilande of Santanton, or sainct Antonie, which lyeth towarde the Weste, and are .lxxxx. leagues the one from the other. All this was no more but to contend, and the other of the Malucas, is vntrue: But they that haue a naugh∣tie matter, must set it foorth with woordes and brabbelyng. Here they founde howe greatly they were deceyued,Howe the Por∣tugales were deceyued. in that they de∣maunded that the lyne should be drawen three hundred threescore and tenne leagues more to the West, from the Ilandes of Ca∣bouerde (as appeareth hereafter) and not one hundred, accordyng to the assignement of the Popes Bull.The Spany∣ardes allega∣tions. The Spanyardes on the contrary parte affyrmed, and made demonstration, that not only the Ilandes of Lurney, Gilolo, Zubut, and Tidore, with the other Ilandes of the Malucas: but as well Samatra, Malacha, and a great parte of China,Samatra. Malacha. China. Magallanes. should belong to the Castilians, and that those countreys fell on theyr syde, and on the parte of theyr con∣quest: Also, that Magallanes and Iohn Sebastian were the first Christian men that founde them, and obteyned them for the Em∣perour, as the letters and presentes of Almanzor doe testifie. And although the Portugales had been there fyrst, yet went they thyther after the donation of the Pope: neyther got they any ryght or iuste tytle thereby. For although they shoulde drawe the lyne by Buena Vista,Buena Vista. what inconuenience should folow ther∣of, sith as well by the one way as the other, the Ilandes of the Malucas muste parteyne to the Castilians? yea and moreouer, the Ilandes of Cabouerde shoulde also parteyne to the Castili∣ans,The Ilandes of Cabo Verde. forsomuche as drawyng the lyne by Buena Vista, the I∣landes of the Malucas doe remayne within the lyne on the
Emperours syde. They continued in these controuersies for the space of two monethes, without any resolution or end made. For the Portugales prolonged and put of the matter,The Portu∣gales cauil∣lations. fleeyng from the sentence with cauillations and colde reasons, to the ende that they myght dissolue that assembly without any conclusion or determination: for so it stoode them vpon The Castilians which were the Iudges of the propertie,The lyne of diuision. drue a lyne in the great globe three hundred and .70. leagues from sainct Antonies Ilande, ly∣ing by Weste Cabo Verde, accordyng to the intreatie and deter∣mination which was agreed vppon, betweene the Catholyke Princes and the kyng of Portugale. These Iudges gaue sen∣tence vppon this matter,The sentence. callyng the contrary parte before them vppon the brydge of Caya, in the yeere .1524. The Portugales could neyther disturbe or deferre the sentence, nor yet would they allowe it to be iust, and accordyng to ryght: Saying that there was not sufficient processe made, that they should passe to the gi∣uyng of sentence: and so departed, threatenyng to sleye the Ca∣stilians,The Portu∣gales threaten death to the Castilians. as many as they should fynde in the Ilandes of the Ma∣lucas: For they knewe ryght well that theyr countreymen the Portugales, had already taken the shyppe called the Trinitie, and had also taken the Castilians in Tidore. Then also departed our men, takyng theyr iourney to the Courte, gyuyng vp to the Em∣perour all their writinges and declaration what they had done. And according to this declaration must be signed and marked all Globes and Mappes whiche good Cosmographers & maisters doe make. The line also of the repartition and last diuision of the newe world of the Indies,The line of the last diuision. ought to passe (litle more or lesse) by the poyntes of Humos and Buen Abrigo, as I haue sayde in an o∣ther place. And thus shall it appeare euidently, that the Ilandes of spices, and also the great Ilande of Samotra, doe parteyne to Castile.The great I∣lande of Sa∣motra. The lande of Brasile, partey∣neth to the Portugales. But the lande of Brasile parteyneth to the kyng of Portu∣gale, where the Cape of sainct Augustine is, being .viii. degrees beneath the Equinoctiall. This lande reacheth from the poynte of Humos to the poynte of Buen Abrigo, and is in length North and South .viii. hundred leagues: being also some way two hun∣dred leagues East and West. And heere after these serious matters,A mery tale. wee will rehearse one mery thyng, whiche was this. It so chaunced that as
Frances de Melo, Diego Lopes of Sequeyra, and other of those Por∣tugales of this assembly, walked by the ryuers syde of Guadiana, a litle boye, who stoode keepyng his mothers clothes which shee had washed, demaunded of them whether they were those men that parted the worlde with the Emperour. And as they answe∣red, yea: he tooke vp his sherte and shewed them his bare arse, saying, Come and drawe your lyne heere through the myddest. Which saying was afterward in euery mans mouth, and laugh∣ed at in the towne of Badaios: yea euen among the Commissio∣ners them selues, of whom some were angry, and some maruey∣led at the saying of the chylde. The cause and aucthoritie whereby they diuided the Indies. THe Castilians and Portugales had long deba∣ted and reasoned about the golde myne of Guinea,The gold mine of Guinea. which was found in the yeere of our Lorde .1471. in the tyme of the raigne of Don Alonso kyng of Portugale,Alonso kyng of Portugale. Golde for thinges of small value. ye fyrst of that name. This was a matter of great impor∣taunce: For the Negros or blacke Moores, for thinges of no value, gaue golde by whole handfulles, whiche was at that tyme when the sayde kyng of Portugale pretended ti∣tle and clayme to the kingdome of Castile,Contention for the kingdome of Castile. in the ryght of his wife Queene Ioane (called the excellent) agaynst the Catholyke Princes Isabel, and Don Fernando, whose it was in deede. But that stryfe was ended as soone as Don Fernando had vanqui∣shed Don Alonso,Warre against the Moores of Granada. The conquests of the Portu∣gales in Affrike at a place called Temulos, nor farre from Toro, whiche place Don Fernando chose rather to make warre agaynst the Moores of Granada, then to buye and sell with the blacke Moores of Guinea. And thus the Portugales remayned with the conqueste of Affryke, from the streightes forwarde: which beganne where the infante of Portugale Don Henrique (sonne to Kyng Iohn the bastarde, and maister of Auis) dyd begyn to enlarge it.Pope Alex∣ander. When Pope Alexander the .vi. (beyng a Ualen∣tinian borne) had knowledge hereof, hee mynded to gyue the Indies to the kynges of Castile, without any preiudice to the Portugales, who had conquered the sea coastes of Affryke.
These Indies, the Pope gaue of his owne mynde without the motion of any other, with this burden & charge, that they should conuerte the Idolatours to the fayth of Christ:The Pope maketh the diui∣sion. and commaun∣ded a lyne or meridian to bee drawen North and South, from one hundred leagues Westward, beyonde one of the Ilandes of Capo Verde towarde the Weste, bycause the Spanyardes should not meddle in Affrike,The kyng of Portugale re∣fuseth to stande to the Popes Bull. parteynyng to the conquest of the Por∣tugales, to the auoydyng of all stryfe betweene them. Kyng Iohn of Portugale, the seconde of that name, was greatly of∣fended when he red the Bull and donation of the pope, although his owne Ambassadours had made the selfe same request vnto his holinesse: He also founde him selfe agreeued with the Ca∣tholyke princes Isabel and Fernando, that they had shortened the course of the landes he had discouered, depriuyng him of the rychesse which belonged to him, and therefore refused to stande to the Popes Bull in this case: desiryng the Catholyke prin∣ces Isabel and Fernando, to graunt him three hundred leagues more to the West, besyde the one hundred which they had graun∣ted before: and threwith sent his shyppes to keepe the coastes of Affryke. The princes Catholyke were content to satisfie his mynd, and to please him according to theyr gentle nature, and for the aliance that was betweene them: And in fine, with the consent & agreement of the Pope,The agreement of the last di∣uision. graunted two hundred & sixtie leagues more then the Bull made mention of, at Tordesillas the seuenth day of Iune, in the yeere of our Lorde .1494. And wher∣as our kynges thought that they shoulde haue loste grounde in graunting so many leagues that way, they woon by that meanes the Ilandes of the Malucas, with many other ryche Ilandes. The kyng of Portugale also herein deceyued him selfe, or was deceyued of his, whom he put in trust,Wherein the Portugales were deceyued. hauyng no certayne know∣ledge of the situation of the Ilandes of the ryche Spicery, in demaundyng that which the kyng dyd demaunde: For it had ben better for him to haue requested the three hundred and sixtie leagues, rather Eastwarde from the Ilandes of Capo Verde, then towarde the Weste. And yet for all that, I doubt whe∣ther the Malucas should haue fallen within his conquest, accor∣dyng to the ordinarie accoumpte and dimension which the Py∣lottes and Cosmographers doe make. And after this maner they
diuided the Indies betweene them by aucthoritie of the Pope, for the auoydyng of further stryfe and contention. Howe and by what occasion the Emperour layde the Ilandes of Maluccas to pledge to the kyng of Portugale. WHen the Kyng of Portugale Don Iuan the thyrd of that name, had knowledge that the Cosmographers and pylottes of Castile, had drawen the lyne from the place before na∣med, and that he could not deny the trueth, fearyng also thereby to leese the trade of spi∣ces, made suite & request to the Emperour, that he should not sende foorth Louisa,Sebastian Cabote. nor Sebastian Cabote to the Malucas, and that the Castilians should not attempte the trade of spices, nor see suche euylles and miseries as his Captaynes had shewed in those Ilandes to them that aduentured that viage with Magallanes: which thyng he greatly couered, although he payde all the charges of those two fleetes, and made other great bar∣gaynes. In the meane tyme, the Emperour maryed the Lady Isabel,The Empe∣rour and the kyng of Portu∣gale ioyned in aliance by ma∣ryage. sister to kyng Iohn, and kyng Iohn maryed the Lady Catharine, sister to the Emperour: whereby this matter waxed colde, although the kyng ceassed not to speake hereof, euer mo∣uyng the partition. The Emperour by the meanes of a certaine Biscaine that was with Magallanes in the gouernours shyp, had knowledge what the Portugales had done to the Castilians in the Ilande of Tidore,The Portu∣gales robbe the Castilians. whereof he tooke great displeasure, & brought the sayde maryner face to face before the Ambassadours of Por∣tugale, who denyed all that he sayd, one of them beyng the chiefe Captayne and gouernour of India, when the Portugales tooke the Castilians in Tidore, and robbed them of theyr Cloues & Ci∣namome, and suche other thinges as they had in the shyp named the Trinitie. But as the kyng of Portugales trade was great, and our necessitie greater,The coronati∣on of the Em∣perour. in the meane tyme Themperour (who was nowe goyng into Italie to be crowned in the yeere .1529.) gaged the Malucas and the spicerie to the kyng of Portugale,The gagyng of he Ilandes of Malucas. for three hundred and fyftie thousande Ducates, without any tyme
determyned,Zamatra and Malaca. otherwyse then the controuersie defined vppon the brydge of the ryuer of Caya: for the which thyng, kyng Iohn pu∣nyshed the licentiate Azeuedo, bycause he payde the money with∣out declaration of the tyme. The couenaunt of the pledge was blyndly made, and greatly agaynst the myndes of the Castilians, as men that well vnderstoode the profite, commoditie, and ry∣ches of that trade: Affyrmyng that the trade of spices myght haue been rented, for one yeere or for two, for sixe tymes as much as the kyng gaue for it. Peter Ruiz of Villegas, who was twise called to the bargayne, as once at Granada, and an other tyme at Madrid, sayde that it had ben muche better to haue pledged Estremadura or Serena, or other great landes and cities, rather then the Malucas, Zamatra, or Malaca, or other ryche landes and ryuers in the East, not yet well knowen: forasmuch as it may so chaunce, that either by continuance of tyme, or aliance, the pledge myght be forgoten, as though it parteyned to the ryght of Por∣tugale. In fine, the Emperour considered not the Iewell that he pledged, nor the kyng what he receyued. The Emperour was oftentimes counsayled to release the pledge of those Ilands, in consideration of all the aduantage he myght haue thereby in fewe yeeres. Furthermore, in the yeere .1548. the procuratours of Cortes beyng in Valladold, made petition to the Emperour, to surrender the spicerie to the kyngdome of Castle for vi. yeeres, and that they woulde repaye to the kyng of Portugale his .350. thousande crownes, and after those yeeres, restore the trade to the crowne, that his maiestie myght inioye the same, as was agreed at the beginnyng But the Emperour, being then in Flaunders, sent woord to the counsayle, that they should not assent to Cortes his request, nor speake any more hereof. Whereat, some maruey∣led, other were sory, and all helde theyr peace.
Exemplar Bullae Seu Donationis, Autoritate cuius, Epi∣scopus Romanus Alexander eius nominis sextus, con∣cessit et donauit Castellae regibus & suis successo∣ribus, regiones & Insulas noui orbis in Oce∣anooccidentali Hispanorum nauiga∣tionibus repertas. ALexander Episcopus, seruus seruorū Dei, Cha∣rissimo in Christo filio Ferdinando Regi, et Cha∣rissimae in Christo filiae Elizabeth Reginae Ca∣stellae, Legionis, Aragonum, Siciliae, et Grana∣tae, illustribus, salutem et Apostolicam benedic∣tionem. Inter caetera Diuinae maiestati beneplacita opera et cordis nostri desiderabilia, illu profecto potissimum existit vt fides catholica & Christiana religio nostris praesertim temporibus exaltetur ac vbilibet amplietur ac dilatetur, animarum{que} salus pro∣curetur, ac barbarae nationes deprimantur et ad fidem ipsam reducan∣tur. Vnde cum ad hanc sacram Petri sedem Diuina fauente clemen∣tia (meritis licet imparibus) euocati fueremus, cognoscentes vos tanquam veros catholicos reges et principes: quales semper fuisse no∣uimus, & a vobis praeclare gesta, toti pens orbinotissima demonstrāt, nedum id exoptare, sed omni conatu, studio, et diligentia, nullis labo∣ribus, nullis impensis, nullisque parcendo periculis, etiam proprium sanguinem effundendo efficere, ac omnem animum vestrum, omnesque conatus ad hoc iam dudum dedicasse, quemadmodum recuperato reg∣ni Granatae a tyrannis de Sarracenorum hodiernis temporibus per vos, cum tanta Diuini nominis gloria facta, testatur. Digne ducimur non immerito, et debemus illa vobis etiam sponte, ac fauorabiliter con∣cedere per quae huiusmodi sāctū ac laudabile ab immortali deo acceptū propositum, indies feruentiori animo ad ipsius dei honorem et mperij Christiani propagationem, prosequi valeatis. Sane accepimus que vos qui dudum animum proposuratis aliquas insulas et terras firma remotas et incognitas, ac per alios hactenus non repertas, quaerere et inuenire, vt illarum incolas et habitatores ad colendum redemptorem nostrum et fidem catholicam profitendum reduceretis, hactenus in ex∣pugnatione et recuperatione ipsius regni Granatae plurimum occupati, uiusmodi sanctum et laudabile propositum vestrum ad optatum finem
perducere nequiuistis: Sed tamem sicut Domino placuit, regno predicto recuperato, volentes desiderium vestrum adimpere, dilectum filium Christophorum Colonum, virum vtique dignum, et plurimum commendatum, ac tanto negotio aptum, cum na∣uigijs et hominibus ad similia instructis, non sine maximis labori∣bus, ac periculis, et expensis destinastis vt terras firmas et insulas re∣motas et incognitas, huiusmodi per mare vbi hactenus nauigatum non fuerat, diligenter inquireret. Qui tandem (Diuino auxilio fasta ex∣trema diligentia in mari Oceano nauigantes) certas insulas remotis∣simas, et etiam terras firmas, quae per alios hastenus reperte non fue∣rant, inuenerunt. In quibus plurimae gentes pacifice viuentes, et (vt assiritur) nudi incedentes, nec carnibus vescentes, inhabitant: Et vt praefati nuncij vestri possunt opinari, gentes ipsae in Insulis, et terris praedistis habitantes, credunt vnum deum creatorem in Coelis esse, ac ad fidem catholicam amplexandum et bonis moribus imbuen∣dum, satis apti videntur: Spesque habetur, quod si erudiretur, no∣men saluatoris Domini nostri Iesu Christi in terris et insulis praedictis facile induceretur. Ac prefatus Christophorus in vna ex principa∣libus Insulis praedictis, iam vnam turrim satis munitam, in qua cer∣tos Christianos qui secum inerant in custodiam, et vt alias insulas ac terras firmas remotas et incognitas inquirerent posuit, construi et aedificari fecit. In quibus quidem Insulis et terris iam repertis, au∣rum, aromata, et aliae quam plurimae res praeciosae diuersi generis et diuersae qualitatis reperiuntur. Vnde omnibus diligenter, et praeser∣tim fidei catholicae exaltatione et dilatione (prout decet Catholicos Reges et Principes) consideratis, more progenitorum vestrorum clarae memoriae Regum, terras firmas et insulas predictas, illarumque inco∣las et habitatores, vobis diuina fauente clementia subijcere, et ad fi∣dem Catholicam reducere proposuistis. Nos itaque huiusmodi vestrum sanctum et laudabile propositum plurimum in domino com∣mendantes, ac cupientes vt illud ad debitum finem perducatur, et ip∣sum nomen saluatoris nostri in partibus illis inducatur, hortamus vos quamplurimum in domino, et per sacri lauacri susceptionem, qua mandatis Apostolicis obligati estis, et per viscera misericordiae Do∣mini nostri Iesu Christi attente requiribus, vt cum expeditionem u∣iusmodi omnino prosequi et assumere prona mente orthodoxae fidei zelo intendatis, populos in uiusmodi Insulis et terris degentes, ad Christianam religionem suscipiendum inducere
velitis et debeatis, nec pericula nec labores vllo vnquam tempore vos deterreant, firma spe fiduciaque conceptis, quod Deus omnipotens conatus vestros foeliciter prosequetur. Et vt tanti negoij prountiam Apostolicae gratiae largitate donati, liberius et audacius assumatis, motu proprio non ad vestram vel alterius, pro vobis super hoc nobis oblatae petitionis instantiam, sed de nostra mera liberalitate, et ex certa scientia, ac de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, omnes Insuas et terras firmas inuentas et inueniendas, detestas et detegēdas versus Occidentem et Meridiem, fabricando et construendo vnam lineam a polo Arctico, scilicet Septentrione, ad polum Antarcticum, scilicet Meridiem, siue terrae firmae et insulae inuentae, et iueniendae sint, versus Indiā, aut versus aliam quamcumque partem, quae linea distet a qualibet insularum, quae vulgariter nuncupantur de los Azores, et Cabo verde centum leucis, versus Occidentem et Meridiem. Itaque omnes insulae et terrae firmae repertae et reperiēdae, detectae et detegen∣dae a praefata linea versus Occidemtem et Meridiem, quae per alium Regem aut Principem Christianum non fuerint actualiter possesse vsque ad diem natiuitatis Domini Nostri Iesu Christi proxime praete∣ritum, a quo incipit annus praesens Millessimus Quadringentessi∣mus Nonogessimus tertius, quando fuerunt per nuncios et capitaneos vestros inuentae aliquae praedictarum insularum, Autoritate omnipo∣tentis Dei nobis in beato Petro concessa, ac viccariatus Iesu Christi, qua fungimur in terris, cum omnibus illarum dominijs, ciuitatibus, castris, locis, et villis, iuribusque et iurisdictionibus ac pertinentijs vni∣uersis vobis, heredibusque, et successoribus vestris (Castellae et Legi∣onis regibus) in perpetuum tenore praesentium donamus, concedimus, et assignamus: Vosque, et haeredes, ac successores prefatos illarum Do∣minos, cum plena, libera, et omnimoda potestate, autoritate, et iuris∣dictione, facimus, constituimus, et deputamus. Decernentes nihilo mi∣nus, per huiusmodi donationē, concessionē et assignationē nostrā, nul∣lo Christiano Principi, qui actualiter prefatas insulas et terras firmas possederit vsque ad predictum diem natiuitatis Domini nostri Iesu Christiius quaesitum, sublatum intelligi posse, aut auferri debere. Et insuper mandamus vobis in vertute sanctae obedientiae (vt sicut pollicemini et non dubitmus pro vestra maxima deuotione et regia magnanimitate vos esse facturos) ad terras firmas et insulas pre∣dictas, viros probos et Deum timentes, doctos, peritos, et expertos ad instrendū incolas et habtaitores prefatos in fide chatholica, et bonis
moribus inbuendum, destinare debeatis, omnē debitam diligentiam in praemissis adhibentes. A quibuscumque personis, cuiuscunque dignita∣tis, etiā imperialis et regalis status, gradus, ordinis vel conditionis, sub excommunicationis latae sentētiae poena quā eo ipso, si contra fecerint incurrant, districtius inhibemus ne ad insulas et terras firmas in∣uentas et inueniendas, detectas et detegendas versus Occidentem et Meridiem, fabricando et construendo lineam a polo Arctico ad polum Antarcticum, siuae terrae firmae et Isulae inuentae et inueniendae sint versus Indiam aut versus aliam quamcumque partem, quae linea distet a qualibet insularum, que vulgariter nuncupantur de los Azores, et Cabo verde centum lucis versus Occidentem et Meridem vt praefertur, pro mercibus habendis, vell qua∣uis alia causa accedere praesumat, absque vestra ac haeredum et successorum vestrorum praedictorum licentia speciali: Non obstanti∣bus constitutionibus et ordinationibus Apostolicis, caeterisque quibus∣cumque, in illo in quo imperia et dominationes et bona cuncta proce∣dunt: Confidentes quod dirigente Domino actus vestros, si huiusmodi sanctum ac laudabile propositum prosequamini, breui tempore cum foelicitate et gloria totius populi Christiani, vestri labores et conatus exitum felicissimum consequentur. Verum quia difficile foret prae∣sentes literas ad singula quaeque loca in quibus expediens fue∣rit deferri, volumus ac motu et scientia similibus decernimus, quod illarum transsumptis manu publici notarij inderogati sub∣scriptis, et sigillo alicuius personae in ecclesiastica dignitate consti∣tutae, seu curiae ecclesiastice munitis, ea prorsus fides in iudicio et ex∣tra ac alias vbilibet adhibeatur, quae praesentibus adhiberetur si essent adhibitae vel ostensae. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat banc paginam nostrae commen∣dationis, hortationis, requisitionis, donationis, concessonis, assignationis, constitutionis, deputationis, decreti, mandati, inhibitionis, et volun∣tatis, infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri et Pauli Apostolorum eius, se nouerit incursurum. Datum Romae apud sanctum Petrum, Anno incarnationis Dominicae 1593 quarto nonas Maij, Pontificatus nostri, anno primo.
The copie of the Bull or donation, by thauthoritie where∣of, Pope Alexander the syxt of that name, gaue and graunted to the kinges of Castile & their succes∣sours, the Regions and Ilandes founde in the west Ocean sea, by the nauigations of the Spanyardes. ALexander Byshop, the seruaunt of the ser∣uauntes of God, to our most deare beloued sonne in Christ kyng Ferdinando, and to our deare beloued daughter in Christ Elizabeth Queene of Castyle, Legion, Aragon, Sicilie, and Granata, most noble princes, gretyng, and Apostolical benediction. Among other woorkes acceptable to the diuine maiestie, and accordyng to our hartes desyre, this certaynely is the chiefe, that the Catholyke fayth and Christian religion, specially in this our tyme, may in all places be exalted, amplified, and enlarged, whereby the health of soules may be procured, and the Barbarous nations subdued and brought to the fayth. And therefore whereas by the fauour of Gods clemencie (although not without equall desertes) we are called to this holy seate of Peter, and vnderstanding you to be true Catholyke princes, as we haue euer knowen you, and as your noble and woorthy factes haue declared in maner to the whole world, in that with all your studie, diligence, and industry, you haue spared no trauayles, charges, or peryls, aduenturyng euen the shedyng of your owne blood, with applying your whole myndes and endeuours herevnto, as your noble expeditions achyued in recouering the kyngdom of Granata from the tyrrany of the Sarracens in these our dayes, do plainly declare your factes, with so great glory of the diuine name. For the whiche, as we thynk you worthy, so ought we of our owne free wyl fauorably to graunt you al thynges, whereby you may dayly with more fer∣uent myndes, to the honour of God, and enlargyng the Christian Empire, prosecute your deuout and laudable purpose, most ac∣ceptable to the immortall God. We are credibly infourmed, that whereas of late you were determyned to seeke and fynde certayne Ilandes and fyrme landes, farre remote and vnknowen
(and not heretofore founde by any other) to the intent to bryng the inhabitantes of the same to honor our redeemer, & to professe the catholike fayth, you haue hytherto been much occupied in the expugnation and recouerie of the kyngdome of Granata, by rea∣son wherof you coulde not bryng your sayde laudable purpose to the ende desyred. Neuerthelesse, as it hath pleased almyghtie God, the foresayde kyngdome beyng recouered, wyllyng to ac∣complishe your sayde desyre, you haue, not without great labour, peryls, & charges, appoynted our welbeloued sonne Christopher Colonus (a man certesse wel commended, as most worthy and apt for so great a matter) well furnyshed with men and shippes, and other necessaries, to seeke (by the sea, where hytherto no man hath sayled) suche firme landes and Ilandes farre remote, and hytherto vnknowen, who (by Gods helpe) makyng diligent searche in the Ocean sea, haue founde certayne remote Ilandes & firme landes, whiche were not heretofore found by any other: in the whiche (as is sayde) many nations inhabite, lyuyng peace∣ably, and goyng naked, not accustomed to eate fleshe: and as farre as your messengers can coniecture, the nations inhabytyng the foresayd landes and Ilandes, beleeue that there is one God, creator in heauen, and seeme apt to be brought to the imbrasyng of the catholyke fayth, and to be imbued with good maners: by reason wherof, we may hope that yf they be well instructed, they may easyly be induced to receyue the name of our sauiour Iesus Christe. We are further aduertised, that the forenamed Chri∣stopher hath now buylded and erected a fortresse, with good mu∣nition, in one of the foresayde principall Ilandes, in the whiche he hath placed a garryson of certayne of the Christian men that went thyther with hym, aswell to thintent to defende the same, as also to searche other Ilandes and firme landes farre remote, and yet vnknowen. We also vnderstande, that in these landes and Ilandes lately founde, is great plentie of Golde and Spy∣ces, with diuers and manye other precious thynges, of sundrye kyndes and qualities. Therfore all thynges diligently consyde∣red (especially the amplyfying and enlargyng of the catholike fayth, as i behoueth catholike princes, folowyng the examples of your noble progenitours of famous memorie) whereas you are determined, by the fauour of almyghtie God, to subdue and
bryng to the catholyke fayth thinhabitantes of the aforesayde landes and Ilandes. We greatly commendyng this your godly and laudable pur∣pose in our Lorde, and desyrous to haue the same brought to a due ende, and the name of our sauiour to be knowen in those partes, do exhort you in our Lorde, and by the receiuyng of your holy baptysme, wherby you are bound to Apostolical obedience, & earnestly require you by the bowels of mercie of our Lord Ie∣su Christ, that when you intende for the zeale of the Catholyke fayth to prosecute the sayde expedition, to reduce the people of the forsayde landes and Ilandes to the Christian relgion, you shall spare no labours at any tyme, or be deterred with any peryls, conceiuyng fyrme hope and confidence, that the omnipotent God wyll geue good successe to your godly attemptes. And that be∣yng auctorysed by the priuilege of the Apostolycall grace, you may the more freely and boldly take vppon you thenterpryse of so great a matter, we of our owne motion, and not eyther at your request, or at the instant petition of any other person, but of our owne mere liberalitie and certayne science, and by the ful∣nesse of Apostolycall power, do geue, graunt, and assigne to you, your heyres and successours, all the fyrme landes and Ilandes found, or to be foūd, discouered, or to be discouered, toward ye west & south, drawing a lyne from the pole Artik to ye pole Antartike (that is) from the North to the South: Contaynyng in this do∣nation, whatsoeuer fyrme landes or Ilandes are founde, or to be founde towarde India, or towarde any other part what so euer it be, beyng distant from, or without the foresayde line, drawen a hundred leagues towarde the West and South from any of the Ilandes whiche are commonly called De los Azores and Capo verde. All the Ilandes therefore, and fyrme landes, founde and to be founde, discouered and to be discouered, from the sayde line towarde the West and South, such as haue not actually ben heretofore possessed by any other Christian kyng or prynce, vntyll the daye of the natiuitie of our Lorde Iesu Christ laste paste, from the whiche begynneth this present yeere be∣yng the yeere of our Lorde .M.CCCC.lxxxxiii. when so euer any such shalbe founde by your messengers and captaynes, we by the aucthoritie of almyghty GOD, graunted vnto vs
in saint Peter, and by the office whiche we beare on the earth in the steede of Iesu Christ, do for euer, by the tenor of these pre∣sentes, geue, graunt, assigne, vnto you, your heyres, and suc∣cessours (the kynges of Castyle and Legion) all those landes and Ilandes, with theyr dominions, Territories, cities, castels, towres, places, and villages, with all the ryght, and iurisdic∣tions thereunto parteynyng: constitutyng, assignyng, and depu∣tyng, you, your heyres, and successours, the lordes thereof, with full and free power, aucthoritie, and iurisdiction: Decreeyng neuerthelesse by this our donation, graunt, and assignation, that from no Christian Prince, which actually hath possessed the foresayde Ilandes and fyrme landes, vnto the daye of the na∣tiuitie of our Lord beforesayd, theyr ryght obteyned, to be vnder∣stoode hereby to be taken away, or that it ought to be taken away. Furthermore we commaunde you in the vertue of ho∣ly obedience (as you haue promysed, and as we doubte not you wyll do vppon mere deuotion and princely magnanimitte) to sende to the sayde fyrme landes and Ilandes, honest, vertu∣ous, and learned men, suche as feare GOD, and are able to instruct thinhabitantes in the Catholyke fayth and good maners, applying all theyr possible deligence in the premisses. We fur∣thermore streightly inhibite all maner of persons, of what state, degree, order, or condition soeuer they be, although of Impe∣riall and regall dignitie, vnder the payne of the sentence of ex∣communicatiō, which they shal incurre if they do to the contrary, that they in no case presume, without speciall lycence of you, your heyres, and successours, to trauayle for merchaundies, or for a∣ny other cause, to the sayde landes or Ilandes, founde, or to be founde, discouered, or to be discouered, towarde the West and South, drawyng a lyne from the pole Artyke to the pole Antar∣tike, whether the firme landes and Ilandes, founde and to be founde, be situate toward India, or toward any other part, beyng distant from the line drawen a hundred leagues toward the west, from any of the Ilands commonly called De los Azores and Capo Verde: Notwithstandyng constitutions, decrees, and Apostoly∣call ordinaunces whatsoeuer they are to the contrary. In hym from whom Empyres, dominions, and all good thynges do pro∣ceede: Trustyng that almyghtie GOD, directyng your enter∣prices,
if you folowe your Godly and laudable attemptes, your labours and trauayles herein, shall in shorte tyme obtayne a hap∣pie ende, with felicitie and glory of all Christian people. But forasmuche as it shoulde be a thyng of great difficultie these let∣lers to be caryed to all suche places as shoulde be expedient, we wyll, and of lyke motion and knowledge do decree, that whyther so euer the same shal be sent, or wheresoeuer they shalbe receiued, with the subscription of a common notarie thereunto requyred, with the seale of any person constitute in ecclesiasticall dig∣nitie, or suche as are aucthorised by the Eclesiasticall court, the same fayth and credite to be geuen thereunto in iudgement▪ or els where, as shoulde be exhibyted to these presentes. It shal therefore be lawefull for no man to infrynge or rashly to contrary this letter of our commendation, exhortation, re∣quest, donation, graunt, assignation, constitution, deputa∣tion, decreee, commaundement, inhibition, and determination. And if any shall presume to attempte the same, he ought to know that he shal therby incurre the indignation of almyghty God, and his holy Apostles Peter and Paule. Geuen at Rome at saint Peters: In the yeere of thincarnation of our lorde M.CCCC.lxxxxiii. The fourth day of the nones of Maye, the fyrst yeere of our seate.
An Abridgement of. P. Martyr his .5.6.7. and .8. Decades, and particulerly of Ferd. Cortesius conquest of Mexico, by. R. VV. THe fyrst foure Decades of. P. Martyr, you haue already seene done into Englyshe by R. Eden, as also certayne parcelles of the foure last. P. Martir made eight decades of the west Indish newes: in lesse labour these may be run ouer, speciall regarde being had vnto that Decade wherein the more princi∣pall matter is expressed: I meane the fyrst, and that chiefly for the famous conquest of the citie Themistitan, in Mexico pro∣uince, yea of all that great region we doe nowe vsually call newe Spaine. As for the sixte Decade, it conteyneth very little matter woorth the rehearsal, except it be certeine reportes of the Spani∣ards, how they found, where they traueyled in the West Indies, plough stuffe of gold: that the prince of Nicoragua with his fami∣ly became christian: that certaine beardles Indians greatly feare suche men as haue beardes: that they vse to sacrifice lyue men vn∣to their Idolles, eyther taken in the warres, or fatted vp at home bountefully for that purpose: that Nicoragua Mere, for the great∣nesse and vnknowen length thereof, for the ebbes and fluddes and many Ilandes therin, myght woorthely be called a freshe water sea. This freshet hath ben thought to run into the Northwesterne streicte, rather of ignorance (the course therof being not through∣ly knowen) than that it so falleth out in deede, as. P. Martyr wry∣teth. Finally in the .9. & .10. bookes of the sixt Decade, newes is sent to Rome of the controuersie betwixt the Spaniardes & Por∣tugales, concernyng the Moluccaes, handled more effectually & in more ample maner, by. R. Eden. Fol. 448. than. P. Martyr in this place penned it. Wherfore it were a needlesse woorke and actum agere in deede to trouble the reader therewith any further, especi∣ally whereas in this volume, mention hath ben made therof, euen by. P. Martyr him selfe, as you haue already seene. The lyke opinion am I also of, touching the .vii. & .viii. decades, some parcels wherof the Aucthour doth repeate out of his former
writinges as Dec. 7. c. 2. the ruine of the Ilandes Iucaies, out of his fourth Dec. c. 3. Item out of the second Decade. c. 10. the na∣ture of that spring in the Ilande Boiuca, otherwyse called Agna∣neo, the water whereof who so drinketh, by reporte, of an old man becommeth young agayne, is in many woordes repeated by. P. Martyr, Dec. 7. c. 7. the whole summe of whose seconde discourse thereof is expressed in the former place, by. R. Edens addition of this clause (Perhappes with some diet) the which woordes are not in P. Martyr his texte: to be shorte, the two kindes of breade the Indians doe make of the rootes Iucca, and a kynd of graine called Maiz, suffitiently declared. Dec. 1. lib. 1. &. Dec. 3. lib. 5. lib. 9. Dec. 3. be repeated againe, Dec. 8. c. 3. Other parcelles of these aforesayd Decades, wherein the subtelties of theyr Magici∣ans and Coniurers Peaces or Pages are discribed, their Tigres crueltie, their sundry kindes of wylde beastes, foule, & Serpents, their diuers sortes of trees and fruites, partly may you reade of in the breuiarie of Gonzal. Ferd. Ouiedus historie: as of the fountayne of pytch, the stone pellets naturally made for Gunnes. Fol. 224. out of the .7. Decade. c. 7. and the Glowoormes out of the same c. 9. partly in R. Eden his notes of newe Spayne, Peru, Rio de la Plata, Baccaleos, and Florida, set downe in this volume. Fol. 225. as particulerly of the Nutshelles vsed in steede of money, taken out of P. Mart. Dec. 8. c. 4. Partly in Theuetus woorkes of the newe founde worlde, Englished long since, and finally in those bookes which sundry learned Simplicistes haue lately written prin∣cipally to ayde the Phisitians of our tyme. Some other curiosities there be conteyned in. P. Martyr his two last Decades, namely the Iucaien women, to be so fayre, that for theyr loue other countrey Barbares seeke to inhabite those I∣landes. Dec. 7. c. 1. The Spanyardes well vsed of the Iucaiens, contrary to all curtesie, to haue carried away many of those Ilan∣ders into slauery and misery: Agayne certayne traueylers to haue ben seene there that had tayles lyke fyshe. Dec. 7. c. 2. Fonde fan∣tasies of mens soules departed, Dec. 7. c. 3. wandring first North and than South about the worlde, afterwarde to growe young a∣gayne in iolitie: Agayne, other to imagine that the departed soules rest in Caues, and to be that reflexion of the ayre the which we doe call Eccho. Dec. 8. c. 9. The contention betwixte Garaius
and Cortesius, for ambition, Dec. 7. c. 5. & Dec. 8. cap. 1. & .2. The great Cormorantes that deuoure fishe of fyue pounde weight at one morsel. Dec. 7. c. 9. The shamelesse daunses of naked women at theyr funeralles and obsequies. Dec. 7. c. 10. Theyr woorship∣ping of the crosse in Saltier .x. Or made thus, x vppon theyr newe borne babes to dryue away deuylles, as also in the nyght tyme if they feare any thyng, imagining with that signe the place to be purified. Dec. 8. c. 9. The Chiribikes follies in daun∣sing whole weekes togeather, theyr language full of difficulties for leauyng out some sillables in speech, theyr maner of mariage by clippyng the brydes heare, Dec. 8. c. 8. The dead bodyes of gentlemen to be rosted, & so hanged vp to roofe for buttry goddes, the bones of other that laye buried a whole yeere to be taken vp againe at the .xii. monethes ende, and solempnely buried. Decade 8. c. 9. To conclude, How Captayne Olitus, whom Cortesius feared not a litle, & therefore sent vnder the pretexte of honour as it were to discouer other landes, tooke head him selfe agaynst Cortesius, and miserably was murthered in the end. Dec. 8. c 6 & .10. These with some other the lyke thinges, may the curious reader finde in many woordes, set downe in the aforesayde .7. and .8 Decades, spoken of all for the most parte before in. P. Martyr his other doinges, or mentioned in Ouiedus Summary, or by. R. Eden brief∣ly noted, or not greatly needfull to be set foorth at large in Eng∣lyshe, except they were matters of greater weight. One speciall thing I obserued amongst other in reading ouer these .6 7. and 8. Decades, to wyt, the West Indians not onely to be conquered by the Spaniardes, but also to be theyr slaues and bondmen: the cause why after the conquest made of them, the Spanyardes doe in continuall bondage and slauery keepe them vnder, is expresly brought foorth by. Pe. Martyr. Dec. 7. c. 4. in the spanysh tounge, as it was read at the Indishe counsayle boorde in Spayne, and may thus be Englished. These be the Indians qualities, in respecte whereof they deserue no libertie. IN the continent or fyrme lande they eate mans fleshe: they be more gyuen to Sodomye than any other nation of the world: there is no order of iustice among them, they goe naked, they haue neyther loue nor honestie, they bee fooles and furious,
there is no truth in them, except it be for theyr owne profit: incon∣stant, without all discretion, very vnkynde, & louers of nouelties: they delyght to make them selues dronke with wynes made of di∣uers hearbes, fruites, and graine, as ale and sider, & to ouercome their braynes, as wel otherwise with hearbs, as in making drinke thereof, or eating them▪ They are very bruitishe, and doe make it a prayse to wallowe in vyces. No obedience, no reuerence at all sheweth the young man to the olde, the childe to his father. Ney∣ther teaching nor chastning amendeth them: they be traitors, cru∣ell, so full of reuenge that they neuer forgyue any offence, great enemyes vnto our religion. They be slothfull, theeues, of iudge∣ment very grosse and base, without all honestie and good order. Neither doe the men behaue them selues loyally with theyr wy∣ues, nor the wyues with their husbandes: they be superstitiously giuen to soothsaying, as fearful as Hares, filthes, eating lyse, spi∣ders, & woormes, whersoeuer they finde them: they haue no arte, nor good condition of men. Hauing learned any pointes of Chri∣stian religion, they are woont to say that to be good in Spayne, but in India nothing woorth, for that they desire not to alter their maners. They haue no beardes, for they peele and plucke vp the heare as faste as it groweth. They take no pietie on sicke folke, suche as bee very sicke, they gyue ouer to some one kynsman or neighbour of theyrs, or els carry them to the mountaynes to dye there, leauing with them some small portion of bread and water, and so goe theyr way. The elder they waxe, the woorse they bee: vntyll they be .xi. or .xii. yeeres olde, some hope there is that they would prooue ciuil and vertuous, when they grow elder, they be∣come bruit beasts. In conclusion, I say that god neuer created so corrupte a people for vice and beastlinesse, without any mixture of goodnesse and ciuilitie: they are as blockishe as Asses, making no accompt at all to kyll them selues. In the fyft Decade is written by. P. Martyr, or geathered rather by him out of Ferd. Cortesius relations, the conquest of that portion of the West Indishe continent, that lyeth in the hot zone, neare the Tropike of Cancer, betwyxte our Weste sea and Mar del zur, the chiefe prouince wherein is Mexico, and the principall citie Themistitan. This region, after that it was conquered by Cortesius, beganne to be called Noua Hispania, newe Spayne, for the lykenesse thereof vnto the Spanysh kyng∣dome
in nature of soyle, greatnesse, disposition of the ayre, & other such lyke thynges, as Cortesius him selfe writeth vnto Charles the fifth, humbly desiryng his maiestie to allowe of that name. Some later wryters haue gyuen the particuler name of one shyre vnto the whole, callyng it Mexico, and the generall name of that whole shyre to the head citie therein, calling Themistitan lykewyse Mexico, howbeit in trueth Themistitan is the principal citie in Mexico prouince, Mexico the chiefe prouince in all newe Spaigne. Of this countrey, the commodities it doeth yeelde, the nature of the inhabiters, partly you haue already seene in Gon. Ferd. Ouiedus historie. Fol. 221. and chiefely Fol. 225. The kyng of this countrey bare name Monte Zuma, or Muteezuma, as Cortesius that conquered him writeth▪ in P. Martyr his Decades printed in Spaigne. An. d. 1530. Meteezuma. in his .4▪ Decade, entituled de insul. nuper inuentis to. no. orb. p. 506. Multoxumam, as also in the last edition thereof at Cullen, ioyntly with the three first decades, the which our Printer in the translation hereof, hath fo∣lowed in the discourse of the West Indies Ilandes. Straunge names are many tymes diuersly written, though in effecte they meane all one, Henricus say we, with the Frenchmen Henry, the Almans Henreich, the Italians Arrigo, the Portugales Henrico, as Barros speaking of king Iohn the first his sonne, whom Cadamust called in his Nauigation Huric. This kyng was so welthie, so mightie, his dominions so large, that the inhabiters knew no other prince in all the worlde, of him Cortesius had intelligence by Montegius and Portucarrerius, and from him certaine rich presentes for his maister Charles Them∣perour, as in the aforesayd discourse of the west Indish Ilands it hath ben sayde. Wherefore the .16. day of August, in the yeere of our Lorde .1520. Ferdinandus Cortesius, with .15. light horsemen, and fyue hundred footemen well appoynted, besides three noble men of the citie Cempoal, named Teuchius, Mamexus, & Tamaius, and .13 hundred men of that countrey, to serue in steede of packe horses, for cariage, after the maner there, began to set forwarde from his Castle Vera crux, towardes Themistitan in Mexico, di∣stant from thence Westwarde a hundred leagues, or thereabout. Cempoal standeth from Vera Crux .4. leagues, eche league in this countrey is .4. Italian miles. Foure dayes iourney from Cempoal Cortesius was enterteined curtuously by the inhabiters of a good∣ly
shyre named Sienchimalen, as also by the citizens of Texuacan, after that he had passed with his army an exceedyng hygh hyll, thicke clad with yse & snow euen in the moneth of August. The like enterteynment was offered him & his companie as hee mar∣ched forward, vntill he came to the Tascaltecans lande, who are so great enemies vnto the Mexicans, that liuyng amyd their domi∣nions, they had rather want their greatest necessaries, to wit salt, and cotton to cloath them, than become subiects in any wise to the Prince of Mexico. With these Tascaltecans, Cortesius had three conflictes passing through their countrey, & in the ende valiantly gaue them the ouerthrow. Tascalteca is a greater citie, more po∣pulous,Tascalteca. and better serued than Granata in Spayne was, at what time the Moores yelded: their bread is made of Maiz, that is, In∣dish corne, a very good seat for hauking, hunting, & freshe water fishing, sea fish is scarse, for it standeth from the sea aboue .50. lea∣gues: of pulse good store. This towne wals, & houses in number 20000. built of stone, high, & strong, in respect of the enemy euer at hand: they keepe markets and fayres. The people doth weare hose, and maketh good accompt of Iewels, precious stones, of crestes, & bushes of feathers, to set them foorth in the warres, they garnishe euery thing with gold: wood is brought to be sold to the market on mens shoulders: timber, boordes, bricke, lime, & stone, are vsuall merchandise. Theyr Carpenters, Masons, & Potters, are very skilfull. There is no vessell wrought amongst vs more artificially than theyrs is Medicinable hearbes are solde openly. They vse baths, the nation politike, gouerned in maner of a com∣mon wealth. The whole circuit of this prouince is .90. leagues, full of townes, boroughes, and villages, hils and dales most ruit∣full, & well stored of good souldyers, in respecte of their enemyes rounde about them. About one league of this citie encamped Cor∣tesius, & by his spials vnderstanding the citizens not to mistrust or feare any inuasion, tooke the strongest part therof by night: in the morning came the best citizens to offer him all obedience. Cortesi∣us than returning with the victorie & victuals to his campe, found it in a troublesome mutinie for the great distresses & present cala∣mies they thought them selues to be in, so far of from their owne country, in the midst of their enemies This mutinie appeased he with good woords, & comfortable reasons, persuading them their enemies to be weaker, the spreadyng abroade of the gospell to be
now in their hands, them selues to be Spaniardes, who esteeme not death to wyn glory: a most happy death that to be, where life is spent in the conquest of infidelles and barbares, & to lye by the sea side idlely, that were to no purpose.Churultecal. Thus appeased he the re∣bellious myndes of his companyons, and after .20. dayes abode made in this prouince, he led them into an other shire for pastures and riuers the most commodious, for habitation best in all that countrey. The principall citie hath name Churultecal, as great, as faire, as Tascalteca, and so gouerned, vntil the king of Mexico op∣pressed it. Here was Cortesius receyued with songes, musicall in∣struments, and trumpets, by the priestes and children of the citie after their maner, & wel feasted. The end of all this mirth was an vprore of the inhabiters agaynst him, procured by the kyng of Mexico, as it was supposed, whereof Cortesius hauing secrete in∣telligence by a woman of Cempoal that folowed his Campe, sum∣moned a parle with the beste citizens of Churultecal, at his owne lodging. Those citizens first laid he fast by the heles, & than spee∣dely with his army, warned to be in a readinesse for that purpose, set vpon the deceiptful Barbares of a soden, before that they were throughly prouided, and gaue them the ouerthrow. The prince of Mexico acquitted him selfe of this vprore, protesting by his Am∣bassadors to Cortesius, that his disloyall subiectes the Churultecals had bruted that conspiracie vnder his name to doe him iniury, whom they would not willingly obeye. He sent withall rich pre∣sentes, praying Cortesius to come to Themistitan, promising him that he should want nothyng there, notwithstandyng the harde prouision thereof in so barren a place, altogeather in the water. To conducte Cortesius thyther, he sent also certayne Gentlemen for guydes, and other of his nobilitie to receyue him as he came neare. To speake of euery curtesie shewed him in this iourney, and to wryte of euery place he passed, and particulerly to rehearse euery dayes iourney, euery hyll, towne, ryuer, house, and gar∣deyne, by the way, would breede ouermuche tediousnesse. In fewe, the Lordes of the countrey, as he went, vsed him well, e∣specially in Guazucingo prouince, and Chialcho shyre, the one whereof was violently oppressed by the prince of Mexico, the o∣ther willingly subiect vnto him. In the cold mountaynes he wan∣ted no wood, in the townes hee was prouided for, and his
companions, who were of Cempoallens, Tastaltecans, Chu∣rultecans, & Gzucinges, in number .4000. of Spaniards not aboue .300. In this maner, Cortesius accompanyed & folowed, came at the length into a vale, bearing name Colua▪ wherein be two meres, the one salt water of .60. leagues in circuit, the other a freshet. Partly on the land, partly in the salt meere standeth Iz∣tapalapa a fayre towne, from whence to Themistitan, the roy∣all seat of Mexico, there lyeth a way on a stone wall, two speares length broad, built vp in the water by hand with infinite charges, the wall serueth also for a bridge, by this bridge sides stand three fayre townes, Mesicalcingo, Coluacan, & VVichilabusco. The first is supposed to haue .3000. houses, the second .6000. the third .4000. wel built, especially their Towers, & their Temples wherin they doe sacrifice. In these townes great aboundaunce of salt is made, that serueth all such as doe acknowledge the Prince of Mexico for their Lord. Other be denied it, as of the Tascal∣tecans it was sayde. This salte meere rysing doeth flowe into the Freshet, & as it ebbeth the Freshet falleth into the salt meere agayne. The freshe water may serue neuerthelesse for drinke, the salte water becommeth not freshe therewithall. The wall hath many draught bridges for warfare, and sluses for passage, where toll is payde vnto the kyng. Halfe one league before you come to Themistitan, where the lyke bridge or causey from the lande ioyneth with the aforesayde wal, standeth a strong Castle, double walled about, with two strong Towers, not possible to be con∣quered. To this place came a thousande Gentlemen Courtiers foorth of the citie to receyue Cortesius, all apparelled a lyke, sa∣luting him one by one after theyr countrey maner, to wytte, tou∣chyng the ground with theyr finger, and than kyssyng it, in signe of reuerence. After all them came the kyng of Mexico Monte∣zuma him selfe in the middle of the bridge, accompanyed with two hundred of his nobles, orderly two and two, in better attyre then the other aforesayd, but all on their bare feete, though euery body in this countrey otherwise weareth shooes. The kyng as he went, leaued vpon the shoulders of two noble men, the one wher∣of was his brother: not that he needed any such helpe, but for that the kynges of Mexico are woont so to be honoured, as though they were holden vp by the strength of theyr nobilitie.
These two noble men, Cortesius meeting with king Meteezuma, and lyghtyng of his horse to imbrace hym, dyd forbyd hym to touche theyr kyng, as an vnlawful action in that countrey: the rest of the kynges company came orderly to salute Cortesius, after theyr maner. Cortesius presented the kyng with a chayne of Bugle, set with some Diamondes and Rubies, of no great value, but such as pleased the kyng, who rewarded hym agayne with two other chaynes of gold, wrought in maner of sea Crab∣bes, & Snails, & so returned into ye citie with Cortesius againe, where he, lodgyng hym in the royal pallace, erected therein for hym a throne, and presented hym the seconde tyme with other riche gyftes, and prouision of all thynges necessary for hym and his trayne. All the bridge length, as he went with the kyng, stoode on eche syde certayne great Temples, wherein were sa∣crificed slaues, and chyldren payed for tribute by kyng Metee∣zumaes vassalles. Neere vnto Cortesius throne kyng Me∣teezuma had his clothe of estate, where vnto the Spaniardes, before his nobles there assembled, he spake in this sort. Noble and valiaunt men of armes in the feelde, and mercyfull Capitanes vnto such as do yeelde them selues, you are welcome into this countrey. Of auncient tyme we haue hearde,Kyng Metu∣zuma his orati∣on to the Spa∣nyards, and in our old Chronicles we do reade, that neyther I, nor any of this land, be auncient inhabiters hereof, but aliens and forreyners, brought hyther by a great prince, vnto whom we were al subiect. While this prince, leauyng vs heere, went home agayne to see his coun∣trey, our forefathers maried, had issue, buylded vp houses, and erected certayne cities, so that at his returne we neyther woulde go backe agayne with hym, nor acknowledge him for our prince any more: Wherfore we haue been euer of opinion, that his po∣steritie woulde come to recouer this countrey, and make vs his subiectes againe. Consyderyng then the place from whence you say that you do come, and that which you gyue vs to vnderstand of your great and myghtie lorde and kyng that sent you hyther, we be throughly perswaded that he is our true Lorde, so muche the more, for that, as you say, he hath long since knowen that we dwelt heere Assure your selues therfore, that we wyll all yeelde vnto you, and acknowledge you our lordes, in his name that sent you: in this wyll we not fayle, we wyll not deceyue you, all my
dominions shall you rule, for all my subiectes shall obey, com∣maunde all that we haue, for you be nowe in your owne pro∣uince and house. Be ye mery, and refreshe your selues after your long trauayle and many laboures in the warres. I am not ignorant what hath happened vnto you all the way, I doubte not but that the Campoales and Churultecanes haue said euyl of me vnto you, but I pray you geue no credit vnto any mans wordes concernyng me, especially vnto my enimies, some wherof hauing ben my subiectes, at your commyng are gone from me, and do report vntruethes of me, to purchase therewith your fauour. I knowe that they beare you in hande, that my seate, the furniture of my house, the very walles therof, are beaten golde. Further∣more, that I am a God, that I fayne my selfe a God, and suche lyke toyes: but you see all thynges here are made of lyme, stone, and earth. Do you not see that I am made of fleshe and bone, mortall, and corpulent? you see they haue not sayde the trueth. I haue in deede certayne place lefte me by my forefathers,A note. what soeuer I haue it shall be yours, dispose thereof as you thynke good, I wyll nowe departe to other of my houses where I am woont to lye, I wyll see that neyther you, nor your trayne want any thyng: be ye of good cheare, be gladde, for you are in your owne countrey, you be in your owne houses. Cortesius aunsweared in fewe, and to the purpose, especially concernyng that poynte, the kyng of Spayne to be that prince whom they looked for. After syxe dayes spent there ioyfully, noyse was brought to Cortesius of certaine murthers and iniuries offered vnto the Spanyardes in a towne of Muteezumaes domi∣nions,A note. and that by Muteezuma his consent. This occasion tooke he, throughly to bryng Muteezuma in subiection. And fyrst he caused hym to keepe that house wherein Cortesius laye, then to sende for the malefactors, whom Cortesius openly executed, by whose confession Muteezuma founde gyltie, was for a tyme set by the heeles, but delyuered agayne by and by, confessyng his faulte, and promysyng all loyaltie and dewtie, chose rather to re∣mayne a trew subiect in Cortesius palace, then to lyue abrode at libertie like a kyng, as in effect he shewed, both in sendyng abrod commission to discouer the golde mynes throughout all his do∣minions at Cortesius motion, in geatheryng togeather great
summes of golde and treasure to be presented vnto the Spanyshe kyng, in geuyng both counsayle, and the meanes howe to con∣quer crftelie prince Cacamozin, Muteezumaes vassall, refusyng all obedience vnto the Spanyardes, finally in a publike assem∣bly, exhortyng all his nobles to acknowledge the kyng of Spaine for theyr soueraigne Lorde, and to yeelde vnto hym that obedience and in his name, to Cortesius that duetie, whiche he hym selfe was woont to looke for at theyr handes. The processe was written by publike notaries, confyrmed by the nobles, and a copie thereof delyuered vnto Cortesius. Mexico prouince,Mexico. enuyronned about with hygh and Alpyshe mountaynes, stan∣deth in a playne countrey in circuit .70. leagues, about the greatest part whereof are two Meres, the one of salt water, the other of freshe. The two lakes go one into the other at a streict, caused by litle hylles that runne amyd all the foresayde playne. This streict is passed by boate out of the one lake into the other, to all the townes standyng on either syde of the aforesayd lakes. Our Indyshe wryters name the boates Canoa, the Indians call them Acaler, troughes as it were, all of one peece. I haue traueyled in the lyke vpon the ryuer Sone, in the edge of France, neere hygh Burgundie. In the mydst of the salte Mere, two leagues euery way from the lande, standeth that ryche and wel∣thy citie Temixtitan or Themistitan,Themestitan no lesse in quantitie then Siuilia, or Corduba in Spayne. From the land, vnto it lye foure wayes, or walles built vp out of the water two Speares length brode, commodiously for suche as trayuayle thyther by lande, with sundrye draught brydges by the way, to cut of inuasions if neede were. Of these foure wayes, one was that, where Cortesi∣us met with kyng Muteezuma. In one of these walles or brid∣ges, freshe water is brought from the lande into the citie by two gutters, no lesse in quantitie then hoggesheades: the one thereof serueth when ye other is either stopped, or musty. The streats are streight, many in number, built much after the maner of Uenice, both to go by lande and by water. The brydges ouer the water in this citie be made of woodde, of suche breadth that tenne may passe ouer them togeather, so many in number, that it were a thyng almost infinite to recken them.
The number of houses therein amounteth to .60. thousande. Amongest other one streate is very large, sumptuously buylte, and famous for all sortes of merchaundies, that prouince yeeldeth, wont to be solde there .60. thousande merchauntes, as it is thought dayly haunt that streat. There are solde sun∣dry sortes of mettales iewelles, fruites, foule, hearbes, and all other necessaries seruyng for meates, clothes, warfar, buyldings, and pleasure. For euery speciall kynde of merchaundies, is ap∣poynted a speciall standyng by it selfe. They sell by tale and measure, the vse of weyghtes as yet they haue not. Theyr mony is a kynde of Nutte shels, of the kyrnell it selfe is made theyr drynke. The tree is planted vnder the bowes of some other for defence, vntyl it be growen strong, hable to abyde the heate of the Sunne, then is the fense tree cut downe, and that let to con∣tinue, many Lordes haue thereof great reuenewes in that coun∣trey. Steele and Iron they want, in steede whereof they vse to make theyr instrumentes of a kynde of harde stone, wherewith they woorke golde, syluer, copper, brasse, exellently wel in what fourme or shape so euer they lyste. You can not shewe them any kynde of thyng, but they wyll drawe it, and set it out most lyuely in metall, so cunnyng artificers they be. To the markets all thinges are brought, eyther by water in Canoaes, or on slaues backes. There standeth a goodly palace in the market place for iudgement. There be resydent alwayes .x. or .xii. graue se∣nators, to see good order kept in that streate, to decide controuer∣sies happenyng there, to punyshe offenders. Other see what is to be solde in the market, and what measure is made. Many gorgeous temples be in this citie, many goodly towers buylte where noble men haue ben buryed, with gallant chappelles to theyr Idolles, many princely palaces, for that all the nobilitie of that countrey lyeth some parte of the yeere in the citie, and the best citizens great ryche men. The good order and policie in so barbarous a nation, is wonderfull to beholde. Concernyng their abhominable Idolatry, Cortesius is worthy of great commendati∣on, for the throwyng downe the Idoles where he came, beyng a stranger, though the princes of that prouince and Meteezuma al∣so tooke it not well, principally in the palace, persuadyng them that it was not seemely for a kyng to worshyppe that whiche a
knaue or slaue of his had made. Euery noble man hath, besydes the palaces in the citie, his castle, souldiers, receyuers, & other officers in the countrey: and neere the court gallant houses for recreation, with pleasaunt gardens, orchardes, pondes,The Courtiers. & other the lyke delightes. The noble men and Gentlemen of this coun∣trey, can not be fewe in number, whereas dayly the court is fur∣nished with fyue hundred young gentlemen, besydes the multi∣titude of seruyng men that attende on them. And the fashion in this countrey is of all the nobilitie, to sende theyr sonnes for edu∣cation sake vnto the Court, although many of them dwel an hun∣dred and fyftie, or two hundred leagues of. So large & so mygh∣tie is the kyngdome of Mexico, & yet so well gouerned, the kyng so duetyfully obeyed of all his subiectes, aswel absent as present, eche shyre yeeldyng and duely paying vnto hym the commodi∣ties therof, according to theyr custome, that Cortesius thinketh no prince in the world to be more feared & reuerenced of his people. The kyng hath sundry goodly pallaces,The kynges houses. and in them many ryche and costly ornamentes, of golde, of syluer, of feathers, so artifi∣cially wrought, that neyther any sort of needle worke, nor kynde of picture, may seeme to make the lyke shewe. Among the rest, three special houses of recreation the kyng hath in his palace. In one of them are a number of moustrous and defourmed persons, dwarfes, crookebackes, syngyng men by nature, twoo headed monsters, and others, with theyr keepers. The second house is  so large, that in it commodiously two kynges may be resident. The place is set foorth with many Alabaster & Marble pyllers, ten goodly pondes therin, well stored with fyshe, and foule, of al sortes that eyther do lyue in the water, or on the lande, with their keepers, and diuersities of meates for theyr diuers natures. In this place kept he also young chyldren, that had whyte heades, & were of fayre complexion, aswel boyes as gyrles. The thyrde house serued for Lions, Tygers, Wolues, Foxes, and other the  lyke wylde beastes, eche sort in theyr seueral dennes. The least of these three houses is so well buylt, that the kyng at his pleasure may lodge therein, with all his court. The prince is thus ser∣ued. Fyue hundred gentlemen at the least, with theyr folowers, gyue attendaunce at the court al the day long,The seruice of the kyng. though they come not alwayes in the kynges syght. These gentlemen syt downe
to dynner when the kyng sytteth, and do fare as well as he, their folowers haue theyr reuersion. The buttrey, cellar, pantry, and other offices neuer shut, come in who wyll, meate & drynke he can not want. The hall wherein the kyng dyneth, is matted vnder foote, his meate is brought vp by .300. young men pen∣sioners, fleshe, fyshe, fruites, salates of all sortes vppon chaffyng dyshes in the wynter to keepe the meates warme. These way∣ters neuer come neere the boord, for the kyng sytteth on a leather cushyng artificially wrought, at a table raylled about, within the precincte whereof standeth his Sewer, to set hym downe those meates he lyketh of best. At his ryght hande syxe olde men syt downe, vnto whom the kyng hym selfe carueth. The kyng wash∣eth before meate and after, he is serued in earthen dyshes, his cuppes be of the same mettall: he shyfteth hym selfe foure tymes a daye. Whatsoeuer he hath once vsed, be it apparell▪ napery, or any other kynde of housholde stuffe, it is neuer brought hym any more to vse, but bestowed by hym vpon his seruauntes or frendes at conuenient tymes. For honour sake eche one commeth into the palace barefoote, in most humble wyse they come before the king, when they are called, bowing downe theyr heads, theyr eies to the ground. It were great presumption to looke the king in the face when he talketh with any of them. A man would thynke they were all dombe in the presence of the kyng, suche is theyr silence. No man dare turne his backe to the kyng, but departyng from hym eche one goeth backewarde. No man dare go out of his place when the kyng passeth by. At his goyng abrode he is fo∣lowed with a great troupe of his nobles and gentelmen, and hath three rods borne before hym, one whereof he taketh in his owne hand when he commeth foorth out of his lytter, wherin common∣ly he is caryed abrode. In conclusion no heathen prince hath so many cerimonies as this kyng of Mexico. Quietly in this citie from the .8. of September the yeere of our lorde .1520. vntyll Maie folowing, remayned Cortesius with al honour, enioying his pictorye, and rulyng so myghty a kyngdome conquered by hym, with al prosperitie. When Velasque a Spanyarde, then Lieuete∣naunt of Cuba, that euer enuied at his good hap, sent Naruaez a lusty young captayne with eyghtene sayle wel appointed to com∣maund Cortesius out of Mexico, and to geue ouer the rule of that
countrey, which he him selfe had paynefully conquered vnto their pleasure, by forged patents from the Spanyshe kyng. Muche a∣mazed at the fyrst was Cortesius with this tydinges, consideryng that if he went agaynst Naruaez, the Mexicanes not yet through∣ly brought in subiection might in the meane time reuolte: againe if he staied, Naruaez might put his conquest in ioperdy, violently forcing ye countrey euerywhere as he came. The matter was tho∣rowly knowen to the barbares of Themistitan. The king himselfe had brought hym by his vassalles, paynted in a table, the ships, theyr number, artillarye, horsemen and footemen landed. In the ende Cortesius resolued hym selfe to go agaynst Naruaez. Wher∣fore leauyng at Themistitan a Garryson of Spaniardes, the whi∣che he hyghly commended vnto Muteezuma, marched forward with .170 footemen, sendyng other .80. that way before hym. Naruaez lykewyse came on agaynst Cortesius, and had nowe ta∣ken Cempoal, and styrred vp agaynst hym those citizens. Cortesius hauyng intelligence of Naruaez certayne beyng there in an hygh towre garded with .800. souldiers, and .19. Canons set at the steyre foote, thynkyng neuerthelesse nothyng at all of his com∣myng, set vppon Naruaez with .250. men, and there tooke hym on Witsunday night, the rest of his company yelded them selues. In the meane while the citizens of Themistitan reuolted against theyr prince and the Spanyshe gouernement, as by a messenger dispatched thither from Cempoal, to declare Cortesius good hap and Naruaes imprisoment, it was vnderstoode. The castle of The∣mistitan besieged, in many places set a fyre and vndermyned, the Spanyshe Gartyson to be in great ieopardye, the flye boates they made, burnt, the messenger him selfe gree∣uously wounded, Muteezuma the kyng onely to fauoure them, and hym nowe scarsely obeyed, the nobles to choose death rather then to obey suche geastes, that keepe theyr kyng lyke a warde, that dispossesse them of their owne citie, that meyntayne therin theyr enimies the Tascaltecans & Guazuingoes, euen before theyr face at theyr owne charges, to despight them, that deuoure theyr vittaylles harde to come by in that citie so situated in the water, that iniurie them, that lay on tributes, that by hooke ad by crooke make away from them whatsoeuer good there is to e had, that breake downe theyr Idolles, and suppresse theyr aun∣cient rytes and cerimonies.
Cortesius therefore speedily with .70. horses and fyue hundred footemen,Corteius re∣turneth to Themistitan. and as muche artillery as he could, returneth againe to Themistitan, whyther he came about mydsommer daye. At Cortesius entrie into the citie agayne, the Spanyardes, throughly beaten by the Barbares with dartes and stones from hygh pine∣apple trees, & an hygh tower that was neere, began to take hart, and to hope for good happe after theyr great troubles. The Barbares lykewyse vnderstandyng of Cortesius commyng, grew to be more cruel and fyrce▪ with horrible cryes, shootyng of theyr arrowes, and throwyng an infinite number of dartes and stones, for the company of them was innumerable, that the ayre seemed darke and cloudie therewith. Cortesius sent out a captaine with two hundred to rescue the Spanyardes in the palace. This captayne slue many of the Barbares, but the multitude was so great that he dyd litle good. Foure of his souldyers were slayne, he hym selfe, greeuousely wounded, had much a do to retyre a∣gayne. Cortesius set vppon them at an other syde, litle harme dyd he them likewyse, for that as sone as the Barbares had spent theyr dartes and stones, eche one gat vp into the turrette of his house to saue hym selfe. The fyght helde on fyrcely a good while. Cortesius was forced in the ende to retyre with some daunger, and losse of many of his soldiers. The whiche thyng when the Barbares had espied, they begane to geue a newe assalte on e∣uery syde of the palace, to fyre the gates, and stoutely to con∣tinue batterye, fyghtyng euen vppon theyr felowes dead car∣casses, and wyshyng with them rather to be slayne, then to lyue in bondage vnder the Spanyardes. Thus spent they in armes the whole daye, yeeldyng a newe supply of men (the multitude was so great) foure tymes an houre, and raysyng clamors all the nyght long to the Spanyardes great annoy, that then coulde take no rest after theyr paynefull and daungerous conflycte the daye tyme, fewe in number, fyghtyng from mornyng to nyght without intermission, and .80. of theyr companye wounded. The next day the Barbares set vppon the Spanyardes agayne. Cortesius planteth .xiii. feelde peeces, and furnysheth his van∣garde with harquebuziers and archers, but theyr enimies so litle esteemed death, that seyng at one shoot a dozen of theyr fe∣lowes torne in peeces, all feare set a syde, they supplyed styll the
voyde places. The day folowyng, the Spanyardes wanting vic∣tuals, issued out in open feelde: they slue many Barbares, they o∣uerthrew the houses neare ye pallace, they tooke certaine draught bridges, but at night they returned with their Generall and 50. of their company wounded, as hungry as they went foorth. Where∣fore they caused warlike engines to be made of boords, in fourme of a fouresquare house, going on wheeles, placing in ech one ther∣of .20. shot, whom many rascall souldiers folowed with pikeaxes and hatchets, to do harme that way in destroying their buildings: but stones & dartes came so mightily & so thicke about the Spa∣niardes eares, that such as went thus foorth, were faine to creepe home againe out of their engines torne in peeces: they that taried at home could not once looke out but they were domaged. Kyng Muteezuma, desirous to dissuade his citizens from the assalt,Muteezuma slayne. she∣wyng him selfe vnto them out of the Pallace, had a blowe with a stone, whereof in three dayes he dyed. This Prince was of a ve∣ry good nature, wyse, and very patient, his body the Spaniardes lefte vnto the Mexicans to bury, for that they them selues had lit∣tle other leasure then to thinke how to saue their liues, rather than to bury the dead. The next day the nobles of the countrey came to a parle with Cortesius,A Parle. at the same place where Muteezuma tooke his deaths wound. Cortesius exhorted them to peace, otherwise threatning the vtter decay & ruine of that their so famous and noble a citie, with protestation of pietie on them whom once he had taken to be his friendes, promising pardon for that which was done, and settyng downe what befel vnto other nations that refused his friendshyp. The Mexicans making small accompte of his woordes, answe∣red, that they tooke him for no friend, but for their enemy, that he should depart with all his trayne out of their countrey if he would haue peace, otherwise they woulde so long continue theyr siege, vntill by force they had dryuen him out, though for euery Spany∣arde slayne, there dyed a thousande Mexicans, for his friendshyp they cared not, pardon they asked not, most willingly they would all dye, so that they might deliuer their posteritie from the Spa∣nyshe tyranny. Wherefore Cortesius, waying with him selfe the great daunger that presently might ensue for want of victualles if he stayed, the
Mexicans continuing their assalte, for perill to be stopped at the draught bridges if he departed, so muche the more for that these Barbares were not ignorant of .70. thousand ducates heaped vp togeather by him in that prouince: set vppon them the seconde tyme with the aforesayde engines, but all in vayne. So stoutly their enemyes defended them selues, and so fiercely they resisted the assalte giuen. Chiefly the Spaniardes courage appeared in winnyng of a certayne Tower that alwayes commaunded them, nexte in the ruine of such houses as for the nearenes thereof bred them great incombrance and perill. After many woundes recey∣ued, and great slaughter done on both sides, the principal citizens, counterfectyng a conclusion of peace, promysed obedience vnto Cortesius, so that all deedes past myght be forgotten. Cortesius ly∣kyng well thereof, at their request set free a priest he had of theirs in prison, to deale betwyxt them, and throughly persuaded that no guyle was ment, withdrew his company from skirmishing. But he was no sooner set downe to dynner, after his restlesse afflicti∣ons and continuall labours, but the Mexicans tooke the towne bridges, and voyded the trenches, which Cortesius for passage had caused to be filled vp. Presently therefore he rushed out amongst them agayne with his horsemen, but the iourney went so hardly with the Spanyardes, that Cortesius wounded in the head was scarsly able to retyre agayne, many of his company were slayne, such as escaped were not able to continue in the fielde any longer, wearyed with blowes, worne out with hunger. It remayned on∣ly, that now they eyther presently must peryshe, or els depart out of the countrey. By nyght therefore Cortesius and his souldyers priuely thought to slyp away with Muteezumaies children,Cortesius flee∣eth out of The∣mistitan. and certayne of the Mexican nobles captiues, charging the Spanysh kyng his officers with the fifh part of his treasure, and takyng the residue thereof with him. But the Barbares hauyng intelli∣gence thereof, oppressed them in the way, tooke theyr goods, slue many of the Spaniards, and with them their captiues: if happely any escaped, they were such as marched in the most, for both the vangarde and rereward were altogeather discomfited and lost, to the number of .150 Spanyardes 42. horses .2000 Tascalte∣cans, and Guazuzings, that ayded them. Thus paynefully, with great daunger and no lesse griefe, Cortesius lefte Themistitan, pur∣sued
by his enemyes that folowed him, nothyng holpen by the way as he repayred home, refreshyng his Campe with a dead horse, after fyue dayes spent with the foode of parched corne, and that in small quantitie before he came to Tascalteca. The Tascaltecans curtuously enterteyned him and his, with whom he made his abode .20. dayes, to refreshe his wearyed ar∣my: that done, he conquered other cities in that prouince, eyther enemyes vnto the Tascaltecans, as Tepeaca, where he buylte for safetie of passage Segura la Frontera: or suche as for feare of the Mexicans had not yeelded them selues before, to wyt, Guaccachi∣ulla, Izzuca, and other principall townes therabout. Finally, he sendeth for horsemen and shot out of the Ilande Hispaniola, wyn∣neth many Barbares fauour & assistance agaynst the Mexicans, maketh prouision of .13. flye Boates, to annoye by water the citi∣zens of Themistitan. Meteezumaes, Nepheu, Catamazinus, the new kyng of Mexico, fearyng on the other syde the Spanyardes returne, and seeing many of his subiectes to fall from him, wan∣teth not in any wyse to set all thinges in a readinesse for warres, especially pykes, to annoye the horsemen, whom they most drea∣ded. Eightiene leagues from Tascalteca towardes Themistitan,Cortesius re∣turneth to the siege of The∣mistitan, standeth Tazuco, a goodly citie of the Mexicans. Cortesius fyrst of all tooke this citie, & caused his prouision for fly Boates wrought in Tascalteca to be brought thyther. Such was the hatred of the Tascaltecans and Guazuzings agaynst the Mexicans, that they carried the tymber vppon theyr shoulders from Tascalteca to Ta∣zuco, without any grudging, for the prouision aforesayde. From Tazuco Cortesius cut a passage into the salte Mare of Mexico, to bryng his flye Boates to the siege of Themistitan: this trenche, three Englyshe myles long, and foure fathome deepe, was finy∣shed by .8000. pyoners of that countrey in fyftie dayes. This na∣uy annoyed very muche the citizens, in destroying theyr sculles and troughes, and stopping their passage from place to place, be∣sydes the assale giuen therewith to the towne it selfe. Cortesius army, euer as it came, destroyed all suche places by the way, that either persecuted him fleeing away before, or presently might do∣mage his returne. The citie he besieged in three places at once, after that hee had cutte of all the freshe water conductes, and taken the wayes
and bridges, and stopped all passage for any enemy of his into the towne: the number of his souldiers amounted vnto .120000. for out of all the countrey about, the Barbares came with Corte∣sius, some for libertie, some for friendshyp, some for hope of gaine. The siege lasted neuerthelesse ten weekes, in the ende whereof with continuall battry the citie defaced, and more than .100000. citizens worne out partly in fight, and partly wasted with misery and hunger, Cortesius tooke theyr new kyng priuely walkyng in a secret corner of the lake,Themistitan conquered a∣gayne. and subdued throughly with him the ci∣tie Themistitan .14. townes by the lake syde, & all the Mexican re∣alme and prouince, vnto the Spanyshe crowne, in the iurisdiction whereof it doeth presently remayne. The spoyle of the citie, in va∣lue great, Cortesius diuided amongst the Spanyshe souldyers, re∣seruyng the fyfth parte therof, and certayne fine feather woorkes, the whiche he sent into Europe, to be presented vnto Charles the fyfth kyng of Spayne, and Emperour, than in Germanie. Who lysteth to see this hystorie more at large, may reade Cortesius Nauigations, and Frauncis Lopez woorke thereof writ∣ten in the Spanyshe tongue, made not long since Italian by Lu∣cius Maurus, and if I be not deceyued, nowe a doyng into Eng∣lyshe. An abridgement thereof I promysed, or a commentary, as Caesar termeth suche kynde of wrytynges, to gyue other men oc∣casion to set foorth at large those thinges by leasure, which briefly are noted and signified in fewe vnto some, that willingly woulde not be altogeather ignorant thereof, nor yet stande to long in any such discourses. To set downe particulerly eche Spanyarde and Portugale his doynges in these new discouered landes, to drawe Geographically the places, to wryte all their battelles, victories, and conquestes, to describe the cities rased, the townes erected, to poynte out the Capitaynes personages, to shewe theyr traueyles and good hap, it would requyre an other Homere, an other Thu∣cydides, an other Liuius labour: it would requyre an other Empe∣rour to set students a woorke, as Iustinian dyd his lawe geathe∣rers: the relations of the Indyshe traueylers are so many in num∣ber, theyr reportes so diuers, the volumes written therof so huge, and in so sundry languages. R.W. FINIS.
R. VVilles Speciall aduises to be obserued in readyng ouer this woorke. Fol. 6. De Medea. put out De. Fol. 7. Of my Decades, reade of my fyrst Decade. For as the two fyrst bookes of the first Decade were by. P.M. dedicated vnto Ascanio Visconte, than Cardinall and Uicechaunceller of Rome, so are the eight bookes folowing in the same Decade written to the Cardinall of Aragonia. Fol. 54. Euery Decade hath ten bookes or Chapters, whereof it hath, according to the Greeke woord, that name. Fol. 20 A. and. O. &c. His meanyng is, that this selfe same poynte is extreme West, in respect of one halfe of the worlde, and extreme East in respecte of the other halfe, or hemisphere beneath vs. Fol. 31. Iuga de Canias. Reade. Iuego de Canas. Fol. 35. Barramedabas. Reade. Barrameda. Fol. 39. To be part of the continent. This was then spoken for want of further knowledge, as in other writynges folowyng it will appeare. Fol. 45. The gold whereof they are made is natiue. &c. This place should be thus Englished. Their golde is lyke vnto that golde in Germany, wherof the Florenes are made. The nexte sentence likewise is not without some falte of the translator, for the latin goeth thus. Alibi in eo tractu intra vaginam mentula∣rem neruum reducunt, funicuio que praeputium alligant. Fol. 47. Gorgodes Meducias. Reade. Medusaeas, Fol 49. Being demaunded of me. This place should you reade thus. Being demaunded of me afterwarde, were it not a sea se∣parating two landes: they answered, the water there of to be fresh & sweete, & the further they went vp against the streame, it to be so much the more freshe & sweete, to be full of Ilandes and holesome fishe. They dare aduouche the breadth thereof to be more than .30. leagues, and the ryuer very swiftly to fall into the sea, yeeldyng vnto the fury of the freshe water. Fol. 49. Beyond the citie of Cathayo. They supposed it according to theyr skyll in vnknowen places. Fol. 50. Animae album. Reade. Animen.
Item. You shall now therfore. This sentence is not in. P.M. But  an other of the same length, wherin he abaseth his own know∣ledge, in respecte of T. Liuius, and auoucheth the fantasis fo∣lowing to be better than Lucianus tales, for that Lucianus ∣ned his fables, but these follyes to be truly suche in deede. Fol 51. But nowe most noble Prince. Three other vaine tales are here left out, of the beginning of the sea, and the original of woman kynde: all Greece could neuer haue imagined more vayne, more scornefull, more shamefull fables: and so are they lefte to such as lyst to reade them in that language wherin P. Martyr dyd wryte them, with the prayse of suche Barbarous ministers as doe preache them. Fol. 57 The yeere of Christ .1520. Reade .1502. Fol. 83. Pezulana. Reade. Petrus Arias. Fol. 89. Or that in Niogita. Reade, or that in the blacke burnt Moores countrey, or kyngdome of Melinde. Fol. 90. Water is turned into ayre. Reade, ayre is turned into water. Fol. 98. The niene Boates of Culchas. Reade, or Culchas. Fol. 153. Colacutea Reade. Calecut, Cochin, Comorin Fol. 164. Etesti. Reade, Etesiae Fol. 169. emobal Reade, Cempoal Fol. 186. The generations of nations. Reade, of metalles. Fol. 231. Eight. Reade, eighteth. Item. 36. Reade, 63. Fol. 232 The West Ocean. Reade, South Ocean, namely Mar del zur Fol. 234.  in the margine, should haue place in the texte be∣fore. . Reade, the Greeke verse  and . Fol. 252. P. 231. In the margine. put it out. Fol. 253. Peruse, these foure volumes, Read, the foure volumes. Fol. 260. Santlianum, Reade, Santianum Fol. 265. Obo, alias, Oba and Obi Fol. 268. Fladimer, al, Volodimer Item, Smolne, al, Smolensko Fol. 269. Impreignable, Reade, inexpugnable. Fol. 270. Nicene, Reade, Nice. And of theyr fayth more lykely hereafter. fol 273 although fol. 302. the former opininion be recited againe. Fol. 274. Prohibit, Reade, prohibited. Fol. 283▪ Volham, Reade, Volgha
Item, Diuidna, al, Duina Item, Vistiuga, Reade eche where, Vstinga Fol. 279. Schondia, for these countreys folowing see Ortelius. 45. table in his first edition, de reg, Septentional Fol. 280. Sigismundus liberus, Reade, liber, for he was Baron of Harbestein & the Deutche Barons are called frey heren, wher∣of in latin also his title was written, Liber Baro ab Herbestein, out of his woorkes is that discourse taken. Fol. 301. Fol. 281. Wardhus Castle .54. the one rowe of figures here sig∣nifieth the longitude, the other sheweth the Latitde. The rea∣der for his assuraunce herein, shall doe well to conferre all the figures so set, with the Mappes, lest he be deceyued. Fol. 294. By vnknowen nations. Reade, motions. Fol. 297. The ryuer Clesma. al. Desma. Item. Marouians. Reade. Morauians Fol. 298. This tongue is spred further. Read agayne of the Scla∣uon tongue at large. Fol. 301. Fol. 304. Bengas, Of theyr money, and also of all other nations coynes shall you haue a speciall discourse heereafter, if God sende vs lyfe. Fol. 308. Tumen. It should seeme to be that Tamen spoken of be∣fore. Fol. 246. Fol. 310. To Artach. Reade, in Artachs. Fol. 311. Besermanni. What they be. Reade, Fol. 335. Fol. 312. As do the Christians, imagining so of vs, for that many Christians, to wyt, the meaner sorte, dwel commonly euer in one place. Fol. 316. Seuen werstes, to wyt, seuen Moscouian myles, that is, fyue Englyshe myles and somewhat more. Fol. 321. It shall suffice to the reader, put out, to. Item. Sachana. al. Sughaua. Hisnouogrod. Reade, Nisnouogrod. Tartars, Nogaies, pointe it thus. Tartars Nogais. Bilbil. al Bilbek. Casbin. Reade, Casmin. Baccho. al Bachu. Fol. 323. Sharuan. al Chirua, and Seruan. Tollepan. Reade, Torbante. Fol. 324. Arash al. Exesch.
Fol. 326. Unto Mecha in Arabia, to honour Mahumets tombe,  whereof you shall reade in Lewes Vartomannus Nauigations. Item. Ardaxuil. Reade. Ardouil. Item. Fol. 320. for Ardeuelim. Fol. 327. Ought to be beloued. Reade, beleeued. Fol. 329. Tulibante. Reade Torbante. Fol. 329. The Persians, to wyt, the Gentlemen of Persia. Estee∣ming artes and sciences, for silkes and furnitures of horses. Fol. 326. &. 330. Fol. 330. Turquestan, it lyeth Northeast from the Caspian sea. Item. Phison, is thought to be Ganges. it should rather seeme to be some braunche of Tigris. Fol. 331. Deli. al. Dalangar. Caraconi. al. orassan. His chief mansion place, it was so: but now it is not. Fol. 322. Fol. 337. Potofarina, reade Portofainra. Boua, reade ona. Fol. 345. We made sayle. Reade, sale. Fol. 354. inclinations, diuinatiōs. Read, diuiations or wandryng. Fol. 358. Stranger solgiers, reade Soldyers. Fol. 375. In the meane tyme. This is the later ende of the sixte Chapter, the residue whereof the Printer hath for modestie lefte out: And Eden him selfe hath in this translation also lefte out many thinges to be seene in the latin copye, eyther as su∣perfluous, or vnseemely. I am not willyng to defraude Varto∣mannus, Eden, or the Printer of theyr due. Fol. 382. Condaliis. I would reade Sandaliis, as it may seeme in the letter folowing, meanyng thereby a kynde of high shooe or buskyn. Fol. 394. Rime. Reade, rine. Fol. 429. It was lost and not founde vntill this day. It may be that P. Martyr dyd wryte the historie thereof at large, in Pope Clement the .7. his time, that happely was loste at the sacke of Rome: but his abridgement of the aforesayd viage shall you finde written to Pope Adrian afterwarde in his fyft Decade, Cap. 7. Out of the which woorke, togeather with the reportes of other traueylers that went the aforesayd vyage, this present Pamflet hath been taken.
Fol. 429. A day lost in three yeeres and one moneth. I doe not thinke but that in very deede these Spanyardes that sayled  thus rounde about the world, folowyng continually the west, dyd lose on day in theyr iourney. In lyke maner I am of opi∣nion, that if the Portugales folowed continually the Easte rounde about the worlde, they should fynde at theyr iourneyes ende one day to many. I meane it thus. Let two passengers depart from Lisbona, the one Westward, the other Eastwarde, rounde about the worlde, and both re∣turne home agayne that daye whiche we do call Mydsommer daye. I saye that day woulde be to the Easterne passengers the next day after Mydsommer daye, to the westerne trauey∣lers but Mydsommer euen. My reason is, for that euery .xv. degrees of the great circle East or West, maketh difference one houre: wherefore Eastward after fyfteene degrees, you shal begyn your daye one houre sooner: after fyfteene degrees Westward, you shall ende your daye one houre later, then you dyd in that place whence you dyd set foorth. The whole circle than of the worlde conteynyng precisely .360 degrees, that is, foure and twentie tymes .xv proportionably to the .24 hours of the day, how can it be otherwise, but that these passen∣gers traueylyng styll eyther Westwarde rounde about the worlde, or Eastwarde, shoulde either mysse a daye at theyr iorneyes ende or elles fynde one to many. Fol. 430. The epistle of Maximilian Transiluane. This pre∣face is to be founde in the tome of the nauigations wrytten in Latine. Fol. 524. Fol. 436. The pole Antartike Of these starres, and the order therof about the Antartike pole, may you reade more at large in Albericus Vesputius nauigations. Cap. 119. to be seene in the volume of nauigations written in Latine. Fol. 91.
The Table. RYcharde Willes Epistle dedicatorye to the Countes of Bedforde. The Preface for the whole woorke. The fyrst discoueryng of the west Indies. Fol. 1 What maner of man Christopher Colombus was. Fol. 1 What labour Columbus tooke. Fol. 2 Why they were called Indians. The fyrst part.Fol. 3 Of the colour of the Indians. Fol. 4 Plato his testimony of the west Indies. Fol. 5 Seneca his testimony thereof. Fol. 6 P. Martyrs Epistle to Charles the Emperour. Fol. 30 The fyrst Decade. Fol. 8 The seconde Decade. Fol. 57 The thyrde Decade. Fol. 94 The .4. Decade otherwyse entituled of the west Indish Ilandes. Fol. 155 A briefe rehearsall of the contentes of the aforesayde Decades. Fol. 173 R. Edens preface, Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus Epistle to Charles the 5. concernyng his historie of the west Indies. Fol. 185 The ordinarie nauigation from Spayne to the West Indies. Fol. 187 Of two notable thynges as touchyng the west Indies: and of the great ry∣ches brought from thence into Spayne. Fol. 188 Of the golde mines and manner of woorkyng in them. Fol. 188 The maner of fyshyng for pearles. Fol. 191 The familiaritie that the Indians haue with the deuyll. Fol. 193 Of temperate and habitable regions vnder the Equinoctial line. Fol. 195 Of dyuers particular thynges, as Woormes Serpentes, beastes foules. Fol. 198 Of trees, fruites, and plantes. Fol. 204 Of Reedes or Canes. Fol. 207 Of the venomouse apples wherewith the Canibales inuenome theyr arrowes. Fol. 209 Of fyshes and the maner of fyshyng. Fol. 211 Of the rysyng and fallyng of our Ocean sea and the south sea called Mar del zur. Fol 215 Of the stricte of lande betweene the north sea and Mar del zur. Fol. 216 Howe thynges of one kynd differ by the nature of the place, and of the beastes called Tigers. Fol. 217 Of the manners and customes of the Indians of the firme lande and of their women. Fol. 219 Of the Ilandes Hispaniola and Cuba. Fol. 221 Of the Ilande Cuba and other. Fol. 224 Of the land of Baccallaos. Fol. 225 Particularly of newe Spayne called Noua hispania or Mexico. Fol. 225 Of Peru. Fol. 226 Of the ryuer called Rio de la Plata that is the ryuer of syluer. Fol. 226 Of the landes of Laborador and Baccaleos lying west and northwest from England, and beyng part of the fyrme lande. Fol. 227 The description of the lande Florida. The second partFol. 228 For maister. Cap. Furbysheys passage by the northwest. Fol. 230 Reportes of the prouince China. Fol. 237
Of the Ilande Giapan and other litle Isles in the east Ocean. Fol. 251 oysins Fres letters touchyng Giapan. Fol. 253 Of  Isles betwixte China and the Moluccaes. Fol. 260 A discourse o dyuers voyages and wayes by the whiche Spices, precious stoes, and golde were brought in olde tyme from India into Europe  pares of the worlde also of the voyage to Cathayo and east India by the north sea, of the voyages lykewyse of Sebastian Cabote and particularly of Moscouia. Fol. 254The third part. A biee discription of Moscouia by Munster and Gastaldus. Fol. 271 A discription of the north regions and howe they are habitable, contrary to the opinion of the olde wryters. Fol. 275 Schondia. Fol. 279. Swecia or Sweth land. Fol. 287. Bothnia. Fol. 187 Groenland. Fol. 280. Gothia or Gothlande. Fol. 288 Islande. Fol. 281. Futland with Emingia. Fol. 288 Laponia. Fol 282. Norway. Fol. 284. The difference of regions and causes of great cities. Fol. 288 Paulus Iouius historie of the Moscouian ambassage. Fol. 289 Other notable thynges concernyng Moscouia geathered out of Sigismun∣de Baron of Herbestein. Fol. 301 A discription of the regions and people lying north and east from Moscouia to the ryuer Petzora and the prouince of Iugra and Oby euen to Cathayo. Fol. 305 Of the famouse ryuer Tanais, Fol. 308 The way out of Moscouia to Cathayo. Fol. 309 Of the Tartars. Fol. 311 The nauigation by the frostye sea. Fol. 315 K. Edwarde the .6. letters to the northeasterne princes by Sir Hugh wyl∣loughbye, in latine and Englyshe. Fol. 318 Our Englyshe merchauntes voyage into Persia. Fol. 321 Of maister Ienkensons voyage into Persia. Fol. 322 Of the last vyage into Persia in the yeere of our lorde 1568. Fol. 324 Of the kyng of Persia his name. Fol. 330. Of the Persians religione and other their fashions. Fol. 325 Of the Persian Empire and the originall thereof. Fol. 329 Of Persia out of. M.P Uenetus. Fol. 329 Of the Persian kyngdome out of Haytthon. Fol. 330 Of Ormius kyngdome ioynyng vnto Persia. Fol. 331 Of the Sophi or kyng of Persia accordyng to the late writers. Fol. 331 The trafique of Persia with other countreys. Fol. 332 Of the Persian gulfe. Fol. 332 The preuileages graunted by the Sophi to our merchauntes. Fol. 332 Arthur Edwardes vyage into Persia, with the continuance of the former priuileages. Fol. 333 The commodities that Engglyshe merchauntes may haue by the trade into Persia. Fol. 335 The maner howe Christians become Busormen. Fol. 335 Of the Bombasine or Cotton tree. Fol. 336 The writyng of the Persians. Fol. 336
Of two voyages made out of Englande into Guinea in Afrike. Fol. 336. A briefe description of Afrike. Fol. 337. The fyrst voyage to Guinea. Fol. 338. Pinteado his letters patentes made hym by the kyng of Portugale his maister for his returne. Fol. 341. The seconde voyage to Guinea, with a more full description of Africa, E∣thiopia, and the blacke Moores countrey. Fol. 342. The Doues of the Ilande Madera. Fol. 353. Of S. Thomas Ilande vnder the Equinoctiall line. Fol. 353. Lewes Uertomannus nauigation into Arabia, Egypte, Persia, Syria, Ethiopia, and East India. Fol. 354. The contentes of the whiche voyages are these folowyng. The contentes of the .vii. bookes of nauigations and voyages of Lodovicus Vartomannus to the regions of Arabia, Egypte, Persia, Siria, east India, and Ethiopia. The contentes of the fyrst booke. The fyrst Chaptere is of the nauigation from Uenice to Alexandria in Egypte. Fol. 355. Of the citie named Cayrus, Alcayr, Memphis, or Babylon in Egypte, vp∣pon the ryuer of Nilus. Cap. 2. Fol. 355. Of the cities of Beryntho, Tripoli, and Antioch. Cap. 3. Fol. 356. Of the cities of Aman and Menin. Cap. 4. Fol. 356. Of the citie of Damasco. Cap. 5. Fol. 357. Of such thinges as are seene in the citie of Damasco. Cap. 6. Fol. 358. Of the Mamalukes of Damasco. Cap. 7. Fol. 358. The iorney from Damasco to Mecha: And of the maners of the Arabi∣ans. Cap. 8. Fol. 359. Of the strength and valiantnesse of the Mamalukes. Cap. 9. Fol. 361. Of the cities of Sodoma and Gomorrha. Cap. 10. Fol. 361. Of a mountayne inhabited with Iewes: And of the citie named Medina∣thalhabi, where Mahumet was buryed. Cap. 11. Fol. 362. Of the Temple or Chapell and Sepulchre of Mahumet and his fe∣lowes. Cap. 12. Fol. 362. Of the Secte of Mahumet. Cap. 13. Fol. 363. The iorney to Mecha. Cap. 14. Fol. 364. The fourme and situation of the citie of Mecha: And why the Mahume∣tans resort thyther. Cap. 15. Fol. 365. Of the Merchaundies of Mecha. Cap. 16. Fol. 366. The pardons and Indulgenses of Mecha. Cap. 17. Fol. 366. The maner of Sacrificyng in Mecha. Cap. 18. Fol. 367. Of the Unicornes of the Temple of Mecha, whiche are not seene in any other place. Cap. 19. Fol. 368. Of dyuers thynges whiche chaunced to the autour in Mecha. Cap. 20. Fol. 368. Of the red sea, and why it can not be sayled in the nyght. Cap. 21. Fol 370.
The contentes of the secounde booke. Of the citie Gezan in Arabia Foelix. That is, the blessed or happie Ara∣bia. Cap. 1. Fol. 371 Of certayne people named Banduin. Cap. 2. Fol. 371 Of an Ilande of the red sea named Camaran. Cap. 3. Fol. 371 Of the citie of Aden, and theyr maners and customes towarde straun∣gers. Cap. 4. Fol. 372 Howe the women of Arabia are greatly in loue with white men. Cap. 5. Fol. 373 Of the liberalitie of the queene toward the autour. Cap. 6. Fol. 375 Of the cities of Lagi and Aiaz in Arabia Foelyx. And of the towne of Dante. Cap. 7. Fol. 375 Of Almacharan, a citie of Arabia Foelyx: And of the fruitefulnesse there∣of. Cap. 8. Fol. 375 Of Reame, a citie of Arabia Foelyr: And the Temperatenesse thereof. Cap. 9. Fol. 376 Of Sana, a citie of Arabia Foelyx. Cap. 10. Fol. 376 Of Taessa, Zibith, and Damar: great cities of Arabia Foelyx. Cap. 11. Fol. 376 Of the Soltan of the forsayde cities: And why he is named Sechamir. Cap. 12. Fol. 377 Of Monkeys and Marmasettes, and other beastes noysome to men Cap. 13. Fol. 377 Of certayne places of Ethiope. Cap. 14 Fol. 377 Of the citie of Zoila in Ethiope: And the great fruitefelnesse thereof: And of certayne straunge beastes seene there. Cap. 15. Fol. 377 Of Barbara, an Ilande of Ethiope. Cap. 16. Fol. 378 Of Ethiope, reade more in the last nauigation in the ende of the booke. The contentes of the thyrde booke. Of Persia, and of certayne townes and portes of Persia. Cap. 1. Fol. 378 Of the Ilande and citie of Ormus or Armusium: And of an Iland of Persia where pearles are founde. Cap. 2. Fol. 378 Of the citie named Eri, in Corozani, a region of Persia, and of the ryches thereof: Also of Reubarbarum. Cap. 3. Fol. 379 Of a ryuer thought to be Euphrates: and of Castoreum. Cap. 4. Fol. 379 Of the citie of Saint Bragant, bygger then Babylon: And of the kyng of Persia, named the Sophi. Cap. 5. Fol. 380 The contentes of the fourth booke. Of India, and of the cities, and notable thynges seene there: And fyrst of the citie of Cambaia, most fruitefull. Cap. 1. Fol. 381 The maners of the people of Cambaia: And of the Soltan of that citie Cap. 2. Fol. 381 Of the citie of Ceul, and the maners of thinhabitantes. Cap. 3. Fol. 382 Of Goga an Ilande of India. Cap. 4. Fol. 383 Of Decham a very fayre citie of India. Cap. 5. Fol. 383 Of certayne other goodly cities of India. Cap. 6. Fol. 384 Of Canonor and Narsinga, great cities of India. Cap. 7. Fol. 384
Of the fruiteful citie of Bisinagar in the kyngdome of Narsinga. Cap. 8. Fol. 384 Of the Docilitie, agilitie and wytte of Elephantes. Cap. 9. Fol. 385 Of the ingendryng of Elephantes: And of the magnificence and ryches of the kyng of Narsinga. Cap. 10. Fol. 386 The contentes of the fyfth booke. Of the famous and ryche citie of Calecut Cap. 1. Fol. 387 Of the kyng of Calecut: And of theyr Idolatrye. Cap. 2. Fol. 387 Of the maner whiche the kyng vseth at his meate. Cap. 3. Fol. 388 Of the Priestes of Calecut named Bramini. Cap. 4. Fol. 388 Of the diuers sectes of Idolatours in the citie of Calecut Cap. 5. Fol. 398 The apparell of the kyng, queene, and the inhabitantes of the citie of Ca∣lecut: And of theyr maner of feedyng. Cap. 6. Fol. 389 Of theyr custome after the death of the kyng. Cap. 7. Fol. 389 Of theyr changyng of wyues. Cap. 8. Fol 390 The maner of feedyng of the common people of the Idolaters: And of these Iustice. Cap 9. Fol. 390 Of their honouryng of Idoles. Cap. 10. Fol. 390 Of their maner of warre. Cap. 11. Fol. 391 Of theyr shyppes and maner of saylyng on the sea. Cap. 12. Fol. 391 The palace and courte of the kyng of Calecut. Cap. 13. Fol. 392 The Spices of Calecut. Cap. 14. Fol. 392 The foules and byrdes of Calecut. Cap. 15. Fol. 393 Of a most fruitefull tree of all the worlde. Cap. 16. Fol. 393 Howe they sowe Ryse. Cap. 17. Fol. 394 Howe theyr Phisitions visit the sicke folkes. Cap. 18. Fol. 394 Of theyr exchaungers, bankers, and brokers. Cap. 19. Fol. 395 Of thinhabitantes of Poltar and Hiraua. Cap. 20. Fol. 395 Of foure fouted beastes, foules, and byrdes of Calecut. Cap. 21. Fol. 395 Of certayne Serpentes whiche are seene in Calecut. Cap. 22. Fol. 396 Of the lyghtes and lampes whiche are seene in the palace of the kyng of Calecut. Cap. 23. Fol. 396 The great multitude of Idolaters whiche resorte to Calecut for pardon of theyr sinnes. Cap. 24. Fol. 396 ¶ The contentes of the syxth booke, of the Nauigation of India. Of the citie of Calcolon and Colon. Cap. 1. Fol. 397 Of Cyromandel a citie of India. Cap. 2. Fol. 397 Of the Ilande of Zailon, and the precious stones founde there. Cap. 3. Fol. 398 Of the tree of Cinamome in the Ilande of Zailon. Cap. 4. Fol. 398 Of Paleachet, a citie of India. Cap. 5. Fol. 399 Of Tarnasari, a Citie of India. Cap. 6. Fol. 399 Of the wylde and tame beastes in the citie of Tarnasari. Cap. 7. Fol. 399 The maner whiche the kyng of Tarnasari vseth when he permitteth his wyfe to be deflowred of whyte men. Cap. 8. Fol. 400 The maner of burnyng dead bodies in the citie of Tarnasari. Cap. 9. Fol. 400 The Iustice which thinhabitants of Tarnasari obserue. Cap. 10. Fol. 401 Howe the Mahumetans are buryed in the citie of Tarnasari. Cap. 11. Fol. 401 The dyuers sorts of their shyps or other vesselles of sailing. Cap. 12. Fol. 401
Of Bangella, a great and ryche citie of India: And of the great power of the kyng of that citie. Cap. 13. Fol. 401 Of certaine Christian merchauntes which trafique there. Cap. 14. Fol. 402 Of Pego a famous citie of India. Cap. 15. Fol. 402 Of the magnificence, humanitie, and great ryches of the kyng of Pego. Cap. 16. Fol. 403 Of the citie of Melacha, and the great ryuer of Gaza. Cap. 17 Fol. 404 Of the Ilande of Sumatra or Taprobana. Cap. 18. Fol. 405 Of an other kynde of Pepper: Also of sylke, and the precious gumme called Laserpitium or Belzoe. Cap. 19. Fol. 405 Of three sortes of the tree of Aloes. Cap. 20. Fol. 405 Howe the gummes of Aloes & Laserpitium, are proued. Cap. 21. Fol. 406 Of diuers merchauntes in the Ilande of Sumatra or Taprobana. Cap. 22. Fol. 406 Of the Iland of Bandan where Nutmegges & Mase are founde. Cap. 23. Fol. 407 Of the Ilande of Monoch, where Cloues growe. Cap. 24. Fol. 407 Of the Ilande of Bornei▪ Cap. 25. Fol. 407 Of certayne obseruations vsed in the nauigation to the Ilande of Giaua. Cap. 26. Fol. 408 Of the Iland of Giaua, & the maners of the people. Cap. 27. Fol. 408 Of the cruell maners in sleying their parentes to the Anthropophagi to be eaten. Cap. 28. Fol. 409 Of the strange course of the Sunne in the Iland of Giaua. Cap. 29. Fol. 409 Of theyr returne from the Iland of Giaua. Cap. 30. Fol. 409 Agayne of the citie of Calecut after theyr returne thyther. Cap. 31. Fol. 410 Of the commyng of the kyng of Portugales shyps to the citie of Canonor▪ Cap. 32. Fol. 411 Howe the autour playde the phisition, and counterfet holynes, lest he shoulde be taken for a spie of the Portugales. Cap. 33. Fol. 411 How the Mahumetā priestes cal the people to their church. Cap. 34. Fol. 412 The maner of praying among the Mahumetans. Cap. 35. Fol. 412 What subtiltie the autour vsed to depart from Calecut, to go to the Portugales. Cap. 36. Fol. 413 How he fled to the Portugales from the citie of Canonor. Cap. 37. Fol. 413 Of the nauie of the citie of Calecut, and of the memorable conflicte betweene the Christians and Mahumetans: In the which the Portugales with in∣credible valiantnesse, gaue theyr enimies the ouerthrowe: And howe the kyng of Canonor reioyced at the victorie. Cap. 37. Fol. 415 The contentes of the seuenth and last booke. The voyage or nauigation of Ethiopia. Cap. 1. Fol. 419 Of dyuers and many Ilandes of Ethiop. Cap. 2. Fol. 419 Of the Ilande of Monzambrich, & the inhabitantes therof. Cap. 3. Fol. 419 Of the Cape, named Caput Bone Spei: That is, the the Cape of good hope. Cap. 4. Fol. 421 Of the hygher east India, called Terciera. Fol. 42 Of the pryces of precious stones and spyces, with theyr weyghtes and mea∣sures, as they are accustomed to be solde both of the Moores, & the Gen∣tyles: and of the places where they growe. Fol. 423.
Of the Rubie. Fol. 423 Of the Rubies whiche growe in the Ilande of Zeilam. Fol. 423 Of the kynde of Rubies called Spinelle. Fol. 424 Of the Rubies called Balasni. Fol. 424 Of the Diamondes of the olde mine. Fol. 424 Of Saphires. Fol. 425 Of Topasies. Fol. 425 Of Turquesses. Fol. 425 Of Iacinthes. Fol. 426 Of Smaragdes or Emeraldes. Fol. 426 Of dyuers kyndes of spices, where they growe, what they are woorth in Calecut, and whyther they are caryed from thence. And fyrst of Pepper. Fol. 426 Of Cloues. Fol. 427 Of Cinamome. Of Ginger called Beledi. Of Ginger Mechino. Fol. 427 Of greene Ginger in conserues. Of the Apothecaries drugges, and of what price they are in Calecut and Malabar. Fol. 428 Of the weyghtes of Portugale and India, and how they agree. Fol. 429 Of the vyage made by the Spanyardes rounde about the worlde. Fol. 429 Maximilian Transiluanus letter thereof to the Cardinall of Saltzburge. Fol. 430 The debate and strife, betweene the Spaniardes and Portugales for the diuision of the Indies, and the trade of Spices, and the Moluccaes, out of Lopez de Gomara. Fol. 448 The repartition and diuision of the Indies and newe worlde betweene the Spanyardes and the Portugales. Fol. 448 The cause and aucthoritie whereby they deuided the Indies. Fol. 450 Howe and by what occasion the Emperour layed the Ilandes of Moluccaes to pledge to the kyng of Portugale. Fol. 451 Pope Alexander the .6. his Bull touchyng the aforesayde partition of the Indies, Latine and Englyshe. Fol. 452. &. Fol. 454 An abridgement of .P. Martyr his .5.6.7. and .8. Decades, & particularly of F. C. conquest of Mexico by. R.W. Fol. 457 FINIS. Imprinted at London by Rychard Iugge. Anno. 1577. Cum Priuilegio.
