8185 33150888 28804
❧ By the Queenes Commaundement. FOrasmuch as it is found by good proofe, that many persons which haue serued of late on the Seas, in the iourney towardes Spayne and Portingall, in comming from Plimmouth, and other Portes of the Realme, haue fallen sicke by the way, and diuers died as infected with the plague: And that it is likely that many will haue purpose to come from the said Nauie, to the Citie of London, and so consequent∣ly to the Court, whereby danger of infection may come to her Maie∣sties housholde, and so approche to her sacred person. Therefore it is commaunded by publication hereof, both at the Court Gate, and in all the Townes within the Uerge, that no person that hath serued within the said Fleete, shall come to the Court, nor within the Uerge, except such as shall be specially sent from those which were the Generals of the Nauie, with letters to the Court: which persons shall not enter within the Court Gates, vntill the cause of their comming from the Generals, with letters of importance be notefied to some of her Maiesties priuie Counsell, and thereupon the Queenes Porters warned to suffer them to enter into the Court. And if any such person shall contrary to this commandement, from this day being the xxii. of this moneth of July, attempt to come either to the Court, or within the Uerge, and shall not immediatly vpon knowledge hereof depart with conuenient speede, the same shall be apprehended by the Knight Marshall and his Deputies, or by any Iustice or Constable dwelling within the Uerge, and shall bee committed to the Marshalseas without any bayle, vntil he shall be dismissed by some two of the Priuie Counsell attending on her Maiesties person. And yet it is not meant, but if any shall haue necessarie cause to come to the Court, to exhibite any suite or information concerning his seruice in the said Nauie, the same person shall cause the same his suite or information to be sent to the Court in writing, or by message to be brought by a person that hath not bene in the saide Nauie, and not knowen to be infected, to bee deliuered either to one of her Maiesties ordinarie Masters of Requests, or to the Knight Marshall, or to some one of the Priuie Counsell, by which meanes the suite may be duely vnderstoode, and so a reasonable answere to bee made thereto. At Nonsuch 22. Julii. Anno 31. Reginae Eliz. b. 1589. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London by the Depu∣ties of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
