8327 33150719 28725
❀ By the King. THE care wee haue to preuent all occasions of dispersing the Infection amongst our people, doeth sufficiently appeare by our former Proclamations, and that for that cause Wee are contented to forbeare at our Coronation all such Ceremonies of honour and pompe vsed by our Progenitors, as may draw ouer great conflu∣ence of people to our Citie. For which cause also being informed that vsually about the day of our Coronation intended, and for some dayes after, a Faire hath bene vsed to bee kept in the fieldes neere our house of S. Iames, and Citie of Westminster, commonly called S. Iames Faire, which if it should holde at the time accustomed, being the very instant of our Coronation, could not but draw resort of people to that place, much more vnfit to bee neere our Court and Traine, then such as by former Proclamations are restrained. Wherefore Wee haue thought it ne∣cessary to put off the keeping of that Faire for some few dayes: And to the ende that all men may take notice thereof, doe publish the same to all mens knowledge, Requiring those who are Lords of the Faire, or otherwise interessed therein, That according to this our pleasure, they doe forbeare to holde the sayde Faire, and to resort thither, for the space of eight or ten dayes after the first day of the vsuall holding thereof: Licensing them after that time to keepe the same, as they haue vsed to doe. Furthermore, to auoyd ouer great resort to our Cities of London and Westminster at that time, for the cause of our Coronation, Wee haue thought good to limit the Traines of Noblemen and Gentlemen, hauing necessarie Seruice or Attendance there, to a number certaine, Viz. Earles to sixteene, Bishops and Barons to ten, Knights to sixe, and Gentle∣men to foure: which numbers we require each of them to obserue, and not to exceed, as they tender our fauour. Giuen at our Castle of Windsor, the xj. day of July, 1603. in the first yeere of our Reigne of England, France and Jreland, and of Scotland, the sixe and thirtieth. God saue the King. ❀ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. Anno 1603.
