905 99836142 396
LOVE and VALOR OR The diuers Affections of Minerva. Will Marshall sculpsit. London Printed by Th: Harper & are sold by Tho: Stater▪ at his shop in Duck lane 1638.
LOVE AND VALOVR: Celebrated in the person of the Author, by the name of ADRASTE. OR, The divers affections of MINERVA. One part of the unfained story of the true Lisander and Caliste. Translated out of the French by W. B. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Slater, and are to be sold at his shop at the Swan in Duck Lane, 1638.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY, AND MY Truely honoured Favourer, Sir PETER TEMPLE, Knight and Baronet. Honoured Sir, HOwsoever I have received more encouragement from your selfe alone, then all men living besides, had not my Author deemed his la∣bour worthy the survey of so great a Prince, I should not have entitled you to my worthlesse labours in the conversion; since the difference between his originall, drawn by a free and art commanding hand, and my rough Copy being the first essay of my abilities
in this nature, may be more then the distance between your condition and a Princes. In supplyance of which defect, being unable to adde any thing but the bare figure of my devotion to serve you, it were but ill rhetoricke, and worse arithmeticke in me through many words multi∣plying ciphers, by ciphers to blot my paper with infinite nothings. Yet gracious Sir, I perswade me that I see, though I have not delivered in the booke, many lines and draughts resembling the patheticke facility and gentlenesse of our best writers: which draughts being but bare disse∣ctions, and curious anatomies of humane na∣ture, it is impossible to be over-tedious, if per∣tinent therein. But I flourish as if I would say something, where I am in truth a sceptique igno∣rant, and doubting all things, but my own weak∣nesse and the strength of those affections borne your service, Worthy Sir, by your vertues honourer, W. B.
To my Lord the MONSIEVR, Sole Brother to the King of FRANCE. MY Lord, so much is to be said in your commendations, as to forbeare in so ample a subject of elocution, were rather an ingratitude then silence; and I never sparing of my praises in all mens merits, seeming to have refused them untill now to yours, shall doe much better here to confesse, then to defend my thanklesnesse. It is not my good Lord, but I have as much inclination to honour you, as I have cause, which is to have it in the greatest perfecti∣on that can be imagined; but the same instigation I have had to speake, hath made me still silent, and the greatnesse of the subject which had ani∣mated most, hath yet discouraged me. There is so farre a distance from your highnesse to my
lownesse, and twixt my own power and my will, as I deemed it a sinne against my knowledge, rashly to have undertaken a thing not possible to be performed, but in great imperfection: and that my enterprise would much rather have discove∣red my weakenesse then my intentions. Notwith∣standing which my Lord, are they not the most rare affections which men testifie to their owne prejudice? how can I then more perfectly mani∣fest mine, then at the dispense and disrepute of my knowledge? How can I better make seen to you the passions that I undergoe for your service, and for your glory then by the exposing them a∣mid my own weakenesses, and my defaults? This consideration my Lord hath changed my former feares into rashnesse, and hath made me so bold to undertake that, which I have not had the da∣ring to thinke of: beleeving that if the execution were impossible, yet the enterprise was at least honourable, and by so much the fitter to manifest my devotions bent to you wards, as it beares me hood-winked beyond my knowledge and my power. But I am erred my good Lord even at the entry of my discourse, which beginning with your commendations, as the greatest and richest argument that could be chose, I know not how I have so suffered my selfe to be carried away with my passions, as I have said without thinking that which I would not, and have not yet spoke one word of what I would say. The cause of my er∣ring is the boundlesse extent of my subject. Hardly could it be but I should lose me in a laby∣rinth,
from out of which it is so difficult to get; but the wonder is I have not entred it, and that in stead of loosing my selfe in search of the issue, I have erred at the entry without once having found the beginning. But indeed great Prince, where is there any beginning in things infinite? If I should begin at the greatnesse of your birth, and weigh you as Prince of the chiefest kingdome in the world, and Son and Brother to the two grea∣test Kings the earth hath ever bore; were I not di∣verted by the excellence of your admirable na∣ture, by the exquisite education wherewith it is so happily propagate, and by the ample hopes you give both of the one and the other? what multitudes of other things might here be added in your commendations, did I not feare to doe them wrong, and loved I not more to honour them in silence, then to injure them by going a∣bout to speake their greatnesse: but reducing me to these three onely, and speaking but one word of each; what more excellent nature was there e∣ver found in Prince, or more generous then yours? What Achilles fed with the marrow and pith of Lyons one day to subdue the force of He∣ctor, does not give way to you as well in noriture, as couragious heart? And what hopes may we not well conceive from such and so magnani∣mous a Prince, as surpasseth the greatnesse of his birth by the excellence of his nature, and the ex∣cellence of his nature by the goodnesse of his no∣riture. But rising up to the fount head, and scorse of your great Ancestors, and so descending by
the succession of so many Kings as have been since S. Lewis, to Henry the great, I not observe you onely as a green and flourishing branch of thestock of Bourbon, or as a Sience of that of Anjou, but as Sonne and Prince of France, that is to say, of the best house and most illustrious Empire of the world. What can I hope lesse, or the enemy feare more, then some still, and unexpected en∣terprise mannaged with no lesse silence and priva∣cie, even to the entire and generall conquest of all such authority as strangers do usurpe from us? victories seeming as incident unto the house of Bourbon, as crowns seem destinated unto that of Anjou. Charles the brother of Lewis was the first of this family crowned King of Naples, Sicile, and Ierusalem. Lewis, brother to Charles the wise, and first Duke of Anjou, went to take possession of those kingdomes with 30000 horse. And in our times the last Henry of the house of Valois, being then Duke of Anjou, and brother to Charles the ninth, was crowned almost against his will King of Poland. But the most honourable titles of all these Kings, were yet to be brothers to the Kings of France. For this cause only was it that Henry rather chose the quality of Duke of Anjon in France, then that of King of Poland. And for the same reason as well he as Francis his brother, be∣ing but Princes of France, did precede the dead King your father, when as he was but King of Na∣varre: which I speake but by the way my Lord, to let you see how much this dignity of brother to the King ought be esteemed by you before all
the Scepters and the Crowns of the whole earth. Be it then that you would regain you the antient possession of your inheritance in Italy; the remem∣brance of Charles the eighth, of Lewis the ninth, and of Francis the great, causeth the Alpes as yet to tremble. Be it that you would passe to Constan∣tinople, the eastern Empire conquered, and posses∣sed by the French, doth there (with all feare) still redoubt their very name. If you would yet thrust further, and as farre as Palestine, the same French have conquered and possessed that also you may affright the Sultans of Egypt, and the Mores in Affrick, by the sole memory of S. Lewis. In what part soever of the world fatecalleth you, thither may the renown of your predecessors open you a passage; No mountain is so steep that will not stoop below your feet, nor sea so inraged and im∣petuous, as not to be appeased and humbled be∣neath your sailes. Go on great Prince under the name and armes of that great King, to whom onely you ought rest a subject. Goe and happily re-enter on the possession of so many Realmes. Eface by your immortall acts, & those in the end worthy a Gaston of France, the glorious memory and illustrious name of Gaston of Foix. Make seen there is as much difference between your valour and your renown and his, as there is between his condition and his house and yours. 'Tis said, A∣lexander intending to passe into Asia, there was one of the statues of Orpheus, whose forehead stood with sweat, from whence the Augures drew a presage that he should there bring so great
things to passe, as should produce sweat on the browes of such Poets and Musicians, as should de∣sire to relate them. May you great Prince, beare Armes more farre then Alexander, and do those deeds as the admiration and astonishment thereof may render men mute, and statues speaking, that after I have been often covered with sweat in the pursuit of the thunder of your Armes in battell, I may again sweat within their triumphs, singing the hymnes of your so glorious victories. So as I may from out those large extended wings wher∣on Renown it selfe ought beare your glory, draw a quill best capable of their description, and which supplying the imperfections of this book, (that I purpose to the eternity of your memory) may leave to posterity, works more worthy your name, and the desire I have to signallize me. My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and thrice affectionate servant, D'AUDIGUIER.
A Table of the Arguments. MInerva commeth to solicite her suits in Paris, is beloved of Balamyr, Crassus, Arnolphus, and Adraste, but loveth onely Arnolphus. The dis∣favour of Adraste, causeth that of Crassus, Adraste desirous to give a Serenade to Minerva, accompanied with Periste and Oristene, runneth a dangerous Misfortune. Page 1 Adraste reconcileth himselfe to Minerva, and not being able to vanquish the inclination shee hath for Arnolphe, of a Lover he becometh a Friend. Tatius renders himselfe necessary to Minerva, and so enga∣geth her estate, & marrieth her person, after the death of Arnolphe, and the vaine predictions of Adraste. which were found so true, as they produced a second separation of Marriage betweene them. 16 Minerva commeth back to Paris. The second loves of Adraste with her, are ruined by the practices and confederacie of Brasidas, and of Gracchus her kins∣men and Lovers. 32 Adraste closeth againe with Minerva, comforteth her on the death of Arnolphe. Commotions in France and divers adventures upon that subject. 56
The reprisall of Minerva in affection with Adra∣ste: a dangerous adventure of his, going to see Mi∣nerva. A walke of Adrastes with Minerva, and some others in company with her at Ruel. 78 The divers pursuits of Crassus and Adraste. The departure of Minerva, her returne, and confidence in Adraste. The sodaine disfavour of Adraste on the Eve of his parting, and the Letter he wrote to Miner∣va. As also the reconciliation of Adraste with Mi∣nerva, and his departure for the Army. 101 That neither his Love, nor the perfections of his Mistris could be possibly spoken of, but imperfectly. 123 Vpon his Mistris forbidding him to Love. 125 He sayth that he loveth as well by election, as desti∣nate thereto, and intreats his Mistris to examine the cause for which she doomes his death. 127 He complaines of the indifference of his Mistris. 129 The Answer. 130 The Reply. 131 He amorously seemes angry with his Mistris. 133 He comforteth his Mistris, on the death of his Rival, and manifesteth the excellence of his Love, above all other affections. 135 He complaines of his Mistris that she had failed him in a meeting appointed by her to walke. 141 The Answer. 142 He justifieth his fancies. ibid. Why his Mistris should not be moved at his Martyr∣dome, upon his departure. 143 He intreats his Mistris to torment him, to the end such pleasure as she takes therein, be increased propor∣tionably to the increase of his torments. 145
He excuseth himselfe for putting his Mistris in col∣ler, by preferring a just complaint unto her, and pro∣testeth that he will never more complain since he seeth he cannot complaine, without giving her offence. 146 The Answer. 148 Hee endeavours to maintaine a wager hee had pro∣pounded to have lay'd, that hee would write no more to her, and begs pardon, that hee doth not aske her par∣don for it. ibid. After his Mistris departure, hee comforteth her in her afflictions, by the example of his owne adversi∣ties. 150 An Epistle of a Lady, to a faithlesse Lover. 151 He justifieth his silence. 153 He dares not see his Mistris. 154 Hee complaines of his Mistris absence, and of those would hinder him from seeing her. 155 Hee comforteth a Lady upon some displeasures shee had received. ibid. He answereth to a Letter of Minerva's. 157 A Ladies answer to her Lover. 158 Hee makes answer to a complaint shee had made of him, for his silence, and not writing. 159 Vpon some discontent a little before his departure. 160 The Answer, 161 The Reply, 162 Being returned to Paris, he found that his Mistresse had harkened to some ill reports of him, whereof hee complaineth, and for that she had taken from him such houres of visitation, as he had hardly acquired to give them to another. The first occasion of breach betweene them, 164
Vpon that shee had answered to his former Letter, how she was inforced to her griefe, to suffer unpleasing company, and that she was sorry she could not admit of his entertainment, as she would. He returnes that the party whom shee fained her to be unable to be rid of, was rather commanded to stay, purposely to keep him off. And that be needed not his assistance in such case, knowing well that she might absolutely command, and forbid him what she pleased, in full assurance to bee o∣beyed. 166 He complaines of the languishing he suffers in her absence, and entreats her presence of her, as the onely thing sufficiently able, to chase her image from his thoughts. 168 He begs of God, hee will inspire him with words of force to make her more favourable. And he complains, that hee had beene made to attend all the day for an Answere. 169 She answers to his precedent Letter, that she knowes not what to say or send word of, and complaines much of the importunity of those that visit her, 170 He replyes, that if she knows not what to say or send him word of, he knowes lesse what to do. 171 Hee praies her not to loose her peace of minde in the affaires, wherein she is busied. And so fals in discourse of his passions, and sufferings for her love. ibid. She answers, that if he knew how much she partakes in his sufferings, hee would rather lament her then himselfe, and that no one should ever esteeme better of his merits, nor so cherish his affections, as her∣selfe. 173 Hee sayth that it is impossible hee should undoe him
from the thoughts, that have undone him Represents to himselfe the time he hath lost, in serving her▪ what she hath taken from him, and what shee hath yet left him. And concludes, that it is high time that he retire all naked as he is, to some desart, whither her image shall not be able to pursue him further. But that all this discourse vanisheth on her presence. 176 He complaines that they would debar his visits on the passion weeke, and that it was not a generall rule: but his greatest griefe was, to leave her in the hands of her enemies, whose drifts he discovereth to her, and offers himselfe to undertake them. 178 Having fought this morning upon the occasion spo¦ken of in the former Letter, and having astonisht his Mistresse, by the recitall of so unlooked for an action, he writes to her that her astonishment caused him to judge that she hoped some better end, or feared a worse. And shewes that neither the one, nor the other, could be. 179 He complaines that she had judged amisse of a good action. Saith that hee beleev'd that shee had seene the man of whom hee spake, and got from him the confes¦sion shee desired. How conformable which was to his words, hee should finde when she should fulfill hers. And that hee nere should rest, till hee had made him avow the truth. 181 He saith that he hath something to say to her which he had not yet sayd, for that whatsoever hee premedi∣tateth to tell her in absence, flies his memory when she is present. Represents to her his languishings and the put offs, wherewith shee had from time to time protra∣cted him, yet without complaint, for that loving her
with an extraordinary affection, hee was well pleased to testifie it by respects in common. 183 Hee persisteth still in the discourse of his langui∣shings, and some others which hee framed in walking alone a long the Seine. At last hee concludes absence, for absence, it were more supportable, farre off then neere, and that the more hee deferreth, the more hee draweth out in length the violence of his torments and vexations. 185 He conjures her take some pitty on his languishings, and not still to detaine him in the solitude shee had the day before. Complaines that he having so little time to spend with her, should waste it so ill, that he abides here but onely for the sight of her, and yet hee sees her not, but amongst such company as doe deprive him of her sight. 188 Vpon a quarrell which he had had on her occasion, of which shee had endeavoured an accord, upon some tearmes. Hee intreats her to pardon him if so be he would not endure that it should be conceived in that manner. 189 Being pressed to an honourable agreement, and threatned with her disfavour, in case he should refuse, he saith that shee urged him to a thing that she would upbraid him with so soone as he had done it. Notwith∣standing which, he would consent to whatsoever shee should doe, to testifie his obedience to her. 190 Vpon some coldnesse in his Mistresse, he saith that he dares not so much as send to her house to know when she will be pleased he may come thither. Nor yet can he but doe it, having so little time to live neere her, 191
Vpon a promise she had made him to afford him her company and entertaine, at 5 of the clocke, he sent to see if her watch were not stayd or put backe, or if shee had not yet againe some other demurre, to put him off to another time. 192 He excuseth himselfe of an action to which the vio∣lence and indiscretion of a bad woman, had born him, in the lodging and presence both, of his Mistresse, for which he humbly entreateth her, either to pardon, or punish him. So taking againe a discourse in hand that he had left, he humbly entreats her to weigh the impor∣tance of it, and to afford him one houre upon that sub∣ject. 193 The Answer. 195 The Reply on the same occasion. ibid He saith that he will write to her continually, since she hath commanded it, and will never lament him, for that she hath forbade it. Confesseth that he wants the good parts might oblige her to wish him well, and that he hath but too many ill ones, to merit her bad u∣sage, saith that all things worke according to their pro∣perties, and that he having a heart of flesh, and she one of stone, it must be that she should be as insensible of his affections, as he is quickly sensible of hers. 196 Shee answers that the cause why shee prayd him to write, was, that her deserts could not be commended, but by the judgment he gave thereof. That she sorrow∣ed that a passion so worthily entertained, should be for a subject so uncapable of the acknowledgment. 198 He replyes that if she knew the greatnesse of his pas∣sions, she would not say that he did worthily entertaine them, but that hee injures them. And intreats her to
give him leave to come and learne at hers, the subject for which shee desired hee should become passionate, according to her promise to him. 199 Hee saith that if hee did not by obedience, what hee also doth through affection, hee knowes not why hee should write to one that is as litle mov'd by his letters, as the posts and corners of the walls, to which our Bills be usually fixed. That instead of animating an image, and rendring it sensible of his passions, he hath rendred her sencelesse, by the vertue of his sighes. And of a heart of flesh he hath made one of impenetrable stone. 200 Having forborne three dayes without writing backe one word to him, (whatsoever may be sayd in her an∣swere) for missing this morning, shee seemes astonisht at his silence, and commandeth him to aske her pardon for it. 202 After so many complaints and delayes thereon, upon which hee had resolved to speake no more, then in one Letter, he intended to send her on his departure he yet gives her answer, and bids her farewell. ibid. Meeting him yet by chance, and being made friends, she failes againe of her promise to him, which obligeth him to breake with her once for all, and send her this his last farewell. 206 The Answer, 210 His Mistris being informed hee was in blacks, tooke occasion to write word unto him; by which she condoled with him the new affliction she beleeved had beene be∣fallen him. ibid. After having a long while dispated with himselfe whether hee should answere her Letters, or not, he tels
her that besides the afflictions hee under goes for her, he slighted all such as could happen to him. That he could not beleeve that she condoled theills, she dayly augmen∣ted. And wherefore he beleev'd so. 211 She replyes, that she is more amarvailed then offen∣ded at his Letter, and wisheth that all his vanities were in that paper, to the end they obliged no other one to answere them. 213 He answers her threats, and to the vanities she accu∣seth him of, in a stile altogether estranged from the re∣spect he had wont to render her, though not from his discretion. 214 He answers to certaine complaints that Minerva had made some while after, as well to his friends, as himselfe of his indifference, and sheweth that it was founded on the necessity of obeying her, and upon good reason. 222
Faults escaped in some Copies. PAge 10. line 30. for that, reade it, p. 11. l. 19. for others, r. ours, p. 21. l. 7. for revenger, r. revenge, l. 14. for & who shall then, r. who shall then, l. 17. for such as, r. those that, l. 19. for inconstant, r. con∣stant, l. 20. for misery, r. mischiefe, p. 39 l. 29. for these, r. those, p. 42. l. 7. for or what, r. what, p. 46. l. 15. for esteemed, r. seemed, p. 50. l. 15. for to obey, r. to obey you, p. 55. l. 2. for most provoked him, r. most troubled him she was it that most provoked him, p. 60. l. 15. for on yours. Adraste r. on yours Adraste, l. 27. for book, r. broake, p. 74. l. 7 for penthouse or a long, r. penthouse a long, p. 81. l. 3. for passion, r. possession, l. 22. for agreed, r. angred, l. 31. for forgot to, r. forgot not to, p. 82. l. 15. for after in death, r. after death, p. 83. l. 6. for to quite me of, r. to quit me of, p. 85. l. 10. for discourse, that it, r. discourse for that it, line 18. for or least, r. or at least, l. 30. for Adraste hath purged, r. Adraste having purged, p. 95. l. 16. for could tender, r. would render, p. 100. l. 8. for and to went set, r. and so went and set, p. 106. l. 26. for compassionate, r. compatiate, p. 110. l. 11. for that would, r. that she would, p. 113. l. 31. for desire, r. de∣signe, p. 116. l. 11. for nor to be to, r. nor be to, l. 17. for render me, r. render it me, p. 117. l. ult. for satisfaction to, r. satisfaction then to, p. 118. l. 23. for light doth rejoyce, r. light, thou that dost rejoyce, p. 119. l. 7. for state, r. fate, l. 13. for lesse, r. left, l. 27. for once as yet, r. once more as yet, and some others, which in courtesie may be borne withall.
Love and Valour: OR: The divers affections of MINERVA. The Argument. Minerva commeth to solicite her suits in Paris, is beloved of Balamyr, Crassus, Arnolphus, and A∣draste, but loveth onely Arnolphus. The dissavour of Adraste, causeth that of Crassus, Adraste desirous to give a Serenade to Minerva, accompanied with Periste and Oristene, runneth a dangerous misfor∣tune. CHAP. I. DId I desire to frame the foun∣dations of a true story upon a tale, I might say the earth never produced the equall of Minerva, and deriving her o∣riginall from heaven, it were not onely a lye, but blasphe∣my to bring her backe againe to earth. So then
let us not speake untruths for feare of lying, nor let us blaspheme for feare of blasphemy; fable hath no part in this discourse, the Star by which I meane to steere my course, being truth it selfe. This here is not that Minerva the Goddesse, but a woman whose cleere minde and brave spirit hath acquired her the name of that Pallas presi∣dent of Art and Armes; her birth was not of the head of Iupiter, but of an illustrious family, the worth whereof hath beene ere whiles graced with the most honourable charges of this Realm, her father having left her very young, she was married at 9 yeeres old to a husband but of ele∣ven; and as the one nor the other were then ca∣pable of love, they produced no other but hate. Her desire to be divorced from one she loved not, caused her come to solicite her affaires at Pa∣ris, where her beauty did acquire her rather ser∣vants then Iudges; and where her youth more proper to the exercises of love, then businesse of law, rendred her apter to hearken to the suits of her servants, then to give eare to, or prosecute her necessary suits. I know not whether she were cru∣ell or favourable on their behalfe, but certaine am I that the Sejan horse was never more unhap∣py to his Masters, then she to some of her ser∣vants. Whilest she followed her affaires, Bala∣myr was the first of whose service she admitted. I have heard him say, she esteemed more of his valour, then she loved his person, and that her vanity to captivate so great a courage, caused her suffer the importunity of his pursuit, their love
became hatred: Balamyr, were it through judge∣ment or inconstancy, with, or without cause, quit her for another Mistresse, and was unlamented of Minerva sometime after slaine. But she conti∣nued not without a servant, for she wonne on all she would, and she would win on all she could: and for all that she complained here sometimes of the miserable conquests she made against her will. She made no acquisition but to her profit, and wherewith she served not her selfe in some designe or other. See here the cause why she contemned not the affection of Crassus, howsoe∣ver his ill shape, and worse favour, rendred him sufficiently contemptible. But Arnolph was he that most feelingly touched her to heart, all the rest were amorous of her, and she only of him. It was not that his services or quality obliged her to love him more then ordinary: it was a certain inclination proceeded of the sympathy in their wils, and I know not what feminine humour more taken with a soothing observance, or hand∣some legge making, then with all the faire quali∣ties or good parts can be in a man, or the faith∣fullest services that can be rendred them. Many others fell into the snares of Minerva, whose vul∣gar affections merit not a particular history, but she kept alwaies a kinde of order in the receit of such as she intended to inregister in number of her subjects: for when she began to favour Ar∣nolph, she was fallen off with Crassus, and never was reunited during the life of Arnolph. Not∣withstanding she accepted of Adraste, when she
was yet ingaged, and suffered that he sighed for her, whilest she languished for another. But A∣draste accompanied his affection with so much respect, as sufficed to have begotten pride even in humility it selfe, and besides was so sensible of offences, and so tenderly feeling the least cold∣nesse, that he would not have suffered them from a Goddesse, which was the cause that at some time or other he spoiled all his Mistresses, and then that he undid himselfe too: for that seeming not so much to love as to adore them, he so rai∣sed their haughty humour and naturall vanity above the condition of their sexe, and gave them so absolute an Empire, as himselfe was not able to live under, so as he lost often by impatience, what he had acquired by much passion: he threw well, but he plaid his game ill. The first occasion of breach between him and Minerva, was but slight, and more capritious then reasonable: as for the most part there appeares in the processe of love, more rage then reason, but it was fol∣lowed by a mistake that is very pleasant. Adraste being at Minerva's, with one Thymon a fine com∣panion, & of a good wit, whom Minerva not disli∣ked of: after having entertained them some time in a low room, shee intreated them up the stairs, which were at the going out of the room, of suf∣ficient breadth for two, but too narrow for three. When Minerva being about to ascend, observed them both, looking one or the other of them would take her by the hand, and seeing both to recoile and step back, she goes up her selfe for∣most,
as to shew them the way. Adraste forbore to take her hand, for that it seemed to him she had first looked on Thymon, and Thymon abstained to assist her, out of respect to Adraste, who tur∣ning about, got him out of doors, saying nothing to one or other, but went his way. There was no∣thing but love, & that in choler could cause him commit so great a discourtesie: Minerva marvel∣led not a litle, and Thymon was more astonished at it. But Adraste went not alone, for the vexation hebore along with him, made the greater part of himselfe. After a profound consideration of the fury of his disease, accusing yet his Mistresse of his owne fault, he resolved with himself to com∣plaine, and found not a better meanes to mitti∣gate his griefe, then (if it might be,) to disburthen himselfe of it upon paper, he wrote to Minerva, That since for honouring her without any obligation, she had slighted him without cause, making him un∣dergoe such punishments as hee was unworthy of▪ in place of the recompence he merited; hee was resolved to keepe his services for other favours, since she kept her favours for other Lovers. I know well said hee, that this will adde to your cantentment, and still more aggravate my discontents: but the more violent they shall be, the lesse lasting you had not been so ill to me, had you not found mee still so good, but however it be the effect of a low spirit, to take occasion from the goodnesse of any one to use them ill, I never yet shall alter mine, to revenge me ought of your bad usage. I doe confesse that I thus breake with you▪ in the most extremity of griefe I ever suffered yet, or ever can
and which I never shall recover whilest I live, and that if the wounds of the minde endure after death, eternity it selfe must onely be the tearme of their con∣tinuance. But I shall chuse to breath my afflictions elsewhere, or smother them in my owne breast, or that they smother me, then to increase them daily with new indignities. And if you wonder that I have taken so small an occasion, having heretofore passed by so great ones, remember that they are not the greatest sicknesses, but they are the last that doe bring death: and that it is no marvell that so slight a disfa∣vour succeeding so many other insupportable ones, should now conclude the lesse of what you have so many times neglected. Hee gave this Letter to a servant that Minerva knew not to belong to him, with his commands, that so soon as hee had delivered it to her own hands, he should not stay for her answer. It was done just as he willed, this man went his ways to Minerva, to whom presenting the Letter, he told her, that his Master most humbly kissed her hands; Who is he? said she. Madam answered he, that you shall finde in his Letters. Have a little pa∣tience then answered Minerva, which saying, she stepped into her Cabinet, as well to peruse as to write an answer to her Letter, when she saw it was not signed, the desire and impatience she former∣ly had to know the Author of it, was now by the difficultie redoubled. She staid upon it some time to bethink her if she could divine therof by the character. At last, being able to gather nothing from thence, she commanded that they made the
messenger come in, but they found that hee was already gone, and with such haste, as all sight of him was lost. As yet, had Adraste never wrote unto her before this time, and Minerva not think∣ing that shee had given him any cause of dislike, no way suspected him for this Letter. But Cras∣sus being discontented at her, and shee yet much more offended at Crassus, shee imagined it an ef∣fect of his ill will. And therupon writing back to him in the heat of her choler, and despight, and in the rage and violence of her first motions, shee returned him the most bloudy and injurious Let∣ter, that a furious and revengfull woman could bethink her of against a man. So as Monsieur Cras∣sus that had been before offended by her, and ex∣pected rather to be satisfied, farre from what he looked for, received an amends much worse then the offence. In the mean while, was Adraste un∣able to suffer the absence of his Mistris, and yet was unhappily banisht her presence, hee desired with all impatience to see her, yet obstinately shunned he all occasions of seeing her, seeking and fearing in one and the same time to meet her, a troublesome passion that brings us to will, and not to will in the same time one and the same thing. In matter of love a diverting on some other object, is no little helpe; Adraste endeavoured what he could to divert himselfe, and thinking to lose the remembrance of his malady, found it even in the same divertisement. Hee went to see a friend of his called Periste, that tooke him a long to supper with him in the Suburbs of Saint
Germans, with a certaine Gentlewoman named Oristene, to oblige him by a double pleasure he added to the daintinesse of their fare, the delight of Musicke joyning with 4 or 5 Lutes, as many excellent voyces, of which Oristenas was the most excellent. All which did but more ripen the griefes of Adraste, and by the object of such felicity, but represent the more to him his un∣happinesse. It was that time of the yeare when the longest daies make the evenings most de∣lightfull, and dispose lovers still to give or re∣ceive your serenades or evening musickes, which awakened a marvellous desire in the heart of A∣draste, to present Minerva with one. All the com∣pany agreed to it, Oristena her self would make one of the party, which that she might doe with the more convenience, she changed the attire of her sex, and put on mans apparell. They set her on a foot cloth nag, and all the rest beating along on the hoofe, they left her lodging, just as the day left our horizon. Oristene lodged in the most re∣mote quarters of the suburbs, and Minerva in the middest of the City, so as to goe from the one to the other, the directest way was through S. Germans street: when they were come so farre as the Well in that street, some 50 paces from the Abby, Oristena calling to her Page, which indeed was but a Laquay, was by her voyce knowne of some 4 or 5 that would needs lay hands on her horse bridle. The Musicians who were they that were neerest to her, having drunk too much, and not understanding things aright, began to draw
their swords, and charge upon them. These Roysters defended themselves, and but for A∣draste that opposed himself unto their weapons, and making some by good words, others by threats retire, appeased the first tumult, there had been some extraordinary hurt done. They shea∣thed all their swords but one onely, that looked as if he would have eat them all at a bit. Adrastes choler rose then above his wisedome, to curbe; and doe you only Sir said he, forbeare notwith∣standing the wary example of your fellowes, and therwithall passed 5 or 6 thrusts just at the throat of him, and with so ready and able a pursuit, as the other warding and giving backe, without having leisure to strike one stroke, or speake a word, found himself retired so far as the Serjeants barres, which is at the end of that street: and then Sir said he, what injury have I done you? you have not put up your sword for love said Adraste, which I by force will now make you sheath: that needs not Sir, I will put it up upon your word Sir, replyed he: do so then answered A∣draste, or you are but dead: he sheaths his weapon, and thereupon Adraste returned towards his friends, and the other followed him, who desi∣red likewise to finde his. So soone as they came neer the Well where they had left them, Adraste found not any of his company, but in place, two men bearing a third under the armes, who as be∣moaning himselfe, cryed with a faint and dying voyce, I am slain: he that followed Adraste, knowing they were his frie nds, one of which
was run thorow the body, drew his sword on A∣draste, and tilting at his back, cryed out, the mur∣therer, the murtherer, this is he that did it: wher∣upon all the others at once fell upon him, and the hurt man not able to do more, fell a crying, kill, kill, kill. Adraste had much better have returned toward the Abby, then have gone forwards, for he had not found any other to encounter, then he that followed him, who would nere have stood him, but desiring to overtake his company, and beleeving that they were got into the City by S. Germans gate, in pursuit of their first intenti∣ons, he flew amongst the thickest of them before him, who made him way, on the violence of his fury, and having let him passe, followed him full close along the butchery, did he not finde thinke you, his legs more usefull to him then his armes? Adraste had a little English foot-boy, who was by when the man was run thorow, and having seen part taking on all sides but his Masters, stood him close up at a Butchers dore, with a bottle of wine in his hand, which he set down so soon as he see his Master so pursued, and suddenly run∣ning from his place, cryed out, courage Sir, here be all your friends; which words so replaced the heart of Adraste in his body, and put such afright in his enemies, as they all turned their backs so soon as he turned head upon them. For they all thought it true Adraste, for that he desired it, and they because they feared that Adraste having cau∣sed them to flee that had pursued him, and liking better of their rooms then companies, demanded
of his boy what was become of Periste, Oristena, and the rest that he left there. In good faith Ma∣ster, said he, I know not, but seeing you so hard∣ly put to it, I thought it best to say they were all here. It was not ill done, said Adraste, but let us go see if they be not gone into the City. As they went, the whole suburbs were in tumult, for these villaines in flying, had given the alaram every where, crying out, that they massacred Monsieur, the Princes officers, so as all was in rout, in hub∣bub, and affray, which made Adraste make more haste to the gate of the City, hoping that his company were already entred, and that himself should finde with them more assurance there, then without in the suburbs. But he found the gates already shut, and one of his Chanters on the bridge, like another Orpheus at the gates of hell, but that he intreated Pluto to let out to him Euridice, and others here begged leave of the Porter to let him into the City. Adraste asked him what he made there, what was become of the company, and wherefore they had all left him so. I know nothing as concerning your two last demands said he, but to the first I stay here to have them open me the gate, for me thinks the whole suburbs are raised upon us, and would to God I were gone with the losse of my Lute. As he yet talked, they perceived a company of some 30 or 40 persons that came towards them, by the light of ten or a dozen torches that were carried before them. So soon as Adraste saw them, he conceived that they were people assem∣bled
together to take him, and fearing to be so surprised against a gate that was shut against him, not having elswhere passage then amongst them, he resolved to make himselfe way by his sword, as he had done a little before, but with as much more apparence of danger, as here were many more people: he expected to be slain, but he chose rather to dye, then to be taken. Wherfore looking amongst them, and making a flourish with his sword naked in his hand, he rushed through the middest of this multitude; as it had been a mad man. Never in his life was Adraste so happy▪ all this heard of people fled, some here, and some there, and gave him no lesse room then the whole street; he passed them like thunder, and fled much marvelled at so admirable a suc∣cesse: he need not feare following, for the others fled as fast on the other side. But there were so great a number of them, that (not seeing any of∣fence neer them when he was gone) they took hart at grasse, as we say, and finding the Musician and Laquay that had not the heart to flye, they laid hands on them. Note that it was a band of Comedians going to act before Monsieur the Prince, accompanied with many others, as well women as men, who thinking of nothing lesse then of the adventure of Adraste, were put in greater afright then he. The Musician thought himselfe already hanged, and the foot-boy at least flead alive; but seeing thēselves not accused for having kild or hurt any one, and that they were onely demanded, who this mad man was
that had so furiously routed them, they escaped by denyall, and were quit by saying they knew nothing of the matter. Adraste in the mean time went his way backe all alone to the house of Ori∣stene, where he found that Periste had brought her back again, yet shaking with the feare this acci∣dent had caused in her. Well said Periste, so soon as he saw Adraste enter, much mooved with for∣tunes he had run; I beleeve it will be this two dayes before you desire again to give your Sere∣nades or your Aubades more to Minerva. I am now ready as ever to return, answered Adraste, but I assure you it shall be alone, for either I will ingage me in no quarrels, or I will not leave my friends engaged in them after I have my self be∣gun them, which I speake not concerning you, for besides that as I know well that you began not this, so had you enough to do to disingage O∣ristine; But was it possible that four or five ras∣cals should so easily rout so many honest good fellowes? As you betook you to your sword a∣gainst that angry blade that would by no meanes sheath up his, said Periste, his companions like∣wise took them to theirs, I seeing them to runne after you, threw the formost of them to the earth with a thrust I made, which stayed and took them all short up. Indeed we were the grea∣ter number, but the most of us had no other wea∣pons then their Lutes, which they threw away the better to flye. Whilest they made away, and the others took up their hurt man, I had the op∣portunity to bring back Oristene. You have done
what you ought, and I what I could said Adraste, assuring you that I beleeve there was never Knight errant that in one evening had two such adventures or so strange as I have had since sup∣per; nor know I well if I may dare to tell them, since I can hardly beleeve them my selfe. Then discoursed he to them what had happened to him, and they knew not, lessening yet the num∣ber of those through whom he had forcibly pas∣sed, for feare they should think it but a tale. But the Musician and footman which he beleeved dead, or at the least prisoners, upon the conclusi∣on of his story arriving, no little renewed his wonder, for he could not imagine how they had escaped. But how went you to work said he, for I left yon invironed by fifteen or twenty people, from whom I scarse hoped that ever you or my selfe should have gotten free. Indeed Sir said the boy, they were 30 of them or more, but they dreamt not of you, and they had more feare in them then they could put you in. And then the Musician told them that they were certain Co∣medians followed by many Lawyers and other gowned people, the most part of whom took their wives along with them to the play, which was to be acted at Monsieur the Princes Court. I wondred indeed how I came so valiant, answe∣red Adraste, but now the marvell is over since I finde with what manner of people I had to doe. To all this discourse poore Oristine said never a word, though she thought nere the lesse, doubt∣ing much that she should pay deere for this piece
of folly, as indeed she did: for the next day A∣draste and Periste having taken leave of her, the Kings Officer in those cases, failed not to visit her house, letting her understand, he would informe against the ryot committed the evening before, and to garnish his Majesties pockets, as the French hath it, began with the seisure of her goods. But not to make a starre-Chamber suit of this in place of a love story, we will leave Oristi∣ne to her suits, and follow the affections of Mi∣nerva.
The Argument. Adraste reconcileth himself to Minerva, and not being able to vanquish the inclination shee hath for Arnolphe, of a Lover he becommeth a Friend. Ta∣tius renders himself necessary to Minerva, and so engageth her estate and marrieth her person, after the death of Arnolphe, and the vain predictions of A∣draste, which were found so true, as they produced a second separation of Marriage between them. CHAP. II. NO misfortune but may bring good to some, the disparagement of Ori∣stene, was cause of the reconcilia∣tion of Adraste with Minerva. She for Adrastes sake, took some pains on the behalfe of Oristene, and then could Adra∣ste do no lesse then go home to her, and thank her for it, where a peace was no sooner treated then concluded. Hee craved pardon for his Letter, which, was indeed to excuse him of a fault that none knew that he had done; so Minerva recoun∣ted to him the mistake that it had caused her to make. Though she loved not Adraste, yet shee liked well to retain him for a friend, or at least
not to have him as an enemy, so as for sometime he governed her very peaceably, by day he wal∣ked with her to the Gardens of Ruel, and those of Saint Germans, and by night he accompanied her to the accustomed places of bathing by moon-shine at the Tournelles, and afterwards ha∣ving carrried her back to her house, and passed the most of the night with her, he usually retired all alone, without light from the one end of the City to the other. Of 1000 men scarce shall ye finde one that would for 1000 women, do what he did for this one. Notwithstanding one conge, one salute of Arnolphe wayed more in the estima∣tion of Minerva, than all the services of Adraste. After some time, debating the matter with him, she confessed to him, what indeeed she could not deny. The same passion you have for me, said she, I have for him, and sigheth as often for his love, as you for mine. But I tell you a secret, I should be loth he should discover; & I swear to you by the love I beare him, that he hath never received the satisfaction therin which you have had, nor once hath hee pretended to it, however you have recei∣ved but what I might with, mine honour, grant. Arnolphe was a stranger, without name, quality, or estate, that entertained Minerva with discourses of his own lightnesse, inconstancy, and the Tro∣phes he reared therby to his vanity, ye, even to the prejudice of that discretion, ought to be used in like cases. But she, as if shee had had power to render him as well faithfull, as loving, beleeved that he would become better to her, than God
himself had made him, lived encharmed with∣in the circle of a faith much more amorous then reasonable. Adraste told her all these things, and that he much marvelled that already having bin deceived by one inconstant man shee could yet a∣gain set her affections, on an other more to be doubted then the first. But said she, this is bad Rhetorick in you, to speak ill, with intention to cause me wish you well. I cannot be so perfect as you goe about to make me beleeve of my selfe, if so I have not judgement sufficient to make an e∣lection worthy me. And grant that he wanteth all those qualites you speake of, yet ought not my affection to be the lesse, that is not tyed at all unto the qualities and fortunes of a man, but meerely to his vertues and his demerits. Then did Adraste take the course is seldome used a∣mongst Rivals; Since it is so said he, that your will and pleasure beares you to this, I will by no meanes stand in opposition: It being altogether reasonlesse, that you having the power you have upon my liberty, should not have the like upon your own. In my example you shall see allover, that doth for the love of his Mistresse, love his rivall. I will for your love serve him, to the end that you even for his sake shall beare me some good will. But yet remember you, that there shall be no justice left in heaven, it for the faithfull love of a slave that doth adore you, you endure not the shamefull tyrannies of a faithlesse and impetuous Master, and in place of that eternity of divine honours, and everlasting faithfulnesse
which I vow to you, you drown not your life in endlesse sorrowes, and soile not your name with as many infamous scandals (An unfortunate pre∣sage, that yet did prove more true). Howsoever Minerva loved Arnolph deerely, yet could she not helpe it, but this extreme submission of Adraste did o'recome her. And though Adraste grieved to see Minerva loved another, yet could not he avoyd it, but this great freedome with which she trusted him in a secret concerned her so neerly must needs oblige him much; so as notwith∣standing they seemed to renounce each others love, yet disavowed they not each others friend∣ship. Adraste therefore in stead of becomming Mi∣nerva's servant, became her friend, an exchange more necessary then favourable, but which de∣pended meerly on her pleasure. Whilst Adraste and Arnolphe thus pretended to Minerva, there was yet a third competitor that bore away the prize they expected and laboured for: but he en∣joyed it not o're-long, nor without much cost, for indeed he was Clericus in libro, as we say, and not in this craft a Master. Minerva for want of good prosecution, and not of right, was quite o'rethrowne in her suit. There was one of the common Councell of the City, an ancient man, and of the longest continuance in the Court of Parliament, one powerfull in meanes and autho∣rity, and one that was not ignorant of all the quirks and quillets in the law, and in truth a most proper instrument to re-edifie and gaine againe a lost cause, Minerva needed such a man as this,
and her fortune would in stead of seeking him out, she was her selfe sought out by him. Tatius, so was this Councellor called, was of an amo∣rous complexion, and covered glowing fires be∣neath the embers of a grey beard. He had no sooner seen Minerva, but he was taken with her, and she well managing the occasion, made him so wed her cause, as in place of counsell▪ he be∣came Solicitor and party, and in a word gaind her the sute which she had absolutely lost, and got her to be sequestred both body and goods from her husband: and all this without Minerva's once troubling her self, which was the thing in∣deed she required & best liked of. But this you may think could never be without much charge, the which Tatius very freely had disbursed, furnish∣ing her with 5 or 600 crownes, that Minerva se∣cured him out of her estate. For though Tatius were a gallant Gentleman, yet knew he well that it sufficed not to carry away this prize from so many others braver then himselfe, and he cleer∣ly found that it behoved him render himself the more necessary, by so much as he was the lesse pleasing, and that he should begin to ingage her estate somewhat to him, the better afterwards to interest him in her selfe. The design was pro∣found and subtile, and succeeded well in the ac∣quisition, howsoever it fell out but ill to him in the possession. The first took notice hereof was Adraste, who incontinently told as much to Mi∣nerva, letting her understand besides, she would become as meane a slave, as those are commonly
sold in Barbary at market, if so she ever marryed this old Sire, that could not be so soon marryed, as jealous of her. And if it chance, said he, as I have told you otherwhiles, that for being too covetous of your favours to one, so capable of the knowledge of their worth, the heavens shall after as a just revenger, consent that you be libe∣rall of them unto some ignorant, that no way shall finde cause to acknowledge them, or shall not be able to return their price; but on the con∣trary, be satiate with your kindnesses, afflicted with his happinesse, and openly neglect even these your excellent beauties for some slight re∣gard. And who shal then assist you to lamentyour cause after so fair a warning, as is this of your disgrace! Who will not think fit such a cruell one as bathes her self still in the bloud of such as love her best, and is not pleased but in the murther of their inconstant loves, at last should fall into the hands of such a sot, as should revenge by his con∣temptuous outrages, the most injurious disdaines wherewith she hath crucified so many faithfull soules? And to remember you that I have said it is a misery fatall unto such as you; and by so much the more assured as it is little feared. Miner∣va did but laugh at these his ominous predicti∣ons, and told him; then she could with ease ren∣der them all wholly false. Aruolphe wer't that he deemed it for the good of Minerva, or that he loved her rather for a Mistresse then a wife, free∣ly advised her to marry Tatius: But she having drawn, and got from him what she would, now
thought not but of the readiest meanes to discard and cast him off. Tatius was a Church-man, and upon that she told him, that her friends took it amisse, that one of his coate should so frequent her company: he sent to Rome, and having obtai∣ned a dispensation for marriage, he sought her o∣penly. Minerva excused her then upon the diffe∣rence betwixt their conditions, qualities, and manner of life. Tatius being a gowne man, used to the City. She being born in the Country, and bred up amongst the Nobility. To every of her objections Tatius found an answer. I will sell my goods, the places and offices that stay me in the City, said he, and will alter my manner of living, to the end you change not yours. Minerva seeing her self so incompassed on all sides, had recourse to the lest remedy of Maids that would put off a suitor, they like not, which is to say, that they will never marry. Added further, that she would become a votary, and that the better to apt and fit her to the formes and customes of a religious and solitary life; she intreated, not onely him, but likewise all such as did her the honour of visitati∣on, to abstain from those favours. Pay back the moneys that are owing me, said Tatius, then, since I must lose the fruit of all my services; when you shall owe me nothing, nor we have more to do with other, I am content since you will have it so, then not to see you any more; but till we are even, I pray forbeare to take from me the honour of seeing you. Though Minerva were descended of a right good family, yet could she
not suddenly lay down the 6000 crowns she ought him, without selling away part of her e∣state, nor could she finde the man would doe it for her: And Tatius proceeding in law, had got a decree for the whole summe: she was drawn dry by her suits, and her expences caused there∣by at Paris; Moreover she being as yet in pupil∣lage, her estate mannaged by over-seers, brought her not in the moyety of the true value. Arnolphe was a stranger, and without estate, as hath been said, and it he had abounded, yet had Minerva much rather have given to him, then to have ta∣ken from him; and by misfortune he had got a wound on the arme, in the time of Tatius his hot∣test pursuit, by one that he desired not to kill, though he dyed himself within three daies after of that hurt, leaving behinde him a most violent griefe and uncomfortable sorrow in the heart of Minerva. There was none left her then but Adra∣ste, who had from farre foreseen this storme; though when he said so, he was not beleeved. Should she now have recourse to him, after so often making her selfe merry at his predictions, and demand counsell of him, having before so often slighted his advise? It must needs be, to whom indeed should one resort, but such of whom they have had so oftentimes sufficient proofe of their fidelity? she dispatched then a Gentleman to him being at Paris, and she in the Country, to lament her misfortune, accuse her incredulity, and demand his advise in a case of such importance. Adraste had much rather have
given her help then counsell, but he could not; his father was yet living, and he managed but what he allowed him, which scarse sufficed for his own entertainment. Queen Margaret gave him indeed some times a quarterly pension, but it was casuall, and not certain, had it been sufficient, nor sufficient, had it been certain. He truely loved Minerva, and if she had given him time to pro∣vice it, he had rather sold what ere he had in the world, then have failed her, but she asked his counsell in a thing that was already past and done: and though he knew not that it was con∣cluded of, for all that he doubted much it was exceeding forward. For Minerva pressed by the importunities of Tatius, after all the shifts and doubles that the craft and subtilty of women could invent, yet was at last constrained to marry him, but in clandestine manner, and to the end to deceive and cast him off, as she had done the o∣ther, getting a promise from him, that the mar∣riage should not be consummate untill sixe mo∣neths after, in which time she thought to take some order in her affaires, and finde meanes to pay him. But Adraste knew not of this, he wrote unto her then in these very words:
Adrastes Letter. WHat I have heretofore oft said, proves now too true. It rests then in you to make it appear in human things whether there be predesti∣nation, er free will; since if you be forced through necessity to imbarce this your mis∣fortune, I shall henceforth beleeve it altogether boot∣lesse to foresee, or to forewarne the event of things, since they are by no means to be avoided. If you be not, I shall beleeve you Mistris of your will, and that it is not in the power of any living man to force it. It is hard to constraine such as are yet in the obedience which you have dispenced with, nor can such a thing be done but with much griefe, and more misfortune. You know it by the experience you have had; and if o∣thers ought to weigh it well as once, you are to think upon it twice. But why complain you of unhappinesse, since you will needs be so? Is it not well known that it can never be unlesse yon will, there being naught so free as marriage is? Think not that these complaints again shall serve you for excuse, they at the first indeed were not amisse, when you were but an Infant, and in the power of those respected more themselves then you. And how be it that then you were free from fault, yet know you well, what you your selfe didundergo therin. The authority of friends no more can heer constraine your infancy. If you do well, the glory will be yours, if ill, lament you of it to your self, for no man else will grieve for you, but I, that cannot chuse but grive that
you the Mistris of perfection, should be destinate to things so disagreeable. If so you be obliged by any man, twere fit you gave him satisfaction in't, but not unlesse you will at price of your selfe, thinke but what must follow, what you are to do, and of the pleasure you shall take in't, if so your discord bring you once more, before the Iudges. But I beleeve it is to little purpose that I argue, and my reasons will not serve so much to profit you, as to my own discharge; However, had I the honour to see you, I might perchance say that unto you, might bring you about to another minde. And if it be not now too late, and that the pleasures you do expect from this your Lover, not precipitate your better coun∣sels, I yet may have a word or two with you before it be long. But if the ill be helplesse, and you must drink of this medicine, prepare you it so, that it be profitable to you yet. Tis all the counsell I can give, in that of which I know not how to advise my self, that could have wished this comfort in my losse, that at the least I had seene it profitable unto you. Fairest Minerva adiew, I cannot keep me more from my lamenting, then I can from loving you; wel may you be unto another, but I can never be to any one but you; and as for you I do beleeve that being unable to be what you ought to me, you will at least be what you may. If you have wept the death of your Arnolphe, now lament the life of your Adraste, that never can esteem it so as the honor to have power to lose it once in serving you, and her to rest yours. When Minerva had once received this Letter, shee became afflicted with two most sensible and violent griefs, one from the losse of a friend shee loved above her selfe; the other from possessing
an Enemy she hated more then any thing. In the one there was no remedy, nor in the other but a very little hope. And is it not enough, said shee, that I have lost the man more deere to mee then all the world besides, but that I must be forced to marry one, most hatefull unto mee of all the earth? Oh Adraste, how justly now migh∣test thou scoff at my vanity. Adraste mocked her not; but seeing Tatius Quarter-master in her house, and watch so neere all manner of resort therto, as that there was no approching her but by his means, he did conceive he had no more to do, and that twas fit he then should lose desire, when hee had left to hope. Tatius slept not the whilest, The six moneths agreed on passed, the marriage indeed was consummated with all se∣crecie, but her great belly ere it were long made seen the whole mystery, and constrained them to celebrate publikely the marriage they had so pri∣vatly made behinde the curtain. So was Minerva almost as soon brought a bed as married, & mar∣ried to a jealous fellow that would not fail to ac∣complish those unhappy presages of Adraste, that armed him with resolution, and constancie, and knowing love best to be cured by some other love, lost the sorrow for his first Mistris in the af∣fections and service of a second and new one, Mi∣nerva wrote to him yet some little time after her marriage, but such a Letter as the extravagance shewed well the ill seat of her wit and judgment; she wrote him word, That she was much satisfied frō the contentment which she had purposed to have given
to him, or at least to have let him see the desire she had to content him. All the rest of the Letter was but testimonies of good will, well wishes and offers of remembrance, protestations, and oaths to e∣steeme him above all the World, and desires of his company, Adraste answered. That after much pondering the contentment shee said shee had determi∣ned to give him, and the satisfaction which rested to her in having made known to him such her desire; he by no means found that the one or the other was come to him, without shee thought she had contented him in saying that shee was well pleased at his contentment, that she might well have afforded him other satisfa∣ctions which had more obliged him then such, and from him might have rendred her selfe better, then those the people gave her▪ but shee seem'd to shew her good will when she had no longer power to manifest it, and offered now her well wishes to render the losse of her affection the more insupportable, that all these protesta∣tions, and these oaths made of her good esteem of him, gratified him not, that it was oncly a dainty she whip∣ped by his mouth, mocking him that had so often in∣treated her to honour him lesse, and love him more. That since there was no meanes for him to succeed and inherit the affections of the dead, whose his had pre∣ceded, he prayed heaven that he might be deceived in his predictions rather then she in her election, and that she might enjoy as much contentment in what she did possesse, as he had sorrow for what he did loose. As for his company, that he wished it no lesse usefull unto her, then hers to him was deere; that he already had rendred her the addues she sent him, with more
weight and measure then she did receive them, and if per adventure she doubted it, the greatest pleasure she could doe him, was to examine it. Minerva seeing Adraste thus in merriment, beleeved he was no longer in love; and as we know not the price of things till after their losse, shee found the discre∣tion and fidelity of this Lover, too late, and when she had not meanes left her to gratifie them. Moreover as things never appeare so much as when they are opposed unto their contraries, the harsh nature of Tatius caused her now to taste the sweetnesse of that gentle one of Adraste: And she by meanes of the tyranny was practised upon her, bethought her of the Empire erewhiles she had exercised on him. The servile condition to which she was now reduced, made her not onely lament the liberty she had taken to her selfe, but the soveraignty also which she had held on o∣thers. And conferring her present misery with her passed felicity, she esteemed her by so much the more wretched, as she remembred her to have been most happy. Tatius used her honoura∣bly, yet in all appearance, much rejoycing him in the good huswifery, and vertuous qualities of his wife, but in effect, she was confined to a pri∣vate corner, where she had sufficient leisure to la∣ment her follies. Her house heretofore open to all commers, where she had wont be often visi∣ted by her friends, indeed was not forbid them, but she shut from them, without leave so much as once to see her kinsfolks. And in the meane time Tatius entertained his guests, in which he
was little skilled, for nere did Clowne act well a Gentleman; and he being born in the City, and brought up a Lawyer, knew better how to en∣tertain a Iudge, with his Writs and Motions, then good company, with the civilities and comple∣ments are practised amongst Ladies and Cava∣liers that live in the Country. Besides, the condi∣tion of Tatius was meane, but for the eminenco of his places, which having sold, he had nothing left him praise-worthy, without it were a few goods that could not long continue. His friends they thought much on't that he had put off all his Offices of credit and of profit, both which had made him appeare eminent and in authority in the prime Court of Parliament in France, to live a private life in the Country, without any emi∣nence at all, and that he had prejudiced his for∣tunes for a wife, that kept hers intire to her selfe: and the friends of Minerva seeing Tatius Iack out of office, as we say, and without employment, were very sorry that she had taken a man that had put off the authority, which indeed onely made him worthy of her. So things standing be∣tweene the friends on both sides, it was yet much worse between themselves, Minerva by so much the more sensible of the ill usage of Tatius, as she little dared to complaine, and Tatius by so much the more continuing to use her still worse and worse, as she continued to suffer it. Minerva lived three yeeres in this bondage, which wereto her no lesse then three ages, perpetually thinking of some meanes to redeeme her. At last having re∣solved
upon it, think you not Sir said she, that the assembly of so many wrongs and injuries as you doe daily heape on me, will not one day breake upon and strike you too▪ for me, I should rather chuse to dye, then once to give you cause to use me thus; But I confesse unto you truely, that in∣deed I had much rather dye, then longer to in∣dure them. Tatins not being used to be braved by a woman, much lesse by his wife, answered sternely to her, that there was no meane between them, but that she must resolve to endure the one or of the other. Minerva replyed not to him, but bethought her presently what she would doe upon this. The mishap or imprudence rather of Tatius would that he must to Paris, which mini∣stred to Minerva an opportunity to order her af∣faires, and to dispose them in such manner, that upon the returne of Tatius, she caused him to be told, that she had reserved two chambers to her selfe, which she intreated him to afford her, and content him with the rest of the house, which she left wholly to him. Tatius that lookt not for this, would needs to her to answer her in proper person: but she would not suffer him speake to her, or by any meanes once see her: and in stead of now playing the Ma∣ster at home, he found that she was at home in truth, and that he was become the weaker; So as neither prayers nor threats being able to shake the resolutions taken by a determinate woman, he was constrained to returne backe
to Paris, whether she followed him soone after, with purpose to sequester her estate from his; very sorry that two children that she had had by him were the cause she could not be separated from him in body as well as in goods.
The Argument. Minerva commeth back to Paris. The second loves of Adraste with her, are ruined by the practices and confederacie of Brasidas, and of Gracchus her Kins∣men and Lovers. CHAP. III. MInerva being disburthened of a charge, shee thought her self very unfit to beare, turned her whole Meditations to the meanes by which shee need never return un∣der his charge; and to this effect having establish¦ed some order in the managing the affairs of her house according to the necessity of her new Common-weal, shee took her way presently to Paris, whither shee was called not onely for the execution of her designe; but likewise for the ac∣complishing of her desires: For her usuall resi∣ding in this incomparable City, where shee had tasted so many delights, was become more deer, and farre more pleasing to her, then that of the Country, where shee had reaped no other then a bitter harvest. Tatius not lesse feeble in adversi∣tie,
then insolent in his better fortunes, under∣stood not so soon that shee was there arrived, but hee sent unto her to intreat so much favour as to be admitted to seeher. It was too soon to descend so low, as to beg leave of his wife to see her; in stead of the possession which hee wont, and ought yet to have had of her; and a wife which but three dayes before he not suffered to see any man. Hee should have done like Alcibiades that bore away his wife by force, through the pub∣like hall, and from amidst the assembly of all the people, where she had summoned him to appear. But he passed from one extreme to another, and fell from a most insupportable tyranny, into a dejected and most insufferable servitude. Miner∣va admitted him to come seeher, and this weak man thinking to mollifie by prayers, her whom he had not had power to overcome by threats, and recover by humility, what he had lost by ar∣rogāce, not onely made her al the offers due from a husband to a wife; but rather all the submissi∣ons that a slave oweth his Master. Minerva for her part did render him all the honour of the world, but without the least being moved by his prayers, or any way slacking her pursuit; most humbly intreating him to pardon her, if shee sought the assurance of her life in that of here∣state, of which shee had not so much as thought, had not hee himself inforced her to it. So were their estates parted, and by consequence their bodies; for Minerva said she had children enough for the fortunes she possessed, & not being able to
maintain any more, she would by no means make any more: Poor Tatius, didst thou for this remove the earth, Eye heaven it self almost, to sequester this woman from her first husband, to the end to see her now again sequestred even from thee? Must thou make merchandise of thy whole for∣tunes and thy honours both, of whatsoever thou didst possesse in all the World, to have a wife, which thou indeed hast not? Minerva having rid her of this thorn out of her foot, learned the news of Adraste, and having bin informed of his lodg∣ing gave him presently to understand where hers was, and Adraste went thither to see her soon after; at their first greeting, they staid some while to view one another, both equally astonish∣ed; Minerva with a little shame, and Adraste with some wonder. Well, Madam, said Adraste, (ha∣ving saluted) you have found at last that I am no lesse veritable then unhappy, since my predicti∣ons have not onely proved true: but unavoyda∣ble likewise. Would I had never spoke them, since they have proved so inprofitable, and were received as ill presages, which for the most part but foregoe mishaps. Indeed Adraste, said Miner∣va, I avow it, that you have shewn more judge∣ment by foretelling my misfortunes, then I have in myaddresses to avoid them; but you are not ig∣norant it is more easie to foresee, then to prevent such things by much. The cause why we some∣times wisely undertake the things, that doe not alwaies well succeed; being cleere that it rests but in our powers to undertake, as wholy it be∣longs
longs to God to give the event. You onely said Adraste, have the art to make those things shew well that in themselves are nothing so; which here I come not to subvert, much lesse yet to complaine of you whose fortunes I lament more then my owne. So have you indeed more cause to plaine my miseries, then to complaine of my actions, answered Minerva, no one of them ere tending to your displeasure. But tell me now how rest I in your memory, and how may I hope to be therein reserved henceforward. Assure you Madame answered Adraste, you abide there bet∣ter then ever, where I preserve you with much more ease, and farre lesle trouble then I was wont to doe: And as for what depends on time to come, you know we positively can say nought. And I have been so much deceived in the event of things are past, that I dare promise nought in future, else had I sworne to you ere this, that all the waters fleeting in oblivions streame, are not of force to wash you cleere from thence; but by the incertainty of things have happened late to me, I judge that it may be that I may beare you long in minde, and with more ardure and more passion too, then ever yet: and likewise it may chance, the helps of reason, time, and absence, may doe me the grace to have power to loose your memory. The greatest displeasure that a man can doe a woman whom he hath euer loved or honoured, is to let her see that he loves her no more: for it seems an outrage done to their beau∣ties. Minerva for all she was much moved, yet
smiled at this answere, for amongst other parts of dissimulation, or of prudence, she had that, never to manifest the least feeling of a grudge, but on the instant of her revenge. She said then to him, that she was very glad to see him cured of an affection which her honour forbade her to remedy, provided that the cure were perfect, and not rather a stupifying of the apprehension of it; for then said she, such as complaine the least, are they are most to be feared, for that their ill is by so much the greater, as their sence of it is the lesse: Moreover as the cure ought be entire, so should it be moderate, for that she had heard, that too perfect a health was oft the presage of a dan∣gerous disease, and she feared a servitude by so much the greater as his liberty now seemed the more boundlesse; which she conceived altoge∣ther incompatible with his humour, that she thought unable, not onely to undergoe the dis∣ease, but more to suffer the remedy. Excuse me if you please, answered Adraste, I shall bear them both, so they come together, but I love not the one without the other; for that the remedy with∣out the evill is to no purpose, and the evill with∣out the remedy is insupportable. Well then, said Minerva, you assure me to be without the disease, and I promise you not to minister the remedy. We are then agreed, Madame, answered Adra∣ste, I demand nothing of you, and you grant me my request: which saying, they fell both in laughter, and to discourse of such accidents as were befallen them since their last intervenue.
Minerva related to him the indignities Tatius had done her, which caused her seek the assurance of her life, in that of her estate, with as much sor∣row yet as any vertuous wife could have in the displeasure of her husband. I marvell not much said Adraste, at what is happened unto you after having been so often forewarned, before it be∣fell you. I should haue wondred if it had beene otherwise. Since you merit it by your increduli∣ty, though not in your actions. I cannot render you so small good will, but I wish you much better then him, though I grieve more for him, then I doe for you; since you have lost a man whose acquisition was your mishap, and he hath lost a wife whose possession was his whole for∣tune. Comfort you so your friends said Miner∣va: yet more harshly, said Adraste, when they dare to complaine to me of ils they suffer for their pleasure, and for not beleeving me. I am further then from daring to complaine to you of the death of Arnolph said she. For that answered Adraste, I shall compatiate with you in your mis∣hap; Arnolph being dead by an accident wherein you had no hand. There is much difference in the misfortunes we suffer innocently, and those we undergoe by our own default. But if you be not receivable in demanding of my counsell or resolution, on the divorce of a husband, how think you to be in demanding it on the losse of a Rivall; had I not as much cause to rejoyce me for my own interest, as to afflict me for yours? And you Madame, that have said you will give me no
help, how dare you demand of me my advice? I could doe no lesse, answered Minerva, then to promise my refusall of help, when you assure me not to have any need. Well Madame, replyed Adraste, but when I doe assure you of need, will you assure me of help? When, how when, said Minerva? It is impossible to come ny fire without being heat; Adraste conversing daily with Miner∣va, whatsoever liberty hee had recovered by his absence, & her marriage, became reingaged in the inevitable charmes of her allurements, and stro∣ken with the same amorous infection, wherwith she woundeth all the world. After long arguing in favour of his reason, he concluded yet accor∣ding to the swinge of his passion, and judged it better for him to submit with all the world be∣neath the Empire of this so excellent a beauty, then he to resist it onely. If he were troubled to resolve this, be sure he was more to confesse it. He was much ashamed that he had plaid the fool, and rendred himselfe so flexible. It seemed strange unto him, to have slighted one he had a∣dored, and again to adore the woman he had slighted so: he cald to minde the first shipwracke he had undergone with her, and by that he ap∣prehended the second, remembred him how ea∣sily he had been ingaged in his affections, and with what pain he was retired. It seemed to him he did but breake in two these chaines were al∣most now worn out, to carry new more strong, and that he freed himself but from an easie hold, to re-enter in a prison farre more mercilesse.
That he should quit a Master that he had more cause to praise, then to complaine of, who a∣mongst the ils he had wisht him, had not yet for∣born to wish him well, and suffer underneath a mercifull resentment of his passions. But love, what can it not in a gentle heart? At last, hee confest to her that more then her ri∣gour, and his absence, the many perfections which hee saw in her, opposed to the many de∣faults he felt in himself, had inforced him to pra∣ctise a remedy more ill then his disease, which having cost him much to finde would cost him more to lose. That her great beauties which wholly occupied his soule, being yet ravished from him, as all hope of their possession was most injuriously torn from him, twas no way to be deemed strange, if so despair had put to death desire, that could not livewithout it were in hope, That to save him from the tyranny of one Ma∣ster onely, he had bin constrained to make him many; and not unprofitably to love one thank∣lesse object ever hee had dispersed the stream of his passions, and divided his affections into as many places, as he found several sorts of objects. That erring like the Pilot that had lost his starre, and rendring him like to the trees on the high∣wayes, that do bear fruit, but for the passers by, he was become infetterd in a chain so sweet in appearance and fair in effect, that he had willing∣ly himself thrust in his armes, and did esteem him now more happy in the losse of his liberty, then he could be in conquering the whole earth. But
that as all things have a certain revolution within the course of which, theyby a time return to their first heads, his destiny constrained him now re∣turn into that honorable servitude, in which shee captivated the most beautious souls. Minerva not lesse wondring at the love of Adraste, then satis∣fied with her own beauties, of which she had heer an illustrious proof in this second conquest of this lover, answered him in these terms. If any other then your self should talk to me thus, Adra∣ste, either I should not believe him at all, or at least should fain not to believe him. But the knowledge I have of your goodnesse, makes me that as I esteeme you veritable, so will I answer you from my own heart, believing you speak to me from the bottom of yours. And to observe the same method you hold with me in confessing your thoughts, I shall discover mine to you, and acknowledge that if I were in such condition as I could give me to any one, it should be you. But I will not forbear to tell you many things that hin∣der me therin, though you do know them neer as well as I; to the end that if you do not receive the satisfaction you have promised you, you may lay the fault on your own errours, and not upon my will, that never shall be wanting in good wi∣shes to you, nor to perform like deeds on your behalf. Minerva discoursing afterwards the causes hindred her from loving of Adraste, missed not to put that of god, in the first place, whom wee ought to love and fear above all things; and you said shee that love and feare him above other
men, would cause me render him my enemy for your love. This divine reason is of such force, as there is no humane passion can or convince it, or withstand the being overcome by it. But if you dis▪esteeme of god, which were so enor∣mous an offence, wher of the monstrous impiety could never be sufficiently chastised, or what could perswade you to make mee believe that I could ever live, after being robbed of my honour in this World? And you that hazard oft so generously your life to save your honour, how dare you heere propose to mee the losse of mine? Is not the honour of us Ladies pray, all out as choice and delicate as that of men? And if you love me as you say, and as I do believe, why do you desire to lose mee so? can you love my person, and neglect my honour? Madam, answered Adraste, my discretion may be shield unto your honour, and this same innocent feare you have of doing ill by favouring me, is void of likelihood. God is not the enemy but the author of nature, and the offence without scandall is no offence. Believe you that the naturall affection, the author of nature imprinteth in our souls, is a∣verse to the will of him that gives it us? and that the first thing he ever commanded, he should now forbid us? God wisheth us no il, but for the ils we do to our selvs, nor takes amisse the offeces done to him, but those we do to our selvs, for being ma¦ker of the universe, his care is most to perserve his workmanship, & his offence, at that, would hinder it, and not at that, which meerly tendeth to the conservation of it. Then, is he, the enemy of vio∣lence,
injustice, cruelty, and the ingratitude that tend to the subversion of love, and not of love it self, and he is angred that we turn his sweets to bitternesse, and doe convert to our dammage that which he hath given us for our benefits: For as love is the cause of our greatest goods, so may it become of our greatest ils; but then it must be by our own improvidence, and not by his. See then, who offends most the divinity, Madame, or I that follow the lawes of love, according to the end for which they first were made, or you that do endeavour what you may to change and to pervert his institutions; and chuse rather to ap∣ply you to the counsell of a thanklesse and unna∣turall rigour, then the true apprehension of a na∣turall inclination, that is not only permitted, but commanded. It is true, that God hath comman∣ded love said Minerva, but that which is legiti∣mate; all other affections being forbid, not only by divine but humane lawes. In which I'le speake no more to him that teacheth others. A good cause defends it selfe; and one word is sufficient in a truth, whereas a lye needs the support of a large discourse. Both of them spake against their conscience, and contrary to their own beliefe; for this discourse of Adraste was quite averse to what he thought, and Minerva's answer was no lesse farre from her meaning. Adraste desiring to perswade a woman that would be perswaded, and whom he perceived to seeke some honest meanes that she might love him without blush∣ing, endeavoured by this talk to take from her
such shame as naturally retaines all women. In which nerethelesse he knew well that he did ill, but one so common amongst men whose reasons are overcome by appetite, as it seems custome not onely renders them permitted, but authori∣sed. Minerva speaking truely according to her beliefe, stretched yet her thoughts unto such things as she might do, accompanying the cold∣nesse of her words, with the quickning flames of her faire looks, drew by the gentlenesse of her fweet charms, him that she yet repulsed by the force of her strong reasons, to let him see the beauty of her minde, in the refusing him that of her body, so as in yeelding both one and the other to him, he should owe the favour ra∣ther to her love then to her ignorance. And permitting him some small privacies which did not much forbid the greater, as they seemed to promise unto him, caused him hope that she would doe like the good wives, that often resu∣ming what men aske of them, yet forbeare not to doe some part of their demands, but saying still they will doe nought. Whilest Adraste so eagerly solicited Minerva, Brassidas and Gracchus both, came athwart his designes. Brasidas was a little of kinne to Minerva, but not so much, but he could have wished to have been more neer. A man discreet, wise, subtile, and a boon compa∣nion, chiefly amongst women. Gracchus was a little more earthy, and retained more of the Souldier, then of the Courtier, but nerethelesse both of them brave Gentlemen, and both Lovers
of Minerva, who seeing Adraste first in time, and consequently in right, however such a conse∣quence is not alwaies necessary in affairs of love, where the last commers are many times first re∣ceived, agreed both together to ruine him. The occasion was offered them by the means of Aste∣ria, one that Adraste saw some times, and Grac∣chus likewise, however for divertisement onely, and each single without the other; notwithstan∣ding which they often met there; Gracchus be∣ing then one day with Asteria, she would needs know the newes of Minerva, and he knowing that she knew not her, but through the report of A∣draste, asked her again what he said of her? Aste∣ria either to give him cause of jealousie, or to make her selfe merry, said that Adraste did speake all the good i'th world of her, but in his particu∣lar he thought no longer of her. And that others might now with his free good will visite her if they would, for he had taken his leave. Gracchus whether he beleeved her, or that he was well pleased to have such an advantage on Adraste, was so sottish, or malitious, as to report again to Mi∣nerva, for a truth, what the other had spoken in jest. And the ill fortune was, that Adraste not see∣ing her of 3 or 4 dayes, she was so weake to be∣leeve it. The next day after Minerva having a∣greed to goe take the ayre with Brassidas and Gracchus, in the Tuilleries, and having given them notice of the time she would passe over the new Bridge, she by chance met with Adraste alone neere his lodging, that it may well be, thought
then of her, but not of the mischiefe she wished him, nor of the charitable office was provided for him, from so far as she could see him, she cal∣led to him, & having caused him come into her coach, told him as they went, the cause she had, or she believed she had, to be offended at his words. Adraste judged presently from whence it came, but he would say nothing behinde the backe of those hee seemed the Authors of this imposture, which were as he beleeved, Brassidas and Grac∣chus, and by so much the lesse he spake, by so much the more he seemed guilty, and to confesse it, so as Minerva extreamely offended at his words, took yet more offence at his silence by which he esteemed to confirm them. Brassidas and Gracchus failed not of the time, at the place appointed by Minerva, but were presently seene on horseback at the lower end of the street Dau∣phine, neer the new Bridge. Minerva offered them roome in her Coach, and they went both into one of the boots, Adraste being with her in the o∣ther. They were scarse set, before Gracchus tur∣ning him towards Adraste; so Sir said he, you have taken your leave, and parted with this Lady, for all which me thinks you are here still: I stay Sir answered Adraste, to tell you, that is a tale, and nothing so. In saying which they being set back to back, one against the other, laid hand on their swords, Adraste on that of Gracchus, and Gracchus on Adrastes, which they drew neer halfe out. Mi∣nerva (and her mother that sate at the end of the Coach) both shrieked out extreamely afrighted.
Brassidas put himselfe between them, the Coach∣man stayed, and both of them sate down againe without a blow striking, out of their respect to Minerva, who was yet irreconcileably offended at the-small regard they had had of her. She complained of wrong to the one and the other, and they both excused themselves to her, defer∣ring their difference untill a fitter opportunity. But Brassidas could not forbeare to tell Adraste that he had done ill; Adraste hearing such words from him he esteemed, and who was indeed part∣ly author of the quarrell, told him very hotly that he was none of his Iudge, and that he should doe well to stay the medling in his causes, till they were brought before him. Brassidas being before interessed in the businesse for love of Gracchus, was now become ingaged on his own behalfe. Note either of them had a sturdy La∣quay, and each of them a sword, and that Adra∣ste had but a little boy who bore none with him neither; so as if they would have took their ad∣vantage, the match had been ill made. The Coach drove along strait to the Tuilleries, whilest Miner∣va forethinking they would strive who should leade her at the going out of the Coach, and fea∣ring some worse matter might yet arise in the bu∣sinesse, very privately charged and conjured A∣draste to take her mother, telling him that she had had promised this day to walke with them, and that shee met him but by chance. Adraste as∣ked her, why if she had made them such a pro∣mise, she called him along, and said that since he
was first in time, if any one led her, it must be he. She then intreated him he would let her goe alone, and promised that none of the other should leade her. Adraste deeming it unfit to en∣force her to suffer her selfe to be led against her will, agreed to that. And as she came out of the Coach, every of them tendring his hand, she be∣seecht them leave her at liberty, saying she was old enough to walke without help of a leader. Notwithstanding, Adraste kept close on one side of her, and Brassidas and Gracchus on the other, without any one once offering to conduct Ar∣lande, though she had more need of their help then Minerva, not out of incivility, or want of courtesie, but through excesse of pride, and cou∣rage, fearing in leading the mother, they might seem to decline the daughter. They walked in this posture so farre as the grande alley of the Tuil∣leries, and from thence as farre as the Echo. Adra∣ste and Gracchus interchanging some braving looks, arose, observed one another, not speaking one word till they came to the end of the alley, when, the King entred at the other end; and Mi∣nerva that had shooke all this while, took Adraste aside whom she had not spoken to since their comming into the Parke, more then to the rest. And just the same feare a poor woman might have, (said she) to see two men of her company fight, have I to this minute had, not, but I thought ve had both sufficient discretion to forbeare do∣ing me such discourtesie, but that I mistrusted my self of sufficient merit to retain the violence of
your first motions, till now the Kings comming frees me from the feare, and you from the means to change blowes; I conjure thee Adraste, by that great power which thou hast made me beleeve I have in thee, not to trouble the delights we ex∣pect in this daies walke with thy company. You have been sufficiently troublesome already, though I think innocently, so as I could wish that true was told me of you, and that I had not had the honour to meet you at all this day; not but your company is deere to me, that being the cause I intreat you now indeed to reserve it for some other time; for now I cannot entertain you for feare of offending them, nor them for the same feare of offence to you. And this little time I spend with you, makes me doubt I have dista∣sted them, since I know well you would be an∣gry to seem talke so long to them. Adraste was no way agrieved at this discourse, for having cleered himselfe to Minerva, and driven his ene∣mies to winde ward, hee was soon weary of the company, had lost what ever could be called pleasure in it, in the bitternesse of this dispute, he desired much to converse with Minerva, but he as much shunned all common entertainments, as he sought particular. The comming of the King took from him all cause of feare that he could be suspected to shun their worst of daring, being sure they would do nothing in his presence to a∣ny man, much lesse to one they had not underta∣ken when he was alone: he gave Minerva then this answer; since I came not here without being
called, it shall besit me I conceive not to retire without your leave. Which since you haue so freely given me, I may well take, and in obedi∣ence of your commands, goe hence, as by your summons I came hither. And more then the con∣tentment of obeying you, I too shall beare along with me the satisfaction to have cleered your doubts: and to have let you see, in my as freely parting, as addresse, that you have not lesse power to abandon me, then to bring me to you. Yet I must here intreat you to acknowledge privately, the wrongs you have done me now in company, and in the evening, yet to honour me with that free entertainment of which I now deprive me willingly to obey. This day said Minerva, I can∣not, but to morrow will dispose so of my affairs, as I will afford you two houres of the morning. Adraste kissing her hands, made a low reverence to her mother, and went his way, hasting after the King, without salute, or once looking on Bras∣sidas or Gracchus. Having o'retaken the Court, he intreated the first friend he met, to take a turn with him, and leading him towards that side of the Parke where he had left Minerva, he told him; how he had been constrained to give some offenceto a couple of Gentlemen that had no just apprehension of it, or perhaps dissembled their grudge, in respect to the company, or it might be for that they scorned to be two to one. That he had intreated him to walke this way with him, to the end that the others seeing them together, might have occasion and
meanes to make a partie of two to two. And is it for this you tooke mee from my atten∣dance on the King, answered Oriste? so was hee called, yes, said Adraste. There are such fools in∣deed in the world, replyed Oriste, amongst whom I did little think you had had a place. And what in the Devils name have you to doe with them, did you not tell me even now that you had given them offence? It is true said Adraste, and I love not to give offence, but presently I will give satis∣faction. That is not amisse, indeed, if you will aske them pardon, answered Oriste, or make them some other submission to repair the wrong you have done them. But you have not offended them as yet but in words, and you would wrong them now in deeds? you have but hurt them, and you would, kill them right out? and call it satisfaction, and reparation of honour? It belongs to them to repair the injury you have done them, by do∣ing you a greater wrong, words, by the lie, the lie by a box on the eare, and a box of the eare by bloud or death. But you have wronged them, and would give satisfaction by increasing the of∣fence, and repair your fault by rendring it alto∣gether irrepairable. As for me, it is a philosophy of the times I understand not. Stay till they come to us, and we will talk with them, but to goe seek them, is to run to meet a mans mishap, and for pleasure to throw ones selfe head-long downe a precipice. True said Adraste, but you know a common error makes a law, and wee are now a days governed more by the examples of fools,
then by the reasons of the wise? In saying which they passed and repassed acrosse the wood, into the same walk, where Minerva was, between the hands of Brasidas and Gracchus, Adraste saluting Arlande, and Minerva, not so much as looking on the others, and they resaluting also without the others observing it. The next morn Adraste ex∣pected a challenge very early, and having stayed till eight of the clock in his lodging hee came by that time shee rose to Minerva's, where hee was scarce entred, but one told Minerva; that Brasidas and Gracchus were at the door. Tell them I am not well, said Minerva, and that I desire them to hold me excused, that I cannot accept the honor they do me. Let it not be so, answered Adraste, for my boy attends me below, by whom they may know I am heer. What shall wee do then, said Minerva? I would you were all at severall ends of the World, farre enough from hence, & where my head might scape breaking in your quarrels. Madame, answered Adraste, yee ought yet distinguish between the innocent, and the faulty; It was not I caused the jarre, you know best what is now to be done, you prayed mee yesterday to retire for the love of them, you may to day pray them to retire for the love of me. And if you should wish them never come a∣gain, after the knowledge you now have of their malice, it were but justly done. Sir, said Arlande, Brassidas is my kinsman, I, nor my daughter can well forbid him the house, nor those he bringeth a long with him. But go tell them said she to one
of her servants, that my daughter is at masse, and that I am busie heere with Adraste. Arlande said this, well knowing they looked not for her, and that the ready way to return them, was to say her daughter was not within. There was three or four Churches thereabouts, to all which they went, and Minerva thinking with her self they would not fail to go thither, and not finding her, they would come back to her house, was much dis∣quieted; for that shee would not refuse them en∣try, or deny her selfe to them twice together in one day, and to turn off Adraste, it was out of all likelihood. When she was once ready, he would have waited her to the Church, but she excused herself, and stole privatly from him to go thi∣ther alone, leaving him with Arlande, who told Adraste what a shame it would be to her daugh∣ter, if her cosen should finde him with her in the street, in stead of being at Church, and the mis∣fortune might follow, if Graccus choller or his ho∣nour, should so o're-rule him, as now in her com∣pany to take satisfaction of the injury done him, which the day before he had for the love of her dissembled. Adraste did not trouble himself to answer her, but taking his leave, followed Miner∣va from Church to Church, and while he sought her in one▪ Brassidas and Gracchus found her in the other; and she found no lesse pain to dismisse them, then she had had to rid her of Adraste, for they importuned her no lesse to wait her backe from Church, then he had to bring her thither.
But at last she escaped them, and returned as she went, after having drawn a promise from Grac∣chus, that he should not call Adraste to account for any thing that had past the day before. In the meane time Adraste returned very discontented at Minerva, it seemed to him that she having pro∣mised him an entertainment to day, should not have left him as she had, to finde out his enemies; and that she was not stoln away so much for any devotion she had to Church, as for the desire she had to see them there. But next day he was much more troubled, thinking to goe make his com∣plaint, when they told him she was gone out to walk with them. Then presently conceived he the plot was not combined against him, but with her counsell and assent, and that she had not one∣ly approved, but designed it. And so returning backe, his brest fraught with more despight then love, and not so much reason as rage, after having resolved now to breake with her once for all, he wrote to her, THat as hee had pitied her weaknesse, seeing shee suffered her selfe to be rather perswaded by passion▪ on the part of his Enemies then by the truth of his words; so hee received no small con∣tentment, to see that for his having cheered himself before them, and for ever being too d screet and re∣spectfull on her behalf, and at her instance on theirs, he was now deprived of what they possessed for having been the contrary. That the time had been when this privation now so easie to undergo, had been most dif∣ficult
for him to believe; but considering that of all things that most provoked him, and the chiefest cause of his vexation and worst tormenting passions, it was easie for him to endure the losse of a good, the possessi∣on wherof was so extremly damageable. Wherfore he would now as with a sponge wipe off the fair impressi∣ons which he had formerly admitted in his memory, and hee intreated her to favour him so farre, as not to oblige him ever by the replacing them. Hee avow'd it the mediate will of Heaven, without which hee had beene as unable 'to execute, as rash in undertaking this designe. For which hee only was to thank her ingratitude, that thinking to work him so much ill, had been the cause of so great good to him. And that he did beseech her by this last, and by all o∣ther, and so many vowes, no lesse religious, then un∣profitable, which hee most foolishly had rendred her, that henceforth shee would never more call them to minde; assuring her he should esteem him fully satis∣fied for all his services, when he should finde they were forgot, and that she held them so indifferent, that hee had never cause to joy in or complain of them.
The Argument. Adraste closeth againe with Minerva, comforteth her on the death of Arnolphe. Commotions in France, and divers adventures upon that subject. CHAP. IIII. WHat delight soever the company afforded, could not be so pleasant to Minerva, as this Letter was bit∣ter to her. But howsoever she took it extreamly ill from Adraste, she would not yet loose him so. No though she knew not to what purpose to reserve him, for she had sufficiently manifested the little good will she bore him. But there are some women that delight themselves to render all men amorous of them, and they affecting none. Or it may be she held this maxime of the wise, that say a man should not breake with friends, no not for any cause whatsoever, for that such as are unfit for one thing, may yet serve to another, and it may be she intended to accommodate her selfe by Adra∣ste to some other purpose. Whatsoever it were, she forbore to answer his Letter till her choler was past over, nor wrote she to him then; but
passing some daies after by his lodging, she cau∣sed him to be told, that there was a Gentlewo∣man in the street asked for him. Adraste came down, and Minerva made him come into her Coach, where she was then accompanied onely with one gentlewoman, and going to take the aire. She told him that she had not answered his Letters, for that shee could not bethink her of termes sufficiently powerfull to make him sence∣able of her anger. So then Madame, answered Adraste, if you have not given me offence, I stand not obliged to you for it, but your ill memory, that had not means to find words sufficiently ca∣pable, to expresse the offence you intended mee; Tis true said shee, but you are a naughty man to write such Letters to mee. And you are then a naughty woman, answered Adraste, to inforce mee to it by so many just and rightfull causes as you have. If I have given you such, replyed she, and have so little reason in my actions, why have you so little judgment in your love; you have lesse reason then mee to love one that hath none at all, and by the extravagance of your unfound minde, accuse me of your own defaults. Madam, answered Adraste, I have caused you to see most cleerly that you are in the wrong, since you can∣not finde meanes to answer my Letters; But how should you finde reasons, that could not in∣deed finde the offence. Wherby it follows that being you have done the wrong, you cannot have reason on your side, since wrong and reason cannot be united in one subject. And yet cry you
that I am reasonlesse, to love one that hath none. I answer you that though I am reasonlesse, it fol∣lowes not but you are so likewise, as I have pro∣ved, without denying but I was my self so; And on the contrary, I have always endevoured to let you see that I had litle reason in me, ever to shew that I had so much love for you. Since if I had, I could not have loved you, or at least but in such sort as I had been loved again of you. And if you were reasonable, you would love mee as I love you. See then wherfore I love you in two sorts, (without reason) first, for that you are reasonlesse, secondly, because I am so also. As to the extra∣vagances of my diseased minde, I apprehend them to my own advantage. Remember you what I have ever said, that my weaknesses, and failings were the things that I desired to cause you see. Tis well I am there arrived. Minerva fell a laughing at these words, and as particular complaints do usually succeed the generall; A∣draste complain'd of her, for that when hee had left his entertainment to his enemies, upon her promise to afford him one more private, and fa∣vourable, she had not onely turned him off to her mother Arlande, but her self had stoln away from him to go to them, had depriv'd him of the ho∣nour of her company, and conduct, to afford it unto them, and had wronged a man whose good∣nesse was so known to her, therby to favour o∣thers whose malice was to her no lesse manifest. Minerva excused her on the just fear shee might have of the bloudy effects their quarrell might
have produced; said that the same fear had cau∣sed her not to suffer him to lead her; and that she had also denied it unto them: And on the contra∣ry having found Brasidas & Gracchus at Church, shee had prayed them, not onely to forbeare to lead her, but to see her. Notwithstanding that Brasidas being since come to see Arlande as his Kinswoman, and Gracchus accompanying him as his friend, she could not hinder the Visitations, nor the Walks Arlande admitted of, it being very uncomly for the daughter, to play the Mi∣stris before her mother; not thinking also that it would have becomm'd a woman of her quality, to testifie the least animosity against them, at all to shew she affected him. In the end she knew so well to plead her cause, as she gained her suite; Adraste asked pardon, and the wronged party made the amends. This day consumed in com∣plaints, and such like satisfactions, took yet a∣way all hate that the last falling out seemed to have ingendred in their hearts, how ever it placed not there the wōted love (not in that of Minerva's for that she yet mourned for the dead, on whose behalf she seemed even to despise her life. Nor in that of Adraste, for that seeking in these disgraces to save him from the ambushes of Minerva, hee was already faln in those of Cariclea, which hee would have dissembled, but Minerva intrea∣ting him to helpe her loose the remembrance of a man whom shee had loved, hee againe beg∣ged of her advise how to acquire the affection of a woman that he adored. You have already so
acquired her, answered Minerva, thinking he had spake of her self, as you need not care further but of means to preserve her. Would to God that he you love were alive said Adraste, and that I were in possession of her I desire, I believe I should have lesse trouble to preserve then I shall have to acquire her. How can that be, said Minerva, that you should be in possession of her you desire, du∣ring the life of him I lament, if you desire not some other then me? And how think you also that it can be believed, answered Adraste, that I have acquired the affections of one, that lives not but in the death of an other? I have the wrong indeed on my side said Minerva, and you the rea∣son on yours. Adraste, to engage your thoughts upon such an object, as hath not ingaged theirs; But since I discover thus my malady to you, if so you cannot give me help, as there is none in death, I pray at least refuse me not your comfort, and be it so that in losing you for a Lover, I may enjoy you as a friend. Madam, answered Adraste, it hath bin the greatest unhappinesse that hath done me outrage, to see how unapt you have bin to think the one or the other of me: But I shall never cease to be both, to you, so long as God shall give me life, and you no cause to die by the ill use you daily do me. The night book of their discourse, which else they had not known how to leave. Minerva having prepared to retire to her house in the Country, and apprehending in the solitude that place offered, the sorrows that Ar∣nolphes death did now make her so lively feel in
the divertisements of this so excellent City, a∣gain conjured Adraste, that did sometimes apply him to such things, to write somewhat in way of consolation, and in verse, on the death of Arnol∣phe, an importune request to pray a Lover, to bu∣sie himself in the commendations of a Rival; and the more for that Adraste medled but unwillingly in making Verses, seeing so many as he did, come off with little credit in that subject. But Arnolphe was dead, and hee hoped in pray sing him, hee should at least flatteringly sooth his Mistris, and insensibly insinuate in her favours, yet the more; unwilling to give the repulse to a Lady, to whom he had given himself, without whom he could not rest, and with whom he could not live, he en∣devoured to render him pleasing and agreeable so far as to celebrate for her the affections of him that living had orethrown his own. So after ha∣ving brought Minerva home to her house, and being retired to his own lodging, hee made the same Evening the following Stanzaes, as you see, which the next morning he sent to her at her up∣rising, to let her see with how much care and rea∣dinesse hee did imbrace all manner of occasion, did at all pertain unto her service. The Verses were these. Stanzaes On the death of Arnolphe to Minerva. CEase fair one, cease your mournfull plaints lay by, Arnolphe is not dead, though absent hence,
More then the Sun remov'd from off our Skie, In shady dark, hath any residence. No he's immortall, and amongst the Saints, And vainly you importune Heaven too late, That hath no eare to lend to such complaints, But must in all things too give way to fate. Great Iove himself that with one thunder might, Dissolve the earth, all things annihilate, Saw maugre him, brave Hector fall in fight, And Troy in dust, lament her ransackt state. How often mov'd, eye pressed by 'his Favorite, And his fair daughter, did he think, to hide, But destiny withstood, and did deny it, That goodly Empire, from the Grecian pride. For in the Eternity of vengefull fate, Before was Priam doom'd his sentence past, Else Pallas power, nor Iuno obstinate, Could have his land orerun, or laid so wast. But your Arnolphe here a blessed man, Though beaven should chance refuse him & deny you, Is happy yet, that he did serve you when He liv'd, and more to be lamented by you. And is not one death then enough, but you, Will with your tears, bring back his soul to breath, And he must so die twice, and you would now, Double your griefs, and twice mourn for his death.
In vain then fall those tears along your face, Nor can they move the destinies decree, And if they could obtain you any grace, That grace were yet, more ill then death can be. Minerva that the Heavens, caus'd to come down, Heer to be seen, perfections object still, Ought she to afflict her, for the love of one, That to acknowledge it, hath power nor will. You moan his body, or his soul lament, If't befor's body you complain, t'is gone, And if for's soul, your grief hath worse extent, For you a good, in place of ill bemoane. Leave to low mindes, these bootlesse tears these moods. Can so much heart, so sooth the sence of crosse? We should not drown our reasons, in those floods, Nor lose our selves, in weeping others losse. The room's too fair to be th'retirement still, Of a guest so foul, as is perpetuall moan, And they without cause, use themselves but ill, That pitying others cruell are t' their own. Do you then celebrate's immortall fame, And with proud marble heer, his corps inshrine, Then let some happy pen divulge his name, Throughout the earth, where ere the Sun do's shine.
This doth accord with great Augustus minde, And your brave heart, that wont not be so griev'd. But t' feed your soul with sorrows so unkinde, And griev'e he's dead, is to lament he liv'd. Quit then your sorrows, yet your grief make even, And know when you lament that naturall throw, Common to all the World, ordain'd by Heaven, Your plaint is most unjust, or that is so. These Verses mortified not so many flames in the brest of Minerva, as they produced teares in her fair eys; & this cure was one of those that stir up much more grief, then they appease. Yet mar∣velled shee at the strength of Adrastes affection, which had born him to a complyance so contrary to his passion, and how soever shee was extremly ingrate, shee could not help it, but she found her self extremly obliged to him in it. But her depar∣ture some few days after, did quickly efface this small good will. Yet she saw Adraste once be∣fore shee went, thanked him of his pains in her comforts, and left him more affection then shee carried away with her. For shee was then most stedfastly allied to the first object of her love: And Adraste hung so even between the affections of Minerva and Cariclea, that they called him the Knight of the cloven hart. A little time after some Princes of France took armes, pretending reformation of the State, and comfort of the peo∣ple, whom the Souldiers much solaced, by the discharging them of whatsoever they were able
to carry away for them, Tatius that had so well managed the affairs of his house, would now needs meddle with the government of the King∣dome, and seeking so to readvance his private fortunes upon the publique, took part with them. The small number of men that were of his con∣dition, caused that they not onely imbraced him, but renewed the luster of his ancient titles, by the glitter of a new dignity, making him chief of the Councell of that faction, and not putting him in lesser hopes then of the Seals of France. He took this occasion to follow some means of reconcilia∣tion with his wife, whom he disposed therto ve∣ry easily for the part shee pretended to in the hopes of her husbands fortunes: And Tatius sought her the rather for the need he had of her assistance; for although he were not setled in his new office, he needed mony for his use in it, which he knew not how to raise, but on the cau∣tion of Minerva, who freely became bound for him, deceived in the hopes of this false prosperi∣ty▪ Fortune was not so favourable to him as shee promised: for that such as had armed for the State, and Republique, comming to a Treaty, used not a word but of their owne particular interests; and left not the people onely more miserable, more ruined then ever; but also Tatius discharged of his Office, and his wife burthened with part of his debts. This last affection of Minerva being founded on the hope of advantage, could endure no longer then the foundation; so as that was no sooner
ruin'd, but this fell to the ground, and Tatius and Minerva to as ill intelligence and accord as here∣tofore; which brought her backe very sodainly to Paris. Adraste failed not to go see her so soone as he knew she was come; But in her absence the affections of Cariclea, had so occupied his heart, as it seemed there was small roome left for the reestablishing those of Minerva. And besides dis∣sention being as it were inseparable and ever fatal to the Realme of France, where calmes doe but presage the following stormes, and where those stormes are never calmed but in the occasion of greater and more furious ones, and chiefly in the youth and first yeares of their kings; This last e∣motion was not so soon appeased, but there arose an other by so much the more to be feared, as the pretext, and cause was more honorable in shew & plausible to most. Which obliging the king to make an excursion into Normandy to assure him that Province, consequently obliged A∣draste to follow him, who a more faithfull subject then a Lover, preferred his sense of honour, and courage to his apprehension of his amorous de∣lights. Hee let him proceed as far as Roane yet, and then to Deepe. But hearing hee intended to put himselfe into Cain, where the Castle decla∣red it selfe against the City, and the City for his Majesty against the Castle; he should have been exceeding sorry not to have beene at the first place, which the King had ever yet in his owne person beleaguered. He left then Minerva, and Caricha, at Paris, where his desires, & ease, would
still have detained him, and made all diligent haste to travailes, to paines, and perills, where his devoire did call him. The history of this siege not being our subject, it shall suffice to let you know that the good fortunes, providence, coun∣sell, and diligence of the King conquered him, this place, in lesse then three dayes. And three daies after al that great Province which gave him meanes, and leisure to prevent his enemies, as we hope to make it appeare elsewhere more seri∣ously. But Adraste seeing the warre ended on this side, before any man had once meanes to give notice of his abilities in the least measure, and the King to take the way to Manns, tooke that to Pa∣ris, without other cause then to see his two Mi∣stresses, by whom he was variably agitated; He lov'd them both not onely through his inclina∣tion meerly, but also with designe, to the end the one should hinder him to give himselfe wholy to the other, that his sufferance should be by so much the lesse as it should be divided; and by so much the better moderated as it should bee the lesse. An excellent remedy in affaires of love, had not his too perfect fidelity hindred him to put it in practise, for that he served himself as then most happily with it. And after having sometimes seene one, and sometimes the other, he quit them both againe to look out the king, that was as then at Manns with his armie. The departure of Adra∣ste, the absence of Brassidas and Gracchus; the dis∣grace of Tatius, and death of Arnolphe gave Cras∣sus opportunity, who was then at Paris, some∣what
to renew his affection with Minerva, but so far onely as the tearmes of a common wel-wish∣er. Adraste having found a gentleman of his ac∣quaintance called Chabrias, a man of great abili∣ties, and no small execution, who being married some three or foure dayes before; had left those lawful pleasures of a bridegroom, to embrace the travailes of warre, met neere Manns an other Ca∣valier, who tould them hee had found some Thirty Commanders about two or three leagues from thence, which it was sayd were of the ene∣mies party. Adraste and Chabrias had over taken & left behinde them a company of souldiers be∣longing to the Queen, that were to joyne with the kings army. They then intreated this Cavalier to advise them of their intentions, and pray their Captaines to follow them a gallope, whilest they went on before. The gentleman failed not to give them the same advise, and the company ha∣ving overtaken them at a small Village where they stayed for guides, they put themselves in front, and went forwards altogether to a great Towne where these people lay intrenched. But they found they belongd to the King, and that they had but travailed themselves and their hor∣ses in vaine, especially Adraste, who being hurt sometime before in the legge, drew such store of grosse humors to the part diseased, by the vio∣lent motion of this post, as it became almost so bigge as his head. There is a fine house neere Manns, and I dare say the most beautifull, and de∣lightfull of the Country, the owner whereof
was brother in law to Chabrias, a perfect gentle∣man. Adrastes hurt constrained him to stay there, though in the absence of Chabrias, and his bro∣ther, who had both followed the king to Flesche, but there was a Lady whose vertues obliged him no lesse to celebrate her memory, then hea∣ven which since tooke her in the prime and flow∣er of her youth, constraineth all such as have seen her to lament her death. She was a summary of wisedome with beauty. The abridgement of all humane perfections in a woman, and the mirror of her sex. Adraste having rather asswaged the sorenes of his wound, then perfectly heald it, by the rest and good usage he found in this so sweet a retreate, parted from thence upon an advise he received that the King would be gon with all speed from Flesche, and came thither before the departure of his Majesty; But so ill disposed as he had like to have dyed. He fell very happily yet into the hands of a Chirurgion, not a lesse suffici∣ent, then an honest man, who alwaies dressed him with singular dexterity, but he could not be so soone healed, for that the accomplishment de∣pended not so much on the Chirurgions reme∣dies, as the repose of his person. And the King marching directly to Pont de Se, Adraste sayd as Pompey once, It is necessary that I go, but not that I live; Lets away, no danger shall stay me; And easing his legge in a scarfe, he got on horse∣backe the next day after the Armie dislodged, roade in one day as farre as that had marched in two, and with so good hap as he was there time
enough to loose his horse that was slaine under him, in the entrenchment the enemie had made before the bridge. This was a mervailous glo∣rious dayes worke to the King, to whose name (after God) we may impute the affright that sei∣zed the heart of his enemies; and honourable to all such as endeavoured to become remarkeable therein: Amongst whom Nerestan was none of the least, commanding that day as Marshall of the Field, who got a musquet breach through the thigh, whereof not long after he dyed. I re∣ferre such to the history, as would see the parti∣culars of the taking of that place; but will say by the way, it being no part of my subject, that six∣ty Perdus, backt with three Regiments, trode un∣derfoot three Thousand men intrenched, and gain'd the bridge which needed but to have been drawn to have stayed them. That they were but thirteen which at the first entred the City, wher∣as there was at the least thirty or forty Comman∣ders of the Enemie which issued, without those of our part so much as daring to speake to them because of their weakenesse, nor they to ours, by reason of the affright they were in. That more then sixty of their souldiers, shut themselves up in the Castle, and one of ours amognst thē that was not known till the next day. The Leaders of the Perdus were Malissy, and dead Massott Leftenants of the Gards; the latter slaine since at Clayrac. The Volentiers found with them in the Citty were amongst others, the Barons of St. Iohn, & of Monrial, with three gallant Souldiers of Lan∣guedoc,
that Adraste met upon the way with Tau∣raut; and but for the hurt of his leg, and losse of his horse, that tooke from him all meanes of be∣ing there, he had beene companion of their for∣tune. I have through the default of my memory, lost the names of the two first, which hath indeed caused me do the like by others: The third was called Albanas a yong gentleman of some Eigh∣teene or twenty yeares of age, who seeing a Ser∣jeant of the Guards contest upon the command Malissy had given him, to passe the bridge to get helpe from the King swame the river of Loire by night, and went to Mounsieur Crequi, who sent Mounsieur Miraumonts cōpany thither. The king lost not in this day any gentleman of quality but Marais, and two yong gentlemen of the Guards, whose names have escaped me, Of the enemie that were lost there, a man cannot well say the number, for that the affright forced them head∣long into the river, which drowned the most of them. But the next day there were buried some hundred or sixscore of the slaine bodies. The Earle of Saintagnan was there taken prisoner, the Marquesse Focillere, and the Viscount of Betan-Court, honourably wounded each of them in the arme with a pike. The feare and astonishment was so great, that the King talking after to the Baron of Meilam in Brisas. Adraste being by, told him that a poore fellow finding a horseman a∣live, and armed at all parts in a ditch, tooke from him not only his Armes & horse, but his cloaths also, and left him there stark naked. A great many
of people were ill lodged there this night, and Adraste in particular, who having no lesse angred his hurt by his labour in the fight, then by his tra∣vaile on the way, had the cold Aire for his ge∣nerall entertainment, the heavens for a covering, and the earth for a Couch, and all for want of knowing his friends quarter, and the meanes to carry him thither had he knowne it, having lost in the disorder two Laquays, and a couple of horses that he left behind him. But amid so many wants, and incommodities he had water enough, of which he dranke plentifully at the expence of the river of Loire, on whose banke he passed the night of one of the longest dayes of Summer, more cooly then he had the precedent day, but amongst the dead & wounded bodies, or people gathered together on all sides, in whom he had no knowledge, or trust. The next day he found his horses with one of his footmen, who had look'd every where for him, not lesse estrayed then himselfe, having lost his companion that was never seene since: And the king being gone to lodge in the Castle that had render'd the same day, and the lodgings being all disposed off in the City, and Suburbs, though none to Adraste, that had no body to send to demaund it, and was too much busied to go himselfe, for having pas∣sed the night without sleepe, and the day before without meate, he no sooner found his Laquay, but he sent him for Provision to the first Cooks: and having asswaged his extreame hunger, passed the most part of that day in the shade under a tree
beneath which he had taken his repast, the vio∣lence of the travaile he had undergone, the want of sleepe, and the griefe of his wound forced him to give to rest, such time as others imployed to lodge themselves, by the same meanes letting his horses take their rest, and feed, that had no lesse need of it then himselfe. But when he saw it grew late, and that the heavens covered with clouds (whose thundring and lightnings threat∣ned the earth with a sodaine storme) caused him to fear another night worse then that he had pas∣sed, he got on horse-back to goe to the Castle, well hoping that if so be he could not finde any officer to lodge him, it was impossible but hee should light on some friend with whom he might retire. But it was alreadie darke before he came there, each man toiled with the labour of the day precedent, was retir'd betimes. The King himselfe was in bed, and the Guard of the bodie had already accommodated their couches at his chamber doore. He could have wished to have laine amongst them, but his horses were abroad with his Laquay, and the feare to be denied, the Scotch in France being none of the most curteous of the world, though he had the honour to be the Kings servant, caused him that he chose rather to suffer what ever ill might happen to him, then the shame of being repulsed. Having staied then till the Captain of the Guard of the body, would shut in the Castle gates, he went out, it being night; and one so dark as a man could not see but by the beames of the lightning in it: and for his
better comfort, it rained so fast as there was not any man left in the streets; So as when Adraste was got out he found not his man or horses wher he left them. Was not this cripple finely overta∣ken? he called, he hallowed, and made such a noyse, as some Souldiers as were got to covert under the pent-house or a long the streets, told him that there was a boy a sleepe betweene two horses, that neither winde, raine, nor thunder had power to wake. He groped out his way thether, and having roused his youth, got on horsebacke, not onely despairing to finde lodging, but with∣out knowledge where to looke it. Notwithstan∣ding being extreamely a dry, and thinking these Souldiers could likelyer shew him a drinking place, then a lodging, he prayed them to direct him to some Inne where he might drinke a cup. They carried him to the White-Crosse, where Mounsieur the Kings brother, his followers lay. Adraste perceiving it was the Mounsieurs quarter, hee conceived hope of finding some curtesie there. There were many people before the gate, some desiring to go in, and others calling for wine, who gave way to him. Adraste comming neere the gate which was shut, and desiring to speak with some of the Mounsieurs gentlemen, he was so blessed that one of his friends that was within knew his voice: but not so well but hee asked him his name for better assurance. Gentle∣man said Adraste, that knew not to whom he spak, you will know me better by face then name, ob∣lige me so much as to open the gate, and you will
see I am the Kings servant. At last he was forced to say it was Adraste, and at that name they ope∣ned the doore, caused him to enter, and they em∣braced him. Adraste entred not as into an Inne, but a Paradise, ravished with a contentment by so much the greater as he had little hoped it. No∣blesse, so was this friend called that let him in, caused a bed to be made for him, for though sup∣per were ready, they perceived well that he had more need of repose, then a repast. But there could be spared but one Chamber onely where Mounsieur de Vendosme, having made it his kitchin but two dayes before, had left such an infection as a man could scarce endure the ill smell. But it being a happinesse to be within there, in compa∣rison of the ill weather abroad, and a greater to have a bed, where others lay on benches, he layd him downe. There is nothing like necessity to give a value to things, nor doe things so appeare or are esteemed but by their contraries. Priso∣ners deem nothing like liberty of which they are deprived, and which they neglect when they may enjoy it. Adraste could not have beleeved there had been such felicity to lodge in a stinking kitchin, which he would not once have lookt in∣to at another time, if the misfortune, and necessi∣ty wherein hee was become had not caused him finde the difference between rest and labour, pe∣rill and surety. His horses and Laquay lay and supped in Fresco with divers others in a Garden that was on the backside of the Inne. On the morrow after having thanked his hosts, he went
to seek the Harbinger, that bilited him in the Suburbs of Saint Martins right against Chabrias, and neer the bridge, and sufficiently commo∣dious. Scarce had hee entred his Lodging, but one habited like a Souldier, having saluted him in the street, entreated harbour of him. There is a certaine kinde of fate, that causes misfor∣tunes often to encounter their like. Adraste observed this man with compassion, seeing him in such a case as himselfe was but lately; had he been hurt, dashed in the rain, or in the darke of night, as hee was. My friend, said hee, it is not long since, that if you had requested this of mee, I could very hardly have done it you, but having now meanes, and knowing the wants that you are in by that I have suffered my self, I shall be very loath to put you off, though I know not who you are. Sir, answered the other, I am such a one, who have seen you in Paris with such a one▪, and comming now out of Italie, I am very inconsiderately faln into this perplexi∣ty, endevouring to follow the Court with a friend, untill the King should return to Paris. A∣draste looking him more neer in the face remem∣bred it was a Merchant whom hee had seen mar∣ried at Paris, to a faire Gentlewoman, for whose love, and of a brothers she had of excellent wit, hee became yet more obliged to pleasure him; so as hee not onely afforded him the ac∣commodation hee intreated, but hee took him a long with him as far as Burdeaux, where leaving him till their return from Bearne, hee afterwards
accompanied him so farre as Saintis, But this ad∣venture of Adraste nothing to the subject of my Discourse, hath made me stray a little from the affections of Minerva, which now let me again resume.
The Argument. The reprisall of Minerva in affection with Adra∣ste: a dangerous adventure of his, going to see Mi∣nerva. A walk of Adrastes with Minerva, and some others in company with her at Ruel. CHAP. V. THe King having appeased this dis∣order on this side Loire, turned head towards another, which a∣rose about Garonne, after having made some small stay about the Clain. And having setled peace in Guien, pro∣ceed as farre a s Bearne, where he put in execution the decree he had made four yeers before against the Hugonauts, in favour of the Ecclesiastiques, and then returned in all glory to his chief City. But that belongs to the History of France, and not at all to ours. Nor have we spoke of it but to avoid a more tedious discourse which must have beene made to continue the adventures of A∣draste, whose particular return comprehending
in the generall, we have not now to say, but that having still followed the Court, hee came there∣with to Paris, where from the morrow of his ar∣rivall he was taken with a quoridian Fever which brought him so low, as it was not hoped he could ever get up again. He had the help of an excellent Physician in his art, a worthy man, his intimate and perfect friend, to whose care and goodnesse, next under God, hee stands obliged for his life. Amongst his visitants Minerva was one, that came to see him, not onely contrary to his expe∣ctation, but his hope also, for the continuance of his absence, the travail of the journey, and most of all the violence of his sicknesse, had so efaced all impressions of his love, as there remayned not so much as any line or draught therof in his me∣mory. He was not in the height of his disease, but in the greatest weaknes of his person, so as when his Fever somewhat ceased on the one side, it seems that this visit prepared for him a new cause to re-alight his affection on the other. But yet be∣ing visited more by Chariclea, then by Minerva, the assaults and batteries of the one, ruined and oreturned even to the ground whatsoever the o∣ther erected. Reason and Civility willed that hee being well should see such as had visited him sick. Of which he acquit him very religiously to all, but Minerva whom he saw not, in doubt that freeing him of one malady, he might fall into an other, by so much the more to be feared, as those of the minde are generally more dangerous than they of the body. Contempt is the greatest vexa∣tion
to a high minde, especially when it comes from such of whom they have made esteeme▪ or from whom they have been accustomed to re∣ceive honour and respect. Minerva having been so perfectly honoured of Adraste, could not in∣dure without despight, that he that had not liv'd but in her, and for her, and of the life, and health of whom, she had testified so great a care, should visit all such as had seen him but her self. And her indignation was by so much the greater, for that she knew he faild not in this duty for want of ci∣vility, nor of knowledge. He offends not, said she, of ignorance, but contempt, and believed that it was of purpose. In the end Adraste must needs go see her, for shee had sent so often to his lodg∣ing as it had bin discourtesie, and ingratitude to have done otherwise. She congratulated his re∣covery, she civilly complained of his incivility, and pray'd him not onely to see her, but also to write unto her. Adraste well saw that these were so many snares set by Minerva for his liberty; but hee had scarce power to refuse a thing which he had first demanded of her, had he not bin pre∣vented. And as love is an Enemy not to be van∣quished, but by the absence of the thing beloved, very hardly could hee avoid being overcome by such approaches as these were. Two strong con∣ceits wrought in his thoughts, like two contrary winds at Sea, with a perishing vessell; the most violent which was yet most pleasing, counselled, and almost constrained him against his will to love this woman, the other more gentle, and yet
more troublesome, did utterly forbid it. And as his imaginations figured to him the matchlesse delights he might gather from the passion of such beauties; his memory again presented to him the most affrightfull torments he was sure to suf∣fer but pretending therunto; and the divers ship∣wracks he had undergone in the same Port, did counsell him in any wise, not now to re-imbarke him there. But the means likewise for him to a∣void it, (he that lov'd not his own eys without it were for seeing her, in whom he had already har∣boured the chiefe felicities of his life) was away. In this conflict of difficulties hee addressed him unto her self, as sole and sovereigne Arbiter of his thoughts, beg'd of her to restore them back the rest she had bereft them off, and to render to her self the same contentment, which her cruel∣ty had ravished from him, in outraging the con∣stance of a Lover, and betraying her own proper desires, through the ingratefull misacknowledge∣ment, wherby she did receive his pure affections. As Minerva had bin provoked and agreed at the indifference of Adraste, she was now well pleased to see him stirred again with love of her. But be∣ing a discreetand subtile woman chiefly in the art of faining, in which she out-went the most exqui∣site of her sex, shee so farre as possibly she could hid him from her intents, that were to re-en∣snare him. And as the ordinary custome of wo∣men is to oppose their honour to such as speak to them of love, Minerva forgot to hold up this buckler against such armes as Adraste could ad∣vance,
talking to him, yet nerethelesse in such a manner of the sence shee had of the one, as shee put him not in despair of such as he had of the o∣ther. But they so long had known, and were so well acquainted with one another, that they could not possibly so well dissemble it, but that they espied each other behinde the best curtain could be drawn. Minerva proposed extreme dif∣ficulties in the love of Adraste, and Adraste as ma∣ny resolutions upon those difficulties of Mi∣nerva: shee alleaged first her marriage, which absolutely hindred her to be any way lawfully sought. Adraste put her in minde of Arnolphe, whom shee had lov'd before, and since, and whom yet shee lov'd after in death, however shee was straightly obliged to love him, that lived, and was in affection before the other. By which hee let her see that the marriage she alleaged, was but a pretext, by which she co∣vered her ingratitude, being assured that if it had been the true cause that hindred her from lo¦ving him, it had bin so as well for another as him. I lov'd Arnolphe before I married, said shee, and that love which indeed I bore unto his vertues, nor that which as yet I bear his memory, did ever wrong my honour, where yours tendeth meerly to the subversion of it. Your honor is easily pro∣tected in my discertation, answered Adraste, and though mine be one thousand times more deer to me then my life, I should chuse rather a thousand times to lose it, then ever so little to have tainted yours. But you are too wise a woman, to be ig∣norent
that honour chiefly doth insist upon the ma∣naging, and is not incompatible with love. You are too wise a man likewise, answered Minerva, to think what you say; But if so be I should grant you any thing so unfit to be granted, what reason have I yet to quite me of Arnolphes affection, to reinvest me in those of Adraste? it were but to passe from one extream to another, and not one∣ly from a love permitted, to a love forbidden, but from constancie, to inconstancie, and light∣nesse; since you are no lesse fickle then hee was ever constant: and howsoever hee be dead, the vertues that I loved in him are immortall, and in such measure living in me, as I have no memery of life without it be to think of, and to live in him. One part of this discourse was true, but the other artificially fained by Minerva, to ingage Adraste the more, and to let him see how much shee did deserve to be belov'd, in shewing him how capable she was of love, and how much she could cherish the affections of a living man, since she so long retained those of a dead one. I dis∣course according as I think, said Adraste, but you talke not as you thinke: nor content to expresse your want of reason in your words, by accusing me of lightnesse, it seems that you will make it appear that you have lesse in your actions, by the unprofitable affection you beare to the ashes of Arnolphe. The cause you have to divest you of which, and put on mine, being reason it self, that should ever counsell you to preferre things pro∣fitable to those are hurtfull, the recreative to the
afflictive, and the reall to the imaginary. There are three things in the world which produce and do contain all the rest, which be honour, profit, and pleasure, and from his affections you cannot so much as hope of one of them, but on the con∣trary you must expect trouble, damage, and shame; wheras you may finde them all in the af∣fections of Adraste, with so much precedence, that if the other were yet living, hee must himselfe be constrained to avow the preeminence, and you to acknowledge the desert, if love were to be judged by the endevours, and by reason. Minerva without approbation, or reproving the reasons of Adraste, proposed still new difficulties, and some∣times declyning her own interest, imitated such Decoyes, as to gain an other mans mony, do wil∣lingly lose some of their own. Why if it should be so, said shee, an affection cannot be so easily shifted as wee do our smocks, heal mee first of my passion, and then will I cure you of yours. It is most certain, Madam, said Adraste, and I have approved it but too true in that I undergo for you; But where are now those so sufficient rea∣sons by the which you have ere-whiles endevou∣red to perswade me that I might easily discharge me of mine? Why serve you not your selfe a∣gainst your self, with the armes that you so well do handle against others? Why think you it im∣possible to free you from the passions which you have for a shadow, having to fore believed that it was easie unto me to acquit mee of those I have for you? If the subject of my love be more ex∣cellent
then yours, and that I be more easie & ca∣pable of love then you, as sure it is too true; does it not follow then that your passion is lesse then mine, and that you may more easily discharge you of it then I? But how will you that I should heal you of a passion which you have for ano∣ther, if you refuse to receive from me the remedy you did desire of him? I have given my self a little liberty in enlarging of the extent of this discourse, that it belongs to the History, and is necessary to the end that I pretend to ther∣in. If it be a little too long, Lovers will not be much displeased therwith; And others may passe it by, or more seriously fix on some other object. So it is that Adraste again setting on foot this dis∣course on the last speech of Minerva, imployed all his five sences to cure her of a disease which indeed shee had not, or least wherwith hee was more infected, then shee, in which it hapned to him just as it did to Clement Marot, who seeing his Mistris bleed, and the Chyrurgion telling him that with the ill bloud hee would likewise draw from her the ill humor that rendred her so cruell to him, and that the new bloud that should in∣crease in her veins, should mollifie her spirit and render her more capable of the impressions of love, added afterwards, that it was true, and that she did become more gentle, and susceptible of love, but the thing was, he concluded that it was not of his love. So Adraste hath purged Minerva of this fancie, in hope that by efacing from her heart the portract of Arnolphe; he might the easi∣lier
set there his owne; renderd her truely amo∣rous, but his ill hap would yet, twas not of him, as then. I say then, for that hee hath since found that it was his good fortune; And that he might well say as once a great Captaine did, that he had been lost, if so he had not then been lost. Adraste having once againe seene Minerva, continued his visits so thicke, as it seemed he ra∣ther dwelt with her, then went to see her. In the morning hee used there from nine a clocke till noone. After dinner he stayed till supper, and after supper untill midnight. And howsoever his company was so frequent, yet hindred shee not the diligence of his Letters, that followed and forewent him twice a day, as doth the light both usher, and attend the Sun: So as, either by Let∣ter or by presence, Minerva could not ope her eyes but she saw Adraste ever before her. From whence proceeded the jealousie of Crassus, who as we have sayd, was againe restored to her ami∣ty, if not love. The first note whereof that A∣draste received, was from her selfe, that had di∣vers designes therein. First she desired to know what he thought of it, and knowing well that A∣draste was ignorant that she was beloved of Cras∣sus, in discovering the love hee had for her, it shewed shee had none for him: And in manife∣sting his jealousie, she would render Adraste jea∣lous of Crassus, as she had rendred Crassus jealous of Adraste. For she as it were swimming her selfe in pleasure at the vexation of another, even to the torment of her owne soule, and suffering the
most extreame Martyrcomes, but to procure small ones, it seemed that her repose was in the midst of paines, and sufferance, and the calme of her spirit consisted in the impetuous shocks, and violences, wherewith she agitated others. Shee did affect a rough and high going sea in love, and did esteeme an affection soft and gentle, withe∣red, and fading, if so it were not intermingled with the sharpnesse of some jealousie. Moreover in shewing the jealousie of Crassus, because of A∣draste, she manifested to Adraste the affection she had for him, for from the jealousie of the one ap∣parantly followed the affection she had for the o∣ther, it being certaine that Crassus could not bee jealous of Minerva for Adraste, if hee beleeved not that Adraste was beloved of her. To which she added this Art, to faine that she did so much hate and had in horrour that passion, that if Cras∣sus had been otherwise pleasing unto her, and that his demerits or his services had obliged her to wish him well, yet was his jealousie such as might ruine and well overthrow what ever good will she could have for him, and confirme all such affections as he pretended to subvert in her. But Adraste being no wait moved with the jea∣lousie of Crassus, onely intreated Minerva shre would preserve him her affection, which onely he desired to keepe, and feared to loose. That but it, all other things were very indifferent to him, and the passions of his enemies so little re∣garded, as he beheld them rather with pleasure, then offence. Minerva was much deceived in
this answer, for she thought to quicken his affe∣ction by the jealousie of another, beleeving like them that esteeme of nothing well that is not deare; that amorous delights cannot be pleasant, if not sharpe. But dissembling, as full well shee knew, and was accustomed to do, she by so much the more approved of this humor of Adraste, as he cared little for the jealousie of his Rivall, and made shew to love him the better for it; In the meane while bethinking her of other meanes to heighten his affection, insomuch as this had fay∣led. We have sayd that Adraste visited her at many houres of the day, but chiefly after Sup∣pers, which she had forbidden all others, of pur∣pose to affoord it him onely; and which hee so dearely valued, as hee never fayled to let flip one without going thither. They were lodged in the Suburbs of St. Germans, but a good way one from the other; For Minerva lodg'd neere the Market, and Adraste by the River side. One Evening as hee went to see her according to his custome, he tooke along with him a yong gentle∣man named Polinice, and a Laquay which she had sent then unto him to borrow a book; they were no sooner out of Adrastes lodging, to take the way that leadeth along the ditch from porte de Nifle, to that of Bussy, but they heard some walk after them, and turning about, they saw a man muffled up in his cloak that made great haste, ha∣ving his sword under his arme, and who having overtaken them, followed the same way they held upon the Causey, which is along by the
houses. At the same time they perceived there were others yet, that kept them behind the piles of durt, which the passage of Coaches & Carts causeth commonly in winter along by the ditch. And presently Adraste perceived that he that had overtaken them, slacked his pace, and reeld as he walked, as if he had been drunke. This man said he to Polinice, counterfeiteth the drunkard, and h'is not so, for we saw him walke otherwise then thus, and very upright and lustily, and be∣leeve me not another time, if it be not to put some trick upon us. Be it what will, answered Polinice, I thinke he will gaine little by us. In which say∣ing they walked on still. Adraste bid the Laquay to goe forward some five or sixe paces with the light before, and not to be surprized, drew his sword from out of his hangers, and bore it up∣right in his hand, and Polinice did the same by his likewise. They walked thus some thirty paces, and overtaking this Roister, that staied to the same purpose. When he was amongst them, and hee perceived the others which were not farre off, hee began to call aloud, Who be those that laugh there? no man answered a word. But Adraste houlding this for suspect, and beleeving it was the word given amongst them, as the event pro∣ved, bade his footman go on, and Polinice follow, keeping himselfe two or three paces before him Mounsieur, quoth then this gallant to Polinice, in siding him, and counterfeiting the stranger, can you shew me the way to St. Germans gate. No Mounsieur answered Polinice, scoffing him, I am
not off this Country, more then your selfe are, nor do I know the streets of the City. I am glad of that answered the other, whats that he would have sayd Adraste, who extreamly mistrusted these devices. St. Germans gate replied Polinice, St. Germans gate Sir, quoth the Impostor. Looke you where tis said Adraste, you are at it, or at least in a faire way to it. I thanke you Sir replyed the Rogue; who not two steps after, seized on Poli∣nices sword, saying, what will you draw your sword? So soone as Adraste heard talk of swords, he drew his; but howsoever it were as sodainely as he could speake, he had not so soone drawn it, but it was layd hold on, and their light put out at the very instant; which saved his life, for those that layd hands on him, casting themselves alto∣gether, and at once upon him, one wounded the other in seeking to kill him. So as of many thrusts made in the crowd, and in the confusion of this darknesse, there was but one touched him, and that upon the arme. All the others lighting on the parties themselves, on whose behalfes they were made. But feeling his sword engaged, and seeing himselfe in the midst of so many enemies, as the greatnesse of their number hindred them∣selves, he heard some cry out kill, kill, and at the same time others, Oh you kill me; which put him in such a fury as having recovered his sword in two or three shocks, hee made himselfe such place, as the field, and fought battell rested on his side. As for Polinice, Adraste thought him dead, for that he had heard him call out Murther,
Murther, and having seen him fall to the ground; he beleeved certainly they had killed him. But these theeving Rogues having taken their flight, and the Neighbours being come in at the noise, with their weapons, & lights, he foūd that he had disingaged his sword, and quit himselfe of them with the losse of his cloake, and some light hurts he had received, wherewith he was become lesse bloudy, then miry. Quite contrary to Adraste, who found himselfe more fowled with bloud then dirt, though it were with that of his ene∣mies; For the thrust he received on the arme was so favorable, as it passed not the skin further then the flesh. He lost not his cloake, but his Hat fal∣ling off, and his Galloshooes, both one and the other were presently found in the Street, with the sheathes of their swords. And howsoever that after the distemper of such an incounter, he had more cause to retire to his lodging, then fol∣low his designe; so is it, that apprehending more the affright Minerva might take at this newes, then the dammage might come to him in the vi∣sit, hee beleeved it was a small cause to deprive him of a good, which he beleeved could not bee too dearely bought, not with the greatest mis∣chiefe of the world: And this hindrance not ha∣ving served but more to re-inflame the desire hee had to see his Mistresse, he tooke onely another Laquay with another Torch at his lodging, and in the same case hee was in, hee came presently with Polinice to that of Minerva; hee found her and the Laquay yet shaking at the affright they
had tane, and he recounting to her the death of Adraste, and Polinice: For having seen them laid hands on, and invironed by so many, he bleeved not that they could escape, and for him, it was easie to flee, for that they had nothing to do, but with his light, which being at first put out, they gave him very good leisure to retire. So soon as Minerva saw Adraste, she seemed to rejoyce ex∣treamly, And I assuredly beleeve it was no way fained, whatsoever hath beene sayd, that this ambush was layd, and Minerva had not sent for the booke by her Laquay, so much for that, as to bring him in compasse of the snares of these Ras∣cals; which could never enter in the thought or beliefe of Adraste. You have prevented me of an ill nights rest, sayd she, which this companion went about to prepare for mee: I beleeve you could not have bestowed a visit on me this good while, or so pleasing, or necessary as this was; But tell mee, how happened this misfortune to you? Madam, answered Adraste, your Laquay is not so blame worthy as you may thinke, for he saw me in such case, as there was more liklihood that he left me dead, then alive: But it pleaseth God that I live yet for your service, and to be∣stow on you more necessary visits, and more pleasing nights then this. And then he recounted at large to her what had befallen him since Sup∣per, whilst the uncloaked gentleman Polinice en∣tertained her women with the same discourse. Very well sayd Minerva, then I bid you good night, and desire you come no more at such
houres to see mee. That is to take good nights from me, answered Adraste, and not to give mee good night, this same command not to see you any more by night. It shall be what you please, replied Minerva, for I shall indeed rather chuse to take from you good nights, then suffer upon my occasion that you perchance have your life taken from you, as you have now very narrowly escaped with it. Adraste accepting her will for reason, retir'd with his good, or ill night, after having tould her, that God did reserve him to some better end; and that on no occasion his life could be so well imployed, as in the losse of it, for so worthy a Subject. Adraste being retired without any further mis∣chance, passed the night as accustomed in the thought and contemplation of an enchanted Lo∣ver, by the charmes of a fair Mistris. The next morning rising very early, he went to take a turn at the Louvre, where he was informed of the de∣parture of the King. It was at the time of the great assembly at Rochell, which being made a∣gainst his Majesties permission, and continued contrary to his cōmand, gave cause to the Court of Parliament to declare them that held it rebels, and to the King to arme himself, for the defence of his authority. Adraste went from thence to the uprising of Minerva, carried her these sad news, not so much lamenting the publique mis∣fortune that threatned the State with a civill war, as his own particular condition, that forced him leave his Mistris, to use his life in a quarrell
wherin he had so little interest. For howsoever he were not constrained by any place, or benevo∣lence of the Kings, he was nerethelesse born and enforced therto, by the laws of his own worth and honour? But since that nothing induceth you said Minerva, to follow the King but your honour, you are not obliged to follow him other where then in service. Let other men then go a∣long and wait on him, whose offices and pensions doe oblige them to attendance every where be∣sides, and do you stay untill he does sit down be∣fore some place, or that hee hath made some o∣verture of war wherin you may be seen to do the service you desire: and think not then that I will make it difficult to give you leave, for that your life being of smaller esteem to me by much then is your honour, I shall rather chuse to command then to forbid it you. Adraste was easily perswa∣ded to stay with a Lady, whom indeed hee could not indure to part from, but seeing he had not li∣berty to entertain her as hee wished in her house, where she was watched by her own people, gai∣ned and corrupted by Crassus, & the prime of the Spring, inviting every one to see the beauty of the Country, hee intreated her to bear him com∣pany to Ruel, to the end that no other but the Nymphs of those fountains should be by at the last farwels hee would take of her. Minerva that desired but to passe time away, rendred Adraste his desires in that, by contenting likewise her own. But what she might easily and absolutely of herself have done, was accompained with so
many limitations and circumstances, as the plea∣sure of it was ever lesse then the sufferance, were it that by the difficulty she would render her fa∣vours, the more estimable; or were it a quality inseparable in love, that often promiseth much sweetnesse, where naught is reaped but much bit∣ternesse. Reason, and what was decent not suffe∣ring that she should go alone with Adraste, caused her to take with her an old Gentlewoman that was rather her Governesse then Servant, with two little children that she had had by Tatius, and would yet have Plancus and Melite, besides of the company. Melite was one of her friends, and Plancus a new Captive of Minerva's whom shee had insnared without Adraste once perceiving it: whom she made believe, how shee could tender him amorous of Melite. Adraste agreed very wil∣lingly to that, thinking that whilst Plancus enter∣tained Melite, and that the Governesse should be busied with Minerva's children, he should have no ill opportunity to govern her. But the diffi∣culty was to get from her house, and people un∣suspected, for she would not by any means that they should know of this journy, for fear it might come to Crassus eare. And this Lady otherwise exceeding able; had already given him such Empire over her, as not so much as ever remem∣bring Tatius that was her husband, she let her self be troubled with the jealousie of a man, that she said was nothing to her, and that she seemed not onely to be unable to love, but also one of whom shee could not endure to be beloved. It is most
certain that such as be in love are blinde, for if Adraste absolutely had not bin so, he might by this have seen that Crassus had more interest in his Mistris, then himself. But he believed more in her words, then in his own eyes. To the end then that Minerva's people should take no notice of the designe, she willed that Adraste should wait very early in the morning at Church with a coach and four horses, that Plancus and Melite should come thither another way without either of them comming neer her, and that she would meet there at the same time with her little companions. The Coach and horses they were ready almost be∣fore day; scarce was the Church doore opened but Adraste was got in; hee had heard at the least two Masses, before Plancus, or Melite came, though they failed not at the houre appointed them, bnt she that appointed it failing them many houres after. And after having waited one or two, which were so many ages to the impatience of Adraste; who had sent three or four Messen∣gers one after another, that brought back word, that she was ready, that she was come out, that she came; shee arrived at last about ten a clock when every one began to despaire of her com∣ming at all. And in place of excuse for having made the company stay so long, she would needs perswaded Adraste that hee was extremly bound to her for the pains shee had taken in getting so soon away from her houshold, and affairs both: for she told him that she had an occasion of ex∣traordinary importance at the Palace, which she
had neglected for his love. Adraste replyed not a word to that, but letting her say what she would, got him into the Coach with her, sufficiently manifesting by his silence, and looks that he was more offended at her words by which she would excuse her fault, then at the fault it selfe. They were soon out of the City keeping the direct way to Ruel, when Minerva angred at Adrastes si∣lence and grudge, asked him whether he had de∣sired her to accompany him into the Country to aire themselves there, or his ill humour? and see∣ing he still forbore to speak, she continued, I am very unhappy to quit such company as adored and reverenced me, to finde me slighted here, and to have neglected my affaires, to offend them I thought to have obliged. Turn about Coachman, said Adraste, without answering Minerva, and drive to the Palace, that this Lady may by no means neglect her businesse. It is not possible to expresse the despight shee tooke at these words. He shall turn I assure you, said shee, or I will go back thither a foot. But Melite blaming Adraste, and gently entreating Minerva that would by all means have returned, perswaded so farre as they followed on their way to Ruel. Minerva notwith∣standing having got out of the Coach, Adraste took her under the arme, and led her along a fair way more then a mile, whilst the Coach follow∣ed them softly with the others that were in it. And as Lovers are soon angry, and soon pleased, and re-alight the fires of their affections by the breath of such brabbles, they had not so soone
began to discourse together, but they became a∣greed: For Minerva cared not if one offended her, so they asked pardon of the offence. And Adraste cared not to offend her on those termes, if it were a giving her offence, to resent the of∣fence he had received from her. Arrived at Ruel, the first thing they talked of was dinner; after which they fell into discourse, which they them∣selves would be much troubled to resaye, watch∣ed yet by that importune old Beldam, who una∣ble to follow them walking, left not yet to im∣portune them with her eyes thorow every Ally of the plots, and parteries into which these excel∣lently beautifull Orchards are divided. Notwith∣standing, the burthen of age, and the care she had of the little ones in her charge, gave leisure and opportunity yet to our Adraste, somewhile to enjoy his Mistris in the cool of a shade, whilest Plancus and Melite entertained each other in ano∣ther place, where in the presence of the Nymphs and other loanly deities of those sacred foun∣tains, their waters were taken to witnesse the e∣ternity of their flames. Adraste summoning yet, things more firme and solid, swore that the Hea∣vens should change their course ere he his Mi∣stris; and that the earth should sooner leave her firme stability, then his love its lasting quality. And Minerva swore that waters should rise up∣ward, and fire descend downward, ere she would leave to love Adraste. But those things shee swore by being light, and transitory, could not produce but lightnesses, no lesse agreeing with
their qualities, then her nature. After having plea∣santly past the remaynder of this day, they took again the way back to Paris, so late as they durst stay, but they got not thither without danger, for the Coachman being drunk, drave his Coach so carelesly over a bridge in the way, as for lack of take heed, the Horses, Coach and all that was in had like to have faln into the water, but God was pleased to shew them the precipice onely, & keep them out of it. The rest of the way, they talked not but of the journey of Adraste, Minerva wish∣ing it as short, as happy to him; and Adraste be∣leeching her not to let such, (as then hee being present desired to crosse his fortunes) any way to ruine them in his absence; it being a certainty that such as sought to overthrow him, in her affe∣ctions being now with her, would not forbeare when he were gone. Minerva complained of this his request, as grounded she thought, upon the mi¦strust Adraste had of her saith and constancie, and shewing him the Sun that as then yet shined; so long, said shee, as this so glorious a Planet, still shall be the light and comfort, of all mortall men, so long shall you be mine; I could pardon one that had not known my minde so well as you, but you are by so much the lesse excusable as you the better know it. Adraste excused him, if the dan∣ger to lose a thing, the preservation wherof was so extreamly valued by him, and the losse so rui∣nous, had constrained him to intreat her to pre∣serve her affection to him; which should he lose,
he must for ever grieve the mischance, and never cease to accuse his fate or indeferts, and keeping it as now she did assure him she would; he should part thence with such felicity, and comforts in himselfe, as he promised fortune, never more to to take offence at any lucklesse chance shee ere should put upon him. In conclusion of this Dis∣course they came to the City, & to went set down Minerva at the end of the street wherin her house was, for she would not suffer them to accompany her any further, not for fear of Tatius who was farre enough off, and for whom she cared little, but for fear of increasing the jealousie of Crassus that lay at watch in the same street, where he had taken a lodging to wav-lay all resort to Miner∣va'es. And for that shee desired they should be∣lieve yet that she cared not for him; Adraste poor man that saw this, gave, as I say, more faith to the witnesse of her words in the contrary, then he put in his own eyes that saw it. For this cause it is; They say that love is blinde, insomuch as passion hood-winketh all such as follow him, troubles their judgment, and takes from them their very knowledge. Plancus went home with Melite, and Adraste retired to his own lodging with intent to write to Minerva, as if it had bin some long time, since he saw her furious effects of a violent and extraordinary affection, which we will now leave, the sooner to see the end of the first part of this Book.
The Argument. The divers pursuits of Crassus and Adraste. The departure of Minerva, her returne, and confidence in Adraste. The sodaine disfavour of Adraste on the Eve of his parting, and the Letter he wrote to Miner∣va. As also the reconciliation of Adraste with Mi∣nerva, and his departure for the Army. CHAP. VI. THat very Evening was Crassus ad∣vertised of this walke of Minervas with Adraste, (they say he was so diligent in those things as he went even to the Divel himselfe for in∣telligence) but his Empire being as yet not well confirmed, he durst not complaine but modestly to her, and was contented with reason backe. But the meanes by which he established his go∣vernment, were quite contrary to those of A∣draste, as the men, were nothing alike. For A∣draste proceeded with freedome and all manner of ingenuousnesse, and Crassus went forwards by stealth, and in many windes and turns, hiding a profound designe, under an excellent Artifice. Adraste knowing that a generous spirit aimeth
chiefly at glory, and holding Minerva for such, rendred her the honors Crassus could not; and without medling in her affaires, endeavored one∣ly to conforme her to his pleasures, hoping that his compliance, gentile fashion and affection, should render him more worthy her love then his Rivall. Crassus tooke another course, for fin∣ding that he had not in him those good parts that sufficed to win the heart of Minerva, & rēder him preferable to so many others at all parts better qualified then him, of all whom she was hono∣red, and adored; under pretence of officiously embracing her affaires, first he got her papers, and writings into her hands, and not long after, her Iewells, to the end that both the one and the other, should render him necessary, since hee could not render himselfe amiable; and that this necessity, and fitnesse, might become love, as it had don with Tatius, though he had more cause to shun, then imitate the example, had hee beene counselled by his Reason, and not by his passion. And Minerva, that already once before had been taken in the like snare, after having beene often forewarned, suffered her selfe yet againe to bee caught, but it happened not till after the depar∣ture of Adraste. In the meane time two or three daies after the journey to Ruel, the King leaving Paris to go to Saumur, caused Adraste to provide to follow him. VVhen see, upon an advise that Ar∣lande was fallen sicke some forty Leagues from Paris, Minerva resolved presently to go see her, her affection overcomming all difficulties that
opposed her endeavours, which indeed were then no small ones, for the want of a Coach, the aboundance of fowle weather, nor the inconve∣nience of the waies, could any whit divert her therin. Crassus had the first notice, as he to whom the packets of Minerva were still addressed, who being unable to accommodate her with more then one Nag to carry her, it was needfull to make use of Adraste, but he was ready to be gone; and to borrow his Horses at the time of his de∣parture, was somwhat out of season. Notwith∣standing which, Minerva tould him, if hee were not urged to depart by any necessity, she would intreate him to lend her a horse for some five or sixe dayes. Adraste was so farre from refusing a horse to Minerva, that he could haue wished him∣selfe one, for the happinesse of such a burthen, and already envied the honor of the beast should beare so sweet a burthen; which for all that had beene but a miserable good fortune, for shee re∣turned him his horse so jaded, and cripled, as he never did him service after. But Adraste wished he had beene as much worth, as himselfe, or as much as he could hope in the world, and the the had died in her service; beleeving that his life could not be better emploied, then in so happy losse of it. But hee was not content to send her a horse onely, he went and offered himselfe to be her guide, all other occasions set apart, and most humbly intreated her to give him leave to waite upon her. She thanked him, prayd him to stay her returne to Paris, or newes of her there at least,
and to take the charge on him, of sometimes see∣ing her children for her, whom she left in the hands of the Governesse we have before spoke of: and parted the same evening in extream bad wea∣ther, accompanied onely with one man, and a maide that attended her. Adraste bore her com∣pany, untill such time as she commanded him re∣turne; and being forbidden to follow her any fur∣ther, hee accompanied her yet with his eyes so farre as his sight gave him leave, and then excee∣ding pensive, he returned not to his lodging, but Minervas, to cheere him for her absence in the entertainment of her children. Who in the first innocence wherein they were yet, not knowing any thing of their Mothers absence, caused in him no lesse pitty of them, then she caused love in him. In the meane time while he busied him∣selfe there, a knavish Laquay, with whom hee had increased his followers for the Iourney in∣tended, having before taken notice of some mo∣neys he had to that use provided, intended to lay hands on it, which he so happily brought about, that at his going from thence, Adraste found him∣selfe first without Footman, and so soone as hee came to his Lodging, without money, which was indeed a divertisement, but very hurtfull to his purse, and little wholesome for his passi∣on, for it yet hindred not, but he thought still on Minerva, that to say truth, tooke up his whole thoughts: And in the violence of that griefe hee suffered by the absence of two or three dayes, he apprehended what hee was to undergoe in the
length of so many months, so as he was not one∣ly burthened with his present ills, but likewise with those were to come. But Minerva having found her Mother in better state then she expe∣cted, came backe to Paris eight daies after her departure, with the same diligence shee was gone from thence: and by her returne dispersed such clouds as darkned the serenitie of Adrastes spirits, that might say with one, That as her parting caused him grieve amaine, So greatest Ioyes with her return'd againe. The first day of her arivall was passed in com∣plements, gracious favours, and kind welcomes The second, however Adraste never feasted un∣invited, as the French hath it, nor tooke notice of any others affaires, but when he was thereto required, shee intreated him to perswade one of her Farmors to give up the Lease of the lands she formerly had made him. This Tennant of hers was a clowne, if ever were such, and yet a more knave then clowne; So as hee deserved to have beene well cudgel'd, nor would Minerva have tane it amisse. But Adraste loving the reputation of his Mistris equall with his owne, and seeing it was not for the honour of the one or the other to beate this Looby, rendr'd him, how extream∣ly so ever brutall, yet so capable of reason in the end, as he promised not onely to give up his Lease, but also to become conformable to the will and pleasure of Minerva. Minerva as then had few thoughts to which Adraste was not made
privy, for in recompence of his service, she com∣municated her secrets, at least such as he had not interest in. For proofe whereof, she recounted to him an action of Tatius, which well noteth the great confidence betweene them. Tatius being privately some time before come to Paris, got one day unperceived to his Wives house, where staying below in a little Parlour, hee caused Mi∣nerva to be called downe thither, who not be∣leeving she might honestly refuse to see her hus∣band, not mistrusting any ill, came down to the same roome, where he stayed her. After having saluted, Minerva praying him to walke up into her chamber, he tould her, that he had but a lit∣tle while to stay there with her, aud hee desired not to be seene, no not of her servants, and that being borne away by that extreame affection which he ever had for her, she must beleeve that this visit so unexpectedly made, and by stealth, was a sufficient testimony thereof. But thou most faire Minerva, cōtinued he, having tane her in his armes, art thou not in pitty any whit sensible of my misfortunes? Sir, answered Minerva, I am not so insensible & stony but I suffer some impression from your passion; and in your disgraces do com∣passionate yet as in mine own. But you know well the cause that parted mine from your interest, and I wish no other Iudge in this case, then your selfe. Indeed said Tatius, I did not use you I confesse as your demerits did oblige me; but ex∣cuse the passions of a Lover, pardon him that does repent him, forget the ills that I have done
you, and but now remember you of all the good that I have wished you, you shall make nature a lyar, if you become not then as pittifull, as you are faire, if you have not the same sweetnesse in your minde you carry in your looks. They were all alone, for the servant that had called downe Minerva, was gon out, and Tatius enjoying those rights the opportunity, and his cōdition afforded him, and reducing so his words into actions tou∣ching the heart of Minerva, which was not made of wood, or marble, as partly by consent, partly by force, he reentred the possession of those fa∣vours he had formerly lost. But so soone as hee had satisfied his owne desires; See but the thanks of this disloyall▪ and ingratefull soule. No man can witnesse, said he, that I have now been heere, Thinke not I came for love of thee, but of my owne revenge; to the end, that after having left with thee what I can utterly deny, I so may give thee lost. Lo here the wicked act of Tatius, which amongst the most remarkable basenesses that ere were perpetrate, may hold the place of the most enormous treason, and the most faithlesse wic∣kednesse, that husband ever committed gainst a wife. Minerva never trusted this secret but to the fidelity of Adraste, who never abused that trust, or ever wronged her in it, and if hee hath spoke on't since, it hath beene still to her defence, gainst such as have accused, and blamed her much, for living from her husband. And to make seen what cause she had to be for ever doubtfull and mistru∣sting such and so inveterate and setled a malice.
As Adraste had no care that tended not to the service of Minerva; it seemed no lesse that shee had no inclination but tended to the love of A∣draste: She spake not but of his merits, remem∣bred her not but of his services, nor in appea∣rance, thought of any thing more then of the meanes to acknowledge them. Yet this faire sun∣shine, but presaged a storme. Sailors have cause to seare a calme too smiling, And physitians think it not amisse to doubt a health too perfect and se∣cure; for as the one doth but presage a furious storme, the other argues still a dangerous disease. But when that sicknesse doth succeed excesse of health, Raines, a great winde, or stormes ensue grosse clouds, no man at all is moved thereat; for that already were foreseeen the signes that usual∣ly precede. But when that in a time cleere and serene, the face of heaven is in an instant bound about with clouds; Or that we see a man to die at going out of bed, that did arise in health; Tis then we do become affraid, and that amazement, seiseth us, for that we are surprized, and by so much the more astonished, from these accidents as we could not foresee the event. So had there beene but any cause, or a pretext that had pre∣ceded the disgrace of our Adraste, here, hee had not marvailed at it aught, for he knew well what kinde of soule he had to deale withall. But all at once when he the lest expected it, and that he did esteeme himselfe the most in favour with his Mi∣stris, not knowing why, or doubting how, hee found him fallen in her contempt: and in the
place of recompence and those kinde favours, whereof his tried affections, and his services did render him most worthy, he did yet undergo the scornes and chastisements, which he had no way merited. He had not three dayes to stay in Paris, when going to see her one morning a little later then hee was wont, hee found shee was gone to Church, whither very readily following her, ra∣ther in desire to see her, then for any other devo∣tion he had: It is no mervaile that God permitted him to be so ill entreated. She had in her com∣pany only the Governesse, and had already heard Masse upon the arivall of Adraste, who having bid her good morrow, presented her his hand to leade her home, dinner time pressed them not so, but having sufficient leisure, fair weather to walk in, and the place they were in, inviting them thereto; Adraste, that thought he might have better liberty to entertaine her in this walke, then at her house, intreated her to take a turne in the Garden of that faire house, belonging to the Queene Mother. And Minerva admitted him to conduct her, as well to entertaine him, though very differently, and with an entertainment, and welcome much contrary to the desires and hopes of Adraste. So, as he pressed her to recompence his services, and at the least, would needes have some kinde favour from her; for him to beare along with him unto the warres. Minerva chan∣ging her discourse, did tell him straite, that his so frequent visits, and disorderly addresses unto her, had scandalized her much with all the
Neighbours bout her house, so as she was infor∣ced to intreat him come more seldome there, that esteeming his company as she did, she could not deprive her of it, she sayd, with little griefe, of which she did beleeve that hee would have his part, but knowing likewise that he did esteeme more of her reputation, then himselfe, she hoped he alwaies would preferre that good, to any plea∣sure that he could receive from seeing her; that would the best she might temper her sorrows for not seeing him, with the remembrance she would keepe of him; And never should she have so li∣ving in her breast, ought else besides as that ever∣lasting memory of his deserts. Adraste having such a lecture, upon the Eve of his departure, lost all manner of patience, and straite it came into his head, that it was but an effect of the jea∣lousie of Crassus, and that contempt he had ever had of him till then, turned into fury; He remem∣bred him of the advise Minerva her selfe had gi∣ven, and how oft she had sayd that all her house was still averse to him but she; and casting an eye upon the Governesse, accompanied her, he did beleeve, as it was true indeed, that nothing but her counsailes, and seducements could have power to make her capable of his disgrace, and her maliciousnesse. And as amongst a multitude of things one knows not what to chuse, or leave; So Adraste did not know in so great choice, and such diversity of Reasons, what to answer her; so from the aboundance of his Reason, did pro∣ceed his want of words. At the last his passions
breaking silence, this he sayd. Madam, so long as you assured me that it could not alter your af∣fection, I have scoft my enemies, and made mee merry at their jealousies; but now that you doe let me see the contrary, by a discourse so out of season, and all sence, it is no slighting them. And I see well to what it tends. Minerva perceiving that Adraste spake this by Crassus, answered in his favour, and by her answer as it were partaking in his interest, shee more incensed Adrastes fury, who not willing to continue this discourse fur∣ther with a woman, and one he had so perfectly adored, left her to walke alone with the Gover∣nesse, and went to Crassus his lodging, resolved if he met with him, to make him tak to his sword. But not finding him, hee passed away his rage in dining with an il appetite▪ Minerva retiring home extreamly grieved, that she had so reduced A∣draste to despaire, and apprehending what mis∣chance might rise thereon, instead of going to dinner, went to bed tormented even to death, and much offended at the Governesse, and Cras∣sus too, the cursed Authors of so unhappy coun∣sels. Crassus comming to her hereupon, and then much out of time, desiring to impart his pas∣sions, found so ill a welcome, that having very handsomely received her leave to be gone, hee tooke her at her word, and went not onely away from her house, but out of the City also, though not very farre, for he returned within two daies, were it on his owne motion, or that she sent for him. Adraste having sent away his Equipage be∣fore,
but after the King▪ changed the desire he had to cal Crassus to accoūt, into a much better design of serving his Prince, and more bravely manife∣sting his courage in occasions more honourable & more dangerous indeed to take his journy the next morning, with a Horse and one Laquay onely, which he had caused to be left for him, he was though to conclude his leave taking, and bid some adiew which as yet he had not done, and he determined to depart without once bidding far∣well Minerva. Who returning the same day from Vespers, and seeing Adrastes Laquay who waited him with his horse at the door of a Ladies lodging by, asked him where his Master was? Madam answered the Laquay, he is within here. Why replyed Minerva, and is he not yet gone? not yet Madam but his Equipage is already well forwards on the way, these words touched the quick, for Minerva thought Adraste had not bin so neer ready, nor that hee could have resolved to part without bidding her adiew. But whatsoe∣ver she thought, dissembling it before the laquay, she said to him well my good friend tell him, I pray, that I do kisse his hands. The Laquay failed not to tell his Master so at his comming out from thence, which did not alter him at all, but on the contrary the little day which yet rested importu∣ned him more then that, and hee wished night were passed, to the end he might the next day make a great journey forward on his way, and by so much withdraw and bear himself the further from this thanklesse and ingratefull soul. Not∣withstanding
which he had wrote a Letter that he determined should be delivered to her when he was gone, by which he gave her to under∣stand. That if he had followed the stream of his first moti∣ons, to which the violence of hers had born him, hee had let her see an action, which shee not onely had per∣mitted, but the indifference that shee had manifested unto him, had cleerly ingaged him to. That hee had sought, found, and ruined the honour which she did so much esteem, or else himself, which yet hee could not think; or at the worst it had bin the best, that could befall him, for that his life was so unhappy by her meanes, as it must needs have been a great good for∣tune to have lost it. But since upon reflection in him∣self and having lesse regard to his own passions, then to the interest she had in them (whatever oath she had taken to have none) hee had believed that it should no way misbecome him, goe his way to a place, where a more great and honourable danger might make seen to her, his more obdience and courage, then hee could render her in the defeat of one, so miserable, whom he did deem sufficiently punished in the vexations shee would procure him. Besides he was not willing to ruine so many incomparable proofs of affection, as hee had daily manifested, by one action that might be the least displeasing to her; and not expecting that there could be found content for him after (for her pleasure) be∣ing banisht from all that he enjoyed in the whole earth. That this had caused him hasten his desire, least some new accident, with the remembrance of so bloudy a
discourtesie, bore him not yet to mend himselfe as hee could. And however that hee parted thence, deprived of the honour of her sight, by her so cruell doom, with as much spoile and ransack as an extreme fury could possibly make in the brest of a man, hee yet did beare along with him, those his affections to her as freshly li∣ving even in this her great disfavour, as if shee had honord him with all the graces, that she could conferre. Which now hee did not say to bend her ought to pitty; for hee in giving her this last adiew, did give it also to all hope to see her face, or once to write to her more, but twas to let her see the constancie and excellence of his tryed love, since that he did conserve it yet, within the midst of losse, and that how low and base compa∣red with his were those affections which she yet prefer∣red to his. Adraste bethinking him of means to deliverher this Letter, was visited by three or foure of his friends, that caused him to sup at home, and to passe with them the remaynder of this trouble∣some day. After Supper, taking the ayre with the same company along the walk by the River, which is right against the Louvre, and talking of his departure, as one that meant to be on horse∣back by eight a clock in the morning, he felt one pull him behind, and turning head, hee saw Mi∣nerva's Footman, who having caused him break off discourse, and bid adiew to the company, pre∣sented him with a note from his Mistris, which Adraste as then did not open, nor could hee have read it without light; But hast thou said he, to the
Laquay, nothing else to say to me? No Sir, an∣swerd hee, but that I most humbly kisse your hands. Well then, return said Adraste, and pre∣sently bear back this Letter to your Lady, which I had thought should not have bin delivered till after my depart, and having given him his Let∣ter, went into his lodging to read Minerva's, that was to this purpose. These lines that bring you my adiew, since I my selfe cannot otherwise give it, may assure you that I doe wish you a happy journey, and a ready return that am your servant. Howsoever Adraste were extreamly incensed against Minerva, he became so appeased by the reading this note, as he resolved to see her that Evening, though it were very late, In which might well be seen he was truly amorous; And that Minerva knowing him no lesse easie to be re∣gained, then rejected, caused these devises with him on assurance or rather presumption she had of regaining, or calling him back at pleasure. Going then to her house, they told him that she was in bed: but if he would go up to her cham∣ber he should not fail to see her. So went he up and having sat him down on her bed side, after saluting her, but with countenance somewhat cool, and shamefull, said she to him before he had leisure to speak. Now you see my goodnes very true, said Adraste, yet are you as slow of compas∣sion, as ready of anger, if you were but as quick
to heal, as you are to hurt you might yet be bet∣ter. But what will you say of my easinesse, said she, that had not the heart to let you part, without calling you backe. Nay, what will you say of mine, answered Adraste, that had not the spirit to go my ways, after so many indignities, without returning upon so small a signe, as you gave me that you desired it. Call it not easinesse, it is obe∣dience in you, answered Minerva, or rather your duty, you cannot be a slave, and a free man, both at once, nor to be to mee, and execute your own designes, without conforming them to mine. It is then lesse in you answered Adraste, without you will have it easines to call back by reason, him you had banished without cause. It was an easines in you to take from me your company, and a ge∣nerosity, to render me again, since there is nought so slack and ill as is ingratitude, nor any thing more generous then is a free acknowledgment & requitall. You say your pleasure, answered Mi∣nerva, and I have done as I ought. As you ought Madam, replyed Adraste, was it a part of your devoir, to forbid me visiting you the Eve of my departure, behoved it you, to have permitted me so long, just then to barre and keepe me out. Be∣hoov'd it you to have so many times given notice to me of my Rivals jealousies, to banish me upon the first complaint I made of them, and openly so much oppose your passions, to my Reasons. Nay, sayd Minerva, lets abolish now, and quite forget those things; I protect the absent gainst the present ever. And you are ignorant what I
have said to him on your behalfe, you being a∣way; and you perhaps thinke much at what hee holds himselfe contented with. Madam answe∣red Adraste, absolutions and forgivenesses, if so you meane, are still for crimes, as recompences are for services. You have cause to wish you could forget the wrongs you have done to mee; And I have reason nerethelesse to urge my satis∣faction. As to the cause that others have to please themselves, or to complaine them, of the usage, good, or ill, that you afford to them, I not ob∣serve, or neere, or further off. I have told you heretofore, that your deportment was so just on my behalfe, as that the very wrongs which you have done to mee; to me, have yet seemed good. But I complaine that any one should ere controle both mine, and your carriage, that people no way interessed in the one, or other, should yet take upon them both. And above all I needes must grieve, that you, that ought not once to grant your pardon to the thought, should have so much approved the effect, as that in place of being offended gainst that tyranny, seeks to sub∣ject you, to the furious jealousie of one; you take offence against your humblest vassall, that hath never ownd a thought, but how he might honor you. Well then sayd Minerva, if I have done you any offence, I hope you now are satisfied? And Madam from what satisfied? from seeing you so beautifull within your bed, answered Adraste, that indeed were well, if so we could be satisfied by sight. Is there a greater satisfaction to see the
party that you love, replied Minerva. Not any said Adraste, so as we likewise may possesse it too. But otherwise the sight of what wee have not power to enjoy, doth serve but to torment us more. And by so much as it is deare to us, even by so much it breedeth our vexation more, and chiefly when it rests in the possession of an other too, and one that altogether is unworthy of it. They did proceed so farre in this discourse, as the whole house at last were fallen a sleepe, some here, some there. Adrastes boy that had atten∣ded below in the Court, seeing that it was alrea∣die so late, that they were all fallen a sleepe in the house, retired to his Masters lodging, and left him there; beleeving he would passe the night as he did. But Adraste, and Minerva, slept not, it being scarse long enough to finish one part of what they had to say. And at last, there was not any thing that parted them but day. Minerva, being affraid that Adraste might be seene to goe out of her house, intreated him to go his way, and that hee would see her againe before his de∣parture. Sweet light, doth rejoyce the heart of all mankind, and which of all things in the world, art most delightfull, and most beautifull, how importune, as then wert thou? and much displea∣sing to these happy Lovers heere. And oh sweet night, offensive onely, that thou wert too short, permit that I expresse the rest of their kinde lan∣guage, each to the other then, by thy own silence. And that I never violate the sacred mysteries, of thy lov'd shades. Adraste seeing that he needes
must part, and judging of the paine, and suffe∣rance, he was to undergo in parting from Miner∣va, when as he must away unto the Campe, by that he now did feele, in but retiring to his bed. Oh me my greatest blisse, sayd hee, why should we ever part? what ominous starre, what Spirit of portent, or what cursed state is it, hath power to force me to it? Alas, I doe but hunt, and run in quest of that false honour that deceiveth me, to leave that true and reall glory, that does render me content. Nay Sir, go on, sayd she, you can∣not part from me, for I shall ever follow you, at least in my imaginations, since that it is not lesse within my choice, to live within your sight. Oh mee my better Genious! sayd Adraste, then. I here consigne you ore my life, and doe conjure you there withall, that you doe still remember you of this your promise made. Assure you sayd Minerva, I shall sooner lose the memory of my name, then ever of this promise made to thee. And that I sooner will bee drawne to leave my life, then this possession thou hast put me in. I sweare this by thy selfe, that art the onely thing I wish to sweare by under heaven. And adue my deare Adraste, content thee yet with this my full assurance given. My goddesse, then farwell A∣draste sayd, in going backe, Once as yet, farwell, And againe once more, farwell. Adraste being parted from Minerva, as from his owne Soule, how ever no lesse contented in her favours, then an other Iason in his conquest, retired to his lod∣ging by the light of the morning, which he could
more willingly have cursed, then saluted, for ha∣ving so soone brought backe the day: And go∣ing to rest at such an houre, as others rise, and as he had beleev'd he should have rose himselfe, in∣stead of being on horsebacke at eight a Clocke, according to his forecast, hee found it was almost eleven, when he was yet in bed. But he had pro∣mised Minerva to see her at ten, who perceiving the houre passed, went to Masse, and to meet him, she made choice of the next Church to his lodg∣ing. But Adraste being up, sayd prayers, and broke his fast almost together, and both in haste, with a gentleman that had stayed for him, even since the morne, to go along with him. So soone as he had dispatched such incumbrances, as ordi∣narily doe hinder men upon their leaving such a Citty. At last hee got on horsebacke, after one thousand adues of his friends, and went on pas∣sing by the Lodging of Minerva; there yet, to enjoy one moment of the pleasure, of which hee now went to deprive him utterly. Minerva ha∣ving commanded at her going out, that they should tell him at what Church shee would be, He prayed the company ride on, whilst he went backe thither, though it were a good way off. But he would have gone much further: Minerva being gon on foot for love of him; well might he go on horsebacke for the love of her so farre. He found her at the church, just as the masse was done, when her devotions being finished, shee rested wholy in expectance of him. After ha∣ving pratled some while at the Church, hee led
her backe to her house, there to chat at more li∣berty, and having withdrawne her againe unto her bedside, where he so happily had passed the former night. Good gods, what sayd they not? Oh Love! how much renowned mightst thou render mee herein. And I againe might render thee most famous to the world, if so thou wouldst inspire mee now, but with a part of those adues they tooke. Minerva heretofore more cruell then a Lyonesse, was then become more gentle then a Dove. Adraste holding her between his armes, transported with this object of his high felicity, and present happines, remembred now no more the great misfortunes he had passed. Oh happy condition of a bless'd and perfect Lover, had it not beene disturbed by the apprehension that he had of loosing it. It was past two a Clocke, be∣fore Adraste could remember him to take his leave, or that Minerva thought it time to dine. But Adraste fearing to spoile Minervas dinner, & Minerva being afraid to hinder Adrastes journey, both of them gave way to the necessity of a se∣paration, and in the end resolved them of their last farwell. But God knows with what violence their soules met in the kisses of their lips; and then their hearts feeling the one to approach the other, leaped with such force, as it did seeme they would have changed place. Adraste never ceasing to conjure her love him still, and to write to him oft. Intreated her now to bestow a favor of him, that hee might beare in this warre, and with the title of her Cavalier, or Palladin. The fa∣vour
was promis'd, but not given, because Miner∣va did desire to have it a scarfe of such a fashion, as would take more time, then she as then had to make it up. The quality of Paladine was yet con∣ferred on him, as we shall tearme him in the second part of this history; which we hope ere long to render you more pleasant, and He∣roicke then this First. The end of the First part.
DIVERS AMOROVS Epistles wrote by the Author to the same Lady, during the time mentioned in the precedent story, and not therein spoke of. The Argument. That neither his love, nor the perfections of his Mistresse could be possibly spoken of, but imperfectly. Epistle 1. Madame, I Was extreamely rash to dare once to entertain the first conceptions of my love: nor am I lesse unhap∣py in my desires to manifest their resentment. An extraordinary pas∣sion like mine, should not have been expressed by an ordinary meanes, like those of the common sort. I should have dyed without speaking, hiding
the depth of my disease in as profound a silence, that the novelty of a respect so great, might have invited yet some pitty. It may be she whom the most to be lamented sorrowes of life, hath not had power to touch, might yet have been made sensible by a too late compassion of my death. And Madame, think you as you please, 'tis not so sure, that now I talke, as 'tis most certain that I dye, and that these here be grones I utter, & not words, for that a passion so extreame learnes ra∣ther how to sigh, then speake, nor think that mine are lesse for being ill expressed, for that doth best explaine how great they are. I never speake of them but to their prejudice, and still confound me in willing to expresse them. For would I shew the ills you cause me undergoe, the words torture and martyrdome, are too too gentle to expresse what I from time to time do suffer; and would I entertaine you with the good which you forbid meere to hope, the words delight and glory, seem to me but low. Would I manifest my obedience and my service to you, the qualities of slave and vassaile, to me, seeme not sufficiently humble; and should I go about to speake your power▪ and your demerits, why the titles of Empresse and Goddesse are not sublime enough. So as Madam, be it that my wit confounded in the excellence of yours, be unable to endure the brightnesse of it, be it that yours incomparably elivate above mine, be not lesse inaccessible, then you your selfe are altogether inexorable; be it that the chaos of despaire whereto your cruelties have reduced
me, do take from me my speech, together with my life, or be it that as there is no thoughts can equall the greatnesse of your merits, so is there no words can reach the greatnesse of my thoughts; be it what it will be, Madame, this is sure, I cannot speake, or of my love, or your per∣fections; but imperfectly; and that a stile most new, and words unknown, behoved to expresse as yet so rare and most unheard of things. The Argument. Vpon his Mistresse forbidding him to love. Epistle 2. YOu yesterday gave me in command, not to love, which I confesse I have ill obeyed, for be it, for the afflictions I feele in that cruelty, be it, that things forbidden are ever most desired, I have not had the power to think another thought since you forbade it me. Madame, there is no kinde of duty that I owe you not; command me that I shed your enemies bloud, or that I spill my own, I shall not leave one drop within my veyns; I shall oppose the violence of times, and of the elements, nor is there cruelty of chance or fate, to which I shall not willingly expose my selfe to obey you. But either cease you to forbid me love, or otherwise forbid your image to pursue me, since that doth watch me every where, and leaves
me not or liberty or thought, but what it doth in∣spire, or else you may as well forbid the Sunne to enlighten the whole earth, the earth not to produce her fruits: you may as well forbid the waters to descend, and fire to mount on high, since all these functions are not halfe so proper unto them, nor yet so naturall as 'tis most natu∣rall and proper unto me, to think on and to live in you. But Madame, I beseech you say, what Empire else but yours hath ever reached so farre as to the thoughts of men? what tyrant but your selfe, forbids to think of things desired? Is it not sufficient that I obey you in things most difficult, but you will yet command me those impos∣sible? shall then so much respect and passion, with so much violence and lasting too, availe me nought, nor ever bend the cruelty of your so pit∣tilesse spirit? how many yeers is it I have sighed for you? is it not time at last to yeeld, is not my constancy as yet sufficiently proved? shall you not reape more glory and contentment to pre∣serve me, then to betray your selfe in my ascertai∣ned losse. Madame, I have told you heretofore, that no desire so violent bides in the heart of man, or mad indeed, as that I have to possesse you. But I shall rather chuse eternally to undergoe such rage and violence, then seek my remedy in any thing displeasing to you. Oh what mistrust, or what so feeble strength as now hath power to make you doubt a faith so known? If quite dis∣favourd as I am, I cannot chuse but love you yet, and worship now in you even this ingratitude and
cruelty, that makes me dye, what should I then do, would you but render me possessor of that grace, the only hope whereof doth cause me live? Madame, conceive the rest by thought, and think your selfe of what you do forbid me think. The Argument. He saith that he loveth as well by election, as desti∣nate thereto, and intreats his Mistresse to examine the cause for which she doomes his death. Epistle 3. Madame, I Told you yesterday that I did love you, as of meer election and free will, but likewise by an absolute necessity, with an ardent, excessive, and a most furious passion, of which I could not pos∣sibly be healed, without it were by a possession, or by death: and that herein was neither end or meaue; you Madame as if to slay the creature that adores you, were to doe better, then to give him life, did absolutely then forbid me ere to hope the first meanes of recovery, upon necessity reducing me unto the second then, that is to say, you did condemne me unto death: unto what Iudge Ma∣dame please you shall I appeale? In what religi∣on, in what schoole have you learned so bloudy adivinity? Who hath given you such assurance as to perswade me after this, that yet you wish
me well, and to command me live, when you have doomed me unto death? Who hath beene able to perswade you to impose such rigorous lawes, as doe oblige me beg your pardon, even for the ills you doe me, and for the love it selfe which I beare you? Madame, yet this once, and as the last, I do most humbly intreat you, but to examine the cause wherefore, and why, you kill me? It is for a most perfect love, which hath ex∣tended so it selfe as unto those, that naturally in∣deed I ought to hate. Was ere man found but me, that for the love of his Mistresse, lov'd his rivall too? But wherefore busie I my selfe to represent my affections here to you, that have confessed that you beleeve them much more then I know how to expresse. Doe you represent them Ma∣dame in the true perfection I have conceived them, and see if for being too faithfull, and for having in your love exceeded the most violent passions of man, it be reasonable that you cause me undergoe the heaviest torments of mankind. Think that my fate, or good, or ill, dependsnow on your answer, and that I beg not here my life, but for to make immortall yours; and seen in the extended vastnesse of my sufferings, how bound∣lesse the perfections are, that render yet your cru∣elty so lovely.
The Argument. He complaines of the indifference of his Mistresse. Epistle 4. Madame, I Should live ill satisfied as well from you, as from my selfe, might I not complain me of the ill you doe me, of which the little care you take, is yet more cruell then the ill it selfe. That feeble sparke of reason rests to me amid the blindnesse of so much amazement, lets me yet see in you, so much indifference, as not to see it I should take it for a blessing to have lost my sight. I know well you will accuse me of a raving, but to complain with reason of an ill suffered without cause, is, by no meanes, to rave. The long continuance of my servage Madame, and the advantages my affecti∣on gives me afore all such as honour you, makes me presume, I hold in your affection yet some place above the common sort. And you have told me so: but suiting ill your deeds unto your words, there is no company so ill, the entertain ment, and converse whereof you have not still preferd to mine. Madame, I will not comment on your actions, your deportments being so just on my behalfe, that even the ills you do me, do yet seem good to me. But I complain of heaven, that hath bestowed on me so little merit, and so boundlesse love, according unto which propor∣tions,
the one beares me to adore and honour you, the other doth invite you to disdain and scorn me. Nor can I deny also, but that it seems extreamely cruell unto me to see you harke to a∣ny other speech then that of my complaint. Nor that I conceive not an ill opinion of my selfe, by the slight esteem that you have of my sufferance. Yet Madame since that you are so pleased, I shall conform me to your humours, and make you see, that I have no content at all, but in what pleaseth you. But if my frequent visits rēder you, my passi∣ons importune, I shall most humbly beg you will accuse your own perfections of the fault; that in the image of such beauties have caused me to a∣dore even cruelty it selfe, and seeke the vaine shadow of contentment in a most sure and reall martyrdome. The Answer. Epistle 5. Sir, I Expected the least of any thing such a Letter from you, whom I beleeved better then ever satisfied in my deportments and intentions. You judge both of the one and other rather by opini∣on then by reason, and falsely accuse me to have done you ill, since I have neither had the power or will, and that you never can reape the good I
wish you. You have cause to say that I will ac∣cuse you of raving, and to call to minde that I have promised to love you more then others. This truth me thinks, should hold sufficient place in your beliefe, to hinder that any other contrary impression should ever usurpe the roome. But if you take the pains to remember you of what you do complaine, and chiefly of the complyance, wherewith you say I gratifie all the world, with∣out remembring you; You will finde they are but complements, to which civility inviteth and ob∣ligeth me, and that they have been more liberally imparted to your selfe then any man. I am never importuned by your visits, but on the contrary they have been so valued by me, that I desire the continuance, on condition that you give no more faith to any thing averse to the esteem I have of your demerits. The Reply. Epistle 6. Madame, I Iudg'd what you would answer me before I wrote unto you, and well I knew, that you would not want words, whatsoever reason you might see deficient in. But I know not, nor can I, as yet, learne, on what deportment of yours I ought take up my satisfaction, for either I am ve∣ry
blinde, or else I have not seen any so favoura∣ble, as might render me more satisfied then I have been. Notwithstanding you have cause to say, that I rather judge thereofby opinion, then by reason, for that I have pronounced them just against my selfe, which reasonably I never could. To say I accuse you wrongfully of the ill you do me, and that you have nor power nor will ther∣to, were not onely against my knowledge, but also against yours, and cannot be said without gaine-saying the most certaine experience that I have proved therein: against which it is impos∣sible to beleeve that you have ever wished mee well. As to my raving I my selfe give sentence against my selfe, upon condition you confesse that it proceeds not, but of too much love. And for the verity of your promise, I know not what place it may hold in my beliefe, to hinder a con∣trary impression, not having ever seen the proofe that was not to the contrary. To remember me of things whereof I doe complaine, were but to afflict me more. It were better seek some meanes to forget them, as her, hath been their causer since that I neither can or ought hope other thing.
The Argument. He amorously seemes angry with his Mistris. Epistle 7. Madam, I Should indeed never write more, no nor speak, calling to minde how much both the one, and the other, have beene bootlesse to me, and how much that faithfull, stedfast, and most perfect af∣fection which I beare you, continued of so long time, and with so wonderfull a perseverance, might speak for me, were not you on my behalfe, the most imperswasible woman under heaven; But the violence of my torments, and that rigo∣rous usage wherwithall you entertaine me, when I ought be rather cloyed, then starved with your favours, constraine me to lament my selfe, and to accuse you both of ingratitude, and cruelty. What is the matter Madam? have you lost the name and memory of him that hath not any, but to love you, & to serve you; And is it not enough that you are lovelesse, but you will be too with∣out memory, without▪ knowledge? How long have I sighed for you? and you withstood, not onely my felicity, but more your owne. Re∣member you, that he that begs love on you now, is he, that of so long, hath beene your suppliant, and that it is not a vaine humor that invites him to it, but the truest passion love did ever yet in∣force.
Content your selfe in that so violent resi∣stance you have made till now, against your own good happe, and suffer you your selfe to be ore∣come at last, by an invincible spirit. All things invite you to it, and nothing lets you; your ho∣nour is protected in my warinesse, and my dis∣cretion, and this same innocent feare you have to doe amisse, in my favour, is altogether causlesse. God is no enemy of Natures, but its Author, and the offence committed without scandalls is no offence; for this'tis said that they are blessed whose sinnes are covered. But Madam, the men of the first times, having composed their civill Lawes, did after give them out unto the people, as divine, to the intent to render them the more venerable, and themselves the better obeyed in their Authority. So Numa, made the Romans beleeve hee had the Lawes hee gave them from the Goddesse Egeria. And Lycurgus perswaded the Greekes that Apollo had given him his. Stand you not then on so vaine a scruple, which indeed is no other then a bare pretence, to hide your cruelty. And if you still doubt of that so faithfull constancie, of which you have had so long expe∣rience; Alas! with what manner of proofe have I not testified the same? which notwithstanding, if so bee there yet remaines one I have not ren∣derd; may it include my life, and all that ever I have, command me heere that I present you with it; that so living and dying in obedience, as in af∣fection, I may cause you find me more worthy of the good you refuse me, then of the il you do me.
The Argument. He comforteth his Mistris, on the death of his Ri∣vall, and manifesteth the excellence of his Love, a∣bove all other affections. Epistle 8. Madam, YOu commanded mee to ease you of a passion, gave you offence, and at the same time pro∣mised to cure mee of another, gave me death; And howsoever I hope nothing lesse then the ef∣fects of such a promise, your repose is so deare to me, and your Empire so pleasing, as I have imposed silence on my owne passions, to give care to yours, and forgotten all the ills you doe me, to haste to your helpe, even in those which you your selfe procure you. I cannot deny Ma∣dam, but your sorrowes are naturall, since they proceed from love, and from the death of a man you lov'd; you have not loved him sans merit, and you have lost him without possessing him, so as you lament him justly. This is a truth, and cannot be denied without offending the resent∣ment you have for him; But Madam, against whom complaine you of his death? Is it against God, who did permit him live, or against your selfe most innocent of his death? If it be against you, are you not still the more afflicted, and the more sorrowfull? And if it bee against God,
knowes hee not better what is fit for us, then we our selves? Could not hee have suffer'd him whom you love dead, to have beene living, yet possessed by another Mistris, within whose arms you had lesse loved him, then in his grave? Could not hee as well have taken you againe, as him, thereby reducing you to that first nothing, which he made you of? Consider what you complaine of Madam, and you will finde, that it is nought, and that to be moane your selfe, and vexe your soule for nothing, is an inexcusable weaknesse; We well may pardon the first com∣plaints that griefe inforceth us to utter, for that there is no courage so assured, whom the vio∣lence of these first motions does not overturn; But this storme ceased, there is no more excuse, if Reason reassumes not place, & at her turn does not obtrude those passions, that had turn'd her out. It is for this Men say that the superior part of the Soule, should be like the supreame Region of the Aire, that never is agitated with, or storm, or tempest. See here Madam, the difference twixt what you doe, and what you ought to do, for doubtlesse, discourse, time, the necessity of death, and a thousand other considerations I o∣mit, should before now have setled your resolu∣tion, to have borne a remedilesse mishap. Where see the quite contrary, instead of making your constancy appeare, and shine in such an accident, shewing by how many waies you exceed, in the beauties and perfections of your Sex; you give your selfe over a prey to griefe, like to some sim∣ple
and ignorant woman; you shut your spirits up (which God ordained for heaven) within a grave, together with a dead Carkasse, which he it may be hath deprived of life, even for the immesurable love you bore him, you sacrifice your Soule to a most singular griefe, and vainly runne after a shadow, you are sure you never can oretake. Your Soule is the Temple of God, and you adore there, the image of a dead man, whom hee permitted not that you should love, not whilest he liv'd. You make scruple of small thinges, and make no conscience of Idolatry, which you your self do know to be the grieuous∣est sinne that can be perpetrate. The Lawes al∣low a widdow but one yeare, to testifie her law∣full sorrowes, which for the most part be but in apparance neither, and you resolve to carry yours eternally within your soule. You will nourish a Woolfe that devoures you, embrace what be∣traies you, ruine your repose, outrage your beau∣tie and your health, and cause your selfe to die alive. To conclude Madam, you will openly re∣sist the will of God, according to which you make profession of ordering yours. Who being our Father, loves us his children, & better know∣ing what we want, then we our selves, rules all things by his Providence, and not according to our fancies. For if the world were governed by the various humors, and divers passions of men. Alas! Madam, to what new Chaos were wee then brought backe? And if that sometimes hee afflict us here, tis alwais yet to profit us, & never to our hurt, and even that ill hee does us, is either
still to make us merit some greater good, or else to cause us shun some greater ill. Complaine not you unjustly then of what he justly doth. Think not that he hath suffered now this losse, for other cause then to acquit you of a greater griefe, which howsoever you are unable to perceive, yet see you that his power is infinite, and that his judgements are unknown, and which 'tis better farre to apprehend, then prove. But you will tell me the same you told me yesterday, that your passions are not so easily shifted as your petti∣cotes. It is true Madame, and I finde it but too certaine in what I undergoe for you. But where are now those so sufficient reasons, by which you have erewhiles endeavoured to perswade me, that I might easily put off mine? Why serve you not your selfe against your selfe, with those wea∣pons you so well handle against others? Why doe you thinke it impossible to free you of the passions you have for a shadow, having before beleeved that it was nothing for me to divest me of these I have for you? Is it that you are more capable of love then I am, or that the subject of your love is more excellent then mine? Madame, I will not lessen the merit of your affections, which you had never conceived, had they not been most perfect, of which it is no little proofe to see them live yet, in you, after the death of him that caused them. Yet are they naturall, and no∣thing is more common then to mourne for a lost friend. But that I had power to humble me so, to the pleasure of a woman, as for her love, I have
lov'd even the rivall that hindred me to be belo∣ved, is a proofe of an affection Madame, that in some sort exceeds the rule of nature. And in the which you cannot deny, but I surpasse you, as much as you in all other things exceed me. As to the subject of your love, Madame, he was most certainly lovely, otherwise you had not made choice of him. But without wroning your ele∣ction, or his merits, I dare say, that there was more correspondence in your humours, then in your qualities; and that more then the compli∣ance and discretion wherewith he entertained you, and whereby chiefly he was praise-worthy, he was not possessed of so great perfections, as could make him merit yours. By which you may see, that the subject of my love being more excel∣lent then yours, it followes that your passions must be lesse then mine, and that you may easlier divest you of them, then I of mine; yea, if so the cause remained; which being now no more, it is a marvell that the effect should yet continue. But Madame, I have given sufficient audience to your plaints, it is now high time that you hearken un∣to mine, if not for my ease, yet for your own at least, since the most miserable may finde in them some cause of comfort. You bemoane the dead Madame, and think not of those that die by your meanes. I doe daily perish, and am evenat the last gaspe, and that for your love: and yet have you the heart to sigh for another before my face, and the power to interdict my passions, to make me wed yours. I see a dead body preferr'd to me,
which living I in affection yet preceded, and find you as insensible and whollie inanimate on my behalfe as he is on yours. My whole labours, all my affections and best qualities, are altogether bootlesse; you know, without acknowledging my faith, you looke upon my afflictions, without once being moved: and whatsoever might com∣mend a perfect affection, you behold in me, not daigning ought to regard it. Thou too too much beloved dead man, whose condition is most hap∣py, in comparison of mine! thou wert living be∣loved of the most lovely beauty under heaven, and thou art onely he that art beloved of her as yet even after death. Thou wert not onely belo∣ved of thy Mistresse, but thou wert likewise of thine enemie. In stead of persecuting thee even to thy grave, as thiefe and robber of my good, which thy remembrance hinders me as yet to have; I have honoured thy memory with my writings, which have so imprinted it in the heart of thy Mistresse, as now there is no other impres∣sion can take place for that. Is there any comply∣ance? Is there any passion or perfection indeed in love, that can come neere to this? Madame I implore here the beauty of your wit, and the in∣tegrity of your owne soule, in default of mine, that with this thought passeth away in transe, and leaves me not with other hope or desire, then here to see my life faile me with my speech.
The Argument. He complaines of his Mistresse that she had failed him in a meeting appointed by her to walke. Epistle 9. YOu sent yesterday to let me know that you could not come, and that I should not attend you any longer. I was told that you supped very late, and you chased me away, upon pretence that you would sup in good time. A man should be extreamely purblinde not to see that there was something more in this, then matter of Master∣ship, and that you having threatned to deprive me of a particular entertainment, would let me see, that you were a woman of your word. Hug your selfe for it Madame, you shall never more be troubled, though I continue ever in torment. I shall not onely leave you your liberty, but mine own, which I pretend not to withdraw from so worthy a servitude, where I chuse rather to suf∣fer extreame tyranny, then elsewhere to live be∣neath the perfects Empire. No Madame, what I pretend to, is to make you see in an unparalleld respect, an affection incomparable, and in a blind obedience mute and inconsiderate, how much in∣feriour to me, I leave such as aspire to the glory of your love: and how much I hope to exceed them by those actions, which my courage and the violent ambition I have to merit you, do pro∣mise meto atchieve in this war.
The Answere. YOu conceive things otherwise then they be, and according to your fancies, whereupon you write to me as you please. I shall better an∣swer you by word of mouth, then by Letter, and making you finde your errour, it will belong to you to make me satisfaction. The Argument. He justifieth his fancies. Epistle 10. THe party you left with me yesterday can tell you, how I knew not what to doe with my selfe; after I had then lost you. When howsoe∣ver it were neer night, it seemd to me a tedious day. There is a faire Lady neere you, who lately told me, she would gladly see me. I light on him had procured me this honour, who endeavoured what he could to get me thither, but prevailed nothing, howsoever I knew not how to busie me, but in thinking of you turning and returning in my memory, such things as you have said to me, and those humours and conjectures whereof you accuse me, after having your selfe caused them. I humbly intreat you Madame, take notice there may be fancies and humour without love,
but not love without humour and fancy, and if you upbraid me with them as an error, it is yet a generall one, and common to all lovers, above whom I have this advantage yet, that I order them so as they never trouble her I love. Most beauteous Minerva! glory of my thoughts, the soveraigne good of my life, and extreame felici∣ty of my soule, who can render a more faithfull testimony of this truth then your selfe? that can so casily moderate the furies of my violence. How many times have you staied the most impe∣tuous motions of my passions, with one word, yea with a looke. No more then blame my hu∣mours that doe rather merit commendations, since they make mee honour the cause that brought them forth, and are not onely proofes of my love, but also of my obedience. The Argument. Why his Mistresse should not be moved at his Mar∣tyrdome, upon his departure. Epistle 11. THere is nothing so strange, nor any thing so wonderfull, the accustomed vse whereof, weares not out the astonishment. Observe, that death is most horrible, notwithstanding which, the habit theeves have in murther, causeth that they kill men, not onely without horror, but with
some kinde of pleasure and voluptuousnesse. The comparison is bad, but it is proper. I would say that albeit my martyrdome be without example, and that the novelty thereof, amazeth me, and renders me, my selfe, thereat affrighted, you are so accustomed to plaints, and to the teares of such whom you make sigh, as that you suffer not your selfe to be the least touched at mine. No Ma∣dame, I beleeve your intellect extreamely gene∣rous, and consequently pittifull, but it is beaten so with such discourse, as it but laughs thereat, and lookes on me dying, not only with dry eyes, but with some sort of pleasure too. Oh Madame, were I capable of comforting the afflicted, I should, and not without good cause, begin with my selfe, rather then with those, whose jealousies are more worthy of derision, then of pitty. You Madame, with whom I am to part this day, in no lesse sorrow then if I were to be separated from my proper life; expect not words at my depart, my sorrowes will not suffer them: it will be much if I be able but to bid adue, since that is the last word a man should use in leaving life.
The Argument. He intreats his Mistris so torment him, to the end such pleasure as she takes therein, be increased propor∣tionably to the increase of his torments. Epistle 12. Madam, I give you good night, letting you know besids for newes, that my dolours are become more pleasing then they were, since I tooke notice of the contentment they bring you. Wherefore I intreat you not to lessen them, but to provide me new vexations, to the end your delights bee in∣creased proportionable, to the aboundance of my punishments. For I am not content to under∣goe onely the ills you do me, but I would yet too suffer those are done to you, and become the most miserable soule that ever lived, to render you the most happie. No Madam, I love not for my pleasure, I love for yours, and love not to torment you, but to vex my selfe for the love of you, by whom I desire still to be tormented. I say not this or to flatter you, or to decline your anger, I know that the one is bootlesse, and the other impossible. I speake it as a truth, by which I am thereto inforced, and to make it appeare to you, how much my affections are elevate above all others, the vassailes, and the subjects of your boundlesse Empire.
The Argument. He excuseth himselfe for putting his Mistris in col∣ler, by preferring a just complaint unto her, and pro∣testeth that hee will never more complaine, since hee seeth he cannot complaine, without giving her offence. Epistle 13. Madam, I Were not a man, if I had not passions, nor a Gascoine, were I not violent, nor could I be a∣morous, were I not furious. But that these con∣ditions are so eminent in me, that they have ever appeared to the prejudice of that respect, that subjection, or that obedience which I owe you; I most humbly intreat you Madam, be you your selfe the judge, and do not as yesternight ye did, when desiring with all the humility, and submis∣sion a slave owes to his Lord, but to lament a just resentment; you caused me feele the effect of such wrath as I nere merited, after the depri∣ving me of an entertainment promised. For you alone both pleaded, and adjudged the cause, with such precipitation, not at all hearkning to me, that I had more haste to obey you, without re∣ply, then by reasons to defend my selfe, though it were most evident on my side, and that your award was not onely unjust, but likewise injuri∣ous. But Madam, I begge yet of you, though it were yesterday forbidden mee to speake, it may
be permitted this day to write, and that you will receive this complaint, as the last I hope ever to preferre. For since I cannot complaine without offending you, I shall rather chuse to undergoe all the rigours in the world, then once to com∣plaine of any one. You are Madam so just, as you never give cause of complaint to man, and if any one do of himselfe offer it, you returne him such satisfaction, as a man much injured, could not but be well contented. There is none but mee onely destinate to suffer, not alone hopelesse of satisfaction, but more, most ascertained to bee checked and curbed for all sorts of occasions, and for all sorts of people, which I should embrace yet as a fauour, if no other but your selfe might take advantages thereby. But you haue entitled mee unto the place that does give way to all the world, and forceth me give you away to others, for whom I should most gladly give my life. If instead of those whole daies you say you will af∣ford mee, you would vouchsafe mee onely but one houre, to accept the adue you have comman∣ded me to come and render you, it would be ea∣sie for me to justifie this truth. If not, then must I beare it away within my breast, together with an eternal sorrow to have most innocently offen∣ded you.
The Answere. Sir, HAd I words so sufficient, as I had yesterday cause to be in coller, I should inforce you to confesse that you are in an error, to take it ill at my hands. And if you please to be at the paine to to come hither, I shall not forbeare to tell you, what I thinke therein, and assure you that I am your Servant. The Argument. Hee endeavours to maintaine a wager hee had pro∣pounded to have lay'd, that he would write no more to her, and begs pardon, that hee doth not aske her par∣don for it. Epistle 14. Madam, YEsterday upon the assault of my first motions, I offer'd to have laid a wager with you, of which having better considered, I find that I had reason to have done it, and that you were in an error to take offence at it, for what can I more in writing present you with, which I have not al∣readie sent, and said unto you? And if all that I have said, and all that ever I can say, will not yet
encline you at all to pitty, to what purpose should I trouble my selfe in a labour, that is not onely bootlesse unto me, but likewise hurtfull? For is it not true, that they are so many firebrands, to incense those flames, wherewith I am alreadie most miserably burned? And if I must not hope for any ease therin; why would you that I should againe enkindle them? If the most perfect love of the world, the most extreame fidelity, the dis∣creetest modesty, and most stedfast constancie that ever was; if all these together so often tried, and so many times approved by your selfe, have not power to leave the least impression in your breast, but that on the contrary, my complaints have served meerely for your sport, and pastime; why should I obstinately continue to lament me of an ill, which you have told me, and my perse∣verance lets me see, is altogether helplesse. In a word Madam, why are you pleased that I should ever aske you that, which you will never grant me? Would you not thinke a man extreamly cruell, that should put his enemie to death, that had beg'd life at his hands? Yet am not I your e∣nemy, and yet you use me in this manner, I and worse, for you do take offence both when I aske, and when I do not aske; But Madam, I have so perfectly conceived the greatnesse of your de∣merits, and finde my words so meane, in com∣parison of this conceit, as the despaire to attaine it onely, is a sufficient cause to make me hold my peace, and religiously adore in silence, what I cannot in my discourses, honour but imper∣fectly
Here is the great offence I did you yester∣day; Madam, I most humbly intreate you par∣don me that I aske you not your pardon for it. The Argument. After his Mistris departure, he comforteth her in her afflictions, by the example of his own adversities. Epistle 15. Madam, AFter having bid adue, and followed you with both my eyes, so farre as the way you held would give me leave, I returned to go visit those pledges you left here behind you in the Citty, where the sorrow not to see you with them, re∣new'd those griefes I had for your departure; And sending my man thither to day, Mistris N. let mee know, that shee would write unto you, which hath invited mee to doe the like. I can assure you Madam, if it be a consolation to the afflicted, to have companions in misery, you have great cause to comfort you in your sorrowes, by the example of mine; which really are the most sensible I ever yet have felt. You have not wept alone, you have taught me the mysterie, and a mysterie that hath been altogether unknowne to me ere since I knew my selfe. I most humbly in∣treat you that my sorrowes may mitigate yours; that now at need you make use of your constan∣cie, and fit your heart to beare all accidents that
can arrive, and if so be the pitty of your selfe cannot yet apt you to it, let it for your Children order you therein. They fare here much better then you, and weepe much lesse then him that now blotteth his paper with his teares. Adue my faire and deare Minerva, I am afraid to be sur∣prized in this exercise; And finde no words that can expresse how much I am yours. The Argument. An Epistle of a Lady, to a faithlesse Lover. Epistle 16. SInce that I must write to one that answers not my Letters, take it not in favour of you, it is not to you, but to this paper I will tell my thoughts, and hereon so disburthen me of them, as I will never more have them in minde, but to detest their Causer. You have not deceive mee, for I long since foresawe my goodnesse unable to render you better then nature made you. Yet I accuse you not; for being so light and wavering as you are, what could you likelier follow then the motions of your owne lightnesse. No I com∣plaine of my selfe, that have shut my eyes upon your actions, the better to give care unto your words, and beleeved rather in your fained per∣swasions, then in the true knowledge I had of your humor. If yet you did but tell me the cause of this your infidelity, and not being able to find
a just occasion, you tooke the paine but to search a pretence that were coloured with some false apparance, I would herein excuse you, against my selfe and seeking some reason for your fault, should my selfe put up the wrong thereof, to ab∣solve you. But to talke to mee of a servant that never sees mee, is an excuse worse then the of∣fence, of which though you may well avoid the displeasure, you can never be able to wipe away the sorrow. This then is my comfort, that you have no other reason for your change, then your own inconstancie. And if so that I have not tyes enough to stay you, yet have I resolution enough to let you go; and have as much patience in your losse, as I had contentment in your possession. Go on then, adde to the honour your couragious heart propounds to you to seeke from farre, the triumph to have unthankfully acknowledged my affections. But send mee my Letters, for that I will not that you carry any thing of mine along with you, but the remembrance to have lost my good will, and the despaire of being ever able to recover it. Adue.
The Argument. He justifieth his silence. Epistle 17. Madam, YOu have staied a long while to reproach me of my silence. You have not showne so much patience to heare me speake, as you have manife∣sted to see me forbeare. Yet must I take this for a testimony of the esteeme you have of me, for which I stand so much obliged, as I never shall be able to acquit me. See here how admirable you are in your perswasions. Had I wrote to all such friends, as I may have in Picardy, and yet had forborne to write to you onely, you then had had some cause for your reproaches, and conse∣quently I had erred in my silence; But I have not wrote to any one, where you have writen to all such as you know hereabouts, not forgetting any one, but me onely; You are too blame then, for not having writ to me, as well as others, and af∣terwards upbraiding me for not having wrote to you. But I cannot write to you without complai∣ning, and I chuse rather to be silent, then to im∣portune you with a bootlesse complaint, whence I should have hoped as little satisfaction, as I have had by these alreadie made. Here is the true cause of my forbearance, and not that I have bet∣ter exercises then those that busie me in the enter∣tainment
of so deare thoughts as I have of you. What I have done since I had the honour to see you, hath been to so little purpose, as it is impos∣sible here to set it downe, had I not once beene resolved for Comprigne to have seen you, but that I doubted of finding youthere, for that I was told you were gone to Paris, whither I am now re∣turned to remaine ever yours. The Argument. He dares not see his Mistris. Epistle 18. I Sent you that you desired, and I crave your pardon that I brought it not my selfe, for feare of that amorous contagion, wherewith you strike all such as aproach you. Knew you with what griefe of heart I endeavour to keepe away, you would have pitty of my life, which I had much rather loose for your love, then intreate you to preserve to the prejudice of that you have for an other. Having oft heard say that it is one of the finest subtilties of the world, freely to doe that which a man should of force have been cōstraind unto. See here the cause why I endeavour to ren∣der me my selfe; to be able yet once againe to give me back to you. Howsoever I hope nothing lesse then ever to see you mine as I am yours.
The Argument. He complaines of his Mistresse absence, and of those would hinder him from seeing her. Epistle 19. THere is no longer meanes of living absent from my life, since you are not with me, I am no more my selfe. I may be forbidden the seeing you, but never the loving you, or if they will for∣bid, yet can they never hinder me, such as owe me most good will, do testifie the least unto me, and that by reason of my affection. But I chuse rather to be little obedient to them, to be the more faithfull to you. Live you then in this assu∣rance, if so you will not that I die; and become assured likewise that my life shall sooner be ex∣tinct, then that faire flame that daily does con∣sume it. The Argument. He comforteth a Lady upon some displeasures shee had received. Epistle 20. Madame, I Received the notice you gave me of your re∣membrance, with as much contentment to find
me hold any place in your memory, as sorrow for not being able to merit the same in my servi∣ces. It is your extreame curtesie Madame, makes you say that you are indebted to mine. For the good will I have to serve you, hath hitherto been to no purpose. And had the effect equalled my good will, I had been more then gratified for it by the remembrance you have of me; howsoever I can never render you so many services, but I must still owe you more. The end and middle of your Letter testifie some sence of trouble you have been put to, which I will intreat you loose, for as much as it serves not but to augment them. If so you have had irrepaireable losses, it is lost time to thinke of them; and if they be to be hel∣ped, it were fit to bethink you of meanes to re∣dresse them, and to that end to endeavour what∣soever may be done; and if nothing can, to com∣fort your selfe that it hath not been your fault, that you have therein done what could be possi∣ble, that you are not obliged to doe more, nor justly to grieve your selfe for accients you can∣not avoid. Here be the remedies that I often pra∣ctise on my selfe continually, since I first knew me, wrastling beneath so injurious a fortune, as the most miserable may finde wherewith to com∣fort themselves, in the contemplating me. But I am estrayed Madame, and forget that I increase the number of your troubles by the length of this my Letter, which may witnesse for me if you please, that the desire I have to live, is not so deare to me, as that I have to preserve me yours.
The Argument. He answereth to a Letter of Minerva's. Epistle 21. YOur note enforceth me to avow it, that you have a better memory on my behalfe, then heretofore you have had acknowledgement; and that you doe something acquit you of what you owe me, if so you can pay all my love with one bare remembrance; I finde also that you have cause to beare me in minde, for if so be I have not rendred you the service, the memory whereof may be deare unto you, at the least I have given you no offence, that ought to render you ill a∣paid. As for me I have a thousand reasons that oblige me to cherish yours, but one onely for∣bids me, which is that I cannot remember me of you, without passion, and to suffer a mans selfe to become passionate, for a thing cannot be had, is but a folly. I have of late pretended to wisedome, and have believed my selfe but ill favouredly therein, as you may thinke, notwithstanding which, if so I cannot attain to it, I will at least seeme to have done it, and begin by the forget∣ting of my passions, and of her that was the cause of them; it is true that it is but an ill way this, to begin to forget my love by renewing the memo∣ry thereof, and indeed of what should I ever re∣member me after once having forgotten you?
The Argument. A Ladies answere to her Lover. Epistle 22. THe care which you have to preserve my me∣mory, and the passion you feele for my ab∣sence, to my thinking, are lesse then the meanes you have to expresse them, notwithstanding I va∣lue them so, as I am not much displeased to see the new assurances you give me of your affecti∣ons, which are not over-pleasing unto me, though I were well satisfied with the former. The fairest proofes and most desired effects you can give me of your good will, consists in your return: I ima∣gine not that you have cast the affection behinde you, that you had for me, but contrariwise I deeme that you ever laid it amongst the most eminent of your best thoughts, aud that like e∣nough you may draw your cres after you, but cannot breake them. As to the cape you have made without my leave, I attribute it to your af∣faires, never having any designe that tended to the diverting you from them; if I render you beautifull thoughts, it is not in such abundance, but I alwaies reserve some to my selfe, for the en∣tertainment of my solitude in your absence, you say that you resolve to attend my answer at Brux▪elles, and I am resolved to write to you thither by
an expresse messenger, if so your comming doe not prevent me. Adue, I am your servant. The Argument. Hee makes answer to a complaint she had made of him▪ for his silence, and not writing. Epistle 23. Madame, ONe chanced to deliver me a note, which by the hand and the stile I knew to be yours. I confesse to you Madame, that I scarse understood any thing in it, and that as I have no cause to be∣leeve, that my good wishes are any thing valued by you, so have you yet lesse, to say that you cannot consent to the losse of them. You thinke not that such as love not, but in presence, know well how to love. I know not wherefore you say that Madame, to one that both in your presence, and in your absence, hath testified so much love unto you, and one that therein hath been so ill re∣quited, as you cannot renew the memory of his affection, without refreshing that of your owne ingratitude. You continue to write to me almost against your will. Indeed I cannot deny but in that you doe me a favour, which I hold extream∣ly deare, but with it you ought to avow, that my affections do merit a greater, and that for every word, that you have wrote to me, you have re∣ceived
many Letters from me, from any of which, I cannot thinke that you can draw argu∣ment to prove, that I desire not the continuation of yours. And to demand that I should cleer your scruples thereupon, is it not, to demand new proofes of a passion which you cannot be igno∣rant of, without belying your own experience? you say that should be much contrary to your de∣sire; so sure should it be to mine that hath never tended but to honour you (though to no purpose) and that cannot yet repent the time therein lost. Thus would I entreat you to write to me, answe∣ring my Letters, as I reply to yours, and arguing with me reasonably, without framing to your selfe such chimera's, as have not for support, but your own phantasie. You will be thereby more satisfied, and I more contented, since my content∣ment depends on your satisfaction. I am not in the meane time your servant, but I shall alwaies be so, whilest it shall please God and you to let me live. The Argument. Vpon some discontent a little before his departure. Epistle 24. Madame, IF so be this paper be not as unwelcome to you, as my selfe, I intreate you here peruse a word
or two which my extreame dolors hinder me to come and tell you. I nurse sufficient ills in my de∣spaire, without the need to have had them more exasperated by the interdiction of your speech, and of your sight. Yet nerethelesse are any of them so cruell, but I would rather undergo them still without complaint, then be displeasing unto you. No Madame, I am sufficiently possessed of my affections, but not so much to the prejudice of my obedience, that they shall ever give you cause to tearme your selfe a miserable one. I know not what you thinke; but I wish no part in heaven, if there be any manner of misfortune up∣on earth, I would not undergoe, to render you in happy state thereby. Adue, I goe to breath forth my afflictions, in some place, whereas my worst of sufferings never shall offend the due respect I owe to you, and which I ever shall preserve to you even in my own losse. The Answer. 25. YOu have made an ill construction of my in∣tentions, if so be you thinke that I desire to banish you my sight, since yours have ever been too deare to me, to value it now no better. And you shall much offend me if you doe not bid adue by word of mouth. When you shall enter into your selfe, you will I assure me confesse, that you are in an errour, & that all such things as you ac∣cuse me of, are the furthest may be from any de∣sign of mine.
The Reply. 26. IF I have ill interpreted your intentions, you may blame your selfe, that have alwaies hidden them in words so mysticall, as I have been unable ere to penetrate. I well might thinke you interdi∣cted me your speech and sight, when I perceived that you would neither see nor yet give care unto me. And that hath caused me to resolve to bid a∣due by Letter, not to offend you, but to avoyd your offence, and to punish my selfe for the sinne I have committed in loving you too perfectly. But since you let me know that I should give you offence, if so I should not come, to present it you by word of mouth, I shall collect whatsoever re∣maines to me of life, to come and tender you that word, the sole and onely thought whereof is kil∣ling. I beleeve I shall confesse me in an error, if once I doe re-enter in my selfe, for really I think not therein ever to re-enter. Yet am I not so be∣sides my selfe, that I shall ever forget me so as to accuse you of any thing; no it is I, that I accuse of all the ills I undergoe, and I, the man that doth impute them still to my misfortunes and my ill deserts.
THe next Epistle he wrote unto her, is the last mentioned in the story, where wee leave him departed for the Army, from whence having sent her sixe or seven severall Letters before he re∣ceived one backe, being returned to Paris, hee wrote the following Epistles, which may give much light to the Reader, of the argument of the second part, that was neer finished, but could not wholly, for that, what the Author intended otherwise (as may be thought) fill out an unhappy trage∣dy signed with his owne lives bloud, after he had foure or five times victoriously re∣turned out of the field, on severall appeals, honoured with the better on his enemies, by whom he was unfortunately murthe∣red, neer the bed-side of this Lady.
The Argument. Being returned to Paris, he found that his Mistresse had harkened to some ill reports of him, whereof hee complaineth, and for that she had taken from him such houres of visitation, as he had hardly acquired to give them to another. The first occasion of breach betweene them. Epistle 27. YEt ought I not to die, without so much as one word speaking, nor see my selfe condemned in a cause so just, without defending me at all. I had thought to have smothered my complaints in silence of my death. But the griefes are too too smarting, and the injustice you accuse them of, oblige me to defend them. Madame, when I re∣member me of my departure, of my absence, and of my return, and do consider that in all the three, I have not cone any thing, but still adore and worship you amid the most affrightfull and the hazardfullest divertisements could be; and that in recompence of this, and of an infinite of love, which I have testified to you, you in the instant, and almost on the first day of my arrivall, picked a quarrell with me, upon pretence as false, as my affections are most true, and as remote from my deportments, as two extreames can be the one from the other. When I call to minde that you have too forbidden me the honour of your enter∣tainment,
and of visiting you at the houres, which I acquired by such, and so many cares, and which you now have taken away from me, to give them to the jealousie of a watchfull spie, that day and night orelooketh, and controules your carriage, and continually besiegeth your person. When I see the importunity of his tyrannie unworthily prefer'd the merit of my services; and that there is not that troublesome, or pratling gossip, that doth not importunely approach your eare, and enter∣taine you three or foure houres without the least offence; where I am onely he to whom minutes, I and moments still are interdicted, being forced to passe whole daies entire at home with you, to attend the opportunitie to speake one word, and notwithstanding after this, to goe my waies una∣ble once to doe it. It is impossible such bitternes succeeding such sweetes I promised me, and which you caused mee hope on my returne, can be digested and past ore without complaints In one thing it may be Madam, I have failed indeed, I meane in that I have dared before you, ere to sigh them forth, to whom no sort of plaint as yet was ever just. So have you accused them of in∣justice, and wrote to me that you have not loved the possession of my amity, but to cōsent unto the losse of it; which is a strange conceit, and I dare say not yours for you have too much judgment, ere to love a thing unto no end▪ without it be to loose it. For me, right well you may loose mee, even when you please, ther's nought so certaine, Madam, and I shall readily serve you therein a∣gainst
my selfe: But for my love, you never can, and if I would, I have sworne to you that it shall abide eternally. And once againe I promise you it shall: but never importune, or with such tyran∣nie as doth extend unto the deprivation of your libertie; But on the contrary, I never shall pre∣tend once to stretch mine, but to depend alwaies & absolutely on yours. Here is what I had wrote when your man gave mee your Letters. After dinner I shall tell you more if so you please. The Argument. Vpon that shee had answered to his former Letter, how she was inforced to her griefe, to suffer anpleasing company, and that she was sorry she could not admit of his entertainment, as she would. He returnes that the party whom shee fained her to be unable to be rid of, was rather commanded to stay, purposly to keepe him off. And that he needed not his assistance in such case, knowing well that she might absolutely command, and forbid him what she pleased, in full assurance to bee o∣beyed. Epistle 38. INdeed Madam I apprehend you freer of your elbowes then of your heart, as we say, and that the party you faine ye unable to keepe off, is ra∣ther commanded to stay with you, purposely to keepe me away, and by his presence to deprive me of that, which otherwise you cannot deny to
the justnesse of my desires: For how should it possibly be, but having so good a wit, a judgment so excellent as you have, and both accompanied with so sublime a spirit, you should give such power over your selfe unto a man that is nothing to you, so as he should not give you leave to dis∣pose of one poore houre, that I have any time this month begg'd at your hands; if you had not expresly bid him so to doe? And what indignity were it, that he upon pretence of service, and af∣fection, should so possesse him of your estate, and of the libertie of your person, that not so much as a breathing time should be free to you? And if that it be so Madam, you little need the use of his assistance, you know sufficiently by former expe∣rience, that my will is no way moved, but by the spring that orders yours; of which the least de∣monstration you may please to make mee, shall be my fate. You may absolutly command, and forbid me what you please, in all assurance of be∣ing obeyed, I, were I most certaine of death in the performance. Yet have I taken an ill course, since that which is refused to my submission, and obedience, is borne away by a strong hand, or at least cōstrained to render it selfe to importunity. But if you do not deceive me, but are really besie∣ged against your will; whence comes it that you have such power in me as to command me go or stay, just as you please, and that you have no li∣bertie to take a moment from another, to gratifie me? Is it not that it is onely I, that feare you, and that you feare all others? Is it not that you love
their importunities, better then my discretion? and that you will be troubled, and not served? So had it beene better for mee to have done as o∣thers; for by the meanes of tormenting you like them, I had possessed your entertainment as they have done, or they had beene dispossessed there∣of as I have beene, and the disgrace had not ex∣ceeded the demerit of the action. Notwithstan∣ding Madam, I shall never repent mee to have serv'd well, I had rather been punished for well doing, then noted for ill: But I most humbly intreate your pardon, if so I cannot brooke this passion sans complaint, nor loose my time, my understanding, and my selfe, for you, with∣out ere sorrowing for it. I have tould you oft, that you might render mee the happiest, or most miserable amongst men. But you can never ren∣der me what you may make me loose. The Argument. He complaines of the languishing he suffers in her absence, and entreates her presence of her, as the onely thing sufficiently able, to chase her image from his thoughts. Epistle 29. Madam, I Thought by the request I made unto you ye∣sterday, to have given some bound and order to the confusion of my thoughts; but I have done
nothing but multiply my owne impatiencies; I am mortally wounded in the imaginative, nor is my griefe lesse certaine, for being imaginary, you cannot conceive, nor I expresse, the havock your image hath made in mee, since yesternight; It hath not failed to persecute and follow me unto, but past the Altar, respecting nought the sanctity and freedome of the Church, as if it would with∣stand and hinder mee from worshipping of o∣ther deitie then yours. Beauteous Minerva, have pirtie on so many languishings which I doe che∣rish, and doe amorously embrace for love of you, that are the cause of them; Afford mee your pre∣sence, that onely hath the power to chase your i∣mage from my thoughts; And if in opening a vaine this morne, you have lost bloud, If so you please, command that I replace therein of mine. The Argument. Hee begs of God, hee will inspire him with words of force to make her more favourable. And he complains, that hee had beene made to attend all the day for an Answere. Epistle 30. I Begge of God he will inspire mee with words that may be pleasing unto you, and that I may foresee the meanes to encline your heart to mee, and to perswade you to become more favourable. I lately wrote a word or two unto you, and I
have attended your answer all this day; Have I done you the offence, that hinders you to write? No, you pay not back with silence, those offences you beleeve that you receive from me. And if I have done none, why hold you me in the uncer∣taintie of this expectance? I shall trouble you yet more to complaine of this. I were better bid you good day, and be silent. The Argument. She answers to his precedent Letter, that she knowes not what to say or send word of, and complaines much of the importunity of those that visit her. Epistle 31. I Cannot tell what to say or send you word of, not knowing at what houre I may see you: Ne∣ver was woman in the world so importuned as I am, or rather Assassinde. I have not leisure so much as to write, be it never so little; Neverthe∣lesse I shall afford you some houre after dinner, or else it shall not be in my power, Lament I be∣seech you, and beleeve me your servant.
The Argument. He replies, that if she knowes not what to say or send him word of, hee knowes lesse what to doe. Epistle 32. IF so you know not what to say or send me word of, I yet know lesse what to doe, being much more grievously assassined by my dolours, then you can be by your importunities. Notwithstan∣ding if what you say be true, I lament you, if not, I am the man the most to be lamented under hea∣ven. You might disabuse me in one word, and as I shall beleeve what you say to mee; I shall like∣wise doe whatsoever you command me. I am af∣fraid you will cause me spend this day as others. Patience is a vertue. I cannot chuse but obey you, and attend my life as your favour and grace. The Argument. Hee praies her not to loose her peace of minde in the affaires, wherein she is busied. And so fals in discourse of his passions, and sufferings for her love. Epistle 33. BEauteous Minerva; Accept if so you please, the good morrowes wherwith I present you, together with this advise, not to loose the traqui∣litie of minde you owe your selfe, in such affaires
as you are now agitated with. Alas! I trouble and torment me on your behalfe, and for your occa∣sions, and have no care or thought that I can pos∣sibly withdraw from yours, to apply them to my owne. Madam, I say not this to witnesse my af∣fections, you see them better in my silence, then in any discourse of the world, they can be mani∣fest. For all my words, and all my actions too, being bootlesse still to mee; finding my selfe re∣duced to all extreamitie, you pittilesse, and resol∣ved to see mee die, most carelesse of my ill, or of my remedie: what should I hope from any thing I possibly can say? Besides I know well this that I say now, is from the matter quite, and that you, finding your selfe ingaged in thinges that more concerne you, will now, or not regard them them ought, or else but slightly stay on them, as you were wont to doe. And how can I beleeve that this same Letter here should neerer touch ye yet, then all the passions you have seene me vent, and all the assertain'd dolours you have knowne me undergoe, even with as little sence, and lesse compassion of my ill, then if you had seene mee suffer for another one. So as if for a rare and sin∣gular proofe of my affection, you wished to see the mad discourse of one distract, and reasonlesse, this same is it. Yet Madam, is there found a kind of ease in the complaint of things remedilesse, and some manner of consolation in the relating of mishaps, which certaine ought to be permitted to the miserable, like my selfe, and which yet I will not stretch so farre, as to the importuning
you, but rather chuse to burn and hold my pece, as hoping in your helpe more from your pitty, then my own complaints▪ Good day Minerva, faire one, once more good day, and againe once more good day: permit I here doe give good morrow to my Lady your mother too, together with the antiquity of theeves, which I did pro∣mise her. But tis to you indeed I ought to have presented it, as to the greatest thiefe on earth▪ For if they be the greatest theeves that make the greatest thefts, what greater robber can there be, then one that steales away our hearts? The Argument. She answers, that if he knew how much she partakes in his sufferings, hee would rather lament her then himselfe, and that no one should ever esteem better of his merits, nor so cherish his affections, as her selfe. Epistle 34. IF you knew how much I partake in your suffe∣rings, and how often I wish some meanes in my power to remedy them, you would rather lament me then your selfe; no one shall ever esteem bet∣ter of your merits then I, nor more cherish your affections then I doe; if so I could assure you of this truth by effects worthy you and my own de∣sires, I should not now make use of these misbe∣comming words, which nerethelesse I intreat you to accept, for that they come from her that ho∣nours you the most.
The Argument. Hee saith that it is impossible he should undoe him from the thoughts, that have undone him. Represents to himselfe the time he hath lost, in serving her, what she hath taken from him, and what she hath yet left him. And concludes, that it is high time, that he retire all naked as he is, to some desart, whither her image shall not be able to pursue him further. But that all this discourse vanisheth on her presence. Epistle 35. IT is impossible I should ever undoe me from those thoughts have utterly undone me. You are with me as Hellen with the Trojans. So oft as they in absence did consult on her affaires, they concluded that they would discharge themselves of her: but if so be that she were present, then they did resolve they would retaine her yet. So when I call to minde the many years, that I have spent in serving you, where seeking to obtaine you, I have lost my selfe, there is no reason but doth counsell me to put you off. But what! I have lost all care of my affaires, the repose of my minde, the health of my body, the pleasure of life, and the remembrance of my selfe. You have taken from me my memory, understanding, and will, and have not left me my life, but to prolong my torments, or for the pleasure that you draw from them, or for the glory; since you receive
such honours yet therein, as are not rendred un∣to any other one. Is it not time all naked as I am left, I seek to save me in some desart place, where your pursuing image nere can finde me out: but this discourse doth vanish all, if once I come in sight of you; and I in stead of my supporting it, become as one that dumbly playes the Amorous, demanding straight your pardon to have had the thought; orecome, not by your reasons, but your beauties: And in your absence is it yet much worse; I weep not, no my dolours were full light if I could heale them with my teares: I dye in passion not to be beleeved, whilest you do cause, and yet doe sleep secure and carelesse of my ill. I was yesterday to have seen some Ladies, to have diverted me, intending to have spoke to them of love, as unto them indeed I did, but it was still of yours, or rather indeed of mine. Pressed thereup∣on to name the cause from whence my sighing did proceed, I told them there, I sighed not for a woman, but a deity. My goddesse, then adue, re∣ceive part of the sighes you cause, which bring you a good morrow, and know the King departs on Monday without faile. I am to goe this mor∣ning into many places, whither I shall not carry other then my body, howsoever I have much to doe with the best gifts of my soule. Of which if so that you be asked the newes, say boldly, that it dwels with yours, in Flying-heart street. I his suf∣ficeth not, I must adde that you have lost one half of my Letters which I intreat you to look out.
Argument. He complaines that they would debar his visits on the passion weeke, and that it was not a generall rule: but his greatest griefe was, to leave her in the hands of her enemies, whose drifts he discovereth to her, and offers himselfe to undertake them. Epistle 36. Madam, NOt seeing you yesterday at Church, accor∣ding to that you have told me, I judged you were retained at home by some unhappy discon∣tent; but I was ignorant of meanes to inform my selfe thereof; for to have sent to you, it was at such an houre as you had not dared to have retur∣ned me answer, and for to have had me come un∣to you much lesse: I too, remembred me of what you said, concerning visits on these daies, of which I think full well, and should much better yet, were it a generall rule for all, and not a par∣ticular exception for me onely. But if it were not amisse as yesterday, it is yet good to day, and to morrow better, and I being to depart on Mon∣day, shall consequently goe without the honour to see you, for whom I not onely am and stay here, but for whom onely I live, which is not the greatest of my unhappinesse, though it be ex∣treame, since having alwaies placed your pleasure
above my owne, I easily can resolve of any thing contenting unto you; but my misfortunes being to me a much lesse burthen then are yours, it is the greatest sorrow I can have, to leave you in your enemies hands, from whence it seemes you have no will to free your selfe, and from whence my minde foregives me, that you will not part, but by the light of some debate. Madame, to say truth, it is not for me to talke of this: for as it is fatall to me to foretell you verities, it also seems that you are destinate not once to credit them, and that you have no faith nor cares, that you can lend to any one, but such as will deceive you. By so much the more as you are good, and generous, by so much are you subject to deceit, since gene∣rosity is alwaies opposite unto distrust. Who doth no ill, suspecteth none, and one that doth not thinke ere to deceive a friend, beneath the shadow of affection, cannot beleeve that in an other, they cannot once conceive in themselves. But feele you not the effects of some designes, that you have never seene? doe you not see, that they have got possession of your goods, and of your liberty, and that under a pretence of serving you, they doe but tyrannize? But though it be a marvell, I should herein confine me to so little speech, having such reason to extend me in so sensible a cause, for all this I wish not that my passion Madame, should yet render me importu∣nate; but on the contrary I most humbly crave you will pardon me, if the sorrow to know you in these displeasures, and the feare to see you fall
in others yet more great, have made me hazard the displeasing you. It is no part of my designe, no rather may I dye then once to think it. You know how much I honour you. I wish no other witnesse of the affection I beare you, then your selfe. Beleeve then, it is that which makes me speake, and that I looke upon all other things, sans interest. Here then, accuse me not of hu∣mour, and of phantasie, upon mine honour there is none, if you call not humour and fancie an ex∣treame passion to doe you faithfull service, for which there is no desire of honour, nor necessity of businesse, that I'le not quit, nor man upon the earth I would not undertake, and he by so much the more heartily then others, as he does under∣take concerning you, and does not onely marre the good of your affaires, but more the beauty of your daies, in shadow of obliging you. Yet par∣don me that I doe take offence at the ill is doneto you. I cannot chuse but doe it, being so intirely yours, as that you have not any thing so proper∣ly belonging to you as my selfe. And after having pardoned me, give leave I bid you here farewell.
The Argument. Having fought this morning upon the occasion spo∣ken of in the former Letter, and having astonisht his Mistresse, by the recitall of so unlooked for an action, he writes to her that her astonishment caused him to judge that she hoped some better end, or feared a worse. And shewes that neither the one, nor the other, could be. Epistle 37. Madame, THe astonishment wherein I saw you o're∣whelmed at the recitall of an action, wholly advantagious, as well for you as me, and where∣unto I did not bring lesse consideration, for any thing might have regard to you, then ought that might concern my honour or my life, hath put me in care for what you undergoe, and caused me judge, or that you hoped of a better successe therein, or feared a worse. To hope a better Ma∣dame, it could never be, that one should render satisfaction in the field more happily then I have done, unto a man so offended in his honour, with∣out the least submission made, or any hurt recei∣ved; and for to feare a worse, I cannot thinke he hath received so much content therein, as that he covets much to come more there. And to what purpose were it indeed to returne to the place from whence we of our selvesretired without the
least obligement from another one? For me, I am well pleased to have rendred him the satisfa∣ction, he did desire to see me with my sword in hand, and he hath seen me; but he hath not let me see, that he understood so well the maximes of honour as by his chartell he did promise me, since he did let me part from him without infor∣cing of the satisfaction, which he did pretend un∣to. See here the cause by which he most impor∣tunes me, to speake no more of this our combate, then I have done therein. For me, Madame, I am not so ill versed in the mystery, but I know well it will be said, we had no great desire to hurt our selves, and that these sacrifices ever are by so much the lesse honourable, as they are little blou∣dy: but it was to preserve my honour, and not to atchieve thereof, from him that I came there, I have acquired enough in hotter places farre, and as I doe not feare the faces or the swords of all of any enemy; I likewise not desire to reduce them unto such despaires, as make them undertake more then their courage could. He was offended, and he hath done nothing that I know, but beare away the sad repentance of his own offence, and left with me the pleasure of it. Good day my god∣desse, send me back my man, to the intent he may direct me where you please.
The Argument. He complaines that she had judged amisse of a good action. Saith that hee beleev'd that shee had seene the man of whom hee spake, and got from him the confes∣sion shee desired. How conformable which was to his words, hee should finde when she should fulfill hers. And that hee nere should rest, till hee had made him avow the truth. Epistle 38. Madam, IF so I caused your astonishment this morning, by the discourse I had with you, you have now after dinner render'd me againe sufficiently ama∣zed at your judgement, and opinion thereof. I am become so much dismaid to see you doubt the verity of my words, and blame my carriage, as that there cannot bee that fault, wherof I deeme my selfe not guilty. I was this morning much sa∣tisfied in my proceedings, and it seemed to mee I had done well inso easily rendring him content, that was so much displeased. But your opinion Madam, quite perverteth my whole sence; And as I rather do beleeve in what you say, then what I doe my selfe, I now conceit whatsoever I did think wel done before, most ill, for that you judge it so. And the worst of all is, that as on the one side you absolutely forbid me to doe better, so on the other, you most openly inforce mee thereunto.
And if you knew how much I suffer in this thought, and how much I esteeme me miserable in that sufferance, to loose the blisse of your pre∣sence, for having but too carefully endeavoured it, you then should have the most mercilesse heart that ever was, if so you had not pitty of my life. But Madam, I beleeve you have seene the man of whom I speake, and got from him the confes∣sion you so much desired. I know right well, you will not tell me so: for you are forbidden to re∣veale it; but I shall finde, if so it be conformable unto my words, when you accomplish yours, that promised mee nere more to make esteeme of his friendship; and in such case I demand not but the continuance of yours. But by the esteeme that you shall henceforth make of him, I shall per∣ceive or that you are no woman of your word, or else that he hath disavowed of mine. I assure you Madam, I shall never rest untill I have inforced him to avow the truth of what I have said; And doe assure you yet once more, that you shall not againe blame me for having done too little. Adue Madam, impart yet of your hand to him who you doe utterly debarre your sight.
The Argument. He saith that he hath something to say to her, which he had not yet sayd, for that whatsoever hee premedi∣tateth to tell her in absence, flies his memory when she is present. Represents to her his languishings and the put offs, wherewith shee had from time to time protra∣cted him, yet without complaint, for that loving her with an extraordinary affection, hee was well pleased to testifie it by respects in common. Epistle 39. I Had a large discourse in my head this morning, which certainly I should not yet have delivered you; for whatsoever in your absence I premedi∣tate to say unto you, vanisheth still in your pre∣sence like shadowes before the Sunne: But what∣soever I have said to you before, I found mee greatly disburthened to see you, and to heare you speake with such freedome as yesterday you did, and by so much the more as I hoped it was with little divertisement, and much leisure: but the e∣vent did no way answer to my hopes, since in place of a daie more favourable then I had pro∣pounded to my selfe, I approv'd it yet a hundreth times worse, more tedious, and unhappie. After having attended you from ten of the clocke this morning, untill twelue, your man comes to tell mee that you cannot come, but that after dinner I shall heare from you, with advertisement that
you were still extreamly busied. To night retur∣ning from walking those fancies which you have so much blamed me for, I found Poliarque be∣fore your doore, who intreated mee to come in, as if it had been his house. I most humbly thankt him for his kinde offers, and hee perceiving that I did not accept them, at last asked me if I would not enter, to which I answered, that there was no∣thing in the world which I would more willing∣ly, nor any thing likewise which I durst lesse. He marvailed at this, And I doe marvaile at it like∣wise, well knowing that the continuance onely of my acquaintance, did give me better accesse to you, then hee could proffer mee: Neverthelesse Madam, I tell you this without any kind of com∣plaint; for loving you as I doe with a more then ordnarie affection, I am well pleased to testifie it by respects incommune. I would onely that they did cause you see, that they are such which ought to be invited, who you with ease may rid you off, and not those men, of whom one knows not how to be freed, for feare they doe not render you like to that wife that was faine to be enforced, and torne from out the armes of her lovers. But see here if I be not estrai'd from the discourse I said I had to make to you, and if I should not mightily have erred before you, that have upon my paper so let my selfe be carried away, in thoughts so much estranged to the subject of my intentions? which was here to have cleered such difficulties as you have propounded to me, since I could not doe it by word of mouth, and you see
on what I am fallen. I hope well, it needes not neither, that this suit should be legally tried by forme in writing, you will not alwaies be so bu∣sied, and inexorable, but you will give me some time of audience to plead my cause; were I but so assured of your favour, as of your justice, I am sure I should not doubt of a good issue, which nerethelesse I expect more of your grace then its demerits. The Argument. He persisteth still in the discourse of his languishings, and some others which hee framed in walking alone a long the Seine. At last hee concludes absence, for ab∣sence, it were more supportable, farre off then neer, and that the more he deferreth, the more he draweth out in length the violence of his torments and vexations. Epistle 40. IF the afternoone were yesterday tedious, this morning hath seemed againe to me an age. I had sufficient leisure to heare masse at little Saint Augustines, and after that to walke as farre as The good mens, in which walke I have beene agitated with such variety of imaginations as now I can∣not say. I had no other company but one servant though somewhat too much of him; for besides that many times words escaped him that distur∣bed my thoughts: I held for enemy whatsoever opposed mee their entertainment, and sought so carefully to order them, as to be solitary in them
at the better leisure, (if I could have separated me from my selfe) I should have done it. It behoves Madam, since I am unhappily deprived that good of seeing you, that at least yet I retaine that of en∣tertaining you in my contemplations, and that augmenting with my teares the waters of Seine, I should oblige some of her deities one day to mak you the pittifull recitall of my sorrowes; Yet I beleeve that such as thinke that certain deities do haunt the banks of Rivers are mistaken much; for had there any one beene there, they must have tane some note, and consequently then some pit∣ty of my ills, and I had not returned from thence disconsolate. Yet it may be that they perceiving my griefes remedilesse, chose rather not to seeme to see them, then vainly to insinuate their good wills, to cure an ill, incurable, or such a one at least, as meerly did depend on you alone to help. At last Madam, having well weighed my passi∣ons, in a confusion of divers thoughts, in the re∣volt of my best wits, and in so profound a forget∣fulnesse even of my selfe, as with much a doe da∣red I hope once to returne from hence: I thought it did behoove me yet to lend some eare to what my reason did enforce, and not to stop them still gainst all that ever she can speake; that it is not e∣nough for us to manifest couragious hearts a∣gainst our enemies, but that we ought imploy our constancies against our selues, and use the utmost of our powers to vanquish us; for that the fairest victory that can be had, is that we doe obtaine u∣pon our selves; that absence for absence tis-ea∣sier
to endure far off then neere, for that you shall be therby the lesse importuned; and I by so much the lesse afflicted, as I shall not see my enemies neere a good, which I am constrained to decline. That at last yet I needs must come, & that which reasonably I should not doe, I shall yet by neces¦sity be enforced unto. This is the most cruell and the unhappiest resolution to which my il fortunes possibly can bring me: but things inevitable can∣not be avoided; Of needs I must be gone, of force I must depart from you, and the longer I deferre this parting, I doe but the more enforce the vio∣lence of my torments. My devoire, the good of my estate, and my honour calls me away, and no∣thing staies mee here, except your company, of of which I am deprived. It is not possible to tell you now the havocke, and disorder, which these thoughts have caused within my breast. Yes, you know more there of then possibly I can relate, but you know not of all that I do undergo therin. But Madam, you know well I she them not in hope to make escape, I may perchance extend, but cannot breake your chaines, but wheresoere I go, I still shall bear along with me their waight, together with your figure in my breaft, whe e I shall never honour ought like it. You that know better then my selfe this that I say to you; pardon if so that I herein doe still appeale to you, and if that henceforth I forbeare more to disturb the peace of your faire soule, by the outragious furies and despaires of mine.
The Argument. He conjures her take some pitty on his languishings, and not still to detaine him in the solitude shee had the day before. Complaines that he having so little time to spend with her, should waste it so ill, that he abides here but onely for the sight of her, and yet hee sees her not, but amongst such company as doe deprive him of her sight. Epistle 41. IDoe conjure you here take yet some pitty of my languishings, have some regard to the con¦straint I undergoe by my not daring to approach your sight uncalled. If so againe you will afford this day unto the company you did the last, I shall againe become o'rewhelmed in the same so∣litude I was, and in the selfe same sorrows which do as yet remain with me, for having so little time to stay with you, and employing it so ill, not be∣ing here but onely for the good I reape in seeing you, and not seeing you at all but in such compa∣ny as doe deprive me of your sight. But if so be that this disfavour were yet recompenced by some particular grace, I then should be perswa∣ded that this your ill usage were to hide from me that small good will you beare me, and that I were not absolutely lost, for that I might beleeve
I had acquired something in you. But you will not afford to me the time you know not what to doe withall. Our walkes and visits after supper too, are taken away from me: others may see you in bed, where I can scarse at Church, and yet have you the heart to let me part with this dis∣comfort in my breast, even I that likely you shall nere see more. This very thought is now my murtherer: but here I call to minde the argument I had with you this morne: how that you wisht me well, or that you did not wish me well; and if so be you doe, why then should I afflict you by this same recitall of my ills; and then if not, why should I afflict my selfe for an ingratefull one. I left you three of my Letters, to which you have not answered yet, but not to oblige you any whit thereto; no, could I oblige you unto any thing, it should be to love me, as I do you, above all o∣ther things on earth. The Argument. Vpon a quarrell which he had had on her occasion, of which shee had endeavoured an accord, upon some tearmes. Hee intreats her to pardon him if so be he would not endure that it should be conceived in that manner. Epistle 42. MAdame, they have spoiled our accord in go∣ing about to amend it; they could not be∣leeve
that I was in case to fight, without belee∣ving the contrary of what they saw, and of what I said before I dream of a challenge. Wherfore I most humbly intreat your pardon, that I cannot endure it should be conceived in such tearmes. I beseech you likewise, Madame, not to think that it is to render me difficult in what you desire of me, nor yet to shew me a brave fellow, I am suffi∣ciently braved by my sicknesse, that not onely hinders me from sighing, but from agreement likewise; and I beleeve but for the visit and par∣don which you were yesterday pleased to afford me, I should not this day have been in case to ac∣cept it. Faire Minerva, good day, since that ho∣nour is so much esteemed of by you, let it please you that I live and dye honourably, and for that otherwise I cannot merit to be yours. The Argument. Being pressed to an honourable agreement, and threatned with her disfavour, in case he should refuse, he saith that shee urged him to a thing that she would upbraid him with so soone as he had done it. Notwith∣standing which, he would consent to whatsoever shee should doe, to testifie his obedience to her. Epistle 43. MAdame, you now urge me to a thing, which you your selfe will upbraid me with so soon
as I have done it, and you threaten me with ano∣ther, the very conceit whereof oppresseth me so, as I am unable to undergoe it. I esteem much of the merits of that Cavallier whereof you speake, and am his most humble servant: but he and you both must pardon me if so I cannot think I ought to put mine honour on the protection of any o∣ther then my own sword. Neverthelesse, Ma∣dame, to manifest that all impossible things are yet easie, where it ought concernes, or your con∣tentment, or the inviolable obedience I have sworne to you, I shall assent to whatsoever you please I shall doe, to the intent to live ever in qua∣lity of your most humble and over-obedient ser∣vant. The Argument. Vpon some coldnesse in his Mistresse, he saith that he dares not so much as send to her house to know when she will be pleased he may come thither. Nor yet can he but doe it, having so little time to live neere her. Epistle 44. MAdame, you are so severe on my behalfe, and I so unhappy in giving you offence still, (however innocently) that I dare not so much as send to your house to know when you will be pleased that I may come thither, yet cannot I chuse but doe it too, for that the lesse time I have,
the more precious it is to me; foure dayes have passed since I interrupted your affaires, or that I gave you meanes to shew me the ill lookes you did this morning. Wherefore, Madame, I most humbly intreat your pardon, if so I seek to hus∣band what is left to my best advantage, and if I pray you forbeare to heape all your indignation on the head of a poore innocent, that lives not but to dye yours. The Argument. Vpon a promise she had made him to afford him her company and entertaine, at 5 of the clocke, he sent to see if her watch were not stayd or put backe, or if shee had not yet againe some other demurre, to put him off to another time. Epistle 45. IT is at least 5 of the clocke here abouts, but for that all watches goe not alike; I have sent to know if yours be not stayed or put backe, or if so be you have not yet againe some device to put me off till the morning. It may be that thus pro∣tracting time, you hope to weary me out, or that you may finde some occasion to breake asunder what you have so often stretched and extended. 'Tis true, I may be wearied with importuning you, but never can by honouring you, and that you may at pleasure breake any thing with me, but the chaines that fasten me to your service.
The Argument. He excuseth himselfe of an action to which the vio∣lence and indiscretion of a bad woman, had born him, in the lodging and presence both of his Mistresse, for which he humbly entreateth her, either to pardon, or punish him. So taking againe a discourse in hand that he had left, he humbly entreats her to weigh the impor∣tance of it, and to afford her one houre upon that sub∣ject. Epistle 46. THe discourse you began with me upon the arrivall of the good woman, and the bad acti∣on she inforced me to commit, have incensed new turmoiles in my breast, the sence whereof I feele in the indisposition of my body likewise. Not Madame, that I am sorry for any thing she said to me, or I did, but that it was in your lodging, and almost in your presence, which I would have as religious a regard to, as to the Temple or the Al∣tar. But I am outraged in the resentment you have testified therein, and feele so great sorrowes for that I have really sinned against the respect I owe you, that I should never receive comfort therein, did I not know that her impudence pro∣voked my modesty, and that you your selfe, Ma∣dame (pardon that I dare to say it) made the first way unto this mischiefe, by opening your dore unto her. Moreover, Madame, it was not for any
offence she did me, that I offended her, but for the clamor she made in your lodging, which I was not able to endure, so as I left not my duty, but to enforce her to keepe within hers. VVherein, Ma∣dame, I confesse I have done amisse, and most humbly intreat you either to pardon, or else to punish me for it: for any one of them shall con∣tent me, so you may be satisfied. But as to that discourse was entred into by you, I hold it a thing so serious as you never did that act wherein there might be more judgement or discretion needfull then in it. I will not write thereof unto you, but forbeare my advice: for besides that the interest of my passions might render it suspected, I am still so infortunate in such things, as I know you would chuse the contrary, to that I might coun∣sell you, as you know well you have done ere∣whiles in the most important actions of your life, the repentance wherof is not yet absolutely past, You know too, Madame, that there is no passion in the world so deare to me, but your good is yet much more valued of me; & when you do let me see that it is for your good, I shall forbeare to op∣pose it, and most faithfully serve you therein a∣gainst my owne affection, and against my selfe. But be you not so rash as to precipitate a designe of that importance, without scarce thinking of it. Remember you how often I have been unhappi∣ly certaine in my predictions, and how many deaths I should suffer to see you commit a second error worse then the first. But I beseech you grant me the favour I may have one houres dis∣course
with you to morrow on this subject, be it a walking, or any other where that you shall think convenient, to the end I adde not such an appre∣hension (to those sorrowes I groane under) as to abandon & loose you, you, that have begot hopes in me much contrary to this despaire. The Answer. Epistle 47. I Pardon you yet againe this one time, but more of my own goodnesse, then o'recome by your reasons, and I will to morrow afford you an hours conference, if so it be in my power. The Reply on the same occasion. Epistle 48. YOur Indulgences be not absolute. Yesterday you pardoned me, and to day againe you pu∣nish me, by forgetting your promise. I am never∣thelesse ready to endure all, as one that you know yours.
The Argument. He saith that he will write to her continually, since she hath commanded it, and will never lament him, for that she hath forbade it. Confesseth that he wants the good parts might oblige her to wish him well, and that he hath but too many ill ones, to merit her bad u∣sage, saith that all things worke according to their pro∣perties, and that he having a heart of flesh, and she one of stone, it must be that she should be as insensible of his affections, as he is quickly sensible of hers. Epistle 50. HOwbeit I doe but irritate my ill in going a∣bout to expresse it, and that it is some kinde of ease to me to complaine, I will nerethelesse no way cease to write to you, because you have commanded it, and never will I lament me be∣cause you have forbidden it. For besides that complaint is bootlesse and extreamely hurtfull; it seemes `to me injust that I should complaine of the ills which I suffer but justly, either through th' excesse of your deserts, orthrough the want in me. No Madame, I learne now to acknowledge the wrong I doe you, in complaining of you unto your selfe: and as I most humbly crave you mer∣cy, I likewise confesse that it is at my selfe that I onely ought to take offence, for that I have not sufficient good parts, to oblige you wish me well, and that I have but too many ill ones, to merit
your bad usage, And then, it must needs be too, that all things should work according to the constitutions of their proper and immediate natures. A man should be but laught at, that should com∣plain because the day is light, and the night dark, it being a thing so well knowne, that the one can∣not be without cleernesse, nor the other without shade. Wherefore then should I expect lesse on my complaints, for that I see you so obdurate in the behalfe of my passions; since that hee that made me a heart of flesh, made yours of Marble? Must it not then be, following our owne consti∣tutions, that you are as obdurate, and insensible of my affections, as I am quickly sensible of yours? But who renders me thus subtile, to pro∣duce such reasons as arme your cruelty, against my selfe? Is it not a proofe of the greatest perfe∣ction in love, to which the wit of man can attain? You Madam, amōgst the many slaves which you have captivate, have you ever heard whisper'd of an affection so perfect as mine, or once heard speech of an Empire so absolute and powerfull as yours. But it is unworthily done of me to betray my passions, in going about to speak them. Learn you them then, of your selfe that cause them, and beleeve mee more capable of the sufferance ther∣in, then of the expression thereof.
The Argument. Shee answers that the cause why shee prayd him to write, was, that her deserts could not be commended, but by the judgment he gave thereof. That she sorrow∣ed that a passion so worthily entertained, should be for a subject so uncapable of the acknowledgment. Epistle 51. IT is not with designe to irritate your ills, that I have prayd you write to me; It is for that your Letters being welcome still, and perfectly well composed, cannot but greatly oblige those to whom they are addressed, and me more particu∣larly, that more particularly doe honour you. I agree not neither that you have so many de∣faults, and I so many perfections, they be words of courtesie, which serve rather to make knowne your demerits, then mine commended, which in∣deed are no way recommendable, without it bee in the judgment you give thereof. I answer not to the marble heart, wherof you complaine, since I have told you by word of mouth, whatsoever can be written thereupon. And it is true that you sigh, and not unworthily become passionate, and I am sorry that you doe it not, for a subject more worthy the acknowledgment thereof.
The Argument. He replyes that if she knew the greatnesse of his pas∣sions, she would not say that he did worthily entertaine them, but that hee injures them. And intreats her to give him leave to come and learne at hers, the subject for which shee desired hee should become passionate, according to her promise to him. Epistle 52. IF so you knew how great and many more my passions are, then my sighes, you would not say that I did worthily entertaine them, but rather that I much injured them; And as to the marble heart to which you will not answer, you cannot better then thereby, make seene that you your selfe are wholy marble. You are agreived that I sigh not for a subject more capable of an acknow∣ledgment thereof. I most humbly beseech you Madam, to give mee leave that I come to your house this afternoon, according to what you pro∣mised mee yesterday, to learne it of you. And likely I may as well sigh for some other, when you have commanded it, as I have power to leave sighing for you, when you have forbidden it.
The Argument. Hee saith that if hee did not by obedience, what hee also doth through affection, hee knowes not why hee should write to one that is little mov'd by his Letters, as the posts and corners of the walls, to which our Bills be usually fixed. That instead of animating an image, and rendring it sensible of his passions, he hath rendred her sencelesse, by the vertue of his sighes. And of a heart of flesh hee hath made one of impentrable stone. Epistle 53. IF so you had not commanded me to write, and that I did not in obedience; what I likewise doe through affection, I should be much troubled to say: wherfore I write to one, that permits not her selfe to be once touched at my Letters, but rests as little moved therewith, as the posts, and cor∣ners of walls, to which men use to fixe their wri∣tings. Tis said, a Lover once of old, through the force of sighs and vehement desires, did animate an image, rendring it sensible of his passions: But I by the power of such sighes, and vehement de∣sires, have render'd you sensible of mine, and of a heart humane, and naturally pittifull, my hard mishap hath made an inaccessible Rocke. It is in∣deed a Prodigious mervaile, that I should still continue opinionatly obstinate, in seeking meanes to mollifie your disposition, having so long since had sufficient proofe, that my perseverance daily
more hardneth you, and whatsoever can be ima∣gined in love, to decline the cruetly of a woman, seemes but to heighten yours, and make a temper still more impenetrable, Why then doe I perse∣vere? I know no cause, unlesse it be that having no manner of reason in what I doe, it belongs not unto me to give a reason for my actions, and that not doing any thing but what you please, you are to render reason for what I do. Tell me then you, why tis I busie me to present to you a passion in paper here, that is no more unknowne to you, then to my soule; and each one sees so cleerely in my face, that even my man hath simply told mee, that they at yours, report that I but pine a∣way, and languish for your love. It is most cer∣taine true, I doe, and that for a subject so solely worthy of my languishings, that I should deeme mee most unhappie not to doe it. But yet it does belong to you, my beauteous Goddesse, not to forbeare untill this passion hath reduced me unto such extreamity, as your too tardive pitty may deprive me of my life, & you of the most faithfull subject ever lived beneath your Empires lawes.
The Argument. Having forborne three dayes without writing backe one word to him, (whatsoever may be sayd in her an∣swere) for missing this morning, shee seemes astonisht at his silence, and commandeth him to aske her pardon for it. Epistle 54. I Cannot beleeve you can accuse mee, having so much cause to lament mee, and marvaile that you have not sent unto me this morning, being you know well, how much your Letters pleasure me as a contentfull divertisement. You should de∣maund my pardon for having failed therein, since you are yet to remaine here some time in this Citty. The Argument. After so many complaints and delayes thereon, upon which hee had resolved to speake no more, then in one Letter, he intended to send her on his departure, he yet gives her answer, and bids her farewell. Epistle 55. AFter having born my patience even unto de∣spaire, and having let my heart fret and eate it selfe for 3 or 4 dayes, regardlesse of my ill, howsoever you have put me off as many times,
from eve to morn, and then from morning, untill eve againe. In the end, you send your man to mee to enquire of my health. I told him you knew better then I, and then I was resolved to have said no more: for whatsoever reason I can have, yet am I still in fault if I complaine, and finde no other satisfaction to be had, then acccu∣sation of an ill dispose, and humorousnesse. My intention was thereupon to have born my unhap∣pinesse alone, not speaking or once writing to you, more then a Letter, which I meant to send you just upon my parting, and which I really thought should be the last of all my life. For what other thing can you expect from me, then to see my rage converted against those that are the cau∣sers of my banishment, or by a worser stroke be turned upon my selfe? Madame, if so I lived not with you, in more respect then they are capable of, or ere can render you, I might come to you as well as they, nor could you shut your dore against me, in opening it to them, without the giving me just cause to make complaint. Am I not then ex∣treamely miserable, to loose the happinesse of seeing you, even by the meanes that ought to ac∣quire it me? To see me punisht for the honours that I render you, and they recompenced for the offences they commit against you? And if in o∣ther things we were equals, and they were able yet to honour you like me. Me thinks, comming from so farre, and having staid so long time here, but for the sole desire of seeing you, now that I am upon the instant of my departure, and my vi∣sits,
it may well be, the last that I shall ever render you, ought in some sort to be preferred before such as you have time enough to see when I am gone: but of these things I had resolved to have spoke no more. Two reasons yet oblige me here to mention them; the one to shew you that I have no other humour in it, then is most reasonable, and would to God it were much lesse, the other in answering of the note was given me from you. You have reason, Madame, to say I cannot accuse you; for how should I accuse one, of whom I dare not once complaine? You safely may con∣tinue your blowes, and well beleeve that if I have not accused you of the ills which you have done, and as yet doe unto me, I never shall accuse you of those you doe procure me. For the cause (you say) I have to lament you, you know well, Ma∣dame, it is unknowne to me, at least as much as the depth of your intentions, in which I never entred yet, without it were in that did nought be∣long unto me. You know, Madame, likewise, that this is not the first time, you have comman∣ded me to lament you, on such occasion as there was more need by much, that you lamented me, though by much lesse then there is now. Yet I have nerethelesse lamented you, and I as yet doe grieve for you▪ though I have never been lamen∣ted, nor doe know the cause as yet, for why I grieve. You are astonisht that I sent not to ye this morning; you flout me Madame, for my asto∣nishment, and cruelly you here renue the impati∣ence and the anguish that I groane beneath, in the
prolong'd expectance of what you should have sent me. As to my Letters, Madame, it is true they were not drawne but meerly for your con∣tent, and for your glory, and if so be I knew my penne, or tongue were animated yet, from other object then your felfe, I never more would write or speake, whilest I had breath; so am I indeed at the next dore to doe nor one, nor the other: but they have served you for a may-game, your sport, and not divertisement, and have procured me more ill, for one poore word taken amisse, then I have had of good, from so many commen∣dations, which I have not lesse worthily expres∣sed, then rendred you. You will that I demand your pardon, Madame, hold you to that, I have my knees as plyant, and my heart as humble too, as ere they were▪ but then it must be onely in my thoughts, since, that your sight is positively so denyed me, and that I cannot thinke that the lit∣tle time you have to afford me your company, can wipe from off my soule, the sorrowes that I feele, for that you have made me loose. Adue then Madame, amid the sorrow of such griefes as beare me away, I yet shall carry along with me, the contentment never to have increased the number of those importunities, which make a rape upon your liberty, nor never to have dispen∣ced with the obedience which I owe you.
The Argument. Meeting him yet by chance, and being made friends, she failes againe of her promise to him, which obligeth him to breake with her once for all, and send her this his last farewell. Epistle 56. VVHen I met you yesterday, I thought it had been for my good, but I finde to day it had been for my good, but I finde to day it was but to render me yet more miserable. I had set up my rest, and as there is more suf∣ferance to resolve of an unhappinesse, then to sup∣port it; I had already digested therein the worst of bitternesse, for that I was resolved. But this unhappy encounter hath as it were reburied me in the ills from whence I was almost gotten, and have caused me to finde them by so much the more sensible, as they happened to me unexpe∣ctedly, and upon the promise of a false good, that hath caused me a thousand reall evils. What can I have done unto you since yesternight, Madame, who hath obliged you to doe me the displeasures you have caused me feele this morning? which I beg'd of you, and you promised me as the last I had to passe in this City, I did put you in minde of it last night, and having rose this morning by 4 of the clocke, I expected newes from you un∣till 8. At 8 a clock I sent my man to you, who af∣ter
a long stay returned to tell me that you went unto the Fryars to masse: you came not there un∣till upon eleven: the masse lasted till 12. and then I perceived you in conduct of another, to hinder me from comming neere you; you that the night before would by no meanes permit me to leade you. Is not this right worthily to acquit you of your promise? have you not cause to enquire if I be not in better humour then yesternight, ha∣ving so well satisfied me? but this is not all, to the end I take away all cause of your accusing me of fantasticknesse; 'tis fit I justifie a latter action by another word or two. You know Madame, that I have this two moneths intreated you to afford me the audience, caused me to come two hundred leagues to obtaine it: for I had no other businesse here, and could conveniently have staid the re∣turne of the King, without comming to seeke the misfortunes I have found, in place of those felici∣ties I promised me, after a thousand assurances, & as many failings, in the end you did vouchsafe it me the last time I was with you, but in such sort as it had been better much that you had never af∣forded it, for it was neither to talke to me, nor yet so much as once give eare to any thing I said, but to render me a spectator, at such discourse as then you held with some that I found with you, and whom you gave command I should leave there. Setting aside, that whilest your entertain∣ment was refused me, you have afforded it, & doe afford it yet most orderly on every day to some, without the least divertisement, and to a man, of
whom, observe the end which ever crownes the act. Not knowing what more to do or say in this, wherin I have done or said as much as can be pos∣sible; I resolved to embrace despaire, and pati∣ently to goe my waies without once taking my leave, rather then bootlesly lament mee of an ill remedilesse. You found me yesterday in this re∣solution, which then you made me leave, to cause me take again to day, by this unkinde ill use. Your servant notwithstanding comming from you to seeke mee, and imposing your commands not to depart without my bidding you Adue, obligeth me to write unto you. I have told you Madam, heretofore, that I had rather once to fall, then stumble still so oft; That the time you can afford me now, by no means can repaire what you have made me loose, and that the long & violent sor∣rowes for such a losse is far more cruell unto me, then such a short possession can possibly be sweet. I am none of those that can crave pardon in their midst of punishment. When we are come so far, the worst is past, there is no more but one step then; Nor should I bee in fit estate to receive it, would you vouchsafe it, nor doe I now expect it. You have used me thus this Twelve month, and if this parting should yet happen like the last, why my returne were likely then to prove the same. Which is the cause that I most humbly request your pardon, Madam, if not to interest you in my disgraces, I bear them to some other place where you shall never be accused of them; and if not to importune you with my visits, and complaints,
I write you here this last farwell that you shall e∣ver have of me so long as I live. To come home and give it you, to speak with you, and to see you; It needs not that I take here the heavens to wit∣nesse for me that I do desire it, since from having too too ardently still coveted it, and from having beene over injustly denied it, proceeds all my un happinesse. But you have too much irritate my sores, to heale them now, A moment of time wa∣sted in interrrupted teares, and unprofitable sighes, and yeelded at the point of my departure, cannot eface the sorrowes for the time that you so long have still with-held from mee; And then it were indeed, but now to knit, to breake againe to morrow, to beat one round, and endlesse path, againe and againe to ascend one rocke. I had ra∣ther die, then once more thinke of life, after the losse of all that ever made mee value it. God knowes the outrage that I doe my selfe, and the good whereof I doe deprive me; But I offer my selfe no violence that you have not constrained mee to, nor deprive mee not of any thing you have not first deprived mee: All the ills I can ap∣prehend you have already caus'd mee undergo, and I have yet this comfort in my griefes, that if so be there is nothing I can hope, there is also no∣thing that I can feare. It is as now almost a yeare since you did promise mee a boone, Alas! with what an infinite of gentle thoughts have I still cherisht that, without once seeing it yet! I render it backe unto you; and I beseech you gratifie some other therwithall, whose merits are more known
unto you, and affections more esteemed; For me, I never shall withdraw mine from an object so lovely as your selfe, and shall ever beleeve that as they could not be more ingratefully acknow∣ledged, they likewise could never be more wor∣thily employed. But I shall leave you at least in peace, and never more with my misfortunes will I ever trouble your repose. The Answere. Epistle 57. IF you depart not to day, I shall make you ac∣knowledge you are in the wrong, and I entreat I may speake with you; If you desire it, I will give you to understand of mee at two a Clocke, And in the meane time, I pray you think you are in an error to complaine of mee. The Argument. His Mistris being informed hee was in blacks, tooke occasion to write word unto him; by which she condoled with him the new affliction she beleeved had beene be∣fallen him. Epistle 58. I Have learnd that you are habited in mourning, and that consequently some new affliction is be∣fallen you. The lawes of what is decent, and those of my owne inclination, cause mee partake
therein, and to condole with you, with so much the greater sorrow, that it is unprofitable unto you that I am your servant. The Argument. After having a long while disputed with himselfe whether hee should answere her Letters, or not, he tels her that besides the afflictions hee undergoes for her, he slighted all such as could happen to him. That he could not beleeve that she condoled the ills, she dayly augmen∣ted. And wherefore he beleev'd so. Epistle 59. I Disputed long with my selfe whether or no I should read your Letter, before I would receive it, And whether I should answere it or no when I had read it; And not finding me any waies ob∣liged either to the one, or the other, I thought for sufficient answer to have return'd it you, with some others that were better in your hands, then in those of a man you have offended. Neverthe∣lesse I thought that I ought you yet a word, or two, and following rather the advise of my passi∣on, then that of my reason, I chose to breake the oath I had made never to write more unto you, before the resolution I have taken ever to honour you, to whatsoever contrary effect you may pos∣sibly oblige mee. I doe let you know then, Ma∣dame, that if I mourne, it is not for any new af∣fliction befallen mee, and that after those, you
cause mee I slight all such as can happen to mee, That is very true that according unto the Lawes, of what is decent, and of humanity likewise, if you have any, you ought therein compatiate: But that I can never beleeve that you condole with me an ill, that you your selfe doe daily augment, letting me finde so many effects contrary to your words, as there can be no day of my life, where∣in I shall not repent me to have beene thereby so much seduced. For to what purpose speake you to me of sorrow, you that doe all that ere you can to loose, and ruine me▪ You have offended mee to death, not onely without cause, but for such reasons as are most capable of appeasing, had I offended you. And I have undergone it, not one∣ly without revenge, but likewise fans complaint, continuing still in more respect then in offence. If I complaine of you, I cannot do it but commen∣ding you, And if I take offence, tis ever gainst my selfe, or such as doe defend me against you, and render those praises as due, rather to my goodnes then your merits. You Madam, on the contrary seeke to defraud the man that honours you, and repaire not the wrongs you have done him, but by most irrepairable outrages. Be it true, that I was offended at the speech you had with mee a∣bout the businesse chanced in Easter, you have a∣mended that, with another much worse, that since you held in my absence, with distinction of quality, which could not be done without passi∣on, nor suffer'd but with rage, and madnesse, I complained that you refused me the honor of your
entertaine, and conduct, and you have satisfied me in affording it to al sorts of people else, And walk∣ing night by night before my window in compa∣ny of those you know doe hate mee. And after this, to write that the Lawes of your inclination enforce you to partake in my misfortunes; is it not to take mee for the arrants Wittall ever lived? But I see well your meaning, you are not content to have heard say that wee fought, but you would see it. And I shall deeme me most unworthy life, and to have dared once to pretend unto your ser∣vice, if I manifest not to you, that I am your most obedient servant. The Argument. She replyes, that she is more amarvailed then offen∣ded at his Letter, and wisheth that all his vanities were in that paper, to the end they obliged no other one to answere them. Epistle 60. I Am more amazed then I am offended at your Letter, and I could wish that all your vanities were inclosed in the paper you sent me, to the end that being unknown to any one but me, they should not oblige any man to answer them. I meane not for what hath respect to my self, how∣soever you have reported that I entreated you to come and see me, and that you had no desire, nor
would do it, you know it a thing I never thought, and me think it would better become you to ob∣serve a modest silence▪ then to discourse of your goodnesse and of my demerits, since both the one and the other are but imaginary, as whatsoever appeareth, or in your Letters, or your discourse, be but vanities; which I feare every one wil not e∣ver suffer from you. And for that you accuse me to have said, I will let you see so soone as you pleasein presence of those have made that report, the cause you had to give credit thereunto, and the wrong you doe me to complain of my walks: I have not refused your conduct when it was fit I should admit it: and for the rest, the little interest you have in my actions, ought to forbid you, or meddle with or observe them. I conclude with this counsell which I entreat you make use of, viz, that you speake of others as they doe of you, that is to say, worthily. The Argument. He answers her threats, and to the vanities she accu∣seth him of, in a stile altogether estranged from the re∣spect he had wont to render her, though not from his discretion. Epistle 61. YOu have cause to say that you are more ama∣zed then offended at my Letters, since indeed
there is more cause of astonishment then of of∣fence. In all the rest you are in the wrong, and chiefly in accusing me throughout of vanity, wherewith you manifest your selfe so stored, as you thinke to arrest and stay my words by your threatnings. I answer not to what hath been re∣ported to you, because indeed it merits not an an∣swere; and that it is altogether opposite to com∣mon sence, that a man that hath perpetually com∣plained, that you would never see him, should vaunt to have been intreated thereunto, and not to have been willing. But there is no imposture so manifest, to which you rather lend not your beliefe, then to my best reasons, provided that it be against me, for that sufficeth to render it ever just. Notwithstanding you know that I have o∣ther manner of subjects to cherish my vanities with, would I embrance them, and if I were not more discreet then your advice can render me, I avow it, that it had been better indeed for me not to have spoken so worthily of your demerits, or my goodnesse, but not that the one or the other are imaginary, nor that the modest silence seems to you so comely, hath ever been broken yet, un∣lesse by you. As to that you say that whatsoever appeares in my discourse, or in my Letters, is all but vanity, I appeale unto the judgement you your selfe have heretofore pronounced thereof, and to posterity that better farre shall judge ther∣in then you. But you know me little, having had so long experience of me, and have exceeding ill impressions of my courage, if so you think 'tis
feare that renders me so modest as I a m. I never feard but you, for that I never loved but you; and and when I shall not love you any more, I shall then feare you no longer. Those whom you think to oblige to answer me, are for themselves already sufficiently ingaged, and they shall finde me ever as free, but more advised then they have found me yet. You are afraid that they should know what I have said, and I will print it to the end that none be ignorant thereof. I take no knowledge of the report was made to me, and so lightly beleeve not what is said of you, as you beleeve whatsoever is said of me; but by that you have said to my selfe, I have judged what you might say to others. As to your walks, it is true I have no interest in them, more then in the rest of your deportments, but you deserve well to see some sport made you for your love; and my pro∣mise, and your threats, oblige me to let you finde that I doe not forget you. For conclusion, you counsell me to speake of others as they speake of me: that indeed were good, if other mens actions were as even as mine. But I give you an advice, which is not to menace a man you can neither hurt nor fright.
Reasons of the Authors against his Love▪ IT is true that it is the thing of all the world that I have loved the most; but it is that also loves me the least. I have a great delight in lo∣ving, but it is traversed with a thousand torments. I grieve extreamely to forgoe it, but that is swee∣tened with abundance of peace. And indeed, how should I preserve that I never well acquired? have I not done my utmost both in the acquisiti∣on and preservation? what can I doe more then, after the most I was able? I never loved woman equall to her, but it is better not to love at all, then to love ones vexation, and render a man misera∣ble in the humour of an ingratefull one. She hath at all times sought me, but it hath been to loose me: and those pleasures she hath caused me, have been so short, so thwarted, and so imperfect still, that compared with the painefull afflictions she hath procured me, it hath beene a twinkling of faire weather in the incessant haile of a perpetuall storme: and one drop of sweet water amid the boundlesse extent of a vast sea, brackish and bit∣ter, where the continuall windes and billowes roaring and rowling on each others necke, in their contentions move an eternall tempest, that meets no calme in her embroiles, nor end in the strife of
its perpetuall motions. In a word she's an ingrate∣full one, that hath done all that ere she could to torment and offend me. And one that hath not worthily acknowledged my affections, but re∣compenced them with her outrages. Where is the memory of those indignities and those offen∣ces which she hath so often done me? Hath she not poorely abandoned me, in favour of my ene∣mies? hath she not taken from me her converse and company to give it them? Hath she not per∣mitted that they have challenged me three or four times, not once or twice, but I say three or four times? And if she shall deny the approving of their actions, her own bearing gives her words the lye. For hath she not since opposed me, to su∣stain their quarrell? hath she not preserv'd their friendship with the losse of mine? Had she loved her honour, or my life, could she ever have seen again the men, conspired both against the one and the other? And nerethelesse having broken the band of her affections sworn tome, to knit the faster with them, is it not to make seen that she the only approved their actions, but also, that she cōceivd & formd thē before they were produc'd? But since she disavowes others actions, let us look a little into her owne; When honour and the▪ ser∣vice of my King called me before Saint Iean, 3 or 4 daies before I bore my life thither, fell she not out with me on the Eve of my departure, preten∣ding that my visits were scandalous unto her Neighbours? Since hath she not let mee see the weaknesse, and untruth of this her pretence, when
shee hath permitted him for whom I was turned off, not onely to see her at all houres, but also to take a lodging in the same street, to besiege her in hers, and to hinder the resort of all others thither? There is no more to be said then, of scandall to them of the street, then to those of the Indies. Cal∣led she me not backe before my going, to the end I carried her figure along with mee in my breast, as I did with so lively an impression, as the pra∣ctise of so much paines, suffered in so long and la∣borious a journey, nor the frequent Alarums, of so dangerous a fortune, speeding to the aproaches assaults, and bloody sallies, of so many sieges, had ever power to eface the draught? Writ shee not to me that so long an extended absence, could not be compatible with great love, complaining that I testified unto her more courage, then affection? Forced she me not from the beloved place of my birth, and from between my parents armes, wher the contentment of my soule, and good of my af∣faires required me, here to make me wed vexati∣ons, and misfortunes infinite, in hope yet of in∣comparable happinesse? I knew well the King would come againe, and that I should do nothing here, but take an unprofitable walke of some two or three hundred Leagues for the love of her; But I was passionated with so violent a desire to see her, that I beheld all other things sans interest, and deemed the time I passed from her, not onely lost to me, but even that it was death it selfe to forbeare her sight. Let us see now, this great good fortune, and this glory so desired, hoped
for at my return, as end and crowne unto so great a Martyrdome. Tis true that I was welcom'd, well received, and much made on the first day of my arrive; they tould mee that they had grieved my absence, and deplored my death that a false bruit had spread, and all, full of other comple∣ments and pratles of a woman: but found I not my place possessed by my Rivall, and those for∣mer favours she had permitted me, and I againe look'd to have had, cut from my hopes, and to a∣nother given before my face? Set by those sub∣tilties, the escapes, and the repaires, wherewith so long she entertained and did abuse my too cre∣dulous easinesse; the meetings given out of her house, whilst others saw her day by day, not one∣ly with all liberty, but Emptry also, the irreconci∣lable enmities, and bloudy quarrels she by her imprudence caused me, and her vanity, for yet I would pardon those. But to bestir her so much as she could possibly on all sides, to give unto my enemies the advantages God gave me over them! to say my sword was longer then my Rivals, that he hurt himselfe, and that my Laquay was a ly∣ar, when hee recounted the truth of this action, though his wound, and his naturall innocence, in telling of the tale spoke sufficiently for him, and whom she her selfe had given me but the day be∣fore, for most trusty! To be sorry that twas said I had the better, and she to say gainst al the world and truth it selfe, I had the worst! to forget her selfe so farre as in opposition of my selfe, over∣weeningly to dispute a thing, of which she knew
nothing and which I my selfe had done! Can it be imagined that a woman worshipped and ado∣red, with so much passion and respect as she; or rather that the waight of all th'ingratitude of wo∣men kinde melted together, and reduced in masse, should ere bring forth the effcts of so profound a malice? In summe, she turned me off, not for a single friend, but for some five or six, nor yet for such as lov'd her more, or those were better made then I, but much, much worse. She hath beene the cause I have beene challenged by my friends, that I have much neglected my Parents, & estate, that I have forborne to follow my King into my owne Country, and seemed to shn those occasi∣ons I have ever sought; and which is more then all, that I have left my self to pursue the injustice, and cruelty of her fond passions, that I have pre∣ferred her martyrdomes before the sweetest rest, her love, to Gods himselfe, who had made mee happy had I served him so as her; where she hath render'd me most miserable still, for having ser∣ved her better farre then him. To love her then as yet, after all this, were but to be a sot, and no way amorous. Perfidious and most thankelesse Soule, what wrong hath thy unthankfulnesse, and thy faith-breach done to thee! what glories have they ravisht from thy memory! I had prepar'd thee a place in heaven, where the luster of thy starre had been adored, saluted, and made known to all mortall kinde, where those that live be∣neath another Pole, had worship'd thee, even as their chiefest constellation. Thy image and thy
name had beene so venerable to posterity, that our Nephewes had not filled the earth but with thy Altars, nor had perfumed the ayre but with the odours of thy sacrifice; The universe had beene thy Temple where men had preached, but thy vertues, Celebrated but thy praises, and pub∣lisht but thy merits: And thy renowne had been so famous ore the world, as it had found no other bounds, then the extreamity of thats extent, and the eternity of its lasting. And though I could yet heape upon thee as much blame, as the honor I prepared for thee, and satisfie my selfe with as much vengeance as an outraged heart could wish, yet will I not afflict thee with a greater punish∣ment, Then leave thee buried in the abisse of thy owne forgetfulnesse, And not remember mee henceforth of thee, but to detest thy memory. The Argument. He answers to certaine complaints that Minerva had made some while after, as well to his friends, as himselfe of his indifference, and sheweth that it was founded on the necessity of obeying her, and upon good reason. Epistle 62. Madame, YOu cannot think that I wish you ill, but by that you have done me; the feeling whereof I have quite lost, together with the remembrance of what good I wished you. If I should wish you
ill, it should be for that you do unto your selfe; and in such case, I should counsell you to forbear any further to do it, to the end I ceased further to wish it, were you not altogether as incapable of my counsels as of my affection. After such things as have passed 'twixt you and me, I ought not re∣taine the least affection that may have regard to you, nor any thought that may acknowledge you. And if you say  indifference is worse then enmity, I  it a truth, but you must acknowle  there was not that violence by  not essayed to en∣force me thereunto,  flee, by the which I have not endeavor  me still therin. It is not to be marvelled at the  at last have performed your will, since my will was ever subject unto yours, or rather was indeed no other but yours. But what you ought finde strange, is indeed, that I can endure your contradiction, whilest you can by no meanes endure my obedi∣ence. When that I liu'd not but in you, and my jealousie made me complain of your deport∣ments, you have full often told me, that I had no interest in your actions; wherefore would you that I should have now that you are dead as it were to me? you have full oft refused your sight and entertainment unto me when as it was the chiefe and onely one of my desires; Wherfore offer you it me now, that it is the last of all my cares? And wherefore having so many times fled me when that I followed you, doe you now fol∣low me, when that I flee you; if so it be not to
make seen that you are alwaies contrary, and that your pleasure abides in my tortures? but if you shall reply that I am altogether irreconcileable, I would set you in my place and aske you but this question. If you had lov'd me so as I have ever affected you; and having outraged and discarded you for other women, as you have wrong'd and abandon'd me for other men. I desired to renew affection with you, yet livin  dying for other men, would not you bid  discharge me of the women, for whom I had used you so ill; and that afterwards I should see what you had to doe. So quit you first of such men as you have un∣worthily preferred before me, and then we will see what reparation you may make me. You say that you finde your fault▪ and that you repent you of the doing it, and desire to render me satis∣fied; begin with satisfaction, and having quit the sinne, we will see if you be capable of mercy. But to thinkthat you can at one and the same time, be capable of both, there is never a Casuist in Sorbonne but will condemne your opinion. Yet think not I give you this advice, nor in hope or desire that you should follow it, for knowing that you have ever done quite contrary to such counsels, as I have given you, I should then rather give you this to the intent you followed it not, if I were not very carelesse both of the one and the other. What I say herein, is too manifest that it is not with so much incivility as reasō, that I endeavour to escape your snares, and that it is with more va∣nity then judgement that you hope to take me there againe. FINIS.
