A412 12710662 66091
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Tryal and Conviction OF Sir John Friend, FOR HIGH-TREASON In Conspiring the DEATH of His Most Sacred Majesty, King WILLIAM, and the Subver∣tion of the Government. &c. At the Sessions-House, in the Old-Baily: On Monday, the 23d. of this Instant March, 1696. Before the Right Honourable the Lord Chief Justice Holt, the Lord Chief Justice Treby, &c. NEver was Conspiracy, more happily, and more fully discovered than the late horrid Design for the barbarous Assassination of His Majesties Person, the Invasion of the Kingdom, and Sub∣version of the Government, and consequently the Protestant Religion; when beside the Number, and withal the Credit of the Witnesses, we have the publick Confession of the Dying Criminals themselves, ex ore suo, making their own voluntary self Condemnation; and ever justifying both their Accusers, and their own Execution; as their own Papers, delivered to the Hands of the Sheriff; and since Pub∣lish'd by Authority suffitiently testifie. But to Ballance the Case between the three Unfortunate Romish Zealots, viz. Charnock, King, and Keys,, that have already received Justice, and the present Criminal Sir John Friend, now brought to the Bar of Justice, in or∣der to receiveing it, we have this unhappy Difference between them; That, of the Two, this unfortunate Gentleman lies under (if possible) the much more hainous, and less pittied Circumstances; For though there can be no Apology for Guilt so Barbarous on either side, yet certainly it must be an infinite Aggravation of the Crime in Sir John Friend, professing him∣self a Member of the Protestant Religion; whereas the other Three Con∣victs were all Papists, and consequently were mislead by some Impulse of Blind Zeal, a Bigotted Superstition that might animate this Conspiracy, in favour both of their own Altars, and their darling Champion of them the late K. J—'s: But Sir John Friend, under his contrary Capacity, when Embark'd in the same Black Cause, besides the Blot in their Scutcheon
has this additional Stain in his, viz. Not only of such perfidious d shame∣ful Treason against his King and Country, but even against himself; for no Protestant can list under such a Bloody Banner, but in realiiy must be an Actor in his own, as well as his Countries Ruin: And certainly it must be no common Infatuation that could misguide and ensnare a Man into so horrid and likewise so stupid a Confederacy, where the Phrenzy of Rebellion edges and arms the drawn Sword even against our own Throats. And if there can be Degrees of the most Capital Sins, it lies a a little more heavy upon this unfortunate Offendor, who with that Mass of Wealth, and those Smiles of Fortune, should never∣theless debase himself to the engaging in so wicked a Cause, when Profligate Lives and Desperate Fortunes (one would think) should only be tempted to Fish in Troubled Waters. It has been Remarkt, that never were more Generous, and those Repeated, Tenders of Mercy offered, than to Sir John Friend, from the King's own Mouth, upon his Examination before the Councel; but his Obstinacy, and hardened Denial of his Offence, and some other ill Ascendants over made him, reject the Royal Clemency, till too late to be recalled, which has brought him to this deplorabel Scene. Being brought upon his Tryal, on Monday the 23d. of this Instant March, after Ten in the Morning, which continued till Two in the Afternoon. The greatest Stress of the Testimony a∣gainst him, besides his General Assistance in the Conspiracy, was his Acceptance of a Collonels Commission for Raising a Regiment of Horse; it being proved by Capt. Porter and Mr. Blair, that he had chosen all his Captains, (who were all mentioned) and had met them at several Taverns and elsewhere in this City, and had Paid several Sums of Mony for carrying on the cause: The Evi∣dence was Full and Plain against him; besides one of hi own Let∣ters was produced to confirm their Testimoy: He endeavoured to invalidate the credit of the Witnesses, as being Papists, but that was Over-ruled. In short after a long Tryal and Full Hear∣ing the Jury went out, and soon Returning, brought him in Guilty. The Court then Rising, and Adjourning till to Morrow, at which time we expect to hear Sentence Pronounced. London, Printed for Edward Steel, in the Strand, 1696
