B3186 07874253 40248
NEW and CURIOUS OBSERVATIONS On the Art of Curing the Venereal Disease. And the Accidents that it produces in all its Degrees, explicated by Na∣tural and Mechanical Principles, with the motions, actions and effects of Mer∣cury, and its other Remedies. WHEREIN Are discovered on the same Subject the Errours of some Authors, and the most no∣torious Cheats of Empiricks, Mountebanks, and generally of Ignorant Pretenders, and Im∣postors. Written in French by Monsieur de Blegny, Chirurgeon in Ordinary to the French Queen. Englished by Walter Harris, Doctor of Physick, lately Fellow of New College in Oxford. With the several Approbations of the most Eminent Doctors and Chirurgeons in Paris. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Dring, over against the Inner∣temple-gate; and Tho. Burrel, at the Golden-ball under St. Dunston's Church in Fleet-street. 1676.
THE PREFACE. HAving had the happiness to be well acquainted with the Ingenious Au∣thour of this Treatise, while I spent some considerable time in Paris, in pursuance of those advantages in Physick, which are now found there to be very great and extraordinary; by the univer∣sal care, and diffusive munificence of the present Active Monarch; in∣somuch that the Curious and Inqui∣sitive of Montpellier, and their o∣ther famous Universities, do now continually flock to Paris, for their better improvement; enjoying not only the pleasure of this Author's good Conversation, but the oppor∣tunity of his great Practice, in the
Cure of this Disease; Finding his Principles established, not only by many good Ratiocinations, but se∣conded by much Experience; And being an eye witness there, how well success did answer his Preten∣sions, I have thought it not alto∣gether useless to make England en∣joy the same benefit of these Ob∣servations, that France did there∣by lately receive. And that France did indeed receive some benefit by this Book, we have reason enough to believe, if we can trust the Judg∣ment of all the best Physicians there. For hardly hath Book been fa∣voured with more numerous Ap∣probations of Learned and Able men. The most Famous Faculty of Paris was pleased to attest the use∣fulness of it, though I believe no University in the World is more cautious of admitting or approving
New Principles, or New Practice in Physick: None can keep closer to the Ancient Long-experienced Method than they. The King's first and chief Physician, the chief Physicians of the Prince of Condè, and of Madam, the several Chirur∣geons also of the Royal Families, and most eminent ones in Paris did all agree to put their Names to it, for to testifie their particular ap∣probation of this Book, and the great Usefulness of these Observa∣tions. 'Twill therefore need no Rhetorick to recommend it to the Publick; the lamentable Practice, to say no worse, that is here com∣monly used in the Cure of this Dis∣ease, by many who do acquire them∣selves a Reputation by nothing else but good store of Confidence, will sufficiently convince those that read and understand it, of what conse∣quence
it may prove to the better performance of their undertakings. I know that the Author neverthe∣less, before the publick appearance of this Work, whilst his Design was the Subject of men's ill-grounded Discourses, wanted not enemies in abundance to censure & decry him; those who were Masters in the My∣stery, and had long and sweetly tast∣ed the pleasant fruits, and plentiful rewards of men's unhappiness and debauchery, became presently ap∣prehensive; thought there was Treachery in the case; and endea∣voured to villifie the thing and per∣son too, as much as they were able, 'till the Press had cleared, or de∣stroyed all their Jealousies. Now the same exceptions may be made against its appearance in English, many may perhaps shrink, and fear some diminution of their
livelihood; others may indeed plead against our thus exposing the foun∣dation of this, as well as other parts of Physick, to the small understand∣ing of every Good Woman or illi∣terate pretender. The first must only be pitied, for that they build their Fortunes only on the Igno∣rance of others; but the latter may deserve a more ample considerati∣on. For many Sober and Learned men have been of the opinion, that our thus discovering all parts of Physick in the Language of every Gossip, is far from being beneficial to the publick; that we hereby put edged tools into the hands of Chil∣dren, and teach men to play too much with their own and others Healths. But if we well consider what the most eminent Physicians in for∣mer Ages did in this matter, we shall
quickly dissipate such groundless fears, and reconcile our opinions to this Condescention to the mean∣est Capacities. Hippocrates, Galen, Celsus, and others, both Greek and Latine Oracles in Physick, did al∣ways write their works in Greek and Latine, because those were the Mother-languages of their Coun∣treys; and their Design was really to do their Countreys good. How easily do men grant, that every Good, the more it is communicated, the better it is! And certainly that man doth effectually do more good, who makes his labours conduce to the benefit of the Generality, than he who desires to be Admired only in the Closets of Contemplative men, or the Schools of an Univer∣sity. The Honest Improvers of Husbandry, and Mechanicks, were the men Deified heretofore, and
that will still deserve Immortal Ho∣nour in all future Ages. Apollo could never procure that Favour for a man's being skill'd in Lan∣guages, or for the most admired Theories, that were useless, or little beneficial. And it is for this reason that I can never enough admire the truly No∣ble Designs of our Royal Society, who do not lose their time in unty∣ing frivolous Knots, and unfolding intricate Riddles: They take as large a prospect into Universal Na∣ture, as the Dioptricks of Man's Weak Understanding will give leave; and though the Subject of their Disquisition seems sometimes low and mean, yet their end is al∣ways Noble and Great, and adorn∣ed with all the advantages that can be desired. I know giddy heads, and frothy spirits do often make
this Royal Assembly the sport of their little Wits, and the mockery of such as have as little understand∣ing as themselves; but they may know, that long after their poor hearts are quite knaw'd with Envy, and become the proper food of Worms, this August Society will remain the Admiration of all Wise men, and the Glory of this Nation. It is not a little Observable, that the Ingenious Members of it have unanimously chosen to write their Works in English; and though they converse or correspond with all parts of the World, yet they chuse to confine a little to us their vast Discoveries, and most conside∣rable Improvements of Knowledg; which shews, they had rather do much real good at home, than make Ostentation of Learning and gain Reputation abroad.
Now notwithstanding what hath been said on this Subject, though Galen and Hippocrates did commu∣nicate their great Wisdom in their plainest Language, and the most In∣genious of this Age do so now, yet this must not be an encouragement for presumptuous persons to think themselves hereby grow wise on a sudden, or that the reading of this Book, will sufficiently enable Igno∣rant men to become Bold Under∣takers. They are very much mis∣taken, who think the printing of an English Dispensatory (as hath been of late years indeed done, but with the needless Additions of the most uncouth and silly Drollery, that e∣ver Learned men have had the ill fortune to be abused in, and this by one who thought himself, for∣sooth, abundance wiser than so de∣servedly renowned a College, but
must expect to be thought so only in some poor Chimney-corners, and over the Winter-tales of some few harmless deluded people, who must be pitied as well as himself) 'tis not such a business, I say, that can set up Good women for the Practising of Physick. Much sweat, and ma∣ny great Advantages, both Inward and Outward, God knows, are re∣quired to the right performing so weighty an employment. The most exquisite Fabrick in the Universe, or the Anatomy of the Microcosm, must be throughly understood; the most profound Principles of this Art must be maturely considered, and well digested in the under∣standing; the Nature of Diseases, their several Motions, and different Symptoms, be diligently searched into, either through those great as∣sistances men usually meet with in
other Countreys in all manner of respects, or the particular Introdu∣ction of some Friend here at home; the spacious Field of the Materia Medica, must be often walk'd into, the many curious productions of Nature known, and the excellent Compositions that Art abundantly furnishes us with, must deserve Good Consideration. If these things were but indiffe∣rently weighed, and the severe Ob∣ligations that lye on every Honest man's Conscience, to the right per∣forming what he undertakes of this high nature, were but a little sober∣ly thought on, it might be able to deter many from so presumptuous∣ly venturing on the lives of others; and turning Mountebanks, with a few Receipts. It is a sad and bleed∣ing reflection, what infinite mis∣chiefs, and frequent Murthers are
daily committed in this Great City, by those who slily lurk in corners, or else, who impudently paste their senseless pretensions in all the pub∣lick, but stinking places of the Town. And indeed it is a thousand pities, that Able men had not more commonly a Declared Honesty, and Known readiness to supply the wants of the Multitude; who find themselves in a manner constrained through the Pride and Avarice of some, and the Laziness of others, to commit the most precious of all Temporal Blessings, their Health, into the Merciless Hands, and Dan∣gerous Experiments of such unsuf∣ferable Enemies to the Publick Good. But the College now in∣tends in a short time to prevent the encrease or continuance of these unhappy mischiefs, by their particu∣lar Care and Charity; and they may
thereby expect more blessing from Heaven on their daily endeavours. For let prophane Bravo's, or con∣ceited Naturalists, scoff, or smile, at the particular Dependence I pre∣sume every man's Health and Af∣fairs certainly have on the Influence, and Providence of Heaven above us; if they will but seriously glance into the History of their own past actions, and the most important e∣vents of their lives, they'll be easi∣ly confounded at their former fol∣ly, and sufficiently convinced of the the truth of what I assert. Those therefore who love their Healths in earnest, & do not place it in the reach of Universal Pills, High-named Elixirs, and suspected Arcanums, may be further pleased to know that Man's Body is a Ma∣chine of so very curious a Nature, that its Diseases and Infirmities are
capable of as great variety of cir∣cumstances and alterations, as there are infinity of different parts in it; that since Luxury and ease have so far prevailed upon us, as to render us uncapable of enduring those hardships little Cottages do still suffer, and thereby receive the be∣nefit of; since there is such variety of circumstances in our several ways of living, and so great an inconstan∣cy both in the quaility and quanti∣ty of what we eat and drink, Dis∣eases even of the same kind must needs have a very great Latitude, not only in different persons, ac∣cording to their several Constituti∣ons, but even in the same person at different times. Nature doth sufficiently declare the truth of this in the various con∣figuration of men's Faces; for see∣ing there is so great curiosity shewn
in the outward contexture of so small dimensions, that not two per∣sons in all the World can ever be found exactly alike, if they are closely compared together; what may we then think, or how many little instruments must we imagine requisite within us, for the orderly motion of the whole Mass! We have no reason therefore to won∣der, that not only different Nati∣ons, but also particular persons, we are once acquainted with, may be easily known, or distinguished by their outward Gest, and particular Martch▪ because the subtil diversity of their infinite little Organs, and various disposition of the whole Fa∣brick, must needs incline them to very different motions. I shall not endeavour to fore-stall you with any Collection of the most considerable Remarks of this
Book. A very little Patience will be able to conquer them all. On∣ly I shall take notice to you, that he makes the Pox to be as Ancient as Fornication and Adultery; that wanton men in the days of Old were the Fathers of it, and Harlotry its Mother, when and wheresoever Beastliness and Un∣cleanness have much prevailed on the practice of men. The Con∣fusion and Corruption of so pre∣tious a substance as is the Seed, is here supposed to degenerate into so high a malignancy, when the Seed of many different persons do meet together in the Womb, are there cherished by the natural heat, and at length exert their acttivities in this heterogeneous Fermentation▪ and we may the easier conceive the truth of this, if we consider what strange and dismall effects, how
numerous and dreadful Diseases the Womb is often the Mother of, by Corruption of the Seed in one Woman alone; how much more exalted then must the putrefaction be, and the unhappy Parent of how degenerate an Off-spring, when the additional successions of many new Corruptions do still conspire to the same end, and still contribute to a further Advancement! Now though this and several o∣ther things here, are very prettily conceived, and have my entire ap∣probation of them, yet I would by no means be thought implicitely to embrace whatsoever is here esta∣blished, or at random defend all the delights of his thoughts, the scattered productions of his, or any man's wandering Fancy. Every man hath his roving, as well as lucid intervals; and though they may
very often be in the right, yet they may sometimes be in the wrong too. We have all indeed our particular Talents, and it will be certainly re∣quired of us, how we have employ∣ed or advanced them. It will not be enough for us sluggishly to say, we have had such or such a Learned Ma∣ster, and carefully laid up the Trea∣sure he committed to our charge, unless some improvement be made of it, or at least we shew our endea∣vours to make an encrease. I am very confident, nothing in all the World hath ever put so considerable a stop to the successive career, true Science would daily make, as a blind Suf∣frage, and mean submission to the dictates of persons we have a good opinion of. And for this reason I cannot but commend, and admire the declared designs of some Wor∣thy men among us; who, though
they do not transact Wonders eve∣ry Month, and shew themselves Chosen Sons of Nature, yet sure they deserve good words at least, and that Petulancy, with which some do daily nibble at them, might methinks be well spared. But to return again; as I do not profess my self a Disciple of this Gentle∣man, in all things he is pleased to utter; so I cannot but give him his due, and commend him much for his ingenious Attempts. For whe∣ther Mercury be of such absolute importance to the cure of this Dis∣ease, when Fermented a while in the Blood, and grown a little invete∣rate, as this Author would have it; or whether the Ceremony of omis∣sion of a Flux in some persons of Quality, and especially Women, be not the True and Latent Cause of their continual Indispositions, I
leave to every man to judge by his own Discretion and Experience. For my part, as I do not assent to those who violently maintain, that nothing at all can be done without Mercury; so I much pity the poor Spirit of those who think of it as a Hobgoblin; and are as apprehen∣sive of giving or receiving the ad∣ministration of it, as they would be of meeting a hungry Lyon. Men ought indeed to be Wonderful Cautious, how they presume to make use of so suspected a Medi∣cine; yet he hath seen but little into the Nature of things, or is wholly involved in a popular pre∣judice, who knows not, that Quick∣silver, as quick as it is, may be tam∣ed by Art; and may sometimes, by Discreet Masters, be very seasona∣bly employed to good purpose. I know 'tis very hard to speak of this
subject without being mistaken, on without being thought to have too great a kindness for it, if one doth not utterly Declare War against all who magnifie its effects: Neverthe∣less, I am sure all knowing men will interpret what I have now said, fa∣vourably enough. There's a famous Doctor in Pa∣ris, one of the King's Professors of Physick, but one who can never hear speak of Mercury, without pre∣sently reckoning up twenty Mortal Diseases it must needs be apt to pro∣duce: This person hath told me, when I took occasion to speak of the Salivation, that he hath perfor∣med a Flux before some Doctors of his Faculty, without the assistance, or use of Mercury; and that he mix∣ed the Ingredients, and gave them the Patient faithfully before their faces. The truth of it is, I had so
little Faith in the possibility of rais∣ing a Flux, or at least a sufficient one, without Mercury; and had so much condescention, as rather to submit with a complacent nod, than offer to dispute so considerable, and perhaps beloved an asseveration, that I had not curiosity enough to enquire the manner how it could be done, though I know the person to be the greatest enemy in the World to such things as Secrets. But I am apt to believe, that those Mor∣tal Diseases he so zealously Fathers upon Mercury, do rather arise from the indiscreet use of it, and gross a∣buse that is easily made of so Active a Medicine; when Quacks or Igno∣rants boldly take it into their hands. Whatsoever is the Nature, and how dangerous or beneficial soever are the effects of Mercury, certain∣ly the Author of these Observati∣ons
hath made a fair progrese to∣wards the clear Explication of its various Activities; and deserves to be commended for so considerable a Design. If the French are able to begin well, & lead the way with Courage, our English, I am sure, can not only do the same, but be ve∣ry useful to them, in a brave prose∣cution of what they undertake. Let the French with their nimble Fan∣sies start, and Invent things some∣times; the solid Judgment of an English man is required, to bring them to a due Perfection. As par∣ticular persons, so particular King∣doms have their peculiar Genius & Abilities; we must, and ought to assist one another with our Com∣munications. One man's head is not big enough to comprehend, or suf∣ficiently contain the vast extent of the Great, or Infinite Curiosities of
the Little World. And the neces∣sity of this mutual correspondence, and free intelligence among men, especially of different Countreys, (whereby Envy and Jealousie are not able to breed the Poyson, they usually do upon the same spot) puts me in mind of those Advantages a Traveller may therefore meet with in Forreign Countreys, more than the Natives themselves are capaci∣tated to enjoy. For if he be not too raw and young, he shall easily gain admittance into the Closets of their most Ingenious men: all the Rari∣ties they pretend to, and Observa∣tions they have made, will be dis∣covered by them, 'tis doubtful whe∣ther with more Ambition, of De∣light. Lastly, all their Arcanums, and close Reserves of Knowledge, shall with a slight Promise of si∣lence, while among them, be sub∣mitted
to his open view. The truth of what I now say, I have indeed ex∣perimented more than I could any way pretend to, from several Inge∣nious persons abroad, and particu∣larly from the Worthy Author of this present Treatise; into whose House, I had a long time free access; there to see the several Degrees of the POX treated not Speculatively, but Practically, according to the dif∣ferent Progress it usually makes.
The Approbations of the Chief Physicians of the Royal Family. I Ʋnderwritten, Counsellor of the King in his Counsels, Chief Physician of his Ma∣jesty, do Certifie; that I have read and ex∣amined the Book of Monsieur de Blegny, treating of Venereal Diseases; in which I have found his Principles well established, his Therapeutick part very Methodical, and his Observations Good, Curious, and such as must needs be very useful to the Publick. At Versailles, this 15th. of March. 1674. Signed, Daquin. I Ʋnderwritten, Chief Physician of the Queen of Sueden, and the Prince of Condè; do Certifie, that I have read and examined the Book of Monsieur de Blegny, containing many exact and useful Observa∣tions, from which he draws good consequen∣ces for the Knowledge and Cure of the Ve∣nereal Disease; his Reasonings are very clear, the whole Work is very solid, and Experience does confirm it: So that I can∣not but testifie my Approbation of this Book.
At Paris, this 20th. day of May, 1674. Signed, Bourdelot. I Ʋnder-written, Doctor of Physick, Coun∣sellor of the King, Physician in Ordina∣ry to his Majesty, and chief Physician of Madam, do certifie unto all to whom it may appertain, that the New and Curious Obser∣vations made by Monsieur de Blegny, the Queen's Chirurgeon, on The Art of curing Venereal Diseases; are very advantageous for all such as are afflicted with them; and do contain the most assured means of curing them. At Paris, the 16th. of May, 1674. Signed, N. Lizot. The Approbation of the Dean, and Do∣ctors, deputed by the Faculty of Phy∣sick of the University of Paris, for the Examination of this Book. WE under-written, Dean and Doctors of the Faculty of Physick, of the Ʋ∣niversity of Paris; after having heard the Relation of Dr. Philibert Morisett, Antony Morand, Francis Gouell, and Antony St. Yon, Doctors of the same Faculty, Com∣missioned
and Deputed, for reading and ex∣amining the Book entituled Observations on the Art of Curing Venereal Diseases, composed by Nicholas de Blegny, the Queens Chyrurgeon; who submitted it to the judg∣ment of the said Faculty: do consent to the Printing of this Book: And though it esta∣blishes the Cause of the POX upon Principles wholly New; yet we have not found any thing in his Method of curing, that is not confor∣mable to ancient received Maxims: and we conceive, that the New Observations which it doth contain, will serve to encrease an e∣mulation for the future, towards a more di∣ligent search of the truth of things less known. In testimony whereof, we have signed. At Paris, the 28th. of June. 1674. Signed, Moreau, Dean. Deputies. Morissett. Deputies. Gouell. Deputies. Morand. Deputies. De St. Yon. Deputies. The Approbations of the Chyrurgeons of the Royal Families. I Ʋnder-written, Chyrurgeon of Monsieur, the Kings only Brother, Duke of Orleans; do certifie, that I have read and examined
a Book entituled, New and Curious Ob∣servations, on the Art of Curing Venereal Maladies; in which I have found nothing contrary to the true Method of curing them. At Paris, the 13th. of July. 1674. Signed, Tanquered. I Ʋnder-written, Chyrurgeon in Ordinary to the deceased Duke of Orleans, and Syndick of the Chyrurgeons of the Royal Fa∣milies; do certifie, that I have read the Book of New and Curious Observations of Monsieur de Blegny: In which I find the Principles very solidly established, and con∣formable to Experience; so that it cannot but be very useful, both to such as are infect∣ed with the Venereal Disease, as well as those who undertake the Cure of it. At Paris this 30th. of June. 1674. Signed, Roberdeau. The Approbations of the Sworn Master Chyrurgeons of Paris. I Ʋnder-written, Master, and ancient Pro∣vost, and sworn Guardian of the Com∣pany of sworn Chyrurgeons of the City of Pa∣ris;
do certifie, that I have read and exa∣mined a Book entituled, New and Curious Observations on the Art to cure Venereal Diseases, composed by Nicholas de Blegny; Chyrurgeon in Ordinary to the Queen; in which I have found his Principles well esta∣blished, his Therapeutick part very Metho∣dical, and his Observations Curious and Ʋse∣ful to the Publick. In Testimony whereof, I have signed the present Approbation. At Paris, the 8th. of May. 1674. Signed Forbett. I Ʋnder-written, sworn Master Chyrurge∣on at Paris, and the Chyrurgeon in Or∣dinary to the Hospital General; do certifie, that I have read and examined the Book of Monsieur de Blegny, the Queen's Chyrurge∣on; in which I have found his Principles well established, his Method of Practice ve∣ry sure, and his Observations good, curious, and useful for the knowledge and cure of Ve∣nereal Diseases. In testimony whereof, I have signed this present Approbation. Dated at Paris, the 28th. of May. 1674. Signed, Antony le Duc.
NEW and CURIOUS OBSERVATIONS On the Art to Cure THE VENEREAL DISEASE, And the Accidents that it produces in all its Degrees. SECT. 1. In which some useful Reflections and Obser∣vations are made on the Names, Defini∣nition, Origine, Causes, Differences, Signs, and prognostick of the Pox. CHAP. I. Of the Pox in general. 1. Of its different Names. 2. Of its Defi∣nition. 3. Of its Origine. 1. AMONG all the Diseases which afflict mankind, it is remarka∣ble that none hath ever re∣ceived more different Names, than this of which I am going to treat.
All Nations that have smarted under it have reciprocally endeavour'd to re∣proach one another with its Origine, or at least with its Communication; and e∣very one in particular hath bestowed the Name of it on that which was esteemed an usual enemy. Whence it comes to pass that our Europeans have been pleased to call it American, Spanish, Neapolitan, I∣talian, and French. Good men have gi∣ven it the Name of the Shameful Disease, to render it the more odious unto all, or because it hath really somewhat infamous in it, and is the mark as well as the fruit of Debauchery and lubricity. The Poets have given it the Name of Siphilis, be∣cause they have pretended a Shepherd of that Name was first infected with it. But it is now generally known in this part of the World under the Names of the Venereal Disease, or the Pox, by rea∣son that the parts which are submitted to the influences of Venus have heretofore served for its Origine, and do now more often than any others serve for its Com∣munication; and because it very often produces spots and pustules on the skin, which are commonly supposed to be like those of the Small Pox, though in good
truth they have no similitude at all. 2. But if there appears such difficulty in giving it a proper Name that may be universally received, it will prove much more difficult to define it with all the ne∣cessary circumstances to a regular Defini∣tion, by reason it is so obvious to remark in its form almost all the kinds of Disea∣ses that Physicians use to speak of; or ra∣ther indeed because all the Accidents it produces are not able to furnish us with one Essential Difference, they resembling many others which nevertheless have Causes very different from that of this Disease. Wherefore the Definition that you'l here meet with is properly one of those that may be called simply Acciden∣tal, or a Description. The Pox is a contagious Distemper occasioned by Contact, and by means of a Venemous Salt, proceeding from the mixture and corruption of the Seeds of divers persons, received and contained in the wombs of publick Women; by which all the liquid substances wherein it mi∣xes do thicken and corrupt the nerves, skin, and in general the flesh to which it adheres, become prickt, gnaw'd, and dry; lastly the bones and cartilages that it
penetrates, do rise up, rot, and corrupt. Some will perhaps say, that it might have been more exactly defined by a more comprehensive Genus than Distem∣per, since the solution of Continuity, and a bad Conformation do accompany it al∣most at all times; nay and that of Affe∣ction against Nature, which I might have chosen too, may seem to do better, but indeed would not have determined it so precisely. For Distemper is absolutely Essential to this Disease, whereas divers Examples may be given, which do prove it may subsist without solution of Conti∣nuity, or a bad Conformation, and con∣sequently they ought not to be consider∣ed but as separable Accidents. Now though this Definition be a ve∣ry long one, yet there is but little need of any ample explication. For though I do remark, for example, that the Pox is contagious by Contact, there is no neces∣sity of troubling you with the proof of this Truth, because it is sufficiently known to Physicians, and the most part of other Men; Again it may be easily remarked that the Venereal Matter is a Venemous Salt, only by making some re∣flections on the effects which do result
from its mixture, adhaesion, or penetrati∣on; And lastly it may be easily under∣stood that this Salt is partly Fixt, having the quality of Acids, and partly Vola∣tile, as having that of Poisons. It should now remain to shew you how it can ori∣ginarily proceed from the mixture and corruption of the Seeds of divers per∣sons. But seeing this matter will be fully explicated in the following Chapter, speaking of the causes of this Disease, I'll say nothing more particularly of it here to avoid needless repetitions; Let it suf∣fice to tell you by the by, that the princi∣ples which it contains are as probable as new, that they do agree throughout with the following Observations, and that they consequently ought to be well un∣derstood by those who are desirous to receive profit from them. 3. As for, the Origine, or first begin∣ing of the Pox, nothing hath been ever canvassed with more heat, and differen∣ces of opinion by the Authors who have written of it; some have maintained that it was an effect of God's Judgment on Men, and that the source of it was to be sought only in the punishment that Men had drawn on themselves by the Debau∣cheries
of the last Age; Others have drawn it from the Indians, Spain, Naples, and other places, from whence they tell us it was not long since brought; Some have proposed the carnal copulation of a Leper and a Strumpet, or the conjuncti∣on of a Man with a mangy Beast; and others also have had particular Opinions on this subject, which we have reason to believe have as little truth in them, as those I have already hinted at, because all of them are either Theological or Fa∣bulous, and consequently out of the con∣sideration of Physicians, who ought to have for their End nothing else but the conservation of the Nature of Man, con∣sidered simply as a reasonable Creature; or else the destruction of what is contra∣ry to it: Wherefore it may be said that they ought not to use any other means to attain this end, but only such as are pure∣ly Natural, and that they should not draw their Knowledges and Maximes but from things sensibly known. In truth, if Natural Philosophy serv's for a Basis and Foundation to Physick, ought not Physicians to demonstrate all things that depend on it, by the princi∣ples of Nature, or of Art that imitates
Nature? And is not it very fit to leave Divines the consideration of whatsoever is Supernatural, and also to the Poets by the same reason, all things feigned, Chi∣merical, and supposed? That we may the better observe the Rules now mentioned, and satisfy Reason it self, by searching in∣to the Origine, Causes, and Remedies of all Diseases, in the true Agents that have produced them, or may be able to de∣stroy them: that is to say, in whatsoever causes the diminution, depravation, or a∣bolition of Natural Motions, or else in the Medicaments that can correct their Defaults; for otherwise we must be o∣bliged to acknowledge Cures that are Miraculous, Magical, or Superstitious for the Effects of Physick. Moreover seeing the true Origine of the Pox is the same with that of its Mat∣ter, & that shall not be particularly pro∣ved till the following Chapter, for the reason before marked, it seems the Rea∣der must be sent thither to learn the ac∣count of it: Nevertheless as there have been at all times debauched Women, who have prostituted themselves indiffe∣rently to all sorts of Men, it may here be observed by way of provision that the
Pox is almost as ancient as the World, and that its Origine ought to be drawn from the Impurity of the first Ages, in which it was but little less common than in the present times we live in; since the most ancient Physicians have spoken of all the Accidens that it produces, as well as other Indispositions that were then common & familiar, and that they have known them as well as wee, under the Names of Heat of Urine, Gonorrheas, Virulent Ulcers, impure Buboes, dry Pu∣stules, Tetters, Warts, and lastly Nodes, and rottenness of the Bones. We may also conceive that the settled inveterate Leprosie, which they speak of as a Disease very rare and incurable, was what we now call Leprosie, and that the other species of simple Leprosies, which they have mentioned as very common, were the different impressions that Venereal Salts made upon the skin; since they were accompanied with the greatest part of the other Accidents of the Pox, and that they were cured by the application of Mercurial Oyntments, which we now make use of to anoint and cure those that are infected with the Pox.
But it is very likely, that the regulari∣ty which our Fore-fathers observed in their way of living, did render it more rare, and less apparent, than it is now a∣dayes: As also it may be believed by the same reason, that the brutality of the Indians hath render'd them the more subject to it, and that the extreme heat they suffer in most places they inhabit, renders its Accidents more terrible, and apparent, by making the Blood boil more violently. CHAP. II. Of the Causes of the Pox. 1. Reflections on the Divisions of some Au∣thors. 2. Division of the Causes of the Pox, and a Discourse of its Generation. 3. A remarkable Observation on the same subject. 4. Divers necessary Observations on the cause of its Communication. 1. THose who despise common Ex∣pressions, and affect to use terms extraordinary and unknown, to cast (as they say) dust into the eyes of their
Readers, divide the Causes of Diseases into Occult and Manifest, Sympathick and Antipathick, in a word into Agents and Patients, to which they also often add by way of subdivision, those which they pretend Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final; Primitive, Antecedent, and Conjunctive; Near, and Remote; In∣ternal, and External. Nay some Authors seem to strain themselves to divide things that appear indivisible. Nevertheless it is observed, that these sorts of Divisions have no other profit, but to plung the minds of Men into confusion, into igno∣rance and obscurity, though they are, or ought to be taught with the design of instruction. An Example of this truth may be seen in the greatest part of young Students, who often employ a consider∣able time to learn things that are either unuseful, or of which they are not able to give any reason, whether it be that they do not understand them, or that they are really inconceiveable, and those who write of them have not been able themselves to conceive them. 2. But that we may not fall into the like inconvenience, and to enlighten the matter I treat of, as much as it is capable,
I shall consider but only two Causes of the Pox; to wit, that of its Generation, which consists in the Mixture and Corru∣ption of the Seeds of divers persons, re∣ceived and retained in the same Womb; And that of its Communication, which consists in the contact of impure Persons. It is so much the more necessary to prove the possibility of the former, as it is a new Opinion, that will consequently be pretended false by those who admit no Novelties at all: And I fear also that Reason and Experience do not furnish us with proofs clear enough, to discover this truth before the eyes of Opiniators, that love rather to follow blindly what they conceive through prejudice, than take the pains to examine things, to di∣stinguish rightly the true from the false. 'Tis after this manner I reason on this Subject. Philosophers, and generally the Learned, do acknowledge no consider∣able change in Nature, that is not made by a fermentation; of which no cause is found more evident than the motion and action of contrary Bodies: An Example of this truth, which may particularly serve for a proof of my Opinion, is ob∣served in the Generation of perfect Ani∣mals,
and principally in that of Man; for the Seeds of which he is generated do con∣tain not only the Idea and Form of all the parts, but also the good and ill Qua∣lities, the Temperaments, and Natural Inclinations of those from whom they are emitted; and this is so true, that the particles which convey these powers, act one upon the other, after the Conce∣ption; and that Infants of the same Fami∣ly are sometimes Male, sometimes Fe∣male, now like Father, another time like the Mother, and often partly like one, and partly like the other. Now if it be true to say, that the dif∣ferent qualities which are found in the Seeds of only two persons may be agita∣ted so considerably, as to cause one to o∣ver-rule the other, whilest they are con∣tained in the Womb, for Generation; that of a third person, which is there re∣ceived a little afterwards, may be lookt upon as a matter extraordinary, which must hinder Generation, or at least ren∣der it imperfect, by a more unequal mix∣ture, and stronger agitation; this serves to perswade me that Moles in Women may be as well the effects of Cuckolding, or Adultery as the production of Imagi∣nation;
since it is known besides, that the best Anatomists do esteem great quantity of Menstrual Blood (which is notwithstanding another principle of Ge∣neration) for one cause of this confusion and disorder: To which may be added, that it is by reason of this Confusion that common Strumpets never conceive at all, though they often do the same with those that have Children, & perhaps also with more advantageous circumstances; be∣cause the different Seeds that they re∣ceive, do cause a more vehement and ir∣regular fermentation, as they come from abundance of persons, and are filled with a great many contrary and opposite par∣ticles; from which fermentation there must consequently proceed a very bad change, and further from Perfection, to which Nature doth always tend. On this subject it may further be observed, that Corruption is the change, which follows fermentations that are absolutely against Nature; and it is easily to con∣ceive, how those Seeds being mixed to∣gether, may pass from their fermentation to corruption, almost at one and the same time, since this mixture doth render them improper for their Natural Use, and that
the heat and moisture of the part which contains them, do quickly dispose them to be corrupted. Now the most impor∣tant thing that remains on this subject, is to let you see, how they can become Ve∣nemous, that is to say, subtile, penetrant, and proper to coagulate and corrupt the Blood, as other Poisons do. But as the Seed is generally acknowledged for the best part of our Blood, and every body knows, that Corruption is so much the worse, as the matters corrupted were more pure and delicate before; It seems that this truth is sufficiently proved of it self, and that there is no necessity of searching Reasons more strong or con∣vincing to sustain it. Nevertheless if we reflect on the great store of Spirits where∣with all the Seed is filled, and on the quality of the Part that receives them; we shall then see that there is no matter which can remain more Spirituous, and consequently more Venomous after its Corruption; because there is none bet∣ter stor'd with Spirits, nor any more di∣ligently preserved; this change being made in the Womb, which is a part Na∣turally disposed to receive the Seed, and conserve all the parts of it: And what is
still observable, is that in passing from its Natural subject into other subjects, it be∣comes so much the more Venemous, as it hath passed a greater number of new Fermentations. 3. Furthermore, we may say of this Opinion, that it is one of those that can∣not well, be proved by any other way but our Reason, and that it is almost im∣possible to find subjects, on which Expe∣riments sufficiently sure and undoubted may be made; for besides that the Pox doth not always appear, and that there are but few persons who may be believed absolutely pure and clear from it, there must therefore remain but few indeed who can be esteemed proper for such an Experiment. Nevertheless I shall here report an Observation, that meer chance was the cause of to one of my Friends, and which may also serve to prove my thoughts on this subject. A young Girle of between 14 and 15 years of age, being pursued by her Mo∣ther, who would needs beat her, throws her self into the arms of one, who was a Brother of a certain Community of Workmen, established in a part of the Town, that it is not necessary to name;
this Man conducts her to his Chamber, and forces her; he presently communi∣cates the opportunity to him that u∣sually lay with him, who failed not to make use of the occasion, and to discover it also to another of his Camerades; in so much that in three days she was there, six several persons made use of her. Af∣ter this, the wisest among them, foresee∣ing that this business was like to draw some dangerous consequence, sent her home again by a Woman, that feigned to have found her in a Church; her Mother presently shuts her up in a Closet, where∣in no body was suffer'd to enter but her self, and six days afterwards she com∣plain'd of great pains that she suffered when she made Urine; her Mother cau∣sed her to be visited, and was told that she had got a Clap; nevertheless they neglected to make use of any Cure, be∣cause they would not believe it, and twelve days afterwards there appeared a Bubo in her right Groin: then they be∣gan to question her about it, and she ac∣cused the persons she had been with; they were all visited by Order of Justice, and were all found clean, and in good health; And the Chirurgeon that im∣parted
to me this story, assured me that he had familiarly frequented their Com∣pany a long time afterwards, and that he had never found any Venereal Di∣stemper among any of them, though 'tis now twelve years since it hapned. Though this Observation seems to be accompanied with all the Accidents that can be desired, to maintain my Opinion, yet I do not pretend to make it pass for a thing altogether unquestionable; both for that it is possible to be false, and be∣cause there might have been some un∣known Abuses under equal and as good appearances, I therefore leave all curi∣ous persons the liberty of making what other Experiments they please, and to e∣very one in particular that of judging the other circumstances of this Opinion, according to their own Ideas, or parti∣cular Observations, as things Problema∣tical, and no way absolutely necessary to the Art of curing the Pox. 4. After having sufficiently explicated what I mean by the Original Cause or Generative of the Pox, it is now neces∣sary to observe the several sorts of Con∣tact, that can conduce to its Communi∣cation, & which are here considered as
Causes of this Disease, because it is by them principally gained. But we must not imagine that this se∣cond Cause is always found in Coition, as the first; it matters not after what man∣ner the Contact is made, provided that it permits an adhesion or entrance to some part of the Venereal matter; it may be made either directly or indirectly, and here's an Example of it: A Woman with Child, who in the Company of one that hath the Pox, shall attract into her Womb, the corrupted Seed that shall be there ejaculated, will catch the Pox im∣mediatly, by reason of the Coition and Contact that preceded; and the Infant that shall be in her Womb, will be also infected with it, by reason of the same Coition, but not by reason of the Con∣tact, because the remoteness of the In∣fant hinder'd the Infection from being direct in respect of it. The same thing may be said of Infants that are engender∣ed of divers like Seeds, according to the ordinary course of Nature, or by way of Superfetation. Besides the Example that I just now gave, many other sorts of Contacts may be found, which are made by other ways,
and yet fail not to cause the Pox: For Example, if one should happen to drink after him that hath the Pox, and by chance put the Lips to the same place of the Glass, where some little Poison of the Ulcers of his mouth, or else some of his spittle fill'd with Venereal Salts, shall have stuck; it often happens, that this either causes other Ulcers, by superficial∣ly adhering to the parts, or else without delay the universal Pox; when the Salt that they contain is volatil and penetrant enough to enter into the Veins and Ar∣teries, without leaving any marks of its passage; for let ever so little of it be once mixt with the Blood, it will work like Leaven in a great deal of Dough, or rather it ferments and corrupts as other Poisons do, which are always more per∣nicious by their quality, than by their quantity. Another Example of this nature may be drawn from those who are infected with this Disease, for having unfortunate∣ly lain in the sheets, wherein one in the Pox had sweated, or in which there might remain some of the matter that run from his Ulcers. Besides these sorts of Contact, all others
may be said to be immediate, because they are made by the application of one part against another: Among them all the most ordinary is Coition, because this Disease doth for the most part begin in the parts that serve for Generation, and its matter is not always dispersed univer∣sally through the Body: In this action, if a Man hath Venereal Ulcers on his Yard, some part of the Poison that nou∣rishes them, and which is nothing else but a dissolution of the Salts that consti∣tute the Pox, doth almost always stick in some part of the Womb, or else in the wrinkles of the neck of her Womb, that he lies with, wherein he often causes o∣ther Ulcers, by adhering to the skin, or pellicules that cover those parts; on which matter it may be observed, that I have just reason to add this last circum∣stance, by reason that this matter doth not always necessarily adhere in Women, either because the Membrane that covers the Vagina, is very smooth, polished, and cover'd with a slimy Humour, or be∣cause the Seed that is therein ejaculated doth often slide out at the same time, and carries away with it this Virulent matter so much the more easily, as it hath not
had time to adhere, and as the scituation and form of this part do much contribute to its easier sliding out; it is also for this reason that common Strumpets do some∣times give hurt to others, though they have none at all themselves; because the approaching them a little after they have enjoyed the Company of other men that are impure, doth give some part of the impurity they received, though them∣selves may be exempt from any adhesion, or effect of the remaining matter, by the means that I have mentioned. It is observable that a virulent Clap, and the universal Pox are able equally to render the Seed impure; in so much that if that of a Man who is infected with it, be attracted and retained in the Womb of a Woman, it may cause in her either a Virulent Clap by adhering particularly to the spermatick Vessels, or else the uni∣versal Pox, by passing through the Ori∣rifices of the Arteries and Veins, that terminate in this part. In a word, a Wo∣man that shall suffer such Indispositions, may in like manner communicate them to a sound Man, that shall converse with her, by the adhesion or entrance of the matter that can cause them. It is also observeable, that the Impuri∣ties
of the Mouth of a little Infant that hath the Pox are able to infect the Nurse, by adhering to her Teats, or else the air of his Respiration, that can easily pene∣trate them through the pores that give passage to the Milk. In like manner an infected Nurse can impart her Disease to the little One, by an adhesion of the matter of her Ulcers, or by the use of the corrupted Milk that is suckt from her Teats. To ly with one that hath the Pox, and touch him naked while he sweats, or when he hath Ulcers and Pustules on his skin, is a thing that may well be believ∣ed very dangerous, and chiefly for those that have their pores very open, and therefore do easily receive the impression of any thing that touches them. The custom of Kissing with open Mouth, is another very dangerous business, for the reasons I have spoken of. Lastly, there are so many different Contacts which are capable of giving the Pox to those who have it not, that when you shall once know it assuredly by its Signs, you need not trouble your self but little about the manner how it was communicated, since you cannot always find it out,
and since it is often unknown, even to the persons sick themselves. CHAP. III. Of the Differences of the Pox, which may serve to make a Prognostick. 1. An Advertisement on this Subject, and general Division of the Degrees; from whence may be drawn some Differences. 2. Explication of the Differences that the first Degree furnishes us with, and general division of those that may be ob∣served in the second. 3. What may be un∣derstood by Particular Poxes. 4. What the Ʋniversal Pox is. 5. Explication of the differences that may be drawn from the third Degree. 1. BEfore I come to speak of the Diffe∣rences of the Pox, it is good to acquaint you, that I do not conceive any different Species of it, nor own any Sanguine, Cholerick, Phlegmatick, and Melancholick ones, as some Men have in∣considerately
done; but on the contrary do always esteem it as the same, in what degree, and whatsoever subject it may be found, since it is always produced by one and the same cause, that always acts after the same manner, and produces different Effects according to the various disposition of the parts that receive its action. This being once presupposed, you will easily grant, that the differences of this disease can only be drawn from the di∣versity of its degrees; that is to say, from the time that its matter hath been receiv∣ed, from the progress that it hath made, and from the Accidents that it produces. 2. Though I consider the time that the Venereal matter hath been received, for one degree, from whence some differen∣ces of the Pox may be drawn; and that some Authors do think to ascertain the Prognostick of it, by the consequences they thence draw; yet it must be ac∣knowledged that they are of no great consideration. For though it may be said that this Disease is either New or Inve∣terate, according to the more or less time it hath been contracted, yet one cannot judge for all that of the easiness, difficul∣ty,
or impossibility of its Cure: because this same matter is more or less active according to its quality or quantity, or else according to the particular disposi∣tions of the Bodies, in which it enters. For 'tis certain, as I have already obser∣ved, that it becomes more Venemous, & consequently more penetrant & sub∣tile, when it hath had duration in the change that may be made of it from dif∣ferent subjects; and the great quantity of it doth very much advance the disor∣der it is able to make, in every particu∣lar person. To which may be added, that it acts the more suddenly, when it is excited by the heat that is found in the Temperaments of Cholerick or Sanguine Bodies, which are so much the more dis∣posed to suffer its insinuation, as their pores and other passages are naturally more open; but on the contrary it is sometimes so fixt, and shut up in the cold, or gross Humours of Phlegmatick or Me∣lancholick persons, that it can lye there a long time like fire under ashes, and ex∣perience lets us see, that it can lurk 10 or 12 years, before any effects of its Mo∣tions will be felt; whence it follows, that the Judgment of the three Circum∣stances
I related, do chiefly depend on the examination that ought to be made, on the progress it hath already made, and the accidents it hath produced. For by the consideration of the first circum∣stance, the Particular or Universal Pox may be judged of: and this distinction is of such importance to the right pro∣gnostick of the easiness, or difficulty of its Cure, that it lets us see, in what degrees particular or common remedies may suf∣fice, or whether the stronger and more general are also necessary. 3. Before we pass further, it seems ve∣ry proper to explicate what I mean by this Difference, that I may let you see how it doth not serve only to distinguish the degrees of this Disease, and that it is not any way contrary to what I said of it at the beginning of this Chapter. I do call then a particular Pox, when its mat∣ter doth continue fixt to some parts, which suffer it to be dressed and cured with particular Remedies, external, or topical; and for which those are em∣ployed chiefly that are called General, or Internal, as well as to hinder the progress it might make by the penetration of its Salts: such are, for example, the Vene∣real
Ulcers and Chancres, or else Claps, and Virulent Gonorrheas; and which I call the Pox, as well as the others named before, because they are all of them pro∣ductions of an impure Contact, and of some Venereal matter received; of which all the effects may be observed, though it doth still adhere to some particular parts, as well as when it is dispersed over all the Body; for the coagulation and corruption that I have said doth happen by it in the liquid substances may be ob∣served in the Seed that runs in Virulent Gonorrheas, or else in the fixation of the Juyce that nourishes the parts in which the Venereal Ulcers are, that do by this means degenerate into Chancres, or Car∣nosities; The pricking, gnawing, or dry∣ing up of the Flesh, may be also observed in the beginning, augmentation, and changes of these same Ulcers; in a word, the elevation, rottenness, and corruption of solid parts are sometimes the conse∣quents of these first Evils, when they happen upon Bones or Cartilaginous parts; in so much that you may hence see with how much reason I do reckon them for degrees of the Pox, since it is commonly by then that it is found to
begin, and they are almost never seen to advance into a higher degree, when they ar drest as they ought to be. I do acknowledge nevertheless, that this name of the Pox was at first given to this Disease, only by reason of the re∣semblance that was thought to be be∣tween it and the Small Pox, through their spots and pustules; and it seems consequently, that this Name should then only belong to it, when it is in the degree that produces them. But we must observe, that it often passes from one de∣gree to another, almost insensibly; so that sometimes it cannot properly de∣serve that Name, if we stick close to this Circumstance; besides it may be said, that Names do not establish the essence of Diseases, and it matters not how this Disease is called, provided that it be con∣sidered as always of one Species accord∣ing to my opinion. 4. When the Venereal Salts are sub∣tile enough to penetrate through the po∣res, without staying in the places through which they pass (as hath been seen in some persons) or rather when they there stop, and cause the particular Poxes, of which I have spoken, without the per∣sons
taking care notwithstanding to op∣pose its insinuation, by the means of fit Remedies that drive or attract from within outwardly; they then cause what I call the universal Pox, by insinuating into the Vessels that contain the Blood, and spreading universally over all the Body, by the Circulation. They who have read the Authors that write on this subject, will wonder doubt∣less that I make the Venereal Salts pass from the superficial parts into the Veins and Arteries, without speaking of that Species of the Pox they make consist only in subtile Vapours and Spirits; but, as I have already told you, I cannot acknow∣ledge any different Species of it, and there is no reason besides, for considering what they have proposed on this subject, as one of its degrees, since it is not at all likely that these Spirits they pretend in∣fected, are able to circulate about the body, to penetrate the narrowest pores, cause Itchings, Inquietudes, and fall of Hair, the consequences of it, without mixing with the blood, by penetrating the Vessels I now spoke of which are but too porous for this effect, and are general∣ly dispersed into all parts of the body.
5. Moreover it may be said that the differences which may be drawn from the Accidents the Pox produces, are very considerable; for it may be said to be Mobile, during the ebullition of the blood, the dispersion and motion of its matter: that is to say, when it yet cau∣ses those wandring pains, or other Acci∣dents that appear, and vanish away suc∣cessively one after another; and on the contrary, it may be considered as in a fixt condition, when this dispersed matter doth adhere more particularly to some parts, out of which it is not able to get neither of it self, nor by the endea∣vours that Nature uses, unless seconded by proper Remedies, which also do be∣come useless, in those that have their In∣ternal and Principal parts much injured by the adhesion and action of this mat∣ter. But as the dispersion of it, as well as of all other Humours that are extrava∣sated, is caused most commonly in the Extremities; the most familiar Example of this degree may be observed in those that suffer in the night fixt pains of these same parts, the elevation and corruption of bones and cartilages. Lastly it may be seen by what I have said, that these dif∣ferences
are able to furnish us with the most important consequences for the bet∣ter making a good Prognostick of the Pox; because we can easily judge that the degree in which its matter continues still in Motion, can be carried off with ea∣siness enough, without leaving any im∣pression at all of its ill effects; and on the contrary, we may judge it sometimes in∣curable, where this same matter is abso∣lutely stopt & fixt, because it hath made us see in some persons all its effects on those parts that are necessary to life, and it is also rarely carried off in those I men∣tioned for the ordinary Example, with∣out leaving the sad marks of its activity: since it is sometimes impossible to rege∣nerate those parts that have been con∣sumed; for Example, the bones, and a∣mong others those of the Palate & Nose, which are often consumed in this degree, and leave after their entire corruption very considerable deformities, that can never be repaired.
CHAP. IV. Of the Judgment of the Pox. 1. Its division, and how ignorant Men and Impostors do commit Abuses in this Dis∣ease. 2. Many notorious Deceits and Impostures on this subject. 3. A general division of the Signs that make us know this Disease. 4. Particular divi∣sion of the Symptomes that happen in all its degrees, by the means of which the Prognostick, of it may be assuredly made. 1. THe Judgment of the Pox consists in knowing its Essence, or Pro∣gnosticating (as I have already said) the easiness, difficulty, or impossibility of its Cure. The Signs by which these things may be judged of, are the Symptomes that ac∣company this Disease in all its degrees, and are of a very great number, and do therefore deceive ignorant Men, because they do not all happen at a time, and Symptomes do often happen that much resemble them, though they are indeed
produced from other causes. This is that which gives, occasion to Impostors to make but ill use of the credulity of those that doubt of the condition they are in, and therefore find themselves engaged in this uncertainty to ask Counsel, and re∣quire succour of those from whom they in Justice ought to expect it, if they had but Honesty and Charity, which are things very necessary for all such as do profess Physick. The Reason that I have to speak after this manner  that the greatest part of those who pretend to cure this Disease now-a-days, do make the smallest appea∣rances pass for undoubted degrees of the Pox, and they do not fear to establish their Reputation at the cost of those who are not wise enough to know their own Folly, and yet have a blind confidence on others so mighty ingenious, as to run the hazard of losing all their Employ∣ments, their Estates, and Lives, for to be cured of an imaginary or supposed Dis∣ease. Though I have learnt an infinity of Cheats of this nature, by the report of those who have come to consult me after others on this subject, and by what I
have seen my self, by feigning my self sick, and several other ways; yet I will not by relating them encrease the bulk of my Book without profit, and I believe it will suffice, to relate some of the most remarkable of these Impostures, to serve for an Advertisement or Warning to those who may be for the future in the like perplexities. 2. The greatest part of those who think they know the World well, do believe themselves sufficiently assured, if they have escaped from falling io the hands of Empiricks, and such as distribute secret Remedies; nevertheless it is too true that there are many of those who are con∣trary to this sort of Men, that are not re∣ally Honest, but only in appearance, and do indifferently make profit of all the oc∣casions they meet with. This truth is suf∣ficiently known to many curious persons who have feigned themselves to have the Pox, & have found among those I spoke of persons that love their interest enough to confirm them in this Opinion upon the smallest suppositions; and I have seen my self by chance that there are some among them, who do not so much as endeavour to hide their Impostures
by affected appearances, but without a∣ny fear make ill use of the ignorance and easiness of those that go to consult them, with a very strange piece of confidence: The story that I am going to relate may serve so much the better for a proof of what I here affirm, as it happened to a man of good credit, that is now living, and might be able to assert the truth of it. This man came to consult me upon the account of several hard Pustules, that grew over all his skin; Upon this occa∣sion I made all the necessary remarks on his past Life, his Temperament, the pre∣sent condition of his person, his Wife and Children; and by this examination I knew it was nothing else but what Phy∣sicians call, the Gnawing or Corrosive Herpes, and I therefore proposed to him the use of a Bath, and other Remedies both general and particular, that ordina∣rily serve for the cure of this Distemper. But because he was afraid he had the Pox, and people often think they have the misfortunes they are afraid of, he still continued in the apprehension he was in before, and came to desire me some few days afterwards to conduct him to some famous Practitioner, to see whether he
would joyn his Opinion with mine, that so he might be better assured what to belie∣ve of it. To this end I waited on him to a certain person, whom a fair show of seem∣ing Honesty, store of Riches, and a good Reputation of being an Able man, have assuredly placed above the common Rank, but was guilty nevertheless on this occasion of an action altogether un∣worthy of those good qualities; for with∣out giving leasure to the Patient, or my self, to relate those things that the sight cannot discover, without making any examination at all, and only after a pre∣cipitate inspection of these Pustules, he told him it was a very fine sort of Pox, and therefore he had best presently re∣solve for a retreat of six weeks. This new way of judging of Diseases, will surely very much surprize all those that shall make some reflections on the difficulty there is of knowing them, and chiefly those Diseases whose causes are absconded in the secret internal parts, such as is the universal Pox; since the difficulty of knowing them is sometimes so great, that the most expert, profound, and most knowing Physicians, do happen to be mistaken, in taking one for another;
and they do observe for this purpose, the common Rule of Lawyers, by which they do never offer to give determinate Judg∣ment, upon the presence of one Witness only. But besides these considerations, it must also be remarked by the by, that those words of Fine Pox, do show at the same time both the ignorance, and quacking of those who make use of them: But after all, this same Patient was a lit∣tle afterwards comforted again by one that proved more honest, who after an ample knowledge of the circumstances I related, gave the same Name to this Dis∣ease that I had done before, and so ad∣vised him to those Remedies that I had proposed to him, by the use of which Remedies he was quite cured in a short time. Moreover it may be said, that In∣terest was the sole Motive of this treache∣rous dealing; for there is no likelihood that the ambition of appearing a great Doctor, should have been the cause, since he might have appeared so much more by reasoning on the Disease, than pro∣nouncing such fine words. Nor is there any reason to believe he did it to render me a good Office, since Offices of so high a nature are but seldom done without
the hopes of receiving equal ones again, and we two were not of Intelligence enough for that. Therefore it is much more likely, he thought with himself that I desired to put this person under his hands, for some particular consideration, and so he might have no other thought but of embracing the occasion offered. Besides those that engage credulous persons to suffer the Salivation, when there is no necessity of it, there are also a great many Mountebanks to be found, who give a false Judgment of the Pox, and perswade men they have it when they are altogether free. The easiness they have found in perswading men so, hath given them encouragement for an∣other sort of cheating: They cause Bil∣lets to be distributed in most parts of the Town, and clap up papers in the most re∣sorted places, nay and sometimes presume to write little Pamphlets, filled with no∣thing but follies and lyes, wherein they confidently boast that they are able to cure the Pox, without Mercury, without garde, or keeping their Chamber; and they have so much the more easily found persons who will believe them, and ren∣der their Imposture somewhat likely by
their own mistaken Experience, as there are many persons who think themselves sick of this Disease, when they do really enjoy most perfect Health. But that which plainly shows us it had not subsisted hi∣therto but only by this means, is that they are known to give the Salivation to those they think really in the Pox, for they do then suppose their Disease in a degree almost desperate, and they are not able consequently to cure them, but by making use of this Remedy, which they make pass for the extreme one of all, and do nevertheless very familiarly em∣ploy it under this disguise, with such a conduct as must always be believed very dangerous, in those that have learnt no∣thing of it but by Receipt. Though this Imposture be the more common and ordinary of all, yet it must not be esteem'd the only one, and there are some among them that do practise another still more remarkable. Whatso∣ever Accidents those that have the Pox do suffer, when they address themselves to these men, they will always assure them they have no such thing as the Pox, and so will promise to cure them with such Remedies as they call pleasant, mild
and insipid, but are always notwithstand∣ing the strongest and most violent Sudo∣risicks, Purgatives, and Vomitives, that do extremely exhaust and dry up the bo∣dy, to make the Accidents cease, by con∣suming the serosities that are spred a∣broad, and are the Causes of them; in∣somuch that these Patients find them∣selves cured in all appearance, till the next ebullition of the Blood begins again, and there happens a new dispersion of the matter that is able to produce other Symptomes, which they then make pass for unhappy Relapses, or else new Disea∣ses, that must undergo a new Cure. So that these persons thus affected do fur∣nish them with continual profit, as Cows with Milk, and a small number of them will be able to provide them Employ∣ment enough. But among all those that impose on credulous persons, there are none that make use of a more abominable Strata∣gem, than these that follow; for they do endeavour to perswade all their Pa∣tients that apply to them for help, that all their bodies are filled with Mercury, or else with Venereal matter, that must be driven out as fast as may be, if they
desire to escape death; and to convince them of the truth of this supposition, they tell them, they shall presently see abundance of Impurities come out of their bodies, so soon as ever their Remedies begin to be applied. In effect, as this pretended Remedy is nothing else but an Oynt∣ment applyed on their skin, that is com∣pounded of Cantharides; this promise of theirs seems true to many men, because it raises Blisters full of serosities, that seem to come through their pores, and because it makes them Urine prodigiously, nay often blood it self, by causing an inflama∣tion and exulceration of the Bladder, which are mortal Accidents. 3. But after having sufficiently spoken of the false Judgments of Impostors, and the means they make use of for commit∣ing their Abuses, it is time to let you see what are the true Signs that candid men must take notice of, for to judge aright of this Disease. These Signs may be divided into such as are known to the Patient alone, and such as are sensible both to Patient and Physician. The former are the impure Contacts that have preceded this Disease, the
pains they feel while they Urine, the In∣quietudes, and universal Itchings, the loss of Appetite, the indifference for Coition, the Nocturnal pollutions without plea∣sure, the suppression of the Terms in Wo∣men, or of the regulated Hemorrhoides in some men: Lastly the mobile or fixt pains of the Head, the Shoulders, and Extremities. The latter Signs are Gonorrheas, Bu∣boes or Poulains, Ulcers, and Chancres of the Yard, and of the Privities of Wo∣men; or else the hardness that remains after their Cicatrices, the fall of Hair from Head and Beard, the Wounds and Ulcers that cannot be cured with ordina∣ry Remedies, the Tetters, Pustules, and Warts; lastly the Elevation, Rotteness, and corruption of Bones. But we must be sure to observe that all, or most of these Signs that I have named, are but Accidents of the Pox it self; that it produces not all of them at all times, nor in all subjects, and that they become different according to its divers degrees; in so much that they do not happen always in a constant and as∣sured Order. For there have been some persons seen, whose bones have rotted
with the Pox, before ever any of those Accidents, Authors do call Antecedent, have been at all felt; which Accidents I had rather call Consequent, because they do most commonly follow those that ac∣company the particular Poxes, of which I have spoken. Nevertheless as it is im∣possible to make a good Prognostick of this Disease, without being able to di∣stinguish all the degrees it can happen in, it will be necessary to reflect on all that hath been already said, to the end we may the better find, how it passes out of one degree into another, and why in each particular one it doth produce very dif∣ferent Symptomes. 4. It may with Reason be said, that the Ulcers which are caused by impure Contacts, do constitute the first degree of the Pox, because they are the effect of some matter that very superficially ad∣heres; they cannot be distinguished from ordinary Ulcers at their beginning, but by the preceding Contact, and the parts in which they happen; and they may be cured in this condition with com∣mon and ordinary Desiccatives. But when the Salts that caused them, cannot be destroyed by these or other means,
they then penetrate into the Vessels that contain the blood, or else mix with the Natural moisture that remains in the ul∣cer'd part, and fix it in such manner, that from Ulcers they degenerate into Chan∣cres; and then indeed they are much more dangerous and hard to cure, but are known by the elevation of their white sides, by their obscure colour, and by their hardness. You may easily judge that Claps, or Virulent Gonorrheas, are of a yet higher degree than the Ulcers I now spoke of; because the matter that makes them is more deeply driven into the bodies of those who suffer them, and the parts that are infected with them are such as are in∣ward and concealed: The Bladder, for Example, and the parts adjacent or de∣pendent on it, are the first that suffer the Inflammation, which is sufficiently known by the heat and pains that are felt in urining, and sometimes by an en∣tire suppression of the Urine; the semi∣nal parts, and the Seed it self are not more free from an Alteration, since the loss, thickness, & corruption of the Seed, are undoubted marks of it. Lastly the passages through which these Impurities
are carried do not long remain free from their ill effects, but become exulcerated by the sharp points of the Salts they con∣tain, and this exulceration doth cause them to suffer very grievous pains, du∣ring the passage of their Urine. While this particular Pox is but new∣ly contracted, it can be cured with a great deal of ease and safety, by prevent∣ing that which we ought otherwise to fear, and taking away whatsoever ap∣pears, by the use and application of pro∣per Remedies to this effect. But when it hath had a considerable duration without necessary succour, it must be then believ∣ed to be of a much more difficult and dangerous Cure, because all its Accidents become greater, and the further pene∣tration if its matter, that is, the universal Pox, may be then with just Reason su∣spected. Therefore it must then be treat∣ed with more care and precaution, and the Prognostick that is made of it must be more doubtful. We may now observe that the Vene∣real Salts do often pass from the parts I spoke of into the orifices of the Veins and Arteries, and do sometimes penetrate more directly by the subtilty & keenness
of their points. Nevertheless what way soever they enter, it is always true, that they cause in some a great ebullition of their blood, either by the particular dis∣positions they find in it, or else by their own deleterious quality; during which ebullition, the Impurities do separate, much after the same manner as Lees do in the fermentation of Wine, and so are driven out after a while by the force of Nature, or, if you will so, by the Facul∣ty Expultrive into the Glandules of the Groins, where it causes a Bubo, or Botch, that serves for a Crisis of the Pox, if it be attracted and brought to perfect Suppu∣ration. It may be distinguished from other Tumours, that sometimes happen in those parts, by the impure Contact that pre∣ceeded it, by the Claps, Gonorrheas, Ul∣cers, and Chancres, that often happen a little before its discovery, but principal∣ly by its slow advancement, its durity, and large Basis. But this penetration of the Venereal matter into the mass of the blood, is not always attended with so happy success as the extrusion of such a Tumour: the Venereal Salts do sometimes participate
more of fixt than volatile, and the blood is not equally hot and subtile in all sorts of men, so that in some it presently coa∣gulates by this means, much after the same manner as some curious persons have experimented, by syringing Acid Li∣quours into the Veins of Brutes; and this coagulation is often the Cause of those suppressions I took notice of, and of their loathing all Meat, a of their indiffer∣ence as to Coition, because whil'st it continues, the Circulation grows very slow, and consequently the Natural Fun∣ctions that depend on it, become inter∣rupted. Wherefore this time may be ob∣served for another degree of the Pox, that can nevertheless be clearly carried off, by the inward Sudorisicks, which do dissolve and attenuate the blood, by new ebullitions, provided that Nature be also assisted in her other evacuations. At the time that this coagulation of the blood ceases, by the separation of the different particles it then contains, we may consider the beginning of its fer∣mentation, which is performed so much the more gently, and by degrees, as it met before with Obstacles to hinder it; whence it comes to pass that this blood
doth but only rise and boil by little and little, though indeed this gentle ebulli∣tion fails not nevertheless to cause Sym∣ptomes very much different from those I have already spoken of, and such as I shall remark hereafter. For whil'st it lasts, light vapours arise from it, that are car∣ried all over the body, and do cause those inquietudes of mind, and body, those Itchings of  skin, and fall of the Hair from the Head and Beard. Wherefore this time may be also con∣sidered as another degree of the Pox, wherein nevertheless it may be absolute∣ly cured, as well as in the former, by a good use of ordinary Remedies, or else by a Critical Motion of some other Dis∣ease supervening. But as these means do fail sometimes of the desired effects, it were much better in this condition to provoke a light Salivation, by which a quick, easie, and assured Cure may be hoped for. When the fermentation encreases, or that it is in its height, the Venemous se∣rosities do separate from the blood, and pass á travers the coats of the Vessels that contain it, after which they slide along, the Nerves and Membranes, and cause
those wandring pains that are felt now in one part, and now in another; some∣times also Nature strives to drive them forth through the pores; but as these serosities are heavy and full of Salts, they adhere to the skin instead of going forth, and there cause Ulcers when they are mixt with some corrupted matter; or if on the contrary they are chiefly charged with fixt Salts, they there raise pustules, that are flat, scaly, dry, and of a red drawing towards an Orange colour; or else if they are fill'd with volatil Salts, they rise somewhat higher, and produce hard Tetters and Warts upon the Yards, privities of Women, the Groin, and other places. This degree of the Pox is not the most difficult of all to be cured, but it is known very well by experience that there is no∣thing but Mercury among Remedies that is able to excite the Crisis that can termi∣nate it. Oftentimes after these matters have been thus wandring about the body, they altogether adhere and absolutely stay in some parts, and cause by this means the last and most terrible degree of the Pox. For though their adhesion doth some∣times
happen only in the Muscles and Pe∣riostium, they fail not to cause most la∣mentable Accidents, because by prick∣ing, gnawing, and continually drying the nervous Fibres of these parts, they there produce those fixt and nocturual pains, some persons have found insupportable. The Cartilages, and especially the bones, are also other parts that suffer great changes by their penetration; for they cause a sort of fermentation in the Mar∣row or Juyce they contain, by the means of which Tumours are seen to happen, that are called Nodes, and which are no∣thing else but an elevation of their very substance, that is at last rotted and cor∣rupted by the presence and action of these Impurities. Nevertheless though the Pox is very hard to cure, when its matter is thus stopt, and sunk into the parts I named, it may be observed that it would be al∣ways curable even in this degree, if this same matter were not sometimes stuck to parts that are still more considerable. But it hath been unhappily proved in some Men, that the parts which are call∣ed Noble, and those that immediately administer to the Noble ones have not
been exempt from its activity and cruel effects. Wherefore the Prognostick that may be made of it, is so sad and lamenta∣ble, that it always consists in judging the extraordinary difficulty, or else impossi∣bility of the Cure. But besides the general Considerations that I have marked, for making a good Prognostick of the Pox in, all its degrees, there must be respect had to the particu∣lar circumstances of each subject, as, for example, to the Temperament, Sex, Age, Strength, and also Employment of him we pretend to cure. For I have known by Experience that the inquietudes which important affairs do give some men, do heat and inflame the Spirits, and thereby cause the Mercury to enter into the Brain, where it finally causes most deplorable Accidents.
SECT. 2. In which necessary Observations are made on the means to cure the Pox, while it is but Particular; on the Natural and Cri∣tical. Motions which do terminate it when it becomes Ʋniversal, and on the Medicines which commonly serve to raise the Artificial Crisis of it. CHAP. I. Of the sorts of Particular Pox that are called Ulcers and Chancres. 1. Why the particular Poxes are here treat∣ed of in the first place, and of the general division that may be made of them. 2. Of Venereal Ʋlcers in general. 3. The parti∣cular Method of curing them. 4. Obser∣vation on the Purges that ought to be em∣ployed in their Cure. 5. Of other Preser∣vatives. 6. Divers necessary Observati∣ons on the Remedies that serve for curing them, when they degenerate into Chan∣cres. 7. Of the Phymosis and Paraphy∣mosis. 1. AFter having thus remarked all the general things that I have judg∣ed
necessary for the understanding those that more particularly relate to the Art of curing the Pox: It is now time to speak of its Remedies, and the circum∣stances that must be observed for the u∣sing them well and without danger. And seeing the matter that causes the Pox doth in a manner always adhere to some particular parts, before it advances to in∣fect the whole body; some Reflections shall here be made in the first place on the means of curing it, while it doth con∣tinue particular, and on the Preservatives that ought to be used for hindring its be∣coming Universal. But to the end we may avoid useless Repetitions, I shall say nothing more in general of particular Poxes, nor of the Reasons for which I have so named them, because these things have been already sufficiently explicated, when I spoke of the Differences and Signs, which may serve for the Knowledge and Prognostick of all the degrees of this Disease. It will suffice to say here, that they maay be di∣vided into such as appear only in the parts that may be seen and touched, and into such as happen in other parts that our senses cannot discover: so that ac∣cording
to this Division, different Re∣medies may be given the more success∣fully, as occasion requires. 2. The first are the Ulcers and Chan∣cres, which are caused by a light and su∣perficial adhesion of some matter, that hath not penetrated more inwardly. I add this distinction, because I do not now intend to speak of those that are made in the Ureter, by the passage of Virulent matter in Claps or Gonorrheas; nor of such as are the Symptomes of the univer∣sal Pox, since the manner of treating them is much different, and that they do depend on other degrees. This particular Pox is nothing else in the beginning, but the ruption or dila∣ceration of the superficial Fibres of the skin, or pellicules that cover the parts to which the matter doth adhere; so that no other Name must consequently be gi∣ven to it, than that of Venereal Ulcers: especially if we will not do like Igno∣rants or Impostors, who make the smallest Excoriations pass for Chancres of a most difficult cure, and they do not indeed cure them, but with a great deal of pains and time, because they dress them with caustick burning Medicines, which
make them become very painful, hard, and apt to suppurate, though oftentimes the gentlest desiccatives are sufficient to cure them in three or four days. These Ulcers may indeed happen in all parts of the body, because they are all capable of an impure Contact, but the more tender and delicate ones are most subject to them, by reason that the im∣pure Salts do more easily stick in their susceptible substance; whence it comes to pass, that the Yards in Men, the Pri∣vities in Women, the Teats in Nurses, and the Mouth in Infants, are the parts which are most commonly infected with them. 3. That which ought to be done to∣wards their Cure while they are in this condition, consists principally in drying them up like other Ulcers, only regard must be had to the matter that causes them, and proper Desiccatives employed for breaking the points of the Salts they contain, and to oppose their penetration, which is so much the rather to be feared, as it is done insensibly. The following Liquours will very well answer this first respect, if you wash the Ulcers twice a day with them, and lay
Tents upon them, that are dipt in these Liquours, observing always to give such a strength to them as is most agreable & proper to the particular Temperaments of the bodies and parts, on which you shall apply them, and this by encreasing the quantity of Pouders to render them the stronger, or else that of the Waters to make them the weaker. Take of the seventh Water of unslakt Lime one pound, Spirit of Vitriol, Salt of Saturn, and Verdegrease, of each half a drachme. Or else, Rose and Plantain Water, of each half a pound, Aqua-vitae two oun∣ces, Orpiment a drachme and a half, Verdegrease two scruples, Aloes half a drachm. Or again, white Wine a pound, Rose and Plantain Water, of each four ounces, Orpin two drachmes, Verdegrease one drachm, Mirrh and Aloes of each a scru∣ple; Make the Liquours according to Art, for the use above mentioned. To answer the second respect that I re∣marked, you must use both Purgatives and Diureticks, if the Ulcers are upon the Yard of a Man, the Genitals of a Woman, or about the Groin of either of
them; or else you may use inwardly Su∣dorisicks, that drive from the Center to the Circumference, if they are in any o∣ther parts. 4. It must be especially observed, that the Purgatives, which you shall make use of for this effect, be strong enough to move Nature, and help it to drive by Stool any impure matter that might have penetrated a little more inwardly, than the Ulcers which appear to you; and al∣so that they be not violent enough to at∣tract the Humours from the remoter parts; for this attraction would help the matter to make a further penetration, then it would otherwise have been able to do of it self, and so cause by this means the universal Pox, which you do endea∣vour to avoid: And here you may take notice that the greatest part of Men are themselves the causes of the frauds and deceits that are done to them; for there are very many who will never think themselves well purged, unless they have felt excessive pains, and cruel gripes in their guts, and unless they go to Stool fiveteen or twenty times at least: though to speak the truth, Nature can never en∣dure these extraordinary and violent
Motions without the diminution or de∣pravation of their Functions, which ne∣vertheless are the principal Agents in the separation and expulsion of Impurities. If you desire therefore to avoid these excesses, you'll find nothing more safe than an Infusion of Senna with Salt of Tartar, in which you may also dissolve the Syrups of Roses or Peachflowers; proportionating the doses to the age and strength of the Patient you take in hand. 5. The Diuretiks you must make use of to repel by Urine, are Crystal Mineral, which you may give from half a drachm to two or three, and the Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur, from six to thirty drops in Pellitory Water, or an Aperitive Pti∣sanne, you may prepare with the Roots of Strawberries, wild Succhory, Grass and Dandelion. Those of Parsly, Fennil, Sperage, and Rest-harrow, are much more aperitive than the former, and divers forms of Pti∣sannes may be prepared with them, that are useful indeed to some, but may have very ill effect on persons extremely hot and dry, as well as Radish-seed bruised, and taken in white Wine, which is not∣withstanding a most powerful Aperitive.
For the Sudorisicks that are taken in∣wardly, you may successively make use of the Spirit of Harts-horn, which you may give in half a Glass of Carduus-water, from six to twenty drops, or a like number of grains of its volatile Salt dis∣solved in the same Water. But among all you'll find none to have a greater effect than the Pouder, or vola∣tile Salt of Vipers, if you give the first from ten to thirty grains, and the latter from five to fiveteen, in equal parts of Cinnamon and Carduus-waters, or in the Water that remains in the distillation of this same Salt. 6. It remains to say, that these Evils do not long continue under the Name of Ulcers simply; for it is well known that the matter which causes them doth sometimes insinuate more deeply, and by this means doth make another degree of the Pox; but it more often happens, that by long continuance in the exulcerated part, it makes the Ulcers turn into Chan∣cres, after the manner I spoke of before. Wherefore it is good to observe, that you dress them in this condition with Escaroticks and Suppuratives, because you must consume the hardness that is
found in them, for fear of leaving a fer∣ment in the parts, that might produce af∣terwards a far greater Evil, than you are going to destroy. They who follow the ordinary Pra∣ctice in this case, are content to apply Red Precipitate, which in truth makes a skar when it is good, but that a light and superficial one, such as is not able to hinder the hardness from encreasing in la∣titude and profundity, and from re∣maining also after their Cicatrice, what time soever is employed towards their consumption. Some do make use of sublimate Cor∣rosive, but besides that it causes intole∣rable pains during the Operation, it at∣tracts watry fluxions on the parts it is ap∣plyed to, which are very hard to dissolve, and do besides dispose the parts to a Gangrene, and this principally in those parts that are near the passages which serve for expulsion of the Excrements. The causes of these misfortunes, and many others, is an Errour of some ancient Authors, that every body may easily be convinced of, yet hath nevertheless been received by way of Tradition, by the greatest part of those who have written
ever since, or do still write on this sub∣ject; according to which Errour they represent Quicksilver to be like a Ferret that goes and searches out the Venereal matter in all parts of the body, for to ex∣pel it thence presently, as this little Ani∣mal doth the Connies out of their Holes: For which Opinion nevertheless they have had no other proof than an indeter∣minate prejudice, that hath for its foun∣dation nothing but pretended occult and specifick qualities, which no body can understand. Nevertheless we know they look on no other Remedies to be other∣wise than to be impotent of unuseful for these sorts of Maladies. And so we must not at all wonder, that they are so stiff and re∣fractory, in never making use of any o∣ther Causticks than such as are made with Mercury, which in good truth is the most assured Remedy for raising the Crisis of the universal Pox: but this only by reason of such Motions and Actions, as may be determinate and known. Whatsoever is the truth of it, you'll find by Experience, that the Caustick Stones, which are prepared of unslackt Lime, and the Cineres Clavellati, have a much more certain effect, since they cause a
skar more profound than Red Precipi∣tate, and act with less pain than Subli∣mate Corrosive. You must use them notwithstanding with prudence and discretion, and re∣member that a part already exulcerated is more easy to penetrate, than when it is covered with its skin; and consequently you must use them in a smaller quantity, and they must be limited to fit places on∣ly, by means of a Plaster with a hole in the middle of it, of the exact bigness you desire to make your skar, and this to hin∣der the Salts from overspreading them∣selves, after they have been dissolved by the moisture of the Ulcer. But if you will be still more assured in what you do, you may then make use of the Lapis Infernalis, with which you may see and conduct the Operation as it were in an instant. After having made a skar by some of these means, but more particularly by the two last, you may procure the fall of it with the common Suppurative, in which you may afterwards mix a little Red Pre∣cipitate, and burnt Alum, to encrease the Suppuration, and consume the hardness that may remain. But if it is considerable
or you have to do with a body Dry and Melancholick; you may add with good store of the foresaid Ointment, a little Sublimate Corrosive, and wash the Ul∣cer every time you dress it with the last Collyre of Liquour I described, adding a little Aegyptiack when there is need, to make it more detersive. You may also lay over the Tents the Plaster of Mucilages, in which you shall have mixed 4 or 6 ounces of Mercury for every pound, and rub the places about the part with the Neapolitan Ointment double or treble of Mercury, in the mean time not forgetting the Purgatives that you must reiterate on this occasion, as well as the other general Remedies I have proposed for a preservation from the universal Pox. 7. When these sorts of Mischiefs are on the Yard of a Man, there happens some∣times a Phymosis to the prepuce, either by the Patient's negligence, or the igno∣rance of him that takes the cure in hand, and this hinders him from being able to uncover, or dress the Ulcers or Chancres that are underneath. The common way of remedying this Accident, is to make one or two Incisions, and this Operation
is so much the more subject to unhappy consequences, as the part is already affli∣cted, and therefore more disposed for re∣ceiving Fluxions; and therefore you will do much better to try some Emol∣lient Fomentations, and Cataplasms, that you may prepare with the Decoction and Residence of Mallow-leaves, Roots of Marsh-Mallows, and Lin-seed, not forget∣ting the frictions of the Ointments, and application of the Plasters I named be∣fore. During which, you must mundifie the Ulcers, and Chancres, as well as you can, with the Collyres or Liquours before described; of which Liquours you may often make Injections under the Prepuce, with a little Syringe, observing to stretch it by little and little with your fingers, by drawing it toward the root of the Yard, as often as you dress your Patient, till the Gland becomes again wholly un∣covered; but all this must be done ve∣ry gently, and without any violence, for otherwise there will happen a Paraphy∣mosis, which is an Accident much worse than the former; for besides that the Ba∣lanus is suffocated, and cannot by any means be uncovered, this suffocation causes such a pain, as presently draws
Fluxion, Inflammation, and Gangrene, if all possible care be not suddenly used. Some have indeed very happily cured this Indisposition, by only bathing the Yard or Belly in cold Water, but this principally in its beginning. All the Remedies described against the Phymosis are also useful in the Paraphymo∣sis, when there is time to make use of them. But oftentimes one is obliged to practise and prefer the Incisions before a∣ny of the other. Now I shall not say any thing of the means how to cicatrize the Ulcers and Chancres, since they do principally con∣sist in mundifying them well, and Nature labours enough of her own accord to re∣unite the divided parts, when the Phy∣sician knows how to remove the Impedi∣ments.
CHAP. II. Of the other particular Poxes, that are called Claps and Virulent Gonorrheas. 1. That the Salts which cause these sorts of Poxes are very Volatile, and have some similitude and some difference between them. 2. Diverse necessary Observations on the Method of Curing them. 3. Con∣cerning the Inflation or Swelling, and Inflammation of the Testicules, with the means of Healing them. 4. Of Carnosi∣ties that sometimes follow these first Mis∣chiefs, and of their Remedies. 5. A ve∣ry useful Observation on particular Poxes. 1. THe other particular Poxes, which I have said do happen to the parts our senses cannot discover, are Claps, and Virulent Gonorrheas; which are the effects of a very subtile, or rather volatile matter, since in Women it often passes from the Vagina (wherein the Seed is received) into the Ejaculatory Vessels, and into their Testicules; and since it passes in Men all along the Ure∣ters,
to make their adhesion to the same Vessels, and to the Bladder, without leaving nevertheless in the one or in the other any marks at all of its passage, in the parts it goes through. Though Virulent Claps, or Heats of Urine, do never happen without Go∣norrheas, that is to say, without the cor∣ruption and flowing of the Seed, yet they must not be confounded indifferent∣ly together under these two Names, as some Authors have very inconsiderately done; because this last Indisposition re∣mains sometimes a great while after the former, and it is seen sometimes to hap∣pen alone, that is to say, without Exul∣ceration, and apparent Inflammation, though indeed it be actually caused by the presence of impure Salts which pos∣sess the Spermatick Vessels. Nevertheless as the Gonorrhea is inseparable from a Clap, and the Remedies which agree to it as an Accident, do also serve for curing it, when it is a Disease apart, it will not be necessary to treat of it here more par∣ticularly; it may suffice to acquaint you, that it is often taken in Women for the Whites, for want of observing, that its Flux is continual, whereas that of the
Whites is almost always Periodical and Menstrual. Furthermore I have sufficiently expli∣cated otherwise what I mean by Virulent Claps, and after what manner I conceive them to be produced, that there is no need of making repetitions here; I be∣lieve also that all the divisions which I could make of it be altogether useless, because I do not intend to speak but on∣ly of those that are caused by the en∣trance and adhesion of some Venereal Salt, or else because its Accidents do suf∣ficiently distinguish it from such as hap∣pen by violent Exercises, by the use of fermented Liquours, and by other causes. Therefore I believe it will suffice to give you in this Chapter the circumstances it is necessary to observe for the curing suc∣cessfully all the Accidents that accompa∣ny this I am now going to speak of, or else for assuredly preventing the univer∣sal Pox, that might otherwise follow. 2. Inflammation may be said to be the most pressing Accident of all that happen in this degree of the Pox, for 'tis by it that the matter which runs out is render∣ed the more sharp and corrosive, that the Ulcers of the passages become greater and
more profound, that the pains grow in∣supportable, and lastly that the means of making Urine become so extream diffi∣cult, nay and sometimes in a manner im∣possible: 'Tis therefore requisite to take care betimes of preventing, or else cu∣ring it by cooling Remedies, such as may be those I am now going to propose. Some persons, whom we must by no means imitate, do begin with Blood∣letting in the Arm, which may be apt to attract or drive the Venereal matter more inwardly into the body, and must conse∣quently be suspected as dangerous; o∣thers are not afraid to let Blood in the Foot, which also may have the same ef∣fect, or else precipitate the Defluxion in∣to the Stones; wherefore you should ab∣stain from them both, and prefer the use of the following Ptisanne, which will ser∣ve at the same time to cool the parts, drive the matter outwards, and diminish its Acrimony. Take the Roots of white Lillies, and Marsh-Mallows, of each a pound, Sorrel half a hand full, Liquorish a sufficient quantity, Barley three hands full, Lin∣seed two ounces, common Water four and twenty pounds; make a Ptisanne
the usual way, remembring to press the remainder well, for to draw out the Mu∣cilage the better. Add in every Bottle of this Ptisanne ten or twelve drops of the Spirit of Vi∣triol, and make, your Patient drink of it as much as his stomach will bear, and this indifferently at any hour, day, or night. Though this Ptisanne be often suffi∣cient to answer the intentions I have named, when you begin in good time to make use of it; yet it is found every day in some persons, that the malignity of the matter, and disposition of the bo∣dy and parts, do cause the Inflammation to grow so great, as to communicate it self to the Reins, and neck of the Blad∣der, so that the Patients do suffer ex∣treme pains, when they are in Bed, du∣ring the erection, and in urining: but this more particularly in Men; for the Convulsion of the Nerves of their Yard, which by retiring toward their origine do swell, and thereby render this part crooked, or bended, doth cause the de∣gree of the Pox in which it is said to be corded and stringed; and in which also you must add to the fore-named Ingre∣dients
for the Ptisanne, two ounces of the Cold Seeds, half an ounce of white Pop∣py Seed, and the Juyce of two or three Limons, for to render it more Anodyne, more refreshing, and agreable. You shall also give from time to time emulsions made of Whey, sweet Almonds, and the Seeds and Juyce I have now named. You may for the same intention rub the Reins, and Perineum with the Cere∣cloth of Galen, which you must after∣wards cover with Linnen dipt in Oxye∣rat that is made of one part of Vinegar, and six of Rose-water. The use of cooling Clysters must be frequent too, as well as Injections of this quality, which must be made into the Yard, by means of a little Syringe, and this with luke-warm Milk, for Example, which is marvellous for this effect, and one may make use of it much more suc∣cessfully than of common Water, to dip the Yard in whil'st he urines, and so fa∣cilitate the passage of the Urine. Some of those who do not esteem things that are common, chuse rather to make use of the Waters of Night-shade, Roses, and Plantain, to make Injections,
which are indeed Refrigerant and Ano∣dyne, because they hinder the matter from flowing, and drive it back by their astriction; but it is a dangerous thing to do so, and therefore you must have a care of using them, unless the matter be grown thick, and hath run sufficiently. Turpentine of Chios, or in defect of it that of Venice, hath a marvellous effect for asswaging and qualifying the matter, and driving it out, because it very easily slides into those parts, and is very Diuretick. You may give it in Bolus or Pills from two drachms to half an ounce, or its Spi∣rit drawn Chymically from five drops to fifteen, in Aperitive Waters or Pti∣sannes. Experience will let you know that the Salt, which is called Polychrest, is a powerful Remedy to drive out the Ve∣nereal Salts, if you dissolve two drachms of it in two glasses of the former Ptisanne, or of Pellitory-water, to give it a little after the Inflammation is past, and reite∣rate it after this manner two or three times, augmenting the Dose each time with a drachm more. After the use of these Remedies, you must begin to purge gently, with a light
Infusion of Senna, Crystal Mineral, and Cassia, and may reiterate this Purge some days afterwards, augmenting the Dose, or else adding other Medicaments that are most convenient to the present Dispositions. When the matter shall come to run more white, more thick, & in less quan∣tity, you may then hinder its effluxion for altogether, shutting up and closing the Spermatick Vessels by astringent and in∣ward Remedies, whil'st you are clean∣sing and desiccating the Ulcers of the U∣reter, with detersive and desiccative In∣jections. Some of those that abuse Physick and its Remedies, do strive to stop the mat∣ter that runs in Claps, only with astrin∣gent Injections; which causes the matter to sink into the more inward parts, and so consequently there happens a greater Evil then they pretended to cure, or at least the effluxion begins again so soon as they have left off the use of these pre∣tended Remedies: in so much that they are compelled sometimes fifteen or twenty times to reassume the use of them, without attaining the end they proposed themselves. For these Injections cannot
go in Men further than the inward ex∣tremity of the common passage to the Seed and Urine, nor in Women further than the neck of the Womb, or the neck of the Bladder; but this happens chiefly, because by this means they hinder the evacuation of such Impurities as may still remain sometimes after the Operati∣on of the former Medicaments, and are too often the only cause of the duration of this Disease. Now none of this hap∣pens, when Stiptick Remedies that are taken inwardly, are used with prudence; for they close the Spermatick Vessels by little and little, which by this restriction or compression do discharge themselves of their remaining Impurities; so that you may always make use of them with good success, observing only that you give them at first in a very small quantity and this a little after the Purgatives spo∣ken of before. To this we must add ne∣vertheless, that it is sometimes needful not to make use of them at all, and that Circumstances do sometimes happen wherein they are unprofitable, or dange∣rous. For it is remarkable in the great∣est part of those that are thus affected, that the matter which runs out toward
end of their Cure, is nothing else but the Virus of some of the Ulcers in the passa∣ges, & so consequently its effluxion must not be hindred by any other Remedies than such as are cleansing and desiccative. Sometimes also the extraordinary heat of the Bowels doth nourish and continue the Inflammation and Dilatation of the ejaculatory Vessels; so that the alterati∣on and loss of Seed cannot be hindered but by a proper Dyet, and cooling Re∣medies. At other times again the Go∣norrhea is caused by Virulent serosities, that fall into the Testicules, and cannot be consumed but by the use of the De∣coctions of China-root, Salsaparilla, and the other Sudorificks. Lastly it may be perpetual and incurable in Men, when the Caruncula Mammillaris (which shuts the Holes through which the Seed passes into the common passage from the Glan∣dulae Prostatae) hath been unhappily con∣sumed by some Ulcer, or else by corro∣sive Medicaments. But you must observe that the greatest of these Exceptions do not commonly come to pass, and you must consider the Astringents, of which I have spoken, as the most assured Remedies in the Cure
of Gonorrheas; & besides it is by the use and effects of them, that you may best judge of the necessity of these others; wherefore you may always try them without danger, and make use of to this purpose, for Example, a great Glass of Water, wherein you shall have boiled, half a quarter of an hour, half an ounce of Myrobalans beaten together. Or else, of the Tincture of red Roses, drawn in common Water, or the Juyce of Berberries, with the Spirit of Vitriol, and given Morning and Evening from two to six ounces. Or again, four parts of Electrum, or in∣stead of it Amber, with one part of Cam∣phire poudered, and incorporated into the Conserve of Roses, the weight of both, to give of it every Morning from half a drachm to a drachm and a half. But among all the Remedies that may be used to this intention, you'll find none more assured in their Operation than the following Pills: Take of Mastick in Tears, red Coral, and chosen Amber, of each two drachms, Camphir one drachm, Laudanum eight grains; make Pills according to Art, with a sufficient quantity of Syrop of Quinces
to make a Mass, of which you may give from a scruple to a drachm, for each Dose. As for the Ulcers which may happen in the passages, you may mundifie them with detersive Injections, made with the decoction of French Barley, and Agrimo∣ny, in which you shall mix the Syrop of Wormwood, or Honey of Red Roses, with some drops of the Spirit of Vitriol. After the detersion you may dry them with the seventh Water of unslackt Lime, in which you shall dissolve a little Salt of Saturn. Or else, take white Vitriol, Iris of Flo∣rence, and Camphire, of each half a drachm, Roch-Alum one drachm, Rose and Plantain-water, of each eight ounces, make Collyres for the foresaid intention. The Troches of Abbot Rhafis, mixt in the same Waters, in the Water of di∣stilled Alum, or its dissolution in com∣mon Water may also serve to the same effect. 3. When the Patients way of living is very irregular, and licentious, or else when the matter hath been driven back too soon by astringent Injections; lastly, when it hath been precipitated by Pur∣ges,
that are too violent, or inconsiderat∣ly given, it spreads into the proper Mem∣branes of one of the Testicules, or of both together, where it causes a great and painful Tumour, which sometimes creates more trouble to cure than all the other Accidents. The situation of the parts where the Evil lyes, doth indicate to you the neces∣sity of repose; the defluxion of Humours, Inflammation, and great pain that draws them thither, do also indicate to you the necessity of revulsive Phlebotomys, and Anodyne and cooling Clysters, which you must reiterate as often as shall be found necessary, to stop or divert the Motion of the matter. Cataplasms made of Cows-milk, Crums of White-bread, Yelks of new-laid Egs, and Oyl of sweet Almonds, are here very profitable at the beginning. Fomentations and Cataplasms made with Mallow-leaves, Marsh-mallow roots, Flowers of Camomille and Melilote, Line-seed and Fleawort-seed, may much contribute to the Cure of this Indisposi∣tion. When the Inflammation and pain shall be taken away by all these Remedies,
and the Tumour a little mollified, you may begin to use resolvent Cataplasms, such as are made with the four sorts of Farine or Meale boiled in Oxymel, add∣ing to them a little Oyntment of Roses, and Saffran. Cummin-seed well bruised, and boil'd also in Oximel to the consistence of a Cataplasm. Lastly, the Balsom of Sulphur applyed alone, or mixed with Myrrh, in the con∣sistence of a Cere-cloth, as it is described by Rulandus. 4. If the Ulcers of the passages have not been cleansed and dryed, as they should be, the remaining matter thickens, and fixes the Humour, which flows into the ulcerated part; in so much that the Flesh there grows hard, rises by little and little, and at last hinders the entrance of the Yard, when it happens in the neck of the Womb of a Woman, but doth more often hinder the passage of the U∣rine in both Sexes, if it be not consumed before it possesses the Circumference of the Ureter. It is more particularly requisite in Men to take care of preventing this extremity, and endeavouring to consume these ex∣crescencies,
so soon as ever it is perceived, that the Urine doth not make so large a stream as usually, or that it runs out forked and divided. For when it comes to go out but only drop by drop, or is altogether thus suppressed, we are almost always obliged to open the Perineum by an Incision, or at least to introduce a Ca∣theter into the Bladder, which in passing along doth cause very grievous pains. You may easily consume a Carnosity in its beginning, by excoriating it with a Catheter, and applying thereupon (by the means of a little Candle made of Wax and Turpentine) red Precipitate, calcin∣ed Alum, Verdegrease, the pouder of Sa∣bine, and yellow Orpiment; of which Drogues you may prepare several sorts of Remedies. But when it is become ve∣ry great and hard, you must first of all try to render it tractable, by the applica∣tion of emollient Remedies, such as are the Fomentations that I have described for the swelling of the Testicles, or else the residence of the Decoction, with which you may make Cataplasms for the same effect, beating it and boiling it to the consistence of Pap. You may also make Liniments with
the Oyl of Lillies, Man's Fat, or the Nea∣politan Oyntment, and apply thereupon the Plaster de Vigo, or rather that of Mu∣cilage with Mercury. Some have found a great deal of help from a Fumigation that is raised from A∣qua-vitae, or Vinegar, cast upon hot stones or bricks. When the Carnosity shall have been a little mollified by these, or other means, you may make use of the Corrosives de∣scribed before, or put twelve grams of Sublimate Corrosive in an ounce of the Plaster of Mucilage, which will assuredly prove of great effect, if you use it dexte∣rously; that is to say, if you apply it in a small quantity, and this directly upon the excrescence. Moreover, I shall not speak particular∣ly of those that happen to Women in the same passages, by reason that you may also consume them with the Remedies I have already described; and this also with much more ease than those, which happen in the common passage or the U∣reter of Men. 5. You must observe that the particu∣lar Poxes of which I have spoken are found to be sometimes accompanied with
the universal Pox, because it sometimes happens to appear just at the same time; or the Venereal Salts are now and then so volatile and penetrant, that they force against the opposition of Nature and its Preservatives. In this case it is to no pur∣pose to make use of the greatest part of the particular Remedies I have proposed; since by taking away the universal Infe∣ction of the body by the general Reme∣dies that will be described in the sequel of this Book, you'll destroy the Cause of the Disease, wheresoever it may ly, and the Accidents will easily vanish almost all of themselves by this means.
CHAP. III. Of the Natural Crises of the Uni∣versal Pox. 1. General division of the Crises of the Pox, and why the Evacuations that fol∣low the Application of its Remedies, may be so called. 2. Of the Natural Crises of the Pox, and first of those that terminate it with other Diseases. 3. Of those that are produced simply by the Opposition of Nature. 4. Of Buboes and Poulains in particular. SEeing the universal Pox doth consist in a general Infection of the body, it cannot be-terminated but by such Cri∣ses, as are able to carry away all its Im∣purities. These Crises may be raised either by Motions purely Natural, or else by the proper Actions of Mercury, and the other Remedies. I know well enough that those who stick closely to what the Ancients have taught, will not allow of this division, because according to them the Crises of
Diseases are only the productions of Na∣ture, and not the effects of Remedies; Whereupon it is necessary to remark, that the Evacuations which follow the appli∣cation of Remedies against the Pox, and particularly that of Mercury, must not be considered simply like those that are seen to follow, when the Vessels are opened, or after the use of Vomits and Purges; be∣cause these last have always determinate Motions, whereas those others I speak of are made either by the mouth, or by the pores, or siege, or by urine, accord∣ing as Nature finds the Impurities or pas∣sages best disposed; whence we may ea∣sily conclude that they are properly the works of Nature, and that the Remedies which are employed for this effect, do principally serve to move and dispose the bodies to their purification by an agita∣tion of all the Humours. 2. But to return to those which are caused by Motions purely Natural, they may may be distinguished into such as are provoked by the Causes of some other Diseases, which do render the Pox some∣times complicated, or into such as are made simply by the opposition of Na∣ture.
The Diseases which may cause the for∣mer, are, for Example, the Plague, Pleu∣resie, and generally Feavours, but prin∣cipally those that are called Malignant, whose Crises may be able to carry off the Pox, because they never happen but af∣ter their Causes have procured a great ebullition in the blood, by which Na∣ture is sometimes so violently moved, that she makes an extraordinary effort to separate all the Impurities that are mixed with it. But seeing the Pox may be carried off after this manner as diffe∣rent ways as there are different Natural terminations of it, and because this mat∣ter cannot be treated of here without confusion, I shall not speak more amply of it, but do believe it will be sufficient to explicate in this Chapter the other sorts of Crises, which may be said to be peculiar to the Pox. 3. Seeing the Venereal matter is ve∣nomous, subtile, and penetrant, it rarely makes its Attache any considerable time on the superficial parts, without entring into the Vessels, and mixing with the blood; and as there is nothing more ordinary than those sorts of adhesion, there would consequently be nothing
more familiar than the universal Pox, if Nature did not oppose its introducti∣on, and make use of all its force to hin∣der a mixture and insinuation that is so contrary to it. Nay we see, that she pre∣vents as much as possible the disorder that this poison may be apt to make. For when she is not able to escape its Intro∣duction, she knows how to act against it another manner of way, by separating it from the Humours that are pure, and dri∣ving it away with the ordinary Excre∣ments through commodious passages. These passages may be the same as serve also for Natural Purgations, such as the Terms of Women, and the regulated Hemorrhoides of certain Men, or for ex∣traordinary Evacuations, as sordid Ul∣cers, or lastly for the universal purifica∣tion of the blood, and the Emunctories. But as the Venereal matter is driven al∣most insensibly through the former ways that I have mentioned, & seeing Nature hath no need of assistance in this Opera∣tion, I shall not give any more precise ex∣plications of them, and shall be content∣ed to describe the means of making the Crise succeed well, that often happens through the latter.
4. Whereas the Genital parts do serve oftner than any other for the introducti∣on of Venereal Salts, the Groin which is very near them doth suffer the impure Tumours by which they are driven out, more commonly than the other Emun∣ctories; after the same manner as the Humours that serve for a Crisis to the Pe∣stilence, do rather happen to swell under the Arm-pits, because they are nearer the Breast, which first received by inspirati∣on the infected Air that caused this Dis∣ease. But though it be easy to remark that those sort of Tumours are always made by some Critical Motion, it is known nevertheless that the efforts, which Nature makes on this account would often prove to no purpose, if she were not seconded by the application & action of Remedies that Physick does furnish us with. An Example of this truth is observed particularly in Buboes or Poulains, that often appear in the Groins, when the impure matter hath been driven thither, but yet disappear again sometimes, when it hath not been stopt there by Attractives; which hap∣pens not in the Crises that are made the other was I have spoken of, by reason
that they have nothing to hinder the pas∣sage of Impurities, and because the Hu∣mours that run through them do at the same time serve to extend and dissolve the Venereal Salts, which are easily dri∣ven out by this means. But it is not the same when a Bubo begins to rise, the lit∣tle Humour that there is mixed with those Salts, thickens by this mixture, be∣cause it remains a long time under the skin, and can have no issue at all but by piercing it; so that these Crises can sel∣dom become perfect, unless Nature is as∣sisted with Art. The intention which you ought to have for to answer this respect, doth prin∣cipally consist in augmenting the Emoti∣on of Nature, and procuring a Suppura∣tion. This Augmentation may be made two manner of ways. The first is, by driving it from within outwardly, by the use of hot Aliments, for Example, of Wine, or else of Remedies of the same quality, such as Treacle, or Treacle-water. The se∣cond is by attracting and digesting the Tumour by Topicks. The attraction and digestion of Buboes is wont to be made ordinarily, with the
Plaster Diachylum, that is compounded of Galbanum, Opoponax, and the other hot and attractive Gums. But I know by ex∣perience, that it attracts but weakly, when the Gums enter into it in a small Dose, and that it becomes on the contrary Re∣solvent, when too great a quantity of them enters; so that its application doth not hinder the Tumours from disappear∣ing sometimes, and this chiefly in Melan∣cholick and Phlegmatick persons, whose Natural heat is but weak; wherefore you must prefer at least for such persons the following Cataplasm, which hath for certain a much better effect. Take eight or ten Snails with their shells, six Lilly-roots, two ounces of fresh Butter, and three ounces of old Rye-lea∣ven, make Cataplasms of it, and apply them hot, and renew them every six hours; remembring to augment the Dose of the Leaven, when you would attract more strongly in robust Bodies, and also to diminish it for those that have their skin tender and delicate, to avoid those excoriations which might otherwise be feared. Moreover, this Remedy hath not only the vertue of attracting, but also that of stopping and fixing the Humour
in the part, by contributing much to the Suppuration. When the Tumour is rebellious, and advances not so much as may be wished, a great Cupping-glass may be successfully applyed upon it every twelve hours, which must be left each time, till it hath made a considerable attraction; after which you may take it off, and put upon the point of the Tumour a Tent of the bigness of a farthing, on which you may put an Ointment made of equal parts of Basilicum, and Leaven fermented with the Spirit of Vitriol, to apply afterwards upon it the Plaster, or ordinary Cata∣plasm. After you shall have brought the mat∣ter to Suppuration by these means, you must open the Bubo in the most eminent part of it, or a very little lower, accord∣ing to the Longitude of the Fibres of the Groin, with Potential Cauters, and the Lancet; after which, you may make use of the ordinary Suppuratives and Mun∣dificatives, by putting at first upon it the Plaster Diachylum, and afterwards that of Mucilage with Mercury; and at last you may treat it like other impure Tu∣mours, remembring to purge frequently to∣ward
the latter end by Stool, and by U∣rine. It is remarkable that there are some Impostors here, and other where who do make ill use of these Remedies, and do make artificial Buboes appear, on those that have none really, but sometimes doubt of it, by reason of some Glandules filled with serosities, or other edematous Tumours, which happen either during, or after some particular Poxes. CHAP. IV. Of the Plants which have been e∣steemed capable to carry off the Pox by Sweat. 1. General Observations on these Sudori∣fick Plants, by which is proved that they are not able to Cure the Pox neither in Europe, nor in the Indies. 2. Particu∣lar Observations on Guaiacum. 3. On Sassafras. 4. On China. 5. On Sarsapa∣rilla. 1. Before we speak of the Crises that are artificially raised to cure the
Universal Pox, I have thought it conve∣nient to remark some useful Observations on the Sudorifick Plants, which were heretofore accounted infallible for this effect, and some others upon Quicksilver; which are of so much the more impor∣tance, as they are at present also acknow∣ledged for its most assured Remedy, without any bodie's endeavouring ne∣vertheless hitherto to understand why and how they come to have such power. These Plants, or their parts which are ordinarily in use, are, for Example, the Wood Guaiacum, and the Roots of Sassa∣fras, China, and Sarsaparilla, which have been brought hither from divers places of both Indies, and at several times; they have all had their turns of the common advantage new things usually meet with; the Dearest, and Newest have been al∣ways most esteemed, and the greatest part of Authors have used this occasion to speak Wonders of them▪ and make profit by this means of the prejudice of Men's minds; so that they have been generally acknowledged for the soveraign, speci∣fick, & assured Remedies of this Disease. These Abuses have made way for ma∣ny others, Empyricks have distributed
them for things of a most pretious value, the Chymists have drawn their Extracts and Quintessences out of them, which they have sold at the price of their weight in Gold; Mountebanks, and such as distribute secret Remedies, have put a disguise upon them by the mixture of many other Ingredients; last∣ly, ignorant people have preferred the use of them before all other Remedies. Because the Stories and Relations of those that have made Voyages into the Indies, did perswade us that the Indians were perfectly cured by a Decoction of these Plants, and the Impostors of Eu∣rope took care to render their success good in all appearance by the deceitful Cure of imaginary Diseases; All people were a long time entertained in this Er∣rour, and every body continued obsti∣nate in the use of them, notwithstanding the false Experiments that were daily made, which were rather imputed to the indiscret and careless use of them, than to their proper fault. Wherefore Men tryed several ways of preparing and em∣ploying them, which nevertheless were acknowledged to be useless, as well as the common and ordinary Preparations.
This obliged those that had especially strived to keep them in vogue, to ac∣knowledge and declare that the same advantages could not be drawn from them here, as were pretended to be in∣fallible in their Natural Climats. But lest it should seem ridiculous to con∣demn absolutely such things as have been generally approved but a little before, some of them therefore taught, that the Providence of God had made them grow only for the Cure of those Countries, where this Disease was supposed to have its origine, but that they could not be transported so far as us without the loss and alteration of their Vertues. These Propositions do not prove ne∣vertheless that the Indians are better cu∣red than we by the use of these Plants; since I have proved in another place that the Pox hath still been in all places, and at all times; And it may be further add∣ed, that if God had permitted the trans∣portation of this Disease without altera∣tion of its form, he would also by the same Reason have permitted the trans∣portation of its Remedies too, without diminution of their Vertues. Besides there would have been no need, but only
of augmenting the Doses, to render the Compositions that were made of them more strong and active. But that which particularly lets us see, those people are not cured but only in appearance too, by the Decoction of these Simples, is, that they do desiccate the bodies here as much or little less than they do in the Indies; and that this desiccation doth make the Accidents often disappear for the present, & leave only the appearance of a Cure; in so much that they do always cause a new fermentation afterwards, and appear some other time more terrible than be∣fore. Whatsoever you please to think of it, it is certain this Opinion was at last found and acknowledged to be true, and the greatest part of our Physicians began at last to disabuse themselves; so that di∣vers Essays were made to discover some other Remedy for this Evil. Our Apo∣thecaries prepared for this effect divers sorts of Purgative and Vomitive Potions, Antidotes, and Cordial Confections, Pla∣sters, Ointments, and generally all kinds of Compositions of the Galenical Phar∣macie. The Chymists did not fail on their part to try their Elixirs, their Ar∣canums
Magisteries, Quintessences and Extracts, both Emetick, Cathartick and Diaphoretick. Lastly, after a great ma∣ny proofs of the like nature, it was hap∣pily found out, that those who had the Pox could be cured indeed by Frictions with Mercurial Ointments, which served heretofore for the pretended Leprosie, of which I have spoken before. Never∣theless seeing these Sudorifick Decocti∣ons did heretofore take away the ap∣pearance of it in some persons, they were not neglected altogether; and the esteem that had been made of them for∣merly did still contribute much to the use that hath been made of them since, and is continued now a days, which is to give them for preparing the Bodies, on which Mercury is designed to be ap∣plied. Moreover it is not hard to understand how the Accidents of the Pox can dis∣appear for some time, without destroying its Cause, since it is evident enough, by what I have already said in the First Section of this Book, that it essentially consists in a venomous Salt mixt with the Blood, which ferments and sets it a boil∣ing; so that during this Ebullition there
continually arises out of the Vessels that contain it many vaporous or serous mat∣ters, which produce different Symp∣tomes, according to their Quality, or Quantity, or Parts where they adhere. Now seeing these same Matters can be easily consumed by Sudorificks, Diure∣ticks, and generally by desiccative Re∣medies; we must not at all wonder, if their Effects do not appear for a time af∣ter the use of a Decoction of these Plants, and if nevertheless the Ferment that rais∣ed up those Vapours, do still continue mixed with the Blood, since it is a Salt dissolved, fermented and confounded with it, that cannot be sufficiently car∣ried off by matters that pass away so quickly. I know very well it may be said, that one can hardly believe how the Indians should be cured only in show, and should be so long deceived without perceiving their errour. But observe how I conceive that may be done: Strumpets are there wonderful common, and they make use of them with the Brutality that is usual to such as have little Religion in them; which makes this disease so familiar among them, that they have reason to think they
contract it still anew again. For indeed it is not at all likely, that they should be ob∣lig'd so frequently to reiterate their Cures, as Histories and Relations tell us they do, if they really had any assured Remedies to destroy this Disease in its Root. I do not mean (as I have already said) that the Universal Pox can never be cured by these Sudorificks, or by other Reme∣dies more ordinary and common, whilst it is yet but in its first degree, that is to say, when its Matter hath not been per∣fectly united with the Blood by a Fer∣mentation: But besides that this Degree doth continue but a little while, it is not always liable to be rightly distinguished, and Mercury doth carry it off with so much promptitude and facility, that it were indeed vain to try other Remedies. Notwithstanding that these Observa∣tions are founded both upon Reason and Experience, and do prove by these two means that these Plants are not Spe∣cifick against this Disease; we must avow nevertheless that there are some Occurrences, wherein they may much contribute to the Cure, seeing there are some Bodies that must be abso∣lutely desiccated before the application
of Mercury; Wherefore it is necessary to take notice of the Observations that I have made on each in particular, to know more precisely the use that must be made of them. 2. The Wood Guaiacum gives a yel∣lowish Tincture, more sharp, and more distasteful, but also more desiccative than that of the other three Simples named before. Some Authors pretend that this Effect proceeds from its Sudorifick ver∣tue; and others contend to prove that it is much more Diuretick: but which so∣ever it is, 'tis always true that it con∣sumes the Phlegm and Serosities, carry∣ing them off either by Sweat or Urine. And that these different motions do principally proceed from the internal disposition of those that use them, since it is found by Experience that it doth make some sweat and others urine. I have often observed, that it may be ren∣dred more proper to open the Pores, by adding to its Decoction some French Barley, which doth also render it sweeter and more agreeable. We have reason also to believe, that the manner of using it among the great∣est part of Americans doth not a little
contribute to the rendring of it Sudori∣fick; for they first heat themselves by violent and extraordinary Exercises, be∣fore they presume to drink of its Deco∣ction, and after they have drunk of it, they lie in Cotton-beds hung up, and so continually swinging, which gives a new agitation to the Humours by such conti∣nued motions, and makes them evaporate more easily by wayes already disposed. We must grant indeed that the Volatil and Essential Salt, which causes it to pro∣duce this Effect, doth more abound in that which they employ, than this that is brought over to us; because they cut it fresh from young Trees, and the Sprigs of old ones, in which the Universal Spirit, that causes the Vegetation of Plants, is doubtless more active, and less divided; and it is for this reason requisite to make choice of the smallest and yellowest, be∣cause the greatest & blackest is most like∣ly to be taken from old sapless Trunks. Such as make the goodness of Reme∣dies to consist in the strength of their activity do rather employ the Bark of this same Wood, which is in good truth more drying than all the rest of the Tree, but is accompanied with so much Heat and Acrimony, that I would not coun∣sel
any body to make use of it; and it would be much better on an occasion to render the use of the ordinary Decoction longer and more frequent. 3. The part of Sassafras which is com∣monly made choice of, and which I e∣steem also to be the best, is its Root, of which nevertheless there is little use made at present; either because its Ver∣tue is not well known, or because the other Sudorifick Roots are dearer, and so consequently more esteemed. It is true notwithstanding, that its Decoction hath a very pleasant and agreeable Smell and Taste, and that use may be made of it as well as of Guaiacum, to consume the su∣perfluous Humidities, in driving them either by Sweat, or Urine, or else by siege, adding some light Catharticks to it. I have observed nevertheless that its Root doth not desiccate so powerfully as Guaiacum, and that it is consequently good for such as must be more mode∣rately dried. But more force may be found in the Bark of its Wood, which also gives a Tincture yet more Aroma∣tick, more quick and sharp. 4. Whereas the Root of China is the dearest of sudorifick Druggs, that serve to prepare or cure such as are infected
with the Pox, the Merchants and Tra∣vellers, who have brought it hither from the places where 'tis found, have all en∣deavoured to boast its good effects very much to its advantage, that they might thereby have the better Market of it; and its Vertues have been also so much exaggerated by some Authors, that such as have preferred their Report before the Experience and Observations which they might have made themselves, would have thought they had laboured in vain, if they had presumed to cure the Pox without employing it to this intent. Nevertheless we must acknowledge, that this preoccupation deserves to be bla∣med, and that this Root hath nothing in it proportionable to the esteem that hath been made of it, nor to the dear∣ness with wich it hath been sold: seeing the Decoctions that are made of all these Drugs, do principally and most proper∣ly serve to dry the Bodies of such as use them, and the Decoctions of the other two I now mentioned may be employed to this effect with more success. Not that this may not be very useful, to prepare such as should be more gently desiccated. Yet it may be also let alone,
when occasion serves, only by diminish∣ing the Doses of those that are stronger, or augmenting the quantity of those that are weaker. 5. The Root of Sarsaparilla is now-a-days more commonly employed to the abovesaid use, because it gives a Tincture very like that of Wine, and its Decocti∣on hath nothing disagreeable for Smell or Taste. Nevertheless I have observed that it dries something less than the other three Sudorificks of which I have spoken, and that it passes more willingly by way of Urine, than through the Pores: whence it comes to be of great use for the curing Gonorrheas, that are caused by virulent Serosities, which do sometimes occupy the Testicles and and other parts that serve for the Concoction and Distributi∣on of the Seed.
CHAP. V. Of the Observations it is necessary to make on Mercury, to know whence the different Effects that follow its application do proceed. 1. Whence it comes to pass that the Quali∣ties of Mercury have not been yet known, and the necessity there is of knowing them. 2. That it easily joyns it self with sulphurous and metallick Bodies, and that it is by consequence necessary that it be revived from Cinnaber, to become pure. 3. That it is always in motion, and that it never loses its mobility but only to retake it. 4. That its Sulphurs do render it volatil and penetrant, but its Gravity inclines it to search down∣wards. 5 That Resinous substances do serve for the division of its particles, but Acids do dissolve it more perfectly. 6. That Heat sublimes it, but Alkalis does precipitate it. 7. That Acids do diminish its Volatility, but that it is so much the more Corrosive as there are A∣cids
mixed with it. 8. That the diver∣sity of Bodies with which it joyns makes the diversity of its Actions and Effects. 9. That it is no way poysonous in it self, and that the divers dispositions of Sub∣jects on which it is applied, do cause the different Effects that do result from its application. 1. SEing the Ancients have not explica∣ted the Qualities of Medica∣ments, but only by the different de∣grees of Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, and these same degrees have not been at all known or distinguished more precise∣ly than by the Actions and Effects that result from these Qualities; we must not at all wonder, if they have held Opi∣nions so very different on the subject of Quicksilver, since that this Mineral doth act so diversly, and doth produce such different Effects, not only in the seve∣ral Bodies that receive it, but also at diffe∣rent times, when received in the same subject: Whence it comes to pass that some have maintained it to be cold, by reason of the cold Diseases that it cre∣ates; and others have esteemed it to be hot, because it doth consume Phlegm,
and desiccates the bodies in which it is made to enter. Some also have judged it to be Venomous, by reason of the Acci∣dents that ordinarily arrive to such as draw it out of the Mines, to Gilders, and other Artificers that make use of it; and yet some others again have asserted that it is an Antidote of poisons, and an Ene∣my of Corruption, because it generally kills all Vermine, and is used with suc∣cess in malignant Feavours, the Pestilence and Pox; lastly all their Conceits on this subject have been so opposite, that they have determined nothing at all yet; and modern Authors who have ordained this Remedy against certain Diseases, have been contented to say, that it acts by un∣known occult Properties. Though there is nothing less known or understood in all Physick, it is true nevertheless that nothing doth really de∣serve to be known more, since the use of it now a-days is acknowledged to be e∣qually familiar, profitable, and dangerous, and the little knowledge that is general∣ly had of its true Motions, is perhaps the only cause of all the misfortunes that fol∣low its application. This therefore ought to engage you and I (good Reader) to
use our utmost endeavours to render them more sensible, that we may by this means avoid the Reproaches Posterity might otherwise make to our Memory, much more justly indeed than to that of our Predecessours, since we now live in a more knowing and inquisitive Age, and the Lights that this Age hath furnished us with are sufficient for the discovery of an infinity of excellent Truths, by ma∣king rational Applications of what they and our Ancestors have taught us, to what we do now see, and what curious and new Experiments do continually supply us with. This is that which I do hope to advance your knowledge in, by the se∣quel of my Observations, wherein I shall endeavour to omit nothing of what may any way serve to render that Manifest, which hath been hitherto supposed to be Occult. Nevertheless as it is not my de∣sign to play the Naturalist altogether, you must not expect to find here the com∣pleat History of Mercury. So that if you desire to know the Etymologie of its Names, its diverse Definitions, the Mines from whence it comes, the manner of drawing it thence, the means of counter∣feiting it, and infinite Circumstances of
the like nature, you may have recourse to many Authors that have amply writ∣ten of all these things. 2. The common ways of dividing Mercury in the Galenical Pharmacy, do shew us that it easily joyns with Sulphurs, seeing that Turpentine, Rosen, and fat Bodies that serve for this effect, are of sulphurous and inflammable substances. But the truth of this doth principally ap∣pear in the composition of Cinnaber, which every body knows to be a mixture of Sulphur and Mercury together, subli∣mated Naturally in the bowels of the Earth by the force of the Centrical Heat, or else Artificially in Furnaces by the violence of Actual Heat; which proves the Chymists do with reason make its principles consist of a subtil and sul∣phurous Earth, seeing it it true that Ho∣mogeneous Substances do always unite more willingly, and the particles of some mixt bodies do very easily quit those to which they were joyned for to adhere to other bodies that are more Natural and agreable to them; from whence it comes to pass, that Metallick Water which passes through one of its principles and may be said to be the most evident,
doth suffer the mixture, union, and amal∣gamation of this Metal with the greatest part of other Metals: which gives occa∣sion to Impostors to augment its quantity with Lead and Tin; so that it now becomes very difficult to find any of it truly pure, unless one mixes Cinnaber with the sha∣vings of Iron to draw out pure Mercury by distillation. For by this means we are sure to have it in its purity, because the other Metals are not volatil enough to mount with it, but remain in the Retort united with the Sulphur and the Iron. 3. Though Mercury unites it self easi∣ly with other Metals, and a Metallick matter is sensibly perceived in its compo∣sition, yet it must be considered but as an imperfect Metal, seeing the crudity of its Water, and volatility of its Sulphurs do hinder it from being liable either to dis∣solution by Fire, or to extension by the Hammer; and that those two substances are tyed and united together after a man∣ner so proper for Motion, that it always escapes the power of those Agents, and never submits it self to their violence, unless it be fixt by the mixture of other bodies that serve to hold it in dissolu∣tion.
That which renders the Mercury of such a mobile, rowling, and fugitive Na∣ture, is its Sphaerical or round Figure, which is Natural to it, and conserves it also in the separation of its parts; so that after having dissolved it with Acides, and reduced it into a most subtile Powder, it may still be perceived to continue in its ancient Form by the means of a Micro∣scope; its Nature being so altogether ad∣mirable, that it seems impossible to find means for the absolute destruction of its accidental and exteriour form. But seeing its roundness seems lost on∣ly by false appearances, it may be also said that it loses its mobility only to re∣take it again, seeing this last Accident is but a production of the former; and it is very certain besides that nothing in all the World hath been able to fix it in such manner, but that it may be revived by the force of Fire, though some Impostors do maintain the contrary. 4. That which is most surprizing in this Mineral is, that notwithstanding its Gravity, it rises up with the gentlest heat; that though it is Volatile, yet its own weight serves to precipitate it down∣wards. The first of these contrarieties
may be proved, by putting some of it upon burning Coals, or else by observing the Sublimations that Chymists make of it; the other contrariety may be suffici∣ently discovered by putting it upon Tin, Lead, Wood, and especially upon the Earth, which it doth penetrate so vio∣lently, that some have pretended to be able to dry up a great pond, only by casting into it some store of Mercury that might be able to make a hole big enough to give a passage to the Water which should follow its Motion. We know easily enough that Gold & Lead are gross and sulphurous, by their malleability, but the Sulphurs that en∣ter into the Composition of Mercury seem to discover themselves chiefly by its vo∣latility, and conjunction with sulphurous substances. I have observed nevertheless that Metals which abound with this principle are more weighty than others, because their parts are more perfectly tyed and united together; so that they always have so much the less weight, as they are better digested, or become more perfect, because the parts do continually separate in digestion, or else because the greatest part of its Sulphurs do exhale,
and so leave empty spaces in the mixed. Now seeing Mercury is a Metal very crude and weighty, we may for this rea∣son say, that it is also very sulphurous, as you see by the things spoken before, that its Sulphurs do render it very proper for Motion; and so you ought not to won∣der, that it is Volatil, when moved or excited by any Heat, or that without Heat it is proper to penetrate, and sink deep into bodies, since its weight, fluidi∣ry, and agitation of its Sulphurs, are things sufficient to bear it downwards. 5. Notwithstanding you must observe that it doth not always necessarily sink downwards, but that it may be rendered purely penetrant and volatil by its di∣vision; this truth appears in the Compo∣sition and Application of Mercurial Pla∣sters and Ointments, in which it is held divided into imperceptible particles by the means of resinous substances, that they may the more properly be able to penetrate the pores of all the skin on which they are applyed. But though this division be very useful, it is nevertheless very imperfect, seeing the gentlest Heat is able to melt the re∣sinous matters that held the Mercury so
divided, and by this means it easily re∣unites to appear again in its ancient form; which doth not happen, when it hath been dissolved with Acids; for putting the Dissolution over the Fire, the Moi∣sture will evaporate, and the Mercury re∣main at bottom in form of Salt, or else continuing the Fire, it sublimates to the middle of the Vessel; so that after ha∣ving been thus several times sublimated, it remains at last alone, or mixt with very few Acids, without losing never∣theless the form of Salt. 6. I do not mean that Mercury cannot be sublimated by Heat without being di∣vided, but it is very certain that the Heat must be more or less strong according as the Corpuscules of Mercury are gross or heavy; whence it comes to pass that it is divided into very subtil particles in the Troches that are used for Fumigati∣ons, that it may the easier be carried of, and with the less violence. But though it loses its weight when so divided, and its lightness renders it im∣proper for precipitation, we know not∣withstanding by experience that Alkalis will precipitate it, since by casting Lime-water, or the Oyl or Liquour of Tartar,
on the Dissolution of Sublimate Corro∣sive in common Water, the Mercury is seen to precipitate in a yellow powder by the first, and in a green powder by the second. 7. Furthermore I am not able to un∣derstand why the Red powder of Mer∣cury is now-a-days called Precipitate, seeing it is nothing else but its Dissoluti∣on with Aqua fortis, or the Spirit of Ni∣tre, which is afterwards made evaporate to siccity; unless it be because the Acids do unite to all parts of it in these sorts of Dissolutions, and so by this means render it more fixt, heavy, and if you will too more penetrant than after the ordinary divisions that are made of it with resi∣nous bodies. Whatsoever is the Reason, it is always true that this is no Precipita∣tion at all, and that the Acids thus in∣corporated with the Mercury, do not hinder it from being sublimated, but on∣ly from mounting so high, as it would do if alone, or mixed with resinous Drugs; if so be the Mercury be not in too small a quantity, or driven by too violent a Heat. We may easily conceive, that nothing but the different quantity of Acids doth
render it more or less Corrosive, if we make reflection on the manner of dulci∣fying Sublimate; one part of Sublimate Corrosive is mixed with another part of crude Mercury, till the whole Mass ap∣pears greyish; afterwards it is sublima∣ted again, and after this second Sublima∣tion is found to be less Corrosive than it was before; because some part of the Acids of its Nitre and Vitriol do fly out of the Sublimatory Vessel, and others stick to the neck like mill-dust, but are easily separated from the sublimated Mass besides also that those which still remain are more extended by the augmentation of Mercury; so that by thus powdring and sublimating it three or four times, it becomes at last so ducified, that it may be safely given inwardly in a considera∣ble Dose, though it were at first the strongest Corrosive and poison. 8. From the fore-going Observations may be drawn several Circumstances ve∣ry useful for knowing the Motions of Mercury; but chiefly, that it always tends downwards by its own weight, when alone, and in its Natural form; & on the contrary that it penetrates indif∣ferently upwards, downwards, and on
every side, when it is divided into subtil particles; that it is heavy and corrosive when mixed with Acids; and on the contrary very benign and volatil when separated and extended by resinous bo∣dies; that Alkalis can precipitate it, when dissolved and mixed with Liquours; lastly that the diversity of bodies to which it joyns doth serve to distinguish its Actions and Effects: to which may be added also some following Observations, that serve for a proof of this truth, as well as the Applications that I intend to make of them, when I shall speak of the Crises that it excites. The first is, that Natu∣ral Cinnabre taken inwardly drives the Impurities by Sweat, or insensible Trans∣piration, and that there are Sulphurs in our bodies which do mix with it, when taken alone, and do make it produce this effect. The second is, that there are a great many Acids with which it may joyn too, because all Natural Fermenta∣tions are made by their means, and the Venereal Salts do change all the Phlegm into this same quality. The third is, that the effervescences it produces do also shew that there are some Alkalis too, which may serve to precipitate it.
9. By what I have now said, and par∣ticularly by the last three Remarks, you see that the divers matters which are found to abound in bodies on which Mercury is applyed are the Causes of its different productions, seeing you may be also satisfied, that it is not poisonous in its own Nature, and that all its unhappy effects do principally proceed from the inward dispositions of mind and body; for when the Spirits are agitated by vio∣lent passions, they may then sublimate the Mercury with Impetuosity, even into the very Brain, and cause by this means the most doleful Accidents that are found to follow its Application. So there may happen Accidents very dangerous too, for not having well corrected the ex∣tream Inanition or Repletion of bodies ill disposed for its Reception. Lastly, every body knows, or every body may know, that it is given inwardly without any danger at all against the Disease call∣ed the Miserere mei, and there's the less fear, when a great quantity of it is given, which will then be the easier carried off by its own weight, for otherwise it might possibly stop in the Intestins, and there become Corrosive by its joyning with the Acid Juyces, which there abound.
SECT. 3. In which the true Method of Artificially raising the Crises of the universal Pox is explained. CHAP. I. Of the Crises that are provoked by common Remedies, and of the Seasons proper for the Ap∣plication of Mercury. 1. That the general Observations which were related in the preceding Sections are absolutely necessary for the right under∣standing of particular Ones. 2. General Division of Artificial Crises, and why common Remedies are tryed sometimes to provoke them. 3. What are those Reme∣dies, and why they are not here treated of to the bottom. 4. Of the choice of pro∣per Seasons for the Application of Mer∣cury. 5. Means to correct the soulness of the Air and Weather. 1. WHen Nature is not able of her self to raise Critical Motions, and one infected with the Pox requires
the speedy Application of your Art, to terminate his Disease by Artificial Crises: You must then take into your thoughts those general Ideas I have given you, and recal all the Circumstances that may con∣duce to the particular use you would make of them, if you desire to compleat happily the Cure of this Disease. For it is certain that they are of so great impor∣tance, as you cannot expect to succeed well without the Observation of them, and by judiciously applying them to the particular Maximes you'll find in the se∣quel of this Book, you'll establish for your selves and for others an infallible Practice. 2. You must first of all observe that the Crises of the universal Pox, which are Artificially made by Remedies, may be distinguished into such as are excited by common Evacuatives, or such as are provoked by Mercury. Though these first Remedies have less assurance in them, yet they are often put in practice, and chiefly when a person's Health is in a doubtful condition, be∣cause they are very useful to assist Nature in preventing this Evil, and are sufficient to Cure it, while it is but in the first de∣gree;
besides that it is according to the Order of Physick to begin with things that are most easy, and if they do not absolutely Cure the Pox, they can serve to take away the present appearance of it which is a Circumstance very considera∣ble sometimes in the Junctures wherein, persons may find themselves engaged to retard their Cure. 3. Moreover these Remedies are such as open the principal passages of the bo∣dies and expel Impurities through the ways that are most Natural; for Example the Sudorisick and Diuretick Decocti∣ons of the Simples I have spoken of, which do carry off impure Humidities either, through the pores of the body, or by the way of Urine, or else all the other Drugs that may serve for this effect; Lastly all the Purgatives that evacuate grosser matters by siege, and in a need Emeticks too which Purge by Vomit. But seeing these Remedies are so very com∣mon, and well known, and that their quality and quantity can never be regu∣lated but by the Judgment and Experi∣ence of such as employ them, I cannot think it necessary to treat particularly of them, because all expert and proper per∣sons
have a perfect knowledge of them already, and those that are ignorant of them should never dare to practise, or use them, without first demanding Coun∣sel of such as can inform them, and that especially in things of so great Moment. 4. If you have tryed in vain all the Remedies I now spoke of, if the Pox hath past its first degrees, lastly if your Patient is willing to be cured once for all, without endangering the loss of his time, money, and pains, to little or no purpose, you must procure the Crisis of his Disease by means of Mercury; and to do it the more successfully you must choose the most temperate Months, such as are March, April, and May, which do make up the Spring of Physicians, or else Sep∣tember and October, which make up their Autumn. For the Summer by its exces∣sive Heats doth cause a dissipation of the Spirits, and by this means the diminution of the Natural Heat and strength, with∣out which you cannot effect your Cure; and the Winter by its extream Cold doth condensate the pores of the body, closes up all the Natural passages, concentrates the Natural Heat, Spirits, and Humours, and doth after this manner hinder Na∣ture
from acting as she ought to do in raising the Crisis you desire to pro∣cure. Nevertheless it is not necessary to stick precisely to the Months I named; for though they are commonly the most pro∣per for this effect, it sometimes hap∣pens that they prove very intemperate, as on the contrary there often happens very seasonable mild Weather in the others. Neither is it so very requisite, that all the dayes of the Crisis should be tempe∣rate; it may suffice the time of provo∣king it be mild enough in Winter, that the Humours may the more easily be set in Motion; and not so extreme hot in Summer, as to keep the Pores too open, and to divert the Salivation by importu∣nate Sweats. For when Nature hath but once well begun a good motion, she per∣severes to the end, though the Physici∣an co-operates but little. 5. Though the Seasonableness of the Weather, and other Circumstances that I have remarked, be very useful indeed for the well performing this business, yet occasions do sometimes happen, wherein they cannot be exactly observed. The Accidents which the Pox produces, or
the particular affairs of sick persons do sometimes require so sudden and pressing a Cure, even in very unseasonable times, that there is a necessity of present treat∣ing it, notwithstanding the unhappy occurrences which may then come to pass; and you must not be too fearful in undertaking such a Cure at this time. For 'tis certain, that the ill quality of the Air may be corrected, with a great deal of care and necessary application. You may, for example, put your sick in the Shades of the excessive Sum∣mer-heats, by choosing a Chamber large enough, whose Windows are ex∣posed to the North, and closely shut in the day-time, to hinder the Air and re∣verberation of the Rayes of the Sun from entring into it; the Coverlets of the Bed must be very light, and the place round abound it may be sprinkled with Oxycrate, made of one part of Vinegar, and six of Rose-water, and the rest of the Chamber may be also sprinkled with common water, in which you may mix a little Vinegar too. Lastly the Windows may be opened some hours of the night to let in the cool refreshing blasts. On the contrary, during the extraordi∣nary
colds of the Winter, you must choose a little Chamber, whose Win∣dows open to the South, and shut them very exactly in all places where the wind may enter; then see that the Bed be not far from the Chimney, in which you must be sure to keep a good fire day and night, remembring to cover your patient carefully; and, if it may be had, a skreen about the Bed, to keep it the warmer.
CHAP. II. Of the Preparation of Bodies in which Mercury must enter. 1. Confutation of the ordinary ways of preparing Bodies for the reception of Mercury. 2. That the true Method of preparing them cannot be perfectly de∣scribed, but that a sufficient Idea may be given of it, for such as have been Experienced. 3. Particular Preparation of Bodies of a good Constitution. 4. Means of correcting the Tempera∣ment of such as are extremely Hot and Dry. 5. The manner of diminishing the extreme Repletion of those that are Cold and Phlegmatick. 1. AMong those that employ Mercury for the procuration of the Crises of the Universal Pox, some prepare their Patients by Abstinence, Fumigations, Su∣dorificks, and drying Decoctions, for to consume the Phlegmatick humour, to which they pretend the Venereal Matter doth particularly adhere; others use
Baths, Ptisannes, and whatsoever is able to moysten and cool the Body, to facili∣tate the following Salivation hereby, and render the actions of Mercury the less pernicious; some others use partly things that moisten, and partly such as dry; and others again make use of In∣finite different means, which I find to be all alike ridiculous, because they are used indifferently to all persons, and they all differ only because each have found them practised on several persons; whereas in truth the Age, Sex, Strength, Temperament, and generally the present dispositions of the several Patients ought to constitute all the difference. Indeed if it be by the means of Mer∣cury alone that the Crises of the Univer∣sal Pox are intended to be raised, there is no need of employing the other Re∣medies both Alterative and evacuative, before the application you would make of it, but only perhaps for the opening and dilatation of the passages that serve for Expulsion of Excrements, in such as are of a good Temper, or else to cor∣rect the faults of those that are remote from this good Constitution. For if you should offer to desiccate a Body that is
of a middle Age, moderate Temper, and that rightly performs all its natural Fun∣ctions, 'tis certain it must receive great Alteration, and this Alteration must necessarily remove it from the Equality and Moderation it was in before, which nevertheless is exactly the estate in which Nature keeps its true vgour, and in which consequently it must be better able to second the force of Remedies; whence it follows, that it comes to be less proper for the Critical motions which do fol∣low the application of Mercury, in those in whom a sufficient quantity of acid Humours may be found, to stop and de∣tain the Mercury in the several parts, for the time it ought to remain in them. But if this Alteration can be so con∣siderably pernicious, even to such as are in a state of perfection; you will not at all wonder, if the Salivation cannot be safely procured in Dry, Cholerick, or Melancholick Bodies that have been pre∣pared after this manner: nay, you will find on the contrary, that all the parts will receive injury from the activity of Mer∣cury, seing it is now agitated by an ex∣traordinary Heat, and finds nothing that is able to fix and detain it.
It is no less dangerous to make use of things that cool and moisten, for the preparation of those that are replete and phlegmatick; for by this means the re∣pletion is augmented, and the Humours become so disposed for Fluxion, that Mercury soon draws them along with it in great abundance, and very often all the parts about the Throat do fill and swell in such manner, that the Patients are soon suffocated thereby. But now speaking of the danger there is in making use of the same Remedies in all different Subjects, it comes into my mind, that I have read in a famous Author a certain Dispute that he raises and resolves himself; 'tis whether those that have the Pox ought to be bled in their Preparation; he relates some Au∣thorities and Reasons Pro and Con, and at last concludes in favour of Blood let∣ting, of which he makes so general a Rule, that he will not except even such as are Hectict: Whereupon you must observe, that this Maxim doth seem so much the more authentick, as it appears to be established by a Learned Doctor, and founded on the examination and comparison of contrary Opinions; from
whence we may conclude that the faults which are committed by such as blindly observe it, are so much the more excu∣sable, as they are often irreparable; since there are a great many persons who never dare go a step further than the I∣deas of those that taught them. But I dare say, it is a shameful thing, & disparages Physick very much, that the greatest part of those who practise it, do apply themselves so little to things of such moment; and that many who have by their own industrry acquired some par∣ticular knowledges, are so covetous and fearful of communicating them, that they affect to keep them secret, even when they pretend to teach and dis∣cover them. Let this be said by the by. 2. Nevertheless you must not imagin that infallible Rules can be given, for correcting exactly all the degrees of Tem∣peraments, and several dispositions of all Bodies that are of different Consti∣tutions. For besides that there are some inward and secret dispositions, which can no way be known; the number of such as may be known are in a manner infi∣nite, and the endeavour I might here make for reckoning them up, would
cause nothing but confusion in this place. Notwithstanding it is certain, a sufficient Idea may be given of the Method that ought to be followed, for well preparing those that are infected with the Pox, by the discovery of such Remedies as may very happily serve to dispose Bodies of a good Constitution, and correct the faults of such as are extremely removed from this good estate by Repletion and Inanition; because these patterns may serve to discover the comparison of the Mean and two Extremes, from whence Formules may easily be drawn for all the greater and lesser degrees, by joyn∣ing a good Judgment, Application, and Experience (which are Qualities abso∣lutely necessary for establishing a sure practice) to the following Rules and Ob∣servations. 3. You may cause a light Emotion in Bodies of a good Disposition and middle Age, by some gentle Purge; such as may be an Infusion of two Drachms of Senna, mixt with an Ounce of new-drawn Cassia, which will sufficiently o∣pen the way by siege, if you continue to repeat it four times, every Second day.
In the intermediate days you may Bathe your Patient morning and even∣ing, to dissolve the coagulated Humours, and dispose the Pores of the Body for a dilatation. During all this time you may make the following Ptisanne serve for his or∣dinary Drink, which will open the Pores too, and also the passages of Urine, that serve for expulsion of Serosities. Take half a Pint of good white Wine, in which infuse and steep before-hand half an Ounce of Guaiacum; then take two Ounces of French Barley, four Quarts of common Water, and so much Licorice as may be sufficient for ren∣dring your Ptisanne pleasant enough to drink; in each Quart you must mix ten or twelve Drops of the Spirit of Vi∣triol. 4. The faults which are opposite to this good Temperament of which I now spoke, are chiefly Inanition and Siccity, or else Repletion and Humidity. The former are the effects of a boyling Heat, and therefore require for Cor∣rectives, whatsoever is capable of moist∣ning and cooling at the same time; whence it comes to pass that Blood-let∣ting
which cools by allaying the Ebulli∣tion of the Blood, is notwithstanding dangerous and to be suspected on this occasion, because it also carries off the Humours, which are there already in too small a quantity. You may thence judge that Purges, and chiefly such as are violent are also dangerous; for besides that they consume the little Moisture which remains, they are extreme hot too; which are two Qualities absolutely contrary to the In∣tention you ought to have. It will be good nevertheless to keep the Body open, by giving every morning half a Pint of Whey, in which you must infuse every fourth day, a Drachm of Senna, and half a Drachm of Crystal Mi∣neral, to dissolve in it afterwards half an Ounce of new-drawn Cassia. Seing Clysters that serve to cleanse the Guts are able to cause some Alteration, you must have a care of giving them, unless it be a Decoction of cooling Pot∣herbs, with two Ounces of Honey of white Lilies in each. You must Bathe him morning and eve∣ning for fifteen days together, and take care that the Bath be not hot enough to provoke Sweat.
You may prepare a Ptisanne for his ordinary Drink with French-Bar∣ley, and the Roots of wild Succory, Sorrel and white Lilies, to which you may add some Lycorice, and a little Lemmon, to render it more agreeable and cooling. Broths and boil'd meat must serve for his nourishment, which you must diminish the quantity of by little and little; so that the Patient may find himself insensibly reduced to the constant use of liquid Aliments toward the end of his Pre∣paration. 5. Excess of Repletion & Moisture is chiefly found in Bodies of a cold & Phleg∣matick Temper, which you may cor∣rect by evacuating and drying them with the following Remedies. You may frequently give them Cly∣sters made of the Decoction of the Leaves of Mallows, Marsh-mallows, and Mer∣cury, the Flowers of Camomile and Melilot, Seeds of Anise and Fenugreek, adding to them Honey of Mercury. You may here practise Blood-letting without any scruple, and repeat it seve∣ral times, if you judge the Plenitude of the Vessels to be very considerable.
An Infusion of three Drachms of Sen∣na, one drachm of Agarick Trochiscated, and as much of the Salt called Polychrest, mixed with half an Ounce of the Con∣fection Hamech, and an Ounce of Sy∣rup of Peach flowers, will make up a Purge that may serve to evacuace abun∣dance of Phlegm, if you repeat it seven or eight times every second day. You may prepare your Ptisanne with two Quarts of ordinary Water, two Handfuls of French Barley, and three Ounces of Guaiacum, which you must have steeped beforehand in a hot place with a Pint of white Wine, and you may render it fit and easie to drink, by adding to the things aforesaid, a little Cinnamon Coriander-seed, Licorice, or Lemmon, according to the Taste and Palate of your Patient. You may make him sweat every eve∣ning, by giving him a good large Glass of the foresaid Ptisanne to drink, in which you shall have dropt fifteen or twenty drops of the Spirit of Harts∣horn; remembring to warm his Bed and Chamber as much as you can, and to put at the feet of such as difficultly sweat, Bottles filled with hot water. But if
these things are not able to cause some persons to sweat, you will infallibly force them to sweat sufficiently, by making them receive the Vapour of the Spirit of Wine in a certain Stove made on purpose. You must diminish his Nourishment by degrees, as I have already told you in the former Preparation; only you may make those I now speak of fast with much less danger, than any others, and you must prefer Rost-meat before Boil∣ed, as being much more drying, because the Particles of Fire do act more direct∣ly upon it. Besides the Middle Temperament and two Extremes, of which I have now spo∣ken, you will find many Bodies that re∣quire a less alteration, whether by Heat or Cold. In such cases you must use Re∣medies of a more moderate strength; and for such as are but indifferently Replete and Phlegmatick, you must lay aside the strong Sudorisicks, and only use the De∣coctions of Sassafras, China and Sarsapa∣rilla, according as there is more or less necessity of drying. In like manner you may bath less those that are very hot and dry, or else forbear the other cool∣ing
Moistning Ptisanne. Lastly, for them all you must be careful in augmenting or diminishing the strength of Purgatives and in general of all Remedies that serve for Preparation, according to the fore∣said Considerations. CHAP. III. Of the different ways of making Mercury to enter into the Bo∣dies of such as are infected with the Pox. 1. General Division of the wayes, and that the practice of giving it by mouth is none of the best. The Preparations of Mercury that are given inwardly. 3. The different wayes of making it enter by the Pores of the Body; and first of Plai∣sters that serve for this effect. 4. Of Ointments. 5. Of Troches for Fumi∣gations. 1. HAving let you see after what man∣ner you ought to prepare the Bo∣dies in which you would have Mercury
to operate; it is now time to speak of the several ways of using it, and the choice that ought to be made of them according to the degrees of the Disease, the supervening Accidents, and unhappy Circumstances, in which persons thus dis∣eased do sometimes find themselves. Mercury is usually made enter into their bodies two manner of ways; either in at the Mouth, or else universally by the Pores. It is worth observing, before we pro∣ceed further, that the first of these ways is indeed none of the best, because the Mercury that is thus taken at the Mouth, descends presently into the Stomach, whence it is suddenly Sublimated up∣wards by the Heat of this part; which causes the Salivation that is raised by this means to continue but a very little time, and not to terminate completely the uni∣versal Pox, unless the Natural Heat be found strong enough to supply this de∣fect by vigorously following the Motion of Mercury. I know well enough that some persons do mix Purgatives with it, which do hinder its Sublimation, by precipitating it downwards. But this custom seems to
have as little certainty as the former, be∣cause only passing through the Guts, it cannot purify at most but that which is called the second Region of the bo∣dy; for there is no likelihood at all, that it should be able to penetrate into the most remote parts, to mix with all the Acid Humours that are there extra∣vasated, and so draw them into the pla∣ces I have spoken of, by a contrary Mo∣tion. By this way of arguing, and by the proof that I have made in this matter, and seen others make too; I cannot but think, such as indifferently practise this way of administring it, and make it pass for infallible in all that have the Pox, and in all the degrees of it, ought to be esteem∣ed Ignorant, or Impostors; and Patients should in all reason rather rely upon the Honesty and Experience of true Physi∣cians, who do find but too many Occa∣sions for discovering this truth, and are not wanting to advertise ingeniously such as have an unhappy inclination to run the hazard of a false palliative Cure, be∣cause they have been once falsly perswa∣ded, or because they are engaged by par∣ticular Motives to search out Remedies
they fancy more easy, and less trouble∣som. I do not mean but there may be found abundance of persons, who will maintain they have been cured by taking Mercury this way. But you must observe, that among them there are many who never had the Pox but only in their ima∣gination; that in some Nature did pro∣cure a Critical Motion of her own accord, near about the time they made this use of Mercury; that in others she had been strongly moved to the same effect, by the activity of other Remedies which have been mixed with it; lastly that those who have used it in the first degree of this universal Pox, that is to say, when its matter remains still in the Vessels, and hath not yet caused the ebullition of the blood, and consequently diffusion of se∣rosities, might have been perfectly puri∣fied, by receiving through the rough Ar∣tery some part of the Mercury that is sub∣limated from the Stomach up to the Mouth, and might by that means be car∣ried to the Heart, from whence it be∣comes universally spread through the Vessels by the Circulation; or else by attracting through the Lacteal Veines some particles of that which is precipi∣tated
downwards by the conjunction of Purgatives, out of which Veins it may be also carried to the Heart, and thence dispersed by the Motion of the blood, af∣ter the manner I now spoke of. 2. Nevertheless if you will be desirous of trying to raise the Crisis of the Pox af∣ter this manner, you had best cause a loosness with it, by mixing crude Mercu∣ry or sweet Sublimate with purging pow∣ders, such as Aloes, Colocynth, and pre∣pared Scammony, which you may re∣duce into the consistance of Pills, of which you may give every day a Dose proportionable to the present condition of your Patient. You may also provoke the Salivation, with these two sorts of Mercury, by in∣corporating as much as you can of the first with Turpentine and the Crust of Bread dryed and powdred, to reduce it afterwards into the form of Pills, of which you may give from half a drachm to one drachm; or else by mixing the se∣cond from fifteen to thirty grains for each Dose in a little Conserve of Roses; remembring always that this last ought to be preferred, and that the former is much more suspicious, because it may re∣unite
it self in the Stomach, or in the Guts, after the Turpentine is dissolved. Besides sweet Sublimate, there are se∣veral other Chymical Preparations of Mercury, that are pretended to be Pur∣gative too, and do really Purge both by Vomit and Stool: Such as are red and white Precipitate, which are given from four to eight grains, and Turbith Mine∣ral from three to six. But you must ob∣serve that this effect doth principally proceed from the Corrosion and Acute∣ness of corrosive Salts, that hold Mercu∣ry under these several forms, and so the inward use that is made of them is al∣ways to be accounted dangerous, unless you break the points of these Acids be∣fore-hand, by burning more then once these powders in the Spirit of Wine. Almost all the Receipts, and pretend∣ed Secrets of Empyricks, and generally of such as promise to Cure the Pox with∣out obliging their Patients to quit their Employments for some time, or any way changing their usual way of Living, do consist in the use of the Powder of Algarot, and some other Preparations of Antimony, which have no considerable effect, besides that of spoiling the Sto∣mach
and disordering all the Natural Functions; or else in the several ways of giving Turbith Mineral, and the two Precipitates I now spake of. For some of them give these things simply, and without any other Preparation, in the Conserve of Roses; and pretend to make them pass quickly into all parts of the bo∣dy, by giving presently afterwards to their Patients as much Wine as they are able to drink; on which subject you must observe, that Wine taken in good quantity is mighty Diuretick, and that Mercury thus impregnated with Salts is easily dissolved, and carried off by Urine, which for that reason then becomes very Salt and Acid, and is therefore the cause that there is but a very small part of them that can enter or continue in the sangui∣ferous Vessels, and so very small help can be expected from them. Others again give these powders mixed with Gumme Gutta, the Resine of Jalap, and other Purgatives alike violent, which truly do preserve it in Motion, and do hinder it from adhering to the Stomach and Guts, but do often cause most terrible Acci∣dents by the fire that they enkindle in the body, and by the violence of the activity.
3. It remains then to make Mercury enter through the pores of the body, b applying Mercurial Plasters or Ointments upon it, and by reducing it into a Fumi∣gation when mixed with resinous Drugs. Mercurial Plasters and Ointments are applyed to the same places, and have ve∣ry near the same effect; the manner of using them doth not differ neither, only the first must be spread upon Leather be∣fore they are applyed, whereas the lat∣ter are applyed directly upon the skin, which is afterwards only covered with some Linnen. That which is particular in this matter, is that the Mercury which enters into Plasters requires a longer time to pene∣trate the Mass, than that which is put in∣to Ointments, because it is more closely confounded in the solidness of the mat∣ter, and therefore you must not change them but seldom or not at all, and cover from the beginning all the parts that ought to be covered. The Plaster which is ordinarily made use of, is that which is described by, and called de Vigo, and is found prepared in all Shops, simple, double, or treble with Mercury. But for as much as it is of too
hard a consistence, and doth not easily ad∣here to the skin, you may to better pur∣pose prepare another with eight ounces of Mercury, four ounces of Turpentine, and two pounds of the Plaster of Muci∣lages. 4. That which is commonly called E∣morbo, or the Grey Ointment, and by the Physicians Neapolitan, is found pre∣pared in Apothecaries Shops, and some make the friction with it. But because the Dose of Mercury is very small in it, and, because it is of an unsavoury smell; you may prepare another, more effectual Oyntment, with four ounces of Mercury, two ounces of Turpentine, one ounce of the Oyl of Bays, two drachms of Saffron, and a pound and a half of the Ointment of Roses. You may employ about two ounces of this Ointment for the first friction, which you must make from the Ankles till a∣bove the Knees, and from the Wrists to the end of the Shoulder-blades. Though this quantity of Mercury be seldom sufficient to bring Nature to a Critical Motion, nevertheless some per∣sons have been found so tender and deli∣cate
or easy to put into this Motion, that they have received a Salivation even from the, very first Friction, and in which persons a second would have proved very dangerous; so that you must ob∣serve narrowly the Patient you under∣take, so soon as you have thus given him Mercury, and you must diligently exa∣mine whatsoever happens to him anew, to the end you may presently leave of your Frictions, so soon as the signs of a Salivation do appear, and this to avoid Suffocation, which doth always happen, when the Humours are carried up to the Throat in too great an abundance. In the second Friction which must be made four and twenty hours after the first, you may employ up to four ounces of your Ointment, and rub the Legs and Thighs with it from the middle of the Foot to the upper part of the Hips, the Chine or Back-bone from the end of the Os Sacrum to the middle of the Neck, and the Arms, from the Wrists again to the Shoulder-blades, not forgetting the places where the Glandules are seated, which serve for Emonctories to the No∣bler parts. This second Friction is sometimes sufficient,
but we are often compelled to make a third too, with the same Circum∣stances of the quantity of Ointment, and parts whereon it is applyed, which doth almost always produce the desired effect, when the body is rightly prepared as it ought to be. But you must not despair, though it should fail to come yet; you must then use your best prudence and discretion, and have a care of going too fast in your intention, lest Nature should chance to surprize you on a sudden. For Example, you must let it alone for a day or two, before you begin a new Friction, and you must employ but a small quantity of your Ointment, if you perceive any appear∣ance of Commotion. Be not obstinate neither in filling a body with Mercury by fifteen or twenty repeated Frictions, as some Authors do unadvisedly Coun∣sel, because it is a thing of very danger∣ous a consequence, and the Crisis you must desire should rather depend on a good Preparation, than such an abun∣dance of this Medicament. Howsoever you'll find by Experience that a Dose of sweet Sublimate will now prove wonderfully beneficial, if you give
it after a reasonable number of Frictions. There remains something still to be said of the time and manner of perform∣ing them, because there are some very useful Circumstances which depend on them; For Example, in a Cold Season, it is needful to make choice of Noon, for the rubbing your Patients, because the Air of our Climate is then rendred a lit∣tle more benign; and in hot Weather on the contrary you must prefer the Mornings and Evenings, lest the ex∣traordinary Heat that is joyned with the Fire you must make should weaken them too much; but in mild Weather you may indifferently make use of any hour of the Day, observing only that the di∣stribution of Aliments be then finished, that Nature may have no other Employ∣ment to take her off from conspiring to∣gether with the Mercury to raise the Crisis you desire. As for the manner of making this Fri∣ction, 'tis necessary to say it must always be made before the Fire, which must be very great, but especially in Winter, and enclosed with a Skreen, or some such like thing, to hinder the Wind, and serve to reverberate the Heat, that the Mercury
may the better penetrate through the pores, and the Patient may not be mo∣lested with any Cold; the Friction must be repeated several times on each part to facilitate this penetration. 5. Among the three ways of making Mercury enter through the pores, I have found by practice that the Fumigation is the worst of all, and is so much the more dangerous, as it is commonly performed by the Smoke of Artificial Cynabre, which may prove a kind of poison in its self, but is thought to be corrected by the mixture of Sublimate Corrosive, yel∣low Arsenick, and other like Druggs, which are indeed poisons much more pernicious. Howsoever I grant it may be some∣times preferred before the others, when the Pox comes to be in the last degree of all, by reason that the Mercury being thus turned into Vapours, doth penetrate the bones the better. But if you desire to draw the best effect that can be expect∣ed from it, make use of crude Mercury reduced into Troches with Turpentin, Coals made of Willow, and Orris pow∣dered, and leave all the other Formules to such as Ignorance doth engage to con∣tinue
in a certain road they dare not stir a step out. To conclude, there is nothing more common than the way of giving the Fu∣migation; a certain Couch is covered all round with a sheet, and a little Stool turned upside downward is put under it, & upon it a Chaffendish of lighted Coals, in which Troches are burnt, whose Va∣pour the Patient receives all naked under the Covering, always excepting the Head, which is only kept within from time to time, when there are Ulcers in the Nose, Mouth, or other parts of it.
CHAP. IV. Of the Critical Motions that are wont to be caused by Mercury. 1. That no Author hath ever yet explicated the Causes of these different Motions, and the necessity there was of doing it. 2. Of the ways that serve for the Crises which are excited by Mercury, and how that by sweat comes to pass. 3. Of the Critical Evacuations that are made by Siege. 4. Of those that are made by Urine. 5. Of the Salivation. 6. Of the signs that do al∣ways demonstrate a Salivation. 7. Re∣medies against the Accidents that do commonly happen, and general Rules of the time it ought to last. 1. THere are some Authors who have maintained, that Mercury ap∣plied exteriourly on the skin, doth act on the body only by an irradiative ver∣tue, and that the Dose which was em∣ployed to this effect, might easily be found again entirely in the Linnen and Plasters, after provocation of the Crisis;
others have endeavoured to prove on the contrary, that it penetrates the pores, that it acts on all the inward parts, and lastly that it goes out so sensibly with the Impurities of the body, that a piece of Copper may be whitened only by rub∣bing it a while in the Phlegm that runs out in the Salivation. But no body ever yet took the pains to enquire, why its Motions and Actions, and the Crises that result from them do appear so very diffe∣rent, though it be prepared and given in the same form and manner. Those who have made some Reflecti∣ons on this subject, are contented to ad∣mire this Mineral, and consider it as an Hydra with many Heads, or as the Pro∣teus of Physick; they have pretended that there was some Analogie between it and the Mercury of Astrologers, which produces different effects according to its different Conjunctions with other Pla∣nets; without taking notice of never∣theless, or presuming to teach us, what are those matters it usually joyns with, for to act so differently. They have made indeed many Elogiums of its ver∣tues, without offering to give any expli∣cation of its effects; Lastly they have
told us that no Drug in all the Medicinal matter is fit to serve for a Substitute in its place, but have never discovered to us any reason of its singular qualities, or what's the matter that those who have employed it have only acted like blind-men in it; so that young Students who have turned over all manner of Books for some illustration of this matter, have never been able to find any satisfaction, but have still been compelled (as others have) to remain in their former obscuri∣ty; and Patients who have been surpri∣sed with Events contrary to what they were made expect, have found no per∣sons capable of building the comfort they give them on sufficient or solid Reasons. Nevertheless the explication of these things was not really so difficult; Men might have made comparison between the Principles of Art and those of Nature, and between things Artificial in Mecha∣nicks, and especially in Chymistry, with what passes Naturally in the bodies wherein Mercury doth enter. The Ob∣servations which I have made on this subject, and which every body might have made as well as I, may perhaps prove sufficient for the Evidence of what
was hitherto hid, being also joyned with the Applications of them, persons may make themselves. In a word, the many Experiments and Events would clearly have discovered the truth, if men had been but curious enough to seek it out. But whether it be that the knowledge of it was not judged necessary, or that no body was willing to take the pains of acquiring it, or else that those who pos∣sessed the knowledge of it were not will∣ing to communicate what they knew; it is very certain that no Author hath yet undertook to teach it, and yet I cannot conceive, how the Artificial Crises of the Pox can be perfectly explicated, with∣out letting see at the same time what it is that renders them so different. 2. The ways through which the Ve∣nereal matter doth ordinarily pass in these sorts of Crises, are either such as serve for Sweat, or for passage of the Urine, or ex∣pulsion of the grosser Excrements, or espe∣cially those that serve for the Salivation. The Crisis that is made through the first of these ways doth happen, when the Mercury finds a great many Sulphurous Vapours which do serve for the matter of fat, in bodies wherein it enters; for as
it doth ever mix willingly with Sulphurs, and is already disposed to it by the divisi∣on that hath been made of it with Re∣sinous bodies, it doth easily unite with fat and vaporous matters, which render it more light, more volatil, and conse∣quently more fit to follow their Motion from the Center to the Circumference. But as this same Motion is in some manner contrary to the penetration which Mer∣cury ought to make for sufficiently puri∣fying the blood; it often happens that this Crisis is but imperfect, unless Nature her self be that way exceedingly dispo∣sed. 3. Some bodies are found to be so fill∣ed with a Tartarous Salt, or other mat∣ters of the Nature of Alkalis, that the Mercury which enters into them precipi∣tates downwards by their means, and the Impurities are carried off by Siege. But as these matters do not hinder the Mercury from-penetrating into all the parts, this Crisis is much more certain than the for∣mer, especially when the Physician helps Nature to act, by often-repeated Purges and Diureticks. 4. That which causes the Mercury and Venereal Salts to be sometimes carried
off by Urine, is that Acids are found in some bodies, near in as great a Number as Alkalis is in others: The truth of this Opinion may be easily proved; for e∣very body knows that Acids taken in∣wardly become Diuretick, and the Ob∣servations upon Mercury do shew, that they may be sublimated by Heat, when joyned with it, and that they can be pre∣cipitated by Alkalis, even after this Sub∣limation. Now you may perceive by what I have said, that the property of Acids is to carry off Phlegm and Serosities by way of Urine, but that they are not able to produce this effect, when joyned with Mercury, and agitated by the Natural Heat, unless Alkalis do also sufficiently a∣bound, to precipitate it downwards. Fur∣thermore seeing impure Salts are easily dissolved in watry substances, and this Crisis hath very much affinity with that which is made by Salivation, I conceive it must be more perfect than the other two, when its Evacuations continue long and large enough. 5. As 'tis the property of Leaven to extend it self in the things that ferment, and render them hereby of a like Nature, so the Venereal Salts do dissolve in the
blood, extend themselves into all parts of the body, and render by this means almost all the Humours sharp and Acid. This is the reason why the Salivation is the most ordinary Crisis of the Pox, that is provoked by the help of Mercury, be∣cause it charges it self with these Acid Liquours in so great a measure, that no∣thing is able to carry it off so well by the other ways I mentioned; And it is this which may be esteemed the surest of all to cure this Disease; for besides that it is very seldom seen to fail, when well ma∣naged, the Circumstances which do ac∣company it make us judge the better of its goodness. It is remarkable in the first place, that its Motion is from below up∣wards, and is commonly equal, moderate, and without any interruption, which shews that Nature acts rather of her own accord, than by the meer force of the Re∣medy. Moreover all the Acid and impure Humours do ascend so sensiby with the Mercury, that this mixture is near of the same quality with the dissolution of this Mineral in the Spirit of Niter, or Aqua fortis, in so much that being driven up by the Heat, there is made a kind of Sub∣limate Corrosive which exulcerates all
the parts of the Throat and Mouth, and penetrates them so exceedingly, that their Vessels are opened, and blood runs out of them for some days, until the mat∣ter becomes less acrimonious by a smaller quantity of Acids. Impostors who give the Salivation to such as have not the Pox, make these Ul∣cers pass for effects of the Malignity of Venereal Salts▪ that they may the better conceal their Villanies by such perswa∣sions. But you must observe, that they do indeed happen as well to such as have not the Pox, as those who really have it, because they are produced by the mix∣ture I lately spoke of, or by reason that there are Acid Juyces in all Men general∣ly; in a word because the Mercury is soon sublimated, passes quickly, and doth but lightly heat the Mouth in those who have too few Acids to govern its Motion, unless the other matters which I have spoken of do train or draw it some other ways: So that the Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat ought to be considered as inseparable Accidents of this Crisis, whatsoever Indispositions it may be in∣tended for. 6. Moreover you may know it in its
beginning by the agitation of the Pulse, the inquietudes of Mind and Body, the diminution or entire loss of appetite, by the retiring of the Eyes, heat of Mouth, swelling of the Gums and Lips, thick∣ness of the Tongue, stink of Breath, pain of Teeth, whiteness of the Palate, and interruption of sleep. When you shall find the Crisis to ap∣proach by all these Signs, you must for∣bear your Frictions, Fumigations, and generally all Mercurial Remedies, to a∣void Suffocation and other accidents which Mercury doth cause, when given in too great a quantity. But if its ap∣plication hath been reasonably well per∣formed in a Body rightly prepared, there will succeed to the Signs I named a con∣tinual trickling of white phlegm in a long thread, which will at first run but gently, but will augment by degrees for nine days time; so that the more Phleg∣matick persons may be able thus to spit up to eight pounds in four and twenty hours, and others in proportion. In the first days of the sublimation of Mercury, the Belly receives some com∣motion from its passage, and this causes a Flux downwards, which lasts indeed
but a small time, and requires no parti∣cular consideration. It may be also ob∣served in the increase of the Salivation, that the Ulcers which I spoke of do enlarge in latitude and profundity by the action of the matter that runs out of them; and that the motion of the Ar∣tery appears almost as strong and une∣qual, as in burning Fevers, because im∣purities cannot be thus seperated from the Blood, without raising a great Ebul∣lition in it, by the motion of Mercury, or strength of the natural heat. But seeing these things do happen through an indispensible, necessity, and are not at all contrary to what may fairly be expect∣ed from the Action of Mercury, you need not trouble your selves to think of preventing or curing them by con∣trary Remedies. 7. Nevertheless you may mitigate the pains in the Belly, when they be∣come very hard to endure, by the means of Anodyne and cooling Clysters; or else diminish the corroding Acrimony, which causes Ulcers in the Mouth, with gentle affwaging Gargarisms; such as are, for example, Cows Milk luke-warm, or the Decoction of French-Barley, Lin∣seed,
and Fleawort-seed; to which must be added, that it is sometimes necessary to consume the corrupted flesh about them with Spirits of Wine, Vitriol, or Sulphur. It should remain to say something of the Quantity of the Matter, and time of its running; but seeing these two Cir∣cumstances do absolutely depend on the Temperaments of persons, and degrees of the Disease, they cannot be precisely regulated, but by the Judgment, Ap∣plication and Experience of him that treats them. Wherefore I shall not de∣tain you to no purpose on this Subject, but believe it may suffice to say general∣ly speaking, that you ought not to be∣gin counting the days of the Flux, until it is able to furnish at least two pounds of Matter in four and twenty hours, and that it ought to continue a fortnight at least, and a month at most. Nevertheless there are some Authors who pretend that the cessation of Acci∣dents, and especially of the Flux, are undoubted marks of a complete and per∣fect Cure. But you may easily perceive this Rule not to be infallible, since I have proved in another place, that the
Cause of the Pox may still remain, when the ordinary Accidents are vanished a∣way; and that there are other Accidents on the contrary, which can never whol∣ly disappear, but by the application of particular Remedies, either during, or after the universal Purification of the Bo∣dy; for example, the Rottenness of Bones, which must be corrected by a∣ctual Cauteres; the Consumption of Flesh or Skin made by Tetters or pro∣found Ulcers, which can never be rege∣nerated but by mundifying Medicines; lastly the Relaxation and weakness of the Spermatick Vessels, which causes in some persons a continual Effluxion of the Seed, until they be closed up again by styptick and astringent Remedies. Be∣sides you will find by experience, that the Flux often ceases before the Disease, and that it is sometimes necessary to re∣new it; or at least to assist the former Evacuation with Remedies that purge through other passages, especially when Nature is so inclined. But you must not do like those who think they can never enough drain the Bodies that are thus infected, who con∣sume and exhaust the Radical Moisture
it self, which is the foundation of Life, after having drawn away all the other Humours. But remember rather, that it is of as great importance to preserve what is natural to the Body, as to de∣stroy whatsoever is enemy to or against Nature. And to the end you may the better avoid this Excess, you must ob∣serve very exactly, how far the Body is dried, how the forces are spent, and all the other Circumstances, which I gave you before; that so you may timely stop the Salivation after a sufficient con∣tinuance of it, by change of Linnen, Bed, and sometimes Chamber too, or by the Precipitation of Mercury, which may be made with the Salt of Tartar taken alone in a Broth, or mixed with the ordinary Purges and Diureticks.
CHAP. V. Of the Diet of such as are in the Artificial Crises of the Pox. 1. In what this Diet doth consist in gene∣ral, and why it is necessary to give par∣ticular examples of it. 2. The manner of governing those who are of a good Complexion: 3. Who are Hot and Dry: 4. Who are Cold and Moist. 5. Gene∣ral Observations for them all. 1. THE Method of governing such as are in the Crises that are rais∣ed by Mercury, doth in general consist in preserving them from the violence of ill Air and bad Weather, in regulating the Quality and Quantity of Aliments and Medicaments, and if you will also, in a Moderation of the Passions of the Mind. The means of answering the first point have been already given, when I spoke of the proper seasons to treat the Pox; and it seems that the prudence and dis∣cretion of the Physician ought to make
Rules for the other two. Nevertheless seing it is often impossible to correct perfectly in the Preparation, all the pre∣ternatural Dispositions which proceed from the diverse Temperaments of per∣sons, and it is consequently necessary to persist until the end of the Cure, in a re∣gular use of things that are contrary to their pernicious Qualities; it may be expedient to do as I have here done in delivering the Method of Preparing such as have this Disease, that is to say, of shewing here the proper management of Nourishment and Remedies for such as are of an even and good Tempera∣ment, and for those that are removed from this good Mean, by great Repleti∣on and Inanition; after which you will here find some general Circumstances it is convenient to observe, in all those persons who are treated with Mercury. 2. There are two Rules particularly important for the Diet of one of a middle Temper; the first is, Not to give him any more Aliments than will preserve his forces in good plight, that Excre∣ments and Superfluities may not too much abound: and the second is, That you give him light Remedies for to open
the chief passages, that Nature may not be diverted in her operations by contra∣ry motions. You will sufficiently answer the first Rule, if you give him two new-laid Eggs at noon, and a Broth every fourth hour, all the rest of the day and night, which you may make with a Leg of Beef, Pul∣lets and some Succory. The Ptisanne which I have before de∣scribed for preparation of Bodies of this consistence, may also serve them very well during the Crisis, to answer the se∣cond Rule I gave you; because it is Su∣dorifick and Diuretick, and may be also rendred proper for gently loosning the Body, by making a cold Infusion of two Drachms of Senna four and twenty hours in a Quart of it, which you may make him drink every second day at several draughts. 3. When you shall come to treat a Body that is very Hot and Dry, you must remember it would be a dangerous thing to nourish him too little, or give him A∣liments of a Heating quality. Where∣fore you must prefer Broths before new-laid Eggs, and give him one at least eve∣ry third hour, made of a Leg of Veal,
Beef and Pullet, adding to it in Summer Sorrel, Lettice and Purslain, or in Win∣ter Succory. But if your Patient nau∣seates this kind of Nourishment, you may make him a Gelly with the above-mention'd meats, French-Barley, a little of the cold Seeds and Sugar. You may safely make use of the moist∣ning and cooling Ptisanne, which I de∣scribed when I spoke of the means of preparing these persons; in a Quart of which you may infuse a Drachm of Sen∣na, and so much Crystal Mineral to give him every fourth day. Clysters that cool and moisten the Bo∣dy will prove very effectual, if you make them of Whey, or a Decoction of Pot∣herbs, mixing with each an Ounce of Honey of Violets or white Lilies. 4. On the contrary, during the time you treat a Body that is extreme Phleg∣matick and replete, you must not be con∣tented only with the Critical Evacuati∣ons that are commonly made by the Mouth; but you must endeavour al man∣ner of ways besides to exhaust his Hu∣mours; so that some Broths or new-laid Eggs given every six hours will suffice for his Nourishment, because you must give
him but only just enough to keep him alive. The Ptisanne made of Guaiacum will also serve to dry him the more, if you prepare it according to the Dose I men∣tioned in the Chapter of the Prepara∣tion. You may often give Clysters made of common Honey, and a Decoction of the Leaves of Sage, Wormwood, Rue and Fennil. You may prepare laxative Potions, whose use must be frequent, with a De∣coction of Sage-leaves, an Infusion of Senna and Hermodactyls, and the Syrup of Roses or Peach-flowers; taking care of giving them to such a Dose, as may not be apt to divert the Salivation in its beginning, or diminish it when it is in its vigour. 5. By the Examples I have given you, and by what hath been already said in delivering the means of preparing Bodies for the Motions and effects of Mercury, you will easily frame different Methods, for such as are in the several degrees of more or less; and there is no necessity of prescribing any others more particu∣larly on this Subject. But it is so much
the more necessary here to remark the following Observations, as they ought in general to serve for all those who are in any Crisis that follows the application of this Remedy. In all fainting and swooning fits you may prefer a little Wine before Cordial Liquours, or Acid Fruits, and you will find by experience that it hath a better Effect. You must forbear Biscakes, Comfits, and generally all sweet sugar'd things, be∣cause they make the Teeth black, and increase the acrimony and pain which they do then suffer in the Throat. After the Evacuations have been suf∣ficient, and you have stopt the Flux, or hinder'd the others, you must draw your Patients by little and little, out of the great weakness they then subsist in, by a gradual augmentation of their nourish∣ment, after the same manner as you di∣minish'd it in their Preparation; remem∣bring always that you cannot suddenly change them out of Inanition into Re∣pletion, without endangering their Suf∣focation, or putting them into some de∣sperate and mortal Disease. So soon as they shall be re-established a
little by this means, you may reassume the use of Purgatives, Diureticks and Sudorificks, to set Nature at work again, and help to drive out such Impurities as do sometimes still remain after all these former endeavours. Moreover the Tranquility of the Mind is so necessary during all the Cure, that there is always a great deal of danger, where it is wanting, and consequently it is your Duty to remove from your Pa∣tients all things which may stir up the Passions of the Mind, and especially Fear, Sadness, Anger, care of any busi∣ness of concernment, or any kind of particular application of the Mind; so that you must always be sure to entertain them with the hopes of a safe and hap∣py Cure, you must relate to them only things which may please and rejoyce their hearts, and you must give them all manner of satisfaction as far as you are able; or at least pleasantly represent to them the prejudice they would be apt to suffer from things which cannot be granted to them without danger. Nay, you must also take care of their affairs, where there is occasion, either really or else in shews; Lastly, you must take away
from them all Books, Manuscripts, and generally all such things as are capable of engaging them in two much thoughtful∣ness, especially after that Mercury is once applied. CHAP. VI. Of the particular Circumstances that ought to be observed for treating Methodically Women and little Infants. 1. Necessary observations for the treating of Women. 2. That Infants are susceptible of the Pox at all times, but that there is no necessity of giving different Me∣thods for all degrees of Youth. 3. The manner how to treat the smallest Infants, and a Precept of moment on this Subject. 1. Whatsoever hath been hitherto said concerning the way of curing the Pox, may equally serve for both Sexes, as well as also for all Ages, if you do but proportionate your Reme∣dies
to the strength of your Patient. On∣ly there are indeed some particular Cir∣cumstances it is necessary to observe, for the better curing of Women, and little Children. For if the first of these per∣sons have their Terms supprest, you must in the first place of all labour to provoke them, while you are in their Preparation for the reception of Mercury, because you must always make the application of it, so soon as, or presently after they have sufficiently flowed, for fear lest if they should renew their Course too soon, they might create a great disorder in the Oeconomy of Nature, by a contrary mo∣tion to that of the Salivation. You must also take notice that there sometimes happen very urgent Accidents which engage them to be treated while they are with Child; and you will find by experience that they can then under∣go the Cure without danger, by observ∣ing to manage them gently, and especi∣ally to choose a time wherein their gross∣ness is a little advanced; because the Infant is too weak in its beginning, to resist the disturbance which Mercury and the other Remedies do cause in the Bo∣dy, and because it might be apt to ac∣celerate
celerate the Child-bed toward the end, before the Off spring doth receive a per∣fect maturity. 2. Infants are capable of catching the Pox, either in the Womb of their Mo∣ther, or by sucking diseased Nurses; in a word, by being kissed or toucht seve∣ral wayes by persons infected with this Disease. Whence it comes to pass, that it may happen in all the times and de∣grees of Youth, and so consequently cannot be treated after the same manner, since the stripling that sucks his nourish∣ment from the Teat, is infinitely less fit to bear the violence of Remedies, than he that is able to live like other men, by advancement of years. Notwithstanding there is no necessity of giving different Methods for all Ages, because the many various Intentions, Re∣spects and Remedies, which I have al∣ready mentioned, may also serve for the Cure of Infants, only observing a due proportion of them to their small condi∣tion. But it is needful nevertheless to prescribe the particular Method of cu∣ring well the smallest of all; that so ha∣ving examples before you of the greatest and least, you may the more easily judge
of the quality and quantity of things which ought to be employed in the dif∣ferent degrees of mediocrity. 3. So soon as you shall have discover'd the Pox in an Infant that sucks, you must first of all endeavour to discover the per∣son that did communicate it, to the end you may remove such person before you entreprise any thing. After which you must choose a good Nurse, to contribute towards the purification of his blood by the use of wholsom Milk, which you must carefully preserve in all its purity by pre∣scribing her a good Dyet, and separating your little Patient from her; and you must give him Milk only with a little spoon, or else with fine Linnen, that he may suck after 'tis dipt in it. But you must know that the Milk of a Goat well fed is infinitely to be preferred before that of an unsound Woman. It will be necessary to purge him in the beginning of all with a little Water of Cassia, or the Syrup of Roses, and repeat this Purge several times, according as he is more or less replete. You may prepare a Ptisanne for him with a handful of French-Barley, and three or four drachms of China-root,
which you may boil in three Quarts of common Water, to the diminution of the third part, adding to it toward the end a little Licorice, & after you have pass∣ed it ten grains of Crystal Mineral, for to give him to drink or suck of, from time to time day and night. After having opened by this means the common passages of the Excrements, you may rub the bottom of his Feet every third day with a drachm of the follow∣ing Ointment; Take a drachm or a drachm and a half of Mercury revived from Cynnabre, and kill it in two ounces of the Balsom of Ar∣ceus, adding afterwards six ounces of Hogs-grease well washed, and make use of it six or eight times the way I have told you. If these first Frictions don't procure a Flux, or do cause some other sort of Cri∣sis, you must even continue them with∣out other Mystery as long as they shall be thought necessary; or else you may make them stronger by the augmentation of the Dose of the fore-said Ointment, with half a drachm, or more for each Fri∣ction, and by employing it partly on the Feet, and partly on the hands.
During the time of the Critical Evacu∣ations, you may give him every six days two or three grains of the volatil Salt of Vipers, dissolved in a little of the Tisanne described before; and you may prefer this same Remedy before all the Treacle, Philosophical, and Sudorifick Waters, from whence some Authors do promise such false wonders. Now the most important precept I have to give you on the account of little Infants, is to treat them as gently as they have but little strength, and to spare neither time nor pains to encrease their small strength, or at least to preserve it; for if you weaken them by the force of your Remedies, you'll miserably drive them into an inevitable death, instead of curing them as you designed; seeing the Operation of Medicaments is always ei∣ther dangerous, or unuseful, if it be not seconded by the efforts of Nature.
CHAP. VII. Of the Misfortunes which may fol∣low the Application of Mercury. 1. The Causes of the Death of some that are infected with the Pox, and the Causes of the Accidents which sometimes happen after the Application of Mercury. 2. What are those Accidents. 3. General Remedies that serve to put a stop to their Violence. 4. Particular Remedies for the Cure of them. 1. THough the Pox be not a Disease mortal of it self, and I hold it curable in all its degrees, it is true ne∣vertheless that Men may dye of it (as I have said before) when its matter hath corrupted or destroyed the parts without which there is no living; when one in∣fected with it hath fallen into the unhap∣py practices of Ignorants and Impostors: Lastly when careless Physicians do not soon enough remedy the Accidents which sometimes happen after the Ap∣plication of Mercury.
Not but the precepts which I have gi∣ven are almost infallible, for curing this Disease suddenly, easily, and surely, and hardly can they fail in one of a thousand, when they are regularly observed. But there are some dismal Circumstances, which it is impossible to remove. For be∣sides that Men are necessarily mortal, the true Cause of their Death is often un∣known, the time of it cannot be avoided, and the Cacochymie of bodies is now & then so very great, that it cannot possibly receive Correction; to which may be added that there are some inward Dispo∣sitions, which can no way be known, or there is no possibility of taking away. Whence it comes to pass, that the success of this undertaking is not always so hap∣py as we could wish, and Accidents may indeed happen which could in no wise be expected, to which nevertheless we ought to adhibite Remedies with all manner of care and exactness, which are things greatly necessary in all Occasions where Life and Death are concerned. 2. Now though all these Causes are of the same consequence, it would be but a vain attempt to deliver the means of de∣stroying them all, since that some of them
cannot be known, and others cannot possibly be removed. It may be suffici∣ent to say something of the ill Tempers of Bodies, and the too great quantity of Mercury which may be made enter into them, because they are the usual Causes of all the Accidents which follow its ap∣plication, and there are none but may happen by reason of them. For when all the things that cool and moisten have been used to no purpose for quenching the Fire, and correcting the dryness of an extraordinary Melancholick body, there is often found to follow a loosness accompanied with unsufferable gripes & pains, and which soon leaves a constipati∣on behind, that causes an Inflammation of the Entrals, Brest, Throat, and Mouth, with difficulty of Breathing, Swallowing, and Speaking; which Symptoms soon be∣gin a Fever, that in a small time be∣comes violent enough, to sublimate the Mercury up to the Brain, and thereby cause Swoonings, Phrensies, Convulsi∣ons, and very often Deafness, and Blind∣ness, Apoplexies, and Palsies, or lastly Death it self, if care be not suddenly ta∣ken to prevent it, by due applying fit Remedies against this train of misfor∣tunes.
In like manner if the Dyet, drying Decoctions, and strong Sudorificks have not been used sufficiently to make a con∣venient alteration of a very Phlegmatick and replete body, or else if Mercury hath been applyed in too much hast, it will sublimate along with it all on a sudden, so great a confluence of Humours that the most part of the Accidents I now reckoned up will also appear, but more particularly an extraordinary Swelling of the Throat, Tongue, Cheeks, and often of all the whole Face, with considerable hardness, and loosness of Teeth, and with an immoderate Flux of Blood from the Ulcers of the Mouth, which in a short time become great, spreading, black, stinking, and gangren'd, and which do at last cause Death, if a Suffocation don't prevent their malignancy. 3. In all these miserable Conjunctures the best means to be used do consist in hindring the Activity of Mercury, in the diminution of its quantity by change of Bed, Linnen, and Chamber, and in the precipitation of the rest downwards by astringent Gargarisms, Clysters, Phlebo∣tomies in the Foot, and especially by of∣ten repeated Purges, in which you must
be sure always to mix the Salt of Tartar, proportionating the rest of the Ingre∣dients to the Age, Strength, and Tempe∣rament of your Patients. Some do make use of a Golden Pill, which they cause to be swallowed sever∣al times after as many Lotions, and which always indeed carries off some very little Mercury on its Superficies; but it is so very small a quantity for so long a time, that no great effect can be expected from it, and its use must by no means hinder that of the former Remedies. 4. After having thus provided against all these Accidents in general, by the means that I have proposed; 'tis time to think of such as demand particular Cor∣rectives, and apply Cupping-glasses with scarifications on the nape of the neck, or on the shoulders, for all Phrensies, Con∣vulsions, Apoplexies, Deafness, Blindness, and in general for all Indispositions of the Brain and Nerves. A Gargarism made with a Decoction of Plantain, red Roses, and Agrimony in which you must drop a little Spirit of Vi∣triol, will prove astringent enough to re∣pel the Blood or Phlegm that runs out of the Mouth, and detersive enough to
cleanse the Ulcers which shall be toucht from time to time with the Chymical Spi∣rits before named. It is observable, that this same Garga∣rism may also serve to strengthen the loose Teeth, by closing of the Gums, which nevertheless may be much better fastned by touching them with the Aqua secunda. An Oxyrrhodin made of one part of Vinegar, and two of Oyl of Roses, out∣wardly applyed on the Throat, asswages it, takes down the Swelling, and dimi∣nishes the Inflammation. You may also for the same effect make use of the Cere-cloth of Galen, mixt with the Oyl of sweet Almonds. A few spoonfuls of good Wine will do a great deal of good in all Faintings, and Swoonings, for to fortifie the Heart, and disperse again the suffocated Spirits, which you must prefer in this occasion, before all the Confections, Cordial Poti∣ons, and other artificial Cardiacks. Cows-Milk luke-warm will wonder∣fully appease the pains in the Guts, if you make Fomentations of it outwardly and Injections within, in which you may add some Yelks of Eggs, and some grains of
Laudanum, to render them yet more A∣nodyne. Besides these Ordinary Remedies, the knowledge which you ought to have of things that appertain to Physick, the In∣structions which you may learn, and the Counsel you may please to take, will fur∣nish you with an infinity of others on particular Occasions. FINIS. INDEX. SECT. I. IN which some useful Reflections and Observations are made on the Names, Definition, Origine, Causes, Differen∣ces, Signs, and Prognosticks of the Pox. Chap. I. Of the Pox in general. Chap. II. Of the Causes of the Pox. Chap. III. Of the differences of the Pox, which may serve to make a Prognostick.
Chap. IV. Of the Judgment of the Pox. SECT. II. In which necessary Observations are made on the means to Cure the Pox, while it is but Particular; on the Na∣tural and Critical Motions that do ter∣minate it, when it turns to be Univer∣sal; and on the Medicines that serve to raise the Artificial Crisis of it. Chap. I. Of the kinds of Particular Pox∣es, that are called Ʋlcers and Chancres. Chap. II. Of other Particular ones, that are called Claps and virulent Gonor∣rheas. Chap. III. Of the Natural Crises of the Ʋniversal Pox. Chap. IV. Of the Plants which have been esteemed capable to carry off the Pox by Sweat. Chap. V. Of the Observations it is ne∣cessary to make on Mercury, to know whence the different effects that follow its application do proceed. SECT. III. In which the true Method of artificially
raising the Crises of the Universal Pox is explained. Chap. I. Of the Crises that are provoked by common Remedies, and of the proper Seasons for the application of Mercury. Chap. II. Of the Preparation of Bodies in which Mercury must enter. Chap. III. Of the different ways of making Mercury to enter into the Bodies of such as are infected with the Pox. Chap. IV. Of the Critical Motions that are provoked by Mercury. Chap. V. Of the Dyet of those who are in the Artificial Crises of the Pox. Chap. VI. Of the particular Circumstances which ought to be observed for treating Methodically Women and little Infants. Chap. VII. Of the Misfortunes which may follow the application of Mercury. FINIS.
