B4259 12877118 94859
THE CHIMNEYS SCUFFLE. Publica fumantes tetigere tributa Caminos, Naribus audacis fastidiosa plebis. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.
THE CHIMNEYS SCUFFLE. This is no Libel, such as Rogues disperse, But a poor Chimney-Plea in honest Verse. DEar Mistress of the Muses, Polihymy, Breath Spirit into th' Funnel of my Chimney, That old Mull'd-Sack,Who chang'd his Name for a Sum of money conditionally paid him by his Fellow Chim∣ney-Sweepers. who to such fortunes crept; And from a Chimney to a Mannor lept, May with our Steemy Consort joyn in One Throbbing our Suff rings in a Sooty room. But whence comes this Complaint? Be pleas'd to hear; More's laid upon out Hearths, than they can Bear. Our Chimney-Sweepers may their Hovels keep, For now the Owners must their Chimneys Sweep
To lessen their Scrude Tax.—Turn o're thy Book, Search thy Records,Late'y crea∣tea Keeper of the Fower-Records; but his Fanatick Brain and Fan∣tastick Pea have run such Division, as they will un∣strip him of that Imploy∣ment. Cropt Prin, and shew why Smoak Should thus be hoisted: where so many shar'd, While Other Smoakers in our State be spar'd! Th' like Smoaking Age did never yet appear, 'Tis thought we shall turn Aetna the next year: We're all in Smoak and Powder: not a Stove But must our Synods grand Designe improve. Alas poor Chimney-pipes! Say, why should you Be used thus, who stand but for a Show In Great mens Kitchins; while your Lords at Court Act for high Places, of some other Sport: Presenting there their Pagentry so clear As if they meant to make't a Theater. Their Tyre-rooms are alike: and it is common, Women act there with men, and men with women. Their Tents remov'd: the Meniey must resort By their Lords conduct to the modish Court, Where his disbanded ancient Family A Squirrel Lacky, or py-colour'd Page, Becomes reduc'd to one bare Livery; Which may secure his Honour from much wage; His Vails will do it, or a cashier'd Suit With some Appendices of Fancy to't. Batts now and Scrich-Owls may keep open house, While their Lords sated with a Court-Carouse, Display their loose debauch'ry: yet must they For their Starv'd Smoakless Chimneys duely pay This late enacted Tax: O precious Jewel That pays the State for Fire-work without Fuel! And this is just: for These get any day More by one Suit than thousand Chimneys pay. Whereas poor Tradesmen who live by their Booth, Earning no more than serves from hand to mouth, With all their Stock can scarce pay Scot and Lot, Eating at night more than the day had got:
These must be Smoak'd too, though their Chimneys speak They knew not what Fire meant throughout the Week. Is this a Parallel, line, or Solon's Law? That those whose Fortunes are not worth a straw Should be thus pounc'd to Muminie, and receive No more Exemption than our Grandees have. —Caesar I beg a boon, and it is this That I may plead in Forma Pauperis For these wcak Starvelings, who make't their desire That their Estates may purchase first a Fire Ere they pay for their Chimneys; and that those Whose grandeur by our Suff'rings daily grows To such a boundless bottome, as in time Their daring height will threaten a decline, May feel Your Princely Lash; and these be many Who ought well to be smoak'd as much as any. For they're such State-Impostons, as their Task Is to disguise their actions with a Mask Of Partial-guilt Conformity; and such As like base Bulloign will not bide the touch, Being all Coat-Cards, but of that vicious Crue, Their Hearts are false for all their modish Shew. And I must tell You from the zeal I bear Unto that Sacred Diadem You wear, That those Court-Burs who onely set their rast On best-betrust or on Self-interest, (For that's prime Game at Cards they daily use For their advantage and Your high abuse,) Can with a Spanish-Shrug complete their Ends, And make the world beleive they're Caesar's Friends; Ingratitude concludes them to be those Whom You reward the most be most Your Foes, Be not these Courtly Cay-ducks,A Fashion to our Nation un∣known though now disps'd through City, Country, Town. whose repute Swoln with ambition of a gaudy Suit, Or some Outlaudish, gimp-thigh'd Pantalour, A garb since Adam's. time was rarely known;
Strut all a-long to win the eyes of men, Who, if discreet, with Scorn dis-value them; All Sycamours for Shadow; nought for Fruit, Vers'd only in a frivolous dispute Or loose discourse of Hawk, or Hound, or Horse, Or in pursuit of H, what's ten times worse. These be those lazy fruitlesse Droans who thrive By sucking Honey from Your Princely Hive, What they ne're wrought nor duly labour'd for, And these may rest securely on the Shore; While Your endeered Zelots who have lost Their Fortunes for Your sake are hourly crost By adverse Winds: Long have these Starvelings bin Waiting at th' Pool in hope to be tane in, But some desertlesse Amorists of Fashion, Though really the Refuse of our Nation, Must be admitted to the highest place Not by internal but external Grace. 'Tis only Gold-foil that performs the work, Heav'ns blesse our Court from such a cursed Turk, For though his partial Presence honour win, He had no hand in bringing's Sov'raign in. Awake Great Prince, intend your own Affairs, Let no light Dalilah rob You of Your hairs;Sampsonis Ca∣pilli sunt Prin∣cipis nervi; qui Pascivis am∣plexibus, impu∣dicis amoribus debilitari so∣lent, si non di∣rimi. Proc. Those royal nerves should now imployed be In Steering th' Rudder of Your Monarchie; And smoaking those Ratouns who make't their aime To raise their Fortunes though they split their Fame; Nay, th'honour of our Nation; which is tride Sufficiently at th'Game of Peep and Hide. Our State's a constant Mask:—nor can we know Their faces by their vizors; but they show Best when they'r least discover'd: for what good Can be deriv'd from Those corrupt their blood, And mould base Heraldry, sprinkling a shame Upon th'degenerate House, from whence they came?
All's out of Order; Marriage Beds begin To take a Surfet and to rellish Sin. Stoln Waters rast the sweetest;Neither Fruits of their owne planting, nor Waters of their own draining, nor Soil of their own im∣proving. those Fruits too Which in their proper Soil did never grow, But by a strange-inoculating hand Seizing on that which th' Owner should command, Solace their Palates most:—Actors oth' Stage Spouse it the best with th' Peerage of this Age. Yet th' Spousal holds not: a dispensive Power Has made his Wife his constant Paramour:Fortis amatorls fit Palma, Co∣rone labotis, Quo Sponsus thalamum Ser∣vat honore Suum. Mancin. And yet HE loves HER as he loves his Life, And dearer too then if She were his Wife. But that we may the sooner make an end, Let us unto Your Offices descend, Both great and num'rous in Your peaceful State, And such as make our Officers too fat: So swoln as they forget what they have bin, With those brave Places they are seated in. My Pen ne'r brook'd the Style of Parasite, The World shall see I'll do each Office right. And first to Those whom we account the prime,Pastoral Office in the first place, because the highest prize: and pur∣chas'd by Re∣newal of Lea∣ses at the low∣est price. Those Lawn-fleeves of our late reformed time, Whose boundlesse height such Priviledges give As if they trench'd on Your Prerogative. For these are Smoakers too, give them their due, When we our dormant Leases should renew; Which might have been prevented in our Land If you had kept those Leases in Your hand. Which would have given those mounting Lords content, And rais'd fit Pentions for Your indigent Deserving Friends; who bravely stood their ground When these Mandilions were not to be found. Yet those insatiate Herds for all their store Are in their thoughts as empty as before: Though Diocesses be of large extent To thirsty Lungs they're insufficient.
Balaam's Priests could cunningly devise How to convey their Idol Sacrifice. This thirst deserves rebuke in Him that preaches, Cathedral Rabbies should be no Horse-leaches. And some we have no Leprous gold will touch, They're yet thin own, may we have many such. There's Smoak in Law too, having to much skill As to drain Water from the Clients Mill. The one as simple as the other wife, The Lawyer ginds and takes the Millers grife. He'l finger your pretence be 't right or wrong, Though th' Cause be weak, fat Fees will make it strong. Had these in Xerxes or Severus dayes Sought to enlarge their Fame, or Fortunes raise, They by Imperial Sentence had been Smoak'd, And with Gold molted down their Throat been Chok'd: For nought in reason could be held more sit, Than those who sold base Smoak to fall by it: Shall I draw near Your Court? it will aver The ranting Courtier Smoaks the Cavalier; Who though he never fought not ever will, He can prefer a Suit, and there's his skilp. Yet this Brisk Gig for all his garish show, Proves Smoaked by his Damasella too;In they Court of Bs (as the Apologua observes the Elephaunt would not be admitted, be∣cause his knees were so unwel∣dy, they would not bend, Who near the Lobby or the Back-Stairs waits To squeeze her Pention from her Brothel Mates: This brings revenues to the Surgeons Hall, But Cheats and Courtly Cringes pay for all. Those in our State he only held for Wisemen Who are design'd Commissioners and Excisemen. These be those Grand Impostors of our State, And need not for preferment long to wait, For they've already feather'd well their Nest, And on Your Subjects ruine set their rest. These to improve Your Rents, as they pretend, Become Your Farmers, but observe the end
Of their Imployments! 'tis their only aim To make a Booty of their Soveraign. With modest boldnesse let me tell Your Grace, That these have cheated You before Your Face, In prizing th' rates of Customs to be such, When th' Annual profit render'd thrice as much. Now was not this Design persued well, To take the Kernell and leave You the Shell? Yet these be Farmers still: Persons of case Sharing in Your Revennes as they please: Made to Cajole the State, but do no good Unlesse it be to suck the Vital blood Of Your endeered Subjects, who have serv'd Both You and Yours; and better far deserv'd Than these Cantarides who cleave to th' Skin For the Rivulets of Blood that flow within: But when their yawning Chaps have drunk up all, High-swoln with Loyal blood, they're forc'd to fall. These too like impudent Suiters lately wooe To be the Farmers of our Chimneys too: Which by their active undermining wit They first contriv'd, by Votes committing it To a Self-own'd Committee, whose Compact Brought this Proposol to an expresse Act: And though by Act prohibited it be No Member share in that Proprience, A trick is found out by their quick-silver'd Brain, A Dispensation for a future gain. These raking Rocks when they're on profit Set; Take all for Fish that comes into their Net. And these Grandalions of Your own Retenue Who would be thought to heighten Your Revenue: And with more fullnesse of Content instore You Than any Prince that ever Raign'd before You: Just as that Rebel Parliament profess'd To Your late Father in His Suff'rings bless'd.
Brave Plots; rich Profers! which like Flow'rs were strew'd Not to refresh the Sense but to delude. But was this done, my Gracious Liege, for You? No, though at first sight it might make a shew, As Painted Projects use, t' inhance Your Rens, Their Subtile Sconces moulded worse intents Than pur-blin'd Eyes discover'd; for they sought Either by Farming what their Brokage wrought, Or by their Agents to ingratiate▪ Your Smile for whom they did negotiate. But such base baits You cannot rellish, sure, Those be Your Friends who make You most secure: Whereas Court-Fawns, those Buffouns of our age Practise a-long Your HONOUR to ingage; Which Princes ever held the precioust Gem That could enrich a Royal Diadem. For what's this guilded State but painted Clay If Spotlesse Reputation fall away? May that live still unblemish'd, and remain An Individual to my Sov'raign, I'm bold, but 'tis my Zeal that makes me so, Who spares to speak he is Your fawning Foe. Satyrs who lay true tincture on a Crime, Deserve more praise then Humorists oth' time. 'Tis Charity in Him that shews the way, Or lends his Light to One who goes a stray A Subject to his Prince is such a Debter, The Plainer that He writes, he loves him better. Into Your Court such Favourites have rush'd, Whose Coats being full of Moats had need be brush'd; 'Tis true indeed we have Comprolors plenty, But of that Rank there is not one of twenty Dare execute that Office as, he should, Nor would He, I'm perswaded, if he could. The Weeds of others cannot well be mown By those who have so many of their own:
Their Studies are Lampounds; wherein their aime☜ States Court-abuses to the Penner's shame; For there's not any witty Back-stair Wench But reading jeers them for their want of Sense. We talk of a strange thing call'd Reformation, But where's that Creature to be sound ith' Nation! That Language is Utopian, none of ours, And has been long time since shut out a doors As a regardlesse Alien:—Let us can And take our Circuit from man to man. Phanatick, Libertine and Leveller, Our rigid Presbyterian, who to err Were held a Prodigy: let's see what peace Or Reformation any one of these Can hold forth to us!—but the other day Iohn Presbyter was to be pack'd away With his Sedicious Spawn: but are they gone As 'twas injoyn'd them, forty Miles from Town? No, no, believe it this was a brute Thunder, Their swelling Spirits are not so kept under;Whose Argu∣ments, though strongly secon∣ded, in a late debate were evinced, and those Fiery S∣parts deser∣vingly silenced. Mean while their Conven∣ticles and Clan∣destine Assem∣blies by their own riviledge frequently con∣tinued. For they're repriv'd, their Censure now blown o're And re-estated where they were before: And now restor'd, they vapour it afresh As none might touch their Sanctified Hesh. Those who supply their Places few draw near them, And though they preach pure Doctrine none wil hear them. Is this the way to Reformations, say, When Shepherds who have taught their Flocks to stray Must be indulg'd; and though they bring forth Leaves But no Soul-saving fruit, yet must Lawn-eeves Though ne'r so Orthodoxal; be content With a fraterual shrug to give consent To these Church-Cattines, whose active pate Works to reduce us to that forlorn State Which our Anarchiall Government retain'd While th' Syracusan Tyrant o're us raign'd?
Nor can I blame those Magpies if they give Such freedome to these Zimreys to live; High forts support the Lower: those who ne'r were Friends to Church discipline nor the Lords Prayer Be their GOOD LORDS: and These in such high Grace As they'l cast dirt in any Bishops face; So bravely rais'd they are, to Courtly strong ☞ As they will do no right nor suffer wrong: Nor is it strange that they their Faith dis-own Who made their Breach of Faith before with Crown. Grave Presbyterian Patrons,Witnesse those Hubbuls raised in several Paro∣chial Churches. who display Their Zeal by throwing Common Pray'r away Doom'd to a difrent Martyrdome, as of late Was done in flat defiance to the State And th' High Prerogative sole due to You, As if we had no Native Caesar now: If this succeed, as't his a fearful Shew, A tragick Epilogue must needs ensue. We hear of Coiners too, but they're so Greai As they may safely play the Counterfeit: Men of meb high descent and brave desert Scorn to receive their Convoy from a Cart. The Sun has many Moats, yet who'l assay To take those radiant blemishes away? They're glorious Soils: and Those are daring Fools Who call in question either Art or Tools. I much commend those Coiners pollicy Who stand secur'd by their Society: For they on such dependent Statists hing, They're priviledg'd from Cap'ring in a string. But to our Chimney-work!—This Enterview Must Catechise us—Sir, what Chimneys you; What Hearths, Stoves, Ovens? render us account, For we're Contractors. and must stand upon't: Do not deceive your self, return your number, For you're to suffer if you render under.
The Lash oth' Act shall swinge you with such Strokes As never shall be cur'd by Iohn an Oakes Nor those grave Coif-men, who for either side In our late Bickerings have their Judgements tried: And as they well delerv'd, now high advanc'd, So well it has unto those Neuters chanc'd; Who with such solemn Ceremonial State In funeral Robes on Bradshaw's Corps did wait: And as they drol'd in mournful Habits thither, It had been well they had been Earth'd together. Small Coal, Small Coal.—Still, still that Croaking Cry; I've stopp'd up all my Hearths; no Coals will I. I will not Salamander-like desire To make mine Habitation in the Fire: These age-benummed Joynts I'll never warm E're I pay more for Chimneys then my Farm. Though hoary Winter now draw near at hand I'll shew such due obedience to Command; With Damocles I'd rather chuse to starve Than lessen his Revenues whom I serve;☜ Yet let the State excuse me, for Blind Hugh My Mason clos'd my Hearth before I knew. Maduesse hath made me senselesse of all shame, Within this Fortnight I from Ped'am came; Where I my Crack-brain'd Amours did express As Woers should; Tom to his lucky Bese. And this contents me, though mad Boyes we be, I've found a Court grown madder far than we. My Brain is madling; I am now for Court For no Suit-quest, I am not monied for't; But to observe their posture; for we hear What strange-divining Meteors rusle there. State-Criticks now our Sprucer Sprigs be grown, Ready to brush all garments but their own; Those must be lightly touch'd, for they alledge Their Acts pretend a Native priviledge:
Sphear'd above Censure is their Regiment,An Apish-mo∣dish vosture the only sweet Courtly garb. Apish or modish it is sufficient So it be forraign, be it ne're so gay Nor garish-gaudy,  will find a way To gain admirers: and with speed prepare New Fashion-Mongers for a stranger aire: Our Countrey Artists be such homely Creatures As they mis-shape the Beauty of their features. So it bear th' Title of Outlandish work, 'Twill give content though moulded by a Turk. There's nought exact done by an English hand, ☞ No dresse complete but from an other Land. So is the World might think we stare a quarrel Both with our plunder'd Language and Apparrel. Thus begger we our own; not care we much So we content our Selves▪ our humour's such. Here may you see a light py colour'd Jack. Wear a whole Lordship on his crazy back; Which his extorting Ancestor convey'd To Him, who for his death entirely pray'd That he might Pawn his Aores; and ingage. His State to dawb his Lackey and his Page:A gallant Re∣tinue, to travel out the fagend of a Prodigals Fortune. Resembsing those to life who nostle here Learning first to get Clothes, then how to wear, (To th' Mercers Ruine) though a Venial Sin To cheat a Book who meant to Cozen Him. Turn over Leaf by Loaf ith' Drapers Book, You'l find his long own Scores as light as Smoak. Yet is he out of Debt I dare well say, For He is said to own who means to pay. But being at last stake what shall he do? He has no Brains ith' World to five unto: The only way then to evade this Shelf Is to serve one no wiser than himself, Some Laptand Lord, who having got no Heirs, Makes his thoughts Strangers to all thriving Cares.
Now what Supplies accommodate the youth Of these profusive Sparks, whose Fruitlesse growth Has spent it self to atoms? They must look To be Collectors of our Chimney Smoak,A Cool Coal-Cordial for a Consumptive Prodigal. And by their mis-accounting profit bring Gain to themselves in Cheating of the King. A bold adventure, yet an usual guize As may appear by Farmers oth' Excize; Which in one Instance I shall clearly shew, Though not recorded yet approved true: Th' Event so just it highly pleased me Not in the Act but the Catastrophe. A Stirring Member of the Parliament Stor'd richly with all Blessings save Content, Became Excifeman; but before he found The Profit on't, his Patent fell to ground. I wish all Patentees may have sike hap, Who draine Revenues from the Ale-wifes Tap. O brave Design! Struck on a fatal Shelf, By his own Vote th'Exciseman splits himself But how has this Exciseman born himself! How has this timing Bird beray'd his Nest! How has he run his Pinnace on a Shelf! How has he ruin'd those deserved best! Split th' Cavalry of their just interest! Was not this Act a Crime beyond compare I will not judge, but leave it to the Chaire! But these ambitious thoughts we have at Court Make hopes of Honour ramble in this sort. THESE from their Countrey have such glory gain'd By ringing backward they are entertain'd.Hear this Countrey Peal, ye Knihs oth' Shire and Bur∣gesses. This is my Maxim: they're not Caesar's friends Who mould their Votes and Acts for private Ends. All such as lov'd their Prince have underood That they did neither King nor Subject good.
Those to their Soveraign ever prove unjust Who 'twixt Him and his People breed distrust. And such, my Liege, or else we hear a Fable, Receive admittance daily to Your Table, Who to inlarge the Bounds of their Estate Will hackney Honour out at any rate. These be Court-Butterflies, who make a Show Just as our Lordships Chimneys use to do In cheating Beggars, making their repaire But find no Warmth nor Crum of Comfort there. ☞ Discretion will not measure true desert By Apish postures or Outlandish Art. He only merits the esteem of Greaetnesse Who Suits his dresse without affected neatnesse. Your Highness sways three Scepters independing From Elders numberless by line descending; Let no Act derogate from that descent Through hostile force or Subjects discontent. Clear that Augean Stable; Let no stain Darken the Splendor of our Charlemain, Nor his Court-gate: May th' Ladies of this time Be Aemulators of our Katharine Late come, long wish'd: whose Princely same shall be A living Annal to Posteritie. To whose pure judgement,A Princesse in Habit & Diet unexemplarily temperate. then which none more strong Being Stranger to the World and so Young Nought can detract more from a knowing Nation Then making a meer Idol of a Fashion; Or in resemblance unto—Speculum sibi fingit Asellus Flumine, quo speciem compli∣cet ille suam. Farn. Isis Asse To sacrifice the Morning to their Glasse: Such atoms of lost honour SHE esteems For wandring Fancies or Phanatick Dreams: This Royal Pattern may, no doubt, re-gain ☞ Our Albyon Halcyon days and Saturns- Raign. The World's new-moulded:—SHE who t'other day Could Chant and Chirp like any Bird in May
Stor'd with Caresses of the Choicest lort That Art could purchase from a Forreign Court, Limn'd so by Natures Pencil, as no part But gave a wound, where e'r it found an heart. A Fortresse and Main-Castle of Defence Secur'd from all Assailants saving Sence. —But SHE's a Convert and a Mirrour now Both in her Carriage and Profession too; Divorc'd from strange Embraces: as my Pen May justly style Her Englands Magdalen. Wherein She's to be held of more esteem In being fam'd a Convert of the Queen. And from relapse that She secur'd might be, SHE wisely daigns to keep her Companie▪ But forasmuch as noisome weeds are found In no Soil more than in our Holy Ground; And Darknesse sometimes takes the Robe of Light, So as all is not clear that seemeth white; Admonish those Lawn Sleeves they grow not proud But seasonably communicate pure food To their deputed Flock: Your Grace has carv'd Large parts for them, let not their Sheep be starv'd For want of nour shment: I'd have them too Not only stand like Beacons for a show; Their Church-revenues as they be not small, 'Twere fit for th' Poor they built an Hospitall;☜ Which Almes-work so long as they delay,We leave the injurious U∣sage of one of these (a Formal Fox, and ad∣vanc'd to oue of our highest Places) to the ingeuuous Rela∣tion of Mr. Cressey, a mo∣dest deserving Gentleman. Let their Revenues for our Chimneys pay. At least, for Tenths as they precisely stand For each tenth Chimney let them pay through th' Land Their Leases to that vast advantage rise They may increase their Pride and Avarice. The Poor should be their Children during life, A Diocesan Care their Married Wife. This would imbellish Miters and inlarge Their Pastral pains to edifie their Charge.
For th' Presbyter, because there cannot be An Unity 'twixt Him and Monarchie, For if th' Oue rise, the Other needs must fall, Left of those Sectists be there none at all,Such Phleboto∣mists as practise wholly upon the Basiica Ven for a State-Cure are dangerous Artists: and fitter far for Jamaica than us. Silence is not Sufficient: Such Division Requires strict Exile for the best Physician. Their Plots are all Phlebotomy, but Yours By mild indulgence tender easier Cures. No more; vouchsafe upon our Suit to look, Our Hearths want Fires; and where's no Fire, no Smoak. The COURT-CURRIER. OUr Country was of late with blood imbrew'd, And in this Age as viciously indew'd, Impoison'd with base Ingratitude, Where th' Hydra-headed Slavish Multitude Admires those only who have so much Sence, As beg a Place with srontlesse impudence: And by their activ'st Pavourite, ready pence, And without merit seels for recompence. These be the thiving Boyes, who at this day Are tane into the P while others stay. The Honest CAVALIER. MAny have here high hopes,Distinguish these by their Cignizances. but they expire Before they mount to th'height of their desire. They're only wise that have the least to do Fixing on Flim from whom all Graces slow. Nothing so sirm that may Affiance give. Let us only love where we may ever live. So shall our hopes be crown'd, and Saints receive us Into those Courtly joyes shall deceive  never leaves us. Some find the way who after learn to stray. The End tries all, the Evening Crowns the Day. FINIS.
