B451A 11992408 52044
THE LIFE OF Monsieur DES CARTES, Containing the HISTORY OF HIS Philosophy and Works: AS ALSO, The most Remarkable Things that befell him during the whole Course of his Life. Translated from the French, By S. R. LONDON, Printed for R. Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul's Church-yard, MDCXCIII.
An Abridgement OF THE LIFE OF Monsieur DES CARTES. BOOK. I. THE Family of Des Cartes hath ever been reputed as one of the best in all Tourain, there was never observed in it any unfit Matches or wrong Al∣liance, that might alter its Nobility, and we find no date of its being made noble that can determine and fix the antiquity thereof, the branch of the Eldest Brothers having diffused it self into the House Lillette, and then a∣gain into that of Maillé, the branch of the Puinees, or Younger Brothers increast very much, and extended it self into the upper Poictou, yea and it even past as far as Berry and
Anjou by means of its Alliances and Matches, until at last, at the time of the League it was reduced on the Males side to but one single person Peter Des Cartes Grandfather to the Philosopher whose Life we are here about to undertake to write. Peter Des Cartes, after having with good success served in the War against the Enemies of the Religion of his Countrey, and against those of the state of his Prince, quitted the service pretty early, on purpose that he might the longer relish the fruits of repose, that he procured himself; he had no more but one Son of Claudia Ferrand Sister to Anthony Fer∣rand, principal Lieutenant particular of the Chastelet of Paris; and Sister to Michael Fer∣rand who was Father to M. Ferrand Dean of Parliament. This Son by name Joachim was the first of the Family who was of the Long Robe or fol∣lowed the Law, who went to settle in Bri∣taigne, after he had got the place of Chancel∣lour of the Parliament of Rennes on the 14th of Feb. 1586. upon the resignation of D'Emery Reynald; he Married afterward by a Contract bearing date 15. Jan. 1589. Jane Brochard Daughter to the Lieutenant General of Poictiers, who bore him three Children during the little time she lived with him: the Eldest named Peter Des Cartes Sieur dela Bretailliere Counsellour of the Parliament of Bretaiyne, was Father to Monsieur Des CartesJeachim. seur de Kerleau, who is at present Subdean to the same Parliament. The second was aJoane. Daughter,
Married to Mr. Roger de Crevis, and Grand∣mother to Monsieur the Count de Villeneave alive at this day. II. The last was Renatus Des Cartes our Phi∣losopher,His Birth. who was born at La Haye, or the Hague in Turaine upon the River of Creuse on the 31th day of March, in the year 1596. in the seventh year of Henry the Great or Hen. 4. in the beginning of the fifth year of the Pon∣tificat of Clement the eighth, He shewed him∣self very ill satisfied in the course of his Life, afterward, that any one should take notice of his Birth-day from the Baptismal Register of the Parish, and from the Genialogical Ar∣chives, or Pedigree of his Family; his Reason was, because He had a great aversion to your Calculaters of Nativity, whose errour one seems to promote when he publisheth the Birth of any one. But it is not so much a reason as a pretence which he alledged to those who were willing to make use of this Circumstance to make him known to the publick. III.His Bap∣tism. He received Baptism the third day of April ensuing in the Parochial Church of St. George of La Haye, and they gave the Sir-name of Du Perron which was a Lordship belonging to the Family, that he might be distinguished from his Eldest Brother in the family. His Mother being brought to Bed and ly∣ing in, pretty fortunate for him, was followed with a sickness that hindred her up sitting: she had been ill all along from the very time of her being big, of Pulmonic distemper, oc∣casioned to her by some displeasure, that came
not to our notice: her Son who told us this particular, only informed us that she died shortly after she was delivered of him. The cares of the Father may well defend the Child from those inconveniencies which are to be fear'd from the loss of the Mother,The condi∣tion of his health. yet they cannot for all that, secure him from those infirmities that attend the weak disposi∣tion he brought into the World with him. A dry cough and pale colour were hereditary to him from his Mother, which he kept until he was above twenty years of age: and all Physitians whoever looked on him before that time, condemned him to dye young. But amongst all these first rubs, he received one advantage which he remembred all his Life time, that is, that of being entrusted to a Nurse who omitted nothing at all, that her duty could possibly require of her, which he was willing generously to acknowledge by a Pension he settled upon her for the remainder of her life, as soon as ever he found himself in a capacity to enjoy and manage an Estate. The Death of his Mother did much contri∣bute to the taking his Father off from his ac∣quaintance he had in Poicto,Second Marriage of his Fa∣ther. and to the chang∣ing his inclinations he found for Touraine. His residing in these Provinces, in some of his Houses, or in some place where his Estate lay thereabouts, wonderfully pleas'd him till that time, and he took great delight in going thither to pass away that time which his six months service in Parliament could spare him. But a few years after he reduced himself
wholly to Britaigne, and there he fixt the rest of his days, by a new Marriage which he con∣tracted with Anne Morin, Daughter to the chief President of the Chamber of Accompts at Nants. He had by her a Son and a Daugh∣ter. The Son was Counsellour in Parliament, Seigneur de Chavagnes by name, Father to Mon∣sieur de Chavagnes now living, a Counsellour in the same Parliament, who has turn'd Priest since the death of his Wife. The Daughter was Married to one Louis d' Avangour Seigneur dubois de Kergrais. IV.His inclina∣tions to Study. The cares of this new family did not cause Joachim des Cartes to divert his cares he owed to his Son du Perron whom he was wont to call Philosopher because of the insatiable curiosity that appear'd in the Child to demand the reasons and effects of whatsoever enter'd, by his senses. The weakness of his disposition, and un∣constancy of his health obliged the Father to leave him along time under the tuition of Wo∣men. Yet at the time they were but busie about his body, and endeavour to procure him a good strong constitution, he afforded almost every day instances of the beautifulness of his genious. He shewed, in the midst of these his infirmities such promising dispositions for study; that his Father could not chuse but procure him the first exercises suitable to the design he had of cultivating his stock of parts, maugre the resolution he had taken to make sure of the corporeal health of his Son, before he attempted any thing upon his mind.
To this effect they carried on the business, that nothing was spoiled. So that a Man may say these first studies were nothing but sleight Essays, and but superficial rude draughts and delineations at those they intended to make him perform when he was of Age. His Father considering he was going into his ninth year,They send him to La flche to Stu∣dy. thought it behoved him to take the advantage of the new foundation of that famous Colledge of La fleche in favour of the Jesuits, he admitted him, and put him into Commons there Anno 1604. after Winter was over, and recommended him particularly to the care of Father Charlet his Kinsman. This Father, who was along time Rector of this Colledge, before he proceeded to the chief employments of the Company, conceiv∣ed such a tender affection for young Des Cartes du Perron, the willinger took upon him all the care in reference to his Body as well as his Mind. He was like both a Father and Go∣vernour to him above eight years together that he stay'd in the Colledge, and helped him to Father Dine for a tutour, who was since Provincial and Confessour to our Kings. Both of them perceiving our young Scholar pretty sensible of all their kindnesses, were not long before they joined to them some esteem and affection for him, and after that had been his directours as to his Studies, Con∣duct and Behaviour, so they made him their Friend, and continued so to be till death, whom also they were careful to discourse with and entertain, by a mutual commerce of Let∣t and Recommendations.
Young Des Cartes,The profi∣ciency in Latin and Greek. whom we shall no lon∣ger call du Perron, but only at such time as there is need to distinguish him in His Paren∣tage, Had brought along with him at his first coming to the Colledge a more than or∣dinary Passion to acquire the Sciences, and this Passion being backt with a solid under∣standing, yet quick, lively, and free withal, he evermore answered the intentions of his Father, and diligence of his Tutors beyond expectation; in all the course of his Humanity which was five years and an half, none ever perceived in him the least affectation of singu∣larity, except that which emulation produced, for he took some Pride, to out-run such of his companions who had out-stript others. Being of a very good nature, of an easie com∣plying humour, he never found himself uneasie at the submission he paid to his Masters Will; and his diligence in plying his business and performing his task, both of the Classe and Chamber, cost him nothing. With these two hopeful dispositions he made great proficiency in the knowledge of the two Tongues, the importance and necessi∣ty whereof for understanding ancient Authors he early apprehended. He loved Poetry a great deal more than those, who look upon him but as a Philosopher, can possibly imagin. Nay he had even something of a Talent for Poe∣try; he hath made it plainly appear that he was not astranger to the phancies and niceties there∣of. He found moreover a great deal of pleasure in the Fables of the Ancients, not so much be∣cause
of some mysteries of natural and moral Philosophy that was couched under them, as that they roused his Spirit by their genteil phancies. In recompence of his faithfulness and exact∣ness wherewith he discharged his duty, he ob∣tain'd liberty, not to keep close to Lectures, nor compositions which otherwise were enjoin'd him in Common with his associates. Now his business was to make use of this liberty to satis∣fie his passion, which he felt to increase in him to acquire a clear and certain knowledge of wha∣oever conduceth to the profit and advantage of Life, which they had put him in hopes to attain by means of humanity; upon this account not taking up with that which is taught in the Colledge, he run over, If a man may believe him, all the Books that treat of Sciences, that men account the most rare and curious, which you must understand only of what could at that time come to his hands. I shall add, for the undeceiving those who have suspected, that in the whole series of his life, that he had but small inclination, or value for Books: that we meet with but very few sentiments more advantagious than those he past upon them in those days, He was fully persuaded that reading of good Books, is as it were the conversing with the greatest wits and honest∣est persons of former ages, who were Authors of them, but withal that it was a studied conversation, in which they discovered to us their best thoughts only.
V.His friends in the Col∣ledge. Besides emulation of study, behaviour and genteil breeding, Colledges do yet pro∣duce another advantage, of which Monsieur Des Cartes would not be deprived, that is to say, the advantage of friends and acquaintance, which one does there contract with those of his own age, and humour, and which prove the Seeds of the strongest and most durable friendship; the antientest of his Friends were without doubt those he got acquaintance with in the Colledge of La fleche. But besides Re∣natus le clerc, since Bishop of Glandave, and the Sieur Chauveau of Melun, who afterward be∣came a grand Mathematician, and a zealous Cartesian; we know no more, besides, in those days, but Father Marinus Marsennus, a Minim, who past for Monsieur Des Cartes his Resident at Paris, amongst Learned men, and for the Dean, of his friends and followers, notwithstanding, he was near upon eight years older than he, and albeit he was in his Rhe∣torick, when the other did but begin his Ac∣cidence. M.The carry∣ing Hen. 4. Heart to La flch. Des Cartes was in the first year of his course of Philosophy, when the news of the Kings Death, slain upon Friday May 4. 1610. made a Non term in the Colledge, this Prince upon bestowing his house of La fleche upon the Jesuits, desired his Heart, that of the Queen, and his Successours might be carried thither after their Death, and kept in their Church, so that all the time that past between that fatal news, and the removing the Kings Heart to La fleche, was spent in publick
Prayers in the Colledge, in funeral composi∣tions, both in Verse and Prose, and in prepa∣rations for the reception of this depositum. It was performed on the first of June with a great deal of Ceremony, and it was constituted and agreed upon in the Townhall of La flesche, that upon the aniversary day their should be performed every year a solemn Procession, with Service suitable thereto for the Kings Soul, and that the said day should be obser∣ved thence forward just as Holy days are, in shutting up all Courts of Indicature, in mak∣ing vacation in the several closses, and causing all shops to be close shut up. Monday following of June the term begun again for performing the usual exercises in the Colledge,The fruits he reaped of his lo∣gick and E∣thicks. and Monsieur Des Cartes continued his Study of Ethicks. The Logick he studied the Winter foregoing, was the only one of all the parts of Logick, whereto, as he after∣wards declared, he applied himself the most in the Colledge. From that time he perceiv∣ed that Syllogisms, and the greatest part of the other instructions of your School Logick, serve not so much to understand things which one would fain know, as to explain those one knows to others: or else to prate without judgement of those whereof a man is ignorant, which is the effect they ascribe to Ramond Lul∣lies Art. Of all the dictates he received from his Masters, he retained none but the four Rules, which served afterwards whereon to ground his new Philosophy, the first is, Not to admit any thing for truth, that he did not clearly
and distinctly know to be so. The second, To di∣vide things as far as possibly one could, the better to resolve them. The third, To regulate a Mans Thoughts orderly, beginning with the most simple objects, on purpose to come up by degrees, to the knowledge of the most compound ones. The fourth is, To omit nothing in the anumeration of the things whose parts he is to examine. But at that very time he compiled a singular method for himself of disputing in Philosophy, which mightily pleased his perpetual director Father Charlet, as it did likewise his Tutor Father Dinet, altho' it put him that moderated to his Trumps. When they came to propound an argument in the disputation, he, at first, asked several questions de definitione nominum; then he asked if they did not agree about cer∣tain received truths known, of which he made them agree and consent to. Thereup∣on he composed only one argument, from which it was very hard to get clear without pussing. The Study of the Morality of the Schools stood him in stead, chiefly to make him distinguish that of the Heathen, and of the Moral honest man of the World, from that of a Christian, but we are at a loss to know certainly whether or no, he was beholding to his Masters Papers, for the four Maximes wherein he makes all his particular Morality to consist. The first of these Maximes was To obey the Laws and Customs of his Country. sticking close to the Religion in which God was pleased he should be born. The second, to be sted∣fast
and resolute in his actions, and to adhere as constantly to the most dubious opinions, when he should once be determined to follow them, as if they were most certain. The third, to labour rather to conquer himself than Fortune. To change his desire rather than the Order of the World, and to persuade himself that nothing is ab∣solutely in our power, but our Thoughts. The fourth, To determine and propose something to himself, without blaming other Men in their Em∣ployments and different occupations, to determine and propose to himself the business of improving his reason; and to search out the truth of all things all his Life long. The year following which he spent in the Study of Metaphisicks was less satisfactory to him, than the Study of Logick and Ethicks. At that very time he perceived himself perplext with errous and doubts, in∣stead, of that clear and distinct knowledge of whatsoever conduceth to the benefit of Life, which they bore him in hand he should discover in his Studies. The further he proceeded, the more he discovered his own ignorance, he saw by the Lectures of his Masters and the reading of their Books, that Phylosophy had been cultivated and improved from all antiquity by the men of the most excellent parts that ever appear'd in the World, and yet for all that, there was not any thing in the World, of which men did not dispute, and call in question, and con∣sequently nothing but what was doubtful. All the esteem he had put upon his Masters, could not stock himself with presumption to hope that he could hit on it better than others;
considering the diversity of opinions main∣tain'd by learned persons touching the same subject matter, there being never more than one of them that could be true, he had already accustom'd himself almost to repute whatso∣ever was but probable, for false. If he had never had but one Master, or if he had never been acquainted with these different opinions amongst Philosophers, he protesteth he should never have had occasion to sequester himself, and withdrawn from the number of such who must be content to follow other mens opi∣nions, rather than to find out others them∣selves. But having learnt even when he was in the Colledge, (they are his own expressi∣ons) that one cannot imagine that thing so uncouth and wild that hath not been advanced by some Philosopher or other, he pretends he could by no means make choise of any one guide, whose opinions could appear to him much to be prefer'd before the opinions of others: this was that which put him upon cut∣ting out himself a new road in process of time, and to undertake the conducting and manage∣ing himself. In despight of all the rubs his tow'ring Spi∣rit met with in the pursuit of his Philosophy, yet was he to come to the end of his course, in the same time as the rest of his fellow Stu∣dents did, that never found any quaeries to put, nor any difficulties to remove in the trans∣cripts of their Masters; they made him pro∣ceed after that, to the Study of Mathema∣ticks, to which he alloted his last years resi∣dence
at La flesche, the delight he took there∣in, paid him with interest for the vast trou∣ble and pains the School Philosophy had put him to; and the progress he made there∣in was so extraordinary, that the Colledge of La flesche hath acquired it self by his means the glory of having produc't the greatest Ma∣thematician they ever yet saw. Amongst the parts of Mathematicks, he chosed the Analysis from Geometry, and Algebra to make the sub∣ject of his particular application, on purpose to purge them from what was unprofitable and hurtful in them, and to bring them to perfection, this is that he laboured about at the very time he was in the Colledge, with∣out depending either upon his Master or fel∣low Collegians, if we give credit to those who would make him the Author of that sort of Algebra which they call the Key of all the Liberal Arts and of all Sciences. Which they esteem as the best method, that ever saw the light, to discern truth from falshood. The dispensation he had obtain'd from the Father Principal of the Colledge not to be ob∣liged to practise every punctilio of the School Philosophy, supply'd with an opportunity and means to follow it as closely as he could rea∣sonably desire. Father Charlet Rectour of the Colledge had conceded to him amongst other priviledges, that of lying long in Bed, as well by reason of his weakness of disposition as for that he observed in him a mind natural∣ly inclin'd to meditation, Des Cartes finding when he awaked all his Spirits recollected,
and his Senses much composed and sedate af∣ter his Nights rest improved all these favoura∣ble conjunctures for to meditate; this practice turn'd so into a second nature, that it was his usual manner of Studying all his Life after. And one may safely say, that the World owes to his Morning Meditations in Bed, all those fine important productions of his Brain both in Philosophy and Mathematicks. VII.He leaves the Col∣ledge. Having finished the course of his Stu∣dies in the Month of August 1612. He quits the Colledge of La flesche after eight years and half being Resident therein, and returned home to his Fathers House, with the accumu∣lated Praises and Good Word of his Masters or Tutours. There remain'd to him all his whole Life after, a great stock of thankful acknowledgment for the obligation they laid upon him, and he had a great kindness and esteem for the Colledge, which he was wont to extol above all others, whether it was be∣cause his own experience had afforded him a more particular knowledge of it, or else be∣cause we are natural and commonly induced to commend the Place of our Education equally with that of our birth, and to boast of our Masters as of our Parents. But altho', he might be satisfied with his Masters upon his leaving the Colledge, yet was he by no means satisfied with himself.Small sa∣tisfaction in his Stu∣dies. It seem'd to him that he had got nothing by his Studies, but a greater knowledge of his ignorance, all the advantages he had gained, in the Eyes of the World, and which were
bragg'd of as so many wonders, were all re∣duced, according to his own opinion, to em∣barras and perplexity, to doubts, and troubles of mind. The Laurels wherewith his Masters crowned him, thereby to distinguish him from his fellow Students, appeared to him but Thorns. If we do not belye nor undervalue the judgment of those who were well acquain∣ted with those times, we should not deny but that he abundantly deserved, a stripling as he was, that Rank, the Publick bestowed on him even at that time, amongst the Able Learned Men of the Age. But it was never a more dangerous time to be lavish of the qua∣lity of a Wise and Knowing Person; for he was not content only to reject this quality which Men would have fastened upon him: but willing to measure other Mens Corn by his own bushel, it was ten to one but he had taken those who bore the same quality, for no real Knowing Learned Men, and his un∣dervaluing of whatsoever, Men Term, Scien∣ces, was very like to have discovered it self. The displeasure he conceived to see him∣self disabused of the mistake wherewith he flatter'd himself to be able to acquire, A clear and assured knowledge of whatsoever is profitable to life. Was like to have precipitated him into despair, seeing, besides, that the Age he lived in was as flourishing as any of the preceeding, and phancying with himself that all the Men of Parts, of which this Age was very fruitful,
found themselves in the same predicament he was in, although peradventure they were so sensible of it as himself; he had a shrewd Temptation to believe, that there was no such thing as a Science in the World in every res∣pect, such an one as they made him hope for. The result of all these tedious,He discards Books and Sciences, and why. vexatious Deliberations, was that from the year 1613. he would forsake and discard all Books, and totally rid himself of the Study of Learning. By this kind of forsaking, he seem'd to imi∣tate the greatest part of your Sparks of Qua∣lity, who are not necessitated to Study where∣by to subsist, or to get Preferment in the World. Yet there is this difference, that these in bidding adieu to Books, dream of no∣thing else but to shake off that Yoak which the Colledge had rendred insupportable to them, whereas Monsieur Des Cartes would not have packt off his Books, for which, he had otherwise a great love for; but only because he found not in them what he sought for, upon the Credit of those who ingaged him to ply his Study. Although he was sensible how much he was obliged to his Masters, who o∣mitted nothing within the verge of their pow∣er, for to satisfie him; Nevertheless he did not believe himself at all beholden to his Stu∣dies, for what he afterward effected for tra∣ing of Truth in Arts and Sciences; he did not stick to say to some Friends, that although his Father had not brought  up a Schollar, yet he would not for all that, have forborn writing in his Mother Tongue, the self same thing he has written in Latin.
VIII.His stay at Reimes and then at Pa∣ris. He spent the Winter at the latter end of 1612. and beginning of 1613. in the City of Reimes or Rennes, in paying visits to his Family, to learn to ride the gaeat Horse, to learn to Fence, and other such like Exer∣cises suitable to his quality, one may guess by a little Treatise of his concerning Fencing, whether or no he mis-spent his time in that Exercise. His Father who had already caused his El∣der Brother to apply himself to the Law, seemed to have some thoughts of designing him for the Service of his King and Country in the Army; but his tender years, and the weakness of his Constitution, would not per∣mit him to expose him so early to the Toiles of War. He judged it adviceable, first to let him see the World, to that purpose he re∣solved to send him to Paris towards the Spring, but perhaps it was a great over-sight in him, to Abandon him to his own Conduct, and leave him to himself, without affording him any other Governour but a valet de Chambre, and not any to inspect him besides a Lacquey or two: he relyed too confidently upon the wisdom of a Youth of 17. years, void of Ex∣perience, and of all helps, but his own pro∣per strength to wrastle against all occasions of undoing himself. Yea, and he had power enough to guard him from grosser Debauches, not to be over∣taken by the Disorders of Intemperance; but he found he was not proof against Companies that hawled him away, to take a walk now
and then to Gaming, and other Divertisements that pass in the World for indifferent in them∣selves: that which contributed much to make him more particularly addicted to Gaming, was, that he came always off with great For∣tune, especially in those Games that depend more upon industry than chance. But the worst improvement he made du∣ring this idle time, was the renewing his Ac∣quaintance with divers persons, whom he had seen at La Flesche, and the Friendship he Con∣tracted with some Persons of worth; who served a little to reclaim him from that aver∣sion that had seized him for the Study of Books. The most considerable of his new Friends,His Friend∣ship with M. Mydorg. was that Famous Claudius Mydorge Treasurer of France, and of the generality of Amiens, Son to a Counsellor of the great Chamber, and Successor to Vieta, in his Reputation of the chief Mathematician in France, during some time; M. Des Cartes, who was younger by al∣most eleven years, found, I know not, what in this Acquaintance: Whether for his humour, or the Character of his Mind, which united them so close in such strict bonds of Friend∣ship, that nothing could have separated them, but Monsieur Mydorge his Death. It was about the same time also, that he light again upon Marcinus Mersennus at Paris,With Fa∣ther Mer∣snus. ut as to his Exteriour Garb, quite different from that he had known him at La Flesche, Mer∣sennus had turn'd Minim after his leaving the Sorbon-School, this renewing of their acquain∣tance,
was so much the more acceptable to the Monk, because Monsieur D. Cartes was not so much below him, as when he saw him a Lad in the Colledge. On the other side, the Meeting proved Advantagious for Monsieur Des Cartes; forasmuch as it served to deliver him from his being given to Gaming, and o∣ther unprofitable pastimes: They began to relish the sweetness of their innocent acquain∣tance, and to solace one another in the re∣search of truth, when Father Mersennus was about the year 1614. sent to Nevers, there to read Philosophy to the young Monks of his Order. This Separation went to Monsieur Des Cartes his Heart.His Retire∣ment, and his return to his Study. But in stead of occasioning him any thoughts to return to his sports and idle∣ness, it made him come the better to himself, than the presence of his Virtuous Friend did, it inspired into him the Resolution to retire from the World, and forsake even his usual Friends and Companions, on purpose to set himself again to the Study that he had Re∣linquished. He made choice of a place of Retirement in the Fauxbourg St. Germain, where he hired an House out of the Noise, and shut himself up, with only one or two Servants, without so much as giving his Friends or Kinsmen notice thereof. Having in this manner recovered his gusto for Study, he was over Head and Ears in the Study of Mathe∣maticks, to which he bestowed all that Lei∣sure he had but now procured himself, which continued near upon two years.
Such of his Friends which were good for nothing else but to pass away the time and di∣vertisement, soon grew weary, that they see him no more: They sought him up and down, but all in vain, in the City, at Court, and in his Country; he was so wise at the beginning of his Retirement, to prevent the chance of meeting any, that he might not fall into the Hands of these Troublesome Persons, when he was obliged to go abroad about his occasi∣ons; the business had no bad Success for near two years together; but he afterwards relyed but too confidently upon the luckiness of his Solitude, for not being vigilant enough about his regress and ingress, and not cautious of his ways, and turnings as before, he was met with by one of his Friends, whom he could not get quit off, till such time as he should discover the place of his Abode. This cost Monsieur Des Cartes his Liberty,He is found out and in∣terrupted. to say no worse, the Friend did so far prevail by his frequent reiterated visits, and by his importunity, that he first troubled his Repose, and then Diverted him from his beloved So∣litude, to bring him again upon the Stage of the World; and to plung him again into Di∣vertisements as before. But he soon perceived he had changed his Relish for Pleasure, Games, and walkings were not so Charming to him, as once before; and the Enchantments of Worldly Delights, had but very weak effects upon him, against the Charms of Philosophy and Mathematicks, from which his Jovial Friends were not able
to free him. They made him spend the Christmas holy days Anno 1616. and the be∣ginning of the next year, till Shrovetide, as merrily as they possibly could. But they could not make him take delight in any thing but Musick, by a Consort of which he could not chuse but be much taken, considering the skill he had in Mathematick's. He no longer could hope from the impor∣tunate companions of his Age and Quality,He goes in∣to Holland to bear Arms. to have the liberty of retrieving and improv∣ing his retirement, and beside seeing himself one and twenty years of Age, he deemed it his duty to enter upon Service; He departed for Holland in the Month of May, and Listed himself in the Prince of Orange his Troops, in quality of a Voluntier, doing in this as many other younger Brothers of the French Nobi∣lity did: who flockt thither, to learn the Trade of War, under the Conduct of that great Captain. But as his Heart was already prepossessed by a stronger passion for the research of Truth,is design in it. to which he was fully resolved to apply him∣self sooner or later, his design was not to be∣come a great Warriour in this Prince his School, so that in determining to bear Arms, he resolved never to appear any way forward as an Actor, but every where to be but as a Spectator of what is played in all sorts of Common-wealths and States, upon the Stages of the World. He turned Souldier for no other end, but only to Study the different natures of men more according to nature, and
to endeavour to make himself proof against all the accidents of Life. That he might not be uneasie under any Superiour Power, he re∣fused upon his first entrance all Command and all Engagements, and always maintained himself at his own charges. But pro forma to keep up the custom he was to receive once at least his Pay, and had the curiosity to pre∣serve that piece of Money he had for his Pay all his Life, as a Testimony of his having serv∣ed in the Army. He did really take delight in War at that Age, but this inclination was but the effect of the heat of his Liver, which was asswaged in process of time. Altho', the City of Bre∣da where he lay in Garrison, enjoy'd at that time the quiet which was procured it by the Truce concluded upon, between the Spaniard and Hollander, yet for all that he always shew∣ed himself an utter Enemy of Idleness and Libertinism. Whether you consider him in his Military Occupations, wherein he was assiduous and careful as any of the hottest for∣wardest Souldiers, or be it you look upon him at the leisure hours he could spare from his Duties, which he employed in Study, when others spent it in Debauchery. At that time it so happened, that an Ano∣nymus person caused a Problem of Mathema∣ticks to be affixt up and down the streets of Breda, to be propounded to the Learned, and to require the solution of it. Monsieur Des Cartes beholding the concourse of Passengers stopping before the Note affixt Writ in Dutch,
desired the next Man he found by him, that he would please to tell him either in Latin or French, the substance of what is contained. The Man, as good luck would have it, to whom he addrest himself, was willing to sa∣tisfie him, yet upon this condition, that he on his part would be obliged to solve the Pro∣blem, which he judged it self to be very difficult. Monsieur Des Cartes accepted of the condition with such a resolute Air, that the Man little expecting such a thing from a young Cadel in the Army, gave him his name in Writing, together with the Place of his Abode, to the intent he might bring him the solution of it when he should find it out. Monsieur Des Cartes understood by his Note, that his Name was Isaac Beekman, and that he was Principal of the Colledge at Dort, no sooner was he return'd to his Quarters, but setting himself to examine the Problem of the unknown Person, after the Rules of his Me∣thod, he found out the solution of it with much ease and readiness, as Vieta once did in resolving in less than three hours, that famous question propounded by Adrian Romain to all Mathematicians under the Cope of Heaven. Not to fail of his Word, away he goes next day to Beckmans Lodging, brings him the so∣lution of the Problem, nay and offers to give him the construction of it, if he desired so much, Beckman seem'd surprised, but his won∣der increased when beginning to discourse, on purpose to pose him, and sound the parts and capacities of the Young Man, he found his
Abilities much beyond his own in the Sciences wherein his whole time had been taken up for several years. He craved of his amicable correspondence, and offered him his, and be∣eecht him to consent that they might main∣tain a mutual commerce of Studies, all the remainder of their Life. Monsieur Des Car∣es answered all those Civilities with all the effects of unfeigned amity, notwithstanding e was younger than he by near thirty years, nd that he might give him evidences of the confidence he reposed in him, he chearfully consented that he should be his correspondent for Holland, as he desired he might. Whilst Count Maurice came to be P. of range upon the Death of his Brother,He compo∣ses his Treatise of Musick. which happened the 20th. of Feb. 1618. and was just going through the Provinces and Cities with ome Troops, to reduce the Armenians: Monsieur Des Cartes had a mind to stay at Breda, where he imploy'd his time in compo∣ing some Writings, amongst which, that which is best known, is his Teatise of Musick, e composed it in Latin, for he had acquired a notable knack of Conceiving and Writing ex tempore, whatsoever came into his Mind. He was willing to entrust him with the Ori∣ginal, at whose request he had composed it, ut with this Proviso that he should let no body see, because, judging it very imperfect, he fear'd lest it should become publick, ei∣ther by Printing it, or by Multiplication of some Copies. Beeckman who was reckoned amongst the prime Mathematicians of the
Age, found it not too imperfect for him, and thinking Des, Cartes had disown'd and laid no claim to it, he thought fit to get some credit by it, as tho' he had been the Author of it. Monsieur Des Cartes believed he was obliged to bring down his Pride, and to let him un∣derstand what a base thing it is to acquire him∣self a little reputation at the expence of pre∣judicing the Truth. His Friends could never get his consent to publish this Treatise whilst he was alive; his Enemies having come by a Copy of it not so perfect as should be, sought for an occasion to be revenged of him after his Death. But they laboured to their own shame, and were so far from disgracing his Memory, that they drew upon him the admiration of all who knew that it was the composure of a Youth of 22 years old. To tell you Truth, the pub∣lick does not at this time judge it such a mean piece, as the Author would make them be∣lieve it to be: the multitude of Editions, and the Translations into English and French, warrants its being approved on. XI.Other Works be∣gun. Beekman leaving to the Ministers and Divines the care of holding their National Council in his City comes to Breda to spend the best part of his Time with Monsieur Des Cartes to exercise himself in the Mathe∣maticks with him, and to propound questions to be resolved by him; Monsieur Des Cartes did not acquiesce in the answers he made to them. He left behind him also divers pretty works, that would have past their Word
that he spent his time well, if he would but have let them see the light; Amongst this ju∣venile Works, one finds his opinion concern∣ng the Souls of Brutes, or, of Machines: Writ, twenty years before he published his rinciple touching the distinction between a Thinking Substance, and a Substance extend∣d. He had not so much as perused at that Age St. Augustin, or Pereira, nor any other Author that was capable to afford him any sight into this Sentiment, nay, it moreover ppears, that he never in all his Life had seen ereira, and that it was from some of his Friends, and some who envied him, that he ad the news that they found some resem∣lance between his opinion and that of this paniard. Nevertheless Monsieur Des Cartes not find∣g that variety of occupation under the Prince f Orange, that he promis'd himself upon his aving France, sought for an opportunity to emove from the Low Countries to serve omewhere else. The news that was brought o Breda of the great Commotions of Germany, wakened his Curiosity of being Spectatour of the most considerable affair that past in Eu∣ope. They talked of a new Emperour, they talked of the States of Bohemia's Revolt against their King, and of a War commenced be∣tween the Papists and Protestants: upon this ccount Monsieur Des Cartes having a mind to leave Holland, made use of this pretence, viz. The little exercise the Cessation of Arms afforded him, which was agreed on between
the Prince of Orange his Forces, and those of Marquess Spinola, which was to continue two years longer, conformable to the Conventions of Truce. His resolution was to pass into Germany, that he might serve in the Papist Armys, yet before he would determine to enter into any ingagement, he long'd to be present at the Coronation of the new Empe∣rour which was to be performed in the City of Francford. XII. He departed from Breda in the month of July, Anno 1619. he got to Madstricht, and from thence to Aix la chapelle, where he learnt the State of Affairs of Germany; and the pre∣parations that City were accustomed to make for the Coronation of the Emperours. Be∣ing come to Mentz he understood that John Schwichart the Elector, had summoned all the other Electors of the Empire according to the usual manner, and had ordered them to meet at Francford on the 20th of July to pro∣ceed to the Election of a new Emperour. He was in this last City against the time that Ferdinand II.He was present at the Coro∣nation of Ferdinand. II. arrived there, as King of Bohemia and Elector of the Empire: this Prince was Elected King of the Romains the 28th of August, and was Crowned Emperour the 30th of the said month, according to the old stile, that is to say, the 9th of September according to our account. Monsieur Des Car∣tes did not appear at the first Ceremony, that respected the Election of the King of the Ro∣mains, by reason that an order was issued out to all Forreigners and Strangers, that is to
say, to such that neither belonged to the place, or to the Electors retinue, to void the Town, yet was he present at the second Ceremony that concern'd the Coronation of the Empe∣our, and he had the curiosity to behold once or all, what past at it; To the end he might not be ignorant of what the principal actours of this World do represent of most pompous and glorious upon the Theatre of the Uni∣verse. Before he went to Francford; he deliberat∣ed with himself what side he was to be on,He gets in∣to the D. of Bavaria's Army. when he informed that the Duke of Bavaria levy'd Forces. This news produced a design in him to list himself therein, without knowing precisely against what Enemy they were to march; all that he understood of it came to thus much, that he was not ig∣norant of the noise the troubles of Bohemia made throughout all Germany. As he did not much matter the entring into the interests of States and Princes, under whose dominion Providence had not ordain'd him to be born, so he did not pretend to bear a Musquet to promote the concerns of the one, nor yet to destroy those of the other. He listed himself therefore in the Army of the Duke of Bava∣ria, only as a private Voluntier, not being wil∣ling to accept any employ. And at that time the report went that they were design'd against Mansfield the Bastard, and the other Generals of those that had revolted in Bohemia, but the Duke of Bavaria gave them to under∣stand a little while after, that they were to
March against Frederick V. Elector Pala∣tine of the Rhine, whom the States of Bohe∣mia, had chosen for their King, but four days before the Coronation of the Emperor Fer∣dinando the Second, whom they intended to exclude from that Crown by this Enter∣prize. BOOK II. From 1619. to 1628. MOnsieur Des Cartes not intending to serve otherwise under the D.He goes in∣to Winter Quarters. of Bavaria, then he had done under the Prince of Orange; began the Campain, with putting into Winter. Quarters in the Dutchy of Newbourg, upon the Banks of the Danube, in the Month of O∣ctober, An. 1619. He found himself in a place so remote from Communication, and so little frequented by people, whose Conversation might afford him any Diversion, that he even procured himself such a privacy, as the con∣dition of his Ambulatory Life could permit him. Not being secure abroad,His privacy. and not having by good luck any anxieties, nor passions within, that were capable of disturbing him, he staid withal all the Day long in his stove, where he had leisure enough to entertain himself with his thoughts; at first they were nothing else but preludiums of imagination, and became daring by de∣grees, by passing from one Cogitation to ano∣ther,
proportionably as he perceived the de∣ght of his Mind to increase by their Concate∣tion. One of the first that presented it self, as, that we do not usually meet with so uch perfection in works Composed of seve∣eral pieces, and made by the hands of seve∣al Artists, as in those in which only one hath ade it his business; it was not an hard task or him, to find wherewithal to Foment and Maintain this thought, not only in Arts, where∣ one may observe, how much difficulty there , in bringing any thing to perfection, if you and only upon another Mans shoulders, work∣ng only according to the Model of another; ut even in politicks, which respects the Go∣ernment of People, yea, and in the Esta∣lishment of Religion, which is the Handi∣ork of God alone. And then he applies this notion to Sciences, e knowledge of which, or its precepts, are ntrusted to Books, he supposeth that Sciences t least those, the Reasons, whereof are only probable, not being backt by any Demonstra∣ions, having swell'd by little and little, by the Opinions of divers particular persons, and being only Composed by the reflections of se∣veral persons of different Intellects, do not approach so near Truth, as the down right Reasonings, that a Man of indifferent good Sense, useth naturally concerning things which present themselves to him. From thence he undertakes to proceed to Human Nature,He endea∣vours to rid himself of his prejudi∣ces. with the same thought. He will consider, that because we have been In∣fants
and Children before we were Men, and because we have let our selves be a long time governed by our Appetites, and by our Ma∣sters and Tutors, who have oftentimes con∣tradicted one another; it is in a manner im∣possible, that our Judgments should be so clear or so solid, as they would have been, put the Case, we had had the perfect use of our Rea∣son, so soon as ever we were born, or if we had never been governed by any thing but it. The liberty he gave to his Reason not meet∣ing with any Obstacle, led him insensibly to the Subverting of all the ancient Systems; yet he refrain'd doing so, taking notice of the indis∣cretion he should have been apt to have blamed in another Man, who should have gone about to have pull'd down all the Hou∣ses of a City, under pretence to rebuild them after another manner. Nevertheless, as one cannot find fault with a private Person for, causing his own to be pull'd down at such time as it threatens him with unavoidable ruin, that he may rear it up again upon more solid and substantial Foundations: So he was perswaded that it would have been taken for a piece of rashness in him to desire the refor∣ming of Sciences, or the Order settled in the Schools for the teaching of them; but no body could reasonably blame him for making tryal of it upon himself, without incroaching upon any other. So that he fully resolved once for all to get quit of all the Opinions he had received and
embraced, till that time; but it was his in∣ent not to exclude them quite out of his Be∣ef, but only that he might substitute others terwards in their room, that should be bet∣r, or even to take up the same again if need quired, after he should have verified them: nd, he believed, he could find out in this articular, some means or other that might ave that Effect as to regulate the Conduct f his Life a great deal better, than if he ould pretend to rear a Fabrick upon old oundations, upheld only by a Company of rinciples which he had suffer'd to be in∣ll'd into him in his Youth, without ever ving examined whether they were true, no. He foresaw notwithstanding, that so daring d Novel a Project, could not be laid t with some difficulty; yet he was apt to tter himself, that these difficulties were not uperable, but might admit of a remedy. esides, he did look upon them no ways omparable to those that occur in the Refor∣ation of the smallest Matters relating to the ublick; he made a vast difference between at, he went about to destroy in himself, d those Publick Establishments we observe this World, which he compared to huge odies, whose fall must needs be very sad, hich besides are abundantly more difficult be erected again after they are batter'd own, than to be propt up and made to stand, hen they shake and totter. But without tending to carry on his Designs as far as the
Interests of the Publick, he cared only to re∣form his own proper Thoughts, and did no mean to Build upon any Ground to which he had not a good Title. In case of bad Suc∣cess, he thought he should not be much loser by the Bargain, since that the worst that could happen thereupon, could but be th loss of his time and pains, when all came all; which he did not judge very necessar to the Benefit of Mankind. In the new Heat and Career of his Resol∣tions,His Pains and Incum∣brances. he undertook to put in Practice the Fir Part of his Designs, which consisted only Destroying and Pulling down. This witho doubt was the easiest of the two, but quickly perceived that it was not quite so eas for a Man to get quit of his Prejudices, as set Fire on his House; he had already prep∣red himself for this abjuring and renounci from the very time he left the Colledge. H had practised some Attempts to that purpos first of all, in his Retirement in the Fauxbou St. Germain in Paris, and after that; whilst sojourned at Breda. With all these Dispo∣tions he had no less to undergo, than if he been to unman himself. He believed nevertheless, that he had a¦complish'd his design, and to speak the tru it was enough that his Imagination did repr∣sent to him his Intellect quite naked, for make him believe that he had effectual brought it to this condition, there was n∣thing left him but love for truth, the pu∣suit whereof was to make up for the futur
e whole occupation of his life; this admi∣stred the only matter of torment he suf∣red in his Spirit; but now the means hereby to come to this happy Conquest casioned no less trouble and perplexity an the end it self. The Enquiry he inten∣ed to make after these means, threw his ind into such violent Agitations increasing ore and more by a continual Contest where∣ith he kept it intent, without so much as ving leave to his walking abroad, or Com∣ions to divert it from what it was about. e wearied it out to that degree that his ain took fire, and he falls into a spice of nthusiasm which disposed his Mind, already ite spent, in such a manner, that it was to receive the Impressions of Dreams and sions. He acquaints us, That on the Tenth of No∣mber 1619. laying himself down Brim-full of Enthusiasm, and wholly possess'd with the ought of having found that day the Founda∣ons of the wonderful Science, he had Three reams one presently after another; yet so traordinary, as to make him fancy that ey were sent him from above; he supposed e discerned through their shadows the tracks f the Path which God had chalked out for m, to perform his Will in his choice of ife; and inquiry after truth, which was the ccasion of all his disquiet; but the Divine piritual Air, which he took a Pride to give the Explanation of these Dreams, was so ar a kin to that Enthusiasm wherewith he
believed himself to be warmed, that a Man would have been apt to have believed that he had been a little Crack-brain'd, or that he might have drank a Cup too much that Even∣ing before he went to Bed. It was indeed, St. Martin's Eve, and People used to make Merry that Night in the place where he was as they do in France; but he assures us, that he had been very Sober all that Day, and that Evening too and that he had not touched a drop of Wine for Three Weeks together. Whatever was the matter with him, I can∣not tell; but the impression of these Agitation made upon him, caused him to make several reflections the next day what course he should take. Without presuming too much upon the favourable Construction he had put upon his Dreams▪ he had recourse to God afresh, to beg of him to give him some Intimations o his wi, without an Aenigma; That he would vouchsafe to enlighten him, and direct him his research of Truth. He endeavoured also to interest the Virgin Mary in this Business which he judged as the most weighty impor∣tant one of his Life, and taking occasion from a Journey he thought to take into Italy, he made a Vow of Pilgrimage to our Lady o Loretto, which he was not capable to Perform till some Years after. He got quit of his Enthusiasm a few days after, but altho' his Mind was reduc'd to its former Station, and reinstated in its usual calmness, yet was he no more Positive thann before, touching what he should resolve upon.
II.His search∣ing after the Society of the Rosacru∣sians. His Solitude during this Winter was wholly without interruption, especially by Persons who were not capable of starting Questions in order to discourse, yet did he ot debar any one from his Chamber who was inquisitive, or understood how to discourse of Sciences or Philosophical Transactions. By Conversing with such sort of Persons▪ he understood there was a Fraternity or Club of Learned Men, settled in Germany some Years since, under the Name of Brethren of Rosy Cross, they gave them wonderful Commendations often to him, they buz'd in the Ear that they were a sort of Men which understood every thing, and that they promised to help Men to a new-Wisdom; that is to say, a new Science not hitherto discovered, adding all the Pro∣digies which every private Person told him concerning it, to the rumor that was spread abroad through Germany, about these Fellows; He found himself so much the more concern'd at it, because he received the News at the very time when he was the most busy con∣cerning the Mediums he was to propound to himself for the finding out of Truth. He thought he was ingaged not to be un∣concerned upon the account of the Rosa Cru∣sians, because, (says he to a Friend of his) if these should prove Impostures, it had been unlawful to let them run away with so much Reputation, ill-gotten, at the expences of the Peoples Credulity; and if so be they were able to produce any new thing into the World which is worth knowing, it had been a most
base unworthy thing in him to under-value all Sciences amongst which he might find one, of whose Foundation, he might have been igno∣rant. It was his Business therefore to find out one of these new Virtuoso's, that he might understand what they were, upon his Know∣ledges, and also confer with them. But seeing one of their Statutes was, not to appear, what really they were; not to be distinguished from other Men, neither by their Garb nor manner of Living; nor to discover themselves in their Discourse, you need not wonder if all his Pains and Curiosity came to nothing. It was not possible for him to find out one single Man, who would really own himself of that Fraternity, or that was but so much as suspected to be of it: It was an hundred to one but he had put the Society out of the Pre∣dicaments, and rankt them amongst Chimae∣ra's; but that which made him forbear to do so, was the great shew the numerous Apolo∣getical Pamphlets made, in favour of these Rosacrusians, as well in Latin as High Dutch. Yet he thought it not safe referring himself to all these Apologies, whether it was be∣cause his inclination induced him to take these new Virtuoso's for Impostures, or else because renouncing all Books, he had a mind to inure himself to judge of nothing but upon his own proper Experience. And this is the reason why he was free to say some few Years after, that he knew nothing of the Rosacrusians: he was likewise surprized that his Friends should tell him, returning to Paris 1623. that the
Reputation he had got of being one of the Fraternity of the Rosacrusians was well worth is Sojourning in Germany. Seeing himself thus frustrated of his hopes e had entertain'd to find some body or other apable of encouraging him in the enquiry af∣er Truth▪He goes into Suabia, and gets acquain∣tance with Faulhaber. he relapsed into his former Trou∣le and Incumbrance; He spent the rest of he Winter and Lent without resolving on ny thing; thinking himself, upon the whole, o have had a good Deliverance from the Pre∣udices of his Education, still entertaining a design of Building all de novo; yet altho, this incertainty with which his Mind was agitated, made the difficulties of accomplishing his de∣sign, more sensible to him, than if he had forth∣with resolved upon it; yet for all that, he never was discouraged; he still kept up his Spirits with the Success he experienced in adjusting the Secrets of Nature to the Rules of Mathe∣maticks, according as he made any new disco∣very in Physicks. These Occupations secured him from Melancholly Fits, and other effects of Idleness: and they took up his time till the D. of Bavaria order'd his Troops to advance towards Suabia. He laid hold on this Opportunity to be at Ʋlm, an Imperial City, in which the French Ambassadors were to hold an Assembly for Redressing the Disorders committed in the Empire. He arrived there only in the Month of June 1620, but there he spent the whole Winter. There he got abundance of Acquain∣tance with the most Creditable Persons in
that place, and particularly with those who were in any Reputation for their Abilities in Phylosophy and Mathematicks: No Body was ever more esteemed for his acquaintance, in that Country, than John Faulhaber, nor did ever any one more than he approve of the capacity of a young Souldier, who presently made him mend his pace in Mathematicks. Some suppose, that then by means of a Para∣bole, he found out the Art of the Construction of all sorts of solid Problems in general, re∣duct to an aequation of three or four Dimenti∣ons: Which occurs plainly, Demonstrated in the third Book of Geometry. Towards the end of September,He was at the Siege of Prague. he left Sua∣bia, to return to Bavaria, and so to pass into Austria, where the Ambassadors of France were gone, after concluding the peace at Ʋlm, to meet the Emperor once again, to proffer him their Meditation, in respect of the Male-Contents of Hungary and Bethlem Galer, Pr. of Transylvania: But having learnt, that the D of Bavaria had ordered his Troops to march in∣to Bohemia, in stead of following the Ambas∣sadors into Hungary, he went from Vienna, straight to his Camp, and was in person, in the Expedition of the Imperial Catholicks and Bavarians, and above all, at the Famous Bat∣tel of Prague, into which he entred, together with the Victors. Some Authors dare sup∣pose, that he made use of this opportunity, to visit those Famous Machines of Tyco-Brae the Astronomer: But were plundered above a year before, and either broken in pieces, or
ut out of order by the Elector Palatins Ar∣y, and the great Caelestial Globe of Brass, he only one they had the good fortune to save as Transported to Neice in Silesia, and depo∣ed at the Jesuits Colledge. After the taking of Prague,He past in∣to Hungary under the Count de Bucquoy. M. Des Cartes ame to pass the Winter Quarters with a par∣y of the Troops the Duke of Bavaria had eft upon the extremities of South-Bohemia, here he sets himself again to work upon his sual Meditations upon Nature, exercising imself in the praeludiums of this great design, and improving the advantage he had in his Hand, to live alone amongst those, whose li∣berty of Drinking and Playing, he could not easonably envy, so long as they left him to his iberty of Studying. Nevertheless, he found himself hard put to it, in not resolving upon something, besides he knew not what to determine in respect of his choice of a way of living, answerable to his Designs: He defer'd the deciding of it till another time, and on purpose to give some diversion to his Troubles, he resolved once more to take a Musquet, and to weather out ano∣ther Campaign. The desire to be acquainted with other Countries, and other Manners, caused him to quit the Duke of Bavaria's Ser∣vice towards the end of March, 1621. that he might List himself into the Troops of Count of Bucquoy, passing out of Hungary, into Bo∣hemia; April ensuing, he was with him at the Seige of Presbourg, Tinaw, and several other places, wherein some suppose, he Signalized
himself; but the raising of the Siege of New-Hausell, which had not been so successful to the Imperalists, as the others, added to the loss of his General, who was Slain there, put him so out of humour, that he had no sto∣mack to the profession of Arms. It will be to no purpose,But he did not serve against the Turks. to take notice of the mistake of those who, pretend he went after that into the Service against the Turks, nay, and that his Personal Courage too, acquired him Notable Reputation against those Infidels, it may suffice to acquaint you, that quitting the Imperial Service on the 28th. of July, the very next Day after the Raising of the Siege of Newhausell, he came back to Pres∣bourg, in Company with certain Walloons, who were exceeding numerous in the Count of Bucquoy's Army. IV.He forsakes the profes∣sion of Arms. His Design was not to come back into France so soon, whether by reason of the War the Hugunots had but just began, or else because of the Plague that Raged particularly in the City of Paris, for near a year together, which ceased not till 1623. He betook himself there∣fore to Travel into that part of the Northern Country, that remain't to be seen by him. Yet one may avouch, that it was without chang∣ing his condition: For what he undertook, was nothing in a manner, but a Continuation of Travels, which he intended to perform hence forward, without being bound to follow Armies, supposing he had sufficiently pryed into, and discovered Mankind, by way of its Hostilities. He always mentioned this Mili∣tary
Profession, in such a cold and indifferent manner; that Men judged thereby, that he looked upon his Campaigns as mere Travels, nd that he made use of the Bandolier, but as Pass-port, which facilitated his access, even o the innermost recesses of Tents, and to the ottom of Trenches, the better to satifie his Curiosity. Wherefore chusing for his future Voyages,His Nor∣thern Tra∣vels. such Countries that were not▪ pestered with War, he applyed himself particularly, to see and examine Princes Courts, to frequent the company of persons of different conditions, and contrary humours. He Studyed moreover to make a Collection of several Experiments, as well upon the natural Productions of seve∣ral Climats he past through, as upon politick matters, which he observed amongst People, in respect of their Customs, Manners of Lives, and Inclinations. This is what he calls the Great Book of the World: Wherein he maketh account to find out true Science, dispairing to find it any where else, except in this Volum opened to every ones view, and in himself, according to his perswasion, that the Seeds which God hath Sown in us, are not so totally stifled by ignorance; or other effects of sin. According to these principles, he intended that these Voyages and Travels, should serve him to make trial upon himself, in the Acci∣dents and Occurrences fortune should propose to him, and that they might put him upon ma∣king Advantagious reflexions upon every thing that presented it self, and became pro∣fitable
to him, for the Conduct of his Life; For he flatter'd himself with the hopes of find∣ing more of truth in the reasoning private persons use, touching their own concerns; than in those which a great Schollar shut up in his Study, useth upon Speculations, which or∣dinarily produce no other effects, than Vanity and Haughtiness, and sometimes he prides himself the more in them, by how much they are for the most part more dissonant to common Sense, after he hath labour'd and set all his Wits upon the Rack, to make them pro∣bable. But to speak the truth, when he applyed himself only, narrowly to survey the manners of other Men, he found very little in them, whereby he could make himself sure of any thing. He perceived in a manner, as great a diversity in them, as he had before met with, in the Opinions of Philosophers: So that the greatest Advantage that occurred to him by that inquiry, was, that seeing several things, how extravagant and ridiculous soever they may appear to us, yet do not cease for all that, to be commonly received and approved of by other People; he learnt at last, not to believe any thing upon slight grounds, and not stifly and peremptorily to stand up for that which both Example and Custom had formerly per∣swaded him to be right. Leaving Hungary, he took another turn in∣to Moravia, where he joyned the Emperors Forces, under the Count Bucquoy. He visited Selesia, the utmost parts of Poland, Pomerania,
he Coasts of the Baltick Sea, the Marquisate of Brandenbourg, and descended into Holstein; from whence, after he had turned off his re∣nue, he Embarqued, but with one Man-Ser∣ant for East-Freez-Land: when he had exa∣min'd it in a few days, as he had done the o∣ther Provinces of Germany, he put again to sea, with a Resolution to go a shore in West-Freez-Land, the principal places of which he ong'd mightily to see likewise; that he might do it with the more freedom, he hired a small Boat for himself, and so much the rather, be∣cause it was a short cut from Embden, to the first Landing place of West-Freez-Land. But this putting things in order,He was in danger of his Life. the better to provide for his own Convenience, was like to have proved fatal to him; he had to do with a crew of the most Clownish, Barbarous Ma∣riners, that ever Man see amongst People of that profession. It was not long before he un∣derstood, that they were a pack of wicked Rogues, but after all, they were Masters of the Boat. M. Des Cartes, had no other to con∣verse with, but his valet, with whom he spoke French. The Marriners who took him rather for a foreign Merchant, then a Cavallier, thought he must have good store of Money a∣bout him; this made them take a Resolution, which was by no means favourable to his pock∣et, and that they might deprive him of means to tell Tails, they had thoughts of making him away: They perceived he was a Stranger, come from some remote Country, who had small acquaintance in the Country, and that
no Body would prosecute them, if he chanced to be missing, they found him of a very sedate, very patient humour, and judging by the mild∣ness of Countenance, and the Civility he shew∣ed them, that he was a person of no Experi∣ence in the World, from these circumstances, they concluded they should have his Life at cheaper rate; they made no scruple to hold their Counsel before his Face, not know∣ing that he understood any other Language besides that, in which he Discourst with his valet de Chambre; at last, the result of their Deliberation, was to knock him on the Head, to fling him into the water, and divide the Spoil. Monsieur Des Cartes seeing they were in earnest, starts up all on a suddain, puts on ano∣ther Countenance, draws his Sword with that stearness they little expected, speaks to them in their own Tongue, but with such a Tone, that frightned them out of their Wits; and withal, threatning to run them through, if they durst but hold up a finger against him. It was upon this occasion, that he perceived what resoluteness of a Man may do, upon your pittiful Low-spirited Souls. Such a resolute∣ness as is above a Mans power to execute, a re∣soluteness, which upon other occasions, might pass for a meer Bravado, such an one as he shewed upon this occasion, produced a won∣derful effect upon the Spirits of these wretches, the cruel fright they were seized with, was followed with amazement, that they knew not how to make use of their Advantage, but
brought him without any more adoe, to the lace whither he was bound, as peaceably as e could wish. V. From West-Friez-Land,He goes back to his own Coun∣try. he stept into Holland, where he past a good part of the Vinter, expecting the event of the two Sieges of Juliers and Sluise, formed by the Spaniard or Fleming, who had taken up Arms again, against the Hollanders, five Months after the Truce was expired: In the Month of Febru∣ary ensuing, he past into the Catholick Nether∣lands, whose principal Cities, he had a great mind to see, from whence, getting into France, he went straight way to Rennes in Britany, to his Fathers House, towards the middle of March. He was at that time 26 years of Age Com∣pleat, and his Father seeing him present, took occasion of his being at Age to settleupon him his Mothers Joynture, of which he had given two Portions to Monsieur La Bretailliere, and to Madam du Crevis, that were elder than he, seeing that all his Estate was in Paictou, he had the curiosity to go view it, on purpose to see how he could improve it to the best advan∣tage, he departed for that Province in May, and at that time, fain would have a good Chapman to have bought it, that with that Money, he might buy some place suitable to him, he returned about the latter end of Sum∣mer to his Father, the year slipt away before any one of his kindred could make him any overtures concerning what kind of life he should betake himself to.
Having little or nothing to do at his Fathers House,He goes to Paris. it made him have a huge desire to take a turn to Paris, towards the beginning of Lent, the next year. People began to suck in a pu∣rer Air in this City, then they had done for near three years, that the Contagion had cor∣rupted it. At his Arrival, the Affairs of tha unfortunate Prince Palatin of the Rhine, elected King of Bohemia, the inroads, the Expediti∣ons of Bastard Count Mansfield, and the con∣ferring the Prince Palatins Electorat to the Duke of Bavaria, ratified at Ratisbon, the 25th. of February aforegoing, furnished mat∣ter enough, for publick Discourses. He was well stockt with matter, where-withal to sa∣tisfie his Friends, as to that point, but in re∣quital, they imparted to him some news, that created them a great deal of sorrow. It was but t'other day, that Men began to speak of the fraternity of the Rosacrusians at Paris, which he sought up and down in Germany, and all to no purpose, in 1619. in Winter, and some be∣gan to spread abroad a report, as if he had ad∣mitted himself into that fraternity. He was so much the more surprised at this News;He takes of the slander of being a Rosacrusian. because it did not at all suit with the Character of his Genius, nor to the Inclina∣tion he ever had, to look upon these same Ro∣sacrusians, as a company of Impostors and Visionaries, they were called in Paris, the In∣visible, and they published that of thirty six Deputies, that the Head of the Society had sent throughout all Europe; six of them were come into France, in the Month of February,
d lodged au marais du Temple Paris, but that ey could not Communicate their concep∣ns to the World, neither could any Com∣nicate his to them, but by their thoughts n'd with their Will, that is to say in a man∣ imperceptible by sense. Chance, that had made their pretended ar∣al in Paris to jump with that of Monsieur Cartes, would have produced very ill ects in reference to his reputation, had he ne about to abscond, or had he but retir'd to some solitude in the City, as he had done fore his Travels, but was so happy as to confound those thoughts, to improve this con∣cture to confirm their calumny. He ap∣ar'd before the face of the World, but es∣cially to his Friends, who desired no other gument to be persuaded that he was not a ember of the Fraternity of the Rosacrucians Invisibles, yea, and made use of the reason their Invisibility to excuse himself to his riend, in as much as he had not been able discover any one of them in Germany. His presence above all things was a means calm the agitation, wherein his Friend Fa∣er Mersennus was in, whom they sent for ack again to Paris at the end of 1619. this lse report had so much the more easily ext and troubled him, as he was less apt to elieve that the Rosacrucians were Invisible, r the Spring of a Chymaera, considering hat several Germans, together with Robert ludd an Englishman had delivered in favour of them.
VI.His  for his  of Lively∣hood. The great Concourse of People Mr Des Cartes saw in Paris, was not capable o filling up all the vacancies of his stay there▪ nor yet to keep him always busied out of him∣self. Whenever he was with himself, h∣self always his disturbance coming upon him concerning his choise of a way of livelyhood agreeable to his vocation, and that might b convenient for the executing some designs h had in his head concerning finding out Truth▪ The settlement wherein he saw the most par of his Friends, each of them placed in advan∣tagious Posts for their Life, signified nothin for the fixing his resolutions. His own experience had convinced him along time agoe of the small benefit of Math maticks,He declares against  and Phy∣sicks. especially when Men study them on∣ly for themselves, without applying them to other things, since the year 1620. he had wholly laid aside the rules of Arithmetick the great delight he had for Geometry con∣tinued yet a little longer in his affection, be∣cause the Mathematicians of Holland and Ger∣many he had met with during his Travels had contributed much to his retaining them by reason of their Queries and Problems they propounded to him to solve. But yet we must confess, that his esteem of them wa efiened from the year 1623. if it be true tha in 1638. it was above 15 years that he professe he had quite laid aside Geometry, and would neve more mele with the solution of any Probleme, b only at the request of some friend. He sees nothing less solid than for a Man to
busie himself about pure simple numbers, and maginary Figures, without having any fur∣er design, nay he found something in it ore than unprofitable, and he knew very ell it was of dangerous consequence to ap∣y ones self too seriously, to these superficial emonstrations which hazard supply'd us with, ftner than industry and experience, and are ather to be judged of by the Eyes and Imagi∣ation, than by the Understanding. His Maxime was that this same serious application oth insensibly accustome us, not to make se of our Reason, and evidently exposeth us o loose the high Road, that its Light Chalks ut for us. But we may acknowledge that he did not ive over the particular Study of Arithmetick nd Geometry,The Study of Univer∣sal Mathe∣maticks. but to give himself up intirely o the research of that general, and withal, nfallible Science the Greeks judiciously stile Mathesis, of which all Mathematicks are but arts. He pretended that for these particular Knowledges to deserve the name of Mathe∣maticks, it was necessary they should have references, relations, proportions and measures or their object, upon that account he judged that there was a general Science designed on purpose to explain all the questions that one could put, touching Relations, References, Proportions and Measures, considered as sepa∣rated from Matter, and that this general Science might justly claim the title of Mathe∣sis, or Universal Mathematicks, since it com∣prehends whatsoever can possibly put other
knowledges in a condition to deserve the name of Science or Mathematicks. Now that is the ridling of the difficulty,He falls up∣on Ethicks and sets to Physicks a∣gain. to believe that Monsieur Des Cartes had quite and clean forsaken Mathematicks, at such a time that it was no longer in his choice to be ignorant of them, he practised likewise some attempts upon himself to discard the study o Physicks or Natural Philosophy. Finding a∣bundance of discouragement in the little cer∣tainty he took notice of in his Observations. Being resolutely bent to apply himself to no∣thing but the Art of living well, he set him∣self again to the Study of morality, for which he had testified already, before he went to Travel, a great predilection, and one may lawfully say he was as good as his Word, for he loved it to his latter end. But it was without ostentation, and more for the regulating his own behaviour than that of others. Yet it was not long be∣fore he was persuaded that the study of Natural Phylosophy, was not altogether useless in tha of Morality, and that the Progress he could make, in discerning of true and false, would stand him in great sead for regulating his actions. That caused him to return to his Observation upon Nature, being persuaded, That the most certain means to know how we ought to live, is to know before hand what kind of Creatures we are, what kind of World it is we live in, and who is the Crea∣tor of this Universe which we inhabit. He hath oftentimes since declared, That the in∣sight he had acquired into Physick, had
been very serviceable to him in establishing certain Foundations in Morality or Ethicks. And that it was abundant more easie for him to find the satisfaction he lookt for in this point, than in several others that relat∣ed to Physick or Medicine altho' he had em∣ployed more of his time therein—So hat after all these inquiries he might boast, ot so much that he had found out the means o preserve Life, but, that, of not being fraid of Death, and that he prepar'd himself for it, exempt from the disquiet common to those whose Wisdom is derived from other Mens indoctrinements, grounded upon Foun∣dations, that depend only upon the Prudence and Authority of other Men. Monsieur Des Cartes was two months and upward in Paris entertaining his Friends with the Discourse of this elusion that had possest him,He goes in∣to Britany & Poictou where he sells his E∣state. touching his pretended renouncing Ma∣thematicks and Physicks. He sometimes took much pleasure in dis∣sembling his Resolutions, and the least occa∣sion they presented him with, to resolve a Problem, or to make an experiment, were unavoidable snares for him. The perplexity of his Mind, joyned to the necessity of regu∣lating his affairs, made him go back into Bri∣tany towards the beginning of May, thence he goes into Poictou, and in June and July, during his sojourning there, he sold the great∣est part of his Estate with his Fathers consent; he had it from his Mother, and especially the
Lordship of Perron, which was his Title he bore to satisfie his Relations. VII.His Voy∣age into Ialy. Coming to Paris in August, and no finding an occasion to put out his Money to the best advantage, he resolved at last to un∣dertake a journey into Italy, which he had still deferr'd thitherto, before he had procur∣ed him a place which deprived him of the means to accomplish it. He departed, after that he had sent Word to his Friends, That a journey beyond the Alpes, would be much to his advantage for the instructing him in business, and gain some experience in the World, and get acquaintance with men verst in Worldly affairs, which he had not yet done, adding, that, tho' he might not re∣turn Richer, yet at least he would come back from thence more capable for business. He took his Way through Switzerland, re∣solving to visit what he had not yet seen in high Germany in his first Travels. It had been an easie matter for him to have found at Basil, Zurich, and other Cities store of Philosophers and Mathematicians capable to entertain him in Discourse: but he was more curious to see Waters, Minerals, Mountains, the Air of e∣very Country with its Meteors, and generally what was at the greatest distance from fre∣quenting Mens Company, that he might know the Nature of things which appear to be least known to the Vulgar Learned; when he passed through any City he saw your Learned Men but just as others, he observed their actions no less than their discourse.
In July he past into the Country of the Grisons amongst which the commotions in the Valtoline retained him some time. He con∣tinued his Journey through the County of Ty∣ol, from whence he came to Venice toward ogation time, there to behold the Ceremo∣ny of the Doge or Dukes Marrying the Adriae∣ick Sea, from Venice, he thought of discharg∣ing his duty he imposed upon himself in Ger∣many in Nov. 1619. of paying his Vow to the Lady of Loretto, which he could perform at that time. His Vow fulfilled, he had Leisure, before he went to Rome, to think of some Do∣mestick business, which served him amongst his Friends for a pretence to Travel. The pretence was to try if he could get to be In∣tendant of the French Army in Piedmont un∣der the Constable Les diguieres in which he had no good success. The occasion of a Jubilee of 25 years the opening of which was to be performed on Christmas Eve, to continue the whole year af∣ter, produced in his Mind some stirrings of Devotion, altho' his prime motive was no∣thing else at first but the curiosity of seeing Rome, and the Popes Court. There arrived in the City about the latter end of November, a prodigious concourse of People flocking thi∣ther from all parts of the Popish Europe, this appear'd so favourable to the passion he always had to know Mankind by his own proper knowledge, that instead of spending his time in examining Edifices, Statues, Paintings, An∣tiquities, Manuscripts and other rarities of
Ancient and New Rome, he betook himself particularly to the Study of Inclinations, Man∣ners, Dispositions, and Characters of Mind in the Crowd and Medly of so many different Nations. This conveniency gave a dispensa∣tion of travelling further, and stay'd his long∣ing to go even to the very Heart of Sicily and Spain, there to find out the People that re∣main'd to be seen by him. VIII.His return unto France. He departed from Rome to go back into France just at the time when Cardinal Jo∣seph Barberini the Pope's Nephew (whose esteem and friendship he had won) embarqued in order to be Legat at the Court of the most Christian King; but for his part he desired to return home by Land, not to lose the oppor∣tunity of seeing a Country he was over-joy'd to know. He past through Tuscany, where he did not fail to render a visit to the renowned Gallilaeus, if we may give credit to those who have mentioned his Journey into Italy; but that was writ only upon false Relations, and we are obliged to acknowledge upon his own con∣fession that he had never seen that Mathemati∣cian, and that he had no correspondence with him. Men did nothing but talk of the Expeditions the Duke of Savoy, and the Constable Les Di∣guires were going to make upon the Genueze and Spaniard, which afforded M. Des Cartes the Curiosity just as he went out of Tuscany to go take a view of the Army of the Constable, whom he found very busie at the Siege of Gavi, when he arrived in his Camp, the City taken the last of April, he had still a mind to be eye∣witness
to one part of the wonderful progress he D. of Savoy's Army made. Thence he went Turin towards the month of May, but passing hrough the Country of Suza to re-enter France, he turn'd aside towards Savoy to exa∣ine the height of the Alps. It was upon this ccasion that after some observations made upon Snow, first heated, and then made hea∣ier by the heat of the Sun, which the least motion of Air make to fall one upon another with an huge noise, that he was confident he guessed at the cause of Thunder, and found out the reason why it Thunders seldomer in Winter than Summer. IX.He comes to live in Paris. He came Post between Lyons and Poictou, where understanding that his Father was at Paris, he departed about the latter end of June to joyn him, and beg his Advice touch∣ing the place of Lieutenant General of Chastel∣reaut, which was proffer'd him, with a pretty good composition. Being come to Paris, he found that his Father was gone for Britany, which being joyned with the Intreaty of his Friends, who wisht to see him setled in Paris, did not a little contribute to the causing his business of Chastelreaut to prove abortive, and put him out of conceit with the Country. Taking Lodgings at the house of Monsieur le Vasseur d'Etoiles,His man∣ner of Life. Father to Mons. de Vasseur now living, Councellor in the Grand Chambre, he procured himself a kind of Settlement in Paris; where drawing up a Model of deport∣ment or conduct concerning the manner of living, which all gentile well-bred men of the
World are wont to prescribe to themselves he embraced the most plain, simple kind o life, the most remote from singularity and af∣fectation he could possibly think on. Ther was nothing in his house but what was prett common, his Furniture and Table very clea and neat, but without superfluity: He was served by a few Valets: He marched th streets without any at his heels, with a Suit single Taffity, which was Alamode in thos days, not wearing a Plume of Feathers, Sca and Rapier but as badges of his Quality; fo no Gentlemen at that time could be dispens with to wear otherwise. He had put off till he had finished his Tra∣vels, his pitching upon a stable profession for the remainder of his days. But as he appear∣ed not at all to have mended his pace in deli∣berating, and was as much to seek as at the beginning, yet for all that he did insensibly confirm himself in the thoughts of not be∣ing subject to any employ, not but that be made a second serious review of the several occupations that Men of this World follow, on purpose to try if he could find one, which he could handsomely manage, and might be conformable to the dispositions of his Spirit. But having examin'd every thing by the touch∣stone of Reason, he found at length that he could do nothing better than to continue in that Occupation which he then actually fol∣lowed, since he had got shut of all the preju∣dices of his Education. This occupation did solely consist in imploying his whole Life to
ultivate and improve his Reason, and to make the greatest progress he possibly could the knowledge of Truth, conformable to he method he had prescribed to himself. He did not find himself,A maxim for regulaet∣ing himself. God be praised, ny way a Slave to any of those passions which ause young men to become vicious. He ound himself perfectly cured of the strong clination for gaming they had formerly in∣pired him with, and also of the indifference for mispending his time, the irresolution that might still remain touching the general aims of his state and condition, had no effect upon his particular actions. He lived and acted, without ever taking notice of the incertainty e found in the judgments he past upon Scien∣ces, According to the maximes that he fram'd to himself of Morality, he intended to mbrace the most moderate opinions, the most commonly received in practice, and the far∣thest from excess, for the regulating his con∣duct and demeanour. Doing himself besides the justice not to prefer his private opinions to those of other persons, whom he judged more Wise and more Sensible than himself. He appear'd upon all occasions so very jea∣lous of his Liberty, that he could not dissem∣ble the aversion he had conceiv'd, for all the engagements that are apt to deprive us of our indifference to our actions, not that he would pretend to find fault with the Laws, which are for remedying the inconstancy of weak Spirits, or for setling sureness in the commerce of Life, permit men to make Vows or Con∣tracts
obliging those who voluntarily and law∣fully make them, to persevere in what they undertake. Yet seeing nothing that continues in the same state and condition, and promising to himself to perfect his judgement still more and more, he thought he should have trespas against Sense and Reason, if he had taken up∣on him to take a thing for good, when it ceas∣ed so to be, or to appear to him to be such▪ upon pretence that he might have found i good another time. In respect of these actions of his Life which he believed could not admit of delay, when he was not in a condition to discern the truest opinions, he always stuck close to those that were probable. If it so happened that he met not with more probability in some of them, than he did in others, yet did he not cease to determine upon one, and not to consider them afterward, as dubious in respect of practice, but as very true and certain, because that he found that the reason he had to determine and pitch upon one, was such as by this means he acquired the habit of delivering himself from repentings and remorses, which usually rack the Consciences of weak and unstable Spirits, who are induced but too rashly to practise as good, the things which they judge afterwards to be evil. Being persuaded that his Will never inclin'd him to pursue or avoid any thing, but so far forth as his understanding did represent it to him good or evil, he thought it sufficed him, to judge well for to do well, that is to say, to acquire all Vertues, and
all the benefits they are able to produce. With these inward dispositions he lived in appearance after the same manner as they , who being out of employment, think of thing else but to live a sweet peaceable in∣cent Life in the Eyes of Men, studying to their leave of the pleasures that attend ice, and that they may enjoy their leisure me, without thinking it tedious, have re∣ourse now and then to honest divertisements. o that his deportment having nothing that mell'd of singularity in it, capable of produ∣ing ill effects in the Eyes or Imagination of others, no body contrived to put an obstacle to the continuation of his designs, and he, for his part proceeded day by day, in his inquiry into Truth in relation to natural things. X.His reputa∣tion gains him friends and is tir∣ed out with visits. and XI. Albeit Monsieur Des Cartes had procured himself a kind of settlement in Paris, yet was he not so constant in his resi∣dence, during his year and half abode there, but that he afforded himself from time to time, the liberty to take a walk into the Fields, and even sometimes to undertake Journeys into his Country. Some few weeks after his return from Italy, the desire of seeing the Court of France again, made him take a turn to Fontainbleau where he met with an opportunity to salute the Le∣gate, whom he had not seen since his depar∣ture from Rome. He made use of his credit he gain'd at Court with him, to recommend to him some learned persons of his friends, namely Monsieur Balzac, whose cause he de∣fended
before this Cardinal against Father Gorela General of the Feuillans. After a Journey he took the year following with Monsieur Vasseur his Landlord and Re∣lation, he went and took him a Lodging in the Fauxbourg St. Germain, to live more retir∣ed and private, but it was not such an easie matter as it was before, in the days of his lei∣sure: his old acquaintance, especially Mon∣sieur Mydorge and Father Mersennus, had so far spread abroad his Reputation, that in a short time he found himself worn out with frequent visits, and the place of his retirement changed into a Rendezvouse of Conferences. He could by no means hinder the number of his Friends from multiplying, yet neverthe∣less He was his own Master as to the choice He made of them. The chief of his Friends, besides Monsieur Balzac whom we but just now mention'd, was M. Hardy a Counsellour in the Chastelet, a very able Man in Mathematicks, and abun∣dance of Languages; M. de Beaune, Sieur de Gouliou Counsellour in the Presidial of Blois, one of the greatest Wits of his Time, in re∣spect of Mathematicks; M. Morinus Regius Professour of Mathematicks in Paris, Doctor of Physick, Father Gibeuf Doctor of the Sor∣bonne, Priest of the Oratory, one of the great∣est Divines of his Age; Father dela Barde; Father de Sancy; Father de Goneren, all of the same Congregation, besides Cardinal de Be∣rulle who was head of it; M. Des Argues a Gentleman of Lyons, an able Mathematician,
and Mechanick; M. de Boissate, a Gentleman f Dauphine, whom he saw at the Siege of avi; M. de Serizay Comptroller of the house of the D. de la Rochefoucault; M. Sarazin Se∣retary to the Prince of Conty; M. Silhon, a Gentleman of Gaseoigny; M. Frenicle Sieur de essy; M. Jumeau, Prior of St. Cross, who ent for one of the greatest Arithmeticians of that Age, as did M. Frenicle, Jumeau had een Tutor to M. the Duke de Vernevil; M. de Marande. Recorder of the Court of Aides. M. the Abbot de Launay; M. de Barreau; M. the Abbot de Touchelaye the Elder; M. de Gandais; M. de Ville Arnou; M. de Ville Bres∣sieux, a Physitian of Grenoble, and a great many more besides; of whom we shall name none besides M. de Picot Prior of Rouvre, who would fain have been his correspondent after∣wards, and his agent concerning his Dome∣stick affairs. XII.His cutting Spectacle Glasses and Looking Glasses. But of all his Friends, there was none at that time, next to Father Mersennus, that he see oftner, nor more constantly than Mon∣sieur Mydorge, neither was there any one whose Company was more Beneficial, or whose Ser∣vices were more Cordial and Sensible to him; which he particularly experienced in respect of the Glasses he got cut in Paris, in the year 2627, 1628. when they enjoyed one anothers Company at leisure. Nothing appeared to him more Serviceable, than these Glasses, for the Apprehending and Explaining the re∣flexion and refraction in vision, Mr. Mydorge caused some concave ones to be made for him,
as also Hyperbolick Oval, and Elliptick ones▪ and having an Hand as sure and fine, as hi Wit was quick and subtil, he was willing to describe these Hyperboles and Ellipses him∣self. Monsieur Des Cartes himself,Ferrier a Mathema∣tical Instru∣ment ma∣ker. proved to be a great Master in the Art of cutting Glasse in a short time: Now since the Mathematici∣ans industry oftentimes signifie nothing, fo want of Work-men, whose dexterity doth not always answer the ingenuity of those th set them a work, he therefore apply'd himself particularly to direct the Hand of some Tur∣ners, that he found the most expert and best capable of performing this sort of Workman∣ship. Which he did particularly in favour to the Famous Monsieur Ferrier, Mathematicial Instrument-maker; who was nothing else but a plain downright Artificer, that could only move his Hand, he was likewise master of the Theory of his Profession, and not altogether ignorant in Mathematicks. He stuck closs to Monsieur Des Cartes, who took a particular affection for him, not being content to employ him after a way that might raise his Fortune, was moreover willing to instruct him, after what manner he might perfect himself in his Art. Nevertheless he perceived himself up to the ears again in abstruse Sciences,Mr. Des Cartes is quite out of love with Company. which he had declined; he retires once again, seeing how few People there was in Paris, with whom he might Communicate his Notions. But sets him∣self again with more earnestness, than ever to
the Study of Man, in which he had made so dvantagious progress during his Travels: This Study let him sufficiently understand, that these bstracted Sciences, are not too necessary and onvenient for us, and he himself in diveing in∣o them, was more at a loss, than they who were gnorant of them; he thought to have found least, amongst so many generous Souls, ma∣y Companions in his Study of Man, since it is hat Study that is most convenient, and agrees est with us; but he found he was mistaken, nd he observed, that in that great City which asseth for the Epitome of the World, as well s Rome and Venice, or any other place where e had been, that there are fewer persons who study Man, than study Geometry. That made him resolve once more to eny himself, as much as possible, and be content with a small number of choice Friends, for the Comfort of his Life, but his Reputation was a great hindrance to his Resolution. This Reputation had made Monsieur Vasseur's House, whither he was return'd from the Fauxbourg St. Germain, a kind of an Academy, by drawing thither abundance of People, who were introduced into his Chamber by the favour of his friends; those that had a curiosity for ingenious Learn∣ing, were forward to slip in amongst the rest, and accompanying such of his Friends as took delight in spreading his Reputation, they ven∣tured to propose to him to put Pen to Paper to make the Publick a sharer of his fine con∣ceptions. The very Booksellers who always
seek to make a Trade of the reputation of Authors, seem'd also as if they had a mind to be in the Plot with those that lay close Siege to him at Mons. Vasseur's. He acquaints us, that from that very time, one or other of that Profession, caused Presents to be offered to him to engage him to Promise them the Copy of what he should Compose, not being a∣shamed to desire to buy the honour of serving him. This was it that made his Sojourning in Pa∣ris very tedious and burthensom to him,He lyes hid and is dis∣covered. and made him feel his own Reputation to be an insupportable Load for him. He could not bethink himself any Remedy for it but Retire∣ment, and to begin to deliver himself from the Importunities of those haunted too often, he once again quitted the House of Monsieur Vasseur, and withdrew to the Extremity of the City, where he might have chused whether he would let himself be seen or no, except only to a few of his intimate Acquaintance who knew of his Privacy. Mr. Vasseur, to whom he judged it not convenient to disclose, was a good while troubled at it▪ till such time as by mere chance calling to mind our Philo∣sopher's valet, he see five or six Months after, he obliged him to inform him concerning his Master's abode, and carry him thither, it was past Eleven a Clock when he found him just getting up; After he had a little observed his way of Studying and Writing in Bed, by means of his Valet, who had declared to him his Master's Secret.
XIII.He goes to the Siege of Rochelle. Mons. Des Cartes finding himself thus discovered, it was in vain to regret the sweet∣ness of his Retirement, and to seek means to repair the loss of his Liberty; he could not divert the course of his ill Fortune, and he relapsed again in a few days into the same in∣convenience he had freed himself from in ab∣sconding. His Vexation at the Discovery, beat up his Quarters, and produc'd in him the desire to go see the Siege of Rochelle. He came into the Country d' Aunis towards the latter end of August 1628. only to be an Eye-witness of the Siege which was already far advanced, that he might Survey, as a Ma∣thematician, the famous Ditch of Card. Riche∣lieu, with the Line of Communication; but he could not handsomly forbear serving in quality of a Voluntier, beholding the Activity wherewith the King in Person order'd his Army by Sea and Land. In which particular he was soon follow'd by divers Gentlemen of his Age, who came only to the Siege out of a Curiosity like his. He entred the Town with the King's Army upon All Saints Day, which was on a Wednesday, he assisted the next day, being All Souls, at the Solemn Procession of the Host performed in the Streets; now there being nothing more to be done after the Consummation of this famous Siege; He came back to Paris by Post, where he was against Martinmass.He was pre∣sent at a fa∣mous As∣sembly at the Nun∣cio's House. XIV. Some few days after, he was at an As∣sembly of learned & curious inquisitive Persons at the Pope's Nuncio's House, who was called
Monsigneur Bagne, created Cardinal shortly after, who honoured our Philosopher with his acquaintance a good while ago. Monsieur Des Cartes was invited thither, and carried along with him Father Mersennus and Mons. de Ville Bressieux to hear the Sieur Chandoux, who was there to debate concerning some new Opini∣ons in Philosophy. Chandox made a long Discourse for to refute the way of teaching Philosophy, used in the Schools. He proposed moreover, a pretty common System of Philosophy which he pre∣tended to introduce, and had a mind to make it pass for a new one. The Pleasantness wherewith he accompa∣nied his Discourse, did so impose upon the Company, that he received from it an almost Universal Applause, except from Monsieur Des Cartes, who was not forward to demon∣strate outwardly any signs of Satisfaction which indeed he had not received from the Discourse of the Sieur de Chandeux. Cardinal Berulle, who was one of the Assembly, took special notice of his Silence; which put him upon demanding his Opinion touching what he had heard, which appear'd so excellent to the Company. Monsieur Des Cartes did all that he could to excuse himself from delivering his Mind decla∣ring that he had nothing to say against it after the Approbation of so many knowing Men.They make him ex∣plain his meaning in his Philo∣sophy. This shuffling accompanied with a certain tone, which somewhat suspicious, made the Cardinal conjecture he did not judge of the
Discourse altogether as the others did; which mov'd him still the more to urge him to declare what he thought of it. Monsieur the Nuncio, and other most remarkable Persons in the Assembly joyn'd their Intreaties to those of the Cardinal, to urge him to speak his Mind. So that not being able to recoil without being incivil, he told the Company, that the truth of it was, he had never yet heard any one that could boast of speaking more to the purpose than Monsieur de Chandoux had done. He first of all commended the Eloquence of his Discourse, and his great Talent he was endow∣ed with for quaint words and expressions. He commended withal that generous Liberty he demonstrated for indeavouring to deliver Phi∣losophy from the Perplexity of the Schoolmen. But he took occasion from this Discourse, to observe to them the Power of veri similitudo, taking the upper hand of Truth, which upon this occasion seem'd to have triumphed over the Judgment of so many grave, judicious Persons. Adding withall, that at such time as one has to deal with People easie enough to take up with very similitude or likelihood, as the illustrious Assembly before which he had the honour to speak had done, it was not difficult to put off false Ware for true, and interchangeably make Truth pass for Falshood by means of appearing so. For to give them an instance of it upon the spot, he demanded of the Assembly that some body in the Company would give himself the trouble to propose to him such a Truth as he
pleased, that might be in the number of those that appear the most incontestable and irre∣fragable: they did so; and with a Dozen Ar∣guments every one more probable than ano∣ther, he proved to the Company that it was False. Then he bid them propose to him a Fallacy or Falshood, such an one as Men com∣monly take for a most evident one; and by means of another Dozen of probable Argu∣ments, he forced the Auditors to acknowledge it to be plausible Truth. The Assembly was surprized at the extent of the Genious Mon∣sieur Des Cartes shewed in his Reasoning; but it was still more astonishing to see themselves too plainly convinced of the easiness with which our Mind becomes Cully'd by very Si∣militude. Then they asked him, If he could think of no infallible Expedient to avoid Sophisms? He reply'd, That he knew none more certain than that he himself made common use of; adding withal, That he had fetched it from Mathematicks; and that he did not believe that their could be any Truth, that he could not clearly demonstrate by this means accor∣ding to his own Principles. This way was nothing else but his Univer∣sal Method, which he calls otherwise his Na∣tural Method, according to which he try'd and squar'd all sorts of Propositions. The first benefit of this Method was to demonstrate at the first sight, whether the Proposition was possible or no; the other benefit consisted in making him infallibly to sound the difficulty of the said Proposition.
There was not any Person in the Company that did not appear much taken with his Rea∣sonings,The Cardi∣nal makes him resolve to Publish his Philo∣sophy. but no body took greater Satisfaction in them than Cardinal de Berulle, who declar'd to Monsieur Des Cartes, that he could wish to hear him once more upon the same Subject in private. Monsieur Des Cartes, very sensible of the Honour a Person of his Dignity did him, paid him a visit some days after, and discour∣sed with him concerning the first Notions he conceived about Philosophy, after he had per∣ceived the small benefit that flows from the means commonly used to treat of it. And by the way, he shewed him the consequences his Thoughts might produce, if they were rightly guided, and the benefit and advantage that would accrew to the Publick, if they would but apply his way of Philosophy to Medicine or Physick and Mechanicks; one whereof would produce the recovery and preservation of Health, the other the lessening and relieving Labours. The Cardinal had not much adoe to appre∣hend the importance of the design, and judg∣ing him the most proper Person to put it in execution, he made use of the Authority he had upon his Spirit to induce him to under∣take this great Work. Nay, he made it case of Conscience, he gave to understand that having received from God Strength and Pene∣tration of Mind, and withall was so enlight∣ned to this effect which was not granted to others, it behoved him to render an exact ac∣count how he improved his talent, and that
he would be responsible before the Supreme Judge of all the World, for the injury he should do to Mankind, in depriving them of the benefit of his Meditations. Yea, and went so far as to assure him, that considering the capacity of his genius, so vast as he knew it to be, God would not be wanting to him in be∣stowing his Blessing upon his Labour, and granting him all the Success he could possibly expect. The impression that Pious Cardinal made upon him, seconded with what his own good Nature and Reason dictated to him long be∣fore, won him over to resolve upon it. Till that time he had been of no Party in Philosophy, & had made choice of no Sect, as he himself ac∣quaints us. He persisted in his resolution to keep his Liberty, and to work upon Nature it self, without insisting much upon seeing in what he might come nearer, or be further off from those that treated of Philosophy before him. The earnest requests his Friend renewed to him for to hasten him to communicate his clear Notions to the Publick, did not permit him any longer to go back with his word, He now only deliberates about the means how he might most commodiously execute his design; having observed two main Obstacles that might prevent his succeeding, to wit, the heat of the climat, and croud and hurly-burly of People: he resolved to retire for good and all from the place of his Friends and Acquaintance, and pro∣cure himself a perfect Solitude in a Country in∣different cold, where he might not be known.
BOOK III. From 1628. to 1637. HAving made choice of Holland for the place of his Retirement,He retires into the Country, and then into Hol∣land. as the most fa∣vourable Country for his Designs executing: He appointed Father Mersennus to be his Cor∣respondent for his Commerce of Letters which he was to keep on foot in France, and com∣mitted the management of his Domestick Af∣fairs to Abot Picot. Going out of Town a∣bout the beginning of Advent, An. 1628. he thought it not convenient to go straight into Holland, that he might not suddenly expose his Health to the rigour of the Season: But he retired into a place in the Country, where he spent the Winter at a distance from the conveniency of Cities, on purpose to accustom himself by degrees to Cold and Solitude. After an Apprentiship of near Four Months to get the knack of it, away goes he for Hol∣land, about the latter end of March, An. 1629. He was at that time just 33 Years of Age; scarce was he arriv'd at Amsterdam, but he re∣ceived an account of the discontent of some who mutter'd against his resolution, who blamed his retirement. The Complaints that were made of it, to speak the truth, had no other Sourse but the Respect and Kindness of some Persons of his Acquaintance, believing themselves quite forsaken and forlorn.
The reproaches were reduc'd to three sorts, First of all, for leaving France, where his Grati∣tude & Education seemed to have obliged him to tarry, and for having chosen Holland before all other places in Europe; and last of all, for having forsaken Humane Society by avoiding Company. As he had prepared his Spirit for all Events, so had he likewise hardened his Heart against all false Kindness and Tenderness, and being perswaded that his deportment needed no Apology, he did not trouble him much to sti∣fle the Complaints of Friends and near Rela∣tions; yet seeing that time had dipated their resentments, which reason perhaps was not able to accomplish all on the sudden, it came into his Mind to give some account of his Proceedings and Conduct, for the satisfaction of those who would be moved at these sort of reproaches. As to the reason that made him quit France, he alledged the hurry and importu∣nity of the Croud of People that he must have been obliged to see and endure in his own Country to the prejudice of his Studies. Be∣sides, the heat of the Climate, which he ex∣perienced no ways favourable to his Constitu∣tion in respect of the freeness of his Mind. For to justifie his preferring Holland, he urged the Tranquility the Heart of this Country en∣joyed, being surrounded with Armies that served to preserve it; the Conveniences of Life that Trade and Commerce produc'd, the opportunity of leading a Solitary and un∣known life there, amongst a People taken
up with their own, and last of all, the quali∣ty of the Climate to be preferr'd in respect of his Health, to the hot Air of Italy, which he should otherwise have pitch'd upon for his Abode, upon Consideration of the Catholick Religion; but as for what they lay to his charge, that he declin'd the Company of Men, he was perswaded, that it was not so much his particular case, as that of all great Philoso∣phers, who, that they might procure liberty to apply themselves closely to their Studies and Meditation, have abandoned the Courts of Princes, and staying in their own dear Country. II.His ambu∣latory hid∣den Life in Holland. Arriving in Holland, he gave out at the very first that he would look upon himself but as a Foreigner there, who did not aspire to the Rights and Privileges of a Free Denizon, and desired to take Lodgings, only with a reso∣lution of changing his abode ever now and then; the space of Twenty Years that he past in Holland which he called his Inheritance, was as unsettled and fleeting as the sojourning of the Israelites in Arabia the Desert, notwith∣standing he bragged that he could preserve his Solitude in the greatest croud of People, as easily as in the mid'st of a Wilderness; yet did he shun the throng of great Cities, and it was always his way to lodge in the remotest part of their Suburbs. He evermore preferr'd to them Villages and lonesome Houses far in the Country, provided he could find them convenient for his purpose, and pretty nigh Cities, whereby to be provided the more ea∣sily with all sorts of Provision.
Seldom or never did he cause his Letters or Pacquets that were directed to him to be sent right to the place of his abode, the better to keep himself concealed, sometimes they were received at Dort by Mr. Beckmen, at Harlem by Monsieur Bloemaert, at Amsterdam by Ma∣damoiselle Reiniers, or Mr. Van Sureck de Ber∣gen, at Leiden by M. Hoogheland, and at other times at Ʋtrecht by Regius, or Mons. Schu∣man's Brother, an ingenious learned Lady of that Name; commonly there was no body beside Father Mersennus who was privy to his Secrets upon that account, and he kept it so close, that several learned and inquisitive Per∣sons of France, who travelled during all that time in Holland, were deprived of the Satis∣faction of seeing him, because they could not possibly find out his haunts. For his part whenever he writ to his Friends, especially before he settled at Egmond, he generally da∣ted his Letters, not from the place of his abode, but from the City, as from Amster∣dam, Leiden, &c. where he was sure no body could find him; when he became too well known in one place, and that he was too fre∣quently visited by Persons, impertinent and useless, he never delay'd to decamp, that he might break off his Acquaintance, and so re∣tire to some other place where he might not be known. Which succeeded very well all along, till such time as his Reputation was a means to discover him in all places, where it followed him as his Shadow.
From Amsterdam,He goes to live in Friezland, where he sets upon his Meta∣physical Medita∣tions. where he stay'd at first, e pass'd into Friezland, retiring to a place near Franeker, he lodged in a little Castle separa∣ed from the City but by a small Ditch. He udged this place so much the more convenient or him, because they said Mass there with much security, and because one found there erfect Liberty for all the other exercises of he Catholick Religion. There it was he renewed his old Protesta∣ion before the Altar, not to Labour, but on∣y for the glory of God and benefit of Man∣ind, and therefore intended to begin his Me∣ditations concerning the Existence of God and Immortality of our Soul. But that he might undertake nothing which had any affinity with Divinity, he did not intend to look upon God otherwise, but as the Author of Nature, to whom he made account to consecrate all his Talents. It was not Natural Theology, but only that of Revelation that he excluded from his Designs. III. Metaphysicks or Natural Theology,His Notion touching Dioptricks. did not so much take up all his time but that he re∣served some Portion of it for Experiments in Physick; and particularly for those of Diop∣tricks, whereunto he had mightily addicted himself in France. Scarce was he settled in Friezland, but he called to mind that he had left Monsieur Terrier at Paris; he who was the famous Workman in Mathematical Instru∣ments, whom he had employed for Cutting of Glasses. He thought he was not yet dischar∣ged of the care he had taken some time be∣fore
of his Fortune and Instruction; but the Proposals he made of receiving him into hi House, and to receive him as his Brother i an equal Communication of his Substance and Studies, became all of none effect, for want of management in Ferrier, whose Negligence occasioned his falling into divers Miseries since, which Monsieur Des Cartes, who had foretold him what would come on him, could not help, but by halves at that distance. The unresolvedness of Ferrier,He returns to Amster∣dam. made him change his measures he had taken for several Laboratories he had already prepared in his House near Franeker, that he might get him to Work about making Instruments and Glas∣ses. At the end of Six Months, he forsook this abode to return to Amsterdam, where he spent Three Months more upon his Mathema∣tical Meditations: But the Treatise of it which he had begun, was interrupted by his other Studies at the Beginning of the next Year, and he set not about it again till Ten Years after. IV. He was still in Friezland,The occa∣sion of his Treatise of Meteors, the Pheno∣mena of Parhelias. when he was solicited to put out his Reflexions upon the fa∣mous Phenomena Parhelias or false Suns, ob∣serv'd at Rome in March, An. 1629. the Ob∣servation was sent him by Father Mersennus, and before that by Sieur Henry Reneri, or Re∣nier, a new Acquaintance he had got at his ar∣rival in Holland, who was since looked upon as one of his Chief Disciples or Followers that ever publickly taught his Philosophy; Reneri receiv'd it from Monsieur Gassendus then
n Holland, who Composed a Dissertation pon it in his Travels, before Monsieur Des artes. 'Tis to these Observations of Parhelia's that he World is beholding for that excellent Treatise of Meteors, which Monsieur Des Car∣es presented it with, some Years after. He roke off his Metaphysical Meditations, that e might examine in order all Meteors, and e laboured several times upon this Subject, before he could find any thing in it where∣withal to satisfie himself; but at last being capable, by reason of several Observations very exact, to render a Reason of the most art of Meteors, especially concerning the co∣ours of the Rain-bow, which puzled him more than all the rest, he resolved to Compose a Treatise of it, which concludes at the Dissertation of Parbelia's. V. At his return from Friezland,The Death of his Dire∣ctor Card. Berulle. he lost an excellent Director and most sincere Friend in the Person of Cardinal de Berulle, who died suddenly in Paris the Second of October. He had always a great Veneration for his Merit, and mightily valued his Advice, he lookt up∣on him, next to God, as the principal Promo∣ter and Author of his Designs. He had the Satisfaction, after his decease, to meet with some of his Scholars; I mean, some of the Priests of the Oratory, in whose hands he might intrust the direction of his Conscience all the while he remain'd in Holland. No sooner was he settled in Amsterdam, but (not being able to forget the End and Scope
of his Philosophy,His Study of Physick, Anatomy and Chy∣mistry. which was only the benefit of Mankind) he seriously undertook the Study of Physick, applying himself more particularly to Anatomy and Chymistry. He imagined that nothing was more capable to produce the temporal Felicity of this World, than an hap∣py Union of Physick with Mathematicks; But before he was in a Capacity to contribute any Comfort or Relief to Mens Labours, or could multiply the Conveniencies of Life by Mecha∣nicks, he thought it necessary to find out some way or other to secure Humane Body from Evils that might disturb its Health, and de∣prive it of power and force to Labour. Upon this Perswasion, he began to put his designs in execution by Study of Anatomy; wherein he employ'd all the Winter he spent at Amsterdam. He declares, That he had so much eagerness for the Knowledge of this, that it made him go almost every day to a Butcher's Shop to see him Kill Beasts, and from thence he caused the Parts of such Ani∣mals to be brought home to his Lodging, as he design'd to Anatomize at his own leisure. This was his common Practice, frequently in other places where he was since, thinking that there was no disgrace for him, nor any thing unbeseeming his Condition in the practice of a thing that was in it self very innocent, and might prove very serviceable in its effects. He joyned the Study of Chymistry to that of Anatomy, from the latter end of the Year 1629. and he assures us, that he learn't daily in this Science, as he did in other, something
that did not occur in Books; but before he would apply his Mind to the finding out Di∣seases and Remedies, he had a desire to know whether or no there was any means to find out a Medicine that might be grounded upon infal∣lible Demonstration. VI. VII. These Beginnings were abundance more Prosperous to him than he durst hope they would have been,The ill Conduct of Beeckman and Ferrier. and there could be no∣thing wanting to his Satisfaction to see the first success of his Studies, but the assurance of see∣ing the issue of them; the great delight he took in them, made him more and more relish the sweetness of his retirement; and nothing disturb'd his repose this Year, but the ill be∣haviour of Beeckman and Ferrier towards him. The first, above Thirty Years elder than he, seeing his Reputation to increase in the eyes of the World, discovered a Pedantick Itch to make People believe that he had been for∣merly his Master: altho' he himself had learnt of Monsieur Des Cartes that of which he bragg'd up and down he had taught him; thereupon he took him to task, Doccumen∣tized him handsomly to make him know him∣self; and altho' he was willing to forego something he had given him formerly upon Algebra, Dioptricks, and Geometry; yet he made him restore him the Original of his Treatise of Musick, that he might at least keep his Vanity within Bounds. The other, acknowledging his Fault he had committed the foregoing Year, in refusing to go along with Monsieur Des Cartes, to live
with him in Friezland, & being willing to make amends, at a time when M. Des Cartes was no longer in a capacity to such like advantagious Kindnesses, made, as if he complain'd of his bad Fortune to frame real Complaints against Monsieur Des Cartes his Benefactor. He car∣ried his Complaints every where, where there was any considerable Persons that knew him, several of which writ to Monsieur Des Cartes in his behalf. Now he, that he might not be∣come suspected of hard dealing, see himself obliged to argue the case with them, and to justifie the distance and impossibility that there was for him to grant at that time those Condi∣tions he had urged him to accept of, when he intreated him to come live with him at Fra∣necker. Nevertheless, after he had convinc'd him in particular, that he might take himself only for all the hardships he suffer'd and com∣plain'd of, he was willing to take up his for∣mer thoughts of good will towards him, as he had done in respect of Beeckman.Visit of Fa∣ther Mersen. The Book of Father Gibeuf. But to com∣fort him for those petty Causes of being vext, that these two Men had administred, there happened two things in relation to two other of his Friends, which he reckon'd amongst the good Fortunes of this Year. The first, was a Visit Father Mersennus went to make him as far as Amsterdam. The second, was the pub∣lishing of Father Gibeuf's Book concerning the Liberty of God and of the Creature, wherein he had the pleasure to find where-withall to authorize what he conceived of Indifference and Free Will.
VIII. It was at the same time the Count de Marcheville,He resuseh to go into the Levant. nominated by the King to go Am∣bassador to the Port, got some to desire him that he would be pleased to accompany him, together with Monsieur de Chasheil, M. Bou∣chard, M. Holstein, M. Gassendus, Father The∣oph. Minuti, with divers other Learned Men he intended to carry along with him to Con∣stantinople, and into the Levant; he would have heartily wish'd such another opportunity had presented it self 4 or 5 Years before, but being of a Condition not to Travel any more, he excused himself upon the account of his Occupations not permitting him to leave the place of his retirement. Yet for all that,He goes in∣to England. he made a Voyage into England a little while after, and he made, somewhere, not far from London, some Ob∣servations touching the Declinations of the Magnet, which do vary in England; this Voy∣age which he terms but a meer walk, was but short. At his return, He was thinking of ea∣sing himself and Father Mersennus of part of the Importunities which his reputation brought upon him, upon the account of some Mathe∣maticians, to the end,He would propound no more Questions to any bo∣dy, & stints himself not to resolve any but those they had pro∣pounded to him. that both might husband the leisure they had for more important studies. Some particular Persons knowing there was no other way of Communication but by Fa∣ther Mersennus, by which they might get their Consultations conveyed to Monsieur Des Car∣tes, and to receive Answers of them, flock'd to his Convent to bring him their Questions, and returned to fetch the Solutions and Expla∣nations
of Monsieur Des Cartes. This Con∣course put him to a trouble he had the good∣ness never to complain of; and not satisfied to exhort Monsieur Des Cartes to answer all the Questions that were propounded to him, in the Pacquets he sent him; He challenged him also to send him some of his own Problems to propound to others, of which he undertook to send him the Solutions. Monsieur Des Cartes put him in mind that he had utterly discarded the Study of Mathematicks for several Years last past, that he was fully resolved not to lose his time in those jejune Operations of Geome∣try and Arithmetick, that at the long run there was nothing material or important got by it. But upon the whole he acquainted him, that his design was, not any longer to propound Problems to any one whatsoever; and that he thought he had taken a hard task upon himself, to be reduc'd for the future, not to resolve any but those of others, wherewith he professes besides that he was quite tired. IX. Of a great many Friends in France,He receives Ville Bris∣sieux into his House. to whom his Absence seem'd difficult to bear, who declared their great Passion, they should have had to come and lived with him, we know none but Monsieur Balzuc, whom he could like, to have lived with him; but the Obstacles that thwarted Monsieur Balzac's good intent, must needs be such as were not easily to be surmounted, if all be true that he Protests very seriously, That he had a long∣ing desire to be reunited to him, and never more to forsake him.
Monsieur de Ville Bressieux had much better luck than he in this particular, and his pre∣sence was by so much the more acceptable to Monsieur Des Cartes, as he knew there was in him a vast Genius for Mathematicks, and a strong Inclination for Chymistry, accompanied with a great deal of affability and sweetness of disposition: Ville Bressieux was not content to become his Disciple; he would fain have been his Domestick Crony, to have learned his Deportment as well as his Opinions. Henry Reneri,He goes to reside at Deventer. whom we told you was one of the fir Admirers of Monsieur Des Cartes, who had publickly professed his Philosophy, that is to say, his Principles according to his Method, being made Professor in Philosophy at Deventer, sway'd much with Monsieur Des Cartes to go live in that Town; which he did in the Year 1633. in the Spring: there he he busied himself to continue divers works he had broke off the preceding Year, particularly his Dioptricks, and his Treatise of the World; he applied himself likewise afresh to the knowledge of Celestial Matters, and his Astro∣nomical Observations made him quickly un∣derstand the necessity of studying the Natures of Comets to the purpose. He took occasion from this sort of Study, to draw up the Model of the Histories of Ce∣lestial Appearances, for Father Mersennus, just such as he conceived it to be, for the assi∣stance and furtherance of those, whom the Father had sent him word, took wonderful delight in sparing no pains for the advance∣ment
of Sciences, even to be willing to make Experiments at their own Cost and Charges. X. During this Year's Summer,His Trea∣tise of the World. he finished his Treatise of the World, long look'd for by Father Mersennus and his Friends with great impatience. He call'd it his World, because it was the Idea of a World that he had imagined answerable to the World we live in; and he comprised in an Abridgment all his Physicks, I mean, all that he could come to the know∣ledge of, concerning material things, saving only that which relates to Light, which he in∣tended to explain in its full Extent and La∣titude. That he might not be engaged to follow or refute the Opinions commonly received a∣mongst the Learned, he was willing to give over this same World to the exercising of their Brains in disputing about it; and to speak only of that which might happen in a New World, put the case God did create sufficient matter on the imaginary spaces to Compose such. He supposed God would diversly and confusedly agitate the parts of this matter, so that he would Compose of it a Chaos, or an indigested confused Mass, and that in process of time, he should only send his Ordinary Concourse to Nature, and let her act con∣formable to the Laws and Ordinances he hath established. Upon this Supposition he describes you this matter at the very first, he made appear what kind of Laws of Nature these were; he de∣monstrated
afterward, that the greatest part of the matter of this Chaos ought, consequent∣ly in obedience to these Laws, dispose and range themselves after such a manner, that would make it resemble our Heavens, &c. From the description of all Bodies imagi∣nable that could be composed of this matter, he was pleased to proceed to the Explanation of the reasonable Soul, upon which he judged it convenient to expatiate more at large. He demonstrates, that it cannot be deduced from the power of the matter, as were other things he handled; but that it is expresly to be created. XI. He revised his Treatise of the World,Gallilaeus his Con∣demnation makes him keep this Treatise lock'd up. for to send it to Father Mersennus, to get it Printed in Paris with the King's Priviledge, at such time as he heard the News of what befell Gallilaeus. This Mathematician had been obliged by the Inquisition of the Holy Office, publickly to abjure his Sentiment of the Earth's Motion, as a rank Heresy; ay, and he hampered in the Prison of the Inqui∣sition. This Adventure did so much the more surprize Monsieur Des Cartes, as he, on one side had a more than ordinary Submission to the Holy See; and because on the other side he was perswaded that the Opinion of the Earth's motion is by much the most probable, and withal the most Commodious for the ex∣plaining all Phenomena's. Upon this Hypo∣thesis he had Built the greatest part of this World; Insomuch, as not being able to de∣stroy
it without rendring all the rest defective▪ he thought it more advisable to suppress and conceal his Treatise, than to send it abroad lame and imperfect, or to expose himself to that scurvy humour of the Inquisitors of Rome, by publishing that Hypothesis they had con∣demned without understanding it. Yet he was resolved to have the other touch at it, and new model his Explanation of the Earth's motion, to shew which way one may deny this motion, in opposition to Gallilaeus, altho' in truth, it may really be carried about, and tho' the Hypothesis of Copernicus remain in full force, which he did not so much out of Crossness to stupifie the Inquisitors, as for to explain those Passages of Scripture which are commonly alledg'd against this Opinion. XIII. M. Des Cartes's stay at Deventer,He retur∣ned to Am∣sierdam. where he had remain'd from April, An. 1633. occasion'd him an entire peaceful Solitude, enjoying no no other Company in that place, but that of his Friend Reneri, who Professed Philosophy in that place; yet seeing it somewhat too di∣stant from the Carriers Roads, for to maintain his Correspondence with Father Mersennus, and other knowing Persons, he quits this abode the next Year ensuing, to remove to Amster∣dam again. A little while after,He goes in∣to Denmark with M. Vil∣le Bressieux. he took a Journey into Denmark, and the Lower Parts of Germany, in Company of Monsieur Ville Bressieux, who profited no less by his Instructions upon their Road, than in his House at Amsterdam. It was upon these Precepts, and chiefly upon his
grand Maxim, That the most Plain and Simple things are usually the most Excellent, That Mon∣sieur de Ville Bressieux invented so many pretty neat Machines beneficial for the use of Life. He inculcated to him divers other Princi∣ples, upon which this Man made several Ex∣periments since, which hath gotten him a name of being an extraordinary Virtuoso in Chymi∣stry, Mechanicks and Opticks. At the time Monsieur Des Cartes left the City of Deventer, Reneri likewise went thence for Ʋtrecht, whither the Magistracy had drawn him by fair words to Read Philosophy in the Colledge, which was very speedily to be changed into an University. This ingenious Man, who had at his leisure quite exhausted Monsieur Des Cartes his Philosophy at the very Fountain Head when he enjoy'd his presence, laid hold on such a favourable Conjuncture as this, to bring the whole University over to be Cartesians, that it might be illustrious at its very birth; which he effected with so much Prudence and Discretion, that there would never have been occasioned any di∣sturbance there, had not the Precipitated Zeal of him that succeeded him, quite snar'd his fine oeconomy. The Winter following afforded Monsieur Des Cartes matter for those Observations he made upon Snow of six Points or Angles;An Obser∣vation up∣on Snow of an hexago∣nal figure. and, upon that occasion, to make some upon Hail and Rain. He since Compiled a Sixth Dis∣course of them, which is to be seen in the Treatise of his Meteors. But above all, he
seem'd so much satisfied with the Observa∣tions the Snow that fell that Winter gave him occasion to make, that he could have desired that all the Experiments that he was necessi∣tated to try for the rest of his Physicks, might have dropt from the Clouds in that manner; and that he might have stood in need of nothing but his Eyes to know them. Remembring his delightful abode at De∣venter, he was moved to return to that City, to avoid the frequent Visits his Sojourning at Amsterdam drew upon him. Five or Six Months after, viz. towards the latter end of Autumn, Anno 1635. he pass'd into Friezland and re∣tired to Lewarden, the Principal City of the Province, two Leagues from Franeker, where he remain'd till the Year 1629. there he Com∣posed, or rather that I may make use of his own Expression, he Broached his small Trea∣tise of Mechanicks, for M. de Zuitlechem, his Friend and Correspondent, a Gentleman of great Worth, Counsellor and Secretary to the Prince of Orange. He came back to Amsterdam about the be∣ginning of March,Observati∣on upon the Circles about Can∣dles. and made a great many Cu∣rious Observations concerning the Crowns or Circles of Candles, in relation to our Eyes. Understanding at his return, that one of his Acquaintance was busy'd in putting out a Treatise of Spectacles, he most frankly and generously sent him his, that was made upon the same Subject. His Friend took out of it what he thought fit for his purpose; now that Part of the Treatise, relating particularly
o the Practice, served his turn. The rest was ot quite lost, some of it saw the Light, and was since found digested and inserted in Mon∣sieur Des Cartes his Dioptricks. Towards the latter end of the same Year, he lost one of the best and ancientest Friends he had acquired in Holland, by the Death of Isaac Beeckman, Principal of the Colledge of Dordrecht or Dort. BOOK IV. From 1637. till 1638. I. & II. AFter the resolution Monsieur Des Cartes had taken to suffer his Works to be Printed in his Life-time,He causes the Essays of his Phi∣losophy to be Printed. one would have thought that all the Business had been to kill him, to put the Publick in Pos∣session of a Benefit that was to be their own; His Friends made him reflect upon the In∣justice of this Proceeding, and snatch'd him out of harms way; that is, from the danger of being Sacrificed to the Publick Danger, in causing him to conclude upon Publishing what he had put in a Condition to come abroad. He reduced what was contain'd in his Pa∣pers to Four Treatises, for which he desired they would crave the Priviledge of the King, which was granted, with Testimonies of e∣steem and respect for him, the 4th of May
1637. to cause to be Printed not only the Four Treaties there specified; but also what∣soever he had written till that time, and whatsoever else he might write, during the whole Course of his Life, in what Part thought most convenient, within or without Kingdom of France, &c. These Four Treatises that he would have pass, for the Essays of his Philosophy, wer Printed at Leyden, Intituled, A Discourse of Method for the well-governing ones Reason, and find out truth in Sciences. Moreover, Dioptric Meteors, and Geometry, with certain Essa this Method. His design was not to teach all his Metho in the first of these Treaties. But not to pro∣pose any but what he deem'd sufficient to mak a Man judge, that the new Opinions that shoul appear in the Dioptricks, and Meteors were not conceived at Random, or a la Legere, and that it would be worth the while strictly to examine them. He begun his first Treatise or Discourse of Method, with divers Considerations upon Sci∣ences; Then he proposeth the Principal Rules of Method which he sought, for his particular use in the manner of conducting or govern∣ing a Man's Reason. After that, he produ∣ceth some Maxims of Morality, that he hath drawn from this Method; Then he deduceth some Reasons, by which he evinceth the Exi∣stence of a God, and of the Humane Soul▪ which make up the Foundations of his Meta∣physicks. One may there see further the order
Questions of Physicks, and that he hath in∣ired into together with the difference be∣ixt our Soul and that of Beasts. In the last ace, he makes a deduction of things, he sup∣osed requisite to proceed farther in the re∣arch of Nature, than any one had hitherto one. He concludes, solemnly protesting at his chief scope and aim tended only to e Advantage and Profit of his Neighbour; ut that he was altogether averse from de∣ring ever to apply himself to what might be of o Advantage to some, without doing wrong to hers. He did not pretend by this Treatise to Prescribe any Method to any Man, but only o make known to all, that Method he him∣self had followed, by the right which the li∣erty of conducting himself according to those Natural Lights he received from God, allowed im. III. The first Essay of this Method,His Diop∣tricks. is the Treatise of Dioptrick, divided into Ten Parts, which make so many Discourses, or very short Dissertations concerning Light, Refraction, he Eye and Senses; concerning the Images that are formed at the bottom of the Eye, and concerning Vision, Spectacles, and cutting of Glasses. The design of the Author in this Treaty, was to shew us that one may proceed pretty far in Philosophy, to arrive by means of it to the Knowledge of Arts profitable to Life. The Treatise that he makes upon the second Essay of his Method,His Meteors. is that of Meteors, divi∣ded
into as many parts as that of Dioptricks. He treats therein of Terrestrial Bodies; of Vapours and Exhalations, of Salt, of Winds; of Clouds, Rain, Snow, and Hail; of Tem∣pests, Lightning and other Fires kindled i the Air, and of the Rain-bow; of the colou of Clouds, of Circles or Crowns appearin now and then round about the Stars; of Pa∣helia's or Apparitions of many Suns. The last of the Essays of his Method,His Geome∣try. is his Treatise of Geometry, containing Three Books; where is handled chiefly the Construction of Problems; the Author's design in these Works, was, to shew the way of Demonstra∣tion, that he had discovered abundance of things not known before him, and to hint by the by, that one may find still a great many others; to the end he might more effectually excite all Men to the research of Truth. But a Man would be mistaken to believe that Monsieur Des Cartes intended to deliver the Elements of Geometry in this his Work, which requires othergates Readers than Scho∣lars in Mathematicks. He studied in the Three Preceeding Treatises to make himself under∣stood by every body, because the main Busi∣ness was to make those things to be compre∣hended that were never taught before, or whose true Principles by none was ever yet delivered; but perceiving that there was a great number of Works of Geometry, against which he had nothing to say, he thought he was not oblig'd to repeat in his Treatise, what he had found good, and very well demonstra∣ed
in others; so that, so far was he from ren∣ring them unserviceable, that he laboured hat he could to make them necessary, begin∣ing where they left off: Insomuch, that it expedient to have read them, to compre∣end his Geometry. He suppress'd the Prin∣iples of the greatest part of his Rules, with heir Demonstrations. He foresaw also, that everal who might have read other Geome∣ries, yet who might have acquir'd but a com∣on insight into this Science, might most asily attain to the Knowledge of his Wri∣ings. IV. Altho' the subject matter of these Four Treatises seem at first view to have no Rela∣ion to one another,Connexion and Rela∣tion be∣tween these Four Trea∣tises. yet hath he so used his kill, that the Three last should have some Connexion, and that a very strait one with he first; to this intent, after having proposed Model or Pattern of a general Method which e adopted; yet without pretending to ob∣rude it upon others for their Instruction, he ath chosen in his Dioptricks a mixt Subject of Philosophy and Mathematicks; in his Meteors one, of pure Philosophy without mixture; nd in his Geometry one, of pure Mathematicks; o shew you that there could be nothing in whatsoever Natural Knowledge he might ave, that he had not a design to refer and reduce to this Method; and nothing wherein e did not hope to have good Success, provi∣ded he might have the Experiments that might be necessary to that effect, and time to discuss and examine them.
As for his way of arguing,In what manner they are writ. it seem'd, that it was look'd upon by others after a quite dif∣ferent manner, from what it really was accor∣ding to him. He did by no means agree with those, upon this Subject, who published that the explication of things he hath given, may be very well rejected and waved, but tha they cannot be opposed nor refuted by rea∣son; for not admitting of any Principles which he did not believe most manifest, and consi∣dering nothing besides, Greatnesses, Figures and Motion, after the manner of Mathema∣ticians; He excludes himself from all retreat▪ which Men usually reserve for themselves to escape to, as need shall require; and debar' himself of all the Subtersuges of Philosophers so that the least Error that shall slip into hi Principles, will be easily perceived and confu∣ted by a Mathematical Demonstration. But on the contrary, if there be any thing found therein that may appear so true and certain, that one cannot overthrow it by such like Demonstration, that cannot, without doubt be undervalued without a fault, at least, by those whose Profession it is to Teach and In∣struct. For altho' he makes as if he did nothing else throughout his Discourses, but barely propose what he says, without proving it nevertheless, it is not difficult to fetch Syllo∣gisms from his Explications, by means of which he believed that other Opinions touch∣ing the same Subject Matters, might manifestly be destroyed, and that those who should de∣fend them, would have much adoe to answer those who defend his Principles.
The liberty he took to Publish these Trea∣tises in his French Tongue rather than in that of the Learned, and to conceal his Name in it, put him to no trouble, notwithstanding he had all the reason in the world to fear it from the Criticks; but it did not fare so well with the distribution of the Copies he caused to be made.Whence proceeded Roberval's animosity against Des Cartes. It was more pernicious to him not to give Monsieur Roberval one of them, whom he did not know, tho' he Professed Mathema∣ticks in Paris; than it would have been to his advantage to have presented a great num∣ber of them to the Court of France and Rome. Mons. Roberval held himself wrong'd by this omission; and altho' it was occasioned by Fa∣ther Mersennus, rather than Monsieur Des Car∣tes, yet did he from thenceforward prepare to Criticise upon Des Cartes his Geometry; such was the rise of that inveterate, immortal Ani∣mosity he conceived against him. The Pre∣cence of it he had not so much as the discre∣tion to dissemble to some Friends whom he knew otherwise to be Monsieur Des Cartes's, as well as his own. To take breath alitle after the Incumbrance the Publication of his Essays had occasioned him, he was desirous to take a turn to the Siege of Breda; a City not altogether indiffe∣rent to him, by reason of his quartering there two Years together when he bore Arms. After the taking of this City by the Prince of Orange, he took a Journey into Flanders, and went to see Mounsieur de la Basse's Court, Go∣vernor or Commander in the City of Douay
for the King of Spain; This Gentleman, who was one of his best Friends; omitted nothing whereby to regale him nobly: he procured him for Eight days together, amongst other things, the Conversation of Dr. Sylvius. Syl∣vius was one of the ablest Divines of his Age, and after Estius his Death, the principal Orna∣ment of the University of Douay. He seem'd very much satisfied with Monsieur Des Cartes; but he had not cause to be so with a Politick Gentleman, that the Philosopher had brought along with him, who oftentimes put the Dr. to a Nonplus in the Conferences which were held after Meals at M. Bassecourt's. Monsieur Des Cartes at his return went to sojourn in Egmond,He goes to live at Eg∣mond. the prettiest Village of all North-Holland, where the exercise of the Ro∣man Religion was undisturb'd and Publick. Scarce was he settled there, but he perceived the fruit the reading of his Book produced. One of the first that appear'd to render him an account of it was Dr.He anss Fromondus,  and Cier∣mans. Fromondus, Regius Professor of the Holy Scriptures in the Univer∣sity of Louvain, he propounded to him divers Objections against several Passages of his Me∣thod, Dioptricks, and more especially of his Mereors, of which himself had published a Treatise in 1631. that had been highly esteem∣ed; Monsieur Des Cartes answered him, and they were very well satisfied one with another for to continue their Friendship the remainder of their days. He answered also about the same time, the Objections of an Holland Physician who had
Preferment at Louvain named Plempius, who was one of his Acquaintance some Years be∣fore. These Objections related chiefly to what he had writ concerning the Motion of the Heart. They contained, according to his Opi∣nion, whatsoever one was able reasonably to object against him upon this Subject. Plempius, who declared that he had not made these ob∣jections, but with a design to be better in∣form'd, and for the better discovering of truth; let Monsieur Des Cartes at that time know, that he was very well pleased that he had answered him. The Answer he gave Monsieur Ciermans, Professor of Mathematicks in the Colledge of Jesuits at Louvnin, had no worse success. He found this Father's Objections very judicious and solid, the main hinge they turn'd upon was Geometry and Meteors, and especially in reference to the Rain-bow. The Father on his part seem'd so well satisfy'd with the An∣swer Monsieur Des Cartes gave, that he freely gave his consent that they might Print his Objections with the Answer. He could not forbear declaring, that what he chiefly liked in Monsieur Des Cartes, was that boldness, that made him turn aside out of the beaten Paths and Common Roads; and that he was indued with the Confidence to enquire after new Lands, and make new Discoveries. Monsieur Des Cartes, having no other Pas∣sion in all he writ, but that of finding out Truth, and believing that he was not capable of accomplishing it alone, fought for, if one
may so say, Adversaries, rather than Appro∣vers; to the end that the Obligation to an∣swer them, and sift their Objections, might render him more and more exact, and might be a means to make him open his Eyes upon that he was not able to know before. In or∣der to this he hopefully expected the Obje∣ctions the Jesuits of La Flesche, Louvain, Lifle, and some other places had promised him by their Letters; but he was somewhat surprized to learn by some of them, that they wonder∣fully approved of him, that they desired nothing as to what he was pleased to explain, but only in that which he would not write; and that they deman∣ded of him his Physick, and Metaphysick with great Importunity.The good Offices of M. Mydorge. VI. In France the reading of his Book ope∣rated upon the Spirits of Men, according as they were well or ill prepared. There were but few things in all that he had writ that did not appear dubious to some, and Novel in re∣spect of others; the true knowing Persons did not boggle at all they found new, which could not render the Author odious, but to such who were fond of their own Prejudices; yet they took an occasion from what seemed du∣bious to make some Objections against him. M. Mydorge had been one of the most fit Persons in that respect, if so be he had not been beforehand of the same Opinion with him in several things, from the very first time they saw one another in Paris. He might have been able at least to propound some difficul∣ties to him concerning divers Passages in the
Sixth Book of his Dioptricks, where he treats of Vision in a quite different manner from that he was wont himself, to explain this matter: he was content to mention such a business to Father Mersennus, who gave Mon∣sieur Des Cartes notice of it in Writing. He did not take ill some Advices the Philosopher gave him in his Answer to this Father. Af∣ter that, he had no other Objections to start to his Friend; nay, he was so far from fatigue∣ing him with many others upon that score, that one may say▪ he plaid the Des Cartes in Paris, in taking upon him to answer, for his absent Friend, all the Objections which they had not a mind to send into Holland. He was not alone in studying to render him friendly Offices in Paris.The good Offices of M. Des Ar∣gues. Monsieur Des Argues, who already was very busie with Father Mer∣sennus to make the Priviledge of his Book effe∣ctual against the disobliging Practices of the Sieur de Beaugrand, was wanting in nothing wherein he could be serviceable to him with Cardinal Richelieu, and to give Credit to his new Speculation of Dioptricks, amongst those who were about his Eminence; He let him understand by Father Mersennus, that the Car∣dinal was pleas'd to give ear to the Proposi∣tions they had made to him, of endeavouring to make Spectacles and Prospectives accor∣ding to the Rules he had Prescribed in his Dioptricks. Monsieur Des Cartes thought it stood him upon to cross this Understanding, and to that effect, he desired Father Mersennus to declare
to M. Des Argues, and others, that had an hand in this Business; that he was extreamly obliged to them for the good Opinion they had given to the Court of his Dioptrical In∣ventions; but that he did not believe that the Cardinal's thoughts ought to stoop so low as to a Person of his Rank. It was not out of an un∣seasonableness that he resisted the purposes of these Gentlemen; it was out of timerous∣ness, lest they might not successfully compass their End in his Absence, and lest they might lay the Workmens fault at his door; for he judged his presence necessary to direct the hand of Turners, and to give them new In∣structions, according as they proceeded, or failed. VII.Mons. de Fermat's Objections against the Dioptricks. Amongst the Virtuoso's of France, that would fain have tried a touch with Monsieur Des Cartes, there was none of them found more diligent than, nor more capable to do it, than M. de Fermat, a Counsellor of the Parliament of Thoulouse, one of the Chief Men in the Age for fine Endowments of Mind, and especially in respect of Mathematicks. The Month of November, he sent to Father Mersennus some Objections against M. Des Car∣tes his Dioptricks; and this Father received an Answer to them in the Month of September, notwithstanding the distance of places, that might have afforded a pretence for delays. At the same time,Mons. Petit his Obje∣ctions. Monsieur Petit, then Commissioner of the Artillery and the King's Ingeneer, who was since Surveyor of the For∣tifications, started likewise some Objectious
against the Treatise of Dioptricks, which Monsieur Fermat found to come but little short of his own. Mr.A Paper of M. Fermat. upon Geo∣metry. Fermat, before he had received an An∣swer to his Objections, caused to be dispatch∣ed to Monsieur Des Cartes by Father Mersennus, a Pamphlet of Geometry of his Composing. De Maximis & Minimis, i. e. of the greatest and least quantities; and that he might conceal his Name again from Mons. Des Cartes, he made use of that of M. de Carcavi, one of Lyons, a Friend of his, being then his Collegue in the Parliament of Tholouse. This Present Monsieur de Fermat sent to Monsieur Des Cartes,The Origi∣nal of the Dispute be∣tween M. de Fermat, and M. D. Cartes. was not only a Token of his esteem and grateful acknowledgment, but also an Advertisement of what he believed Monsieur Des Cartes had omitted unawares, or forgotten unseasonably in his Geometry. That occasion'd a new difficulty to arise, in the clashing Mons. Fermat begun, which he belie∣ved to be in a capacity to decide in a few days. But it was no such easie matter to extin∣guish these first sparks; the fire of the Dispute got ground by the Zeal of those who were willing to enter upon it; at length two mate∣rial Points, one relating to Dioptriques, the other to Geometry, became the main Subject of their Debate. Here you may take notice of the cause of that famous Quarrel, which continued even after Monsieur Des Cartes his Death; this is that Monsieur de Fermat stiled, his Skirmish with Monsieur Des Cartes, or sa petite guerre contre Mons. Des Cartes, and that
which Monsieur, Des Cartes calls, son petit pro∣ces de Mathematique contre Mons. de Firmat. VIII. Whilst Monsieur de Fermat, (amidst his great business in pleading Causes and Do∣mestick Affairs) appli'd himself tooth and nail to the Answer Monsieur Des Cartes made to his Objections about Dioptriques;Mons. Pas∣cal and Ro∣berval spouse Mr. de Fermat's Quarrel. Father Mersennus receives Monsieur Des Cartes his Observations and Animadversions upon his Treatise de Maximis & Minimis; but instead of sending them directly to Monsieur de Fer∣mat, in conformity to Monsieur Des Cartes his intent, he thought it convenient to shew them to a couple of this Magistrates particular Friends in Paris; the one was Monsieur Pascal the Father, heretofore President in the Court of Aides in Auvergne; the other was Monsieur Roberval, Mathematique Professor in Paris. These Gentlemen supposed themselves ob∣liged to espouse the Qurrel of their Friend; and seeing him busie upon his reply about Dioptriques, they dispens'd with him from prosecuting the Quarrel about Geometry, and undertook the answering Monsieur Des Cartes his Observations against his Treaty de Maximis & Minimis. Monsieur Des Cartes reading their Answer before he received Monsieur Fermat's Reply, commended their Zeal; approved their cordial dispositions, and lookt upon Mon∣sieur Fermat as an happy man, for having been prevented by such great Assistance at such a hard pinch as that was; nay, and he had much ado to forbear conceiving much esteem for their Abilities; some proofs of which he had
observ'd in their Writing; yet he found that albeit they had performed all the Punctilio's of Friendship in respect of Monsieur, yet that they very scrrily acquitted themselves of the Com∣mission they had taken to discharge him from the trouble, and defend him. This Writing,Mr. Des Car∣tes answers them. which could be no other than the style of Monsieur Roberval, was re∣futed by Monsieur Des Cartes before the end of February; and Monsieur de Fermat's Reply coming out at last, touching Dioptriques in the same month, he made several Answers to it, which he directed to Monsieur Mydorge, another to Monsieur Hardy, a third to Father Mersennus, his chief Friends. IX.Proceed∣ings of the Difference between Mr. Des Car∣tes and Mr. Fermat. Perceiving that there was no necessity that could oblige Monsieur de Fermat to send him his Treatise de Maximis & Minimis, to ex∣amine, he took this action for a defiance; the manner of sending the Challenge added to the Merit of the Person who sent, prevail'd with him to avoid this occasion; the Paper he sent to Father Mersennus against his Treaty de Maximis, was next door to accepting of it. The City of Tholouse, and the Village of Egmond, were the utmost bounds of the List, where it seem'd very difficult for the Parties to try their Skill; and they were both too stout, and stood too much upon their Pantofies to advance one step, one in favour of the other. Providence ordered a place between, and disposed matters in such a manner, that Paris, where were their acquaintance, friends, and foes, became insen∣sibly the Randezvouse where their difference
was to be decided; Father Mersennus, with∣out ever dreaming of such a thing, gave occa∣sion for this disposing of matters, by putting into Monsieur Roberval's and Monsieur Pascal's hands-at Paris, the Paper of our Philosopher, which he should have sent directly to Mon∣sieur de Fermat at Tholouse. Monsieur Des Cartes on his part thinking he was bound to answer these two Gentlemen, seem'd to give way that his business should come to Trial at Paris. But now since these two Gentlemen had thought fit to appear in his Cause as Advo∣cates,Mons. My∣dorge, and Mr. Hardy on Mr. Des Cartes side, Mr. Pascal and Mr. Ro∣berval on Mr. Fer∣mat's. he desired they would be pleased not to be his Judges, or that they would except against those that were appointed, with others of Monsieur de Fermat's friends; the other Mathematicians that might have been engaged to have sit Judges in the Cause, without doubt were not a few; but some of them were not capable of understanding Monsieur Des Cartes his Geometry, and others were not well enough known by him, except two worthy Geometricians, to whose Judgment he might safely have referr'd himself; they were Mon∣sieur Mydorge, and Monsieur Hardy, who past generally for his two intimate friends. This con∣sideration render'd them no less liable to be excepted against by Monsieur Fermat, than Monsieur Pascal and Monsieur Roberval were by Monsieur Des Cartes, by reason of their great acquaintance with Monsieur Fermat: Therefore it was his best way to resolve to chuse them not so much his Judges, as Advo∣cates;
or to speak in the Language of the Cartel or Challenge presented by Monsieur Fermat, Monsieur Mydorge, and Monsieur Hardy were retained by Monsieur Des Cartes for his Seconds, to oppose Monsieur Pascal and Monsieur Roberval, who had offerr'd to second Monsieur Fermat in the Combat. Fa∣ther Mersennus was desired to stand Neuter, and be content with the office of a bare Specta∣tor, on purpose that he might not be suspected by either Party, to hold with the Hare, and run with the Hound. Monsieur Des Cartes immediately produced the Writings, sent them with the Instructions necessary in order to the hearing of his Proces or Cause of Mathematiques to Monsieur My∣dorge and Monsieur Hardy, and recommended to them withal to forget or suspend the Senti∣ments of friendship, to adhere to the Rules of Justice and Truth. If Monsieur de Fermat had taken three Advocates on his side, Monsieur Des Cartes would have been sure to have taken Monsieur Des Argues for his third, being no way inferiour in Learning, nor less affectio∣nate for him than Monsieur Mydorge and Monsieur Hardy. He intreated Father Mer∣sennus to communicate all things to him how∣ever, and to let him have the perusing of all the Writings if he should desire it. Amongst other Pieces, he sent directly to Monsieur Mydorge, Monsieur Pascal and Mon∣sieur Roberval's VVritings. Monsieur Mydorge caus'd it immediately to be conveyed to Mon∣sieur Roberval, by Father Mersennus. Monsieur
Roberval, without letting the heat whereinto this Answer had put him, forthwith drew up a Reply under the name des deux amys de M. de Fermat, of Monsieur de Fermat's two friends▪ that is to say, of Monsieur Pascal and his own▪ but in that he imposed upon Monsieur Pascal, who had pass'd his word to carry on the Dis∣pute of Monsieur de Fermat in his name against Monsieur Des Cartes. Monsieur Pascal was not at Paris at that time; he withdrew out of the City upon the occasion of some Troubles that arose upon the account of one of his friends; and Monsieur Roberval was a trusty Steward in the mean time to signifie his ab∣sence, by subscribing their common Reply alone. Monsieur Pascal scarce took any more cognisance of this Dispute, because at his re∣turn he was preferr'd to be Intendant of Justice in Rouen. The clownishness and moroseness that Monsieur Des Cartes observed in the style the Reply was writ in, made him imagine Monsieur Pascal was absent indeed; or that he had no hand in Composing this VVriting; wherefore being soon disheartened by the un∣politeness of Monsieur Roberval, and his preci∣pitation, he sent word to Father Mersennus, that he did not resolve to answer him, because he stood upon his points, and was out of humour, in∣stead of imitating that gentle sincerity and moderation wherewith Monsieur Pascal and Monsieur de Fermat treated him; he intreated him notwithstanding to assure Monsieur Ro∣berval, that he was his most humble Servant, and that he was no more offended at what was in his
riting, than men are commonly in playing, at the nger of those that lose. Monsieur Roberval in espite of the singularity of humour he affect∣d, would, without all question, have been sa∣tisfied with so much civility: But Father Mer∣ennus, who had a peculiar Talent of setting Learned men by the Ears, and to prolong Disputes, fearing to see them make an end of his so soon, could never be at rest till Mon∣sieur Des Cartes should promise him to make a rejoynder to this second Paper; he sends it him in April, but he took special care to let nothing slip that might move Monsieur Ro∣berval's spleen. X. In the mean time Monsieur de Fermat grew weary with disputing;Mr. Fermat makes his peace with Mr. Des Car∣tes; and becomes his friend, and so doth Mr. Pascal. and fearing lest Monsieur Roberval's Zeal might not cause him to prolong it, he did not only leave that which Monsieur Des Cartes writ against his last Re∣ply touching Dioptriques; without a rejoynder, but also writ to Father Mersennus to beseech him to comply with Monsieur Des Cartes, and withal to procure him his acquaintance. On the other hand, Monsieur Mydorge and Mon∣sieur Hardy could not abide to see a person of that worth and quality Monsieur Fermat was of, should to such little purpose be at odds with Monsieur Des Cartes; set all their Wits a work to find a way to reconcile them, and to change their Dispute into a perfect amity and correspondence; the benefit whereof they might reap in a mutual Communication of their Humours. They mentioned it to Father Mersennus, who being solicited on the other
hand by the Overtures & Concessions of Mon∣sieur de Fermat, was prevail'd upon to write to Monsieur Des Cartes about it, notwithstanding the great desire he might have to see them continue. Monsieur Des Cartes received the proposa of it with no small joy; and having thanked Monsieur Mydorge and Monsieur Hardy for the good success of their friendly Offices, he charged Father Mersennus to signifie to Mon∣sieur de Fermat, his esteem for him, and his cordial affection towards him. Monsieur de Fermat receiving from Father Mersennus all the assurances he could possibly desire on the part of Monsieur Des Cartes, gave himself the satisfaction at last to write to him straightways▪ to offer him his friendship and services. The Acquisition of such a friend as that, might be numbered amongst Monsieur Des Cartes his best Fortunes: He perfectly understood the value of so important a friendship; he appear'd so sensible of it, that there were no expressions passionate enough to thank him for it. To the end he might not be satisfied with this Reconciliation by halves, he was willing to extend it likewise to the other two friends of Monsieur Fermat, who had under∣taken the defence of his Geometrical Piece de Maximis & Minimis; he earnestly entreated Father Mersennus to signifie to them that he desired nothing so much as the friendship of honest persons; and upon this consideration he put an high value upon theirs. Monsieur Pascal made answerable returns, like an ho∣nourable
person; but Monsieur Roberval quick∣y discovered that he bore no great good-will o Monsieur Des Cartes, but only from the eeth forward; but it was not so with Mon∣sieur Fermat. But as it is usual amongst friends f different humours and designs; the truth their minds did not always keep pace with heir hearts. Monsieur Fermat perswaded, as before, of the rightness of his method (that is o say, of the Rule he had contrived to find ut the greatest and least quantities in Geome∣try) found much ado to grant the Exceptions Mons. Des Cartes had brought in, and to make hold water. He maintain'd many Contests about it, not with Monsieur Des Cartes him∣self, who could not allow precious Time and Talents for Disputation, but with young Guillot, who had been Monsieur Des Cartes his Domestick, with Monsieur de Chauveau, who had been his Fellow-Collegian at La Flesche, Monsieur des Argues, and other Mathemati∣cians, who since this bustle declared themselves Cartesians day by day, maugre Monsieur Ro∣erval's Jealousie. As for Monsieur de Fermat's other Dispute concerning Dioptriques,Mr. Rohault and Mons. Clersellier did the bu∣siness in convincing Mr. Fermat. he did not judge it advisable to revive it in Monsieur Des Cartes his life-time; but after his death explain'd his meaning about it, after such a manner, as tho' he had had a mind to make us doubt whether or no the Philosopher had satisfied him. Now because he seem'd from time to time to in∣vite some of Monsieur Des Cartes his friends to renew this antient Quarrel; Mons. Rohault
answered immediately; after which Monsieur Clersellier offer'd himself, and put an end to the Controversie, to the glory of Monsieur Des Cartes, and to Monsieur Fermat's satisfaction▪ who threw down his Arms and surrendred. XI and XII. M. Petit did not demur so long upon yielding,A Dispute with Mons. Petit. touching some difficulties Dioptriques he had propounded to Monsieur Des Cartes; he improved the advantage he over Monsieur de Fermat upon the account his Experiments, which agreeing to a ha with the Doctrine of Monsieur Des Cartes, were very instrumental to him to get himself disabused, and to seek to procure his friend∣ship before it was too late. Yea and he turn∣ed some few years after, one of the most zea∣lous Proselites to his Philosophy; when the perusing of his Metaphysical Meditations ha deliver'd him of some difficulties wherewith he labour'd, concerning the Existence of God▪ and the difference between Soul and Body in Men. The Controversie that was a foot between him and Monsieur Morinus,And with Mr. Morinus Regius Professor of Mathematicks in Paris, put him harder to it, than that he maintain'd with Mons. Petit; it commenced the 22th of February 1638. with the Objections Mons. Morinus made against Light. Mons. Des Cartes valued them as much, as Objections, which he lookt upon the most substantial of all those that had been hitherto rais'd against his new Opinions, could deserve. This esteem of his Objections did so puff up Mons. Morinus, who must needs shew by a
Reply to his Answer, that he was altogether unworthy of it. Monsieur Des Cartes makes a second Answer, wherewith Monsieur Morinus pretended to be fully satisfied; but endeavour∣ing to procure the honour to write last, he makes a new Reply, to which he declares, he desired no Answer. Monsieur Des Cartes, by this instances the Character of Mons. Morinus his spirit, and what he would be at; he did not stick to grant him that satisfaction he de∣sired, since it cost him so little. The occasion he had about that time to re∣fute a dangerous Book,With M. de Beaugrand. caused him to com∣pile a dissertation of Geostatiques; that is to say, upon the Query, to know whether a body weighs more or less, being near the Center of the Earth, than when it is at a distance from it. The Book that had given occasion to the writing of it, had for its Author Mons. Beau∣grand, Secretary to the King, indifferently skill'd in Mathematicks, but who did not do himself Justice enough in this point: He was Mons. de Fermat's friend, enemy to Mons. Des Argues: The considerable respect he had for this last, had prevail'd with him to render but ill Offices to our Philosopher occasioned by the Zeal wherewith he perceiv'd Mons. Des Cartes apply himself to serve him; nay, and he could not forbear letting slip some strokes of his bitterness and ill-will in his Book. Mons. Des Cartes might perhaps have done very well to have withstood the desire of those who in∣duced him to refute it, that he might not have made himself suspected of resentment:
But he was quickly recovered of this weak∣ness, by revoking his permission of Printing this Refutation, and by separating it from his small Piece of Geostatiques, the publication of which he did not intend to prohibit. XIII, XIV, XV. It was at the same time that there was started a Question amongst the Mathematicians of France,Of the Rou∣lette, and what part M. des Cartes had in the Question. the famous Que∣stion de la Roulette, whereof one could not trace the least footsteps, neither among the Antients, nor in the Books of any of the Ma∣thematicians that lived till that time; notwith∣standing nothing is more common than this Line, and no less frequent in the business o motion than the right and Circular Lines. La roulette, the rowling, is nothing else but the way in the Air, the Nail of a Wheel de∣scribes by its ordinary motion, from the time the Nail begins to rise from the Earth, till the continued motion of the Wheel hath brought it back again to the Earth, after having finisht a whole entire round: Yet in this definition it must be supposed for the convenience of Geometrical operations, that the Wheel is a perfect Circle, that the Nail is a point mark∣ed in the circumference of the Circle, and that the Earth which toucheth this point, beginning and ending its round, be perfectly even or plain. Father Mersennus was the first that took no∣tice of it, and who gave it the name of Rou∣lette: He had a mind afterwards to understand the nature and properties of the same; yet not being so fortunate, in resolving your fine
Questions, as framing them; so had he not enetration enough to compass this. This put im upon propounding to others. Monsieur Roberval was the first that demonstrated the he space of the Roulette is triple of the Wheel that describes it. After that Monsieur Fermat and Monsieur Des Cartes demonstrated it; and their respective Solutions are not only found different from one another, but also from that of Monsieur Roberval. Father Mersennus ha∣ving acquainted Monsieur Des Cartes that Mon∣sieur Roberval found his demonstration too oncise to be good, he thereupon received uch Elucidations as he desired. Monsieur Des Cartes sending him an ample explication of his demonstration of La roulette, advertised him, hat there was nothing to be altered in this demonstration, and withal that the Elucida∣ions that he adjoyn'd thereto, were not spun ut to that length, but only that they might e understood by those who did not make use f Analysis; others needing no more but three rokes of their Pen to find it out by calculation. Amongst divers Questions depending upon that of the Roulette, there were a great many things whereof Monsieur Roberval profest him∣self in a manner ignorant. Now for his In∣struction Father Mersennus must hye to Mon∣sieur Des Cartes his ordinary Refuge, and re∣ceived all the Solutions he and Monsieur Ro∣berval could wish or desire. With the help of this, the latter made two more Solutions; one of which was, The dimension of the solid of the Roulette round about the basis: The other,
The finding out of the Tangents of this Line: But for all these kindnesses of Monsieur Des Carte he was not so obliging or grateful as on might have expected. His dissimulation, a the indirect proceedings of his behaviour, did disgust Monsieur Des Cartes, that he would longer concern himself in what past since touching the Roulette. At the end of Septe∣ber he did all he could to get himself dise∣gaged for good and all; and without eve pretending to the glory of this Invention, which with all his heart he relinquisht to Mon∣sieur Roberval, that he might apply himself somewhat else; he writ to Father Mersenn to the end he might acquaint all the Mathe∣maticians, that had hand in the business, th he would desist. XVI.He leaves Geometry. The reason he alledgeth for desiri to be dispens'd with, for labouring any mo about the Roulette was, that he had bid adi to Geometry in earnest. These Mathema∣ticians of Paris, that were of the number his friends, were not pleased at these news And Monsieur Des Argues, above all, coul not forbear to testifie his dissatisfaction fo the same. Monsieur Des Cartes took it kindly at his hands, and that he might deliver hi from his trouble, he gave him to understan by Father Mersennus, that his leaving off wa only in respect of abstracted Geometry: Bu that he would persist in improving anothe sort of Geometry, conversant about Phoem∣mena's of Nature, as he had done in that had writ of Meteors, &c.
He studied to shew more precise marks of esteem for this friend;His respect for M des Argues. for understanding that he passages of his Printed Geometry, where∣n he had affected to be obscure, did a little uzzle him; he was pleased himself to give explanation of them in a Book, that he writ expresly to that intent, to let him know how far his Zeal for to serve him had transported im. Besides these explanations upon some hard passages propounded by Monsieur des Argues,An Intro∣duction to his Geome∣try. he gave his consent that an Holland Gentleman, one of his friends, should draw up a regular Introduction followed by his Geometry, on purpose to facilitate the understanding of it to all sorts of Readers. It was so excellent and concise, that most believed he was the Au∣thor of it. Those that complain'd of the brevity of this Writing, were desired to con∣sider it was an Introduction, and not a Com∣ment; yet one might afford the Title of Comment to the excellent Notes Monsieur Beaune,Mons. de Beaunt's Notes. Councellor in the Presidial of Blois, made this year upon Monsieur Des Cartes his Geometry. There was nothing in it but what was exactly conformable to the Author's No∣tion, and according to his Intention. The joy Monsieur Des Cartes conceived at it, increas'd yet more when he perceiv'd the profound pe∣netration wherewith Mons. de Beaune was able to tell the meaning of things that he had only inserted in his Geometry in a very obscure manner.
Moreover,Exercises of Arithme∣tick with M. de St. Croix, and M. Frenicle. one may reckon in the number of the chief Occupation of Mons. Des Carte this year, the Exercise which the two mo eminent Arithmeticians M. de St. Croix, and M. Frenicle put him upon, touching several Questions of Numbers. But the Answer he gave to those M. de St. Croix put, in June, did so much fatigue him, that he conjured Fa∣ther Mersennus to send him no more of that nature, be they what they would: He endea∣voured also to rid himself of the Problems and barren Objections of others, under the most plausible pretences he could possibly imagine. Thus wearied out by bearing the burthen∣som Title of an Oracle,He gives over an∣swering Problems. he dispens'd to answer more before the latter end of the year 1638. and was content to draw up a Trinity of the best Objections that had hitherto been put to him, and of the most curious Problems that had been propounded, for to have them Print∣ed, together with his Answers, when it should please him, whose Prerogative it is to dispose of all things. BOOK IV. From 1638 till 1641. I.Regius be∣came one of M. D.C. Disciples & Professors at Ʋtrecht. WHilst they fatigued Mons. Des Cartes in France with Objections and Problems, they did nothing almost in Holland but
think of discarding the old Philosophy, and follow his. The University of Ʋtrecht, which one would, had been Cartesian from its Cradle: After they had made Reneri come from Deventer to anticipate its erection; it was insensibly fill'd with the Disciples of our Phi∣losopher under the Discipline of this able Pro∣fessor. He that stickled most was a young Physician named Henry de Roy, alias Regius. to whom Reneri communicated this excellent Method he received from Monsieur Des Cartes, where∣by to guide and conduct his Reason in the re∣search of all sorts of Truth. Regius would not limit his knowledge by Reneri, but went up as high as Des Cartes, for whom he now conceiv'd an high esteem. These were but the fruits of having conversation with Mons. Des Cartes. This Book at length came to appear. Regius shewed himself the forwardest to read it; and the esteem he had conceived for Monsieur Des Cartes, soon turned to a true passion. He satisfied of getting the Principles of his new Philosophy deeply imprinted on his mind, the Essays of which he found to jump with what Reneri had taught him before, and adopting them in lieu of those had been al∣ready taught him in the Schools; He betook himself to digest and model them for the use of others. He had a Colledge where he actu∣ally read Philosophy and Physick to some private Students in the City: And that he might not be diverted from the Study of M. Des Cartes his Philosophy, he thought fitting
to set it down in Sheets, and so distribute it amongst his Scholars under the name of Phy∣siology, according as he comprehended it. The simpleness of the Hypothesis, the pretty concatenation of Principles and Reasonings, the neatness, clearness, and easiness wherewith he made them deduce the Truth from them, did transport them to that degree, that with∣out remaining within the bounds of ordinary acknowledgment to a Master, they perceived themselves so extremely obliged, that they fram'd a kind of a League amongst themselves to lay their heads together to procure his ad∣vancement, and use their utmost to get him some place, either in the University, or in the Councel of the City: A little while after there was a great talk of settling a new Pro∣fessorship of Physick for Botanny & Theory. Re∣gius his Scholars, most of them Youths of good Families, thought then that the occasion they sought for was at hand, and they spared nei∣ther their Relations nor Friends to obtain the plurality of Votes in the Senate in favour of him. Regius had powerful Competitors, but the approbation his Physiology gain'd, accom∣panied with the difference that men observed in the manner of arguing, that distinguished his Disciples from those of the Publick and Vulgar Scholars, extorted belief that he must have a particular Philosophy, and that he must needs be an excellent Master in the Art or Method of Instructing. This was the business that prevailed with the Magistrates to prefer him before others worthy to fill the Chair;
and so they caused all the Professors of the University, whose minds Reneri had disposed, willingly to receive him for their Collegue. Regius believed himself particularly obliged to Monsieur Des Cartes, for the success of this business, whose Philosophy had produc'd in him that desert, that had made him carry it before his Fellow-Candidates. He assumed the li∣berty by his first Letter bearing date the 18th of August, to give him many thanks for that important Service he had render'd him, with∣out knowing of it. He conjur'd him next not to forsake his own bandy-work, and not to refuse him the Assistances necessary to keep up this new acquired Reputation; he promised on his part to do whatsoever was within the sphere of his Activity, that he might deserve the quality of his Disciple, which he preferr'd to all the advantages of his Life; and that he would tread in Reneri's steps as close as he possibly could. To put himself forth with Impossession of the Priviledges and Rights annexed to this Quality, he sends him his Essays of Physick, that he might examine and correct them with all the severity of a Master; and he demanded of him all the Objections that had been lately made against the Circulation of Blood, together with his Answers. II.He begins to receive Instructions from Mr. Des Cartes. Monsieur Des Cartes, who had been in∣form'd of what had past at Ʋtrecht by Reneri, who came to Egmond to visit him in the month of August, granted Regius his Friendship, with all the Benefits it might produce. He had but
little violence to do his will, to give him what he demanded concerning Physick, be∣cause it was actually his Profession, and be∣cause he was apprehensive of what great im∣portance it was prudently to manage the Zeal of so well-affected a Disciple. He just made an end of his abridged Medicine, Compendiu Medecinae, which he had fetched partly from Books, and partly from his Reasonings; and he judged he might lay up this Work in store, to serve him to obtain some delay of Nature, and to retard grey hairs which began to grow upon him. Reneri and Regius were not the only two Friends he had in Holland,M. Des Cartes his Friends in Holland. or that his Philo∣sophy had for Admirers in and about Ʋtrecht. He could reckon besides of the Professors, An∣tonius, Emilius, Cyprianus, Regneri; and amongst the Magistrates of the City, Mr. Vander Hoolcks, Van Leew, Parmentier, &c. besides the two Van Dams Physicians, the two Waessinaers Mathe∣maticians, Mademoyselle, Ainna Maria Scharmans, and her Brother John Alphons, Officer in the Army, Godfrey de Hoestrech, a Gentleman of Liege retired near Ʋtrecht. There is no fewer of them at Amsterdam, Leiden, and the Hague, where all Persons of worth and reputation took it for an honour to be acquainted with him. Yet the Idea we have of the Country, should not make us suppose that his Friendship did terminate in Protestants. All the Catholicks whatsoever, of never so little Note, were his Friends; we may reckon in the upper rank of his chief Friends Cornelius
de Hoogheland a Gentleman of Leiden,Bannius and Bloemart Popish Prietis. as also two Priests of Harlem, one of which was John Albert Bannius; the other, Augustin Aelstein Blemart, who had a huge Estate by Inheri∣tance, great Almoner for the Poor, his Cor∣respondent as to Letters & Pacquets that were directed to him; They were both good Ma∣thematicians, Lovers of Peace and the Libe∣ral Sciences, Vertuous, of a frugal and exem∣plary Life amongst the Protestants, whose respect and affection they had almost generally won. Monsieur Des Cartes sallied sometimes from his retirement at Egmond to go see them at Harlem, or else in a Country House not far from thence. Seeing they were no better Drinkers nor Gamesters, then the Collation they had amongst them, was only a Consort of Musick, whereat Bannius did use to Enter∣tain them. Monsieur Des Cartes, whose Friend∣ship never proved barren or useless, render'd them about the end of this Year very consi∣derable Service with the P. of Orange, and High and Mighty State, by the Mediation of M. Zuitlechem, and other Lords, his Friends, who were in repute. III.The Death of Reneri chief Car∣tesian Dr. It did not please God to let Monsieur Des Cartes long enjoy the double pleasure to see his Principles publickly taught in the Phi∣losophy and Physick Schools at Ʋtrecht, by the two Ablest Professors in the University. Scarce was Regius settled in his new Professor∣ship, but they lost Reneri at the middle of March 1639. upon his very Wedding-Day, after he had lived 45 Years.
His Funeral Rites were perform'd with a great deal of Splendor and Magnificence in the great Church of that City, at which ap∣pear'd in a Body the Senate, or Magistrates with the University. The Funeral Oration was pronounced the next day in the Name of the University by Antonius Emilius, Professor of Rhetorick and History. They admired the Eloquence of the Discourse; and the Oratour sensibly moved them by his pertinent Refle∣ctions: But they presently saw that it tended no less to the making a Panegyrick on Mon∣sieur Des Cartes then alive,The Pane∣gyrick of M. Des Car∣tes, pro∣nounced publicly at Ʋtrecht, by order of the Senate. than to be the Fu∣neral Oration of the deceased Reneri. The chief praise that Emilius gave to the illustrious Defunct, which they respected as the principal support, and fairest Ornament of this Infant University, was, for that he shewed Courage enough to pack off the Ancients, and free him∣self from their Authority, and that of the Moderns too who preceded him, to the end he might possess the Liberty that God hath granted to our Reason, to govern and conduct it self in the research of Truth, which is the only Mistress we are obliged to Court; This was an Heroick resolution incident only to high-born Spirits of the first rank. But Mon∣sieur des Cartes must needs be the Director of this Enterprize, who first inspired it into him, as he did into some others who had closely adhered to him from the very beginning of his Retirement in Holland. Emilius extol'd with wonderful Eloquence, the great Progress Reneri had made in the knowledge of Nature,
under a Leader of this Quality. He magnified with the liveliest Colours of Rhetorick, the benefit both City and University had reap'd from the disposition of Reneri, that he was ca∣pable to reach there the Principles of true Phi∣losophy, which he pretended did remain un∣known to Mankind till Des Cartes his time. The Auditory seem'd perswaded of it; and the Magistrates after they had honoured this fine discourse with their Approbation, gave order it should be printed, and publickly di∣stributed under their Authority, as well to honour the Memory of their Professor, as to demonstrate convincing Proofs of their ac∣knowledgment for the signal Service Mon∣sieur Des Cartes had rendered in forming such a Disciple. Emilius that had long sought an opportunity to gain Monsieur Des Cartes his Acquaintance, received, as a Piece of Provi∣dence, the Order that the Magistrates sent him, to make an Encomium upon him, and upon the new Philosophy in his Funeral Oration for-Mon∣sieur Reneri. After he had spoke it, he sent him a written Copy of it with a Letter full fraught with Re∣spect and Esteem, upon pretence that this dis∣course personally relating to him, and the Ma∣gistracy having ordered the Publication of the same, it was but convenient that he should see what ought to be corrected therein, before it went to the Press. Monsieur Des Cartes was put to the blush upon reading so many and great Elogiums; but since he had nothing to do to contradict the Judgment and Conduct
of the Chief Magistrate, he durst not meddle with it. Some time after, he gave out that he had not suffer'd these Elogiums, but because it was not in his power to suppress them. For Emi∣lius sending him a Copy of Verses with too much Confidence that he had composed upon the same Subject, to desire to know how he liked them; and demanding them again of him, because he had not kept a Copy of them, de∣siring to Print them: Monsieur Des Cartes sought for an Excuse for not sending them back; and he took his revenge as well as he could by this Suppression for offending his Bashfulness and Modesty in Monsieur Reneri's Funeral Oration. The loss which Regius in particular had su∣stain'd of an excellent Director of his Studies in the Death of Reneri, made him have fresh recourse to Monsieur Des Cartes. He conjured him that he would please to afford him that place with him, that the deceased possessed; adding moreover, That if so be he would grant his request in this particular, he should esteem himself as happy as if he were wrap'd up to the Third Heavens. 'Tis most certain,Regius be∣comes his first Disci∣ple. that next to Reneri, no body at that time could boast with better right than Regius to deserve the Quality of the first Disciple of Monsieur Des Cartes; he was endowed, as to his Qualifications of Mind, with Talents fit to maintain his rank with the Dignity and Abilities necessary for it; his Profession of Medicine joyn'd with Physicks,
afforded him a good opportunity for it, and the advantage that neither of the other Philo∣sophers of Holland and France had, who did not ead and teach publickly, and were Philoso∣phers for none but for themselves; yet it might have been wish'd for his own particu∣ar reputation, that Reneri when he instructed him in the Method and Principles of this Phi∣losopher, had known how withall to have nspired him with his Modesty and Pru∣dence. After Reneri's death, they augmented his Sallery by so much more than it was, and nnexed his Professorship, to a new Employ∣ment, which consisted in explaining Problems n Physicks at such time when he was not busie about Botanny, that is to say, in explaining the Nature of Plants and Simples. He com∣municated to Monsieur Des Cartes the Joy he had conceived at this new Commission, because t presented him with new opportunities of eaching and understanding his Philosophy; he had under-hand cunningly sued for this Em∣ployment, which pass'd for a piece of Super∣rrogation in the University; and M. Voetius had been very serviceable and instrumental to him in prosecuting this design, he was Professor in Divinity, and at that time a great Promoter of his Interests. But that which he had an Eye most upon as a considerable ad∣vantage to make his parts appear, and to make pass for Currant the new Opinions of Physicks and Medicine, which the ancient Peripaticians and Gallenist would not suffer with their good
will, that they should be taught in the School where they were Lords Paramount, became afterwards a pretence to the very same Voetius, of somenting a troublesome Dissention; little Conduct he was Master of, was the cau of much perplexity and incumbrance that heavy upon Monsieur Des Cartes, and occasi at length of a tedious Process he was oblige to carry on very prejudicial to him, and ways comporting with his Solitude and Tra quillity of his Life. IV. No body at that time was more pro∣moted nor look'd upon than Voetius in the Uni∣versity of Ʋtrecht;What Voe∣tius was. His Design. he was Professor Primari in Divinity, besides Chief Minister or Past in the City; He assumed, wherever he went such a triumphant huffing Air, that he broug with him from the Synod of Dordrecht or where he chanced to be of the Victorio Party; that is to say, of those, who being assisted with the Sword, and Authority P. Maurice, had accomplished their aim in con∣demning the Party of the Remonstrants, an he had acquired in the City a sort of Authority over Men's Spirits, by I cannot tell what re∣putation of Gravity and Sufficiency; He ha a Spirit naturally prone to contention an wrangling, and spoil'd by reading the Pole∣micks of the Controvertists of his Party, and of Books of Irreligion, and Boufonnery, where in he had spent a great deal of time. He wa of a very Whimsical maggotish Humour, bu of an ordinary mean Judgment and Superficial Learning.
The good Qualities that he might challenge for his own, were supported with a spice of Love for himself, accompanied with an in∣ward scorn of all those he was not Master of. Insomuch, that being accustomed by a long habit not to esteem what he did not under∣stand, and not understanding in Philosophy whatsoever was not comprehended within the limits of trivial Scholasticism, one might have pardoned him the little relish and aversion that he had had at first sight for Monsieur Des Cartes his Works, if he had not been allarm'd t it, as a pernicious Novelty, which it beho∣ed him to exterminate. The reverence that was due to Reneri, had stopt his Mouth till his Death; but going pre∣possess'd to his Funeral Oration, the unex∣pected Encomiums he there heard of Monsieur Des Cartes, fill'd him with so much jealousy, that he came from it with a resolution to set work all that ever his Industry could supply him with, to destroy this Novelty. Never∣theless, the Approbation wherewith the Ma∣gistracy back'd these Encomiums, obliged him to slacken his Career that he might not un∣seasonably come to Daggers-drawing with his Superiours; wherefore setting aside what was within the Verge of Philosophy, against which it was not safe nor becoming to shew his teeth, he reduc'd his intent only to heap toge∣ther what might any-ways relate to Divinity, in the Discourse and Method of Monsieur Des Cartes; as the subject matter of his cen∣sures, endeavouring by this means to banish
his Philosophy out of the University, as de∣structive to the Protestant Religion and Tran∣quillity of the States of the United Pro∣vinces. He began his Hostilities with some Theseses he composed in June, An. 1639. concerning Atheism, and for the observing some order in the Productions of his ill-will, he refrain'd from nominating at first dash the person he had a design upon, and contented himself only to lay the foundation of his Calumny where∣with he thought he must load him, that he might have his end, to ruin him. This Calumny, in which he hath still per∣sisted since, consisted in making M. Des Cartes pass for an Atheist: and to the end that one should not be deceived in taking another for him, he scattered up and down in his Theseses amongst the Criterians of Atheism, all the things he knew to be ascribed to Mr. D. C. by the common report. V. These first steps of Voetius open'd Regi his Eyes,Regius pre∣cautions and secures himself a∣gainst Vo∣etius. and he perceived it behoved him to practise dissimulation if he meant to keep in with him: that put him in mind to secure him∣self in the Physick Chair more than hitherto he had done, and to reserve the principal Bu∣siness of New Philosophy for the Problems he read upon certain days in the Week by the by, out of the hours appointed for publick Lectures; in which he seem'd to rely upon the consent of the Professors, not excepting Voetius, who had even been serviceable once more in the Petitioning for this New Com∣mission.
But, altho' he left his Auditors to their liberty of believing, or not believing Pro∣blems; yet did he not refuse occasions to demonstrate the ridiculousness or weakness of ancient Opinions. This Cunning way, con∣trived insensibly to destroy the Principles of the vulgar Philosophy in vogue in the Schools, proved yet more dangerous to it, than his open and Sincere manner of teaching Des Cartes his Principles in his Lectures of Medi∣cine. This is that which put his Colleagues to their trumps, who conserved some value for that Philosophy which had been taught them; who thought it was very much for them to grant Regius the Permission to teach the new Opinions together with the old. Regius not submitting enough (out of his Writings and Lectures) to cape the meaning and drift of Monsieur Des Cartes,His Indis∣cretion. being of a mild and moderate Spirit, administred a fresh occasion of discontent to his Colleagues, by a piece of weakness that he shew'd in an Act of Philosophy on the 9th of July, kept under Professor Senguerdius, by one Florentius Schuyl, who proved a notable Cartesian afterward, for all that. The Opponent that disputed, had compos'd his Arguments according to the Opi∣nions of the New Philosophy, and he had chosen the Nature and Properties of the Load∣stone for the subject of them—The Respon∣dent, notwithstanding otherwise well verss'd in his Dictates, and Papers of his Master, seem'd a little gravelled; but the Professor interposing to bring him off, up starts Regius,
and without respecting either the Assembly; or Professors Duty, interrupts him, very inde∣cently insults over him, and would fain have adjudged the Victory to the Opponent, which Civility and Custom might have obliged him to suffer the Respondent to bear away. This Action which we have had an account of, from none besides his Enemies, did offend the Professors of the University in general, and made them willing to hearken to what Voetius could hint to them against the Innovations. The Exercises a few days after put an end to this Thesis, and Regius writing to Monsieur Des Cartes the 14th of July, when Vacation begins, would be sure to acquaint him what he had done at the Act. He only gave him to understand, That he had finished his Pub∣lick Course of Medicine for that Year, that he still strictly adhered to his Principles and Method; and passionately desir'd he might conser with him about the best way of ma∣king a new Course the ensuing Year, which begun after the Fair in August, according to the regulation of the University. Altho' his measures to go for Egmond were broken,What In∣structions M. Des Car∣tes gives him. by the need that his Wifes bigness had of his presence, yet did he not for all that spare Mons. Des Cartes his time—He scarce did any thing else all along September and Octo∣ber, but answer the Consultations of this Pro∣fessor. How tedious and how frequent soe∣ver these Letters of this Zealous Disciple were, yet did he not grudge his time to Instruct him; because he thought he should not be
sorry for it as ill spent. The Importance of the Queries and Difficulties he propounded to him, hindered him to take care to put him in a condition of establishing his Principles. Their main hinge was, of the difficulty of the nature of Angels, upon the nature of man's Souls, of its Union with the Body, of the Soul of Beasts and Plants, of Life, Motion of the the Heart, and upon the Circulation of the Blood. Monsieur Des Cartes had brought this last Question into great request amongst the learn∣ed,Plempius his ill Beha∣viour. and he had wonderfully establish'd the credit of Harvey upon this account, having been basely abused and decry'd by the Satyrs of divers Physicians in the Low-Countries, the most part ignorant, or fondly valuing themselves upon the ancient Maxims of their Faculty: that which could be plausibly brought against this Opinion, was objected 18 Months before to Monsieur Des Cartes, by his Friend Plempius, a Physician of Louvain. Now altho' this last seem'd to remain satisfy'd with his Answer, yet did he afterward an Action unworthy of their Friendship; he thought fit for the inhancing the splendour of his own Reputation to mention in a Book that he was going to put out, what had pass'd between Monsieur Des Cartes and he, touching the two Questions of the Motion of the Heart, and of the Circulation of Blood; He, to this effect, gave all the gloss that was necessary to the Objections he had made to him, but when they came to the Answers to them
that he received, he was so far from behaving himself towards Monsieur Des Cartes as a Friend who deserved to be respected, that he was not so faithful to these Answers as is requisite even in Adversaries that confuc one another, and look upon one another as Enemies. Regius was exasperated at such unhandsome Carriage, and having confronted his Book with the Answers Monsieur Des Cartes had made to his Objections, he could no longer smother the indignation that made him snatch up his Pen to signifie his resentments to Des Cartes. He set out the ingratitude and de∣ceitful dealing of Plempius in such lively Co∣lours, that one cannot express in any Lan∣guage as he spoke them, without running into the like transports of Anger against such a dirty, smooty Behaviour. He says, That as for the places where Monsieur Des Cartes dis∣covers the most hidden Secrets of Nature, wherein consisted the main stress of his An∣swers; Plempius hath been so malicious as to play the Mute, or at least to pass by the grea∣test part of them: and as for those which he doth relate, he so maims them, that he quite spoils the sense of them. That in the place where he treats of the Circulation of Blood, he is content only barely to relate the diffi∣culties, as if no body had answered them; altho' the Answers Monsieur Des Cartes made to them were very convincing ones. That in the place where Monsieur Des Cartes relates several Causes, which being joyn'd together,
produce the beating of the heart; Plempius introduces but one of them, which is heat. If Monsieur Des Cartes, after he has alledg'd Rea∣sons necessary for the evincing a thing; add thereto some others less convincing in order to a great Illustration of the Point; Plempius is so treacherous and unfaithful as to insist only upon this last Reason, as tho' it had been pro∣duced for an Essential or Fundamental one; and leaving you to suppose that this might be the only one, that could have been alledged by Monsieur Des Cartes, he labours to make him ridiculous, which he goes about to do in places he doth not understand. Plempius hath now forgotten what formerly he writ, that he did not believe one could be able to charge Mons. Des Cartes, of having ever uttered any false thing, or but an idle trifle. But if he thought good to revoke the Praises he gave him, it was sorry pittiful retraction to blot them out with injuries. Mons. Des Cartes seem'd not at all concern'd at such uncouth behaviour, and was once of the mind only to oppose them by silence. Regius did not judge so; he reveng'd his Masters Cause in such a manner, that probably made Plempius open his Eyes; seeing he hath altered his Opinion about the Circulation of Blood, to embrace that of Mons. Des Cartes. VI. In the Month of November,The Coniqu of young Mr. Pascal at Sixteen years of Age. in the same Year, Father Mersennus being return'd from some Journeys, gave Advice of a Pro∣digy that lately appear'd in Paris. This Pro∣digy was, that a young Lad of Sixteen years
had Compos'd a Treatise of Coniques, that was matter of astonishment to all the old Mathe∣maticians that ever were shewn it. This Youth was Son to Monsieur Pascal, Inten∣dant of Justice at Rouan: And men thought it no piece of flattery to publish that he had been more successful than Apolonius in some Points. Mons. Des Cartes, that admired al∣most nothing, dissembling his purpose, an∣swered, that he did not think it such an ad∣mirable thing, that some should be found that could demonstrate Coniques more easily than Apolonius; but, that one might propose some other things about Coniques, that a Child of Sixteen would have much ado to resolve. Not having a mind to refer himself to any concerning the matter of fact, but to the Te∣stimony of his own Eyes; for Mersennus was to send him a Copy of the Treatise; He had not read the half of it, but he judged that Monsieur des Argues had share in Composing it, upon pretence that he was there quoted: Understanding after clearing of some doubts touching the matter in hand, that there was no likelihood that his friend Monsieur des Argues had the least hand in it; he rather be∣lieved that Monsieur Pascal the Father was Author of it, than be perswaded that a Boy of Sixteen Years could be capable of Com∣posing such a strong Piece of Work. This great Man's doubt proved much more glo∣rious to this Prodigy in Nature, than the ad∣miration of all those who are certain of the matter of fact.
His Incredulity was not only grounded up∣on the want of Age and likelihood; it had another foundation still, even the Project of a brave Design about Coniques, that Monsieur des Argues had lately got Father Mersennus to send him. But he did not in the least suspect Monsieur Mydorge to have contributed his Assistance or Name to young Monsieur Pascal, altho' they see his four Books of Coniques come out of the Press that same year; and tho' he was ignorant what this friend had already done upon the same Subject some years be∣fore. At the same time Monsieur de Beaune,His Exerci∣ses with M. de Beaune. who was no less one of his friends than Monsieur Mydorge, and Monsieur des Argues, put him upon the Solution of divers Questions that he propounded to him about Mathematicks; and under a pretence to discourse with him upon his own designs, he endeavoured to pump out the Communication of his, in one of the An∣swers Monsieur Des Cartes gave him. This saying chanced to escape from him, that his Physicks were nothing else but Mechanicks; and he declared something to him as his Con∣fident, that he would not otherwise have told, because that the proof of it depended upon his World. Monsieur de Beaune suffer'd this Ad∣vertisement to persist: He used many instant Intreaties to prevail with him to publish his World, which the accident that befel Galilaeus, had made him to keep close under Lock and Key: But not being able to accomplish his desire, altho' he was at that very time the on∣ly
He of all his friends, to whom he was mos unlikely to refuse any thing. Monsieur Des Cartes had quitted his abode at Egmond some time ago, and was retired Haderwick. Regius finding he was still too distant from him, thought with himself tha if he did but once peep out of his Solitude North-Holland, any other place would be in∣different to him: Wherefore he begg'd him that he would please to come neare Ʋtrecht, as well for the satisfaction of several of his friends in the City, as for another grea convenience he should have of consulting him nearer hand. He came therefore some few Months after to lodge in a Country-house near that City,He goes to sojourn at Harderwick near Ʋtrecht thence to Leiden. in the Neighbourhood of the Castle Renoud, the dwelling-place of Monsieur de Haestrecht his friend: But whether it was by reason the Winter was vehement in the Country, or that he apprehended Voetius practices, I know not; but away goes he at the beginning of the Year after, to live at Leiden, where he had yet more friends than he had at Ʋtrecht. Besides Mon∣sieur de Hooghland, a Catholick Gentleman, and some Magistrates; he might have well reckoned the half of the Professors, the chief of which was Golius, Schuchen and Salmatius, Son to a Councellor in the Parliament in Bourgundy, without forgetting Rivet, who was of Poictou, with another Minister of the place called Abraham Heide, alias Heidanus. This last,His acquain∣tance with Heidamus. who was in high reputation in the Country, was not subject to usual faults of
other Protestant Ministers: And altho' Mon∣sieur Des Cartes profest to be a friend to none of them, the extraordinary merit of Mon∣sieur Heidanus made him presently except him out of the number: He was not only satis∣fied to be a follower of his Philosophy, as others were, but he was also the Protector and Supporter of it; having the name of the most Eloquent Preacher in the Country, so he most advantageously improved it, to instill into his Auditors the value he himself put upon this Philosophy, from which he deduc'd his Arguments, Comparisons and Explanations, that made him be cry'd up and admired. It did not fare so with Rivet,Rivet's friendship, and Stam∣pion's quar∣rel. who crackt to be a Cartesian, without understanding the Wri∣ings of Monsieur Des Cartes. All his friendship consisted in nothing else in a manner, but in a kind of an itching humour he had to speak of him continually in his Letters, and in his Company: The least Toys in the World were Subjects good enough for him to write to Father Mersennus, to Monsieur Gassendus, and other Virtuoso's of France, provided he could but bring Monsieur Des Cartes in by head and shoulders. He it was that inform'd them concerning the so much talk't of wager about Mathematicks, between young Wasse∣neur and Stampion, where Monsieur Des Cartes was present, drawn in by the indiscretion and ill-will of the latter; notwithstanding Wasse∣neur's Victory was very glorious; for our Phi∣losopher, who went publickly for his Master, yet he managed this business but as a piece of
Merriment, which was not worthy of Rivet's disturbance, nor the curiosity of the Mathe∣maticians of France. In the mean time there was a Book past the Press at the Hague,A Book against Mr. Des Cartes. writ against Monsieur Des Cartes; it was the first of all the Works that had ever been undertaken to ruin his Philo∣sophy. That the Author should come off well in the matter, was a business of great conse∣quence, to the end that other Adversaries that were to bring up the Reer, might from thence take a good Omen. The Author run a risque in appearing first in the Combat: Yet had he the discretion to conceal his Name, that he might not expose himself as a Laughing-stock in case of bad success. The Event justified his Prudence: The Book came abroad for a New-years-gift in the year 1640. The great Name of the Man that he attaqued, provok'd the curiosity of some to see it; and it was not long before it was in the hands of the inge∣nious in France and England; the business prov'd the Glory and Renown of Monsieur Des Cartes; they dispens'd with the Author as to his Name, only they took it very ill to see that this Anonymous Fellow had not an∣swered the Expectation of those, that requi∣red something besides idle Stories against a Philosopher, who was brought in question, and was to be confuted in good earnest. Mons. Des Cartes seem'd to be the same Man he was for all that, and even let this Mist vanish of it self.
Voetius in the interim cast about in Ʋtrecht,Regius his Thesis, the under-hand dealing of Voetius a∣gainst him. how he might accomplish his design to undo Monsieur Des Cartes as to his Reputation, and to have him declar'd an Enemy to the Re∣formed Religion and Protestant Churches; ay and by those too that honoured him most with their kindnesses. He had caused Acts to be kept a second and third time, wherein he had rubb'd up the old Sore, reviving the Scandal of Atheism against him, on purpose by little and little to prepare the Spirit of the People, and to cause the Magistrates at length to change their good disposition towards him. But now to effect this design, Regius was mark'd out for Ruin; this is what he mainly laboured after, canvassing his Lectures and Writings to find something that might bear an Action. He begun at the Examination of the new Opinions which Regius vented in his Chair, where he read Physick, and laid to his charge before his Colleagues whatsoever was amiss, and not conformable to the Antient Phy∣sicians and Philosophers established and al∣lowed on in the Universities of Holland; his Complaints broke out at  upon the ac∣count of an Act or Publick Disputation the Professors were to keep the Tenth day of June concerning the Circulation of Blood, which he taught according to the Hypothesis of Harvey and Des Cartes, which still past but for an Heresie amongst the ignorant and opi∣nionative: He went so far as to make the most part of the Professors to revolt from this
Sentiment: Insomuch that the magnificent Rector Bernard Scotanus who otherwise was one of Monsieur Des Cartes his Friends, and Regius his particular Friend▪ could not with∣stand the earnest Intreaties to hinder him from reading in favour of these Innovations. The Rector laid the matter before hi in such a manner, as if he meant only barely to exhort him to look about him, take some course to prevent the murmuring of his Col∣leagues, and not to disturb the peace of the University. Regius set before his Eyes what a business of Consequence it is, not to reject or betray a Truth upon this pretence only, that it is Novel; and not to adopt Errours under the Masque of Venerable Antiquity. It came to this result, That there was a Congregation to be called, to deliberate about the Refusal he seem'd to persist in, to acquiesce in the de∣sires, and award of his Brethren the Professors. It was there resolved, that Regius should take up some other Subject, less different from the commonly received Opinions in vulgar Medi∣cine; or if he remained refractory, and would still retain that of the Circulation of Blood in Harvey's sense, he should do it only by the by, in the nature of a Corollary, or Addition to his Theseses, with this usual Formula, Exer∣citii causa defendemus. Voetius, in the Manifesto he caused to be Printed in the Name of the University, pre∣tends that Regius in stead of acquiescing in this deliberate Verdict, got them Printed without any other Expedient for remedying
he matter, than that of having got them lookt ver and corrected by Monsieur Des Cartes, o put them beyond Exception. Regius re∣ceiving these Corrections, took occasion to hank him for them, and withal to desire him that he would please to honour these Positions with his presence. Monsieur Des Cartes pass'd his word he would, upon condi∣ion it might be in the Auditory or Tribune of Madam Schurmans, because he had not a mind to be seen. But the business proved in∣effectual, by reason that this Act being put off ill the Month of June, he made the best of a bad Market, and comply'd with this ill ma∣nagement of business, to go from Leiden to Amersfort, three little Leagues from Ʋtrecht. The great Success of Regius his Thesis, did mightily displease Voetius; besides, the Physi∣cians of the antiquated Doctrine did a little grumble at it; nay, and some of them went about to confute it; amongst others, Primrose and Sylvius, whom he judged convenient to Answer. The outragious and injurious man∣ner of their proceeding against him, so rais'd his Choller, that without ever dreaming of securing himself from the bad effects of their Example; he sometimes was bitter against them; by and by he uses a pleasant jocular way, when as the business was only to be done by a serious moderate confutation. Monsieur Des Cartes, to whom Regius sent his Answer in October, to correct it after his usual manner, began to take upon him, and so much the rather made he use of his right,
because this Professor told him, it concern'd him so to do. He corrected several things that smelt too much of Precipitation, he adds several others to it; and retrencht others, a∣mongst which were those bitter Expressions which he made him forbear, representing to him, how much it concerns a man to treat a Adversary with a great deal of mildness and civility. In this Juncture, the Overseers of the Uni∣versity of Utrecht, sollicited by Voetius and some other Professors, to redress the Distur∣bance that they pretended the Theses and the private Opinions of Regius had begun to raise amongst them, publish'd an Order to Prohi∣bit the introducing of Novelties, or any Max∣ims contrary to the Statutes of the University: The business was something Equivocal. This induc'd Monsieur Des Cartes to unravel it, and to draw up an Explanation of the Curator's Orders in form of an Answer. M. Vander Hoolck, one of the principal Magistrates of the City; nay, and a Consul to the year follow∣ing, found this Answer very ingenious and judicious: and he was wonderfully pleased with M. Des Cartes his design of letting Regius continue in his way of Reading Lectures in new Philosophy, if he would but moderate his heat, and reform what should be too bold and adventurous in his Opinions. Regius was not the only Man of his Disciples that was to take,His Opini∣on concer∣ning the Seat of the Soul. to Instruct; there were pre∣sented day by day new ones, who were no less real and passionate than he, in their Inquiry
after Natural Truths; but they came not to our Knowledge, by reason of the indifference they shewed to make themselves known to any other besides Monsieur Des Cartes. 'Tis to one of these newly admitted that we are beholden, for the explanation of his Sentiment touching the Seat of the Soul in the Brain; which he confin'd to the Glandula Penialis, called Conarion; the same unknown Person, one of no mean quality, declared to him at the same time the Species that serve for the Memory, which he supposed extended into all the substance of the Body, which is resembled to the folds that remain in a Sheet of Paper, after it hath been once folded. It was about this time that Monsieur Des Cartes had notice of a Project on foot,His Project of settling in England, his ac∣quaintance with Mr. Cavendish. with∣out his knowledge, for settling him and Mon∣sieur Mydorge in England, under the protection and by the Munificence of King Charles the First; Monsieur Des Cartes did not appear backward, especially considering what they had assured him, That the King was a Catholick in his heart. The Promoter of this Design was an English Lord, named Charles Cavendish alias Candish, Brother to the Duke of New-Castle, both of them acquainted with our Phi∣losopher. Candish was an excellent Mathema∣tician; he became moreover desperately in love with Monsieur Des Cartes his Philoso∣phy. He look'd upon this Method as an in∣comparable means to bring Mathematicks to their perfection; one may judge by that, what joy possess'd him to perceive Des Cartes make no
Objections, nor hindrances against the designs of his Settlement in England. Monsieur My∣dorge, ty'd by the heels in Paris by reason of his Family, was harder to move. King Charles might have, peradventure removed all his Ob∣stacles by the goodness he had to promise Monsieur Candish to make ample Provision, and take care for all. But the beginning of the Troubles of Great Britain, making him and Monsieur Des Cartes to apprehend lest these vast Sums that the King would set apart for Natural Experiments, might be laid out in the Expences of the War, and lest they them∣selves might be deprived of that repose they flatter'd them withal, together with other Effects of that Prince's Clemency: they re∣main'd, one in Holland, the other in Paris; and continued the exercise of their Friendship with Mr. Candish as before. The Amity Monsieur Des Cartes entertain'd with Monsieur Salmasius,His ac∣quaintance with Sal∣masius. would have been no less to his Advantage; if he had profess'd Philosophy or Mathematicks. This defect nevertheless did not hinder him from being reckoned amongst the Cartesians, and he wil∣lingly embrac'd Monsieur Des Cartes his Friend∣ship. The Correspondence between them, was not confined to the Exercises of Mathe∣maticks and Philosophy alone;The ill hu∣mour of Salmasius. but as it was a piece of fatality that attended those that were acquainted with Salmasius, and deser∣ving to Experience his ill Conditions: as good luck would have it, Monsieur Des Cartes was involved in their destiny, lest detraction
some time or other should reckon him a∣mongst some of Monsieur Salmasius his Friends, who were of such a low spirit, as to prize the faults of this learned Man, or so great Co∣wards as to adore him. It is true, he never had but one occasion in all his life to incur his displeasure, but it was but a trivial occa∣sion: and he was beholden to his own Pru∣dence that made him almost ever have an aversion from conversing with him, even when he staid at Leiden, where Salmasius re∣sided. I say, a trivial occasion, but it should never have been an occasion to a just equitable Person to fret himself. Monsieur Salmasius suspected Mons. Des Cartes a Friend to Heinsius, whom he did not love. It was besides a piti∣ful mean Jealousie, and much below a Gentle∣man and a Scholar. But now this suspicion of his was ill grounded, seeing Monsieur Des Car∣tes had never in all his life spoken to Heinsius, and altho' a Man well deserving, and of great account in the University of Leiden, by reason of his Employ and Learning, yet had he never so much as interchanged a word with him. Nay, and what is more, He could nto be ig∣norant that Heinsius could not abide him for a long time, because he was Mr. Balzac's Friend who had censured his Tragedy of Herod. X. Yet the Consequences of M. Salmasius his ill humour signified in respect of the Conse∣quences of a bad Business,He falls out with the Jesuits. that had like to have set him at odds with a whole Society, where∣in he flatter'd himself to have some Friends
All things as to his Philosophy seem'd to smile upon him; when, some time after he had triumph'd at Ʋtrecht in the publick Act of Regius, his Philosophy was assaulted at Paris at other Acts, kept in the Colledge of Cler∣mont. He supposed at first,Thesis of M.  this Conduct was only the fulfilling of the Requests to the Jesuits, that they would vouchsafe to examine his Works; but according to the Idea that he had framed in his mind of Correspondence, Agreement, there is amongst all those of the Order of Jesus, He was presently alarmed at what was done a∣gainst him by the Mathematick Professor in that Colledge, supposing that might have been contrived and concerted with his Superiors or fellow Collegiates. This Professor was Father Bourdin, who going about to confute two of the places in Monsieur Des Cartes his Dioptriques, instead of sending him his Objections, as Monsieur Fermat, Petit, Morin, and other Mathema∣ticians had dealt with him; he goes and in∣serts them (for the use of his Scholars) into the Theses or Propositions defended the 30th of June and 2d of July, by one Charles Potier, who some while after turn'd Cartesian, maugre his former Impressions. Father Mersennus, not content to defend his Friend's opinions against the Scholar and Pro∣fessor, sent him an Extract of the Position that refer'd to him, together with the Preamble or Preliminary Discourse composed by the Pro∣fessor for the opening of the Dispute, because
it was point-blank against him; signifying by the by, that it was the Professor himself that sent it him, by him. Monsieur Des Cartes having forgotten the manner of Comportment in Colledges,The Cu∣stom of the Colledge in Disputes. seeing the Preliminary Discourse and the Points of the Thesis, imagined they design'd to set upon him publickly; he thought that the Jesuits in∣stead of giving him notice before hand of his Faults, did study to expose him to the laughter of the greatest Wits of Paris; that made him lose the unconcernedness he had declared upon so many occasions for whatsoever pass'd to his Prejudice: And he was vext to the purpose, when he saw that the Professor, under pre∣tence of Composing a Subject of Disputation for his Scholars, had father'd upon him cer∣tain Opinions that he was not of, that he might the more easily confute them. Perhaps he did wrong not to consider, that on such like occa∣sions, the Masters are sometimes forc'd to forge Chimera's to their Scholars to accustom them to wrangle; that, as for what is per∣form'd in these Publick Acts, is but a sport and divertisement of Mind; that what is there spoken is of little consequence against the truth of an Author's Opinions that they there oppose; that according to the Custom of the Schools, the Master's and Respondent's Honours are concern'd to appear at least to come off victorious in the Disputation; that these petty Triumphs last but a Day, and that the Applauses concern neither the Ma∣ster, nor his Opinions, but only the Scholar;
whom they Applaud, when he hath but re∣peated an Argument, and responded (well or ill) suitable to the Dictates and Lectures of his Mr. The Union that he supposed to be amongst the Members of the Company of Jesus,He declares War with the Jesuits. made him conclude from the Example of Father Bourdin, that he had pull'd an old House over his head, and that he should have all the Je∣suits upon his back, and represented just then this Society as a formidable Army that ad∣vanced towards him. He was not a whi daunted nor discomposed for all that, but plucking up his Courage, he resolved to march alone, against them all, without staying to Combat, either Father Bourdin, or any other in particular. In order to this strange resolution, he ad∣dresses himself to the Father Rector of the Colledge of Clermont, to whom he writ in La∣tin, a Letter dated 22 July, very pithy, per∣tinent, and full of respect. He begged of him to interpose his Authority to engage the Fa∣thers of the Society to disclose to him once for all what they had to find fault with in his Works, to the end he might either Correct himself or Answer them; This was a gene∣rous Declaration of War against the Jesuits in his Name, which he judged fit to intrust with some wise discreet Person; in order here∣unto, he pitcht upon his Friend Monsieur Mydorge, charging him to go deliver it imme∣diately to the Rector, and let him understand that there was no rashness in making his Ad∣dresses
directly to his Reverence; since Fa∣ther Bourdin had commenced a formal War, not by his Thesis, which he should take no further notice of; but by a Velitation or Skir∣mish which he dispatched to him since. He answered this Velitation, expecting the Effect of his Letter to the Rector, who re∣ceived it, not from M. Mydorge his hands, who was afraid to draw the Tempest upon his Friend by this proceeding, but by the hands of Father Mersennus, who was not so scrupu∣lous when the business was to foment differen∣ces amongst the Learned, and breed Quarrels conducing to the advancement of Sciences. XI. The Rector seem'd not a little satis∣fied with the Reasons and real Sentiments of Monsieur Des Cartes;A Personal Quarrel with Fath. Bourdin. but he did not believe that the Society was bound to concern it self in a difference wherein it was not a party con∣cern'd. He thought it sufficient to permit Father Bourdin to decide his Controversie in person, as well as he could with him, and instead of answering his Letter, he order'd this Father to Answer it himself, and to ren∣der a reason of his Proceedings to Monsieur Des Cartes. Father Bourdin declared positively to him in his Letter, That he had not, nor should ever undertake a particular War against his Opi∣nions. Yet he promised him to send him his Treatise within a Week; that is, the Rea∣sons he made use of not to approve his Sen∣timents. The term of eight days, at the end of which Monsieur Des Cartes expected these
Treatises, being expired over and over, he be∣gan to despair of them, when he received some Letters from some other Fathers of the Society, by which they demanded of him Six Months delay longer. He made no question but this was a Stratagem to Correct these Writings at leisure, and to put them in such a condition no longer to fear his censure. He conjectured by these Fathers Letters, that notwithstanding the assurances they had given him of a pure personal Quarrel with Father Bourdin, yet that he was going to detach from the main Body of the Society, a powerful Party of Jesuits against him, to back their Fellow-Collegian. Knowing that their chief Strength consisted in the Art of Logick,He pre∣pares for the Jesuits. of which they perform many Exercises in the Society, to make them handle their Arms the better in their Disputes against all sorts of Adversaries, he thought likewise he was to look about him, and have recourse to Scholastick Arms, which, he thought he had laid aside this many years, not so much as ever dreaming he should have any more occasion for them. He communicated his purpose to Father Mersennus, who expected him in Paris towards the end of this Year, and he writ to him about it in these terms: I shall not yet take my Journey this Winter; for, being I am to re∣ceive the Objections of the Jesuits within four or five Months; I believe I must be in a posture ready to expect them; in the interim, I have a great desire, a little to peruse their Philosophy
(which I have not done this Twenty Years) on purpose to see if I like it better now, than I did heretofore. To this effect, I beseech you to send me the Names of the Authors who have writ a Body of Philo∣sophy, which are most followed amongst the Je∣suits, and whether or no they may have any new ones. I remember none but Collegium Conim∣bricense. He desired him also to inform him,He under∣takes to confute the School-Philosophy if they had not compiled some Abridgment or Com∣pendium of all Philosophy of the Schools that was much read; (to spare him the labour of turning over the Schoolmen;) such a one as that of Eustachius. Father Mersennus could tell him of none but de Raconie, which was not so fit for his purpose as Eustachius; but he forceably urged and exhorted him, not to neglect the Philo∣sophy of the Schools, such as was at that time taught in the Colledge, supposing that the time of Sacrificing of it to truth, was come; letting him understand by the way that he was the only man, from whom the Lovers of Truth and Wisdom expected this piece of Service. Monsieur Des Cartes writ back to him the Eleventh of November, That he did not be∣lieve the School-Philosophy so hard to be confuted, because of the diversity of Opi∣nions that it contains; He declared to him at the same time the aims he had upon Philosophy in reference to that of the Schools. His intent was to write in order, a whole course of Philosophy in the nature of Posi∣tions;
or without any superfluities of Dis∣course; he would put down only all his Con∣clusions, with all the Reasons, from whence he deduc'd them; which he hoped to be able to do in few words. In the same Book, ac∣cording to his Project, he did get a course of Vulgar Philosophy printed, such an one as that of Eustachius, with his Notes at the lat∣ter end of each Question, where he intended to add the various Opinions of Authors, and what a man was to believe of them all accor∣ding to him. In a word, he put us in hopes (for to serve for a Conlusion to his Work) that he would make a Parallel or Comparison of two Philosophies, that is to say, of his own; and that of others. He was only sollicitous to know if Eustachius were yet alive; because having no design, neither on his Person, no Writings in particular, he had a desire to keep a fair Correspondence with him; and use all sort of Civilities towards him. As for the Collegium Conimbricense (i. e. the Courses of Philosophy of the Jesuits of Conimbra in Por∣tugal) in his Opinion they were too long. But he could have wisht they had writ as suc∣cinctly as Eustachius; because having to do with the Jesuits, he should have preferr'd their course to all others. XII. This Year proved fatal to our Philo∣sopher by the loss,The Death of his Fa∣ther and Daughter. not only of three or four of his Friends, Mathematicians, or Philoso∣phers, but especially of two Persons the dear∣est to him in all the World, viz. his Daughter Francina, and his Father, Dean of the Parlia∣ment
of Britain, who departed this Life in October, 78 years of Age. Francina died on the 7th of September at Amersford, only 5 years of Age. He pub∣lickly own'd her for his Daughter, altho' we cannot learn who her Mother was, having not any proof of his being Married; He lamented her Death with that passionate affection that forc'd him to Experience, that true Philoso∣phy cannot stifle Natural Affection. The Sorrow and Grief that over-whelm'd him for this loss, makes us apt to believe she was his only Child: But those that speak ill of him, have not stuck to father more upon him. The Calumny, altho' supported by the Au∣thority and Writings of a grave Minister amongst the Reformed at Ʋtrecht, seem'd to him so ill-grounded, that he only laught at it; and answer'd his Enemy that cast it in his teeth, that not having made a Vow of Cha∣stity, and not being exempt from Humane Frailties; he should make no scruple at all to own them before all the World, if he had any; but albeit he had none; yet he agreed not to pass for a great Saint, with a Minister that had no good opinion of the Gift of Con∣tinency in the Ecclesiasticks of the Roman Church, who live in Celibacy. He staid not long to repair the breach that was made in integrity of his life, wherewith he honoured his solitude, and the profession of his Philosophy, and restor'd his Celibacy to its pristin perfection, ever before he had acquired the Name of Father. Upon the
whole, the Publick had never come to the knowledge of this humbling Circumstance o his life; if he had not made a Publick Con∣fession of it himself by writing the History of his dear Francina, upon the first Leaf of a Book that was to be seen by many. Three weeks after the death of this Child,The trick Voetius play'd with Mersennus, a∣gainst him. he quitted the Town of Amersford to return to his abode at Leiden. He was quite out of conceit with the Neighbourhood of Ʋtrecht, because of Voetius his Intrigues, that allarm'd all the Country, making as if Regius was a Pestilent Fellow, good for nothing but to trouble the Schools; as for his Des Cartes, he would have him pass for an Enemy of the Protestant Religion, a Spy sent out of France against the Interest of the United Provinces: not judging the Writers of his Religion in his own Coun∣try sufficient to exterminate him, he thought good to find out some amongst the Catholicks, and that too in the middle of France. To find such, it was necessary to change his Language. He went about to perswade them that they had to deal with a common Enemy, and in all their concerns to defend Religion in ge∣neral against a Sceptique and an Atheist; wherein the Catholicks were no less interested than Protestants. He went to sollicit Men of Parts as far as the recesses of Cloisters in Pa∣ris, and had even the Confidence to attempt Father Mersennus, upon pretence that this Fa∣ther was already train'd up and vers'd in making his party good against Atheists and Deists, with whom he had enter'd the lists
y divers Works; he represented to this Fa∣her, that being besides a good Philosopher nd Geometrician; an undertaking of this na∣ure, was worthy his eminent Learning and Sub∣lty. And to engage him the deeper by more revalent Expressions, he tells him, That ha∣ing shewed himself all along, the Defender of Truth in his way of Treating of Divinity; He eeded not to question but the same truth all'd for his assistance, to secure it from the exatious insults of this new Philosopher. This is perhaps the first time that ever any ody heard the Protestant Ministers congra∣tulate the Roman Catholicks, and what is more, even the Monks for having successfully stood up for and guarded truth in matter of Theology. The thing was yet something the more remarkable, because Voetius, a man would have thought, should have been the ast from whom one might have hoped to have heard such a like Confession, having without any cause taken a great liberty to oppose the Roman Church upon other occa∣sions; yea, and falling out with some Mini∣sters, who were not able to endure his ex∣cessive flyings out and impostures; But con∣sidering the Catholicks conn'd Voetius but little thank for this Confession, and because the Protestants did not lay it to his charge: Men looked upon it as the consequence of his dis∣orderly Spirit, to which the one, and the party were pretty well accustomed; there needs no other sign of this irregularity than the ma∣lignity wherewith he affects to make Mon∣sieur
Des Cartes pass for an Savage Jesuite, tha he might decry him, and render him odiou another way. Father Mersennus feigned that he let him∣self be allured by the Charms of Voetius hi Discourse; and to demonstrate that he wa still more a Friend to Truth than to Monsieu Des Cartes, he promised him the service of hi Pen, provided they could supply him with Matter and Reasons sufficient to attack the Opinions of that Philosopher. Some pretend the Monk spoke in earnest Voetius was so far perswaded of it, that imme∣diately he noised it abroad that Mersennus was a writing against Des Cartes. Afterwards he sought up and down for Materials, and wa very importunate with all his Friends to dis∣patch relief to Father Mersennus; yet a whole year was spent without being able to get the Father to make his words good, save only in a Comparison that he made between Monsieur Des Cartes and Vaninus; desiring him to make much of this, as an important Piece, and to display the Parallel of the new Philoso∣pher with that Impious Wretch who was Burnt at Tholouse. Without doubt they had a better opinion of Monsieur Des Cartes at the Court of France;The King invites him to Court upon ho∣nourable Conditions but all in vain. Seeing King Lewis the 13th commanded to send him word at the latter end of this Year, that he would publickly gratifie his Merit. This Prince informed by Card. Richelieu, or by those that presented him with his Book, that this Ornament to the Kingdom would
e always out of its Element, so long as he hould be out of his Realm; had thoughts of preferring him to some eminent place, either Court, or in the Parliament, thereby to ender him conspicuous to all his Subjects; nd to grant him a great Pension suitable o his rank, and able to support it; But here were no sollicitations powerful enough o wean him from his retirement. He re∣garded the Delights and Pleasures of Court, nd the most glorious Occupations of Coun∣sels and Parliaments, as equally prejudicial o the repose and leisure that were requi∣re to serve Mankind in the Profession he ad chosen, and putting infinitely a greater value upon his King's good will towards him, than upon all the Honours and Riches that e would have pleased to heap upon him, e wisht rather to live alone, content with the perpetual acknowledgment of his gra∣cious offers, than to expose himself to ha∣tard of losing the advantages of his Philoso∣phy, under pretence of being desirous to bear the heavy weight of those Honours, and to justi∣fie the choice of so great a Prince.
BOOK VI. From 1641 till 1644. I.The pub∣lishing of his Meta∣physical Meditations IN the Year 1641. began to appear in pub∣lick the second Works of Monsieur Des Cartes, with the priviledge of the King, and approbation of the Doctors of Paris, intituled, Meditations touching the first Philosophy, wherein is discovered the Existence God, and the Immor∣tality of the Soul. But you must observe, tha it was not the Author's intent▪ that they should insert the word Immortality instead of that of Immateriality. This Work, the publication of which he pretends to be purely owing to his own Con∣science, was of a more Antient Composing than his Essays, being the very first fruits of his retirements in Holland. The importance of the subject matter prevail'd with him, be∣fore it went to the Press, to let the most able Divines of the Roman Church see it; nay and other Learned Men too of other Commu∣nions, who past for the most subtile Wits in Philosophy and Metaphysicks, to the end that he might profit by their Censures, answer their Difficulties, and cause their Objections and his Answers to be Printed together at the same time with his Treatise. His Manuscript was, in order hereunto above a year in the hands of Father Mersennus;
who had a Commission from him to find out Censurers or Approvers for this Book, of all faculties, whilst he in the mean time did the same in the Catholick and Prote∣stant Netherlands. Yea, and he had some in∣tensions to dedicate it to the Doctors of the Sorbonne; that is, to all the Faculty of Divi∣ity of Paris, because, saith he, the cavils of some persons had made him resolve to guard himself henceforward with the Authority of others, since Truth is so little regarded when it is alone. He re∣commended this business to Father Gibeuf, Fa∣ther of the Oratory, his friend, who by his great Capacity had gain'd a great Esteem and Credit the Sorbonne, and amongst Men of Wit and ngenuity, and left Father Mersennus to order all the rest. II.An Abridg∣ment of what it contains. Whilst this Father searched for Cen∣surers for his Book, whilst he collected the Objections of Divines and Philosophers, he could possibly find in Paris; he received an Abridgement of it, concerning the chief Points about God and the Human Soul, which serv'd for an introduction to the whole Work, which he divided into six Meditations. In the first he propounds the Reasons why we may doubt of all things in general, and espe∣cially of material things, until such time as we have established a better foundation in Sci∣ences than those we have had hitherto: He akes it appear that the advantage of this general doubt consisteth in delivering us from all sorts of prejudices to loosen our Minds from Sense, and so to bring it about that we
cannot any longer doubt of the things which, we shall afterwards know and acknowledge to be true. In the second he demonstrates that the Soul making use of its own liberty in supposing that the things of whose Existence there may arise the least doubt, do not exist at all, in effect doth acknowledge that it is impossible but that at the same time it exists it self; which serves to make it distinguish the things that belong to it, from those that belong to the Body. In the third he produceth and displays the best Argument he hath for the Existence of a God, without using any comparison dra from corporeal things. In the fourth he proves that all things we have a clear and distinct notion of, are true; he there explains also the nature of the Errour that is in the Judgment, and the discerning of true from false. In the fifth he explains the nature of a Body in general; he doth there likewise demon∣strate the Existence of God in a new manner; and he makes appear that the certitude of de∣monstrations themselves depend upon the knowledge of God. In the sixth he makes a difference between the action of the understanding, and that of the imagination. He there evidently shews that the Soul of Man is really distinct from the Body, and that nevertheless it is so nearly joyn'd to it, that it composeth as it were but the same thing with it. He explains also all
he several Errours that proceeds from Sense, ith the means to avoid them. Last of all, he here brings in the Reasons from which one ay conclude the Existence of things material. We must observe that the Author doth not ind himself up to follow the Order of matters hroughout this Work,After what manner they are written. but only the Order of Reason. I mean, that he hath not under∣aken to speak of whatsoever appertains to he same Subject, in the same place, because would have been often impossible to prove well, inasmuch as there were Reasons, some hereof were to be fetcht a great deal fur∣her off than others. But in reasoning in or∣er, that is to say, beginning at the most ea∣e things, and so passing after that to things ost difficult, he hath deduced from thence what he could possibly, sometimes for one, atter, and sometimes for another; which was in his Opinion the true way to find Truth recisely, and to explain it aright. He judged his Order only profitable to those whose Reasons are free and unbiassed, who can say s much of one difficulty as of another. And this is the reason why he thought it ot convenient, nor yet possible to insert into the Text of his Meditations, the Answer to he Objections one might give, because that would have interrupted all the Series, nay and might have invalidated the force of his Rea∣sons, which depends chiefly on the necessity of diverting ones thought from things sensible, from whence most part of the Objections might be drawn. But yet he set down those.
that were already come to his hand from the Low Countreys at the end of his Treatise, to serve for a Model to others, if there chanc'd to come any, and to shew how they might come in course, and follow, in the impression by inserting his Answers at the end of each Objection. These first Objections were sent by thei Author Monsieur Caterus or Catters, Doctor of Lounvain,First Ob∣jections. employ'd in the Missions of Ho∣land: He accompanied them with all the Ci∣vilities and Modesty that ordinarily sway learn'd lovers of Truth; they were direct∣ed to two of his friends Bloemart and Bann who knowing very well the capacity of this Doctor, had desired them of him, and tha too as strong and pertinent as possible he could make them, that they might be suitable to our Philosophers Intentions: The two friends sent them to Monsieur Des Cartes just as they received them; and he in like manner direct∣ed his Answer he made to them, he endea∣voured especially not to come short in Testi∣monies of Esteem and Civility of Monsieur Caterus, who became a new Accession to his friends all his life after. Fath. Mersennus,Second Ob∣jections. that he might perceive some Effects of his Commission, sent him in January the Objections he was able to pick up by word of mouth from off Divines and Philosophers he consulted in Paris: Their difficulties were neither considerable, nor in great number, notwithstanding this Father offer'd some of his own, and tho' he had done whatsoever lay in
his power to start some from his Answer to the first Objections which he had conveyed to him, with a design to have him to examine them, with the rest. Monsieur Des Cartes seem'd to believe that these several Objections had been made by persons sincere and honest, and perswaded of the solidity of his Principles, and drew up an exact Answer to them. Now, for as much as the Authors of these Objections-had signified by the Pen of Father Mersennus, that it would be very proper and useful, if, at the end of his Solutions, after having first of all presented some definitions, demands and xioms, he would wind up all according to the Method of Geometricians, so that at one glance, Readers might find wherewith they hould be satisfied; he was exceeding glad that he had made him a proposition so agreeable to him, and so easie to be put in Execution; he therefore accompanied his Answer for their satisfaction, with another Writing containing the reason for proving that there is a God, and the difference there is between Spirit or Soul, and Hu∣man Body, couched after a Geometrical manner. He had not quite finished his answering the second Objections,Third Ob∣jections by Mr. Hobbs. but he received those of the famous Hobbs, an English Philosopher, who had long sought an occasion to get acquain∣ance with him. Father Mersennus had aug∣mented his desire when he begun the reading of the Manuscript of Meditations, for to make Animadversions thereupon; but he declared to him, that the only way to deserve his friendship, was to be plain with him, and not
spare him. M. Hobbes took it for granted; the Father upon sending these Objections to Mon∣sieur Des Cartes, accompanied them with a word or two in behalf of his Friend, to the end he might be acquainted with his desert and might know what kind of Philosophy it was, whereof he made Profession. Monsieur Des Cartes, overjoy'd to learn that the number of true Philosophers was increased by such an ingenious person as M. Hobbes, had a mind to study the Genius of the man in his Objections; but he found them not proper to let him judge of his Solidity and Profound∣ness. He inserted into the very Body of these Objections, the Answer he made to each Point. This is what we exhibit under the title of Third Objections. Notwithstanding all Monsieur Des Cartes his Intreaties to Father Mersennus to send him no more Objections,Other Ob∣jections of M. Hobbes. but such as related to his Metaphysical Meditations; yet this Father could not forbear communicating to him the Marks M. Hobbes had made upon his Diop∣triques, nor could Monsieur Des Cartes forbear answering his Friend. Mr. Hobbes shot wide of the mark in his writing, by a beginning that had no relation at all to Dioptriques. He talked in it of God and the Soul as things Cor∣poreal; he discours'd concerning his Internal Spirit, which he established as the principal of all things; we meet with abundance of other stuff, no way relating to Mons. Des Car∣tes his Dioptriques—For altho' he pretended that Materia subtilis was the same with his In∣tern
Spirit—yet he might as well have said, The Moon is made of green Cheese; the one was not discernable in the other; Mr. Hobbes made a tedious reply, which was conveyed to Monsieur Des Cartes the 7th of February; but all the business of this peaceable Discourse cen∣tered in Father Mersennus. M. Hobbes, nor Monsieur Des Cartes never writing to one ano∣ther immediately, their Communication ex∣tended no further; and altho' Monsieur Des Cartes sent his last Answer to Mr. Hobbes his Reply, he begg'd of Father Mersennus either to keep it to himself, or to disperse it at discre∣tion, that it might not be discover'd by M. Hobs, nor no body else, that it came farther, than from the Convent of Minims in Paris. He signified withal to this Father, the Rea∣sons that induc'd him to have no more to do with this English Philosopher, that he might preserve his Commerce for those Friends who love one another without Communica∣tion. He gave him a fresh account of what he judged of this Man's Intellect, which he look'd upon as very obstinate, and dangerous in its affecting singularity, altho' it might not be indued with an exactness fit for judging aright, nor with any strength for arguing. IV. In the whole Society of the Sorbonne, there was not found one Censor of Monsieur Des Cartes, notwithstanding the great pains Monsieur Gibeuf and Father Mersennus were at to procure some; we must except one young Doctor or Licenciate, who having heretofore
read the Essay of the Method of our Philoso∣pher with no small delight, did acquiesce in Father Mersennus his desire, hoping to meet with the like pleasure in the reading of the Meditations; This Doctor was the famous Monsieur Arnaud, at that time near 29 years of Age, not being able to obtain of the Fa∣ther to peruse it Gratis without costing him some Reflections, he thought himself obliged to act two Parts in the Examen they required of him; At first, he appear'd like a Philo∣sopher, to represent the principal Difficulties that might be objected against Monsieur Des Cartes, touching those two grand Questions; concerning the Nature of our Soul and the Ex∣istence of God. Then again, he acted the part of a Divine, to take notice of the things that he judged apt to offend ears accustomed to the usual Expressions of his Theology. Monsieur Des Cartes had never yet any more rational, or more able Adversary than this young Doctor, who not taking up with ren∣dering himself very Profound in all sorts of Knowledge, made a perfect Geometrical Spi∣rit to reign in all his Argumentations; but in∣stead of mispending his time in admiring him; he sets all his Wits on work to Answer him; which troubled him more, and put him harder to it, because he was to satisfie a Spirit upon which it was impossible to impose, and that the business was to solve withal certain most solid and most sublimely propounded Diffi∣culties.
He sent back word to Father Mersennus, that he could not have desired a more quick∣ighted penetrating, nor yet a more fair and officious Examiner than he was; That he had been treated with so much Candor and Civi∣ity, that he could scarce imagine that it was n Adversary that writ against him: But that e had examined what he had opposed with so much diligence, that he could wish nothing might have escaped him. And that his lively penetrating manner of urging, and pushing things that he could yield his Approbation to, made him confident that he was void of the the complaisance to dissemble with him. He sent his Answer to Father Mersennus upon Easter-Day, with many thanks to Mon∣sieur Arnaud, for two friendly offices he had rendered him by writing against him; the first was for having proposed the Reasons of his Book, in such a manner, that he seem'd to e afraid lest others should not find them sufficiently strong and convincing. The other was for having fortify'd him with no small Succours in backing him with the Authority of St. Augustine, whose Philosophy had the same Principle as his, for its Basis and Sup∣porter. Having a pretty while weighed the force of Monsieur Arnaud's Arguments about Phi∣losophy, he judged, that endeavouring to solve those which respect the Nature of the Soul or Humane Spirit, it behooved him to alter his Method, fearing he might not be able to re∣sist the force of those, he had propounded to
him touching the Existence of God. That's the reason why, instead of taking upon him to bear up against all his Efforts, as hitherto he did, he would imitate those who are to defend themselves against an Adversary that hath the advantage, and studied nothing more tha cunningly and skilfully to parry his blows rather than expose himself down-right to the violence of them. When he was as far as the Answer that he was to make to the Difficulties that might baffle, and non-plus Divines, he declared, That he opposed Monsieur Arnaud's first Reasons (concerning the Humane Soul) that he had labour'd to elude the second Reasons concerning the Existence of God) but that he had done his best into the third, except to the last concerning the Eucharist; to which he undertook to answer. Monsieur Arnaud gave Monsieur Des Cartes several Advices as important as judicious to obviate that wrangling that might be fear'd in ill-disposed Minds. Monsieur Des Cartes desiring to demonstrate the deference he had to his Judgment, and esteem for his Counsels, sent to Father Mersennus, the Places or Passa∣ges, by themselves, separate from his Answer, which this young Doctor judged convenient to run over again, and alter in his Meditations. He desir'd the Doctor to set down the Addi∣tions or Corrections in the very Text of his Work, by separate By-marks like Parenthe∣sis, to shew how he desir'd to be instructed by the advice of another, without aiming to
ascribe the Glory of it to himself, and to ex∣cite by such a generous Modesty, all his Exa∣miners; nay, and his Antagonists too, to af∣ford him the like advice, in hopes of having the same Justice done them. He wisht Monsieur Arnaud might see his Answer, that he might pass his judgment of it, and that he might communicate to him his replies, or give him new advice; but we heard no more of it: And Monsieur Ar∣naud signified to Father Mersennus, that he re∣main'd fully satisfied. He added, That he himself held, and openly maintain'd the very same Philosophy in part, that it had been stifly opposed in a full Congregation by seve∣ral Learned Persons, but that it could not be beat down, nor so much as stagger'd. This disposition begot in Monsieur Des Car∣tes a Prejudice for his Philosophy so much the more advantageous,The esteem M. Des Car∣tes had for M. Arnaud. as he judged this Doctor an Adversary less capable of Mistakes in what he knew, and less dissimulation in his de∣meanour. He did not stick since to acquaint the Fathers of the Oratory, that as young a Doctor as Monsieur Arnaud was, yet did he esteem his Judgment more, than, that, of half of the Old ones of the whole Faculty. Of all the Objections that were made against his Meditations, there was not one of them to whom the Publick bestowed more honour than to those of the young Doctor, and M. Des Cartes, who judged them prefera∣ble to all the rest, was not ashamed to honour himself particularly by it, as a new support
for his Philosophy. It was not his fault that he did not hold up this growing acquaintance, and amicable correspondence with a Friend of that importance. But Monsieur Arnaud, notwithstanding a great Philosopher and ex∣cellent Geometrician; had at that time so much dedicated his time to Theology, that there was left him but a very small Portion of it for exercises of Humanity, or study of Classick Authors: Insomuch that they had a Kindness one for another since, without much Communication; yet nevertheless, Monsieur Des Cartes express'd so much sympathy for him, that he had cause to fear that Monsieur Arnaud's Enemies were his also. V. Besides the Objections of Mons. Hobbes and Monsieur Arnaud,Fifth Ob∣jections by M. Gassen∣dus. he received also those of Monsieur Gassendus, who was come from his Country Habitation to Paris, very oppor∣tunely in order thereunto. They were old Cronies; yet their amity never proceeded to the degree of Friends, loving one another, without ever discovering, or reproving what is amiss in one another. Whatsoever it was at the beginning, Monsieur Des Cartes always pre∣served it in an equal poise: but now as for Mons. Gassendus, it was not so with him, since our Philosopher's Edition of his Treatise of Meteors.The origi∣nal cause of the falling out of M. Gassend. and M. Des Car∣tes. Monsieur Des Cartes had not omit∣ted in this Treaty the Phenomina of Parhelia's, or Mock-Suns that appeared at Rome. An. 1629. of which Monsieur Gassendus had composed a Dissertation. But his silence bred the occasion of being vext at him, and shewing a great deal
of indifference for him, who took it very ill that Monsieur Des Cartes should not make the least mention of him upon this occasion. This ill disposition of Mind in M. Gassendus, attended with a secret Jealousie, which the reputation or designs of our Philosopher begot in him, was a soveraign Preservative against his natural sweet disposition and mildness, that one might have fear'd he would have used in his Objections against the Metaphysical Meditations, where Monsieur Des Cartes needed all the severity of the most able Animadver∣ters. He was very careful to acquit himself handsomly of the Confutation he had under∣taken; yet towards the Conclusion, taking up his wonted Complaisance that he endea∣voured to suspend awhile, in the Body of the Writing, he protested that his chief design in Writing against Monsieur Des Cartes was nothing but maintain himself in the honour of his friendship. He added moreover, That if any thing too rude had escaped his Pen, he would disown it upon the spot; and gave his consent, that whatsoever might displease Mon∣sieur Des Cartes, should be razed out of his Writing. His Civilities did not tend to so good an end. He writ also a particular Letter full of Commendation, not only of Monsieur Des Car∣tes great parts; but also of the that very Work he undertook to Animadvert upon. But what he adds afterwards touching the necessity Fa∣ther Mersennus had driven him to send him his doubts and scruples, touching his pretended
Incapacity, touching the weakness of his Ar∣guments, was the product of such a cunning Dissimulation, and so near akin to Modesty, that many did not stick to prefer them to the plain and austere sincerity of Monsieur Des Car∣tes, and to disapprove that blunt disobliging downrightness of the latter, wherewith he thought fit to answer him. This affected Language of M. Gassendus, was only for Monsieur Des Cartes; he changed his note for those whom he handled without Dissi∣mulation; such as M. Daillé in France, and M. Rivet in Holland, where he was not ashamed to confess to the last, That he had not so strictly examined Monsieur Des Cartes his Metaphysicks, but only because he had not received from him all those Civilities that he expected upon a cer∣tain occasion. Yet altho' his revenge was groundless, and most unjust in it self, nevertheless it was very profitable to Monsieur Des Cartes, who re∣ceived his Writing by way of Father Mer∣sennus, under the Title of Disquisitio Meta∣phisica seu dubitationes, &c. he answer'd in a less affected manner doubtless than that of Mon∣sieur Gassendus was; the stile of which, seem'd to him very Eloquent and Delightful; altho' he was pleas'd to be perswaded that he had not so much made use of the Reasons of a Philosopher to confute his Opinions, as the shifts of an Oratour to evade them; but the desire of managing his Adversary a little more, hindered him from maintaining the Character of his ordinary plainness; for a Crotchet com∣ing
into his Pate, to make the Spirit answer he Flesh, as if they had been two Persons that e had a mind to bring upon the Stage, he ave M. Gassendus an occasion to know that y the Flesh, he meant him. It was in vain, fter he had taken off the Mask to expatiate pon M. Gassendus his Praises. Gassendus sup∣osed that he would have paid his Comple∣ents in kind: He fell out with him about , which some of his Friends, and some tur∣ulent Spirits, had a special care to foment by alse Reports and Scandals, that destroy'd in ome measure a part of that Charity these two Christian Philosophers owed one to ano∣ther. The writing of Gassendus, with the Answer of Monsieur Des Cartes, makes up the Fifth Objection in the Book of Medi∣tations. In the mean time,Sixth Ob∣jections. Father Mersennus pickt up whatsoever he could possibly gather from the Objections in Paris, and in the Country, and dispatched them to Monsieur Des Cartes, according as he received them, besides those that he was about, to frame himself by the reiterated Study of his Meditations. Monsieur Des Cartes seeing them of divers pieces and different Compositions did his utmost to re∣duce them into order. Then he sent them back again, together with the Answer he gave Father Mersennus about them, who call'd them the Sixth Objections; after which he made them finish the Impression of the Book of Meditations.
VI.Voetius comes to be Rector of the Uni∣versity of Ʋtrecht. Whilst Monsieur Des Cartes was taken up with his answering the Objections they made against his Metaphysick Meditations; Voetius the Minister, procured a great rein∣forcement to his Faction by the Rectorship of the University of Louvain; to which he got himself preferr'd 16th of March, An. 1641. Regius beholding him in this manner in∣vested with all the Authority that was need∣ful for the executing his designs against Mon∣sieur Des Cartes, and him; sought all occasions to curry favour with him, or at least to pre∣vent the dire Effects of his ill-will. The Re∣ctor at first was overjoy'd to observe his Sub∣missions, and seeing he did so handsomly by him, as to offer him his Thesis to Correct, he was content only to make some Notes upon it, to save the honour of the ancient Philosophy, and left the Paradoxes and new Opinions alone to him by way of Corollaries; together with the permission to put Monsieur Des Cartes his Name at the top of his Thesis. The first dispute of these Theses was per∣form'd on the 17th of April,A Thesis of Regius. Regius modera∣ted, and he that kept the Act was the Sieur Johanes de Roey, still alive, who hath gotten himself a great Name by his great Writings and Learning. The great Abilities of the Mo∣derator and Respondent to make the new Opinions Triumph, soon made Voetius repent of all his Condescentions; he took occasion upon a Tumult, and the Peripatetique Pro∣fessors making their Scholars to hiss Regius to take up his resolution again, of making him
lose his Professors Chair, and to Expel him he University. Regius to stand upon his own Defence, cau∣ed a plain Exposition of this first Dispute to e Printed. He demanded withal, some re∣ef from Monsieur Des Cartes; and sent him ll the Theses or Positions in order as they ere to be disputed on the 5th of May, ith the Remarks the Rector had made upon em before he would let them pass. Mon∣sieur Des Cartes found nothing too unreasona∣le in the Rector's Remarks; but having fielded to the request, Regius prefer'd to exa∣mine his Theses without favour or affection: He corrected divers things which he should ave been sorry, to have been ascribed to im; for it was commonly given out and be∣eved that Regius had no other Opinions but ose of Monsieur Des Cartes. So that people ot being any longer capable of shaking off is Opinion, it was expedient that Monsieur Des Cartes should pass nothing over to Regius, ut what he would adopt for his own, and of which he could not advantageously under∣ake the Defence. He began at that very time to observe some eeds of Errour in that which Regius imagin'd of his own head, and chiefly in what concerns e reasonable Soul; but he was still Master of his Mind, and he had no cause to complain of his docibility. The second Theses disputed on the 5th of May, made as great a stir as the former; ma∣y other disputes followed them all the Sum∣mer
long, which served only to heighten his Reputation, and to exasperate the Spirits of the Professors already prejudic'd against him, insomuch that they were resolved to oppose the Progress of these Novelties, and to enter an Action in the Name of the University a∣gainst him and Monsieur Des Cartes. Voetius who outwardly was pacified by the submission of Regius, pluck'd off the Mask at last, and declared himself the Chief of his Adversa∣ries, upon pretence that in some places of his last Theses he had let fall some Expressions, different from the common Language of the Schools, that he had not shewn him. This Protestant Minister, (having no more to expect from Mersennus) who, (for all he expected a Consutation from him) sent him nothing but a grave Reprimand for the Inju∣stice of his Carriage; undertook to attack Monsieur Des Cartes in two places, first of all by Dispute, setting his Theses against those of Regius; and then again by his Pen, by con∣futing his Writings. In quality of Rector, he ordered Stratenus Professor in Physick, and Ravensperger Professor of Mathematicks, to refute all these Novel Opinions in all the Pub∣lick Acts of November and December. As for himself, he reserved the care to oppose in the Theological Act kept under him, what he judg∣ed prejudicial to Religion. The last Thesis of Regius being stufft with divers Questions that had no relation nor co∣herence one with another,The Thesis of Voetius against Re∣gias. and being they were Composed according to the Fancy of
them that responded, rather than to that of the Moderator: One of the Respondents had unadvisedly put into one of his Assertions, that of the Union of the Soul and Body there did not result a being per se, but only per accidens; alling a being per accidens whatsoever was composed of two Substances quite different, without denying for all that the Substantial Union, by which the Soul is joyn'd to the Body; nor yet that Aptit or natural Incli∣nation that both these parts have for this Union. Regius seeing these Expressions dis∣pleased Monsieur Des Cartes, as being too harsh, tryed to excuse himself to Voetius, but o no purpose; This Minister took occasion from thence to have him declared an Here∣tick, and to get them to proceed to the turn∣ing him out of his place. In the Name of the Faculty of Theology; that is to say, of him∣self, his two Colleagues Carolus Dematius and Mainardus Schotanus, and of the Pastors of the City, he ordain'd that the Students in Divi∣nity should abstain from the Lectures of Re∣gius, as from Dogma's and Tenets pernicious to Religion. Then he causes some Thesis to be Printed, which were to be maintain'd in December against the Paradoxes of the esse per accidens in Man; of the Motion of the Earth, and against the Opinion that disallows Substan∣tial Forms. His Design was to get them signed beforehand by the two other Professors in Divinity, and by all Divines whatsoever, who were either Ministers or Preachers in the City, and then to depute some Persons to the
Magistracy, to give them notice that Regius should be condemned by a Consistory or Ec∣clesiastical Assembly; to the end, that the Magistracy might not lawfully dispense with his not being removed from the Chair. Regius having had an inkling of what they were contriving against him, goes presently to tell Monsieur Vander Hoolck of it, who was one of the Consuls that protected him, and an intimate Friend of Monsieur Des Cartes: The Consul sent word to the Rector Voetius, ordered him to Correct his Theses, to leave out the Title, and whatsoever might concer the reputation of Regius. The Rector, who was to sit Moderator at these Theses, being a quandary at the Consul's order, spoke not one word more either of the Consistory, or signing; yet because the Passages of the The∣ses's that related to Regius and Des Cartes were already Printed, and because they were to be defended the next day; he made use of this pretence to Cloak his Disobedience and ill Intensions. These Theses's were defended the 18th, 23th, and 24th of December. The Respon∣dent whose Name was Lambert Waterlaet, sig∣nalized himself full as much as the Professor in opposing these new Opinions, defended with an equal heat by the Opponents; who were almost all Regius his Disciples. The Professor seeing himself towards the end a little too much put to it by one of the Oppo∣nents who urged the Argument home, and would not be put off with his Responses;
was not able to extricate himself, but by saying out of spite. That those who did not like the ordinary way of Philosophy, might expect ano∣ther Monsieur Des Cartes, as the Jews ex∣pected their Elias, who should teach them all Truth. VII.A Storm raised a∣gainst Re∣gius. Voetius seem'd to triumph over the new Philosophy, during the Three days of the Publick Act. But Regius foreseeing that if he should hold his tongue, many would think him conquered indeed, and on the other hand, that f he went about to defend himself by Pub∣ick Theses and Acts, they would not fail to drown his Voice by Hissings, Hummings, and Clapping of Hands, as they did at his last Theses of the 8th of December; ingaged to Answer in writing Voetius his Theses's. He ends his Answer to Mons. Des Cartes to be examined, informing him by the way, that the Spirits were more and more incensed a∣gainst him; and that Consul Vander Hoolck's advice was, that he had better be silent. Monsieur Des Cartes being inform'd by Co∣onel Alfonso of what had happen'd at Ʋtrecht,M. Des Car∣tes his ad∣vice to Re∣gius. et Regius understand that he was of the Con∣ul's mind; That his opinion ever was, that e should by no means propound new Opi∣nions, as New, but by retaining the name and appearance of old; one should be content to introduce new Reasons, and use all means, fit to make them be liked. What signified it, says he, for you to go so publickly to reject Sub∣stantial Forms and Real Qualities? Don't you call to Mind that I did declare in express terms
in my Treatise of Meteors, that I did not reject them, and that I did not pretend to deny them but only that they were not necessary to explain my Conception, and that I could without them make my Reasons be apprehended? If you had taken this course, none of your Auditors would have revolted to the contrary side, and you shoul not have procur'd you any Adversaries. But setting aside blaming what cannot be helped, you must think of redeeming your time, and im∣prove what is to come; it is incumbent upon you now to defend with the greatest Modesty you are capable of that which is true in what you have propos'd, and to Correct without being wedded your Opinion, that which did not appear so to be, or what is ill exprest, being perswaded that there is nothing more Commandable, nor more becoming a Philosopher, than a sincere Acknowledgment of his Faults. These Remonstrances, back'd by the ad∣vice of Consul Vander Hoolck, Counsellour Van Leew, Colonel Alfonso, and Professor Emilius could not alter the resolution of Emi∣lius; who thought, that if his Answer did no good to the Publick, yet it would at least be of great use to his Scholars. M. Des Cartes being concern'd at his obstinacy, thought it necessary to make use of some Condescension not to discourage him, and having corrected his Writings upon his reiterated Intreaties, he drew up a new Project of an Answer full of obliging Expressions, and Praises of Voetius, he flourished with formula's of respect for o∣thers, and modestly for himself; this Model
of an Answer, with Matter, Reasons, and Means and Manners of filling it up, are still remaining amongst his Letters, as one of the fairest Monuments of his Meekness and Pru∣dence; yet altho' he had observed to him afresh that his silence would stand him in more stead than all the Answers in the World, yet he must go and publish his Writing; the suc∣cess whereof answered the fears and appre∣hensions that men had of it. They made people believe it was no better than a Libel in effect,Voetius cau∣seth the new Philo∣sophy to be forbid. Printed without the Magistrates Order, distributed by a remon∣strant Bookseller, against the honour of the Rector of the University in general, and of the Protestant Religion it self. Voetius ob∣tain'd, that the Judge of the City Govern∣ment should seize all the Copies of them; which making the Book more scarce, and to be more eagerly inquired after, did so pro∣voke the Rector, that having got on his side the greatest part of the Professors of the Uni∣versity, and Senators of the City Counsel, he obtain'd a Decree from the Magistrates, and after that a Judgment of the University against the New Philosophy; strictly to charge and forbid Regius not to read or teach publickly any thing but Physick or Medicine, and not to hold any private Conferences. Regius dispatcht all these Proceedings to Monsieur Des Cartes the 31st of March 1642; sending him the Decree of the Magistrates of the 15th of the said Month, together with the Judgment and Definitive Sentence of the
University, and the Theses of young Voetius the Rector's Son. Monsieur Des Cartes sent him word back again, That as for the Theses they might be waved, nay, and the Judgment of the University too, being an Act both con∣trary to the due Course of Law, and irregu∣lar: But as for the Decree of the Magistrate, it was not the same case; for the Senate had issued it out only to be freed from the Impor∣tunities of Voetius and his Colleagues; he ad∣vised him to stick close to the Decree accord∣ding to the Letter, and to teach nothing but Medicine according to Galen and Hippocrates; adding. That Truth would not be long before she would have some or other to enquire after her, wheresoever she was. Notwithstanding, Voetius ill-satisfied at these Proceedings, writ, made his Son and Disciples write against Regius. His Son published his Theses in favour of Substantial Forms, and Wa∣terlaet Printed a Pamphlet intituled, Prodromus; as if it had been the fore-runner of that he prepar'd for the Press, tho' Fortune was not so favourable to him as to succeed his Design. For seeing that all Honest Men were but ill satisfied with his Behaviour at Utrecht, and that sending it to Leiden, to get it Printed there, under the Directions of a Renegado Monk; the Rector of that Uni∣versity, Golius by Name, suppres'd it before it was quite finished, and the Monk took him to his heels. VIII. The good News that Monsieur Des Cartes received at that time touching the good
success of his Philosophy in France,The favou∣rable senti∣ments of the Fathers of the Ora∣tory and Jesuites, for M Des Cart. philosophy. and espe∣cially amongst the Fathers of the Oratory, the universal approbation of whom he had gain'd, served a little to blow over the Mortification he met with at Ʋtrecht. The Jesuites seemed and appear'd somewhat more divided amongst themselves. Some of them were content to like his Principles and Reasonings, or to praise his good Intentions and Endeavours without going any further. Others there were, who without more adoe, embraced his Philosophy, and declared that they were followers of the same. No man ever went farther than Father Vatier, who told him in plain terms, that he did wonder∣fully, approve of whatsoever he had writ, with∣out excepting his Explanation of the Eucha∣rist; and Father Mesland to do honour to his Philosophy, Composed an Abridgment of his Metaphysical Meditations, put them into a Scholastick stile, and intelligible to the mea∣nest Capacity: Cartesianism made mighty progress in the Company of the Jesuits, not only in Flan∣ders, but in France it self, under the Pro∣tection of two Principal Persons of that Or∣der; I mean, of Father Charlet, French As∣sistant to the General at Rome; and of Fa∣ther Dinet, Provincial of the Jesuites at Paris, afterward Confessor to King Lewis XIII. who honoured Monsieur Des Cartes with their Esteem and Friendship, and encouraged him to go on with his Work.
But amongst so many Friends and Admi∣rers that he might reckon amongst the Je∣suites,Fath. Bour∣din writ a∣gainst the Medita∣tions. you cannot choose but imagine but there must be some envious Person that spoke ill of his Writings, and decry'd him, and whispered their dislike of his Works. Father Bourdin behaved himself more cordially and sincerely towards him, ever since his dispute upon Dioptriques have made him his Anta∣gonist. He was pleased to attack him openly; by certain Objections he framed against his Me∣ditations; yet protesting nevertheless, That he would not infringe the Laws of Friendship that was between them, nor yet the Rules of De∣corum and Civility that is practised amongst the Learned. Monsieur Des Cartes pretending he had not strictly performed his Conditions; besides the Answer he gave to his Objections, writ to Father Dinet, who was still Provincial, a long Letter in the nature of a Dissertation, to com∣plain of them: Wherein also he gave a de∣scription of the Troubles which happened at Ʋtrecht; and laid open Voetius in all his subtil Intrigues; The colours he made use of to Paint him, proved seeds of new Discontent, which he was likely to reap in process of time upon the account of Voetius and his Cabal. But the trouble he received from Father Bourdin, issued in a fair reconciliation, accompanied with a solid lasting friendship. Father Bourdin's Piece against the Medita∣tions; with Monsieur Des Cartes his Answer
and Letter to Father Dinet, was Printed under the Title of the Seventh Objections, at the end of the Second Latine Edition of the Medita∣tions, which was put out at Amsterdam, in 1642. IX.M. Des Car∣tes lives at Eindegeest, where Sor∣biere gets acquain∣tance with him. From Easter of the year foregoing, Monsieur Des Cartes sojourned in the Castle of a Village called Eindegeest or Endegest, half a League from Leiden, by the Sea-side, one of the most pleasant Situations in all Holland. There he received Visits more willingly than he had done elsewhere; whether because his Age and Disputes had humanized more than formerly, or because it became him to grant something to the report of his reputation, and yield to the delightsomness of his abode, is not much material; but he was there visited in the year 1642. by Samuel Sorbiere a Provincial, a man of parts, and very inquisitive to under∣stand the Virtues and Vices of the Learned of his time. He thought he must study and practice Monsieur Des Cartes more in his Con∣versation, then Books; But our Philosopher being a man of few words, spoil'd his design; and albeit he hath spoken very well of him, yet after all, we must confess that his great desire to do M. Gassendus a Kindness, and to set them at odds together, hath made him commit abundance of Injustice in respect of Monsieur Des Cartes. Regius was not of that Spirit;Regius and Picot see one ano∣ther at Ein∣degtest. he had other concerns that made him render frequent Visits to Mons. Des Cartes at Eindegeest, which he took for his School. There it was he got ac∣quaintance
with Abbot Picot, who at the lat∣ter end of the year was come to see our Philo∣sopher, in the company of the Abbot Touche∣lay the younger, who was a kind of Se∣cretary to him, in Answering for him the Questions of Phisicks and Mathematicks that were put to him. In the mean time the Duke de Luineo,The French Translation of the Me∣ditations. for the benefit of all Frenchmen, translated Mon∣sieur Des Cartes his Meditations into the vulgar Tongue. Monsieur Clerseiier, one of the most zealous and vertuous Friends of Monsieur Des Cartes, incouraged by this Example, translated another, of the Objections and Answers an∣nex'd: These two Translations were sent to Monsieur Des Carts to be Perused and Corre∣cted a long time before; which he did with that exactness, that he made them even better than his Latine. X.Voetius his Books a∣gainst Mon∣sieur Des Cartes. Whil'st Monsieur Des Cartes his Friends that were in France came in Crouds to Einde∣geest, where they knew he made himself more visible than in other places; the Enemies to his Philosophy, carried on their design at Ʋtrecht. Voetius now grown weary in writing Libels and Pamphlets against it, and his Person, and Regius, did corrupt a young Professor of Groninguen, called Schoockius, who had formerly been one of his Scholars, to put Pen to Paper, or at least to lend him his Name, with a design to make the World believe, that Monsieur Des Cartes had other Enemies besides him. He had a new Book in the Press at Ʋtrecht against him, and finding that they sent all the
Sheets to Monsieur Des Cartes to be refuted according as they Printed them, he put the Copy of it into the hands of Schoockius, desi∣ring him to take care of it, & caused him to put his Name to it, on purpose to cause Monsieur Des Cartes to be condemned of Precipitation; and that then he ight handle him as a Slande∣er and an Impostor that father'd other mens Books upon him. In the Interim there happened an accident that made a diversion to this Libel and its re∣futation,Against the Society of our Lady at Haerto∣ghenbosch. by another Libel that Voetius writ, in the interval of the Impression, against the Burgesses of Bosleduc or the Busse; that is, against the Fraternity of our Lady of the Rosa∣y, which since the reducing of this City, be∣came common to Protestants and Papists, by an Agreement of State Policy. Desmarets the Minister, confuted it by an Order from the Burgesses of Bosleduc; but, seeing he writ rather for them, than against Voetius, Mon∣sieur Des Cartes took upon him to supply this last Point; and by that means gain'd the Esteem of the Chief Men of Bosleduc, and the particular Acquaintance of Desmarets, al∣beit his intent was not to court the Prote∣stants, but to do a piece of good Service to the Catholick Religion. He never put him∣self to the trouble, to make a Treatise of it apart; but he put this Writing just after the refutation of the other Libel, which was to bear Schoockius his Name, and he went on with the refutation after the writing concern∣ing the Fraternity, just as if it had been but one and the same Work.
XI.The Book of Voetius & Schoockius against M. Des Cartes. The Book that Schoockius caused to be Printed by the Order and Directions of Voe∣tius, did not appear in Ʋtrecht till March 1643. under the double title of Philosophia Cartesiana, sive admiranda method Renati Des Cartes. The Author affected an Equivocation in both Ti∣tles, that he might the more securely deceive those, by whom he was afraid he should be refuted. The Book was ushered in by a long Preface, against Monsieur Des Cartes his Let∣ter to Father Dinet, which Voetius had got to be condemned in the Consistory, as being very injurious to the Reformed Religion, and to the Principal Minister of the City. A few days after,M. Des Car∣tes his An∣swer. there was seen at Am∣sterdam Monsieur Des Cartes his Answer, in∣tituled, Epistola Renati Des Cartes ad Celeberri∣mum virum D. Gisbertum Voetium, in quo exami∣nantur duo libri nuper pro Voetio Ʋltrajecti simue editi, unus de Confraternitate Mariana, alter de Philosophia Cartesiana. The Book, tho pretty short, was divided into Nine Parts, which the Author did not judge necessary to con∣nect by any rational sequel. The First, Third, Fifth, Eighth and Ninth, contains the An∣swer to the Book of Cártesian Philosophy, or of the admirable Method. The Sixth, is the Examination of a Book against the Frater∣nity of our Lady of Bosleduc; The Second and Seventh, are a kind of particular Informa∣tion concerning Voetius his Carriage and Con∣duct. The Fourth is the Judgment pass'd upon his Books and Doctrine.
This Work was by Voetius carried to the Magistrates,Proceed∣ings at Ʋ∣trecht a∣gainst M. Des Cartes. together with the Letter to Fa∣her Dinet, as two Libels, scandalous and in∣urious to a Minister of the Gospel. He ob∣ain'd an Act of the Magistrates, June the 23d, which he caus'd to be proclaim'd at the ring of a Bell. Monsieur Des Cartes perceiving by his same Act, that not only his two Writings were condemn'd; but that he himself was summon'd in publickly to justifie them be∣fore Persons that were not competent Judges, nswer'd this Publication by a Dutch Paper, lated July 6. at Egmondehoef, whether he went to sojourn the First of May, quitting he Neighbourhood of Leiden. He offer'd orthwith to justifie whatsoever he had ad∣vanced in his two Writings; altho' he thought not himself liable to be judged by that Court. Voetius that could prove nothing else against him, saving only that he had father'd the Book that bore Schoockius his name upon him, suborning five Witnesses all exceptionable by Monsieur Des Cartes, and to depose upon an Action of Calumny and Defamation, obtain'd a Sentence against Monsieur Des Cartes the 23d of September, ten days after he caused him to be warn'd in before the Magistrate as Guilty. Monsieur Des Cartes had no warning of all these Proceedings till towards the middle of October,Schocckins is summon∣ed to ap∣pear at Go∣ninguen. now not knowing that they had gone so far in the business; nor that they had vio∣lated all the forms of Justice in the Cause, as he learnt afterwards; he made use of the
Authority of the P. of Orange, by means o Monsieur De la Thuillerie the French Ambassa∣dor, to redress this disorder. The Prince of Orange caused the Proceedings of the City Magistrates to be stopt by the States of the particular Province of Ʋtrecht. Now Mon∣sieur Des Cartes, understanding that Schoocki for to favour Voetius, had declared himself sol Author of the Book that went under hi Name, took occasion to cite him to appear personally at Groninguen, before his own na∣tural Judges, there to Answer in his own Name, for the Calumniating Monsieur Des Cartes, that was laid to his Charge, and where∣with this Book was stufft. XII & XIII. The Vexation that seized Voetius for the bad success of his Intrigues, produced a new Libel he put forth shortly after against his Metaphysical Meditations, un∣der the counterfeit name of Theophilus Cosmo∣polita; the Piece died so soon as it was born, the reason was, because the Publick was ter∣rified not only at the extravagancy of the Stile, and the grossness of the Abuses; but also, because of the Cheat and Imposure that conspicuously reigned from the beginning to the ending. It fared quite otherwise with the new Piece Gassendus had lately Composed,Instances or Reply of M. Gassen∣dus. under the title of Instances for making a Reply to the Answer Monsieur Des Cartes had made to his Objections touching the Meditations. The Author had divulged it, and sent it from hand to hand in Paris, before he sent
to Monsieur Sorbiere, to get it Printed in Amsterdam. Monsieur Des Cartes had timely notice of it, ut not being endowed with the Gift of Diffi∣ulation; he goes, without thinking any harm, discover to Monsieur Sorbiere what his houghts were concerning such-like dealing as his; little thinking he spoke to M. Gassendus is Spy, whom he took into his House as his friend; he declared to him somewhat too rankly, that he had Monsieur Gassendus in is thoughts, when he complain'd of some, ho let his Enemies secretly read, what they writ gainst him. Sorbiere who was the Sollicitor f the Cause, snatch'd at this Declaration, and utting the worst Construction he could be∣hink himself of upon it, whereby to blast assendus his reputation; he sent it him, signi∣ing to him by the by, that whereas Des Cartes took it ill that he should conceal his stances or Reply; it was but meet he should fford him the Satisfaction to see them appear publick. Thereupon Gassendus sends him his Copy, nd left the disposing thereof wholly to his iscretion, without obliging him to any thing ut only to call to mind that his writing was only intended for such of their Friends who could not abide that Monsieur Des Cartes ould brag for having had Adversaries. Mon∣sieur Sorbiere caused the Work to be printed Amsterdam, together with the disquisition first Objections against the Meditation and Answer of Monsieur Des Cartes. Nay, and he
Composed a Preface to boot, in the Printer Name, wherein he bespatter'd our Philoso∣pher as much as he thought good, without exposing himself openly to his displeasure. Regius incensed at this so disobliging carriag of Sorbiere, did what in him lay to animat Monsieur Des Cartes against Monsieur Gasse∣dus his Instances,, and to perswade him tha they were full of rancour and affront. The were reproaches otherwise contrary to th Character of this Author's Spirit. Monsieur Des Cartes did all he could to ∣dervalue these Instances, and to forbear read∣ing them, for fear lest he might there me with matter for an Answer, and by th means, an occasion of prolonging the Quar he had had enough of. Having learnt fro one of his Friends, that the Piece deserve an Answer, he was willing to promise on yet he deferr'd the performing it, till aft the Edition of his Principles then in the Pres his Voyage into France, and after his new su at Groninguen, which was to be tryed and d∣cided at his return. He had hopes to see the finishing of the Im∣pression of his Principles,Sorbiere puts M. Gassen∣dus and M. Des Cartes at variance. before he took h Journey. But the tediousness of those th Graved the Figures, obliged him to leave th to M. Schooten, and depart in Company Monsieur de Ville Bressieux the First of May putting his Cause depending at Groninguen to such a posture, that it was not likely create him the least trouble or surprize: From Egmond de Hoef he came to Leiden, fro
thence to Amsterdam, and then pas'd through the Hague, to take leave of his Friends. Monsieur Sorbiere, who feigned himself to be one of that Number, expected him there supply'd with such Arms as he had required of M. Gassendus, to assault him about his opinion of a Vacuum. Monsieur Des Cartes was armed with the patience to Answer all his Difficul∣ties, without complaining of the unseasonable∣ness of the time, whereby he was straiten'd. M. Sorbiere having spent his whole stock of Ammunition against him, could not for shame beg any new Arguments touching a Vacuum of M. Gassendus, but sought out other Subjects to plague and quite weary Monsieur Des Cartes out of his Skin; applying himself rather to find what to object, than to comprehend what Answer was given him. The next day he writes to M. Gassendus, to give him an account of whatever he had performed against Mon∣sieur Des Cartes to be serviceable to him; yea, and he set them so very much at variance, that they were very shy of one anothers Company, and treated one another with a great deal of indifference for a pretty while, without so much as careing to see one another when they were both in Paris. XIV. Elziver perceiving the Impression of Mons. Des Cartes his Principles to be brought almost to a Conclusion;The Latine Translation of the Es∣says by Cur∣cellaeus. intreated the Author to permit him at the same time to Print the Latine Translation of his Essays, which Fo∣reigners that had no knowledge of the French Tongue earnestly longed for. Mons. Curcellaeus
was Author of this Translation; who desired Monsieur Des Cartes to review it, before he gave leave to publish it. He did so, and withal took occasion to take another touch at some of his Notions, and to make some. Alte∣rations in his Original. Insomuch that these Translations have as great an advantage as that of his Principles, which surpasses the Originals in goodness. Now M. Curcellaeus translated nothing but his Discourse de Methodo, and the Treatise of Dioptriques and Meteors. He did not meddle with Geometry; whether he judged it above his reach, or whether he had notice that M. Schooten had undertaken to translate it, we know not. Monsieur Des Cartes embarked and set sail from Holland,A Voyage iuto France. to the great sorrow of his friends, fearing the great Obstacles that might hinder his return; but especially they feared the re∣sentment of the Indignities committed in re∣spect of him, by the Magistrates and Professors of Ʋtrecht. He arrived at Paris towards the latter end of June, and went to lodge at Ab∣bot Picet's in the Rue des Ecouffes. He departed from thence for Orleans the 12th of July, from whence he went down the Loire to Blois, to Monsieur de Beaune's House, who was a Coun∣sel in the Presidial; from thence to Tours, to Abbot de Touchelay Junior's House, in the Absence of the Elder Brother. There he see a great many of his Friends and Acquaintance, and some of his Relations. After that he pass'd to Nantes, and so to Rennes; from whence, accompanied with his two Brethren,
Counsellors in Parliament, he went to Crevis in the Diocese of St. Malo, to his Brother-in-Law Monsieur Rogiers a Widdower, who married his Sister Jane Des Cartes; there they all laid their heads together, how to settle and accommodate their Domestick Affairs. He was to go from thence to Kerleau near Vannes, to his Eldest Brother's House, and then to Cha∣vagnes in the Diocese of Nantes to his Younger Brother's. After that he went as far as Poictou, upon no other Errand than he did in Britagne, to visit his Friends and Relations; and so came back to Paris towards the middle of October. BOOK VII. From 1644 till 1650. I. & II. AT his Arrival,An Edition of his Prin∣ciples of philosophy. he found the Edi∣tion of his Principles, and the Latine Translation of his Essays finished, and the Copies come out of Holland. The Trea∣tise of Principles did not come out, neither did that Piece he called his World, nor his Course of Philosophy, both of which were suppress'd. He had a mind to divide them into other Parts: The First of which contains the Prin∣ciples of Humane Knowledge, which one may call the first Philosophy or Metaphysicks: wherein it hath very much relation and con∣nexion with his Meditations.
The Second contains what is most general in Philosophy, and the Explanation of the first Laws of Nature, and of the principles of na∣tural things, the Proprieties of Bodies, Space, and Motion, &c. The Third contains a particular Explanation, of the System of the World, and more espe∣cially of what we mean by the Heavens and Celestial Bodies. The Fourth contains whatsoever belongs to the Earth. That which is most remarkable in this Work, is, That the Author after having first of all established the distinction and difference he puts between the Soul and the Body, when he hath laid down, for the Principles of cor∣poreal things, bigness, figure and local motion; all which are things in themselves so clear and intelligible, that they are granted and recei∣ved by every one whatsoever; he hath found out a way to explain all Nature in a manner, and to give a reason of the most wonderful Effects, without altering the Principles; yea, and without being inconsistent with himself in any thing whatsoever. Yet had he not the presumption for all that to believe he had hit upon the explication of all natural things, especially such that do not fall under our senses, in the same manner as they really and truly are in themselves. He should do something indeed, if he could but come the nearest that it was possible to likeli∣hood or verisimilitude, to which others be∣fore him could never reach; and if he could
o bring the matter about, that, whatsoever e had written should exactly agree with all he Phenomena's of Nature, this he judged sufficient for the use of Life, the profit and benefit of which seems to be the main and only end one ought to propose to himself in Mechanicks, Physick, or Medicine; and in all Arts that may be brought to perfection by the help of Physick or natural Philoso∣phy. But of all things he hath explained, there is not one of them that doth not seem at least morally certain in respect of the profit of life, notwithstanding they may be uncertain in re∣spect of the absolute Power of God. Nay, there are several of them that are absolutely, or more than morally certain; such as are Ma∣thematical Demonstrations, and those evident ratiocinations he hath framed concerning the existence of material things. Nevertheless, he was indued with that Modesty, as no where to assume the authority of positively deciding, or ever to assert any thing for un∣deniable. Altho' what he intended to offer, under the Name of Principles of Philosophy, was brought to that Conclusion, that one could not lawfully nor reasonably require more for the perfecting his design; yet did it give some cause to his Friends, to hope to see the Explication of all other things, which made people say, That his Physick was not compleat. He promised him∣self likewise to explain after the same manner, the nature of other more particular Bodies,
that belong to the Terrestrial Globe; as, Mi∣nerals, Plants, Animals, and Man in particu∣lar; After which, he proposed to himself (according as God should please to lengthen out his days) to treat with the same exactness of all Physick or Medicine, of Mechanicks, and of the whole Doctrine of Morality or Ethicks; whereby to present the World with an entire Body of Philosophy. He dedicated his Book of Principles to his most Illustrious Disciple,Elizabeth Princess Palatine of the Rhine, one of his Disciples. the Princess Palatiné Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to that Unfortunate Prince Frederick V. Elector Palatine, chosen King of Bohemia. The Princess had been Educated in the Knowledge of abundance of Languages, and in whatsoever Learning is comprised under the name of Litterae huma∣niores, or Politiores; but the elevation of, and profoundness of her genius and natural parts, would not suffer her to dwell long upon these Arts, by which the greatest Wits of her Sex, who are satisfied with desiring to seem some∣body, are commonly limited. She desir'd to proceed to those parts of Learning, that the strongest Application of Men had advanced, and accomplish'd her self with, and became a great proficient in Philosophy and Mathematicks; till such time as seeing the Essays of Monsieur Des Cartes his Philosophy, she conceived such high esteem and affection for his Doctrine, that she look'd upon all she had learn'd till that time as good as nothing; and so put her self under his Tuition for to raise a new Structure upon his Principles.
Thereupon she sends to him, to come and see her, that she might drink in the true Phi∣osophy at the Fountain Head; and the great desire to do her Service nearer, was one of the reasons that drew him to Leiden & to Ein∣degeest. Never did Master more happily im∣prove the docibility, aptness, penetration, and withal the solidity of a Scholar's Mind. Ha∣ving accustomed her insensibly to the profound Meditation of the grand Mysteries of Nature, and sufficiently exercising of her in the most abstracted Questions of Geometry, and the most sublime ones of Metaphysicks. There was no longer any thing abstruse or mysterious to her; and he ingeniously confesseth and own∣eth, that he had not yet met with any besides her (he excepted Regius in another place) that ever arrived at a perfect understanding of the Works he had published till that time. By this Testimony that he bore to the extraordi∣nary Capacity of the Princess, he intended to distinguish her from those who were not able to apprehend his Metaphysicks, altho' they might have some insight into Geometry; and from those that were not able to understand his Geometry, altho' they might be pretty well vers'd in Metaphysical Truths. She continued to Philosophise with him Viva voce, till a certain Accident obliged her to absent herself from the Presence of the Queen of Bohemia her Mother, and to quit her abode in Holland for Germany; then she chan∣ged her Acquaintance into an Intelligence by Letter, which she kept afoot with him,
by the Ministery of the Princesses her Si∣sters. III. According to the measures M. Des Cartes had taken upon his return from Poictoù,His abode in Paris, where he sees his Friends. to reach Holland before the Frost, he reduc'd himself to the necessity of staying no longer than Ten or Twelve days in Paris. They were all taken up in continual Visits that he was fain to pay his Friends he had never seen since the Siege of Rochelle, and to those his reputation had acquired him in his ab∣sence. His greatest care was, to be sure to visit the Jesuites of the Colledge of Clermont, where was performed the last Ceremonies of his re∣conciliation to Father Bourdin, his old Adver∣sary; who, that, his friendship might be active, and not consist in a parcel of words, offer'd to be his Correspondent for the Letters he should send to the Fathers of the Company in any Province of the Realm, and into Italy, and also for those that he was to receive from them. He visited also, besides the Duke de Luines, and Monsieur Clerselier who translated his Me∣ditations, Monsieur Chanut, whose desert had reach'd his Ear, by the Commendations of Father Mersennus. This Friend was pleased to introduce him into the Chancellor's Com∣pany, who received him with all Testimonies of respect, that one could possibly expect from a Magistrate who favoured Men of Parts and Learning, that loved the Sciences, and was already advantagiously prepossessed with a
good opinion of our Philosopher, by the read∣ng of his Essays of Philosophy. He entertain'd likewise frequent Conferen∣ces with Sir Kenelm Digby, an English Catho∣ick, then in Paris, and reckoned in the num∣ber of one of his chief Friends for many years together; but altho' he confin'd himself to see those Friends, he had never seen, the num∣ber of them was too great, and the term he had prescrib'd for his abode too short, to give them all the Satisfaction he could have wish'd. Yet he thought himself obliged not to pass by Monsieur Robervall unsaluted; he desired to assure him how much he valued him, offered him his friendship afresh, and declar to him Viva voce, that all the Impression of their petty Paper-scuffles were perfly razed out of his Spirit. Monsieur Robervall strain'd hard to An∣swer the honour Monsieur Des Cartes did him; and he protested freely how much he was dis∣posed to pay what he ought to his Worth, and to his Quality; but the small Coherence Monsieur Des Cartes observed in his Discour∣ses, gave him quickly to understand the truth of that Idea he had conceived of his Interiours: it was no hard matter to judge that the amity of this Geometrician was a benefit that would soon perish. Nevertheless, he did him the justice to believe that there was less malice and affectation, than nature and disposition in his unpolite, rough-hewn, disobliging Be∣haviour; and he received his friendship how∣ever, the best that he could give, without ta∣king his Bond to warrant it, either more solid, or durable than it was.
Leaving what Copies of his Principles he had to Abbot Picot's disposal, at whose House he lodged, who had already translated the better part into the French Tongue, he de∣parted for Holland about the end of October. And Father Mersennus, that had nothing le at this departure that could retain him in Pa∣ris, took a Journey into Italy, which he was obliged to do for the matter of Eight or Nine Months. IV & V. The News of Monsieur Des Cartes his return,He retires to Egmond. dissipated the trouble he had put his Friends in Holland to, about some suspi∣cions they had that he should be retain'd in France. Upon his Arrival about the 15th of March, he went directly from Amsterdam into North-Hollan to his retiring place at Egmond de Bearnen, with a resolution to shut himself up more closely than ever in his old beloved Solitude, and at a distance from the importunities of his Neighbours, and visits of Friends, having resolved wholly to apply him∣self to the knowledge of Animals, Plants, and Minerals. That he might procure himself the ease and quietness necessary to his Studies, he presently had thoughts of putting an end to that process or suit that he had depending at Groninguen against Schoockius, Professor and Rector of the University; which was partly the cause of that which Voetius had commen∣ced against him at Ʋtrecht. The face of this Ʋtrecht affair changed to his honour at last; altho' by the ill-will of the Judges Voetius
ad bribed, he got but little advantage by it. But it was enough for him that their irregu∣ar Proceedings contrary to the Course of Law, turn'd to their confusion; the great noise heir Injustice made, stood the Judges of Gro∣inguen in no small stead, for the regulating heir Proceeding in the Judgment they were o pass between the Professor and Monsieur Des Cartes. The Business was depending in the Senate r Counsel of the University, which is the ight Court of Judicature where Schoockius his Causes were to be tried: and the Action a∣gainst him was, to make a publick amends nd reparation for the Calumnies, and Slanders, hereof the Latine Book was full, intituled, Philosophia Cartesiana, or, Admiranda Methodus, which was composed and published by Voetius, n Schoockius his Name, who declared himself Author of the same; and consequently to be esponsible for it. Upon a Letter Monsieur Des Cartes writ about it the 7th of February, to Tobias Andraeus one of the Professors of the U∣niversity, and one of the Judges that sit upon the Cause; Schoockius was warn'd into Court; upon his appearance, without holding it ne∣cessary to hear the Cause, they gave Sentence in favour of Monsieur Des Cartes the 10th of April, 1645. yea, and they dealt very favou∣rably with Schoockius (because he was Col∣league to the Judges) being content only, that he should acknowledge and confess his Errors, and that he had been but only the Instrument and Broaker of Voetius his Calumnies and Ex∣cesses.
The surprizal that his Cause came to an Hearing in his absence, even before he had produced his Writings, made Monsieur Des Cartes look upon this quick expedition, as pure effect of the Evidence that his Cause was good. The Judges of Groninguen sending him a Copy of the Judgment, together with all the Acts that served to the prosecuting the Cause, he judged it convenient to dispatch them to the Magistrates of Ʋtrecht, with five Letters of Voetius their Minister, written to Father Mersennus, on purpose that they might open their Eyes, and behold the Impostures and Malignity of this Hypocrite; But instead of repairing the loss, and making amends for what was past, their confusion turn'd into their being asham'd at it; which produced nothing but an Act to Prohibit the Impression and dis∣persing whatsoever was for, or against Mon∣sieur Des Cartes. Notwithstanding this Order, Voetius taking on like a Madman for what had past at Gronin∣guen, did nevertheless Print a Letter in Schooc∣kius his Name against the Author's consent, who disowned it: and his Son falls foul upon the Judges of Groninguen, by a most insolent Libel, intituled, Tribunal Iniquum: it was but requisite Monsieur Des Cartes should take upon him to defend these Gentlemen and their Judgment. Nevertheless, Voetius the Father, and Dema∣tius his Colleague, branded in the Sentence as Forgers and Slanderers, did complot and con∣trive an expedient how to punish Schoockius
his Ingratitude, who had been Scholar and Confident to Voetius. They termed the Obli∣gation that lay upon him to prefer Truth to Falshood, before the Tribunal of his Judges, ingratitude. But because he was no longer under the lash; they entered an Action of Scandal against him, as tho' he had done wrong. Nevertheless, the threatnings Schooc∣kius thunder'd out against Voetius, that he would discover all his Roguery in Court, caused the latter to surcease his Process just when it was upon the point of being try'd at Ʋtrecht, and they never really pardoned one another after. The disposition of Monsieur Des Cartes in respect of them was quite otherwise. The Storm once blown over; he scrupled not to discover his heart: and had the generosity to facilitate their reconciliation, and freely ten∣der'd them his friendship; but Voetius seem'd not to be sensible of all these Courtesies. He boasted that he had reserved another Action still against him, that he could make use of when occasion served. This put Mon∣sieur Des Cartes upon drawing up an Apologe∣tical Manifesto for the Magistrates of Utrecht, to the intent he might once for all bury all the whole Affair in Oblivion. He made for them an Historical and rational Compendium of what past in their City from the Year 1639▪ touching his Philosophy and Person: He laid before them the justice of the Cause, and the injustice of his Enemies to prevail with them at last to do him right, for the wrong they
had done to his reputation, out of the favour they bore to Voetius. However the reading of his Principles pro∣duced good or bad effects in mens Minds, ac∣cording as they found themselves inclined an disposed in respect of the Author of them Accordingly Monsieur Des Cartes could hope for nothing but what was favourable to hi from Rivet, who called himself his Friend, and an Admirer of his Doctrine too, that might imitate several Cartesians with wh he was to live. Yet not so well understand∣ing it, he thought he put an acceptable Com∣plement upon M. Gassendus, in propounding to him to make the same Reflections upon his Principles, as he had done upon his Medita∣tions. M. Gassendus excused himself thereupon, first of all, upon pretence that he would rub up an old Sore; and then, upon pretence that he undervalued his Principles, & was pleased to let, fly some injurious Expressions against him for to discharge his Mind. The Jesuites carriage was quite contrary to his, in the Judgment they past upon his last Work. He received ex∣ceeding advantagious Testimonies thereof from the Heads of their Body, even to the making him believe that the Society would take his part. The Progress of his Philosophy was no less in Holland than in Paris:Hereeboord teacheth Cartesia∣nism at Lei∣den. In the Month of February, M. Hoogheland sent his three diffe∣rent Positions lately defended at Leiden, con∣taining nothing but his Opinions. They were
pretty fortunately introduc'd into this Uni∣versity by the Industry of Adrian Heereboord, Professor of Philosophy, and Sub-principal of the Theological Colledge, by leave of Hey∣danus Minister and famous Preacher, of Golius Schoolen, and of some other Professors, who were themselves become strenuous maintainers of this new Philosophy. Heereboord's Zeal in is first Lessons was not perhaps heated to that egree as was that of Regius at Ʋtrecht, yet it eemed to be more circumspect, cautious, and etter regulated. So was it also of a longer continuance, and an answerable success. It had been very well for Monsieur Des Cartes,The Schism and Ingratitude of Regius. Regius had followed the same course, r that he had persevered at least in the same first tractableness and docibility in respect of Monsieur Des Cartes: since he hath ventured o dogmatize upon his own head concerning he Union of the Humane Soul with the Bo∣y and upon some other nice Points, he put Monsieur Des Cartes to a great deal of trouble, who by his particular Exhortations, Corre∣tions of his Theses's and other Works, en∣eavoured to keep his Spirit within due ounds. Regius, since that, fell away strangely nd insensibly: and either because he had re∣overed his first Genius, or that he searcht out ome middle way to get again into the favour f his Friends of Ʋtrecht; and by that means, ecure himself of the peaceable possession of is Professor's Chair; he drew up, during Monsieur Des Cartes his Travails certain Essays f a Philosophy of his own making, to which
he pretended to give the name of Fondemens de Physique, the Foundations of Physicks. The Experience he had of Mons. Des Cartes his Kindnesses, made him believe this Work would have gone down with him. Just as he had composed it, he ends it him to peruse and examine, rather, not to give over his old Custom all on a sudden, than to make any ad∣vantage by his Mr's. reading of it. Monsieur Des Cartes was not so complaisant, as he flatter'd himself to find him; he observed in this last Writing of his, more License than he had ob∣served in all the rest; and instead of sending Regius the Corrections of the places that re∣quired them, as his constant practice was for∣merly, he writ to him and told him roundly, That he could not, nor would not afford a general Approbation to this Work. He ad∣ded withal, That if he doted so much upon his own private Sentiments, not to follow the advice he had given him to suppress or reform it, that then he should be obliged to disown it, and so undeceive the World, who thought all along that he entertained no other Senti∣ments but his. Regius, who had already taken his part, and obstinately stood it out against all sorts of Re∣monstrances, did nevertheless thank Monsieur Des Cartes for his advice: but instead of follow∣ing it as formerly, he did what he could to excuse his Work, and to shew the neat Con∣trivance and Excellency of it to his Master; as if these particulars had escaped his Refle∣ctions. He commended to him more especi∣ally
his Method of Analysis, and that curious way of his to define and divide. But to avoid the inconveniencies Monsieur Des Cartes had given him notice of, he sent him this Model of an Advertisement to the Reader, with which he intended to conclude the Preface of is Book. For to undeceive those who might be pt to imagine that the things contained in this Work might be the meer Sentiments of Monsieur Des Cartes, I am willing to give notice to the World; that there are, indeed, several Passages, wherein I do, ex professo, adhere to the Dictates of that excellent Person; but that there are others lso, wherein I am of a quite contrary Opinion; nd some others again, upon which he hath not hought good to explain his meaning. That he might endeavour to prevent the publick dissa∣isfaction and disowning of it, wherewith he hought himself threatned by Monsieur Des Cartes: He offer'd him to add moreover in his Preface whatsoever he should judge con∣venient; because he apprehended this disown∣ng, as a Confutation of his Work, capable of tifling or decrying it, at its very birth; but, at the bottom, he talked not a word of altering or mending it. Monsieur Des Cartes sent him word that he mightily approved of his manner of treating of Physicks by way of Definitions and Divi∣sions, provided he would adjoyn thereto the necessary proofs: But let him understand withal, that he did not appear to him suffi∣ciently vers'd in Metaphysicks nor in Divinity, to undertake to publish any thing about them:
And, that if he were fully bent upon the Publication of of his Foundations or Grounds of Physick, he should do well, at least to re∣rench what related to the Soul of Man and Divinity, and not to falsifie any thing he bor∣rowed from him: In a word, that he should do him a kindness not to make him a parta∣ker in his mistakes and extravagant notions in Metaphysicks, nor in his Visions in Natural Philosophy and Medicine. This last Letter caused Regius to pluck off his Mask: and being resolved to Sacrifice his Master's Honour to his own; he quite and clean renounced his Discipline by a Declara∣tion written 23d of July 1645. after such an hectoring huffing manner; that, what they tell us of Aristotle's ingratitude to Plato, and of Maximus the Cynick's insolence to Gregory Nazianzen is not incredible; Regius went far beyond them by this insult, and lost by his Schism that Glory which involved him in such Dangers and Persecutions that had like to have made him the Proto-martyr of the Car∣tesian Sect. Nay, and he joyn'd Injustice and Unfaithfulness to his Revolt, for retaining the best part of his Master's Doctrine, thereby to get the same Honour as he did before, he disfigured and spoil'd it, as he pleased. And under pretence that Monsieur Des Cartes refu∣sed so long as he lived, to acknowledge it to be his, because of that forreign outside: He seized upon it after his Death; suppressing even his Name so unworthily and basely, that men look upon him as much to be the first
Plagiary of his Doctrine, as the first Schisma∣tick of his Sect. Monsieur Des Cartes answer'd all the affronts and outrages of Regius; with so much wisdom and sweetness, that might have been capable to have made an Apology for him if he had needed one; and he would not make an end of keeping a Correspondence with this ingrate∣ful Wretch, until he had given the most wholsome advice that one could possibly expect from a good Master and true-hearted Friend. VII.The Trea∣tise of Ani∣mals stoln by Regius. The most odious part of the Robbery which denominated Regius Plagiary of Mon∣sieur Des Cartes, consisted in certain Memoirs that he had composed ever since the Edition of his Principles, with a design to make a Trea∣ise of Animals: the Copy which Regius, by what unning took, I know not, was very deficient: nd out of a piece of indiscretion that helpt to etray him, he had almost inserted it all into is Book of the Grounds of Physicks, or Natu∣al Philosophy; without being able to under∣stand the meaning, as well because the Fi∣gures were wanting, as because what Mon∣sieur Des Cartes had done, was not quite fi∣ished. In effect, what Regius intended to produce, was nothing else but a very imperfect rough∣raught of that which Monsieur Des Cartes esign'd to perform upon this Subject. After he winning of his Cause at Groninguen, the de∣ire of putting his grand design in execution, made him set about Anatomical Operations
with fresh Application. At this time of be∣ing thus busied, he was visited by a Gentle∣man, who desired to see his Library; he shewed him nothing but a Calf, which he was going to dissect. From the Knowledge of Beasts,His Studies and Treaty of Anato∣my. he pro∣ceeded to that of the Humane Body by the help of his Experiments, and begun in the Autumn of this Year 1645. his single Trea∣tise de l'homme, of Man: And also that De la formation du foetus; altho' he had not finish'd his piece of Animals. He gave a little diversion to this Study,Questions about the Quadra∣ture of the Circle. by reason of his being ingaged with the most eminent Mathematicians in Europe to make one, in that famous difference that arose this same Year, between Longomontanus and Pellius touching the Quadrature of the Circle. He had been a long time convinc'd that it was impossible; and after he had tried it by means of his Method and Analysis, he would have nothing more to do with this Operation, as a thing impracticable and of no use. At the beginning of October,He sees M. Chanut and M. Por∣lier at Am∣sterdam. he sallies out of his solitude to go imbrace his Friend, who pass'd by Amsterdam for Swedeland, in quality of Resident of France. There he got Ac∣quaintance with Monsieur Porlier, who be∣long'd to M. Chanut's Company; who, during the Four days he sojourned at Amsterdam, took singular delight to hear the recital of divers particulars, fit to destroy the Slanders of our Philosopher's Enemies.
Monsieur Des Cartes returned very much satisfied the Tenth of the Month to Egmond, where he pass'd the Winter being very severe that Year; then he composed two little Works to pass away the time; because the Plants in his Garden were not yet in a Condition to supply with Experiments necessary for the Continuation of his Physicks. The first of these Works was the Answer,He an∣swers M. Gassendus his instan∣ces. he at first refused to the Book of Monsieur Gassendus his instances, translated by M. Clen∣sellier into French, with softer Expressions in behalf of the last, whom he desired to bring to an Agreement with our Philosopher; the other was a small Treatise of the Nature of the Passions of the Soul. His design was not to make a thing that was in all Points so com∣pleat as to deserve to see light, but only to exercise himself upon Morality for his own Edification, and to try if his Physicks or Na∣tural Philosophy might be as serviceable to him as he hoped, for the establishing of sure and certain Foundations in Morality. VIII.His dispute with M. Ro∣berval about Vibrations. In this interim, Mons. Roberval for∣getting by little and little the resolution he had taken up to live in good intelligence with Monsieur Des Cartes, after the honour he had received from one of his Visits in Paris, re∣turn'd insensibly to his restless Genius. He spoke, hit he, miss he; of what he knew, and what he knew not, with very little precaution. Monsieur Des Cartes had notice of it by some who peradventure represented Monsieur Ro∣berval more in the fault than he really was,
without ever considering that there was more of weakness than malice in his behaviour and deportment. He had advice at the beginning of 1646. of two main Points, concerning which, M. Rober∣val boasted he could baffle, and run him down. The first, was concerning the Question of Pappus; of which he proposed no new diffi∣culty at that time. The other was about Vi∣brations; that is as much as to say, what big∣ness every body of what figure soever, must have, being suspended in the Air by its extre∣mities, to make its turns and returns equal to those of a Plummet hanged at a thread of a length given. The Question of Vibrations was propounded to him by Father Mersennus, which he an∣swered the 21st of February, and the 2d of March; and after that by M. Cavendish then at Paris. He sent the Solution of this Question to that Noble Person the 30th of March: whereupon Monsieur de Roberval made some Observations, which M. Cavendish did not fail to dispatch to Monsieur Des Cartes. He received an Answer to them some time after. Now Monsieur Des Cartes seeing that M. Ro∣berval relied chiefly upon his Experiments, he sends Father Mersennus word that he durst not presume of himself to undertake at first dash, to give a sufficient Reason, for all that one might have experimented. But, that he believed all the Cunning in examining Experiments, consisted in choosing such that depend least upon divers Causes, and such
whose true Reasons might be the most easily discovered. Monsieur Des Cartes could have heartily wisht to see a timely end of this Dispute, which he perceived degenerate at last into unprofita∣ble needless Questions: But M. Roberval was pleased to prolong them beyond the Years end. This Conduct of his, together with his Fopperies about Pappus his Question, brought an old house upon his head, by the censure of his Aristarchus; that is to say, (a Book of his touching the System of the World) together with a Judgment upon the Intellect and Ca∣pacity of this Geometrician, which Monsieur Des Cartes sent to Father Mersennus. Much what about the same time that he ex∣amined Seneca's Book,A Com∣merce of Moral Phi∣losophy with the Princess Eli∣zabeth. De vitâ Beatâ, of an Happy Life, in favour to the Princess Eli∣zabeth his Scholar, who had desired him to furnish her wherewithal to divert her, being out of favour at the Spa; where her Physitians had debarred her of all Study, and serious application of Mind: the judicious reflection the Princess made upon the said Work, en∣gaged him afterwards to handle divers of the most important Questions of Morality with her, touching Summum bonum, or Soveraign Good, the Liberty of Man, the State of the Soul, the use of Reason, the use of the Passions, of virtuous and vicious Actions, and touching the good and bad things of Life. Nothing at that time interrupted the Joy he received from that happy Communication of Moral Philosophy with this Princess,He disowns Regius and his Book. except
Regius his Book, Intituled, The Grounds of Phi∣sicks; he believed he was obliged publickly to disown them for the Reasons we have men∣tioned. Therefore he inserted his disowning them utterly in the French Edition of his Prin∣ciples, which came out shortly after. IX. At the very time that Regius broach'd his Schism against Monsieur Des Cartes, M. Hoogheland a Popish Gentleman, renowned for his Vertue and Charity,A Cohe∣rence be∣tween Mr. Hoogheland and M. Des Cartes. his Landlord Leiden, and his Correspondent, gratified the Publick with tokens of his strict alliance with him; which he made appear by his publish∣ing a Book that he dedicated to him concern∣ing the Existence of God, the Spirituality of the Soul, and its Union with the Body; besides the oeconomy of the Body of the Animal me∣chanically explained. The Civility and Courtesie of the Author in acknowledging how much he was behold∣ing to Monsieur Des Cartes, made him point-blank against Regius, which made him stand upon his Pantofles. My Friend, saith he, M. de Hoogheland, hath acted in Opposition against Re∣gius, in as much as he hath Writ nothing that he did not borrow from me, and upon that account contrary to me; whereas the other hath writ no∣thing which is properly mine, yet there is nothing against me; forasmuch as he hath followed the self∣same Principles. But the World would not be put off with a Declaration they suspected to be made only the more generously to recompence the ho∣nour this Friend had done him the very
Front, and through the whole Body of his Book; nay, they were so far perswaded of the contrary in Rome, that upon the relation of the Business two or three Years after, by Father Magnanus to M. Carcavi, some were apt to take the Name of Hoogheland for a Stalking-Horse, by which Monsieur Des Cartes had a Mind to make surer of his Game, to publish a new Piece. The Condition of other Friends with whom Monsieur Des Cartes kept Correspondence,The disper∣sing of his Friends at the Hague, and retire∣ment of the Princess. especially at the Hague, was somewhat dis∣composed and put out of order at that jun∣cture of time, by the retirement of the Prin∣cess, his most Illustrious Scholar. Several of those who were Retainers to her, got out of the way of their own accord; very few of them were permitted to accompany or follow her in her Journey. Some again were re∣tain'd by their Settlement and Employment about the Prince and Princess of Orange. M. Becklin staid to wait upon the Princesses Sister to the Lady Elizabeth. M. de Pollot was preferr'd to a Chair of Philosophy and Mathe∣maticks at Breda, in the P. of Orange's New Colledge; as was M. John Pell, heretofore Professor at Amsterdam. M. Sampson Johnson that pass'd at Paris for Princess Elizabeths Tu∣tor, but, was only Chaplain to the Queen of Bohemia her Mother, was also admitted into the same Colledge to be Professor of Divinity. All these Professors who took a Pride to fol∣low the Cartesian Doctrine, made their Uni∣versity otherwise called Schola illustris, all over
Cartesian at its very birth, by the good likeing and favour of the Curators. Mons. Rivet Al∣moner, and Chaplain to the Prince, and Mons. Huyghens, second Son to Monsieur Zuitlichem, educated in the Principles of Monsieur Des Cartes. Amongst those that continued at the Hague, there was none more considerable than Mons. de Brasset, a French Gentleman, his Corre∣spondent, and since that Resident of France to the States General with M. de Burggrave de de Dhona the younger, Governour of the City of Orange, who for all that persisted in the exercise of the Cartesian Philosophy with the absent Princess. Besides so many subjects of satisfactions,The condi∣tion of his friends a∣mongst the Jesuits and elsewhere. Monsieur Des Cartes received also, all the year long, divers Complements from the Jesuits of France, and the Low-Countries. The business was so much the more delightful to him, be∣cause these Fathers seem'd to be the persons in the World, who should think themselves concern'd in the publication of a new Philo∣sophy; nay, and who, according to him, should have pardoned him the least, for so doing, if so be they had found any thing to blame in it. He was likewise much pleased to perceive some of those in Germany and Italy to be reco∣vered of their prejudice, and particularly Fa∣ther Athanasius Kercherus▪ who intreated him to grant him his friendship by the intercession of Father Mersennus. He was also inform'd by the reading of two Tracts of Physick, that Fa∣ther Stephen Noel, Rector of the Colledge of
Clermont in Paris, presented him with, That the Fathers of the company of Jesuits did not so much tie themselves up to Ancient Opinions, as not o dare to propose new ones likewise. Father Noel was so much his friend, that the next year he thought himself obliged to undertake his de∣fence against young Paschal, before ever he was quite brought over to the Cartesian Party. Much about the same time he received the Philosophy of Father Fabri, the Jesuit Mathe∣matical Professor at Lyons; this Philosophy had much reputation to be a good one, not∣withstanding it was contrary to that of M. Des Cartes. Men past the like Judgment in a man∣ner upon another Piece of this Father's, that came to light that year, concerning Local Mo∣tion. Monsieur Des Cartes upon the receipt of these two Pieces had advice, that the same Author had some thoughts to Compose a Course of Philosophy to oppose his; that which moved him to the resolution of contradicting his Notions, was, in case he might be backt by his Society, and, that it should appear that the Jesuits would be pleased to adopt his Doctrine. But the Event let him understand that Father Fabri had not then got the approbation of his Society. In September, that year M. Des Cartes lost a friend by the death of Father Niceron, a Mi∣nim; but he gain'd another in the person of M. Le Comte, Controuler General of the War, who was already friend to M. Clersellier, Cha∣nut and Porlier; he deserved his acquaintance by some Objections he started concerning his
Book of Principles, which Abbot Picot and his second self were pleased to Answer. X. Scarce had Monsieur Des Cartes done with his new Friends M. le Comte and Mon∣sieur Porlier,He answers the Q. of Sweden and M. Chanut touching some Que∣stions in Morality. but he was necessitated to An∣swer M. Chanut about one of the most material Questions in the World; and prepare to sa∣tisfie the Queen of Sweden's desire, suitable to the high opinion of him, wherewith this Resident had possess'd that Princess. The last Letter he writ from Stockholm concerning the rare Perfections of Christina; The dis∣course he held upon the same Subject with M. de la Thuillerie at his return from his Ambassy of Sweden, and the example of his illustrious Scho∣lar the Princess Elizabeth, suffer'd him no longer to question the possibility of all these wonders that Fame had published of that great Queen, not yet above 19 years of Age. The gusto M. Chanut had already inspired into her for his Philosophy, made her demand his opinion concerning a Question of Morality, that was bandied about between her and this Resident in November 1646. The Question was, to know, when a Man makes a bad use of love or hatred, which of these two irregu∣larities, or bad uses is the worst: M. Chanut in beseeching Monsieur Des Cartes in the Queens behalf to send her his Sentiment upon the Question, sent him word, that the Queen and he were of two different opinions, without telling him which was the Princesses, which his. Monsieur Des Cartes, that he might afford
Queen the Satisfaction she demanded, drew p presently (that is, at the beginning of the ear 1647.) a fine Dissertion upon Love; which we have in the first Volume of his Letters; in that Tract he discuss'd three things his usual Method; First, what Love is. Secondly, Whether or no pure Natural Light eaches us to love God. Thirdly, Which of he two Irregularities of Love or Hatred is the worst. This Piece was sent into Sweden in February, the reading of it made the Queen udge that whatsoever M. de Chanut had told her concerning Monsieur Des Cartes, came short of the real Truth. She seemed so a∣bundantly pleased with it, that she was never eary of commending the Author, and be∣gan to inquire into some particulars of his Person, Life and Conversation. Monsieur Des Cartes, (says she to M. Chanut) as far as I perceive by his writing, and by the Character you give me of him, is the most happy man alive, and his Condition seems to me to deserve envying: you will do me a Kindness to assure him of the great esteem I have for him. She consented to all that was contained in the writing, except one word, that shew'd, by the by, that Mon∣sieur Des Cartes was not of their opinion that hold the World to be finite; she signified her doubting whether or no one can admit the Hypothesis of an infinite World, without do∣ing Injury to Christian Religion. M Chanut was required to signifie so much to him, and demand his Explanation of this difficulty, to which he answered, that he did not hold the
World infinite but, indefinite; as much as to say, that he had no Reasons to prove it to b finite. And withal, he satisfied M. Chanut who had added another, of his own head touching the true Rule that we ought to fol∣low in dividing and sharing our Inclination concerning friendship in the exchange of mu∣tual offices of Benevolence, and in the distin∣guishing of esteem and respect from Affection. XI. The pleasure Monsieur Des Cartes tasted in his Communication with the Queen of Sweden and M. Chanut about Moral Philosophy,The trou∣ble Regius and Trig∣landius put him to in Leiden. was disturb'd at the beginning of this year 1647. by certain Leiden Divines, who did their utmost to put him to some trouble in their University. Revius, Principal of the Colledge of Divines suborned, (as is credibly given out) by the secret Artifice of Voetius, who could not endure that Cartesianism that he laboured to root out at Ʋtrecht, should get ground at Leiden; thought good to cause Four different Theses against Monsieur Des Cartes, to be dis∣puted on in January and February. Revius his intent was to pervert the sence of the Meta∣physical Meditations of our Philosopher. In which business he was seconded by Triglandius the Minister, Head-Professor of Divinity in the University. Their design was to have him condemned by their Classes and Consistory▪ as a blasphemer, an impious Person, and a Pelagian: Monsieur Des Cartes being acquain∣ted that these new Slanderers did not oppose any one of his true opinions, but only that they charged him with false ones, which had
never entered into his thoughts: writ to the Curators of the University, to demand Satis∣faction for the same. The Curators having ited the Rector and Professors to know what was the matter, issued out a Decree in all aste on the 20th of May, to forbid them to make any mention of Monsieur Des Cartes and is Opinions in their Lectures for the future. Whereupon they write to Monsieur Des Cartes, o give him notice, That having satisfy'd him, to their Power in what he demanded of them, they hoped that on his part, he would likewise answer their Desires. That to this effect they intreated him, that he would forbear to debate any longer that question which he said had been opposed by the Professors of their University; to prevent the inconvenience that might ensue to both Parties. Monsieur Des Cartes was very much dissatis∣y'd with their Carriage towards him, and ound nothing commendable in it, but the ci∣ility of terms. He wrote to them to let hem understand, how much he was astonish'd hat he was able to comprehend their mean∣ng; or that he had not made his plain enough to make them understand what it was he esired of them. These Gentlemen were istaken to think that the Business was about Question that had een opposed by the two Divines, Revius and Triglandius. It was only bout giving him satisfaction for a Calumny whose dangerous Consequences were to be eared, because of the rank and credit of the Calumniators.
Monsieur Des Cartes seeing the niceness of the Curators, who were afraid to put a bt upon the  of their University, and knowing besides that Revius and Trigland , who had  brought over to their side the  of the Ministers, Divines and Professors,  went to get him con∣demned their Consistories or Synods; thought  best to make use of the Prince of  Authority, as he had done in the business of To that purpose, he writes to M. Plenipotentiary for the Peace of Munst; who supply'd the place of an Ambassador for some time at the . The purport of this Let∣ter was, that the Divines might be made to hold their peace, and that the Faculty of Di∣vinity might be Judges in this case; yet they took  care not to do any thing that miht offend or discourage the Ministers and Pro∣fessrs in their Funetions and Zeal they shewed for the Service of their Religion. Nevertheless, the Divines very sorry to siee Monsieur Des Cartes and his writings snatch'd out of their clutches, wreaked their Malice up∣on of their Colleagues whom they knew followers of his Philosophy. The Storm fell heaviest upon Professor Heerebord and du Ban. and also upon Heydanus the Minister, whom they accused to be a favourer of the Popish Religion, because he Preached like a Cartesian; But they durst not meddle with either Golius, or the two , nor with young Dr. de , who professed Physick in private.
XII. These new Troubles were not capable to make him any longer put off his Journey into France,His second Voyage in∣to France. which de designed at the begin∣ning of them. He departed from the Hague the 7th of June, and got to Paris, with a reso∣lution to pass into Bretaign at the beginning of July, to regulate his Affairs that furnish'd him with a pretence for his Journey. But the French Edition of his Principles which was finished, in the hands of Abbot Picot the Tran∣slator, gave him an occasion to defer a little longer, as well to put a Preface before it, as to see a man who was to be his Companion in his Journey freed from this business; he see no body during this interval but Father Mer∣sennus, Monsieur Mydorge, who he was never to see more, as also M. Clersellier, who, after a tedious Sickness had some Months before that, procured the publishing the Meditations in French, translated by the D. de Lucines and himself. When he had settled his Affairs in Bretaign and Poicton, he came back through Tourain, where M. de Crenan, a Gentleman of his Ac∣quaintance detain'd him for some time. At his return, he found a great deal of disorder in his Acquaintance. Father Mersennus sick, Monsieur Mydorge dead about a Fortnight be∣fore. Yet he had some other Friends at Court who thought of him, tho' he never dreamt of them; they made their interest with Cardinal Richelieu, to procure him a Pension from the King; it was granted him in Consideration of
his great , and the Profit and Advantage that his Philosophy and the Inquiries of his long Studies procured to Mankind; as also to help him to pursue his mode Experiments that required much expence, &c. He was surprized to see the Ex∣pedition of the Letters Patents, importing the Donation of a ension of 3000 Livres, Sealed March the 6th before he had so much as heard of the Proceedings his Friends had made to that  and he found Marshal de then Governour of the Finances, who honoured him with  particular Ac∣quaintance, a Person very punctual and careful to see it paid him. The next day he thought upon his return into Holland, just as he met, near the Place Royal, M. Paschal the Son, who had a great desire to see him, from the time he knew him to be in France. Monsieur Des Cartes was much taken with his Discourse about the Ex∣periments he  his Father's, in Rouen, of a Vacuum matter of 15 Months before. He found these Experiments pretty conformable to the Principles of his Philosophy; notwith∣standing M. Paschal was still averse to it, by reason of the engagement & uniformity of his Sentiment with M. Roberval, and others, who hold a Vacuum; but yet that he might make some part of amends for his Conversation, he advised him to try other Experiments upon the Mass of Air to whose Gravitation he re∣ferr'd that which vulgar Philosophers vainly ascribe to the fuga vcui. He assured him of the good success of his Experiments, altho'
he himself had not made them, because he discours'd of them, conformable to his Prin∣ciples. M. Paschal who was not yet perswa∣ded of solidity of his Principles, who also promised some Objections against his Materia subtilis, perhaps would have had no respect to his advice, if he had not been informed about the same time of such a like Notion, that Tor∣ricelius a Mathematician of Florence enter∣tain'd. The Experiments he made upon this advice, and which he also caused M. Perrier his Brother-in-Law to make in 1648. were very successful. But methinks, he looks upon himself beholding rather to Torricellius than Monsieur Des Cartes for them. He departed as soon as ever he had received the Letters Parents for his Pension.His return to Holland. He arri∣ved in Holland towards the end of September with Abbot Picot, who kept him Company in his beloved solitude till the middle of January of the ensuing year. They spent the three last months of the year in enjoying one another, in cultivating Philosophy in a profound tran∣quillity being chiefly busied in divers Experi∣ments of a Vacuum, which they found more and more agreeing with his Principles; im∣proving to their best advantage the mildness of the Winter, which was extraordinary that same year. These Occupations were interrupted by a Letter of the 9th of November,He sends his opinion of summum bonum and Treatise of the Passions, to the Q of Swden. that Monsieur Des Cartes received from M. Chanut, who be∣seeched him in the Queen of Swedens name, to explain to her his opinion concerning summum
bonum. He acquitted himself as well as he could reasoning upon matters of Faith; foras∣much as the Queen acquainted him that she only consider'd summum bonum in the sense of your ancient Philosophers. He accompanied his writing with some Letters which he had heretofore directed to the Princess Elizabeth, upon the same Subject, together with his Ma∣nuscript Treatise of Passions. The Queen was so well satisfied with them, that she was pleased to write to him with her own Hand to give him thanks, thinking at that very time to have him near her. XIII. Towards the end of the year,Writings of  and Regius. there appear'd in Holland two Latine Pieces; as to which Monsieur Des Cartes was not likely to shew himself unconcern'd. Nevertheless, he thought to have slighted the first, as being directly against him, intituled, Consideration sur la Methode de la Philosophie Cartesienne, Consi∣deration upon the Method of the Cartesian Philosophy. I say, he thought to have slighted it, because the Author of it was Revius his Enemy, and because it was stufft with needles Cails, and gross calumniating Abuses. The other touched him more to the quick, altho' it did not meddle with him but indi∣rectly; The Author, was his old quondam Disciple Regius; the Title of it was, An Ex∣planation of Humane Spirit, or, of the Soul of Man. Monsieur Des Cartes took notice of several Opinions therein, which he judged false and pernicious: And because men were generally perswaded that Regius had still the same Senti∣ments
be inspir'd him with, he thought him∣self obliged to discover the Errors of this wri∣ting, for fear they might be imputed to him, by those, who not having read his Works, especially his Meditations, might accidentally fall a reading this writing; the Confutation of it, writ in Latin, was intituled, Remarks upon a contain Placart, &c. was  without his knowledge, Regius answered it, not that Des Cartes cared a straw for his Answer. But it was confuted afterwards by Tobie d' Andre. He made no more account of two other Libels that appear'd against him about the same time: and his undervaluing of them was followed by that of the Publick, that suffer'd them to perish unregarded. Scarce was the Winter over before he re∣ceived a kind of Order from Court,A third Voyage in∣to France not succesful. and that too, as if it had been in the King's Name, to com∣mand him to come back into France upon ad∣vantagious offers; they consisted in proposing the acceptance of a new Pension and a consi∣derable place, which was to procure him more honour than trouble; that so he might have leisure to continue his Studies, he shewed an extraordinary backwardnes to undertake this tedious Journey; for he suspected the success, by representing to himself the posture of the Affairs of the Kingdom. But receiving a brief of his new Pension, that an Officer at Court, a friend of his, sent him by M. Martigny; He was no longer in a condition to be at his own disposal. He departed therefore in May: but scarce
was he arrived at Paris, but the state of Pub∣lick Affairs afforded him a fair Prospect of the incertainty of Humane things; and shewed his own easiness to let himself be overcome; trou∣bles unexpectedly coming on, were the cause why, instead of effects and performances that they had made him hope for, by their promi∣ses, he found that they had made one of his Relations pay for the Letters they sent him, and that he stood indebted to him for the Money they cost. So that, it was just as if he had come to Paris upon no other Errand but to buy a Scroll of Parchment; ay, and the dearest and most insignificant one, that ever came to his hands. That which he most took pet at, was, that none of those who were the occasion of his coming up to Court, did declare that they had any other business with him, but only to stare him in the face, as if he had been some Elephant or Leopard. This so unexpected adventure, taught him never more to undertake a sleeveless Errand only upon bare Promises, tho' they may be writ upon Parchment. Nay, he would have scamper'd off immediately, and no body the to return as he came, that his presence might not increase their Shame that sent for him. But his friends, after they had let him take his leave of the Court, detained him at Paris near three Months, and omitted nothing that he might make this time seem short and pleasant. During this Interval, the Abbot d'Er, since Bishop, Duke of , at present a Car∣dinal,
was pleased amicably to reconcile him to M. Gassendus. Which was done in the pre∣sence of several persons of worth and account, to the great satisfaction of these two Philoso∣phers, and their Friends. XIV. That day they were reconciled was remarkable for Roberval's first undertaking to demonstrate the impossibility of Motion with∣out admitting a Vacuum.Roberval's wrangling. Monsieur Des Cartes, who was personally pointed at, by this pre∣tending Mathematician; found it no hard task immediately to Answer all his Objections: But he did it with all the respects due to the presence of the Abbot d'Etrees and his Com∣pany, without ever changing the face of so noble and peaceable Conversation. M. Roberval's humour, which had always need of grains of allowance from those that had to deal with him, did by no means agree with that Phlegm, which usually accompanied the Discourses of Monsieur Des Cartes. So that he was not long before he grew hot: and upon all occasions during the remainder of his stay at Paris, Roberval made him sensible of the effects of this heat, and animosity that no Consideration was capable of extinguishing or abating. The Persecutions of this man,His return into Hol∣land. who took a Pride not to be absent from any Assembly, where he knew the other would come, toge∣ther with his wrangling and twitting him with his taciturnity, did contribute as much as his publick Troubles, to the making him out of love with the City; he took occasion from its
being baracdoed, to make a shift to get out of it next day, through all the Confusion. He got safe into Holland on the 4th day of September: After some short stay at Lde with M. , and at Amsterdam, he went on the 9th of the aforesaid Month to his dear Egmond, to sequester himself there, as i a Port, secure against all the Tempests, whose Preludes he had already seen in his Voyage. XV. Scarce had he tasted the first fruits his repose,Death  Fath. M∣sennus. but he receives the News of the death of Father Mersennus, whom he left dan∣gerously sick at his departure from Paris. This was the ancientest of his friends and followers, who always stuck to him by a constancy and faithfulness that endured all Tests. Nothing could more sensibly affect him, than the loss of such a friend: yet to demonstrate that af∣fliction had not bereaved him of Judgment, he begg'd of Abbot Picot to know what was be∣come of all the Letters he sent to this Father for near upon 19 Months, because he was sure they were carefully preserved: He granted al∣so a Commission to try to get them out of the Minims hand, for several very weighty reasons. But his foresight being a little too ardy, proved useless and of none effect, through the negli∣gence of the Monks, who had lost a great com∣pany of them, and crafty diligence of M. Rober∣val, who had already got a good part of them into his Custody. In the mean time,The Q of Sweden turns Car∣tesian. the Q. of Sweden disintan∣tangled from the Negotiations for the Peace of Europe concluded at Munster the 24th of
Octob. betook her self to the Study of the lit∣e Treatise of Monsieur Des Cartes's Passions, nd the good opinion of them, that was instill'd nto her, made her resolve to proceed to the Study of all his Philosophy. She forthwith ordered Freinshemius▪ her Liberary-Keeper, to Study his Principles, to the end he might pre∣pare the way for her, to come to the under∣standing of that Philosophy: the Resident of France Monsieur Chanut▪ had a Commission also to be assisting to him in this Work. Monsieur Des Cartes was then much taken up in satisfying the first heats of a new Disci∣ple that his Philosophy had gain'd him in  of  Cartesian,  then his Adver∣sary. this was Dr. Henry More, whose and Reverence for our Philosopher, had almost proceeded to Idolatry. Monsieur Des Cartes, without giving much heed to his elaborate En∣comiums, apply'd himself only to instruct him, and to remove his difficulties, according as he let him understand what they were. This correspondence continued till the death of M. Des Cartes, after which, More's Ardor for Cartesianism appear'd much abated, by reason of his being diverted by other urgent Occa∣sions: until one single Letter of M. Clersellier, revived it in him, in the year 1655. and made him give fresh proofs of his affection for his Doctrine. XVI. The year 1649. supply'd the Princess Elizabeth with several considerable occasions to put his Moral Philosophy in Practice;His affe∣ction for the princess Elizabeth. and supply'd Monsieur Des Cartes, her dear Master, with occasions to comfort her, concerning the
Accidents of this Life, and Phantasticalness of this World's Catastrophes. These occa∣sions caused the Distemper the Princess had upon her. 1. The Regicide committed by the English on the person of her Uncle by her Mothers side. 2. The indifference and haugh∣tiness of the Q. of Sweden towards her. And then, the small Satisfaction her Brother the Elector Palatin had received by the Peace of Munster. The Princess residing at that time at the Court in Berlin, had often entertain'd him with the mighty Satisfaction she should have to en∣joy his Company in the Palatinate, whether she made account to retire, after the reinsta∣ing of her Brother: And he on his part assu∣red her of the delight he should have to go live near her, in a Country he had been ac∣quainted with ever since 1619. which he took for one of the finest and most commodious in Europe. All places were indifferent to him at that time.His fickle∣ness as to the place of his abode. Altho' he might think he was on the lap of repose in North-Holland, and tho' he might enjoy his thoughts in his Solitude at Egmond. as peaceably and sweetly as ever he he did, yet he earnestly desired, that the Storms of France might shortly be calmed, that he might there settle himself. But the Continuation of his Countrys Troubles, ac∣companied with the apprehension of never ta∣king another Journey, seem'd to incline him to resolve to pass the rest of his days in Holland; that is to say, in a place, that had not now the
ame Charms it formerly had, to detain him; nd which did not seem commodious for him, ut only because he knew no other, where he ould be better. When he argued the case thus;The Q. of Sweden would draw him to Stock∣holm. he was still gnorant of the Lot Providence had designed or him. But it was not long before it made im Conjecture that it disposed of him other∣ise than he thought it would. In March he eceived some Letters from M. Chanut, by hich he was given to understand the desire he Q. of Sweden had to see him at Stockholm, o learn his Philosophy from his own Mouth▪ ust as he was devising Expressions how to ex∣use himself from taking this Voyage, he re∣eived a second, and then a third Letter very rgent in the Queens Name. Insomuch, that augre all the Apprehensions and Difficulties, hat presented themselves, in a Voyage that e judged very dangerous to his health; he ignified to M. Chanut his inclination to obey he Queen towards Mid-summer, provided she ould please to give him leave to come back gain to Egmond within three Months, or to∣wards the latter end of Winter following at urthest. The Queen presuming upon his good Inten∣ions, even before M. Chanut had received is last Answer, gave order to Admiral Flem∣ing to go take him on Board at Amsterdam, nd bring him thither before the end of April. The Admiral went as far as Egmond, ut by the Name of an ordinary Officer of he Swedish Fleet to offer him his Service,
and thereupon shews the Queens Order, ad∣ding withal, that he might consult his ow convenience and take his own time, that h would cause the Vessel to wait for him long as he thought convenient. Monsieur Des Cartes was surprized at thi Visit, and excused himself as civilly as possi∣bly he could, to this effect, that having w back to the Resident of France, he expecte an Answer of his Letter, that would explai the Queens Will and Pleasure more precisely to him, and would determine his Resolution upon a Voyage. The Officer returning to Amsterdam without making himself known Monsieur Des Cartes received from Monsieur Chanut some Letters that had miscarried matter of a Fortnight, that gave him notic that the Queen had given to Admiral Flemming all necessary Orders for his Transportation in∣to Sweden. Upon reading of them, he perceived the mistake the stoppage of these Letters had made him commit, in taking one of the Ad∣mirals of the Kingdom for a private Officer▪ who had done him the honour to give him Visit, and bring him the Queens Orders him∣self; fearing lest the refusal of his Service might not be misconstrued to the prejudice of his good Intentions, he forthwith got ready▪ his Bag and Baggage and little Equipage, that he might be no longer surprized, when he should receive orders to depart, in case he could not obtain three Months longer stay, as he had demanded.
A little time after Monsieur Chanut took his leave of the Queen of Sweden, to go to give an account of Residence to the Court of France. He arrived in April in Holland, where he was prevented by the King's Brevet, who made him his Ordinary Ambassador to he same Queen. He goes to find out his Friend in Hermitage of Egmond, and left him no more difficulties to be removed as to his Voyage. He left him, directing his Course for Paris, resolving to take him at his return, and carry him along with him to the Queen of Sweden, in case he could obtain a Dispensation from his new Ambassy, and Permission to bring his Family back into France, from the King his Master. XVII.A Latin E∣dition of his Geo∣metry. Towards the Month of March, came out the First Edition of Monsieur Des Cartes's Geometry in Latin, translated by Schooten, Ancient Mathematick Professor of the Uni∣versity of Leiden. He added a Commentary to it of his making, together with the excel∣lent Notes of Monsieur de Beaune; whereof we have already given you an account, who died some Months after this Edition. Schoten, like all the rest of Monsieur Des Cartes his Translators, desir'd him to revise his Version, and render it in every respect conformable to his original Conceptions, as he had done other; but chose rather to let it pass untouch'd, than Correct it by halves. And to shew that he had no hand in the Work, he was pleased to call it, La Geometrie de M. Schoo∣ten, without so much as claiming the Ground∣work
of it. This unconcernedness was not approved of by those who could have wish'd it might have had the advantage of other Tran∣slations: yea, and M. Carcavi complained to him of it, as, in the Name of some Virtuoso's of Paris. This man exercised on this occasion the Office of the late Father Mersennus,M. Carcavi M. Des Car∣tes his Cor∣respon∣dent. in whose place he got himself substituted by Monsieur Des Cartes, for the Correspondence touching Philosophical Transactions, and New Books. He began at telling the success of the Experi∣ment upon the Gravitation of Air, performed at Puy de Domme near Clermont in Auvergne, by M. Perrier and M. Pascall. He sent him like∣wise two small Books come from Rome, con∣cerning Physicks; according to the new O∣pinions. In one of the two, there was mention made of the Principles of Mon∣sieur Des Cartes, with abundance of esteem: but some were of opinion at Paris, that the Author did not well understand them; he ac∣quainted him moreover by the same means, that at Rome there was a French Minim called Father Magnan, more knowing and more profound than Father Mersennus, that put him in hopes of some Objections against his Prin∣ciples. Monsieur Carcavi,Lets M. Ro∣berval go∣vern him. that was all one with Monsieur Roberval, was not wanting in his care to send him divers of this Geometrician's Objections, using his endeavours withal, to bring him into a good conceit of him, pre∣tending that he was not out of his favour, but
only through Fath. Mersennus his Indiscretion: Monsieur Des Cartes, thought it stood him upon to vindicate the memory of this Father: but yet for all that he took it in good part from Carcavi, that he testified his love for Peace, and Uniting Affections. And he was willing upon his account, to answer the Objections of Monsieur Roberval, just as if they had been pro∣ounded to him, by a Person that ore him no ill Will. M. de Roberval who took always delight to be Objecting, and not to receive, or admit of Solutions; making as if he knew nothing of the Answers Monsieur Des Cartes had given to his Difficulties, was willing to make use of Monsieur Carcavi's Name, to Object them to him afresh; this counterfeiting did no ways please Monsieur Des Cartes, who made nothing of discerning Roberval's Spirit, under Mon∣sieur Carcavi's hand, therefore instead of wri∣ing back to the latter, he addrest himself to Monsieur Clerselier, being still in Swedland, and ntreated him to signifie to Monsieur Carcavi, hat he was his humble Servant, and that he should not fail to Shape him an Answer, when∣soever he should Write him his own proper Thoughts. XVIII.Some trou∣ble about his Voyage into Swe∣den. The Summer Season drew on, and Monsieur Des Cartes waited for the return of Monsieur Chanut, the French Ambassadour t the Court of Sweden, to make his Voyage n his Company. But understanding on one and that he could not depart from Paris be∣fore November, and then again, that the Queen
of Sweden daily expected him, he intended to prevent the first rigours of the Winter: only he long'd to understand beforehand, whe∣ther the envious persons, that his Philosophy had procured him, had not been too quick for him at the Court of Sweden, to endeavour, to render him some ill office or other, in pre∣possessing the Queen's mind. He was not ignorant of the aversion the Swedish Nobility, and the best part of the Officers of that Court, testified for all sort of Science. He knew likewise that the Queens passion for Learned Men, began to become the object of scorn, railery and obloquy of Strangers; it was in every bodies mouth that she assembled all the Pedants of Europe to Stockholm, and that it would not be long ere the government of the Realm would be managed by Grammarians. He was afraid to see himself counted as ones hail fellow well met with this sort of Cattel, where the Natives of the Country, do not care to distinguish Strangers. And then the business of the Catholick Religion, helpt to increase his Scruples. Now it was Freinsheinius his business, to whom he communicated secretly his Thoughts, to dissipate them, and once more to be very earnest with him in behalf of the Queen. Altho' he began to appoint his return pre∣cisely in the Spring of the next year, yet he was seized with, I do not know what, appre∣hension, and foresight of his destiny, that sway'd with him, to set all matters to rights, as tho' he had been about to take a journey into the other World.
He forook his beloved solitude on the first day of September. And leaving his little trea∣tise of Passions in Elzivers hands, to be Print∣ed in Autumn, he embarqued at Amsterdam, having no more Domesticks, besides Scheuter a German, a faithful affectionate Servant that Abbot Picot had lent him for this Voyage. He happily arrived at Stockholm at the be∣ginning of October, and went a shoar to Madam Chanut's, Sister to his Friend Monsieur Cler∣selier, where he presented to her some Letters from the Ambassador her Husband who ex∣pected him, and had provided him an apart∣ment ready furnisht: Which he must accept. The next day he went to kiss the Queens hand,His recep∣tion in Swe∣den His meeting the Queen. In favour with her. who received him with such a distincti∣on, as was observed by the whole Court, which perhaps did not a little contribute, to augment the jealousie of some of the Learned, to whom, his coming seem'd formidable. At the second visit he paid the Queen, she disclosed to him the design she had of getting him into Sweden for good and all, by a good settlement. But having prepar'd himself from the time he left Holland, against all sort of solicitations, he return'd that with a comple∣ment. Afterward she contrived with him some means whereby to learn his Philosophy by word of Mouth: and judging aright that she should have occasion for all her Wits about her, and all her application to accomplish her design succesfully, she pitcht upon the first hour after her levé for this Study, as being the
most quiet and leisure time of all the day, when she perceived her Mind more sedate, and her head more disengaged from the in∣cumbrance of affairs. Monsieur Des Cartes re∣ceived with abundance of profound respect the Commission she granted him, to meet in the Closet of her Library every morning by five of the Clock, without ever alledging the irregularity she must needs cause in his man∣ner of living, nor the danger to which she should probably expose his health, in this new change of abode, yea and in a season too, that was much more severe in Sweden, than in any other place, he had ever lived in before. The Queen in recompence, granted him the favour that he desired Freinsheinius to beg of her, which consisted, in dispensing with him as to the nice Ceremonies of the Court, and to free him from all confinement, or to speak in the Language of Philosophers, from all the miseries of Courtiers. Yet, before they begun their Morning Exercises, it was her will and pleasure that he should allow himself a month or six weeks to compose himself, to familiarize himself with the genius of the Country, to make his new acquaintance take deeper root, by which she was in hopes to make him de∣light in his new abode, and retain him by her the remainder of his Life. But having fa∣thomed the capacity of his Spirit, that extend∣ed it self to other things besides Philosophy, she did not demur long, before she appointed him to be one of her Privy Counsel: and the confidence she reposed in him, prevail'd on
her to regulate her own particular conduct and behaviour, and even divers points concerning the government of her State, according to his advices. He made good use of this new favour, not only to be serviceable to Count Bregy, and other worthy persons near her, but above all, to obliterate out of her mind, the reasons of strangeness, aversion, and coldness she seemed to entertain, for the family of the P. Palatine and also the reasons of the secret jealousie she had already conceived of the parts, learning and merit of the Princess Elizabeth in particular. XIX.The jealou∣sie of the Queens Grammari∣ans. This credit joined to some applause that he gain'd at Court for a Copy of French Verses, the Queen had put him upon touching the peace of Munster, allarmed your Gramma∣ians, and other pretenders to Learning in the Palace, notwithstanding all the precaution he used to prevent jealousie; they studied carefully to find out occasion of doing him a diskindness, and to abate the ardent affection she shewed to her Philosopher, they rung peals of the pre∣tended undervaluing of Tongues, and all Hu∣mane Learning, that they laid to his charge; at last dispairing of blasting his Reputation with the Queen, considering the great passion she declared for the knowledge of those Sciences, they thought they could be no bet∣ter revenged of him, than to make him pass for one, no better than themselves amongst the Lords of the Court, but especially a∣mongst publick Ministers. They laboured to perswade them, what a strange thing it was that this new come upstart, should have all
the honour of the Queens confidence, and how dangerous it might prove to let him inter∣meddle with any affairs, but such as related to Philosophy and Sciences, but they were not long at Court, before they made a diffe∣rence between Monsieur Des Cartes, and those that vainly profest to be knowing, who brought an Odium upon Sciences, to all the Nobility of the place. However he had news from Elziver,His Trea∣tise of Pas∣sions. that the Edition of his Treatise of the Passions of the Soul was quite finished. He presents it to the Queen, not so much as dreaming to dedi∣cate it to her, by reason that it was chiefly composed for his most illustrious Schollar the Princess Elizabeth, whom he would be sure not to forget. To the intent he might make this work intelligible to all manner of persons, he inlarged it by three parts upon Monsieur Clerselier's Advice. He divided it into three parts, in the first of which, is treated of the Passion in general, and by the way upon the nature of the Soul, &c. in the second, of the six primitive Passions; and in the third, of all the rest. The sight of this Piece, made the Queen suppose there might be amongst Monsieur Des Cartes his Papers, many more Treatises that had not yet come to light. And having a strong desire to make him compile a com∣pleat body of all his Philosophy, which she liked more and more, she was pleas'd to en∣gage him to reduce the rest of his works, that he had not yet published, into a method, in
order to prevail with him at length to com∣pleat them. Monsieur Des Cartes in obedience to the Queens command,His Posthu∣mous works. began to rummish, and ransack his Trunk, where his Papers were, which he had bound up, hand over head, at his departure from Holland. He finds nothing compleat in them. They were all in pieces scattered up and down; of which they have compiled Treatises since, that have been pub∣lished. Amongst the most considerable of his fragments were, That De Homine, which Monsieur Clerselier had caused to be Printed since, wherein the Author hath lay'd open all the functions that belong to the body alone, without medling with those that belong to the Soul. That De Formatione Faetus: whose Title doth sufficiently declare the subject matter, which hath been published in the same volume with that De Homine, by the same Author, assisted by Monsieur de la Forge, a Physician of Saumur, and Gerard Gutichowen, Professor of Mathematicks at Louvain. That De la lumier, or du monde, of light, or of the world, which is nothing else but a little extract, or parcel of his famous Treatise of the World, which he supprest upon the news of the disgrace of Gallilaeus; Monsieur Cler∣selier put it out pretty well corrected. That De l'Explication de Engins, which was missing, went astray after his death, and which indeed, is nothing else in a manner, but his Treatise of Mechanicks.
But the most considerable of all his Posthu∣mous Works, is his inestimable Treasure of Letters, that were found in his Trunk, of which Monsieur Clerselier hath publisht a col∣lection in three volumes. XX.His other Manu∣scripts. These Posthumous pieces, which M. Clerselier, and the other Cartesians have obli∣ged the publick with, after the Death of their Author, were not the only ones, that were found upon the second rifling of his Papers. There was besides divers works begun in se∣veral parts of Mathematicks and Physicks, un∣der Titles that had no manner of relation to those subjects, as Parnassus, Olympica, Demo∣critica, Thacomantis Regia, &c. His Treatise of Algebra, still found in the Studies of some Learned men. An Introduction, containing the grounds and foundations of his Algebra, which we are affraid is lost. Divers fragments upon the Nature and History of Metals, Plants, and Animals. An Abridgement of Pure Mathematicks not finished. Divers bundles of free unbyased thoughts upon the Soul, upon Nature, and framing of the Universe. An Introduction to his Geometry, whereof we have had occasion to speak, which was not so much his work, as that of one of his friends. Amongst those which Monsieur Chanut's care made to fall to Monsieur Clerseliers share, there is none of them more considerable, nor perhaps more compleat, than the Latin Trea∣tise,
that contains Rules for guiding our mind in the inquiry after Truth. At least we can assure you, that there is not one of them more beneficial to the publick. Of three parts, whereof it should have consisted, we have no∣thing but the first, and half of the second in∣tire. Another Latin piece which he had carried on a good way, of which there remains a pretty large fragment, is that, of the study of good sense, or the art of apprehending, which he stiled studium bonae mentis. Which he di∣rected to one of his Friends, concealed under the name of Masaeus. There was found likewise the beginning of another piece amongst his Papers in the Trunk in Sweden, it was writ in French Dialogue-wise, under the Title of recherche de la verite. The research of Truth by innate light, which in it self, without borrowing any helps from Re∣ligion, or Philosophy, determines the opinions, that an honest man should have of all things that imploys his thoughts. This work was divided into two Books, the first of which related to the things of the World, considered in them∣selves, the second, the same things in relation to us, considered as Good or Evil, True or False. There goes also up and down the World, divers of Monsieur Des Cartes his little Manu∣scripts that were not found amongst his Papers, when he lookt them over; as, his little Trea∣tise of the Art of Fencing: That of Socrates his Genius, &c. for I do not mention the French
Comedy, which he had but just made in Sweden, which M. Chanut saved from perishing, con∣trary to his intent and purpose. Nevertheless,The Queen hath a mind to settle him in Sweden. the Q. of Sweden seeing the French Ambassador return'd to her Court, communicated to him the design she had en∣tertain'd of keeping Monsieur Des Cartes with∣in her Dominion: and obliged him to labour with her to obtain his Consent. Of all his Pretences, she would hearken to none, but that of the coldness of the Climat; because she believed that in effect his Temperament must needs suffer much in such a cold Coun∣try. The Expedient she proposed to the Am∣bassador was, to chuse him a noble and consi∣derable Charge in the most Southern Parts of the Crown of Sweden, acquired by the Peace of Munster, either in the Archbishoprick of Bremen, or in Pomerania, to appoint him a Re∣venue of a matter of 3000 Crowns per annum, and bestow on him a Lordship of some Lands, that it might pass by Succession to him, his Heirs and Executors for ever. The Indisposition of the Ambassador whom the Queen had charged to put the business in execution, conjoyntly with a Senator of the Kingdom, put a stop to it; which proved very hurtful, not to Monsieur Des Cartes, for whom God had designed something else; but to his Heirs, who failed of being Lords in Germany. The Ambassador fell Sick on the 18th of January, at his return from a walk with Monsieur Des Cartes; and what diligence so∣ever he used to solicit his Friend, Night and
Day, yet for all that, he fail'd not to be at the Palace at Five a Clock in the Morning to dis∣course with the Queen, without complaining of the severity of the Season, which was more than ordinary that year, and which daily im∣paired his health. The Queen who dream't of nothing less than to incommode him,The Pro∣ject of an Acadamy. obliged him at the the very height of the Ambassador's Sickness to return after Dinner to the Palace, to con∣sult with her concerning a Conference or As∣sembly of Learned Men, that she had thoughts of founding in form of an Academy, of which she was to be Chief and Protectrice. She would have him to draw up the Model or Design of it, and Compose Statutes. He brought it her accordingly the First of February, which was the last time he had the honour to see her Majesty. The Queen mightily approved eve∣ry Article, but was somewhat surprized at the second and third, that excluded Strangers. She questioned whether it might not be a piece of Monsieur Des Cartes his Modesty, who shut the Gate of this Academy against himself▪ whom she designed to have appointed Director. XXI.Mons. Des Cartes Sick∣ness. This very day coming from Court, he perceived himself,His Death. seized with an Illness that was to put an end to his days, and the Ambassador began to recover. The next day being Candlemass-Day, our Philosopher with other Catholicks, approached the Sacraments of Pennance and Eucharist, which he received from the hands of Father Viogué, an Augustin
Friar, Missionary and Almoner to the Am∣bassador; he was able to finish the Ceremonies of the rest of the Day, standing up. The Symptomes of his Malady, were the very same that preceded the Ambassador's, and were followed by a continued Feaver, ac∣companied with an Inflammation of his Lungs, just as the Ambassador was taken. The dis∣order of this regular was of living, added to the dividing of his Care between the Queen and the Sick Ambassador, in a Season that was an Enemy to his Constitution, and more rigid than it had been for Threescore Years, by the report of ancient People, caused his Feaver to be more Malignant than the Am∣bassador's was. It was within him the first days, it possess'd his Brain so far, as to make him Rave; took away the liberty of knowing what Condition he was in▪ or hear the advice of his Friends; and deprived him of all strength but only to resist every bodies will. The Queens Chief Physician Monsieur du Ryer, by Nation a Frenchman, and a particular Friend of his was unfortunately absent at that time: and that Princess order'd the next in course to take care of him; he was an Hol∣lander, called Weulles, one of M. Des Cartes sworn Enemies, ever since the Ministers and Divines of Leiden and Ʋtrecht bid him defy∣ance. The sick Person upon sight of this Do∣ctor, and others that the Queen sent with him, was so obstinate as to do nothing that he or∣der'd him, but especially he would not hear of being let Blood, all the while the transport
of his Brain lasted; which occasioned terrible llarms to the Queen and Ambassador, who took great care to send a Gentleman twice a day to see how he did. His Brain began to be discharged at the end of the 7th day, which made him a little more the Master of his Head, and faculties of his Reason; that was the first time he was sensible of his Feaver: He took notice of the Error he had hitherto laboured under, and now thought of nothing but to dye like a Chri∣stian Philosopher. He got himself let Blood twice together, and in a great quantity, but to no purpose, it was then too late. He pray'd them to send for Father Viogué his Confessor, who was about the exercise of his Mission some Leagues distant from Stockholm: and de∣sired those who were about him, not to dis∣course with him any longer, but about the Mercy of God, and of the Courage where∣with he was to suffer the Separation of his Soul. He remain'd quiet and still the two last days; and Departed peaceably in the Arms of the Ambassador and Father Viogué, the 11th of February, at Four a Clock in the Morning, Aged 53 Years, 10 Months, and 11 Days. XXII.His Burial. The Queen upon this News, soon discovered her Affliction by the true and abun∣dant Tears she shed for the loss of her Illustrious Master; this was the Title she was always pleased to honour him with, and distinguish him from other Learned Men about her. She immediately dispatcht a Gentleman of her Bed-Chamber to the Ambassador to assure
him of her Grief and Sorrow; and to declare to him, that she was willing to leave to Po∣sterity a Monument of the respect she bore to the Merit of the Deceased; and that she de∣sign'd him his Sepulchre in the most honora∣ble Place in the Kingdom, at the feet of the Kings her Predecessors with Magnificence an∣swerable, besides a rich Mausolaean of Marble that she resolved to have erected for him. The Ambassador that had not yet been able to stir out of Doors since he fell Sick, went in the Afternoon to pay a Visit to the Queen: and obtained of her, (for good Reasons that he produced to her) that the Sepulchre should be after a very plain manner at the deceased his own proper Cost and Charges, in a place of the Foreigners Burial-place, where they laid Catholicks and Children that died before they came to the use of their Reason. The next day the Corps was brought out to the place of Interrment without any great doings; yet all according to the Ceremonial of the Church of Rome, by the special Per∣mission of the Queen, and the Governor of Stockholm, the Body was carried by the Am∣bassador's eldest Son, Monsieur de Saint San∣doux, since Governor of Tournay; M. Picques Secretary to the Ambassy, at present Coun∣sellor in the Court of Aydes; and by M. Belen Secretary to the Ambassador, who is now Treasurer of France. The day following, the Ambassador accom∣panied with the first Gentleman of the Queens Bed-Chamber Erric Spatacre, Baron of Crone∣berg,
took an Inventory of what Monsieur Des Cartes brought with him into Sweden, and on March the Fourth following, M. de Hooghe∣land took one of the things he had left in Holland, in the presence of Monsieur Van Su∣reck, Seigneur de Berg, Creditor to the de∣ceased. The Ambassador, whom the Queen had given to understand that she persisted in her resolution to rear him a Marble Monument, judged that before-hand, it would be much better to erect a plain Tomb over the Grave of the deceased. He caused it to be made an Oblong Square of Free-stone cemented, the four Sides were wainscotted outward with planed Boards; These four Sides were covered with a course white Linnen waxed, painted: and they caused to be writ upon it by the Painter, the Curious Latine Inscriptions that the Ambassador composed in Honour of his Friend. Not many Months after, they caused a Me∣dal to be Coined in Holland to the memory of our great Philosopher, the reverse contains Magnificent Elogiums. XXIII.The tran∣slation of his Body into France. After the Conversion of the Queen of Sweden, wholly due to Monsieur Des Cartes and Monsieur Chanut, which was manifest some years after, by her renouncing Lutheranism, there remains no more for us to observe con∣cerning that Philosopher, saving only the tran∣slating of his Ashes and Bones from Sweden into France, Seventeen years after his Death. It was M. d'Alibert, Treasurer General of
France, who was the Chief Man in this Enter∣prize, and who was at the sole Charge and Expence. He employ'd to this purpose M. le Chevalier de Terlon, French Ambassador in Swe∣den, who was shortly to depart from thence for Denmark in the same Quality. The Ambassador caused the Body to be ta∣ken up in presence of M. Pompone, who was come to Stockholm to succeed him, at present a Minister of State. He caused it first of all to be carried to Copenhaguen, from whence he sent it into France, in Custody of true and faithful persons, the Second day of October 1666. arriving at Paris in January the year after; it was carried to Monsieur d' Alibert House in the Rue de Beautreillis: and some days after, it was deposited without Ceremony in a Chappel in St. Paul's Church. From thence it was transported in a pompous manner, the 24th of June, upon Midsummer, or St. John's Day, at Eight a Clock at Night into the Church of St. Genevieve du mont; where it was received by the Abbot and Cannons Regular, with most splendid Preparations. The day following, being Saturday, they perform'd solemn Service; where the Abbot, Father Blanchard, General of the Congrega∣tion officiated in his Pontificalibus. There were a great many Persons present qualified accordingly; Father l' Allemans, Chancellor of the University▪ had prepared a Funeral Ora∣tion: But there chanced to come an Order from Court, that it should not be pronounced.
They set the Herse in a Vault between two Chappels on the South-side of the Nef, or Body of the Church; where Monsieur d' Alibert hath caused to be put up a fair Marble against the Wall, representing the Philosopher's Bust, with a very pretty Epitaph, composed of two Inscriptions; one whereof is French Verse, Composed by M. de Fiewbet Counsellor of State, heretofore Chancellor to the Queen: the other which is in Latine, comes from M. Clerselier, notwithstanding some would still to this day have Father Allemant to be the Author of it. After the Service for Saturday, the 25th of June, was done, they carried the Titles, the Verbal Process, and Certificates, which were drawn up in good Form, into the Archives of the Abby of St. Genevieue. Then M. d' Alibert Conducted all the Principal Assistants to the famous Bocquet's House, where he treated them with a most sumptuous and magnifi∣cent Banquet. BOOK VIII. Containing the Qualifications of his Body and Mind, his Manners, His Life and Con∣versation towards God and towards Man. I. MOnsieur Des Cartes his Body was some∣thing under a middle stature,His Body. but very delicate, and well-proportioned in all the
shape and symettry of Parts; yet he seem'd to have an Head a little too big in proportion to the Trunk of his Body. His Brow or Fore∣head was broad, and standing out a little; His Complexion pale from his Infancy to his lea∣ving the Colledge, and then mixt with a pretty ruddy vermillion blush till his retirement into Holland, and ever since somewhat sallow till his dying day; He had upon his Cheek a kind of Pimple or Push that broke now and then, and grew again; His Under-Lip stuck out a little, a pretty wide Mouth; a Nose of a big∣ness answerable to its length; His Eyes dark grey; His Sight pleasant and firm to the end of his days; His Countenance evermore serene and calm; His Mind affable and Courteous; The Tone of his Voice pleasant between Base and Treble; yet too feeble to carry on any long Discourse, occasioned by an altera∣tion of his Lungs he brought into the World with him. His Hair and Eye-brows pretty black, the Hair of his Chin not quite so black; and he began to be grey at the age of 43 years. Some few years after he wore a Perriwig, but of a fashion that resembled his own Hair; and that too upon the account of his Health. He followed less the Mode, then he suffer'd himself to be drawn into it; he staid till it be∣came common that he might not affect Singu∣larity. He was never disregarded, yet he chiefly avoided to appear in the Garb of a Phi∣losopher. At such time as he sequestered him∣self from much Company in Holland, he chang∣ed his Sword for a Cloak.
His course of Diet was always uniform.His Diet. Sobriety was natural to him. He drunk little Wine, and was sometimes a whole Month toge∣ther without drinking a drop yet seeming very jocund and pleasant at Table, his frugality not burthensom to his Company. He was neither nice nor difficult in the choice of his Victuals, and he had accustomed his Palat to every thing that was not prejudi∣cial to the health of the Body. His Diet did not consist in eating seldom, but to discern the quality of the Victual. His judgment was, that it was good always to keep the Stomach and other Viscera a doing, as we do to Horses, but that it ought to be with such things as afford small nourishment, as Roots and Fruits, which he believed more proper to prolong the Life of Man, than the Flesh of Animals. He observed that he eat more greedily and slept sounder when he was sad and melan∣choly, or in some eminent danger, than he did at any other time. He slept much, or at least his awaking was never forced; so soon as ever he perceived himself dis-ingaged from sleep, he studied, meditating in Bed, and raied but half his Body now and then, to commit his thoughts to writing. This is the reason why he often continued ten Hours, nay, sometimes twelve, in his Bed. His Condescension to the necessi∣ties of his Body, never proceeded to an Apa∣thy, or so far as insensibility of them. He knew Nature must be supply'd. He laboured hard and long. He delighted pretty much in
bodily exercise, and indulged himself therein at his time for recreation; till at length, his sedentary life broke him off that Custom. He was apt to believe that health of Body, was the greatest Blessing in this life next to Virtue. He had no great share of it in his Infancy, and it was but ill preserved whilst he was subject to the government of Physicians; he was troubled during his Childhood with a dry Cough, hereditary to him from his Mo∣ther, and very infirm till the Age of 13. when he was let Blood the first; but never after till the Eve of his Death. He reckoned Phlebo∣botomy, extream dangerous to most People. At the age of 19 or 20 years, he thought he was not so much a Fool as not to be his own Physician. Therefore he thought he was of age to take upon him the Administration of his health, and dispensed with a Physician 'till his mortal Distemper. He abhorr'd not only Mountebanks, but even the Drugs of Apothe∣caries & Empericks; yea, and he required great Caution in the administring Chymical Reme∣dies. When he was disengaged and free from that heat of Liver, that made him in love with a Military Life in his youthful days, he took up a course of Life so even and uniform, that he was never Sick with any thing, except by that Foreign Cause, that brought him to his long home. The two grand Remedies were his spare regular Diet, and moderation in his Exercise: yet he preferr'd before them, those of the Mind and Spirit, that have a mighty influence upon the Body; as plainly appear'd
by the great change; Anger, Wrath, Fear, and other Passions did excite in him. The manner of living he prescribed him∣self, was founded upon the oeconomy and well-ordering his Family. He entertain'd a sufficient number of Domesticks, all pickt and cull'd, and very neat; and he took care to get them all bandsom, both as to Body and Mind: His House was like a School of Learning and Vertue to them; and not content to render them knowing and honest, he thought it like∣wise his Duty to meliorate and advance their Fortunes: and that was the Reason why there was always a great deal of earnest striving, and suing who should first get into his Ser∣vice: and men always look'd upon a Place a∣mongst his Servants as a very advantagious Post. On his part, he treated them with that Indulgence and Mildness, that he won them over, and brought them to his beck by meer love and kindness. As for those of an higher rank, who nearest approached him in quality of Secretaries, or Valets de Chambre; he counted them so little Inferior to him, that one would have taken them for his Equals sometimes. This thing conduced much to mould and mo∣del their Heart and Mind; nay, most of them became Persons of great Worth and Conside∣ration in the World. Men have observed it in the Person of M. de ville Bressieux, a Physi∣cian at Grenoble, of M. Gutschowen, Regius∣Professor at Louvain, of the Sieur Gillot the Mathematician, and Sieur Schluter, Auditor, or Intendant of Justice in Sweden, and of a great
many more Persons preferr'd to great Places, who are at this day very eminent in Lan∣guedoc. II. The Expences of his House was ever well regulated,His uncon∣cern for the Goods of Fortune. tho' his Passion was wonderful for multiplying Experiments; yet he never affe∣cted running in Debt beyond his yearly Re∣venue. This Revenue was about 6000 Livres and upward per annum; if you except some few years at the latter end of his life, where∣in he had augmented it. If so be it had been not so plentiful at the beginning, it would ne∣vertheless have seem'd sufficient for him. Monsieur Des Cartes did consider the good things of the World, not as a covetous, indi∣gent Gentleman; but as a rich and contented Philosopher. He carried it always very high to Fortune, and amongst the Croud of those that a∣dore this blind Goddess, his sport was bravely to scorn and laugh at her, contenting himself to deplore the Condition of some Philosophers his Friends, who shewed so much weakness as to complain of her. So Fortune again had a mind to be even with him seeming to be very sensible of his Disdain, she endeavoured to be revenged of him upon every occasion that pre∣sented it self of being Rich. Yet was he not one of those whimsical Fops, and churlish Cy∣nicks that seek all occasions to dare her, or insult over her; no, he was never guilty of the Vanity to triumph over her with ostenta∣tion. And indeed, one of the Principal Max∣ims he prescribed himself for the guidance of his Life and Conversation, was to endeavour
rather to conquer himself, than Fortune; to change his desires rather than the order of the World. He was endowed with no less generosity, than unconcernedness▪ his heart would give place to no man alive but to his King in point of Liberality. He was never the man that would accept from any private person whatso∣ever the relief that was offer'd him, to supply the expences that his Experiments required. He civilly refused a pretty considerable Sum of Money which the Count d'Avaux sent him into Holland. He excused himself in like man∣ner to Monsieur de Montmor, who with many instant entreaties, offered him to make his best of one of his Country Houses and Farm of 4000 Livres per annum. Other Persons of emi∣nent Quality, laid open their Treasures to him, but all to no purpose. He counted it a disho∣nest and uncivil part in him to borrow ought of any person, that he was not able to restore with interest: and he pretended it would have been burthensome to him to perceive himself indebted to the Publick. But altho' he de∣clared the unconcernedness of Philosophers for Riches, yet was he not pufft up with their Pride. He did not only look upon those that make good use of Riches with a favourable Eye, but he thought it his Duty not to neglect and slight that Estate his Father had the kind∣ness to reserve for him. He accounted a law∣ful Patrimony as a Present of Nature, and not of Fortune: and of all the Goods that one is capable of acquiring in this World, there is none more innocent, or more according to
that order God hath appointed. This made him one day tell his elder Brother in his Let∣ter, That he more valued 1000 Livres by Inhe∣ritance than 10000 Livres that came to him otherwise. III. How you must not ascribe Monsieur Des Cartes his being rich and contented,His retired Life. to his modest Revenue, that seem'd competent; nor yet to his Frugality: It was his choice of a solitary Sequester'd Life that rendred him so. He admitted of very few Visits at any time, and return'd yet less; yet was he neither a Me∣santhropus, nor morosely Melancholy: He car∣ried along with him to the very recesses of his Solitude, that pleasant humour and natural briskness, that was observed in him from his tender years; His usual chearfulness made him do things without straining; and if we credit him, facilitated their success; yea, and con∣tributed not a little to his health; for without it, he could not have sustain'd the weight of his retirement with so much perseverance: that was it, that changed his inclination for retirement, into a real doting upon a confined Secret Life. And his desire never to relin∣quish it, induc'd him to take two Symbolum's or Motto's very proper to hinder him from for∣getting this resolution; the first out of Ovid: Benè qui latuit, benè vixit. The remembrance of which made him often∣time quite off the design of publishing his Works. The other is taken out of Seneca's Tragedies,
Illi mors gravis incubat Qui unus nimis omnibus Ignotus moritur sibi. Which is a smart Condemning of such Per∣sons who love to be known by others, with∣out knowing themselves. After he had reduc't himself to a private condition,His con∣tempt of Renown. he ever judged that the inconve∣nience, of being too well known was a dan∣gerous distraction, and taking a man off his design, never to go abroad out of himself. But only when he had a mind secretly and se∣riously to converse with Nature, and never to quit and forsake Nature, but to come home again to himself. He lookt upon the desire men are taken with, to live in the good opi∣nion and minds of men as a frivolous vanity: yea, and never did Philosopher make less ac∣count, of that glory and splendour, most peo∣ple find in what they call reputation: he had not such over-weaning thoughts of himself, as to take it ill, that, if any one thought of him, he had not a good opinion of him: but he could rather have chosen that he should never think of him at all. The trade of a solitary life,His habits of writing, of reading. His stile. cost him but a few months Apprentiship to learn, because the inclination he had to it, was seconded by his temper and constitution, and a particular hu∣mour of his. The habit of meditation that he had got ever since he left the Colledge, made him mighty reserved and sparing of his
Tongue. But altho' he spoke but very little at any time, yet he spoke always to purpose and very naturally. His conversing was ne∣ver starcht or affected, never troublesome or uneasie. He shunned above all things to ap∣pear Learned or a Philosopher in Discourses. He was as little inclined to commit his Specu∣lations to writing, as to vent them by word of mouth. He was pretty much indisposed to write, but his small, close, straight, regu∣lar way of writing is sufficient evidence, that he had conquered this idleness by a long habit, yet for all that he relaps't into it from time to time, as appears not only from the great re∣pugnance he testified in composing his Works, but also from his usual negligence to answer his friends. He had not doubtless, so much listlessness and aversion for reading, as he shewed for writing. We must nevertheless grant you, that he did not read much, and that he had a small parcel of Books. Discouraged at the unprofitableness and errours he observed in Bookes, he solemnly forsook reading of them: but that I may not tell an untruth, he did not quite and clean forsake them, nay, he makes his forsaking even suspected of dissimulation. Some believe he made more use of Books than he was willing every body should know; and they have been apt to ground this opinion up∣on the quality of the stile, and the multiplici∣ty of matter he treated of in his Works, but more particularly in his Letters. This is a judgement, or rather a conjecture
fetched from the elegance of his stile; the re∣gularity of phancy, and quaintness and exact∣ness of his expressions. IV.His Wit, Memory, and judg∣ment. He had a mind of an almost infinite ex∣tent, and of a strength in a manner equal to the extent; his penetration was prodigious in depth and vivacity. This appear'd more especially when the business in debate was, to fathom the depth of mans Soul, and precisely to de∣termine what is possible for a man to do, and what is above his reach or power. Never did man under the cope of Heaven, manifest that which we call, a Geometrical Spirit; and an exactness of Wit and Solidity of Judgment in an higher degree. He shewed it I say, in his not confounding the principles one▪ with another, in penetrating all the con∣sequences that may possibly be deduc'd from them, and indeed never arguing falsely upon known principles. His Memory was neither treacherous, nor unhappy; but we don't see that it was answe∣rable to the greatness of his parts. If he was deficient in any thing upon that score, it was abundantly recompenced by that other portion of the Soul, which we call Judgment, which is the light of the humane Soul. He was solid and judicious in all respects. He had a shrewd insight into things, very exquisite, and a most subtil discerning of that which is in common use, which your greatest Wits, especially Geo∣metricians are wont to pass by and overlook. Nothing ever contributed more to bring this excellent quality to perfection in him,His love for Truth.
than his violent passion for Truth, that never forsook him all his life long. The upright∣ness of his heart, being always attended by the rightness of sense and understanding, his con∣tinual care was to find out Truth in all his Studies; and to make her appear nothing but the truth and the naked truth, in all his acti∣ons; in all his discourses, openness and can∣dour were at all times the particular character that made him be differenced from those, a∣mongst men, who seem'd to resemble him in other respects: and all that polite breeding he might receive from his Education, and fre∣quenting the Courts of great Persons, was ne∣ver capable to make him double-minded or false-hearted; nor to perswade him, that fawn∣ing, counterfeiting, and lying ought to be practised. Faults that are committed against Truth, when they proceed from ignorance or mistake, where there is no design at the bot∣tom to injure truth, appear'd to him pardona∣able; but if he had been upon the Bench as a Judge, he would have proved inexorable as to those that are committed against Knowledge and Love of Truth. Notwithstanding, this kindness he bore to Truth, pusht him on to pursue her wheresoever he suspected she might lye hid, yet he concluded that for finding of her, he was to pitch principally upon the Sciences, in which he did usually examine what they contained, and what solidity was in them, to the end he might not lose his time, for that which signified nothing; and
that observe to others, what use and benefit they were likely to make of them. V.His aptness to learn. A great many have believed that he was not ignorant in any Science, and that he had skill in all the Liberal Arts. But it may suf∣fice us to believe that he might have a compe∣tent knowledge in the Nature of all the Scien∣ces, without being vers't in every particular kind of them. He shewed more docibility and aptness, if a man may so say, than real Science: this ver∣tue in him was a jewel so much the more in∣estimable, as it is very rare in the ring-leaders of a Sect. The Passion he testified to correct his faults, was always attended with a grate∣ful acknowledgment to those who let him un∣derstand them. The Pride and Vanity his Adversaries have taxed him withal,His mode∣sty. upon some occasions, are frivolous and superficial, because they never took place, in his heart. But in respect of suspicions of haughtiness and presumption, that they have imputed to him, they could not hold out long against the brightness of his Modesty, that dissipated them in a moment. This Mo∣desty accompanied with abundance of polite∣ness, as the Noble Cantibrigian Philosopher, or More hath it, resided much more in his sentiments than in his discourses. It was no where affected, but appear'd, as it were, in its proper natural places, if you consider the little account he made of himself, and his productions, and the aversion he shew'd for praise and commendation.
This vertuous quality lay not dormant nor barren in him,His Mek∣ness. one may say without a soelecisme that it begot one pretty like it in Regius a Phy∣sician of Ʋtrecht, by that incomparable model of an answer he drew up for him against Voe∣tius the Minister, whom he was obliged to refute, which is no less a master-piece of mek∣ness and civility, than of modesty; this sweet∣ness of disposition that was disperst through all his actions, and deportment, never went under another name amongst his friends: but the trial his adversaries made of it▪ changed its name to Moderation in respect to them;His Mode∣ration. it was not in its miridian against the turbulent Spirits of Gassendus and Fermats temper: there was need of a Roberval to make it shine out. But especially there wanted some giddy hair-brain'd Ministers, and wild extravagant Philosophers to make it triumph. The love he bore all his life long for peace and tranquillity, caused him by times to under∣value calumny, and forget injuries. He was naturally an enemy to dispute, especially for that which is mixt with wrangling, contesta∣tions and troublesome heats; and thence pro∣ceeded his aversion to rip up the faults of o∣thers, or to make them greater than they were, when he observed them in reading, this trade seem'd unworthy of a man that owed all his time to the inquiry after truth: nay he thought he went out of his road, when he stopt to look upon other mens wanderings. VI. So many lovely qualities could not chuse but get him the love of every body,His friends. so that
he did not want for friends, than whom no bo∣dy could boast to have more, but tho he did not refuse any mans friendship, yet he used a great deal of discretion in affording his, because he endeavoured as much as possibly he could, not to separate it from his esteem and respect. He never placed confidence in any one, in whom he had not observed Wisdom; perfect∣ed and consummated with Science and Ver∣tue. He was a man of the most tender Con∣science in the World, even according to the relation of those who render'd themselves the most unworthy of his friendship. He shewed a mighty kindness and faithfulness for his friends, which was proof against the incon∣stancy and vicissitude of the things of this World. He was neither distrustful nor suspi∣cious. He easily gave credit to the good, but hardly to the ill that was spoken of his Friends. His Maxim was to suspend his consent always to disadvantagious reports, till such time as his own experience or infallible demonstra∣tions should ascertain him of the matter they reported to him. Another maxime of his friendship was never to be troublesome to his Friends, yet nevertheless to render them all services he was capable of. Thinking that this good disposition that reigned in him, might be instead of a rule whereby to judge that of another man, he raised the obligation of ami∣ty to such an high pitch, that he pretended those that did good turns, are also the persons obliged.
A person of his character should not have had any enemies,His Ene∣mies and Adversa∣ries. nor indeed had he any but such who were enemies to Vertue and Truth, who made Insurrection not so much against his Person, as against his Writings. The enmities of others never troubled him: nay, and without being too Inquisitive to spy out what Enemies he had, he was content to be no bodies Enemy. And to be always ready to be reconciled to those who desired to come into favour with him again. But he judged it not fit to pass by the ene∣mies of his Philosophy, some whereof became his envyers and emulators, and others open ad∣versaries; the little vanity that might be in him, was without doubt well enough satisfied with the first sort, and his merit could not be more inhanced, nor set off to better advantage, than by the envy of others. As for his Adversa∣ries, whose number far surpast that of his en∣vyers, he never refused to answer those, who notwithstanding their prejudice and ignorance, discovered to him any tokens of honesty and sincerity. As he had some Adversaries in his life time, who, for all that, profest, to be his friends. So, we cannot question but he had some af∣fections to check and restrain them, as Adversa∣ries and Enemies of his intent and purpose. In respect of the first he had nothing in a manner besides his own reason to follow, without fearing any thing from his inclination. But as for the others, where, it seems, his reason could not come in play, it was his best way to
retain his inclination. There was rooted in him a strong affection for pur-blind people all his Life time, and was occaioned from the impression made upon his Infancy, at which time he loved a little pretty Damsel that was somewhat pur-blind. What some of his Enemies have given out concerning his pretended inclination to the Sex,His inclina∣tion for the Sex. seems to have been devis'd but only from a passage of the Sieur Borel, who testi∣fies that our Philosopher was not displeased with Women's company, because, as to the business of Philosophy, he found them more tractable, patient, docile, and in a word, more void of prejudices and false doctrines, that many men. The adventure wherewith some idle spi∣rits have asperst him, about a Lady of Tou∣raine, named La Menaudiere is a mere fiction, forged upon a Picture of our Philosopher, that, she had seen at the house of Abbot de Toche∣laye. He never laid his Eyes upon this Lady, and for her part she had never seen him, but in Picture: but now the case was otherwise as to Madam du Rosai, whom he Courted just when his Relations had thought of marrying him, for whom he fought a Duel with a Ri∣val of his, encountring him upon the Road between Paris and Orleans: yet this Lady was heard to confess at last, that Monsieur Des Cartes found more charms in Philosophy than in her: and that altho she did not seem ugly to him, yet he past a course compliment upon
her, when he told her, that he found no beauty comparable to that of Truth. The fault he but once in all his Life com∣mitted against the honour of his Caelibacy, is not so much a proof of his inclination for the Sex, as of his weakness; and God having been pleased speedily to raise him up again, would have the remembrance of his Fall, to be matter of continual humiliation to him, and that his re∣pentance should be a wholesome remedy a∣gainst being exalted above measure. He recovered by this glorious reinstate∣ment,His Ver∣tues. all the benefits wherewith it pleas'd God to honour the Vertues of his Soul. Till that time, he never wanted any of those that are the ingredients of a Gentleman and an Honest man: and he laboured since to deserve those that are able to make up a perfect Christian Philosopher. Those who knew him the most intimately, have all born witness of the innocency of his Life. They found him Religious as to his Sentiments, Wise in his demeanour, edifying in all his discourses, giving examples of purity and integrity, that were proof against the common corruption of the Age. VII.His opini∣on of Reli∣gion. After we have known what he was in Conversation with men, and toward himself, it is convenient to know how he demean'd him∣self in his relation towards his Creator, what his Thoughts were about Religion, wherein his Piety consisted, which was very sincere & solid, and was not allay'd with Bigottry, or
Faction, in the opinion of persons of both per∣suasions. Never was a Philosopher observed to bear a more profound respect to a Deity, than him∣self; He was also sober about matters of Reli∣gion, he never mention'd God, but with a great deal of circumspection, always with abun∣dance of Wisdom, always in a noble and sub∣lime manner. The fear or rather niceness he shew'd in this point, made him scrupulously to decline entering upon questions of pure di∣vinity. Believing that it was to do wrong to Truths, that depend on Faith, and cannot be proved but by natural demonstration, to go about to strengthen them by humane reasons, and they only probable. His blood rose against the boldness and rashness of certain Divines, who run away from their guides, that is to say, from the holy Scriptures and Fathers of the Primitive Church, that they may be their own guides, through those ways that they are not well ac∣quainted with. But above all he blamed the boldness of Philosophers and Mathematicians, that dare appear so positive and peremptory, in determining What God can, and what he cannot do; he said, it is to speak of God as of a Jupiter or a Saturn, to make him subject to Styx, or fate, to hold that there are some truths independent on him. As concerning the existance of God, he rested so well satisfied in the evidence of that demonstration he thought he had found in
that matter, that made no difficulty to pre∣fer it to all the evidences and demonstrations of Geometrical Truth. It was moreover his opinion that the Universal consent of all peo∣ple, is sufficient to maintain a Deity against all the injuries of Atheists, and that no pri∣vate person should ever enter upon a dispute with them, except he were sure of convincing them. It is not much material to call to mind in this place the calumnies of Atheism and Scepticism, wherewithal his Enemies endea∣voured to brand him, notwithstanding all the success he had, in opposing Atheists and Scep∣ticks; one could not possibly have opinions, that he studied to resute. By a childish im∣pertinence making people believe that he halted between holding, and refusing them. VIII. The precaution he took along with him, never to incroach upon Divinity▪ went not quite so far as to deny, that humane reason may have any share in Divine Sciences, nay, and even in those that were communicated to us only by revelation from Heaven. He was not so ignorant of the great benefit of reason, for the establishment of Maxims of Religion; and he was persuaded that Philosophy well improved is one of the main helps to support and justifie faith in an illuminated mind. Not that he pretended that a man must needs be a Philosopher, to be a good Chri∣stian: but  he thought that albeit the rea∣son of a man submits to Faith, nevertheless,
Faith makes use of humane reasoning to cap∣tivate reason, and bring it under subjection to its authour. He was persuaded that his opinions might prove very serviceable for the explaining of the truths of Faith. He believed that there could be nothing in whatsoever concerns Divi∣nity and Religion, with which his Philosophy would not much better agree than the vulgar Philosophy doth. And as for some controversies frequently agitated in his time in the Divinity Schools, by reason of the false principles of Philosophy upon which they were grounded, he hoped they would cease and come to no∣thing of themselves. If ever it should so hap∣pen, that his principles should be admitted to come in vogue: That which pufft up his mind the most is, that, describing the begin∣ning and origen of the World, according to the principles of natural Philosophy, and read∣ing over the first Chapter of Genesis, he found that it could be all of it expounded according to his conceptions, much better than by all the ways whereby your interpreters expound it. Nevertheless from the appearances only of his undertaking▪ and from his maner of Phi∣losophizing, several have judged that his Phi∣losophy was, if not pernicions, at least very dangerous for Christian Religion, and that it was equally contrary to the Divinity of Papists and Protestants. And that is, the reason why some controvertists of both persuasions, would fain have ipt it in the bud and supprest it.
Men are delivered from these apprehensions amongst the Catholicks, except here and there a few Peripaticians hoodwink'd by their own Prejudices. But the Protestants that have not experienced it so favourable to their Do∣ctrines have been a long time without pardon∣ing him for broaching it; because he hath not spoken as they do, of the Providence of God, and of the Liberty of Man: the worst that they have been able to disoblige him in, is, making him pass for a Pelagian; But their Accusation is vanished, they not being able to ground it upon any Passage of his Writings, or upon his particular Behaviour and Conduct, where the Grace of Jesus Christ or Supernatural Glory is questioned. IX.His manner of treating of Transub∣stantiation. He was so much perswaded of the en∣tire Conformity of his Opinions with that which the Church teaches, concerning the Truths of Faith, that Transubstantation it self, which, according to Protestants, is impossible to be explained by the ordinary Philosophy, is, according to him, very easie, by his Philoso∣phy: His explanation in the Judgment of some Cartesian Catholicks is much less intricate, than that the Schools present us with: and if a man will credit some Jesuites▪ He hath very clearly explained the whole Mystery of the Eucha∣rist according to his Principles without an Entity of Accidents. This made several Protestant Universities to judge that this Doctrine of his was won∣derful prejudicial to Calvinism: and they have
had reason to respect Aristotle, as more pro∣per than he, for the design of maintaining their Tenets, and to dispute against the Dogma's of the Church of Rome. Honesty obligeth us to acknowledge more∣over, that the best part of other Protestants have not been swayd by these Considerations, when they exploded Aristotle out of their Schools, to introduce Des Cartes; who have in that Point less considered the interest of their Divinity, than that of his Philosophy. But he will be for ever honourable for his manner of explaining Transubstantiation, to understand that it hath been so powerful as to Convert Huguenots to the Faith of the Church of Rome; even as his manner of speaking about Religion hath brought some Profess'd Atheists over to the said Church. Nevertheless▪ God hath suffered Calumny to attack him just in the particular wherein consisted his deserved Praise. Some Catho∣licks there have been, who upon unjust, groundless Suspicions, have not stuck to accuse him of Calvinism: and some Calvinists again, out of a piece of Malice, would fain have done themselves the honour to count him one of them: But their Slanders have been invali∣dated by the Testimonies of a great number of Persons of both Perswasions, by the Queen of Sweden's Certificate, by that of the Princess Elizabeth, of Father Viogué his Confessor, of Monsieur Chnut, Clerselier; and, in fine, by the Justice the Church hath done his Memory
by a Publick Burial, which we take to be th Seal of the Communion of Saints. This Justice was a Debt owing to such a Religious Observer of the Cannons of the Church as our Philosopher was.His Pra∣ctice of Piety. Never did he want Zeal for her; yet was not his, a mis∣guided, blind Zeal, never was he ashamed, publickly to profess his Catholicism amongst Societies separated from the Church: never did there escape from his Pen or Mouth any term that savoured of liberty or irreverence touching certain Rites and Customs of our Church, upon which Philosophers and Wits do usually play, and make sport; the respect that he entertained for the Gospel-Ministry of the Protestant Divines never made him utter a word that smell'd of Complaisance, or fa∣vour for Schism or Heresie. The Caution whereto he had confin'd him∣self upon his first entrance into Countries professing a different Religion, had made him so discreet and reserved, that he scarce ever opened his Mouth without edifying, nor with∣out causing some impressions of respect and esteem for the Religion he profes'd. His carriage and behaviour was no less edi∣fying than his discourse he did not make, all the Duties requisite to a true Christian to con∣sist, in an inward worship only, as most part of your Philosophers do; no, he was extraor∣dinary careful to accompany it with all the exercises of a good consciencious Catholick; nay, and he acquitted himself of all his Obli∣gations,
as exactly as one of the humblest and plainest of Believers would have done. He frequented more especially the Sacraments of Pennance and Eucharist, with all the disposi∣tions of a contrite heart, and humbled spirit; as far as is permitted to refer our selves to the honesty and truth of Confessors, who had the cure of his Soul in Holland and Sweden. His adhering so closely to the whole Body of the Church,His Sub∣mission to the Church. whereof himself was a Mem∣ber, was kept up by a sincere submission to its authority without any reserve. He decla∣red no small deference for whatsoever bore the Character, or but the Name of the Holy See; He harboured very great esteem for the Sorbonne; that is to say, for the whole Faculty of Divinity in Paris, that he respe∣cted as the Depository of the Key of Sci∣ence; Knowing that the Key of Power was in the hands of the Pope and of Bishops, which made him firmly believe that his Conscience should be secure▪ so long as he should have Rome and the Sorbonne on his side. His Submission to the Holy See did ex∣tend even so far as to have some respect for the Roman Inquisition, although he was no where in a Praemunire, whereby to become liable to its lash. He was not ignorant of the difference one ought to put between the Pope's Authority, and that of the Congregation established at Rome for prohibited Books: yet did he not fail to
testifie respect for it, and to say, out of Ci∣vility, that it's Authority had little less power over his Actions, than his own Reason had over his Thoughts, and he took all measures necessary, not to write any thing that might incurr its displeasure; it is more than probable that this Congregation would have spared him, if it could have got clear from the In∣trigues of a particular Author who had cun∣ningly slipt one part of his Works into the Index Expurgatorius, amongst a Catalogue of other Books prohibited by a Decree of the 20th of November 1663. X.Of the Cha∣racter of Novelty in his Opini∣ons. It is possible they could not devise a more specious pretence to censure and reject him, than that of Novelty, which men believes might have amounted to a Crime; this, perhaps (amongst all those they could impute to him) is the only one wherewith they could most reasonably have charged him. To speak the truth, he did not so much boggle at Novelty as they do, who fondly adore the Ancients; he judged that in Philosophy, where the business is only the research of natural Truths, that have not hitherto been Discovered, it might be pardonable to em∣ploy new means; especially since the An∣cients have had the ill luck not to discover them to us. Besides, his Spirit was not of the temper of those upo whom two or three Thousand years are capable to impress a Veneration for Error. He was sure that the ancientest things that have been received
by Posterity; were new, at their first appea∣rance: and if Novelty had been an Obstacle to their Reception, one should never have received any thing into the World. But, since men are engaged upon honour, not any longer to confound Novelty with Falshood, nor Antiquity with Truth, Envy that could not endure that Monsieur Des Car∣tes should pass Scot-free, hath gone about to change the Scene, and invert this order to bring him in guilty; his defenders that plead∣ed his Cause, that they might retort the Ob∣jection of Novelty, did take upon them to make appear that his Opinions were not so Novel as they would make them, and that, several of them had been defeated before him; those that envied him, who thought all to be new, till that time, were not wanting to make their best advantage of this Overture, and have been ready to ac∣cuse him for having robb'd the Ancients, nay, and the Moderns too, who went before him; for it is the opinion of some, that he stole his Method of Algebra from one Harriot, an Englishman. The multitude of those who seem to have had before him sorry Sentiments resembling his,His meet∣ing with those that preceded him. may very well serve to inhaunce the value of his Philosophy, and serve to let men judge of the importance of the new things he hath superadded, both to Correct or Perfect that which was but only rudely drawn, or but ventured at before his time,
without any Method, without any Principles: But this signifies nothing to prove him to be the Plagiary of so many Authors, the most part of which, it is well known, were ut∣terly unknown to him. This Multitude, I say, makes us the more inclinable to be∣lieve that he found out more than all these Philosophers put together; and that he hath been more happy and successful than them all, in matter of Probability and Solidity, for the establishing his Principles, and the curious Connexion of his Consequences. His System is, in all respects so compleat, and so well furnished, that one must not think it strange, that whatsoever hath been the most plausibly fancied by both Ancients and Moderns, is there couched and rectified, that there is little need of feigning that he bor∣rowed it from their Writings. Monsieur Des Cartes agreeing to what is commonly objected, that what he said might possibly have been said by some other be∣fore him, judged that his Case was the same with a man, whom they should tax for ha∣ving plunder'd the Alphabet and Dictiona∣ry, because he might not have made use of any Letters that were not in the former, nor of any words that were not found in the latter; But he adds further, That those who should please to own and acknow∣ledge the neat Concatenation of all his Con∣ceptions that do so necessarily follow one another, would be induc't presently to con∣fess,
that he might be as innocent of the Felony laid to his charge, as an excellent Oratour, that might be condemned for a Plagiary of Calepin, or old Evander, for ha∣ving borrowed Words from the one, and Letters from the other. The main, and only difficulty that re∣main'd to be removed out of the way by the Cartesians, consisted, in alledging that a man comes a Day after the Fair in his In∣vention of a thing, when it hath been al∣ready invented to his hand. But, pray con∣sider, that Experience shapes us an Answer in behalf of them, (viz.) That the very same thing, may be invented more than once at different times and in divers pla∣ces, by Persons that might not have learnt any thing from one another, nor might have had the least Communication together. M. Des Cartes makes it evident, that it is not much material▪ to his purpose for being the first, or the last, in writing the things he writ, provided only they might be true. He hath not the vanity to boast that he was the first Inventer of any thing he hath advanced. He is content to tell us, that if he received, and admitted of them, it was not because they were produced, or not pro∣duced by others; but only and principally because reason had perswaded him of their being true. In a word, he was not one of those rest∣less, byassed Spirits that are afraid lest some
body should rob them of their Inventions: nay, his Judgment was, that a noble gene∣rous Soul ought not to complain of Plagia∣ries robbing of him, provided they do not wholly conceal and suppress their Theft; in case they do not spoil him, and that the Publick be not frustrated thereby. He hath left to Posterity very fair Examples of that Generosity and Dis-interest which he exa∣cted from others upon such Occasions: In respect of two Hollanders, who turn'd Pla∣giaries of his Writings; and that, before he had Communicated them to the Publick, he thought it sufficient to take all necessary Praecautions against the Vain-glory of the one, and Treachery of the other. That done, he committed the rest to God Al∣mighty, as the sole Author of whatsoever good there might be found in his Writings, without challenging any thing in them, be∣sides defects; which Ignorance and Humane Infirmity might there have produced. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by R. Simpson at the Harp in St. Paul's Church-yard. THe Young Man's Duty. A Discourse shewing the ne∣cessity of seeking the Lord betimes; as also the Dan∣ger and Unreasonableness in trusting to a Late, or Death-bed Repentance. Designed especially for Young Persons, before they are Debauched by Evil Company, and Evil Habits. The 6th Edition, by Rich. Kidd  D. and Dean of Peterborough. Time and the End of Time, in two Discourses: The first about Redemption of Time; The second about Considera∣tion of our latter end. By John Fox. Miscellan. The Second Part; In Four Essays. 1. Upon Ancient and Modern Learning. 2. Upon the Gardens of Epicus. 3. Upon Heroick Vertue. 4. Upon Poetry. By Sir William Temple Baronet. The Third Edition, Corrected and Augmented by the Author. The Husbandman's Calling: Shewing the Excellencies, Temptations, Graces, Duties, &c. of the Christian Husband∣man. Being the Substance of Twelve Sermons preached to a Countrey Congregation, By Richard Steele, M. A. and Mi∣nister of the Gospel. The Third Edition corrected and amended. Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment. The 7th Edition. By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Mad∣lis Milk-street, London. A Treatise concerning the Lord's Supper: with Three Dialogues, for the more full Information of the Weak, in the Nature and Use of this Sacrament. By Tho. Dolittl. The Seventeenth Edition. A Communicant Instructed: Or, Practical Directions for worthy receiving of the Lord's-Supper. By Francis Roberts, D. D. Rector of the Church of Christ at Wrington in the County of Somerset. The Fifth Edition, diligently Revised and Corrected by the Author. An Explicatory Catechism: Or, An Explanation of the Assemblies shorter Catechism. Wherein all the Answers in
the Assemblies Catechism are taken abroad in under Que∣stions and Answers, the Truths explained, and proved by Reason and Scripture; several Cases of Conscience resolved; some chief Controversies in Religion stated, with Arguments against divers Errors: Useful to be read in private Families, after Examination in the Catechism it self; for the more clear and through understanding of what is therein Learned. By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Mad Milk-street in London. A particular Account of the present Persecutions and In∣humane Oppressions of the Protestants in France. A True Account of the Siege of London-Derry, by the Reverend Mr. George Walker, Rector of Donogh-More in the County of Tyrone, and late  of Derry in Ireland. The Couess of Pembroke's Arcadia, written by Sir Philip Sidney night, with his Life and Death, a brief Table of principal Heads, and some other New Additions. The whole Body of Cookery Diflected, Taught and fully Manifested, Methodically, Artificially and according to the best Tradition of the English, French, Italian, Dutch, &c. or a Sympathy of all Varieties in Natural Compounds in that Mystery; wherein is contained certain Bills of Fare for the Seasons of the Year for Feasts and Common Diers. Whereunto is annexed a Second Part of rare Receipts in Cookery, with certain Useful Traditions. With a Book of Preserving, Conserving and Cndying after the most Ex∣quisite and Newest manner, Delectable for Ladies and Gen∣tle-women.
