C2852 15565655 103840
TWO LETTERS Of His Majesties Left upon the Table of Hampton-Court the 11 of November 1647. The one to Colonell Whaley, the other to the Lord Mountague. Also a Letter of Advice to his Majestie, sub∣scribed by E. R. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE royal blazon or coat of arms Printed for Mathew Walbancke 1647.
Hampton Court, 11 Novemb. 1647 COlonell Whaley; I have been so civilly used by you and Ma∣jor Huntington, that I cannot but by this parting farewell acknowledge it un∣der my hand; as also to desire the continuance of your courtesie, by your protecting of my houshold-stuffs and Moveables of all sorts which I leave behinde me in this House, that they be neither spoiled nor imbesled: Onely there are three
Pictures here which are not mine, that I desire you to restore; to wit my wives Picture in blew sitting in a Chaire, you must send to Mistris Kirk; my eldest daughters Picture copied by Belcam, to the Countesse of Anglesey, and my Lady Stannops Picture to Cary Rawley; there is a fourth which I had almost forgot, it is the Originall of my eldest daugh∣ter (it hangs in this Chamber over the board next to the Chimney) which you must send to my Lady Aubigny. So being confident that you wish my preservation and resti∣tution, I rest Your Friend, CHARLES R.
I Assure you it was not the Letter you shewed me to day, that made me take this resolution, nor any advertisement of that kinde; But I confesse that I am loath to be made a close Prisoner, under pretence of securing my life. I had almost forgot to desire you to send the black Grew Bitch to the Duke of Richmond.
Hampton Court 11 Novem. 1647. MOuntague, First I doe hereby give you and the rest of your fellowes thanks for the civili∣ties and good conversation that I have had from you; next I command you to send this my Message (which you will finde upon this Table) to the two Houses of Parliament, and likewise to give a Copie of it to Colonell Wha∣ley, to be sent to send to the General: likewise I desire you to send all my sad∣dle-Horses to my Son the Duke of Yorke; as for what concernes the resolution that I have taken my decla∣ratory Message sayes so much that I re∣ferre you to it, and so I rest Your assured friend CHARLES R.
May it please Your Majesty: IN discharge of my du∣ty I cannot omit to ac∣quaint you that my brother was at a meet∣ing last night with eight or nine Agitators, who in de∣bate of the obstacle which did most hinder the speedy effecting of their designes, did conclude it was Your Majesty, and as long as Your Ma∣jesty doth live you would be so; and therefore resolved, for the good of the Kingdome, to take your life a∣way; and that to that Action they were well assured that Master Dell and Mr. Peters (two of their prea∣chers) would willingly beare them company, for they had often said to
these Agitators, Your Majesty is but a dead dogg: My prayers are for Your Majesties safety; but do too much fear it cannot be whilest you are in those hands. I wish with my soul Your Maje∣sty were at my house in Broadstreet, where I am confident I could keep you private till this storme were o∣ver, but beg Your Majesties par∣don, shall not presume to offer it as an advice; it is onely my con∣stant zeal to Your Service, who am Your Majesties dutifull Subject, E. R. Novemb. 9. 1647. FINIS.
