C4540 15586895 103997
THE LIVES Of Two and Twenty English Divines, EMINENT In their Generations for Learning, Piety, and painfulnesse in the Work of the Ministry, and for their Sufferings in the Cause of CHRIST. Whereunto are annexed the LIVES of Gaspar Coligni, that famous Admirall of France, slain in the Parisian Massacre; and of Joane Queen of Navarr, who died a little before. By Samuel Clarke Pastor of Bennet-Fink London. Qui sanctum virum imitatur, quasi Exemplum aliquod intuetur, seseque in illo quasi speculo prospicit, ut adjiciat, quod deesse virtutis agnoscit. Minus enim seipsum homo considerat: sed dum alterum intendit, id quod minus est virtutis addidit. Isiod. de summo bono. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Ʋnderhill and John Rothwell in Pauls Church-yard, 1660.
The Names of those whose Lives are contained in this Part. Dr. Collet. p. 1 Bishop Coverdale. 4 Dr. Sands. 7 Mr. Richard Greenham. 14 Mr. Thomas Cartwright. 19 Mr. Paul Baines. 27 Mr. William Bradshaw. 32 Mr. Richard Stock. 78 Mr. Richard Rothwel. 85 Dr. Preston. 95 Mr. Arthur Hildersam. 144 Dr. Thomas Tailor. 157 Mr. Hugh Clarke. p. 160 Dr. Sibs. 166 Dr. Chaderton. 168 Mr. John Ball. 171 Bishop Potter. 182 Mr. Richard Sedgwick. 184 Mr. Julines Herring. 188 Mr. John Dod. 198 Mr. Robert Balsom. 213 Mr. Herbert Palmer. 218 Gaspar Coligni Admirall of France. 243 Ioane Q. of Navarr. 297
To his loving Friend Master CLARKE upon his Lives of these eminent DIVINES. SAMUEL CLARKE. Anagr. Make us recall. MAke us recall the lives of Worthies dead, (Herein thou art, blest soul, our learned Clark.) In suffering times thereby to hold up head, And live their lives, (Herein thou art our Mark) To soare aloft their Glories to ascend, And sing such Praises, (here thou art our Larke) To live when we are dead, and so to end Our Pilgrimage, and enter Noah's Arke. Thy paines and pattern Make us to recall Their Graces, Glories, and their Lives withall. John Herring, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word.
The Life of Doctor Collet Dean of Pauls, who died Anno Christi 1519. JOhn Collet was born of Worshipfull Parents in Lon∣don;His birth and education. his father [Henry Collet] having been twice Lord Maior of London, by whom he was careful∣ly trained up in learning. In his younger daies he travelled into France and Italy,His travels. whereby he much improved his learning.His going to Oxford. At his return into England he went to Oxford, commenced Doctor of Divinity, and began to read publickly upon Pauls Epistles instead of Scotus and Tho. Aquinas, which before were only in request in that University. When he came to London he Preached often,He is famous for preaching. His character. and had a very great Auditory both of Courtiers and Citizens. His diet was very frugall; his life upright and unblamable: In discipline he was very severe, in so much as being made Dean of Pauls, his Canons complained that they were held in too much by him. He alwaies preferred the honest and honourable estate of Matrimony before the unchast single life of Priests. At dinner time he used to have some portion of Scripture read to him, either out of Pauls Epistles or Solomons Proverbs. He used no supper at all. He was no friend to the irreligious religious orders of Monks and Friars. He was an enemy to the barbarous Divinity of the School-Doctors, as of Scotus, and Thomas Aquinas, insomuch as when Eras∣mus highly commended Aquinas for his learning and acutenesse,His judgment of T. Aquinas. Doctor Collet answered; What tell you me of the learning of that man, who unlesse he had been of an arrogant and presumptious spirit, durst ne∣ver have taken upon him to discusse and define all things so boldly and rashly as he did? And except he had rather been worldly minded then heavenly, he would never so have polluted Christs wholsome Doctrine with mans prophane Doctrine, as he hath done. The Bishop London at this time was Fitz James, who of a long time bore a great grudge to Dr Collet,The Bishops hate him. And article against him. and therefore joyning with two other Bishops, they entred an action of complaint against him before Dr Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. The Articles exhibited against him were three. First, For preaching against the worshipping of Ima∣ges. Secondly, About hospitality, for that he preaching upon those words in the Gospel, Feed, feed, feed; having expounded the two first for feeding by Doctrine and example, the third he expounded for
feeding by hospitality; yet not so much for feeding the body as the soul by good counsel and conference. The third was for speaking against such as preached bosom Sermons, declaring nothing to the people but what they bring in their Papers with them: This the Bi∣shop of London used to do, and therefore took it as spoken against himself, which much irritated him against Dr Collet. But the Arch∣bishop more wisely weighing the matter, and being well acquainted with the worth of Collet,The Archbi∣shop frees him. so took his part against his Accusers, that at that time he freed him out of trouble. The Bishops implacable malice.Another design of Fitz James was to make him an heretick for tran∣slating the Pater noster into English, but the Archbishop holp him out of that also. Yet the Bishops malice was restlesse, for when he could not prevail against Dr Collet before the Archbishop, he laid a train to accuse him to the King, and the occasion thereof was this: About this time King Henry the eighth was preparing War against France, and the Bishop with his complices took advantages against Dr Collet, for that in one of his Ser∣mons he had seemed to preferre Peace before any kind of Warre, though never so just. For this they inveyed against him in their Ser∣mons,They accuse him to the King. and traduced him also before the King; Yet on good Friday after, Dr Collet preached before the King, at which time he treated up∣on the Victory of Christ, exhorting all Christians to fight under Christs standard against the devil; adding moreover what an hard thing it was so to do. He shewed also that all they who upon pri∣vate hatred or ambition took weapons against their adversaries, one Christian to destroy another, they did not fight under Christs Banner but under Satans. He exhorted therefore all Christians in their Wars, rather to make Christ their Prince and Captain in fighting against their enemies, then to imitate Julius Caesar, Alexander, &c. The King hearing this,The King fa∣voures him. and fearing lest the hearts of his souldier should by these words be withdrawn from the Wars, took him aside into his Garden after Sermon, and had much private conference with him. Bishop Fitz-James and his a associates seeing this, were now confident that they should see Collet presently sent Prisoner to the Tower, and therefore they waited for his return out of the Garden; But contra∣ry to their expectation, the King used him very courteously, bad him put on his Cap, much commended him for his learning and integrity of life, and agreed with him in all points that he had taught; onely he desired him, lest the rude Souldiers should misinterpret that which he had said, that in his next Sermon he would explain himself more fully to them, which afterwards he did accordingly: And so after long communication, and great promises of favour, the King gently dismissed him with these words, Let every man have his Doctor as him∣self best liketh, this shall be my Doctor. His adversaries seeing and hear∣ing this, dust never after that time molest him any further. He did many excellent works of Piety and Charity, and amongst the rest he erected that famous foundation of Pauls School London,His Charity.
where one hundred fifty three poor mens sons should be taught freely, and for this end he built a very convenient dwelling house for the Schoolmaster. He assigned also a large annual stipend both for the Head-Master and Usher, whom he willed rather to be chosen out of the number of married men, then of single Priests with their suspected chastity. He left sundry rents and houses for the payment of those sti∣pends, which he committed to the oversight of the Worshipfull com∣pany of Mercers in London. He caused to be ingraven upon the School in Latine, Schola Catechisationis puerorum in Christi Opt. Max. fide, & bonis literis, Anno Christi M.D.X. The first Moderator of this School was Mr William Lilly, a man no lesse eminent for his Learning then Dr Collet was for this Foundation; he made the Latine Grammer which ever since by authority hath been used in all Schools. Dr Collet was very expert in the Scriptures, especially in Pauls Epi∣stles, which he hath illustrated by his Commentaries. He held Justi∣fication freely by the merits of Christs, and not by our own works. He was an enemy to the idle and unchast life of the Popish Clergy. He abhorred those that persecuted the Professors of the truth. He died Anno Christi 1519. and was buried in Pauls Church,His death. upon whose Tomb Mr Lilly engraved this Motto, Disce mori mundo; vivere disce Deo.
The Life of Miles Coverdale sometimes Bishop of Exester, who died Anno Christi 1568. His Birth and Breeding.MIles Coverdale was born in the North of England, and from his childhood was much given to learning, and by his diligence and industry profited exceed∣ingly therein; so that in the reign of King Henry the eighth, he was one of the first that professed the Gospel in England.The Bible translated. He was very well skilled in the Hebrew, and translated the Bible into English, and wrote sundry Books upon the Scriptures; which Doctrine being new and strange in those daies, he was much hated and persecuted for it,His flight. his Bibles printed. especially by the Bishops; whereupon he was forced to fly into the Low-Countries. There he printed the Bibles of his Translation, and by sending them over, and selling them in Eng∣land he maintained himself. But John Stokesly Bishop of London, hear∣ing thereof, and minding to prevent their dispersing in England, enqui∣red diligently where they were to be sold, and bought them all up, sup∣posing that by this means no Bibles would be had; but contrary to his expectation it fell out otherwise; for the same money which the Bishop gave for these Books, the Merchant sent over to Miles Coverdale, by which means he was enabled to Print as many more, which he also sent into England. This caused the Bishops to pursue him with such eager∣ness,He removes into Germany. that he was forced to remove himself out of Flanders into Germany, and to settle himself under the Palsgrave of the Rheine, where he found much favour. At first he taught children for his subsistence; but ha∣ving learned the Dutch language, the Prince Elector Palatine gave him a Benefice at a place called Burghsaber, where he did much good by his Ministry and holy life; maintaining himself partly by his Living, and partly by the liberality of Thomas Lord Cromwell, who was his good Lord, and relieved him very much. At length, when by the happy coming in of King Edward the sixth, Religion was altered in England, and the Gospel had a free passage, he returned into his native Countrey,His return in∣to England. where he did very much good by Preaching. At the time of the commotion in Devonshire for Religion, he was appointed to go down as Chaplain with the Lord Russell, who was sent to suppresse the same;He is made Bishop of Ex∣ester. and after the work was over, for his excellent learning and godly life he was made Bishop of Exester, being conse∣crated
thereunto at Lambeth, by Tho. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno Christi 1550. He most worthily performed that Office that was committed to him. He preached constantly every Sabbath and Holy day,His diligence in his place. and most commonly twice in the week he read a Divinity Lecture in one Church or other within the City of Exester. Considering his Means, he was a great lover of Hospitality, and kept a very good house. He was so∣ber and temperate in his diet, holy and blamelesse in his life;His character. friendly to the godly, liberall to the poor, courteous to all men, void of pride, full of humility, abhorring covetousnesse, and an enemy to all wicked∣nesse and wicked men, whose society he shunned, and whom he would in no wise intertain or keep in his house or company. His Wife was a most sober, chast and godly Matron: His houshold another Church in which was exercised all godlinesse and Vertue. He suffered no one person to abide in his house,His care of his Family. who could not give an account of his faith and Religion, and who lived not accordingly. And as he was very carefull to promote Religion in his Diocess, so was he as ready to give direction for good Government in all Ecclesiasticall affairs: And be∣cause himself was not skillfull therein, neither would be hindred from his godly studies, nor encumbred with worldly matters; and yet judging it meet that the Government should be carried on with all up∣rightnesse, Justice and Equity, he sent to Oxford for a learned man to be his Chancellour; and by the assistance of his Friends, he obtained Mr Robert Weston Doctor of the Civil Law (and afterwards Lord Chan∣cellour in Ireland) unto whose fidelity he committed his Consistory, and the whole charge of his Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, allowing him,His liberallity. not only all the Fees belonging thereto, but also lodged, and found him, his Wife, and Family, horse and man within his own House, and gave him a pension of 40lb per annum besides, which was a very great matter in those daies; so liberall was this good Bishop in the allowance which he made to this good Chancellor. And surely the Bishop was no more godly and carefull in performing his Office of preaching, then his Chancellor was diligent, strict and just in doing of his Office without the reproach of partiality or bribery. Yet notwithstanding that this god∣ly Bishop lived most holily, painfully, and virtuously,He is hated by the Papists. the common peo∣ple (whose old bottels were not capable of new wine) could not brook nor digest him; and when they could find no other cause, this was judged a crime sufficient, that he was a Preacher of the Gospel, an enemy to Papistry, and an honest married man. Hereupon many devises were set on foot for his disgrace, and removing him out of his place; some∣times by slie and false informations against him, sometimes by open railing and false libels; sometimes by secret backbitings; yea at last their malice proceeded so far that they practised his death by poyson∣ing; but by Gods good providence the snares were broken,A special pro∣vidence. and he was delivered. Having thus continued Bishop about three years, it pleased God to take away that famous English Josiah, King Edward: and his sister
Mary succeeding him, the face of Religion was soon altered, and this good Bishop amongst others was deprived,His imprison∣ment. and clapt up in Prison: And though the malice of the then Prelates and Arch-Papists against him was very great, who also had sworn his death; yet it pleased God most miraculously to preserve and deliver him out of their hands, which was effected by this meanes. The good King Christian of Denmark, having formerly known him at his being in Germany,His delive∣rance. wrote divers times, and sued so earnestly and effectually to Queen Mary for him, that at last he was dismissed out of Prison, and suffered to go over into Denmark. There he staied a while,He goes into Denmark. and afterwards, with the leave of the King, went into Germany to his former worthy friend the noble Elector of the Rheine, who most willingly received him, and restored him to his former Benefice of Burghsaber. The reason why he staied no longer with his deliverer the King of Denmark, but chose rather to go into the Palatinate, was, be∣cause he could Preach in the Dutch language,To the Pala∣tinate. but not in the Danish Tongue. At Burghsaber he remained a faithfull and painfull Preacher all Queen Maries daies, till hearing of her death, and of the change of Religion under Queen Elizabeth, he once again returned into his native Country. His return into England.His Bishoprick was reserved for him till his return, and then sundry times profered him, but he would by no meanes accept thereof, but chose rather to live a more private life, yet not out of action; for he continued in London, teaching and preaching the Gospel so long as the strength of his body would permit; and at length being very old and stricken in years,His death. he died comfortably and peaceably in the Lord, be∣ing about eighty years old, January 20. Anno Christi 1568. and was honourably buried under a fair Stone in the Chancel of Bartholomews Exchange in London, upon which Stone is engraven this Epitaph. In obitum Reverendissimi Patris, Milonis Coverdale OGDO ASTICHON. Hic tandem requiemque ferens, finem{que} laborum, Ossa Coverdali mortua Tumbus habet: Exoniae qui Praesul erat dignissimus olim, Insignis vitae vir probitate suae. Octoginta annos grandaevus vixit, & unus Indignum passus saepius exilium. Sic demum variis jactatum casibus ista Excepit gremio terra benigna suo.
Dr. SANDES
The Life of Doctor Sands Archbishop of York, who died Anno Christi 1588. EDwin Sands was born of an ancient and worthy Family about the year 1528. and being train∣ed up in Learning, he so profited therein both in the Countrey and University, that he was cho∣sen Master of Katharine Hall in Cambridge, and having Commenced Doctor, he was made Vice-Chancellor of that University; at which time that blessed King Edward the sixth dying, and the Lady Jane Grey being proclaimed Queen, as we have heard before, the Duke of Northumberland was sent with an Army to apprehend the Lady Mary. And when he came to Cambridge he sent for Dr Sands the then Vicechancellor, and some other Doctors to sup with him; and at supper required Dr Sands to preach on the morrow. The warning was short for such an occasion and Auditory, yet he refused it not, but went home and so to bed: The next morning he arose at three a clock, and having prayed a good while, rose up, took his Bible in his hand, and closing his eyes earnestly prayed to God that it might fall open at a fit Text for the present occasion, and accordingly it opened, and the first Text that he cast his eye upon was Joshua 1.16, 17, 18. And they answered Joshua saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and whi∣thersoever thou sendest us we will go; according as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee; only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses. Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy com∣mandment, and will not hearken to thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death, only be strong and of a good courage. This Text he prosecuted with such prudence and affection, as drew many tears from the eyes of his Auditors. After Sermon the Duke and other Nobles desired him to Print his Sermon, and he only re∣quired a day and an halfs time for the writing of it, at the end where∣of he delivered it to Mr Leaver, who was presently to carry it to Lon∣don to the Presse: But just at that instant came one of the Beadles to him weeping, and bad him shift for himself; for, said he, the Duke is retired, and Queen Mary is proclaimed. Dr Sands was nothing trou∣bled herewith, but delivered his Sermon to Mr Leaver, and so went to dinner to Mr Moores one of the Beadles, his great Friend: At dinner be∣ing of an undaunted courage, and cheerfull disposition, he was very merry, Mistress Moore drinking to him said, Mr Vicechancellor, I drink to you, this being the last time that ever I shall see you:A Prediction. which accordingly proved true.
That night the Duke sent for him to joyn with him in proclaiming Queen Mary, and then told him that the Queen was mercifull, and that he hoped for a generall pardon; to which Dr. Sands answered, My life is not dear unto me, neither have I done or said any thing that troubleth my conscience. For what I spake of the State I have instructions signed by sixteen Counsellors to warrant me therein, neither can speeches be treason; nor yet have I spoken any thing but what the Word of God and the Lawes of the Land will bear me out in, therefore the will of the Lord be done. But be you assured my Lord, you shall never escape death; for if the Queen should spare you, they that now shall rule, will kill you. That night the Duke was apprehended, and some were as busie about Dr. Sands, but Sir John Gates that lay in the Doctors house, drave them away. The next day Dr. Sands was walked into the fields, when the University in an irregular manner meeting together, ordered Dr. Mouse and Dr. Hatcher to go to Dr. Sands his house to fetch away the Univer∣sity Statutes, the Keyes, and such other things as were in his custody, which accordingly they did;Dr Mouses in∣constancy and ingratitude. and Dr. Mouse, who the day before was an earnest Protestant, was now turned a zealous Papist, and a great ene∣my to Dr. Sands, from whom he had received great curtesies. That afternoon a Congregation was appointed by them, and the bell rang to it; when Dr. Sands coming out of the fields, sent for the Beadles, asking what the matter meant, requiring them to wait upon him to the Schools according to their duty, which they did, and Dr. Sands took the Chair. Mr. Mitch and a rable of unlearned Papists seeing this, withdrew, and conspired amongst themselves to pull him out of the Chair. In the mean time Dr. Sands began his Oration,Dr Sands his Oration. expostulating with the University about their dealings, and charging them with great ingra∣titude towards him, affirming that he had said nothing in his Sermon but what he was ready to justifie, and that if he were faulty, they were as deeply guilty in concealing and consenting to that which he had spoken. In the midst of his speech in came Mitch with his associates, some laid hands on him to pull him out of the Chair, telling him it was not his place, others called him traytor, &c. Dr. Sands seeing that they used violence, being of a great courage, felt for his dagger to have dispatched some of them, as Gods enemies; but Dr. Bell and Dr. Blith prayed him for Gods sake to hold his hands, and patiently to bear that great wrong; to which he assented, and so the tumult ending, he went on, and finished his Oration, and having some money of the Universities in his hand, he delivered it up, together with all other things belonging to the University, and then resigned his Office, praying to God to sub∣stitute a better in his room, and to give them better and more thankfull hearts, and so he repaired to his own Colledge. On the morrow came to him Mr. Germingham and Mr. Tho. Mildmay; Mr. Germingham told him that it was the Queens pleasure that by two of the guard he should be conveyed to the Tower, together with the Duke; Mr. Mildmay told him that he wondered that so learned a man
as he, should speak so unadvisedly against so good a Prince. Dr. Sands answered, I shall not be ashamed of bonds,His courage. but if I could do as Mr. Mild∣may can, I need not to fear them: for you came down in armes against the Queen, and now you are in arms for her; I cannot thus blow hot and cold with one mouth. Presently Dr. Sands his stable was robbed of four excellent Geldings, and an Inventory was taken of all his goods, and he was set upon a lame jade that halted to the ground; whereupon a friend of his desired that he might lend him a Nagg to ride upon. As he went out at the end of the Town some Papists assembled to jeer, and some of his Friends to mourn for him. He was carried through London in scorn, and as he en∣tred in at Bishops-gate a base woman threw a stone at him, and hit him so full on the breast that he was near falling from his Horse. To whom he mildly said, Woman, I pray God forgive thee.Meeknesse. As he went through Tower street, a woman in her door said to him, Fie on thee thou Knave, thou Knave, thou Traytor, thou Heretick. At this he smiled, where∣upon she said, Look, the desperate Heretick laughs at it. Another wo∣man on the other side of the street, said, Fie neighbour, thou art not worthy to be called a woman, railing thus upon this Gentleman whom thou knowest not, nor yet the cause why he is thus used: and turning to the Doctor, she said, Good Gentleman, God be thy comfort, and give thee strength to stand in Gods cause even to the death: and thus he was carried Prisoner to the Tower,He is impri∣soned in the Tower. where the Yeoman of the Guard took from him his borrowed Nagg, and whatsoever else he had: and whereas his man brought some linen after him, that also was taken from him. The first three weeks he was in a very bad prison, at the end where∣of he was removed to another, where was put to him Mr. John Bradford. On the day of the Queens Coronation his prison door was left open, and there came to him one Mr. Mitchell, a special friend of his, and said, Dr. Sands, there is such a stir in the Tower that neither gates, doors, nor Prisoners are looked after this day; therefore take my cloak, hat and rapier, and get you gon, save your self and let me do as I may.Flight refused· The Doctor refused his offer, saying, I know no just cause of my imprison∣ment, and if I should do this I should make my self guilty, I will expect Gods good will; yet am I much bound to you for your love. Mr. Mitchell not prevailing departed. Dr. Sands and Mr. Bradford continued in prison twenty nine weeks, one Bowler, a perverse Papist being their Keeper; yet by their affable and loving carriage and converse, he began to mislike Popery,A Jailor con∣verted. and to favour the Gospel; yea he was so far at last wrought upon, that on a Sabbath, when others went to Masse, he carried up to them a Service-Book, a manchet and some wine; at which time Dr. Sands administred the Sacra∣ment to Mr. Bradford and him, and so Bowler became their son begotten in their bonds. When Wyat was up in Arms, that room might be made for him and his in the Tower, Dr. Cranmer, Dr. Ridley, and Mr. Bradford were
put into one prison; and Dr. Sands with nine other godly Ministers were removed to the Marshalsey. As they went, the people every where prayed God to comfort them, and to strengthen them in his truth, whereupon the Keeper of the Marshalsey said to Dr. Sands,His Name was Thomas Wyat. I perceive that the vain people would set you forward to the fire, but I hope you will not prefer your own know∣ledg before the judgment of so many worthy and learned Prelates; if so, you shall find me as strait a Keeper as one that utterly mislikes your Religion. Dr. Sands answered, I know my self young, and my learning small, its enough to know Christ crucified; and he hath learn∣ed nothing that sees not the great blasphemy that is in Popery. I have read in Scripture of some godly and courteous Keepers, God may make you one; if not, I trust he will give me strength and patience to bear your hard dealing with me. The Keeper replied, Do you then minde to stand to your Religion? Yea, said the Doctor, by Gods grace I do. Truly, said the Keeper, I love you the better for it; I did but try you before, and what favour I can shew you, you shall be sure of it, and I shall think my self happy if I may die at the stake with you, and ever after he shewed the Doctor much favour, suffering him to walk into the fields alone, where sometimes he met with Mr. Bradford, who being removed to the Kings Bench, found the like favour with his Keeper. He also lodged him in the best Chamber, and would not suffer irons to be put on him, as other Prisoners had, and suffered his Wife, a beautifull Gen∣tlewoman, both in body and soul, to resort to him. He lodged also Mr. Sanders with him. To these two holy men there was much resort, and much Money was profered to them, but they would receive none. Three or four times they celebrated the Sacrament, and had many Communicants, at which times Dr. Sands gave such exhortations as drew many teares from his Auditours, and wrought in them an utter abhorrency of the Masse and all Popery. Sr Tho. Wyat profers him his liberty.When Sir Tho. Wyat with his Army came into Southwark, he sent to Dr. Sands in prison, desiring his company and advice, telling him that the prison doors should be set open for him and the other Prisoners: Dr. Sands bad the Messengers tell him,His prudent answer. that if his rising were of God he should stand, otherwise he should fall: and that for his own part he was committed by order, and that he would never depart thence ex∣cept he were discharged by the like order; the like answer made Mr. Sanders, and the other godly Ministers that were prisoners there. Dr. Sands having thus lain there nine weeks, at last by the mediation of Sr Tho. Holcraft, then Knight Marshall, he was set at liberty; the manner of it was thus:His release from prison. Sir Tho. Holcraft made great suit to the Bishop of Winchester in the behalf of Dr. Sands, yet could get no grant from him except he would turn to their Religion, which if he would do, he should have great preferment; yet at last by importunity he extorted from him, that if the Queen would grant him his liberty he would not op∣pose it. Then did Sir Thomas, by two Ladies of Honour, prevail with
the Queen that he should have his liberty if Winchester liked of it: Sir Thomas having this grant, watched the Bishops next going to the Queen, and then again moving the businesse, he at last prevailed with them, and gat a Warrant signed by them for his deliverance; yet Winchester after∣wards commanded him not to release him, till two Gentlemen should give a thousand pound bond for him not to depart the Kingdom with∣out License. Sir Thomas seeing this, procured two Gentlemen to be willing thus to be bound with him; and then sending for Dr. Sands he imparted all the businesse to him; to whom Dr. Sands said, I give God thanks who hath moved your heart to be so carefull of me; I think my self much bound to you for your love, which God will requite, and I will never prove ungratefull. But as I came a free man into Prison, so I will not go out a bond-man; for as I cannot benefit my friends, so nei∣ther will I hurt them; and if I be set at liberty I will not stay six dayes in the Realm, if I can get out. Therefore if I may not go free, send me back to prison, where you shall be sure of me. Sir Tho. Holcraft was much troubled at this answer, yet seeing the Doctor immoveable in his reso∣lution, he said to him, Since I cannot change you, I will change my own mind, and am resolved to set you at liberty come of it whatever will come, therefore get you gone quickly over-sea, and never write any thing back hither, for so you may undo me; and so friendly kissing him, he bad him farewell, and commanded his Keeper to take no fees of him. Dr. Sands returning to the Marshalsey tarried all night, and on the morrow gave his prison-fellows a dinner; bad his bed-fellow, and sworn stake-fellow, if it had so pleased God [Mr. Sanders] farewell, they kis∣sing each other with many teares. Then went he to the Kings bench to Mr. Bradford, and Mr. Ferrar, comforting them, and they praising God for his happy deliverance; and so he went into London to a private friend, and the next night changed his lodging, hearing that search was made after him.He is again sought for. For Dr. Watson and Christopherson went to the Bishop of Winchester, and told him that he had set at liberty the greatest Here∣tick in England, and one who had most corrupted the University; whereupon the Bishop sent for all the Constables in London, command∣ing them to make diligent search for him, and promising five pound to him that could apprehend him. Dr. Sands suspecting the matter shifted from place to place, and appointed his man to provide him two Gel∣dings, purposing the next day to go into Essex to his Father-in-law Mr. Sands, with whom his Wife was: But that night having a pair of Hose too long for him,A special pro∣vidence. which were made without measure whilst he was Prisoner in the Tower, he then lodging in Cornhill, requested the good Wife of the house to send them to the next Taylor to be cut shorter; and it so fell out, by Gods providence, that the next Taylor was a Protestant, and the man that made them; he knowing the Hose, went at midnight to the Doctors lodging, and being admit∣ted into his Chamber, wished him not to be troubled at their un∣seasonable coming in: to which he answered, Nothing can be amisse,
what God will, that shall come to passe: then the Taylor told him of the Bishops sending for the Constables, whereof he was one, and of their hopes to find him; for, saith he, it's known, that you have pro∣vided Geldings, and that to morrow you are to go through Algate, where you will certainly be taken: therefore let your man walk boot∣ed and spurr'd to morrow neer where your horses stand; and in the mean time they shall be conveyed privately to Bednal-green, and at a fit season I will come and convey you thither also: as you go along the streets look wildly, and if you meet your Brother in the mouth, know him not, &c. Accordingly Doctor Sands attired like a Gentleman, and looking wildly, went with the Taylor the next day, who conveyed him through back lanes to Moore-gate, and from thence to Bednal-green; where ha∣ving his horses ready, he kissed the honest Taylor, and would have gi∣ven him the greatest part of that little which he had, which yet he would not receive, and so with teares they parted: yet afterwards Doctor Sands requited him thankfully. That night he rode to his Father-in-law, and within two hours after his coming, his Father was inform∣ed that that night two of the Guard would seek to apprehend him there; whereupon he was presently conveyed to an honest Farmers house neer the Sea-side, where he was locked up two dayes and two nights in a chamber all alone, and then removed to one Mower a Ma∣ster of a Ships house at Milton shore, attending a wind for his depar∣ture: and while he was there, Mower brought forty or fifty mariners to him, to whom he gave such an exhortation, that they being taken with it, resolved all of them to die rather then he should be appre∣hended. May the sixth the wind served, and he took his leave of his Host and Hostesse, who had been married eight years and had no child, and when he took his leave of the woman, he thanked her kindly for his entertainment, and gave her his handkerchief with an old royall of gold in it,A Prophecy. saying, Ere a year be past, be of good comfort, God will give you a Sonne; and accordingly it came to passe; for when there lacked but one day of a twelvemoneth, she was brought to bed of a fair Son. He flies be∣yond sea.Doctor Sands and Doctor Coxe were both in the same Ship, and ere it was out of ken, two of the Guard were upon the shore to have apprehended Doctor Sands: but God gave them a good passage; so that they arrived safely at Antwerp, and were invited to dinner to Master Locks house; and as they were at dinner Master George Gilpin, Secreta∣ry to the English house, came to them, and whispering to Doctor Sands,A special pro∣vidence. said, King Philip hath sent to make search for you, and to ap∣prehend you: hereupon he immediately rose from dinner, and though it rained very fast, yet he went out at the gate that leads towards Cleveland, where meeting with a Wagon, he hasted away, and came safely to Ausburg in Cleveland, where he tarried fourteen daies, and then travelled to Strasbourgh; where after he had continued one year, his Wife came to him. There he fell sick of a great Flux, which
held him nine moneths, and brought him to deaths door:His sicknesse. He had a child also that fell sick of the Plague, and died. His Wife died.His godly, and ver∣tuous Wife also fell sick of a Consumption, and died in his armes. Whil'st he remained there, he was chiefly maintained by one Ma∣ster Isaac, an English Gentleman of Kent, and one that suffered exile for the same cause of Christ: he so entirely loved him,Charity. that he was al∣waies more ready to give, then Doctor Sands was ready to receive; so that he gave him above a hundred marks, which Doctor Sands after∣wards thankfully repayed again. After the death of his Wife, he travelled to Zurick in Switzerland, and there sojourned in the house of Peter Martyr for five weeks space, at the end whereof as they sate at dinner, news was brought them of Queen Maries death, and Doctor Sands by his friends was sent for back to Strasbourgh. This news occasioned joy to all but Doctor Sands, who was stricken to the heart to think that he was called back to new sorrows. Master Bullinger, and the other Ministers feasted him before his de∣parture from Zurick, and so he returned back to Strasbourgh, where he preached, and so in the company of Master Grindall,His return to England. he came for England, arriving at London upon the Coronation-day of Queen Eli∣zabeth. By her, for his singular piety and learning, he was advanced to the Bi∣shoprick of Worcester An. Christi 1559. and afterwards he was removed to the Bishoprick of London, An. Christi 1570. And lastly,He is a Bishop. he succeeded Doctor Grindall in the Archbishoprick of York, Anno Christi 1576. In all which places he governed the Church with singular prudence, and modesty; and having finished his course on earth, he went to receive his Crown in Heaven, August the eighth,His death. Anno Christi 1588. being about the age of sixty, and lies buried in the Collegiate Church of Southwell in Nottingham-shire. He was a man of whom it is hard to say, whether he were more famous for his admirable vertues, or great learning, as his Sermons yet extant in print do manifest. He left many children, of which three were Knights, excellently qualified both in mind, and body, especially Sir Edwin Sands, who deserved so well of his Coun∣trey.
The Life of Master Richard Greenham, who died about the year, 1591. I Can yet learn nothing concerning the Countrey, Parentage, or first Education of Mr. Richard Green∣ham. The first place, where I find him, was in Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, where he followed his Studies so hard,He was Fellow in Pembrook-Hall. and was so eminent for his profici∣ency in learning, that he was chosen Fellow in that Society, and after a while he was called to a Pastoral charge at Dry-Drayton,His remove to Dry Drayton. not far from Cambridge, and like a faithfull Mi∣nister of Jesus Christ, he spared no paines amongst his people, where∣by he might advance the good of their souls. His constant course was to preach twice on the Lords day, and before the evening Sermon to Catechize the young people of the Parish.His extraordi∣nary pains. His man∣ner also was to preach on Mundayes, Tuesdayes, and Wednesdayes, and on Thursdayes to catechize the youth, and again on Fridayes to preach to his people; and that on these week dayes, the people might have the better opportunity to attend upon his Ministry, his course was to be in the Pulpit in the morning so soon as he could well see. He was so earnest, and took such extraordinary pains in his preaching, that his shirt would usually be as wet with sweating, as if it had been drenched in water, so that he was forced so soon as he came out of the Pulpit to shift himself, and this won∣derfull and excessive paines he took all his time. Twice a day he prayed in his Family, and after Sermon he used to call his servants together, and examined them of what they heard, and what they remembred.His hard Stu∣dies. And besides all these his publike labours, he studied very hard, rising every day both Winter and Summer, at four of the clock in the morning. His Charity.He was very eminent for his charity to the poor; whereof we have this notable Example: In a time of scarcity, when Barley was at ten groats the Bushell, (which in those daies was an extra∣ordinary price) he by his prudence brought it to passe, that the poor had it sold to them for four groats the Bushell of every Hus∣bandman in the Town; and thus he effected it. There were about twenty Plough-holders in the Town, all which he by his holy per∣swasions drew to an agreement amongst themselves, to hire a com∣mon granary, and therein to lay up Corn for the poor, some more, some lesse, every man accordingly to his ability; so that some laid
up one Coom, some a quarter, some three Cooms, and Master Greenham himself laid in five Cooms, all which was delivered out to the poor at a groat a peck. There was one day in the week ap∣pointed for all the poor to come and be served, at which time every one received according to their charge; where there were but two in a Family, they received one peck a week, and so more according to that proportion; only no Family had above three pecks a week. He kept but two Beasts himself, that the poor might have his straw, and when other men sold their straw for two Shillings the dayes thresh, he sold his for ten pence: So that in that dear time all the poor in the Parish had been well neer famished, had it not been for his prudence, and liberality, which he also continued, till the price of Corn abated, which was suddainly, and extraordinarily; for that Corn which was sold for a noble the Bushell, was within one moneth after sold for fourteen pence the Bushell. But during the fore-mentioned dearth, by publike Order, the Bushels were cut, and made lesse; This Master Greenham preached much against, and publikely reproved wheresoever he came, and withall gave his man a charge, that if the Clerk of the Market sent for his Bushell to cut it, he should not carry it in, which was done ac∣cordingly, for which he came into some trouble, but the Lord de∣lievered him out of the same. Also at this time though his Bushell was bigger then other mens, yet he would often charge his man not to strike off all the Corn. He used not to trouble himself with reckonings and accounts, but would sometimes ask his man when he came from the Market, how he sold Corn? and if it was dear, he would say, I pray God bring down the price of it; and if it was cheap, he would heartily blesse God for it. Yea, his Charity was not onely extended to the poor of his own Parish, but to o∣thers also; for if at any time he had seen a poor body at a distance from him as he rode abroad, he would send his man with money to him, and when at any time he rode by the Castle at Cambridge, the Prisoners would never ask him for any thing, nor any one that was with him, for if he had any money in his purse, they were sure to have part of it. By reason of his great liberality, though his living was worth a hundred pound per annum, yet he usually wanted Money to get in his Harvest, so that his Wife (formerly Doctor Bounds widow) was forced to borrow money to supply that want: Yet was he so well content with his present condition, that though he had proffers of livings worth three of that which he had, yet would he by no meanes be perswaded to ac∣cept of them. He was a great friend to, and promoter of peace and concord amongst his Neighbours and acquaintance,A great Peace∣maker. insomuch that if any had come to him who were at variance, he would either have made them friends himself, or if he could not prevail, he would have made use of other friends to re∣concile them together, thereby to prevent their going to Law.
When Martin Mar-Prelate came first out, Master Greenham being to preach at Saint Maries in Cambridge, isliked Martin Mar-Prelate. spake freely against that Book, manifesting his dislike of the same: For (said he) the tendency of this Book is to make sinne ridiculous, whereas it ought to be made odious. On a time the Bishop of Ely sent for him to appear about his Non-conformity:He is convent∣ed before the Bishop. at which time the Bishop told him that there was a great Schisme in the Church, asking him where the blame was to be , whether upon the Conformists, or Non-conformists? To which e readily answered,His Prudence. that it might lie on either side, or on neither side: For (said he) if they loved one another as they ought, and would do all go Offices each for other, thereby maintaining love and concord, it lay  neither side: otherwise, which party soever makes the rent, the Schisme lies upon their score. The Bishop was so pleased with this answer, that he dismissed him in peace.He is dismissed He was much troubled with a bad concoction, whereby he had fre∣quent sick nights, which kept him much waking; but then his manner was (as much as possibly he could) to spend the time in meditation and prayer.His Piety. We have before heard of his great Charity to mens bodies: His Cha∣rity to souls was not lesse exemplary. For having great experience, and an excellent faculty to relieve and comfort distressed consciences, he was sought to, far and neer, by such as groaned under spiritual afflicti∣ons and temptations; all whom he entertained friendly and famili∣arly, without respecting the person of the rich more then of the poor. Yea the fame of this spiritual Physician so spread abroad, that he was sent for to very many, and the Lord was pleased so farre to blesse his labours,His skill in cu∣ring spiritual diseases. that by his knowledge and experience ma∣ny were restored to joy and comfort, out of unspeakable and in∣supportable terrours and torments of conscience. If the Lord had not so soon translated him out of this sinfull and miserable world, there was none more fit, nor willing to have prescribed Rules, and a Method to be observed in this so little a known Art. Of his good will herein, let his own words testifie the forward desires of his heart: For upon a special occasion he thus speaketh of him∣self; I have had (saith he) for a long time a settled resolution, (which I hope is from God) to study the cases of conscience, that there∣by I may be the better able to succour the tempted and perplexed in spirit. He was filled with bowels of compassion towards the afflicted, sympa∣thizing, as if he had been afflicted with them. Many godly and learned friends of his, perceiving his abilities and inclination thereto, did labour much to excite and incourage him in those studies, upon these and the like grounds. First, that he might hereby the better train up some young men in the like studies, communicating his knowledg and experiences to them
therein. Secondly, that he might leave to posterity a Com∣mentary of such particular Maladies as God had made him in∣strumental in the cure of, together with the meanes by him used for effecting of the same. And because Precepts are wanting, Rules of direction might be framed, partly by his own observation, partly by conference with other learned and experienced persons, where∣by in that, and the age following, that Art might be brought into some form and method, to the publick good and benefit of many, not only fo the fruitfull curing, but also for the healthfull preventing of manifold mischiefs. To such as complained to him that they were troubled with sphemous thoughts, his counsell was, that they should not fear them, but abhorre them. And when some poor Christians were miserably afflicted with feares, that they had commited that unpardo∣nable sinne against the holy Ghost, he used to tell them, that if they would not have committed it, it was certain that they had not faln in∣to it. The graces of Gods Spirit did all abundantly shine forth in this man of God: all tempered, as with unfeigned love to Christ, so with bow∣els of love and compassion towards men; and he again was greatly be∣loved of all men. In the whole course of his Ministry, he was very carefull ever to avoid (as much as was possible) all occasions of offence, de∣siring in all things to approve himself as a Minister of Christ, and Workman that needed not to be ashamed. He much rejoyced in, and praised God for the happy govern∣ment of Queen Elizabeth, and for the blessed calm and peace which the Church and people of God enjoyed under the same, speaking often of it, both publickly, and privately, as he had occasion, en∣deavouring to stirre up the hearts of all men (as much as in him lay) to praise God with him for it, and to pray also for the continuance thereof. Yea this matter so affected him, that the day before his departure out of this world, his thoughts were much troubled, for that most men were so unthankfull for those wonderfull and happy deliveran∣ces, which the Lord of his mercy vouchsafed to that glorious Queen, from the conspiracies and dangerous practices of her Popish Adver∣saries. He was a special Instrument and meanes under God to incou∣rage, and train up many godly and learned young men in the holy service of Christ, in the work of the Ministry; and to restrain, and reduce not a few from errours and schisme; striving by all meanes to retain them in obedience to the Lawes of the land, and to provoke them highly to prize, and preciously to esteem the peace of the Church, and people of God. Having continued at Dry-Drayton about the space of twenty, or one and twenty years, he left it, and went from thence to London, about the year 1588, or 89.His remove to London. Yet was very carefull be∣fore
his remove to get an honest and able man to succeed him in that place. The causes of his removal, were partly the untractablenesse and unteachablenesse of that people amongst whom he had taken such ex∣ceeding great paines. For besides his publick Preaching and Catechi∣zing, his manner was to walk out into the fields, and to conferre with his Neighbours as they were at plough: And partly he did it upon sup∣posall that he might do farre more good in a more publick place by com∣forting afflicted consciences, wherein the Lord had given him such an admirable dexterity. He wholly spent himself in the service of God and his Church, and therefore often made use of that saying of the Prophet David: The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up. He was a little man of stature, and usually indifferent well in health; but when at any time he was sick, he would suffer no body to sit up and watch with him, that so he might more freely converse with God. He continued not in London above the space of two years, but be∣ing quite worn out, he comfortably and quietly resigned up his spirit unto God,His death. Anno Christi, 1591. and about the sixtieth year of his age. He hath a Volume of Sermons, and Treatises of Divinity in Print.
Mr. THO: CARTWRIGHT.
The Life of Master Thomas Cartwright, who died, Anno Christi, 1603. THomas Cartwright was born in Hertfordshire, about the year 1535. and being by his Parents kept at School till he was fit for the University,His Birth. He went to Cambridge and was admitted into Saint Johns Col∣ledge, Anno 1550. He there followed his Studies exceeding hard, and being a man of excellent na∣tural parts, he profited in learning more then ordi∣nary; He never used to sleep above five houres in a night,His studious∣nesse. which cu∣stom he continued to his dying day. Three years after, at the death of King Edward the sixt, he left the University, and betook himself to the service of a Counsellor, yet followed his studies very hard, as taking more pleasures therein, then in the study of the Law;He is a Law∣yers Clarke. Thus he continued till the beginning of Queen Elizabeths Reign, at which time his Master meeting with Doctor Pil∣kinton, Master of Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, he told him of his mans learning and studious disposition; the Doctor desired to speak with him, and thereby perceiving his great abilities, and hopefulnesse, with his Masters consent, he took him again to Saint Johns Colledge,His return to Cambridge. where his proficiency and Progresse both in the Arts and Tongues, was so eminent, that Anno 1560. he was chosen Fellow in that Colledge, and about three years after he was removed to a fellowship in Trinity-Colledge, where for his great worth, he was ere-long made one of the eight Senior-fellows. Anno 1564. Queen Elizabeth coming to Cambridge, great Preparati∣on was made for her entertainment,His Disputati∣on before the Queen. and four of the eminentest men in the University, being chosen to keep a Philosophy act before her, he was one of them, who performed it with extraordinary abilities, to the great content and satisfaction both of the Queen and his other au∣ditors. Anno 1567. He commenced Batchelor of Divinity, and three years after he was chosen to be the Lady Margarets Divinity-Reader. He read upon the first and second Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles,He is chosen Professor. and performed it with such acutenesse of wit, and solidity of judgment, as caused admiration in his hearers: and even at that time he was so fa∣mous for his Ministry, that when his turn came to preach at Saint Maries, the Sextone was fain to take down the windows,His multitude of hearers. by reason of the mul∣titudes that came to hear him. In his Lectures he was occasioned to discover his judgment about Church-discipline, which the Doctors and Heads in the University
took very hainously, as being dangerous and destructive to the present Hierarchy, whereupon he was convented before the Vice-Chancel∣lour, Doctor May, and other Doctors, and examined upon sundry Articles, or Propositions of Doctrine delivered by him publickly in his Lectures,He is questio∣ned before the Vice-Chancel∣lor. and elsewhere, which they affirmed to be contrary to Religion received, and allowed by publick authority in this Realm, and thereupon they de∣manded whether he would stand to, or revoke the said Opinions and Do∣ctrines delivered by him. Master Cartwright upon deliberation, desired that he might have leave to set down in writing what his judgment in those things was, and what he would stand to; which being granted, he drew up in six Propositions what his judgment was; and setting his hand to it, de∣livered it to the Vice-Chancellor, who thereupon admonished him to revoke the same, and upon his refusal, punished him by the substracti∣on of his stipend, and so he continued in his Lecture that year. But the year after, Doctor Whitgift being chosen Vice-Chancellour, he a∣gain convented him before him, requiring his absolute answer whether he did mind to teach his Auditors otherwise, revoking that he had be∣fore taught, or whether he would abide in the maintenance of the same? Unto this Master Cartwright answered, that for the Propositions deli∣vered by him under his hand to Doctor May, and now shewed to him, they were his own hand writing, such as he had openly taught, and still continued fully determined to maintain and defend as Truths. Hereupon after Master Cartwright had a while withdrawn, and the Vice-Chan∣cllor had conferred with the other Doctors, Master Cartwright was a∣gain called for, and this definitive sentence was pronounced against him by the Vice-Chancellour, Doctor Whitgift, that perceiving that no admonition would help, but that he still persisted in the same mind, he did therefore pronounce him, the said Master Cartwright, to be re∣moved from his said Lecture, and by his finall decree or sentence did then and there remove him, and declare the said Lecture to be void; and that he minded, according to the foundation thereof, to proceed to the Election of a new Reader.He is expelled the University. And further he did then and there by vertue of his Office, inhibit the said Master Cartwright from preaching within the University and the Jurisdiction of the same. Now that the Reader may be better satisfied what the Arricles were which Master Cartwright drew up, and signed with his hand, and for which this sentence was passed upon him, I shall here set them down in his own words, as I have them transcribed out of the Origi∣nal, standing upon Record in the Registry of the University of Cam∣bridge. The Articles for which he was expelled.1. Archiepiscoporum, & Archidiaconorum nomina simul cum muneri∣bus, & officiis sunt abolenda. 2. Legitimorum in Ecclesia ministrorum nomina, qualia sunt Episcopo∣rum, & Diaconorum separata à suis muneribus in verbo Dei descriptis, sim∣pliciter sunt improbanda, & ad institutionem Apostolicam revocanda: ut E∣piscopus
in verbo, & precibus, Diaconus in pauperibus curandis ver∣setur. 3. Episcoporum Cancellariis, aut Archidiaconorum Officialibus, &c. regimen Ecclesiae non est committendum, sed ad idoneum ministrum, & Pres∣byterum ejusdem Ecclesiae deferendum. 4. Non oportet ministrum esse vagum, & liberum, sed quisque debet cer∣to cuidam gregi addici. 5. Nemo debet ministerium tanquam candidatus petere. 6. Episcoporum tantum autoritate, & potestate, ministri non sunt cre∣andi: multo minus in Musaeo, aut loco quopiam clanculario: sed ab Ecclesia electio fieri debet. Hisce reformandis, quisque pro sua vocatione studere debet (vocationem autem intelligo) ut magistratus authoritate, minister verbo, omnes precibus promoveant. Per me Thomam Cartwright. Master Cartwright being thus driven from the University, not long after, finding the way for the exercise of his Ministry in England obstructed, he went beyond the Seas to visit other reformed Churches,His travels beyond-sea. where he grew acquainted with the famousest men for Piety and Learn∣ing in Christendome, with whom he kept correspondence all his life after. He was also highly prized by them, insomuch as Beza writing about that time into England to a Friend of his, hath this expression;Beza's testi∣mony of him. Est quidam Anglus nobiscum, nomine Thomas Cartwright, &c. Here is now with us your Countreyman Thomas Cartwright, then whom I think the Sun doth not see a more learned man, &c. He was also chosen Preacher to the English Merchants at Antwerp,He is Preacher to the English Merchants. and afterwards at Middleburrough, where he did very much good by his Mi∣nistry, the Lord blessing his labours exceedingly in those parts; and when he understood that the Merchants, by whom he was maintained, through their great losses decayed in their estates, he returned his salary to them again. Not long after he came over into England, being earnestly sollici∣ted thereunto by Letters from Master Dearing, Master Fulk, Master Wiburne, Master Leaver, and Master Fox; about which time the Non-conformists having drawn up an admonition to the Parliament for the Reformation of the Church, Doctor Whitgift, who was then preferred to the Arch-Bishoprick of Canterbury, answered the same in Print; whereupon the Ministers which wrote the Admonition, consul∣ting,He is chosen to answer Dr. Whitgift. but not agreeing upon the choice of one to reply to Doctor Whit∣gift, Master Cartwright was at last chosen by lot to undertake it, and performed it so well, that his very Adversaries were heard to advance and commend him for it. Yet was he with divers other of the Non-conformists brought into the High Commission Court, where, for refusal of the Oath ex Offiicio, they were clapt up in prison,His imprison∣ment. and afterwards proceeded against in the Star-chamber; but it pleased God so to order it by his Providence that
those very witnesses which were brought to accuse them, did so clear them, that they were dismissed, and sent home much more honoured and beloved then they were before. Whilst Master Cartwright was Prisoner in the Fleet, he had thirty pounds sent him from a noble friend,His contempt of the world. of which he took but ten shillings, returning the rest with many thanks to the Donor; and when the Earl of Leicester offered him the Provostship of Eeaton-Colledge, saying, that it was a hundred pounds a year more then enough,His favour with the Earl of Leicester. besides the conveni∣ency of the place; Master Cartwright answered, That the hundred pounds more then enough was enough for him. About the year 1580. His fame was so spread through the Reform∣ed Churches,King James sends for him into Scotland. that King James, then King of Scotland, sent for him, profering to make him Professor in the University of Saint Andrews: whereof twenty years after, upon King James his coming into Eng∣land, Master Cartwright makes mention in his Epistle before his Com∣mentary upon Ecclesiastes, which he dedicated to King James, return∣ing humble thanks for that Royal favour. The Arch-Bishop of Dublin also sent for him into Ireland, proffering him preferment in that King∣dom. He is sent to for counsell.He was sent to from divers eminent Divines beyond the Seas, wherein they craved his advice for the direction of young men in the method of their studies, as also in the behalf of the Churches in ge∣neral, for his counsell in regulating their proceeding in the waightiest affairs. He is made Master of the Hospital at Warwick.Also about the same time the Earl of Leicester preferred him to be Master of his Hospital at Warwick, which place was worth to him a∣bout one hundred pounds per annum: His imployment was to pray with the poor men twice a day, to catechise twice a week, and to preach once on the Lords day at the Parish Church: This place he willingly and thankfully accepted of, because he was therein exempted from the Ju∣risdiction of the Prelates. His carriage and deportment was such, that there was not a Noble∣man or Gentleman of quality in all the Country that looked Heaven∣ward,His esteem in the Countrey. or was of any account for Religion and Learning, but they sought to enjoy his company, and found much pleasure and content therein; for his conversation was such, that scarce a word came from his mouth that was not of some good use and concernment. He was of a very laborious and indefatigable spirit; it was his meat and drink to be doing the Will of his heavenly Father; so that be∣sides all his paines in Writing, and in the Hospital, he preached every Sabbath-day in the morning about seven a clock in the lower Parish of Warwick,His diligence in the Mini∣stry. and, when he could be suffered, in the upper Parish in the af∣ternoon; Besides which, he preached a Lecture on Satturdayes in the afternoon in the upper Church, in which he went over a great part of the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes with singular judgment and profit; and this he did of his own free Will, without demanding or recei∣ving one penny for his paines. And whereas he was sometimes suspen∣ded
by the Bishops from preaching in the Churches, his manner was at those times to preach in the Hospital, whither many resorted to hear him, though they were sure to be brought into the Bishops Courts for the same. Presently after his coming to Warwick, the English Seminary at Rhemes published their Version of the New Testament, and Annotati∣ons upon it in English, which coming over into England, it was looked upon by all as a Book of dangerous concernment, and therefore fit to be answered by the ablest pen that could be found;He is impor∣tuned to answer the Rhemist Te∣stament. Hereupon (as I have heard) Queen Elizabeth sent to Beza to request him to undertake the answer; but he modestly excused it, and returned answer that she had one in her own Kingdom, far abler then himself to undertake such a task, and upon further enquiry declared that it was Master Thomas Cart∣wright. Then Sir Francis Walsingham, a man of eminent place and power,Encouraged by Sir Francis Walsingham. who herein, as in other affairs, was accounted the mouth and hand of the Queen and State, wrote to Master Cartwright, earnestly requesting him to undertake the work, assuring him also of such aid as should further him in the finishing thereof; for which end he sent him one hundred pounds towards the charges of buying Books, and procuring Writers which were to be employed by him therein; This was An∣no 1583. The same year also he was earnestly sollicited by the most learned men of the University of Cambridge by a solemn Epistle,He is sollicited thereto by the Doctors of Cambridge. with joynt consent written to him to undertake the answer, wherein amongst o∣ther passages they have these expressions; With you we are earnest (most Reverend Cartwright) that you would set your self against the unhallowed endeavours of these mischievous men, either by refuting the whole Book, or at least some part thereof. It is not for every man Work-man-like to frame Gods Tabernacle, but for Bazaleel and Aholiab; neither is every one rashly to be thrust forth into the Lords battels; but such Captains are to be chosen from amongst Davids Worthies; Of which, as we acknowledge you to be one, by the former battels undergone for the wals of our City, the Church Church-Discipline.; we doubt not if you will enter this War (which truly you ought to  according to the Zeal and Piety you bear to your Countrey and Religi∣on) but that you fighting for Conscience and Countrey (yea even for the very inmost holy place of the Temple) will be able to tread under∣foot the forces of the Jebusites, which set themselves to assault the Tower of David. Moreover, (which may marvellously sharpen the edge of your courage) you are not now to fight with a Brother, or fellow of the same Re∣ligion (which maketh the Conflict more faint) but with the most inveterate enemies of Jesus Christ, &c. Then they thus conclude: You see to what an honourable fight we invite you. Christs business shall be under∣taken against Satans Champions. We stir you up to fight the battels of our Lord; where the Victory is certain, which the triumph and applause of the An∣gels will ensue. Our Prayers shall never be wanting unto you. Christ without doubt, whose cause is defended, will be preset with you. The Lord Jesus much
increase your courage and strength, and keep you very long in safety for his Churches good. Vale. This was subscribed by Roger Goad, William Whit∣taker, Thomas Crook, John Ireton, William Fulk, John Field, Nicholas Crane, Giles Seintler, Richard Gardener, William Charke, &c. And by the Ministers of London and Suffolke.But besides these, the Reverend Ministers of London, and Suffolk did by their several letters earnestly exhort him to this work; and Master Cartwright, was at last by these importunities drawn to undertake it, and neither diligence nor constancy was wanting in him to have carri∣ed it on to perfection; but he met with such great discouragements and hinderances from Potent Adversaries, that he was forced often to lay pen aside;His discou∣ragements in the work. yea Arch-Bishop Whitgift sent him a positive command that he should deal no further in it; yet afterwards by an Earl and privy Counsellor of great note, and some other noble Personages, he was at last drawn to take pen in hand again; But receiving new discourage∣ments,The work left imperfect. and having such continual employment in the Ministry, he lived not to perfect that work. His going into Gernsey.Whilst he was at Warwick, being silenced by the Bishops, he was re∣quested by the Lord Zouch, Governour of Gernsey, to go with him in∣to that Island, with whom he continued some time, and in the mean space he substituted one Master Lord, a godly and holy Minister, then living at Woolstone, in his room at the Hospital in Warwick, allowing him the greatest part of the profits of the place during his abode there; and the rest he caused to be distributed amongst the poor. His contempt of the world.He was far from seeking after great places or great things in the world, and for riches he sought them not, yea he rejected many op∣portunities whereby he might have enriched himself; His usual man∣ner was, when he had good summes of gold sent him, to take only one piece, lest he should seem to slight his Friends kindnesse, and to send back the rest with a thankfull acknowledgement of their love, and his acceptance of it, professing, that for that condition wherein God had set him, he was as well furnished as they for their high and great places. His manner was not to keep any more money in his purse, but what might serve for charitable uses; He was very bountifull to poor Schol∣lers;His charity. He distributed money every Sabbath-day amongst the poor of the Town of Warwick, besides what he gave to the Prisoners, and upon o∣ther occasions both at home and abroad. For his Houshold affairs, he never troubled himself with them, but wholly left them to be ordered and managed by the Prudence of his Wife. He was very carefull to regulate and order the businesses of the Hos∣pital for the best advantage of the poor Brethren.His Prudence. He continued his dili∣gence and assiduity in his studies even in his old age,His studious∣nesse. and his usual manner was to rise at two, three, and four a clock in the morning at the latest, both summer and winter, notwithstanding that his bodily infirmities were such, that he was forced to study continually kneeling upon his knees.
He was of a very meek and quiet spirit, as appears in those conflicts which he had with Doctor Whitgift, and Doctor Sutcliffe,His meekness. wherein he used soft words and hard arguments; he could not endure, so much as in private, to hear his adversaries reproached, and if any in his pre∣sence used disgracefull speeches of them, he would sharply reprove them for it, saying, That it's a Christians duty to pray for, and not to reproach his adversaries; and when Martin Mar-Prelates Book came forth, he shewed much dislike of the Satyrical and tart language used therein. He was also very humble,His humility. not enduring to hear any thing spoken in his own commendation, or any titles given him, which in the least measure savoured of ambition; He affected not popularity, but avoid∣ed it as much as possibly he could. Indeed all his ambition was to advance the Kingdom and cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to promote Gods glory.His sympathy with the Church. It was the great joy and rejoycing of his heart to hear of the welfare and prosperity of the Churches at home and abroad; for this he earnestly and daily pray∣ed; and when he heard any ill tydings, with Nehemiah he sate down and mourned, and fasted, and prayed before the God of Heaven, so that all that conversed with him, might easily discern that nothing did affect him in any degree, like the good or ill tydings of the Churches state. He was frequent in Prayer every day,His frequency in Prayer. and in his younger years hath risen many times in the night to seek our private places to pray in. And as his labours were very great in the work of the Ministry, so it pleased the Lord to make them very successefull for the conver∣sion and confirmation of many,The successe of his Mini∣stry. and for terrour and restraint unto o∣thers. There was one Master Chaplin, a woollen Draper, in Warwick, who made a Profession of Religion, but many times brake out into scan∣dalous practices; Master Cartwright on a time walking with him in his Garden, dealt plainly and faithfully with him,A remarkable judgment up∣on a loose Professer. rebuking him for his miscarriages, and shewing him the dishonour that he brought to God, and the Gospel thereby; This so wrought upon Chaplin, that he pre∣sently sunk down, and being carried home, died within a few hours after. In his old age, he was much troubled with the stone and gout, which much empaired his strength, yet would he not intermit his labours, but continued preaching when many times he could scarce creep up into the Pulpit. The Sabbath before his death, which was the last Sermon that he made,His last Ser∣mon. December the 25. he preached up∣on Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. The morning before his death which was the Tuesday following, he was two hours on his knees in pri∣vate Prayer: In which (as he told his Wife) he found wonderfull and unutterable joy and comfort, God giving him a glimpse of heaven be∣fore he came to it,Joy unspeak∣able. and within a few houres after he quietly resigned
up his spirit unto God,His death. December the 27. Anno Christi, 1603. And of his age sixty eight. Master Dod preached his Funeral Ser∣mon. During his abode in the University, he was of great power, and credit in the Regent-house, so that the Doctors feared lest the Preci∣sians (as they were then called) should choose him Vice-Chancellour, whereupon they procured the alteration of the Statute, whereby the choice was formerly in the Regent-house; and confined the Election of the Vice-Chancellour to one of those two whom the Heads should prick. After long discontinuance Master Cartwright coming to Cambridge, was importuned to preach on a week day in Saint Maries, where there was a great confluence of all sorts to hear him; grave men ran like boys in the streets to get places in the Church. After Sermon he dined at Master Chaddertons, and many went to the house to see and hear him speak.
The Life of Master Paul Baines, who died Anno Christi, 1617. PAul Baines was born in London, and had his Educa∣tion in his younger years at Withersfield in Essex, under one Master Cosens, his Schoolmaster,His Birth, and Education. from whence, being fitted for it, he was sent to the University of Cambridge, and admitted into Christs Colledge, where his conversation at first was so irregular, that his Father being grieved at it, be∣fore his death, being intimately acquainted with one Master Wilson, a Sailes-man in Birchin-lane,His Fathers Prudence. he left with him forty pounds by the year, desiring him, that if his Sonne did forsake his evil courses, and become an honest man, he would then give him that fourty pounds per annum, if not, that he would never let him have it. But it pleased God, not long after his Fathers decease, to shew him his sinnes, and to work effectual repentance in him for the evil of his waies; so that forsaking his former evil company and practices,His conversi∣on. he became eminent for Piety and Holinesse, and according to that of our Saviour, Much being forgiven him, he loved much. After which gracious change wrought in him by the goodnesse of God, it was not long before Ma∣ster Wilson fell dangerously sick, and hearing how God had dealt with his Master Baines, he sent for him and desired him to pray with him, by which, as also by his savoury discourse, finding that what he had heard of him rather came short of the truth then exceeded it, according to that trust reposed in him, perceiving himself to be upon his death-bed, he told Master Baines of the fourty pounds per annum,Mr. Wilsons fidelity. which his Fa∣ther left with him, and so faithfully delivered up to him those writings of the agreement which had passed betwixt his Father and him, and being like to leave behind him a Wife and two Children, he intreated Master Baines,Mr. Baines his Gratitude. that as he had faithfully and carefully discharged his trust towards him, so when God should take him away hence, that he would have a care of his Wife and Children, and be a Friend to them. And Master Baines, after Master Wilsons death, that he might fully discharge that trust which was reposed in him, and also by way of gratitude for that friendship and fidelity, which he had found in Master Wilson, mar∣ried his widow. But before this, for his eminency in learning,He is chosen Fellow. he was chosen Fellow in Christs Colledge, where he so much (through Gods
blessing on his studies and endeavours) improved his time, and talents, that he became inferiour to none for sharpnesse of wit, variety of Reading, depth of judgment, aptnesse to teach, holy, and pleasant language, wise carriage, heavenly conversation, and all other fulnesse of grace. By his holy life and coversation also he did largely preach to all such as came neer unto him: and for the heavenly frame of his spirit, what it was, his incompa∣rable Writings will sufficiently demonstrate to all future genera∣tions. When Master Perkins, who was Lecturer at Saint Andrews in Cambridge, had there for many years held forth a burning and shining light, the sparkes whereof did flie abroad into all the cor∣ners of the Kingdom, and after he had served in his generation, was taken up into Heaven, there was none found so meet to re∣ceive, as it were, the Torch out of his hand, and succeed him in that great Office of bearing it before such a people, as Master Baines,He is chosen Lecturer. upon whom also the spirit of that Elias was by experi∣ence found to be doubled. In which station he so demeaned him∣self for some years, that impiety only had cause to complain. But all that favoured the wayes of God, or savoured of Religion, rejoyced, and gloried in him and his Ministry, as in a spiritual and heavenly treasure. But at length the hour of darknesse came from Lambeth, when Arch-bishop Bancroft sent Master Harsnet to visit in that Diocesse, which was but a trick to suppresse those which were not friends to the Bishops Kingdom. At which time, though there were mul∣titudes of unable, and notoriously scandalous Ministers, yet none were found worthy of censure, but only Master Baines, of whom indeed the world was not worthy, and one other godly Minister like unto him. It's yet hard to say, whether the silencing of this good man were more odious, or the manner of it more shamelesse, which was thus: Their custome was, for fashion sake, at their visitations to have a Sermon, and Master Baines was chosen out by the Visitor to preach it at this time, not out of love and respect to him, but from a designe, either to ensnare him in his words if he did not apply himself to their humour,Prelatical ma∣lice. or else to grace their ungracious courses if he did. But it succeeded not handsomly either way; for Master Baines delivered holy and wholesome Doctrine, apper∣taining to the present audience, in such a wary manner, that no specious occasion could be taken whereby to deprive him of his liberty. Yet they were resolved to spit forth their malice a∣gainst him, whether by fair or foul meanes, which they thus ef∣fected. Master Baines having heat his weak body by much straining his voice to speak to so great an Auditory, Sermon being ended, he retired himself presently to provide for his health, which other∣wise
would have been much endangered. They in the mean time going on with their businesse, according to their accustomed Lord∣ly way, called for Master Baines amongst the rest, and upon his not answering, though he was not cited thither as to a Court, but only intreated to preach, as he did: Yet for not appearing, he was immediately silenced. But afterwards the Chancellour being informed that that grosse sentence was illegal, and there∣fore a meer nullity, he went another way to work, and send∣ing for Master Baines, he urged him about subscription and conformity, and upon his refusal, to make sure work, silenced him over again. In which businesse he was so conscious to him∣self of unreasonable and ridiculous dealing,He is silenced. that when Master Baines, standing to receive that unjust sentence from so cor∣rupt a man, lifted up his heart and eyes towards God, with an heavenly smiling countenance, as his manner was, the Chancellour interpreted that gesture to be a scorning of his au∣thority. After this Master Baines was perswaded by some of his Friends to make triall of the Archbishops courtesie, to whom when he had addressed himself, at the very first salutation, the gravity, and severity of Arch-bishop Bancroft, led him sharply to rebuke the good man for a little black-work edging upon his cuffs: telling him in a very Episcopal strain: that it were a good deed to lay him by the heels for it. After which time Master Baines would have no more to do with such absurd and unreasonable men: but preached some∣times where he might have liberty, and as the weaknesse of his body would suffer.His painfulness and piety. The rest of his time he spent in Read∣ing, Writing, Meditation, and Prayer, saving that upon occa∣sion he instructed and comforted those that came to him in private, wherein he had a very happy and heavenly gift. He was indeed all his life after pressed with want,And poverty. not having (as he often complained to his friends) a place to rest his head in. Yet did he never so much as consult with himself a∣bout his denying his sincerity and complying with the Bi∣shops; of whom, and their courses, he was wont to say, They are a generation of the earth, earthly, and savour not the wayes of God. Whil'st he lived a private life his Wife died, and being thun∣der-struck by the Bishops bolt, he had time and leasure to apply his able wit and judgment, about the discussing of many questions, which if the Prelates had not forced such leasure upon him, it may be he would have passed by with o∣thers. He was of such an holy and heavenly temper, that he was reve∣renced by all good men that knew him. His manner was in the summer-time, to go from one Gentlemans house to another,
and happy were they that could get his company. He had such a Di∣vine and heavenly Majesty in his countenance, that it would awe any man to look upon him. Little recreation he used, but sometimes to play at Chesse. The Bishops malice.Once he was called by Bishop Harsnet, to the Councel-table, the Bishop having laid a designe to suspend and banish him un∣der the pretence of keeping Conventicles, the reason whereof was this. He was an excellent Casuist, and thereupon many doubting Christians repaired to him for satisfaction in cases of Conscience, which the Bishops would needs have to be keep∣ing of Conventicles. When he was accused hereof before the Privy-Councel,Gods Provi∣dence. one of the Noble-men said to him, Speak, speak for your self: Whereupon he made such an excellent speech, that in the midst thereof a Nobleman stood up and said, He speakes more like an Angel then a man, and I dare not stay here to have a hand in any sentence against him; upon which speech they dismissed him, and he never heard more from them. Upon a time he went to the House of Mistresse Sheafe who was his Wives Sister, at Cranbrook in Kent; where observing that she, and others of the Family used to play much at cards and such like games, as the custome was, and still is too much used in Gentle∣mens Houses, he took occasion on the Sabbath day in his Ser∣mon to speak against such games: And it pleased the Lord so to work upon Mistresse Sheafes heart by that Sermon,His faithful∣nesse and pru∣dence. that when she came home, she came crying to him, saying, Oh Brother, Why would you thus suffer me to live in sinne, to the dishonour of God, and would never tell me of it before? To which he replied, that it was best of all that God had wrought on her by the pub∣lick Ministry, and that it might not have been so well if he had spoken to her in private. He was a man of much communion with God, and acquaint∣ance with his own heart,His Character by Dr Sibbs. observing the daily passages of his life, and was much exercised with spiritual conflicts, whereby he be∣came the more able to comfort others with the same consola∣tions which himself had received from God. He had a deep insight into the Mystery of Gods Grace and mans Corruption, as appears by his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Ephe∣sians. He was one that sought not after great matters in the world, being taken up with comforts and griefes unto which the world is a stranger. One that had not all his learning out of Books: Of a sharp wit, and clear judgment. So that though his Meditations were of an higher strain then ordi∣nary, yet he had a good dexterity, furthered by his love to do good, in explaining dark points with lightsome simili∣tudes. His Prayer in his Family was not usually above a quarter of
an houre long, and having respect to the weaknesse, and infirmi∣ties of his Servants and Children, he used to disswade others from tediousnesse in that duty. It pleased God to make him an instrument of the conver∣sion of that holy, and eminent Servant of Jesus Christ Do∣ctor Sibbs. In his last sicknesse he had many doubts and feares, and God letting Satan loose upon him, he went out of this world,The manner of his death. with farre lesse comfort then many weaker Christians enjoy. He re∣signed up his spirit into the hands of God, in Cambridge, Anno Christi, 1617.
The Life and Death of Master William Bradshaw, who died Anno Christi, 1618. IT hath from time to time been the lot of divers persons of singular worth, and eminent parts, that they have lived in obscurity, and in a low conditi∣on, and past their time without that due respect, and regard, which their excellent endowments might justly have claimed; partly through the shortnesse of outward supplies; (for, they get not up easily, though never so well deserving, that are scanted in that kinde) partly by reason of an inward bashfulnesse, and over-awing modesty, accompanied with an undervaluing repute of them∣selves, and their own abilities; and partly through the iniquity of the times, wherein they have lived, and the disaffection of those who have swayed most in the State and Government under which they have re∣sided. Such was the condition of that worthy and faithfull servant of the Lord, Master William Bradshaw, though a man richly endowed, as well with such spiritual graces, as in truth are of highest esteem, being peculiar to Gods favourites, that have interest in his Christ, as with such gifts and parts also, as might, and did render him usefull and in∣strumental for the publick good of Gods people; yet never enjoying any plentifull condition; howsoever never prone to complain of want; nor forward at any time, or in any place to put himself forth, as having ever a very low and mean conceit of his own parts, and admiring in o∣thers, what his own eye either could not descry, or would not take no∣tice of (howsoever to others conspicuous enough) in himself; and be∣ing never suffered to continue long quiet in any setled place of more pub∣lick imployment, through the envy and malice of some that had a jea∣lous eye on him, and the disturbances of him in the work of his Mini∣stry, set on foot by others ill-affected towards him, but accrewing from the same, pursued by some of those, who were of greatest power and authority in Ecclesiastical affairs, and could not brook any, that did not in all particulars comply with them and their courses, as they conceived him not to do. He was born at Bosworth, a Market-Town in Leicestershire, famous for the Battell fought near to it, wherein that bloody Usurper, Ri∣chard the third lost his Crown, (attained by the unnatural murther
of his two Nephews in their non-age,) together with his life.His Parentage. His Father Nicholas Bradshaw, though descended from an ancient Family of the Bradshaws in Lancashire, with the crest of whose Coat therefore be∣ing a Buck browzing, this our Brother used to seal; yet living but in a mean condition, and being not so well able therefore to train this his Son up in learning as he desired; an Uncle that he had at Worcester un∣dertook the education of him;His Education at Worcester. whether being Master of the Free-School there, as some have supposed, or of some other Profession, as some other conjecture: for that he hath been heard to report, that Master William May, (who was sometime by the Turky Merchants imployed at Aleppo, and afterward lived and ended his dayes in or about London, a man of more then ordinary skill in the learned languages, and in Ex∣position of Scripture very accurate and exact) was Teacher in a pub∣lick School at Worcester, while he lived there; relating withall, what a neat man he then was, howsoever in his after-dayes he grew Cynically sordid, and by his uncouth deportment and jealous disposition, made himself nothing so usefull to others, as otherwise he might have been. But however it was for his Uncles Profession, under him (who by some Relations of his may not improbably be deemed to have been a Scri∣vener or publike Notary) he was brought up and kept at School, un∣till it pleased God to bereave him of this support by his death. Af∣ter whose decease, returning home to his Father at Bosworth,His return to Bosworth. he was enforced, though very much against his minde and desire, to intermit the prosecution of his studies in literature for some space of time; His Father now designing him to some other course of life out of despaire of maintaining him in a way so chargeable, as his meanes, being not large, would not reach unto; especially having other Children, three Sons and two Daughters to provide for, besides him. But while the disposall of him hung thus in suspence, it pleased the Lord (who is wont to have a more speciall Providence over those, whom in his secret pur∣pose he hath fore-designed unto the work of his Ministry,Gods Provi∣dence in pro∣viding for him to have them fit∣ted for the same) to stir up the spirit of one Master Ainsworth, a man of much worth, then School-Master at Ashby de la Zouch in Leicester∣shire, to divert his Parents purpose of disposing him to any other im∣ployment. For by his favour, (having taken notice of his capacity, in∣dustry, eager desire of farther progresse in good literature, fitnesse of disposition to be wrought upon to that purpose, and by some buds sprouting out from such seeds thereof as had already been sown in him, conceiving good hopes of such future fruits, as did accordingly ensue) he was taken into the Free-School there; where he so profited, and made so successefull a proceed, that after a years continuance, being then a∣bout eighteen years of age, he was deemed sufficiently fitted and fur∣nished for the University; and in the year 1589. was,His going to Cambridge. together with that worthy man of great renown, Joseph Hall, after Bishop of Exceter first, then of Norwich, and Hugh Cholmeley, (who had both been trained up in the same Schooll with him, and did continue also afterward a kinde affection to him, and friendly correspondence with him)
he was admitted into Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge;Admitted into to Emanuel Colledge. where with them also he followed his studies under the tuition of that reverend Di∣vine Master Gilbie, then Fellow of that Colledge; being there main∣tained, partly by the allowance of some Gentlemen his fellow-pupils under the same Tutor; and partly by some supplies afforded him from two noble Knights of the honourable house of the Hastings, Sir Ed∣ward and Sir Francis, (on the latter of whom his Father also had some dependence) upon the recommendation, and at the motion of that worthy servant of God, now with God, Master Arthur Hildersham, who was himself also allied to that Family. In the Colledge with these supports he continued, husbanding his time to the best advantage, with an abundant blessing of God upon his sedulous endeavoures,His diligence in his studies. to a clear evidence of large improvement, manifesting it self in such scholerly exercises, as his time and place there required (in the performance whereof speciall notice was taken of him, as an acute and eager dispu∣tant) untill he had taken both Degrees, first that of Batcheler, and af∣ter that of Master of Arts. But then, being not capable of a Fellowship in that Colledge, for that the Statutes of the House admitted not above one of the same Shire, and of that one for Leicester-shire Master Jo∣seph Hall before-mentioned, being of the same time and standing with him, was already possessed; and having refused a Vicarage, endowed with some competent yearly revenue, by that Noble Knight Sir Edward Hastings one of his Patrons tendered him, not daring yet to adventure on a work of that nature; Master Laurence Chaderton then Master of the Colledge, and the first from the very foundation of it,Dr Chadertons care for him. bearing a singular affection to Master Bradshaw, as well for his parts of learning, as for his pious deportment, but being unable for the cause above-mentioned to bring him in there, cast about with him∣self, how to procure a place, and get some employment for him else∣where. Some years before, that right Honourable and thrice Noble Lady, Frances Sidney,Sidney Colledg built. Countesse of Sussex, had by her last Will and Testa∣ment given order for the erecting and endowing of a Colledge in Cam∣bridge, to be furnished with a certain number of Fellows and Scholars under one Master or Head. The Colledge was now in building, by the provision of the Right Honourable the Earl of Kent, and Sir John Har∣rington, instructed by her for the performance of that work; and Ma∣ster James Mountague Sonne to Sir Edward Mountague, then living as Fellow-Commoner, but Student in Divinity, among the Fellows of Christs Colledge, was designed for Master. With him dealt Master Chaderton in Master Bradshaws behalf; To have him set down for a Fellows place there: which through his Mediation was from those No∣ble Trustees without difficulty obtained. But because some space of time would runne out, ere the building of the Colledge could be con∣summated and made fit for receipt; it was thought good in the interim, to dispose of Mr. Bradshaw for some imployment elsewhere, untill he might be setled there. It fell out (God so disposing it) that Sir Tho∣mas
Leighton Governour of Guernsey, wanting one to be imployed a∣bout the instruction and education of his children, and having requested that worthy servant of Christ Master Cartwright, abiding then at Cor∣net-Castle with him, to write unto Master Chaderton, to furnish them with one fit for such a charge, this Letter of Master Cartwrights arrived with Master Chaderton in that juncture of time, wherein he and Ma∣ster Montague had this businesse in agitation about Master Bradshaw: and the matter being by them broken to him, who referred himself wholly to what they should advise; it was joyntly agreed, that Master Bradshaw should be sent, or lent rather, unto them, to undertake that charge, and continue in the discharge of it, untill the Colledge building were compleated, wherein upon return thence he was then to reside. Thither therefore long without delay, being furnished with Letters of recommendation from those here to them there, he addressed himself;His journey in∣to Guernsey. and, through Gods goodnesse, arriving safe there, was with all kinde and courteous entertainment by them received. By this occasion he became throughly known to, and inwardly acquainted with Master Cart∣wright, who highly esteemed of him, renewed, or pursued rather his acquaintance with him, after both Master Bradshaws,Mr Cart∣wrights love to him. and his own return also into England, (as may appear by entercourse of Letters yet to be seen, written by him to Master Bradshaw, while he stayed behind him in Guernsey, and from Warwick also after his departure from thence) and to his dying day continued expressions of entire affection to him, and due respect of him, as also both before and after his decease, his Chil∣dren, both Sonne and Daughters, and those that they were matched unto, rnd his Widow also, did. And indeed such was his demeanure, wheresoever he came, that he left behind him a gratefull memory of him, in the hearts and minds of all well affected, that had occasion to take notice of it; not unlike therein to musk or civet, that leave a sweet sent behind them, even for a long time after they be gone, in the boxes wherein they were formerly kept, the which continued after his departure thence, not among the French Ministers alone in that Island, but among such also of the old Garrison Souldiers, on whom Master Cartwrights Ministry had had some efficacious and gracious work; Who, as Sir Peter Osburn, who had afterward the government of that place, hath been heard to relate, would be oft talking of one Master Bradshaw, that had lived sometime there, and speak with much affection of him. But for his constant carriage during his abode there, his piety, industry, integrity, fidelity in discharge of the trust reposed in him, and charge committed to him,His carriage in his place. together with his course of life and conversation o∣therwise unreproveable; as also the love and affection to him, earnest desire, if it might have been, of his continuance with them, and loath∣nesse to leave him, with these, who were, after some time spent among them there, then to part with him; all these things will by no meanes better appear, then by the Letters of that sincere Servant of God, and constant Champion of Christ, Master Thomas Cartwright of holy me∣mory,
and the relations concerning him therein contained, being writ∣ten and directed to divers in these parts, either neer upon, or at Ma∣ster Bradshaws departure from thence. Among others, in one to Sir Francis Hastings of September the fifth, 1598. wherein he assures him of his diligence in following his studies,His return to Cambridge. Mr Cart∣wrights com∣mendation of him. and of his sharp and ready capacity, likely through Gods blessing to bring forth such fruit of learning, as he might have good cause to rejoyce over any cost that he had been at with him, or should farther bestow that way on him; as also, of his love to the best things, and his conversation in the Family without reproach, for ought he could learn, having had an eye constantly on him. In another to Master Chaderton of December the fifth, (the time, it seems of his departure thence) wherein he thankfully acknow∣ledgeth the great benefit they had received by Master Bradshaw, procured by him to take so long and painfull a journey to them, and his wise and lo∣ving care in so good provision for them; returning thanks also to him, from Sir Thomas Leyghton the Governour, and his Honourable Lady for him; and withall requesting him, that they may once again taste of his ac∣customed love and care in that kind. And in another yet more fully of the same date to Master Mountague in these words; The Law commandeth, that of things borrowed great care should be had for the well usage and due restoring of them. Both which we have endeavoured in Master Bradshaw: But the full performance must rest rather in yours and his acceptation, then in pay. For as touching the former of them, his desert of care to profit those committed to his charge, and his Behaviour otherwise in the house, hath been more then every one is able to esteem, and therefore in all respects not so fit to reward. For the other, (unless unwilling parting with him on all hands be against duty) you shall (we hope in the Lord) have him duly restored; Out of all doubt with all thankfulness to your Worship, by whose kindness, both we have enjoyed him some good time, sithence you of right might have taken him away, and he hath received a supply of recompence for that we were not able to make good unto him. And so with hearty thanks and commendations from the Governour and his Honourable Lady, and my humble thanks for your love, and this fruit I have received thereof by Master Bradshaw, I commend you to the gracious keeping and blessing of God in Jesus Christ. Unto this Letter Master Mountague now Master of the Colledge, upon Master Bradshaws access thither, returneth answer, both thanking him, for the remitting of him to them; (so that on no side thanks for him were wanting,His gracious deliverance in his return. so well was he esteemed of on either part) and withall advertising him of a very great danger, and no lesse deliverance, that neer unto his journeys end had betided him. Whereunto Master Cartwright in a Letter of March 7. the same year thus replieth; Sir, It cometh from the abundance of your love, to thank me for that which duty it self required at my hands towards Master Bradshaw, and therefore the thanks are returned unto you, who esteem so highly of duty, as to let it go in the account of a Benefit or good turn. My hope is the same with yours, that the Lord, who by deliverance of him
from so great a death, bindeth him to a straighter obedience, hath set such an impression of it in his mind, as will be in stead of a watch to waken him every morning to all cheerfull service, which his place will require. And indeed the Letter he wrote of that matter, carrieth that sound, and even undertakes so much in his behalf. And in one to Master Bradshaw him∣self, after receipt of that from him, touched upon in the close fore∣going; That the Lord our most mercifull Father delivered you from so great a death, it pledges unto you deliverances hereafter, especially if they be inferiour to this. So much the rather, as the swimmer sunk like a piece of lead, and he that could no more swim then the Iron-head of the Scholars hatchet, was graciously born up: and therefore by how much the Proverb is true, , by so much we have cause to praise God, that by the Angel of the waters saved you: And withall you may help to incourage others against the excessive fear of drowning in passing the Seas: Seeing it was more safe to you to passe the winter-Seas, even when they rage most, then the small brook of Hawston-Mills. I remembred you to Sir Thomas and my Lady; who told me that if any entertainment would have holden you, they would not have suffered you to have gone from them, and rejoyced much at your gracious escape. Subscribed, Your assured loving Brother and Fried, Thomas Cartwright. The Escape in those Letters mentioned was this:Gods special Providence o∣ver him. Master Bradshaw being to leave Guernsey, shipped himself for England. Nor was his passage by Sea wholly free from hazard, for with so violent a storm were they surprized at Sea, that the Passengers most of them expected nothing but wrack, and a Gentlewoman among them, with another, whom she much affected attending upon her, did in a cord, by the waste fasten themselves either to other, that they might perish together, and draw their last breath, or breath it out rather, in the mutuall embraces either of other. But that storm being allaied, and the danger of it o∣ver, and the Ship with her Passengers now arrived in safety, Master Bradshaw having attained London, did there hire a Hackney, such as are commonly used on that Road, to convey him to Cambridge, there to enter upon the Fellowship prepared for him, and assigned unto him; by help of which Beast, he got so far on his way in safety, that he was now within three miles of his journeys end. But danger oft lieth in wait for us, where we least of all either expect or suspect it; and then many times overtakes, and surprizeth us unawares, when we deem our selves wholly past danger, and are neer approaching our intended, much desired, and now fully expected Port, and have alwaies need therefore both of an eye of Providence constantly on us, and of an hand of protection continually over us. For being there to passe a small Brook crossing the road near to a Village called Hawston, and the Water-mills seated on it, thence Hawston Mills; he that had escaped so eminent and apparent a danger at Sea, lighten on, and fell into that unexpectedly, that proved much more hazardous on land, where no appearance was of ought in that kind: for being unacquainted with the course of the stream, otherwise passed ordinarily, and that daily without danger, and having not fetched a
compasse far enough, as he ought to have done, the Beast that bare him plunged suddainly into the Mill-pond, or pit; and being not able to recover it self, therein perished, and there left him floating in a strong vertiginous current, unskilfull in swimming, (nor had any such skill in likelihood been available in such a case to have saved him) and altoge∣ther unable to shift for himself; where he must of necessity have gone the same way with the Beast, had not either some one occasionally look∣ing out of the Mill,A Miracle of mercy. or some Passenger on the way, espying one floating in that manner, and at the very pinch of perishing, called hastily on the Miller, or those next at hand to let slip down the Flood-gates; by means whereof the stiffe current of the water-course was stayed, and this Ser∣vant of God, though not without much difficulty, rescued out of the water, and delivered unexpectedly out of that his, in a manner, even de∣sperate distresse. And it may indeed justly be deemed a wonder of wonders, (in regard whereof that venerable Minister of Christ before-mentioned, seems to have apprehended the ministry of an Angel used in it) that he was not suddainly in an instant, either swallowed up in that whirling gulf, or hurried away with the violent course of the current, and that he should bear up and keep above water, so long in a place of that nature. For he hath been heard to relate, that while he continued thus floating and strug∣ling with that wheeling surface, it troubled him not a little, that he could not addresse himself as he desired to prepare for his departure, though having nothing but death in his eye, while his ear was taken up with the voice of some talking in the Mill, from whom he supposed yet some help might come, though neither was he able to call unto them, nor they to hear him. Thus even Gods Children themselves find a defect oft in themselves, that they cannot with such an exact composure of spirit, in times of distress address themselves unto God, untill he have pulled away all outward pro∣sperity, as well hopes, as helps from them. But being by a special Pro∣vidence of God thus recovered, and as another Moses drawn out of the water, and brought into the Millers house, he was there shifted, and put into such dry apparell, as the Miller himself used to wear; in which garb when some of his acquaintance found him, who upon tydings of of this occurrent, came posting over to him from Cambridge, they could not forbear smiling to see him sitting in that habit, though not a little affected with the casualty occasioning it, and no lesse heartily glad∣ned for the gracious issue that God hath pleased to afford it, and expres∣sing much thankfulnesse for his mercy and goodnesse therein manifested. The Lord it may seem would hereby fit this his servant reserved to o∣ther hot and hazardous services, unto a farther and firmer dependance in and under them upon him. But thus his Horse lost, (which to the Carrier its owner, as by his default mis-carrying, requiring it, was made good) being after his e∣scape and recovery somewhat revived and refreshed, and fitted again with a wonted Suit, he was with some of those his acquaintance accompa∣nied
to Cambridge, and repaired to the Colledge; where having present∣ed himself to the Master, he was entertained in the Chamber of one of the Fellows, that assigned him, being not yet fit to receive him, (as in∣deed they came all to very raw Chambers at first) and the use of that offered him, untill his own could be fitted and furnished for him:He is admitte-Fellow in Sid∣ney Colledge. which being his first entertainment there, albeit but a sorry courtesie to speak of, yet did so affect him, as upon occasion, to some of his familiar friends he afterward professed, (of so ingenuous and gratefull a dispo∣sition he was, and so prone with thankfulnesse to acknowledge,His Gratitude. and to set an high rate on the least kindnesse shewed him, or meanest office done for him) that it laid the ground-work, or first stone thereof at least with him, for such an Union of inward and entire affection, and well fastned knot of unreserved familiarity and strictest friendship, as did af∣terward ensue between them two, and so continued, not only while they abode in the Colledge together, by a mutual communication of their studies, counsels, courses and purposes either to other; but even after also, when through distance of abode they were severed the one from the other, by a constant course of vicissitudinary writing, therein advising either with other, and discussing mutually such questions and doubts, wherewith either of them were occasionally encountred; by meanes whereof they received much help and light either from other; and albeit in some particulars either not so clear, or not so cleared to their joynt apprehensions, their judgment might, and did sometime dif∣fer, (which having on occasion professed to a Friend, desiring to know their joynt judgment in a case then questioned, and seeming to marvell that they two should be of divers minds in ought, he made answer, that it was no wonder at all, it might rather be wondred, considering mans con∣dition in intellectuals, so impaired and clouded, that any two seriously set upon the search of truth, should not in many particular cases dissent; yea that if in every particularity they should wholly concurre, it might seem to savour rather of a cunningly contrived compact or conspiracy, then a reall and rational consent) yet where by force of argument they seemed con∣vict, or any mistake manifested, they were ready to yeeld, and did in∣deed in not a few things, come home either to other,His humility. unto their mutu∣al much advantage; nor did their remaining differences ever produce any breach, or abatement of affection between them, but that the knot once knit, from the first to the last, continued firm and inviolate, never loosed nor slackned, so long as God was pleased to lengthen out the line of his life.His inviolable friendship. In the Colledge he so demeaned himself, that though the Fellows were not all of one mind, or one way, and there were among them (as usually in Societies of that nature) men of divers dispositions, and sub-divisions consequently of companies, consisting of such as more fa∣miliarly consorted, and more inwardly conversed with some few, whom selected from the rest they most affected; yet so loving and lowly, yeel∣ding to all, and complying with all, was his carriage, that notwithstand∣ing he were by some deemed over-strict, and would freely as occasion
was, speak his mind, and deliver his judgment, yet he retained ever the, professed at least good liking,His prudent and winning carriage. and external kind usage from them all: Where it will not be amisse to relate a speech of one of them, (a man by occasion of some discontents strongly and strangely possessed with a spirit of jealousie and suspitiousness of every one, even his inwardest and entirest friends, which in the end proved his overthrow) who ha∣ving entertained a conceit, that something spoken by Master Bradshaw in a dispute should have a glance closely at somewhat that concerned him, and having discovered that his suspition to a common bosome-friend of them both, (by whom also upon disclose of that groundless conceit, he was evidently convinced of his errour therein) he used these words of him, Although I am sure, he had a gird at me, yet the man is of so kind and loving a disposition, that I could not be angry with him, though be had broken my head. But I cannot let passe one remarkable Instance that may evidently manifest in him a due temper (which is not over-frequently found) of freedome of spirit, and discreet demeanure, wisely mixed, and well consistent the one with the other. During his abode in Guernsey, a Question was on foot, among Divines of special note, on either side yet in debate, concerning the lawfulness of some pecuniary contracts, wherein Master Cartwright having by writing declared his mind, in way of answer to some arguments objected against it: Master Bradshaw being required by him freely to discover his judgment therein, and seriously to consider of that his answer, albeit of himself he would not have adventured to undertake such a task; yet being so put upon it, he did it freely and largely, with as much strength of wit and argument,His Prudence. (it may not without ground be deemed) as any have done, that have hitherto dealt on that subject; and yet so discreetly and respectively managing the business, that though being then of a contrary judgment, he used his best forces and strongest en∣deavoures to shake and shatter Master Cartwrights grounds, yet did it not breed any breach between them, nor did it (that could be discern∣ed) lessen Master Cartwrights either affection to him, or esteem of him; which from time to time, as occasion was, and as in part hath already been shewed, he was ever ready to expresse. Howbeit it must withall for a truth be ackowledged, that Master Bradshaw, howsoever in the Colledge performing a Divinity-Problem,His self-denial as they term it, did still stiffely maintain that his former Tenet; yet upon farther consi∣deration in his latter dayes, he is known to have altered his judgment therein. While he stayed in the Colledge, that he might with the more free∣dome employ that talent that the Lord had committed unto him, he en∣tred into the Ministry;He enters in∣to the Mini∣stry. the rather advised (as some other also were) so to do, while admission was yet more easie, and the way of entrance lesse obstructed, in regard of some things, which out of diversity of judgment, and tenderness of conscience he stuck at; then was by pru∣dent men, observing how State-businesses began to be carried, deemed
like to last long. And at the motion of one Master Pigot, a religious Gentleman residing at Abington about eight miles from Cambridge,His imploy∣ment at Abing∣ton. he rode weekly over thither, there to preach every Lords Day for some good space of time; joyning also in a weekly Lecture, as he had oppor∣tunity, with some other neighbour Ministers, at a greater Town called Bassingborn not farre thence distant. Afterward he was drawn over to Steeple-Morden in the same shire, by one Master Martin,And at Steeple-Morden. an ingenuous Gentleman, who enjoying the appropriation, entertained him as a Le∣cturer, in regard of the infirmity of the party that was possessed of the Vicarage. But while he was thus taken up with employments abroad, there a∣rose a storm against him at home, and that upon this occasion. About that time two Leicestershire Ministers of his acquaintance,The occasion of his first trouble. Master Dar∣rel and Master Moor, being questioned about the dispossession of Wil∣liam Somers and Thomas Darling, (besides some others) supposed to be by evil spirits possessed, the one of them, to wit, Darling stood stiffely in avowing the truth of the thing, and refused to acknowledge any deceit or collusion therein; yea though many slights were used to enduce him thereunto, and Letters forged and tendered to him in Master Darrels name, as beginning to grow somewhat suspitious of the busi∣nesse, yet nothing could prevail with him; but the other, to wit, Somers,The Bishops subtlle pra∣ctices. being in like manner dealt with, and enticed by large Promises of such provision to be made for him, that he should be sure not to want, nor should need to go down into his own Countrey again, was perswaded to accuse Master Darrell to have set him on work, and taught him how to act sundry strange feats and gestures, whereby he might be deemed to be a Demoniak. Whereupon some of the Bishops, London specially, in whose house the boyes had been kept apart, eagerly pursuing the business, the two Ministers were cited into the High Commission Court, and there being charged with imposture, were suspended and imprison∣ed untill further cognizance, and Master Harsnet [Londons Chaplain] mean while set on work to pen and publish a virulent Pamphlet against Master Darrell, traducing him therein as a Grand Impostour and Jugler, and the whole action about the possession and dispossession of William Somers, as a meer Puppet-play. Hence Master Darrell thus traduced, was enforced to write and publish something for the defence of himself, and clearing of his guiltlesness herein; and so did first in a briefer Nar∣rative concerning the manner of their proceedings with him, entituled his Triall; and afterward in a larger Answer to Harsnet, in way of far∣ther Apology for himself. Of these Books some Copies being sent down to Cambridge, were directed to Master Bradshaw, and a parcell of them by him delivered to one Underwood a Taylor, who dispersed of them as well in the Colledges as in the Town. Intimation hereof being given to Bishop Bancroft at London, that such Books were in divers hands at Cambridge, he writes to the Vicechancellor to make diligent enquiry after the dispersers of them. He lights on Underwood, whom upon examination, confessing that he had received a certain number of
them from Master Bradshaw, he bindeth in a bond to appear upon warn∣ing before the High Commission, and chargeth him withall not to give notice of ought to Master Bradshaw. The next morning by seven of the clock Letters came from the Vice∣chancellor to the Master of the Colledge, requiring him at eight of the clock to repair unto him, and to bring Master Bradshaw with him. A∣bout the same time that these Letters came to the Master, an unknown Scholar repairing to Master Bradshaws Chamber, telleth him, that Un∣derwood was in trouble, and he should do well to look to himself. Master Bradshaw upon these tydings thus brought him, went presently to Master Wright the Senior Fellow of the house,A special Pro∣vidence. to ask advice of him what to do in this case: he wished him to withdraw himself, and withall, directed him to Gransden, a Town about nine miles distant from Cambridge, as a fit place of retire, where one Master Castle a Gentleman well-affect∣ed, and Master Wrights Brother-in-law, he well knew, would be right-willing to receive him. But Master Bradshaw resolved first to have an assay made by some other, whereby it might be discovered, what the Masters mind herein was. Hereupon Master Ward was sent for, who being requested to break the matter to the Master, was right-willing and ready to undertake that Office. The Master mean while upon receit of the Vicechancellours Letter, had sent his man presently to enquire for Master Bradshaw at Master Gatakers Chamber, which in his absence then discontinuing he had the charge of, and kept most in, being more convenient then his own; he not finding him there, was returned back, just as Master Ward came in to the Master: Who upon his repair to him, having but named Master Bradshaw, the Master, before he could deliver any part of his errand, demandeth of him where Master Brad∣shaw was, and saith he must speak with him. Master Ward told him, It was not safe for Master Bradshaw to come to him, because he was in danger of the Vicechancellour. The Master replied, That therefore he must come; for that he had Letters from the Vicechancellour to bring him presently to him. Which Letters while he stept into his closet to fetch, that he might shew them to him, Master Ward a fast and true-hearted friend, more carefull of Master Bradshaws safety, then fearfull of the Masters displeasure, and his own danger, stayed not the Masters return, but slipt away with all speed to acquaint Master Bradshaw how things stood. The Master at hs return missing Master Ward, was exceeding∣ly enraged against him, and threatned to punish him, by setting a deep fine for example upon him. But the hour being now elapsed, which the Vicechancellour had set, the Master wrote back to him, that Master Bradshaw could not as yet be found. Master Bradshaw hereof advertised, albeit that all his friends there, were earnest with him to withdraw, yet for the present refused, and requested Master Wright to repair to the Master, that by him he might understand from him, what his resolute will was, which he purposed not to withstand. Master Wright, according to his request, repairing to the Master, found him in much heat: no nay he would have, but Master Bradshaw must needs go; it would else endanger
him, and endanger the Colledge, &c. Master Bradshaw enformed here∣of by Master Wright, not at all fearing to suffer in a good and just cause, as he deemed it to be, and no less loath to have any other en∣damaged, or endangered for him, (notwithstanding that his friends were all utterly against it) without farther dispute or delay, went pre∣sently to the Master, and presented himself to him; who entertaining him with hot and high terms, the good man answered him in a calm and meek manner, that he had no cause to be so much offended with him,His courage. or incensed against him; he knew not of any such Commission that he had, when he sent at first to him; but sent only to him for counsell in that case, deeming it better for him to do it by some other rather then by himself; and being loath to come into trouble in those turbulent times: (for the Earl of Essex his business was then on foot) and that so soon as he understood his pleasure, he readily condescended thereunto. The Master thereupon charged him by the authority of his place, to bring him all Master Darrels Books, that he had in his hands, and to go presently with him unto the Vicechancellour; which without far∣ther reply he yeelded unto. But while he was gone to fetch the Books, the Vicechancellour sent his servant to the Master, desiring him to come to himself; and the Master, his man to Master Bradshaw, charging him to stay within untill he returned. At his return Master Bradshaw of his own accord repaired to him; who then charged him, at twelve of the clock to repair to his Chamber, that he might take his Answer, and a Bond for his forth-coming. But Doctor Barwell Master of Christs Col∣ledge in the mean space coming to him, (whether about that business or upon some other occasion, uncertain) by his advice (it seems) the Master altered his mind; and in likelihood the rather, after much mutual consultation, and better consideration past between them, be∣cause both the Masters had themselves bought of the Books: for he sends for Master Wright, and now tells him, that it would be the best course for Master Bradshaw to go out of the way: which accordingly he did.He withdraws from the Col∣ledge. The Bishop of London not long after wrote again to the Vice∣chancellour to imprison Underwood, and to make farther enquiry after Master Bradshaw, concerning whom the Master being by the Vice∣chancellour demanded; made answer, that he was not in the Colledge: whereunto he replied, that it was best so for him, not willing (as may be deemed) to be used as an instrument in molesting him, if it might be avoided. The carriage of this business, together with the se∣veral overtures and circumstances of it, is out of a Narrative of his own, the more particularly related, to shew both the discreet and mo∣dest, and yet ingenuous and couragious disposition of this Servant of God; and the remarkeable passages of Gods Providence in a concur∣rence of occurents so unexpectedly managed, that he should thereby be kept out of the clutches of those that were so exceeding thirsty to seize on him, and so fiercely bent against him. Master Bradshaw being thereof informed by some Friends, and con∣sidering how the Bishop persisted in enquiry after him, conceived that
Cambridge for the present could be no safe or quiet place for him: and having therefore withdrawn himself, though retaining his place still there, he spent his time for the space of some moneths, partly with Master Pigot at Abington, and partly at Morden with Master Martine, in which places he had formerly exercised his Ministry, and as occasion required, so still did. Thus there hovering, in a Letter to a speciall Friend, whose good opinion of him he much valued, he thus writes; I fear it will be somewhat offensive unto you,His Letter to a Friend about it. and that you will condemn me for being too rash and indiscreet in this matter. But I trust you will consider that the thing I have done, was to pleasure most good and Christi∣an Friends; that the cause, it is the cause of God, and the glory of God hath been much increased by it, by reason of the truth of God shining therein; unto which I could not perform a less duty; there being no∣thing in the Books (as I am perswaded) against the State; howsoever there are many hot words, that might have been spared, though none that have not been deserved. I wish they had past my poor censure before the coming forth of them, they should not then have given so much advantage to the enemies of the truth. I will (God willing) flie the danger as much as I can, especially in these troublesome and tragicall times, which seem of purpose to be chosen, that they might do the more injury, and the speech may be the less. And in another to the same party; My danger for Master Darrel troubleth me not a whit, I thank God; neither do I repent of any thing I have therein done, so long as you think never the worse of me: other matters trouble my mind more, yet such is the goodness of God, that though they distract my mind from other studies needfull for me to wade into, yet when I come to exercise my poor Ministry, and to study for my Sermons, my mind is free enough. Thus is the Lord wont in more special manner to support the spirits of his servants, for such particular imployments, as he hath more specially assigned them unto. The matter that more troubled him, was concerning his entrance into any setled place for the exercise of his Ministry, which he suppo∣sed would be, and upon some triall indeed found, every way so ob∣structed, that, albeit places of imployment enough were offered, and his imployment in them much desired, yet he could not conceive how it might be cleared in regard of the tenderness of his conscience, and scruple of some things that he stuck at, which were like to be tendred unto him, and pressed upon him, before admission thereunto; and that the rather in probability in regard of the prejudice now had of him for the business concerning those Books. For he had been offered the Rectory of Abington by Master Pigot the Patron, who would have com∣pounded with the present Incumbent for the bringing of him in: And Master Wendy likewise, a Religious Gentleman in those parts, had, to∣gether with some others, been endeavouring to bring him in at Basing∣born: but neither of them took effect. He was invited also to New-Castle in Staffordshire, whither also he repaired, but found not matters to his liking there: and after unto Yarmouth, to be Lecturer with them,
with assurance of a liberall maintenance from them; for they very much affected him. But that their design was crossed by the Bishop of the Diocesse, having a jealous eye as well on them as on him, and being de∣sirous to prefer and place a Chaplain of his own therefore there. To the Colledge he returned again after some time spent abroad,His return to the Colledge. the storm seeming now to be over-blown, and howsoever there he met with no re∣newed molestation about the fore-mentioned business, yet had he no heart at all there to continue; partly in regard of the departure thence of a special friend, whom he intirely affected, of whose return thither, being now elsewhere setled, he was wholly out of hope; and partly be∣cause he perceived, that the Master did not then so affect him, as former∣ly he had done. Amidst these distractions, a Preachers place falling vacant at Chatham in Kent, where a great part of the Navy Royal, and Officers of the same attending, did usually reside; the business of supplying them with an able and faithfull Teacher was by general consent referred to Master Chaderton, being at that time in Kent not far from thence, thither drawn over from Cambridge, about the consummating of a marriage between that reverend man of God Master Josias Nicols, who had passed ma∣ny sharp bickerings and brunts in those times, and the relict of that fa∣mous worthy Doctor Whitaker deceased. He commended Master Bradshaw to them. Concerning whom the piously affected party, after diligent inquiry, received such ample testimony, that (whereas divers other made first for the place, and by their labouring with some friends had wrought a siding among them, to prevent such obstructions as thence might arise) they sent an express to Cambridge on purpose with instructions, in the first place to Master Chaderton, to entreat him, that he would not any wise give consent to have any other designed to the place, but him only whom he had already propounded: for that they rested in his choice; and longed much to see and hear him. And in the next place to Master Bradshaw, to request him, that he would make no doubt or delay of coming to them; wherein he would not be slack, if they knew how earnest∣ly they longed to see and enjoy him; and withall to signifie to him, what had been delivered to Master Chaderton from them;He is sent for to Chatham. that they desired on∣ly the sincere milk of Gods Word, and a Pastor bearing a sincere affection and tender heart to his people: that they had wrought great meanes to ob∣tain him; that if he refused to come to them, he did not know what he did; and if he came, and found them not worthy of him, yet his labour and charge should be fully made good. Thus being importuned, (as by his own Letter to a Friend of July the eighth 1601. appeareth) though by some still pressed for Abington, with hopes suggested of clearing the way there for him; he came up to London, and after advice had with some Friends in the City, from thence went down to Chatham.He goes to Chatham. And though it go for a common buy-word, oft verified, that personal presence abateth much of foregoing reports, and great expectations preconceived are wont seldome to receive full satisfaction; and it be true, that Master Bradshaw was not a man of much out side, nor forward to
put out himself, of a very bashfull and demiss, but not fawning deport∣ment; insomuch that his bodily and personal presence might (as the A∣postles sometime,) seem weak, and not to promise much, with such e∣specially, as look no further then the face: Yet when he came and was heard, and his meek and discreet carriage by the generality observed, by the wiser sort well weighed, he was by joynt consent agreed upon; and a solemn Letter of invitation appointed to be drawn up by Master John Cook, sometime Fellow of Trinity Colledge, then enjoying an Office under Sir Fulk Grinvel Treasurer to the Navy, and afterward Secretary of State to King James, subscribed by the Officers there be∣longing to the Navy, and the most of any note and repute in the place; intimating their election of him by joynt consent to the place, professing a willingness to submit themselves to his Ministry, and promising to afford him all due support and assistance in the same. Upon the receit hereof he fully now resolved without farther delay, to entertain the call, and ac∣cept of the place; and having signified so much unto them, was very lovingly received by them, and quietly for some good space of time (to wit,His faithful∣ness in his place. from July 1601. unto April 1602.) laboured in the Word and Doctrine among them, (together with Master John Philips, who en∣joying the Vicarage did as Pastor of the place therein joyn with him) with good success and much comfort, and to the great contentment and gladsomness of people well affected in those parts. Being thus then setled there,A motion of marriage made to him. with good hope of continuance, motion was made to him by some of his Friends there (supposing that might be some means of farther engagement of him for to stay with them, of a match with a Widow an houswifely Woman, and one that had lived alwaies in good repute with them. Which not fore-seeing in likelihood, what would afterward ensue, he did not unwillingly so farre forth hearken unto, as to entertain some good liking of the Woman; howsoever in regard of the ensuing change of things, the business was no farther then proceeded in, but by mutual agreement between them laid aside, and delayed, untill God should see good to make way by some means, for their more convenient coming together, and comfortable cohabitation of either with other. For those Halcyon seasons lasted not long; the common adversary of God and man, who out of his inveterate envy and enmity can in no wise brook the propagation of the Gospel, and dilatation of Christs curtains, began at first more covertly and under hand to contrive some course, whereby to cast a rub in his way, and to procure a restraint of his farther proceeding in a course so successefull and advantagious for the glory of God and the good of his people. For about the time above-mentioned,Satans malice against the progresse of the Gospel. some neighbour-Ministers, envying the recourse of people to his teaching, began secretly to plot against him, though they would not be seen in it; by suggesting to the Bishop of the Diocess, that he was a man not conformable to the Rites of the Church,He is accused to the Bishop. nor well-affected to the present Government. This how far forth it prevailed with the Bishop that then sate there, doth not appear; but the business being
smelt out, and by some means discovered, to prevent trouble from him, and settle Master Bradshaw (as they supposed) more surely in the place, it was by divers of his people and friends there deemed most expedient, (though therein peradventure much mistaken) to have some means used to obtain a Confirmation of him therein from the Archbishop of Canterbury, unto whom Rochester was as Suffragan, and no man be∣ing deemed fitter to deal in this business with the Archbishop then that Noble and Religious Knight Sir Francis Hastings, he was by a Letter from Master Bradshaw requested to make some tryal of his interest in, and power with Archbishop Whitgift, to that purpose in his behalf. He upon the receit of Master Bradshaws Letter, the very same day, April 22. 1602. returned him this most kind Christian, and affectionate Answer, My love to your self you know, and shall ever know it in any thing, wherein I can make it known: my duty, your duty, and all our duties to God, his Church, you know better then my self; and my duty to further a good people to a good Minister, a longing people to hear, to a a labouring speaking Minister to teach them, is a bond of duty that I may never forget, and a work of duty that I must ever be ready to perform. Assure your self therefore, my velle shall not be slack; and if my posse can prevail, I shall be glad, I will say no more: but pray to my God to en∣crease his graces in you, to teach profitably; to encrease grace in your peo∣ple, to hear diligently; and to multiply his graces both in speaker and hearer, that they may speak and hear fruitfully, &c. Subscribed, Your true Christian Friend, Francis Hastings. Nor was he more ready to promise, then forward to perform. For within three daies after, to wit, April 25. he wrote to the Archbishop this modest, pious, and zeal∣ous Letter: May it please your grace to pardon me,Sir Francis Hastings his Letter to the Archbishop in his behalf. that I do not perso∣nally attend you, but presume to write:—I make bold to become suitor to your grace, for your favour to a young man, being one that I hold my self interessed in, and to whom I owe my best help, to further him to some place of employment and maintenance, which causeth me to become an humble suitor for him to you, not without a special regard to that people, who so Christianly thirst after knowledge and instruction. The man for whom I sue is one Master Bradshaw, a Master of Arts of Sidney Colledge in Cambridge: The matter I sue for, your graces favour and allowance that he may preach: the place where his labours are desired, is at Chatham. And I most humbly beseech your grace, that however you may find or bear, that he is fearfull to do some things that may be urged on him; yet seeing he is well qualified with gifts, and of honest carriage sitting for his cal∣ling, let not his fearfulness prejudice him with your Lordship, but vouch∣safe him liberty to bestow his talent; and I will undertake to your grace for him, that he shall not offer any disturbance to the peace of our Church either in word or action; but shall painfully bestow himself in that place, to preach Christ crucified, and to arm his people with some measure of know∣ledge, to stand Christianly and couragiously for the truth of Christ, and to resist all Errours broached against that holy Doctrine. And the ra∣ther I make hold to tender this suit to your grace for him, because I find
plenty of practising by Seminaries and Jesuites to corrupt and pervert the peoples hearts both in knowledge and obedience; and that through penu∣ry of preaching in some places it may prove dangerous. I never heard the young man preach my self, but I hear his gifts greatly commended; and I know him to be learned, and painfull also, and carefull in that he taketh in hand. And though I know the tendernesse of his Conscience some waies, yet I dare engage my credit again, (as before) to your grace for him, that he shall walk dutifully, wisely and discreetly in the whole course of his preaching, without all offer of disturbance to the peace of the Church. And so longing to hear that my suit may find my desired success with your grace, I commend mine humble duty to you, and commit your grace, and all your godly proceedings to the protection and directian of the Lord Al∣mighty. Subscribed, Your graces most bounden, and ready to be com∣manded, Francis Hastings. What Answer the Noble Knight had from the Arch-bishop, or what effect this his Letter had with him, we can∣not certainly say; but by what followed it may well be deemed, that of the Archbishop it was not very well relished; who in cases of this kind, was seldome wont to do ought without the advice of Bancroft, a∣nother Bonner,Bishop Ban∣crofts malice. as well in regard of place, as of disposition and pra∣ctice, in eager pusuit of many of Gods faithfull Ministers in those times, so far as the power of his place would permit, in whose stomack the memory of Master Darrels business stuck still, and of Master Bradshaws act about his Books. For not without some animation in likeli∣hood from above, those Master Bradshaws back-friends, who had be∣fore dealt in the dark, did shortly after begin to disclose themselves, and to manifest their malice, which had formerly lain hid, as embers raked up in the ashes.Master Bear∣blocks malice against him. The first of them that openly appeared in the busi∣ness, was one Master Bearblock Minister at Strowd, a Town or Village adjoyning to Rochester, a man of very mean parts for learning, and of a very scandalous life; but one of those whom the Prophet Jeremy speak∣eth of, that had a singular faculty of slicking and smoothing his tongue, to sooth men up in their sinnes. This man (among other) vexed at the concourse of people that repaired from the places adjacent to Ma∣ster Bradshaws teaching, (although Master Bradshaw desirous to com∣ply, so far forth as without offence he might, with him) used to fre∣quent his week-dayes Lecture;He is charged with Heresie. stuck not both in private meetings to tax Master Bradshaw for delivering heretical Doctrine, and publikely also in a Sermon on the Lords Day so to charge him therewith, that the Auditory, though he named him not, might well know whom he meant. Now albeit the man himself were of no esteem, and his cen∣sure consequently little to be regarded, yet Mr. Bradshaw deemeed, that a publick charge of that nature, should not be let pass with silence. How∣beit, not willing, nor esteeming it meet to pester the Pulpit with Apolo∣gies, he chose rather to deal with this his Opponent and Traducer by a Letter, which it will not be amiss here to insert. His Letter to Master Bear∣block about that charge.Master Bearblock, I was informed by some of your Christian Auditours at Strowd, that in your forenoons Exercise, you took oc∣casion
in the repetition of your former Sermon, to adde thereto something in bitter terms, against some Heretical Doctrine lately broached in some neighbour-Church; which divers of your most cha∣ritable, and the most of your judicious hearers, conceived to be di∣rected against me. At the first, I had no cause easily to entertain the report, because I was no way guilty to my self, so much as of the least shew of any occasion given unto you, to break out in that man∣ner against me; and did presume you had better learned the Laws of Charity, then in such an open manner to traduce a fellow Minister of the Gospel, before you were better possessed of the cause. Besides, I thought, that reproachfull reports, that have been bruited against your self, should have taught you, if you be innocent, that a Mini∣ster of the Gospel may be much abused and mis-reported of, both for life and doctrine; and therefore that you would not teach by your own practice me or any other thus in open manner, to make the re∣ports of men a sufficient Text to preach against your life, as you have made them to preach against my Doctrine. But since that time I am given to understand, that you have given it out at one Master More∣lands Table, that I was the man; that you then before God and his holy Angels endicted and arraigned; and that of no lesse a crime then gross Heresie; and that some of your Congregation were pur∣posed to proceed in Law against me for it. You know there was a Law, (and it were well if it were now in force, to bridle distempered tongues) that if one were accused of a crime, which could not be proved, the Accuser should suffer the punishment due to that crime; and then Master Bearblock, if heresie deserve a punishment, if you should but accuse me of that, which methinks you have already con∣demned me of, your back should bear the punishment of two Here∣sies. For first, it is most untrue that I have taught any such Do∣ctrine; and secondly, if you could not prove that Doctrine, as I know you cannot, this you here so tax to be heresie, your Do∣ctrine that calleth it heresie, deserves no less lege Talionis, then he∣resie; which I speak not so much in regard of your weakness, as in grace of the strength of the cause; wherein though with the dim eye of mine own judgment I could see nothing, yet I have cause to be confident, in regard of their judgment whose shadows it would be∣come you and me to give room unto, yea, and to run away from. And I am verily perswaded, that though some of your spirit may be found to judge it an Errour to hold, That a bare Reading Minister, is not a lawfull Minister before God; yet that none that deserves the name of a man of judgment, will push with such horns against it, as you do, that it is an heresie, and that a gross and abominable one. I would I might be worthy to know, upon your better consideration of the point, whether that heart of yours, that set your tongue on fire so against this poor Heresie, would serve to set fire to the pretended Heretick. But blessed be God, that Supream Authority keepeth the fire-brands from the hands of such furies; else there were some
cause to fear, lest the Saints of God (I give them no other title, then your own conscience gives them, nay then your own mouth in publick hath given them) should find your hands as hot, as they now feel your tongue; for methinks in your Divinity, to make but a questi∣on of any thing in Religion established by Law, is no less then Trea∣son and Heresie. There must be some Mystery in it, that every poor man must not presume to look into; that one that is so full of chari∣ty towards Adulterers, Drunkards, Blasphemers and other sinners that swarm in the Church, should be so fiery against these new He∣reticks of your own making. What? Are they of all other past hope of repentance? Or do not the mercies of God, wherewith your mouth is so oft sugred, of all other, belong to them? My self on the week-day am one of your Auditours, and I hope, none of the worst-minded, and then you seem (as oft as ever I heard you) as if your soul did overflow with Charity towards us all. You cannot be ig∣norant of the words that so often were in your lips; That none that hear you, but they are Gods faithfull Children; That though they be foul, grievous sinners, yet they are repentant, and Gods mercy belongs unto them; That no man is without sinne, but the best and holiest are unclean. This hath been your tenor for this half year; the Sermon is yet to come, that ever with the least zeal you spake a∣gainst lewdness of life: And yet now how full of zeal are you against errours in Doctrine, of this sort especially? whereas considering the slanders that run of you, (for I call them so, as I desire for the Go∣spels sake they may prove) you could take no better course, then to be most zealous in Doctrine against those sins, that fame hath gone about to brand you withall; and to condemn such with your own mouth to hell, rather then to set open Heaven gates so wide unto them, as you use to do; as though your self were out of hope of Heaven, except the lewdest of your Congregation go to Heaven. I may be bold being the injured party, and knowing you better then you me, to take this leave to tell you thus much of your self, who have so freely given leave to your self, to speak to others worse things of me; that if the Lords judgments should pursue me so fast, that mine inward corruptions should break out into notorious crimes, and yet should dare for all that to exercise an holy Ministry; that then of all methods of teaching that ever I heard, I would surely follow yours. To keep you from advantage, I acknowledge the Doctrine that you have taught in my hearing to be very sound and true: But this is it that I affirm, and you may keep it to your self if it please you, that in dealing against sinne, in all the Sermons I have ever heard you, you have said no more in substance, then what you shall have alwaies running in the wickedest mouthes; That All men are sinners; That the godliest do fall seven times a day; That men must not despair of Gods mercy; That they are sorry for it, when they have done; That it is their corruption of nature, &c. which are all very excellent and comfortable Doctrines to a broken heart, but very poyson to an impe∣nitent;
so that if a Minister should preach them to the stews, he should have as many applauses and Amens there to them, as any where else. If therefore a foul life be as abominable in the eyes of God and man, as false Doctrine; if this zeal of yours against false Doctrine were of God, you would blow as strong a blast against the other, as you do against it, and a stronger too, considering that the other having bor∣rowed the wings of fame, is flying continually in your own face: This, if you could have let me alone, would never have bitten you. But to draw to an end, if my bare deniall, and the voices of them, that with best understanding heard me, and are best able to repeat the heads of that Sermon, can perswade you, that there was no such Doctrine then delivered, I hope you will satisfie that Congregation, whose ears you have abused with that report; and especially the Gentleman, to whom you related the particulars. If you cannot be moved to this; yet be contented, sith you say the Law must proceed upon me, to stay the proceeding of your tongue against me, till you have tried me guilty or not. If you tannot yield to this, but have a purpose to pursue the matter, let Religion over-rule you thus far, to deal with me in the points by private writing. But if you have resolved to go on in this in∣direct course, openly thus to injure me; do it I pray you, in your weekly exercise, that I may not trust to the report of others, but may be a witnesse to my self of mine own abuses; and then I shall know the better how to satisfie you. It is the humour of most of your stamp, under pretence of a zeal to her Majesties proceedings in mat∣ters of Religion, to take your liberty of speech against some, that are perswaded some things might and should be reformed, if the State had leasure to look into them: and you know it full well, that such as you are, shall find ears enough to receive your accusations against such; else upon equall ground you would not be so confident, thus hand over head to condem as good Subjects (without any disgrace) as your self, of no less then Heresie and Treason. As for my self, I thank God, I have had that care, both of mine outward conversation and Doctrine, that none of any civility, I trust, shall find a face to re∣proach me for the one, nor any of any judgment in Religion, will accuse me of the other. And as for those Reports, that are given out against me, out of yours and others mouthes; your shame shall send them home again, and I will wear them about my neck as Chains and Garlands. In particular, for your self, (though I desire the love, acquaintance, and favour of any well-gifted Minister) it will be no great disgrace to me, to sit at home without your countenance, ex∣cept your self were in greater countenance with them that truly fear the Lord. Thus leaving you at this time to a better spirit, then that which set you so greedily on work against me, I commit you to the grace, mercy, and pardon of God; and my self to his wise direction, hereafter to take heed, how I give mouthes, so readily open to reproach my Ministry, any just and direct occasion. Chat∣ham the last of April 1602.  Your Fellow-labourer and Minister in
the Lords work, desirous of peace, and if it were possible, of love also, William Bradshaw. This Letter, though somewhat large, it seemed not amisse at full to relate; because it representeth to the life, both the Character of many such Teachers, as were forwardest to oppose Gods faithfull Messengers in those times, and the manner of their teaching, which the most of our Antinomian party that give out themselves as the only Gospel-Preachers,The Antino∣mians practice. come so near unto now adaies; and the most unequall and unchristian courses also, that were by such then commonly practised, to work them into disgrace with the people, and to procure trouble to them from the State. But the malice of the man stayed not here; which of it self for ought he was able to do, was not much to be regarded. For being netled by this Letter, upon consultation had with some of his complices, a Knight of note in that County, a man of some parts of learning and wit, but of loose life, utterly averse from, and adverse to the profession and practice of piety, was by them procured, to come down from Rochester,A Spie sent to entrap him. where he then was, to Chatham on a Lords day, to hear Master Bradshaw, and that for no other end, but to pick somewhat, (if it might be) out of his teaching, for which, upon his information against him, (a practice most unworthy a man or his rank) his mouth might be stopped, or he inhibited at least from farther imployment in that place. And according indeed to their wicked design and ungodly desire the plot proceeded. For, whereas Master Bradshaw being then entred upon the handling of the story of Christs Temptations (related by two Evangelists; on which his Sermons, much desired by many that heard part of them, and though not fully perfect∣ed by him, yet by some small supplies being made up, may peradven∣ture hereafter see light) had observed, that this was the main scope of Satan in his first encounter, to bear our Saviour in hand, that howsoe∣ver he had been put in some hope by a voice, as from Heaven, that he was the beloved Sonne of God; yet God by his present neglect of him, and leaving him in such difficulties, destitute of all necessaries, did thereby manifest that he did not respect, or regard him at all; hereupon he took occasion to admonish all true Christians, to arm themselves diligently against this temptation, and to strengthen their Faith in the assurance of Gods favour towards them, care of them, and undoubted truth of his Promises made to them; using this as an Argument to in∣cite them unto the greater care in this kind; for that (said he) If this temptation do once fasten upon us, that we shall come by Satans sleights to be perswaded, that there is no such matter, that God hath no such re∣spect or regard unto us; it cannot but cool our love unto God. Which words of his,He is falsly ac∣cused. very wholesome and good, the Knight perverting and misreporting, enformed underhand against him, that he should deliver, That a man was not bound to love God, unlesse he were sure that God loved him.He is summon∣ed before the Bishop. Hereupon Master Bradshaw was shortly after, by a short note un∣der Doctor Buckeridges hand bearing date May twenty six 1602. and directed unto him at Chatham, made acquainted, that it was the plea∣sure
of his Lords Grace of Canterbury, and his Lord of London (the main prosecutor of the business against him) that he should the next day by nine of the clock appear personally before them at Shorn,He is summon∣ed before the Bishops. a Town situ∣ate between Rochester and Gravesend: whither accordingly he repaired, and there appearing, after some questions moved, and answers there∣unto returned, the Bishop of London began to charge him with teach∣ing of false and ungodly Doctrine, such as had been suggested by the Knight before-mentioned; whereunto when he answered Negative∣ly, relating withall truly and sincerely, what he had delivered, and of∣fering to produce not a few of good credit, who could and would testifie what then he taught, that would not be admitted; London affirming, that what had been enformed, was averred by such, as were able to conceive, being learned; and to understand aright what it was that he delivered, and received it not by report from others, but had been ear-witnesses of it themselves. However at last to strike all dead sure,Subscription made a snare. subscription was tendered to him; whereat they knew he would stick: which because he professed that he could not condescend unto, they inhibited him to preach any more at Chatham, and having bound him to appear, when he should be farther called upon, for the present so dis∣missed him. The next Lords day was one suborned,He is suspend∣ed from Chat∣ham. in the habit of a traveller, to repair early in the morning to Master Bradshaws lodging at Chatham, who asking to speak with him, pretended that he came on purpose out of his way to hear him, and demanded of him whether he preached that day or no? whereunto he answering, that he did not,Another Spie sent to entrap him. being by authority inhibited, he made shew of much sorrow, as being frustrated of his expectation, but he was descried to be no other then a Spie, sent to found Master Bradshaw what he intended to do; so greedy were they to have farther ensnared him, if by any meanes they might. The same day Master Bearblock was observed at Strowd, as tri∣umphing after a Victory atchieved against some great adversary, to have appointed to be sung before his fore-noon-Sermon, the former part of the 27. Psalm. Those of Chatham much affected with the inhibition of their faithfull Teacher, and grieved in their souls for the restraint of that precious food, which they had formerly received from him, were not backward to use what means they might for the taking off of the inhibition, and removal of the restraint. To this purpose a Supplica∣tion was framed in the Name of the Parishoners of Chatham unto the Bishop of Rochester their immediate Diocesan, in these words; Right Reverend Father, and our very good Lord,The Inhabi∣tants of Chat∣ham Petition for him to the Bishop. If we were not by manifold triall and long experience assured of the love that you bear, and the care that you have over that flock, which the Lord hath committed unto your charge, we could not with so good hope and comfort, as now we do, become Petitioners unto your Lordship in the behalf of our too much wronged Preacher Master Bradshaw; Unto whom, in sincrity of a good conscience we do voluntarily yeeld this testimony, that he is a man so farre in every respect from desert of those misreports, wherewith his causelesse adversa∣ries have endeavoured to incense your good Lordship against him, as his
accusers have been from the remembrance of that duty, which they ought to bear to your Lordship, whom they have abused with sinister and unjust informations; his Doctrine alwaies holy, wholesome, true, and learned, utterly void of faction and contention; his life so throughly garnished with unblemished vertues and graces, as malice it self cannot reprove, or suspect him; directing all his labours only to the beating down of sin and wick∣ednesse, the comfort of the faithfull, and the instruction of the ignorant, without intermedling at any time, with the needlesse and conceited contro∣versies of this factious age. May it therefore please your good Lord∣ship with favour (according to your wonted goodnesse) so to tender this your little poor flock of Chatham, as to restore unto us our vertuous and faithfull Teacher; lest otherwise we be as sheep without a Shepherd. Which being obtained, we your humble Suppliants will account it so great a bles∣sing of God from the hands of your Reverend Fatherhood, as that we shall hold our selves bound faithfully to pray unto the Almighty, for your good Lordships endless prosperity. This their Petition after their own frame conceived, is the rather here inserted, to shew their reverend estima∣tion of Master Bradshaw, and their earnest desire to have retained him still with them. But the business was in higher hands. London was the man that must do it, if ought were done. With whom Master Chaderton going up to London upon occasion of some Colledge-affairs, promised to deal in Master Bradshaws behalf; and in likelihood did: but (as appeared) without success. Thus was this blessed Servant of God tossed to and fro, and could not be suffered to abide long in any place; though a man of peaceable carriage, a most meek and humble spirit, and a kinde and loving dispo∣sition.Gods Provi∣dence for him. But Gods pious providence over his, and gracious provision for them, never faileth. He is oft working for them, when they least see it, and where or whence they least look for it. He was then preparing a re∣tiring and resting place for him, when he seemed to be now utterly out of hope of any.He departs from Chatham. For being now driven from Chatham, he came up to London, whence after some short stay with a Friend, having at present no employment, he thought good to look down into Leicestershire to visit his Friends there. And he indeed intended the journey only as a visit: howsoever the Lord in his hidden disposal, unknown unto him, had a farther aim in it then he was then aware of, as by the event appear∣ed, and he afterward took speciall notice of, and did thankfully acknow∣ledge. For upon his coming down into those parts, by the good hand of God, using that his worthy servant of blessed memony, Master Ar∣thur Hildersham (as formerly sometime, so now again) as an instru∣ment therein, he was brought into some notice with, and commended unto one Master Alexander Redich, a religious Gentleman, then resi∣ding at Newhall, an house of note, situate neer to Burton upon Trent, in the confines of Darbyshire,He is setled at Newhall. Leicestershire, and Staffordshire. He not only received him into his house, but obtained also for him from the then Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, being a moderate man, a Licence to preach in any part of his Diocess: which favour and liberty, being
by a Present of Venison at first procured, and afterward maintained by a yearly gratuity of a brace of Bucks out of the Gentlemans Park, Master Bradshaw without any interruption enjoyed in those parts during that Bishops life, yea, and after too, without any trouble (a light and short storm only excepted, and that soon again laid, the year before his decease, (whereof somewhat hereafter) unto the time of his release∣ment. For his entertainment there,His small means of Maintenance. though the means allowed him were very small, in regard that the Gentlemans estate was much encom∣bred, and he by reason thereof disabled to do what he otherwise desired; the Lady Ferrers his Wives Mother yet surviving, who had an estate for life in that part of the Land, which was to come to his Wife, where∣on he then resided; nor in regard of Religion (for a strong and zealous Papist she was) so well-affected towards them, being forward another way; and some other part of it, by concealment of some Evidences being wrongfully detained from him, as in process of time upon disco∣very thereof did evidently appear.His contenta∣tion. Yet the small pittance that was al∣lowed him, together with their kind carriage toward him, and the lo∣ving affection to him that he found generally in the Family, did give him very good content. For in a Letter to an inward Friend he pro∣fesseth, that he found both the Gentleman, and his Wife, very tender-hearted and sincerely Religious so kind unto him,His Letter to a Friend about it. as his heart could not desire more; and that in gifts they were otherwise beneficial unto him; and the truth is, (saith he, for you have his own words) it is impossible to find more love in a place, then I do find more and more both of great and small in the House: so that the Lord, I see, hath not clean forsaken me. And in another to the same party; Never let your mind be troubled about the smallnesse of my Maintenance, it is more then he from whom it cometh can well spare yet;His humility. as much as my labours upon them deserve; and more then many of my betters have. To adde hereun∣to some farther matter of encouragement and contentment, he withall signifieth, that the Lord had blest him there with a most kind neighbour, (abiding in a house not far from thence with the Lord Paget) a young man of Oxford, and a Londoner by birth, one Master Hassal, a man of very rare parts for all kind of learning, of most prompt and ready speech, and of a very courteous and affable disposition. With him he entertained familiarity, and maintained a good correspondence, while they abode so neer together. For he was not nice to imbrace acquaintance with any moderate man, of endowments especially; and very forward to take notice of the good parts of others, and to set them out as occasion was offered, to the utmost: so far was he from that malevolent humour so rife with too many in these times, of extenuating or blurring the en∣dowments and abilities of others; such especially as do not in every par∣ticular conceit, though but groundlessely oft fancied, comply with themselves; as also together with his ingenuous composure of spirit, his pious disposition may herein be observed, in taking notice of, and acknow∣ledging a passage of divine providence in every accommodation, that might any way, or in any measure, improve the comfort of his present condition.
But that the great moderation of mind in one of such worth as was this Servant of Christ, may the better appear, we shall compare the means of maintenance afforded him, and his employments, whereof he professed before, not to deserve so much as so small a pirtance a∣mounted unto the one with the other. That the allowance was very small, may very justly be deemed, when his friends were so much trou∣bled and grieved, to think that one of his endowments should be dri∣ven to accept so low and slender conditions: and the truth is, as by his own relation appears, the allowance at first agreed upon, was but ten pounds by the year, his diet, fire, candle, and all kind of attendance, as himself draws it out at length to make the most of it. That which is here specified, not in any wise to asperse the Gentleman, whose present condition would not then well afford better termes; and yet shew∣ed his good will by free addition to what he stood engaged for, even in his first year of abode with him; and afterward also, as charge grew upon Master Bradshaw: though means were not much amended with him, yet strained himself unto a farther enlargement, as hereafter shall be shewed; but to manifest the excceeding, and almost unparallel'd modesty of the man, esteeming his labours beneath so poor an allow∣ance. For his employments that himself so much undervalued, what were they? Besides his private exercises at set times performed in the Family; he preached at first constantly twice every Lords day in a Chappel of some capacity,His great pains. belonging to the Gentlemans House, and situate within the Park wherein the House stood; and afterward, when the resort from other parts more remote, grew so great, that the place could not well contain them; (that the more might enjoy the fruit of his Ministry, and with the more ease to them, though the less to him and the Houshold) he was easily induced, the Governours of the Fa∣mily, out of their religious disposition, well approving thereof, and condescending thereunto, to bestow his labours, as he had before done in the Chappel, in a more publick place, at a Parish-Church (where a Reading Vicar only was) at a Village called Stapenhill or Stapenhall, about a mile distant from the place of his abode. And this he did constantly for above twelve years at least, at such times as the Gentleman abode with his Family at Newhall, which was the principal place of his setled abode: receiving for such his pains among them, no consideration at all from the people of the place;Monstrous in∣gratitude. (the most of them deeming him more beholden to them, for coming and staying to hear him, then themselves to him for coming to preach to them; and some of them complaining, that they had lost many a good Pistle and Go∣spel for his Preachings;) save that on the Lords day for his better ease and refreshment, between his forenoon and afternoons employment, he was usually entertained at the House of one Master Alexander Buck∣ley, who had sometime belonged as a Bayliff or Steward to Master Re∣diches Family, and whose Wife Mistress Anne Buckley, a very sweet na∣tured, humble and godly woman, was both a Mary and Martha to him, no lesse diligent to attend his teaching with the one, then sedu∣lous
to make fitting provision for him with the other; and that some of the better affected sort among those that heard him, would now and then gratifie him with some kind of Countrey-courtesies, when he kept house by himself. Having thus spent above a twelvemoneth or more with Master Re∣dich, his thoughts began to be more solicitously renewed concerning that businesse of marriage propounded to him at Chatham, and so farre forth, as hath been formerly shewn, embraced then by him; which in regard also of some other emergent occasions had hung hitherto in suspence. This to proceed in and consummate he much desired, not so much in regard of himself, as in regard of the other party, who had been held in expectation thereof so long already, and might deem it some wrong, if it should be still so delayed. But how this might con∣sist with his continuance in Master Rediches Family he was not able well to conceive; and how very loath he was to part with a Family, where he had found so much love. Howsoever he resolved to break the mat∣ter unto them, before he would proceed any farther therein, that if no fit means of compliance there could be contrived, he might with their good leave look out for some other place of employment, and they have some convenient space of time for the fitting and furnishing of themselves with some other to succeed with them in his room. Up∣on relation hereof, according to such his resolution, (having taken a fit time for it) made unto them, enforming them truly and freely in all circumstances, how the case stood with him, and how he stood affected towards them, it was strange to see (it is in his own words related) how great affection they shewed to bear unto him, expressed even with teares; that on no condition he must depart from them; such course should be taken, as that, when he should in that kind change his condition, he might still conveniently and comfortably abide with them. Whereunto he subjoyn∣eth; And this indeed is the first hour of my solid comfort, that the Lord hath vouchsafed me a standing place, where I may settle my self. And in∣deed God was pleased to work in some particulars somewhat strange∣ly and unexpectedly, beyond what he was then able to foresee or fore∣cast, toward the farther acomplishment of his desire in this kind; as hereafter shall be shewed. Mean while Master Redich being by occasion of businesses drawn up to London, and having taken some lodgings for himself and his retinue neer unto Christ Church, with purpose to make stay some good space of time in the City, Master Bradshaw abiding there with him, was re∣quested to preach sometime at Christ Church: which accordingly he did, and that with such approbation and good liking of the well-affect∣ed in the Parish, that the afternoons Lecture there becoming vacant, albeit Doctor Milward a man of some note in those times stood for it, yet by the greater number of votes, in a Vestry purposely for that end assembled, Master Bradshaw was chosen to be their Lecturer;He is chosen Lecturer at Christ Church London. though not having sought it himself, but having been without his privity pro∣pounded by some such of them as had been much taken with his for∣mer
Sermons. But the will of God (it seems) was, that he should still adhere to that Family, which he was fallen into, and where he had found so much affection; that which to his dying day also he did. For though by some of those, who earnestly desired him, great means were made to the Bishop,Bishop Ban∣crofts malice. yet would he in no wise condescend to give way thereunto. Yea, such was his malignity against Master Bradshaw, that having cited him, but by a wrong forename, to appear before him, to answer for preaching in his Diocesse without his Licence; (in which re∣gard also the Church-wardens were checked and threatned that suf∣fered it) upon his non-appearance he proceeded so far, as to send out an Excommunication against him; which he for the mistake before-mentioned, little regarded; only by advice, for some time kept out of the way, untill the Bishops translation, or evection rather, unto the lofty pitch of his Primacy, which shortly after did ensue. During his stay in these parts, looking down to Chatham, he there consummated that businesse, which hitherto had been delayed. And in regard that Master Redich with his Wife and retinue were by reason of his urgent affairs in divers kinds likely to continue for a longer space of time in the City then at first was expected;His marriage. Master Bradshaw ha∣ving brought up his Wife with him from Chatham, did for a while board her with a sister of hers, before married and seated in the City, and af∣terward took part of a tenement for himself and her, who being a wo∣man that affected employment, for their better support, taught there a few Scholers. Much about this time, by occasion of that formall conference acted and transacted at Hampton-Court, wherein some of our chief Prelates endeavoured to possesse the Kings Majesty with a pre∣judice against those that made suit for a Reformation of things amisse in Church-affairs, (his disaffection to whom he had himself also in some writing of his partly discovered already) and to perswade him, that for Ecclesiastical affairs all things were so well setled, that no Reformation needed,Conformity strictly pressed but some strict injunction only of a precise conformity unto, and constant observation of things already established; which began thereupon in many places with much vigor to be pressed; It came to passe that many Books came abroad, being privately printed, wherein divers godly Ministers, who were of a contrary judgment, declared their grievances, laid down their exceptions, set forth their grounds of dissent, and returned answer to the Arguments produced and urged a∣gainst them to induce them to Conformity. For Books of this nature search was made in the City; for one, more especially among the rest, that had (it seems) given our great Clergy-Masters most offence, and Master Bradshaw being known to abide then in the City, a man in much suspition with them, two Pursuivants, accompanied with Master Norton the Kings Printer, were sent with Commission to search his house both for it and him. Whither accordingly repairing, but not finding him at home, they enforced his Wife to open his Closet or Study, the Chests, Trunks, Boxes and Presses, to make search for such Books, but found nothing. For the truth is, (and there was a good Providence of God
in it (after that Master Bradshaw was that morning gone out, not above half an hour before that this business fell out,Gods good providence o∣ver him. his Wife looking into his Study, and seeing some of those Books there, to prevent future danger, (which yet she then little deemed or dreamed to be so near at hand as it proved to be afterward) had taken them out from thence, and cast them into a hole between two Chimneys, where being covered over with old besomes, they remained undiscovered. But howsoever they could meet with nothing of that which they looked for, yet on his Wife they seized, who would rather have had him;The trouble of his Wife. her they took and led unto Doctors Commons, where having presented her before Doctor Stanhop, Doctor White, and a third party, whom she knew not, a number sufficient to make up a compleat High Commission Court; they examined her, yet without oath: first, Where her Husband was? where∣unto she answered, she knew not; then, What meanes of Maintenance she had, and from whom? to which she made answer, that she gat her living by her work, and teaching of a few young Children; after that, What Children she had? she told them, none yet; but one she hoped in her belly, being then great with Child: which was her first-born Sonne, now a Minister of the Gospel, afterward born in that House they then dwelt in, in Thred-needle-street, and baptized in the Church near thereto adjoyning, where the Minister of the place, somewhat thick of hearing, by a mistake, instead of Jonathan, naming him John, which name therefore he bare afterward, and doth to this day. But af∣ter divers such questions to little purpose propounded and answered, in conclusion they told her, that they knew well enough that the Book they then searched for▪ was none of her Husbands making, though he might have a hand in the venting of it; and withall, that if they had been dis∣posed, they could have had him, for all his keeping in a Lancashire Gentlemans house. So they termed Master Redich,Gods mercy. because his own Lands of Inheritance lay in those parts. Thus hauing parlied with her, they dismissed her, not suffering those greedy Harpyes the Pur∣suivants, who were eager upon her for their fees, to exact ought from her; only binding her at a daies warning to appear again before them. Thus through Gods goodness and watchfull eye over his Servant, too regardlesse in some sort of his own safety, having escaped the snare that was set for him, he returned after some space of time, Master Re∣diches main businesses being now dispatched, together with him and his, unto their former place of abode at Newhall, taking his Wife and little one together also along with him. Being there arrived, the Gentleman both enlarged his maintenance,His return to Newhall. and assigned him and his Wife certain Chambers in his own House conveniently furnished▪ as also herbage in the Park for a certain number of Kine, and of Swine, and some Poultry, together with a convenient room for a Dary, wherein she might exercise her huswifery; which she very well could do, and accordingly did. Now while they thus lived together in Master Rediches House, Master Bradshaw went on cheerfully in his wonted
course, both of private exercises for the instruction of the Family, and of publick employment on the Lords day for the benefit of others also abroad. But the old Lady Ferrers, Mistresse Rediches Mother, a wo∣man of a great spirit, and a resolute Papist, though not an absolute pro∣fessed Recusant, could by no means brook Master Bradshaw, and the lesse now because married, and for that he had brought his Wife also to live with him in House with them: yea she had conceived such an ex∣tream hatred against him, professing to hate him above any man in the world; that she had made a vow, that she would never set her feet in the house where he was; and it was therefore feared, not without some just ground of suspition, that the Family might from her fare the worse for him. But the hearts of all men, and women also, are in Gods hand, and he can wind and turn them which way he will: and when a mans waies do please the Lord, he can, if he see it good, yea, doth oft, when he seeth it will be for the good of his, make of his utter foes, his Friends. And even so fell it out here. For the Lady notwithstanding this her extream disaffection, so deeply rooted, and so vehemently expressed, yet in pro∣cesse of time being enduced by some that were in credit and repute with her, to visit her Son-in-law and Daughter, and make stay for some time (which they much desired) in house with them; and being withall in∣formed and assured by them of Master Bradshaws mild and moderate demeanure, and his meek, kind, and lowly carriage, she was over∣wrought by them, contrary to that her former unnaturall and irreligious engagement, to repair thither, and take up her lodging with them: where it pleased God withall, not long after her accesse thither, (being now an eye-witnesse her self of what she had formerly heard by report of him from others) so to alter that her former disaffection to Master Bradshaw, and to cast it into a clean contrary mould, that all that beheld and observed her carriage on all occasions towards him,The Lady Fer∣rers respect to him though a Papist. wondered ex∣ceedingly at it, to see so strange an alteration, and such not unexpected only, but unusuall carriages in her. For, albeit she were otherwise, a Gentlewoman, as of very proper and personable presence, and in that regard much admired by the Scottish Queen that suffered here, whom she also much affected, so of her self no lesse forward to take and keep state; yet she used Master Bradshaw with very much courtesie and com∣plement, at table drinking to him, and carving for him; resorting twice a day constantly to prayer with him and the Family, and speaking reverently of him; yea whereas formerly she could not be induced to hear any of our Ministers preach; howsoever for fashion sake, and to escape penalty of Law, she might sometime repair to hear the Liturgy read; yet was she content to hear Master Bradshaw, and commended his Sermons. Which the better to work upon her, he wisely framed to such subjects as he deemed would best serve,His prudence in his Mini∣stry. to take off such false imputations, as are wont by the adverse party to be cast upon our Pro∣fession and Preaching, as if we were utter enemies to mortification and good works. For first out of Matth. 5.16. he took occasion to speak of the necessity and nature of good works; the ground from whence they spring,
and the end that must be aimed at in them; and after that out of Psal. 51. of repentance and mortification, with both which discourses she seemed to be very much affected. What farther work these things had upon her after her departure thence, we are not able to say; but certain it is, that while she abode there, she seemed to be much better disposed, not towards Master Bradshaw only; but (contrary to what was formerly feared, and strongly suspected) toward her Son-in-law and Daughter also. For before she went thence, she sealed them a Lease for three years, of the Land they held from her, with abatement of an Hun∣dred pounds by the year, of the rent formerly paid, and a remission of thirty pounds by the year besides, otherwise accruing to her, (God might blesse the House for his Josephs sake) and her continued good opinion of, and affection to Master Bradshaw she farther manifested, by her free consent, to have an House built for him and his Wife to live in, on a parcell of land that she had interest in; which was accordingly with as much speed as might be, not long after effected. Then which (saith he, so modest and moderate were his affections for the things of this life) I desire no more worldly things, then that I may be setled in that little House, and rest there in quiet, which these times give small hope of. This he conceived the lesse hope of, because the Bishop under whom he had hitherto lived quietly, about this time, deemed not like long to continue; and indeed shortly after deceasing, it was given out, that Bishop Neal, translated from Rochester, was to succeed (that which he much dreading, in divers of his Letters had oft up, Lord keep us from Rochester) and so he did indeed, though not immediately; yet not long after. For Doctor Abbots Dean of Winchester, who came in between them, sate not long there, but before many moneths ex∣pired, stept from Litchfield to London. But Bishop Neal was the man, whom all the pious, as well private men as Ministers, in these parts mis-doubted would do the most mischief.Bishop Neals malice. And indeed presently upon his entrrnce, that boisterous Prelate began in so fierce and furious a sort to bestir himself, and kept such a busseling and blustering among them, that (howsoever one that then abode thereabout, writing somewhat freely of him, saith, The more he shufflled in his Lions skin, the more he made his Asses ears to appear, and exposed himself to derision and contempt even with the meanest) yet it was by the most feared, that unlesse God in much mercy should put a ring into his Nose, he would in likelihood root up all effectual means of piety, within the precincts of his power. And the rather had Master Bradshaw cause to expect little favour, all rigour rather that might be, from him; in regard of some neighbour∣ing loiterers, that should have been labourers, as he was, in the Lords work; who not enduring to see others affected and followed, for doing that, which they should have done, but did not themselves, were there∣fore bitter enemies to him, and were in great grace with the Bishop. Besides that, it was reported, that the Bishop was minded to reside some space of time at Drakelow, a place not far distant from Newhall;
whose neighbourhood was like to prove no more beneficial to Master Bradshaw,Gods Provi∣dence over him. then the brass pots company in the Fable to the earthen pitcher. But, as dangers oft befall us, where we least mis-doubt or suspect ought, much lesse expect any; so (the Lord on that wise dispo∣sing things for the safety of his servants, and the enuring of them to a constant dependance on his providence) it falleth out sometime on the other side, that we prove least assailed or annoyed from thence, whence we have been most affrighted with the greatest expectation of much damage, or sore distresse. So it fell out with Master Bradshaw here. For, how∣soever in one of his Letters he manifesteth his fears to that purpose, that in regard of the considerations before-mentioned, he much doubted that Zone would be too hot for him, yet in another afterward he signifieth that he had not as yet heard ought from him, or of any complaints that had been made to him against him. Nor indeed doth it appear that he was at any time after molested, or disturbed in the exercise of his Ministry by ei∣ther of them, by what means soever the Lord was pleased so either to represse or divert, as well the malice of the one, as the might of the other, that neither of them should fasten to any purpose upon him, untill the year before he died. About this time Master Redich bestowed his eldest Daughter Mistress Grace Redich in marriage with Sir Robert Darcie, Son and Heir to Sir Edward Darcie a Kentish Knight, a very religious Gentleman, in great favour and repute with that Illustrious Prince Henry, of rare parts, and great hopes, of whom this land was not worthy, and one that highly esteemed Master Bradshaw, as he justly deserved. He making his abode most at Newhall untill his Fathers decease, (where his Lady a very gracious Gentlewoman according to her name, not inferiour to her Hus∣band, either in piety, or in sincerity of affection to Master Bradshaw, was the second time delivered of twins, and became Mother of four Children, within compasse of a year) Master Bradshaw by his company there received much comfort and encouragement in the work of his Ministry, and furtherance also in his Studies. For Sir Robert being a Scholar and studious, had a Library furnishnd with many of the best Writers, as well in Divinity, as in other kindes of literature, whereof Master Bradshaw had the free use; and he brought also upon his motion divers other on purpose, that might be usefull for him. And this his af∣fectionate and courteous carriage to Master Bradshaw, toward whom he ever demeaned himself with much reverence and due respect, was con∣tinued by him untill his decease, which did not many weeks precede Master Bradshaws. In the year 1613. it pleased God to take from him that worthy Gentleman Master Redich his Patron, who in a very holy and Christian manner at Newhall departed this life. His frequent removals from Newhall to Longford, another house that had befallen him in those parts not long before his decease, was occasion of much distraction to Master Bradshaw, now setled with his Family at Stanton Ward near to Newhall; but his decease much more: Concerning which he thus writes, among
other things in a Letter to a Friend;His Letter a∣bout Master Rediches death Master Rediches decease hath made an heavy alteration in this Family; and for mine own estate, Mistress Re∣dich giving over house, as she intendeth to do, and to live somewhere here∣about, as privately as she may, for the better discharging of her Husbands debts, it will be the lesse comfortable, and more chargeable to me then it hath been. But I am willing for her good to undergo any thing. Master Redich on his death-bed was willing to have assured me of something du∣ring my life. But the force of his disease did so grow upon him that he could do nothing. If God lend Mistress Redish life, till the debts be dis∣charged, or a sure course taken for them, I hope she will, if it lie in her power: for she hath promised so to do; and I assure me, she will do her utter most to effect it. But whatsoever fall out, I trust I shall be content, ha∣ving been hitherto at the Lords finding; who hath shewed himself at all times a loving Father to me his unworthy Child; and our time here, though it be full of wants, is but short. Thus it pleased the Lord to inure this his Servant to a dependance from day to day for provisions upon his Providence; and as a grave man of God sometime said, Whereas many other have, and eat their bread stale; to receive his bread,Note. and eat it daily new from his hand; that which he also, you see, was very well content to do. Mean while the good Gentlewomans incumbred and unsetled estate she was left in, being to take course for the payment of her Hus∣bands debts, and to compound for the Wardship of her younger Daughter, who was afterward matched to one of the Lord Chief Justice Cooks Sons, could not but exceedingly distract Master Bradshaw, as well as her self; and drew him up to London together with her, oftner then he had any mind of himself, or desire thereunto. But from that Fa∣mily the main means of his maintenance accrued; and to it therefore he constantly addicted himself, as in duty he deemed himself obliged to do. At Stanton Ward, not far from Newhall, as was before intimated, his Family still abode in the little house there built for him: Where, while Mistresse Redich abode in those parts, or when he had any liberty to get down from these parts, while she was longer then usually de∣tained in or about the City; he went on constantly in his wonted course, teaching freely at Stapenhill every Lords day, as formerly he had done. Only in the year 1617. coming down from London, (upon what occasi∣on, or through whose instigation, uncertain) he was welcomed home by the Bishops Chancellour a corrupt man,He is inhibited from preach∣ing. with an inhibition to preach there, till he heard further from him. But by the mediation of a couple of good Angels, the one from himself, (so willing and forward was he to redeem his liberty, for the benefit of others,But soon re∣stored. without advantage to himself) and the other from a Friend, the Chancellour was soon pacified, and the restraint removed; whereby it appeared that the Prohibition proceeded principally from his own avarice, rather then from mis-information from any thereabout, or injunction from above. Amidst this his restlesse and distracted condition, and constant pur∣suit of his religious employments, the Lord was preparing a place of
setled rest for him, and a royall reward in the highest Heavens, for his faithfull service here upon earth, drawing on apace now to its utmost period. For in the year 1618. being come up from Stanton, to attend Mistress Redich, while he lodged with her at Chelsey, not far from the City,His last sick∣nesse. visiting a Friend at Rederith, whose house he usually frequented when he was in these parts, he complained of some malady, that by his present distemper he mis-doubted might be growing upon him, and though by his friend being earnestly urged, to take some speedy course, by the Physicians advice, for preventing the farther growth of it; yet being too regardlesse of himself, while he neglected so to do, he was suddainly surprized with a violent, and (as the Physician affirms) ma∣lignant Fever, which so fiercely set upon him, that in its very first ap∣parent encounter it cast him down upon his couch. And notwithstand∣ing all the means used, that either were desired, or could be procured; no care being omitted, or cost spared, by that worthy Gentlewoman, who most tenderly and intirely affected him, for advice of Physician, who constantly repaired to him, assistance of Apothecary, according to direction with all requisite necessaries supplying him, and diligent attendance, as well of those in the Family, as of some other also for that end procured from abroad, without intermission successively about him; even the Gentlewoman her self (though advised to forbear, in regard of some malignity deemed to be in the disease) frequently resorting to him, sitting by him, and with her own hands offering for his better ease to be helpfull unto him, which yet he was very loath to admit; in all which from the first to the last she expressed a very great measure of cordiall affection unto him, and no lesse an earnest desire, both of his present relief, and future recovery also, if God should see it so good; yet the time being now come wherein the Lord had deter∣mined to put an end to his faithfull Servants labourious employments, continued distractions, and restlesse condition, and to translate him hence to a place of endlesse rest, and peace never to be interrupted a∣gain; the force of the disease within the space of a few daies fretted a∣sunder those bands that kept soul and body together, and leaving the one behind to be laid up in the bowels of that element whence it had its first original,His Death An. Christi 1618. set the other at full liberty to return unto him, from whom alone it immediately received its existence at first. During the short time of his sickness, wherein yet through Gods goodnesse he continued free from any notable sense of pain, and was accompanied with much freedom of mind and memory,His behaviour in his sickness. he had his heart and tongue in meditation set wholly upon God, acknowledging his spe∣cial favour and goodnesse unto him, who had so far forth vouchsafed to cast a gracious eye upon him so vile and loathsome a creature, while he yet con∣tinued in his native condition, as to give him an interest by Faith in his Christ; yea so farre farther to grace so unworthy a wretch, as to call him to be a Minister of his Word, and Publisher of his Will, and to make his weak endeavours and worthlesse labours, at any time in any measure effica∣cious to any of his people, (as he hoped in some sort with some at least they
had been) either for the conversion and bringing of them home unto him, or for the establishing and building of them up in the saving knowledge and belief of his truth, and in the graces and comforts of his Spirit. With∣all seriously professing this to be his comfort, the testimony of his conscience in the sight of God bearing witnesse in his behalf, that in sincerity of heart, though with much weaknesse, and amidst many failings, through the whole course of his Ministry, his main end and scope in all his labours and endea∣vour's had been both in publick and private, to seek the glory of God, the delivery of his truth, the peace of his Church, the spiritual good of his people; in all things to approve himself to him, and continue faithfull with him, who hath been pleased to take him into his service; and desiring now nothing more, then that he might be so enabled through the support of his good Spirit, that by his Christian and comfortable carriage under his Fatherly hand, in this close of his day-work, he might confirm and seal up to others the truth of those things that he had formerly professed and taught. Withall earnestly exhorting all that came about him, to learn now to die before they came to it,His counsell to his friends. to be sure to lay a good foundation in time of life and health, for matter of firm support and sound comfort in time of sick∣ness, and at the hour of death; and to make as much provision and strong preparations against that time as they could, assuring themselves, that they should find all their utmost endeavours and carefullest addresses to be little enough, when they came once to that Work. Amidst these and the like Religious Meditations and Pious Employments, peceiving his desired end now to approach, and having requested prayer to be con∣ceived in his behalf by a special Friend, who had accompanied him most part of his sicknesse, not long after that Office performed by him, he quietly and peaceably resigned his soul into the hands of his blessed Sa∣viour, no lesse ready (doubtlesse) to receive it from him, then himself was desirous and forward to recommend it unto him. His Funeral rites were performed at Chelsey, where he drew his last breath; most of the Ministers of better note about the City,His Burial. either constantly residing, or occasionally detained there, besides a very great multitude of private persons well affected, repairing thereunto. Who were all there, after the usuall manner in such cases and on such occasi∣ons, entertained at the charge and by the bounty of that worthy Gen∣tlewoman of singular Piety, in whose house he deceased. From which place his Corps being conveyed on the shoulders of six of his Reverend Brethren of the Ministry, who of their own accord offered themselves unto that Office, to the place of publick Assembly, where it was to be interred: Master Thomas Gataker his ancient and inward Friend, though full of grief for the loss of one, who so entirely affected him, and whom as well for the high esteem he had of him and his worth, as for that entire affection which he constantly bare to him, was most deser∣vedly exceedingly dear to him; and in regard thereof not so free or fit for performance of that Office; yet enforced himself to preach at his Funerall, and to give, though very briefly, such Testimony of him, as was generally approved of by his Reverend Brethren there present.
And he was indeed a man of very eminent parts,His excellent parts. for sharpnesse of wit, clearnesse of apprehension, soundnesse of judgment, exactnesse of method, and powerfulnesse of delivery, of singular dexterity in beating out perplexed and intricate debates, descrying and discovering where the knots lay, stating of Controversies aright, and dissolving of difficult cases of conscience; to which purpose not only many even from remote parts resorted unto him, either of their own accord, or di∣rected and recommended unto him by other his Brethren of the Ministry, as one most likely of any to give them satisfaction in their doubts; but divers of them also, of good note, (as by their Letters to him may appear) deemed it no disparagement to seek resolution from him in questions of that nature themselves. Neither was he one that kept his talent wrapt up in a Napkin; but though he were cooped up mostly in an obscure corner, through the harsh courses of those, that would not suffer his light to shine forth in any eminent place; yet was he ex∣ceeding laborious in those parts wherein he lived, both in private em∣ployments at constant set times in the Family, and in publick also, where he might be permitted, though without benefit to himself: that which may appear by abundance of papers and note-books yet extant, though by many casualties a multitude of them have miscarried. Be∣sides his constant course of preaching at Stapenhill, for the most of his time from his first admission into that Family, save only by interrupti∣on, through occasion of removals, which neither usually lasted over∣long, nor, though distracted him in his Studies, did any whit lightly lessen his labours; he was frequently drawn forth to joyn with other his Reverend Brethren in their meetings and exercises, at Ashbie de la Zouch in Leicester-shire, at Repton in Darby-shire, and at Burton upon Trent; at some of which meetings the manner being, that some one of them preached his hour on the Scipture propounded the meet∣ing before, and the rest or a certain number of them spent af∣terward, each one his half hour or thereabout on some other por∣tion of Scripture, one being appointed to moderate, by minding each that spake, if occasion were, of the time, and to close up all with some succinct rehearsal of what had been delivered, together with an additament, if it seemed good, of somewhat of his own. It hath been reported by some of those Ministers, who frequented these ex∣ercises, that when they could get this our Brother, into that number, or into the chair, which latter he could hardly be drawn into, he was observed to have a reach still beyond the rest; and in regard of his depth of judgment, and dexterity in due ballancing of points controvert∣ed, and differences in opinion concerning the same, he was com∣monly stiled among them The weighing Divine, as hath been attest∣ed by that worthy Servant of Christ now at rest with him, Master Oliver Bowles, from the mouths of some of them, who in his hearing related it. His method in teaching.For his ordinary manner of teaching, it was in some kinde some∣what different from the usuall Method of the most Teachers in those
times. For he seldome made any excursion into the handling of common places, or drew his subject matter out at length by any prolixly continued discourse: But the main frame both of his pub∣lick Sermons and private Exercises, for the most part, if not wholly, consisted, after some brief and genuine resolution of the context, and explication of the termes, where need required, of notes and ob∣servations, with much variety and great dexterity drawn immedi∣ately from the text, and naturally, without constraint, issuing and flowing either from the main body, or from the several limbs of it, with some usefull application annexed thereunto: which though neither of them long insisted upon, yet were wont with that viva∣city to be propounded and pressed by him, as well might, and oft did, pierce deep into the hearts of his hearers,The efficacy of his Mini∣stry. and not only rectifie and clear their judgments, but have a powerfull work also upon their affections. Nor was it his manner to quote many Scriptures, finding it troublesome to his memory, and supposing it would be so to his Au∣ditours also: (that which was the practice and opinion also of Doctor Chaderton, as they well know, that heard him on Matth. 21.13.) besides deeming it the lesse needfull, in regard that his Observati∣ons being grounded immediately on the Scripture he handled; and by necessary consequence thence deduced, seemed to receive proof sufficient from it. A constant form of prayer he used, as in the Fa∣mily, so in his publick Ministry;He used a form of prayer, and why. only varying or adding upon speci∣all accasions, as occurences intervening required; the reason he gave thereof, was this, because hesitation, (which he said he was much subject unto) was in prayer more offensive, then in other dis∣course; unto prophane ones especially, whereof in mixt multitudes, and meetings, some lightly, too many usually, were; that which he af∣firmed also to have been Master Cartwrights practice, with whom some∣time he conversed. In such manner of teaching he went over divers portions of Scrip∣ture: Among others, the fifty first,The Scriptures which he preached over. and the hundred and nineteenth Psalms: the story of Hanna, 1 Sam. 1. and of Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5. Part of Christs Sermon on the Mount, Matth. 5. the Parable of the Sower, Matth. 13. and of the rich man and Lazarus, Luk. 16. the relation of Christs Temptations, recorded by two of the Evangelists: the whole History of Christs apprehension, araignment and execution; together with Judas his end; the four first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romanes; the three last Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, beside many other more particular parcels of Scripture. Of this sort was by himself published in his life-time, A Preparation to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;His works that were published. at first written out at the re∣quest of that right religious Lady Darcy for her private use, and by importunity afterwards, made more publick for the farther benefit of others. Therewith many have been much taken, (by means whereof it hath oft been reprinted) and among others one Tho∣mas Foster a Mercer by trade, living at Shefford in Bedfordshire, a
very honest, humble-minded, and sincere-hearted Christian, hath been heard to professe, that that Book, and that part of it more specially wherein are laid down certain marks and signs of Faith and Re∣pentance, was as farre (as he was able to deem) the only outward Instrumentall means of his Conversion, through the gracious co-ope∣ration of Gods Spirit working powerfully and efficaciously upon his heart in the reading thereof. And since his death have been published, A Nuptial Sermon, entituled, A Marriage Feast, on Joh. 2.1.—12. A Meditation of Mans mortality, on Psal. 90. His Sermons on the se∣cond Epistle to the Thessalonians. A Treatise of Christian Reproof, on Matth. 18.15, 17. And another of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, on Matth. 12.22.—32. which in his life-time he had been by that wor∣thy Knight Sir Robert Darcy, who died not long before him, much pres∣sed to publish; but could not prevail with him, being very backward in that kind, much undervaluing his own works, and very rarely, if e∣ver, satisfying himself in ought that he undertook. For the use of the Family wherein he lived, he drew up a twofold Catechism as they term it; the one somewhat large, the other more brief, for young beginners extracted out of the former; which latter, to save labour of transcri∣bing, he permitted to be printed. What spare time he had from his constant imployments either private or publick, when not taken off by occasionall Occurrences, he spent most of it principally three waies. First, In labouring to clear some Points about the Dotrine of Faith and Justification; Concerning the latter whereof, after many debates (first occasioned by some Lectures of Doctor Grey, sometime Fel∣low of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, then reading on that Subject at Gresham Colledge in London) that passed to and fro by reciprocall Let∣ters between him and a special friend of his, he began to set upon an exact Treatise of that Argument: Which being upon the first draught of it communicated to that friend of his, upon some advertisements from him, he in divers particulars farther cleared; and being afterward imparted to divers of prime note in either University, he was by them not much encouraged only, but earnestly incited to divulge it; that, which though by much difficulty drawn unto, yet at length he did. And howsoever that accurate piece was but coursely enter∣tained by one of his Brethren in the Ministry, then living in the City, traducing it publickly in a Lecture at Pauls, quarrelling with him who had licensed it for the Presse, and framing a bitter In∣vective against it; which upon perusall was found so virulent, that he could not get it permitted to passe to the Presse; yet was the work so well approved by many learned and judicious in both our Universities, that divers of them have professed to have received more light thence in that Point, then they had ever before from the writings of any that had dealt in that Argument. Hence it was that having occasion to be sometime on the Act-day at Oxford, one of those that had seen it, and deeming not underservedly of the workwan by the work,
seeing him passe along in a plain russet cloak, is reported by some that were then in company with him, to have said to them, Do you see the man that goeth yonder, in that plain habit, and in that self-neglect∣ing garb and posture? he hath more sound learning in his head, then twenty of us have. And that famous Professor Doctor Prideaux, af∣ter his decease, in some company hearing his Son yet surviving then pre∣sent there named, demanded of him whether that Master Bradshaw, that wrote the Treatise of Justification were his Father? and being informed that he was, he professed himself heartly glad to see the Son of that man, for the old acquaintance he had, not with his Father himself, but with that work of his, for those were the Doctors own words. Hereunto may be added the Verdict of that great and grave Counsellour of State, so much esteemed for his judgment in Law-Cases, the Lord Cook, who visiting the Gentlewoman (by the marri∣age of her daughter to his Sonne, noe neerly linked to him) at her house where Master Bradshaw then lay sick, and finding the Book ly∣ing accidentally in a window, after the perusall of some good part of it, freely professed, That he had seldome read a thing more pithily and preg∣nanly written. Nor was this work of his in such esteem at home only, but with other learned also abroad. Among whom Master Lewis Cappel a man of speciall note for variety of learning, and Professor of Divinity at Salmure in France, having received the Book sent him from Lon∣don by Master Aaron Cappel his kinsman, then Minister of the French Church there, returneth him many thanks for it; requesting him withall, to enquire after the Authors place of abode, and con∣vey from him unto him the Letter enclosed; In the Superscription whereof he stileth him, Doctissimum, ornatissimun, clarissimúmque virum; and in the Subscription, out of his respect to him, and estima∣tion, yea admiration of him, in regard of that piece alone, thus writes of himself, Tui non studiosus modò; sed cultor & admirator. In the body of the Letter, after signification, how upon some occa∣sion being to part with the Book, he had taken pains, before he would let it go out of his hands, to translate it out of English into French, he passeth this censure of it, A little Book, small for bulk, but for learn∣ing, wit and acutenesse a grand one.—To speak ingenuously, I never hitherto read ought in any humane writing of Doctrinal Divinity, that so exceedingly liked me; so learnedly, acutely, soundly, pithily, plainly, and yet with admirable brevity is this Argument so fully comprised, and throughly handled therein, I want words wherewith to commend and ex∣toll it according to its due desert; I have oft read it over, and yet ne∣ver have enough of it; but the oftner I return to it, and read it over a∣gain, the more eagerly is mine appetite stirred up unto it, so much light and brightness of learning, wit and art shineth forth in it. And whereas treading then precisely in Piscators steps, he propounded his doubts withall, concerning some particulars, wherein Master Brad∣shaw seemed to swarve from Piscator; Master Bradshaw to give him
farther satisfaction therein, and yet save much writing at large to and fro, reviewed his own work, and endeavoured to clear those things somewhat better; wherein also he was farthered by some Excepti∣ons from Master Wootton imparted unto himself, unto which he had returned an Answer; and having turned it so revised into Latine, he sent a copy of it in writing unto Master Cappel, who upon receit thereof, wrote back at first briefly, but not long after more fully, in these words; Right worthy Sir, I wrote before to you, that I had received your truly golden Book, enlarged by you and turned into Latine, and that presently I read it over, but in haste; so eager an appetite had I unto it, by reading the other Edition of it in English before. Since that I have read it over again, not once, but often, and taking leasure thereunto. Which the oftner I read over, the more it pleaseth me, and is approved of by me, so accurately and exactly is it composed by you, I hope this birth and issue of your mind will find approbation with peaceable and moderate dispositions, on whether side soever, albeit you condescend not unto them in all things that they require. You so space in the middle between either o∣pinion, that neither of them ought to be displeased with you, if they truly love peace and concord. Thus that learned man word for word translated out of his Let∣ters in Latine, which in the same language have been represented al∣so, and published elsewhere. Whereby may appear, what entertain∣ment, approbation, and estimation this Treatise (which yet the Au∣thor speaks so meanly of himself in private Letters to his Friends) found with the learned in forreign parts, and he himself also, where otherwise wholly unknown, for it. And whosoever shall with a re∣gardfull eye read over the generally well approved, and deservedly much esteemed writings of those worthy Servants of God, now with the Lord, Master William Pemble and Master Samuel Torsel, con∣cerning this subject, collated with this of Master Bradshaw, which came forth some good space before either of them had writ ought; he shall easily discern, on whose foundation they built, in whose steps they trod, with whose heifer they ploughed, at what Torch they lighted their Tapers, and from whence they received much of their light in that Argument. For it may be with good ground of truth be averred, that amids the extream opposition of Divines in this point dissenting, this our Brother did herein beat out such a middle tract be∣tween them, as appears not to have been formerly discovered by any, wherein these two men of special note coming after him, for the main matter of their principles, have kept close to his footsteps, in the path by him cut out and cleared to their hands. Of this latter in Latine, a Copy being sent over by him to Doctor Ames not long before his dicease, was by him not long after it printed. Unto this his purpose was to have added a Treatise of Ju∣stifying Faith, the proper nature, peculiar act, and Office of it in that work, and great pity it was that such and head as this one piece shews him to have had, was not set apart for such like employ∣ments.
How many points of much difficulty might haply been clear, if one of his parts had received encouragement, and means of support, to apply himself and his main studies unto so usefull an employment? Surely what he saith of another, might be well said of him, That if such as he was, had the handling of Controversies, Questions would not be so infinite and intricate oft as they are, and being aright stated, some that now fight most eagerly one against another, would be found to agree, being brought at length aright to understand either other. A second businesse whereunto he applied himself, about which he took much pains, was in the discussion of the matters then in contro∣vesie, for which he so much suffered, about Subscription, the Cere∣monies then pressed, the Civil Power, and the Prelatical, in affairs of that nature. Of this kind discourses penned by him were under∣hand printed, and published, as they could be secretly got out and dispersed, these folowing: A Protestation of Supremacy: The Eng∣lish Puritanism: A Treatise of True and False Worship: Twelve Arguments against the Ceremonies, and conformity thereunto: Of the Nature of things Indifferent. Of which Argument also he wrote in Latine an Answer to Master Gabriel Powel, which yet was not pub∣lished. And it is well known to some yet surviving, that the greatest part of that which was done in that grand Controversie with Doctor Downham concerning Episcopacy, for the main matter of it, came forth of his forge; (howsoever of his labour and paines there∣in taken, another bare the name, and received the reward of the work) the tart and bitter language only, wherewith it was rather pickled then seasoned, proceeding from another pen, somewhat too much steeped in Vineger and Gall, that which he complaineth of, as much misliking, in a Letter to a Friend: for he was a man of a very mild and meek spirit, and of a moderate disposition; and how farre forth in his judgment and practice he could have acknow∣ledged, submitted unto, and complied with some kind of Superin∣tendency, or Episcopacy, as it is commonly stiled, may appear by his demands propounded to Master Francis Johnson in his Answer to his Reasons for Seperation, of which more anon. Divers other subjects he had set upon, and made entrance into, but afterward laid aside; whether for want of time and opportunity, or for what other causes, uncertain: among others, of the former sort, was a Refutation in Latine of Dutch Thomsons Diatribae, de amissione & intercisione justificationis & gratiae; which upon notice given him of Doctor Abbots undertaking of that task, he surceased; of this latter sort, in English, An Answer to Master Hookers Ecclesiasticall Po∣lity, a work so much cried up; and admired by the most, and it were greatly to be wished, that he had had life and leasure (had the Lord seen it good) to have gone through with it: but the Lord had otherwise disposed. In the third and last place, amids these his labours about, and suffering for those controversed matters, he bent his forces as much also another way; to wit, against Sectaries and Separatists. To
this purpose he had divers bickerings with them, and with some of the chief leaders among them,His zeal a∣gainst Secta∣ries and Sepa∣ratists. both by Conferences with them, and by writings against them and the courses taken by them, whereby many were stayed from going those wayes, and some also reclaimed and brought back again. Among other, at the request of a Gentle∣man of Lincolns-Inne, (for the stay of some that were staggering, and warping that way, that one Master Clifton had gone before them, seduced by Master Smith sometime Fellow of Christs Col∣ledge, who had thrice been baptized) having imparted to him a Re∣lation in writing, of what had past between Smith and Clifton, who by that their mutuall Collation pretended, as upon good and just grounds, being convict in conscience, to have past over to him; he wrote a large Discourse, wherein he discovered a great deal of weak∣nesse, as well in the Arguments of the one, as in the Answers of the other; thereby making it manifestly to appear, by what slight and ill-wrought twine rather then twist, that might have easily been snapt asunder; Master Clifton had been drawn away, and indu∣ced to leave his former station, and abandon his wonted profession; nor was his labour herein without its desired successe with those, for whom it was undertaken: As also thereby he took occasion to write A Defence of the Baptism of Infants, against the same parties. A∣gainst Master Francis Johnsons Reasons for Separation, he wrote a Book entituled, The Unreasonablness of Separation, and that upon this occasion. One that was deemed to be a man of an ingenuous disposition, was earnestly solicited by some with whom he conversed, to withdraw from our Congregations, and seeming to be much per∣plexed with Master Johnsons Arguments, was yet perswaded by some of his discreet Friends, to do nothing inconsiderately in a businesse of that concernment and consequence, but to consider seriously first of it, and have conference with some grave and godly Ministers, such as he deemed as well judicious as consciencious; whereby it might be descri∣ed, whether the grounds that he was in this course intended to go upon, were such as would endure triall or no; this advice of theirs was hearkened unto, and choice made by himself of Master Bradshaw and another, whom he conceived to be both understanding and moderate men.A Disputation. The place for conference was agreed upon to be in a common Friends house, and the meeting intended to be very private, not above two or three of that party, besides himself, the two Ministers and those of the house; but such of them whose presence alone he desi∣red, having acquainted divers others of their complices therewith, a multitude of them intruded themselves. Now in regard of such an unexpected company, it was deemed meet to proceed the more wa∣rily. And the party in the conference principally concerned, being put to his choice, whether he would Argue or Answer, was willing rather to Argue, and to make use of Master Johnsons Arguments, then to frame others of his own: that which very well pleased those of the separating side, as deeming Master Johnsons Arguments un∣answerable.
To prevent mis-reports, it was mutually agreed, that two persons, one of either side, should write down each Argument, as it was propounded, and each Answer, as it was returned thereunto, and should read audibly, what had passed in the prosecution of any Ar∣gument at the close of it, before entry upon a new, which was accord∣ingly done; and so many of Master Johnsons Reasons discussed as the straits of time would permit; in pursuit whereof was so evidently shewed how grossely Master Johnson had abused divers passages of Scripture, quoted for proof of those propositions, whereunto he had affixed them, that the whole company of them were exceedingly puz∣led with it, and some of them to save their Champions credit, would fain have fastned some fault upon the Printers, but could not well find how to do it. The evening coming on, the debate ceased for that day: and Copies on either side taken, being read, collated, and interchangeably delivered, the conference was adjourned till after∣noon the next day, what time the other Arguments were to be scanned. But the party, whom the businesse concerned, being per∣swaded by the rest of them, (as it seemed) to desist, did the next morning make known his unwillingnesse for some pretended causes to go on; and so it brake off. Howbeit Master Bradshaw having wa∣ded so farre in examination of Master Johnsons Reasons, was much importuned to proceed on therein, and to go through with the rest, considering how needfull a work it was, and how usefull it might prove. Which being at length drawn unto, and that the rather because Ma∣ster Johnson had fetcht some Arguments from grounds laid by him in that Treatise against Conformity, which it stood Master Bradshaw up∣on therefore to consider of, and give satisfaction unto; that which was drawn up by him, after perusall and approbation of some, on whose judgment he much relied, was by their advice sent over to Master Ames, who with an Epistle of his own prefixed, caused it to be printed in those parts, where he then abode. Neither was there any Reply e∣ver returned unto it, in defence of Master Johnson, either by himself, while he lived, or by any other in his behalf, so long as Master Brad∣shaw survived; only many years after Master Bradshaws decease, an attempt was made against it by one Master Can of Amsterdam, which was not long after returned back upon its Author by a Friend of the deceased. And indeed to Separation he was ever very adverse, and to withdraw∣ing from the publick places of Assembly, or from any part of Gods Worship there used. To which purpose shall be related out of his pa∣pers in his own words the ensuing passages; delivered by him in a Sermon at Longford on Matth. 5.1. It is the great mercy of God to∣ward us, that we have no cause to seek the word in deserts and wildernesses, in woods and caves and desolate mountains; but such worthy edifices as these to assemble in, dedicated only to this use. And where Gods people have by publick authority such places as these appointed and allowed ordi∣narily to assemble and meet in, we are fouly at least to suspect those As∣semblies,
and the worship done therein, which forsake those places, and fly into woods and deserts. It is true, that among the Jews at this time there was the Temple, and besides sundry Synagogues, answeriing to these Churches of ours; and which is more, the doors of the Pulpits were ge∣nerally open to Christ himself; and yet our Saviour often taught in other places, but this was upon extraordinary occasions, such as seldome or ne∣ver fall out with us; and so carried by our Saviour, that there was no Schisme or Separation made by him, or any of his speciall Disciples or fol∣lowers, from the Assemblies then established. And after concerning the places of Assembly themselves: It is indeed an honour, that those which are in Authority and ability, should do to the Worship of God, to see that comely and seemly places be dedicated and separated from other common uses thereunto; and it is a disgrace and contempt to Gods Worship, when men that may remedy it, care not how base and contemptible the place of Gods Worship is; when men have not that care of the place, where the holy Assembly of God meets, as they have of their barns and stables. As al∣so concerning some circumstances of Gesture used in them; From Christ sitting to teach, we learn in such externall behaviour to follow our Savi∣ours example; that is, in matters not doubtfull, and controversal, at least to conform our selves to such outward fashions as are generally used in those times, and that Church wherein we live. For example, in the like case; It is the general custom in our Church, that the Ministers preach standing in a seat higher then the People, and bare-headed: and this ge∣sture is no peculiar gesture, but borrowed from the common practice of O∣rators and such persons as make speeches to solemn Assemblies. It's meet therefore in such cases, that we should not be singular and odde, but con∣form to the received fashion of the Church. So that if we should sit and preach as Christ did, we should not conform to Christ; because we should cross that, which was the ground why Christ sate. Lastly, concerning re∣pair to all parts of Gods service, from those words; And his Disciples came to him, &c. This also is a matter of order, that, as much as may be, divine Worship should begin, when the Congregation is assembled and come together. Therefore the Members of an Assembly should make more conscience then usually they do of coming together sooner. I urge this the rather, because it is a general fault in our Assemblies, not committed only by them, that care not which end of Religion goeth forward, but ge∣nerally of most, that so they come to some part of Gods Worship, it is well enough, especially if they can come time enough to the beginning of the Sermon. Hence many times the Minister with the Clerk are fain to per∣form a great part of the publick Worship of God alone, or with one or two at the most, and the rest of the Church come dropping in one after ano∣ther at their own leasure; as though the publick prayers of the Church, and reading the Scriptures were a Worship that concerned the Minister, and Clerk only, and not the whole Church. This is the rather related, and here inserted, because not published, to manifest the moderation of the man, notwithstanding so much hard measure as he sustained from the hands of those, who so grievously abused the power they had in those times.
Thus have you a rude and crude delineation of this blessed and faith∣full Servant of Gods course and race, whose life was indeed as a con∣tinuall peregrination here upon earth; extracted, partly from Letters written to him by others, communicated, for the better making up of this module, by Master Samuel Hildersham, Pastor of the Church at West-Felton in Shropshire, Sonne to that famous man of pious memo∣ry Master Arthur Hildersham, and Master John Bradshaw, at present Minister of the Word at Echingham in Sussex, Sonne to this worthy Champion of Christ Jesus, both genuine heirs of their Parents best parts; and partly from relations of his own and others of good credit, his Letters especially to a bosome Friend, whom he was wont from time to time thereby to acquaint with most occurrents of note that befell him, or did any way concern him, while they lived at a distance. It might have been more exactly and intirely performed, had not some Letters of his been lost, and a bundle of others to him miscarried, torn by Rats in his absence from the place where they lay, the losse whereof in a Letter he much laments, and wishes that as many of his Books, to save them, had undergone the like ill-usage. His death was much lamented, as by all that knew his parts, and how usefull he might farther have been to Gods Church, had the Lord been pleased to lengthen out the line of his life; so more especially by the well-affected of that Family, whereunto he had adhered; but in a degree farre above the rest by the head thereof, Mistresse Katharine Re∣dich the relict of Master Alexander Redich, deprived now of a second stay, and principal support, for spiritual helps especially, since her Husbands decease; a very tender-hearted Gentlewoman, much addi∣cted to hospitality, and of very remarkeable devotion and piety, report∣ed by those who were inwardly acquainted with her more retired courses, to have been wont constantly to spend privately twice a day, at several set times an hour at least, in meditation and prayer mixed oft with many tears. She good soul, was so affected with his departure, and so feelingly apprehensive of her own losse thence ensuing, that al∣beit she survived him about, if not above some twelve years; yet was it observed by those that conversed with her, that to her dying day, she could very seldome with dry eyes, either speak of him, or hear him spoken of by others; that which made divers forbear speaking of him, what they well might, in her presence, for the renewing of her grief. Nor was her hearty affection to him, and due esteem of him manifested in such kind of expressions alone, (where, in even counterfeits, though not so constantly, yet can at sometimes exceed) but it was made to appear in beneficence to her ability, and in carefull provision to her power for those he left behind him; for what by her Husband was in∣tended, though she met with many obstructions in the pursuit of it, the state was so entangled, she at length got made good, and setled accord∣ing to his desire. And for his eldest Sonne, (for he left three, where∣of two yet survive, and a Daughter,) being set apart for a Scholar, she maintained him at Grammar-School, untill he was fitted for the
University, and at the University in part also, so long as she lived. With those in general, among whom he lived, and that knew him but at a distance, he left behind him the estimation of one very studious, humble, plain, honest, loving, free, liberal, charitable and compassionate. Very studious they deemed him, because they seldome saw him walk∣ing abroad without a Book in his hand; and reading usually, if alone, on it, as he walked, though he walked commonly somewhat fast, being therein farthered through the quicknesse of his eye, and the steadinesse of his hand. And for his humility, it so readily offered it self to the eye in his whole deportment, that they could not but take notice of it, reading it as written in text letters, therein, that saw ought at all in him. A plain man he was, as Jacob, without welt or gard; and a plain-deal∣ing man, as Nathaniel, without craft or guile; free from all courtship, either for counterfeit, or complement. Among the meaner sort he was the more beloved, because, though his means were but mean and scant, yet they perceived him to be of a free and liberal disposition; and were willing therefore to work with him ordinarily before any o∣ther,His Charity. because he used to give them somewhat above their hire or agree∣ment, which few others did. His charitable mind and tender-hearted∣nesse many waies manifested it self. It hath been known, that he hath borrowed money, when he had none about him, or by him, to relieve some that have been in want; and to have been as carefull to repay it, as forward to part with it. While he was at Chatham, some gallies that had sometime been built for service, and lay a long time after there idle, being found unusefull for our Seas; yet being then on foot, and some put into them; he walked down one day with some company to see the manner of them: which when he had viewed, it seemed to him so dis∣mal a sight, to see men, Christian men, put to such kind of servitude, that he could not endure to behold it without tears, and having given them a little money, so left them, returning back in a very sad and pensive moode. Yea, he was one of those, whom Solomon speaks of, whose commiseration reacheth even to the bruit beasts, which he could not endure to see unmercifully used: and would oft say he was perswa∣ded that men took too much liberty to themselves in killing and mis∣using some, even contemptible creatures, without cause. Riding home∣ward sometime with his Sonne behind him, whom he had taken out with him, the waies being bad and deep, and the beast that bare them travelling heavily and wearisomely, he took occasion thereby to enter into a discourse to the lad behind him, what hardship the poor unrea∣sonable creature was put to, to be serviceable to us, what misery such sustained for mans sinne; and so affectionately he spake of it, that to his Sonne, whom he spake to, he seemed to weep with it. He may be thought to have had some presage of his end, approach∣ing, before his last accesse to the City. For it is reported by his Sonne now in the Ministry, and treading in his Fathers steps, that being very earnest in soliciting of him, that he might then go up to London with him, which since he sucked, it seems he had never seen, he willed him,
not to be so desirous to see London; for whensoever he saw London, he should see it to his cost. And to his great grief indeed he did, coming up with his Mother a heavy Widow, not long after his Fathers depar∣ture hence, and funerall rites here performed. We shall close all, with that free and ingenuous Character, which that Illustrious late Bishop of Norwich, his old, true and loving Friend (he is pleased so to stile himself in some Letters to him) truly giveth of himself: He was, saith he, of a strong brain, and a free spirit;Doctor Halls character of him. not suffering himself for small differences of judgment to be alienated from his Friends; to whom notwithstanding his seeming austerity, he was very pleasing in his conversation, being full of witty and harmlesse urbanity: he vas very strong and eager in arguing, hearty in his friendship, regard∣less of the world, a despiser of complement, a lover of reality, full of di∣gested learning, and excellent notions; a painfull labourer in Gods work, and now, no doubt, gloriously rewarded. This Life was drawn up by my Reverend, Learned, and worthy Friend Mr. Thomas Gataker of Rederich.
The Life of Master Richard Stock, who died Anno Christi, 1626. His birth and breeding.RIchard Stock was born at York, and after he was throughly furnished with Countrey Learning, he went to Cambridge at the age of eighteen or nine∣teen years, as most in those Northen parts in those times used to do; where he was admitted into St. Johns Colledge, and after a while was chosen Scholar of the House. At this time Dr. Whittaker was Master of St. Johns (under whom his younger Brother had a Sisers place) who favoured Mr. Stock very much for his ingenuity, industry and proficiency in his Studies. There he remained till he had taken his degree of Master of Arts, at which time he had had a fellowship, but that his Countrey was full; whereupon he left the Colledge,His remove from Cam∣bridge. and lived some space of time with Sir Edmund or Edward Cope, at Cannons Ashby in Northamptonshire; from whence he afterwards removed to the Lady Lane at Burton on the water in Gloucestershire, to be her Chaplain. Before he left the University he was designed to a Fellowship in Sid∣ney Colledge, then intended and beginning to be built, but having long discontinued before the building was accomplished, he had then no mind to return to the University again. His coming to London.But coming up to London he was chosen Lecturer at Austins in Wat∣ling-street, after which he preached twice every Lords day at Mildreds Bredstreet, during the life of an old man who had the charge there: Whence he removed a little higher to All-hallows, where he continued preaching constantly, one Mr. Edmunds retaining the charge, but by reason of age and infirmities accompanying it, unable to Officiate and discharge the place himself. His Ministry was so gratefull and accept∣able to the people, that after the death of Mr. Edmunds, the Pastorall charge of that place was conferred upon him, which he held to his dy∣ing day. His marriage.Being setled there he married a Wife yet surviving, by whom he had three daughters. He was a grave and reverend Father in the English Church, a faith∣full Minister and Servant of Jesus Christ,His character by Mr Gataker. and a vigilant Pastor over his Congregation. His life and courses and constant labour in the work
Mr. STOCK
of the Lord were well known through the whole City of London; wherein he constantly continued the work of his Ministry by the space of about thirty two years. During his abode in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, even from his first beginnings,His study of Humanity. he was of eminent note for his unwearied industry, and singular proficiency in those studies of humanity, that are as handmaids to Divinity, and help to lay a good ground for any future Profession. So that his care was to inter∣twine piety and humanity the one with the other, that as web and woof they ran on ever along together through the whole course of his stu∣dies. Nor was he only carefull of this practise himself, but (accord∣ing to that of the Apostle,Heb. 10.24. . Observe one another to whet on to godliness and well doing;) he was no lesse forward to incite others to the like practice: Yea, not only to incite them thereunto, but to assist them therein, and to afford what helps he could (which well also he could do) unto any that were desirous, yea or but willing to embrace them, so that many of his Friends had cause to blesse God that ever they came acquainted with him. In a word, whilest he stayed in the Colledge he gave before hand e're he came to it, evident signes of one likely to prove a skillfull Master-builder in Gods work, and a winner of many souls unto God. Nor was he one of those rath-ripe wits, that promise fair in the blossome, but fail in the fruit; that like Comets, blaze brighter then the fixed Starres for a time, but after a while vanish and come to naught, the matter of them being either wholly spent or dispersed. But his proceedings in publick were correspondent to his beginnings in private. When it pleased God to call him out, and to set him apart to that imployment, that he had ordained him to before, he proved a painfull and faithfull Minister of Jesus Christ; a skilfull and powerfull dispenser of Gods Word. And if any proof hereof be desired, Not to insist upon his constant and incessant imployments with generall ap∣probation and applause of those that were Religious and judicious, continued for so many years (as aforesaid) together;His painful∣nesse. not a Sabboth intermitted, wherein (if health served) he preached not twice, either in his own charge (where he was most frequent) or elsewhere abroad, besides his Catechizing of the younger sort in the week dayes at cer∣tain times, and other such Offices as to the Pastorall function are ne∣cessarily annexed, and are privately to be performed; wherein also he was no lesse diligent then in the execution of his publick Ministry. Not to insist (I say) upon this (which yet were sufficient proof of it) as the Apostle saith of the Corinthians, You are the seal of my Apostleship, and my Letters Testimonial.1 Cor. 9.2. The effectu∣alnesse of his Ministry. So may it well be said of this reverend man of God, Many Christian souls having professed themselves to have had their first effectual Calling and Conversion from him; the like whereunto few others could say at that time; besides the mul∣titudes of those which have acknowledged themselves to have been edified, built up, and bettered by him, are the seal of his Calling, and of Christ speaking in and by him, and not verball or vocall, but
reall Letters testimoniall of the efficacy of his Ministry, through Gods blessing upon the same. One saith that the Apostles were like Fishermen, the succeeding Mi∣nisters like Huntsmen. The Apostles like Fishermen that caught ma∣ny at one draught: The succeeding Ministers like Huntsmen, that with much toil and clamour running up and down all day, scarce take one Deer or Hare e're night. And such is the hard condition of many of Gods Servants, that notwithstanding the faithfull and painfull dis∣charge of their duty, yet are enforced to complain with the Prophet, Who hath believed our report?Isa. 53.1. and 49.4. and, I have laboured in vain. Scarce able to produce, or instance in any one, of whom they can with some good ground of assurance presume that they have gained at least him unto God. But well might this worthy Servant of Christ, through Gods blessing upon his labours, stand out and say, not of one or two, but of troops,Isa. 8.18. 1 Cor. 4.15. in the words of the same Prophet, Behold I, and the children that God hath given me. And with the Apostle, These have I be∣gotten unto God by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Yea more then that, many famous lights in Gods Church, and faithfull Ministers of his Word do professe to have lighted their can∣dles at his Lamp; yea some of them to have received their first begin∣nings, not of light only, but of spiritual life and grace (without which all light, be it never so great, is no light, but meer darknesse) from his Ministry. It's no small honour for a man to win, if it were but any one soul (He hath saved a soul, saith St. James, as a matter worthy the glo∣rying in.Jam. 5.20.) For to win a soul, is to win more then the whole world be∣sides is worth. But what an honour then is it to be, not a winner of a soul, but a winner of such as prove winners of souls; and so by win∣ning of some one immediatly, to be a mediate winner of many others by him? They shall shine (saith he) as the Heavens, that instruct; and they that convert others as the Starres.Dan. 12.3. And how gloriously then (sup∣pose we) doth this blessed man of God shine now in the Kingdom of God, that was an instructer of those that are instructers of others, that was a converter of those that are converters of others them∣selves! Luk. 1.16.Many then did this worthy man (as the holy Ghost saith of John the Baptist) win unto God. Many he won, though all he could not, that was more then the Apostle Paul was able to do. The Jews op∣posed themselves against his Ministry, and blasphemed, Act. 18.6. and 2 Thes. 3.2. All men (saith he) have not faith; But yet many he won,Rom. 10.1. and his desire and endeavour (with the same Apostle) was to win all, his own Flock especially, of whom he used to protest, That it was more comfort to him to win one of them then twenty others. But some refractory spirits (as what Minister doth not?) he met withall, that would not be reclaimed; that by their crosse-grain carriage and behaviour, were as thornes in his eyes, and as goads in his sides, and proved a vexation of heart to this faithfull Servant of Christ. But against such persons, not only the dust of the Ministers
feet, but the sweat of his brows, and the tears of his eyes,The danger of unprofitabe hearers. and his strength wasted amongst them, and his spirits spent upon them, shall one day rise up in judgment against them, to make their doom the heavier, if it be not prevented by speedy and unfeigned repen∣tance. But because a man may win others, and yet lose himself, he may save others, and yet not save himself; They may beget life in others that have none themselves. The Word may work by a man, and yet not work in him. He may be like a stone-gutter (saith St. Austin) or a leaden pipe, that conveyeth water into a Garden, yet receives no be∣nefit thereby it self. Or like the hand on the high-way that pointeth others the way, but never walks therein it self. Or like an Harp (saith the Heathen) that maketh others melody, or a Trumpet that sounds loud, but heareth nothing it self. Or like to the water in Baptism (saith Gregory) that helps men to Heaven-ward, but afterwards is poured down the sink it self. He may preach to others, and not preach to himself. He may convert others, and yet himself prove a castaway. Though yet indeed it's seldome seen,1 Cor. 9.27. that much good is done where a due consent is wanting between tongue and hand, between lip and life. It was far otherwise with this reverend man of God; he was none of those that say and do not; but as he taught so he wrought; his Do∣ctrine and practice concurred, and went hand in hand together.Mat. 23.3. His exempla∣ry life. His actions were, though silent, yet reall and effectual Sermons of that which he preached in the Pulpit. The course of his life was uniform with the tenour of his teaching; and both joyning and concentring in one, were a means to draw on many; who by the one alone probably had not been so easily won to Christ. In a word, for his teaching, many that were his constant Hearers, have given him a large testimony; and they that knew his conversation have done the like for his life. He was not a flash, one of those which shew all in a Sermon, or that spend all upon one curious good work that they mind to make their Master-piece. But both in his life and teaching he held on such a constant tenour, that the more men, especially such as were wise and judicious, were acquainted with either, the more they reverenced and esteemed him for both. There are two things (saith one) that make a compleat man,What makes a compleat man. Inte∣grity and judgment; the one whereof is but lame and maimed without the other; and yet in few they use to meet together; yet there was an happy conjunction of them both in this worthy man. One sign where∣of will appear by the frequent practice of many who made use of him for to be an overseer of their last wills, and craved his assistance by way of direction for the disposall of their outward estates (and all know how cautious men use to be in that kind.) Another testimony of it was by those Reverend Brethren of the Ministry, as well as others, who either by Letters or otherwise, out of all parts of this Realm, did usually seek to him, as to one more then ordinarily able to give them satisfacti∣on for the resolution of their doubts.
What makes a compleat Mi∣nister.These two then made him a compleat man; but there is something more required to make a compleat Minister, viz. That he be able to speak his mind fitly (for what use can there be of a mute Messenger) and that he dare do it freely (for of whom is courage and freedom of speech more required then of Gods Messengers?) Nor was Mr. Stock defective in either. For as for the former, how well able he was, not to expresse only, but to urge and presse too;His manner of preaching. not to confirm alone, but to commend also that that he delivered with clear method, sound proof, choice words, fit phrases, pregnant similitudes, plentifull illustrations, pithy per∣swasions, sweet insinuations, powerfull enforcements, allegations of antiquity, and variety of good literature; that both the learnedest might receive satisfaction from him, and the very meanest and dullest might also reap benefit by him, and so as might well leave a deep im∣pression in the hearts and minds of the Hearers, they cannot be igno∣rant, that for any space of time heard him. In a word, in this kind he was such an one as many strove to imitate, but few attained to equa∣lize him. Again, Because it is in vain to be able to speak to good purpose, if a man dare not use his tongue: if (as one said of the Eretrians) he be∣like the sword-fish, that hath a sword in his head, but no heart in his body: or like a cowardly companion, that carries a weapon to ruffle with, but dares not draw or make use of it, though just occasion be offered. For his freedom of speech therefore in reproving of sin, and that even to the faces of the greatest, whether in publick or private, when occasion ; many even now living are able to testifie, and some accidents made it more publickly known, then his desire was that it should have been. His zeal for the Sabbath.He was very zealous and earnest for the reformation of some pro∣phnations of the Sabbath. Wherein he prevailed also for the altera∣tion of something offensive in that kind, as well with the main body of the City, as with some particular Societies; as for their meetings upon St. Thomas day. He perswaded also some of the companies to put off their solemn Festivals from Mundaies to Tuesdaies, that so the Lords day might not be prophaned by their preparations for those Feasts. His prudence also appeared in his order of Catechizing the young persons of his Parish;His prudence. by examining them apart, the youths on one day, and the maids on another. The riper and forwarder first in the presence of the ruder and rawer, and the ruder and rawer apart by themselves, when the former were departed, that so they might reap what fruit they could by hearing the others, and yet might receive no discouragement by being heard of them. His care of his Family.Neither was his pious diligence and care lesse seen in the Religious instruction and education of those that were under his private charge, as Children and Servants, for whom his care was greater to provide for their souls then their bodies, for their spirituall then for their tem∣porall
estate (yet not neglecting that neither) by bringing them up in the nurture and fear of the Lord. In a word, time and speech would sooner fail then matter, If I should proceed to write of all the gifts, graces and praise-worthy qualities of this eminent servant of Christ. In his publick Ministry his usuall manner was upon occasion to quote the sayings of many of the Fathers, which some taking excep∣tions at, he thus Apologized for himself,His Apology for quoting the Fathers. If any (saith he) take ex∣ceptions at my alledging of Fathers (as some have taken offence at my using of Reasons to confirm the Doctrine, but with very little Reason as I suppose) I must pray them, to give me leave to use them, till I can see that unlawfulnesse which they affirm to be in the practice, and to censure me in charity for the use of them, as I do them for not using them. I will look as well to my heart in the use of them, as God shall enable me; and when I shall see the hurt of them, I will endeavour as much to avoid them. In the mean time I will make as much use as I can of them, to edifie the Church of God. In his younger dayes being called to preach at Pauls Crosse, he dealt somewhat plainly and freely in taxing some abuses in the City in un∣equall Ratings, whereby the meaner sort were overburthened,His faithful∣nesse in repro∣ving sin. whilest the rich and great ones escaped with more ease. This was ill taken by many of them, who checked him as over-rash for dealing in such matters, calling him a green-head: but in his latter daies being called to preach at the Lord Maiors Election, he fell again upon the same sub∣ject, and told them a gray-head spake now what a green-head had done formerly. But to draw to an end together with his end; the end of his labours, but the beginning of his rest; the end of his work, but the receit of his reward. In the aformentioned and such like imployments, pub∣lick and private, he spent his time:His last sick∣nesse. He spent his strength like a Torch or Taper, wasting and consuming himself for the profit and benefit of others, having his work with God then, and his reward for it from God afterwards. And for these imployments sake was it principally, that he desired recovery of health and strength: Unto the perfor∣mance whereof also (though therein injurious to himself, and con∣trary to his own desires) he oft strained himself, and that in the midst of his infirmity and weaknesse, not to uncertain hazard only, but to evident impreaching and impairing of either. What is the sign (saith Hezekias, when he promised recovery) that I shall go up to the house of the Lord? as desiring continuance of life, and recovery of health for no one end more then that. And therefore also was it that this worthy man was desirous of recovery, that he might repair to Gods house again, and that he might return to Gods work again. To which purpose the very last Lords day before his disease, having after many relapses recovered a little strength, he made shift to get out to a neighbour Congregation, there to joyn with Gods people in pub∣lick performance of such solemn service of God, as that day is usual∣ly spent and imployed in. And having held out with them to the end
in both parts of the day, he rejoyced much therein that he was able so to do, the rather because he thereby conceived some good hope, that he should be strong enough ere long to return to his wonted work and imployment again. But the Lord saw it better (for his will appears by his work) to put an end to his incessant labours here,His death. and to transhate him to the place of his endlesse rest elsewhere, and that upon the twentieth day of April, Anno Christi 1626. having been Preacher at All-Hallows Bredstreet during the spence of thirty two years,1 Tim. 4.12. where he was an exmple to his people in word, in inconversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. But as one saith, An exact face is seldom drawn but with much disadvantage; so neither is his cha∣racter; so that we may well say as one doth of Basil, There wanted but his own tongue to commend him with.
The Life of Master Richard Rothwel, who died Anno Christi, 1627. RIchard Rothwel was born in Lancashire, at, or near Bolton in the Moors, about the year of our Lord,His birth, and education. 1563. After he took the Ministry upon him, and God gave him another heart, he disposed his tem∣poral estate amongst his friends, and , 1 Cor. 9.11.14. He lived of the Gospel. His education was in the Schools, and afterward in Cambridge; in the one he attained to an exact knowledge of the tongues, (especially Greek and Hebrew, wherein he was a Critick) and in the other of the Arts, so that he became a skil-Linguist, subtil Disputant, copious Orator, and of a deep insight into any kind of knowledge, Humane or Divine. In this first course of his studies appeared presently to his observers, the buds and blossomes of that fame which after he attained; for he had a prompt wit, a quick apprehension, a clear understanding, a sound judgement, a ready speech, and a strong memory. All these seldome meet in one man, but did in him very eminently,His natural, and acquired parts. and were improved by diligent study, which (out of a desire of learning and knowledge) he continued to his last without wearinesse. His constitution of body, and moral endowments of minde, were great props and supporters to his intellectual habits, Gratior est vir∣tus veniens è corpore pulchro. This is not the ordinary lot of Scholars; He was tall, well set, of great strength of body and activity, of a stern countenance, of invincible courage, of approved valour, and of a very goodly and majestick presence: Grief nor any misery could ever break him, but joy would presently melt him into tears. He was of a generous spirit and deportment, yet withall very humble and courteous; His language was sententious and proverbial. I have heard many others say, what I must needs my self, Nunquam illi accedo quin doctior evadam; I never came to him, but I went the learneder from him. He had a great dexterity in communicating his mind to ano∣ther, and speaking to his understanding, God gave him a great inlet into the hearts of men. After many years spent in the University,His entring in∣to the Mini∣stry. he betook himself to the Ministry, and was ordained Presbyter by Doctor Whitgift then Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, who forbade him medling with interpretation of Moses Types, the Book of Canticles, Daniel, and the Revelation. Which then he thought himself, as the Bishop did, were not so useful for him to study as some other Scriptures.
But alas! all these natural dispositions, intellectual habits, personal deportments were but as so many weapons in the hands of a mad man: Judge how able by these to resist the truth; for he remained some years without any change of heart, or sensible work of grace upon his soul, but preached learnedly as they called it, and lived vainly;His course of life before his Conversion. abhorring debauchery, and debauched companions, through the height of his spirit, but gave himself to hunting, bowling, shoot∣ing, more the became a Minister of the Gospel; and sometimes he would swear Faith and Troth, and in his passion greater blasphemies. I have heard him tell that there were two Knights in Lancashire fallen out, and great fewd betwixt them; That the one had a very good Park with store of Deer; That the other had excellent good Fish-ponds, and store of Fish: He robbed the Park of the one, and presented what he got to the other; and the Fish-ponds of the other, and presented the Fish to his adversary; thus he pleased himself in the daies of his vanity, with such kind of follies. In doing this one night, the Keeper met with him, his Dog having killed a Buck; at the fall of the Buck the Keeper came in with his fauchion and staff, and met Master Rothwel who had a staff also; They fell from words to blows; He got the Keeper down, bound him by the thumbs, and drew him up to his full height, that he could but touch the ground with his toes, and so left him tied to a tree till next morning, when others found him and loosed him. At length God pleased, who separated him from his Mothers womb, as he did Paul, and called him by his grace to reveal his Son in him. Which be∣cause it was famous, and he himself afterwards proved the means of the Conversion of so many, I shall set it down as I remember I have heard him speak it. He was playing at Bowles amongest some Papists and vain Gentle∣men, upon a Saturday, somewhere about Rachdale in Lancashire; there comes into the green to him one Master Midgley, a grave and godly Minister of Rachdale, whose praise is great in the Gospel, though far inferiour to Master Rothwel in parts and learning;The means, and manner his Conversi∣on. he took him aside and fell into a large commendation of him, at length told him what pi∣ty it was, that such a man as he should be a companion for Papists, and that upon a Saturday, when he should be preparing for the Sabbath-day. Master Rothwel sleighted his words, and checked him for his medling. Power of Prayer.The good old man left him, went home and prayed privately for him; Master Rothwel when he was retired from that company, could not rest, Master Midglys words struck so deep in his thoughts; The next day he went to Rachdale Church to hear Master Midgley, where it pleased God to blesse that Ordinance so, as Master Rothwel was by that Sermon brought home to Christ. He came after Sermon to Ma∣ster Midgley, thanked him for his reproof, and besought his direction and prayers, for he was in a miserable condition of nature; and under the spirit of bondage he lay for a time, till afterwards, and by Master Midgleys hands also he received The Spirit of Adoption,His Faith, and comfort. wherewith he
was so sealed, that he never lost his assurance to his dying day. Though he was a man subject to many temptations, the devil assaulting him ve∣ry much, yet God was mightily with him, that out of his own experience he was able to comfort many. He esteemed and counted Master Midg∣ley ever afterward for his spiritual Father. This makes me think upon Augustines speech to God, when he came to hear Ambrose preach: non ut Doctorem veni (but upon another account) ad eum; per te duce∣bar nescius, ut ad te per eum sciens ducerer.Confess. l. 5. c. 13, 14. So did the Lord by Master Midgleys plain kind of teaching, put forth the evidence of his spirit up∣on this mighty and learned Rabbi. Whether it was before or after this his Convesion that he went a Souldier,His going in∣to Ireland. and Chaplain to a Regiment under the Earl of Essex into Ireland, I know not; but there he was, and did very great things. And certainly his wisdome and courage were so eminent in him, that there were few of his Calling his equals, I think none at all his Supe∣riours. He now becomes another man, forsakes all his wonted courses and companions, preacheth in another manner then formerly, opens the depths of Satan, and deceitfulnesse of the heart, so as he was cal∣led the Rough Hewer.The efficacy of his Ministry. He had the power of God that went with his Mi∣nistry, when he preached the Law to make men tremble, yea some∣times to cry out in the Church: and when he preached the Gospel, he was another Barnabas, and had great skill in comforting afflicted con∣sciences. He studied now the point of Non-conformity, which was as the joynts in Ahabs armour, through which the Prelates hit, and depri∣ved so many godly and able Ministers in those times. In these Contro∣versies he was so well versed, that he satisfied many, and silenced any that disputed with him. He was so fixed in his judgment, that he would never either marry, (expecting daily persecution; and the word he used in all his Books, was Persecutio pignus futurae felicitatis;) nor take any Benefice, (though divers great livings were proffered him) because he would still say, My head is too big to get into a Church-door. But he betook himself first to a Chappel in Lancashire, as a Lectu∣rer,The places of his first em∣ployment. and afterward (to decline the storm of the Prelates) to be a Do∣mestick Chaplain to the Earl of Devonshire, and at hat time I first knew him, and came (I blesse God) acquainted with him. There now ran nothing more in his mind, but why the Bishop should forbid him preaching upon those Scriptures before mentioned; and he began to conceive that there was sure something there, could he find it,The study of the Prophesies. which would mightily batter bown their Hierarchy; He prayed there∣fore much to God, (wherein he was mighty) and studied them, and God opened those mysterious passages of his Book to him more then to other men, that he seldom preached abroad out of any other Scriptures, and did write an exact Commentary upon Moses Types, which he unveiled with very much profit and delight to the Reader; but that Book is lost to the great losse of Gods Church thereby.
Learned and godly Master Cotton enquired of me whether that or a∣ny thing else might not be found amongst his papers after his death I told him there was little found, but what was in Characters. He prayed me to send him what I could gather, to Boston, where men were that were expert in Characters. I did so, but I believe they could make nothing of them. That and some other of his learned and judi∣cious labours he hath lent out, I suppose, and I fear they will not be re∣covered. Learned men that have seen them, judge them a rare trea∣sure. His contests with the Bi∣shops.He had some contests with the Prelates, especially with Bishop Neal then of Litchfield, afterwards of Durham; in the which the Bishop, I dare say, was more afraid of him, then he was of the Bishop: But I for∣bear that story. At length he came to spend most part of his time in the Bishoprick of Durham, by means of an honourable and Elect Lady, the Lady Bowes, afterwards the Lady Darcy in the North. Of whom it was tru∣ly preached at her Funeral, (Alas, that it was at her Funeral) Whereso∣ever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world,Mat. 26.13. there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her. She gave about one thousand pounds per annum, to maintain Preachers where there were none,The Lady Bowes her great charity. nor any means for them, and all her Preachers were silenced men by reason of Non-conformity: Such as Master Baynes, Master Dike, &c. She would lay out all her interest to get them their liberty, and then she would dispose of them, where there needed in the North, or in the Peak in Darbyshire, or other places, and allow them pensions; O! That God would raise out of the ashes of this Phoenix some more such Mothers in Israel. Sir William Bowes her husband dying, his Fu∣nerals were kept at Bernards-Castle, where he had some honour: Ma∣ster Dike (Father of the Writers of that name) was then her houshold Chaplain, and went into the North to that Funeral; at his return he represented the state of the people destitute of a Minister to my Lady, who would have sent him thither; but he told her he durst not venture on so surly a People, but commended Master Rothwel to her. She sent to him, then at the Earl of Devonshires house, and proffered him this employment; His answer was, he would go thither, and if the people called him, he would then accept of her motion. At his first dayes labour, they all desired him, he returned to the La∣dy, and told her he would go; she replyed, though for their sakes she was glad, yet she was afraid to send him; understanding that they were of a fierce disposition, and having never heard the Gospel, might deal unkindly with him; he answered, Madam, If I thought I should never meet the devil there, I would never come there; he and I have been at odds in o∣ther places, and I hope we shall not agree there. He desired to have me with him, and with much ado prevailed; and so (I blesse God) he not only fitted me for the University, but was a means to bring me to the first saving knowledg of Christ; I remem∣ber, and shall do ever, the first Sermon and point which God blessed to
my soul for that purpose. I was about eight years his bed-fellow and eye witnesse of the great success he had in his Ministry there, and over all the Countrey, where he was worthily called, The Apostle of the North. The Lady allowed him fourty pounds per annum, and such as God wrought upon by his Ministry contributed to him, but he would not have a penny from any other. There was once in his absence collected 30. li. by Sir Talbot Bowes,His self-deni∣al. that lived there, from the people; but when he returned and knew it, he caused it to be restored to the Parties, that gave it, and told them, He sought them, not theirs. At his first entrance he had great opposition, and sometimes was way-laid to take away his life; but he overcame all that with his pa∣tience and courage,His patience, and courage. and at length his greatest enemies were afraid of him; and few Sermons, but it was believed, he gained some souls. His manner was to spend the forenoon at his Studies,His carriage amongst his people. and the after∣noon in going through his Parish, and conferring with his people; in which, as he excelled, so he gained much upon them; and within four years had so many judicious and experimental Christians, that they came from London, York, Richmond, New-Castle, and many other places, to see the order of his Congregation: And many lewd Gentle∣men came oft, ten or twelve miles to hear him, to carp and get some∣what to accuse him: many of which God took hold on, and they re∣turned, some convinced, and some converted.Special Provi∣dence. Neal (the said Prelate of Durham) bestirred himself, and outed many worthy men, and endea∣voured his removal. Once he sent three Pursivants to apprehend him, and promised them one hundred pounds, if they brought him.His persecuti∣on by Bishop Neal. He was then out of Town, and had notice by me of their purpose; a Gentleman being with him, one Master Israel Fielding, a true Israelite, desired him to go with him to his house, within a quarter of a mile of Bernards Castle, which was out of the Bishops jurisdiction: to whom he answered, I had thought you had been my friend: what is the devils great∣est name? I answered Belzebub. And what (saith he) is Belzebub? The Master of a flie: and if he be but so, what are these? Midges Gnats.: I will go therefore to my people, and let the devil do his worst. So he came and sent to the Pursivants to come to him, when they came, he took his sword in his hand, (which he alwaies rid with) and bad them Keep their distance and not come too near him, but if they would do their errand, let them come, for there was his supersedeas. God strook them amort, they had no spirit left in them to medle with him. He bad them go to their Lord, and tell him, if he had any thing to say to him, he would meet him on Bernards Castle bridge, (which parteth the shires) and if he could pull him over to him, let him take him: But, (saith he) do you serve a better Master, else he that sets you on work will pay you your wages; and so he left them. Not long after, I went to the University, and after eight years con∣tinuance there, came over into England upon some opportunities,His last sick∣nesse. and
stayed about half a year, ere I returned. When I came to Mansfield in Nottinghamshire,His last sick∣nesse. I found him there their Minister, and sick unto the death; at my coming he revived, and in the strength of that joy so far recovered, that within a week he went about the Town with me to di∣vers places; but relapsed, and engaged me to preach for him once the next Sabbath following, and in the afternoon at Mansfield Woodhouse, within half a mile of Mansfield. On friday we looked for no life from him, he was almost past his understanding; There came a drunken Vi∣car of Mansfield, one Master Brittaine to see him, and desired him now, that he was not like to live, to tell him what he thought of the Cere∣monies, he knew he was learned, and therefore would be glad to be in∣formed by him. Master Rothwel either understood not, or minded not what he said, but answered sometimes Yea, sometimes No, as he ap∣prehended. Master Brittain went away telling him he was satisfied, and reported in divers Ale-houses, and amongst his companions, that Master Rothwel recanted his judgment of Non-conformity. When he was gone, I desired the company to stay, the chamber be∣ing full, and I asked Master Rothwel if he knew who had been with him, and what he said to him? He answered, No: I told him it was Master Brittaine, and that he reported he had recanted his judgment. He answered, If I should do so, I were in a most miserable condition. No, (saith he) I have written a Treatise, and called the Ceremonies Dul∣cissima. And why? (said I) peradventure because as in the itch, scratching pleaseth, but draweth blood: at that he laughed, I asked him if I should send for Master Brittaine, and that he would declare his mind to him; he answered, no: If he come I shall prove him to be a very Knave; but he desired me to go to him, and let him know his mind, which I did, and took some understanding Gentlemen with me, that were present, and so (I thank God,) cleared Master Rothwel, both to Master Brittaine, and afterwards to all the Congregation publickly, from that wicked aspersion. The next day [Saturday] he had some lightning, and sate up in his chair, and discoursed freely, cheerfully and heavenly all that and the next day; some sent to enquire on the Sabbath how he did, he answer∣ed, I am well, and shall be well shortly; and whispering with me, said, Do you know my meaning?He foretels his death. I shall be with Christ ere long, but do not tell them so. He caused me to repeat my Sermon preached in the forenoon for him, after which, with tears in his eyes he laid his hands on my head, and lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and with a short Prayer blessed me: Then he bad me go to preach at Mansfield Woodhouse, and tarry there all night, (for he had promised it to one Master Dand there,) but to be sure to come when he sent for me. This he did next morning about six a clock, when I came I found him in pangs of death, he had known nor spoken to any of an hour before: the chamber was full, and one was praying for him; after Prayer, I spake to him, he turned about his head, took me by the hand, and bade me pray, pray; I desired a Reverend Minister to go to prayer again; Master Rothwel said, Pray you, pray you; I did so:
after that he smiled, Now (saies he) I am well: Happy is he that hath not bowed a knee to Baal; he bad us sing Psal. 120. he sung a while, but in the singing of the Psalm he died,His death. Anno Domini 1627. and in the year of his age 64. Thus have I given you as true an account as I could of this famous Champion of Christ, who notwithstanding his Non-conformity, may be called with Austin, Haereticorum Malleus, The Hammer of Hereticks, and with Ambrose, Orbis terrarum (Anglicarum) oculus. The eye as bright as any other in the English Orbe. Two things (amongst many others) I think worthy the inserting in∣to his life, which have been omitted in the fore-going story. The one is a strange sicknesse and recovery he had once at Bernards Castle. His sicknesse was a Vertigo capitis,His strange sicknesse, and recovery. he would have fourty fits at least in an hour, and every one of them accompanied with mischie∣vous temptations, which when the fit was over, he dictated, and I writ down; these held him about three weeks, in which time he had the ad∣vice of learned Physicians from London, York, New-Castle, Durham, and other places, they all jumped in their judgments, imputing it to much study, fasting, and inward trouble of spirit; their Prescriptions wrought kindly, but removed not his disease; He desired divers Chri∣stians to pray for him on a day prefixed, and promised to joyn with them as well as he could, with some others that should be with him, assuring them, That he was confident that disease would not he removed but by Prayer and Fasting. The morning of that day he had a fit continued four hours together upon him, and the devil set upon him all that while, with most dreadfull temptations,Satans malice. telling him he would make him the scorn of Religion, and every man should reproach it for his sake, that had before by his means looked towards it: That he should never preach more, but should blaspheme the name of God he had preached, with many like suggestions: God gave him courage, comfort and Victory over them all. The devil told him if he did fast and pray that day, he would torment and hinder him, &c. We met at the time appointed, and Master Rothwel would needs have me to perform the duty, which through Gods goodnesse I did, and the devil was not permitted to hin∣der or interrupt him or us, and God heard our Prayers,The power of prayer. so that he had never a fit after that; and the Sabbath-seven night following he preach∣ed, but after many wrestlings with Satan, who told him he would make him mad, and before all the people in the Pulpit make him a scorn if he did adventure to preach; Neverthelesse his Faith in Christ overcame his fear of Satan, and he preached with great assistance and comfort upon that text, Psal. 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Neverthelesse that sicknesse did so weaken his brain, that ever after he was enclining to some infirmities, Which love must cover. The other is a relation which I had from himself, and from divers o∣thers to whom the story was known, that are yet alive.His disposses∣sing of the devil. As well as I can recollect it, it is thus; There was one John Fox living about Not∣tingham,
who had no more learning then enabled him to write and read: This man was possessed with a devil, who would violently throw him down, and take away the use of every member of his body, which was turned as black as pitch in those fits, and then spake with an audible voice in him, which seemed sometimes to be heard out of his belly, sometimes out of his throat, and sometimes out of his mouth, his lips not moving. He lay thus (if I mistake not) some years: many prayers were put up to God for him, and great resort, especially of godly Ministers, to him: amongst the rest Master Bernard of Bat∣comb, then of Worksop; and Master Langley of Truswel, betwixt whom and John Fox, I have seen divers passages in writing, he relating by pen his temptations, and they giving answers when he was stricken dumb. As Master Rothwel was riding to see him, the Devil told all that were in the House, Yonder comes Rothwel: but I will make a fool of him before he goes. The people looked forth, and saw him coming a∣about a quarter of a mile from the house. As soon as he entered the room, the Devil said, Now Rothwel is come: and as some say spake thus. Rothwel, Thou sayest there is no possession, what thinkest thou now? Here is a man opens not his lips, and yet he speaketh? And after a while he further said: Devil: Say nothing to me of this man, for I tell thee he is damned; and he added thereto many fearfull blasphemies. Rothwel: Thou art a lyer, and the father of lies; nor art thou so well acquainted with the mind of God concerning this man, which makes thee thus to torment him; therefore I believe thee not, I believe he shall be saved by Jesus Christ. Devil: He is a murtherer, and thou knowest no murtherer must come into Heaven. Rothwel: Thou liest again, for David murdered, and is in Heaven; and the Jews with wicked hands crucified the Lord of Glory, yet both Christ prayed for them, and Peter exhorts them to repentance, that their sins may be blotted out. Devil: But this man hath not, cannot, shall not repent. Rothwel: If he had not, thou wouldst not have told him so; but if he have not, I believe God will give him repentance, and thou shalt not be able to hinder it. Devil: Thou art a murtherer thy self, and yet talkest thou thus? Rothwel: Thou liest again, I have fought the Lords Battels against his known enemies, the idolatrous and bloody Papists in Ireland▪ Rebels to the Queen my Sovereign, by whose authority I bore armes against them; otherwise I have killed no man. Devil: (Swore and blasphemed) Thou didst murther one this day, as thou camest hither, and there is one behind thee will justifie it. Rothwel looked over his shoulder, and with that the devil set up a hideous laughter, that nothing could be heard for a great while, and then said:
Devil: Look you now, did not I tell you I would make Rothwel a fool? and yet it is true, thou didst murther one this day; for as thou camest over the Bridge (which he named) there I would have killed thee, and there thy horse trod upon a slie and killed it. Master Rothwels horse you must know stumbled there, it seems the devil had power to cause it, but without hurt either to Master Rothwel or his horse. Rothwel: Thou hast oft beguiled me, I hope God will in time give me wisdome to discern, and power to withstand all thy delusions; and he it is that hath delivered me out of thy hands, and will I doubt not al∣so deliever this poor man. The Devil blasphemed fearfully, quoted many Scriptures out of the Old and New Testament, both in Hebrew and in Greek, cavilled and played the Critick, and backed his Allegations with Sayings out of the Fathers and Poets in their own language, which he readily quoted, so that the company trembled to hear such things from one that understood no learning, and that moved neither tongue nor lip. Master Bothwel was mightily enabled by God to detect the devils so∣phistry. Devil: What stand I talking with thee? All men know thou art BOLD ROTHWEL, and fearest no body, nor carest for words, therefore I will talk to thee no more, (that name he carried to his grave; They would say, That is he the devil called BOLD ROTHWEL.) Rothwel (turning to the people) said, Good people, you see the goodnesse of our God, and his great power; though the devil made a fool of me now, through my weaknesse, God hath made the devil dumb now; do you see how he lyeth? therefore let us go to prayer; that God who hath made him dumb, will (I doubt not) drive him out of this poor man. Devil raged, blasphemed, and said, And wilt thou go to prayer? If thou do, I will make such a noise, that thy prayer shall be distracted, and thou knowest God will not hear a distracted prayer: but thou hast got a device, because thou wilt not be distracted with thy eyes in prayer, thou winkest (so he alwaies did,) but if thou pray, I will pull out thy eyes. Rothwel: I look to find thee as great an enemy in this duty now, as I have done heretofore, but I fear not thy threat, I know thou art li∣mitted; God heareth the Prayers of the upright, hath promised to give his Spirit to supply infirmities, therefore in confidence of his pro∣mise, and powerfull assistance of his Spirit, and in the name and interces∣sion of his Son Jesus Christ we will go to Prayer. They did so, Mr. Rothwel kneeled by the bed on which the poor man lay; The Devil for a quarter of an hour together, or more, made a horrid noise; neverthelesse Master Rothwels voice was louder then the Devils. After a while the Devil roared at Master Rothwels face (this was the first motion of any part of the mans body) Master Rothwel opened his eyes, met, and brought down the hand, which he held with great ease, two men being scarce able to hold the other hand: Prayer
was still continued; at length the Devil lay silent in the man, and after that departed from him. The man fetcht divers deep sighs, insomuch as they thought he had been expiring, but his colour returned to him, and the use of all his members, senses, and understanding; and at the next petition, he said (to the glory of God, and amazement, but comfort of all the company,) AMEN: and so continued to repeat his Amen to every petition: Prayer was now turned into thansgiving, and so conclud∣ed. After prayer, John Fox said, Good Master Rothwel, leave me not, I shall not live long; for the Devil tels me he will choak me with the first bit of meat that I eat. Master Rothwel answered, Wilt thou beleeve the Devil that seeks thy destruction, before thou wil trust in God through Jesus Christ, that seeks thy salvation? Hath not God by his Almighty power dispos∣sed him? Had he had his will, thou hadst been in Hell before now; but he is a Lier, and as he is not able to hinder thy souls life, so neither shall he be able to destroy the life of thy body. Wherefore get me something ready (saith he) for him, and I will see him eat before I go, and will crave a blessing upon it. When it was brought, eat saith Master Rothwel, and fear not the Devil, shewing him that he might do it in faith of that Ordinance by which God appoints meat for means to preserve life, and urged that place of Jairus Daughter restored to life: He commanded to give her meat, Luk. 8.55. With much ado, and in great trembling at last, them an took, and eat it. Look, (saies Master Rothwel) you all see the Devil is a Lier, the first bit hath not choaked him, nor shall the rest. Master Rothwel left him, after which he was stricken dumb for three years toge∣ther. I had a Book written with his own hand, of the Temptations the Devil haunted him with afterwards, and the Answers divers godly and reverend Ministers gave to those temptations: but the Cavaliers got them, and all my Books and Writings. Thus the poor man remained tempted, but no longer possessed; At length by Prayer also (which was instantly put up to God for him, every Sabbath and Lecture day, in many places,) the Lord opened his mouth, and restored his speech to him: one using this petition, Lord open thou his mouth that his lips may shew forth thy praise. He answered in the Con∣gregation, Amen: and so continued to speak, and spake graciously to his dying day. This Life was drawn up by my reverend Friend Master Stanly Gower of Dorchester.
Dr. PRESTON.
The Life of Doctor Preston, who died Anno Christi, 1628. Iohn Preston, the Son of Thomas and Alice Preston, was born at Heyford in Northamptonshire, a town divided by a little River into the upper and lower Heyfords,His Birth. and is in Maps oft written in the plural number; It is a Rectory, and hath a fair Church in the lower Heyfords, but yet stands in divers Pa∣rishes. That Farme wherein Master Thomas Preston lived, is in Bugbrook Parish, where they buried and baptized, where we find that John the Sonne of Thomas Preston was baptized, Octob. 27. 1587. but was descended from that Family of the Prestons, that lived at Preston in Lancashire, from whence his great Grandfather removed, upon occasion of a fatall quarrel with one Master Bradshaw, a neighbour Gentleman, whom in his own de∣fence he slew, and satisfied the Law, and was acquitted for it; but not the Kindred, who waited an opportunity to be revenged, as the manner in those Northern Countries then was. It fell out not long after, that Master Bradshaws next Brother meets Master Preston, near to the place where he had slain his Brother, and told him he should do as much for him, or he would revenge his Brothers blood. Master Preston told him he had slain his Brother against his will, and in his own defence: that he bare no evil will unto them; desired him he would forbear, but when no thing would prevail, they fought, and Bradshaw fell again. But Master Preston, was troubled and grieved at it, for he saw a fire was kindled that would not easily be quenched, and therefore resolved that he would leave that fatall and unlucky Countrey, though he was a Gentleman of a very fair estate; and walking one day pensive in Westminster-Hall, one Master Morgan of Heyford, with whom he was acquainted, came unto him, and asked why he was so sad? To whom for answer, he relates the former story. Master Morgan knowing him to be a gallant man, was very sensible of his estate, and told him if he would go with him to Heyford, he should have a good Farm to live in for the present, and what accommodation he could afford him. Master Preston thanked him, and after some consideration of the matter, re∣solved to take his offer, and so Master Preston of Preston in Lancashire, became a kind of Farmer in Northamptonshire, where he afterwards lived and died, and his Son succeeded him, and so it came to Thomas Preston, as we have said.
His Mothers name before she married, was Marsh, but she had an Uncle by the Mothers side, whose name was Craswel, a man of means and good esteem in Northampton where he lived, and where he had been several times Maior. This Uncle being rich, and having no Child, was very carefull of her,His education. and took this Sonne whilest he was young un∣to himself, and sent him to the Free-School in Northampton, where he was a Scholar under the Government of Master Sanderson, then Master of the School, and after under Master Wastel, who succeeded him; and when he had been there some time, his Uncle was perswaded to remove him into Bedfordshire, unto one Master Guest, who had some∣time taught a private School in Northampton, and was accounted a bet∣ter teacher of the Greek tongue, from whence after he had perfected his Studies in the Greek, he was sent to Cambridge, and admitted of Kings Colledge, under the tuition of Master Busse, one of the Fellows, Anno Dom. 1684. where he did,His going to Cambridge. as young Scholars use to do, that is, applied himself to that which was the genius of the Colledge, and that was musick; and finding that the Theory was short and soon attained, he made account the practice would also be so; and accordingly adven∣tured on the Noblest but hardest Instrument, the Lute, but here he found that Art was long, and was not willing to attend it; he used to say within himself, while he was fingering of his Instrument, quantum hoc tempore legi potuit: and whilest his fingers were thus distempered and foundred upon the Lute, it fell out that his Tutor, Master Busse, was chosen Master of the School at Eaton, and so removed from the Colledge about two years after he was admitted. Coming not from Eaten School, but from another, he could not be of the foundation, and was therefore uncapable of those preferments in the Colledge that were of most worth, and the sooner perswaded also for to remove, which he did unto Queens Colledge,His remove to Queens Col∣ledge. where he was received and admitted un∣der the tuition of Master Oliver Bowles, one of the Fellows of that House, a very godly learned man, and a noted and carefull Tutor, under whose Government he setled to his Book and left his musick, and by whose conduct and directions he grew in knowledge, and was improved unto very thriving and undertakings in his Studies. It is not nothing to be well descended, fortes creantur fortibus & bonis, Sheep and Neat bred in Lancashire, or on the Peak-hils, and after dri∣ven into Northamptonshire, and planted there, produce a very gallant race. These Prestons though removed from their native soil, and much impaired in their Revenue, retained yet the garb and mettal of their Ancestors, they carried themselves and were accounted Gentlemen; something there was in this young Prestons spirit that was not vulgar, I have seen in a Book of his, under his own hand, when he was young, such sparklings of aspiring ingenuity, as argued in him something that was not common. He was as yet but Junier Sophister, but looked high, and grew acquainted with those that were Gentile, and fancied state-affairs and Courtship, that had desires or dispositions to be Secretaries or Agents
in Princes Courts; thought it below him to be a Minister, and the study of Divinity, a kind of honest siliness, and accordingly got in with a Merchant, by whose means he did procure that he should live in Paris, and learn the language and garb of France; and another Gentleman in recompence, should be received and entertained in London, to learn our garb and language. Master Creswel of Northampton was by this time dead, and had bequeathed certain Lands in that Town to him after his Wives decease; These Lands he sels to put himself into a posture fit for that design; but here he now began to find that he had reckoned without his Host, and that he should have said, if the Lord will I shall live and do this or that, Jam. 4.15. for the Merchant dies before the exchange could be accomplished, and so these blooming hopes, that had thus long held up his imagination died with the Mer∣chant. He was of an able, firm, well-tempered constitution, brown,His Character. come∣ly visage, vigorous and vivide eye, but somewhat inclining to that kind of melancholly, that ariseth from a dust and parched choler, which now began a little to be discovered in him. For being mated in his first design, he grew discouraged, went not so much abroad a∣mong the Gallants, but struck sail to fortune and retired; yet his appe∣tite was rather dammed then dried up; for after a very little pause and boyling over of his sullennesse, he begins to steer again the same course, although by more certain and domestick mediums, and if he must be shut up and confined to the Muses, resolves to be no ordinary Servant to them; his genius led him unto natural Philosophy, which by that time was become his proper task; which he undertakes, not as boyes use to do, to serve their present use, but with devotion, resolves to leave no secret unattempted; adoreth Aristotle as his Tutelary Saint, and had a happinesse to enter often where others stuck, and what broke o∣thers teeth, was nuts to him, no dark untrodden path in all his Physicks or Metaphysicks, but he was perfect in it; and so drowned and devo∣ted was he, that he seldom or never could be seen abroad, to the won∣der and amazement of his former brave companions, so that no time passed, sine linea;His studious∣nesse. not that between the ringing and tolling of the Bell to meals; and for his sleep he made it short; and whereas notwithstand∣ing all endeavours, there was one in the Colledge that would alwaies be up before him, he would let the bed-cloths hang down, so that in the night they might fall off, and so the cold awaken him; insomuch that his Tutor was constrained to read unto him moderation, and to tell him, as their might be intemperance in meats and drinks, so also there might be in studies; but the evil of it as yet he felt not, the sweet and good he did, came off with honour and applause in all his acts, and was admired in the Regent House when he sate for his degree, both by the Posers and all the Masters that examined him, and from that time much observed throughout the University. About this time his Tutor [Master Bowles,] was called to the Recto∣ry of Sutton in Bedfordshire, and so left the Coledge, and another of the
Fellows, then Master, (afterward) Doctor Porter became his Tutor, a very learned man and great Philosopher, who never went about for to disswade him from his studies, but gave him all assistance and en∣couragement. The year following it came unto his Tutor to be Head-Lecturer in the Colledge, and Sir Preston being to probleme in the Chappel, made such an accurate and strong position, and answered so understandingly, that his Tutor borrowed his Position of him, when he had done, to look on and peruse; and finding it elaborate, resolved to make more use of it, then ever his Pupil did intend. The Master of the Colledge at that time was Doctor Tyndal, who was also Dean of Ely, and resided for the most part there; thither his Tutor goes, and car∣ries his Position with him, which he shwed it to the Master, and ac∣quainted him with what he had observed, that he was a youth of parts and worth, and deserved some incouragement; the Master was an ho∣nest gallant man, and loved a Scholar, and was glad of any oppotuni∣ty to shew it, and so bids his Tutor send Sir Preston over unto Ely to him, where he assured him, he should not want what was in him to do him good; and bad him hold on, and he would take care for him: and there being an Election in the Colledge, soon after he was chosen Fellow by unanimous consent of Master and Fellows, and his Tutor Master Porter brought him word of it, as he was at study, not thinking any thing, and told him that he must come down into the Chappel presently to be admitted,He is chosen Fellow. and accordingly was admitted Fel∣low of Queens Colledge in Cambridge Anno Dom. 1609. That is, five years after his first admission in the University: he was not so much moved at it, as young Students use to be, because he looked still at higher things, and had not quit in his retired thoughts his first de∣sign of being some body at Court, to which he thought this honour might be a bar, this courtesie was compes to him, yet it was not man∣ners to be discontent, but attend what should ensue; he was by this time grown a Master in Philosophy, had waded far in Aristotle, and had met with few that were able to encounter him, and therefore now re∣solves to go another while to School, to Hippocrates and Galen, and ve∣rifie what is so often said, ubi desinit Philosophus, incipit medicus; He had a very penetrating wit, and exact and solid judgment, to conjecture at effects in causes,He studies Physick. and prognosticate events; and being skilfull in Phi∣losophy before, soon made the Theory his own, but because perfectio scientiarum est in summitate, the life and vigour of a science, is in the practice, he resolves to make enquiry after that. Books make not men Practitioners in any Art, Nemo ex libris evasit artifex, he retires unto a friend of his in Kent, who was very famous for his practice, where he earnestly attended and waited on the trade and way of knowing Sim∣ples, and compounding Medicines, wherein he attained to that sufficien∣cy, that had Divinity failed, he might have been another Butler; yet what he had was not in vain; for when any of his Pupils were amisse, though he sent them alwaies unto Physicians, yet himself perused, and many times corrected their Prescriptions.
It was not easie to allay his eager, and unsatisfied appetite and ap∣prehension with any one art, Eccl. 5.10. He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. The more you put into the soul, the wider presently it retcheth. He thought he could not be a good Physician, that could not read the pow∣ers of the Herbs and Plants in Stars and Planets,His study of Astrology. acquaints himself with Ptolomy, and other Authors in Astrology, and other curious Arts and Calculations, as they are called, Act. 19.19. that he might be able to study, not only Books, but Men, and to read mens fortunes in the hea∣venly bodies; but he could not, nor did not read his own. There was a Soothsayer that told Agathocles he should be slain the next moneth: who asked, How long he thought he should live after him? He answered, Many years. He told him he would prove one of the two false, and leave the other to the issue, and so commanded for to hang him presently. Ma∣ster Preston was very busie among the houses of the Planets, but saw not there his own Domestick doom, nor what his Maker had determined concerning him, for as he was in these coelestial contemplations, it fell out, that Master Cotton then Fellow of Emanuel Colledge, preached in Saint Maries, where Master Preston hearing him,His Conversi∣on. was set about an∣other exercise, constrained from his contemplations in Astrology, to look into himself, and consider what might possibly befall him; it was his manner, as it is of other Students, when they come home from Saints Maries Sermons, to run unto their studies presently, or what is worse; but this young Student was forced to retire and ruminate: This Sermon had breaved him of two beloved notions, one was his low opinion of the Ministry and Preaching, for he saw an over-ruling gra∣vity and majesty in that Sermon, that he thought had been impossible to Pulpits. I have heard it often in the Colledge, that he took away sixteen Answers in a Probleme in the Chappel; but here was one he knew not how to take away: Sed haeret lateri lethalis arundo, no cun∣ning in Philosophy, or skill in Physick would suffice to heal this wound. Another was his great opinion of, and ambition after State-employ∣ments, for these were higher things that now were offered to him, concernments of eternal influence, which nothing could divert that he had studied hitherto; there have been divers eminent and great Physicians that began in medling with their own infirmities. Self-love rides alwaies on the fore-horse. His own accounts and aking consci∣ence, set Luther first upon the study of Divinity. Master Preston after this affront and baffle in the Pulpit, wanted ease, and when he could not find it in his other Books and Studies, begins a little to look into the Bible, and to consider of the study of Divinity. In the prosecution of his study in Philosophy, he found many of the Schoolmen quoted, and so was willing for to look a little into them, and finding those he light on, pithy and sententious, went on; it gave him ease, that he was now a Student in Divinity, and had left Albumasar and Guido, and such high-flown speculations, yet it pleased him for to see and find his Master A∣ristole, so often quoted, and in such request among them, and thought
if that were to be a Preacher, he might adventure well enough upon it, and so was drawn on very far in the study of the School-Divines. I have heard him say, There was nothing that ever Scotus or Occham wrote, but he had weighed and examined; he delighted much to read them in the first and oldest Editions that could be got. I have still a Scotus in a very old print, and a paper not inferiour to parchment, that hath his hand, and notes upon it throughout; yet he continued longer in Aquinas, whose Summes he would sometimes read as the Barbar cut his hair, and when fell upon the place he read, he would not lay down his Book but blow it off, and in this tune he continued, untill a rumour came into the Uni∣versity that the King would shortly come to visit them. King James was happier in his education, then his Mother would have had him. It pleased God to breed a Buchanan on purpose, for to guide his younger years, and by that time he was ripe, Scotland was grown acquainted with Geneva, and the King no stranger unto Calvins way. The News awakened all the University, and there were few but promised to them∣selves some good from this fair gale, that seeing promotion came neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, Psal. 75.6. it must and would come from the North; and the Proverb be inverted, and be, Omne bonum ab Aquilone. Doctor Harsnet, Master of Pembroke-hall was then Vice-Chancellour, a prudent well-advised Governour, who knowing well the critical and able apprehension of the King, was very carefull and sollicitous to pitch upon the ablest in every faculty, for Actors in that solemn entertain∣ment, and himself made choice of Master Preston to answer the Philo∣sophy Act, and sent unto him to provide himself. He was ambitious e∣nough by nature, and had this news come a little sooner, nothing had been more suitable to his design and inclination. But now the Gentle∣man was Planet-struck, grown dull and phlegmatick; Master Cottons Sermon had so invaded him, that Kings and Courts were no such great things with him, especially when he understood that another was resol∣ved on for answerer. Doctor Wren was then a very pregnant Scholar in Pembroke-hall, and also Chaplain unto Bishop Andrews, and thought fit to be imployed in this Commencement service, but was not willing to have any other place but answerer: the Vice-Chancellour urged his promise and en∣gagement unto Master Preston, and his opinion of his great ability, but nothing would serve. The Vice-Chancellors Colledge, and the Bishops Chaplain must have Precedency, which he most seriously excused to Master Preston,He is chosen to oppose be∣fore the King. and endeavoured to reconcile him to the first opponents place, which he declined, as being too obnoxious unto the answerer, who is indeed the Lord and Ruler of the Act; but there was no re∣moving now, and so he goes about it with much unwillingnesse, being rather driven then drawn unto it. His great and first care was to bring his Argument unto a head, with∣out affronts or interruptions from the Answerer, and so made all his Ma∣jor Propositions plausible and firm, that his adversary might neither be
willing nor able to enter there, and the Minor still was backed by other Syllogismes, and so the Argument went on unto the issue: which fell out well for Master Preston, for in Disputations of consequence, the Answerers are many times so fearfull of the event, that they flur and trouble the opponents all they can, and deny things evident, which had been the case in all the former Acts; there was such wrangling about their Syllogismes, that fullied and clouded the debates extreamly, and put the Kings acumen into straits; but when Master Preston still cleared his way, and nothing was denied, but what was ready to be proved, the King was greatly satisfied, and gave good heed, which he might well do, because the question was tempered and fitted unto his content; namely, Whether Dogs could make Syllogismes. The opponent urged that they could, an Enthymeme (said he) is a lawfull and reall Syllogisme, but Dogs can make them; he instanced in an Hound who hath the major Proposition in his mind, namely, The Hare is gone either this or that way; smels out the minor with his nose; name∣ly, She is not gone that way, and follows the Conclusion, Ergo this way with open mouth. The instance suited with the Auditory, and was applaud∣ed, and put the Answerer to his distinctions, that Dogs might have saga∣city, but not sapience, in things especially of prey, and that did con∣cern their belly, might be nasutuli, but not logici; had much in their mouthes, little in their minds, unlesse it had relation to their mouthes; that their lips were larger then their understandings: Which the oppo∣nent still endeavouring to wipe off with another Syllogisme, and put the Dogs upon a fresh scent, the Moderator Doctor Reade began to be afraid, and to think how troublesome a pack of Hounds, well followed and applauded at last might prove, and so came in into the Answerers aid, and told the Opponent that his Dogs, he did believe, were very weary, and desired him to take them off, and start some o∣ther Argument; and when the opponent would not yield, but hallow∣ed still and put them on, he interposed his authority and silenced him. The King in his conceit was all this while upon New-market heath, and liked the sport, and therefore stands up, and tells the Moderator plain∣ly he was not satisfied in all that had been answered, but did believe an Hound had more in him then was imagined. I had my self (said he) a Dog, that stragling far from all his fellows, had light upon a very fresh scent, but considering he was all alone, and had none to second and assist him in it, observes the place and goes away unto his fellows, and by such yelling arguments as they best understand, prevailed with a party of them to go along with him, and bringing them unto the place, pur∣sued it unto an open view. Now the King desired for to know how this could be contrived and carried on without the use and exercise of understanding, or what the Moderator could have done in that case bet∣ter, and desired him that either he would think better of his Dogs, or not so highly of himself. The Opponent also desired leave to pursue the Kings game, which he had started unto an issue, but the Answerer protested that his Majesties
Dogs were alwaies to be excepted, who hunted not by common Law, but by Prerogative. And the Moderator fearing the King might let loose another of his Hounds, and make more work, applies himself with all submisse devotion to the King, acknowledged his Dogs were able to out-do him, besought his Majesty for to believe they had the better; that he would consider how his illustrious influence had already ripened and concocted, all their Arguments and Understandings; that whereas in the morning the reverend and grave Divines could not make Syllo∣gismes, the Lawyers could not, nor the Physicians; now every Dog could, especially his Majesties. All men acknowledged it it was a good bit to close with. It was grown late, and so the Congregation was removed unto the Regent-house, and the King went off well pleased with the businesse. The other Acts were easily forgotten, but the discourse and Logick of the Dogs was fresh in mouth and memory, the Philosophy-act applauded universally. The King commended all the Actors, but above all, the Opponent. It was easie to discern that the Kings Hound had opened a way for Ma∣ster Preston at the Court, if he were willing; yet many of the great ones put him in mind, and promised all assistance and encouragement. Sir Fulke Greevill, afterward Lord Brook, was taken greatly with him, and after many demonstrations of his real love, setled at last a stipend on him of fifty pounds per annum, and was his friend unto his last hour; but his ambition after Courtship was well allayed, so as he did not raven∣ously pursue it. But being now resolved to be a Minister, fell to the study of modern Writers, especially Master Calvin, whose very stile and language much affected him. The Corutiers wondered that he did not bite, Prov. 19.15. In the light of the Kings countenance is life, and his favour like a cloud of the latter rain. That a young man should not be ambitious, that a good eye should not see; began to be a little jea∣lous of him. He was reserved naturally, and could keep counsell; few knew how Master Cottons Sermon had affected and wrought upon him. But this not sailing when the wind blew, begat suspition. Some judged he was modest, and wanted opportunity to bring him on; some that he was melancholy, and so neglected what was proper for him to intend; some busie and intent upon his Pupils, who now began to come from all parts. But the Politicians assured, it was some inclination unto Puritanisme, a name now odious at Court; for it could not be, (said they) that he should let so fair an opportunity miscarry, if he had not something else in view. Kings think themselves exreamly undervalued, if a word be not enough; Cardinal Poole being chosen Pope at midnight by the Conclave, and sent unto, to come and be admitted, desired it might be let alone untill the morning, because it was not a work of darknesse. An honest Argument, but not Italian enough; Quis nisi mentis inops? And so they went back and chose another. When Balaam came not at the first call, see how Balak reasons, Numb. 22.37. Am I not able to promote thee? But Master Preston had indeed another King in his thoughts,
when he had found treasure in the field, he parts with all for that, Mat. 13.44. A purchase is not worth the having, that hath not either some convenience annexed, or may not some way be improved. God was a greater good then man, Heaven then earth, a Crown of Glory then a crown of gold. But this neglect and self-denyal, was well interpreted by good men, and that opinion of affecting Puritanes, which blasted him at Court, began to blazon him at home, and work a reputation, that to him was more acceptable. Men thought him meet for to be trusted with the care of youth; and many had their eyes upon him, for their Sons or Friends. Master Morgan of Heyfords,His many Pu∣pils. had been some∣time dead, and had left his Son and heir an Orphan, in trust with some that were his Kinsmen, and like to mannage his estate to most ad∣vantage. This Master Morgans Sonne, under whose shadow these Prestons had for some time lived, was by his Guardians now com∣mended to his care; not only for that relation he had to Heyfords his na∣tive Town, and to the Family, but also that by that means the young Gentleman might be preserved from the influence of his other Friends, who were many of them popish. King James had been so well pleased at the Commencement held before him lately, that he resolves upon another visit. The Heads agree to entertain him with a Comedy. There was one Fuggles of Clare-hall, that had made a jeering Comedy against the Lawyers called Ignoramus. This was resolved on for to be acted before the King, and great care was taken for to furnish and accommo∣date all parts, with Actors answerable. Master Morgan was a comely modest Gentleman, and it was believed, would well become a womans dresse, and accordingly his Tutor [Master Preston sent to,] that he would give way and all encouragement unto the service. He liked not the motion,His zeal. could not believe that his Friends intended he should be a Player, and so desired to be excused. But the Guardians were not so exact and scrupulous, but though if he played this Game well, he might winne more then could be hoped for elsewhere; and so Master Morgan was allowed by his Guardians to play his part, and afterward removed unto Oxford, and suffered to play what part he would, and so relapsed unto Popery, which hath proved fatal and infortunate to him and his. But here was matter for Mr. Prestons back Friends, to argue he was not a Courtier, that would envy so small a courtesie to those, that had so freely offered greater unto him; and it was resented with a kind of angry indignation, that their offers had so little influence upon him; and there were some that watched opportunities to make him sensible of this neglect. There is no such Soloecisme at Court as Independency. S non vis ut per illos tibi benè sit, efficient ut sit malè. But Master Preston by this time had cast up all accounts, and resolved to stand un∣to his bargain whatsoever it cost him. Only he thought if he must be a Puritan, and bid farewell to all his carnal and Court-designes; He would not be one of the lower rank, but would get places if he could. Mediocribus esse Poetis, non dii, non homines, non concessere columnae. That
counsell of the wise man, Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might, he alwaies practised. And what is commonly said, was true in him. In magnis ingeniis nihil mediocre. This faithfulness to Master Morgan, attended with so great a shadow upon himself, increased his reputation in the Countrey,His diligence. so that now he was accounted the on∣ly Tutor; and being carefull to read unto them, and direct their studies, he found himself abridged of his own time, and was constrained to take up time, that should have been bestowed on his body. He also grew acquainted now with many eminent and godly Ministers, as Ma∣ster Dod, and Master Hildersham, who would come often to his Chamber, and he was so hardened in his way, that he would get them many times to go to Prayer with his Pupils, a boldnesse not adventured on by any other; but by these labours his able body was debilitated. It was a great Orator that said, Primò desii velle causas agere, deindè desii posse. At first, said he, I would not plead, at last I could not. Master Preston in his youth would not sleep, but let the bed-cloathes hang down, and a∣waken him: Now he could not, but about midnight still awakened, and slept no more; whereby in time his body languished, and could not answer as in former times. Master Butler of Clare-hall, was then the Oracle in Physick, to him he goes, and opens his condition to him; who after some few questions bids him take Tobacco, and so leaves him. He knew that Butler was odde and humourous, and thought he might give this advice to try him, and therefore resolves to wait a while before he medled with so odde a Medicine, which Hippocrates and Galen had never ordained to any of their Patients, and was at that time not so common, and of no good report; but his want of rest continuing, and his appetite unto his Book encreasing, he goes again to Master Butler, as a stranger, and propounds the case again. Master Butler gives the same advice, and being satisfied that he was serious now, falls to taking of it, and found that this hot copious fume ascending, did draw those crudities from the stomacks mouth, that hindered concoction of his meat, and vapours from it that occasion sleep, and so restored his rest, and that in time his strength, and so he went on in his work, untill Doctor Tyndal [Master of the Colledge] died. He was an old man, and that prefer∣ment of the Mastership of Queens, was more accounted of then now it is. There were very many that had their eyes upon it, but Doctor Mountain in a special manner, who was often heard for to professe he would rather be Master of that Colledge then Dean of Westminster. But Master Preston had another in his eye, Doctor Davenant, was a Gentleman descended, and was a Fellow-Commoner, when under Gra∣duate, but very painfull, and of great capacity, and grew accordingly in learning and in reputation, and for his worth and parts was already cho∣sen Margaret Professour, and read in the Schools with much applause, those excellent Lectures upon the Colossians which now are printed; him Master Preston pitched upon, but knew it must be carried very private∣ly; for the mountain was already grown into some bignesse, was one of parts, and first observed in acting Miles gloriosus in the Colledge, and
had been Chaplain unto the Earl of Essex, but like the Heliotrope or flower of the Sunne, did now adore Sir Robert Carr, already Viscount Rochester, the only Favourite. When it was agreed among the Persians, that he should reign, whose horse first saw the rising Sun, and neighed at it, one turned his horse head towards the mountains, beleiving that the Sun would first arise there; but it fell not out so here. Master Preston having laid his plot before-hand, and seen what mountain was in his way, had taken care that word should be daily brought him how the old Doctor did, and when he found him irrecoverable, laid horses and all things rea∣dy; and upon notice of his being dead, goes presently and was at Lon∣don, and in White-Hall before any light appeared on the mountain top; the Court was quiet, and he had some Friends there. His businesse only was to get a free Election, which he made means for to procure: but knowing also with whom he had to do, makes some addresses unto Vis∣count Rochester, in the behalf of Doctor Davenant, who being unac∣quainted with his Chaplains appetite to that particular, was fair and wil∣ling to befriend a learned enterprise. So Master Preston returns unto the Colledge before the Masters death was much took notice of; and assembling Doctor Davenants Friends, acquaints them with what had past at Court, and so they went immediately to Election, and it was easily and fairly carried for Doctor Davenant, who being called, was admitted pre∣sently. But when Doctor Mountain understood that Doctor Tyndal was departed, he sends and goes to Court and Colledge for to make friends: But alas the Game was played, and he was shut out. Never did Aetna or Vesuvius more fume, but there was no cure; only he threatens▪ and takes on against the Actors, but they were innocent and not obnoxious. This Doctor had made great promises, gave a very goodly piece of Plate unto the Colledge with this Inscription, Sic incipio, but now he vowed it should be Sic desino. However the Colledge for the present was well apaid, and grew in reputation very much; and because they want∣ed room to entertain the numbers that flocked to them, built that good∣ly Fabrick that contains many fair lodgings both for Scholars and Fel∣lows, towards Kings Colledge. It was not long before it came to Master Prestons course for to be Dean and Catechist, which he resolved to improve by going through a Body of Divinity, that might be a guide unto the Scholars in their Stu∣dies in Divinity: for it was not his opinion that others should do as he had done, that is, peruse the Schoolmen first, and then come to the mo∣dern Writers; but first read Summes and Systemes in Divinity, and set∣tle their opinions and judgements, and then read Fathers, Schoolmen, or what they had a mind to. This being known, and some honest Towns∣men hearing him at first by chance, there came the next day very ma∣ny for to hear him, and the next day more, both Townsmen and Schol∣lars from other Colledges, so that the outward Chappel would be often full before the Fellows came. Master Preston was of a very meek and quiet spirit, never resented injuries, nor provoked any unto aversnesse, yet had some enemies: Si injuria multos tibi fecit inimicos,
faciet invidia multos. What had Paul done, Act. 13.45. for to deserve so sharp an opposition, but envy moved them? There had been other Deans and Catechists before this Gentleman, yet no such crowding. Complaint was made to the Vice Chancellour of this unusual kind of Catechizing, it was assured, not only that Townsmen and Scholars mingled, but other Colledges intruded also, that the Fellows for the crowd and multitude could not get through, and come to Chappel to their places; that it was not safe for any man to be thus adored, and do∣ted on, unlesse they had a mind to cry up Puritanisme, which would in short time pull them down; that the Crosier staff would not support them long, if such Assemblies were encouraged: Obsta principiis, serò medicina paratur, &c. Well, upon the whole an Order was agreed on in the Consistory, and sent unto the Colledge, that the Scholars and Townsmen should be confined to their proper Preachers, that no stranger, neither Townsman nor Scholar, should presume on any pretence whatsoever, to come un∣to those Lectures, that were proper only to the Members of the Col∣ledge. The Edict was observed punctually, and the Auditory by it much impaired. Had strangers still been suffered to attend, those Sermons had been printed as well as others: for there were divers that exactly noted, and wrote out all fair, unto the time of this restraint, but no one after that could go on with it, and so it rests. But he went on, and was assidu∣ous to the years end, and waded through it, which was a very great help unto many of his Pupils, who made the greater benefit of those things, because they were not common and in Print. About that time the Lecture at Trinity-Church, and the Sermons at Saint Andrews were prohibited, and the Scholars all confined to Saint Maries, which did occasion Master Preston to read Divinity unto his Pu∣pils on the Lords days, at three of the clock in the afternoon, which he also often did upon the week days; but the Townsmen and the Scho∣lars of other Colledges, that had tasted of his spirit in the Chappel, endeavoured that he would do it where they might hear. Buttolphs be∣longs unto Queens Colledge, and is usually supplied by one of that House; there he is willing to make a tryal, how it would take, and re∣solves the next Lords day to preach at three of the clock after Saint Maries Sermons should be ended; which though but very little known, occasioned such a throng and crowd, as was incredible. Men were not cloyed with preaching then, nor waxed wanton. There dwelt then in the Parish one Doctor Newcombe, a Civilian, and Commissary to the Chancellour of Ely, who being in the Church, and seeing the crowd, commanded that evening Prayer only should be read, but no Sermon; the Minister intreated that for that time Master Preston might be allow∣ed to preach, so did the Earl of Lincolne and others in the Church; but he was resolute, and because he would not be further importuned, went home with all his Family, and left them to determine at their perill what they would do; so upon advice it was concluded that the Sermon should go on, and Master Preston preached a very favoury and holy
Sermon, upon 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. There was so much time spent in de∣bates about it, and messages before the Commissary left the Congrega∣tion, that it was too late to do both, and therefore they adventured for that time to forbear Common-Prayer, that so the Scholars might de∣part, and be at Colledge-Prayers. But this instructed Doctor New∣comb in his complaint. The Court was then near hand, that is, at New-market; thither the Commissary goes the next day, and having the Bi∣shop of Ely there, and many other Clergy men, assures them that Ma∣ster Preston was in heart, and would quickly be in practice a Non-con∣formist, and was so followed and adored in the University, that unlesse some speedy course were taken with him, they might cast their caps at all Conformity, and see their power troden underfoot, and told them gentlenesse was not the way, for he was cunning, and would recover all if he were not seriously and throughly dealt with. There was no Advocate for Master Preston, but the Doctor being first in his own cause, seemed just, Prov. 18.17. And spake to those that were willing to believe. The Puritans began to be considerable, and they doubted he might come in time to head them. It's a great security to a man to be despised: Contempto nullus diligenter nocet. A Fellow that hath nothing in him, nor is not owned, may be exorbitant, as he of one in his time: Contemptu jam liber erat. But David that hath a Party fol∣lowing him, must have an Army to attend him. And therefore he did wisely to professe himself to be a dead dog or a flea, 1 Sam. 24.14. The King was made acquainted with this complaint, and assured that Ma∣ster Preston had as strong an influence into the Puritants as the principal of the Jesuites, which was Aqua Viva, had upon them, and therefore it behoved him to consider what to do. A word was enough to a wise and jealous King, who did not love to play an after Game, and there∣fore hears himself the Doctors information; enquires whether the Bi∣shops and Chancellors Jurisdiction extended unto Members of a Col∣ledge, and finally concludes to proceed against him by the power of the University. A Letter is framed unto Doctor Scot, Master of Clare-hall, Vice-Chancellour at that time, and to the Heads, to call before them Ma∣ster Preston, to give a strict account of that notorious disobedience un∣to the Commissary; he answers mildly, that he was not guilty; refers himself unto the Auditory, that evening Prayer was omitted, because the Scholars might depart in due time, seeing the time alloted for it, was spent in treating with the Commissary, not out of any disrespect unto the service, which he himself did usually attend at other times. When the Wolf complained that the Lamb had fouled the water, that he was to drink; The Lamb answered that if he had defiled it, yet that could not prejudice the Wolf who was above, and the mud would certainly be carried downward; but this answer did not fill the hungry belly of the Wolf. Master Prestons innocency did aggra∣vate his crime, which was his popularity, and therefore they told him they were engaged to support by all just meanes the Bishops Juris∣diction, that the King had honoured him, in leaving that affront to
be examined by his proper Judges, and that except he could take off the Court, they must and would proceed to a very round and serious censure. Musa mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso, Quidvè dolens regina deûm, tot volvere casus, Insignem pietate virum, tot adire labores Impulerit; tantaene animis coelestibus irae? That a Fellow of a Colledge for preaching of an innocent and honest Sermon, in a Church belonging to the Colledge, by the consent and in the hearing of the Incumbent, should be thus vigorously under∣taken. Among many other Gentlemen of quality, that were Pupils unto Master Preston at this time, there was one Sir Capel Bedels, an Orphan, of a very fair estate in Huntingtonshire, a Daughters Sonne of old Sir Arthur Capel, who being Guardian to his Grand-child, had recom∣mended him as he had done many of his own Sons unto his Govern∣ment. It was a great trust, and Master Prestons care was answerable. And because plus vident oculi, he had his spies, that gave him notice of all their carriages and correspondencies; by one of these he was informed that Sir Capel haunted Doctor Newcombs house, and was familiar with his Daughter [Mistress Jane Newcomb,] a very proper well-bred Gen∣tlewoman; his Tutor asked if they were contracted, he answered, no, but would be very shortly, as he was told, for he was resolved to have her. Master Preston charged him to keep all secret, that Sir Capel might not think he was acguainted with it, and immediately appoints a journey unto Saffron-walden, to take the aire, and see that stately pyle at Audley-end, and takes divers of his Fellow-Commoners along, as he used to do at other times; and among others, this Sir Capel Bedels: When they had dined and viewed the house, it was propounded by one of them, that they might go that night to Haddam, and visit old Sir Arthur Ca∣pel, seeing they were thus far on their way, and it was late. Master Preston seemed to be indifferent, and so the Proposition took, and with none more then with Sir Capel, who knew his Grandfather would fill his pockets, and that would sweeten his Newcomb Mistress next embraces, and make him welcome to her. The old Knight was glad to entertain such welcome guests, and that night there was no discourse, but of the stately Rooms, and goodly Gallery at Audley-end, and so the young men went to bed pleased, that the Colledge-bell next morning would not a∣waken them; but Master Preston slept not in utramque aurem, but a∣wakened betimes, and acquaints Sir Arthur with all the businesse, adviseth him, by no means to permit the Gentlemans return unto the Colledge; for though the wound might seem quite cured, and he never so much engage forbearance, yet frequent apparitions would redintegrate: Et nihil facilius quam amor recrudescit. Sir Arthur was a very wise man, and had experience of the world, thanks Master Preston for his faith∣fulnesse; pretends Sir Capel wanted something, and desires his Tutor
to give him leave to stay a little while untill he could be furnished, and then he should be sent, to which the Tutor easily consented, and so the rest went home; and after a while the old man tels Sir Capel he grew in bignesse, and it would be fit for him to travell before he setled, and he prevails with him to be content. But what saies Mistresse Newcomb, who is robb'd by this means of her vowed and resolved servant, and her crafty Father that beholds so good a morsell snatched from between his teeth; do ye think he had forgotten this when Master Preston came to preach within his Jurisdiction? Pul∣vere qui laedunt, sed laesi marmore scribunt, other injuries perhaps may be forgotten, but losse of money is not; ploratur lachryms amissa pecunia veris. Master Preston was not altogether a stranger at the Court, however now there was no remedy; when he came to New-market, he found that Bishop Andrews, then Bishop of Ely, was chief, and that his Juris∣diction in the Commissary, was it that was pretended to be affronted, and therefore applied himself to him, and told him that he did not pur∣pose to offend, but being ingaged for to preach at that time, could not with honour disappoint the Auditory; if he suspected him for any thing, desired he would examine him, and satisfie himself. The Bi∣shop told him the King was told he was an enemy to Formes of Prayer, and held no Prayer lawful but conceived; and therefore being popu∣lar, his judgment and opinion might do hurt. Master Preston answer∣ed that it was a slander, for he thought Set Formes lawfull, and refu∣sed not on all occasions to be present at the Colledge-Prayers, and when it was his turn, to read them. The Bishop answered, that he was glad, and would inform the King, and do him all the good he could, and bad him wait a while, and then repair again to him for satisfaction in it, and so time passed on, and there was nothing done. There were some at Court that wished well to Master Preston, Sed lapsuro assistere formidant, were loth to undertake a drooping cause; only there was one Doctor Young, an honest Scotchman, that was Dean of Winchester, and he told Master Preston plainly,The Bishops Hypocrisie. that Bishop Andrews was his greatest ad∣versary, and though he gave him good words, yet had assured the King, that if Master Preston were not for this expeld the University, Lord Bishops would not long continue; but because Master Pre∣ston was accounted, and not without cause, a learned man, he was not willing to appear against him; but desired the punishment might be inflicted, where the fact was done, and that was in the Uni∣versity. Master Preston saw now that the Bishop was a Courtier, and could give words, where deeds were not intended, and therefore goes again unto the Bishop, and tels him plainly that he or none must put a period to his attendance,His courage. and that either he would speak unto the King in his behalf, or tell him plainly that he would not, that he might know whence all this trouble flowed. The Bishop paused a while on this bold carriage, and at the last bad him come to him such a time
again, and he would deal with the King in his behalf. So he goes unto the King, and tels him that however Master Preston was very dangerous, and it would be a very great security if he were handsomely expelled, yet he doubted it would not hear well, if it should be done for this offence; for he would be absolved in the opini∣ons and minds of men, and be owned and applauded as their Martyr, and might perhaps recover, and live to be revenged; and therefore thought it would be better, for to enjoyn him to declare his judgment about Forms of Prayer; for that would be accounted a recantation, and however would weaken his reputation, with the Puritans, which would be e∣nough: for if they could divide him from his Party, they should not fear him; for he said, his carriage argued confidence in some assistance, which when they had removed, they should be strong enough at single hand. All that the Bishop spake, was as if ex tripode; and order present∣ly was drawn, and sent to the Vice-Chancellor, that Master Preston should in Buttolphs Church declare his judgment, concerning Formes of Prayer, on such a Sunday, or else they should immediately proceed a∣gainst him, according to their first instructions. Master Preston was glad there was a way out, but sensible of the hard hand, that had been carried towards him; but now there was no reme∣dy, and it was vain to strive against the stream; but before he could come home, the news was all about the Town, that Master Preston was to preach a Recantation Sermon at Buttolphs Church on such a day. This was good sport to the brave blades, who now came crowding as fast as any, for to hear, and it was no sin now for any body to be from Prayers; and indeed there was a very great Assembly, though he did all he could to have concealed it. So he went on upon his former text, and preach∣ed a very profitable Sermon, concerning growing in grace, and directed Prayer, as a speciall meanes to make men grow in grace. Now that (he said) was of two sorts,His Prudence. either that which was suddain, extempo∣rary, and conceived; or set, enjoyned, and prescribed before, not only for the sense and scope, but also words and phrases. And whereas some thought this was to stint the spirit, he said, there was a liberty to use conceived Prayer at other times, wherein the spirit might expatiate, and inlarge it self; and also the intention of the mind, though not in extension and variety of language. The Blades that came to laugh, had no great cause to do it, for this passage was at the very close; and the Sermon all along before, was sharp and searching; both sides were si∣lent and went home, not without some prints of good upon their spi∣rits: Optimus Orator censendus, non qui meruit auditorum judicium, sed qui abstulit. He makes the best speech that binds his Hearers, rather to think what was said, then who said it. The good fellows were nothing so merry at the end, as at the beginning of the Sermon. Indifferent Hearers praised all, and were confirmed in a good opinion of the Preach∣er. Good men were glad he came so well off, and was at liberty to preach again, where they might hear him: himself was troubled, lest any thing he said, should be mistaken or mis-interpreted, as he was apt to be.
But there were many eyes upon this action, and all men waited to see the issue. The Courtiers did not like it, that after all these tossings to and fro, he should thus light upon his feet, yet would not meddle for the present, but wait occasions. Those that were well-affected, were glad he was engaged against the Court and Bishops, and did pre∣sage he might be instrumental to their downfall, and every body la∣boured to ingage him more and more against them. The Spanish match was then the common talk, and great unwillingnesse appeared in the people generally; and Doctor Willet had presumed to offer Argu∣ments unto the King against matching with Idolaters. The King was greatly vext at this adventure, and took great paines to perswade the Doctor, that a Papist was not an Idolater: Sed non persuadebat etiamsi per∣suaserat. The people were unsatisfied, and there being then a Parlia∣ment, a very Honourable and able Member of the House of Lords pre∣vailed with Master Preston to write some Arguments against it. And though there were severe Edicts and Proclamations against scandalous Papers, and intermedling with Mysteries of State, yet he promised, it should be scattered and divulged unto fit persons, and none should know from whence, or from whom it came; accordingly when it was finished and written fair, one gave it to a Porter, whom he met in Holborne, and bad him leave it, according to the direction. The next day a great Lord comes unto him, that had perswaded Master Preston unto the ser∣vice, and tels him, that he had met with such a piece against the Spanish match, as he never saw, and protested he was convinced, that he must speak against it in the House, what ever came of it. The other asked him who made it, and where he had it: he assured him, he knew not, but it was left at his lodging, by he knew not whom. The Lord desired he might see it, and so it was copied out, and spread among those of the Parliament they thought fit, but the Authour of it never known. King James had something alwayes in his Writings and Speeches a∣gainst the Puritans, which was ill taken, for that it was apparent, those meant thereby, were godly, conscientious persons. The House of Commons was the only mote in King James his eye, the Remora, (as he conceived) unto his absolute dominion, for he knew not how for to engaged them, as he did the Lawyers and Divines; but if he stopped one mouth with preferment this Parliament, there would be others open the next against him. There were some now that adventured to apo∣logize for Puritans, and to say in Parliament, that honest men were wounded under that name; and to propose that godly Ministers might not be silenced, and thrown out of their Free-holds for trifles and Cere∣monies. But King James would none of that stuff, breaks up the Par∣liament, and sets out Proclamations: Sed quid prodest totius regionis si∣lentium, si affectus fremant. People love not to be enforced unto duty: Homines duci volunt non cogi. The Chaplains that attended monethly at the Court, were not am∣bitious of preaching over-often, and so a Combination was agreed on for Preachers before the King, when ever he should lie within twelve
miles of Cambridge: The King did not despair of making Scholars his, and therefore used all endeavours to oblige them, especially Cam∣bridge men, where a seed of Puritans had been a long time; and though the Plains about Royston and New-market afforded better Winter-game then elsewhere; yet Scholars he conceived might be catcht sometimes, as well as Hares, and so was willing they should preach before him. Young men he knew would preach themselves: Omnis oratio docet, aut rem, aut animum dicentis. He should learn either things, or persons. By this means it came to Master Prestons turn to preach before the King at Royston; he was so muffled at Court in Doctor Newcombs busi∣nesse that he knew not what to do, could not decline it altogether, for that would have exposed him unto too much observation; and yet he greatly feared what might befall him in the doing of it: therefore he changed his course with one that was to preach a little after, and did it very privately, that if his enemies should have designes, they might be disappointed, and so it was not much known. When he was to preach, it fell out that his course came upon a Tuesday, when the King did lie at Finching brook; the Court was very thin, and the Prince and Duke of Buckingham were both abroad, and the King himself was for an hunting match that day, and gave order that the Sermon should begin at eight of the clock. Master Preston had some at the Court that were so∣licitous as well as he, and they told him it would give very great con∣tent, if he would take some occasion in the Sermon, to shew his judg∣ment, as he had done before about Se Formes. Doctor Young Deane of Winchester,Master Preston preacheth be∣fore the King. (of whom we spake before) did then attend, and when the King came in, and sate down in the chair, he told him who it was that preached, and said, he hoped he would give content; I pray God he do, said the King. The Sermon is in print, upon John 1.16. which he so clearly opened and applied, that the King sate all the while as quiet as could be, and never stirred nor spake to any body, but by his looks discovered he was pleased; when all was done, he came unto him as the manner was to kisse his hand; and the King asked him of what Preston he was descended, he answered of that in Lancashire: Then said the King, you have many of your name and kindred very eminent; and Pre∣ston the Priest, although a Papist, is a very learned man. Great haste was made to bring in dinner, and the King was very plea∣sant all the time, had his eye continually upon Master Preston, and spake of divers passages in the Sermon with much content, especially that of the Arminians putting God into the same extreamity, that Darius was put in, Dan. 6. when he would have saved Daniel, but could not: but as soon as ever he was retired, the Marquesse Hamilton kneeled down, and be∣sought him, that he might commend the Preacher to him for his Chap∣lain, protested he did not so much as know him, but that he was moved by the weight and strength of that he had delivered; told him, he spake no pen and ink-horn language, but as one that comprehended, what he said, and that he could not but have substance and matter in him. The King acknowledged all, but said it was too early, remembred New-market businesse, and was reserved.
Sir Ralph Freeman, one of the Masters of Requests, had married a Kinswoman of the Duke of Buckhinghams, and was a Kinsman unto Master Preston; he makes relation of the businesse unto the Duke, and told him, if now he would appear in favour of his Cousin Preston, he might oblige the Puritans, and lay a ground-work for his own security, if tempests should arise; assured him that Master Preston was ingenuous, and might be made, that the King and all the Court were taken with the Sermon, and did approve it. The Duke of Buckingham was a wise man, and apprehensive of what Sir Ralph suggested seasonably, saw those they called Puritans were growing, and in the Parliament were thought considerable, knew that the Kings affections might cool, and he might need friends, and took Sir Ralphs discourse into his most se∣rious thoughts. An honest man, one Master Packer, was then his Secre∣tary, and he set on what Sir Ralph Freeman had suggested, and so it came unto a resolution, that Master Preston should be owned; and the Duke commanded Sir Ralph Freeman, to go to Master Preston from him, and acquaint him with his good opinion of him, and desire to see him; and indeed there was such a concurrence, and concentring of opinions and desires among the Courtiers, that it was assured Master Preston, he might be Chaplain unto whom he would, and that was now the de∣liberation, which of these offers he should accept, and whom he would acknowledge his Patron and Protector for the time to come. There was not so few Clergy men at Court at any time, and so no kind of opposition; yet the King himself hung back, and would do nothing hastily; he was not reconcileable unto the Puritans, and so desired not in that respect for to ingage him; but he desired to deprive them of Master Preston, and to divide him from them, and would do any thing that might drive that on; and considering how many he had wonne, that Master Preston was a young man and might be drawn on, he would not hinder nor oppose; so it was the joynt opinion of all his friends, that the best preferment was to be the Princes Chaplain, who then was grown and had an houshold. This therefore was represented unto Sir Ralph Freeman, and his opinion required, who quickly yielded and proposed it unto the Duke: both Prince and Duke had been abroad, and neither of them heard the Sermon; when therefore Master Preston was brought unto the Duke, he very seriously received him; told him it was the Prince his unhappinesse and his, to be absent when he did preach, and therefore desired him that he would vouchsafe a Copy of his Sermon to him, and believe that he would be ready, to the best and utmost of his power to serve him. There were many other Courtiers that desired Copies of the Ser∣mon, and the Court not staying there, Master Preston came home to furnish Copies. He never penned Sermon word for word but wrote what came into his mind, and as it came, and that in no good hand; and so it was a businesse to provide these Copies, which yet he seri∣ously attended till they were written fair, and then to Court he goes, where the Duke presents him to the Prince, and so he was made and
admitted Chaplain to the Prince in Ordinary;He is made the Prince his Chaplain. for as then the Prince had not compleated the number he intended, which was six, who were accordingly to wait two moneths by the year, and preach unto the houshold upon the Lords daies, and perform such duties as were required of them. But God was making other work for Master Preston; for Doctor Tolson, Bishop of Salisbury dies, and leaves a Wife and many Children unprovided for; for he had been Bishop but a little while. This Wife of his was Doctor Davenants Sister; in pity therefore and commisera∣tion of her case, it was proposed to the King by those that were his Friends, that Doctor Davenant, a single man, and well-deserving, might succeed his Brother in the Bishoprick, and so make some provision for his Children. The King thought very well of Doctor Davenant, not only for his singular abilities and labours in the University, but for his pains also, and service in the Synod of Dort against Arminius; and it was looked on as a deed of charity, and so believed he would carry it, and be the man. But this created Master Prestons cares; Doctor Davenant had been his constant and faithfull Friend, and given countenance upon all occa∣sions to him and all his Pupils. But now who should succeed? and where should Master Preston find another shelter? The Fellows for the most part were not his Friends, envied his numbers, and great re∣lations, and there was no man like so to befriend him. Besides, the Mar∣garet-Professors place would be void also by this remove, and ma∣ny able stirring Batchelors in Divinity, proposed unto him that place, and assured him the Election would be easily carried for him. The truth is, he had no great hope to do any great good in the Election of the Master of the Colledge, and one Doctor Mansel being named, a very moderate good-natured man, he let that care fall, and was more anxious about the Professors place; for though sound doctrine in the University was of much use, yet English preaching was like to work more, and win more souls to God. He alwaies highly valued, and frequently consulted with Master Dod; and he perswaded English preaching, as that wherein God was more immediately served, and said, there were others that might sup∣ply the University in the Professors place, that either could not, or would not labour mens Conversion. And indeed the Master of Sidney-Col∣ledge Doctor Ward, a vast Scholar, was then in view and nomination for the Professors place; yet Master Preston was so solicited by honest men, that he knew not what to do: Two things he thought he wanted to enable him. The one was a Latine tongue, the other a Latine style; in both which, by reason of desuetude, he was unready. For his style therefore, he resolves upon an exact and logical Analysis of all the E∣pistles, which would actuate and exercise his style, and acquaint him with the Scripture-phrase and language; and if he were called to be Professour, might serve for Lectures in the Schooles; which work he
immediately applied himself unto, and very happily compleated a work of great pains unto him, and in it self of great worth; but being Latine, and written only with his own ill hand, was not thought popular enough to come abroad, but lieth in the dark. For the exercising of his Latine tongue, he resolves a journey into the Netherlands, where he should have much occasion of speaking La∣tine, and see those Colledges and Universities; but there was no tra∣velling beyond Sea, without a License under the hands of Privy-Coun∣sellors; this he procures among his Friends with all the secrecy that could be, and a great while before he meant to use it, that he might conceale it from the Colledge and University; but this his secrecy be∣gat suspition that there was some plot. Velle putant quodcunque potest: It is not safe for men to have abilities. It was resented so much the more, because no Clergy man was made acquainted with it, and the opinion was, that something was brewing against Episcopacy. This they were sure of, that Amsterdam was in the Netherlands, and ever had been fa∣tal to the Hierarchy. The Lord Keeper then was Bishop Williams, he sees this plague afar off, Prov. 22.3. and provides a Messenger to go along unknown to Master Preston, that should observe and give intelli∣gence weekly of all that passed: Integer vitae scelerisque purus, non eget Jaculis nec arcu. A breast-plate of righteousnesse is a better guard then a shirt or coat of male. It was Davids uprightnesse that did preserve him, Psal. 25.21. so was it Master Prestons, for he knew nothing of this attendance, till after his return, but gave out in the Colledge, and among his Pupils, that he would go the next Vacation into Kent, to visit Sir Richard Sands, and drink if he saw cause, the Tunbridge waters, con∣cludes to take one of his Pupils with him, a Yorkshire Gentleman, Sir Henry Slingsbys Sonne and Heir; and did accordingly acquaint his Fa∣ther and make Provision for it long before. The time came,His travel in the Low-Countries. and he goes into Kent, and is received in the passage boat for Rotterdam, in the garb and notion of a Gentleman, with his skarlet cloak and gold hat∣band, and all things answerable; and so goes over all the Provinces, both Protestant and Popish, where there was any thing observable, and encounters frequently with divers Priests and Jesuites, professing himself a Protestant Gentleman that was willing to find out the truth, and try all Tenents, and accordingly was courted by them very much, and solicited to be a Papist; and they gave him very many popish Books, and so he came back into Kent, and to the Colledge at the time appointed, unknown to any in the Colledge, but only one of his Pupils, from whom he seldome concealed any thing. He was no sooner set∣led in the Colledge, but a rumour flies abroad, that Master Preston had been beyond the Seas; he shewed them that it was incredible, and won∣ders at their sillinesse, that they would beleeve so unlikely a relation; the matter was not great, now all was past, and so it rested doubtfull and undetermined. He had a long time been successefull in the way of Pupils, but Do∣ctor Davenants leaving of the Colledge troubled him. A great Tutor,
hath much occasion to use the Masters influence, for accommodation and advancement of his Pupils, which now he saw he could not promise un∣to himself; and it fell out much about this time, that Doctor Dunn, Preacher at Lincolns-Inne died, and some in that society proposed that Master Preston might be tried whether he were willing to accept that place for Tearm time: He was himself, neither carelesse, nor cracking of his good name: Famae nec incuriosus, nec venditator. But it was much grown by reason of his successe in the conflicts and encounters he had at Court. It was some refreshing unto honest men, that Master Pre∣ston, so resolute, and constant in the waies of God, was yet the Prince his Chaplin, and helped forward the desire of these men; it suted with him, to have an opportunity to exercise his Ministry in a considerable and in∣telligent Congregation, where he was assured, many Parliament men, and others of his best acquaintance would be his hearers;He is chosen to Lincolns-Inne. and where in Tearm time, he should be well accommodated, so he consented and un∣dertook the place; the Chappel then was very little, and at the first, the numbers that attended on his Ministry, besides their own society, were few, but when the Chappel was new built, as now it is, the numbers were exceeding great, that were his constant hearers, and foundations laid, that will not easily be ruined. This was some ease unto his grieved mind, for Doctor Dave∣nants leaving of the Colledge and University; but filled not his great capacity and large desire of doing good; the Colledge he gave over in his thoughts, but not the University, where his Preaching was much resented, and made great impressions; and though at Lincolns-Inne he had Gown-men to be his Hearers, yet they were not like to propagate and spread it. A Preacher in the University, doth generare patres, beget begetters, and transmit unto posterity, what God is pleased to reveal to him; In a word, doth what the Apostle doth en∣joyn, 2 Tim. 2.2. and he of all men, thirsted after opportunities of doing service, and might well say with the Spouse, that he was sick of love, Cant. 2.5. Some of the Fellows of Emanuel Colledge were very eminent for parts and learning, yet clouded and obscured, (as they thought) by an opinion that lay upon the Colledge, that they were Puritans, that is, not only Godly and Religious, (for so they were, and were content to be esteemed) but non-conformists, and averse to Government; for which cause there had been lately some alteration made, both in their Chappel, and manner of their diet; they thought therefore, if they could prevail with Doctor Chaderton their present Master, to resign, who was establisht in it by the Founder, and named in the Statute, but was grown very old, and had out-lived many of those great relations, which he had be∣fore, they might perhaps procure that Master Preston might succeed him, and bring the Colledge into reputation, being a good man, and yet a Courtier, the Prince his Chaplin, and very gracious with the Duke of Buckingham. But this was sooner said then done, the old Doctor was exceeding wary and jealous not only of his own disparagement, but espe∣cially
of the good and welfare of that brave foundation that had grown and flourished under his Government so long; for if it were but known that he were out, there were divers lay in wait to get a Man∣date, and come in against their minds; a fresh example whereof they had lately seen in their next neighbours, Christs Colledge, where after Master Pemberton was chosen, Doctor Carew Dean of Exeter, was forced on them, and did all he could to mould a new, and alter the consti∣tution and genius of the Colledge. But the Fellows answered, that this might be better hindered and prevented whilest he was alive, then at his death; for his resignation might be carried privately, but his death could not, and if all the Fellows were content, the Election might be past be∣fore the resignation were discovered; and so they promised to found and try the judgment of the other Fellows, and then repair again unto him. There were two things in the Colledge that (in their Opinions) greatly pinched them. The one was the Statute for attendance and continuance whilst they were Fellows, so that they had not opportunity to live in Noble-mens Houses, or take Lectures to exercise their Mini∣stry, and make themselves known unto such as had it in their power to prefer them. Another was the Statute of departing at such a stand∣ing, whether they were provided or not provided; and there was then a fresh example in Doctor Traverse, a man of great worth, yet forced to sojourn as a Fellow-Commoner in Christs Colledge untill he could be better accommodated; the Fellows therefore were easily induced to affect this change; for they thought Master Preston might be an instru∣ment by reason of his great acquaintance, either to get some mitigation of the Statute, or procure more livings to be annexed to the Colledge for their preferment. So they returned to the old man, and told him that the Fellows were all agreed, and ready to do what he should prescribe, and it rested now in him to prevent the danger that did threaten, not only them in their particular concernments, but the growing good and welfare also of the Colledge. The poor man wist not what to do; to out-live the Master∣ship he thought was to out-live himself, and to go into his grave alive; yet he honoured and loved Master Preston very much, and could not an∣swer that dilemma of the Colledge-safety; therefore he told them he would not be wanting to the Colledge-good, but it concerned them as well as himself, to provide they were not cheated, and another forced on them, whether they would or not; and therefore desired that Master Preston might be requested to deal with his Friends at Court, and procure some promise that there should be no Mandate granted, in case his re∣signation should be known; he told them likewise how unprovided he was for maintenance, when that was gone, and how unseemly it would be for him now in his old age for to want, and therefore desired he might be taken in this particular into consideration. But Master Preston quickly eased the old man of all these fears, by procuring a Letter from the Duke of Buckingham in these words.
Sir, The Duke of Buckinghams Letter.I Have moved his Majesty, concerning Master Preston's succeeding of you, in the Mastership of Emanuel Colledge, who is not only willing, but is also graciously pleased to recommend him to the place in especial manner before any other; so that in making this way for him, you shall do a very ac∣ceptable thing to his Majesty, as also to the Prince his Master, of which I am likewise to give you notice, and to put you out of all doubt, that another may be thrust upon you; you shall not need to fear any thing, in regard that from his Majesty there will be no hinderance to his succession; and for that point of supply of maintenance, I shall (as I promised) take care for to procure it, when fit occasion shall be offered; so taking kindly what you have done, I rest. Theobalds, Sept. 20. 1622. Your very loving Friend, G. Buckingham. When the Doctor had received and read this Letter, he was in all things satisfied, as to the Court, but they all knew that Doctor Traverse lay in wait for this preferment; for being outed by the Statute at E∣manuel Colledge, he sojourned at Christs Colledge as Fellow-Commo∣ner, and presumed either by his Friends at Court, to get a Mandate, or be chosen in the Colledge by a party of the Fellows, whom he thought his own; therefore great care was taken to keep all secret, and though the Statute do ordain a vacancy of seven daies, and notice by a Schedule passed upon the Chappel-door, yet such was the concurrent uniform agreement of all the Fellows, that it was not discovered to any of the Scholars untill the day of Election; and because there is a Sacrament to be immediately before it; they were constrained to lock up all the gates that none might come in or go out till it was past; and then two of the Fellows were dispatcht to Queens Colledge, to acquaint Master Preston with what they had done,He is chosen Master of E∣manuel. and to desire that at two of the Clock he would repair unto the Colledge to be admitted, and undertake the charge. It was strange news at Queens, and all the Colledge were much af∣fected with it, wondering extreamly that such a great transaction should be carried with so much secrecy, and that amongst Master Prestons twelve Disciples (as they called them) there should be never a Judas but all concentre in it; but there was order given presently, that all the Scholars should be ready against two of the clock that day, to attend Master Preston and the Fellows to Emanuel Colledge, in habits suitable unto their several qualities, which was done accordingly; and a very goodly company attended him from Queens unto Emanuel, where they were cheerfully received and entertained according to the custome, with a generous and costly banquet, and then returned unto Queens again; but left Master Preston, the prop and glory of it, at Emanuel. In the plantation of Emanuel Colledge at the first, the godly Foun∣der, took great care to store his Colledge with godly and able Fellows
from all the other Colledges, and some were after added that were emi∣nent; but now a Master is bestowed, God in mercy hath enabled that good society to pay their debts, by sending not only Members, but also Heads into very many of the other Colledges, so as they may now well say, Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris. Sir Walter Mildmay their Noble and Religious Founder, was wont to say unto his Friends, that he had set an Acorn, that might perhaps in time become an Oak; blessed be God our eyes have seen it, not only grown and flourishing, but fruitfull, seasonable showers, a great pro∣motion unto a new plantation, and earnest Prayers unto God, a special means to bring these down, of which I think no Colledge ever had more, which in these last years have returned a glorious Harvest; to God be praise. This news ran swiftly all the Kingdom over, and was received as men were affected. Good men were glad that honest men were not abhorred, as they had been, at the Court, and presaged much of that in∣largement and deliverance, which we have lived to see; The Cour∣tiers made full account that he was theirs, and would mount up from one step to another, untill he were a prelate; especially the Duke of Buckingham, who from this time seemed sincerely to affect him, Mul∣tum fuit ad amorem, dedisse beneficium, thought he had given earnest and could not be defrauded of the purchase. The Earl of Pembroke, and the Countesse of Bedford had a great interest in him, and he in them; and all men looked on him as upon a rising man, and respected him ac∣cordingly. As for Lincolns-Inne, they made account they had a special influence into this honour, as having first expressed their good opinion of him, and there was an honest godly old man, one of the Benchers, Ma∣ster Ayres, that upon hearing of the news, would needs be young again, and make an Anagram upon his name, though he was uncertain how he wrote it in Latine, for he had seen it written divers waies. Being there∣fore resolute, and loath to misse it, he resolves to write it both waies, as he that used to say his Prayers in Latine and English, that both might not fail, and so first he wrote it, Johannes Prestonius with this Anagram, En stas pius in honore: And this distitch: Doctrina, ingenium, virtus tua, praemia poscunt; En dedit Emanuel, stas in honore pius. But lest this should be mistaken, he writes it Johannes Prestonus: with this Anagram, Se nosse, non tupiar. And this distitch: Turpia non novisse, bonum; se nosse, beatum: Ista doces alios, sed prius ipse facis. The rest of that Society rejoyced, that their Lecturer was Master of Emanuel, and took occasion to expresse it according to their several dis∣positions and relations, when he came to them in the Tearm, which shortly followed. There was one thing in the Colledge-Statutes that greatly troubled him; and that was that the Masters absence from the Colledge was confined to a moneth in every quarter, and he saw not how he could attend at Court, and preach at Lincolns-Inne in Tearm time, but
he should transgresse; but the Fellows soon consented to an interpre∣tation, that absolved him from the rigid sense, there being in the Sta∣tute a double liberty; first that in case of violent detention it should not hold; they resolved that not only a natural, but also a moral violence was to be understood. The other was, that in case of Colledge-businesse he should not be esteemed absent. Now the Colledge was at that time in suit for a Living in the West, of good value, with one Master Ewins, a Gentleman in the Parish, who had bred up a younger Sonne to be a Scholar, in relation to that Living; and therefore contended for it, as it had been his own Inheritance; and when he was worsted at Common-Law, prefers a Bill in Chancery, and thought by mony to carry it a∣gainst the Colledge-right. Bishop Williams the Lord-Keeper then, was his great Friend, and when after many delayes it came at last to hearing, would not allow the Counsell for the Colledge to speak; Master Preston being present, craved leave to speak in the cause himself, but was not only silenced, but severely reprehended for it; it was Trinity-Tearm, and the plague was very hot in London, so that Michaelmas Tearm was wholly adjourned, and the next Tearm was proclaimed at Redding, and the Records removed thither; but before that, the Lord-Keeper was removed from his Throne, and Sir Thomas Coventry, one of the Colledge-Council that were not permitted before to speak, succeeded him; by whose integrity and justice, the Colledge was restored to their right, which ever since they have enjoyed, and so his following the Colledge businesse excused his absence all his time. Being therefore now established, and greatly minding the good thereof, he observed that the Scholars kept Acts but seldome, and ac∣cordingly when they came unto it, performed it but meanly; he there∣fore advised with the Fellows in it, and after many consultations, it was resolved that the number of Acts should be in a manner doubled, of those under Masters of Art, which was a great advancement to learning of all sorts in the Colledge. About this time Sir Arthur Chichester, afterward an Irish Baron, was chosen to go Embassadour into Germany, about the Palatinate affairs, and Master Preston was by the Duke of Buckingham and other Friends, designed to go along with him; he did not greatly fancy the employ∣ment, but would not contradict; only it was considered, that though he was the Prince his Chaplain, and Master of a Colledge, yet he was not Doctor, which they thought might sound ill abroad, and reflect upon his Master, and there was not time to go unto it, in the ordinary way of Acts and Exercises, therefore a Mandate was addressed to the Vice-Chancellour and Heads, that forasmuch as Master Preston was to wait upon my Lord Ambassadour, and could not in so short a time perform his Acts, he should be forthwith admitted Doctor in Divinity, that he might be ready to attend the service, which was done accordingly with all alacrity. Being therefore thus engaged, and not knowing what might befall
him in the voyage, he resolved to settle his temporal estate before he went. He was not willing to be accounted rich; would often say, Manifestus thesaurus citò expenditur. And therefore though he had great Incomes from his Pupils, and was not Prodigal, yet he was not Master of his money; for he had been advised to adventure in the East-India Company, then newly set up, and because estates there were invisible, he was the willinger, but by that means wanted money; for there was paying for many years, but no returns; yet there was hope it might at last come in, and so it did without diminuti∣on of the principal, but not in his life-time. Therefore he thought it needfull to make a legall disposition of his estate by Will, and so he did, and named a very Honourable person his Executor, who lived to enjoy that money as well as other by vertue of it. But the voy∣age came to nothing; for Sir Arthur did not go as he intended, yet this was his last Will, and according to it all was enjoyed, though he made additions by way of request or direction, which were accordingly per∣formed. It was ever his ambition not to be mercenary in his Ministry, but at liberty to preach where he might do most good, without relation or respect unto the wages; and he considered that the Master of Emanuel could have no Living that had cure of souls annexed, and therefore was willing to give ear unto the sollicitations of the Townsmen, who great∣ly prest him to be their Lecturer at Trinity-Church; for they had ap∣plied themselves to Doctor Andrews Bishop of Ely, and propounded to him Master Jeffries, one of the Fellows of Pembroke-Hall; and he had given way, and Master Jeffries did preach at Trinity some years, but was desirous of a more setled condition, and had desired Doctor Preston to procure him to be Chaplain unto some Noble-man, that was like to help him to a Living, which was a very easie thing for him to do, having so much interest in many great ones; so he pitched upon Mar∣quesse Hamilton, who presently admitted Master Jeffries, Chaplain to him, and shewed him much respect, as well for Doctor Prestons sake, as for his own, and long it was not before a Living fell, namely the Recto∣ry of Dun-mow in Eessex, which the Marquesse procured and bestowed upon his Chaplain Master Jeffries; for he had not then commenced Doctor, and by that means the Lecture at Trinity was shortly to be void. The Townsmen made account that now they had what they desired, namely an opportunity to settle Doctor Preston in the Lecture at Trini∣ty; and great care was taken to increase the stipend from fourty or fifty pounds per annuum unto fourscore, that the Doctor might have twenty pounds a quarter paid him; for they thought the former inconsider∣able, not knowing what principles the Doctor lived by; and when they had effected that, they employed some of the chief to propose the mat∣ter to the Doctor very solemnly; who was easily perswaded to accept their offer, without relation to the stipend; but there was one of the Fellows of Sidney-Colledge, Master Middlethwite that put in for it, and
though few or none of the Contributors or Townsmen sided with him, yet he procured Letters from the Bishop of Ely, and ingaged all his friends, both in the Court and University, that it came unto a very great contest. Doctor Preston who was offered any Bishoprick he would re∣solve on, and told at Royston by the Duke of Buckingham, that the Bi∣shoprick of Glocester was then void, contends with Master Middle∣thwite to be Lecturer at Trinity-Church, for a stipend of fourscore pounds per annum, as the upshot of all his hopes, and fruit of all his great atchievments at the Court; and the contention was so great on all sides, that it could not be concluded by any mediation, but was referred to an hearing at Royston before King James, who was really against the Doctors preaching in the University, the conse∣quence whereof he well saw, and was informed fully of. I confesse I often wondered why Master Middlethwite, an eminent Scholar, and like enough to get preferment, as afterwards it's known he did, should stickle for so small an opportunity to preach, against the inclination and disposition of the Townsmen; untill I under∣stood that he was set on by the Prelatical Heads, who told him that it was a service acceptable to the King, and he should be re∣warded for it. At the time appointed it came unto an hearing, and an Argument was urged against the Doctor namely; that it was a Lecture maintained by six-pences, a thing unseemly for a Master of a Colledge and the Prince his Chaplain; but the Duke had taken care that nothing should be ordered and concluded against the Doctors mind; for the Duke resolved not to lose him, so the meeting was dis∣solved and nothing done; but that night, Sir Edward Contvey then Secretary, invited Doctor Preston to supper, and after supper told him, that the King had ordered him to tell him, that if he would give over his pursuance of that Lecture, and let the Heads dispose of it, he should make his choice of any other preferment, that was more honour∣able and profitable for him; but the Doctors end was to do good, not to get good; the Kings, to make him uselesse, and divide him from the Puritans. The Duke was more indifferent, who laboured in him to win and gratifie the Puritans, whose power in Parliament was now grown very formidable; therefore when nothing else would con∣tent him, he was confirmed Lecturer at Trinity-Church, the last pre∣ferment he ever had, where he preached after all his time, and did much good. The Duke had now obliged Doctor Preston in the judgment and opinion of all the honest Party, and much displeased the Prelatical; and he saw apparently that King James approved not his siding with him; yet he was more expresse then ever in his affections to him, and freenesse with him. He had indeed a very happy and rare composure of sweetnesse and solidity, would play and dally with the King, as if he were a woman, and yet enquire, and apprehend, and argue counsels and debates of State, as if a Burleigh or a Walsingham: saw clearly the affe∣ctions of the King were fading, which the Puritans (though never so
much his Friends,) could not repair, and therefore eyed and adored the rising Sun, who now was grown, and fit for marriage, but no Prepara∣tives to find a Consort for him. He knew the Spanish match was but a colour, and a Treaty dandled between Bristol and King James, to fool the Prince off, and shut his eares against the French proposals. This he discovers to the Prince, tels him Kings did not love an Heir apparent, how near soever; that the daughter of Spain was designed to a Monastery, and kept for a reserve unto the house of Austria; that in France there was a Lady much before her; that if he pleased, he would wait upon him into Spain in a disguise, and take the French Court in their way, and see that Lady, and so discover Bristols, and his fathers jugling; the Prince resents and hugs this overture. They tell King James, the Earl of Bristol and the Spanish Ministers abused him; that it was time to bring that Treaty to some Conclusion, desire they might go into Spain, and play the game out. The King saw who had ploughed with his Heifer, feared, (as he was apt to do) a check-mate; yet for the present urgeth only his affections to them both, and asketh them how he should subsist so long, without their companies? But they persisting, signes a Warrant with his own hand for Jack Smith, and Tom Smith, with each of them a servant and their horses to go beyond-Sea. The Duke even now was not unmindfull of Doctor Preston, but leaves order with the Dutchesse and Countesse of Denbigh, to be carefull for him; and Sir Ralph Freeman having a child to baptize, Doctor Pre∣ston is intreated for to preach, and the Dutchesse and Countesse were both Gossips, who shewed to the Doctor very great respect, and gave him hopes of doing good; and some he did, for he procured by their means, Master Hildershams liberty, and restitution to his place at Ashby de la zouch, and gave great hopes unto good Ministers of fairer times, then had been formerly; only he would relate with much regret, that he often found Doctor Laud, then Bishop of Saint Davids with them, and therefore doubted of the issue and event. The Doctor saw by the debates about the Lecture, that he had ene∣mies as well as friends at Court; that the Duke was mutable, as well as mortal; knew that the King abhorred that journey into Spain, and would remember it, if able: Dulcis inexperto; cultura potentis amici expertus metuit. And therefore though now he were setled and assured in the University, yet would not leave his Lecture at Lincolns-Inne; but being still in London in the Tearm-time, about the Colledge-businesse, con∣tinued Preacher at Lincolns-Inne, and thought it might be a good reserve, in case the naughty Heads or Factions in the Court should fall upon him; and it was well he did, for the Prince and Duke returned the next Octo∣ber, highly offended with the Spanish gravity, and both they and all their train did nothing but tell stories of the Spanish basenesse; so a Par∣liament was called, and the Duke cryed up by all the godly Party in the Kingdome. The Spanish Agent at the Court had order from his Master out of Spain, for to defie him and protest against him at the
Counsel-Table, but seriously he could not have done him a greater courtesie, for the people universally did hate the Spaniard, and now the Duke became the peoples Martyr. I have seen Verses made in his de∣fence and commendation; and Agents presently dispatched in France, to treat of that Match. King James liked not this stuff, but the Prince was able now to go alone, and especially when he had the Duke for one of his Supporters; all things are fairly carried for Religion, and the Duke of Buckhingham, the Princes and peoples Favourite. The people seemed now to have the better, and the Court-affairs for to decline and droop. Doctor Preston like another Mordecai was very great, the Prince his Master, and the Duke his Friend, and the Courti∣ers eyes upon him, because they saw he came not thither for preferment, as all men else. Pisoni in imperium adoptato nihil in vultu mutatum, quasi magis imperare posset, quam vellet. His honours altered nothing in him, but gave encouragement to all the godly Party; and his Ser∣mons at Lincolns-Inne much wrought upon the Parliament, so that a bold Petition was contrived and presented to the King at Whitehall, from both Houses of Parliament, April 23. 1624. against the spread∣ing and increase of Popery, and the Indulgence given unto Priests and Jesuites. King James was in the evening of his glory; his Party in the Court under a cloud; another Sun almost in view, and the , or day-star already risen, and accordingly he answered warily to their Petition, bewails his want of information, as the reall ground of this their trouble, which otherwise he had prevented; acknowledged that whilest the Treaties lasted with Spain and Austria, he was obliged to comply; but now both being broken off, he would be rigid and severe against the Priests and Jesuites; bids them find out a way for to restrain the growth of Popery, and he would second them; but resolves to pay the Duke of Buckingham for all this, and gives order to the Earl of Bristol to prepare an information for that end; but the Match with France, and other intervenient accidents obstruct it, for the present. The Duke having told tales out of School, and broken off the Match with Spain, was much obliged to further and promote the French, which he did seriously excuse to Doctor Preston, upon this ground, that there was not any Protestant for to be had: and for to marry with a subject had alwaies been unlucky and fatal to the Kings of England; that the French would not be ridged in religious observations, but the Doctor constantly opposed; only acknowledged this difference, that Spanish Popery was an absolute ingredient to their intended Western Monarchy, but French was not so, and so this was lesse evil. But the French found out this obligation, and were untractable, un∣lesse the Duke would aid the King of France against the Rochellers: This was a hard chapter for one so much obliged unto the Puritans and Doctor Preston, and he therefore declined all he could, but nothing else would serve, and he knew King James lay ready to take advantages,
so in Conclusion, eight Ships were granted to oppose the Rochel-fleet, and many colours sought to cloude it, and hide it from the world, but from that time Doctor Preston doubted of the Saint-ship of the Duke of Buckingham, whom otherwise he honoured and loved very much. But it was high time for the Duke to look about him; King James was not to learn now how for to play his Game, he was an old, but not a foolish King, Eccl. 4.13. and therefore failed not to make Pro∣vision, and lay rods in pisse, that he might use upon occasion. Kings use for to account an ague in the Spring their Physick, yet Physick till March be past is not good, but this ague antidates the moneths, and comes in February. The King was then at Theobalds, and the Ague was made but small account of. He feared death, but was the most impati∣ent and disordered of any living, what rules soever the Physicians gave, he would observe none; which intemperance might very well occasion the growing, strength and vigour of the disease, which howsoever more and more increased, and at last began to be considerable, then he be∣gan to take advice and to submit to rules, but now it was too late; for March 27. 1625. on the Lords day in the morning, about ten of the clock at Theobalds the King dies. Doctor Preston then attended in his moneth, and was sometimes hastened to the Prince to comfort him, and sometimes to the Duke; and indeed it was a very mournfull morning. Death is a serious thing, and knocks alike at Pallaces as at the meanest Cottage. King James was very much beloved of all his servants; some of the Huntsmen could not be gotten from him; the Prince and Duke were both of them retired and wept exceedingly. But Sir Edward Conwey and some of the Lords drew up a Wiring, and pro∣claimed Charles Steward King, with all his Titles; and hast was made to pack away to London. The Prince and Duke, and Doctor Preston in Coaches shut down, hasten to White-hall, and there he is proclaimed again with more formalities, and the Lord Maior and the City sent to, where it was done with much solemnity, and great rejoycing of the people; for the Prince had that exceeding happinesse to come upon the stage unprejudiced. For he had never interposed nor acted, but in the Spanish businesse, and that succeeded to his great advantage; so that if he listed he might have been as popular as ever any were. This fall occasions many alterations in the Court; the Bishops generally, and Doctor Prestons enemies, and all that had contend∣ed with the Duke were Crest-fallen. King James was like e∣nough to have out-lived the Duke of Buckingham, who had been very sick since his return from Spain, but all is altered, and the Duke does all. But he had many things to do; the affronts received in Madrid, and at the Counsel-table by the Agent, were to be sent back by a puissant and mighty Navy, and Provisions made accordingly. King James to be interr'd; a Parliament to be summoned; the French Lady to be
sent for, and brought into England, which the Duke especially intend∣ed, and spake to all the Gallants of his Retinue to attend him, and to many other of the Gentry and Nobility throughout the Kingdome. But he found it hard thus in the morning of the Kings affairs to be a∣broad, there being then a Parliament, and the sicknesse much encrea∣sing in the City, so he was constrained to employ the Earl of Holland, and attend himself at home. All were not gratified in this great revo∣lution and mutation of affairs, and the discontented Party murmured, and let flie at the Duke, and the sicknesse much encreasing, began to make a mutiny, and it was much desired that the Parliament might be pro∣rogued till some other more healthfull and lesse dangerous time. But the Navy against the Spaniards, and the pressing wants of all sorts that de∣pended on the Court would not permit; so it was only adjourned to Oxford; yet there the sicknesse was as soon as they, and some of their Members smarted for it, but hast was made to gratifie the new King, and the Provisions for the Navy went forward, many men ingaged, and the King resolved to attend that businesse, as admitting no de∣lay. There was one thing that invited Doctor Preston to a journey that year, and that was a strong suspition that the plague was in the town, in which case there is a liberty to dissolve the Colledge, without any de∣triment unto the Officers and Members of it. He was not willing to omit the opportunity, because he had many invitations into the West. The Bishop of Salisbury he desired to consult withall, about a Book of Master Montagues, that was commended to him by the Duke of Buck∣ingham to peruse and give his sense upon it. Master Shervil the Recor∣der of Salisbury was a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne, and a very good friend of his; he had divers Friends at Dorchester, and was desirous to be sea-sick, and was still enticed forward, and at last resolved to wait upon the King and Duke, at Plimmouth, whether they were gone to see the Navy set sayl. Whilest he was there, the Rochel fleet was broken by those ships the King lent, and Mounsieur Sabeeza came into Falmouth with the remainder, and thence to Plimmouth, with most lamentable out-cries against the Duke, who seemed to be very much affected with it, and made mighty Promises of wonderfull repairs, but Doctor Preston failed not to set that businesse home, he did believe the Duke was over-ruled to lend them, and sorry when he saw the sad effects. But whilest the Duke was thus detained in the West, the Earl of Bristol and the Lord Keeper Williams combined against him, and drew in many to their Party, among others the Earl of Pembroke, and divers great ones in the House of Commons, and was so incouraged and heartned in it, that the Earl of Bristol, May 1. 1626. preferred in the House of Lords twelve Articles against the Duke of Buckingham, tending to prove, That the Duke had promised unto the Pope and Mini∣sters of Spain, to make the King a Papist; and over-ruled him, against the judgment of the Earl of Bristol, to write unto the Pope with the title of
Sanctissime Pater; That his carriage in the matters of Religion was so of∣fensive, that he stuck not to kneel before the Host as often as he met it; That he was so licentious and unchast in his behaviour, that the Spanish Mini∣sters resolved not to have any thing to do with him; That when he could not bring about the Match to his own particular advantage, he used means to obstruct it and break it off; That he had informed King James of all these things, who promised to hear him, and leave the offender unto Justice, and that not many daies before his sicknesse. The Duke had now reason to look about him, and was very able so to do, and first he labours to divide the Party by drawing off the Earl of Pembroke, by promising his Daughter to the Earl of Mountgomeries Sonne, which afterward he did accomplish, then he endeavoured to oblige the Puritans, by gratifying Doctor Preston all the waies he could, and particularly in the businesse of the Colledge-suit, by depri∣ving Bishop Williams of the Seal, and giving it to Sir Thomas Coventry, who was one of the Colledge-counsel; yea he went so far as to nomi∣nate the Doctor to the King to be Lord Keeper, and the King was so firm to him, that the Earl of Bristol could do no good, and so withdrew his Articles. Doctor Prestons Friends were Newters all this while, and looked on, neither engaged for him, nor against him, which was sadly represented to the Duke by the Bishops and that Party, who wondered he should dote upon a man that either could not or would not own him in his need, bad him consider whether Puritans were like to be his Friends, whose waies were toto coelo different, and told him plainly he could not have them both. If he adhered to those that sought their ruine, they must adhere to such as would support them: so that the Duke was in a great strait, and knew not what to do. Doctor Preston also was importuned to put it to an issue, and if he would not leave the rotten and corrupted Clergy, then to leave him, and because there had been informations against that Book of Master Mountagues, they propounded it might come to a debate, and not re∣main as now it it did, unsetled. The Doctor and the Duke were both of them unwilling to an open breach, loved for to temporise and wait upon events. But Doctor Prestons friends would not be satisfied, but urged a conference, whereunto they were incouraged by some Orthodox and very learned Bishops, and at last it was concluded by two religious Noble-men, that a conference there should be, the Bishop of Rochester and Doctor White then Dean of Carlisle, on the one side, and the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, and Doctor Preston on the other. A day was set, a Satturday in Hillary-Tearm, at four of the clock in the afternoon, the place was York-house, and Doctor Preston sent to in the morning for to attend it. The Noble-men came unto the Bishops lodgings, about two of the clock, and sent for Doctor Preston to them, who gave many reasons why he could not go, but they were resolute, and taking the Bishop with them went without him; but the Doctor considering, and fearing his absence might betray the cause, and give encouragement un∣to
the other side, went afterward himself unto the place, and sate by as an hearer silent untill all was done; but talking afterwards occasionally of falling from grace, the Bishop shewed that a godly man might go far and yet return, by the instance of the Prodigal, Luk. 15. but Doctor White exclaimed against any that should think the Prodigal in acts of drunkennesse and whoredome not to be fallen from grace, and urged that of the Apostle, Rom. 1.32. That those that do such things are worthy of death, that is, said he, in a state of everlasting death, and therefore fallen from grace; so 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. shall not inherit the Kingdome of God; that is, are not sons, for if sons then heirs, Rom. 8.17. But Doctor Preston answered, that these sins made indeed a forfei∣ture of all their interest into the hands of God, and he might make the seisure if he pleased, but did not unto those which were his children, and in Covenant with him; as two Tennants, by not paying of their Rent, or keeping Covenants forfeited their Leases, yet the Lord might seize the one, and not the other, as he pleased. But the Bishop and the Dean both cried out, this was the way to all licentiousness and looseness. To which the Doctor answered, That the seed of God, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Joh. 3.9. remained in the sinning Saint, or Sonne, and would repair him; as in water, there remains a principle of cold, even when it boyl∣eth over, that will undoubtedly reduce it, when the heat and fire is re∣moved, as in Peter, David, Sampson, and others, was apparent; so that they could not run out into all licentiousnesse, for the spirit lusted against the flesh, that they cannot do the things they would, Gal. 5.17. and though he did not disinherit them, and blot their names out of the Book of life, Phil. 4.3. yet he might, and would withdraw his favour, imbitter all their comforts, Mat. 26.75. raise trouble to them from their dear∣est interests, 2 Sam. 12.11. fill them with anguish, Psal. 38.3, 4. which in reason will keep them from running out, seeing the evil is com∣mensurable unto that good of pleasure or profit their sinne afforded; and if need be, he can adde unto it eternal apprehensions, and make them feel the fiercenesse of his anger, Psal. 88.6, 7. without any hope of being eased; and after this can restrain and withhold them, as he did Abimelech, Gen. 20.6. For if one cease to be a Sonne, be∣cause he commits a sinne that doth deserve eternal death, then every sinne a child of Gods commits, rends his relation or sonship off; for every sinne deserves eternal death, Rom. 6.23. and because in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. we should be alwaies out of sonship and have neither certainty nor comfort in our estate, unlesse he could give some ground out of Scripture, to assure what sinnes put us out, and what did not. The Duke had sent to Doctor Preston to decline this clashing confe∣rence, and assured him he was as much his Friend as ever, and would have stopt it if he could, but the Bishops had over-ruled it, which the Doctor at the first believed, and so was backward. But when he saw the confidence of Doctor White and his Companion, he doubted the sincerity of that assurance, and was afterward informed, that there had
been a meeting at the Countesse of Denbies, and the Duke had promised to leave him; this gave him resolution and encouragement against the second conference, which was managed in a manner by him alone, against Master Mountague and Doctor White. For when the Doctor saw the Duke begun to double with him, he was less fearfull to offend him, though the Duke still carried it, with all the fairnesse that he could, and appeared not in person. When the time came for the second Conference, the Doctor readily appeared; and the first thing he charged Master Mountague withall, was about his doctrine of Traditions, which he affirmed he had delievered as grosly and erroneously as any Papist, Gag. pag. 38, 39, 40. For he justfied that place in Bazil, where he saies, The doctrine retained in the Church, was delievered, partly by written instructions, partly by un∣written traditions, having both a like force unto Piety; which was so unlike to Bazil, and the opinions of those times, that it was generally believed to be put in by the Papists of later times. Master Moun∣tague confessed, it was suspected by some of the preciser cut; but Doctor Preston told him, Bishop Bilson was none of them, yet he did judge it supposititious; and it must be so, or Bazil acknowledged to be erroneous. For he instanceth in praying towards the East, and use of Chrisme or Oyl in Baptisme; both which being rejected by the Church of England, argues they held that place of Bazil not Ca∣nonical. Master Mountague answered, that  there used by Saint Bazil, might signifie a thing that seemed so, and so the sense might be, that some things that seemed true, of lesse esteem and consequence, might be delivered by tradition, as long as matters more substantial were taken from the Scriptures. But Doctor Preston shewed that  signified oftentimes doctrine, and was used here by Bazil for those Heads of doctrine that were more principal, and lesse exposed, comparing them unto those places in the Temple, whereunto the people had not ac∣cesse. Master Mountague answered farther, that his assertion was hypotheti∣cal, that if a doctrine came from the same author, it was no great matter, whether it were by writing or word of mouth, for either had the same authority. But Doctor Preston told him, Bazil was positive, and spake directly, and him he justified, and therefore could not be hypothetical, as he pretended. It is a great step unto victory for to divide. Paul sets the Pharisees against the Sadduces, Act. 23.6, 7, 8. that he might save himself. The Jesuites are so good at it, that though they have but one to be their ad∣versary, they will endeavour to divide him from himself, by moving passion, or compassion, or some affection of his own against him. Doctor White had openly in the Commencement house, maintained that Electi∣on is not ex praevisis operibus, and therefore Doctor Preston resolved to pinch Master Mountague in that particular, that he might bereave him of his animating Champion Doctor White.
There were four several places that Doctor Preston had observed to make good this charge, the first which he produced, was Gag. pag. 179. Some Protestants hold, that Peter was saved, because God would have it so without respect unto his faith and obedience; and Judas dam∣ned, because God would have it so, without respect unto his sin. And added, this is not the doctrine of the Protestants, this is not the do∣ctrine of the Church, the Church of England hath not taught it, doth not believe it, hath opposed it. Now Doctor White was very fierce and eager to engage, told him it was no doctrine of the Church of England, but a private fancy of some, that Judas was condemned, without respect unto his sin; for the wages of sin is death, Rom. 6.23. The soul that sinneth shall die, Ezek. 18.4. But Doctor Preston answered, he did not charge that upon Master Moun∣tague, but the former part of the assertion, that Peter was not saved, with∣out respect unto his believing and obedience, and so Election should not be absolute, but grounded upon faith and works foreseen. Then saith Dr. White, I have nothing against that, but leave Master Mountague to answer for himself. Dr. Preston was glad that he was eased of Dr. White, and yet resol∣ved to make advantage of it, and therefore told Dr. White, if he thought Election was not ex fide Praevisâ, he desired to know whether saving grace were an effect, and fruit of Election, or no? Dr. White ac∣knowledged readily it was; then said Dr. Preston, Whosoever hath sa∣ving grace is Elected. Now you know than an Elect person, can never finally miscarry, or fall away; therefore whoever hath true grace, can never fall away. The old man saw the snare, and would have avoided it, by denying the consequence. But the Dr. urged, that wheresoever the Effect is, there must be the Cause, but Saving Grace is an Effect of Election. This Dr. White would have denyed, but the hearers murmured that the Effect could not be without the Cause, as the day is not without the presence of the Sun. Then Dr. White answered, that Saving Grace was an Effect indeed, but a common Effect. But Dr. Pre∣ston urged, that it was not more common then Election; for all the E∣lect had Saving Grace, and none but they; and therefore they could ne∣ver fall away. But this (said he) is by the way, I will now apply my self to Mr. Mountague. But when Mr. Mountague perceived that his great Goliah Dr. White, forsook him, he was greatly troubled, and cavilled at the words a while, but the book adjudging it for Dr. Preston, he said, The Church of England had not declared any thing against it. Dr. Preston alledged the seventeenth Article, but told Master Mountague, that he affirm∣ed the Church of England did oppose it, and he desired to know where? But after one of the Lords had whispered with Mr. Mountague, he confessed, that for Arminius, he had never read him, and that he had writ∣ten some things negligently in that book, which he never thought should thus be scanned among friends, and therefore promised to write
another book in Butter and Honey, and therein more exactly for to ac∣quit himself. Some of the good Lords proposed, that in stead of this Book which Mr. Mountague had promised to write, the Synod of Dort might be re∣ceived and established as the doctrine of the Church of England, see∣ing there was nothing there determined, but what our Delegates approved. But Dr. White opposed this mainly; for (said he) the Church of England in her Catechism teacheth to believe in God the Sonne, who redeemed me and all mankind, which that Synod did deny. Dr. Preston answered, That by Redemption there, was only meant the freeing of mankind from that inevitable ruine, the sin of Adam had involved them in, and making of them savable upon conditions of ano∣ther Covenant, Joh. 3.16, 17. so as now salvation was not impossible, as it was before the death of Christ, but might be offered unto any man, according to the tenor of that Commission, Mark. 16.15, 16. Which could not be unto the devils, for they were left in that forelorn condition, whereinto their sin and disobedience put them, Heb. 2.16. 2 Pet. 2.4. that the Jaylor was a boisterous bloody fellow, Act. 6.24, 27. yet Paul makes no doubt for to tell him, vers. 31. That if he believed on the Lord Jesus, he should be saved with his house. But Dr. White in no sort received this, but affirmed earnestly, that Christ died for all alike in Gods intention and Decree, for Cain as well as Abel, for Saul as much as David, for Judas as much as Peter, for the reprobate and damned in hell, as well as for the Elect and Saints in heaven. But Dr. Preston answered, That there was a speciall salvation afford∣ed to Believers, 1 Tim. 4.10. That Christ was indeed a ransome for all, 1 Tim. 2.6. but the Saviour only of his body, Eph. 5.23. that he re∣deemed all, but called, and justified, and glorified whom he knew before, and had predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Sonne, Rom. 8.29.30. that to whom in this sense Christ was given, to them were given also all things appertaining unto life and godlinesse, 2 Pet. 1.3. as faith, 2 Pet. 1.. Phil. 1.29. Eph. 2.8. Repentance, Act. 11.18. 2 Tim. 2.25. A new heart, Ezek, 36.26. His Spirit, Gal. 4.5, 6. So that nothing can be charged on them, but Jesus Christ hath undertaken, and is en∣gaged to discharge them, Rom. 8.31, 32, 33, 34. So that they can never perish, nor be taken out of Christs hand, Joh. 10.28, 29, 30. but as they are begotten again unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. so they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, vers. 5. whereas Judas was lost, Joh. 17.12. and is gone to his own place, Act. 1.25. and there are many nations and people of the world, that have no outward offer made unto them in the Gospel, Psal, 147.19, 20. Act. 16.6, 7. and those that have it, have not hearts given them to understand it and believe it, Deut. 29.2, 3, 4. Esa. 6.9, 10. Mat. 13.13, 14, 15. and therefore they are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. and are damned, 2 Thes. 2.10, 11, 12. For he shewed that in Adam all men were lost, Rom. 5.12. and none recovered but by
Christ; therefore such as had not Christs intercession, could not re∣cover; but Christ prayed not for some, Joh. 17.9. and therefore such could not be saved, Heb. 7.25. Dr. White acknowledged there was a difference; for though all had so much as by good improvement might serve their turn, yet the Elect had more, for God abounded towards them, Eph. 1.8, 9. Rom. 5.15, 17, 20. As all the Troop have horses, but the Officers have bet∣ter. Both Travellers have staves to leap over the ditch, but the one a better and stronger then the other. The worst had grace e∣nough to keep corruption, and the renitency of their natures down; but the Elect, such as would do it easily; for Christ had tasted death for e∣very man, Heb. 2.9. and died for those which yet might perish, 1 Cor. 8.11. and bought those, that yet brought upon themselves swift damnation, 2 Pet. 2.1. because they did not husband and improve the favour offered to them. Dr. Preston answered, That Christ was in himself sufficient to save all, and might be said to be provided for that end and use, as a medicine is to cure infected persons, though it cure none actually, but those that drink it, as Prosper. Habet in se quod omnibus prosit, sed si non bibitur non medetur. As 1 Joh. 5.11, 12. but many did not thus apply Christ, because they had him not so offered and exhibited as others had, Mat. 11.21. Luk. 10.13. for God gave some faith and repentance as we have shewed; as the Serpent Moses was commanded for to make, was in it self sufficient to cure those that were bitten, Numb. 21.8, 9. yet cured none, but only those that looked on it. So as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, shall the Son of man be lift up, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have life everlasting, Joh. 3.14, 15. But Dr. White urged that place Esa. 5.4. that God had done all he could, but they neglected and rejected the counsel of God against them∣selves, Luk. 7.30. Dr. Preston answered, That God had done all that they could chal∣lenge of him, for he had given them in Adam power, Eccl. 7.29. and proposed another way of mercy in a Mediatour, and therefore he appeals to any one that was indifferent, Esa. 5.3. but this was unto Israel, he dealt not so with other nations, Psal. 149.20. Beside, he had done what he could, without reversing and rescinding his Decree, Joh. 12.38, 39, 40. for otherwise he could have given them the same spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. the like gift that he did unto others who believed on the Lord Jesus, Act. 11.17. could have wrought in them both to will and to do according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. could have healed them as he promised, Esa. 57.18. and as he did persecuting Saul, 1 Tim. 1.6. but God had other ends, Rom. 9.17. and attributes, Rom. 9.22. which he was willing to discover, Prov. 16.4. But Dr. White asked how then he could require faith and repentance, Mark. 1.15. Act. 17.30. which was all one, as if he should require one to give his judgment and opinion of a colour, that had his eyes shut, and then shut his eyes as fast as he could.
Dr. Preston answered, That he might do it to shew and discover our impotency, as we bid our little children rise, that by their own fault fell, that we may let them know their inability, and be the more beholding unto us to help them up, as Mark. 9.23, 24. and because the call and com∣mand of Christ is the Vehiculum and Conduit-pipe of strength and power, Act. 14.10. Joh. 5.8, 9. as Lazarus, Joh. 11.43, 44. Thus God by bidding and commanding men to take grace, doth thereby fit them and enable them to do it, as that Creeple, Act. 3.6, 7, 8. was by the command inabled; so Saul, Act. 22.13. being commanded to receive his fight, was inabled the same moment to look upon him; and so vers. 16. being commanded to wash away his sins, had the blood of Christ provided ready for to do it. So these commands are not like those the Apostle speaks of, Jam. 2.16. for here is something given; when God bids, he doth not, Verba dare, sed rem. But it was further urged by the Doctor, that God had no pleasure in the death of wicked men, Ezek. 33.11. but that he would rather they should repent and leave their sins, Ezek. 18.23. and vers. 32. if there∣fore God were not ready to the utmost of his power to give them grace, he could not be excused from dissembling and double-dealing. But Dr. Preston answered, That superiours may command unable persons for many reasons, but cannot be said for to dissemble, unless they refuse to give when the required condition is performed. As if I bid one come unto me, and I will give him six-pence, if I refuse when he is come, I did dissemble; but if he comes not, he cannot charge me; for their not coming may be for want of will, Joh. 5.40. as well as for want of power, Joh. 6.44. Now if I know a Creeple will not come, though he could, I may punish him for it. It's true, God delights in nothing but himself, his joy and comfort, is terminated only in him∣self, not in the creature, but as some way served and represented by it; for God made all things for himself, Prov. 16.4. yea for his pleasure, Rev. 4.11. That is, the exercise and illustration of some one of his at∣tributes; as his power, Exod. 9.16. Rom. 9.17. his wrath, Rom. 9.22. Never did strong man glory of his strength, more then God doth of his Soveraignty and Omnipotency, Job 40.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Now, if it fall out, that in the illustration and exercise of these his glorious attri∣butes and excellencies, some creatures smart, yet he delights not in their smart and sufferings, but in the demonstration of his own Omni∣potency. Ahashuerus makes a Feast to all the States and Orders of his Kingdome, to shew the riches of his glorious Kingdome, and the Ho∣nour of his excellent Majesty, Esth. 1.3, 4. This was not done without the smart and suffering of many of the creatures, yet he delights not in their sufferings, but in his own magnificence and bounty. When Christ was at the Feast, Joh. 2.1, 2. he doth not condole the death of all those innocents that went to make it up; Qui fruitur poena, ferus est: but rejoyced in the good cheer, and good will of the Friend that bade him. There were few present of Doctor Prestons Friends, and accordingly
this conference was represented and reported with all the disadvantage that could be to him; insomuch that many Parliament men that were his friends, were much offended at it; which occasioned him as soon as he came to Cambridge, to write the several passages, and send them to those friends that were unsatisfied. But it was an evidence that the Duke and Dr. Preston were not so great, but that he sticked to the Prelates, and would in the issue leave Dr. Preston and the Puritans, which much abated good mens affections to the Duke; and it was believed that he had no such footing in the Kings affections, as he did pretend unto: Posteà Maecenas speciem potius, quam vim tenuit in amicitia Principis. They thought his greatnesse began to languish; and it was believed in the University, that there was another favourite in being, though yet obscure: for the Earl of Suffolke much about this time died, who had been a long time Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and great meanes was used to set the Duke up for to succeed him; but good men were fallen off, because of his deserting Dr. Preston, and others did be∣lieve his glory was departed; and so the Earl of Berkshire, the former Chancellors second Son, was set up against the Duke, and many visited for him that loved greatnesse, and were servants good enough unto the times; and it's believed, it had been carried for him against the Duke, if the wisdome of Dr. Goffing, then Vice-Chancellor, and some o∣thers in the scrutiny had not prevented it; but it was pronounced for the Duke, and great care was taken for the investing of him in a very solemn manner. A representative of the University is designed to attend him at York-house in their habits, and a sumptuous Feast provided for their entertainment; the Duke sate in the midst of the Table among the Do∣ctors, where, by some body, there was an health begun unto the King. When it came to Dr. Preston for to pledge it, he was uncovered and bow∣ed as others had done, but drank but very little, and so delivered it unto the next; but one of the Doctors took notice that he drank not all, and told him, he had seen him drink as great a glass of wine, and did believe he could have drunk this if he would, but that he loved to be singular. The Dr. acknowledged he was not skilfull in the laws of drinking healths, and therefore if he had offended, he desired it might be imputed to his ignorance; but he thought the end was to shew respect unto the persons named, which was done best by the Ceremonies that preceded, as being bare, standing up, and such like; wherein (he said) he had not willingly offended; but if it were an Engine to Court-intemperance, and engage men unto greater quantities then themselves liked, it fell short of that modesty and freedom of the Heathens, Esth. 1.8. and was a sin in all, but in men of their degree and rank and an abominable wick∣ednesse. The Duke misliked this incivility, and frowned on the Doctor that occasioned it; but it was believed it could not have been done, without assurance that the Dukes affections were ebbing towards Dr. Preston. And no wonder; for his end being to make impressions of good upon the Court, he could not but see, if they did not succeed, they would recoil.
If you manure and sow your land, if the seeds subdues it not, and con∣quers it, it is enabled to bring forth the stronger weeds, Heb. 6.7, 8. If your Pearles be cast before swine, they will also turn again and rend you, Mat. 7.6. The Duke had now seen the worth and way of Dr. Preston; he had found that he could not winne him, and make him his, he could not therefore in the way of policy, but labour and resolve to wrack and sink him. When Herod was convented by prevailing conquering Au∣gustus, for his great assistance of Mark Anthony his adversary, and knew it would be in Augustus power to take his head off, he setled his affairs, but gave peremptory order that his beloved Mariamne should be put to death; for this only reason, because another should not enjoy so great a beauty. So the Duke would not another should enjoy the great abilities of Doctor Preston, but was resolved to break him if he could; yet in a civil Court way. But the Doctor was too knowing, not to see this afar off, Prov. 22.3. Quae alii levia faciunt, diu patiendo; ea sapiens, diù cogitando: and had accordingly provided a succession of reserves, wherein to hide him∣self. The first and surest was his conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoycing, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sin∣cerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. If a man be wellcome into his conscience, he need not fear the stormes and blusters that he meets abroad. In te re∣cedas, cum cogeris in turba esse. When a man is forced to be where he would not, as Peter was foretold he should be, Joh. 21.18. yet he may in despite of them retire into himself. Paul made it his businesse to have his conscience alwaies void of offence, Act. 24.16. and so did Dr. Preston; for though his actings, being many of them above the common size were not alwaies understood, and very often mis-inter∣preted, yet he was innocent and upright alwaies in them. An undeni∣able argument whereof was, that he never sued for the least preferment, as we have said, but studied, and often consulted, how without breaking, he might avoid them. And though he lived like himself, and gave re∣lief to others, yet it was ever of his own, as very many yet alive can wit∣ness. And indeed he was a man of very much Communion and sweet Society with God; prayed much in private, and by himself, besides as Tutor with his Pupils, and after, as Master in his Family. Whatever weak∣ness he was in, or business did occur, kept many private daies of Fasting by himself, especially before the Sacraments and Sabbath-daies; and accordingly enjoyed a constant clearnesse and assurance of his Justifica∣tion, and interest in the blood of Christ; even then, when frailties and infirmities did most of all afflict and wound him. He never (that I know,) was troubled or perplexed about Adoption, though very often about the imperfection of his graces, and the unconstancy of Sanctification; so as he studied most exactly that Treatise of the Saints Infirmities, and there is nothing in all his works that may more properly be called his. His next retreat was Lincolns-Inne; for now he said, the Duke was
Chancellour, and would endeavour to ingratiate himself, and be a Be∣nefactor; and had bought Erpenius Manuscripts, and did verily intend to found a Library; and so it would be easie, and in his power, to out him of the Colledge and University. For there was a resolution in some of the Fellows, to petition the Duke without him, and to annul the Statute of continuance or Commoration in the Colledge; yet he conceived the Lawyers would pretend a kind of freedom and exempti∣on. For he saw, when that holy blessed Dr. Sibbs was outed, both of Fellowship and Lecture in the University, yet by the goodnesse and prudence of Sir Henry Yelverton, that constant Patron unto godly Mini∣sters, (a vertue yet running in the veins of his posterity) he was recei∣ved and retained at Grayes-Inne unto his death; therefore he would in no sort leave his title unto, and interest in Lincolns-Inne, but reserved it in his power unto his dying day. But he knew Kings had long hands, and that the Dukes were no∣thing shorter; and that Lincolns-Inne, though a great deal stronger and better built then Grayes-Inne, yet would not hold out long, in case the Duke should seriously beleagure it; therefore he pondered of remo∣ving farther off if need were. And having weighed all retreats, resolved upon Basil in the Switzers Countrey, as a place which the longest handed Kings had seldome touched, even when it was a receptacle of their greatest enemies; and therefore he resolved, in case he could not be free in England, to settle there, and spend the residue of his surviving dayes, in writing what he was not suffered to preach, or had not published ac∣cording to his mind. He was naturally very affable and courteous unto strangers of any Countrey, and by conversing much with them, endeavoured to preserve his knowledge in the French and Italian languages. But after he had thus resolved upon Basil, he was very friendly to all he Germans, that were dispersed from several Universities, especially from the Palatinate; for whom he procured several sorts of entertainments, both in the Countrey abroad, and in the University; for which, as he had very ma∣ny Gratulatory Epistles from particular persons, so one of note from the King of Bohemia, under his Hand and Seal. But he knew that these were but the Foxes earths, that might succes∣sively be taken and possessed. He therefore also thought upon that unum magnum of the Cat, or rather of the Holy Ghost, Prov. 18.10. the Name of the Lord, that is, the goodnesse, mercy, power, of the mighty God; where he was well assured, he should for ever be free enough from Kings and Dukes. Yet these did no way retard his industry in using means. Obstructions quicked industrious and active minds, but damp and clog the dull. There is a Statesman of no mean esteem, that writes pro∣fessedly against the use of Cittadels and Forts, because it makes the Souldier lesse resolved in engagements. And the Spartans were for∣bidden to wall their City, because it would incourage Cowardise. But it did not take off Dr. Preston from his duty. For finding that his standing at Court was untermined, he resolved upon Buttresses to underprop him in the Countrey.
There was in the Countrey of Northampton, a Gentleman of very able parts, and clear affections to the publick good, no stranger to the Court in former times, nor to the Duke of Buckingham, with whom the Doctor used to communicate affairs, and who was then a Parliament man of much esteem; to him, the Doctor in a Letter discovers all, shews him the hopelesse posture of the Duke, how much they both were dis∣appointed in him; layes some directions what to do, and urgeth active∣nesse. This Letter by a sad misfortune was let fall, by him that was in∣trusted to convey it, about Temple-bar, and handed from one to one, untill it came to Sir Henry Spillers; who having viewed and pondered the contents, concluded it was a purchase that would ingratiate him unto the Duke, and so immediately presents it to him. The Duke was troubled to read his faults and face so shrewdly inti∣mated and presaged. His temper was exceeding good, and he could mannage his affections many times, with much serenity and moderation; but now he was quite off, and could not think of any thing but a re∣venge. I have not known any thing so trouble and afflict the Doctor as this did, that the Duke should have his hand against him, and that he had involved so good a man to whom he wrote. But it pleased God to cut the Duke out other work; for the cry of Rochel, and the Protestants of France, was so exceeding great, and so much resented by the Parliament, that the Duke resolves to vindicate his honour by relieving them. And whilest he was busie to set that fleet out, and furnish forces for surprizing the Isle of Rhees, he could not undertake that work of revenge intended against Dr. Preston. But the Doctor thought not that he had done enough, unlesse he proclaimed in the Pul∣pit what he had often told the Duke in private; according to that Com∣mand of Christ, Mat. 6.27. What I tell you in darknesse, that speak you in light; and what you hear in the ear, that preach on the house-tops. As Chrysostome to his people; Cum verum singuli audire non vultis, publi∣cè audietis. When the French Match was concluded, he preached that Sermon of the pillar and ground of truth, against the mingling of Religi∣ons, and mixing truth with falshood; and shewed how impossible it was to mingle truth with errour, or make up one Religion of theirs and ours. For, should they leave out any tenet of their Church, it would follow, that the Church, in that, before had erred; and so that pillar would be overthrown, on which have hanged so many necessary points of Popery. Neither could we part with any one truth; for Religion is of a brittle nature; break it you may, bend it you cannot. It cannot be accommodated to respects of policy, and interests of States and and Kingdomes; but as Elements, when mingled in a compound body, do close their proper Formes. So Religions, when made ingredients, and compounding parts of any other, do lose their Formes, and cease to be Religions in Gods account, 2 Kings 17.33, 34. Pillar and ground, pag. 16. And when the Rochellers were in distresse, and laid their ruine and disasters at our door; fathered their losses and calamities on us; he
preached that Sermon of the new life, where Page 48. we have these words: We cannot stand alone; what measure we mete to others in their distress, men shall measure the same to us in our necessity, Luk. 6.38. And how soon the fire may take here also, we know not. And pag. 52. If any be an impediment, nay, if any do not do their best; I pronounce this, in the Name of the most true God, that shall make it good sooner or later, that they and their houses shall perish, Esth. 4.14. The Court was hood-wink't in all these Comminations; for by Church, they understood the Pre∣lates and their Party; and the King thought if he adhered to them, and did their work, he was absolved. But those that read the Commenta∣ries that have been written since in red letters, will have occasion to be∣lieve the contrary. And when the Duke was in the Isle of Rhees, in which voyage he had engaged many of his very good Friends, and much of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, the Doctor preached that Sermon, called the Demonstration of the Deity, where Page 81. ye have these words: It is certain, that evil is intended against us, and will come upon us, except something be done for to prevent it; for there is a Covenant between God and us, and breach of Covenant causeth a quarrel; now the quarrel of God shall not go unrevenged. Lev. 26.25. I will send a sword upon you, which shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. Gods quarrels are not rash and passionate as mens are; and therefore he will not lay them aside without some true and real satisfaction. If we will not believe his Word, yet will we not believe his Actions? Are not our Allies wasted? Are not many branches of the Church cut off already, and more in hazard? In a word, have not our enterprizes been blasted, and withered under our hands for the most part? Have not things been long going down the hill, and are even now hastning to a period? This Sermon was preached to the King at White∣hall, on the Lords day, and on the Wednesday following, the news came of the total routing of our Army in the Isle of Rhees; which was such a ratification of his Prediction, but the Sabbath day before, as made many to believe he was a Prophet; and they called him Micaiah, be∣cause he seldome prophecied good unto them. And Dr. Neal, then Bishop of Winchester, said, That he talked like one that was familiar with God Almighty. And they were the more affected with it, be∣cause the Doctor had another course to preach before his moneth was out, (for every Chaplain was to preach twice, once upon the Lords day, and also upon the Tuesday;) but the Doctor was desirous to ex∣change his course upon the Tuesday, for a Sabbath-day. So Dr. Potter preached on the Tuesday, and Dr. Preston was to preach upon the Lords day following, and was resolved to proceed on the same text, but to handle a point relating to the third verse. For having shewed in this Sermon, that things were not done by chance, but by God; he now resolved for to shew, that God did things that men do not look for. Which being known among the Bishops, and they affrighted with that disaster at the Isle of Rhees, they interceded with the Clerke of the Closet, that (seeing Dr. Prestons turn was past already, and
this was Dr. Pottors) another might be put up, and he deferred till another time; which was consented and yeilded to: and so upon the Friday before, a Messenger was sent unto the Doctor, to tell him,A special Pro∣vidence. that another was provided to preach for Dr. Potter, and he might spare his pains. The Dr. wondered at the Providence; for he was resolved fully to have said that in that Sermon, if he had been suffered, that would in reason have deserved Micaiahs entertainment, 1 Kings 22.27. but God was mercifull unto him, and used his enemies as instruments to save him from the danger. It would have damped some men to be thus refused. He might have said with him, Mat. 22.4. Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. But he considered what he had preached before, That a Sparrow fell not to the ground without Gods will. That his Will and Resolution for to sacrifice his all, was now accepted as Abrahams was; that his Sermon, whilest an Embryo, and only in intention, had an efficacious operation upon the Auditory. For as they had shewed and discovered their fears, so good men did their joys; and the Sermon was more talked of at Court and in the City, then any Sermon that ever he had preached before. For all men enquired what the Sermon was, that Dr. Preston was not suffered to preach; and many wise men were perswaded, that it did more good, then it would have done, in case it had been preached. So that in stead of being damped and dejected at the affront, he was enlivened and en∣couraged: Repulsus generoso excitatiram, languido tristitiam. I never knew him come home from the Court more satisfied, then he did this time, nor more encouraged in his Ministry at Cambridge; for he was then upon those Sermons of the Attributes, that since are printed, and God was greatly with him in them. Those Fellows at Emanuel, that had been active in making of him Master there, were much satisfied, because the Doctor never would con∣sent to the annulling of that Statute, De mora sociorum in Collegio. For he was convinced, that the Founder had added it upon very weighty grounds; and he saw it was a meanes to make the Fellows Preach, and look abroad, and lesse intend the actings of the Master; that young Schol∣lers were heartned in their studies, with hopes that there would be pre∣ferments ready for rhem. And it was ordinary among the Scholars, to observe how long some Fellows were to stay. Therefore observing these affronts at Court, they Petitioned the King, that that Statute might be abrogated. The Duke was glad of this occasion to be re∣venged upon his old Friend Dr. Preston, and did embrace it with all alacrity. Commissions were dispatched for to hear and consider their Allegations, and many meetings and debates were had about it; in which it was acknowledged, it was a Statute of equal power and vali∣dity with the rest, though added three years after; and upon that, one of the Fellows that had Petitioned fell off. The Doctor used all his Friends, for to support and keep in power and effect this Statute, and found very many very forward to assist him in it; but above all, a very Noble Grandchild of the Founder yet living, did much encourage and
enable the defence: for though a Courtier, and much obliged, yet ad∣ventured, and waved all his interests, rather then he would behold his Grandfathers pious and prudent care so overthrown. So a temper was at last agreed on, that it should be suspended from effects in Law, un∣till six livings of an hundred pounds per annum, should be annexed to to the Colledge. The soul is the undoubted Soveraign of the body, and hath therein Despoticum imperium, an absolute and uncontrolled Jurisdiction; and in case of injury or over-burdening, there is no action lies. But souls should consider, soft and fare goes far: Qui vult regnare diù, languidâ regnat manu. It was Hobson that told the Scholars they would come time e∣nough to London, if they did not ride too fast. It was incurable in this good man to over-ride himself; for the body is pars compositi, when it is tired, we cannot take a new one at the next stage, as we do Horses. But he thought all was one; some lived as much in seven years, as o∣thers did in seventy. Non diù vixit, sed diù fuit was his opinion of ma∣ny men: that our life is like to iron that will consume with rust, as much as employment: Vita sicut ferrum, exerceas, vel perit. These were his principles, and his actings were according; the most unmercifull un∣to his flesh of any living. And it's true, that not time, but action should be the Metwand of all mens lives. Non annos meos, sed victorias nume∣ro: Not how long I have lived, but how? yet God doth usually allow his dearest servants time to do their work in. Moses 120 years of age, Deut. 34.7. David an old man before he dies, 1 Chron. 29.28. Paul aged, Phil. 9. notwithstanding all his labours and activity; but the Doctor had a shorter period put unto his daies: all mens is set, Job. 7.1. his was short. It was no disparagement to good Josiah to die about the Doctors age, 2 Chron. 34.1. Our glorious King Edward, that scarce out-lived his minority, out-stripped notwithstanding all his longest living Pre∣decessors in doing good: God that had set his time, hastned his service, and so he did the Doctors. His preaching and studying labours were exceeding great; but that which spent and wore him, was his care and troubles for the Churches safety and prosperity; Often he would incul∣cate that, 2 Cor. 11.28. That which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. His last sick∣nesse.When his body therefore began to be sick and languish, he was con∣tent a little to abate and take off, and thought a Counttey house in some good air might help, as formerly it had done; and accordingly took one at Linton, near the hils about six miles off, which he furnished and purposed to be in all the week, and come on Saturdays to preach upon the Lords daies; and had this course been taken time enough, much might have been. But now he feared, sollicitude would but be changed into solitude, the air of subitable converse he doubted would be wanting there; and being alone, he saw, would too much gratifie his melancholy▪ the Spring therefore approaching, he was willing to consult with some Physicians; and London being far off, he sent to Bury for Dr. Despotine. His present malady was want of rest, which now Tobacco would not
help him to, as formerly it had done; and therefore he proposed let∣ting blood. The Doctor plainly told him, that might perhaps allay his heats, and purchase sleep; but if it were within the verge of a Con∣sumption, it would be fatal to him. He was inticed notwithstanding with the deceitfull hopes of present ease, and so was let blood, but never lived to repair that losse. For sinking more and more, he went to Lon∣don, and took advice of those that were best acquainted with his state of health; by their advice he retired a little unto Newington, unto a loving Friend of his that lived there, and then to Harefordshire unto a thinner and more penetrating air. The malady they all agreed was in his lungs, which were not Ulcerated neither, but obstructed and opprest with stiff and clammy matter, that he could not void, and perspiration was that he wanted, and they supposed a penetrating air might do the cure; but that was found too searching and corrosive for the other parts, which were pervious enough and penetrable. He therefore thought upon Northamptonshire, his native Countrey, which would in reason be most propitious unto him. However he would leave his breath where first he found it, and thankfully return what had been serviceable now along time to him. He had at Preston four miles from Heyford, a very dear and bosome friend, that was ambitious of entertaining good men; old Master Dod was but a mile off, being seriously invited thither, he pitcht upon it, where he enjoyed with great contentment, what air, converse of friends, and loving entertainment could afford, and at the first was much refreshed by it; but nature being spent, and no foundation being left to work upon, all his refreshing quickly flagged. He had before made use of Dr. Ashworth, and he was one of much experience, and knew his body well; therefore he thinks of riding over unto Oxford to him, which he did, and there continued about twelve daies, and consul∣ted with such as were there of any note. Men die and perish when their time is come, as well errore medici, as vi morbi. Doctor Ashworth was perswaded that the Scorbute was his disease, and that the London-Do∣ctors had all mistook their mark, and therefore pitcheth upon applicati∣ons suitable: A great errour for so experienced and grave a Doctor. Desire of restitution into a state of health, made shift to flatter him in∣to belief it was so. The old man upon this perswasion, comes over unto Preston with him, strains and steeps Scurvy-grass, and gives him Dren∣ches able to have weakned a stronger man then he was now; and having stayed and tampered with him about three weeks, and finding nothing answer his expectation, he takes his last leave of him, giving such or∣der and direction as he thought good, and so leaves him, and returns to Oxford, July 9. 1628. When this dream and fancy of the Scorbute failed, and Dr. Ash∣worth was gone, he resigned up himself to God alone, and let all care of Physick and the Doctors go. He had a Servant who had been laborious with him, and whom he often used as a Friend; he would say, Servi sunt humiles amici was very true of him. To him he therefore now unbosomed himself, not only touching the vanity and emptinesse
of all things here below, but his own belief and expectation of a suddain change; not of my company (said he,) for I shall still converse with God and Saints, but of my place, and way of doing it. His Will was made (as we have said) some years before, but he was doubtfull, if it come to proving, it might be baffled and affronted, and therefore pur∣posed to wave it, and make a Deed of Gift to him that was in that Will his Executor, with such restrictions and limitations as he thought good, all which he set down with his own hand; wherein he carefully provided for his Mother during life, and both his Brothers. His Books, and all the furniture and goods belonging to, and in his lodgings at Emanuel-Col∣ledge, he gave one of his Pupils that was Fellow there, whom he al∣waies greatly favoured. Some exhibitions he gave Scholars there to be disposed of from time to time, by him that was Executor. And as he truly valued, so he liberally rewarded his Servants faithfulnesse, who liveth yet in very good condition and reputation; of whom is verified what is said, Prov. 27.18. Whoso keepeth the fig-tree, shall eat the fruit thereof; so he that waiteth on his Master, shall surely come to honour. And having thus discumbred himself of worldly cares, he took care for the places he now possessed, prayed for the Colledge, that it might con∣tinue a flourishing Nursery of Religon and Learning, told those about him as David before his death, 1 Chron. 29.2, 3, &c. what he had done towards that goodly building since erected, and what care he had taken to get those Rectories in the Kings Letter mentioned, whereof we spake before; prayed God to furnish Lincolns-Inne from time to time with able preaching Ministers, and so the Lecture at Cambride, that had cost so much trouble in the procuring. Then for his Sermons, that they might not come into the world like Vagabonds; but seeing the Father lived not, to see them setled and provided for, those would be carefull whom then he named, and is long since intimated upon occasion. In all which great things God hath so answered him, as I think no man was since Elisha, 2 King. 2.9, 10. The night before he died, being Saturday, he went to bed, and lay about three hours desirous to sleep, but slept not; then said, My dis∣solution is at hand, let me go to my home, and Jesus Christ who hath bought me with his precious blood. And so lay still as in a slumber, till about two of the clock in the morning; then drinking and resting on his ser∣vants armes, he fell into a cold and clammy sweat, which he told them was the Messenger of death; and so continued for about two hours very silent. About four of the clock, he said, I feel death coming to my heart, my pain shall now be quickly turned into joy. And so his Friends were called that were present in the house, who spake unto him, but had no answer from him as they were used to have. They kneeled all down, and a Reverend Divine there present prayed. When Prayer was ended, he looked on them, and turning away his head, gave up the ghost. It was about five a clock on the Lords day, but to him an everlasting Sabbath. He never (by his good will) rested that day, since God was truly known unto him untill now; God gave him therefore now an everlasting rest.
No man deserved better Funeral solemnities. But Master Dod was much against it; and his Friends at Cambridge, who did highly honour him, and desired nothing more, then to have waited on his dust unto its long home, were now obliged to attend the Election of another Master, that they durst not so much as make it known, or do any thing, from which it might be gathered. So he was buried decently, but without state, in Fawsley Church in the County of Northampton. Old Master Dod, the Minister of that place preached, and a world of godly people came together, July 20. 1628. being within a little of one and fourty years of age. Dr. Preston just before his death, asked what day it was, and being answered, that it was the Sabbath day; A fit day (said he) to be sacri∣ficed on: I have accompanied Saints on earth, and now I shall accom∣pany Angels in Heaven. Also, Mrs. Chaterdon telling him of his preach∣ing so profoundly on Gods Attributes, he answered; If it shall please God to prolong my life, I will make all so plain, that every one shall be able to understand it. This Life was written by my Reverend Friend, Master Thomas Ball of Northampton.
The Life of Master Arthur Hildersam, who died Anno Christi, 1631. His ParentageARthur Hildersam was born at Stetchworth, near New-Market in Cambridgeshire, Octob. 6. 1563 He was Sonne of Thomas Hildersam of the said Town (a Gentleman of an antient Family) and Anne Poole his second Wife, daughter to Sir Jeffery Poole, fourth Sonne to Sir Richard Poole, (who was Cousen Germane to King Henry the seventh) and Margaret Countesse of Salisbury, that was Daugh∣ter to George Duke of Clarence, (the second Brother to King Edward the fourth) and Isabel the eldest daughter and Co-heir of Richard the great Earl of Warwick,His education. and Salisbury. Thus much for his Birth. For his Education; In his childhood he was brought up in the Popish man∣ner; taught to say his Prayers in Latine, both his Parents and their Kindred, specially his Mother, being zealous Papists. When he was to be sent abroad to School, his Fathers aim was only to send him to a good School, where many Gentlemens Sons were taught; but God so ordered it, (by his good Providence) that his Father unawares placed him at Saffron-Walden School in Essex, with one Master Desborough, a godly man, and a Religious Protestant, who taking great affection to him for his wit and disposition,His conversi∣on. was very carefull of him, and taught him not only that humane learning that was fitting for his years, but the grounds of the Protestant Religion.A special Pro∣vidence. This his School-master, was the first blessed Instrument that God was pleased to make use of, to work in him a liking and relish of the Reformed Religion. He conti∣nued with him, till he was fit for the University, which was not long. For when he was but about thirteen years of age, he was placed by his Father (the good hand of God still over-ruling him) with a very god∣ly and Religious Tutor in Christs Colledge in Cambridge,His going to Cambridge. where he con∣continued till after he was Master of Arts, where he gained much love and esteem for his Piety, Learning, Ingenuity, affability and harmlesse inoffensive witty Converse. When he had continued in Cambridge some two years, or there∣abouts, his Father sent him up to London, intending to send him to Rome, (being confident he should neither want respect, encouragement, nor preferment, for his great Uncles [Cardinal Pooles] sake, Brother to his Mothers Father) but he refusing to go, his Father kept him long at London, taking him from one Popish Ordinary to another,
Mr: ARTHVR HILDERSAM
hoping that such company, would at length have prevailed with him, to have gone according to his desire. But he continuing firm in his resolution, not to go to Rome, his Father resolved to cast him off;His Father cast him off. which soon after he did. Thus he, whom God had appointed to suf∣fer much for him, began to bear the yoke in his youth;Lam. 3.27. and in his tender years, became a Confessor in forsaking, Father, Friends, all present maintenance, and probable hopes of great future preferment for Christs sake. Being in this dejected and forlorn condition, God that comforteth those that are cast down,2 Cor. 7.6. comforted him by meeting with Mr. John Ireton (then Fellow of Christs Colledge,A special Pro∣vidence. after Rector of Kegworth in Leicestershire, a man famous for Piety and Learning) in London, who at their meeting, said unto him; Arthur, why art thou so long from thy Book, and losest so much time? Alas Sir, said he, I shall go no more to Cambridge; and thereupon told him his condition, and the occa∣sion of it. Be not discouraged, (saith Master Ireton) thou hast a No∣ble Kinsman, whom I will acquaint with thy case: and I doubt not but he will provide for thee. Accordingly Master Ireton soon after went to the Right Honourable Henry Earl of Huntingdon, Lord President of the North (whose Mother and Master Hildersams Mother, were Bro∣thers Children) and representeth to him the sad condition of his poor Kinsman: The Noble Earl gladly embraced this opportunity of doing good; and sent for him, encouraged him, promised him mainte∣nance, and gave order to Master Ireton to send him back to Cambridge, and to place him with a good Tutor; For (said he) I suppose his Father did place him with a Papist. But when Master Ireton assured him the contrary, he gave order he should go to his former Tutor, of whose love to him, and care of him, Master Hildersam was wont often to speak. When Master Hildersam was Master of Arts, he was soon after to Common-place, [a Colledge-exercise in Divinity, not different from a Sermon, but in length] he being loth to adventure upon that Exercise, intreated one of the Fellows (his special Friend) to supply his place the first time; but he, out of love, refused to gratifie him in that, and wished him to remember one Master Sidney Zouch, Master of Arts of that Colledge, who getting one to supply his place the first time, and hearing afterwards some of his own year perform that Ex∣ercise so well, that he despaired of doing the like; could never after, be perswaded either to Common-place, or preach, though he were a very able Scholar. The first time he was to Common-place,His first Ser∣mon. he was much afraid; but observing that there sate a very godly man (his Friend) on th'other side of the Chappel, he thought that that man prayed for him, which much encouraged him. He was of so good repute for his Piety and Learning, that by the major part of the Fellows he was chosen Fellow of that Colledge;He is chosen Fellow of Christs Col∣ledge, but op∣posed. but Dr. Barwell (the Master) making use of his negative voice, stopped him; and the matter came to the Visitors, two of which, viz. Doctor
Perne, and Doctor Goad, favouring his Competitor, Master Willet, (who was afterwards Doctor Willet) made him Fellow. Not long after, he was chosen Divine of Trinity-hall in the said University; where he continued till Septemb. the 14, 1587. at which time, by the foresaid Right Honourable Earl, he was called to be, and placed Preacher at Ashby de la zauce in Leicestershire.His remove to Ashby. The impropriate Tithes of the same Parish being setled upon him for his life by the said Earl, and continued to him by the favour of the two succeeding Earls, George, and Henry, untill his death. He hath given publique notice to the world, of his du∣ty and thankfulnesse to that noble house, in his Dedicatory Epistle to his Lectures on Joh. 4. His marriage.January 5. 1590. He married Mistresse Anne Barfoot (Daughter to Master Barfoot of Lamborn-hall in Essex, who was a very loving and carefull Wife of him, and the like Mother of his Children;) she survi∣ved him about eight years.His first silen∣cing. He was silenced in June 1590. and restored again in January, 1591. He was instituted and inducted into the Vica∣ridge of Ashby, Octob. 4. 1593. He preached at the Assiises at Leicester in the time of a great dearth, July 20. 1596. a godly, learned, zealous, plain, and powerfull Sermon, upon those words, 1 King. 18.17, 18. And it came to passe when Ahab saw Elijah,His Sermon before the Judge. that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? And he answered, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the Commandements of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim. In the handling of which Text he so offended Judge Aderson, that he manifested his anger and displeasure, both by his countenance and gesture, arising to go away; But Master Hildersam speaking some words unto him with ministerial authority,Judge Aderson angry with him. he stayed till the Sermon was done. After Sermon, the Judge would have had the Grand-Jury to have indited him; but in those daies, it would have been hard to have found a Grand-Jury in Leicestershire, that would have done that. Some further and greater danger Master Hildersam was in, by reason of that Judges displeasure for that Sermon; but God in mer∣cy prevented it. In the year 1598. there was an attachment sent out of the High-Commission for his apprehension. In the beginning of King James his reign, when many petitioned for Reformation, (which Petitions were very modest, and moderate, subscribed by above seven hundred and fifty godly able Preachers, in but twenty five Counties; which Petition was directed to the Parliament,He manageth the Petition for Reforma∣tion. and other Petitions to his Majesty, and the Lords of the Council, and to the Bishops:) he with some few others of his Brethren, were chosen, and chiefly intrusted to mannage that important businesse, to prosecute the Petitions, to solicite the cause; and if required, to dispute it. And whereas there were some appointed to deal (for those that desired Reformation,) in the Conference at Hampton Court, he, with Master Stephen Eger∣ton of London, and Master Edward Fleetwood of Lancashire, delivered to them some ten demands and requests, made by thirty Re∣verend
Ministers, in the name of themselves and many others, which they intreated them to solicite his Majesty for, in the behalf of the Church. He was deprived and silenced by William Chaderton, then Bishop of Lincolne, April 24. 1605. for refusall of subscription, and conformity;His second si∣lencing. yet after some time, by the connivance and favour of William Overton, then Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, he preached sometimes in that Diocesse, specially at those two famous Exercises at Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire, and Repton in Derbyshire, which were the meanes of great good to the souls of many,The successe of his Mini∣stry. both Ministers and private Chaistians in the parts adjacent. He was the main upholder of these two Exercises for many years. In January 1608. by the favour of William Barlow, then Bishop of Lincolne, he was allowed to preach again at Ashby aforesaid,He is restored to Ashby. where he began his Lectures on John 4.10. January 31. and continued that Lecture weekly on Tuesday, till Novemb. 12. 1611.His Lectures on John 4. These Lectures being one hundred and eight, he published in his life time, 1628. having them all written by himself, before he preached them; which course he took when he began those Lectures, and continued it to his dying day, blaming himself much that he began it no sooner, and by that neglect, both himself and others were deprived (in a great part) of the bene∣fit of his former labours. Novemb. 1611. he was silenced by Richard Neales meanes,His third si∣lencing. then Bi∣shop of Coventry and Lichfield, who complaining to the King of him, the King commanded the Arch-Bishop, to write to the Bishop of Lin∣colne, to send for Master Hildersam, and to silence him, which was accordingly presently done. The occasion of Bishop Neales com∣plaint to King James was this: One Edward Wightman, a damnable Heretick (afterward burnt at Lichfield for Blasphemy and Heresie,Wightman burnt for He∣resie.) dwelling in Burton upon Trent aforesaid; and coming sometimes to the Exercise there, the Bishop and his Friends gave out, that Wightman learned his Opinions (at least that of the souls sleeping) of the Puri∣tans, and at the aforesaid Exercises, and of Master Hildersam by name.Slander. Bishop Neal informing King James of this, the King commanded him, (when he went into the Countrey) to send for Master Hildersam, and to hear what he could answer Wightman in this matter. The Bishop accordingly sent for Master Hildersam, but would not hear his defence till Wightman came. Wightman being called to his second publique hearing, Novemb. 26r. 1611. (in the hearing of more then five hun∣dred people) charged the Bishop with sundry wrongs he had done him, naming this for one; That he had given it out, that he had learned his Opinions from Master Hildersam: whereas I professe (said he) he ne∣ver taught, nor confirmed me in any of them; but was of all men e∣ver most opposite unto me in them, and caused mine own Friends to re∣ject me for them. Master Hildersam had long before in a private confe∣rence, in the presence of Master Aberly the Minister of Burton, (who had intreated him to take some pains to reclaim Wightman,) shewed him
that his Opinion of the souls sleeping, was directly repugnant to the ho∣ly Scriptures, and an Heresie long since condemned in the Church. The places of Scripture he urged against him, were these, Luk. 16.22, 23. & 24.43. Phil. 1.23. Soon after, he received a Letter from Wightman, March 10. 1608. and perceiving by that, and the report of others, that he grew more and more obstinate in his errours, and laboured to draw others unto it, Master Hildersam took occasion in the next Exercise held at Burton, viz. upon March 15. 1608. publiquely and at large to confute his errour; the text that fell out that day to be handled, leading him directly unto it, viz. Heb. 9.27. Above a moneth after the said exercise, viz. April 21. 1609. Wightman sent him another letter, wherein he revileth him for the said speech, at the said Exercise, and took upon him, after his manner to answer it. Yet after this, viz. November 27. 1611. before the Bishop, he impudently avouched to Master Hildersams face, that at the conference forenamed, he should say, that the whole drift of the Scripture indeed, did make for the Opinion of the souls sleeping, but that the Church had otherwise judged of the matter. Master Hil∣dersam did protest, that he never spake or thought so; and offered by Oath, or any other means that should be required to avow, that he ever held this his Opinion, to be directly contrary to the Scriptures, and a most detestable Heresie: Master Aberly also, who was present at the conference, was ready to depose that Master Hildersam spake no such thing at that time, but the direct contrary. So that not only the rest that were there, were fully satisfied; but the Bishop himself also open∣ly professed, that he was assuredly perswaded, that Wightman had great∣ly wronged him in this that he had said of him. Thus was Master Hil∣dersams innocency cleared in a publique audience, during the time of Wightmans trial at Lichfield; yet he remained under the censure of si∣lencing, which was procured to be inflicted on him upon this occasion; and the two forenamed Exercises were put down. Concerning which, all the chief Gentlemen of worth in those parts, certified unto the Arch-bishop Bancroft a little before his death, that the profit which that Country (which above most other places of the Land besides, was known to stand in great need of such means of instruction) received by them was exceeding great. Master Hildersam continued silenced a long time, yet could not live peaceably from men, though he lived quietly with men. For December 8. 1612.He is cited in∣to the High-Commission Court. Letter missive were sent out of the High-Commission Court, requiring his appearance there; accordingly he appeared. April 22. 1613. at which time he was judicially admonished and injoyned, that (saving the catechizing of his own Family only) he should not at any time hereafter preach,Silenced. catechize, or use any part of the office, or function of a Minister, either publiquely or privately, untill he should be lawfully restored and released of his said suspension. In the Spring, 1614. he fell into a violent Feaver, which held him long,His sicknesse. the malignancy of which, struck up into the roof of his mouth, and the gristle of his nose, which endangered him much; but by the
blessing of God, upon the care and skill of Physicians and Chyrurge∣ons, he was recovered. In Easter term 1615. by Letters missive he appeared in the High-Commission Court again, which committed him to the Fleet,His second summons in∣to the High-Commission Court. (for refu∣sal of the Oath ex officio,) where he continued a Prisoner divers weeks; at length he was removed by Habeas Corpus unto the Kings Bench, where he continued a great while. In both places,His imprison∣ment. he endured imprisonment three moneths. Then he was delivered out of prison, upon bond to appear the first Court day, Term. Mich. 1615. but by dangerous sick∣nesse (whereof affidavit was made in Court,) he was hindered from appearing at that time. September 4, 5, 6. 1616. The Commissioners, Doctor Lamb, Ma∣ster Owen, Master Middleton, and others sate at Ashby, to examine wit∣nesses to prove the Articles exhibited against Master Hildersam, and his neighbours, Master Dighton, and Master Holt, where the deponents were, many of them, professed adversaries, specially Master Hacket, (then Vicar of Ashby) who was the principal accuser and informer of the Court against them; and so his testimony ought not in Law to have been received against them.He is falsly accused. It might well have been discerned by the disposition of many of the deponents, what little credit was to be given to them; and that Master Hildersam might have had the most o∣dious and capital crimes desposed against him by such Witnesses, who did not only in matter of fact affirm upon oath, that which all the Parish knew to be notoriously false; but did also take upon them to know and deliver upon their oath, the reason and ground of his pretended practice, which (they having ever been, as all the neighbours knew, meer strang∣ers to him) was impossible for them to do it. The next term the cause came to be heard and censured; but Master Hildersam hearing of the heavy sentence against Master Dighton, and Master Holt, November 21. 1616. (viz. to return back to prison, there to remain till they conformed themselves; they were also fined a thousand pounds a piece, pronounced excommunicate, and ordered to be so publiquely denounced, and injoyned to make their submissions, in conceptis verbis, in three several places; and lastly, they were condemn∣ed in expences and costs of the suit) concealed himself, and did not ap∣pear at the day of his calling and censuring, but did eight daies before send a Copy of his answer to the several points that were desposed a∣gainst him, to his Advocate, Doctor Hussey, to be shewed to the Court; Which Answer, in the judgment of rational, honest, indifferent men, was full and satisfactory. To instance but in the proof of one Article, and his Answer there∣unto. One George Reding deposed, That upon Palm-sunday was two years, he was one of those that came up to the Communion-Table in Ashby Church in several companies, and (though Master Hacket had before gi∣ven warning, that he would admit none that would not receive it kneeling) refused so to receive it, but would have received it standing, and when he could not have it so, yet stood still among them that kneeled, till the Commu∣nion
was done. To which disposition Master Hildersams answer was, That it is notoriously known to all the Inhabitants at Ashby, that I was at that time sick in my bed, and for many weeks before, and after, utterly unable to stir out of my Chamber; neither did I ever at any other time present my self in that manner to the Communion-Table, neither doth Master Hacket, or any other deponent charge me with any such matter. And this fellow that hath devised this against me, (where∣of there was no colour at all of truth) would in all likelihood have sworn any thing that might have done me hurt, if he had been requi∣red to do it. Notwithstanding this his answer to that, and his answer to all the rest, delivered as aforesaid to his Advocate, the Court proceed∣ed to censure him, November 28. 1616. whereby he was pronounced a man refractory and disobedient to the orders,His censure in the High-Commission Court. rites, and ceremonies of the Church of England. And because he yet refused to submit himself, and to joyn in the administration of publique Prayer, and di∣vine Service and Sacraments, as they are here lawfully administred; therefore he was by the Court pronounced a schismaticall person, and a Schismatick, and thought well worthy of severe punishment. And in respect that he was the prime Ring-leader of all the schismatical persons in that Countrey, both of the Clergy and Laity, he was first fined two thousand pounds to his Majesties use, pronounced ex∣communicate, and ordered to be so publiquely denounced; as also was ordered to be attached and committed to prison, and so to be brought before the Commissioners, to be degraded from his Ministry; and was further ordered, to make his publique submission conceptis verbis, (as shall be prescribed him by this Court;) and lastly, he was condemned in charges. A special Pro∣vidence.When he heard of this terribly cruel sentence, it was his wisdom now to conceal himself, which accordingly he did for a long time in the City; and God so hid him under the shadow of his wings, that his adversaries could not meet with him. He is sent for Leyden.During this time of his keeping close, one Master John Hartly, one of the Elders of the English Congregation at Leiden in Holland, came with Letters of Credence from the Congregation, making offer to him of the Pastors place, then vacant; which he resolved to have accepted of, had not his Wives unwillingnesse to go over the Seas, retained him here. The foresaid fine of two thousand pounds was estreated with∣out abatement into the Exchequer, March 12. 1616. whence seve∣ral Processes were issued to the Sheriffs of Leicestershire, to enquire of his estate; but they, by several returns, answered, They could find none. At length, the said fine was begged and granted by his Majesty, King James, under the Great Seal, to Master Williams, Page to the (then) Marquesse of Buckingham; whereupon Master Hilderdsam compound∣ed both with him, (giving him a great summe of money,) and with the Registers also of the High-Commission Court, for their part of the fine, and obtained a discharge from them both. I suppose it will be hard to find that any man was before, or scarce hath been since in
that Court, so deeply fined, and heavily censured, meerly for his judgment and conscience; having done nothing either factiously, or contemptuously against that Government, and those orders of the Church, that were then established. He was indeed alwaies from his first entering into the Ministry, a resolved and conscientious Non-con∣formist, as appeareth by the foregoing story, and so continued to his dying day, witnesse that clause in his last Will:His constancy. I do hereby declare and protest, that I do continue and end my daies, in the very same Faith and Judgment, touching all points of Religion, as I have ever been known to hold and profess, and which I have, both by my Doctrine and Practice, and by my sufferings also, given testimony unto. He was a great admirer, follower, and friend of Master Thomas Cartwright (famous for Religion and learning) who left his papers to Master John Dod and him, to per∣use and publish what they thought fit. Though he himself was a constant Non-conformist, yet such was his ingenuity and Christian Charity, that he respected, esteemed, and was very familiar with those he knew to be religious and learned, though of another judgment. He did alwaies oppose the separation of the Brownists, and the semi-separation of Master Jacob, with whom,His humility and charity. as also with some Ring-leaders of the former sort, he had divers conferences and disputes.He opposeth the Brownists, and Indepen∣dents. He is called by Doctor Willet (his Con∣temporary, and sometimes Competitor) The Hammer of schismaticks, whom they commonly call Brownists; as you have it in J. C. his Epistle to the Reader, before the forenamed Lectures on John 4. That is, Master John Cottons of New-England, (his dear and familiar Friend,) who there expresses his high opinion of the Authour, those Lectures, and his Treatise of the Doctrine of the Lords Supper, printed 1608. annexed to a little Treatise of the like Argument, set forth by a godly learned man (his intimate Friend) Master William Bradshaw, of which Treatise of Master Hildersams, Master Cotten gives this Testimony: That it hath been of singular good use to many poor souls for their prepa∣ration to that Ordinance.Master Cottons testimony of him. And in very deed (saith he) those questions and answers do more fully furnish a Christian to that whole spiritual duty, then any other, in any language (that I know) in so small a compass. Master Cotton also mentioneth in the foresaid Epistle, a Letter of Master Hildersams, to a Gentlewoman, against separation, which, without his consent, a Separatist (Master Francis Johnson) printed and refuted; Which (saith Master Cotton) hath so strongly and clearly convinced the iniquity of that way, that I could not but acknowledge in it, both the wise∣dome of God, and the weaknesse of the Separatist; His wisdome, in bring∣ing to light such a beam of the light of his truth, by the hand of an adver∣sary, against the Authors mind; and the weakness of the other, to ad∣vance the hand of his adversary, to give himself and his cause such a dead∣ly wound in open view, as neither himself, nor all his associates can be able to zeal. His judgment and testimony of the Author, and his Lectures on John 4. you may read in that Epistle. In a private Letter of his from Boston, February 3. 1629. to him; he mentioneth a Letter he re∣ceived
from a Dutch Minister in London, (one Timotheus Van Ul-eren) who telleth him, he had sent sundry of the Books on Iohn 4. to Ministers beyond the Seas, who do read them with such great satis∣faction, that the said Dutch Minister did, in the name of many others, intreat Master Cotton, to beseech Master Hildersam to put forth his Ser∣mons on Psal. 51. and other his lucubrations. And accordingly Master Cotton in that Letter writeth thus; Since the Sermons already on part of the Psalm, do arise to a just and full volume, be intreated to hear∣ken to the desires of so many at home and abroad, and give them leave to be doing good, whilest the rest are preparing. You have cause to love the Lord your God with all your might; and therefore, since those Sermons might be shewing your love to God in working his work, before their fel∣lows, do not hold back any part of their service to the Church, for the pre∣sent time. This his request he renewed, in another Letter of Iuly 23. 1629. Having mentioned the testimony and judgment of the Reverend Master Cotton concerning Master Hildersam and his labours, whom in his Reply to Master Roger Williams answer of his Letter, p. 117. he stileth A man of a thousand; I shall insert another testimony of a man deservedly famous in the Church, Doctor Preston, then Fellow of Queens Colledge in Cambridge, concerning the formentioned Le∣ctures on Iohn 4. He having long desired, at length obtained of Ma∣ster Hildersam the Copy of them, which he kept a long time, and per∣used, and being desired to deliver his opinion of them, in his Letter to the Author,Dr. Prestons testimony of his Lectures on John 4. November 28. 1615. speaketh thus: I will say to you faith∣fully and ingenuously what I think, without adding a word more then mine own heart is perswaded of. First in general, for putting them to the Presse, I do not only think that they are worthy of it, but so far as any in∣treaty of mine might prevail, I should presse you to it, as depriving Gods Church of a very great Benefit, if you should refuse. In particular, besides the profitablenesse of the matter, these two things I observe in the reading of it: First, throughout the whole carriage, there appeareth a continued strength (that I may so call it) without any failing or deficiency, without any inequality, unevennesse of deformity of some parts with the rest. Second∣ly, it is presse and succinst (though large) the things choice and per∣tinent, and throughly depending each on other. In brief, so it is, there is nothing that need be added, and nihil quod amputem. So that when I went about to take out some things for mine own use briefly, I could not almost tell what to leave out. To say all in a word, Sir, I do think it is such, as will answer to your name, and such as men would look for from you. There are very few writings, but wherein we commonly see some failings in these two particulars, which I men∣tioned. Besides, the method I much like, as very judicious; which hath not ruled you, but you it, in a seasonable changing it, as your matter lyeth, so casting the frame of it, that it extorteth not more then is necessary from you, nor cutteth off any thing that you would deliver: which one precise, uniform method strictly kept, often doth. I hope it will
be a good help to Ministers when they read it, and bring the metod of Do∣ctrine and Uses into more credit. These are Doctor Prestons own words in his Letter. Unto this ample and laudable testimony given, by these two Worthies, this may be added, that his most grave and autho∣ritative manner of preaching, did give an edge and excellency unto his Ministry. Though Master Hildersam, in the judgment of these eminent Di∣vines at home and abroad, and most others that knew him, were a man of such worth and ability, and whose labours were so usefull in the Church; yet was he for a long time, by the then prevailing power in the Church, cast aside like a broken vessel. After his censure in the High-Commission Court,His studious∣nesse. he lived pri∣vately a long time, sometimes in the City, sometimes in the Coun∣trey. He was alwaies, whether silent or having a liberty to preach, a con∣stant student; when he was in the Countrey, and had conveniency of place and weather, he used to walk alone every morning near an hour, to meditate. In the morning he read constantly a Chapter, whence he gathered some observations, and wrote them in a Book, with the reference to some common-place in the margent, which he referred to his Common-place Book by numbers. The like he did out of many Books that he read; in others which he read, he referred the most ob∣servable things in them to his Common-place Book, by the pages in them. As he was much in secret Prayer, so was he fervent therein; yea frequent in holy ejaculations audibly expressed, as was observed by some godly friends, whose occasions brought them often near to the place where he studied. He was alwaies a diligent frequenter of the publique Assemblies,His care to profit by the Word. whether he were in the City or Countrey; he used often even in his old age to write Sermons in the Church. He so highly prized the Ministry of the Word, that he would often say, He never heard any godly Minister preach, though but of weak parts, but he got some Benefit by him. He sojourned in many Families, and alwaies by his godly and amiable carriage, got love and esteem of all in the house. In all places where he did reside, or whether he came occasional∣ly, he was alwaies helpfull in Family-Prayers, in expounding the Scriptures read, and in the repetition of the Sermons preached in the publique Congregation; being also willing by private conference to instruct the ignorant, to satisfie the doubtfull, to settle the wavering, to comfort the dejected, and to encourage all sorts in the exercises of Religion. He was much in the house of Mistresse Katherine Redich of Newhall in Derbyshire, (widdow to Alexander Redich of Redich in Lancashire Esquire, his bosome Friend) his antient acquaintance, and constant dear Friend to his death, who survived him not above eight daies; the grief for his death hastening (as it was supposed) her end. In her
house at Hamstead near London,His sicknesse. August 21. 1624. he fell sick of a violent Feaver, which put him into such danger, that the Physicians doubted of his Recovery; he over-hearing some intimation of it, when he thought none were in the room, the Curtains being drawn about his bed, he was over-heard by one in the room, to speak au∣dibly those words of Psal. 118.17. I shall not die, but live, and de∣clare the works of the Lord. At that time there was as little hope of his preaching,His recovery. as of his recovery. But God, in great mercy, soon after restored him both to health and liberty. The next year, viz. June 20. 1625. he was licensed by Doctor Ridley, then Vicar-general to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to preach in the Diocesse of London, Lincoln, and Coventry, and Lichfield under the Seal of that office. By vertue of which License he began to preach, August 3. 1625. in Ashby Church aforesaid,His Lectures at Ashby, on Psal. 35.3. those eight Sermons on Psal. 35.13. concerning Fasting, Prayer, and Humiliation for sinne, which were published since his death, viz. 1632. according to his own Copy left under his hand, by his Son Master Samuel Hildersam. September 28. 1625. he began his one hundred and fifty two Lectures on Psal. 51. published in the like nature,His Lectures on Psal. 51. 1635. After the last forementioned licensing, he was silenced again, March 25. 1630. by notice given him from the Court at Leicester of the Kings instructions,He is again silenced. for every Lecturer to read service in Surplice and Hood, and he began to preach again, Aug. 2. 1631. and so continued till December 27. 1631. which was the last Sermon that he preach∣ed. His last sick∣nesse.Soon after he fell sick of his last sickness, and discerning it to increase, he sent for his forenamed Sonne dwelling at West-Felton in Shropshire, fourty nine miles from Ashby; He with his Wife came to him withall convenient speed, January 13. and stayed with him till his death. Their company and attendance at that time (as alwaies formerly,) was very contenting and comfortable. And of his Daughter-in-law (who was by himself propounded as a meet Wife for his dearest Son, and in whom he ever took much delight) he was heard, with affe∣ction to ingeminate these words, Never man had a kinder Daughter-in-law. His disease (though not discerned to be so at the first) proved the Scorbute, the which being a dull and melancholick distemper, indi∣sposed him to speak much; yet, as he shewed wonderfull patience through his whole sicknesse, so he used many holy and heavenly expressions to those that attended him, or came to visit him, who (he being so much beloved and honoured in the Countrey) were not a few. He suggested unto some dear Friends, his fears that Wolves would ere long come in amongst them, and thereupon earnestly exhorted them to continue stedfast in the truth, which they had received. And occasion being given to mention those words, 1 Tim. 3.5. How shall he take care of
the Church of God? looking to his Son, he said, Oh Son, Son, that care of the Flock, is the main thing. The most godly people in those parts, his constant hearers (who had been either converted to Christ, or edified and confirmed in grace by his Ministry) being very sensible of the great losse, which not themselves only, but the whole Church of God also would su∣stain by his death, (that they might not seem negligent in the use of any means within their reach, to prolong his life and their own com∣fort) did resolve amongst themselves to set apart a day, that they might solemnly in publique seek the Lord by fasting and Prayer in his behalf, wherein they had the hearty help of Master Simeon Ashe, both in the morning and afternoon by Sermons, and Supplications, who did more owe himself unto Master Hildersam, then to any other man, having been first placed in the University, under the tuition of famous Master Thomas Hooker, fellow of Emanuel Colledge, and af∣terwards directed and encouraged in his Ministry, by his great care and love. March 4. being the Lords day, he grew very weak, and was pray∣ed for in the Congregation in Ashby Church, both at the morning and evening exercise. His Sonne prayed with him divers times that day, and whilest he was praying the last time, he departed, and slept in the Lord, between nine and ten of the clock that night,His death. viz. March 4. 1631. Thus he who had diligently heretofore, kept the holy rest of the Sabbath, did in the close of the Sabbath rest from his labours; and having glorified God often, both in publique and private, on that day before, was at last on that day received into glory. Master Herring (his dear and familiar friend) being then at Coventry, was sent for the next day, and came and preached the Lecture in Ashby Church on Tuesday, March 6. in the morning, (Master Hhildersam having taken order in his Will, that there should be no Funeral-Sermon at his Burial,) and then spake like himself, holily, discreetly, learnedly, and affe∣ctionately, concerning the losse that that Congregation, the Countrey and whole Church had sustained by the death of him that was lately dead. In the afternoon of that day, his body was born by neighbour-Ministers to the grave, accompanied by a great multitude,His burial. both of Ministers and others, who expressed much sorrow and lamenta∣tion. He lived in Ashby aforesaid for the most part (yet being often forced to remove his dwelling) of fourty three years, and six moneths, with great successe in his Ministry, love and reverence of all sorts. He was very charitable to the poor himself, and in exciting of his auditors to contribute towards their relief.His charity. In few Countrey-Congregations in England the Collections for the poor were so large, as they were at the Quarter-daies at his Lectures. The losse of poor Ashby by his death, was exceeding great; for he was the Peace-maker amongst neighbours, and the Patron of the poor; wickednesse was checked, and godlinesse cherished by his great care
and wisdome. He was a Friend to every one in a good cause, and it was his unwearied delight to be Christianly seviceable in any kind. He lived to a great age, (considering that his pains in preaching did ordinarily weaken him so much) sixty eight years and five moneths; yet this happinesse God vouchsafed to him, which was more then ordinary, that he out-lived not his parts, but as his graces increased to∣wards his end, so his abilities of invention, judgement, memory, e∣locution decayed not in his age. He left a precious memory behind him; had Letters of commendation written in the hearts of many, of which some live here, some in glory. His Books will prove more durable Monuments of his name, then that his Sonne erected for him in Ashby Church. And yet his Name, with the lively picture of his Person, lives in his worthy Son, Master Samuel Hildersam, whose learning Cambridge knew, while he was Fellow of Emanuel Colledge; and whose present mini∣sterial labours, and pious conversation at West-Felton in Shropshire, do perpetuate the honour of his reverend Father, whose very memory he doth much reverence, and whose rich Vertues, both personal and mini∣sterial, he doth happily imitate. And his good help from his Fathers Papers, and other waies, hath most conduced to the drawing up of this faithfull relation, that God may be glorified, and many souls may be edified by this famous example, thus presented unto publick view.
Dr. TAYLOR
The Life of Doctor Thomas Taylor, some∣times Pastor of Aldermanbury London, who died Anno Christi 1632. THomas Taylor was born at Richmond in York∣shire, of worthy and godly Parents:His Parentage and education. His Father was Recorder of that Town, and a very Gaius or Onesiphorus to the silenced Ministers of Eng∣land, and to the exiled Ministers of Scotland. He brought up divers Sonnes into the Ministry. This Sonne of his (as the other) was of a Child trained up in the holy Scriptures, which are able to make wise to salvation. Afterward, as age came on, he was well grounded in other Learning, and was sent to Cambridge,His going to Cambridge. where he became Fel∣low of Christs Colledge, as one that should do the Lord Christ abundance of good service. He was there most painfull and un∣weariable in the study of Tongues, Arts, Sciences, all sorts of Exercises about them; and especially for Divinity, which was his Profession. One while he was Hebrew Reader to the Colledge. Being soon ripe, he entred into the Ministry at the age of one and twenty years. In Queen Elizabeths time, he was called to preach at Pauls Crosse, and preached the Sermon in King James his time.His Sermon at Pauls Crosse. In the course and work of his Ministry, he spent thirty five years, with all diligence and painfulnesse, even to the very end,His painful∣nesse in the Ministry. when by right he might have spared himself; living in all sincerity and godly purenesse, with entire love of souls, with all watchfulnesse, with meeknesse, wonderfully quickned with zeal. He was an utter ene∣my of Popery, Arminianisme, Antinomianisme, and other Sects which crept up in those times, as appeareth partly by his writings. Amidst all his pithy Discourses, he was also an excellent and nimble Orator, and wound up his matter with a good farewell, even when at times it was but ordinary. And from this course he would scarce suffer himself to be withdrawn at any time, to refresh his spirits by a little freedom. Yea, sometimes when he was drawn forth into the Countrey for recreation, by the solicitation of Gods people, he escaped not without his usuall burden: Or he spent his vacant time in preparing Books for the Presse, which were both many and very
usefull, and will be to posterity; who have cause to blesse God, who giveth gifts to men, and publique mindes, that they may pro∣fit farre and near, both hearers and strangers, all debtors to him. And men of understanding observed a great Seal put to his Ministry,The success of his Ministry. in several places whereto he was called: Some converted, others confirmed, others comforted in the way of God: And in these times of division wherein many Professors have turned into by-waies, those that were his constant Hearers, continue in that way stedfast and unshaken in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Yea at Reding there was a generation of young Preachers, who under his Ministry grew up in knowledge and holinesse, and some eminency of gifts, profiting by him and his pains there; and some professe it at this day: Perhaps also in the great City of London, and at Cambridge. His piety in private.Neither was he altogether for the publick, but pious in private; and not only in the course of his Family, but in keeping Fasts a∣mong the godly of the place, which in those daies was something a dangerous exercise. And, to make them solid Professors indeed, he put them upon a weekly way of handling Chatecheticall points of Divinity; that is, every week to conferre of one of the heads of Religion, according to the Catechisme subjoyned to Mr. Dods Treatise on the Commandments, still proving the Doctrines by Testimonies of Scripture. For other personall qualifications, he was a man full of love, alms-deeds, and mercifull consideration of the needy, though not with a Trumpet. And he was a man blest of God with all the blessings of wisdome, Prov. 3.16. Length of daies, riches and honour. He had every where both godly and great Friends, and is likely still to have, among those that shall converse in his worthy works. His sicknesse.In that his holy and blessed course, he drew on toward his end. It was his Clymacterical year of 56. Having over-laboured him∣self with preaching in the City, he betook himself to his Countrey-house at Isleworth, to be a little refreshed. But having inflamed and corrupted his blood by preaching, he soon fell into his mortall disease, a Pleurisie; for curing whereof, though no meanes were wanting,His prudence therein. yet the desired effect (through the Counsel of God) fol∣lowed not. In the beginning of his sicknesse he set his house in order most holily, and as became so worthy a Father; and then bad fare∣well to all, as one throughly prepared for his departure; full of Faith and Patience, and joy in the holy Ghost, a great help in that acute disease: Carefull of the welfare of the Church at home, then in danger to be corrupted; grieved for the evils he knew in some mens dealings: Rejoycing greatly (in the midst of the apprehension of death) for the happy proceedings of the heroicall King of Sweden, then victorious in Bavaria. And once when he was told, he must a little help himself by cheerfulnesse, he fell into a most contentfull discourse of those noble deliverances and victories, and more would
have spoken, if weaknesse had permitted. But especially his joy in God, and in the conquest of Christ: Oh (said he) we serve a good Lord, who covers all imperfections, and gives great wages for little work; and in mercy he hath provided for me some of the greatest. With other holy speeches, full of faith and joy, which his infirmity would not suffer him to utter perfectly.His death. In which manner he lan∣guished by degrees, and at last on the Lords day, being the usuall day of his principall labours, he was dismissed of all, and went to keep a perpetuall Sabbath in heaven; where now he resteth from his labours, and his works follow him, even a full reward in endlesse glo∣ry, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither can enter into the heart of man to conceive, what things those are which God hath prepa∣red for them that love him.
The Life of Master Hugh Clark, who died Anno Christi 1634. His birth, and breeding.HUgh Clark was born at Burton upon Trent, in the Coun∣ty of Stafford, August 15. 1563. of honest Parents, who were very carefull of his education, both in Reli∣gion and Learning, and when he was fitted for the University, they sent him to Cambridge, where he was admitted into Jesus Colledge under the tuition of Master Duport,His going to Cambridge. (afterwards Doctor Duport, and Ma∣ster of that Colledge) in that place he followed his study very hard, and his Proficiency was very exemplary; but after two years and an half, the air not well agreeing with his constitution,His remove to Oxford. he removed to Oxford, and continued there till he was Master of Arts. He was a good Logi∣cian, and a very acute disputant. The first place that he was called to exercise his Ministry in,His going in∣to Northamp∣tonshire. was about Oundle in Northamptonshire, where he met with a people, that for the generality of them, were very ignorant and ungodly, and much addicted to the Prophanation of the Lords day, by Whitson-ales, Morris dancing, &c. which sinnes Master Clark in his Ministry much set himself against, endeavouring from Gods Word to convince them of the evil, and denouncing Gods judgments in case of their obstinate perseverance in such provoking courses; but they, having been alwaies trained up in such practices, and having their hearts hardened against admonition, still persevered in their former courses; and that the rather, because they were opposed by the Word of God therein; but the judgment of God found them out for this their wickednesse.Gods judge∣ments on Sab∣bath-breakers For shortly after, on a Lords day, the Leader of the Dance, being a lusty young man, in the midst of their prophane pastimes suddainly fell down and died. Yet these obdurate persons (though a little affected for the present) soon shaked off their fears, and returned to their vomit again. Master Clark the Sabbath following, took occasion from this sad di∣spensation of God, to shew them the greatnesse of their sinnes, and how highly God used to be displeased with those which took liberty to pro∣phane his holy day, withall quoting, Jer. 17.27. If thou wilt not hear∣ken unto me to hallow the Sabbath-day, &c. Then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devoure the Pallaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched; opening, urging, and pressing it home upon their conscien∣ces: yet still they kicked against these warnings, and the evening fol∣lowing, returned to their sports again. Amongst these there was a
Smith that was a chief Ring-leader; But it pleased God the very next day, that two Husbandmen coming to his Shop to sharpen their plough-shares, a spark from the red hot iron as he beat it on the anvil, flew into the thatch, which both the Smith and his neighbours saw, and stood gazing upon it, and might at first with one of their fingers have pulled it down, that thatch being low, but God took away their power of moving towards it; so that they saw it at first burn like a candle, then like a torch, and presently the whole shop was on a fire, and the men running out, both Shop, House, and all the Smiths goods were consumed in the fire, and yet a Neighbours House that stood very near it escaped. The second remarkeable judgment was again by Master Clark pres∣sed upon their consciences, yet nothing would prevail,Isa. 28.15. but as if they had made a Covenant with death, and were at an agreement with hell, they still persisted in their ungodly practises, and God who threatens to walk contrary to them that walk contrary to him, pursued them with one judgment after another; and amongst others,Levit. 26.27, 28. this was very remark∣able: That upon the Sabbath day, which they had highly prophaned, by drinking, dancing, &c. in the night, when they were retired to their se∣veral homes, there was heard a great noise, and ratling of chains up and down the town, which was accompanied with such a smell and stink of fire and brimestone, that many of their guilty consciences suggested un∣to them, that the devil was come to fetch them away quick to hell. This so terrified and wrought upon them, that they began to give better heed to the Ministry of Gods Word, and to break off their prophane courses for the greatest part, so that there was an eminent reformation wrought amongst them; at least, sixteen of those poor souls being effectually wrought upon, and brought home to Christ; and some others that re∣lapsed to their former waies, God pursued them with his judgments till he had brought them to beggery. During Master Clarks abode in this place, he had experience of Gods gracious protecting him from the rage of some desperately wicked men, and amongst others, this is very remarkeable: Master Clark, having on a day pressed Gods judgments against some sins, that he saw some of the people much addicted to, there came the next morning, a lusty young man [a serving man] to enquire for him, as desirous to speak with him. Master Clark being made acquainted with it,A special Pro∣vidence. sent for him up into his chamber, and knowing his vitious life, took occasion sharply to the reprove him, and to tell him of the danger that he was in by reason of the same, in case he persevered in his lewd courses. This round and faithfull deal∣ling, through Gods mercy, wrought so effectually upon him, that falling upon his knees, he intreated him to forgive him: Master Clark answered, that he should beg pardon at the hands of God, against whom he had sinned, for he knew not for his own part, wherein he had offended him; yea, said the other, I have not only offended God by sinning thus and thus against him, but you also; for I came hither with a full resolution to stab you with this dagger here at my back, but God hath so overawed my spirit, that
I have not had power to move an hand, to acccomplish such a wickednesse; and this resolution of mine, proceeded from the Sermon which you preached yesterday, which so terrified my conscience, that my whole body fell into such a trembling, that I was not able to sit, whereupon I rose up, and set my back to a Pillar to stay me, yet neither would that prevail to stay my trem∣bling, &c. But now if you please to forgive me, I shall, by Gods grace, never entertain any such desperate thoughts again. Maher Clark freely forgave him, and after some wholesome and seasonable admonitions, dismissed him. About this time, the schism and errors of the Brownists began to spread in Northamptonshire, and Master Clark had many bickerings and disputations with some of the chief of them, whom he mightily confu∣ted, and through Gods grace, reclaimed some of them. His remove to Woolstone.Anno 1590. He was sent for by Roger Wigstone Esquire, who li∣ved at Woolstone in the County of Warwick, by whom he was chosen to succeed Master Lord, an able and eminent Divine in the pastoral charge in that place, and having preached sometimes amongst them, he was freely chosen by the People also. Then having his presentati∣on from Master Wigston (who was a Gentleman of eminent Piety in those daies, and a great friend to godly Ministers.) He went to Doctor Overton, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, for his institution; but the Bishop having designed the living for one of his Chaplains, he endeavou∣red to perswade Master Clark to desert his title to it,He is opposed by the Bishop. promising that he would remember him when some other preferment should fall. Master Clark considering his fair and direct call to the place, and therefore hoping that God had a work for him to do there, he abso∣lutely refused to gratifie the Bishop in his request, telling him, that he could not with a good conscience do it, and therefore importuned him for his institution. Then did the Bishop set his acutest Chap∣lains upon him, to examine and dispute with him, hoping thereby to get some ground of exeception against him; but when that prevailed not, he framed other excuses to defer the instituting of him, one while alledging that his Register was not with him, and then that he had so many daies allowed by the Law ro make enquiry after him. And hereby he made Master Clark to ride three or four journeys without at∣taining his desire, and this the Bishop did, that the Living might fall into the Lapse. Master Clark perceiving his drift, told him, that if he refused any longer to grant him institution, he would bring his Quare impedit against him, which occasioned the Bishop at last to grant it him; but withall, he sent at several times, sometimes an Apparitor, sometimes one of his Chaplains, and other subtill persons to attend his Prayers and Sermons, to see if they could catch any advantage against him, and upon trivial occasions cited him oft to his Court, and thereby much mo∣lested him. At last the Bishop himself being at Coventry upon a Sab∣bath day, he with some of his Servants came in the morning to Wool∣stone, being but four miles off, and coming into the Church, he set him down in a seat just before Master Clark, none else of the Congregation
knowing him. Master Clark seeing the Bishop, abated nothing of his zeal and fervency in preaching and applying of the Word; insomuch as the Bishop being much netled by the Sermon,His courage. shifted and shufled up and down, as if he had sate upon thornes; an honest man by, observing it, fetched him a quishion, first to sit on, and then another to lean on, but yet the Bishop seemed very restless. The Sermon and Prayer being ended, the Bishop said openly, This is an hot fellow indeed, but I will coole him. Master Clark hearing it, re∣plyed, My Lord, if I have not fathfully delivered the truth of God, I beseech you declare what I have said amisse, that I may make my defence here before my people. The Bishop answered as before, You are an hot fellew indeed, but I will coole you; and so departed. Master Clark re∣plying, It's good to be zealous in the work of the Lord. After this the Bishop picked a quarrel against him, and suspended him from preaching, whereupon Master Clark used to expound the Word;He is suspen∣ded, and ex∣communicated then did the Bishop suspend him from expounding; whereupon he cate∣chized with exposition and application; then was he suspended from ca∣techizing also. Whereupon at the usuall times, in the Church, he caused an honest man, that was his neighbour, to read a Chapter, and at the end of every verse, to ask him the meaning of it, and what instructions and uses might be gathered out of it. This so angred the Bishop, that he pro∣ceeded to Excommunicate him. Whereupon Master Clark repaired to Doctor Whitgift, Arch-bishop of Canterbury,Absolved by the Arch∣bishop. and from him procured his Absolution; and as he returned homewards, about Dunstable he met Bishop Overton going towards London, to whom he shewed his Absolu∣tion, and so went on in his Ministry as before. This so irritated the Bishop, that he still suborned some to watch him in all his publike Prayers and Sermons; about which time the persecution growing hot against the Non-conformists, Master Clark in his Prayer, requested of God to forgive the Queen her sins, though in modest expressions. This the Bishop being informed of,He is accused of treason, and imprisoned. and supposing that he had now gotten that advantage, which he had long waited for, he charged Master Clark with treason, and caused him to be committed to the common Jayle in Warwick, where he lay (bail being refused) till the Assises; and then the Bishop caused him to be arraigned at the Bar, and had so exasperated the Judge against him, that he would have had the Jury to find the Bill. But it pleased God to stir up the heart of a noble Gentleman,Sir T. Lucy. a Justice upon the Bench, from that good report which he had heard of Master Clark, to stand up, and publiquely to tell the Judge, that before Master Clark should have any wrong, he would kneel before the Queen for him. This so prevailed with the Jury, that he was acquitted.He is acquitted Upon his release, Master Clark repaired again to Arch-bishop Whitgift, complaining to him of all this wrong which he had received from the Bi∣shop; the Arch-bishop (very worthily) sent for the Bishop, and upon a fair and equal hearing of the businesse betwixt them,The Bishop enjoyned to ask him for∣givenesse. he enjoyned the Bi∣shop to go down, and in Master Clarks Church, upon a Sabbath day, before the Congregation, to acknowledge the wrong which he had
done him, which the Bishop accordingly did perform, and ever after upon all occasions was Master Clarks great friend so long as he lived. Not long after, the Devill stirred up new adversaries against him in his own Parish, his Ministry being very quick, powerfull and searching, so that some wicked persons that found themselves to be galled by it, railed upon him, threatning to kill him; so that Mr. Clark, being a strong lusty man, for a time walked not abroad without his Rapier in his hand,P. Petiver. for his own defence. At last, one of these wicked men, whose con∣science the Ministry had galled, vowed his death; and as Master Clark was coming from Coventry,Binley Wood. he way-layed him in a Wood. Master Clark in the evening came alone homewards, with nothing but a wand in his hand;A special Pro∣vidence. whereupon this man rod up to him, and falling into discourse with him, Master Clark took the opportunity to reprove him for his disordered life, and so laid open Gods judgments due to him for the same, that he fell into a great trembling, confessed his intention to have killed him, and begged pardon. Yet still he persisted in his wicked waies, and Gods judgments found him out at last; for though he had a very good Living, yet he fell into misery and want, and died in Warwick Jayle for debt. Master Clark had in his Parish a Chappel of Ease, which had two townships belonging to it,His great pains. one of them two miles from the Parish Church, the Chappel it self near two miles from it, and the profits of both (the tythes being impropriated) scarce amounting to a competent maintenance for one man. Master Clark was fain to supply them both himself. And indeed God had extraordinarily fitted him for it, having given him a very strong, able, and healthfull body, so that for the great∣est part of his life there, which was about fourty four years; he rod four times a day winter and summer between the two Churches, read the Word, and preached four times a day, administred the Sacraments, and performed all other ministerial dutyes in them both. He preached up∣pon several texts in each of the Churches, so that divers godly persons, old and young, went betwixt the two Churches, hearing several Ser∣mons to their great profit and comfort. Besides this, every Holiday he supplied both the Churches, sometimes preached, but constantly ex∣pounded in each of them, and for the most part twice a day also; and God so blessed his labours,The success of his Ministry. that he begat many Sons and Daughters un∣to God. He was very carefull in the education of his children, first to train them up in the knowledge and fear of God;His care in the education of his children. for which end he would take all opportunities to whet the Word of God upon them, when he lay down, and when he rose up, and as he walked by the way, &c. and God so blest his labours, that he lived to see, to his great comfort, the work of grace wrought in the hearts of all his seven children. And next to this, his care was to train up his children in learning, and to honest callings; often saying, that if he could leave them no other portion, yet he would give them that education, that they should be able to get
their own livings in any part of the world, where God should cast their lott. Towards the latter-end of his life, came forth the Book for Recrea∣tions on the Sabbath day, and some young persons in the Town where he lived, being encouraged thereby, and by a Popish Landlord which they had, would needs have a Whitson-ale, and Morris-dance, an hea∣thenish sport, long before, through Gods goodnesse, banished out of that town. Master Clark laboured by his Ministry, to beat down the first rising of this motion; but these persons were so backed and encou∣raged by some that set them on, that they would needs prosecute their design notwithstanding all the warnings given them by their faithfull Pastor. But God that hath said, He that despiseth you, despiseth me, &c. made their sin quickly to find them out in a terrible judgment that sud∣dainly ensued; for in that very Barn, standing near a Smiths Shop,Gods judge∣ments on Sab∣bath-breakers where their revels were most kept, there was a violent fire kindled, which notwithstanding all help, quickly burnt it down, and in a strange manner flying against the wind, it went from house to house, burning down all the houses of the chief of those which had an hand in these pro∣phane sports. Master Clark was a man (like Apollos) mighty in the Scriptures, and so studied in the Body of Divinity, that upon short warning, he could preach very pertinently and profitably. He had an excellent pair of lungs, and was exceeding powerfull in his Ministry,His powerfull manner of preaching. striking shame and terrour into the hearts of the wicked, to whom he was a Bo∣anerges, and yet withall, he was a Barnabas to humbled, broken, bleeding souls. His old age was accompanied with a lingring and painfull disease,His last sick∣nesse. which yet he bore with great patience, and as he came nearer to Heaven, so his motion thitherward was more quick and lively. Many godly per∣sons came to visit him in his disease, and none of them went away with∣out some spiritual, and comfortable instructions from him. At last, ha∣ving long glorified God on earth, and finished his work,His death. he went to re∣ceive his wages, quietly resigning up his spirit unto God, November 6. 1634. having lived seventy one years, two moneths, and nineteen dayes, and having been Pastor of Woolstone fourty four years. This Master Hugh Clark was my Father.
The Life of Doctor Sibs, who died Anno Chri∣sti 1635. His Country.RIchard Sibs was born upon the edges of Suffolk, near Sudbury, and being trained up at School, when he was grown ripe and ready for the University, he was sent to Cambridge Anno Christi 1595. and was admitted into St. Johns Colledge,His going to Cambridge. where he by his sedulity and industry so profited in Learn∣ing, and approved himself by his godly and blame∣lesse conversation, that he was promoted from one degree to another in the Colledge; being chosen, first Scholar, and then Fellow of that House.His promotion in the Col∣ledge and U∣niversity. His conversi∣on. He also took all the Degrees of the Uni∣versity, with general approbation and applause. It pleased God to convert him by the Ministry of Mr. Paul Baines, whilest he was Le∣cturer at St. Andrews in Cambridge. And when Mr. Sibs had been Master of Arts some while, he entred into the Ministry, and shortly after was chosen Lecturer himself at Trinity Church in Cambridge:He is chosen Lecturer in Cambridge. To whose Ministry, besides the Townsmen, many Scholars resorted, so that he became a worthy Instrument of begetting many Sons and Daugh∣ters unto God, besides the edifying and building up of of others. He sometimes had a little stammering in the time of his preaching, but then his judicious hearers alwaies expected some rare and excellent notion from him. About the year 1625. or 26. he was chosen Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge,Master of Ka∣therine Hall. the Government whereof he continued till his dying day; and indeed like a faithfull Governour, he was alwaies very solicitous and carefull to procure and advance the good of that little House. For he procured good means and maintenance by his interest in many worthy Persons, for the enlargement of the Col∣ledge, and was a means and Instrument, to establish learned and Re∣ligious Fellows there; insomuch as in his time, it proved a ve∣ry famous Society for Piety and Learning, both in Fellows and Scholars. But before this, viz. about the year 1618. he was chosen Preach∣er to Graies-Inne,Preacher at Graies-Inne. one of the Learnedest Societies in England, where his Ministry found such generall approbation and acceptance, that besides the Learned Lawyers of the House, many Noble Persona∣ges, and many of the Gentry and Citizens resorted to hear him, and
Dr. SIBBS
many till this day,The success of his Ministry. blesse God for the Benefit which they received by him. His Learning was mixed with much humility, whereby he alwaies esteemed lowly of himself, and was ready to undervalue his own la∣bours, though others judged them to breathe spirit and life, to be strong of Heaven, speaking with authority and power to mens consci∣ences.His prudence in the Mini∣stry. His care in the course of his Ministry was to lay a good foun∣dation in the heads and hearts of his hearers. And though he were a wise Master-builder, and that in one of the eminentest Auditories for Learning and Piety that was in the Land, as was said before; yet ac∣cording to the grace which was given to him (which was indeed like that of Elisha, in regard of the other Prophets, 2 King. 1.9. the elder Brothers priviledge, a double portion) he was still taking all occasi∣ons to preach of the Fundamentals to them, and amongst the rest, of the Incarnation of the Son of God, one of the chief Fundamentals of our Faith, one of the chief of those wonders in the Mercy-seat, which the Cherubims gaze at, which the Angels desire to pry into, 1 Pet. 1.12. And preaching at severall times, and by occasion, of so many severall texts of Scripture concerning this Subject, there is scarce any one of those incomparable benefits which accrew to us thereby, nor any of those holy impressions, which the meditation hereof ought to work in our hearts, which was not by him sweetly unfolded, as may appear by those Sermons now in Print. And therefore (saith a Reverend Divine) the noted humility of the Author I lesse wonder at, finding how often his thoughts dwelt upon the humiliation of Christ. As for his Sermons upon Cant. 5. Reverend and holy Mr. Dod upon the perusall of the Manuscript, was so taken with them,Mr Dods testi∣mony of his Sermons on Cant. 5. that he pro∣fessed that he found them so full of heavenly Treasure, and contain∣ing such lively expressions of the unvaluable riches of the love of Christ towards all his poor servants that sue and seek unto him for it, that by his great importunity he prevailed with Dr. Sibs, otherwise much undervaluing his own meditations, to commit the same to the Presse; to which Mr. Dod gave this attestation. I (saith he) judge it altogether unmeet, that such precious matter should be concealed from the publick use. I judge these Sermons a very profitable and excellent help, both to the understanding of that dark and most Divine Scripture, as also to kindle in the heart, all hea∣venly affections towards Jesus Christ; the whole frame whereof, is carried with such Wisdom, Gravity, Piety, Judgment and Experi∣ence, that it commends it self to all that are godly wise: and I doubt not but they shall find their temptations answered, their fainting spirits revived, their understandings enlightened, and their graces confirmed; so that they shall have cause to praise God, for the worthy Authors godly and painfull labours. Indeed he was throughly studied in the holy Scriptures, which made him a man of God, perfect, throughly furnished unto every
good work; and as became a faithfull Steward of the manifold graces of God, he endeavoured to teach to others the whole counsel of God, and to store them with the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. His piety.He was a man that enjoyed much communion with God, walking in all the Laws of God blamelesse; and like John the Baptist, was a bur∣ning and shining light, wasting and spending himself to enlighten o∣thers.His charity. He was upon all occasions very charitable, drawing forth, not only his Purse in relieving, but his very bowels in commiserating the wants and necessities of the poor Members of Christ. He used some∣times in the summer-time, to go abroad to the houses of some worthy Personages, where he was an Instrument of much good, not only by his private labours, but by his prudent counsell and advice, that upon every occasion he was ready to minister unto them. And thus having done his work on earth,His death. he went to receive his wages in heaven, peace∣ably and comfortably resigning up his spirit unto God, Anno Christi 1631. and of his age 58. The Life of Doctor Chaderton, who died Anno Christi 1640. His ParentageLAurence Chaderton was born of an ancient Family at Chatterton in Lancashire, about the year 1546. and his Parents being both Papists, they trained him up in that Religion, yet bred him to learn∣ing; and when he came to some maturity of years, his Father sent him to the Inns of Court: But he being not pleased with that kind of life, through the motion of Gods holy Spirit, who had a work for him to do in another Calling and place, left the Inns of Court,His remove to Cambridge. and went to Cambridge about the twentieth year of his age, and the sixth year of Queen Elizabeth. And getting some acquain∣tance in Christs Colledge, it pleased God that the Master and Fellows took such a liking to him for his ingenuity and industry, that they ad∣mitted him into a poor Scholars place. Then did he write to his Father, to acquaint him with his present condition, and to request some means of maintenance from him: But his Father disliking his change of place and studies,His Father casts him off. but especially of Religion, sent him a Poke with a groat in it, to go a begg withall; further signifying to him, that he was resolved to disinh
him, which he also did: Yet did the Lord support his spirit, to pre∣ferre an heavenly before an earthly Inheritance; and seeing that he had nothing else to trust to, he fell close to his studies; and through Gods blessing upon the same, he so eminently profited in all sorts of Learning, that Anno Christi 1567. being but yet Batchelour of Arts, he was chosen Fellow of Christs Colledge.He is chosen Fellow. Anno Christi 1578. he commenced Batchelour of Divinity; and the same year, October the 26. he preached a Sermon at Pauls Crosse, which he also Print∣ed. He was chosen Lecturer at St. Clements Church in Cambridge, which place he supplied about the space of sixteen years, and by his Holy, Learned and judicious Sermons did very much good, and was suc∣ceeded therein by Mr. Michael Bentley Fellow of Christs Colledge, a godly, plain and profitable Preacher. He was a man famous for Gravity, Learning and Religion; so that when Sir Walter Mildmay (Counsellor of State to Queen Elizabeth Chancellor, and under-Treasurer of the Exchequer) Founded Ema∣nuel Colledge,Chosen the first Master of Emanuel. Anno Christi 1584. he made choice of this man for the first Master: and when Master Chaderton shewed himself not willing to undertake that great charge, Sir Walter replied, saying, If you will not be the Master, I will not be the Founder of it. In the beginning of King James his reign, he was one of the four Divines for the Conference at Hampton Court, chosen by the Mini∣sters that desired a Reformation in the Church Government; and for his Learning and sufficiency, was the same year chosen to be one of the Translators of the Bible. Anno Christi 1612. when the Prince Elector Palatine came to visit Cambridge,He commen∣ced Doctor. he would needs have Mr. Chaderton commence Doctor of Divinity, which accordingly he did. He deserved very well of Emanuel Colledge,His care of the Colledge. for whereas the Foun∣der gave allowance for the maintenance of three Fellows only, toge∣ther with the Advouson of Stranground Rectory in Huntingtonshire, near Peterburrough, Dr. Chaderton procured by his friends and acquain∣tance, allowance for twelve Fellows, and above fourty Scholars of the House, besides the Advousons of Auler and Northcudberry Recto∣ries; as also of the Vicaridge of Dulverton in Summersetshire, Piddle-Hinton in Dorcetshire, and Loughburrough in Leicestershire, of the Noble Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington, which Noble man was a great friend to godly Ministers. After he was Master of Emanuel,His care for young Stu∣dents. his manner was not to suffer any young Scholars to go into the Countrey to Preach, till he had heard them first in the Colledge Chappel. All his younger daies he used to expound a portion of Scripture twice a week in his Family. He was married fifty three years,His care of Servants. and yet in all that time he never kept any of his Servants from Church to dresse his meat, saying, that he desired as much to have his servants know God as him∣self.
If at any time he had a Servant upon triall, though they could do as much work as three others, yet if they were given to ly∣ing, or any other vice, he would by no means suffer them to dwell in his house. Towards his latter-end Arminianisme began to sprout up apace in the University, and he being fearfull that an Arminian might come to succeed him in his place after his death, resolved if he could procure a godly and worthy man,He resigned his place. to resign his place to him in his life time, which accordingly he did to famous Dr. Preston, whom he yet survived, and saw after him Dr. Sancroft, and after him Dr. Holsworth to succeed in his Mastership. He was of a very charitable disposition, insomuch as if he heard of any godly Minister that was in want, he would send them fourty or fifty shillings at a time. Though he lived till he was very old, yet his sight remained very good, as may appear by this example: A little before his death, an old Servant of his came to see him, and found him reading on a Book, so that at the first he took no notice of her, but when she came nearer, lifting up his head, he spake to her, asking her what a clock it was▪ She told him eleven. I have (said he) here got a Book that I have been reading of ever since eight a clock, for I like it very well; and yet all that time he had read without Spectacles. He lived eighteen years after the Resignation of his Mastership, and in November,His death. Anno Christi 1640. resigned up his spirit unto God, being about the age of ninety four years, and was buried in S. An∣drews Church; Dr. Richard Holsworth, the then Master of Emanuel, preached his Funerall Sermon, and gave him a large and deserved Commendation.
The Life of Master John Ball, who died October 20. 1640. IOhn Ball was born about the year 1585. at Casssing∣ton, an obscure village,His birth, and education. (a mile from Hanborough) in Oxfordshire: he being set to School at Yarnton, was found so apt to learn, that the Schoolmaster prevailed with his Parents, (though of low estate) to continue him Scholar there, till he was fitted for the University. Gods Providence, by means of friends,His going to Oxford. made way for his placing in Brazen-nose Colledge in Oxford, where he improved very much in the knowledge of the Arts, and he proved a quick disputant. When he was Batche∣lour of Arts, (wanting meanes for his maintenance to continue longer in the University) he accepted a motion made for his removal in∣to the Countrey, and was placed in the Lady Cholmleys house in Cheshire, as Tutor to her Children,His remove into Cheshire. where many other Children also were taught by him. And though he came raw and un∣grounded in Religion (as himself was wont to expresse it) from Oxford, yet within a short time there appeared (with the increase of his scholastical abilities) the breakings forth of the power of Godlinesse in his conversation,His improve∣ment of his parts. unto them who were most religious and judicious there, who thereupon took him into their society for mutual edification in the waies of Gods fear. Whereas there was great scarcity of godly painful Preachers in that corner of the Countrey, in those times, he did much frequent the Ministry of Reverend Master John Foord, whereby he was not a little edi∣fied. He had few Books, and therefore perused the more seriously such as he had under-hand. Calvins life published by Beza, and his Com∣mentary upon the Psalms, made deep impressions upon his spirit. Grow∣ing into acquaintance with the most godly people in those parts, who much lamented the evils of the times, he often associated with them, in keeping private daies of Fasting and Prayer.His frequent Fasts, and Prayers. Himself with some o∣ther honest Christians, were often convented to Chester, and much troubled there, for keeping a Fast on Ascension day, their fault being aggravated by the Bishop and his Officers, because they fasted upon that holy day. As he took not up, any opinion or practice, till he had well weighed it:His constancy. So was he not much moved by any trouble which
assaulted him in his way. When others judged him ripe for the Mini∣stry, he was not hasty in adventuring upon that Calling, because he was sensible of the weight thereof, and also desirous to satisfie his consci∣ence concerning the way of entrance by Episcopal subscription. And upon the serious studying of the points in controversie, betwixt the Bishops and Non-conformists,His Non-con∣formity. he was dissatisfied to yield unto that sub∣scription which was then strictly commanded. Some conflicts he had with the then Bishop of Chester, about Non-conformity; but though he looked upon a Bishop in those times as a formidable creature, yet he came off unshaken. Having resolved (up∣on the encouragement given by judicious Divines) to enter into the Ministry, when God should make a fair way for his admission, without subscription,He is ordained Minister. by the intercession of Friends, he with Master Julines Herring, (who afterwards was famous for the work of the Lord in Salop,) were made Ministers by an Irish Bishop, (being occasionally in London,) with freedom from the formentioned snare. About the year 1610. he was called to be Minister at Whitmore,His call to Whitmore. (a small village near unto New-Castle in Staffordshire) where he was entertained into the house of Edward Mainwaring Esquire, a pious and much esteemed Gen∣tleman. His marriage. Here he married a godly Wife, whom God had provided as an help meet for him (he himself being alwaies a meer Scholar, neither much minding nor intermedling in worldly affairs, beyond the bounds of his Calling,) by whom he had six Sonnes and one Daugh∣ter. Six of his Children were born unto him while he continued in Master Mainwarings Family, where he found much love, and did much service; for every evening he expounded a portion of Scripture, which was read in course, and many mornings also was helpfull in Catechizing of the Family. Hither many Mini∣sters and others had often recourse unto him for counsell, where they were alwaies friendly entertained; and the Lord blessed that Fa∣mily very much, which doth still shew much kindnesse unto the Chil∣dren of this good man. Afterwards he removed with his own Family unto an house which Master Mainwaring had built for him, where he had his seventh and last child born to him, and where he dwelt till his death. He was a great lover of Learning, and therefore laid out in the first years of his Ministry, all the money which he could spare, from neces∣sary expences, in buying good Books, with which he was so well ac∣quainted (having both a quick understanding and strong memory) that he could readily give an account of all passages most remarkable in them.His diligent studies. He had so well studied Bellarmines controversies, that it is scarcely credible what relation he could make ex tempore of them from point to point; and shew from particular to particular, where the fallacy and the weaknesse of his Arguments did appear. And the like might be truly attested in reference unto the Arminian disputes, and the other Church-Controversies both in former and latter times. It was
his custom to read over a Book, when once he undertook it, and no man could be more cautious in entertaining opinions without much mature consideration, having well weighed all arguments produced on both sides both for and against them; and wherein his apprehensions were different from his Brethren, he did wisely forbear to vent them in such sort, as might occasion any division or offence. Oh how well had it been with England, if all other men had mana∣ged their studies and practices according to this pattern! for then, so many sparks (cried up as new lights) had not been kindled amongst us, which being blown abroad by pride and ignorance, do threaten to set the whole world on fire. But to proceed in the Narrative of this worthy mans life. He was so enriched with knowledge both in Practical and Pole∣mical Divinity, he was so able to interpret and reconcile difficult Scriptures,His skill in comforting afflicted con∣sciences. he had such dexterity in dealing with afflicted consci∣ences, and he was so well furnished with Ministerial gifts for Preach∣ing, Prayer, and the administration of both Sacraments, that it was not easie to discover wherein he most excelled. His ability to counsell and comfort dejected, tempted Christians, was occasioned, (as him∣self would acknowledge,) by his conversing with Mistresse Sarah Mainwyaring, (Wife to the Gentleman in whose house he continued ma∣ny years, as was before mentioned) who was much exercised in that kind, and was an unparallel'd Gentlewoman for holy tendernesse and ex∣actnesse in Religion. Willing he was to trade every Talent with which God had trusted him, as opportunity was offered;His indefati∣gablenesse. and he was a man most unwearied in all waies of service. As he took extraordinary pains in publique, so did he also in pri∣vate, especially on the Lords day.His unwearied pains on the Sabbath. For having by way of Preparation upon the Saturday in the afternoon, spent about two houres in his house, in praying and expounding some Scripture, (to which exercise divers did resort,) on the Sabbath-morning, he expounded a portion of Scripture in his Family, (whereof many neighbours were partakers) then he preached twice in publique, read divers Chapters, and Catechi∣zed also in the afternoon, spending much time therein, especially in the summer season) after the evening Sermon, he went unto Master Main∣wayrings house (being near at hand,) where he repeated both his Ser∣mons, and prayed; likewise after Supper he had another exercise in his own Family, equivalent to a Sermon, unto which divers well-affected of the neighbour-hood did repair. These his great labours were the more wonderfull, in that they were so excellent and solid, as many Mini∣sters and Scholars yet living know, who did often frequent them. He taught a School also (both from a desire to do good, and that he might provide the more comfortable subsistance for his Family,) having not on∣ly the children of poor neighbours, (for he refused none who were willing to learn, but of persons of better quality sent unto him; some whereof were tabled in his own house, and the rest placed in the neigh∣bourhood. Every morning of the six daies in the week, he instructed
his own Children and Scholars in the Principles of Religion, whereby many young ones (of whom some are now Ministers) were well sea∣soned and setled in the grounds of godlinesse. Every night likewise he opened and applyed some portion of the Scripture, for the edification of his Family. And besides his frequent preaching at Lectures, at Madeley especially, where he was the principal upholder of a weekly Sermon, and a monethly Fast,His frequent Fasting, and Prayer. and his helpfulnesse in holy Fasting and Prayer else∣where, (when desired) it was his custom to set apart daies (when freed from attendance upon his School) for the solemn seeking of God, with his godly neighbours, as the necessities of the times did re∣quire. He was most ready to communicate his learning, graces, experiences, yea,His readinesse to do good. his All, for the profit of such who conversed with him: the re∣membrance whereof, is very smarting upon the hearts of some of his surviving friends, because they made not a fuller improvement of him for their own advantage. In the latter part of his time, he had some scholars, whom he in∣structed in Academical Learning, reading Lectures to them in Logick and Philosophy, and hearing them to dispute, which often they did du∣ring his dinner-time: And while he was at supper, other scholars read a piece of Greek, or Latine, (so exceeding diligent was he in Husband∣ing the shreds of time, as he called them) the residue of the day, till very late, he spent in his private study. His tempe∣rance, and meeknesse.And as he was incomparably abstemious and moderate in the use of meat, drink, sleep, and apparel, so he had an admirable command o∣ver his passions. For those who most conversed with him, never saw inordinate out-breaches of anger, or other affections in his conversati∣on. This Character was given by a Friend who was much with him, (viz.) That as Master Dod did turn earth into heaven, by a spiritual im∣provement of all earthly affairs, so Master Ball did reconcile earth and hea∣ven, because worldly occasions were no distractions unto him in his journey thither.His frugality. He lived upon a small maintenance, (viz.) twenty pounds per annum, for serving the cure at Whitmore, and the keeping of one Cow, both summer and winter, by Master Mainwayring aforesaid, with what he got by teaching School. Yet he would often say, that he thought never man passed through this world with lesse care. God in∣deed stirred up some Friends, (who knew his great worth and mean outward condition) to be helpfull unto him, towards whom he was al∣waies really respectfull, requiting their love by his daily Prayers, and his readinesse upon all occasions to do service unto them and theirs. Through Gods singular blessing upon his yearly incomes,His charity. he lived very comfortably, was given to hospitality, and also unto liberality to the poor, (considering his estate) and left a good competency unto his Wife and Children. Yea, such was this holy mans gratitude and contentment, that he would say, I have enough, and enough, and enough. Whereas he went once every year into Oxfordshire, to expresse his du∣tifull
respect unto his aged Parents, he made choice of that time for his journey, that he might enjoy the Benefit of Oxford-Act. And as his love to learned disputations was large, so by strength of memory, he could give a punctuall account of all the most considerable Ar∣guments urged, and Answers returned, upon the severall Questions discussed. And still this Journey was made profitable unto his Christian Friends (near to whose dwellings he travelled) by conference, his assistance in private Fasts and other exercises of Religion. It would be too tedious and tiring unto the Reader, if relation should be made of all those memorable passages in this Reverend mans life, (which his friends surviving, do well remember) which did proclaim the high degree of holinesse, with which God adorned and crowned all his other great abilities, therefore some few of them only shall be reported. His constant carriage towards all who conversed with him,His humility. did speak out his deep humility. For alwaies he was apt to prefer o∣thers before himself; and he was never observed, by any reproachfull speeches, or behaviour, to cast the least contempt or discouragement up∣on the meanest Christian. He was all his life-long,His esteem of the weight of the Ministry. very apprehensive and sensible of the weightinesse of the Ministers Calling, saying, That no man should dream of ease in that Function; and would often much bewail before the Lord in Prayer, his own inconsiderate entrance upon it. A Friend being weary of teaching School, and acquainting him with his pur∣pose to enter into the Ministry, Master Ball told him, That he would find it a far heavier task to teach men then boys. And a Fellow-Minister telling him of his danger to be silenced by the Bishop, he returned this answer, If he should deal so with me, I would put off my hat and thank him· Having experimentally poysed the weight of the Ministers work, he would say unto his Non-conforming Brethren, (when Prelatical persecution threatned to drive him out of England,) If we be necessita∣ted to transplant our selves, you shall preach, and I will teach School.His humility. And alwaies when other Ministers were in company, he would endea∣vour earnestly to put them upon the performance of Family-duties, as judging them to be better able then himself. Such who knew this mans learning of all kinds, and rich ministerial gifts, will admire (upon the consideration of these passages) at the forwardnesse of illiterate Mecanicks in these times, to intrude upon the Ministers Office. And whereas the blessed Apostle himself cryed out, Who is sufficient for these things! we may do more then guesse what spi∣rit animateth those men, whose practises speak thus; Who is insufficient for these things! He did lay to heart the want of labourious learning amongst godly Ministers, because so many neglected to acquaint themselves throughly with the controversies of the times;The necessity of stadying controversies. and he thought that positive Di∣vinity, might be best gained by the study of controversie; when the
main Principles were first well drunk in. He would say, that a sub∣till Jesuite would make wilde work in many places of England, because neither the people nor their Ministers, had sufficient insight into the points of difference betwixt us and the Papists. Now what other errors (no whit lesse dangerous,) have for the same rea∣sons been entertained of late years, (as he foresaw and feared) it is too notorious. Although he himself was much pleased with sober, profitable dis∣putations, yet he would shrink with trouble upon the appearance of their audacity, who dared to question Fundamentals in Religion, or to speak slightly of the matters of God. Once observing a man in the heat of conference, carried beyond the bounds of modest inquiry after the truth, he used these words with holy admiration; And whither will the love of arguing carry a man! He compared many Professors of late times, unto young Travellors, who so soon as they are mounted, begin to gallop, and do out-ride their fellows, but they either fall short, or come late (if not lame) home. The danger of Separation.And he called the waies of separation a Labyrinth, wherein men tire themselves and grow giddy, as in a maze; but when all is done, there is no way out, but that whereby they entred. He made it his businesse to raise and maintain high and honourable thoughts of God at all times, as himself would alwaies speak of the titles of the Almighty with much gravity and reverence, endeavouring to draw forth holy thankfulnesse in all conditions of life.His high e∣steem of God. Here two or three things shall be touched upon, to give a tast of this good mans gra∣cious spirit. He with a Neighbour Minister, having occasion to meet at a place where they had only bread and cheese to their dinner, the Master of the house expressing trouble, that he had no better provision for so good unexpected guests: Hereupon he said, that it would cost a man ma∣ny years labour to be truly and througly thankfull unto God for one piece of bread and cheese,His gratitude for mercies. proceeding to discover, most divinely, the many mercies which were to be acknowledged in that meal and meeting. And whereas at that time Rochal was besieged, and the inhabitants were in great distresse through want of food, he moved a serious con∣sideration, how much bread and cheese with peace and fellowship would be valued at Rochel: yea, he seriously made his demand, whether their obligations at the present place and meeting, were not much great∣er, because they in their instant enjoyments had not experienced Rochels fears and sorrows. At another time a dear Friend relating his great danger by a fall off his horse in a journey, and saying that he never had received such a deliverance. Master Ball answered, Yea an hundred times, (viz.) so often as you have ridden and not fallen; because the preventing of perils is to be prized as much as our rescuing out of them.
At a Marriage-feast, where Christian Friends were civilly rejoycing in the good occasion of their meeting, the many good blessings provi∣ded for their comfort, and in their mutual society, this speech came from him with much gravity;His high e∣steem of Jesus Christ. One thought of Jesus Christ reaching the heart, is more to be valued, then all Creature-contentments whatsoever, though they should be enjoyed in their fulnesse for a thausand years without interruption. That he might keep Gods servants of the lowest parts,His prudence. alwaies high in his own estimation, he would wisely weigh their peculiar service∣ablenesse in some kind or other, though they were inferiours in sun∣dry excellencies. Hereupon when one admiring worthy Master Dods holy conversation, said, Oh how well would it be if all Ministers were like unto him; Master Ball answered, The Church would be quite undone if all others were like him. For though no man more honoured Master Dod, (which not many years before his death he witnessed, by listening unto his fatherly counsell bare-headed, with his hat in his hand) yet he knew, that other men, much inferiour in graces, had some special way of advantage to the cause and the people of God. He was a zealous opposite to passionate frowardnesse,His distaste of frowardnesse. observing the lamentable fruits thereof, in many persons and relations, and he had an extraordinary dexterity to calm them who were boisterous. He would thus advise them, Put judgment into Office; for Affections are good followers, but bad guides. Look well to your hearts,The means of cure. for Passion is the effect of pride. And he would say unto them, You had need to get a strong bit and bridle, for you ride an unruly horse. Observing one bit∣terly to bewail the death of a dear Friend, he said, Rather labour to get good by it. He was wont to humble passionate Professors, who in their heat would speak unadvisedly, by this position, which he would undertake to prove, (viz.) That a moral heathen who never heard of Christ, might possiby by watchfulnesse secure himsel from uttering one froward word all his life long; And therefore it was a great shame for Christians to be worse, who had more grace and greater helps to suppresse sinne. This was one parcell of good counsell, which he commonly bestowed in all cases, Inform judgment; Set Faith on work; Be of good courage. As he used to be large in his Prayers in behalf of the Church of God, (ac∣cording to the peculiar concernments thereof) both at home and a∣broad,His love to the Church, and to his Chil∣dren. so was he particular in minding his special Friends before the Lord, and the spirituall welfare of his children was so much upon his heart, that he daily desired to lodge them in Gods bosome; yea, he seldome gave thanks either before or after meat, (especially to∣wards the end of his life) without some touch of tendency towards his children, in reference unto whom this was one constant Petition,His content∣ednesse. That they might never seek great things for themselves in this world. And his own practice from his youth, proved the sincerity of his heart in this suit, because he never looked after, nor would entertain any
motion of removing for wealth or worldly promotion, though his charge was great, and his eminency, both in ministerial and scholastical gifts, with the power of godlinesse, which did shine in his whole conversation, gained him many Friends, and rendred him in their account, a man more meet for a place of publique note and resort, then the village where he dwelt. When the Prelatical opposition against the Non-conformists was hot and high, he spake thus unto a Neighbour-Brother; Be confident, that although all who are now known Non-conformists were dead and gone: yet God would rather raise some out of our ashes to protest against Episco∣pacy, and the Ceremonies, then suffer that cause to fall unto the ground. He would say, The Fathers wanted some of our light, but we want more of their heat. He was exemplarily carefull to preserve Gods Ordinances from pol∣lution and contempt,His care to keep the Sa∣craments from pollution. and therefore did alwaies take great pains with his people, to prepare them for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. In his Sermons he was wont to tell his Auditours, that their persecuting, impoverishing, imprisoning, and thrusting daggers into their Ministers bodies, would not be more grievous, then their unworthy communica∣ting at the Lords Table, and their unanswerable walking unto the Ordi∣nances of grace dispenced amongst them. And when Parents present∣ed their children in the Congregation to be baptized, he would very affectionately lay open their duty, pressing Sacramental ingagements home to their hearts, with strong Arguments and authority ministerial; Though no man was known by his Friends,His dislike of separation. who more dis-relish∣ed the corruptions in Church-Government, and in administrations of holy worship, yet he hath sufficiently published unto the world his great dislike of the way of separation from our Church-Assemblies up∣on such pretences. Thus he spake unto a Friend who had moved him to maintain our Church-communion against the Separatists, How little am I beholding unto you, who drew me from more profitable studies, to per∣use those sapless speculations? His judgment about Inde∣pendency.He much lamented in his Prayers before God, the first breakings out of Independency in England, both in respect of the present offence, and the wofull consequences thereof, whereof he was much afraid: yea, he did very often tell his Friends (both in the time of his health and last sicknesse) that if God should give opportunity and hopes of Church-reformation, that we might be eased of our present grievances, the Brethren of the new separation, would be found the greatest obstructers thereof. His remembrance of the History of former Separations (with which he was fully acquainted) and his prudential fore-sight of the diducts which would necessarily follow from their Principles, (viz. Anabaptisme, &c.) together with his wise insight into the dispo∣sitions of some persons who then appeared therein; these were the grounds of his foretelling the confusions, the spreading of per∣nicious errours, and hinderances of Reformation, which we since
have sadly suffered under. These Reasons of his Prediction (which is noised abroad) are expressed, lest any should imagine him to have inclined to regard injections and impulsions of spirit,His judgement about revela∣tions. which some cry up as prophetical. His distaste whereof may be evidenced by this one instance, (viz.) Being asked by one who much pretended unto im∣mediate inspirations besides Scripture, whether he at any time had ex∣perience thereof in his own heart; His answer was this: No, I blesse God; and if I should ever have such phantasies, I hope God would give me grace to resist them. When there was discourse concerning the new, (or rather the renew∣ed) errours, which were broached, he would ordinarily say, A good Treatise of the sufficiency of the Scriptures would put an end unto these matters. His exceeding love to study, and his great modesty caused un∣willingnesse to go far from home, or to appear publique in any kind. And if the extraordinary importunity of some much esteemed Friends,His humility and modesty. had not conquered this aversnesse, he would (in probability) never have printed any thing in his own name, or have come into the compa∣ny of persons of chief place and quality; yea God was pleased in both these waies to make him serviceable. For besides the profit which ma∣ny have received from his printed Books, he was happily instrumen∣tall by conference to preserve, some men of chief esteem, (in regard of their Piety, Parts, and places of command) in the Countries where they lived, from warping towards the waies of new separation, upon the sollicitation of such who were busie sticklers therein. Upon the calling of the Parliament, in the year 1640. some hopes being conceived that he might be an instrument of publique benefit to the Church, by dealing with some Parliament-men, that (if further Reformation of things wofully out of order, could not be procured,) men unconformable to the Ceremonies might not be thrust out, and kept out of the Ministry in that regard. He thereupon took a journey into London, with his neighbour and endeared Brother Master Lang∣ley; but receiving small encouragement to his hopes and endeavours in that kind, he returned home with sorrow upon his heart, complaining of the many symptomes of Gods displeasure, which he saw ready to break out against poor England, and resolved to do what service he could in any other way. And being convinced that his labours might be profitable to the Church, both in the present and succeeding ages, he was resolved to lay forth himself for publique service in any kind, as his good Friends should advise; and in pursuance hereof he designed these three works. viz. 1. A Treatise of the Church.His intended works. 2. An Exposition of obscure Scrip∣tures out of all the original Languages. 3. A more full Systeme of Divi∣nity by the enlarging of his Catechism. For all which he had much good Provision under hand, when the Lord saw cause to put an end to his labours. And here, all those must silence their hearts, (who knowing him, may be apt to judge his removall at this time to be un∣seasonable)
with these words, (which were much in his mouth when God checked hopes by crosse Providences) The Lord is wisest: God is most wise.His great a∣bilities. Many conflicts he had with men of greatest strength, (as was imagined) to maintain the new pathes, into which divers had stepped aside. But the truth is, never was any of them able to stand up under his Arguments. Though God was pleased to take him away (whom some in scorn called The Presbyterians Champion) yet he hath raised up other Worthies, who do strenuously gain-say those ex∣travagancies. His last sick∣nesse.When his nature was enfeebled by constant study, and great long-continued labours, he passed the time of his languishing sicknesse with a sweet, humble, divine, peaceable spirit. He preached in pub∣lique so long as bodily ability could bear it; and he continued to pray in his Family till strength failed. Now his addresses to God were most holy and heavenly, as Swan-like Songs, the sweetest at last. Though he spake not very much during his bodily decays, yet the words which he used were solid and savoury. Being asked what he thought of himself, whether he should now die or recover? he answered, I do not trouble my self about that matter. He often bewailed the infirmities of his life, and in special (now as at former times) his inconsiderate entring upon the weighty Calling of the Ministry;His Faith. but he manifested withall an holy child-like confidence in Christ, still strengthening his heart, after his humble mourning for sinne, with this consideration, that the Scripture mentioneth weaknesses in the choicest Saints, which were neither totall hinderances to the exercise of their faith in Christ, nor to their salvation through grace. This question being propounded to him, what he now thought concerning his la∣bours (part whereof were then printed) against the present separati∣on in England? He answered, that though he had been weary of those controversies, which hindered his going on in more profitable studies, yet he did not repent of that which he had done, only he desired God to pardon the defects, which had cleaved unto that and his other ser∣vices. When any mention was made before him of his great labours to do good, he would say, (and this was a speech which he much u∣sed) If the Lord were not a God pardoning sinnes, I was in a miserable condition. And however he did say with tears, that he had too much respect amongst men, and that many judged that to be in him, which was not, (such was his humility;His humility. yet friends expressing ardent desires of his health, for service sake, he told them, that he could have been content to have lived longer, (if the Lord had been pleased) that he might been further usefull in his place, and have born his share in suf∣ferings with his Brethren. For he expected a very sparp storm, though he hoped it would be but short. And he called it, The last combate which we should have with Antichrist. When towards his end he was asked, how he did? he would thus answer with a cheerfull contenance, Going to heaven apace. And as his conversation had for many years been in
heaven, the Lord, (who had ripened him for immediate Commu-with himself) took him unto himself,His death. Octob. 20. 1640. and of his age about 55. The materials of this Narrative, (concerning the pious, fruitfull life of that faithfull Servant of Christ, Master John Ball,) were received from these Ministers of the Gospel, and men of known integrity, (viz. Master John Taylor of Check∣ley in Staffordshire, (who was his Countrey-man, and of his most ancient acquaintance.) Master Thomas Langley of Middlewich in Cheshire,) who besides his former intimatenesse, continued under his Ministry above five years, he being taken off from the ex∣ercise of his own Ministry by Episcopal power,) Master Simeon Ashe of St. Austins London (who for the space of many years had been his bosome Friend,) and from Master George Crosse of Clifton in Staffordshre, (who daily conversed with him for sun∣dry moneths, both before, and in the time of his last sicknesse;) who all of them do acknowledge themselves obliged to God, for the spiritual good, gained by this their dearly respected, and much honoured Friend and Brother, who since his death, have been very sensible of their great losse by his removall. But they and all others must learn to live upon Divine-immutable-All-sufficien∣cy, when creatures do fail. Now the Just shall live by his Faith.
The Life of Doctor Potter, who died Anno Christi 1642. BArnaby Pottor was born in Westmerland, Anno Christi 1578. within the Baronry of Kendal,His birth, and education. and brought up at School there, till he was fitted for the Univer∣sity; Thence he was sent to Queens Colledge in Oxford,His prefer∣ments at Ox∣ford. where he was chosen first a Scholar of the House, then a Fellow, and afterward Provost. Whilest he was Fellow, he was a very carefull Tu∣tor to many worthy Gentlemens sons, whom he trained up in Learning, but especially in true Religion. He was a very humble and meek man,His humility. a man of few words, a sweet Preacher, and a fa∣vourer of strict Professors of Religion. It was the fashion and custom of the Fellows after dinner, to sit or stand a while at the Hall door, and discourse usually of divers points of Religion, or of good Writers, and sometimes of other trivial matters. This man, on a certain time, when he heard them talk of many trivial things, said nothing, but observed what they said;His holinesse. and when they had done talking, he thus bespake them: Now, my Masters, will you hear all your extravagant discourses? for I have strictly observed and marked what you said; and he told them eve∣ry whit, and they admired him for his memory. It was his custom first to write one part of his Sermon, and to commit it to memory presently, and then another, so that he could preach with much facility,His Lectures at Abington, and Totnes. and upon a little warning. He was for a while Lecturer at Abington, and at Totnesse in Devonshire, where he was much respect∣ed. Then he proceeded Doctor in Divinity, and was preferred by Sir Edward Giles to a Pastoral Charge, which Knight was a worthy Gentleman in his Countrey, and often chosen a Parliament man for Devon. Doctor Potter married the Lady Giles her daughter, when he was Doctor but of a years standing. Not long after, Doctor Ayray, a wor∣thy Provost of Qeens Colledge died; whereupon he was chosen to succeed him in the Provostship,He is chosen Provost of Queens Col∣ledge. with the unanimous consent of the Fel∣lows, when he was far from the University, and never dreamed of any such preferment. He was also Chaplain in ordinary to Prince Charles, and accounted at the Court the penetential Preacher. When he had been Provost a∣bout the space of ten years, he resigned his place, and went to his Pastoral charge in the Countrey, and there resided; yet he had not been
there long, but King Charles his Master, cast a favourable aspect up∣on him, and seeing he had not rewarded him for his long and faithfull service, he chose him to be Bishop of Carlisle;He is chosen Bishop of Car∣lisle. and though many sued for the place, yet he said peremptorily that none but Potter should have it; and surely his gracious Master honoured not him so much as he did himself and that age, in the freedom of his noble and unexpected choice. That which Nazianzen said of Basil, may be fitly and properly said of this Bishop; He was promoted, he did not steal or shuffle himself into the chair, he did not invade it, the honour sought and followed him. When he was Bishop,His painful¦nesse. he was a constant Preacher and Performer of Family-duty both evening and morning, and kept his Servants and Attendants in good order. Being called to London, in the beginning of the Parliament, he made at Westminster a worthy and zealous Sermon,His Sermon at the beginning of the Parlia∣ment. wherein he inveighed against the corruptions that were crept into the Church, especially in respect of Ceremonies so eagerly prest by sundry Bishops, as bowing to the Altar, and such like innovations. His Sermon was well appro∣ved of by the best; but he seeing the tumults that were then raised in London about the Parliament House, and hearing that he himself was censured as Popish, because a Bishop, he took it grievously to heart,His death. sickned, and died there, about the great climactericall year of his age. He was a great favourer of zealous Professors and Lecturers,A favouerer of godly Mini∣sters. and therefore he was accounted by many a Puritanical Bishop; and indeed some at the Court in King James his time, said, That Organs would blow him out of the Church. He was well skilled in the Hebrew tongue, and for his further Pro∣gresse therein, disdained not to learn of one of the Fellows,Mr. Thomas Richardson now Pastor of Newbold Pace in Warwick∣shire. An enemy to the book of sports. even when he was Provost. He utterly disliked the Book of sports for Recreation on the Sab∣bath day, and told a Minister with whom he was acquainted, that if it were sent down to his Diocesse, he would sleight it, and urge none of his Jurisdiction to read it. He was of a weak constitution of body, melancholick and lean, as being a hard Student, and therefore to recreate his spirits he loved vocal musick, and to this end, he sent divers times for such Scholars in the Colledge as could sing well, and he would bear a part with them in his lodgings after supper, where they made most excellent melody. He was the last Bishop that died as a Member of the Parliament, and was Bishop of Carlisle some fourteen years.
The Life of Master Richard Sedgwick, who died Anno Christi 1643. RIchard Sedgwick was born at East Deereham, in the County of Norfolke,His birth and education. Anno Cbristi 1574. His Fa∣ther was a Clothier; but by reason of a great losse by fire, fell into decay. He had an Uncle living in Yorkshire, who was very rich, and of large yearly revenues, having no Children; whereupon he took this Richard in his tender years home to him∣self, and put him to School, with an intent to make him his heir; but God had laid up a better portion for him. His Uncle and his Family were prophane, hating the power of godlinesse, and wed∣ded to games and sports; yet even in such a Family God visited him in mercy,His conver∣sion. and awakened his soul by working in him hearty desires after him∣self. While the rest of the Family were at their games and dancings, he would be in a corner mourning. His Uncle at first thought his retired∣nesse to have been bookishnesse, and therefore rebuked him gently, and called upon him to take more liberty; but at last perceiving the truth of the thing, he began to hate him, and to deal roughly with him, and not being able to bring him to his will, cast him out of his Family, say∣ing,He is rejected by his Uncle. that a Puritane should never inherit his land. Before this, his Fa∣ther died, and his Mother being industrious and sparing, out of the little means she had left her,His going to Cambridge. maintained him at Peter-house in Cambridge, where he profited greatly in all kind of learning. He began the exer∣cise of his Ministry in Kent; where he being called to preach in the Ca∣thedral at Canterbury, in his Sermon touching the corruption of the Prebends, and their Cathedral service, he so far displeased them, as that by threats they brought him to condescend,Humane infir∣mity. through weaknesse, to pro∣mise to recant, and a day for this was appointed. Upon his return home, and his second thoughts, he became very sad, and in his perplexity took his Bible and opened it, and at the first,A special Pro∣vidence. lighted on that encouraging Word of God to Jeremiah, Jer. 1.7, 8. Whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak; be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord. By this he was so strengthened, that he resolved to stand to what he had formerly deliver∣ed, whatsoever dangers did attend him. At the time appointed, he preached again in the Cathedral, having a very large Auditory, both of the Countrey and City, in which Sermon he confirmed what
he had before delivered, earnestly pressing the Prebends to reform the abuses amongst them. By this they were so offended,His recovery. that they complain∣ed of him to the Bishop, and so persecuted him,He is persecu∣ted. that he was forced to forsake his place, and to retire himself into private, and was entertained for a time by Sir Edward Bois the elder,And entertain∣ed by Sir Ed∣ward Bois. a man eminent for Piety in those daies. During this his retirement, he came upon occasion to London, and by the meanes of Master Egerton Pastor at Black-fryers, was received into the Family of Sir Edward Anslow,By Sir Edward Anslow. His great pains who lived in the City during the win∣ter, and in summer at Crawley in Surrey, a place destitute of a preaching Ministry. In this Family his encouragement was great, but his labours aboundant. Every day his usuall course was to pray in the morning at six a clock with the Husbandmen, and at ten to pray with the rest of the Family, and expound a Chapter,His faithful∣nesse. in which course he went through the four first Books of Moses. His course at night was after Prayer, to catechize the Family by turns, wherein he used no respect of Persons, the meanest not being left out, and the chiefest not for∣born. On the Lords day, during his abode at Crawley, he preached twice constantly, and after publique exercise, called the whole Family in private to render an account of what was delivered in publique. In the winter, when the greatest part of the Family was at London, under an able Ministry, he was ready to help others, and by Provi∣dence, was called to improve his talent at Battersey in Surrey. Master Wybourne, a Reverend Divine, who constantly preached in that place,His preaching at Battersey. having by a fall broke his legge, and being disabled thereby to con∣tinue his labours, desiring his assistance. At this place the people were so affected with his Ministry, that they requested him to continue to preach among them, promising to strain themselves to provide him maintenance. He had a fair call and opportunity (denying himself) to answer it, for Sir Edward Anslow about this time had an estate befallen him in Hertfordshire, whither he resolved to go to dwell, in which place was an able and godly Minister, Master Sedgwick seeing that, by continuing in this Family, he should not have occasion of exercising his publique Ministry, relinquished fifty pounds annuity during his life,His self-deniel assured to him by this worthy Knight, and accepted of this call to preach at Bat∣tersey. Before his departure out of this Family,His marriage. he married a Wife of an ho∣nest and Religious stock in the City of London. He had not long exer∣cised his gifts at Battersey, bringing glory to God, but the devil again raised up persecution against him. One Master King,He is again persecuted. Church-warden of the place, was offended at him, because he freely reproved sinne, and boldly spake against the corruptions that were then in the Church; by this man he was presented into the Commissaries Court, and by his means cited to appear to answer certain Articles. This was about the latter end of Queen Elizabeths reign, not long before the coming in of King James. Upon this citation he resolved to appear, and came to
London, and being at the door of the Commissaries house, Master Eger∣ton his faithfull and Reverend Friend, by Providence passing by, came to him, and having saluted him, told him he had heard of the opposition made against him at Battersey, and asked him if he would accept of a Call to go beyond the Seas; his answer was (having returned thanks for his kindnesse) that he could not as yet resolve him, forasmuch as he stood accused at present,His Courage. and was resolved what ever came of it, to defend those Truths that he had publiquely delivered; but yet pro∣fessing a willingnesse to follow Providence, whithersoever the Lord should call him. Appearing before the Commissary, he met with courteous usage, and was friendly dismissed; for at this time those men feared a change to be brought in by King James. Not long after this he was called by the Merchant-adventurers to be Minister to their company beyond Sea,He is chosen by the Mer∣chants. whither, breaking through all discouragements, he went. During his abode beyond the Sea at Stoade, and Hamborough (which was about the space of eleven years and an half) he by the advice of the godly learned,He erects dis∣cipline in the Church. erected and established Discipline in that Church. God did greatly blesse his Mi∣nistry, and he begat among that little company, many Sons and Daugh∣ters unto God.Conversion. He had Communion with the Netherland-Dutch Church at Stoade, and at Altenon near Hamborough, and with the godly that came out of England, admitting them, being desirous to come to the Lords Table. The efficacy of his Mini∣stry.In his Ministry he was very searching, many coming and confessing those things which he had never heard of, till it came out of their own mouthes. In his carriage he was affable and courteous, yet grave and awfull, so that many durst not for fear do those things that otherwise they were disposed to. The Merchants here found the benefit by the order∣ly carriage of their Factors there. Yet here the Devil was not quiet, for one of the prime Merchants taking exceptions against his impartiall dealing in his Ministry,Gods judge∣ment on a persecutor. and the order in the Church, threatned by such a day, naming it, to have him over into England; but before that day came, himself was summoned by death to another place. His charity.He was very charitable himself, allowing something yearly towards the maintenance of the suspended Ministers here, and greatly furthered charity in others. By his direction and encouragement Master Jones, a rich Batchelour, and one of the Elders of his Church, bequeathed many thousands of pounds to pious uses, which to this day speaks his praise. He was eminent in self-denial; for being made Executour by the said Master Jones of his last Will and Testament,His self-denial. whereby he might have gained much to himself, he never rested till he had caused him to alter his Will, and to place others in his room. His return in∣to England. His Lecture in Wales.Upon the dissolving of that company of Merchants he came over into England, and being disappointed of a place in London, intended for him by Master Jones, he went to Monmouth in Wales, and for some
time held the Lecture setled there. Afterward a Chappel being erect∣ed at Wapping, he was called to that place,His call to Wapping. and became the first Minister there. Here he abode to his death, being holy and exemplary in his life and conversation, and aboundant in labours, preaching constantly thrice a week, and catechizing on the Lords day besides. The tendernesse of his fatherly care and love of this people, he ex∣pressed all the time of his living with them,His painful∣nesse. but especially in the time of the great sicknesse, when, remaining with them, he preached con∣stantly every Lords day, and the Fast dayes, notwithstanding all the danger that he was in, the infection in that place being much spread, and very violent. The Providence of God over him at that time was very remarkable. For although all the Families round about him were in∣fected, and his house adjoyned to the place of Burial,A special Pro∣vidence. yet neither himself nor any of his Family were any waies smitten with it. Many were his labours in private, being much sought unto both for counsell and for comfort. What successe God gave unto his Ministry, was evident by the many souls won and built up by him. He was very studious, and wrote much,His humility. yet was alwaies averse from publishing any thing, though often requested; saying, that the many Books that were daily set forth, hindred the study and reading of the Holy Scriptures. Once, he committed to the Presse a Catechism fitted for his own Con∣gregation, and before his death had finished a large Tractate of the body of Divinity, which still lies by. He sought the good of all, and was a precious savour unto some, in whose hearts to this day his memory flourishes. He foresaw the en∣suing distractions with a grieved heart, and raised himself up to comfort by contemplating the approaching time wherein Christ and his truth, and his waies shall have the preheminence. His judgement concerning some hath proved true, asserting often that their principles would not (if they continued in them) suffer them to sit down on this side Anabap∣tism. He was a Friend of truth and peace, and an Instrument of re∣freshing the bowels of the poor, many strangers for his sake giving in largely towards their relief. Having finished his course, being spent with labours, he quietly and comfortably ended his daies, and according to his last words,His death. went unto his God Anno Christi 1643. and of his age 69. having continued his Ministry at Wapping six and twenty years.
The Life of Master Julines Herring, who died Anno Christi 1644. His Birth.IUlines Herring was born in Flamber-mayre Parish in Mountgomery-shire, 1582. His Father within three years after returned with his Wife and Family into Coventry, where his Ancestors had been chief offi∣cers of the City, in their course almost for the space of two hundred years, and where he himself also was Sheriff and Maior, living and dying in good e∣stimation there. This Julines his Son, having had his first education in Shropshire, with Master Perkin Minister (at More-Chappel,) his Mothers near Kinsman, (where he learned the Principles of Religion) was brought home unto Coventry,His education. where he was trained up in Learning, under Reverend Master Tovey, who then was Head Schoolmaster there. While he was a school-boy, he was noted for his diligence in reading the holy Scriptures,His love of the Scriptures. delighting in those Chapters e∣specially, which treat of Faith in Christ, and of repentance from sin to God. And even then in his child-hood, he with two or three School-fellows were so religiously disposed, that on play-daies they would pray together, and repeat the heads of their Catechisme, with the Sermons which they heard upon the last Lords day, before they went unto their Lusory exercises. Thus this Timothy grew acquainted with God and his Word, and the waies of Religion while he was a Child. His remove to Cambridge.Being very well fitted for the University, he was sent unto Cambridge, bout the fifteenth year of his age, and admitted into Sidney Colledge, where he was studious and a good Proficient in Academical Learning. When he was Master of Arts, coming home to his Father, he preached often in Coventry, with very good approbation amongst those, who were best affected towards the waies of Godlinesse. Here he had special en∣couragements in the study of Divinity, from Master Humphrey Fen, fa∣mous for his Ministry and Non-conformity at Coventry, (who in the Preface to his last Will and Testament, made so full and so open a Protestati∣on against the Hierarchy and Ceremonies, that the Prelatical Party would not suffer it to be put among the Records of the Court, when the Will was ten∣dred to be proved) and his conscience was unsatisfied to enter into the Ministry by Episcopal subscription, but through a good Providence, he with Master John Ball, were made Ministers by an Irish Bishop without that subscription. The first place of his setled Ministry was Cawk in Der∣byshire,His call to Cawk. (a small village) whither he was called by means of his much ho∣noured
good Friend Master Arthur Hildersam, and where he had good incouragements from Master Bainbridge, a Gentleman there of good e∣state and estimation for Religion. In this place, (which was six miles from Derby, and three from Ashby de la zouch,) his peace and liberty was the better preserved, because it was a peculiar, and so not subject unto Episcopal visitation. Here God was pleased to set a broad Seal to his Ministry, making him an happy Instrument to build up many, who were brought to Christ by Master Hildersams labours, and also to turn many others from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. At this time there was great scarcity of good Preachers in those parts, whereupon people from twenty towns and villages flocked unto Cawk-Chappel, (as Doves to the windows) every Sabbath day, where more congregated, (especially in summer and in afternoons,) then the Chappel could contain; yet standing at the windows without, they might hear the Sermons preached, and Scriptures read, because Master Herrings voice was clear and strong. Hither great companies came in the morning, with joyfull expectation of wholesome soul-provisions; here they continued all day with cheerfulnesse, (some bringing their vi∣ctuals from home with them, and others going to a third ordinary, provi∣ded purposely for the refreshing of strangers) and they went from hence in the evening in companies, repeating the Sermons, and singing Psalms in their return home. Here amongst many others, Master Simeon Ashe received some of his first impressions and bents towards Religion, whom Master Herring loved from his childhood, and who lived in his heart and Prayers unto his death. And this is a matter considerable, that few (if any) in those parts, who were hopefully brought unto God, and by the Ministry of Ma∣ster Hildersam and Master Herring, have been turned aside into the by-paths of errour and separation in these broken dividing times, but they continue sound in their judgements, and holy in their conversa∣tions, well remembring the principles whereof they were well in∣structed and grounded by those two Worthies, their Fathers in Christ. When he had continued at Cawke about the space of eight years, he was forced from thence for Non-conformity by the Prelatical pow∣er, being informed against by ill-affected men, who maligned the great service which he did, and envied the great respect which he had in those parts. Before he removed from thence, the Lord provided for him a most gracious yoak-fellow, who was no discouragement, but an encouragement rather unto him alwaies, both in his services and suf∣ferings for Christ and his cause. His Wife was the third Daughter of Master Gellibrand, (sometimes Preacher to the English company at Flushing in Holland) and Grand-child to that man of God Master John Oxenbridge, (Minister of Southam in Warwickshire, and afterwards of Bablick in Coventry, where he died) and as she came out of a godly stock, so she hath expressed, and still doth expresse the power of godli∣nesse,
in every condition and relation of her life, to Gods honour. By her he had thirteen Children;The educati∣on of her chil∣dren. and as they were happily, mutually helpfull in the waies of holinesse, so it was their joynt care to educate their posterity in the nurture and fear of the Lord. They were taught the Principles of Religion from their childhood, and their tender good Mother (according to their Fathers appointment) caused them to learn the Proverbs of Solomon by heart. Neither was this gra∣cious care in vain; for the blossomes and fruits of grace, sweetly appear in their lives, to the comfort of their Parents, and Christian Friends. And here this one thing is notable and imitable in this worthy man, in reference to his Children, (viz.) That ever before he gave them cor∣rection, he endeavoured to convince them of their sin against God, and sought by tears and prayers for Gods blessing upon that means for their good. When the course of his Ministry was interrupted at Cawk, and there was no hope of his peaceable continuance there, God (by means of Master William Rowley, a wise religious man, and his faithfull Friend) was pleased to open a door for the more publique exercise of his Ministry in Shrewsbury.His call to Shrewsbury. Here he preached at Alkmares Church, every Tuesday morning, and upon the Sabbath also, (so long as liberty was allowed) which Sermon was at one a clock, that neither the Ministers of the town might be offended, nor other Congregations emptyed, by the peoples flocking unto his Ministry. The Sermon which he preached on the Lords day, he repeated it the same night before Supper, at the houses of Master Edward Jones, Master George Wright, and Master William Rowley by course; and where∣as some spies were usually sent thither, (crowding in with the company) to pick quarrels, he behaved himself so prudently, and prayed alwaies so affectionately for the King and present Government, that his adver∣saries gave this testimony of him, (viz.) Though he be scrupulous in mat∣ter of Ceremony, yet he is a loyal subject unto the King, and a true Friend unto the State. Beside the great good service which was now done in Salop, by his Ministry, and private conferences with Christians: in reference unto him many other Ministers had the more frequent recourse unto the town, (Master Pierson, Master Nicols, &c.) who were put upon preach∣ing once or oftner, before they departed thence, whereby knowledge was much increased, and the power of Godlinesse much cherished and promoted there. But Satan maligning those opportunities of service unto Christ,Satans malice. some envious ill-affected persons, (amongst whom Ma∣ster Peter Studley was the chief) were stirred up, to lay in complaints a∣gainst him as a Non-conformist: for such was his prudence, sweetnesse, and peaceablenesse of spirit, that other objections could not with any colour of truth be made against him. Hereupon Doctor Morton (then the Bishop of that Diocesse,) referred him unto two neighbour Mini∣sters for satisfaction; and in pursuance of this order, Master Herring gave in his scruples in writing, and also replyed upon their answer.
The consequence of this paper-dispute was a Certificate to the Bishop from the Ministers, that they believed Master Herring from conscien∣tious grounds, in his own apprehensions remained unsatisfied, and the Bishop himself told Master Herrings Friends, that he was satisfied in his integrity. But such were those times,His suspensi∣on. that he was suspended from the use of his Ministry, though by mediation of Friends, the suspensi∣on was divers times taken off, and then brought on again by persons of contrary minds and waies. Thus he continued in Salop for the space of seventeen years, sometimes enjoying, and sometime wanting liber∣ty for the exercise of his Ministry in publique. But when the Pulpit door was shut against him, he was the more frequent in keeping pri∣vate Fasts, and in expounding the Scripture three times a day in his own Family; by which exercise some of the neighbours were edified also. Alwaies upon the Lords day, (whether he was at home or abroad) he frequented the Ordinances of God administred in publique, pro∣fessing thereby (as himself said) that his practice should declare his judgement against separation from the Congregations in England, though there were corruptions in them. When some seeds of seperation were scattered in Salop (by Daniel Chidley and his Wife,) their growth was check'd by his appearing against them. He had many bowels to∣wards them who were misled in this kind, as was expressed by the ma∣ny prayers with tears, which he poured forth before God in their be∣half. And having upon this occasion, studied that point the more throughly, he would often say, It is a sinne of an high nature,His judgment against separa∣tion. to un-Church a Nation at once, and that this would become the spring of many other fearfull errours; for separation will eat like a Gangrene into the heart of Godliness. And he did pray, that they who would un-Church others, might not be un-christianed themselves. When the Plague was in Salop, he gave himself unto prayer for the town, and in particular for the persons infected; and many from the Pest-houses returned thanks unto him, for the spiritual comfort received by his Prayers. He took great delight in his studies (having a very good Library) and was often willing to misse a meal, that he might the more satisfie himself in conversing with his Books. He was seldome hungry,His studious∣nesse. (as himself was wont to say) while he was in his study, and those who best knew him, could easily render the reason thereof; for as he was afraid of doing Gods work negligently, so it was his meat and drink to converse with his God, and to do the will of his heavenly Father. And yet such were his compas∣sions towards afflicted consciences, that he gave charge unto his whole Family, to send none such away till they had spoken with him: yea, unto them, his manner was to give full liberty of speech, that they might not go away without some clearing and satisfaction. His experience, humi∣lity and sweetnesse of disposition was such, that seldome any one who was troubled in spirit, departed from him without some relief and com∣fort; whereto may be added his great faithfulnesse towards them in perplexed cases, who opened their hearts into his bosome for spiritual sa∣tisfaction.
When he was not allowed liberty to preach in publique at home, he was willing to bestow his pains abroad; and every where he in his Mi∣nistry proved himself a solid well-studied Divine, A Workman who needed not to be ashamed. It may truly be affirmed concerning him, that when he was in journeys, he imitated the Lord Christ his Master, Who went about doing good.His painful∣nesse. For in the Families whither he came, (if there was not opportunity of more publique employment, wherein he might appear with safety in those Prelatical times,) he was alwaies ready by Prayer and Exposition of Scripture, to be serviceable unto the souls of such who desired to improve him. He was a man of an ingenuous and cheerfull spirit, yet very grave and inoffensive; yea, the lightsomeness of his behaviour being accompanied with holinesse and humility, did make his serious services the more acceptable, and more taking upon the hearts of those who conversed with him. Amongst many other rare gifts, with which God had enriched him, this did shine forth brightly unto all them,His humility, and charity. who were acquainted with his way, in performing Family duties, whether in his own house, or elsewhere, (viz.) That he would alwaies most aptly and affectionately enlarge himself upon the Sermon lately heard, or the Chapter read, by con∣fession, complaint, petition, thansgiving, &c. unto the advantage of them, who joyned with him in that exercise. He was indeed a man made up of love and meeknesse, for the discovery whereof, take two instances, which will tell the Reader, that he was Dove-like, without gall. The one is this; Doctor Lambe having broken his legge by a fall, was brought into the same Inne in Norhamptonshire, where Master Herring had taken up his lodging, being in a journey; and that night he prayed very affectionately for him, though Doctor Lambe was a notorious violent Persecutor of Non-conformists, both Ministers and people; yea though he had been a bitter opposite against Master Herring particular∣ly. He being asked the reason why he expressed so much respect to∣wards so unworthy a man, returned this answer; The greater enemy he is to the Church, the more need he hath of Prayers. And then wished those who were with him, To prove themselves Christs Disciples by loving their enemies, and by praying for their Persecutors. The other in∣stance is this, (viz.) understanding that Arch-bishop Laud said unto some of his Friends (Petitioners for the liberty of his Ministry) I will pickle up that Herring of Shrewsbury; he used these words, If he will abuse his power, let it teach Christians the more to use their Prayers. And he then prayed, that the Non-conformists enemies might by observation, know that they have a good God to trust unto, when trampled upon by ill-de∣spised men. His servent Prayers.He was a constant mighty Wrestler with the Almighty in Prayers for England, that the Gospel might not be removed, but that the Kingdom of Christ, might be here advanced more and more. He much feared that bad times would overtake this Nation; and at a conference about the affairs of England, he used these words: Gods rod (I much fear) will be homebred Warre in the State, and Errours and Heresies
in the Church, with Gods visible departure from us. When all hope of regaining the liberty of his Ministry in Shrewsbu∣ry was quite gone, and therefore his continuance there, in wany regards, was judged inexpedient; he removed with his Wife, and such of his Family, who were not disposed of elsewhere,His remove to Wrenbury. unto Wrenbury in Che∣shire, where he sojourned with his Wives dear Sister Mistresse Nicolls, a godly woman, the Widdow of worthy Master Robert Nicolls, who had been very famous in those parts, both for his labours and great abi∣lities; of whom this true character may be given:A character of Mr. Nicholls. He was a man who had a clear head, and a tender heart, who led an holy life, and abounded in the work of the Lord. Here Master Herring lived privately and comfort∣ably, under the Ministry of his good Friend Master William Peartree, doing what service he could by comforting afflicted consciences, and con∣firming the hearts of Gods people in the Faith of the Gospel, as oppor∣tunities were offered. Before any further progresse be made, in ma∣king known his call unto Amsterdam, here may seasonably be inserted, the description given by a Reverend Neighbour Minister, which is as followeth. Whereas you desire my opinion in writing,Mr. Herrings character. concerning that Reve∣rend and Religious man of God, Master Herring deceased; The truth is, I fear my Pen may rather darken his Honour, then my Pensil can draw out his Character; yet as the Martyr counted it a great mercy to be cast into prison, if it were but to see the face of that blessed Angel of God, Master Bradford; so I have look't on it as no small happinesse, that the Lord in his Providence did cast me into these parts, to see the face, and hear the voice of Master Herring, that blessed Angel of a Church in Salop. And I blesse God, that I had some intimate acquain∣tance with him, and knew his Doctrine, manner of life, &c. as Timothy did Pauls, 2 Epist. 3.10. And I should wrong him, if I should with∣hold this just testimony. He was one of whom the world was not worthy, a Messenger, one of a thousand, a faithfull Minister of Jesus Christ; A Boanerges (a sonne of thunder) to brawny-hearted sinners; A Barnabas (a sonne of consolation) to broken-hearted sinners. As sweet a grace he had in Elocution, as ever I heard man in the Pulpit, whose gift of utterance did set a fair glosse on all his holy Sermons; Another Apollos, eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures; and you know the common saying, Bonus textualis bonus Theologus. His Sermons preached in the Congregation, were printed in his conversation; In Do∣ctrine, shewing incorruptness, gravity, sincerity, (for he was a pious and learned Divine) and in life, shewing himself a Pattern of good works; free from visible blame, (saving humane unavoidable infirmities,) none could say (justly) black was his eye. He was indued with an admi∣rable gift of Prayer, and was frequently imployed in daies of private humiliation, even then, when meetings in that kind were branded with the odious names of Conventicles; yet the perils (to which he ren∣dred himself obnoxious,) could not stave him off, from opening his window (with Daniel) toward Jerusalem. He was very fruitfull in
conference, discreet in carriage, and cheerfull and couragious in his suf∣ferings, of which this good old Non-conformist had his share. And when every door was barr'd, and no hope left to enjoy his publique li∣berty, he left the land of his Nativity, and (on a clear call) went into the Netherlands, where (after some years spent in the work of the Lord) this bright star did set, to the no little sorrow of his dear Christi∣an Friends, &c. This faithfull Servant of Christ had many invitations into New-Eng∣land, but received not satisfaction in his spirit, to transplant himself thither. His call to Amsterdam.Afterwards in the latter end of the year 1636, he was propound∣ed by some friends unto Master Rulice, (who was sent from the Eng∣lish Reformed Church in Amsterdam unto London, to provide a Mini∣ster to succeed Master John Paget) as a man most meet to undertake that place. For the case there was this, (viz.) Master John Paget (whose works praise him in the gate) being through old age, rendred un∣able to uphold his wonted work in that Reformed Congregation, was eased of his Pastoral attendance there, (though the Lords of the City, accor∣ding to their commendable custom, continued his competent maintenance till his death,) therefore Master Rulice his Colleague, was employed to find out an Assistant. The reason of his remove.This motion made known to Master Herring, was the rather hearkened unto, because his suspension from preaching was a burthen to his active spirit, and he espied no ground of hope that he should ever be suffered by the Prelates to enjoy his much-desired liberty in England any more. Hereupon coming up to London, after much seeking of God, and serious consulting with godly Brethren, he was perswaded that this call came from God, and therefore might not be gain∣said. Now having resolved (in the pursuance of this Providence) to leave England, amongst other difficulties to be encountred, he was much af∣fected with a double conflict, the one relating unto his Manuscripts, the other unto his near and much endeared Friends. He had many papers and letters (which he much prized) containing both the spiritual breathings of gracious hearts, and matters of great concernment: and those he durst not adventure to take with him (fearing a search,) nor yet did he judge it safe to leave them, because he knew not into what hands they might come; therefore upon advice he burnt many writings, though both then and afterwards he did with tears think of that Letter martyrdome,His Letter martyrdome. (for so he called it,) wherein many of the best thoughts of his dearest friends were committed to the flames. If this was so grie∣vous, then let the Reader guesse, with what grief of heart this thought was entertained, that now he must leave thousands of his precious Friends, without any hope of seeing their faces any more in the land of the living. And truly his labours and his lovely conversation had gained him multitudes of Friends, in every Countrey and corner where he was
known; for no man was more generally and intirely affected, by all sorts, who feared God, then good Master Herring. Although it be not possible to give a particular account of the Gentry and Ministry, (most eminent for Religion) who highly prized and heartily loved him, yet the vertuous Lady Margaret Bromley, (who then dwelt at Sheriff Hales in Shropshire) deserves an honourable remembrance,The Lady Bromleys love to Christs Ministers. be∣cause she was a constant and unparallel'd favourer of all good Ministers and People, being both tender-hearted and open-handed towards such who suffered under Prelatical pressures and otherwise; and at her house, the most famous Ministers in all neighbour Countries, had hearty welcomes, with manifold sweet opportunities of ser∣vice unto God, and of mutuall edification. Besides the frequent soul-helps which the Parishoners of the Congregation, to which she was related, had upon Sabbath daies for her sake; there were few Holy-daies, (daies of vacancy from worldy businesses,) in the year, wherein they had not one Sermon at least, preach∣ed by some able Minister of Jesus Christ, amongst whom, Ma∣ster Pierson, Master Ball, Master Herring, and Master Nicolls, (be∣fore mentioned, who died at this good Ladies house,) were of chief worth. Oh! what pathetical Blessings, with Exhortations, Encouragements, and Prayers, did this worthy man of God bestow upon this, and the Families of other choice Friends, before he took his last farewell of his dear native Countrey! This Narrative would swell too big, if re∣port should be made of generals only in reference unto them, who were naturally, nearly related unto himself and his gracious Consort, besides such who were very dear unto them both, in the spirit of Jesus Christ. Some who beheld the last greetings betwixt him and Reverend Master Ball of Whitmore, professe that they stick too deep in their breasts to be forgotten: for after they had spent together well nigh one day and one night in conference, they did (like Jonathan and David) fre∣quently fall upon one another with mutual embracings, they parted and closed again a third and a fourth time, and when Master Herring was on horseback, and Master Ball on foot, they went together, often shaking hands over the hedges; and upon the finall salutation they comforted each other with this consideration, That though they should never see one another again on earth, yet they should meet in heaven. And Master Herring was so deeply affected with those passages, that he said to some of his company, Two or three more such partings would hinder my journey beyond Seas; and yet adding withall, Master Ball hath conque∣red my passions. In his passage out of England, he with warm affecti∣ons and heavenly benedictions, took his leave of his own and his Wives Sisters, with their Husbands, whose dwellings were in divers Coun∣tries. Those two eminently worthy Reverend Divines, Master Oliver Bowles of Sutton in Bedfordshire, and Master Barry of Cotsmore in Rutland, (who had married two of his Wives gracious Sisters) as they had Bro∣therly respect in his bosome, so they had special visits in his journey
towards Holland. He was necessitated secretly to take shipping at Yar∣mouth, (whither his Brother-in-law Master Bowles did accompany him,) because the then Arch-bishop had given order, that no Scholar nor Minister should passe, without License from the Councel-table. Now whereas in his journey he had often prayed, that God would yet fur∣ther clear his call into Holland, by two special Providences, viz. 1. That he might not be examined whether he was a Minister, (for he pro∣fessed that he durst not deny his holy calling.) 2. That God would strengthen him at Sea, and grant him a comfortable voyage. He had answers of singular grace returned in both.His arrival in Holland. He landed at Rotterdam September 20. 1637. and went aside from company so soon as with conveni∣ency he could, to blesse the Lord for his safe arrival, and for all other favours vouchsafed unto him, who had never before been upon the Sea. The next day he went in a Waggon to Amsterdam, and was met on the way, by his dear Colleague, with the Elders and Deacons of the Church,His entertain∣ment there. and many of the English Merchants, who expressed much joy for his safe coming unto them. By them he was accompanied to the house of his good Friend, Master Whittaker, where he continued till his removal unto his own house, upon the coming over of his Family into Holland. His first Sermon was upon Psal. 24.1. The earth is the Lords, &c. wherein he much insisted upon this consideration,His first Ser∣mon. That Gods Children still tread upon their Fathers ground, whithersoever his Providence doth remove them; and he preached with such satisfaction unto the hearts of his hearers, that thereby way was made for his future acceptance and ser∣vice. The week following he was presented first unto the Honourable Lords, the Magistrates of Amsterdam, (who kindly accepted him, and gave him a gratuity towards the charges of his journey,) and after∣wards to the Reverend Classis, where he was lovingly received into that Society, and thanks were given unto God for bringing him safe unto them. Whereas it was his custom to pray every night before he went into his bed, the night before a fasting day, (appointed by the States, to seek direction in their Counsels, and successe upon their Armies now before Breda) he spake thus to his Son who attended him, My heart is more fit for a thansgiving day, and it would be so unto me, if God would bring over my dearest Christian (for that was his Wives name) thy tender Mother with her company. Come let us pray for them. And the next morning when he was ready to go to the Congregation, he heard that his dear Wife was come unto Amsterdam, by which Provi∣dence his spirit being raised unto holy astonishment and admiration, he uttered these words;Return of prayers. Oh what a God do I serve! How exceeding mercifull is my God unto me? What his prudent and pious coversation was, and what high estimation he had in Amsterdam, may be understood by the testi∣mony of Master Rulice, written by his own hand, March 2. 1650. which is as followeth. How acceptable and dear Master Herring, (my once Reverend Col∣league) was to us all, Church, Classis, Magistrates, yea to all who knew
him, it is publiquely known. How faithfully he employed those excellent gifts, which God in a large measure bestowed upon him, in publique, in private, in his Sermons, in his Advices, in Consistory and Classes, &c. what need I mention, for all well know. For his private conversation, what sweetnesse and inoffensiveness, yea exemplary godlinesse did not he shew upon all occasions. His sicknesse was lingering, his death like a sleep. As in his life, so in his sicknesse, and to his last breath; he shewed that his heart was truly stored with patience, faith, love to God and his People, heavenly-minded∣nesse, zeal to the honour of God, and with intire love to his Wife and Chil∣dren. But I must break off; I hope that Reverend man, who undertakes to publish the life and death of my most dear Brother and Colleague, will so set it out, that it may be a spurre to provoke the living to follow such a worthy Pattern, and be a means of quickning many, not only to walk faithfully in the way to heaven, but also in that great function of the Ministry. Thus farre Mr. Rulice. The strangenesse of Independent Brethren of England,His fear of Independency when they came over into Holland, was a great trouble unto this reall Saint: and his constant Prayers were, that they might neither be deceived them∣selves, nor do any hurt unto the Government of the Reformed Church∣es. He often said, that those men had need of much caution, because the devil in the times of purest Reformation, would be a more subtill An∣gel of light then he was in Luthers daies. When his Son returned into England, he warned him to take heed of joyning with any part, against the Presbyterial Government of the Reformed Churches; For I am sure (said he) it is the Government of Jesus Christ. When the Scots first came into England, it was his constant and af∣fectionate Prayer, that they might be instruments of much good, but of no blood nor division between the two Nations. He was one of Gods special Remembrancers, in behalf of England, begging fervently that the Lords and Commons in Parliament, might be preserved from the two destructive rocks of pride and self-interests. He poured out his soul before the Almighty, that he would appear for the Non-conformists cause in England, and set up the Presbyterial Go∣vernment according to the Scripture Rules. He often professed him∣self to be no enemy unto the Persons of Bishops, but an opposite to their Pride and Prelaticall Rule. When news came unto him of the Battell at Edge-hill, thus he spake with tears: Oh Lord, wilt thou write Englands Reformation in red Letters of her own blood; yet preserve thine own People, and maintain thine own cause for Jesus Christ sake. He greatly bewailed the obstructing of Church reformation in England by them, who professed themselves zealous for Reformation, and it was no small offence unto him, to hear of the Letters which came from some Independents at London into Holland, wherein falshoods were reported, to the reproach of some Presbyterians, his
known, godly Friends in England. He was a true Nathaniel indeed, in whose spirit there was no guile; and therefore all falshood and un∣worthy juglings were an abomination to his heart. There was an holy harmoniousnesse in his whole conversation; his life was a well-spun thread, from the beginning to the end, and tended much to the honour of his Profession and particular Calling. Although he walked exactly with God, and maintained the comfort of constant peace with him, yet Satan was suffered to give him one furious assault the night before he died, as was perceived by those who were then with him; for rising upon his knees, with his hands lifted up, he spake these words: He is overcome, overcome, through the strength of my Lord and only Saviour Jesus, unto whom I am now going to keep a Sabbath in glory.His death. And next morning, March 28. 1644. being the Sabbath day, (about the time when he was wont to go unto ministerial work in the publique Congrega∣gation,) and the sixty two year of his life, he was taken from his labours into rest, unto the spirits of just men made perfect in Hea∣ven, where he shall sing Hallelujahs for evermore.
The Life of Master John Dod, who died Anno Christi 1645. IOhn Dod was born in Cheshire, at a town called Shot∣lidge, bordering on Wales, not far from Malpus. His Parents had a convenient estate,His birth and education. worth a hundred marks a year, which went to the eldest Brother. This John was the youngest of seventeen, and much beloved of his Parents. He was sent to School to West-Chester, and when he was about fourteen years old, he was disposed of to Jesus Colledge in Cambridge, where (though he had little acquaintance,His first going to Cambridge. yet) the Lord prospering his studies, he was chosen first Scholar, and after Fellow; in that Colledge he there remained near sixteen years.His conver∣sion. The manner of his Conversion was thus: The Steward, or Boucher of the Colledge, accused him to the Ma∣ster, for the non-payment of a considerable summe of money due for one of his Pupils, which Master Dod had truly paid, but he forgot to set it down. Hereupon there was a vehement contest betwixt them about this businesse, and the vexation of mind that he should be ac∣counted a defrauder, did so trouble Master Dod, that he fell into a Fea∣ver, and was dangerously sick; yet all this while he was but in a natu∣ral estate. For though he had some good skill in the Theorick part of Divinity, yet he was without any application; and his affliction was this, that he should be blamed for that, which he from the Law and light of nature hated. All his sorrow as yet was but worldly sorrow; and as himself saies, he neither did, nor could tell how to pray. At length the Lord put into his heart that Scripture, Rom. 7. The Law is spi∣ritual, but I am carnal, and sold under sinne; and presently his sins came upon him like armed men, and the tyde of his thoughts was turned, and he left musing how he was wronged, and seriously considered how he had offended God, and he betook himself to great humiliation, and earnestly besought the Lord for pardon and peace in Jesus Christ. Yet for some time he could find no comfort, but going on to seek the Lord, there follows after much humiliation, much consolation, and the Lord sealed to him that his sins were washed away with the blood of Christ. Then did he desire his accuser to come to him, and told him, that though he had accounted him to be his great enemy, yet now he acknowledged him to be his good Friend, for that he was a means to
bring him unto God. And afterwards it so fell out (by Gods good Providence) that it came to this mans remembrance that Master Dod had paid him the money, and he was very sorrowfull for the wrong which he had done him, and did him all the right he could for the healing of his name; and Master Dod said, that he had not a more faithfull Friend in all the Colledge, during his abode there, then this man proved. When he was some years standing Master of Art, he was appoint∣ed to oppose in the Philosophy Act at the Commencement, which he did with great approbation,His disputati∣on at the Commence∣ment. insomuch as it was desired that he should dispute again the next Commencement, but that he avoided. When he preached his first Sermon in the University, he had bestowed much pains about it, binding himself to words and phrases; but in his Ser∣mon he was at a Non-plus, whereupon he resolved afterwards never to pen his Sermon verbatim,Note. but his usuall manner was to write only the Analysis of his Text, the proofs of Scripture for the Doctrines, with the Reasons and Uses, and so leaving the rest to meditation, in which course he never found defect. And whereas Doctor Fulk, Doctor Chaderton, Doctor Whitaker, and some others had their frequent meeting to expound the Scriptures, and therein they chose the Epistle to the He∣brews, they were pleased from their loving respect to Master Dod to take in him amongst them. While he continued Fellow of Jesus▪ Colledge, by the importunity of some godly people of Ely,He preached a Lecture at Ely. he went weekly, and preached amongst them in that City, where the Lord gave a great blessing to his Ministry. His removall from Cambridge to Hanwel in Oxfordshire, was thus occa∣sioned; Master Cope (afterwards Sir Anthony Cope) a man of eminent note, who was much wrought upon by Master Dods Ministry, sent a Letter to Doctor Chaderton, to provide him a Minister for Hanwel, which was then vacant. Doctor Chaderton moved Master Dod to go to the place,His removall to Hanwel. and after he had been a while, and preached severall Ser∣mons, by the desire and consent of the people, and by the approba∣tion of the neighbour Ministers who had heard him, he was setled as their Pastor. While he was at Hanwel he preached twice every Sab∣bath,His great pains there. catechizing also in the afternoon, and kept a Lecture on the Wednesday constantly, and besides this, he was one of the five Mini∣sters who held up the Lecture at Banbury. He gave himself much to Fasting and Prayer,His frequency in fasting and prayer. His hospitality and as his seeds-time was painfull, so his Harvest was gainfull, hundreds of souls being converted by his Ministry. He was given to Hospitality, delighting therein, keeping a constant Table on the Sabbath, and on the Wednesdays Lecture; upon which daies he had not under eight or twelve persons commonly dining with him, and he spent the time amongst them in spiritual exhortation and confe∣rence. He was about thirty years old when he came to Hanwel, and conti∣nued there above twenty years, where he had twelve Children by his dear Wife, formerly Anne Bound, Daughter-in-law to the worthy Ser∣vant
of Jesus Christ, Master Greenham of Draighton near Cambridge, and Daughter to Doctor Bound, she was one that truly feared God, and after her decease (by the perswasion of some Friends) he took to Wife Mistresse Cleiton, who then lived at Stratford Bowe; she also was a godly woman,His second marriage. and he was contracted to her by Master Egerton of Black-Fryers, and married by his ancient and loving Friend Doctor Gouge. But to return back again to Hanwel, it pleased the Lord to give a great blessing to his Ministry in that place;The great suc∣cesse of his Ministry. yet he had much trouble from the envy of some Ministers that lived about him, who though they seldome preached themselves, yet they would not suffer that their people should go from them, and hence he was frequently que∣stioned in the Bishops Courts. And besides this (though some of Hanwel were very courteous and kind, yet) there were some o∣thers who were glad to get from him what they could, and to keep from him what they could, thinking that that which he had was too much. Upon a time Master Dod took a journey to Draighton, to bemoan himself to his Father-in-law Master Greenham, by reason of his crosses and hard usage; Master Greenham heard him what he could say, and when he had done, answered him thus: Son, Son, when affliction lieth heavy, sin lieth light. This deserves the rather to be remembred, because Master Dod used often to blesse God for it, saying also, that if Master Greenham had bemoaned him, which he expected, he had done him hurt; and he forgot not this speech in his old age, but made excellent use of it for himself and others. He was suspended from his Ministry at Hanwel by Doctor Bridges, Bishop of Oxford.His deprivati∣on. And (suspecting what would follow) the Sabbath before he went to the Visitation, he gave his hearers a farewell Ser∣mon out of that text, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered; the people did attend unto him with sad countenances, and weeping eyes. Being thus driven from Hanwel,His preaching at Fenni-Comp∣ton. he preached at Fenni-Compton in Warwickshire, where he had but small means, but he was de∣sirous to be doing good. From thence he had a fair call unto Cannons-Ashby in Northamptonshire, where he lived quietly divers years,His removall to Cannons-Ashby. preached over the whole Prophesie of Danel, with some other Scriptures, having much kindnesse from Sir Erasmas Dryden, (in whom there was a rare mixture of Piety and Learning) and good affection from Master Cope. He was silenced from preaching at Ashby, upon a complaint made against him by Bishop Neal, to King James,He is again si∣lenced. who commanded the Arch-bishop Abbot to silence him. Then he ceased for some time to preach publique∣ly, yet in regard of his heavenly gift in conference,He had an ex∣cellent gift in conference. he might have been said daily to preach privately; he was in his element when he was dis∣coursing of heavenly things. And God in goodnesse so ordered it, that when he was restrained from publique preaching, yet himself conceived that at that time his life was no lesse profitable then it had been in for∣mer times.
He had much employment in comforting such as were wounded in their spirits, being sent for, not only nigh at hand, but also into remote Countries. His comfort∣ing of afflicted consciences.There was a Gentlewoman who had a great worldly estate, and a loving Husband, but she was so sadly assaulted with tentations, that she often attempted to make away her self. Master Dod was sent for to come to her, and the Lord so blessed his Councels, Exhortations, and Prayers, that she did not only recover out of her anguish of spi∣rit, but she was afterwards taken notice of for her singular Piety; and the Lord so ordered, that this affliction was not only the means of her Conversion, but also of her Husbands, so that both of them were a great mercy in the Countrey where they lived, promoting Religion according to their power, and entertaining and cherishing godly people: She lived divers years quieted in her heart, and being rich in good works; and when she lay on her death-bed, Master Dod was sent for to her again, who spake of heaven,Joy unspeak∣able. and to fit her for that glory, she told him, that she felt the comforts of God, and that she could as hardly at that time forbear singing, as formerly in child-bearing she could forbear crying, and short∣ly after she died. There was a Gentlemen related to a noble Family, so perplexed in his mind,Note. that he hath been known in hard frosts to go barefooted, that the pain of his feet might divert his thoughts. Master Dod was sent for to him, who was his spirituall Physician to heale him. It would be long to insist on all particulars of this nature, the Lord having made him a happy Instrument for the good of many. When he had spent some years in this kind of service, by the care and industry of Master Richard Knightley of Preston (a worthy Patriot,) after the death of King James, his liberty was procured for preaching again publiquely,He is placed at Fausley. and then he was setld at Fausley, where he preached twice every Lords day. There he went over the Gospel of John, the Epistle to the Colossions, and other Scriptures. His hospitalityHe was much given to Hospitality at Fausley, as he had formerly been at Hanwel, so that there was scarce any Sabbath in the year, in which he did not dine both poor and rich, commonly three or four poor per∣sons, besides those that came from other places to hear him. He had so large an heart, that upon occasion, he hath given to some three shil∣lings,His charity. to some ten shillings, to some twenty shillings; and when the poor came to buy butter or cheese, he would command his maid to take no money of them. At Fausley he had quietnesse from the Courts, as also at Ashby; for in neither of those places was there any Church-wardens. He was be∣holding at Fausley, to the Right Worshipfull Family of the Knightleys, where his bones was laid. He used to bear crosses with much patience and meeknesse, being wont to say,The benefit of afflictions. that Sanctified afflictions were great promotions, quoting that
of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1.7. , &c. is much more pre∣cious then gold, which he conceived to signifie the affliction that trieth faith, and that the word should be rendred exploratorium, rather then exploratio. He alwaies expected troubles, and prepared himself for them, and put this difference between the affliction,Troubles to be expected. for which we are provided and others; that the one are but blows on the Harnesse, but the other are blows on the flesh. Upon a time when an affliction was upon him, which went to his ve∣ry heart, and in the expectation whereof he wept; yet when he saw that it was the Will of God that it should be so, he said to one whom he loved, I will go and blesse God, for I believe this shall be for my good. He gave himself much to Fasting and Prayer, and when he fasted,His frequency in Fasting, and Prayer. His diseases. his custom was to abstain from the dinner of the day before, to the Supper of the day after. His diseases till he was above threescore, were only Feavers, and these for the most part high and violent. In the sixty third year of his age, he had a Feaver in which there was small hope of life. Doctor Oxenbridge was his Physician, who wait∣ing for the breathing out of the disease by sweating, (in which at last he had his desire) he came to Master Dod, and in the presence of divers, said unto him; Now I have hope of your recovery: To which Master Dod answered, You think to comfort me by this, but you make my heart sad;His desire of death. it is as if you should tell one who had been sore weather-beaten on the sea, and conceiving he was arrived at the Haven where his soul longed to be, that he must come back again to be tossed with new winds and waves. In his greatest health and prosperity, he would speak how he desired to be dissolved. Upon a time, a Gentleman blamed him for it, saying, he liked not servants who would have their wages before they had done their work; but he seemed to be constant in this desire,The reasons of his desire. alledging these reasons amongst others, that God had given him a setled assurance of Heaven, and a sight of the excellency of Heaven, and that the earth was but a prison, and Heaven the Palace; and there was perfect holi∣nesse and happinesse. He took all occasions to do good; when he was in company, by god∣ly speeches, seasoning those which came to him,His taking oc∣casions to do good. that unlesse it were their own fault, they might be the better for him. Being invited to a great feast where there were sundry Gentlemen, and some of them be∣gan to swear, he stopt them by discoursing of the greatnesse of that sin;How he pre∣vented swear∣ing. and that he might not burden their memories, he quoted three Chapters, every one was the first: as the first of Zachary, the first of Matthew, and the first of James, and he opened those Scriptures in such sort, that they were all hushed, and did not again offend in that kind while he was pre∣sent amongst them. The Word of God was his great delight,His delight in the Law of God. his meditation was of it in the night, and his discourse in the day. When those that were with him were speaking of earthly things, he would find out some way to
bring in heavenly. When he could not sleep in the night, he would say, that the meditation of the Word was sweeter to him then sleep. When he had preached twice on the Sabbath, and was aweary, yet to those that came to him, he would go on afresh in holy Discourses; and the comforts which he found in his soul, made him some∣times forget his body, that he hath been speaking till he was ready to faint. His eminency was in frequency, aptnesse, freenesse, and largenesse of godly discourse; in which respect it may be said of him, that in the Countrey where he lived, none were known who therein were equal to him. But he was Micans inter omnes, velut inter ignes luna mi∣nores. His merciful∣nesse.He was very mercifull himself, and to move Parents that were rich to mercy, he would say thus; You are caring and contriving to lay up for your children, but lay up for your selves a good foundation against the time to come, being rich in good works; you will lay up treasure in the earth, which is an unsafe place; lay up treasures in Heaven, that is the sure and safe place. His love, and charity.He loved and honoured those that feared God, though in point of Subscription and Ceremonies they were not of his judgment; and as he sowed, so he reaped. He was full of love himself, and greatly be∣loved of others. Doctor Preston, whom good men loved for his ex∣cellent Piety and Learning, was a faithfull friend of Master Dods, and often entertained him at his chamber,Dr. Prestons love to him. and esteemed much of him for his spiritualnesse in conference and conversation, and for his ability to open Scripture, and to comfort troubled spirits. When the Doctors Consumption was upon him, which put an end to his life, he came to Ma∣ster Richard Knightleys at Preston in Northamptonshire, which was but a mile from Fausley, where Master Dod had his abode, and desired him to speak to him of death and heaven, and heard him with patience and thankfulnesse. Master Dod prayed by him when he lay a dying, and preached his Funeral Sermon. Also Master Throgmorton, a pious and painfull Preacher of the Word; an approved good man, dying the same year of a Consumption, came to Ashby not far from Fausley, to have the help of Master Dods comforts and counsels. He was oppressed with melancholy, and a little be∣fore he gave up his soul to Christ, he asked Master Dod, What will ye say of him that is going out of the world, and can find no comfort? To whom he answered;He comforts Mr. Throgmor∣ton. What will you say of our Saviour Christ, who when he was going out of the world found no comfort, but cryed out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? This speech refreshed Master Throgmor∣ton, and within a little space of time after this, he went to his heavenly inheritance. Master Dod, as he was of a weaned disposition from the world him∣self,His weaned∣nesse from the world. so he laboured to wean others. He put this difference between rich Christians and poor, that for poor Christians their Father kept the purse, but the rich Christians keep the purse in their own hands. But it might
oftner fall out, and did; and therefore the purse was better in the Fathers hand then in the Christians. He was wont to compare wicked men to waves of the Sea; those which were of a great estate, were great waves; those which were of small estate, were small waves,What wicked men are like. but all were restlesse as waves. To a Friend of his that was raised from a meaner estate to worldly greatnesse, he sent word, that this was but as if he should go out of a Boat into a Barge or Ship; but there ought to be a serious and godly re∣membrance, that while we are in this world, we are upon the Sea. He often repeated this, that nothing could hurt us but our own sins; and they should not hurt us, if we truly repented of them;Note. and nothing could do us good but Gods favour, and that we should be sure of, if we unfeignedly sought it. Speaking of Davids penning the 51 Psalm, after his murther and Adultery, he put this glosse upon it, That hearty and true repentance shall have cause to praise the Lord for his pardoning mercy. He said Afflictions were Gods Potions,Afflictions Gods potions. which we might sweeten by Faith and faithfull Prayer, but we for the most part made them bit∣ter, putting into Gods Cup the ill ingredients of our own impatience and unbelief. He gave this reason why many of Gods people lived uncomfortably, for that they shut their ear against what God said, where they should open it; and they opened their ear to what their carnal reason, and Satan, and the world said, where they should shut it. But (said he) the Psalmist was wiser, Psal. 85.8. He would heare none of them all; I will heare what the Lord God will speake. His preaching was searching; and when some did suppose that he had Informers and Spies, because he came so close to them,The power of his Ministry. he answered; that the Word of God was searching, and that if he was shut up in a dark vault, where none could come at him, yet allow him but a Bible and a Candle, and he should preach as he did. He had an excellent gift in similitudes,His excellen∣cy for simili∣tudes. Benefits of death. which did flow freely and frequently from him, as all those knew, who either heard him preach publiquely, or discourse privately. He called death, the friend of grace, though it were the enemy of nature: and whereas the Word, and Sa∣craments, and Prayer, do but weaken sin, death kills it.Benefit of Prayer. Speaking of Prayer, he said, a man was never in a hard condition, unlesse he had a hard heart, and could not pray. Having preached out of that text, O woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou wilt; he invited some women to din∣ner, and told them it was a usuall saying, Let a woman have her will, and then she would be quiet. Now the way for a woman to have her will, is to have a strong Faith,Benefit of Faith. and to pray as that woman in the Gospel did. Upon a time when he had preached long, so that it was some∣what
late before he went to dinner,We should not be weary of hearing. he said, you shall have some Gentlemen will follow hounds from seven in the morning, till four or five in the afternoon, because they love the cry of dogs, which to me was unpleasant hearing; so if we love the Word, we should be content though the Minister stood above his hour. And he added, me∣thinks it is much better to hear a Minister preach, then a Kennell of hounds to bark. Speaking of Recreation, he said, he marvelled what the vocation of many was, who were so eager for recreation. And if we should come into a house, and see many Physick-boxes and glasses, we would conclude some body is sick;Sinfull recrea∣tions. so when we see Hounds, and Hawks, and Cards, and Dice, we may fear that there is some sick soul in that Family. He told some Friends, that if he were to passe sentence who was a rich man,Promises great riches. he would not look into his purse or chest how much gold he had laid up, but look into his heart what promises were treasured up there. For we count him rich that is rich in bonds, and the pleading of the Promi∣ses in Prayer, is suing of the bonds. Speaking to a Minister who was to go to a place where there was but small means, he told him, that his care was to preach, and do God service, and then God would provide for him. When he preached at Fausley, and was much resorted unto, as it was with him in other places, he told a godly man of his acquaintance,His humility. that if the Countrey knew so much by him, as he knew by himself, they would not have him in so much admiration. Speaking about going to Law, his Opinion was, that it was better to buy Love then Law.Love better then Law. For one might have a great deal of love for a little, whereas he could have but a little law for a great deal. He would frequently say, That was well, which ended everlastinly well; and that was ill, which ended everlastingly ill: And that a man was never undone till he was in hell. This was a speech which he often used, that if it were lawfull to envy any,The benefit of turning to God betimes. he would envy those that turned to God in youth, whereby they escaped much sin and sorrow, and were like unto Jacob that stole the blessing betimes. This was a remarkable passage of Providence, that upon a time when it was late at night,A special Pro∣vidence. it came into his mind that he must see a Friend of his some two miles off; he had businesse, and would have put it off, but his thoughts were restlesse; whereupon he went, and when he came to the place, all the Family were in bed, but only his Friend, who was esteemed truly godly, but at that time was overwhelmed with tentations; the occasion whereof was, some cruelty offered to his Children. Master Dod knew nothing, either of the tentation or occasion of it: But knocking at the door, his Friend opened the door to him, to whom he said, I am come to you, I know not why my self, but I was restlesse in my spirit untill I had done it. To whom his Friend answered, You know not why you came, but God knew why he sent you; and withall, pulled out a halter wherewith he had intended
self-murder at that time, which by Gods goodnesse, was by this means prevented. Speaking of losing for Christ, he testified from his own experience, that for the losse of one carnal Brother he had two hundred spiritual Brethren. Before he was married, he could not maintain himself, and there∣upon he was thinking, how he should maintain a Wife and Children, his living not being great; but looking out of his study window, he saw a Hen and Chickens scratching for their living,His Faith. and he considered thus with himself, The Hen did but live before, and had nothing to spare, and now she had as much with that great Family. When he saw a Christian to look sad, he would use that speech which Johnadab did to Amnon, Art not thou a Kings Son? He would say to those that complained of losses and crosses, that which Eliphaz did to Job, Do the consolations of God seem small to you? God hath taken away your children, your goods, but he hath not taken away himself, nor Christ, nor his Spirit, nor Heaven, nor eternal life. He used to instruct Christians how they should never have a great affliction, nor long,How afflicti∣ons may be lessened. and that was by looking upon things which were not seen, which are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. What can be great to him that counts the world nothing? And what can be long to him that thinks his life but a span long? To perswade them that are Christians not to return railing for rail∣ing, he would say, that if a dog bark at a sheep,Meeknesse. a sheep will not bark at a dog. In these times of war, at the first beginning of them, when many well-affected people came to him, being affrighted with the Cava∣liers, he encouraged them, using this speech, that if a house were full of rods, what need the Child fear,Comfort in dangers. when none of them could move without their Fathers hand; and the Lord was a loving Father; state and life, and all was in his disposing. When afterwards the Cavaliers came to his house, and threatned to knock him on the head, he answered with confidence, that if they did, they should send him to Heaven, where he longed to be,His Faith. but they could do nothing except God gave leave. They broke open his Chests, and Cupboards, and plundred him of his goods; but he said to a Friend of his, that he would not do them that honour to say they had taken ought from him, but it was the Lord, alledging that of Job, who when he was spoiled by the Chalde∣ans and the Sabans, yet he did not so much as name the Instruments, but, The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. At length they came to him, when through weaknesse he was un∣able not only to stirre out of his chamber, but also out of his bed;Cavaliers cru∣elty. they cut the Curtains of his bed, and pulled away the Pillowbeers from un∣der his head, asking him whether he could speak Latine, in all which losses, which were great, he never uttered one word of impatience.His patience. In his sicknesse, when extream pain was upon him, as soon as the fit was
over, he would say to his maid-servant that attended him; O think well of God for it, for it is most justly and wisely done, whatsoever he sendeth or doth. When his servants came to visit him in the morning, he would say, have ye been with God to blesse him for your sleep this night? He might have made your bed your grave. He would often say in his sicknesse, I am not afraid to look death in the face;Death not feared. I can say, death, where is thy sting? Death cannot hurt me. He spake how death was a sweet sleep to a Christian; adding, that if Parents should tell little children, who had played all the day, that they must go to bed, they would be ready to cry; but a labouring man is glad when night comes that he might go to rest. So wicked men, death is unwelcome unto them; but a Child of God, who hath laboured and suf∣fered, is glad when death cometh, that he may rest from his la∣bours. When he had been long speaking to those who came to him, and used to ask him questions, and hath been perswaded to spare himself, he would say, hear but this one thing more, it may be I shall never speak to you again; but if it should be so, Blessed is the servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Hearken to a few words more; God hath heard all the words we have spoken, and considered with what hearts and affections we have spoken them. Passionate re∣bukes unpro∣fitable.He used to compare rebukes uttered in passion to scalding potions, which the Patient could not take down. And his opinion was, that if we would do good unto others, we should labour for meeknesse of wisdome, whereby we shall be inabled to use soft words and hard ar∣guments. What conten∣tion should be amongst mar∣ried persons.He allowed to Husbands and Wives only one contention; which was this, who should love one another best; and advised them, that when ei∣ther of them were in passion, they should not answer passions with pas∣sions, but with compassions. He was very plain and familiar both in preaching and conference, yet very spiritual,His manner of preaching. and performed all with much gravity. The chief things he sought God for, in his frequent secret fastings and prayers,The Scope of his Prayers. (as himself said) were the knowledge of the Scriptures, and a blessing upon his Ministry, in both which God answered him abun∣dantly. As for the Scriptures, God had so enlightened him, that he was able to give account of the drift and scope of the Spirit of God in the greatest part of them,His exposition of Scripture. with great clearnesse, and to open them in such sort as proved very effectual for the bringing of Scripture-light into simple mens understandings, who were not able to reach the obscure and scho∣lastick interpretations of many. His manner was to compare Scripture with Scripture, seldome naming the dissenters, and but sparingly different readings, but making out the truth positively, or by necessary consequence. His custom in preaching.In preaching, he usually took some portion of Scripture in order be∣fore him, opening a verse or two, or more at a time, first clearing the
drift and connection, then giving the sense and interpretation briefly, but very plainly, not leaving the text untill he had made it plain to the meanest capacity; then raising those Doctrines that were most agree∣able to the mind and meaning of the Spirit of God in that text, clearing and exemplifying his points excellently out of the Word, opening his proofs, (not multiplying particulars for oppressing memory,) not dwel∣ling so long as to make all truth run through a few texts. He spake most largely and very home in application, mightily convincing and diving into mens hearts and consciences, and leaving them little or no∣thing to object against it. He took great care to speak to the meanest capacity, and to feed the Lambs, saying, he must stoop to the lowest capacity, and if he could reach them, others might help themselves. He could not endure that Ministers should use hard and unusuall English. He said,What preach∣ing is unpro∣fitable. that most Ministers in England usually shoot over the heads of their hearers. He did not strive to speak all that might be said to a point, nor to shew variety, or please curiosity, but to speak to the heart. He would say, that there were many tricks and devices that some men used in preaching, but they seldome did good. The pure Gospel, and that preaching which the world counts foolishnesse, was that that works most kindly. He was very Evangelicall, striving first to make men see their lost condition clearly, and to be convinced of it, saying, Sense of misery was a goo step to the remedy. And then largely and excellently opening the Promises, and the grace of God in Christ according to the Gospel, looking at that as the most effectual preaching. Some (saies he) la∣bour still to keep men under terrors, and load them with threatnings, &c. lest they should not be humbled enough; but the Gospel works true humiliation, not the Law;True humili∣ation. it arises from sense of sin and misery joyned with hope of mercy. The damned have terror and sense of mi∣sery enough, but that did not humble them. He desired to speak distinctly, not giving the childrens bread to dogs, but to discover hypocrisie and sincerity by lively characters and signes,His preaching by signes. but yet with great tendernesse to babes in Christ, striving to discover a babe from an hypocrite. He was excellent for practical Divinity and living by Faith, as to spirituals and temporals, and self-denial; and very consolatory, rendring Religion the most sweet and comfortable life, notwithstanding suffer∣ings. He used to presse much after the seeking of spiritual illumination, in hearing and reading, &c. and divine assistance in religious duties, not contenting our selves with the use of parts and accomplishments, or grace received, but to look higher, saying, David that could preach excellently, and had Nathan and Gad the Prophets also to preach, yet cryes out for teaching; thereby shewing, that all that teaching would not do, unlesse God teach also. And Davids cryes, Open mine
eyes; he had the light without, but he must have light within, viz. sight, else he could not see the wonders of the Law, though he had the Law. Christians should be cheerfull.He used to presse much to meeknesse, and a sweet disposition to affa∣bility, charity and cheerfulnesse, not to be rigid, sour, tart, nor sad, least the world should think that we served an hard Master. Being above eighty years old, his pains were very great, yet not painfull to him.His indefati∣gablenesse. He preached almost all day long on the Lords day, yet said, it was no great matter to pay money when one had it, all the labour was to get it. He opened a Chapter, and prayed in his Family, after preached twice in publique, and in the interim discoursed all dinner while, but eat very little. He brought in many with him to dinner, besides his four or six constant Widows; if his Wife began to doubt of her provision at sight of so many, he would say, Better want meat then good company, but there is something in the house, though cold. This is not a day to feast the bodies but souls. At first sitting down, he would bid them help themselves and one another, and see that none want. Let me (said he) bid you but once, for I would not speak a vain word to day. After both Sermons, the house would be filled; and he being sate in his chair, used to say, if any have a good question, or a hard place of Scripture to open, let them say on; and when he was faint, he would call for a small glasse of Wine and Beer mixt, and then to it again till night. The benefit of plain preach-king.He was excellent in preaching occasionally from the creatures, as he walked or rode. His Ministry was so spiritual, and yet so plain, that poor simple people that never knew what Religion meant, when they had gone to hear him, could not choose but talk of his Sermon. It mightily affected poor creatures to hear the Mysteries of God, (by his excellent skill that way) brought down to their own language and dialect. He was so holy and spiritual both in life and doctrine, that he silen∣ced even desperate and devillish opposers of Religion.His holy life. It was a discre∣dit for any to speak evil of him, because it must needs expresse much malice, and all men most generally (in his latter time at least) honour∣ed him. His peace-ma∣ing.He was very successefull in making peace, though between despe∣rate and almost implacable adversaries, and some of them wicked, mightily convincing them with Gospel-arguments, to the overcoming and quieting of their spirits. His acutenesse.He would answer any questions propounded, that were but fit for a Divine to speak to; yet shewing his approbation or dislike of the que∣stion according to the honesty and spiritualnesse, or curiosity and light∣nesse of it. When mean inferiour people came to speak with him, if he was walking in the Church,His humility. where he used most to study, that he might have room to walk in, (being troubled with the stone) or elsewhere; if he
thought them bashfull, he would meet them, and say, Would you speak with me? And when he found them unable to state their question, he would help them out with it, taking care to find the sore; but would an∣swer and deal so compassionately and tenderly, as not to discourage the poorest soul from coming again to him. If any questioned him about Ceremonies,His modesty. about which many then suffered, he was very wary in dealing, (not shy in speaking his judg∣ment) but carefull of advising them according to their strength. He would bid them take heed of being led meerly by the imitation of any body,  other mens arguments, but look to their Scripture-light, and see  guments they had to bear them out; and whether they could  alone in that case if they should survive their patterns. He would not have them make a businesse about lesser things, and then fall off from what they began to professe. Being to advise a young man in his choice of a yokefellow,What Wise should be chosen. he bad him look principally after Godlinesse. Men talk of a portion, grace is the bst portion. The wise woman buildeth up the house, viz. The godly, &c. Not the rich. Some use to say, There is a portion and civility, and we will hope for grace; But, saith he, rather make sure grace, and hope for riches; There's far greater reason for it. For Godlinesse hath the Pro∣mises, riches hath none. A Sonne or Daughter of God shall be pro∣vided for. He would say, he that could answer two questions well,How we may alwaies have comfort. might have comfort in any place or condition, viz. Who am I? and what do I here? Am I a Child of God? and am I in my calling or way? He hath given his Angels charge to keep thee in all thy waies. And that the knowledge of two things would make one willing to suffer or die, viz. What Heaven is; And that it's mine;What will make us wil∣ling to suffer. I (said one) if a man were sure. To whom he answered, Truly Assu∣rance is to be had, and what have we been doing all this while? He used to say,Assurance to be laboured fo they that hope to go to Heaven (as most do) and had not good evidence for it, were like a man, that passing by a great house and estate, would say, This is mine; but being bid to shew his title, would say, some body must have it, and why not I? Such is most mens title for Heaven. During the time of his last sicknesse, it pleased the Lord to try him by grievous pains, most bitter and sharp, of the strangury; but when he had any intermissions, he was breathing out such speeches, as tended to the praise of God, and to the edification of those that attended him.Thankfulness▪ in afflictions. He slept little all the night or day long before his death, in all which time he imployed his atten∣dants which were about him, to read the Scriptures, which he expounded to them. And when his strength was spent with speak∣ing, he retired himself to Prayer and Meditation.Prayer. When he felt his paines returning, he would intreat those that were about him, to pray to God for him, either to give him deliverance or pati∣ence.
His tentation a little before his death, and his wrestlings with Satan were great;His tentation, and victory. so were his victories. He spake to one that did watch with him all night, about two of the clock in the morning, that he had been wrestling with Satan all that night, who accused him that he neither preached, nor prayed, nor per∣formed any duty as he should have done, for manner or for end, but he said, I have answered him from the example of the Prodi∣gal and the Publican. His faith, and patience.His Faith and Patience were encreased and perfected by his suf∣ferings. He longed and thirsted to be with Christ, which words he often uttered. One of his last speeches was this, with his eyes and hands lifted up to Heaven, he sighed, and said, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. His pains left him not an hour before his death, his speech also then leaving him; he could not eat nor drink two daies before his death. And so quietly and patient∣ly he ended his life,His death. making a happy change, being fourscore and sixteen years old, Anno Christi, 1645.
The Life of Master Robert Balsom, who died Anno Christi 1647. RObert Balsom was born at Shipton-Montague, in the County of Somerset. Having spent some years in New-in-hall in Oxford, upon his removall thence, he was entertained by Master Bernard of Batcomb, in the aforesaid County, to teach School, and preach sometimes as his Assistant; under whom he greatly improved his abilities for preaching. Up∣on the death of Master Bernard, preaching occasi∣onally at a neighbour village call'd Stoke,His call to Stoke. among a company of poor un∣taught people, one that lived thereabouts, told him, that if such a Mini∣ster should come and preach among that people, where there was so small encouragement, he should think that God had a great work to do upon them. Hereupon Master Balsom promised to be their Minister, where he enjoyed about fourty pounds a year.The great suc∣cesse of his Ministry. The successe of his Mi∣nistry there was very great, insomuch that he hath been heard say, that there were but few Sermons that he preached there, but he had intelli∣gence, that some one or other were converted by them. The troubles growing in those parts, by reason of our Civil Warres, after one or two years abode there, he was forced for his own safety, to betake himself to Warder Castle in Wiltshire,His flight to Warder Castle where he had not continu∣ed long, but the Castle was besieged by the Kings party. Upon the news of their approach, he was minded to have gone for London, but be∣ing desired by Colonel Ludlow, the Governour of that Castle, he re∣mained there during the siege. A little before the Castle was delivered up, as they were in Treaty about the surrender of it, Master Balsom walking upon the roof of the Castle, heard three Souldiers say, That they had sworn upon the Bible, to take away the life of one in the Castle. He asked one of them, Who is that ye mean? Is it our Minister? They replyed, Yes; for he is a Witch: which they affirmed upon this ground, because the Castle had divers times been very strangely relieved with provision.Special provi∣dences. As at one time with a herd of Swine coming down to the gates, which they took in; and at another time by some Deer, and Conies, the siege then being not close, but straightning them at a di∣stance. He asked them, what was their names? They told him, they were the three merry boyes: He replyed, your names are very unsuitable to the times. And so after some farther discourse, parted with them. After the surrender of the Castle, and the enemies entry, they pre∣sently seized on Master Balsom, and clapt him up in a close low room.
About twelve a clock at night, the key of the room was given to the three Souldiets that had sworn his death: They having received the key, presently entered the room where he was with another Souldier, who was hanged the next morning: No sooner came they into the room, but they put off their hats, and standing still, lookt on him at a distance, saying nothing to him. He suspecting them to be the men that had sworn to take away his life, spake to them thus; Friends, what is your business? are not ye the men that have sworn to take away my life? They answered to this purpose, We have taken a wicked oath, God forgive us, but we will do you no hurt. He desired them to come near unto him, but they stood trembling, perswaded him to make an escape, vo∣luntarily offering him their best assistance. He answered, now I suspect you, you are ashamed to take away my life, now I am in your hands, but would perswade me to a flight, that you might with the more colour kill me in the pursuit. They assuring him, they intended really the set∣ting of him at liberty; He asked what they thought would become of them? They answered, they would go along with him. He replyed, That you shall not do; for if I be taken again, I shall be but in the same case I am; but if you be taken, it will cost you your lives. And there∣fore I will rather suffer the utmost that God shall suffer them to inflict upon me, then hazard the lives of those that have shewed themselves so friendly to me. Upon this, they had him forth into the fresh air, and in the mean time made clean his room, and so left him. The next morning, a Councel of War was call'd, and as they were debating to put him to death, a Captain of the Councel stood up, and said, I will have no hand in the blood of this man, and so went out of the room, and no farther progresse was made as concerning him. Afterwards they carried him in a Cart to Salisbury;His remove to Sarum. As he was carried through the town to the Prison, the people of the town entertained him with great scorn and contempt; and that night another Councel of War was call'd, and packt for the purpose, by which he was condemned to be hang'd.He is condem∣ned to be hanged. Hereupon the High Sheriff of the County went unto him into the Prison, and after much ill lan∣guage that he used towards him, he told him that he was come to tell him, that he must prepare himself to die, for he was condemned by the Coun∣cel of War, to be hang'd the next morning at six a clock; but withall, assured him, that if he would ask pardon of the King for his offence, and serve his Majesty for the future, as he had formerly served against him, he should both save his life, and have what preferment he could reason∣ably desire. He answered, for me to ask pardon where I am not consci∣ous of an offence,His courage and constancy. were but the part of a fool; and to betray my con∣science in hope of preferment, were but the part of a Knave; and if I had neither hope of heaven, nor fear of hell, I had rather die an honest man, then live a fool or a knave. The next morning he rose about five a clock, being something troubled that he had slept so long: About six a clock the Officers came into the room to bring him forth to execution. While he was preparing to go with them, he heard a Post ride in, asking
hastily, Is the Prisoner yet alive?A special Pro∣vidence. His remove to Winchester. who brought with him a Reprieve from Sir Ralph Hopton, to whom he was carried to Winchester. As he came to the gates of the town, Sir William Ogle the Governour met him, and told him, that he would feed him with bread and water for two or three daies, and then hang him. Then he was brought to Sir Ralph Hopton, who spake to him thus; Master Balsom, I little thought one day that you should have been my Prisoner, and I cannot but wonder, that such men as you should be engaged in a rebellion against the King. To whom he replyed, Sir, I cannot but wonder, that such men as you should call this rebellion. Sir Ralph desired him to give him an account of the grounds, upon which he and his party proceeded, promising him, that he should not suffer for any thing that he spake to him. After a∣bout half an hours discourse, he committed him to his own Marshall, with this charge, Keep this man safe, but use him well. The Marshall received him, and after some little rough entertainment, upon his entrance into his house, he at length used him with great seeming respect. Long he had not been there, but a Gentlewoman came to him with a pottle of Sack,He is urged to recant. urging him to preach a Recantation Sermon the next morning be∣fore the Lords, promising that if he would so do, the King would make him a Doctor. He replyed, Sure you do but mock me; for should I preach upon such short warning, the Lords would never hear such ex∣tempore stuff; but if you be in good earnest, and would make me a Do∣ctor indeed, then let me have the same Law ye use to give your Doctors, viz. a quarter of a years time to make a Sermon, and by that time you may know more of my mind. The next morning an Order was brought for the conveying of him to Oxford, whither he was accordingly carried.His remove to Oxford. He lighted first at the Blew∣bore, whither they brought a company of the Queens followers, who with much fury oftentimes swore, that he should not go alive out of the room. But the Musqueteers, who were set as a guard upon him, desired them to be quiet, telling them that he was their Prisoner, and should not suf∣fer there, but they would suffer with him. Thence he was conveyed to the Castle, where after two or three daies abode, he enjoyed the same liberty with other Prisoners; And a while after, he set up an Exposition Lecture in the prison twice a day: To which, not only the Prisoners, and some of the Souldiers, but divers Courtiers, and many out of the town often came. Being prohibited once or twice to go on in this Ex∣ercise, he answered, if ye are weary of me, I am not willing to trouble you any longer; ye may turn me out of your doors when you will; but while I have a tongue to speak, and people to speak to, I will not hold my peace. After some moneths of imprisonment, he was released by exchange.His Release. As he was departing thence, some Courtiers and others, that had former∣ly shewed him some favour, perswaded him to close with their party, and to stay with them. He utterly refusing, divers of them accompanied him out of town; and as they were parting, one of them said; Sir, If any of us should fall into your hands, we should desire no better enter∣tainment
then you have had amongst us. He replyed, Gentlemen, I could wish that ten thousand of you might fall into our hands within this moneth, that you might see how kindly we would deal with you. Thence he was sent for by the Lord Generall Essex to be Chaplain in his Army,He is sent for by the Earl of Essex. with whom he continued, during his command. Then he went to Barwick, where he was received with great affection of the people,His going to Barwick. and saw in a short time great successe of his labours in the Ministry. During his abode there, two things were very remarkeable: One, whereas there was a Child that had been strangely visited with such a weaknesse, as neither Physicians or Divines could guesse at the cause, or find out the cure; Hereupon Master Balsom moved some Christians there to seek God with him, by Fasting and Prayer, which accordingly they did,A special Pro∣vidence. and obtained a suddain and extraordinary answer. For as the Mother of the Child came home from the Exercise, her Child met her, and told her, she was very well, who before had kept her bed of a long time. The other thing remarkable was this; A Scottish Lord, by name, the Lord of Granson, took up his habitation for a time in Barwick, and brought with him his Family. In which, amongst others, was the Steward of his house, formerly reputed a godly man, who was very much afflicted in mind: Master Balsom came to visit him, and administred some comfort to him for that time. But two or three daies after he being sorely affli∣cted again, Master Balsom was sent for, who finding him very much weakned and worn out by the violence of temptation, began to speak comfortably to him. But perceiving that no words of comfort would fasten on him, he whispered to him in his ear to this purpose, I doubt there is something within, that you should do well to discover. Where∣upon immediately the mans tongue swelled out of his mouth, insomuch that he was not able to speak. Master Balsom continued speaking to him, till at length, to the astonishment of those in the room, being many, and some of them persons of quality, a shrill voice was heard, as from out of his throat (having not any use of his tongue) to this pur∣pose:Possession. Satan. What dost thou talking to him of Promises, and free grace? He is mine. Master Balsom apprehending it to be the voice of the Devil, re∣plyed: Balsom.No Satan, thou dost not know any man to be thine while there is life in him. Satan.But this is a notorious wicked wretch, and therefore is mine. Balsom.The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. If God would let me loose upon you, I should find enough in the best of you,Satan. to make you all mine. Balsom.But thou art bound Satan. And so turning himself to the people, with a smiling countenance, he said, What a gracious God have we, that suffers not Satan to have his will upon us? Satan.Then the Devil began to curse and swear, and blaspheme the Trinity in a most fearfull and horrible manner. Balsom.The Lord rebuke thee.
But this man is mine, for he hath given himself to me;Satan. and sealed it with his blood. I do not believe that the father of lies speaketh truth,Balsom. and I do be∣lieve, how confident soever thou art, that thou wilt lose thy hold be∣fore to morrow morning. The Devil continued to curse and swear further, saying,Satan. How canst thou endure to hear thy God blasphemed? I will never give over blaspheming so long as thou stayest in the room. I will pray for him.Balsom. Wilt thou pray for a man that is damned?Satan. I will go home and pray for him,Balsom. and get all the force I can in the town to joyn with me. After this, there being no more voice heard, Mr. Balsom went home about eleven a clock at night, where he found in his house di∣vers Christians, which he intended to have sent for, waiting for him; and upon the sight of them, he spake to them to this purpose: Friends,A special Pro∣vidence. I wonder at the providence of God, in bringing you hither at this time, for otherwise I must have sent for you. And so declaring to them what had hapned to the afflicted man, he desired them to spend some part of the night with him, in seeking God for him, which accordingly they did. The next morning Master Balsom going to visit him again, found him in a comfortable condition; and asking of him, how he did? He answered, Through the goodnesse of God, I have overcome, and am now as full of comfort, as I was before of trouble. And so continued all that day cheerfull, but in great weaknesse, and the next morning died, no disease appearing upon him. After some time of Master Balsom's abode there, he was earnestly in∣treated to return into his own Countrey, to which, for some important reasons he was inclined, but was as earnestly importuned by many of the inhabitants of Barwick, either to abide with them, or to return again to them. And after many other Arguments, as he was just parting with them, as their last Argument to perswade him to stay with him, they presented him with a list of about threescore that had been (as they were verily perswaded) savingly wrought on by his Ministry,The great suc∣cesse of his Ministry. during the time of his continuance there. He left them, but with a mind of re∣turning to them again, if providence crost it not, but his return was pre∣vented by his death, which hapned about two year after,His death. as he was en∣deavouring to get himself free from the place, where he then was, to return to them. In which space of time he did much good, as in con∣verting many, so in reducing many that were drawn away by Sectaries.
The Life of Master Herbert Palmer, B. D. late Master of Queens-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, who died Anno Christi 1647. His Parentage.HErbert Palmer was descended of an ancient Family of that name, allied to divers other Families of note, of the Nobility and Gentry. His Father was Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham in East-Kent, about six miles distant from Canterbury. His Mother was the eldest Daughter of Herbert Pelham of Crawley in Sussex Esquire. He was born at Wingham, and was there baptized, March 29. 1601. His birth and education.He had the happinesse of a prudent and pious Education. His Fa∣ther, beside his Piety, being a very wise man, and of a more then or∣dinary understanding, as well in State-affairs, as those of a more private concernment. His Mother, beside her Prudence and other accomplish∣ments more then ordinary in her sex, was also eminently religious, and both of them exceeding carefull of his education. Himself also, being even from his infancy, much addicted to the serious study both of Reli∣gion and Learning, in both of which he had made more then ordinary Proficiency in a short time, and continued the exercise and improvement of them afterward. The Symptomes of Grace and Piety began betimes to put themselves forth to the view and observation of others, as soon almost as the ex∣ercise and use of reason; so that we may not without good ground, e∣steem him sanctified even from the Womb.He was sancti∣fied from the Womb. When he was about the age of four or five years, he would cry to go to his Lady-mother, That he might hear somewhat of God; So soon had these her Religious dis∣courses, made pleasing impressions on his apprehension. Neither did these, and such like expressions of affection to good things soon vanish away, (as childish apprehensions use to do,) but continued and encreased, according as his years and the use of reason increased. Hence was it, that even from a child, being asked at any time what course of life he best liked to follow,His early de∣sires of the Ministry. whether to be a Lawyer, a Courtier, a Countrey Gentleman, &c. he would still answer, that he would be a Minister of Jesus Christ. From which, while some of
Mr. HERBERT PALMER.
his Friends (for triall sake) would seem to disswade him, as being too mean an imployment for a Gentleman, telling him that Ministers are ha∣ted, despised, and accounted as the off-scouring of the world, &c. he would reply, It was no matter for that; for if the world hated him, yet God would love him. He was early acquainted with the Book of God,His frequent reading of the Scriptures. which he much de∣lighted in, and read with great affection, (insomuch that while he was but a child, little more then five years old, he wept in reading the story of Joseph) and took much pleasure in learning of Chapters by heart. And here was laid the first foundation of that great exactnesse in the knowledge of the Scriptures, to which he did afterwards at∣tain. He had excellent natural parts, both intellectual and moral:His natural endowments. which as they were soon capable of being imployed, so they were soon set on work; his Parents vigilancy being such, that they suffered no time to be neglected. He learned the French tongue almost as soon as he could speak English; even so soon, as that he hath often affirmed,His skill in the French. he did not remember his learning of it. And he did afterwards attain so great exactnesse of speaking and preaching in that language, together with a perfect knowledge of the state and affairs of that Kingdom, especially of the Protestant Churches amongst them, that he was often, by strangers, thought to be a native French-man; and did not doubt but to entertain discourse with any person of that Nation, for some hours together in their own language, concerning the affairs of that Kingdom, who should not be able by his discourse to di∣stinguish him from a native French-man, but judge him to be born and bred in France; so well was he furnished with an exact know∣ledge, both of the Propriety and due Pronunciation of that language, and of the persons, places, and affairs of that Kingdom, and the Churches therein. A thing not often seen in one who had never been out of England. When he learned the Latine tongue,His industry. with such other parts of learn∣ing, as younger years are usually imployed in at School, his diligence and proficiency therein was such, as produced both commendation and admiration. And while others at vacant hours, were following their sports and recreations, he was constantly observed to be reading studi∣ously by himself; taking as much pleasure in good imployments, as o∣thers in sports; and counting that the best Passe-time, wherein the time was best passed. His carriage towards his Parents, was dutifull and obsequious;His obser∣vance of his Parents. not only during his Minority, but even afterwards; which was very evi∣dent in that honour and reverend respect, which he continued to ex∣presse to his godly aged Mother to the day of her death, which hap∣ned not long before his own: being also a special helper to her in the waies of holinesse. And what he thus practised himself, he did fre∣quently commend to others, being alwaies (though himself unmarri∣ed)
a great asserter of Parental authority; as well from that great em∣phasis which God puts upon it through the whole current of Scripture, as from those remarkable judgments, which in Scripture, and in his own experience he had observed to be inflicted on disobedient and un∣dutifull children, (whom, as he was wont to say, he had scarce ever known to escape some visible judgment for it in this life, though pos∣sibly otherwise godly persons,) as also from those unavoidable mischiefs, which do frequently ensue in Civil Societies,Despisers of Parents usual∣ly punished by God. where the authority of Superiours is vilified or contemned, and which (if well considered) will be often found to take their first rise and original from the contempt of Paternal authority. His admission into the Uni∣versity.He was about the year 1615. admitted Fellow-Commoner in Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, where he continued his former diligence, as well in the exercise of Religion, as the improvement of his learning, both in his private Study, and in the performance of Exercises in the University and Colledge, notwithstanding the exemption which Fel∣low-Commoners in Colledges are ready to plead from the performance of them. He is made Fellow of Queens Col∣ledge.After that he had there taken the degree of Master of Arts, about the year 1622. he was in the year 1623. constituted Fellow of Queens Colledge in that University; where, although he were a Gentleman, that beside his Fellowship, had an estate of his own, and so had the lesse need in point of maintenance, to take that trouble of Pupils upon him;His care over his Pupils. yet (not satisfying himself, to take a place upon him, without performing the Office thereunto belonging) he took many Pupils, of whom he was more then ordinarily carefull, being very diligent both in praying with them in his Chamber, and instructing them in the grounds of Religion; as also keeping them to their studies, and the performance of disputations, and other exercises of learning, privately in his Chamber; beside the more publique exercises required of them by the Colledge, to the great benefit of those that were his Pu∣pils. He is ordained Minister.While he was Fellow of Queens Colledge, about the year 1624. he was solemnly ordained to the work of the Ministry, whereunto from a Child he had addicted himself; And about the year 1626, was called to the publique exercise thereof, as a Lecturer in the City of Canterbury;His call to Canterbury. where, for divers years, (notwithstanding the great oppositions he there met with, from such as were enemies to the power of godlinesse,) he did with much diligence and very great successe discharge that great work, to the spiritual edification and comfort of many yet alive, to whom his memory to this day is precious. The occasion of his coming thither was this; Coming from Cam∣bridge,The occasion of it. to give a visit to his Brother Sir Thomas Palmer at Wingham, he did at the intreaty of some Friends, preach a Sermon at the Cathedral Church in Canterbury, and that with so much true Zeal, and reall savour of Piety▪ as did much affect the godly hearers. The
report hereof coming to the knowledge of Master Delme (a god∣ly, faithfull, prudent and laborious Minister of the French Church in Canterbury) he made a journey to Wingham on purpose to gain a further knowledge of him, and acquaintance with him, (with whom he was already not a little in love from that good report he had heard of him, though as yet by face unknown to him;) and here∣by not only obtained the knowledge of the man, but was also, by his gracious and savoury discourse and carriage, very much confirm∣ed in that good opinion which he had before conceived of him. And this was the first foundation of that intire and Christian friend∣ship, which with much spiritual advantage to them both,Friendship. was con∣tracted between these two holy men, which continued and increased daily to their mutual comfort and contentment while they were both living, and the memory thereof is still precious to him that doth yet survive. After this, before his return to Cambridge, having (at the request of Master Delme,) preached a second Sermon at Saint Georges Church in Canterbury, on a week day Lecture; the most godly and best affe∣cted in the City were more and more taken with him, and expressed great desires of enjoying his Ministry amongst them, if it might be obtained. Hereupon Master Delme, with divers others, of the most considerable Gentlemen and Citizens, having earnestly sought direction from God in a matter of such concernment, did seriously advise about it; and being first assured of the concurrent desires of many others, did by let∣ters and messages to Cambridge, signifie to him the desire of the godly in that City, that he would undertake to preach a Lecture amongst them. This invitation after mature deliberation,His self-denial. he thought good to accept of, preferring the opportunity and probability of doing good in that populous place, before the hopes of preferment, either in the Uni∣versity or elsewhere, which, by reason of his many Friends and acquaintance great at Court, and otherwise, he might likely have at∣tained unto; holding steady to that resolution (which long before that time he had taken up,) so to imploy himself as might probably most promte the Work of God, whatever became of his own advantages. Whereupon a License being obtained for him from George Abbot, then Arch-bishop of Canterbury, authorizing him to preach a weekly Lecture on the Lords day in the afternoon at Alphage Church in that City; He left his Fellowship in the University, and undertook this work. During his abode in this employment, he did much edifie the people there, both by sound doctrine, and exemplary conversation.He was a burning and shining light. His Sermons were altogether spiritual and heavenly, full of solid explications and practicall applications of the Word of God; where∣by the City was well seasoned as with savoury salt, and much preserved from those innovations and corruptions, both in do∣ctrine
and Worship, which in those dayes were creeping on apace; by reason whereof that leven of formality, which many of the Ca∣thedralists were promoting, (who preferred pompous Ceremonies before the power of Godlinesse) was stopped from spreading and corrupting so much,His opposition to innovations. as otherwise it might have done. For al∣though he was not then perswaded of the unlawfulnesse of the then Government, and some Ceremonies then in use, yet he could no way approve of the corrupt innovations coming on in those daies, but did with all wisdome and zeal reprove them, countenancing goodnesse and good men. And by this means, he was a great stay and comfort to the godly Ministers and People, both in the City and Countrey thereabouts; whom, not only by his publique preaching, but by many other Christian and Ministerial helps administred in his more private Converses, he did very much incourage in true Piety. Of this very many Families in that City had great experience, (even those of the meanest ranke,His humility.) whom he was wont often to visit as he had opportunity, that he might the better understand their spiritual con∣dition; admitting also persons of all ranks freely to apply them∣selves unto him as they had occasion, and to partake the benefit of private Conferences, Prayers, and other religious exercises; as likewise affording his Christian advice and direction in cases of difficulty, especially to distressed Consciences; in which cases, by most of his prudent and judicious resolutions, he was frequently consulted with as a kind of Oracle. And that not only during his abode at Canterbu∣ry, but wherever else the Providence of God did cast him. And herein he had an excellent ability and dexterity, and took much delight in it. He doth good abroad.And his assistance he afforded not only to those of that City, but also to many of the most Religious Families of the Nobility and Gentry thereabouts; to whom, both by his personal Converses, and his Chri∣stian letters (of which there are great numbers yet to be seen) he affor∣ded frequent directions and encouragements in the waies of God; And particularly the Noble Family of Thomas late Earl of Winchelsey, then Vicount Maidstone (whose abode at that time was at the Mote, a place near Canterbury:) the exemplary Piety of whose Family, and the several Noble Branches thereof, was by him in a special manner pro∣moted. The like assistance he afforded also to those of the French Con∣gregation in Canterbury, whom, by reason of his exact knowledge in the French language, he was able to edifie very much. And (at the request of their Eldership) he did twice preach to them in that language upon most solemn daies, to the great ashonishment and edification of the whole Congregation. It is memorable, that an ancient French Gentlewoman, when she saw him the first time coming into the Pulpit, being startled at the smallnesse of his perso∣nal appearance, and the weaknesse of his look, cryed out (in the
hearing of those that sate by her) Hola! que nous dira cest enfant ioy? Alas, what should this Child say to us? But having heard him pray and preach with so much spiritual strength and vigour, she lift her hands to heaven with admiration and joy, blessing God for what she had heard. Yet this his faithfull discharge of the Ministry was not without some opposition.He is opposed by Sectaries and Cathedra∣lists. On the one hand those of the Separation, and such as were incline∣able thereunto, were somewhat troublesome to him; but could get no advantage upon him, nor did prevail any thing (while he remained there) upon his hearers. On the other side, the Cathedralists and their favourers did oppose him, fearing (it's like) lest his godly courses and exact walking might be a blemish to their loose and carnal waies. And therefore, though the greatnesse of his birth, and friends hindered them somewhat from prose∣cuting of him, as probably they would otherwise have done; yet once some of the chiefest of them adventured to exhibit Articles against him: But his cause and answers proved such, as that they were not able to hurt him. After three years, or thereabouts, his Lecture there was put down by the Dean and Arch-Dean,His Lecture put down. (upon certain instructions then on foot concerning Afternoon Sermons) to the great grief of his godly hear∣ers. But not long after, upon the petition of great numbers of the Gen∣try and Citizens, to the then Arch-bishop, by whose License and autho∣rity he had been before established, (accompanied with the laudable te∣stimony of divers Ministers, concerning his Orthodox doctrine, and un∣blamable conversation, together with the concurrent testimony of ten Knights,He is again restored. and divers others of the Gentry and chief Citizens) he was again restored. During his continuance here, he was twice (by the procurement of his Friends at Court) likely to be made one of the Preben∣daries of Canterbury.Tentations prevented. But he often admired and praised that Pro∣vidence of God, that his Friends endeavours therein succeeded not; seeing himself by this means delivered from many temptations and dangers, which had been incident, if he had been one of that com∣pany; they being afterward, by the succeeding Arch-bishop, main∣ly set on work, for the setting up and promoting superstitious innova∣tions. After some years he was removed from Canterbury,His remove to Ashwel. to the Vicaridge of Ashwel in Hartfordshire, whereunto he was presented by William Laud the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury, (which in his defence before the House of Peers in Parliament, was by the Arch-bishop insisted upon as one of his good deeds:) to which he received institution, Febr. 7. 1632. where he continued the same zeal, diligence and care, which he had be∣fore discovered, in seeking the good of those souls that were committed to his charge. Beside his constant preaching there twice every Lords day,His great pains he did
also very frequently preach to them occasionally, as any opportuni∣ty was offered; not willing to let passe any advantage offered of doing them good. Wherein, notwithstanding the excellency of his learn∣ing,His humility and sincerity. whereby, if he had sought it, he might have attained great applause and admiration (even from knowing men) in the osten∣tation thereof: yet he chose alwaies to condescend to the capacities of his hearers, with so much plainnesse, as that (if possible) he might be understood by all,His prudence. even those of the meanest capacities, as being most studious, both for the matter and manner of his preaching, how he might be able most of all to profit those that heard him. And on this ground upon any emergent occasions he endeavoured as much as might be, to sute his matter thereunto, that so the Word of God, and the Providence of God, might one adde edge unto the other, and both joyntly become the more effectuall. And for the same reason he did the more approve of Funeral Sermons, for that at such times the minds of men, especially those more immediately concerned, are thereby rendred the more pensive and serious, and so the more fit to take impression by the Word. On the same ground also was he carefull to observe the advantages of sicknesse, or any other considerable afflictions, because his Admonitions and Chri∣stian Aavice, were like to be at such a time the more effectuall, when God had as it were softned their heart, and opened their ear to hear. His diligent catechizing.He was also carefull by Catechizing, both in publique, and at his own house, to instruct in the Principles of Religion, not only the Children and youth, but even those that were more aged, in case he discerned them ignorant, and such as stood in need thereof; and yet not so as might expose them to scorn and reproach, but so as might most con∣duce to their edfication in the knowledge and fear of the Lord. To which end he had prevailed with those of his Parish, at lest the farre greater number of them, and those the most considerable persons to concurre with him in it; by sending their Children and Servants con∣stantly to be catechized on the Lords day before the Afternoon-Ser∣mon (some of whom he catechized publiquely in the Congregation, and others more privately in his own house, either by himself or his assistant,) that so that the publique Catechizing might neither be too te∣dious, nor intrench upon the time allotted for other exercises, as Pray∣ing, Reading, Expounding, Preaching, &c. nor yet the examination of others for want of time, be wholly omitted; as also by their own endeavours at home to help on this work: and likewise to contribute their assistance in perswading others to the same willingnesse. As for those who were more eminent, but yet needed instruction, he laboured both by his own perswasion, and the perswasion of others, to work in them a willingnesse to repair to him in private at convenient times, that by conferences with them, and friendly discourse in a familiar and gentle manner, he might bring them to such a sufficiency of knowledge, as was necessary for their own salvation.
And the better to perswade people to a willingnesse▪ thus to receive instruction, he used by way of encouragement,His prudent charity. (especially to those of the meaner sort) to give Bibles to such as could read, and five shillings in money to such as could not, when they attained such a measure of knowledge, as that they were judged fit to partake of the Lords Sup∣per. And such like rewards and incouragements he used to bestow on others, as he saw occasion; furnishing them with Books and writings, and otherwise encouraging them according as they should manifest their diligence in gaining and improving their know∣ledge. All which the generation to come, and the children yet unborn, may have cause to blesse God for, when they shall receive the benefits thereof, communicated from their Parents to them, while others do as much as in them lies, intail ignorance and atheism upon their poste∣rity. And because he found it difficult to bring those of shallow memo∣ries and weak capacities to understand and remember the Principles of Religion; discerning, that many who could not distinctly repeat the words, did yet understand the matter, and therefore were not to be despised or discouraged; and others of firmer memories, who were able to learn the words, did understand little or nothing of the mean∣ing of them. He did therefore study how he might best remedy both those evils; and to that end, framed several forms of Catechisms in divers kinds. At length he pitched on that form, as the most conveni∣ent that he could think of, which he published in print, intituled, An endeavour of making the principles of Christian Religion plain and easie,His Cathechism. of which so many thousands have been printed of late years, and enter∣tained with great approbation. His method therein is this; The answers which make up the main body of the Catechism, are so many distinct Aphorisms, or entire Pro∣positions in themselves, without dependance on the questions to make the sense entire, containing in themselves a brief module of Divinity: And to that purpose so much of the question is still repeated in the an∣swer, as is necessary to make the sense perfect. Hereby the Learner is freed from a double inconvenience: The one is, that where the sense of an answer is imperfect, he is forced to charge his memory with learning the question also, or else to make use either of this Book or anothers help to ask the question, that so that answer which he hath learned may be perfect sense. The other is, that aptnesse in the Learn∣er to misapply the answer to a wrong question, when he learns only the predicate of the Proposition without the subject. Both which inconveniences are in this way in a great measure prevent∣ed. Another thing mainly considerable in his method, is, That beside the main questions and the answers thereunto, there are also annexed divers explicatory questions, which require no other answer but Yes, or No; which without any further charging of the Learners memory, do direct him to the distinct observing of what is contained in the
principal answer, and so to the understanding thereof; whereas other∣wise heedlesse Learners are apt (Parot-like) only to learn the words without at all regarding the meaning of them. The same also will help to direst a weak memory the better to recite the larger answer, if he be first required to give a particular answer to those expository que∣stions; for he will then have nothing to expresse in the full answer, be∣side what in the Preparatory questions had been suggested to him. As for example; Quest. In what condition was man created by God at the first? Was he made miserable? (No) or very happy? (Yes) In the Image of God? (Yes) In what condition then was man created by God at first? Answ. Man was created at the first in a very happy condition, in the Image of God. And in the same method he intended to digest the lesser Catechism, composed by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, (and authorized for publique use) if God had afforded him life to have seen that Cate∣chism perfected, to the compiling whereof he had contributed no small assistance; which therefore since his death hath been performed, by one that was intimate with him, and fully acquainted with his resolutions in that particular. His manner of reforming dis∣orders.As he was carefull thus to instruct his flock, so was he also vigilant to prevent disorders and misdemeanours amongst them in point of pra∣ctice, wherein he was not contented to use his own personal endea∣vours, but did also ingage his Parishioners to contribute their best as∣sistance thereunto; whereunto they did oblige themselves in divers excellent Resolutions and Agreements, concluded by common consent amongst them, and subscribed by their hands, viz. for the preventing and punishing of Drunkennesse and Tippling, of prophaning the Lords day, and of other prophane, or disorderly demeanours during the exercise of Divine Worship, by sleeping, talking, playing, &c. as like∣wise of stealing, and pilfering, of prophane swearing and cursing, of rayl∣ing, slandering, whoredome, fighting and quarrelling, disobedience to Parents and Governours, and of other misdemeanours in whom so∣ever. His Family-Government.In the religious ordering of his own Family, he was extraordinary vigilant and painfull, that it might be, so much as in him lay, a Gar∣den without weeds; and that those which were under his roof, might either not perish, or at least not through his default. Indeed his house was a School of Religion, such as there are very few to be found; insomuch that it was counted a great happinesse to live under his roof, under the constant enjoyment of so much means for the souls good. It was his great care to entertain none in his Family, but such as were either truly godly, or at least willing to be instructed and educated in the waies of God, and who would be ready and willing to attend the exer∣cises of Gods worship, both publiquely and privately, and to avoid all scandalous conversation. It was his constant practice twice every day to pray with his Family,
not allowing any to be absent; at which times he read to them some portion both of the Old and New Testament. He was carefull also to catechize his Family twice every week, and likewise on Friday and Saturday to require an account from them of the Sermons preached the Lords day before, which he then repeated to them. Having also while he was at Ashwel, the Sonnes of divers consider∣able persons of the Nobility and Gentry, sojourning in his house, for their better education in Religion and Learning, (he maintaining in his house an Assistant as a Schoolmaster to teach them) he required of them the like account in Catechizing and Repetitions as of his own Servants. He had also daily after dinner and Supper, a Chapter read by one of those Gentlemen in course, and he whose turn was to read, was requi∣red also, after he had read, to repeat the substance out of his memory, which (by constant custom) they had attained an ability to perform very exactly; after which, himself used to go over the same briefly, by way of exposition, of what appeared difficult, and noting such obser∣vations as were most obvious from the most remarkable passages therein. Beside this, he required his Servants, after every meal, to have some portion of Scripture read amongst them, or some other reli∣gious Treatise concerning the fundamentals of Religion, if not both. But especially he was carefull that all his Family should sanctifie the Sabbath-day.His care for sanctifying the Sabbath. And therefore would not suffer them to be imployed late the night before about their ordinary employments, but caused them to conclude sooner then on other daies, that they might not be indisposed for the duties of the day following. And on the Sabbath-day it self, he was carefull that they should not spend any part of it idly or vainly, no not in any unnecessary preparations of diet or the like, but only of such and so much as was necessary for their comfortable refreshment that day; but would have them spend the whole day, as much as might be, in the exercises of some of Gods Ordinances publique or private, insomuch that if he had known of any dish that had kept any of his Servants from attending on any of Gods Ordinances, he would not at all eat of it. And for better sanctifying of that day, he was carefull not only to perform private duties in his Family, as Prayer, Reading, Singing of Psalms, &c. but also when he went to the publique Ordinances, he would call all his Family together to go along with him, that so they might be present at the whole service of God. And in the evening of the day, he required of all his Servants, and the young Gentlemen that sojourned with him, an account of such portions of Scripture as had been read in publique; and as they recited particular passages thereof, he gave brief expositions of them, and observations from them: pressing them to me∣ditate in private of what they read in publique.
Beside this great care of his Family joyntly, he was also frequent in giving them personall counsell and direction in the waies of God, exhor∣ting them also to a daily constancy in the performance of secret duties between God and their own soul; so that scarce any Family enjoyed the like measure of helps and encouragements in the waies of holi∣nesse. His secret duties.His exact walking in his own secret devotion, was also exceeding∣ly remarkable. He was a man much in Communion with God. Twice every day he was in secret a Suiter at the Throne of grace, and oftener, as any particular occasion was offered. He would very seldome enter upon any businesse, either by himself, or with others,His Fasting, and Prayer. without first seeking of God. He did often set daies apart to humble himself in secret by Fasting and Prayer, according as ei∣ther publique or particular occasions did seem to call for it; as also in solemn Thanksgivings, for mercies received, whether publique or private. His frequency in reading the Scriptures.He was a great admirer of the holy Scriptures, and much conversant in them. Beside what he had read and heard read in his Family, he did every day by himself read some part both of the Old and New Testa∣ment, and constantly write short meditations and observations of what he so read, whereof he hath left behind him many hundred sheets writ∣ten in Characters. He was so throughly acquainted with it, that it was not easie to name a Chapter or Verse, but he would presently tell the Contents of it; nor to name any sentence of Scripture, but he could presently tell in what Chapter or Verse it was to be found; yea scarce any particular case could fall out in practice, but that he would be able to shew what particular directions the Word of God afforded for it. He was also a great observer of Providence, and took special notice how the Providences of God, and the Word of God did constantly a∣gree together. And from hence was able to give very near conje∣ctures, if not evident Predictions in many cases, what God was about to do, and what good or evil events were likely to come to passe; by comparing present actions with such Precedents as he had before observed, in the Providences and Word of God in like cases. His holy and exact walkingAnd as he was very carefull to order all his actions according to his constant rule, of being subservient to the glory of God, and the good of souls, so that even his journeys, visits, discourses, and familiar conver∣ses with any, were not undertaken without a special eye hereunto; so did he also keep an exact account of what had passed; every night before his going to rest, setting down in writing (in his usuall Character,) the passages of that day, what actions or discourses he had been em∣ployed in, what successes or disappointments, what mercies or crosses he met withall, and what failings he observed in himself: all which he surveyed again at the end of every week, writing down the chief passages of that week, and so from moneth to moneth, and year to
year. By means whereof he was throughly acquainted with his own spiritual condition, and did maintain a constant exactnesse, and even walking with God; which being so uniform, might perhaps by some be the lesse observed. Like as the Sunnes constant brightnesse, produ∣ceth lesse admiration, then some blazing Starre that appeareth but for a while; men usually more admiring things rare then excel∣lent. In the year 1632. he was by the University of Cambridge made one of the University-Preachers (having proceeded Batchelor of Divinity about two years before;) A matter of honour and repute,He is made University-Preacher. rather then of profit or employment. Yet also a matter of some advantage in some cases, (as times then went) being in the nature of a general License, whereby he was authorized to preach, as he should have occasion, in any part of England. At the beginning of the Parliament, he with Doctor Tuckny were chosen Clarks of the Convocation for the Diocesse of Lincoln; wherein he might have been of good use, in case it had been thought fit to have kept up that kind of Assembly, to have acted in concurrence with the Parliament as in former times. In the year 1643. he was by authority of Parliament called to be a Member of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.He is made a Member of the Assembly. And after some time he was chosen one of the Assessors, appointed to assist the Prolocutor in case of absence or in infirmity. He was in that Assembly an eminent and very usefull Member, exceeding diligent and industrious, being very rarely absent,His conscien∣tiousnesse therein. and that not but upon urget unavoidable occasions. For, as he accounted it an honour to be employed by God in so publique a service for the good of his Church: so he did conscientiously attend upon that service, prefer∣ing it before all other more particular employments, which though in themselves excellent, yet ought, in his judgment, to give way to this. And he was exceeding well fitted for this employment,His fitnesse for it. having a clear and ready apprehension, and firm and vast memory, a solid and steady judgement, and a good ability freely to expresse himself. In matters of deliberation, he manifested much Integrity and Christian wisdome. In matters of debate, whether about Doctrine or Discipline, he discovered a great sagacity in searching out the true sense of Scrip∣ture, a clear judgment and strength of reason, as well in the accurate stating of questions for debate, as in confirming the truth, and dissol∣ving objections against it; in all, a great measure of Zeal, Piety, and Prudence. All which procured him much reverence and esteem from the rest of his Brethren, who judged his presence and assistance a very great help and advantage in that difficult work, and bewailed his death as an unspeakable losse. His judgment was known to be for the Presbyterian Government; the principles whereof he did throughly understand, and was well able to defend, and was a very great Instrument for the promoting of
it. Yet in two things he was at first much unsatisfied, but by the de∣bates of the Assembly, did professe himself to receive satisfaction in both. One was concerning the Divine-Right of Ruling Elders, wherein he afterwards professed himself to be fully convinced, principally by the Authority of those two places, 1 Cor. 12.28. (where Go∣vernment is attributed to a distinct rank of Officers inferiour to Teachers,) and 1 Tim. 5.17. which implyeth, that there are other Elders which rule well, beside those that labour in the Word and Doctrine. The other was, whether there ought not to be continued in the Church, an Office superiour to that of Presbyters. For although he did not approve of the Hierarchical Government, as it was of late e∣stablished and practised amongst us: yet since it is confessed that Timo∣thy and Titus as Evangelists did exercise an authority, superiour to that of ordinary Presbyters, the object of which authority seemed to be of perpetual continuance in the Church, it seemed probable to him, that the Office also of an Evangelist was no extraordinary Office, but ought to be continued in the Church. But hereunto he received satisfa∣ction, principally from hence, that in case the Holy Ghost had intend∣ed the continuance of that Office, he would withall have described the work and qualification of persons fit for it, and taken some course for continuing the succession thereof, as is done in that of Elders and Dea∣cons. But this being wholly omitted, there being no more extant in that kind, then concerning the Apostolical Office, the power of working miracles, &c. We are rather to esteem that Office as well as these to be extraordinary, and but of a temporary continuance, expiring with the persons. Being thus called to attend the Assembly at Westminster, he was forced to intermit his ordinary residence at Ashwel;His care for Ashwel in his absence. being able on∣ly to exercise such a care of them as might be performed at a distance, and by making occasionall journeys thither, as he could obtain opportunities so to do. But the ordinary exercise of the ministerial work there, together with the profits of the place, he put over to a godly and able Divine to be performed in his ab∣sence; reserving notwithstanding his title to the place, not know∣ing how soon God might afford him opportunity of returning to them again. But, unwilling to intermit the exercise of his ministerial function, he did at first preach occasionally (as he was requested,) in divers Churches in and about London, resolving notwithstanding with∣in himself, to accept of the first invitation for the constant exercise thereof. And accordingly being soon after requested by the Inhabitants of Dukes-place in London,His choice to Dukes-place. (who were then destitute of a Minister) to preach amongst them, he did (notwithstanding their inability to raise any con∣siderable maintenance,His self-denial. which might invite him) willingly accept of that employment.
This work he performed amongst them with much faithfulnesse and diligence, as well by publique reading,His great pains. praying and preaching amongst them twice every Lords day, and at other times as there was occasion; as also by administring the Sacraments, publique catechizing, and expo∣sition of such portions of Scripture as were read amongst them. And likewise (as his custom had been elsewhere) by more private ac∣quaintance and converse with them in their Families, whereby he might be the better able to afford personall directions, and other Mini∣steriall helps to them, as their severall conditions might require. All which was performed with so much Meeknesse, Wisdom and Piety, and accompanied with such a blessing from God, as that it made a very great impression on them for their good, and was entertained by them with much approbation and affection, they being ambitious who should enjoy most of his heavenly Communion and Converse with him.The success of his Ministry. Here∣by in a short time he did much good, informing such as were weak in knowledge, setling and confirming such as were wavering in judge∣ment, and stirring up in all, both by his heavenly conversation and Christian counsell, a greater zeal and affection to the power of Godli∣nesse. By reason of all which, during the time of his abode amongst them, they were much preserved both from errours and divisions, whereunto the great unsetlednesse of the times did much expose them. Afterwards,His call to the new Church. when the new Church at Westminster was perfected and made fit for use, the Inhabitants there, and others concerned therein, did sollicite him to undergo the charge of that great people; with profer of far larger maintenance then he received or could expect from those of Dukes-place, where the inhabitants were neither many, nor of great estates. But this consideration did not at all prevail with him, who regard∣ed the work more then the wages. For although he doubted not but that both Religion and Reason did require a comfortable and honour∣able Maintenance, for those that laboured in the work of the Ministry, yet for his own part he was willing to deny himself in that particu∣lar, if so doing might ought advance the service of God.His tempe∣rance. And so much the rather, because being a Batchelour, and intending so to continue, nor at all addicted to pompous vanities or excesse, either in diet or apparell (in both of which he was exceedingly moderate) he had the lesse need of being sollicitous in getting riches; being indeed much more sollicitous, how (like a faithfull Steward,) to dispose and order what he had, as might be most for Gods honour and service, then how to encrease it. Yet his removall being much pressed upon grounds of another na∣ture, he did at length, with the approbation of those concerned on both parts, refer the whole businesse to be considered and concluded by divers of the most eminent of his Reverend and godly Brethren of the Assemby, whom he did frequently desire that they would wholly lay aside the consideration of maintenance, and deliver their judge∣ments,
what in other considerations they judged to be most agreeable to Gods will and his duty. Hereupon, they to whom the matter was referred, meeting severall times about it, and hearing at large what could on either side be alledged either for his stay or removall; after mature deliberati∣on had, and seeking of Gods direction, agreed in this opinion; That setting aside the consideration of maintenance,The reasons of his removall. yet in regard of the eminency of the place, the greatnesse of the Auditory, the many persons of quality residing there, and the great need of In∣struction to those of an inferiour rank, many of whom were ex∣treamly ignorant, (by reason that amongst such a great multitude of people, there had in former times been so great a scarcity of preaching) together with divers other reasons of the like nature, which did more then countervail what could be alledged on the other hand, his obligati∣ons also to those of Dukes-place not being absolute; they judged it most fit that he should leave Dukes-place, and undertake that charge at West∣minster. To this their resolution he consented, yet with his Proviso, that those of Dukes-place should be first provided of an able faithfull Pastor to succeed him, being utterly unwilling to leave them destitute. And accordingly, having prevailed with Master Thomas Young, (since Do∣ctor in Divinity, and Master of Jesus Colledge in Cambridge) to suc∣ceed him there, (who was also an eminent Member of the Assembly of Divines, a man of great Learning, of much Prudence and Piety, and of great ability and fidelity in the work of the Ministry) he took his leave of them: commending them to the grace of God, and the pious care of his Successor, taking on him the charge of those belong∣ing to the new Church in Westminster, and was the first Pastor of that Church. He was here also eminently faithfull and laborious in the work of the Ministry, in publique praying, reading, expounding, preaching, ad∣ministring the Sacraments, and Catechizing, with brief and clear expo∣sitions and confirmations of the Principles of Religion, as had been his usual custom in other places. Beside which he was also one of the se∣ven, that by appointment of Parliament did carry on that daily morning Lecture at the Abby-Church;His great pains insomuch that it seems almost a Mi∣racle, that so weak a body as his should possibly be able to do so much as constantly he performed, continuing oft-times to speak in publique for the space of six or eight hours on a Sabbath day, beside much time spent in more private exercises of Prayer, Repetitions, &c. in the Family; yet when his Friends have perswaded him to favour himself, judging so much pains to be more then his body could endure; his answer hath been, that his strength would spend of it self, though he did nothing; and it could not be better spent then in Gods service. Yea so far was he from favouring himself in this kind, that it was a rule with him which he constantly observed, never to favour him∣self by declining any ministerial exercise which he was requested to
perform, whether in publique or private, if he were possibly able to per∣form it. Neither did he here neglect, what had been his constant practice elsewhere, to afford private assistance to those of his flock and o∣thers, as he had opportunity. But what time he could gain from the more publique affairs of the Assembly, he spent for the most part in such duties, not willing to lose an hour which could be imployed in doing good. And to this end, beside that free accesse that persons of all ranks might have unto him, as they had occasion, he spent much time in visiting them at their own Families,A faithfull Pastor. to communicate some spiri∣tual good to them, as Directions, Consolations, and Encouragements in the waies of Godlinesse, which made his company both very profi∣table and much desired. Hereby, besides others, very many conside∣rable Families of the Nobility and Gentry, (whose practice common∣ly hath a great influence on others) were much quickned and encoura∣ged in the visible practice of Godlinesse, and the power of Religion, which thereby was much improved; And very many of them are ready upon all occasions, to professe that it was their great happinesse to be acquainted with him, and bewail the want of it as a great losse. And he was hereunto the more fitted,His amiable and affable disposition. for that he was naturally of a loving and friendly disposition, of a courteous and affable carriage, even towards inferiours, and those of mean rank, especially if he discovered in them signes of grace, which he did honour and encourage wherever he met with it. Hereby he gained much love and and affection from those with whom he had to do, by reason whereof his counsel and advice became so much the more effectual. To which we may adde also his birth and education, and his frequent conversing with persons of quality to whom he was related and allied, by reason whereof he was well qualified with such accomplishments as might render his company acceptable, as knowing well how to give due respect to all, according as their places and conditions did require, and yet to pre∣serve the honour and reverence of his Ministerial authority, which by the gravity, sobriety, and holinesse of his conversation was much se∣cured. In that great Ordinance of the Lords Supper,His care about the Lords Supper. which in these broken and distracted times hath been in many places wholly laid aside, and in many more too much neglected; he took much care and pains how to manage that great businesse, so as might be neither displeasing to God, o justly offensive to good men. The difficulty herein hath been, not concerning the manner of ad∣ministration, which hath afforded lesse matter of contest, but concern∣ing the persons that might be judged fit to be admitted thereunto; which to many men hath been attended with so much perplexity, that they have apprehended a necessity of a totall intermission, and al∣most an impossibility of administring it in any tolerable manner; while on the one hand they durst not promiscuously admit all, (by reason of
the great ignorance of many, and the prophanenesse or loosenesse of others;) and yet on the other hand saw not how they might be able, (for want of authority) to debar any: waiting still for the setling of a Government in the Church, whereby this great difficulty might in some measure be removed: Till at length, through the long intermis∣sion of this Ordinance, those that are prophane and carnal begin to slight and scorn it, and those of better principles do too much abate in their affections to it. And that remedy, which though late, began at length to be applyed, in beginning to establish the Presbyterian Government, hath been yet so much defective in want of power, and so much exposed to scorn and reproach, which men of prophane or turbulent spirits cast upon it, either from principles of prophanenesse, or of seperation, or from some other bitter root which renders men unwilling to have their lusts, errours, unlawfull liberties, or licentious courses in any kind what∣soever to be checked or contradicted; that the matter is now almost grown desperate, unlesse God will be pleased in special favour, to afford some unexpected remedy. Herein this holy man did manifest a great measure of singular Pru∣dence and Piety, wisely avoiding both rocks; Neither totally omit∣ting the Celebration of the Sacrament, nor yet promiscuously admit∣ting all unto it, but those only of whose sufficient knowledge he was assured, and whose lives, so far as he could discern, were unblamable and free from scandal. And this he did, not only of late years, but even formerly, from his first undertaking a Pastoral charge; at what time it may well be supposed, to have been a thing both of greater difficulty and danger, then of late years, to keep off unworthy receivers from prophane∣ing that holy Ordinance. In order hereunto, his first work was to abate, as much as might be, the number of ignorant people, by perswading them to be willing to receive instruction, which with much care and diligence he was ready to afford unto them, in such waies as is before expressed: Which though a difficult work, was yet carried on with so great successe, through Gods blessing on his endeavours, that in his Parish of Ashwel, where was no small number of people, he had in a short time brought them to so great a measure of knowledge, that there was either none or very few, either old or young, who were not able to give a good account of the princi∣ples of Religion. When he had once prevailed with them to be so far sensible of their own ignorance, as to be willing and desirous to learn, it wa then no hard matter to perswade such of their own accord to forbear a while, till they had attained so much knowledge as that they might come with comfort; which would be so much the sooner, accor∣ding as they were more diligent in labouring to attain know∣ledge. When they had attained a competent measure of knowledge, if their lives were answerable, and not obnoxious to just exception; or at least, they willing to redresse what was amisse, and ready to
follow such good advice and directions, as were given them for the ordering their conversations aright towards God and man; there was then no reason why they should be longer debarred, but ra∣ther such good beginnings cherished and encouraged, yet with cau∣tions frequently inculcated to beware of hypocrisie and formality, and not to rest in these beginnings, but to presse forward to per∣fection. But in case they did either obstinately refuse Instruction, or not∣withstanding their knowledge, were scandalous and incorrigible, or such as in point of conversation he could not judge fit to be admitted to that Ordinance: Then probably they would either be found such as were obnoxious to such scandals as might endanger a more publique prosecution, and so curst not be refractory; or else by the conviction of their own consciences, when the danger of unworthy receiving should be laid open to them; or by friendly perswasions from him∣self or others: or by the reverence and awe of his holy and grave car∣riage, and ministerial authority, backed with the concurrence of others amongst them, eminent for worth and Piety; or for fear of being shamed in case they should be openly reproved or refused in the face of the Congregation, or upon some other the like consideration, would be perswaded to forbear in case he judged them as yet unfit to be admitted to that Ordinance. So that scarce any whom he judged utterly unfit, have ever peremptorily pressed upon him to partake of it. And by these means, even in times of greatest danger, was he able to avoid the mixture of prophane and unworthy persons at the Lords Table. Hereunto his naturally courteous and affable disposition did much conduce, whereby he could with the more ease, gain accesse, both to the persons and affections of all sorts of people: together with an excellent mixture of meeknesse and courage, which being managed with singular Prudence, and indefatigable industry, enabled him happily to carry on that difficult work, which might otherwise seem almost insu∣perable. And by the same courteous and prudent carriage, he obtained a like interest in the affections of his people both at Dukes-place and Westmin∣ster: Insomuch as those who were fit to be admitted to that Sacra∣ment, were either otherwise sufficiently known to him, by his conver∣sing with them, or else would willingly upon that occasion approve them∣selves to him, both in point of knowledge and conversation; And o∣thers who were unfit, nor cared to attain a fitnesse for it, would rather of their own accord forbear, then venture the hazard of being refused; By means whereof, himself and some hundrds of godly persons who did communicate with him, could with great comfort joyn in that holy Com∣munion and Fellowship. On the 11 of April,He is made Master of Queens Col∣ledge, in the year 1644. he was constituted Master of Queens Colledge in Cambridge by the Earl of Manchester, then employ∣ed by Ordinance of Parliament, for th reforming of that University.
He had a great influence upon the general Reformation of that Uni∣versity, and by his advice and counsell did very much help forward that work, exciting also, and encouraging others therein, notwithstand∣ing the difficulties in the way that were represented as almost invincible▪ and did improve all that interest which he had, both in that Noble and Religious Earl of Manchester, and in the Assembly of Divines (who were to give their approbation to all such as should be put into the pla∣ces of such as were ejected in that University, whether Masters or Fel∣lows,) that all possible care and circumspection might be used, that such only as were both learned and religious, might be commended to, or approved for those places, lest, in stead of those that were cast out, others as bad as they should succeed them, as well in their vices as their places. His Govern∣ment of the Colledge.But more especially in reference to that place, to the Government whereof he was designed (whereof also he had formerly been a Fel∣low) it cannot easily be believed how exceeding circumspect he was, how cautious and wary in the choice of those who (as Fellows) were to joyn with him in the Government, that they might be learned, pious, and unanimous. The happy effect of which care, in so quiet and peaceable establishment of that society, as could not easily be expect∣ed in so troublesome a time, was, to the great astonishment and amaze∣ment of all, even of those that hated them; and hath had a very great influence upon that happy and flourishing condition thereof e∣ver since. What his aime was in that place, did continually ap∣pear by his constant expressions and Prayers, which sounded of no∣thing more then the advancement of Religion and Learning: And he was as true to those expressions in his continued endeavours and actings. His first and main care was, the advancement of Religion and pra∣ctical Piety; knowing that where this took place, a conscionable im∣provement of time, in other things could not well be wanting. This made him extraordinary sollicitous for the constant presence of the whole society at the publique Worship of God; which he did carefully look to, when he was present amongst them, and was usually one of the last things he gave in charge to all the Students,His care to promote Re∣ligion there. when his more publique employments at the Assembly called him away, and whereof he was very inquisitive in his absence. He took care also for the constant in∣struction, not only of the young Scholars, but likewise of all the Col∣ledge-Servants in the principles of Religion. The exercises of Com∣mon-places or Sermons in the Chappel, which had formerly been in use, only in Term-time, he caused to be continued weekly all the year. Besides which, when he was present in the Colledge, he did frequent∣ly himself, either preach or expound Scripture to them. He also took special notice of the several conversations of the particular persons in the Colledge, as well by his own inspection and observation while he was present, as by faithfull informations in his absence; and was frequent in giving them personall counsell and direction in private.
Consonant hereunto was also the care of the particular Fellows, who beside the instruction of their Pupils in Learning, caused them to come to their chambers to Prayers every night, and to repetition of Sermons on the Lords day. By all which the practice of Religion was much pro∣moted. His next care was for the advancement of Learning,His care to ad∣vance learning which he en∣deavoured to promote by his frequent exhortations and encourag∣ing all to diligence in their studies, and conscionable improving their time and opportunities; as also by requiring the constant per∣formance of publique exercises by persons of all ranks; and exciting the Fellows to a diligent inspection, as well joyntly over the Colledge in general, as severally over their own Pupils in particular for the same ends. On the same ground also he took care to have the Colledge-Library furnished with good Authors▪ giving considerable summes of money for that end, and perswading others also to do the like; And some dues payable to the Colledge, which formerly used to be employed in feast∣ing, were by his means converted to a better use, in buying of such Books, which might feed the minds, both of the present society, and those that shall succeed. He bestowed also a considerable part of his profits there,His charity. upon the yearly maintenance of poor Scholars, and at his death he gave a consi∣derable summe of money for the same purpose, to be disposed of by the present Society to such as stood in need. Indeed his resolution was, that so long as he was hindered from resi∣ding constantly amongst them, by reason of his attending on the As∣sembly at Westminster, he would not be a gainer by the place; but what∣soever profits he received more then would defray the charges of jour∣neys and other expences occasioned by it, he would bestow some way or other for the good of the Colledge. In elections to places of preferment in the Colledge, he was ex∣ceedingly carefull that they might be bestowed on those that were most deserving: and to that end, he did,His prudence. with the unanimous consent of the Fellows, make a Decree, that in all future Elections, none should be admitted to a Scholarship or Fellowship in the Colledge, till they did first approve themselves for Learning by a publique triall or examina∣tion, for two or three daies successively in the audience of the whole Colledge, which hath already produced very good effects for the improvement of Learning in that Colledge, and more are like to en∣sue. In case any sollicited him for preferment of their Friends, his constant answer was, that if they were found to deserve it better then others, they should have it; but if otherwise, they must expect to go without it; and his actings were so exactly consonant hereunto; as indeed in all things his resolutions, words and actions were so exactly consonant, and kept so perfect harmony as is seldom seen: whereas in many, their words are more then their intentions, and their actions lesse then their words.
In his converse with the Fellows, it was his great care to preserve unanimity, that as well Elections as all other affairs of the Colledge, should be carried on by a universal consent; so that if in the proposal of any thing, there were any dissent, his usual manner was to defer the de∣termination of it, till every one should see reason sufficient to concur with the rest; and was himself as ready to hearken to any argument pro∣duced, though contrary to his present sense, which he would either fully answer or yield to it: so that scarce any thing was over-ruled meerly by plurality of suffrages, but all with universal consent; and nothing more ordinary, then for all differences to be quite reasoned down. In his absence from them, his mind was still present with them; being more throughly acquainted with all the affairs of the Colledge, and more carefull of them, then most Heads of houses are when they are present. For by reason of that sweet harmony and agreement be∣twixt himself and the Fellows, he had constantly faithfull intelligence of all affairs, and did communicate his counsel and advice therein; ma∣king the good of the Colledge, (as he was wont to call it) his Magna cura, by reason whereof that Colledge hath flourished in a very eminent manner: And I may safely say, without prejudice to any; that scarce any Society in either University, since the late Reformation, both for the general improvement of Religion and Learning, and the unanimous har∣mony amongst themselves, have been comparable hereunto; yea so great was that unanimity and reciprocal affection, between him and the Society, that scarce ever any Head of a Society was taken from them with more general sorrow. Beside what hath been already said, much more might be added, concerning the worth of this eminent Servant of God; much of which hath been already penned by himself in that small Tra∣ctate, Of making Religion ones businesse, together with the Appendix, applied to the calling of a Minister, (which with other small Tracts are printed together with this title, Memorials of Godlinesse and Christi∣anity.) wherein you may read a true Character of his thoughts, as well as his actions, of which I shall only adde this; That his constant pra∣ctice was so exactly consonant to the strict principles,A true Natha∣niel. that are there expressed, as can hardly be believed by those that have not seen it. He was a man indeed of a very publique spirit, and wholly laid him∣self out for God:His zeal. And therefore, though he were ready to deny himself and condescend freely, where his own interest was only concerned; yet was he zealous and tenacious in things that concerned Gods glory, re∣serving his heat to encounter sin. Hence was it, that notwithstanding his natural meeknesse, he acted in the things of God with much courage and resolution; As in those free and resolute expressions of himself (yet with humilty, meeknesse, and sobriety) in preaching at the Cathedral Church at Canterbury, in presence of the Dean and Prebends, wherein he spared not to set be∣fore
them such things as were notoriously amisse, (yet for the most part expressing in Latine what did chiefly concern them, that they might take notice of it, not the people;) which, though it procured him some trouble and opposition, yet he did not for that abate of his courage and resolution. In like manner, when he was to preach at the Bishop of Lincolns Visitation at Hitchin, he went thither with a resolution to speak fully and freely against the corrupt innovations then in practice,His courage and faithful∣nesse. whatever might be the issue; and did accordingly perform it, though he were sensible of the great danger of so doing. The like resolution he manifested in the question about the Sabbath, when opposition was made against the Perpetuity thereof, and the Morality of the fourth Commandement, a matter wherewith his heart was deeply af∣fected, as being an high affront to the Majesty and Authority of God; the thoughts whereof seemed to be continually in his mind, as was evi∣dent by his prayers, discourses, counsels and endeavours; and parti∣cularly by that elaborate discourse, which he, in conjunction with that Judicious, Learned, and Pious Divine Master Daniel Cawdrey, publish∣ed to the world, entituled Vindiciae Sabbathi; (the latter parts whereof were long ago fitted for the Presse,His vindicati∣on of the Sab∣bath. and want but invitations of publish∣ing, which might encourage the Stationer to undertake the charge.) And therefore when reading the Book for Sports on the Lords day, bowing to the Altar, reading the Service-book there, &c. were urged, he was most resolute against them, resolving rather to lose all, and suffer any thing then to comply therein, and with that resolution went to the Arch-bishops visitation at Welling held by Sir John Lambe,A special Pro∣vidence. where yet he found, beyond expectation, rather a connivance at him, then an en∣forcement thereof. And the like he did concerning the Convocation-Oath in the new Book of Canons, in the year 1640. which he vigo∣rously opposed, and took a great deal of pains in evincing the unlawfull∣nesse thereof. It is well known also what freedom and faithfullnesse he hath used in reference to the publique affairs,His faithful∣nesse. as well in his ordinary Sermons at the New Church, the Abby, and Margarets in Westminster, (to which places the greatest number of Parliament men did usually resort,) as in those by special order preached to one or both houses of Parliament, (some of which are to be seen in print) where he spared not to declare fully and plainly what God expected from them, and freely to reprove what was amisse. For (as he was wont to say) he did not in that place preach BEFORE them, (ut coram Judice) but TO them (authoritativè) as by Commission from God, and how much soever they might be su∣periour to him in other regards, yet he was in that place superiour to them, as acting in Gods Name; and therefore would not be afraid to speak whatever was the Will of God that he should tell them, notwith∣standing any displeasure or danger which might by this means befall him for so doing. And upon this consideration, we may look upon it as a wise Pro∣vidence of God, so seasonably to take him away a little before those
great transactions about the change of Government; which were so directly contrary to his deliberate and setled judgment, that he would certainly have thought it his duty to Speak much more then others would endure to Hear. For although his judgment was clear for the lawfull∣nesse of Defensive Arms (which was the Parliaments case, as it was first stated) as doth fully appear in that Treatise, entituled, Scripture and Reason pleaded for Defensive Arms (wherein himself of all others had the greatest hand:His judgment about the King.) yet was as peremptory against Offensive Arms, or attempting the Kings life, whose person he judged sacred and invio∣lable, and hath oft expressed himself to that purpose, that in case this should ever come to be the question (which he hoped he should never see) he thought himself bound in conscience by speaking, preaching, and otherwise, to oppose it to the utmost of his power, whatever danger he might incurre by so doing; which zeal of his, though at that time he were like to have prevailed very little with men otherwise resol∣ved, yet it might have proved an occasion of much hurt to himself, and therefore God in wisdom and mercy thought good to excuse him that piece of service. He was in his conversation a man of much temperance and sobriety; In his diet he abstained from strong drink altogether;His tempe∣rance, and so∣briety. Wine he drank very sparingly, so far forth only as the necessities of nature did require, and did usually content himself to eat but of one dish at a meal, and that none of the daintiest, even when he had more before him. In his apparell he did neither affect to be gay nor costly, but decent, nor to spend time in needlesse curiosity in dressing. As for Recreations, he scarce used any, but in stead thereof refreshed himself with the Christian converse of Friends; accounting time so precious, that he would redeem it not only from sports, but from sleep also so far as the necessities of na∣ture would permit. His liberality and charity.He was neither wastfull nor covetous, but very liberall; doing ma∣ny acts of charity (beside what hath been mentioned before) to such as stood in need; bestowing plenteous relief, according as he was able, both by his own hands and the hands of others, so that those who recei∣ved it knew not oft-times whence it came. And when that eminent work of charity was on foot in Cambridge, while he was Fellow of Queens Colledge, whereby divers young Scholars, who were forced by reason of the wars to fly out of Germany, especially of the Palatinate, were sent for hither and educated partly in the University, and partly under able and godly Divines in the Countrey, whereby they might be fitted to do God and their Countrey service (when God should give them opportunity to return) having here been educated in the knowledge of our language, and the way of practical Preaching, which hath been no where more eminent then in England, (which work succeeded beyond expectation) he was one of the great actors therein, and did contribute liberally thereunto. The like assistance also he afforded to divers Hungarians, Transilvanians and other strangers, who came over into England for the same reason.
The time of his sicknesse was not long;His last sick∣nesse. for having spent much of his natural strength in his constant labours in the service of God, there was the lesse work for sicknesse to do; His deportment therein was holy and heavenly; His humility, faith, patience, and submission to Gods Will, eminently appearing from time to time, and his discourse full of heaven∣ly expressions till the time of his death. Not long before his death, when one had read to him the 38 Chap∣ter of Isaiah, (having then some little hopes of his recovery) and ready to go to prayer, he desired him to stay a while that he might pray first, which he did briefly, (as his weaknesse would permit) but very fully, both for himself, the Kingdom, the Church of God, and all to whom he stood in any relation; The heads whereof were soon after written as near as might be in his own words, so far as the memory of those that were then present could call them to mind.His Prayer before death. First blessing God for his goodnesse the night past. Blessed be God that hath been so good to us this night. Then praying in behalf of himself. Great God, heal the sinfulness of my nature. Pardon all my transgressions. Take from me a heart of unbelief, that I may not depart from thee the living God. Deliver me from tentation. Accept of Jesus Christ for me. Teach me to improve all Providences. To live upon the Promises. Let Christ be my life. O Lord, let me never shrink from thee. For the good of the publique. Lord turn the heart of this Nation, and all our hearts. Turn the heart of the King. Sanctifie the Parliament and make them faithfull. Blesse the Assembly, and make them faithful and upright with thee. Let not the Army do unworthily, but what thou would have them to do. Blesse all the Ministers. For other Nations. Lord do good to Scotland, and the Churches in France. Blesse New-England and forrain plantations. For the places to which he was related. Lord provide a faithfull man for Queens-Colledge. A faithfull man for this place (New-Church in Westminster.) A faithfull Pastor for those in the Countrey. For Friends and those about him. Lord, remember all those that have shewed kindnesse to me, and have taken pains with me, and recompence them. Thou hast promised that he which giveth a Cup of water in the name of a Disciple, and he that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward
Afterwards (having forgotten to crave a blessing upon somewhat given him to take, he prayed, Lord, pardon my neglect and forgetfulnesse of thee; and deliver from tentation, and the evil of tentation. Thou art holy if thou shouldst forsake us; Our Fathers trusted in thee and were deli∣vered. Lord glorifie thy name in my poor spirit, and let none of thy people ever see me shrink from thee for Jesus Christ his sake. Being spoken to, to cast the burden of his sicknesse and pain upon God, he answered, I should do very unworthily, if when I have preach∣ed to others, that they should cast their burdens upon God, I should not do so my self. His death.In these and many other the like Christian expressions, he did mani∣fest the same savour of holinesse even to the time of his death, which had been constantly discovered in the time of his life. He departed this life, Anno Christi 1647. and of his age 46. having served God faith∣fully and painfully in his generation, being a very great Instrument of much good, and an excellent pattern for imitation. His body lieth in∣terred in the New-Church at Westminster, and his memory yet liveth in the minds of those that knew him.
The Life of Gaspar Colinius Great Admirall of France. GAsppar Colinius or Coligni,His Parentage. was descended of a very Ancient and Honourable Family; his Predeces∣sors had Kingly Priviledges in their own Coun∣try; as the Power of Life and Death, of Coin∣ing Money, Imposing Taxes and Tributes, &c. His Father was Gaspar de Colonia or Colinius, who lived under King Francis the first; and had to Wife Ludovica Monmorancy, the Sister of Annas Mon∣morancy, Great Constable of France. When in the year 1522. the Admirall Bonivet had taken Fontaraby in the Confines of Spain, as soon as he was returned into France, the Spaniards came and besieged it with a great Army: The siege lasted twelve moneths, whereby the Inhabitants suffered much extremity by reason of Famine. King Francis hearing of it, commanded this Gaspar to raise an Ar∣my, and relieve Fontaraby, which Army he presently Levied; but in his march he fell sick, and died at Ax, August 4. Anno Christi 1522,His Fathers death. leaving three Sons behind him, Odet, Gaspar and Francis. Ludovica his Widow, was made one of the Ladies of Honour to the Queen of France, and was very carefull of the education of her Sons, and lived a most chaste and vertuous life all the remainder of her daies, dying in Paris, Anno Christi 1547.His Mothers death. Pope Clement the seventh, seeking to increase his Authority in France,Popes Policy. made the elder Brother [Odet] a Cardinall, knowing that by reason of the eminency of his Family, he might be very usefull to him. By which means the Inheritance fell to this our Gaspar, the second Brother,His Birth. who was born Feb. 16. Anno Christi 1517. whose ingenuity and toward∣linesse appearing in his childhood,His education. his Mother was very carefull of his education; and for his Instruction in Learning, she made choice of Ni∣cholas Beraldus to be his Schoolmaster, a man famous in those daies in France. She also provided him Tutors to instruct him in Military Arts; of such as were most skilfull therein. This Gaspar being thus furnished both for Peace and Warre, when he came to the age of twenty four, the Dolphin of France, the Kings eldest Son besieging Baion at that time, Gaspar went to serve under him, and to put in practice what he had before gotten in the Theory: In which Service he shewed much alacrity and courage;His valour. He is wound∣ed. and in advan∣cing near to the enemies Trenches, he was wounded with a Bullet in
his throat. The same year also the King having intelligence that his, and the enemies Army were ready to joyn battell in Insubria, Gaspar obtaining leave, hastened thither, and in that battell gave great proof of his Valour and Prudence; so that shortly after K. Francis dying, and his Son Henry succeeding to the Crown, he advanced him to great honour; and whereas his Uncle Annas Monmorancy was Generall of the Horse,His advance∣ment. he made this Gaspar Colonel of a Regiment of Foot: In which Office he carried himself so well, that in a little space he gat much repute for his Justice, Valour and Prudence, and thereby became very gratefull to the common people: For whereas the Souldiers formerly by their rapines and plunderings used much to oppresse them, this new Colonel kept them in awe by military Discipline,His military discipline. especially he severely punished them for incontinency, swearing and blasphemy; and his Or∣ders were so generally approved of, that shortly after the King put them amongst his Military Laws. The same King also advanced him to greater honour, taking a great liking to him, making him one of his own Horsemen, which vulgarly are called of the Kings Order. And whereas contention arose about that time between the King of France, and King Henry the eighth of England about the Town of Bulloine, which a little before upon condi∣tions of peace had been pawned to the English; the King of France di∣strusting the English,His military service. made this Gaspar Governour of all that Countrey; who presently going into Picardy, whither King Henry of France had sent an Army to besiege Bulloine: He with admirable art and diligence built a Castle near to it, which was such a shelter to the French, and did so hinder the Sallies of the English, that in a short time they were forced to treat about surrendring of the City. For the finishing of which Treaty, the whole businesse was referred by the King of France to our Gaspar, and his Uncle Rupipontius; which being ended, and the Town surrendred,He is made Admirall. Gaspar returned to the King, and was shortly after made the Great Admirall of France, which amongst the French, is counted the greatest honour in the Kingdom, having the command of the Sea, and the Kings Navy. He was also made Governour of Picardy, and of the Isle of France, and Captain of a Troop of men at Arms, and one of the Kings Councel. Anno Christi 1554. Charles the fifth Emperour of Germany, and Queen Mary of England, raised great Armies against the King of France, and to resist such potent Adversaries, none was thought so fit by the suffrage of all,He is made Generall. as our Gaspar; and therefore he was chosen by the King to that place, who presently raising Forces hasted to the Confines of France, towards the Belgick Provinces to secure them a∣gainst the approach of their enemies. At this time France was in great fear, considering the conjunction of such potent adversaries, and the King of France his want both of Money and Arms to resist them, so that many thought that the ruine of France was approaching. Whereupon our Admirall perswaded the King to treat of Peace; which counsell was so gratefull both to the King and his Nobles, that
the charge of it was presently committed to the Admirall,He makes Peace with the Emperour. which with∣in few daies he effected, to the incredible joy and rejoycing of all the Orders of France; and he was looked upon as an Instrument of saving his Countrey, especially considering upon what honest, honourable and profitable conditions he had concluded the Peace. About this time it fell out that the Guises, who were Lorrainers by extraction, and pretended a Title to Sicily and Naples, which they said the King of Spain had injuriously taken from their Ancestors; perswa∣ed King Henry of France, that for divers years they had held cor∣respondency with a great part of the Neapolitane Nobility, so that if the King would but assist them with some competent Forces, they doubted not to make an easie conquest of that Kingdom. By this their counsell they violated the Peace which was made a little before with Spain, and solemnly sworn to on both sides,His distast of perjury. which was a great grief to our Admirall, who sticked not to say that such perjury proved al∣waies, as dishonourable, so fatall to Kingdoms; and that God in all ages had been a severe revenger of it: Yet the King would not heark∣en to him, but commanded him to raise Forces in his Province.The cause of the feud be∣twixt, him and the Guises. This was the first cause of that deadly feud which arose between the Guises and him: There were some other smaller causes which further kindled that fire, which for brevity sake I omit. The Emperour hearing of these preparations in France, thought to be before hand with them, and therefore raises an Army in the Low-Countries to invade France, which the King being informed of, and knowing that the first storm would fall upon Picardy, he present∣ly dispatched away the Admirall for the securing of it, and before he he had marched two daies journey, he was informed by his Scouts that the Spaniards intended to besiege San-Quintan in Picardy: He also re∣ceived Letters from one Captain Brullius, that as soon as the Citizens of San-Quintan heard of the Spaniards intention, they were seized with such a Pannick fear, that many of them left their houses, and fled into the woods with their Wives and Children. Our Admirall hearing these things, dissembled the matter before his Souldiers, as well as he could, and shewing much alacrity, by great journeys hasten∣ed to San-Quintans. Whereupon two of his Captains [Gernacus and Lusarcius] endeavoured by all means to disswade him from it; tel∣ling him that the City was not fortified, neither provided with food and other necessaries to sustain a siege, and that the enemies would beleaguer it before he could furnish it with such things, and therefore they told him that it was better, and more for his honour, to disturbe the enemy in the open fields, then by shutting himself up within the Walls to expose himself to such danger. But he considering of what consequence that place was, and what advantage the getting of it would be to the Spaniards, adhered to his first resolutions; and ha∣ving by the way adjoyned to himself about two hundred and fourty Souldiers, he hastily flies to the City,His courage. and sets all hands on work for the fortifying of it. The Spaniards being informed hereof, presently
begirt the City with a siege,St Quintan besieged. and began to draw their Trenches about it, and possessed themselves of the Suburbs, whereby by rolling Tren∣ches they approached the Wals. This our Admirall taking notice of, Sallied out upon them, and firing the Suburbs, drave the enemies further off; yet when he had throughly viewed the City, and found the weaknesse of it, he began to suspect that he could not long hold out against so potent an adversary.His fidelity to his Countrey. Yet considering that Gods Provi∣dence had cast him upon these straits, he resolved rather valiantly to die, then to give the enemy so great an advantage against France, by surrendring that Town to them.His industry. And therefore he laid out all his care, labour and industry, for the defending of it; and for the greater in∣couragement of the Citizens and Souldiers, he laid his own hands to e∣very work that was to be done. Whilst he was thus busily imployed, a Messenger brought him word that his Brother Andelot was gotten safe into the City with about five hundred Souldiers; the remains of a greater Army which the King had sent under the Constable for the victualling and relieving the City, which Army was encountred by a great party of German Horse and Foot,The French Army routed. who in the incounter had routed the French, slain many, and dispersed the rest; only in the time of the medly Andelot with his five hundred men had slipped into the City. As soon as this defeat of the French was known to the Souldiers and Citizens, they were possessed with so great a fear that the incourage∣ments of the Admirall were little regarded. Hereupon he calls them all together, makes a Speech to them, and shewed them that the safe∣ty of their Countrey should be preserved before their lives; and there∣upon caused them all to take an Oath, that if any one spake about the surrender of the City, he should lose his head for it; himself also took the same Oath. The City bat∣tered.In the mean time the Spaniards being elated with their former vi∣ctory, presse upon the City harder then before; and for twenty daies together continue their battery against the Wals, whereby they beat down a great part of them. The Admirall seeing this, and perceiving that they were approach∣ing to give a generall storm, he encouraged his Souldiers stoutly to make resistance; telling them that if they did but withstand the first stroke, the enemy would not be forward to attempt a second. Where the greatest breach and danger was, there himself stood armed to re∣sist in the very face of danger: Other places he commended to his Brother,St Quintan taken. and his other Captains. But whilest he was valiantly fight∣ing in the breach, word was brought him that the enemy was entred in two other places of the City: Whereupon taking some of his trustiest Friends with him, he ran thitherward to oppose them, but before he came he found that that part of the City was filled with his armed ene∣mies, against whom whilest he opposed himself, he was invironed by his adversaries and taken Prisoner,The Admirall taken. who presently carried him away to Antwerp.
Whilst he was Prisoner there, he fell dangerously sick,His sicknesse a means of health to his soul. and lay fourty daies tormented with a Fever; and as soon as he began to recover, he called for a Bible, by reading whereof he much eased and refreshed his mind and body; and by the diligent study thereof he began to embrace the reformed Religion, and to have a tast of true Piety, and the right manner of calling upon God. Not long after he payed his Ransome, which was fifty thousand Crowns, and so returned home; and being weary of the Factions and Affairs at Court, and seriously thinking of his change of Religi∣on, he gat leave of the King to turn over his Regiment of Foot to his Brother Andelot,He devests himself of his Offices. and his Government of the Isle of France to his Brother-in law, Marshall Monmorancy; and shortly after he sent one of his intimate Friends to the King, humbly to signifie to him that he intended also to lay down his Government of Picardy, and therefore desired him to think of one to succeed him therein: The King answered that he wondred at his resolution, and scarce thought him wise to divest himself so suddainly of so many places of honour and profit: and from that time he began generally to be suspected of his change in Religion,His tempe∣rance. shewing a minde so free from ambition and de∣sire of rule. Monsieur Andelot also discovering his resolution in Religion,Andelot que∣stioned for Religion. the Cardinall of Lorraine (who hated the Family of Coligni with a dead∣ly hatred, as the greatest enemies to the greatnesse of his Family) watched his opportunity, and suggested to the King, that all men took notice, that many great men of France were infected with the poison of Calvinisme, which they scattered amongst the inferiour sort of people, and in particular that Monsieur Andelot had blabbed out ma∣ny things to the dishonour of the solemn sacrifice of the Masse, &c. The King being incensed hereby, commanded the Cardinall of Chat∣tillion his Brother, and Monmorancy his Cosen, to send for Andelot, and to admonish him to answer modestly to the questions which should be proposed to him. When he came before the King, he professed his great good will to∣warde him, and spake many things of his great merits, and then told him that he was sorry to hear that which was reported, viz. that he thought ill of Religion, and therefore he required him to tell him what he thought of the Mass, which the Calvinists spake so much against?His stout Answer. Andelot being a man of great courage, answered confidently according to the truth; which the King being offended at, exhorted him to look to himself, and to prevent the danger before it were too late. Whereunto Andelot with greater courage answered, that he had hitherto shewed himself obedient in all things to his Majesty, whom he had found alwaies bountifull to himself and his Family, but in the cause of Religion, he could neither daub nor dissemble with God; That his Body, Wealth and Dignity were in the Kings power, of which he might dispose as he pleased: but his Soul was subject to God only that gave it; to whom therefore in this cause he must needs be obedient, as to his greater Lord.
At this the King was so inraged, that snatching up a dish, he there∣with hurt his Son the Dolphin, that sat next him; and then he com∣manded one of his privy-chamber to carry Andelot to the City of Meaux,His imprison∣ment. where he remained a Prisoner in the Bishops house, till he was removed to the Castle of Melodune. Not long after King Henry the second dying, his Son Francis suc∣ceeded him, who was married to Mary Queen of Scotland, the Daugh∣ter of the Duke of Guises Sister, by which means the Guises ruled all at Court, and they also boasted often of the Kingdom of England, to which this Mary was Heir apparent, as they said. The cause why he left his Offices.The Admirall knowing their cruel, barbarous and bloody dispositi∣ons, who would never be free from turbulent Counsels, and especially from pesecuting those of the Religion; he was now, without further delay, resolved to lay down his Government of Picardy: and for that end acquainted Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, concerning his in∣tention, wishing him to beg that place of the King, which accordingly he obtained. Our Admirall being thus eased of these publique Burthens, and the troubles of them which withdrew his mind from Religion, he kept at home in his own Castle, and the rather because of his Wife Carola Lavollia,His godly wife encourages him. born of an Illustrious and Ancient Family, which was wonderfully given to the study of Religion, exhorting her Hus∣band also, that casting off the remainders of Idolatry and Superstiti∣on, he should wholly betake himself to the true service of Christ. The Admirall having often heard her presse this upon him, dealt se∣riously with her, telling her, that he never knew any either in France or Germany which embraced in truth this reformed Religion,Persecution attends the Gospel. but that they were overwhelmed with manifold afflictions, under which they almost perished. He told her also, that by the Laws of France, which were confirmed by all the Parliaments, Whosoever made profession of this Religion, was to be burnt alive, and all his estate to be forfeited to the King. Yet, saith he, if you be so prepared with Faith and cou∣rage, that you can be content to undergo the same lott with others, you shall see that I will not be wanting to do my duty. To this she answer∣ed, That the condition of the Church at this day, was no other then what it had been in former ages, even from the beginning, and she per∣swaded her self, that it would be the same to the end of the world. And thus each of them incouraging other,He instructs and reforms the Family. the Admirall began to instruct his Family in the true knowledge and worship of God, and gave them Bi∣bles and other good Books to read for their furthtr edification. With∣all he stoutly forbad them those oaths and blasphemies which were com∣mon in France, especially in the Court. He provided also godly Go∣vernours and Schoolmasters for his Children, so that in a short time there was a wonderfull change in his Family; yea, by his example his two Brethren, Odet the Cardinall, and Andelot, were exceedingly stirred up to the study of Religion. The Admirall from his childhood had been bred in the Court,
which did in those daies exceedingly abound with luxury and other vices, from which he was not altogether free;The power of Religion. but so soon as he im∣braced the true Religion, there was such a strange alteration in his life and deportment, that the powerfull work of Gods Spirit did won∣derfully appear therein. Before he durst come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, he conferred with divers Godly Ministers,His prudent humility. both about Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, for the setling of his judgment in the truth: and once being present in the Town of Vatevill at a private meeting of the godly, where there was a Sermon, and the Sacrament to be administred; after Sermon he requested those that were present that they would not be offended at his weak∣nesse, but that they would pray to the Lord for him, and then reque∣sted the Minister that he would a little more explain himself about the Sacrament, which he willingly did; and having by sundry texts of Scripture shewed that Christ is received only Spiritually and Sacra∣mentally therein, he concluded with that of St. Augustine,How Christ is received in the Sacrament. Manduca∣re cibum qui non perit sed permanent ad vitam, est credere in Christum. Et Quid paras dentem, & ventrem? crede, & manducasti. Item, Nolite parare fauces, sed cor. Christ is to be fed upon not with our mouths, but with our faith, &c. Our Admirall being much satisfied with this discourse,He partakes of the Sacrament to the great joy of the Churches. gave thanks first to God, then to that Minister and Congregation, and shortly after was himself partaker of that holy Sacrament, the same whereof when it was once spread abroad in France, it cannot be believed what joy and consolation it brought to the Churches of Christ; for though till that time the true worshippers of God had many Laws made a∣gainst them by the Kings and Parliaments, though they were daily dragged to prisons, torments and death, so that they were forced to hold all their meetings in secret, yet was true Religion after a wonder∣full manner dispersed through all the Provinces of France,Persecution the bellows of the Gospel. and the Po∣pish party found by experience that the more they sought to suppresse and extinguish the light of Gods Word, and the Professors of it, the more it daily encreased. Not long after fell out the tumult at Amboise, and the conspiracy of the Nobility against the Guises, whose pride and insolency the Princes of France could no longer bear with. Of this number was the Prince of Conde, and the King of Navarre his Brother. Whereupon the Guises procured an Edict from the King,A meeting of the Nobility. whereby a meeting of the Nobility was appointed at Fontainbleau, especially to treat about matters of Religion; and when the day came, which was Aug. 24. 1560. the King requested those that were present to deliver their opi∣nions: Whereupon the Admirall rising out of his seat,His zeal and courage. humbly pre∣sented the King with two Supplications under this title, The humble Supplications of those who in severall parts of your Majesties Kingdom, do truly and purely serve God. These Supplications were delivered to Albespine the Kings Secretary, who publiquely read them. This bold fact of the Admirall was much wondered at, considering the Kings
bitter enmity against that Religion, and the great power of the Guises. The summe of those Petitions was this: The Prote∣stants Petition.They which purely and sincerely serve God, taking this fit opportunity, do humbly beseech your Majesty, that of your clemency you will be pleased to pity a great number of our Subjects, who unto this day are miserably af∣flicted, tormented and wasted for the cause of Religion in all your Provin∣ces: We humbly beg of you that you will not be grieved to take cognisance of our cause, and to appoint that the Scripture may be the judge in these great controversies; whereby it will easily appear how much we do abhor heresie, which hitherto hath been laid to our charge: as also how falsly we have been charged with sedition, when we never used force or arms to defend our selves, but ever thought it our duty in our greatest extremities only to have recourse to your Majesties clemency. Our humble request therefore to your Majesty is, that you would be pleased to restrain our persecutors, by whose means there is no part of your Majesties Kingdom, which in these late years hath not been defiled with the blood of your innocent Subjects. Our case hath been miserable when we have been forced to plead our cause before the Popes Clients and Pensioners, rather then before equall and indifferent Judges. Our humble request therefore is, that you would be pleased favou∣rably to look upon so many Families who have alwaies acknowledged you for our gracious Lord and King; and according to Gods command have honoured and obeyed you, and shall be ready, if occasion be offered, to spend our lives for your dignity and service; and therefore we think it but equal that our lives and welfare should be protected against the rage of our cruel and bloody adversaries. We further pray, that some publique places may be allowed us where our Ministers may Preach the Word of God sincerely, and Administer the Sacraments truly; that our Religion being no longer con∣cealed, we may be freed from those false calumnies which our adversaries have hitherto cast upon us; And we shall ever pray, &c. After these Supplications were read, there were great debates, but little about Religion, great complaints being made of the Kings debts, and consideration had how the same might be discharged. Hereupon our Admirall spake freely and boldly against the Forces raised by the Guises,His boldnesse. under the pretence of a guard for the King, as if he needed such a guard in the heart of his own Kingdom; whereas the Autho∣rity of the Kings name in France is so sacred and powerfull, that there∣by the meanest Constable is able to suppresse any tumult whatsoever. This free speech of his extreamly vexed the Guises, who hated him so much the more for it. A Parliament desired.Some others propounded that there might be a publique Conven∣tion of the States called, as the only means to cure the distempers of France; which though some had laboured to discredit, and so had caused an intermission of it for eighty seven years, yet it had alwaies been exceeding advantagious to the Kingdom, as the Parliaments in England, consisting of three States, had alwaies been there, whereby the English Kings had been enabled to make such powerfull Invasions of France.
Shortly after King Francis the second dying, his younger Brother Charles the ninth succeeded, and thereupon the former request was re∣newed for calling a Convention of all the States. At this time Catherine of Medice was the Queen Mother, a Floren∣tine by birth, to whom the education of the young King, and the care of his person was committed, according to the ancient custom of France; but she was not suffered to have any thing to do with the Government of the Kingdom: and hereupon the Guises, who for a long time had been powerfull at Court, intruded themselves into that Office. And at that time many of the Nobility proceeded cruelly to torment and afflict those of the Religion;The Prote∣stants persecu∣ted. whereupon there was great fear lest some new Commotions should be raised in the Kingdom: But the Queen Mother pretended favour towards them,The Admirals oversight. for which cause our Admirall endea∣voured, and at last effected that she should be joyned in Commission with Anthony King of Navarr, who was made Protector during the Kings Minority. This many wise men disliked and opposed, saying, that in the stories of former times it did appear that the Government was never committed to the Queen Mother, especially if she were a stran∣ger, but it redounded to the great hurt of France, and was the cause of many Civil broils. When the day of the publique Convention of the States came, he which made the Speech in the behalf of the Nobility,A general con∣vention of the States. A petition for the Protestants about the end of his Oration presented the King with a Supplication, that they of the Re∣formed Religion might have publique places allowed them for the exer∣cise of the service of God in. To this one Quintin a Doctor of the Civil Law,The malice of the Clergy. and Professor of Paris, opposed himself, and made a long Oration in the name of the Clergy, which he rather read then pronounced by heart, where∣in he took the boldnesse to affirm, That all they that moved for pub∣lique places for those of the Religion, were guilty of Treason against the King and Kingdom, the authors of sedition, and bringers in of a new Religion, and therefore ought severely to be punished. Of which when the Admirall in the Kings Councel afterwards complain∣ed, Quintin to excuse himself, professed that he had spoken nothing of his own head, but only had pronounced that Oration which was penned and put into his hand by the Clergy, and that he was ready a∣gain in the Convention of States before the King and all the company to avow that in all that he had said, he had no thoughts of hurt to the Admirall. In conclusion there was an Edict sent forth in the Kings Name, commanding and requiring all the Judges and Magistrates through France, to release all those of the Religion that were in prison,The Prote∣stants freed from persecu∣tion. and it was forbidden them upon great penalties hereafter to meddle with, or to trouble any for their Religion sake. As for the businesse of allowing them publique places for worship, that was put off to the next Generall meeting of the States, which was appointed but held not, to be at Pon∣thoise in Piccardy.
January following, there was a meeting of all the Princes and No∣bles of France, appointed to be held at St. Germans, whither also re∣paired the Deputies from all the Parliaments,Churches al∣lowed them. and there it was decreed that Churches should be allowed to the Protestants in the Suburbs be∣longing to each City: Upon the publishing of which Edict, the Peace of the Kingdom seemed to be setled, and in the Suburbs of all the greater Cities, yea of Paris it self, those of the Religion met publiquely, and had Sermons preached without the least disturbance.A massacre by the Duke of Guise. But present∣ly after was news brought that the D. of Guise in Campania had basely murthered about two hundred persons who were met together at Vas∣siac to hear a Sermon, according to the power given them by the Kings Edict, in a barn; and it was conceived that the D. of Guise took this boldnesse, relying upon the friendship of the K. of Navarr, whose weak mind he had bowed and bound to himself by promising him the King∣dom of Sardinia,The King sei∣zed on by the D. of Guise. and other favours; and upon this confidence, adjoyn∣ing his other Brethren to him, with a great Army he went to the Court, and there seized upon King and Queen Mother, who seemed with many tears to bewail the violence profered to to them, and carried them away to Paris. Hereupon the Queen Mother sent divers messengers to the Admirall, and writ with her own hand to the Prince of Conde, requesting them to help her, and to deliver the King out of this captivity: This caused the Prince of Conde with many of the Nobility,Why the Pro∣testants first took arms. upon deliberation, to resolve to raise an Army for the rescue of the King, and to curb the insolency of the Guises, often saying, that he ought not to be deterred with reports, as if he intended to propagate his Religion by arms, or to offer violence to the Person of the young King. For, said he, After such a publique Decree made by the King and all the States in favour of those of the Religion; What had the D. of Guise, who is a Lor∣rainer by extraction, to do in France? Or by what confidence doth he exercise such cruelty against the Kings faithfull Subjects? And there∣fore he saw that there was no way left but to repell force with force; and that he was not the author of the War, but by War defended those that were unjustly oppressed by War. There was also a publique report that the D. of Nemours had endea∣voured by flatteries to perswade the young Prince Henry, the Kings Brother (who was afterwards chosen King of Poland) to go with him out of the bounds of France, which the young youth had decla∣red to his Mother. There was much speech also of the Massacre at Vassiac, and of their leading the King and Queen Mother as their captives to Paris, where they had a powerfull faction. They had al∣so sent to the German Princes, desiring to be admitted into the league of the Protestants. The Cardinall of Lorraine had also sent to Chri∣stopher Duke of Wirtzberge a prudent and valiant Prince, pretending that both he and his Brethren would embrace the Protestant Re∣ligion, and desired to be enrolled in the number of the Protestant Princes.
These things being publiquely divulged, the resolution of the Prince of Conde to take Arms was generally approved of, and in a few daies many Cities sided with and assisted him, as Orleans, Biturg, Roan, Lions, Vienna, Valentia, Mont-alban, &c. And whereas by the com∣mon consent of all the Protestants in France the Prince of Conde was chosen Generall, he prevailed so far with them,Prince of Con∣de made Ge∣nerall. The Admirall made Lieute∣nant Generall. that the managing of the War was conferred upon our Admirall, to whom he also delega∣ted his own power and interest, for the opinion which he had of his excellent justice, gravity and prudence. This being generally taken notice of, the Queen Mother interposeth as a Mediatrix for peace, and sends for the Prince of Conde to come to their tents, intreating him, that for the convenient situation of it, he would deliver up into their hands for a few daies, as the fittest place for the Treaty, the City of Boience, where there is a bridge that passeth over the River Loir, which bridge she affirmed to be the fittest of all other places for the Parlee. The Prince of Conde upon the perswasions of his Brother,P. of Condees facility. the King of Navarr, and of the Queen Mother, and upon their faithfull pro∣mise that the Town should be delivered back to him again, and that his person should be in safety during the Treaty, without taking any further pledges, delivers up Boience to them, only desiring that whilst the Treaty lasted, the Constable, Guise, and Saint Andrew (who were called the Triumvirate for the ruine of France) might be commanded to withdraw from the Camp. When these things were done,The Q Mo∣thers perfidi∣ousnesse. P. of Conde prisoner. The Admirall releases him. the Queen Mother and the Guises put a garrison into the Town of Bogener, fortifie it strongly, and keep the Prince of Conde prisoner. The Admirall being justly incensed by this perfidiousnesse, and re∣solving not to be wanting in his aid to the Prince of Conde, he present∣ly with all his Cavalry sets upon the enemies Camp, which brought such a terrour amongst them, that thereupon the Queen Mother com∣manded the Prince of Conde to be set at liberty. And a few daies after the Admirall assaulted Boience, and at last took the Town, though with some losse of his men. About this very time the Admirals eldest Son, called Gaspar, being a youth of nine years old, but of admirable towardnesse, fell sick,His eldest Son dieth. and died at Orleance, which was an exceeding great grief to his Fa∣ther. In the mean time the Guises perceiving that they were forsaken by the greatest part of France, which now adheared to,The Guises call in forraign help, and assisted Conde, they resolved to call in forraign helps; and thereupon sending much Money into Swisserland and Germany, they hired from the former Foot, and from the latter Horse, to come in to their aid, which the Admirall used often to say, was a plain demonstration of their trea∣cherous and hostile minds against France: and therefore that he might not be wanting to himself and Friends, who had committed so great a trust to him, he resolved to oppose Forraign by Forraign for∣ces:And so do the Protestants. And for this end he sent his Brother Andelot to the Protestant
Princes in Germany, of whose good will to the French Churches he had good assurance, requesting aid from them, who accordingly within three moneths space sent him three thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot into France. Whilst these things were transacting, intelligence was given to the Admirall that some Cannons,The Admirall taketh their ammunition. and a great quantity of Gunpowder was carrying to the Duke of Guise, who now besieged Biturg, guar∣ded with six Troops of Horse and some Foot. Hereupon the Admi∣rall taking some Horse with him, by long journeys hastened to meet the Convoy, and coming up to them, they scarce stood the first shock, but throwing away their Arms fled, and left the Booty to the Admi∣rall, who wanting Horses to draw them away, by over-charging the Guns brake them, and blew up the Gunpowder, and so returned to his Camp. Andelot returning out of Germany, brought with him three thou∣sand Horse and six thousand Foot; so that the Prince of Conde having a good Army of French and Germans, hasted to Paris; which the Guises hearing of, intended to meet him, having gotten a Regiment of Swissers, in whom they put most confidence, and so the two Armies meeting,A Battell. a Battell was fought, but with a doubtfull event: for on the one side the Constable was taken prisoner by one Will. Steward a vali∣ant Scots man; and on the other side the Prince of Conde was taken prisoner,Conde taken prisoner. The Admirals valour. which made many of his Foot to throw away their Arms, and fly: But the Admirall rallying the Horse, and encouraging them to prefer their Religion, Country and honour befor their lives, he vali∣antly charged the Guisians, in which medly he slew Marshall St. An∣drew, a potent man at Court, and Prossaeus Collonel to the Duke of Guise, and divers other Noble men: The fight being ended, the Ad∣mirall carried the Constable to Orleance, where he made his abode for a while: But shortly after came the Duke of Guise to besiege the City, whereupon the Admirall leaving his Brother Andelot for the defence of it, flies into Normandy, and there besieged the Castle of Cadonius, where the Marquesse of Elboeve, one of the D. of Lorrains Brothers was, and within a few daies had it, with all the Arms and Ammunition surrendred to him. About this time there was one John Poltrot, a young man of a No∣ble Family,John Poltrot slew the Duke of Guise. in the Army of the Duke of Guise, who having embra∣ced the Reformed Religion, and served for some moneths under the Prince of Conde, took up privately with himself a resolution to kill the D. of Guise, as a publique enemy to his Countrey, and a cause of all the present calamities: And, said he, If I had been bound to him by any oaths, I must not have been perfidious; but being free, why should I not venture as Scaevola did, for my Countries safety? With this re∣solution he went to the Duke of Guises Camp, and watching his oppor∣tunity, shot him into the shoulder, of which wound he died within a few daies after. A wicked bragThe very same day in the morning the Duke of Guise being ready
to give an assault to Orleance, wrote to the Queen Mother, that within twenty four hours he would send her word of the taking of that City, and that he would make the day very memorable by sparing neither sex nor age; and that after he had kept his Shrovetide there, he would extinguish the memory of the Town, by utter subverting of it. But man knows not his destiny, nor what shall happen to him, for that the same evening he was slain, as you heard before. Presently after which, a Peace was concluded,A peace con∣cluded. and the Edict renu∣ed for the free exercise of the Reformed Religion through all France, as formerly. Not many moneths after,The Admirall accused. the Admirall being sent for to Court by the Queen Mother, the Widow of the Duke of Guise comes in, and falls down at the Kings feet, crying out with many tears for revenge for her Husbands death, charging the Admirall as the contriver and author of it. The Admirall apprehending that this was but the de∣vice of others, which set her on to seek his destruction by fraud,He clears him∣self. which they could not effect by War; before the King and all the Councel he clears himself, shewing that Poltrot had at his death pro∣fessed that he was set on by none but God; neither did he doubt but that he had done God good service in it, and freed his Countrey from a Tyrant that raged and thirsted after Christian blood, and therefore he was not sorry for what he had done, &c. He also desired, that if they questioned the death of the Duke of Guise, he might have leave also to put in a Charge against him, for that he doubted not but that he could easily prove the Duke of Guise, guilty of murthering wickedly the Kings Subjects, and of violating all the sacred Laws and Decrees of the King; of taking up arms of his own head without Authority, and thereby making himself guilty of Treason, and of kindling those flames in France, which had continued about thirteen moneths. Notwithstanding this resolute speech of the Admirall, his enemies ceased not for some years still to call upon the King for justice against him; whereupon the King at last appointed a Convention of all the Peers of the Kingdom, at the City of Molincum,The contro∣versie deter∣mined by the King. whither also he cal∣led his chiefest Senators and Counsellours; commanding the Cardi∣nall of Lorraine, and the Widow of the Duke of Guise, to produce what proofs they could, and the Admirall to defend himself against them. When both parties had pleaded their Cause, the King told them that he had referred the judgment to his Counsellors, and there∣fore asked them if they had any exceptions against any of them: they answered, No. Then he asked them if they would refer the determi∣nation of their Cause to him, and would stand to his judgment: They answered that they would willingly so do. Whereupon Jan. 29. Anno Christ 1566. the King passed this sen∣tence, That having heard both parties,The Admirall cleared. and consulted with his No∣bles and Counsellours, who were all unanimously agreed in the same sentence, he pronounced the Admirall clear and innocent from the
murther of the Duke of Guise, and therefore absolved him from that crime, commanding his Proctor and all others, that they should never dare hereafter accuse him for the same. He commanded also, that neither his present accusers, nor any other of his Subjects, should dare hereafter to make any mention of it. Nor that any of his Judges or Parliaments should ever admit any plea against him for it. He decla∣red also, that seeing both parties had freely referred themselves to him, his will was, that they should live lovingly and peaceably toge∣ther, never contriving any thing against each other; and that if any of them, their Friends, Kindred of Partakers, should violate this Decree, that they should be held contemners of the Kings Majesty, as guilty of Treason, as disturbers of the publique peace; and lastly, that this his definitive sentence should be recorded in all the Parliaments of his Kingdom. Treachery against the Admirall.But to return to something that hapned before this, the Admi∣rall had in his Family one Hambervilleries, born of a Noble house, whom he made use of in his most weighty and honest affairs; and it pleased God that some Letters of his being intercepted, came to the Admirals hands, wherein he wrote to some great Courtiers, that he was ready to obey their commands in giving the Admirall a Soporife∣rous Potion. Our Admirall having read these Letters, called the man to him, commanding him to write some verses in a paper that lay by, which when he had done, comparing both the writings together, he asked him whether he would acknowledge his hand in those Let∣ters; which he looking upon, being stricken with guilt for his wick∣ednesse, he presently fell upon the ground, and begged his Masters pardon. The Admirall told him that he was willing to pardon him, but upon condition that he should presently depart out of his house,He forgives the Traitor. nor should ever come into his sight again. Not long after the aforementioned Edict of Peace was published, the Queen Mother took counsell to go to Baion to meet her Son-in-law the King of Spain,The Q. Mo∣thers mischie∣vous counsels. and to take her Children with her: This afterwards proved the cause of many tragicall events, though for the present things were kept very secret: and first she ordered her journey to Ly∣ons, which hitherto had been in possession of those of the Religi∣on, because of the great number of them there; and as soon as she came thither,Her subtilty. she presently set her Italian Artificers to work, to build a Citadell upon a neighbouring hill, which commanded all the City. A little before this the plague began to be very hot, and now it had seized upon the Court it self,God follows her with the plague. yet could not the Queen Mother be per∣swaded to remove her self and children from the danger, till she had seen the foundations of the Castle laid. At last making Lossius Go∣vernour of that City, a cruel and barbarous man, and and an implacable enemy to those of the Religion, and adjoyning to him some insolent Souldiers that might daily vex the godly inhabitants, she departed. But this is very remarkable, that whithersoever she removed the Court,
in Cities, Towns, Castles, &c. the plague still followed her, so that for three moneths together the King was in continuall danger, and was still forced to remove from place to place by reason of the infection. At last they came to Baion, where the Queen Mother met her Daughter the Q. of Spain, and Embassadors from the King, with whom she com∣municated her counsels. In the mean time the Marshall Monmorancy, whom the King had made Governour of Paris in his absence,The Guises at∣tempts against the Prote∣stants had certain intelligence brought him that the Guises had imployed their Agents to the common people of Paris, to stir them up against those of the Religion in that City; he heard also that the Cardinall of Lorraine intended suddainly to be there with a great number of armed attendants, though the King by several Edicts had commanded that none in their journeys should carry Harquebushes or Pistols about them. Therefore so soon as Monsieur Monmorancy heard that the Cardinall was entred Paris with his followers thus armed, he presently taking his guard went to them, commanding them to deliver up their Arms: This the Cardinall and his Nephew the young Duke of Guise, took as an intollerable affront to them, and were often heard to say, that that fact should cost Mon∣morancy his life. The Cardinall was very potent in this City, and could easily have raised sixty thousand armed men to have slain the Governour;frustrated by the Admirall. whereupon he resolved to call in some of his Friends to his aid, and in the first place he wrote to the Admirall to hasten to him, who accompanied with three hundred Horse, entred Paris, Jan. 22. which did so terrifie the multitude, especially the Priests, Monks and Canons of the great Church, that they began to think of flying thence. The day after Monsieur Monmorancy sent for the Presidents of the Parliament, and the chief Magistrates of the City to come to his house, to whom he complained before the Admirall, of the audaciousnesse and factious counsels of the Cardinall of Lorrain,Lies raised of him. as also of the se∣ditious speeches cast abroad in the City, as if the Admirall, taking ad∣vantage of the Kings absence at so great a distance, consulted about plundering that rich City; and therefore he thought fit to call the Ad∣mirall before them, that so he might clear himself from that aspersion. Then said the Admirall, I have long since found out what my malici∣ous and implacable adversaries have aspersed me withall,His speech to the Parisians. as if I in∣tended to seize upon this City, which is the Bullwark and Eye of France. But such counsels as these are fit for those that claim an inte∣rest (I know not how it comes in) in the succession of the Kingdom, and contend to have certain Dukedomes and Countries restored to them. For my own part, I neither challenge any right to the King∣dom, nor to any part of it, which yet if I should do, I think there hath not been a Noble man in France these five hundred years, which had the like opportunity to disturb the publique Peace as I. Ye remember after the Duke of Guise was slain, that I had the Constable Prisoner in Orleans, and what a great occasion I had thereby of doing greater
things if I would have embraced it: But on the contrary, I was never more earnest with the King and Queen Mother for peace, then at that time when our affairs prospered best. Who can be ignorant how sol∣licitous and importunate I was for peace at that very time when many potent and flourishing Cities had delivered up themselves into my hands? and divers other great Cities, both of Normandy and Brit∣tany, sought my favour and protection? Who knows not that after Peace was concluded, instead of begging Honours and Offices am∣bitiously of the King, which happily I might have obtained, I retired my self to my own house, and there even to this time have lived a quiet and private life? But omitting these things, and speaking to the present occasion; Being sent for by Monmorancy, I am come hither, not to disturb the peace of the City, or to innovate any thing, but ra∣ther to preserve peace against the audaciousnesse of some that would disturb it. It is not unknown unto you how much confidence those of the Religion do put in me. These being stirred up with new rumours, and terrified with the counsels and factions of the Guises, do daily flock to me; bring me intercepted Letters of the meetings of certain Cap∣tains, who command their old Souldiers to be ready in arms, that when they have occasion to use them they may be at hand. What needs more words? Letters are intercepted written into Normandy, the originall whereof is sent to the Queen Mother, and I will shew you a copy of them, wherein amongst others there is this passage: There is no readier means of restoring the Crown of France to those to whom it doth belong of old, then by rooting out the house of Valois, and by massacring all the Hugonots which are the chief upholders of it; for this end their woods are to be sold, that with the price thereof we may arm our selves and get money; and if the Hugonots sue for them, the businesse being once adjudged against them, they will never move for their charges of the suit. Now also what should I speak of the daily plunderings and mur∣thers? It's sufficiently known, that after the peace was published, more then five hundred of those of the Religion were basely murthered in severall places, and yet not one of the murtherers were ever punished by the Magistrates; and they which have complained of these things to the King or Queen Mother, have carried away either only words, or some empty paper or parchment instead of satisfaction. Who knows not that in the City of Turon lately and openly, many of the Religion were cruelly massacred, even under the Ensign, and by the Souldiers of him who was sent thither by the Duke of Monpensier to settle the peace? These things being so, yet I hear that there are ma∣ny of your Priests who are so terrified by my coming hither, that they consult about leaving the City, and yet there is no place in all France, no City, Town or Castle where the Priests live, and attend their services with more freedom and safety, then in my Town of Castelon. The Admirall having ended his speech, the company was dismis∣sed;
and two daies after there came to Monmorancy about thirty Dele∣gates from the Parisian Merchants, and with them the Bishop and di∣vers Priests, to all whom the Admirall spake very Friendly, bidding them be of good cheer, and fear nothing: and within few daies after, going to the Court of Parliament, he made a speech to them,His speech to the Parliament and told them, That nothing was more desirable to him then the Peace and welfare of the City, neither did he come to them with any other mind then to advance it; and therefore he exhorted them that they also would do their endeavours that the Citizens might behave themselves peaceably and quietly: and so shortly after he returned home. At his return he was informed that there was one Maius,New treachery against him. who lived not far from him, a famous thief that was hired by the Duke of Au∣male the Brother of Guise, to lie in wait for him when he should ride forth on hunting, for which end he had given him an hundred pieces of gold, and an excellent Horse: many also complained to the Admi∣rall against him for his thefts and robberies; whereupon having got∣ten sufficient witnesses, he complained of him to the Parliament at Paris, and a few daies after having apprehended him, he caused him to be carried to Paris; but when he came before the Parliament this villain accused the Admirall as if he had dealt with him about killing the Queen Mother, and had promised him a great reward for the same: The Parliament after examination finding this to be but a Calumny, and proving him guilty of many thefts,The Traytor executed. condem∣ned him to be broken upon the wheel, which accordingly was ef∣fected. Shortly after the Prince of Conde had a Sonne born,The young Prince of Con∣de born. to whom the King would be Godfather, but because he could not himself be pre∣sent by reason of his Religion, he substituted the Admirall to supply his room, which businesse was celebrated with very great pomp; for at the Feast a Table was prepared as if it had been for the King him∣self, at which the Admirall sat alone, and was attended like a Viceroy,The Admirall honoured. which every one interpreted as a pledge of the Kings singular love and favour to him. Not many daies after, news was brought that the Duke de Alva had by the command of the King of Spain brought a great Army into the Low-Countries to suppresse and root out the Protestants, and this Army being to passe by the borders of France, the Admirall moved in the Kings Councel that Burgundy might be looked to; and lest any tumults might arise about the difference in Religion, he ad∣vised that a guard might rather be appointed of the Swissers then of the French men; and it was commonly reported that six thousand Swissers should be ready to oppose the Duke de Alva, in case he at∣tempted any thing against Burgundy.New designs against the Protestants. But a few daies after the Prince of Rupisurias Roch-sur-yon., of the royoll blood, wrote to the Admirall to send him some trusty Person to whom he might communicate a secret which would much conduce to his safety: he also being a Friend to the
Prince of Conde, by reason of their propinquity in blood, told him that there was secret counsell taken at Baion, for the utter extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and all the Professors of it, and for that end those six thousand Swissers were hired and brought into France, under pretence of opposing the Duke de Alva: the Admirall also was informed of the same by many Letters and Messengers from severall of his Friends. The Prince of Conde and Ad∣mirall com∣plain to the King.These things coming forth, first the Prince of Conde, and presently after him the Admirall went to the Court, and told the King, the Queen Mother and all the Councel, that they saw no sufficient reason why so many Swissers should be brought into France, except it were to oppresse them, and many other honest Families which embraced the Reformed Religion: But they should find more that had devoted themselves to that Religion then commonly was thought of, an expe∣rience whereof they had in the late Wars. They told them also, that if their adversaries attempted any innovations, they would not be want∣ing to themselves, nor like sheep would suffer their throats to be cut by murtherers. They therefore earnestly intreat and beseech the Kings Majesty, that he would be moved to pity so many honest Fami∣lies, and the afflicted condition of his Countrey, and of the common people who suffer most in such Warres. But they could get nothing at Court but scoffs and scorns,They are an∣swered with scorns. whereby they perceived their lives to be in great danger, which caused them to withdraw, and to consult about the preservation of themselves and the Reformed Churches: and hereunto they were earnestly solicited by many of the Nobility, and by multitudes of honest Citizens, who complained that they could no longer bear the manifold injuries wherewith they were daily oppressed by the Magistrates in every place.The second Civil War. These things being so, the Prince of Conde and the Admirall knowing of how great Authority the Kings Name was through all France, which caused the Guises in the former Warres to get him into their power; communicating their counsels but with a few, they re∣solved to go privately to the Court to see if by any means they could get the King away from the Guises and Queen Mother, that so by re∣moving him from his evil Counsellours, they might the better esta∣blish peace; but being betrayed by one of their Society, this design was wholly frustrated, whereby they were forced openly to prepare for War. The Prince with five hundred Horse went to St. Denis, where some others arriving,Paris blocked up by the Prince. in few daies made up the number of two thousand Horse, and four thousand Shot; and the Prince considering that the Parisians were not accustomed to fast, hoped that if he could take their victuals from them, he should either force them to fight, or draw his enemies to a more assured peace: Whereupon he sent Andelot with five hundred Horse to Poissy and Pontois, to seize upon the passages of the Seine beneath Paris, and other Troops to seize upon such passages as were above the Town. Some others he sent to joyn with the Forces
that were coming out of Guinne, himself and the Admirall with about eight hundred Horse, and a thousand two hundred Harquebushiers, kept St. Denis, to curb Paris on that side. But the Constable, who was the Kings Lieutenant Generall, hearing that the Prince had thus divi∣ded his Forces, issued out of Paris with about a thousand six hundred Foot, and two thousand Lances, and well furnished with Artillery, and having chosen a commodious place for the Battell,A Battell. the next day he gives the Prince Battell, wherein the Constable was wounded, of which he died within a few daies after. In this Battell the Admirall had wonderfull experience of Gods goodnesse in his preservation,The Admirall wonderfully preserved. for riding upon a very fierce and head∣strong Horse, the curb of his Bridle being broken, his Horse ran away with him, and carried him twice through his enemies Army, yet did not the Admirall receive any one wound, though many Pistols were discharged at him; and whenas his Horse had one Bullot shot into him, he suffered himself to be easily reduced into his own Troop. In this Battell many fell on both sides, especially on the Prince of Conde's, yet was the Kings Army routed and driven into Paris,The Royalists routed. where∣upon the Prince and Admirall thought best to retreat into Lorraine to meet those Horse which were sent for their assistance from divers of the Germane Princes: for they again thought fit to oppose Forreigners a∣gainst Forreigners. In their march thitherwards they were eagerly pursued by their ad∣versaries, especially by Henry Duke of Anjou the Kings Brother, af∣terwards King, first of Poland, then of France; who taking all ad∣vantages to presse upon their rear, put them to many inconveni∣encies. When they came into Lorraine and met the Germans,They joyn with the Ger∣mans. who were commanded by D. Cassimire the Son of the Elector Palatine, they met with new troubles, for the Germans began to mutiny for their arrears, and to cry Gelt, gelt, according to their usuall custom; but how to satisfie them, or to raise the least part of that Money, the Prince and Admirall knew not: Yet in this strait our Admirall found out this re∣medy:The Admirals prudence. He advised that a certain Tax should be imposed upon eve∣ry man in their own Army, according to the rank and place which he held, and for example himself disbursed five hundred Crowns; and the Treasurers going through all the Regiments collected the Tribute: Besides whatsoever Monies the Prince, Admirall, Andelot, or others had, was all put into the Treasurers hands, so that in all they collected eighty thousand pounds, which was given to the Lanceknets, by which prudent advice of our Admirall they were extricated out of that great strait. These Forces being thus united, their adversaries hastily retired, and by long journeys returned to Paris, which the D. of Anjou looked upon as a great dishonour to him. But the Prince of Conde's Army being much encouraged hereby,
went presently and besieged Caen.Caen besieged by the Prince. and having battered the Wals, and made a sufficient breach, just as Monsieur Andelot was ready with his Brigade to have given the assault, the Kings Trumpeters came upon the spur and proclaimed that Peace was concluded,Peace conclu∣ded. for the effecting whereof, Commissioners had been sent from both parties a few daies before to Paris, whereupon the siege was raised, and the Prince of Con∣de dismissed his Army. The Admirals Wife dieth.But some daies before this, word was brought to the Admirall that his Wife, who together with her Children in the beginning of the War had betaken themselves to Orleance, was taken with a violent disease; whereupon he presently posted to Orleance, and sending for the best Physicians he could get, he performed the Office of a dear and loving husband to her, yet it pleased God that she died. This was a very great affliction to him, and when many of his Friends came to comfort him, being overwhelmed with sighs and tears, he said, Oh my God, wherein have I sinned and offended thee, that thou correctest me so bitterly, and loadest me with so many calamities! O that I could live more holily, and be more exemplary in my life then I have been! Most holy Father, look upon me with the eyes of tender mercy, and ease me of these pressures. His counsell to his Children.Then being comforted by his Friends, he commanded his Children to be called to him, and told them that by this losse of their dear Mo∣ther, they might see the instability of all earthly comforts, and that there was nothing here below which they could confide in; and that Houses and Castles, though never so strong, were not given them for habitations, but as Inns; and that therefore they ought not to trust in any of these frail and fading things, but only in the mercy, and goodnesse of God, and then they need not doubt but that they should find him alwaies ready at hand for their comfort; and so two daies after, calling Monsieur Grelleus his Sons Tutor, he told him, that he must needs return back to the Camp,His charge to Grelleus. where he knew not what might befall him, and therefore he required him to have a special care of his Sons, and as he had often requested him, to be carefull to bring them up in true Religion and the fear of God, as well as to instruct them in other Arts and Learning. His Wife had been alwaies very studious of the Reformed Religion,His Wives character. of an admirable courage and constancy in bear∣ing the manifold afflictions which befell both her self and Husband; and amongst her other excellent qualities and vertues, she was alwaies very pitifull towards poor people and sick persons, to whom she was very li∣berall in relieving and assisting of them: and whereas many sick and wounded Souldiers were daily sent from the Camp to Orleance, she fre∣quently visited them, so that the Physicians judged her disease to pro∣ceed from the stench of them. Peace being proclaimed (as is before specified) in many places by the Kings Trumpeters,Popish trea∣chery. the Admirall had scarce been three daies at his own house, before Letters and Messengers came to him from ma∣ny of his Friends, signifying, that instead of peace, his enemies made
great preparations for a more dangerous Warre; for they observed that in every place such provision of War was made, that if the Prince of Conde himself, and the other associates did not timely prevent it, they would be circumvented by their cruel enemies before they were a∣ware; and this they gathered from the Garrisons put into Orleance, Altissiodore, Blesa, and other Cities surrendred to them, as also by the Adversaries possessing themselves of all the Bridges and Passes over the Rivers, keeping the Horse together in the heart of France, and continuing two Regiments neer Paris, under a pretence of a guard for the King. Our Admirall finding these things to be true, thought it most for his safety to retire into Tanlian to his Brother Andelot, and from thence he shortly after removed to Nuceria, a strong City under the Prince of Conde's Government, whither formerly upon the like occasion he had carried his Wife and Family. In his passage thither there fell out this memorable accident: Near to the Town of Molinius there is a great Lake in the passage to Altissio∣dore; when our Admirall came near it,A remarkable Providence. there was in his company an old man called Gripperius, that had been a great traveller by sea, and one that loved the Admirall very dearly; this man observing a black cloud coming towards them carried with a violent wind, he called to the Admirall, desiring him to gallop to the next Town so fast as he could, lest he should be oppressed with the violence of the storm ap∣proaching; the Admirall hearkening to his counsell, spurred on his Horse, but before he had passed the narrow passages of the Lake, there suddainly came such a violent tempest, accompanied with a Whirl∣wind, that many Horses and men were quite overthrown, many were wounded with the great hailstones, and almost quite slain: The wind took off the Admirals hat, which afterwards could never be found, and one of his followers lent him his hat: but herein the great mercy of God did appear, that the Admirall scaped unhurt by the hail, only one hailstone hit and hurt him about the ankle; and had this storm taken him and his company a little sooner, whilst they were upon the Lakes bank, in all probability it had made an utter end of them. The tempest being over, our Admirall comforted his attendants, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, he said, O Almighty God,A Prediction. I thank thee, from whom I know this storm proceeds, to warn us of the tempest of danger that is approaching, by which we shall be sorely pressed, but not oppressed. When they were met together at Nuceria,They send to the King. they sent divers Messen∣gers with Letters to the King, signifying that they had daily intelli∣gence of the snares that were laid for their lives, and therefore they beseeched his Majesty to pity his Kingdom wasted already with two Civil Warres; and that he would not ruine his Kingdom, but rather by his clemency and wisdom quench that fire that is kindled by the Guises.
Our Admirall also wrote to Margaret, Daughter of King Francis, and new Dutchesse of Savoy, whom he believed to have great power with the Queen Mother, intreating her to improve all her Authority and interest for the diverting of the storm that was approaching to the ruine of her Native Countrey. But when he perceived that no ar∣guments nor intreaty could prevail for peace, and understood that Tavannius, who was a little after made Marshall of the Kingdom, was secretly drawing his Forces towards Nuceria,The third Ci∣vil War. there to compasse them in, he advised the Prince of Conde that they should presently depart from thence, and make all the hast that possibly they could to Rochel, which by reason of their ancient priviledges, had never hitherto ad∣mitted of any Garrison. By the way they were to passe over the Ri∣ver Liger, and in the train there was the Prince of Conde's Wife, and six little Children, whereof one was but a year old; and two daies after followed the Admirall and Monsieur Andelots Children, whom the Admirall had sent for to come to them:A special pro∣vidence. At which time this strange Providence fell out; When the Prince of Conde thought to transport his company in two or three little Ships privately over the River neer unto Sancerra, it pleased God that a Foard was found, whereby fifty Horsemen that were of the Princes train rode over, and in the mean time the Ladies, Women and Children were ferried over in Boats, and no sooner were they gotten all over, but, though the day was fair, the River suddainly rose so high, that the Inhabitants of Sancerra took notice of the wonderfull Providence of God, praying heartily for the safety and welfare of those little ones who had escaped such a danger. The King hearing of this their going to Rochel, by the advice of his Courtiers, presently commanded all his Horse, especially those that were in the Countries of Xantone and Poicters, to hasten to Rochel. He sent also his Brother Henry the Duke of Anjou, to raise all the Forces he could, and presently to march thitherwards. In the mean time those of the Religion,The Prote∣stants basely murthered. who relying upon the Kings promise and Proclamation of peace, staied in their own Cities, were every where basely murthered. About this time Joane Queen of Navarr, who in the former trou∣bles had kept here own house,The Queen of Navarr assists them. abhorring such abominable treachery and perfidiousnesse after peace so often renewed, getting what Forces she could together, advanced with them to Rochel, carrying with her her Son Henry, who after her death was King of Navarr, and her only Daughter. Niort taken. Engolisme be∣sieged.These things being thus setled, the Admirall drew some great Guns out of Rochel, intending to besiege Niort, and within a few daies had it surrendred to him. Then he led his Forces to Engolisme, which stands upon an high and steep hill, having only one passage to it, and therefore the enemies had a little before strongly fortified it, but the Admirall planting his Ordinance on that side where it was saultable, within a few daies space had it surrendred to him.
Presently after the Van of each Army met at Jasenullius,A Battell. and fought together, the Admirall commanded that of the Protestants: who charged the enemy so gallantly, that they were presently broken,The Royalists beaten. and scattered, flying to Lusinian for safety, leaving all their bag and bag∣gage behind them, so that the booty which the Admirall gat, was esti∣mated to be more worth then fifty thousand Crowns. Two daies after they intercepted Letters from Fizius the Kings Secretary, to the Queen-Mother, much bewailing that losse. Presently after the Admirall going to the Town of Jarnac,A special pro∣vidence. fell into great danger, and without a speciall providence had become a prey to his enemies. For the enemy understanding that he purposed to tran∣sport his Forces over the River in that place by a bridge of boats, they secretly laid an ambush on the other side, and observing the Admirall where he was, they let fly all their Harquebushes at him, and others endeavoured to break the bridge; of the Admirals side there was one Harquibushier that had often shot at the enemies, and at last was by a bullet slain; whereupon twelve more ran to his aid, so that a tumult arising, the Admirall ran with his naked Sword,The Admirals danger. not having time to put on his arms, and endeavoured to cut in sunder the cords wherewith the boats were fastened; all which time the enemies ceased not continually to shoot at him, yet God wonderfully preserved him; and from that time forwards he resolved never to be without a Lifeguard for his as∣sistance in such suddain accidents. Two daies after the enemies having passed over the River Charenton, the Prince of Conde feared lest they would compasse him about, ha∣ving lately joyned to them three thousand German horse, and six thou∣sand Swissers, yet being of a very resolute and couragious mind, he resolved to stop their course, yet withall if possible to avoid a set Bat∣tell. In the mean time word was brought to the Admirall that some of his Forces which were quartered in a neighbour village, were cir∣cumvented by their enemies, and yet valiantly defended themselves; our Admirall hastened therefore upon the spur to their succour with some horse, whom as soon as the enemies espied,His valour. they compassed round about, which being told to the Prince of Conde, being more valiant then advised, he brake into the midst of them, where being oppressed with the multitude, and his horse killed under him, which al∣so fell upon him, he lifting up his beavour, rendred himself to some of the Kings Captains, who gave him their faith for his safety; but pre∣sently after came Montisquius Captain of the Duke of Guise his guard, not without the secret command of his Master (as it was believed) and setting upon Conde behinde his back,Prince of Con∣de basely slain. as he was talking with the Captains, dispatched him with a dagg shot into his neck. He was a Prince inferiour to none that lived in that age for courage and courte∣sie; he was eloquent in speech, liberall, affable to all,His character. and a most excellent Commander in Warre. After his death his body was basely abused, and at last in scorn laid upon a Shee-Asse, and carried to Jarnac.
The Admirall being exceedingly grieved with this great losse, and suspecting the issue, made a retreat, together with his Brother Andelot, into the Town of St. Jan de Angeli; and whereas he might have re∣venged the indignities done to the body of the Prince, by shewing the like to the bodies of many of his great adversaries whom he had slain, yet he would not do it, but afforded them decent buriall, which thing he also did during all the time of the Warres. The Queen of Navarr being at Rochell, and hearing of this great losse, hastened to the Camp, comforted the Captains, and exhorted all the Souldiers not to be disheartned,The Prince of Navarr in his room. nor to forget their former va∣lour, telling them that she had brought her only Son Henry, that was to succeed her in the Kingdom, to be their Generall, professing that she preferred the safety of the Army before the life of her Son. To him was also Henry Prince of Conde, Brother to Lewis that was lately slain, adjoyned in this honour; but the whole care for managing the Warre, by the joynt consent of all the Commanders and Officers was wholly divolved upon the Admirall, none having the like credit or authority amongst those of the Religion as he: For it was well known that besides his singular skill in military affairs, his justice and tempe∣rance, there was none amongst all the Peers of France that had so openly embraced and professed the Religion as he. He was the first that reformed his Family according to the Rule of Gods Word:The Admirals piety. He was the man that presumed to prefer their Petition to King Francis the second, that was nearly allied to the Guises by affinity. He gave the first example to the Nobility of France of Piety, who were grown extream loose by reason of the dissolutenesse of the Court: and after he had once embraced the Reformed Religion, he never gave the least occasion of scandall to the Churches. And whereas many Delegates repaired often to him from the Churches, he alwaies gave them whol∣some and prudent counsell. He first took up arms, not to fight against the King,His Authority to take up Arms. as some misreported, but at the request and Prayers of the Queen Mother: Neither yet did he it, either by his own private coun∣sell, or of the Queen Mother, but by the Authority of the Parliament of Orleance, the King being not yet twelve years old: As also after the Kings Edict for Peace, established and promulgated by the advice and consent of all the States of France, because it was so notoriously vi∣olated by the Guises, to the utter undoing of many honest Families, and almost the ruine of many flourishing Cities, and to the losse of the lives of many famous Captains, to the great prejudice of the whole King∣dom, and to the oppression of many flourishing Churches▪ dispersed almost in every Town of France. By all which that poor King∣dom was laid open to be a prey to any forreign Prince that should in∣vade it. Andelot's death.After these things a grievous affliction befell the Admirall by the death of his Brother Andelot, who in the City of Xantone died of a vi∣olent disease suddainly, not without suspition of poison; and the ra∣ther because it was a usuall saying of Biraguus, shortly after made
Chancellour, That the War was not to be finished with so much hazard by armed men, but rather by Cooks and Kitchin boyes. Upon this occasion the Admirall wrote a Letter to his own and his Brother Andelot's sons, who were with their Tutor at Rochel, for com∣forting of them, the tenour whereof was this: Although I believe that the death of my Brother Andelot is very grievous unto you,The Admirals Letter to his Sons and Ne∣phews. yet I thought fit to admonish you that you have great cause to rejoyce that you had so good a Father and Uncle, of whom I dare affirm that he was truly Religious and eminent for his valour and skill in military affairs, the remembrance of which vertues ought to be dear unto you, that as much as may be, you may be imitators of them; yea I believe I may boldly affirm this of him, that there is none in all France more skilfull in warlike affairs then was he; and I doubt not but even forreign Nations will subscribe to the truth hereof, especially those which have had experience of his vertues; and this credit he got to himself, not by idleness and sluggishness, but by undergoing the greatest labours for his Countries sake. Truly I knew no man that was more devout to Godward, nor more just to men then he. Neither am I ignorant that it were unfit for me thus to boast of him to strangers; but I mention them more freely to you, because I would have you to be imitators of his vertues, for I even propose him for my own imitation; and I pray God from my heart, that when I come to dye, I may with the like piety and assurance resign up my spirit to God, as I saw him to do; And that my grief for him may be the more extenuated, I ear∣nestly desire that I may see his graces and vertues to live in you: Which that it may be so, I exhort you with all your hearts to embrace Piety and true Reli∣gion, and wholly to apply your selves to your Books, that thereby you may (through Gods grace) be led in the way of vertue: and though I willing∣ly allow you to recreate your selves in those hours which your Master allots you, yet I charge you, take heed that in your play you neither speak nor do any thing whereby you may offend God: Be very carefull to reverence your Ma∣ster, and obey him no otherwise then you would obey me, for I am perswaded that he will give you no other counsel then what may be for your honour and profit. In short, see that you love me, or rather that you love your selves, so that I may hear nothing of you but what I may rejoyce in, and as you grow in years and body, so you may grow in Piety and Vertue. The Lord bless you all, and the holy Spirit preserve you for ever. From Xantone, May 18. 1569 Castellonius. The courage and magnanimity of our Admirall did exceedingly ap∣pear in this, for that though he had lost such a Brother as was second to none in piety, justice, vertue, and the glory of his military actions, so that the Admirall called him his right arm, yet he told his Friends often that he wholly relied upon the divine providence, and knew assuredly that the Church of God was not administred by humane counsels,His Faith. nor this Christian Army, led by the providence and valour of its Comman∣ders, but by God: And speaking concerning his Brother to his Friends, he brake out into this expression, O blessed Andelot, who hast finished the course of thy life so holily and happily!
The Germans aid the Prote∣stants.About this time news was brought him that Wolfgang, Duke of Bi∣pont, had brought a strong Army out of Germany into France, for the aid of the Protestants, and that he had already passed the Loir, and had taken Charity, where was a Bridge over that River; and when he understood that they were advanced as farre as Chalons, he intended to joyn his Forces with them, and that very day on which he came to them, D. Wolfgang died of a violent disease; whereupon the German Army unanimously chose Wolradus Count Mansfield, to be their Gene∣rall. This conjunction of theirs exceedingly troubled their adver∣saries, and every one deemed that the Kings Army would not be able to stand before them, but that the Courtiers would hereby be brought to stoop to them. Yea all good Patriots that studied the publique Peace, did abominate the perfidious Authors of these Wars, publique∣ly saying, that God never suffered such perjury to escape long unpu∣nished; and it was verily believed that if the Admirall had led this gallant Army strait to Paris, many great Cities would willingly have yielded and put themselves into the Admirals protection: which opi∣nion was much confirmed hereby, for that the Duke of Anjou pitch∣ing his tents near to them,The Royalists beaten. and adventuring a Battell, he was easily overthrown, most of his foot being either slain or taken, together with their Commander in chief, Strossius, cosen German to the Queen-Mother. The Admirall having so brave an Army, hoping that now at last the Kings heart would be inclined to Peace,The Admirall sends to the King for Peace. he sent an humble sup∣plication to him (the Duke of Anjou not suffering him to send Am∣bassadours) in his own and the Armies name, intreating and beseech∣ing him no longer to harden his heart, but to pity the afflicted condi∣tion of the common people, and also to consider, that if the Warre should be protracted, it would turn to the great prejudice of all the States of France; there being twenty thousand Auxiliary Souldiers of both parts; and that things were brought to this passe, that by these Civil Warres mens minds were so farre from union and love to their Countrey, that every one sought the blood, ruine and destruction each of other. They therefore humbly intreated that he would spare his poor Subjects that had so long groaned under these heavy pressures, and that he would no longer be led away by the Cardinals and Italians, who had too much power over him, and could not have the like fel∣low-feeling of the miseries of France as the French men themselves. They suggested also that this was the fittest time for a Treaty, when both parties were so confident of their own strength; and that the conditions which he and his Army would propose were very easie, viz. That they might enjoy that Peace and Liberty for the exercise of their Religion, which was often confirmed to them by the Decrees of all the States, and by the Kings own Proclamations; That it was extream madnesse in those Italians and strangers, to think that those of the Religion, whereof there were at least two hundred thousand men, could so easily be rooted out, the truth whereof
the experience of the former Warres might easily demonstrate. The Duke of Anjou having received that disgrace which we spake of before, by the advice of his Councel dismissed a great part of his Army, especially of his Horse, for a moneth or two, bidding them go home and refresh their bodies. Things standing thus, the Admirall called a Councel, wherein it was determined, That seeing Rochel and divers other Maritine Cities and places were wholly in the power of the Protestants, That there∣fore they should take care for the fortifying of them, and then should attempt the taking in of the City of Poictiers, which would be as a Bulwark to all that Countrey; but to this there seemed a main impe∣diment, which was the taking in of the Castle of Lusiniac,Lusiniac sur∣rendred. the strong∣est piece in all France: yet after they had besieged it a few daies, it was surrendred to them; and so also was Castelheraut about the same time. Then they proceeded to besiege and batter Poictiers,Poictiers be∣sieged. The Admirals sicknesse. but within a few daies the Admirall, being quite tired with watchings and la∣bours, fell sick of a Flux, which held him so violently for thirty daies together, that he could neither assist them with his Counsels nor pre∣sence; so that by this means the City was relieved with much provision and three hundred fresh Souldiers, which encouraged them to make di∣vers sallies: The King also wrote to them to hold out, promising spee∣dy aid, which animated them valiently to defend themselves. But it was evident that if the Lord had not laid that affliction upon the Admi∣rall, the City had been theirs. About this time there was one of the Admirals Servants called Dominicus Albio, who having been taken prisoner by the Kings party,Treachery a∣gainst the Ad∣mirall. and stayed some moneths with them, returned to his Master, where after a while he was suspected by reason of some words that fell from him, and therefore being strictly examined, he brought forth a box of poyson which one Riverius, a chief man about the Duke of Anjou had given him; together with one of his Secretaries, both of them promising him two thousand Crowns if he would poyson his Master. Upon this his confession he was condemned to death; and though some would have had him tormented,The Traitor executed. yet the Admirall caused him only to be hanged, for the terrour of orhers. The Admiral being not yet fully recovered of his Disease, news was brought him that Castelheraut, being about seven miles off, was besieged by the enemies; whereupon in his Horselitter, he presently advanced thitherward,The Royalists beaten. and having relieved the place with fresh men he easily raised the siege, and drave away his enemies, killed many, especially of the Italians, neither gave he over the pursuit till they had passed the River, which for the depth of it is called Creusa. In the mean time the young Duke of Guise, who was Governour of Poictiers, in the night time removed out of the City with a great company, put∣ting a fresh Garrison into it; and the Duke of Anjou having recruted his Army with many French, Germans and Swissers, came to Chinon; whereas the Admirals Army was tired out with the long siege of
Poictiers, and much wasted with want of provision, and with great tempests; and of those which remained there were very many sick, especially of the Germans; and most of those of Xantone were gone home to refresh themselves. Many also were gone to La Charity, and Sancerre, which were in the Protestants hands: For which causes the Admirall judging it best to protract time, restrained the eager mindes of his Souldiers from fighting; yet both Captains and common Soul∣diers would not be satisfied, threatning to go home and provide for their own safety. They also judged it farre more fit to fight there in their own Countrey, where they might be supplied with necessaries, then in their enemies; especially considering that they had divers strong Towns in Aquitane, the Delphinate and Leige, into which they might retreat, and from whence they might make excursions for the depopulating of their enemies Countries. The Germanes also cried out, that having wanted their pay for divers moneths, it were better for them to fight, then to be so long from their own Countrey and re∣lations.The Admirall forced to fight. Thus it being resolved that they should come to a Battell▪ both Armies advanced to Monconture, striving which should possesse the place; and the Van being led by the Admirall, was suddain∣ly set upon by the enemy; the Admirall seeking for his Armour-bearer could not find him, yet unarmed as he was, he rushed into the midst of his enemies; Count Mansfelt seconded him, so that they forced them to give ground: Hard by there was a rivolet which the enemies contended earnestly to passe over;His policy. whereupon the Admirall taking some Harquebushiers with him, hastened to the Rivers bank to op∣pose them, where he continued all that evening; n the mean time the enemy continually shot at him both with great and small shot,A special pro∣vidence. who if they could have gotten the passage, might have brought great detri∣ment to the Army; for the enemies exceeded the Protestant Army by a third part, besides they were fresh and in good plight, the other were weary and harrassed out; but this holp them only for two daies space, for on the third day six hundred Germans set upon the Admirall, who had only two hundred French horse with him, and in the fight, the Admirall being often shot at,He is wound∣ed. at last received a wound on his face by the right side of his nose, the bullet piercing into his mouth, which wound bled so fast that he could not spit out the blood: his sword also by many blows fell out of his hand, and the buckles of his Breast∣plate were so broken that it hung by very little: but in this extremity by the assistance and faithfull help of one lorinerius a young Norman, whom he had brought up from a Child in his Family,His Army o∣verthrown. he was rescued and conveyed out of the crowd, and his Forces being overthrown, he was by his Friends conveyed to Parthenaeus. Here we might wonder at his constancy and magnanimity: for whereas in this great calamity most men gave way to despondency, he laboured to comfort and con∣firm each of them; he also caused his Secretaries presently to write into all the parts of France to the Protestants that were in arms,His courage. not to be discouraged, or to think that he had received so great a blow
which might not be repaired within a few daies. The very next day he removed to Niort, where, having setled his affairs, he went into Xantone, and there stayed seven daies for the cure of his wound, which could not be perfectly healed in lesse then twen∣ty five daies space. Being thus tosed up and down with various affli∣ctions, word was brought him that the Parliament of Paris,He is con∣demned by the Parliament of Paris. Sept. 13. 1569. had made a Decree wherein they had declared him guilty of treason, and had proposed a reward of fifty thousand Crowns to any one that would bring him alive to the King. At the same time he had intelligence that one Martinengus an Italian, banished his own Countrey for treason, being made by the King Commander of some Troops of horse, had been at Castellion, and surprized his Castle, and plundered it of all his rich Furniture which for divers ages had remain∣ed there,His house plundered. the value whereof was not lesse worth then one hundred thousand Crowns, besides he had so burned the whole Town ad∣joyning to the Castle, that there was scarce any footsteps remaining of it; which sad tidings were so farre from causing any dejectednesse in him, or disfitting him for his employments, that he did not so much as shew the least change in his countenance: And whenas his Friends and kindred flocked to him to comfort him, he told them, That through Gods grace, he had this frame of spirit given him, that for those things which are usually called Goods, he possessed them, and not they him; and that his Fortunes were subjected to him,His contenta∣tion. not he to them. And whereas in those Civil Warres, Princes, Peers, Nobles, Knights, Horsemen and Footmen had large allowances from the King, whereby they maintained themselves, he on the contrary was alwaies carefull to discharge his quarters, both for himself and Family,His justice. whereby he contracted great debts, taking up money upon use to enable him to it; yea he pawned his very Wives Jewels, Bracelets, Rings, and other rich furniture, thereby to furnish himself with money; by which means he did so weaken his estate, that in the end of this third Civil Warre he was forced in a Councel of the Princes, to move for some allowance wherewith to sustain his Family. About this time he wrote another Letter to his Sons, and the Sons of his Brother Andelot, who were still at Rochel, under the same Tutor, the tenour whereof was this: Truly it would be very gratefull unto me if I had opportunity to see you,His Letter to his Sons and Nephews. and to speak face to face: but seeing I am deprived of that happiness, I thought fit by this Epistle to admonish you alwaies to set Piety and the fear of God before your faces, especially at this time, when you find by experi∣ence that there is no trusting to those things which are called Goods. Our hope must be placed elsewhere then in this world, and other things must be sought after then those which we see with our eyes, and handle with our hands: but because to do that is not in our own powers, we must earnestly pray unto God that he would lead us in that way which is most sure and safe; neither yet must you expect that that way will prove pleasant and delicate, and abounding with worldly felicity: For Christ himself who hath gone
before us, and is our Captain and Ensign bearer, must be imitated by us. Men indeed have dispoiled us of those things which are fading and transi∣tory, but if we be willing and carefull to submit to the will of God, we shall be happy, and it shall be well with us at the last; for those men have wronged you, not for any injury you ever did them, but out of a hatred a∣gainst me, which also proceeds from hence, because the Lord is pleased to honour me by being an Instrument of assisting has afflicted Church; and therefore if for this cause we suffer losse and inconveniences, we have no rea∣son to grieve for it, but rather to assure our selves that he will give us such a reward as men shall not be able to take from us. I have many other things to write to you of if I had leasure; but for the present I have enough, if I may admonish and request you for Gods sake, that you go on valiantly in the study of vertue, and that in all your words and actions you shew an abor∣rency of all vices; be obedient to your Master, and your other Governours, that though I seldom see you, yet I may hear that you increase in Piety and good Manners: To conclude, I pray, if it be the will of God, that whatso∣ever further befals us, either in our estates or persons, we may have it san∣ctified to us for our spiritual good; and I heartily pray to God that he will be a refuge and help unto you, and a defence in this your minority; Fare you well. From Xantone, Octob. 16. 1568. Castellonius. The Admirall and all the Commanders of his Army having often consulted about their future proceedings, resolved to strengthen all their garrisons, and so with their light Horse to go into Tholouse, where they of the Religion held Montalban, a place very strong both by Na∣ture and Art, who also had gotten together a good summe of money for paying the German Auxiliaries: besides they hoped by passing over the two Rivers of Garone and Lotters, to joyn to themselves those forces which were under the command of Mongomry, a man of great authority by reason of his skill and experience in military affairs, who also had lately by the assistance of his forces quieted Berne, that belonged to the Prince of Navarr. This journey, by reason of the roughnesse of the way proved very difficult and painfull, especially considering that the enemies had Gar∣risoned all the Cities, and broken down all the Bridges where they were to passe; yet at length with much difficulty they came to Montal∣ban, from whence the Admirall sent to the King and Queen-mother in in his own,They send to the King for Peace. and in the names of all that were with him, humbly intreat∣ing them that they would not suffer so many valiant and gallant men as were in both Armies mutually to shed the blood each of other; but that rather out of their clemency they would put an end to those mischiefs; that the contrary was the counsell of some Cardinals and Bishops that never came into the field to try the miseries of Warre; or else of certain Italians that rejoyced in the ruines of France; and that it was extream madnesse to suppose that two huedred thousand Protestants to whom so many of the Nobility had joyned themselves, could so easily be suppressed and destroyed. Besides also it could not be but in those Warres many Papists must be great sufferers as well as
the Protestants; some in their persons, and others in their estates and Families. That the speeches of the Courtiers were unworthy the Kings Majesty, who used commonly to say, That the King would not spare his Popish Subjects, so he might destroy his adversaries: For it was the voice of a Tyrant, not of a King, to say, Pereant amici,A Tyrannical speech. dum unà in mici intercidant, Let my friends perish whilst mine enemies fall together with them. That the conditions of Peace were easie, viz. That the Decrees made by the States of Orleance, and the Edicts of Paris might be renew∣ed and established, whereby the Protestants were allowed certain places for publique Worship. These Messengers being dispatched away, they presently resolved to passe the River Oaronna, which was between theirs and Mongomries forces, but the passage seemed very difficult by reason of the breadth, depth and swiftnesse of the River; whereupon the Admirall resolved to take in the Town of Marian, which stands upon the Rivers bank, which he also did, and Mongomry coming to the other bank, the Ad∣mirall intended to make a Bridge, which also with admirable art and industry he effected, and so in two daies space passed the German horse over it: but the night after a Ship coming swiftly along the stream, brake down the Bridge, so that they were forced to make a new one of Boats, whereby Mongomries Army came over safe to them; and the German horse also which brought up his rear, and so having stayed there two daies for the refreshing of his men, he led his Army to Tho∣louse, and took in all the neighbouring Towns, either by storm or sur∣render, though he had only two great Guns in his Train, which he brought with him from Montalban. And the Protestant Army was the more incensed against them of Tholouse, because (say they) they have been violent to burn them of our Religion: They beheaded Cap∣tain Rapin who carried them the Edict of Peace from the King; they have also committed many other insolencies which now cry for venge∣ance, and God hath put an opportunity into our hands, which we must not neglect, &c. Having dispatched these things he resolved to march to Vivaret, and to the bank of Rhodanus, and understanding that some were up in Arms for him in the Delphinate, who also had taken some Towns, he sent part of his forces to them, to assist them in taking in some Cities of greater consequence, committing the government of them to Count Lodwick of Nassaw, who arriving in the Delphinate, struck such a terrour into the Inhabitants as caused them to fly into the Cities; but he having no Guns for battery, only wasted the enemies Countrey, and so with honour returned within few daies to the Admirall. Shortly after the Admirall worn out with cares, watchings,The Admirall falls sick. and in∣cessant labours, fell sick; and though he was greatly afflicted with his disease, yet conceiving that it was of great concernment for him to get to the River Liger, he made no stay, but in his Horselitter march∣ed with his Army thitherward; for he was informed that about La Charity and Sancerra, there were about two hundred risen in Arms for
him, whom he thought to be of great concernment to adjoyn to his Army, the rather because Cossaeus Marshall of the Kingdom, after the Battell in Xantone, by the King made Generall of the Army in the room of the Duke of Anjou, as he understood, advanced with his Army that way, and began to approach near him: And whereas there came a Trumpet from him to the Admirall about exchange of Prisoners, the Admirall sent him word by his Trumpet that he should not need to be at so much pains to seek him, for that he himself was hasting towards him, so fast as he could. Ambassadours from the KingWhen he was advanced so far as the Forrest, behold new Ambas∣sadors met him from the King about a Peace; for when the Courtiers heard that the Admirall, whom they thought to be utterly broken by his former overthrow, had in so short a time gotten so gallant an Ar∣my together again, they were extreamly terrified, lest he should march directly towards Paris, and there should plunder and destroy the brave Countrey Houses of the Courtiers, Senators, and rich Ci∣tizens of Paris, the like whereunto they had heard that the Senators and Citizens of Tholouse had already felt. The Admirall by his march (though in his Horselitter) had his disease much increased upon him, and the Physicians gave their judgment, that if he continued still to be pressed with so great cares and multiplicity of businesses, he could not hold out long; where∣upon the Treaty with the Kings Ambassadours brake off for a time: but some Nobles that were aweary of the Warres complained that there was no reason that the Treaty should cease, because the Admi∣rall could not be present at it, affirming, that though he should die, yet there were men enough of honour and interest that could carry on the Treaty, to the establishing of Peace. The Ambassadors tnswered them, We wonder thrt you do not consider of how great authority the Admirall is amongst you,The great e∣steem of the Admirall. who if he should die to day, we would not offer to any of you tomorrow, so much as a cup of cold water. What? do you not yet know that the only name of the Admirall can prevail more for you then a great Army without him? The Treaty goes on.Within a few daies the Admirall being refreshed, and in a good measure recovered, the Treaty began again, and at last it was conclu∣ded, That certain Commissioners should go along with the Kings Am∣bassadours, to signifie to his Majesty in the name of them all, That they of the Religion desired nothing more then Peace, neither was any thing more grievous to them then Warre; yet was there none of them but would undergo greater miseries, yea and death it self, rather then to deny the truth which they had embraced: That if the King pleased to grant them Peace and the exercise of their Religion upon the former conditions, and to put some cautionary Towns into their power for their security, they would willingly, and for ever lay down their Arms. These Messengers being dispatched, the Admirall advanced for∣ward, and in his way took in the Town of Reneducium, to which some
of the Vantcurriers of Cossaeus were come, and from that day forwards there was no day passed without some skirmishes between the two Ar∣mies; and one day the minds of the Souldiers on both parts were so far inflamed that it had near come to a generall Battell, there being on∣ly a little Brook between the two Armies, Monsieur Mongomry having already broken the first Battell of the adversaries, wherein were Vale∣tius and Vasco, men of great authority amongst the Royalists. But presently came new Messengers from the King desiring a cessation from arms till the Treaty was finished;Peace con∣cluded. and after great debate an Edict was sent from the King, by which certain places were allotted to the Prote∣stants for the exercise of their Religion in, for the performance where∣of they had for two years four cautionary Towns put into their hands, viz. Rochel, Montalban, Cognac, and Charity: and the Kings Proclama∣tions hereof were sent all over the Kingdom; and so an en end was put to the third Civil Warres. The Admirall bringing the German Forces to the borders of their Countrey, dismissed them courteously, and so taking the two young Princes of Navarr and Conde, he went with them to Rochel, where the Queen of Navarr was, purposing to stay there till the Peace was fully setled in every place: and after a few Moneths, trusting to the Kings promises, and to the oaths of the Kings Brethren, and Parlia∣ments, having been tired out with so many and great labours, he be∣took himself to rest; and at the intreaties and perswasions of his Friends, inclined to dispose of himself again in Marriage, the rather because he was earnestly solicited thereto by the kindred of Jacoba Monbella, the widow of the L. Anthony Monbell, who was Daughter of Count Intermontanus, of whose modesty, piety, and wholly life he had heard much formerly.The Admirals second marri∣age. He marries his Daughter to Teligni. She therefore being brought honourably to him to Rochel, he solemnly married her; and not long after he dispo∣sed his own Daughter Ludovica in Marriage to Monsieur Teligni, a young man of great Nobility and vertue. Of all the Nobility of France none seemed more acceptable and dearer to the King then this Teligni, by reason of his admirall ingenuity; and therefore being much about the King, it was he that did afterwards perswade the Ad∣mirall of the great esteem and hearty good will of the King towards him. But God quickly mixed sorrow with the joy of these Marriages,Odet Coligni's death in England. news being brought about that time, of the death of Odet Coligni Car∣dinall of Chattillion, who had been some time in the Court of England, as the Procurator for the cause of the Protestants with Queen Eliza∣beth, who much favoured him for the amplitude of his Family, and the opinion of his vertue and integrity. But the Protestants affairs being composed in France, his Brother Gaspar sent for him: Where∣upon coming to Queen Elizabeth, he obtained leave for his departure; but being taken with a suddain disease, he died Feb. 14. 1571. not without the suspition of poyson, and was buried at Canterbury, being about fifty years old. He was a man of rare courage,His character. candor and faith∣fulnesse,
of a sharp judgment, so that few were to be compared with him in managing great affairs. Guillin his Chamberlain poysoned him with an Apple, at the instigation of the Queen-Mother, as he confessed at the time of his death, when afterwards he was taken as a Spy at Ro∣chel, for which he was hanged. But all this while the Duke of Anjou was a great enemy to the Protestants, and boasted every where of his Victories against them, yet the King did what he could to perswade the Queen of Navarr and the Admirall of his great good will towards them, that they might be induced the more to confide in him.Popish cruel∣ties. Notwithstanding which the Papists in some places made slaughters of the Protestants. As in Orenge, whither all the Inhabitants returned, who had been driven away in the time of the late Warres, the Popish Souldiers made an assault upon them, and slew them without regard of age or sex. Also in Roan, and other places they were slain in great number by the Popish rabble. Whereupon the Queen of Navarr, the Princes and other Protestant Nobles sent to the King to complain of the violation of the Edict, and to require satisfaction for the same. The King entertained them kind∣ly,The Kings dissimulation. protested that these things were done to his great grief, and that he would so punish the Authors of these mischiefs, as should be for the terrour of others. Not long after, viz. Anno Christi 1571. the King wrote very flat∣tering Letters to the Admirall,The Kings dissimulation with the Ad∣mirall. giving him very honourable tearmes, inviting him to his Court at Blesa, intreating him that he would be an instrument of concluding a Marriage between Henry Prince of Na∣varr, and his Sister Margaret, and to prevail the more with him, he sent him word by his Messengers, that no surer way could be found out for establishing the publique Peace of the Kingdom, and for uniting all sorts of persons, then by this Marriage. And the better to delude him, the Guises seemed to be every day lesse welcome to him then other, and Monmorency (the Admirals Si∣sters Son) was used very familiarly by the King, who often protested to him his good will towards the Admirall; communicated to him the counsels of his greatest affairs, for the managing whereof he told him, that he had need of the Admirall for to be his Captain and Mi∣nister. The Queen-Mother also, according to her manner, protested that she liked nothing better then that a certain Peace should be con∣firmed upon equal conditions,Royal dissimu∣lation. the memory of former matters being blotted out. The Admirals entertainment at Court.By these means the Admirall was drawn to the Court, where he was intertained extraordinary lovingly, even beyond expectation; so that when he fell down on his knees to do reverence, the King took him up, calling him his Father, saying often and openly, that a more desired day never shone unto him then that, wherein he saw an end put to the Warre, and a firm Peace setled in the whole Kingdom by his presence; adding, with a smiling countenance, Now we have you with us, you shall never depart from our side hereafter. He was intertained
with the same serenity of countenance by the Queen-Mother, the Duke of Anjou, but especially by the Duke of Alanson, who much favour∣ed him. The King also seconded his words with deeds, causing one hundred thousand Crowns to be paid him out of his Treasury for his private losses in the last Warres; he gave him also the Revenues of the Cardinall his Brother, which were very great, for one year, and also the furniture and houshold stuff of the said Cardinall. A few daies after the Admirals return from the Court, the young Duke of Guise,The malice of the Duke of Guise. by the instigation of the Cardinall of Lorraine his Un∣cle, would have put in a new complaint against the Admirall for the death of his Father; but the King interposing his Authority, drew up a form of agreement, which he made both of them to set their Seals to, and to take their oaths for the keeping of it; notwithstanding which the Duke of Guise shortly after entered Paris, accompanied with many armed men, which the Admirall hearing of, being then at his House at Castellion, he moved the King by his Son-in-law Monsieur Teligni, that he might have leave to keep a small Guard for his own safety: Whereupon the King wrote to him with his own hand, and sent his Letter by Bricmald, a man of great esteem for his vertue; the tenour where of was this: That it was most acceptable to him that the Admirall should be ex∣ceeding cautious and carefull of his own safety,The Kings dissembling Letter. and therefore he gave him power to fortifie his Castle, and to raise as great a Guard as he pleased, desiring him to be confident without doubting of his good will towards him; and that he would be as carefull of his safety, as a Father of his Childes. These Letters with many such like expressions of love being written with the Kings own hand, many read with great delight, and were now throughly perswaded that they ought no longer to doubt of the Kings good will and sincere affections to the Admirall. Hereupon Count Lodwick of Nassaw (whom we mentioned before) thinking this a fit time (and being secretly invited to the Court) mo∣ved the King in the name of his Brother the Prince of Orenge, for as∣sistance; telling him that there were many Cities in the Low Countries, that being oppressed and tired out with the lust, covetousnesse, and cruelty of the Spaniards, would willingly surrender themselves into his hands; And after a few daies spent in debate about this businesse,The King dis∣sembles with C. Lodwick. the King faithfully promised Count Lodwick that very shortly he would send a great Army under the command of the Admirall thither; and it was further agreed upon betwixt them, that if they succeeded in that War, the King of France should have all the Countrey from Ant∣werp to Picardy, and that the Prince of Orenge should have Holland, Ze∣land, and Frisland. About this very time Letters were intercepted and sent to the Ad∣mirall,Intercepted Letters which shewed the dissimulations. written from the Cardinall Peleus to the Cardinall of Lorrain to this purpose: That the King was never better affected then now; and therefore because of his good affections, together with the Queen-Mothers,
and the Duke of Anjou's, he hoped there would be good issue of those affairs which were resolved on in the common Councel: That the King at the Admirals coming to Court, had carried himself more politickly then they could have expected; whereupon the King believed that he had taken away all suspition from the Admirall, and had left him no occasion of doubting of his love and good will towards him, which Lorrain knew to be the basis, by their joynt consent, upon which their future proceedings did depend. That some speech was indeed raised about warring upon the King of Spain, which the King made such use of, that the Admirall thence collected arguments of his greater good will towards him. That they must use such artifices whilst they expected an opportunity to effect what was resolved on. That the King of Spain was throughly acquainted with all these pro∣ceedings, that so he might suspect nothing by reason of those great pre∣parations which were made for Warre, for he was assured that this was done upon good grounds, as subservient to the principal end. That therefore he desired the Cardinall that whatsoever he had heard, or should hear hereafter, yet he should assure himself that the King would never depart from his first purpose, and that whatsoever he did, did but conduce to hasten the end of their Counsels, and that both the King, Queen-Mother, and the Duke of Anjou, were all very solicitous for this thing, and that as soon as ever the businesse should be effected, they would instantly send away Messengers to acquaint Lorraine with it. And as for the businesse of the Prince of Navarrs marriage, they hoped that it would quickly be effected, for this was ro begin all their future designs, &c. The Admirals security.He that sent these Letters to the Admirall, hoped that he would have been warned by them to look to himself and his affairs, but he had such a strong confidence of the Kings love and good will towards him, which also was daily nourished in him by his Son-in-law Teligni, that he which was most provident and sharp-sighted in all others businesses, was fatally blind in this. In the beginning of May 1571. the King desired the Queen of Na∣varr to go to Paris, to provide all things necessary for the marriage, where she arrived the fifteenth day of the same moneth; and the fourth day of June she fell sick of a feavour, whereof she died five daies after, to the extream grief and sorrow of all her Servants and Friends.The Queen of Navarr's death. Two daies before her death, being in perfect memory, she made a most Chri∣stian Testament and last Will, finishing her course with singular piety and joy in God. She was a Princesse of great experience by reason of her manifold adversities,Her character. in all which she shewed an invincible constancy, and he∣roicall greatnesse of courage, most affectionate to her Religion, very carefull of the education of her children, training them up in the fear of God. In her words most grave and full of motherly affections to them. She had a ready and well advised wit, was pitifull and easie to be intreated; constantly maintained that which she judged to be
good, and agreeable to the will and good pleasure of God. She had a great vivacity of spirit, whereby she was able to comprehend all her af∣fairs, and had a lively grace in representing them, either by word or writing. She died June 9. 1572. and of her age 44. It was believed that she was poysoned by the smell of certain per∣fumes; the Doctors and Chyrurgions which opened her, were com∣manded not to open her brain where the mischief lay, and therefore could not determine about the cause of her death. The Admirrll in this time was at his house aa Castallion,The King sends for the Admirall. where he re∣ceived many Letters and Messages from the King to come to him; and because he stirred not, the King sent Cavagnes and Briquemaud to fetch him, that they might come to a conclusion about the Warres in Flan∣ders; and special commandment was given to the Provost of Mer∣chants, and other chief men, that at the Admirals coming to Paris, there should be no affronts done him. About the same time the Admirall had many advertisements from his Friends, both within and without the Realm;His friends ad∣vertisements. that though he could not conceive any sinister opinion of the King, his Mother, or Brother, that yet at least he would consider into what place he was about to thrust himself, amongst so many implacable enemies. But he resting upon the testimony of a good conscience,His security. and the provi∣dence of God, rejected all those counsels, as proceeding from mens covetousnesse, or desire of new troubles, which he abhorred worse then death; and therefore taking a small train with him,He went to Paris. he went to Paris, and was very honourably intertained by the King, Queen-Mother, the Kings Brethren and others, to the great astonishment of the whole City. At the Admirals coming to Paris, amongst other Letters that were brought to him, there was one that gave him these warnings.Warnings to the Admirall. Re∣member the Popish Maxime, confirmed by the Authority of Coun∣cils, That faith is not to be kept with Hereticks, in which number the Protestants are accounted. Remember the implacable spirits of the Papists at this time, irritated by the last Warres. There is no doubt but it is the fixed purpose of the Queen-Mother to destroy the Pro∣testants by any means whatsoever. Consider that she is an Italian, of a most crafty wit, born of the Progeny of Popes, who contrives all extream things against her enemies. Remember in what School the King hath been brought up from his childhood: how he hath been taught to swear and forswear: To pollute himself with whoredomes and adulteries: To compose his countenance: To counterfeit Faith and Religion: How he hath been accustomed to cruelty and blood∣shed: How he hath been taught not to suffer above one Religion in his Kingdom: How it hath been whispered into his ears, That the Pro∣testants seek to dispoil him of his life and Kingdom: That he is not bound to keep Covenants made with armed Subjects: That he is taught the Mysteries of State Policy. Remember that Commodus caused Julianus to be slain, whom he pretended to honour and im∣brace
as a Father. That Antoninus Caracalla, under the pretence of a Muster, caused all the chief youths of the City to be slain. That Lysander under the pretence of friendship commanded the throats of four hundred Milesians to be cut. That lately Atonius Spinola in∣vited all the chief men of Corsica to a Banquet, where they were all slain. That Christian, King of Denmark, used the same art to commit that horrid massacre at Stockholme, &c. That the Kings speech to his Mother at Blois was no secret, when swearing fearfully, he asked her whether he had not carried himself well at the coming of the Queen of Navarr? To whom she answered, That he had begun well, but that would profit little unlesse he went on: But I (quoth he) swear∣ing often, will bring them all into the net. Wherefore if you be wise, haste both out of the Court and City with all speed, as out of a most impure sink. His confident answer.The Admirall having read this Letter, though he were offended, yet lest he should seem to neglect the prayers and warnings of his Friends, he returned this answer; That there was no place left any longer for these suspitions: That he was verily perswaded that so great perfidiousnesse could not enter into the heart of so good a King: That indeed the Duke of Anjou was more estranged from the Prote∣stants; but that hatred would by degrees cease by reverence of the affinity contracted with the King of Navarr: That the King had en∣tred into a league with the Queen of England, and endeavoured to do the same with the Protestant Princes in Germany, which sufficiently shews how he stands affected to the Protestants. Moreover that Faith was given to the Prince of Orenge, and to the E. of Nassaw his Brother to aid them against the Spaniards. That the Kings Ambassadours did daily search into the Counsels of the Duke de Alva, and acquainted the King therewith, as the King daily informed him: That the Navy under Strossius at Broag is rigged for no other end but to disturb the Spansh Fleet, and to assist the Prince of Orenge. That for himself they need not fear, the King having made Friendship betwixt the Guises and him, faith being mutually given that neither should injure other. To conclude, That the King doth all he can to have Peace at home, and Warre abroad; and to translate it into the Low Countries against the Spaniards; wherefore he prayeth his Friends not to trouble his mind any more with suspitions, which is now busied with weightier matters, and to joyn with him in prayer to God, that he would bring those things to a good issue, which are well begun for his glory, and the good both of Church and Kingdom. A little before Count Lodwick with some others had Commissions from the King to surprize some Frontier Town in Flanders.Royal treache∣ry. On the other side the Duke de Alva had intelligence of every step that Count Lodwick took, yet such was his diligence that he surpriz'd Monts in Hen∣ault, wherewith the Duke de Alva was so netled, that he said, The Queen-Mother had sent him the flowers of Florence, but he would for them re∣turn her Spanish thistles; but upon further intelligence he was soon pa∣cified.
Many Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion accompanied the King of Navarr and Prince of Conde to Paris,The Prote∣stants flock to Paris. and the King drew many more of them thither, who otherwise would have kept their houses, under pretence of his Warres in Flanders. Count Lodwick was presently besieged in Monts by de Alva, where∣upon the King gave Commission to Monsieur Jenlis to raise Horse and Foot for his succour:Deep dissimu∣lation. but de Alva being acquainted with all his pro∣ceedings, surprized him, which the King seemed to be much grieved at, and presently wrote to his Ambassadours in the Low Countries to procure the deliverance of the prisoners. He also encouraged the Ad∣mirall to send all the help he could to the Rutters, whom the Prince of Orenge had levied for the relief of his Brother, causing monies to be de∣livered to him for their pay. The Ambassadours of Spain also seemed to be very male-content, be∣cause the King began Warre in Flanders: and the Kings Mother played her part in this Tragedy, pretending that she knew nothing of the Kings proceedings, and now she did know them she would leave the Court. These juglings were carried so handsomly, that the Admirall, Teligni his Son-in-law, and other Lords were confidently perswaded that the King was wholly guided by the Admirals advice. July the last, The Rochelers wrote to the Admirall that the Kings Army approached near them;Rochel block∣ed up. that from Xantone and Gascoine it daily wasted the Countrey about them, using terrible threatnings against their Town, and menacing to plunder it; whereupon they intreated his advice, especially about receiving eight hundred men, which they sought to put as a Garrison into the Town. The Admirall made them an honourable answer, Aug. 7. assuring them of the care he had over them, adding that he found the King so well disposed for Peace, that all men had cause to commend him. Yet the Rochelers neglected not to look to themselves and to fortifie their Town. In other Towns many were the threats of the Papists against the Protestants,The Admirall deluded. which much terrified some: others relied upon the Admirals presence and favour at Court; and to such as suggested doubts to him, he said, that the King had reconciled the differences betwixt the Guises and him, causing both Parties to swear friendship: That the King gave his Sister in marriage, not so much to the King of Navarr as to the whole Church of the Protestants, to joyn with them thereby in an in∣violable union, and therefore he besought all them, that either by writing or words advised him of the hatred of the King, Queen-Mo∣ther, the Duke of Anjou, or the house of Guise, no more to trouble him with those things, but rather to commend all in their daily prayers to God, and to give him thanks who of his infinite mercy had brought things to so good an end. August 17. Henry King of Navarr,The King of Navarr mar∣ried. and the Lady Margaret of France, Sister to the King, in the evening were conducted to the Louure, and the next day were married by the Cardinall of Bourbon in the sight of all the people upon a great Scaffold made before the
gate of the great Church in Paris, which day was passed over in Banquets, Dances and Masks; and that very day the Admirall wrote a Letter to his Wife great with child in this tenour: Most dear and desired Wife, This day was celebrated the Marriage be∣tween the King of Navarr and the Kings Sister,The Admirals Letter to his Wife. and these three or four en∣suing daies will be spent in Feastings, Maskings and Dancings. The King hath promised me, that after a few daies he will set time apart to hear the complaints which are brought from several parts of the Kingdom for violating the Edict of Peace; for the prosecution whereof it's very necessa∣ry that I should improve all my interest with the King: For though I have an earnest desire to see thee, yet it would be grievous to me, and I suppose to thee also, if I should be any waies deficient in a business of so great con∣cernment; neither will my stay here about it be such, but that I hope to come to thee this next week. If I should only respect my own content, it would be much more pleasing to me to be with thee, then to stay any longer at Court, for sundry reasons which I may hereafter impart to thee; but I must have more respect to the publique good, then either to my own pleasure or profit. I have some other things to impart to thee so soon as God shall bring us toge∣ther, which I much long for both day and night. All that I have for the present to write to thee is only thus much; at four a clock this afternoon was celebrated the Masse for the Marriage, during which time the King of Na∣varr walked without the Church with some other Noble-men of our Religi∣on. Some other matters of smaller concernment I shall reserve till we have an opportunity to speak together; in the mean time (most dear and loving Wife) I pray for thee that God will protect and keep thee, Farewell. Pa∣ris, Aug. 18. 1572. Three daies since I was much tormented with the Stone and Cholick, but through Gods mercy they held me not above eight or ten hours, and now by the same mercy I am wholly freed from them. I promise thee that in these great Feasts and Pastimes I will trouble none. Once again Farewell. Thy most loving Husband, Chattillion. The Kings dissimulation.About the same time, their Counsels for the Massacre being not yet ripened, the King with the greatest demonstrations of good will that might be, thus accosts the Admirall, My Father, Remember what you have undertaken to me, that you will be injurious to none of the Guises whilst you are in the Court, they also have interchangeably given their faith, that they will carry themselves honourably and mo∣destly towards you. And truly I put as great trust as may be in your words, but I have not the same confidence in their promises. For be∣sides that I know that the Guises seek occasion of revenge, I know their disposition to be bold and haughty, and with what great favour and affection the people of Paris do follow them; It would be a great grief to me if they who have brought into the City many men of Warre notably furnished with arms, under colour of coming to the mar∣riage solemnity, should go about any thing for your destruction, which would extreamly reflect upon me; and therefore I think it fit,
if you be of the same minde, to bring a Regiment of Praetorian Soul∣diers into the City, under the command of such men (meaning some that were least suspected) who may not only be ready for the publique securiry, but upon all emergencies, if turbulent spirits should attempt any thing against you. This friendly speech so prevailed with the Ad∣mirall that he gave his consent, and so a Regiment was brought in with∣out the suspition of the Protestants, which afterwards helped to cut their throats. Five daies after, as the Admirall came from the Court,The Admirall wounded. where he had been all that morning, accompanied with twelve or fifteen Gen∣tlemen, being on foot about a hundred paces from the Louure, walk∣ing softly, and reading a Petition, just over-against the house of one Villemure a Canon, and Tutor to the young Duke of Guise, one shot with an Harquebush at him through a lattice window, the Gun was laden with three brasse bullets, one whereof brake his forefinger of his right hand, the other two pierced his left arm: He that shot it had a horse ready at the back door, whereon being mounted he escaped through St. Anthonies gate, where finding a Spanish Jennet held ready for him, he posted away to the place appointed for his retreat. The door of the house being burst open, the Harquebush was found with a Lacquey, and another servant who belonged to Challey, Steward of the Kings house, and a great dealer in the Duke of Guises affairs, who also the day before had brought this Harquibushier to that house, de∣siring that he might be well intertained: the Lacquey also was sent that morning by this Harquebushier whose name was Maurevel, to the Duke of Guises Groom of his Stable, requiring that the Horse should be ready that was promised him. The Admirall being brought to his lodging, shewed singular piety and patience; Chyrurgions were sent for, and amongst the rest Am∣brose Pareus, the Kings Chyrurgion, who began first with his finger, which he cut off, but his pincers not being keen,His admirable patience, he opened and pres∣sed them three times before he could cut it off. Then he lanced both those places in his arm which the bullets had pierced; all which the Admirall bore not only with a couragious heart, but with a constant countenance, insomuch as seeing his Friends to weep which held his arm whilst the incisions were made, he said unto them, My Friends, why do you weep?and Christian courage. I judge my self happy that bear these wounds for the cause of my God. And withall looking upon Monsieur Merlin his Minister, he said, These wounds, my Friends, are Gods blessings, the smart indeed of them is troublesome, but I acknowledge the will of my Lord God therein, and I bless his Majesty who hath been pleased thus to honour me, and to lay any pain upon me for his holy name sake; let us beg of him that he will enable me to presevere unto the end. And seeing Monsieur Merlin to weep and lament, he said to him, My Merlin, you should rather comfort me: To whom he answered, Indeed there can be no greater comfort then to think upon the honour which God hath done you, in judging you worthy for his Name and Religions sake to suffer these pains. My
Merlin, answered the Admirall, if God should have dealt with me a¦cording to my deserts, or have used his power over me, he must have de far more severely with me; but blessed be his Name, who hath dealt so mild¦ly and lovingly with me his unworthy Servant. Then said another that stood by, Go on with this your piety, fo God ought to be praised by you who hath left the greatest part sa and untouched, for which cause you have greater reason to admire h mercy in these wounds, then to complain of his justice, especial considering that neither your head nor your mind are wounded. Th said Merlin, You do very well Sir that you turn your thoughts fro these murtherers to God, for truly it was his hand that inflicted thei wounds, neither ought you at all to think upon the blody-minded¦nesse of your adversaries. Truly, said the Admirall, I freely and from my heart forgive both him that shot at me,His charity. and those also that set him on: for I know assuredly that it is not in their power to hurt me, no though they should kill me, for my death is a most certain passage to eternal life. Th same words he shortly after spake to Marshall Danvill when he came to visit him. And whereas Monsieur Merlin told him, that the afflictions and cala∣mities which happen to Gods Children use to quicken the more in Prayer: The Admirall thereupon with an audible voice and fervent soul poured out this Prayer unto God, O Lord God, and my heavenly Father, have mercy upon me for thy tender mercies sake;His Prayer. Remember not against me my former iniquities, neither charge me with the sins of my youth. If thou Lord shouldst strictly mark what is done amiss, or shouldst impute to us our breach of Covenant, what flesh could stand before thee, or endure thine anger? As for me, disclaiming all false gods and worship, I only call upon thee the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and worship thee alone: for Christ his sake, I beseech thee to bestow thy holy Spirit upon me, and give me the grace of patience. I only trust in thy mercies, all my hope and confidence is placed on that alone, whether thou pleasest to inflict pre∣sent death upon me, or to spare my life to do thee further service. Behold Lord, I am prepared to submit to thy will in either, nothing doubting, but if thou pleasest to inflict death upon me, thou wilt presently admit me into thine everlasting Kingdom. But if Lord thou sufferest me to live longer here, grant, O most heavenly Father, that I may spend all the remainder of my daies in advancing thy glory, and in observing and sticking close to thy true Religion. Amen. His Prayer being ended, Monsieur Merlin asked him if he pleased that they also should go to Prayer with him: Yea, said he, with all my heart; and whilst Merlin was praying, the Admirall with his eyes fixed upon heaven joyned with very great devotion. And after Prayer, when Merlin minded him of the examples of the ancient Martyrs, telling him that there was never any man from the beginning of the world, that laid out all his labour and interest for God, and his true Reli∣gion, but that he met with manifold afflictions; the Admirall inter∣rupted him,His comfort. saying, I am refreshed and confirmed with this speech,
and the examples of the holy Fathers and Martyrs do much comfort me, and mitigate my pain. Presently after the two Marshals of the Kingdom, Monsieur de Cosse and Danvill came to visit him, telling him that they were ex∣treamly grieved for his mishap, and that nothing could have happen∣ed more bitter to them; yet withall, say they, we judge it equal and agreeable to your former valour, to recollect and shew your self a man, for your vertue hath given you far more then this ill chance can take from you. Then the Admirall turning to de Cosse, said, Do you not remember, Sir, what I told you of late? Truly so much attends you also. But, said Danvill, My Admirall, I purpose neither to comfort you, nor to exhort you to courage and constancy, for your self is the man from whom such Consolations and Exhortations use to pro∣ceed, only I request you to consider wherein I may be serviceable un∣to you: I wonder from whence this mischief did proceed! Then said the Admirall, Truly I can suspect none but the Duke of Guise, yet dare I not affirm that it was he: However, through Gods mercy,His Faith. I have learned neither to fear mine enemies, nor death it self, which I am sure can do me no hurt, but may forward my eternal peace and happinesse: For I know that my God in whom I have put all my con∣fidence can neither deceive nor lye unto me. Only herein I am sor∣rowfull, for that by this accident I am disabled to shew the King how much I would have done for his service (meaning in the Warre of Flanders:) Would to God I had an opportunity to speak with his Majesty, for I have some things to impart ro him, which much con∣cern his interest, and I believe there is none that dare tell it him but my self. In the mean time the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde complained grievously of this vile and treacherous fact to the King; To whom the King cursing and swearing grievously, called God to witnesse that he would so severely punish this wickednesse towards the Admirall,The Kings prophane dissimulation. that he would leave the example to all future ages to take heed of such villany; and thereupon the Lacquy and Woman that were found in the house, were apprehended and cast into prison. At two a clock in the afternoon, the King hearing of the Admirals desire to speak with him, went to him,The King vi∣sits the Admi∣rall. accompanied with the Queen-Mother, his two Brethren, the Duke of Monpensier, the Cardinall of Bourbon, Marshall Danvill, Tavenes, de Cosse, &c. When the King came first into the Admirals chamber he caused all his servants to go forth, except Monsieur Teligni, his Wife, and Merlin; then going to the beds side, the Admirall said to him, I humbly thank you Sir, that you have been pleased to put your self to so much trouble for my sake. Then did the King with flattering words congratulate his valiant mind, and bid him be of good courage, and hope well of the issue. To whom the Admirall replied; Sir,His speech to the King. There are three things wherewith I was desirous to acquaint
your Majesty; First, To professe my fidelity and observance to your Majesty; and I pray God so to be mercifull unto me, before whose Throne I may be brought shortly to appear by these my wounds, as I was alwaies studious and carefull of your honour and dignity. Nei∣ther yet am I ignorant how often mine adversaries have calumniated me to your Majesty, and accused me for a disturber of the publique Peace; but through Gods mercy, though I should hold my peace, yet my actions will sufficiently clear me from this charge. Indeed this hath been the fountain of all these calamities, because I resisted their fury, and impudency: and because I asserted the authority of your Edicts against their turbulent and violent proceedings; neither could I endure to suffer them so often to violate the faith confirmed by your oathes to your Subjects. God is witnesse of the sincerity of my mind herein, who also fully knows the difference between me and my adversaries, and will righteously judge the same. Furthermore also considering the great Honours and Offices conferred upon me by your Father, and Grandfather, and confirmed by your self; I should be ungratefull and unfaithfull if I should not humbly request your Majesty to provide a remedy against all those maladies and per∣turbations which already disturb the peace of your Kingdom. And now to proceed to the businesse of Flanders, Never any of your Pre∣decessors had the like opportunity of getting Honour as your self. You know that many Cities in the Low Countries desire your favour, and to throw themselves into your protection. This occasion I per∣ceive is in your Court laugh't and scoff't at, and through the default of some few men, the opportunity is like to be overslipt. Those For∣ces which were lately led by Genlisse thitherward, were circumvented, and destroyed by de Alva; you know what a great number of Catho∣licks were in that Army; Of what Religion then I pray you are those who make a jest at the slaughter of so many of their Countrey-men, and of their own Religion? There is scarce any secret word spoken in your Privy-Councell, but presently the Duke de Alva knows of it. I pray you Sir, What good can we expect when those that sit in your Privy-Councell, and should assist your Majesty and your Brethren, do betray your most secret counsels to your publique and professed ene∣mies? I beseech you Sir, that you take care of a businesse of such concernment as this is, yea again and again I intreat it of you. And lastly, I beg with the like earnestnesse, that you will not suffer your Edict of Pacification to be so ordinarily broken: You know how of∣ten you have sworn to keep it: You know that forreign Nations, and all your neighbour Princes have taken notice of it. What an unwor∣thy thing is it Sir, that an Oath so solemnly sworn, should be so much slighted and neglected? Do you think that forreign Princes will hereafter make any account of your Oath? But the other day in Champaigne, as the Nurse carried a child home from Baptism, and from a Sermon which was held in a place allowed by your authority, certain seditious persons lying in wait by the way, basely murthered
the Nurse, Infant, and some other of the company with it. Consider I pray you, how great the wickednesse was, and how Honourable, yea how Glorious it will be to your name not to suffer such cruelty to es∣cape with impunity. Unto this Speech of the Admirall the King returned this answer,The Kings answer. That he had never called his loyalty into question; That he reputed him a good Commonwealths man, and a valiant and excellent Cap∣tain, before whom he preferred no man in his Kingdom. And (said he) if I had had any other opinion of you, I had never done as I have heretofore. About the Flemish businesse he answered never a word. But for the third thing he answered, that he liked nothing better then that his Edicts for Pacification should be holily and invio∣lably observed, for which end he had sent his Deputies into all the Provinces of his Kingdom; for the confirmation whereof he called the Queen-Mother to witnesse, who turning to the Admirall, said, My Admirall, there is nothing more true,Deep dissimu∣lation. Commissaries and Deputies are sent into all parts. Yea forsooth (said the Admirall) of those men who have imposed Fifty thousand Crowns as the price of my Head. Then said the King, My Admirall, there is danger lest your earnest∣nesse may hinder your health, it is better that you take your rest; the harm hath befallen you, but the dishonour reflects upon me; but I swear by Gods death that I will so severely punish this wicked deed, that the memory thereof shall continue to all posterities: The Woman and Lacquy that were found in the house we have committed to safe custody, Whom further do you require to be examined, or whom would you have to exercise judgment? To this the Admirall an∣swered, I leave this businesse to your Wisdom and Fidelity, yet be∣cause you ask my judgment, I humbly desire that Cavanneus and Masparrot may be employed therein, for I think that the author of this deed is not farre off. The King and Queen-Mother coming nearer to the Admirals pillow, spake a while softly, and at last the Queen-Mother said, Although I am but a woman, yet I perceive we must provide be∣times. The King at his departure advised the Admirall to be transported into the Kings Castle, and the Earl Rhetius pressed the same divers times, saying that he feared lest such a commotion should be raised amongst the common people of Paris, as the King with all his autho∣rity should not be able to quell. To this it was answered, That the Physicians and Chyrurgeous would not allow of his removall, lest the stirring of his body should inflame his wounds: That if the King pleased to manifest his love and favour to the Admirall, there was no more fear of the people of Paris, then of a company of women: That the au∣thority of the Kings name was so great in France, especially in Paris, that were the common people never so mad and furious, yet the menti∣on of that alone would easily suppresse them.The Bullet viwed. Then did the King call for the brasen bullet wherewith the Admirall
was wounded, and asked him if he felt not very great pain when his fing∣er and arm were cut? To which receiving an answer, he replied, that there could not be a more constant and valiant man found this day in the world; and so restoring the Bullet, the Queen-Mother looking on it said, I am glad that the Bullet is got out, for I remember that when the Duke of Guise was shot in his Camp, the Physicians often told me, that though it were poysoned, yet there was no danger when the Bullet was out: But, said a by-stander, Madam, we rested not upon that, but we gave the Admirall Physick to prevent the danger if there were any poyson. After the Kings departure came in John Ferrers, Vidam of Chartres, who comforted the Admirall with many words, concluding that the enemies had betraied their great cowardlinesse in that they durst not encounter the Admirall but through a grated window; but that the Admirall was an happy man, who had lengthened out the praise of his vertue to so great an age. Yea, said the Admirall, in this I account my self happy, that the Lord hath been pleased to shew me mercy, for they are truly blessed whose sins are forgiven,Psal. 32.1. and whose transgressions are covered. A Councel held by the Protestants.The King of Navarr, Prince of Conde, and some other Christians of the Protestants being present, they resolved to go down into a lower Chamber, to consult what course to take for their present secu∣rity. At this debate Ferrers was very earnest that they should with all speed depart out of Paris, assuring them that this was but the first act of a more dangerous Tragedy that would suddainly ensue. Others on the contrary argued, That it was enough for the present to require justice of the King, desiring that judgment might be speedily exe∣cuted: In this opinion Teligni stood stiff, affirming that he knew the Kings mind throughly, and that they ought not to suspect his faith and good will. Yet it was alleadged again that many seditious re∣ports were scattered about: That many Papists on the Wedding-day, when the Protestants came out of the Church, that they might not be present at Masse, spake publiquely, That within a few daies they should hear Masse.Presages of the Massacre. Also some of the chief Citizens said, that there should be more blood then wine shed at that Marriage. Also the Pre∣sident of the Senate advised a Noble-man of the Protestants to go into the Countrey with his Family for a few daies. Also John Monluc Bishop of Valentia,Monluc's advice. when he was going Ambassadour into Poland, advised the Earl of Rochfaucand, not to suffer himself to be blinded with the smoak of the Court and its unsuall favours, which are deservedly suspected by wise and wary men; Therefore, said he, be not too secure, cast not your self into dangers, but withdraw your self and other Noble-men betimes out of the Court. But these things could not be heard by reason of Monsieur Teligni's confidence. In the mean time the Woman and Lacquy who were found in the house of Villemur, were examined by the Presidents of the Parliament. The Woman confessed that a few daies before, Villerius Challius, a
retainer to the Guises, brought a Souldier to that house, commending him to her as if he had been the Master of the house, but his name was concealed. The Boy confessed that he had served this man a few daies, who called himself one while Bolland, and another while Bondol, and that he was sent that morning to Challius to intreat him that the Horse might be ready as he had promised. Hereupon Challius was sent for, the more to delude the Protestants. The King also wrote to the Governours of the Provinces,The Kings dissimulation. wherein he detested the wrong done to the Admirall, and required them to do their endeavour that all might understand how greatly it grieved him, and that he would most severely punish it to the terrour of all others. The day after some of the Admirals friends being certified that many things were done tumultuously in the City, and that weapons were brought together in many places; they thought fit that counsell should be taken betimes, for that no good could be expected from those proceedings: Hereupon one was sent to the King to certifie him of the commontion of the people, and of their carrying of Arms, and therefore to request him to charge certain of his guard to stand before the Admirals door for his better security: The King seeming to be moved with this news,Deep dissimu∣lation. began to demand of the Messenger who had told it him? and whether the Admirall knew of it? and withall he sent for the Queen-Mother, who was scarce entred, when the King with a disquiet mind (as he seemed) said, What a mischief? What is the matter? He tels me that the common people are in a tumult, and take Arms. She answered, They are not in any tumult, neither do they take Arms; but you know that early in the morning you com∣manded that all should contain themselves in their own quarters, lest any tumult might arise. That is true, said the King, but I forbad them to take Arms. Then the Messenger again requested that he would send some of his Guard to the Admirals lodging. The Duke of Anjou being by, said, Take Cossen to you with fifty Harquibushiers: The other answered, We desire only six of the Kings Guard, for their Authority will more prevail with the people then many armed men. Yea (quoth the King and the Duke of Anjou) take Cossens to you,An ill omen. for you cannot have a fitter man: which words were pronounced very imperiously. The Messenger knowing Cossen to be a great enemy to the Admirall, yet held his peace; and not far from the Kings Chamber he met with Monsieur Thoree, Brother to Marshall Monmorency, who whispering in his ear, said, No greater enemy could be given us for our Keeper; to whom the other answered, Did you not observe how Imperiously the King decreed it? but pray you remember what I answered to the King when he first commanded it. A few hours after came Cossen with his fifty Harquibushiers to the Admirals house, and chose two shops by, to place his Guard in. A little after Rambulet, the Kings Camp-master followed, who by the
advice of the Duke of Anjou, commanded all the Popish Nobility that lodged in that street to remove their quarters elsewhere, that he might dispose of their lodgings to the friends and familiars of the Admirall; then which no more crafty counsell could be devised for those matters which afterwards fell out.Popish subtilty Towards evening this hapned, which gave to many no small occa∣sion of suspition: A Boy by the command of Teligni brought two hunting poles to the Admirals house; but Cossen put him back, and would not suffer them to be carried in: This being told to the King of Navarr, who was now with the Admirall, he went down, and asked Cossen upon what confidence he did it? Cossen answered, that he had done it at the command of the King; but, said he, since you will have it so, let them be brought in. That day the King sent to all the Admi∣rals familiar friends, admonishing them to go near to the Admirals house, and take up all those quarters. Counsell that the Protestants should leave Paris.But upon the former occurrences another Councel was called un∣der the Admirals lodging, wherein the Vidam of Chartres again urged his former opinion, that the Admirall should presently be carried out of Paris, and that his friends should go along with him: That every hour they observed many things that justly increased their suspition; But most were of the contrary opinion, viz. That they were only to require justice of the King, and to desire that the Guises and their Fa∣ction might be commanded out of the City, as being too powerfull with the people of Paris; and of this opinion was the King of Navarr, the Prince of Conde, and many others; and the rather because Teligni urged that it would be a great injury to the King, if any should call his faith and sincerity into question, and that it would be sufficient if justice were meekly required of him. At this debate there was one Bucavannius a Picard,A Judas. who never spake word; he was a professor in∣deed of the true Religion, but very gracious with the Queen-Mother, and very frequent with her familiars, which probably betraied all to her. About three a clock in the night there fell out another thing which increased the suspition, for one carrying to the Admirals house the Coats of Male of Teligni and Guercius, Cossen turned him back again, which man complaining to Guercius (who was a stout and gallant man) he went to Cossen, and sharply taxed him for it, so that they had well near fallen to blows, but Teligni, who was of a meek and quiet spirit, with gentle words pacified them, himself being so deluded with the fair and flattering words of the King, that he never thought that he spake enough in his commendation. The Massacre projected.In the mean time a Councell was held at Court, where were pre∣sent the King, Queen-Mother, Duke of Anjou, Duke of Nevers, the Bastard of Angolisme, Birage, Tavannius, and Radesianus; and it was concluded, That seeing by the death of one the mischief diffu∣sed amongst so many could not be extinguished, therefore all should be destroyed: And that the wrath which God would not have fulfilled
with the blood of Coligni alone, should be poured out against all the Sectaries; therefore, say they, the bridle is to be let loose to the common people, who are stirred up enough of themselves; and when the businesse is accomplished, reasons will not be wanting whereby the deed may be excused, the blame being laid upon the Guises, who will willingly undergo the same. So they all concluded that all the Protestants were to be destroyed, even every Mothers child of them. Concerning the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde, it was debated, Whether they were to be exempted from the number of the rest: and it was alleadged that the King of Navarr was to be spared, because of his royall Dignity, and his affinity newly contracted; for it would be without all excuse, if so great a Prince, next to the King in blood, conjoyned in fresh affinity, should be slain in the Kings Castle, between the arms, as it were, of the King his Brother-in-law, and his Wives imbraces. Concerning the Prince of Conde the contention was greater; he was much envied for his Fa∣thers sake, yet the dignity of his person, and the authority of the Duke of Nevers, who became surety for him, prevailed that he should be spared. After this the King calling the King of Navarr, told him that by reason of the violence and boldnesse of the Guises,The Kings dissimulation with the King of Navarr. and the common people inclining to them, he would advise him to command those of his houshold whom he knew most faithfull to him, to come to him to the Louure, to be at hand upon all occasions: This the King of Navarr took in very good part, sending for those that were stout of hand to lodge a∣bout him. Now it was observed that armed men rambled up and down in the City every where, and about the Louure also: that the common peo∣ple grumbled and gave forth threatning speeches. The Admirall be∣ing informed of these things, sent one to the King to tell him of it. The King answered, that there was no cause why Coligni should be affraid, for that these things were done by his command to represse the motions of the people, who were stirred up by the Guises, and therefore bad him to rest assured. It was also told Teligni that Porters were seen carrying Arms into the Louure; but he slighted it, saying, that these were unnecessary suspitions, the Arms being carried in for the winning of a Castle in the Louure, that was built for sport. Presently the Duke of Guise, to whom the charge was chiefly committed to see the businesse executed,The Duke of Guise excites to the Massa∣cre. calling together the Captains of the Popish Swissers, and the Tribunes of the French bands, late in the night he discovered to them what the will of the King was, that the hour was come wherein by the Kings commandement punishments should be inflicted on the head, and by consequence upon the whole faction of the Rebels; that the beast was caught and entangled in the net, and therefore they must do their endeavoer that he might not escape: Be not therefore (said he) wanting to so fit an occasion of
carrying home a most glorious triumph over the enemies of the King∣dom; the victory is easie, the spoils will be rich and great, which you may obtain as the rewards of your good service, without shedding your own blood. Then were the Swissers placed about the Louure, unto whom certain bands of French men were added, and charge was given them that they should suffer none of the King of Navarrs, nor of the Prince of Conde's men to come forth. Cossen also was charged with his Harquibushiers to suffer none to come out of the Admirals house. Fatall securityThat evening Guercius with some others, had profered Teligni to keep guard in the Admirals house, suspecting danger; but he told them that there was no need for them so to trouble themselves, and so with gracious words dismissed them; by which means it came to passe that none lodged in the Admirals house but Cornaton, Labonnius, Yolett the Master of his Horse, Merlin his Chaplain, Paraeus the Kings Chy∣rurgeon, and some four or five Servants: Teligni was gone to the next house, where he lay with his Wife. In the Admirals Court were the five Swissers whom the King of Navarr had sent him. Then did the Duke of Guise send for John Caronius lately made Provost of Merchants, whom he commanded to signifie to the Alder∣men, that they should bid those in their severall Wards to appear in Arms at the Town-house about midnight to understand the Kings pleasure: He commanded also Macellus, who was very gracious with the people, to signifie to them that liberty was given them from the King to take arms to destroy Coligni, and all the other Rebels, that therefore they should see diligently that they spared none, nor suffered them any where to be concealed: That order should be taken to do the like in all other Cities of the Kingdom, who would fol∣low the example of Paris: That the sign for the beginning the assualt should be the ringing of the little Bell in the Palace: That the sign whereby they should know one another, should be a white handkerchief about their left arm, or a white crosse in their hats: That therefore they should come armed in good numbers, and with good courages, taking care to have candles lighted in their windows, that no tumult might arise before the sign was given. And thus the Duke of Guise, and the bastard of Engolisme did all they could that things might be effected ac∣cording to the agreement. At midnight the Queen-Mother fearing the Kings wavering, who was somewhat startled at the horridnesse of the fact,The Queen-Mothers mis∣chievous mind reproved him for it, saying, that by his delaies he would overslip so fair an occasion offered by God for the utter vanquishing of his enemies. The King being netled with this which seemed to charge him with cowardlinesse, commanded the matter to be put in execution; which word the Queen-Mother speedily taking hold of, caused the little Bell to be rung in St. Germanes Church about an hour before day,The sign of the Massacre. Aug. 24. being St. Bar∣tholmews day, and on a Sabbath.
Presently the Duke of Guise with Engolisme, and d' Aumal went to the Admirals house, where Cossen watched;The Admirals house assault∣ed. and a noise being raised the Admirall was awakned with it, and heard of a sedition, yet rested secure relying upon the Kings word and favour: But the tumult growing greater, when he perceived a Gun to be discharged in his Court, he then conjectured, though too late, that which was the truth, and so rising out of his bed and putting on his night-gown, he stood and prayed against the wall. Then came a servant to Labonnius, and told him that there was one at the door who by the command of the King desired to be brought to the Admirall; Labonnius therefore taking the keys, ran down and opened the door; then did Cossen catch at him, and stabbed him with his dagger, and so with his Harquebu∣shiers he set upon the rest, killing some and chasing away others: Thus all things were filled with noise, and another door at the stair foot was easily broken open, and one of the five Swissers (sent by the King of Navarr) was slain; yet were the stairs so barricado'd with chests that he could not presently enter. In the mean time Monsieur Merlin went to prayer with the Admirall and the rest; and at the end thereof a servant coming in said to the Admirall, Master, It is God who calleth us to himself, they have broken into the house, neither is there any ability to resist. Then said the Admirall,The Admirals speech. I have prepared my self for death a good while ago; shift you for yourselves if possibly you can, for your endeavour to help me would be in vain: I commend my soul into Gods hand. It was observed that the Admirals countenance was no more troubled then if no danger were at hand. Thuanus relates his words thus; I perceive what is in doing, I was never afraid of death, and I am ready to undergo it patiently, for which I have long since prepared my self; I bless God that I shall die in the Lord, through whose grace I am elected to an hope of everlasting life. I now need no longer any help of man. You therefore my Friends, get ye hence so soon as ye can, lest ye be involved in my calamity, and your Wives here∣after say, that I was the cause of your destruction. The presence of God, to whose goodness I commend my soul which will presently fly out of my body, is aboundantly sufficient for me. Then all his company gat up into an upper room, and crept out at a window upon the tiles, and by the bene∣fit of night some escaped. By this time Cossen with some Swissers of the Duke of Anjou's guard had removed the chests, and were come up the stairs: One Beheme [a German] was the first that entred the chamber, who seeing the Ad∣mirall sitting there, said, Are not you the Admirall? I am (quoth he) but you young man should have regard to my hoary head and old age. But Beheme exchanging no more words, struck him with his Sword, and first embrued himself in the Admirals blood; then Cossen,The Admirall slain. Atinius and the rest followed, and slew him with many wounds. This Atinius re∣ported afterwards that he never saw a man in so present a danger, to have born out death with so great a constancy. Then did the Duke of Guise from below ask if the businesse were
done? answer was made that it was: But, said he, the Duke of Engo∣lisme will not believe it, except he see him himself, therefore cast down his body out at the window; with that they hurled it down headlong into the Court all defiled with gore blood; whereupon the bastard of Engolisme, wiping the blood from his face with his handkerchief, and thereby knowing him,His body base∣ly abused. kicked him in a scornfull manner: Some say it was the Duke of Guise that did it. Then one of the Duke of Nevers servants cut off his head, and carried it to the King and Queen-Mother, who caused it to be embalmed, and sent it as a present to the Pope and the Cardinall of Lorrain,His Head sent to Rome. to assure them of the death of their capitall enemy. The people fell upon his Corps as mad men, one cuts off his hands, another his feet, another his privy members, and for three daies space drag his poor carcasse about the streets with all indignity. Then some boyes would have thrown it into the River Seine, but others dragged it to the gallows at Mountfaucon, where they hung it up by the thighs, and the shoulders downward; but within few daies Francis Monmoren∣cy,Yet buried. who had seasonably withdrawn himself from the danger, caused some trusty persons to take it down by night, and bury it in the Chap∣pell at Contilia. This was the end of this brave man, who was the very first Noble man in all France that durst professe himself a Protestant,His character. and a helper of them. He was marvellous zealous in performance of the exercises of Re∣ligion:His piety and zeal. He used to rise very early, and then putting on his night∣gown: and calling his Servants about him, he went to prayer with them: Then he set time apart to hear the Deputies of the Churches which were sent to him, or for such like publique businesses. Each other day in the forenoon he had a Sermon preached before him, after which he returned to his businesse till dinner, which being rea∣dy, his Servants came in, and there the Admirall standing by the Table, and his Wife by his side, one of David's Psalms were sung, and a blessing craved upon the meat; which course he did not only ob∣serve at his own house, but every day in his Camp without intermissi∣on. When the cloth was taken away, he presently arose, and stand∣ing, with his Wife by him, either himself or his Chaplain returned thanks. At supper-time the same was done, both with Prayers and Psalms: And because he found it difficult to get all his Servants toge∣ther at bed-time in regard of their various employments, he caused them all to come in presently after supper, where after a Psalm he went to prayer with them. Examples pre∣valent.By this his excellent example very many of the French Nobility were enduced and encouraged to use the same discipline in their Fami∣lies; the Admirall often admonishing them, that if they would em∣brace godlinesse in the life and power of it, it was not enough for the Master of the Family to hear Sermons, and to order his life in an holy and religious manner, unlesse by his authority and example
he brought all his houshold to joyn with him in the same. When the time for receiving the Lords Supper approached,His manner of preparing for the Lords Supper. he used to call his Friends and all his Family to him, and shewed them that he must render an account to God for them as well as for himself: If any discord was between them, he reconciled it; If any were ignorant, he took care that they should be better instructed; If any were obsti∣nate, he plainly gave them notice, that it was better for them to remain at their own homes, then for him to maintain such ungodly persons in his retinue. He alwaies esteemed the carefull education of Children in good Schools a singular benefit of God,His care for education of children. and he called it the Seminary of the Church, saying, that ignorance of good letters was the cause of errour both in Church and State; and that Popery crept in, and kept in by that means. Hereupon he erected a fair School at Chattilion un∣der his Castle, in a pleasant and wholesome place, and bestowed great cost on it, where he maintained Learned Interpreters of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latine tongues; he maintained also many poor boyes and young men in that School. He was modest and moderate in his desires after the world,His contempt of the world. for though he had great Honours and Offices conferred upon him, whereby he might much have enriched himself; yet he added not so much as one Lordship or plough-land to the Inheritance left him by his Fathers. He husbanded his estate and houshold affairs frugally; yet having very ma∣ny Noblemen and Gentlemen that resorted to him upon publique busi∣ness, he gave them free and hearty entertainment, whereby he spent all that he saved at other times by his frugality. Yea his extraordinary ex∣pences were so great, that he left his Heir in debt no lesse then fourty thousand Crowns, paying to his creditors yearly use-money no less then six thousand Crowns. There was such incredible love and concord betwixt him and his two Brethren, that all three seemed but to have one mind betwixt them.Brotherly love He lived fifty three years six moneths, and eight daies,His age. and was slain Aug. 24. 1572. He was of a middle stature, of a ruddy colour, his members e∣quall and well compacted; of a mild and cheerfull countenance, of a small and pleasant voice, yet somewhat slow and gentle, of a heal∣thy constitution, of a comely gate and gesture; abstemious in the use of Wine; of a moderate diet and sleep, for he never used to sleep a∣bove seven hours at the most.His abstinence After the Edict for Pacification he suffered no day to passe, but before he went to bed he set down the things in his journall which fell out in the Civil Warres, and were of any moment; which being found after his death, was carried to the King, and admired by his very adversaries, who thereby saw his qui∣et, constant and composed mind in the midst of his greatest busi∣nesses. When the Warre was finished, and he was retired to Rochel, no day passed over his head,His daily ex∣ercise. wherein he did not morning and evening read
over one of Calvin's Sermons upon Job, which History he used to call his Pancrestum or Physick for all diseases, which greatly comforted his heart in all his afflictions. Teligni mur∣thered, and his young Son.By his first Wife he had five Children: He left alive Lewis his el∣dest Daughter, married to Monsieur Teligni, who was murthered the same night with his Father-in-law; then Francis, Odet, and Charles, the two elder survived that furious Massacre; the third being not eight years old, in whom he took much delight for his prettinesse, was ta∣ken by his enemies, and taught to bear the Crosse of Christ in his ten∣der years. He left his second Wife great with child, who was brought to bed four moneths after of a girl; and returning to her native Countrey in the borders of Savoy, was not long after committed to prison by the command of P. Philibert D. of Savoy, for marrying against his con∣sent.
The Life of Joane Queen of Navarr, who was poisoned at Paris a few daies before the bloody Massacre, Anno Christi 1572. IOane of Albert was daughter to Henry the second, King of Navarr, and to Margueret of Orleance,Her Parentage Sister to Francis the first of that name, King of France; and by her Parents was carefully trained up in the Protestant Religion from her childhood, which she constantly adhered to all the daies of her life. She was married to Anthony of Bourbon, Son to Charles Duke of Vendosme,Her marriage. by whom she had Hen∣ry the fourth of that name King of France by his Fathers right, and the second of that name King of Navarr by his Mothers. This Anthony King of Navarr, in the minority of Charles the ninth, being the first Prince of the blood, was to be his Protector; but the Queen-Mother and the Guises seeking to draw all the power and management of affairs into their own hands, laboured by all means to withdraw the King of Navarr from the Protestants; that so by weakening them thereby, they might rule the rost as they listed: For which end they employed the Ambassadour of Spain,Popish policy. the Cardi∣nall of Tournon, Escars, and some other houshold flatterers to him, who perswaded him, that carrying himself a Neuter, and causing the Prince his Son to go once to the Masse, the King of Spain would give him the Realm of Sardinia in recompence for that of Navarr which he had lately taken from him. The Pope likewise confirms him in this hope, which indeed was but to take from him all means of reco∣vering his Kingdom of Navarr when he should attempt it. Yet he being drawn by those Spanish and Lorrain practises,King of Na∣varr turns Pa∣pist. estrangeth him∣self by little and little from the Protestants, sollicited the Queen his Wife to return into the bosome of the Romish Church, and to draw her children thereunto: But she being better grounded in the truth then so easily to forsake it, refuseth;The Queens constancy. whereupon a breach grew betwixt them, and the King her Husband falls in love with one of the Queen-Mothers Maids. The forenamed Guisian instruments seeing this, perswade him that Heresie is a sufficient cause of dissolving marriage,Popish policy. and that therefore he might be divorced from Joane Albert his Wife, as being infected with the poison of Heresie. They tell him also that notwithstanding
his divorce, he should retain to himself the possession of, and interest in all the Dominions and Kingdoms belonging to her, of which she should be deprived as unworthy of them by reason of her Heresie: And in∣stead of her he should marry Mary Queen of Scots, whose Dowry (say they) is the Kingdom of England, and as soon as the marriage is con∣tracted, the Pope would strip Elizabeth of it, as unworthy thereof for the same cause, and settle it upon them, &c. But the King of Navarr abhorring to be divorced from his Wife, it remained that he should accept the conditions about the Kingdom of Sardinia; for the effecting whereof they left no means unassaied; and at last prevailed so far, that they gulled the King of Navarr, and set him at odds with his Brother the Prince of Conde, Coligni the Admirall, and the other Protestants. The Queen his Wife distasting his change of Religion, and adhering to the Popish party, retired into Podium in the Countrey of Bearne, where she kept her Court. The King of Navarr slain.But it pleased God that shortly after in the siege of Orleance the King of Navarr was shot into the shoulder, whereof he died about three weeks after. Treason a∣gainst the Queen.The next design was to seize upon the Queen, together with her Son Henry and her Daughter Katherine, and to bring them before the judgment seat of the Inquisition of Spain, and the Conspirators doubted not but that Philip King of Spain would more willingly hearken to this counsell, for that this exploit would make for the advantage of his Religion, the rescuer whereof he proudly boasted himself to be: As also the businesse about the Kingdom of Navarr, which he unjustly detained, would be hereby dispatched, by the ta∣king away of the unlawfull heirs thereof. They conceived also that the businesse might easily be effected by the means of the King of Spain's Souldiers that lay at Bacinona, ready to be transported into Africk; who, by the waies of the mountains might come upon, and surprize the Queen of Navarr and her Children at Podium before they were aware. One Dominik a Captain born in the territories of Bearne, was singled out to go to the Court of Spain to communicate these counsels with the King, and to receive further instructions from him. But it pleased God that this Dominik falling sick by the way, Annas Hespius an honest man that tended on him,Gods provi∣dence over her. smelt out the oc∣casion of his journey, and by giving timely notice, prevented the effecting of it; by which deliverance God shewed his watch∣full providence over his handmaid, this Religious Queen of Na∣varr. Her going to Rochel.Not long after in the time of the third Civil Warre for Religion, this Queen having raised great Troops, led them to Rochel, together with her Son Henry, and her Daughter Katherine, from whence she wrote Letters to the King, the Queen-Mother, the Duke of Anjou, and the Cardinall of Bourbon.Her Letters to the King, &c. To the King she wrote, That in the common Cause of Religion, in regard of the duty which she owed to the King, and the necessity of blood whereby she was joyned to
the Prince of Conde, she could not be wanting to him upon such an occasion, having alwaies rejected the bloody counsels of the Guisian faction, and especially the Ambition of the Cardinall of Lorrain, from whose friendship she earnestly dehorted the Duke of Anjou, be∣seeching him that he would not yield up himself a minister of his wicked will, in cutting up the Royal stock by the roots. In her Let∣ter to the Cardinall of Bourbon, she sharply chideth him for not being warned by his former danger: For how long (saith she) will you be the Suffragan of the Cardinall of Lorrain? Have you forgotten the treacherous plots that were laid by him for your Head? and are you so credulous as to believe his oaths, when he sweareth that he minded no treachery? &c. But these Letters prevailing nothing, the Warre went on, and in the Battell of Bassac the Protestants were worsted, and the Prince of Conde slain; which news being carried to Rochel,Prince of Con∣de slain. the Queen of Navarr posted to the Protestant Army, where before a great Assembly of Nobles and Souldiers,She encoura∣geth the Army she made an Oration to confirm their mindes, praising the vertue and constancy of the Prince of Conde, who had employed his faithfull endeavours even unto death, in defence of so just a Cause; and thereupon she exhorted the rest to imitate his example, and to persevere in maintaining the truth of Christ, and the Liberty of their Countrey: For (saith she) the good Cause is not dead with the Prince of Conde, neither ought godly men to give way to despondency in such cases, God having so provided for his Cause, that he gave Conde companions whilst he lived that may succeed him now he is dead. I have brought with me mine only Son Henry, and Conde's own Son; who, as he is Heir of his name, so is he of his vertues: These with other Nobles besides I trust will never be wanting to so good a Cause. And having thus spoken to the No∣bles and Army, and many things privately to her Son, whetting his youthfull spirit, she returned again to Rochel to provide new suc∣cours. In the mean time a Commission was granted to Terride, Gover∣nour of Quercie, to summon the Queen of Navarr, and the Prince her Son, to leave the party of the Protestants, and in case of refusal, to invade the Countreys of Bearne, Foix and Navarr, in which he so prevailed, that he reduced all to the Kings obedience,Her Countrey surprized, but only Nava∣ren, which he besieged, as the only strong place that remained to the Queen. Hereupon the Queen and the Princes sent the Earl of Montgomery to encounter him, who with a small Army of five hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot, forced Terride to raise his siege, and retire himself to Ortheze. His men were dispersed, and to prevent his gathering them together again, the Earl besieged him, forced the Town, and to beat Terride with his own weapons, he turned his Cannons which ht found in the Town against the Castle, whereupon it was surren∣dred to him;And regained. after which all other places were suddainly reduced to the obedience of the Queen, and the Earl having garrisoned the
Towns of his new conquest, speedily returned to the Princes. Not long after Peace being concluded betwixt the King and the Pro∣testants, the King published an Edict, wherein amongst other things he hath this passage: The Kings Edict. Let it be lawfull for the Queen of Navarr the Kings Aunt, besides the benefit which is common to all those which have the highest ju∣risdiction, to enjoy the free exercise of her Religion in the Duke∣dom of Albert, in the Earldoms of Armigniac, Foix and Bigorre, in one place of all those Dominions which she holdeth in her own possession, or which may be consigned to her by the King; so that all that will come to that place (though she her self be absent) may enjoy it without danger. Moreover lest any doubt should arise con∣cerning the right meaning of the Queen of Navarr the Kings Aunt, as also of the Princes of Conde, both Father and Son; the King doth declare, That he acknowledgeth them all for his faithfull Cosens and Subjects; and that they and all that have managed the Warres under them shall be free, and not bound to render an account for monies received or taken, &c. Popish subtiltyThe Peace being concluded, the malice of the Popish party was no whit abated; whereupon they sought by Policy to effect that which they could not by power; and for this end Biron was sent to Rochel in the Kings name to treat with the Queen of Navarr about the marriage between her Son Henry,The match propounded. and the Kings Sister, the Lady Margaret; for which end he invited them to come to the Court, where busines∣ses might be fully debated and concluded: He added also that here∣by a fair occasion was offered from God to settle their affairs in peace, &c. The Queen of Navarr having returned thanks in a set Oration, answered that the matter was of that importance that she would take time to her self in deliberating of it; and albeit she did professe and acknowledge that that affinity would be a great ornament and profit to her, yet she was for the present doubtfull what to do in regard of the near kindred betwixt her Son and the Lady, and the difference in their Religions:Her pious care about it. Wherefore (saith she) I will consult with my Di∣vines, and what I shall find to make for Gods glory, and the good of the Kingdom, and that may stand with a good conscience, that I will readily and willingly imbrace, being desirous in all that I may to satisfie the pleasure of the King and Queen, to whom I owe all due ob∣servance. Yet there remained two scruples which troubled the King and the Queen of Navarr, in respect of the place and manner of celebrating the marriage: For the Queen would not have it done at Paris, which City being extreamly addicted to the Popish Religion, she feared was long since an enemy to the Family of Navarr, and therefore she judg∣ed it not safe to have it celebrated there. The King on the contrary said, That it would make for a certain sign of sure Peace to have the celebrity of the marriage seen in the Metropolis of the Kingdom, as it
were on a publique Theater. The other doubt was about the manner of the celebration. For the Queen of Navarr being most addicted to the reformed Religion, would never endure that it should be contra∣cted after the Popish manner, nor the Queen-Mother after the fashion of the Protestants. But the King prayed the Queen of Navarr to par∣don him in that matter, for that it would tend to his great dishonour if he should suffer the marriage of his Sister to be solemnized in any other form then according to that ancient Religion which he had received from his fore-fathers; therefore to resolve this doubt, there was time taken on both sides. In the mean time the Queen of Navarr consulted with the Ministers of the Reformed Religion what might be done in this matter. Some of them insisting upon the simplicity of Gods Word, said,Ministers dis∣sent about it. that it was utterly unlawfull for such marriages to be contracted, especially by il∣lustrious Personages, in whom it is more dangerous because of more publique concernment. Others judging that this marriage would be a sure, and as it were an everlasting foundation of a most happy Peace, assented to it. The Queen of Navarr and the Protestant Nobles striving to find out remedies, both for the Kingdom which was grievously afflicted, and for their own bruised estates, liked these mens judgments best; and so the businesse proceeded, and the conditions of marriage were a∣greed upon between the parties. The King was to give his Sister for her Dowry three hundred thousand Crowns, each Crown being valued at four and fifty Shillings. About this time the Queen of Navarr being zealously carefull to propagate the Protestant Religion in Cantabria (a Province of the Jurisdiction of Navarr) she sent Pastors who had learned the Coun∣trey language, which is understood by almost none of the neighbours,Her zeal to propogate the Gospel. and was before believed that it could not be written. She took care also that the New Testament, the Catechism, and the Prayers used in the Church of Geneva, should be translated into the Gascoine or Canta∣brian tongue; which she caused to be printed at Rochel in a most fine letter, and sent to them. And so upon the earnest solicitation of the King, she went the March following,She goes to the Court. Anno Christi 1572. from Rochel to the Court, which was then at Blois, with great attendance, where it is incredible to think what welcome she had on all sides; especially from the King and his Brethren; who yet when all was done, could boasting∣ly say to his Mother, Now Madam, have not I quit my self well?The Kings dissimulation. Let me alone, and I will bring them all into the net. In April following were the Articles concluded concerning the marriage of the Prince of Navarr with the Kings Sister. And in the beginning of May the King woed the Queen of Navarr again to come to Paris, for preparing things fitting for the Marriage, which she at last consented to;She goes to Paris. and so May the 6. she took her journey from Blois and came to Paris, May the 15. After which she went from place to place in the City into sundry houses and shops, to find out such
things as might tend to the adorning of the day of so great a so∣lemnity. The Queen-Mother in the mean time, who could not endure this good Queen, and yet not finding with what colour she could dispatch her with the rest; though she feared the greatnesse of her spirit in case she should survive them, and judged it impossible to work upon the flexibility of the young Prince her Son whilst she lived. She there∣fore consulted with one Rene an Italian, whose practice was to impoy∣son things; by whose devilish help she brought her accursed purpose to passe. This Rene sold the Queen of Navarr certain Perfumes, whereby he found out the way to poyson her therewith;She is poyson∣ed. and after∣wards he was heard to make his brags of it, saying also that he had the like in store for two or three more, who suspected no such matter. Her sicknesse, and religious carriage there∣in.By this means June the 4. this good Queen fell sick of a continued Feavor, and (though others sleighted it, yet) she perceiving by the strength of her disease that she should not long continue, prepared her self to receive from the hand of God her mercifull Father, that which he had appointed concerning her: And calling her Son Henry, she com∣manded him above all things carefully to serve God,Her charge to her Son. according to the confession of Faith wherein he had been educated, and not to suffer himself to be plucked or diverted from the same by the smoaky plea∣sures and delights of the world, and other incentives unto vices; and that he should take care that the Constitutions concerning the same which she had published in the Principality of Berne, and the lower Na∣varr be inviolably kept: That he should throughly purge his Family, and cause all bad Counsellors to be gone from thence, which thought ill concerning God: As also, all flatterers, the abusers of Princes, and all other vicious Persons: That he should retain with him all good men, as Bellovarius, Francutius, and Betulus, who were men of an unblame∣able life: That he should have a special care of his Sister Katherine, using her gently and lovingly without bitternesse, causing her to be brought up in the Town of Berne, in the same School of godlinesse which himself had been trained up in; and when she should grow mar∣riagable, that he should marry her to a Prince of equall dignity, pro∣fessing the same Religion: That he should love Henry Bourbon his Co∣sen German, as his Brother; and also Francis Marquesse of Contium, taking care that as great concord as may be, be cherished betwixt them and the Admirall Coligni, for the advancement and propagation of Gods glory. Lastly, she makes her Son her Heir; intreating the King, the Queen-Mother, the Duke of Anjou, and the Duke of Alen∣son, the Kings Brethren, to undertake the Protection of the Prince her Son, and of Katherine his Sister, and to permit them the free exercise of their Religion. Then she requested that she might have such nigh about her as might comfort her in her sicknesse out of the Word of God; as also to pray with her and for her, according to that of Saint James,
Is any sick amongst you? let him call for the Elders of the Church,James 5.14. and let them pray over him, knowing that the Prayers of a righteous man prevail much with God. According to her desire, a Minister resorted to her, shewing out of the Scriptures,Her confe∣rence with the Minister. that Christians ought in all things to submit to the will of God, as to the Father of spirits, that they may live; and albeit by reason of the severity of his chastisements, sometimes it may seem to our flesh, as if they were sent for no other end but for our destruction; yet ought we to consider that the just God can do nothing but justly, and being withall a mercifull Father, he cannot but therein seek the wel∣fare of his afflicted Children. To this she replied, I take all this as sent from the hand of God my most mercifull Father. Nor have I, during this extremity, feared to die, much lesse murmured against God for inflicting this chastise∣ment upon me, knowing that whatsoever he doth, he doth so or∣der the same, as that in the end it shall turn to my everlasting good. Then said the Minister, The causes of sicknesses and diseases must be sought beyond the course of Physick, which alwaies looks to the corruption of the humours, or of the distemper to the more noble parts of the body. And though it be not amisse to have respect to these things as to secondary causes, yet ought we to ascend higher, namely to the first, even to God himself, who disposeth of all his creatures, even as best pleaseth him. He it is that makes the wound, and heals; that kils, and makes alive, Deut. 32.39. and therefore to him we ought to direct our Prayers for our comfort in all our griefs and sufferings, and in the end to expect full deliverance, seeing it's easie with him to restore our health, if it stand with his his good plea∣sure. To this she answered, That she depended wholly upon Gods Pro∣vidence, knowing that all things are wisely disposed by him; and therefore she besought him to furnish her with all such graces as he saw to be necessary for her salvation. As for this life (said she) I am in a good measure weaned from it, in regard of the afflictions which have followed me from my youth hitherto; but especially because I cannot live without offending my good God, with whom I desire to be with all my heart. Then said the Minister, Yet long life how full of troubles soever it be, is to be esteemed amongst the blessings of God,Long life a blessing. seeing his promise implies so much; and not only so, but because our lives may many waies serve to his glory; and long life is not only an honour, but a pledge of his favour: Even as it is to him whom a Prince long im∣plies in his service, having had experience of his fidelity many years together. Hereupon he earnestly requested her to pray, that if it was the will of God he would imploy her yet longer in his service, for the further enlargement of his Gospel, and that he would grant unto her such recovery of health, and such a good disposition of body, that
with renewed strength she might be enabled to finish her course much more nobly then ever heretofore. To this she replied, That in regard of her own particular, her life was not dear unto her, seeing so long as she lived in this frail flesh, she was still prone and apt to sin against God; only she said her care was somewhat for her Children which God had given her, in respect that they should be deprived of her in their young years; yet (saith she) I doubt not, but though he should please to take me from them, himself will become a Father to them, and a Protector over them, as he hath ever been to me in my greatest afflictions, and therefore I commit them wholly to his government and fatherly care. Then the Minister blessed God for working in her Majesty this as∣surance of Faith, and ability to cast her care upon the Providence of God, intreating her still to persevere therein, which would sufficiently seal unto her the truth of her Faith. And thus (saith he) did the Patriarchs in times past, commit the care of their posterity into the hands of God, as may appear by the severall blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: But yet he told her that it was very requisite that she should make choice of such, who for their sincerity both in life and Doctrine, might continue to water in these young Princely Plants, the seeds of Piety that had been sown in them by her so great pains and in∣dustry; seeing it was to be hoped that the example of her Faith and constancy in the service of God, wherein she had gone before them, would serve as a perpetuall inducement to them to follow her noble vertues. And whereas she had declared that death was not terrible to her, because it was the way by which she was to passe to her eternal rest, he told her that Christians had little cause to fear death, in regard that they should not die at all, according to that of our Saviour, He that lives and believes in me shall never die, Joh. 8.51. For, saith he, to speak properly, death is no death to them, but a sweet sleep, being often so called in the Scriptures: and therefore Christ for their sakes hath overcome and triumphed over it in his own person; so as now we may cry out with St. Paul, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?1 Cor. 15.55. After this he admonished her to make confession of her sinnes before God, shewing that bodily diseases tend to the dissolution of nature, and that death was the wages of sinne: further declaring, that by this her chastisement she might discern what she had deserved if God should en∣ter into judgment with her, not only in regard of the fall of our first Parents, in which guilt she was enwrapped as well as others; but also by her own personall sins, seeing the best in the world are in themselves but poor, miserable and wretched sinners; yea if the Lord should punish us according to our demerits, we could expect nothing at his hands but eternal death and damnation. At these words she began with her eyes and hands lifted up to Hea∣ven, to acknowledge that the sins which she had committed against the Lord were innumerable, and therefore more then she was able to
reckon up; but yet she hoped that God for Christs sake, in whom she put her whole trust, would be mercifull to her. From hence the Minister took occasion to declare at large upon what ground she was to expect the fruit of this mercy of God in Christ: Adding, The whole have no need of a Physician, but the sick. And Christ saith, He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And, that he is ready to fill the hungry with good things, whereas in the mean while, he sends the rich empty away. Of these things (saith he) you ought so much the rather to be perswaded in your counscience, by how much the more the holy Spirit of God witnesseth to your spirit that you are the Child of God, and enables you to cry Abba, Father: For what is Faith else but a firm trust and assurance of the good will of God ma∣nifested towards us in his blessed Son? But the Minister fearing lest by his long discourse he might be troublesome, or cause her too much to spend her spirits, would have given over; which she taking notice of, earnestly requested him not to forbear speaking to her about these matters of life and eternal sal∣vation; adding that now she felt the want of it, in regard that since her coming to Paris she had been somewhat remisse in hearing such exhortations out of the Word of God: And therefore I am the more glad (said she) to receive comfort out of it in this my great ex∣tremity. Then did the Minister endeavour to set before her the happinesse of heaven, and what those joys were that the faithfull possesse in the pre∣sence of God, which the Scriptures intending to discover, tell us, that Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what those things are, which God hath prepared for them that love him. For, saith he, it is as if a King minding greatly to honour some Noble personage, should bring him to his Court, and there shew him his state and attendance, his Treasures, with all his most precious Jewels: Eved so will the Lord one day reveal to all his Elect and faithfull people, his magnificence and glory, with all the Treasures of his Kingdom, after he hath gathered them home to himself; deck∣ing and adorning them with light, incorruption and immortality. Therefore (saith he) since this happinesse is so great, your Highnesse ought to be the lesse solicitous about leaving this transitory life, and know that you are to change this earthly Kingdom for an heavenly In∣heritance; These temporall good things which vanish and come to no∣thing in the using, to enjoy for ever those things which are eternal and everlasting. For your faith being now firmly set upon our Lord Jesus Christ, you may be assured to obtain eternal salvation by him. Then did he proceed to propose to her this question; Madam, Do you veri∣ly believe that Jesus Christ came into the world to save you? and do you expect the full forgivenesse of all your sins by the shedding of his blood for you? Yea (said she) I do, believing that he is my only Saviour and Mediatour, and I look for salvation from none other, knowing that
he hath abundantly satisfied for the sins of all his people, and therefore I am assured that God for his sake, according to his gracious promise in him, will have mercy upon me. During all the time of her sicknesse, she ceased not to continue in such fruitfull and comfortable communications, sometimes intermix∣ing them with most affectionate sighs to God, as a testimony of that hope and desire she had of enjoying his presence, often uttering these words:Her Prayer. O my God, in thy good time, deliver me from this body of death, and from the miseries of this present life, that I may no more offend thee, and that I may attain to the felicity which thou in thy Word hast promised to bestow upon me. Neither did she manifest her pious affection by words only, but by her constant and cheerfull countenance, so farre forth as the vehemency of her disease would suffer; thereby giving a clear testimony to all that beheld her, that the fear of death could not drive her from the stedfastnesse of her Faith. The Minister also went often to prayer with her, the usual tenor whereof was this which follows; A Prayer.O Lord our God, We confesse here before thy Divine Majesty, that we are altogether unworthy of thine infinite mercies, by reason of our manifold iniquities, and that we are so farre from deserving to be heard of thee in our requests, that we are rather worthy that thou shouldst reject both our persons, and our prayers; But seeing it hath pleased thee to make us a gra∣cious promise of hearing and granting our requests, we humbly beseech thee freely to forgive all our offences, and to cover them under the obedi∣ence and righteousness of thy dear Son, that through him our selves and our services may be well pleasing unto thee. For Lord we acknowledge that all our afflictions are measured out to us by thine hand, who art a most just Judge, in regard that we have every way provoked thee to wrath by our in∣finite sinnings against thee, yea by our rebellions which now testifie against us. For alas Lord, our life hath been no way answerable to that perfect o∣bedience which thou by thy holy Law dost justly require at our hands, which we from day to day do transgress, and therefore do here cast down our selves at this time before thy glorious presence, unfeignedly acknowledging our misery and wretchedness from the very bottom of our hearts. Yet Lord mercy is with thee, and because thou art our Father, therefore thou desirest not the death of sinners, but rather that they should convert and live. For this cause we now fall down before the throne of thy grace, with confidence of obtaining thy wonted mercy which thou hast promised to such as call upon thee in truth; beseeching thee who art the Father of mercies, to have compassion on all such as thou hast humbled under thy mighty hand, but more especially on this thy Servant the Queen, who lieth here before thee sick of a dangerous disease; that as thou hast righteously afflicted her for her sinnes (which she also doth with us acknowledge) so it would please thee in pardoning them all to her for thy beloved Sons sake, to grant that she may profit by this thy correcting hand for the time to come: Above all O Lord, give her a sweet sense, yea full assurance of thy eternal joys, that so she may with the greater patience take down this bitter potion ministred
unto her from thy hand, and that the sole desire of enjoying thy presence may cause her to forget all worldly greatness and magnificence, knowing that they are nothing in respect of the glory which is now set before her. En∣due her also with meekness of minde to bear the tediousnesse of her afflicti∣on, for though the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak, yea full of re∣sisting and unbelief; that so receiving all things from thee as from a Fa∣ther, she may the more willingly submit her will to thine. And because, O good God, thou hast made her hitherto an happy Instrument for the ad∣vancement of thy glory, and defence of thy poor afflicted people, we pray thee, if it may stand with thy good pleasure, restore her to health a∣gain, that so the excellent work that thou hast by her means begun, may not be left unperfected; but by vertue of this her deliverance, she may with renewed strength undertake the same in better sort then ever hereto∣fore, especially for the well educating and training up the Children that thou hast given her. But, Lord, if thou hast a purpose now to call her home to thy self, who are we that we should contradict thy holy will? Only we pray thee that thou wouldst confirm her more and more in the knowledge of thy blessed Gospel, and thereby also in the certainty of her salvation, which thou hast given her by Faith in thy Son Jesus Christ, that thus she may not cease to sanctifie and call upon thy holy Name to her last breath. And as touch∣ing our selves, who are here by thy good providence gathered together about her, being in bodily health, give us to know the uncertainty and brevity of our life, that so according to our duty, we may behold the same in this mirror that thou hast set before us, as knowing that even the greatest in the world are subject to the same calamities as well as the small, that so our chief care may be to employ the remainder of our time to thine honour and service. All which we crave of thee in the Name of Jesus Christ thy Son, our only Me∣diatour and Advocate, Amen. During the time of prayer, she ceased not with hands and eyes lift up to Heaven, to fetch many deep sighs, especially when mention was made of the mercy of God in Christ, which he extendeth to poor sin∣ners; so that all present might evidently see that her heart and affecti∣ons were joyned to the Prayer that was made by, and for her. And whilst she thus lay, she still continued in her holy desires to depart hence that she might be with Christ, taking great delight in the holy and Christian exhortations which were made to her by many godly and learn∣ed men, who came to visit her, to whom also she manifested no small testimonies of that faith and hope which she had in God, touching the salvation of her soul, by her holy and savory speeches, which for brevity sake are omitted. Yea although the Lord exercised her much with the sense of her in∣ward disease,Her patience. yet could you not at any time discern any speech favouring of discontentment or impatience to proceed out of her mouth, nay scarcely so much as a groan. But if at any time she found any refreshings from the violence of her disease (there being no malady so vehement which hath not some in∣termissions and breathing times) she declared her willingnesse to ob∣tain
the recovery of her former health, and for that end she refused no good means prescribed for her by her learned Physicians. Again, when she perceived her sicknesse to increase upon her, and that she grew worse and worse, she was no whit appaled thereat, but shewed her self to be armed with an invincible constancy to undergo the utmost that death could do against her, preparing her self willingly for that last conflict. And when she saw her Ladies and Gentlewomen weeping about her bed, she blamed them for it, saying, Weep not for me I pray you, for as much as God doth by this sicknesse, call me hence to enjoy a better life, and now I may enter into the desired Haven, towards which this frail vessel of mine hath been a long time steering: Yet she shewed her self grieved that she wanted opportunity to reward them, and many more of her Family and Train which had done her faithfull service, as she could have wished, excusing her self to them, and professing that it was not want of good will, but her being prevented by this her suddain sicknesse: But (said she) I will not fail to give order about the same to the ut∣most of my ability. In the end, perceiving her strength to decay more and more, she gave order to have her last Will and Testament made, and thereby set∣led her outward estate. And the 8 of June, which was the day before she died, she called for a Minister, and finding that she was drawing nigh unto her end, she desired him to speak somewhat largely of the temptations which Satan is wont to assail Gods Elect withall in their last conflict. To this the Minister answered, Indeed that is the hour wherein the sworn enemy of all the faithfull doth most busily bestirre himself, if possible to deprive them of the comfort of their salvation, not spa∣ring especially at that time, to set upon them with might and sleight, but yet even then the Lord is not, nor will be wanting to his, filling their hearts with such joy and comfort of the Holy Ghost, as shall make them in the end more then conquerours. His first Engine where∣with he would drive them to despair, is by presenting before their eyes the innumerable heaps of their sinnes and pollutions, wherewith they have been any way defiled in their whole life: and then he pre∣sents to them Gods justice, before which no flesh can be able to subsist, unlesse it were pure and spotlesse; whence he infers, that such miserable sinners can expect and look for nothing but utter death and condemnation. But against these assaults we must as David, Psal. 52. set the infinite multitudes of Gods compassions, which do infinitely surpasse the multitudes of our sinnes. And as for the justice of God, we confesse that no creature that is defiled by sinne can abide to be strictly examined by it, if God should call us to a severe account: but we know that God will never enter into judgment with those that be∣lieve in his Son, but imputes unto them that righteousness and obedience which was accomplished by him, which is sufficient to oppose against the justice of God; therefore in it alone we must expect to stand before his face, and not by our own dignity and worthinesse. Indeed, if we were
to appear before the seat of Justice to receive there what we have de∣served, we had good reason to be overwhelmed in utter despair, but turning our eyes upon him, who being the eternal Son of God, hath clothed himself with our humane nature, to bear on him the same pu∣nishment that was due to our sinnes, and thereby hath acquitted us, then Gods justice doth no whit affright us, but rather yields us assured comfort, because God being just, cannot require the same debt twice. Having therefore received full and perfect satisfaction from Christ, whom he hath ordained to be our surety, and who hath paid our debts for us, thence we gather assurance that he will no more require it at our hands. To which purpose these sentences are to be well observed. It is Christ who hath born our grief, and carried our sorrows. The cha∣stisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. That we all like sheep have gone astray, and have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Christ is our peace, and the propitiation for our sins. The Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world. Upon these considerations Gods justice need not terrifie such as believe in Christ, of whose righteousnesse and re∣demption they are made partakers; seeing that Jesus Christ, who knew no sin, was made sin (that is an oblation for sin) for us, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. I grant (said he) that these things belong not to all indifferently, but only unto such as believing in the Son of God, do wholly cast them∣selves upon the merit of his death and passion, which as St. Peter saith, is sufficient for their salvation, Act. 4.12. Then did he ask her, whether she placed her whole trust and confi∣dence on Christ crucified, who died for her sins, and rose again for her justification. To this the godly Queen answered, that she neither ex∣pected salvation, righteousnesse, nor life from any else, but only from her Saviour Jesus Christ, being assured that his merit alone did abun∣dantly suffice for the full satisfaction for all her sins, albeit they were in∣numerable. This being your faith Madam (quoth the Minister) you cannot come into condemnation, but are passed from death to life, neither need you fear Gods Seat of Justice, since it is turned into a Throne of mercy and grace unto you, and therefore the hour of death will be exceeding welcome to you, being but a sweet passage into a far better life; as also the time in which all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, therefore I beseech you Madam think often of that sweet Text, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their labours and their works follow them. Now the time approaches wherein you shall enjoy the beatificiall vision, the society of your Husband Christ, the fellow∣ship of the blessed Angels and celestial Spirits with the holy Patri∣achs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, partaking with them in the same felicity and glory. He also further said, Madam, If it should please God by this your sicknesse to put an end to this weary Pilgrimage of yours, and to call you home to himself, as by some
evident signs it appears that he will, Are you willing to go unto him? To this she answered with much Christian courage, Yea with all my heart. Then said he, Good Madam, Open the eyes of your Faith, and be∣hold Jesus your great Redeemer sitting at the right hand of his Father, reaching out his hand to receive you to himself. Are you, Madam, willing to go unto him? Yes I assure (saith she) most willing, and much more willing then to linger here below in this world, where I see nothing but vanity. Then he asked her if they should go to prayer with her: which she desiring, they performed it by her, whilst this pious Lady manifested her ardent affection in calling upon God. The Minister Absolves her.Prayer being ended, the Minister discerning in her the undoubted testimonies of unfeigned Repentance, and of the sorrow that she con∣ceived for the offences which she had committed against God, toge∣ther with the assured confidence which she had in his mercies, as a Mi∣nister of the Gospel, and Ambassadour of the Son of God, by the au∣thority given to him, having the word of reconciliation committed to him; he assured her in the Name of Christ, that all her sinnes were forgiven by God, and that they should never come in account against her at his judgment seat; yea, that she should no more doubt thereof, then if the Son of God from Heaven should say unto her, Daughter be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. And to the end that trou∣bled consciences might the better be quieted, Christ hath used these words speaking to his Ministers, saying, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, &c. And the reason is, because the Word which they pro∣nounce is not the word of a mortall man, but of the immortall God, being of no lesse weight then if himself uttered the same. Then he asked her Majesty if she accepted of so gracious a message which assured her of the free pardon of all her sins: Yes (saith she) with all my heart, and make no doubt thereof. The Admirall came to her.Not long after came in the Admirall Coligni, and with him another Minister, to whom she gave ear a good space together, his speech ten∣ding to prepare her for death; and when he had finished his speech, he also prayed with her, which she attended to with great affection. Then she requested that those two Ministers might stay all night with her in her chamber, and that they would in no wise leave her. The greatest part of this night was spent in holy admonitions; which these Ministers gave to this gracious Lady one after another; besides which she required them to read to her some Chapters of the holy Scriptures which were pertinent to her condition, and so they read out of St. Johns Gospel, from the fourteenth, to the end of the seventeenth Chapter. After which they went to prayer with her, which being ended, the Queen desired to take some rest; but it was not long ere she commanded them to read again: Whereupon one of them made choice of certain of David's Psalms, full of ardent and affectionate prayers, suting to this Princesse present condition by reason of her affli∣ction; and for a conclusion read Psal. 31. wherein the Prophet, amongst
other things, doth commend his spirit into the hands of God, Because, saith he, thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Then the Queen willed them to pray with her again; and thus was the most part of that night spent in such holy exercises; during all which time the Ministers never discerned in her the least sign of impatience, notwithstanding the violence of her affliction. Yea whereas immedi∣ately before her sickness she had shewed how affectionately she was bent to provide things most magnificent for the day of her Sons Marriage, according as the State of so great an alliance required; yet it was admi∣rable to observe, that after this sicknesse had seized on her, God wrought in her such a neglect and forgetfulnesse of all such matters, that she ne∣ver shewed to have so much as a thought thereof. This night being thus spent, and past by this Noble Queen, she per∣severing in the expressions of such like affections, and ardency of faith,Her death. the next morning between eight and nine of the clock, she departed this life to take possession of a far better, sweetly yielding up her spirit into the hands of God, June 9. Anno Christi 1572. being the sixth day after she fell sick, and of her age 44. She had her perfect speech and memory, even to the hour of her death, shewing not only that staidnesse and soundnesse of judgement (which ever in times past she had) in the care about the salvation of her soul, but also in the well settlement of her worldly affairs. The King made as if he had conceived great grief for her death, put∣ting on mourning attire, wherein also the whole Court followed his ex∣ample, lest by this suddain accident their Counsels and futurh desperate designs might be prevented. Also to avoid all jealousies and suspitions of her being poisoned by reason of her suddain sicknesse and death, her body was opened by sun∣dry expert and learned Doctors of Physick and Chyrurgery, who found her Heart and Liver very sound, only some scirrousnesse on one side of her Lungs; but her Head they might not open, where the malady lay, by which means the discovery of it was prevented. Anonymus. Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Principal things contained in this Part OF THE LIVES. A. AFflictions profitable to Gods children. p. 202 Antinomians practice. 52 Apostacy plagued by God. 25 Assurance to be sought. 211 Astrologers are lyers. 99 B. BIble is translated into English. 4 Bishops enemies to godly Ministers, and to the power of Godlinesse. 1, 2, 20, 21, 28, 29, 30, 41, 46, 48, 53, 58, 61, 63, 89, 106, 109, 146, 148, 149, 162, 163, 185, 189, 191, 201, 223 A Bishop enjoyned to ask a Minister for∣givenesse in his own Congregation. 163 C. CHarity eminent. 88, 151, 155, 168, 174, 191, 202, 225 Charity of good Ministers. 2, 13, 14, 24, 76, 186, 237, 240 Comfort at death. 142 Comforting afflicted consciences. 16, 173, 202, 204 Constancy. 151, 171, 297 Contentation. 55, 177, 171 Conversion. 27, 86, 99, 144, 184, 199 Conversion of a Jaylor. 9 Courage 245, 270, 283 Courage of Gods Ministers. 9, 43, 109, 163, 186, 214, 222, 239 D. DEath desired 203 Death not feared 208 Devil dispossessed by Prayer 91, 216 E. ENvy. 46 Examples prevalent. 294 F. FAith. 86, 180, 205, 207, 267, 285 Family cared for, and well instru∣cted. 5, 72, 164, 169, 190, 226, 248, 262, 267, 295 Fasting and Prayer. 171, 174, 200, 203, 228 Fidelity. 27, 246 Flight refused in time of persecution. 9, 10 Flight embraced. 12 Friendship sincere. 391, 221 Frugality. 174
G. GRatitude. 27, 39, 176 H. DAnger of unprofitable Hearers. 81 Heretick burned. 147 Hospitality. 200, 202 Humility. 249 Humility of Gods Ministers. 25, 39, 55, 151, 174, 179, 180, 182, 187, 191, 206, 209, 210, 222, 224 I. INgratitude. 56 Joy unspeakable. 25, 202 L. Life exemplary. 81 Long life, why a blessing. 303 M. WHat makes a compleat Man 81 What makes a compleat Mini∣ster 82 Meeknesse of Gods Ministers. 25, 174 207 Ministers cared for by God. 5, 6, 10, 11, Ministers dearly loved. 195 Ministers falsly accused. 52 Ministry of the Word successefull. 21, 25, 30, 67, 79, 87, 89, 147, 158, 164, 167, 186, 201, 213, 217, 231 P. PArents honoured. 219 Painfulnesse in Preaching. 1, 5, 14, 22, 41, 46, 56, 157, 164, 173, 183, 185, 187, 191, 200, 210, 219, 222, 223, 231, 232 Papists enemies to faithfull Ministers. 5, 8, 9, 29 Patience. 89, 207, 283, 307 Peacemakers blessed. 15, 210 Persecutors plagued by God. 186 Persecution. 251 Poverty of Gods Ministers 29, 55 Prayer frequent and powerfull. 25, 86, 91, 191, 196 The Benefits of it. 205 Predictions and Prophesies. 7, 12, 90, 263 Providences speciall. 5, 10, 11, 12, 33, 36, 37, 42, 54, 59, 62, 89, 91, 144, 145, 150, 161, 164, 184, 187, 206, 213, 215, 216, 217, 239, 261, 263, 265, 270, 298 Prudence. 40, 60, 72, 110, 158, 167, 177, 224, 237, 264 S. SAbbath-breakers plagued by God. 160, 165 Sabbath sanctified. 227 Self-denial. 40, 89, 185, 186, 221, 230 Sin the greatest of evils. 205 Slanders cast upon Christs Ministers. 48, 147 Sleep moderated. 19 Studiousnesse of Ministers. 9, 24, 34, 79, 153, 172, 191 Swearing how prevented. 203 Sympathy with the Churches sufferings. 25, 177 T. THankfulnesse in Afflictions. 211 Thanksgiving excellent. 17 W. WOrd of God highly prized. 19, 26, 153, 189, 203, 219 World contemned. 22, 24, 204 Z. Zeal. 103, 238, 301 Zeal for the Sabbath. 72 Zeal against Sectaries and Separatists. 72, 151, 176, 178, 191, 197 FINIS.
Errata in this Part of the Lives. PAge 35. line 14. dele long. l. 27. read demeanour. p. 45. l. 4. dele therefore. l. 32. r. he for they. p. 47. l. 6. r. a for as. p. 62. l. 35. r. bought for brought. p. 70. l. 35. dele be. p. 71. l. 13. put in of. p. 83. l. 43. r. decease for disease. p. 85. l. 12. r. skilfull for skill. p. 94. l. 22. r. he took for then an took. p. 105. l. 1. r. had. l. 2. r. flower. p. 134. l. 41. dele and. p. 151. l. 45. r. heal for zeal. p. 168. l. 17. r. 1635 for 1631. p. 179. l. 18. r. yet for yea p. 189. l. 2. r. three penny for third. p. 217. l. 31. r. them for him. p. 246. l. 26. r. preferred for preserved. p. 250. l. 5. r. your for our. p. 262. l. 2. r. now for new. p. 288. l. 20. r. Chieftains for Christians. p. 293. l. 29. r. erected for elected. p. 298. l. 27. r. lawfull for unlawfull. Some other literall faults there are, which are easily amended.
