C6510 12713829 66140
Praxis Catholica: OR, THE COUNTRYMAN'S Universal Remedy: WHEREIN plainly and briefly laid down the Nature, Matter, Manner, Place and Cure of most DISEASES, Incident to the Body of Man; Not hitherto discovered. Whereby any one of an ordinary Capacity may apprehend the true Cause of his Distempers, wherein his Cure consists, and the Means to effect it; together with Rules how to order Children in that most violent Disease of vomiting and Loose∣ness, &c. useful likewise for Seamen and Travellers. so an Account of an Incomparable Powder for Wounds or Hurts which cure any ordinary ones at once dressing. ritten by Robert Couch, sometimes Practitioner in Physick and Chyrurgery, at Boston in New-England. ow published with divers useful Additions (for publick benefit) by Chr. Pack, Operator in Chymistry. enim si dare vitam proprius Dei munus est, certe datam tueri, jam{que} fugientem retineri, Deo proximum fatea∣mur oportet. Erasm. don, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1680.
TO HIS Highly Honoured AND MUCH Esteemed FRIEND, COLONEL RANCIS WILLIS, his Little TRACT humbly offers and submits it self. Worthy Sir: SEing it hath been your generous Care, and Love to your Native Country, to
transplant this Exotick from Transmarine Parts to us; I think it highly reasonable that you should have the Oversight of its Culture and Growth: That as it hath here received its First Being from your Charity to the Publick, it may also under your Name continue to grow and increase. Sir, your Knowledge in true Medicine, and intimate Acquaintance you had with Mr. Couch the Author,
hath rendred you as able to Judge, as fit to Patronize. His Judgments of Diseases are sound and accurate, and deduced from such Princi∣ples as Heathens and their Followers never yet under∣stood, or were able to refute; as for the Medicines be ad∣vises, you know, Sir, they are not Toys or Trifles to gull an unwary World, but such whose virtues and power of healing are undeniable, both from what they have done,
and are always ready to per∣form. What I have added is only a farther Confirmation of Matter of Fact, the which with the whole I humbly present to you as it is (except Errours, if any, which I reserve to my self) desiring your Favourable Acceptance of those small Endeavours of Your most Humble Servant, CHR. PACK.
TO THE READER. Reader, I Once having the Fortune to see this Little Book of Mr. Couch's in the hand of a Gentleman living in Carolina (who did me the favour to lend it me to peruse) I was so pleased with his Sentiments of Disea∣ses, and manner of describing them, that I heartily wished it were here made Publick; but the Gentleman's suddain depar∣ture out of England recalled the Book out of my hands before I
could half transcribe it. Not withstanding at length I attain∣ed my desire through the Assist∣ae of the Worthy Colonel Francis Willis (a Candid Lover and Promoter of true Medi∣cine) who procured me this Book in Manuscript from Vir∣ginia (where Mr. Couch died) from whom also I had long be∣fore received the Knowledge of those most Excellent Remedies used by Mr. Couch for curing the Distempers treated of in this Book. But seeing that all Me∣dicines now adays (of which there are too many) published as Arcanums, and bearing the names of Universal Remedies, come so far short of their spe∣cious
pretences, they being in∣deed only Engines employed for gain, that I could not reaso∣nably expect that those Worthy Medicaments should be beheld with any other Aspect, if the curing of Diseases should be here restrained to them only. Wherefore I have here added o∣ther Medicines for the cure of each Disease, & such as are good and effectual, in which I have candidly dealt with all persons, and left every one to his liber∣ty what to use. Moreover be∣cause many Persons (into whose hands this Book may come) who live remote in the Coun∣try, upon suddain occasion can∣not have time enough to send
to me for the Powder and Pill, I have also directed the use of such as they may be served withal nearer home, by which I hope I may justly avoid the censure of publishing this Book solely for my own advantage. Truly I abhor such private ends which are not to be attained without hypocrisie, and the pre∣judices and ruines of Lives and Families: but so fast are most people tied to the Heathens precepts of healing, and to the modes and fashions of times and persons, that they know not truth when they meet her, but obstinately persist in errour (for its age sake) and so voluntarily come short of the benefits of
Gods healing mercies, falling short of true knowledge, be∣cause they think themselves to be already sufficiently inform∣ed, according to the saying of Seneca, Multi ad virtatem perveni∣re potuissent nisi se putassent perve∣nisse: So that it may be as tru∣ly affirmed in relation as well to the body as the soul, that ma∣ny perish through unbelief: neither will it be otherwise till the time cometh when the groans of the Creation to be de∣livered from this vanity shall cease, and the Elias of Arts shall appear to restore all things. This little Treatise may be useful for every considerate Reader, enabling him in divers
Maladies to get help at a cheap∣er and more certain rate than usual. Neither will it be un∣welcome to the Tyro's in the Helmontian Philosophy, and Me∣dicine whom it may accommo∣date in many cases; others no doubt at first sight will not free∣ly receive it, because (to them) the Doctrine may be altogether novel, but if they will rightly weigh the discourses of Diseases and compare them with the common precepts and notions of healing (out of desire to find out the truth) they shall cer∣tainly apprehend them to be more agreeable to the frame and simplicity of nature than the other. But as for such Sub∣scribers
to Heathenism, as have taken a Leafe of their Opinions for life, I do not question but to them it will be disgustful, they will contend about the shell till they lose the Kernel, but be it as it will, I design nothing but well in it, what I have said being on∣ly out of love to truth, not re∣flecting upon any man's person or interest. To conclude, I shall still make it my business to loose the bonds of Animals, Vegita∣bles and Minerals; endeavou∣ring with Chimical Keys to un∣lock the choycest. Cabinets of Nature, and whatever I from time to time (by the Divine Bounty) shall be able to take from thence, shall readily be
communicated to the use of the sick; more especially into the hands of honest and conscien∣tious Artists, who may use them to the honour of God the giver, their own credit, and the relief of many a miserable person. In the mean time I remain, Your servant in the fire, Chr. Pack. From my Laboratory, at the Sign of the Globe and Chymical Fur∣naces in the Postern near Moor-gate.
To all Ingenious Students and Practitioners in Physick and Chyrurgery. Courteous Brethren: WE read of Renowned Dr. Harvey our Countryman, who tells us he opened an Imposthume in a Gentleman's left side, where he beheld the Dyastole and Sy∣stole of the heart, and he touched it, and found it insensible, though it gives life unto every part. 'Tis an Argument he is of eminent and publick conducement, useful to derive good to others, who it least sen∣sible of private Injuries offered himself. As for Injuries I have had a double share, and I have not only forgiven them, but forgotten them; I should gladly do them good that did me hurt. There is a saving in Germany, poor Luther made many a Rich man; I
could be contented to be poor, so I might be instrumental to enrich Artists in the Knowledge of Healing, whereby it might tend to the peoples greater good, and God's greater Glory. The Laws of Charity oblige a man that hath gone in a dangerous way to preadmonish him that intends the same. Satis Eloquentiae: Sa∣pientiae parum: abunde fabularum audivintus.So that I stand bound to advise you that you consult not so much with that learned Theory of the Schools; which is good for nothing but to dispute and contend. Learned Dr. Charlton in the end of his Epistle to his Translation of Hel∣mont upon the Magnetick Cure of Wounds. I remember hath a saying to this effect: There are many things (faith be) that have been disputed in the Schools and Colledges, that have been received for truths among them; and they have seemed to have Reason for their Foundation, and Learning for
their Defence or Walls: but when they have come to be experienced, they have fallen to the ground, and nothing of truth hath appeared in them &c. They can inform you nothing of truth, nei∣ther in the knowledge of a Disease; nor a good method in curing, nor a lau∣dable Medicine to effect a Cure. Practice is the best part of Physick, Observation the surest, and the Theory of the Ancients, the uncertainest and emptiest. This we are taught by the example of many Eminent Physicians both Chymical and Gal∣lenical;Paracelsus, Hel∣mont, Crollius. who could with their Arcanum's cure those Diseases that were termed opprobria Medicorum: And we see likewise thoseRiverius, Fo∣restus, Johnstonus, and many more Modern Physici∣ans. Renown∣ed Physicians that were trained up in the Do∣ctrine of the Schooles; yet when they were to encounter any stubborn Disease, they would not trust to their Weapons, (ha∣ving
often been foiled with them) but ran to their Arcanum's, as their Ob∣servations witness. Not that I think all their Secrets were Chymical Preparations; for I have abundance of reason to believe that there are singular specifical virtues in Sensitive and Vegitive Simples, and of a far greater power than some of our large Compositions. I am not so credulous, as to believe all to be true that the Chymists boast of, neither am I so diffident, as to think all the Schools have treated of to be false.Comede da∣ctylos & pro∣jice foras du∣ritiem. Read them as our Mo∣dern Divines read the Schoolmen. Let not any one think (qui forsan Latinè, aut Graecè intelli∣gere potest) that because he is a good Scholar, he can presently be a good Phy∣sician: if he doth,Non quaerit aeger Medicum elo∣quentem, sed Sa∣nitatem, Seneca. be sure he will be mistaken; for he will find the Art of healing to consist in
another kind of Learning. Novi nuper quendam, saith Dr. Primrose, qui cum se Medicum profiteretur; quamvis levissimè eâ disciplinâ tinctus foret; talis tamen habitus est ob quandam Latinae Linguae cognitionem: but there is a great difference betwixt such men and sound Physici∣ans;Garrulosum Me∣dicum alterum morbum aegro esse. 'tis one thing to give a Patient a long and learned discourse of his Disease; but it's another thing to give him a present remedy. I have but only hinted at Diseases, (because I intended this but for an Enchyridion) yet you may perceive by it, that we have been blinded in the true knowledge of the Causes, Places, and Cures of Diseases; I must confess I owe much of it untoVir magno judi∣cio, & praestante doctrina, clarissi∣mus. Helmont, the Stan∣dard-bearer of Physick; yet I speak not his Judgment, but mine own, having enfor∣ced a belief from experience; I have
not written any thing in this Tract, but what I am perswaded of the truth of, though it may in most places seem (to some) at the first view to be Paradoxes▪ yet upon a more accurate inspection i may become received Truths. And if this crude labour of mine finds accep¦tance with young Practitioners; I shal spend some time to enlarge upon it to their satisfaction. As for my Arcanums you'l all conclude, it is not fit to put them to publick view: if any of you should desire the knowledge of them, malè docuit. And to cast them at the feet of all Pretenders to Physick, they may be abused by their ignorance i the preparing, dose, time or manner, &c. for one may have as good Medicine for a Disease as can be by the Art of ma invented,Morborum reme∣dia, si ab indo∣ctis usurpentur venena, si vero à doctis & exerci∣tatis deorum auxilia sunt. yet if he know not the time when, no the form in what man∣ner, nor the dose how much; he may instead of curing kill the Pati∣ent:
Besides, there are some idle and careless Artists, who may not deserve it, that never inquire into Diseases, nor yet Medicine; but expect every thing to be popt into their mouths:Dii laboribus, omnia vendunt. the Gods sold all by sweats; night unto night sheweth knowledge, &c. the gift of healing is a great gift, which comes from above, from which you are to fetch the knowledge of Medicine: And I doubt whether it be safe to divulge Se∣crets: we have no such precedent from any Author: we see Riverius in all the four Centuries of his observations; there was hardly a Disease but he cured with his Febrifugium and Calomanenas, and who knows what they were; (I have a very strong faith, that my Powder which I call my Arcanum Universale, was his Febrifugium, for the dose and operation is alike; and if mine were not the same I am confident it is not inferiour to it, nor any extant) they bid us seek and we may find; for they have
told us nothing, but a Story, how Actae∣on was Metamorphos'd for presenting Diana naked to the People, &c. All their Secrets died with them; or at least communicated to such Friends as kept them from a publick view; then let us do as they did, and we may attain unto that they had; we must not content our selves in the knowledge of a little Mithridate or Diascordium; or to give a Purge or a Clyster; but let e∣very day repent us of yesterdays Igno∣rance. Let us drive to per∣fection,Ars longa, vita brevis, experien∣tia difficilis, &c. though the Age of a man is too short to obtain it: It is much against my temper, to conceal any thing from any Ingenious and ho∣nest Artist; but I have been much mi∣staken, and I am sorry to speak it; that if I had told less, it would have been more for my credit and profit: I can say with the Poet Ovid: Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter ho∣nores.
Nevertheless, the unworthiness of some, shall not detract from the worth of any Civil and Ingenious Brother: I shall always be civil to all, but especially to those that I find are so:Ars praeclarissima Artifex sordissi∣mus. I am sorry to see so ma∣ny shabby and course spirited Fellows, that practise in so high and honourable a Calling: There is such a vast disproportion between the Art and the Artist; that well may the Art be ashamed to own them: There are not only ignorant Jack-daws that are intru∣ders upon this worthy Art, which square out all things by their crooked and indirect Rules; but likewise there are Pompeys and Caesars too, who scorn to admit of Equals, and be Caesars or no bodies, &c. who think it much be∣low their Greatness to advise with any. If they are at any time petitioned unto it, they grant it with this reservation to themselves, to deny every thing o∣thers say, though it be never so undeni∣able and clear a truth; they would ra∣ther
twenty should die under their hands, than part with one to be cured by another, that's a great affront to their Ambition whereunto they sacrifice ma∣ny a mans life, and dissemble their Pride under the cloak of Humility, and so blind the poor Country-man; that they think such a one to be Aesculapius him∣self, and that his Medicines were extra∣cted from the balm of Gilead; when he may be but some Imposter; and his Me∣dicines, it may be, no better than a little Cow-dung, or some thing worse; and as the Papists are kept in blindness, by pray∣ing in a Language they understand not, to the hazard of their souls; so are many amongst us led away (by such de∣ceivers) in harkning unto the false Doctrine of the Heathens, to the ha∣zard of our bodies: for they thunder out Art in Quarto, and Conscience in Folio, and shower down such Heavenly Apologies for their deceit and ignorance, with such clashes of Lightning, that frights the simple into such a belief, as
to mistrust, were a crime unpardonable; whereby they are canoniz'd on Earth, and written in the Rubrick, in the Ca∣lendar of the World. I believe there have been many such Saints on Earth, that never found any room in Heaven. Brethren; have a care none of you be ever found akin to any such Homi∣cide; though you may with such jug∣gles and indirect means deceive the people, you cannot deceive the all-seeing God; he will make you smart for it in the end, when the popular applause of the World shall but torment you the more. The life of man is more worth than all the Creation: And as it is pretious to the Creature; so it is to the Creator; and he will not suffer it to be trampled upon (by the pride of any) without revenge; and yet those sad fellows may be much cried up and in great esteem amongst the vulgar, when a far more knowing and worthy Practi∣tioner may not be regarded. Let not this be any discouragement to any young
Practitioner; for if there be anything of worth in him, and he acts like an Artist, let him expect to be undervalu∣ed by the ignorant, and let him not ad∣mire why it is so; for we find that it hath been the unhappiness of all Ages, that Falshood hath been preferred before Truth, and persons of no worth or value, have had the precedency of persons of true worth and esteem:Scientia non ha∣bet inimicum praeter ignoran∣tem. as for the vulgar, whom Nature huddl'd up in hast; that Act meerly by the prerogative of depraved Nature, speak against every thing but what is naught; whatsoever is of Worth and Art, be sure they will dislike; and ex∣claim against all Persons, but such as comply with their ignorance, whose Ma∣lice and Fury is like the Waves of the Sea, driven by the fury of enraged Boreas. I have read of Cato that he was for∣ty four times brought (by the vulgar sort of people) to the Judgment-Seat,
and every time came off acquitted; what a great happiness it is, when a man hath many malicious Enemies, to find impartial and upright Judges. Every Country hath its Diana, as well as Ephesus: And he that will not sacrifice with the people, shall be crucified by them; but he that doth keep a pure and undefiled Conscience towards God, and acts like an honest and ingenious Artist towards his Neighbour may ex∣tract a Cordial from the World's poy∣son, and live above the reach of Envy. The most splendent Creature is some∣time clouded, and the most vertuous Lady suffers an Eclipse in her innocen∣cy by some malevolent Neighbour when a Strumpet goes unsuspected. It is not every Artist's fortune to arrive at Corinth; but I could wish every ingenious Artist could practice what he knows, and that he knew more, to practise better: so I desire to be un∣derstood, when I say that Practise is the best part of Physick; that there
must be first a knowledge of the Disease, and likewise of the Remedy, and so to proportion the Remedy to the Disease; and not to try practices on mens bodies;Care at successi∣bus opto, Quis∣quis ab eventu facta notanda pu∣tat. that the Poet cursed; but first you must know, be∣fore you practise, and so your practice will confirm your know∣ledge: So I conclude with this advice; first, let God go before you, to counsel and direct you unto the direct means; let him go with you to crown it with a good Success, and let him follow you, to take all the glory unto whom all glory is due. Caepta faveat Deus, ac vota nostra secundet. So wisheth, Robert Couch.
TO MY Candid and Cordial COUNTRYMEN. Friends and Countreymen: SInce Death and Diseases (which are Diametrically opposite un∣to life) are entailed unto us through the Transgression of our first Parents, the Creator and sole Authour of life, foreseeing the weak∣ness of our Natures, to withstand the strength of such mortal Enemies, created Medicine from the beginning out of the Earth, to correct the fury and tyranny of Diseases (whereof Death is the Daughter) whereby each should be at his good pleasure; and so governs it at his will, that he
permits and suffers this man to die, and that to be sick by secondary Cau∣ses, which happen as well directly as irregularly, And whereas the Nature of Di∣seases are various; so he hath endu∣ed the Earth with various and sundry Medicinal Vertues; and he hath likewise called and ordained some to administer and apply such suitable and fit means, as the nature of Di∣seases do require. But the great dif∣ficulties by reason of the invisibility of the Disease, and the great obscu∣rity in the knowledge of Medicine have frustrated many in their expe∣ctation. All Arts and Sciences (ex∣cept Physick) have grown to some pitch; but that hath rather gone backward, till within some late years, famous Helmont (to whom the Art it self stands much obliged) and some Renowned Physicians of our Native Countrey, have begun to cast off that black vail of deceit with
which it was cloathed by the Theo∣rems of the Heathens. Indeed the gate of healing hath remained shut from the Cradle of the World; and the Schooles of the Greeks, instead of opening it shut it closer, and made it more mysterious than ever was intended by the first Creator. The natures, causes and places of Diseases were not rightly understood by them, whereby they failed in their Remedies; they had so much re∣gard unto the effects, that they neg∣lected the causes, which pernicious and destructive course is practised still, by such who are wholly led by their Rules. Wherefore the whole intent of this small Tract is to undeceive you, that you be not deceived of your lives by such erroneous preservers, and that you give not your money for what's not bread, nor buy a Snake instead of an Eele. I know it is not
Artist-like to build so great a Porch to so small a Fabrick: but if it tend to the Owners more conveniency, it is to be dispensed withall. Indulge me therefore Reader, to give thee some cautions; (it may be for thy Good) First, touching the Disease: Secondly, touching the Physician. Inasmuch as we were poysoned from the Tree of Knowledge; so no other Tree could we fetch an Antidote from; but the Tree of Life, which was for healing of the Nations: So Diseases are only cured by fit and suitable means; for thou mayst be kill'd by a bad means as well as re∣stored by a good. Wherefore be an earnest Suiter to Heaven, that thou mayst have the right means from Earth, and a benediction with it, which will make it operate the bet∣ter. And as it must be a true and pro∣per means that must cure thy Disease, so have a special care the Remedy
come not too late. How many have been robbed of their lives upon that score? Opportunity is the soul and perfection of Physick, you may lose that opportunity to day,Post est occasio calva. that the price of the World cannot procure thee to morrow: take time by the fore top lest it be bald be∣hind. There are two great Obstacles which commonly make many dis∣advantages; the first is, from the perswasion of Friends; the second, from the flattery of Diseases. First, when any one is taken sick, one Friend adviseth him to such a thing, another perswades another, and a third another; telling him if it does him no good it will do him no hurt: But there is no such Medi∣um will stand; for if it do not exas∣perate the Disease; yet it doth re∣tard the Cure; and so by trying un∣certain means, you loose the advan∣tage
of a sure Remedy. Secondly, The Deceit and Flattery of the Disease; when Diseases assault you very strongly in theQuanmvis non nunquam morbi in eorum princi∣piis absque peri∣culo tibi videntur: vires & in mores tamen sensim de∣jicientur & cor∣rampentur ut po∣stea nulla salutis spes super fit, at morbus qui pri∣mo curabiis fue∣rat, malignitam neglecta incurabi∣li . beginning, they may have such Inter∣vals and Respites, that you apprehend your selves better to day than you was yester∣day, and that while the Disease doth in∣sensibly: undermine your lives, and then assaults with greater fury than he did at first. Others are very mild and gentle in the beginning, yet they may be very malign: parvae febres quando qui valde malignae; whereby you do not so much mistrust them, much less un∣derstand their danger. And sometimes those that labour under sharp Diseases, the Symptoms
have been so remiss and dark, that it hath been a very difficult thing for an able Physician to presage either life or death, and when he hath passed his Judgment, within few hours there hath been such a change, that he hath been fool'd in his Prognostick. In others again, Diseases have layen so hid and obscure, that they have died before they were percei∣ved to be sick, of which we have had many sad Examples, of some that have died suddenly, who have carried those Diseases undiscovered about them, that wanted nothing but the word, immediately to run them to the heart. Now I have shewed you the De∣ceit and Flattery of Diseases, which have couzened thousands of their lives; of whom you will do well to learn to beware, and act prudently, to prevent by mistrust, what you would not have come suddenly and unexpected.
And as I have told you the deceit of Diseases, so I shall tell you the deceit of Physicians; I mean such who have built more upon the sandy Foundation of theAs if it were for their sake God created Medicine, and Christians should be beholden to them for it. Pagans and Heathens then upon a sure and rocky Foundation, who have studie more to get money than to cure their Diseases. It hath pitied me many a time,  see that Old Saying too often verifi∣ed; viz.Saepe plus mali à Medico quam à Morbo. That many times there is more danger from the Phy¦sician, than from the Disease, such a Physician as practi¦seth by Old Authors. And that yo may the better know them, and un∣derstand some of their juggles, I shal recite some of their Practises. First, when such a Deceiver is call∣ed unto a Patient, if his Diseas should be grown to a great height
which hath made him dangerously ill: (which was the end God or∣dained Physick and Physicians for, to relieve such distressed Natures) he stands at a distance, fearing to come near (like a low spirited fellow) lest he receive such a kick from the Di∣sease in his rotten reputation, as he may not easily recover: but he re∣solves rather to hazard the loss of a poor Patient, then venture the loss of his small credit; wherefore he is re∣solved to look on, and see which will get the Victory: in the mean while he excuses his juggle, telling, the Di∣sease is not yet come to an height; and by such a time he hopes to find a Crisis, and then he may safely take something, in the interim adviseth an Ale-brew, or Herb-Candle, many more such juggles they have to send people to their Graves: Just as if your house were on fire, And one comes and counsels you to let it a∣lone till it burn to the top of the
House, and then is the surest quenching it, you take his counsel. Now 'tis possible that the Heavens may pour down such a shower of rain as may extinguish it; but whether they do or not, doth not this man well advise you, think you; or as if an Enemy hath entered a Garrison, it is not safe to resist him, till he come to the heart of the Town: But good Souldiers will tell you otherwise, that what their Ene∣my gets they shall get it by Inches, &c. And this Crisis they so much talk of, is nothing but an effect of Na∣ture:As Helmont hath well obser∣ved. Nature hath opposite Virtues and Faculties, which hold a great harmony with the Moon's Motion, whereby there is, it may be, some small change a little while through her Motions; but they are not caused by the Moon, but by Nature harmoning
with her Motion: But what of this? what is it to the taking away thy Disease? indeed it may help a little a bad Medicine, but a good Medi∣cine will make a Laudable Crisis, let the Moon be where she will; in staying thus for the Moon, many have lost the Sun. Now this Deceiver finding Na∣ture to have cast the Disease, runs in and congratulates her Victory with a dram of his Bottle; and instead of helping her up, many times keeps her the longer down: But if the Disease hath cast Nature, then he gives his Relation this Cordial: That all the men in the World could do no more, and that he did consult with forty Learned Authors, &c. But if this will not operate then he gives them thisA Medicine to cause Rest or Sleep. O∣piate in a dram of Aqua Coelestis, viz. It was the will of God it should be so, and that his time was come, &c. and
so his decets are buried with his poor Patient: But how doth he make you believe it was the will of God, and that his time was come? we all know, God doth permit that which he doth not will: God may permit this Impostor to give a de∣structive means, or not to use the right; for it is almost all one: If thou hast not something to take off the poyson of the Disease, the poy∣son of the Disease will take off thee. In vain had the Creatour created Medicines out of the Earth from the beginning, unless the natural terms and bounds of things might be pro∣longed by healing and Medicines: And likewise the Tree of Life had been in vain in Paradise; if he that hath bounded the life of man had not together by the same endeavour appointed all means requisite for the bounds of life: then, if I use no means, or not the right means, my
bound is set, which I shall not pass over, according to that saying; woe is me that my Pilgrimage is prolong∣ed; thy Youth shall be renewed like the Eagle, &c. There's a second sort of such Jug∣lers, and they are altogether igno∣rant of any Knowledge, either from Ancients or Moderns; only know how to let blood, give a Purge or Clyster; when any such is called to a Patient, he never stands to enquire into the Disease, but presently de∣termines this to be done, and that to be taken upon pain of life, and if it succeed well, then he is a very skilful man; but if ill, then there was no other course to save his life; and plead the former excuses. These I do as much pity for their ignorance, as blame for their too rash confi∣dence; 'tis probable if they knew better they would act wiser. There's another sort, much akin with the former, but carry things
more modestly, and bring this fetch to excuse their ignorance; they tell the sick, they saw the same Disease cured (in some remarkable place, and by some eminent persons, 'tis like they tell them) and they have the means wherewithal it was ef∣fected, and several times since have tried it, &c. I shall say by these and the former, as Diogenes did when he saw some Rodians gorgeously ap∣parel'd: Tush, said he, that's no∣thing but pride, and seeing some poor Spartans stand by in their thread bare Caps; said, that's but another sort of pride. There are many other such Jugglers that thou∣sands have been decoy'd by, which are palliated with heavenly excuses to blind your eyes; I shall speak but of one more, which is the greatest and most dangerous of all; and that is, in procrastinating and retarding Cures. They will undertake any thing, though they know nothing
(as to a Cure) yet in keeping them in hand so long by their delusions, in promising this time, and that time, and tell them of Spring and Fall so long, till the Patient is fallen: if any such Hocus be asked either by the Patient or some other Friend, what he thinks of his Disease, or Ulcer; he tells them, there is no danger, and that by such a time he may be well, and when that fails, then puts it to another time, &c. Now if any ingenious Patient be∣gins to smell this Juggler, and apply himself to some able and honest Ar∣tist, to mend what he marr'd; but whether it may be accomplished by Art, or not; This Quack-salver hath this fetch to excuse his deceitful ig∣norance, if the Patient be recovered, then saith this Impostor, why I knew and told him so, that there was no danger at all, and that he would be well, &c. but if it cannot be resto∣red by Art, then saith this deceiver,
if he had continu'd with me, I could have cured him (I should not questi∣on it) long before this time and there was no danger in it, when he went from me, &c. This is the Devil's Hocust Pocust, that he teaches such Artists to perswade people, the nearest way to Heaven, is by way of Hell; that gross Impiety and grand Hypocrisie, that such Juglers are guilty of, they commonly lay on the shoulders of the Innocent. I am sorry to speak it, that I have seen too many such deluding souls in this Country; I shall forbear to speak any more lest some should think I speak in prejudice: I protest the contrary, but wish them really such, as they would have the World understand them to be: I expect such as I have touched the guilty conscience of, to snarle against me; who will endeavour to corrupt your Judgment, and perswade you into an ill opinion of this small Piece (for
whose good it was designed by the Author) raising, it may be, curious and malitious Questions amongst you, as the Rabbies and Doctors did amongst the Jews, viz. Can there any good thing come out of Naza∣reth? and that he eats and drinks with the Publicans; &c. But I tell such, 'tis better be a Publican amongst the Pharisees, than a Judas amongst the Apostles. My last advice unto you is this, whatsoever good this, or any other may bring unto you, return all your praises unto that God from whom you receive all your Mercies. — Foelix quicunque dolore Alterius discet, posse carere suo. R, C.
From my House at the Sign of the Globe and Chymical Fur∣naces in the Postern near Moorgate. Febr. 4 1679/80. Chr. Pack. Advertisement. JAmes Pemberton (Son in law to Mr. Rowland Pippin, so famous for curing of all curable Ruptures, or Broken Bellies) liveth at the Sign of the three Naked Boys on Ludgate-Hill, where he undertaketh the Cure of all curable Ruptures, and maketh all sorts of Trusses fit for the accom∣modation of any. His Wife treat∣eth with Women; they give Advice for nothing.
A TABLE of the several Diseases and Distempers treated of (amongst o∣ther things) in the en∣suing TRACT. FEvers in ge∣neral. Malignant Fevers in Children. Directions. Heat in Fevers. Cold in Fevers. Thirst in Fevers. Agues. Dropsies. Falling-Sickness Griping of the Guts. Surfeits. Fluxes. Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Kid∣neys. Windy-Melancho∣ly. Wind in the Small Guts. Collick. Wind-Dropsie.
Gouts. Pleurisie. Yellow Jaundice. Stone in the Blad∣der. Consumption with∣out a Cough. A Consumption with a Cough. The Rickets. Apoplexy. Vertigo. Palsie. Convulsion. Cramp. Worms. The breaking of a Vein. Coughs, Catarrhs, Rheums & short∣ness of Breath. Strangury. Fits of the Mo∣ther.
Praxis Catholica: OR, THE COUNTRY-MAN'S Universal REMEDY. IT was the custom amongst the ancient Greeks, that if a sure Cure was found for any Disease, the party was bound to write it on a Table, and hang it up in the Temple of Diana at Ephesus; that every one labouring with that Disease, might afterwards repair thi∣ther, and receive their Remedy. Soon after did they digest the Art of Healing into a fatal Method, as a Directo∣ry to the true knowledge of Curing;
whereby a further enquiry into Medicines came to be neglected, and so this false Doctrine of the Greeks spread it self a∣mongst the Arabians, Romans, and then amongst the Christians, and is still in use amongst us to this day, to blind us from the knowledge of true and perfect Reme∣dies for curing our Diseases; whereby we see many yearly swept away from us, through some accustomed Diseases, as well as new ones, and especially that a∣mongst Children, of a Griping, Vomit∣ing and Scouring, which gives me great cause to mistrust, that either the true cause of this is not understood as well as the rest, or a fit Remedy not yet found out. Nor is it Children alone, that this Fever, the Prince of Diseases, doth ap∣pear unto in those bloody manners, but to some of full Growth and Strength. It doth assault us in various Shapes and Ha∣bits. This Disease is a grand Enemy to man; for there is hardly a Distemper but is accompanied with a Fever, either going before, or following after it. Wherefore I shall a little anatomize it unto you, and shew you its Rise, the place where it commonly abides, and what it feeds on, and so describe it as you
may know it at a distance, and not only this, but most of our Serpentine Enemies. I shall observe that method in treating of them, as I do in curing of them; which is, to have respect unto that first which doth most press; amonst which, I think that peracute Disease of Children is most ur∣gent, so my method leads me to begin with a child, whom I shall trace unto his old age, where I shall leave him to that great Phy∣sician, whose Servant I am not worthy to be. First it will be necessary that I give a preparative (to your understanding, in unfolding the right use of two or three principal parts, whose proper uses have not yet been discovered) before you enter upon the main Body; viz. The Spleen. Liver: and Gaul. From these three comes Life and Death, Health and Diseases, as they are disposed, either well or ill. These are the Pillars that do support the Fabrick of the Micro∣cosm. The two first do principally respect the
preservation of Health; the last is of a more Balsamical Nature, which doth as well prevent Diseases, as restore health when it is wanting. Understand by a Ferment A Specifical Virtue or Power which eve∣ry part is endued withal, that whatsoever is transferred through them is transmuted into their fermental quality,Omnis facultas quando praeva∣let ea est natura ut mutet sibique simile faciat id quod ad ipsam est victum. as the Aliment in digesting in the Stomach is sow'r; then, when the Chyle passeth through the Guts, Duodenum and Ileon, it is saltish, and being more elaborated in the Meseraick and Milky Veins, becometh more salt, which is a preparation for Sanguification, which is perfected in the Liver, and so assimilated by every part. The whole Body is seasoned and tinctu∣red with the Ferments of those three prin∣cipal parts, viz. sharp from the Spleen,Whitmore de Fe∣bre anomala. Salt from the Liver, and bitter from the Gaul. To begin with the first.
The Spleen. This part hath been hardly censured by many to be the receptacle of the Faeces of the Blood, the mother of black Choler, or Melancholy, the Sink and Fountain of many stubborn and rebellious Diseases, and to be a Bowel of no great use; only to elaborate this more feculent Blood, and give a small nourishment to some of the natural parts: likewise the efficient cause of Madness and Dotage, &c. Some have not stuck to say, that if ever nature made any thing to hurt her self, it was this, and if she had found out some other way for discharging of this Excrement, as she hath done the rest, she had eased her self of abundance of trouble, &c. but I ra∣ther think the contrary, there is not any part within us, nature hath been so liber∣al unto, as to this, nor hath bestowed such special favour on:Vide Dr. High∣more de affecti∣one Hypochon. fol. 132. it is enriched with ten times, at least, as many Arteries as a∣ny other part. There is life peculiarly due unto it more than sensitive; for it is
extant long before quicken∣ing.Helmont. de Au∣thor. duum vi∣rut. It hath a double Fer∣ment; there is a Vital from the Arteries, and the dige∣stive faculty of the Stomach which is made by an acid juice sent from it; and for that great concernment which is committed unto its charge, it is termed the President of the Stomach. I cannot think that any excrementitious matter can reside, where it hath so worthy a place for its Emunctory, as the Stomach; the Arteries fetch from the Stomach of their purest Chyle, and sanguifie it for their plea∣sure; and it may be by their too liberal at∣traction, may debilitate their Ferment, that so they may require an assistance from the main Body, whereby the Stomach may be neglected, with a due quantity of this juice; whence lack of appetite and crudi∣ties do arise, and so this Ferment may be exorbitant in the Spleen; from whence comes bloody and black spitting into the stomach (which some have judged black Choler) which is nothing but an expur∣ging and renewing of nourishable blood from the Spleen it self; the Humour, Me∣lancholy and black Choler was never yet found in nature, nor indeed is there any
such thing extant: wherefore whatsoever distemper may arise from the Spleen, it is from a vitiated or debilitated Ferment: not from a peccant matter, which doth offend only in quality, not in quantity. Again, if the distemper of the Spleen be the cause of Madness, then in its right order, there is a sound and judicious un∣derstanding due to the same place: ac∣cording to that Maxim of the Ancients, Ejusdem partis atque potestatis sit functio sa∣na, cujus est vitiata ac vicissim, i. e. There is a sound function of the same part and power, whereof there is a vicious one, and on the contrary. I could speak much in defence of the Dignity of this noble part, but at present shall conclude with this: the great Offices that proceed from it, and that rich and noble Retinue that attends it, speaks it no less than the pallace where the sensitive soul keeps her Residence. Of the Liver. I shall but only hint at this because I shall speak more largely of it when I come to treat about Dropsies, and other Diseases that are falsely fathered on it: what a
common complaint is there about a hot Liver, and a cold Stomach: when as I shall demonstrate, that the Liver is never hotter than is necessary, nor the Stomach never colder: though it may seem so by imperfect or weak digestion. And although Sanguification is not be∣gun in it, yet it is the perfecter and recti∣fier of it: whereby the Blood is assimila∣ted and conveyed into every part through the Veins. In a word, the Liver is the Ad∣ministrator to all the natural parts in man. Of the Gaul. In the first Disease that I shall speak un∣to, I shall be enforced to anatomize this Bowel, only by the way take notice, that this Gall is the great Balsom of Na∣ture, as well for preventing and destroy∣ing of Diseases, as the curing our Wounds. Understand, that whatsoever is done by nature (in any thing of this kind) is performed by this great Balsom: nor hath this as well as the rest been free from the Calumniations of the ignorant, in ma∣king it guilty of causing several sharp Di∣seases, &c. But more of this in the next.
Of Fevers. I Shall speak a word in general, then come to particulars, all Fevers are of the same essence and name: and differ not so much in the matter as place. Place. The Place it acts in, is the Stomach mostly. The Cause is from the error and estran∣ging of the Faculties; or from things un∣digested and untransmuted; or else from Excrements not being rightly subdued, or separated, and orderly evacuated. Division: there are two sorts, continu∣al and intermitting. From the first there are several Species, viz. some very malign; others accompa∣nied with less Malignity: others with none at all. Intermitting ones, are of three sorts (Legitimate) Quotidian, Tertian and Quartan.
Not to trouble you to treat of any con∣tagious and pestilential Fevers: none hath yet been amongst us, God still keep them from us, and remedy them where they are. I shall therefore begin with malignant Fevers, which are very rife in this Coun∣try, especially amongst Children. A malignant Fever differs from a Syno∣chus, or Burning, or any other Fever in this, that it draws its putrefaction imme∣diately from its own matter: for indeed putrefaction is joyned with it. A burning Fever, and other Fevers do not derive their putrefaction immediately from their matter, but gradually and casu∣ally either from the peccancy of the mat∣ter, or debility of the Ferment where it re∣sides, those are of a less malignity, and bound in a less quantity of the matter of∣fending. Ephemera, or an one days Fever is more from a disposition or inclination to a Di∣sease; for that morbifick matter in the sto∣mach is soon cast up by Vomit, or digest∣ed, I rather call it a Distemper than a Di∣sease. But more particularly.
A Malignant Fever in Children. AS I have shewed that a Malignant Fe∣ver is from the present putrefaction of its own matter;Parvae Febres quandoque val∣de malignae, Hipp. Diagnost. so this violent Disease in Children is of that nature, which is clearly demonstrated from the Symptoms in the first as∣sault; that within forty eight hours pu∣trefaction hath been nigh perfected, as is perceived by a coldness in the extreme parts, and cold sweats, &c. Cause. It is from some thing received which may contain some vicious quality, or a∣bounding in quantity; or from an ill dispo∣sition of the digestive Ferment; for it of∣ten happens, that when the season is most hot, then the digestion is weakest, and then crude Fruits, and things hard to digest take advantage of the stomach: But above all, I look at Milk and Sugar
to be the greatest cause; for Milk is the general Food of Children, and there is such a propensity in its own nature to cur∣dle, that if it be not quickly digested, it obeyeth the acid Ferment of the place, which soon is coagulated, and a Curd made like new tough Cheese, which doth strongly resist digestion, especially in a weak and tender stomach, and if it be not speedily vomited up, it soon begets a pu∣trefactive Ferment, and then soon after those terrible Symptoms are produced, as Vomiting, Scouring, Griping, &c. Natura morbo∣rum est medicus medicus naturae minister.Now Nature, which is the Physician to Diseases, unites her force, and takes with her a quantity of this Gaul-balsom to rectifie this Malignity, and eradicate the Morbifick Matter; and whatsoever this Balsom doth incorporate with, it hinders its putrefacti∣on (as Salt doth in Flesh or Fish) and sea∣sons it with its taste, and colours it with its tincture, as a little Wormwood doth a∣ny thing it is commixt with, and a little Saffron doth Milk, &c. and what part of it is separated for its putrefactive Body, nature endeavours to cast forth, and by reason it still retains its acquired sharpness
from the putrefactive Ferment falling down upon the Pylorus, or lower mouth of the stomach, stirreth up those violent motions; and what part of it passeth through the Intestines, it abstergeth and scoureth away that mucous or phlegmatick matter which nature hath lined the Guts withal; for a twofold end: first, to hin∣der Obstructions, that the Chyle may have a more speedy and slippery passage: Secondly, to defend them from any sharp or corrosive quality that may be in the Chyle, which is transferred through them. Which slimy matter is commonly seen to scour from them in this Disease, and this being gone, this excrementitious mat∣ter doth easily corrode by its sharpness, which is the cause of those Tortures and Gripings. And in regard that this peccant matter which is cast forth, is tinctured by this Balsom, it hath deceived many, who have taken it to be the Gaul itself. 'Tis true, there are Excrements in Children, from eating Milk, not perfect∣ly digested, which are of this Tincture, but of no bitterish Taste, it is brownish in the stomach, yellow in the Ilion, and green
in the blind Gut, yet they may not be sick. And no marvel, that there is little or none of this Balsom found in its Recepta∣cle or Bladder in dead Children; for if this be spent, Death immediately follows, according to that Proverb: When the Gaul is broken, the drown∣ed Carcase riseth to the top of the Water, when it can no longer withstand putre∣faction. Those Sacrilegious Jews knew that this Gaul was a great Cordial for the preserving and continuing life; wherefore they gave our Saviour Vinegar and Gaul: Vinegar to excite the faculties of the stomach, for the Gauls quicker passage into the vital spirits to prolong his life, that they might the longer torment him under his pains before death. But to stay no longer here, it follows in the next place to treat about the great Heat and Cold which happens by Inter∣vals, as well in most other Fevers as in this; and likewise of that inordinate Thirst.
Of Heat. THough Heat and Fever are counted Synonyma's of one and the same name, individual companions, &c. yet I say, this Heat is not of the Quiddity or Essence of the Disease, neither is it the cause of any Disease, but is caused by the stirring up of that vital aiery spirit, the di∣rectoress of life; which spirit it is that makes the assault:Archaeus Para∣cels. . Hippoc. now this spirit being provo∣ked by the Disease, allarms all the Faculties, Virtues and Powers both Vital and Natural, which it doth unite unto it self, and so furiously assault his mortal Enemy, as many Coals of Fire raked together, and blown up, make a great heat, so doth this heat proceed from this inflamed Spirit. EXAMPLE. A Thorn or Splinter being got into the Finger or Hand, presently a heat, pain
and pulsation is felt, which this spirit or Archaeus stirreth up, for the expelling of that extraneous Body: now this heat is not a product of the Thorn, but casually from this spirit, and occasionally only from the Thorn: therefore heat is a latter acci∣dent, and subsequent upon the essence of a Fever. Cold. COld is the Diseases Colours, or Ban∣ner, under which it fights, but it is not either the Disease, nor Cause, but a product and effect of the Disease,Calorem & fri∣gus non esse mor∣bus ut neque bo∣rum causas. Hipp. putrefaction brings in coldness, the Ferment of Putrefaction is sharp and cold: as we have an ocular Demonstration in Gan∣grenes and Mortifications, whilst it is but in fieri a Gangrene, what a hard task it is to revive it by the hottest and most penetrating Medicines we can get; nay,
and fain to scarrifie deeply too, lest it should hinder their operation; or if it fouls a bone, no less than a Medicine that is hot in the highest degree can effect it, and when a Sphacelus, or Mortification is confirmed, without natures Second comes in speedily to her rescue,A Chyrurgi∣on, Chyrurg. naturae mini∣ster. and dismember it, it would soon run her to the heart; and did not pu∣trefaction work by a cold, a Body would be hotter after it was dead, than it was be∣fore; but we see the contrary, when pu∣trefaction grows stronger, the Body grows colder: I could evidence by many demonstrations more, that the Heat is not of the essence, neither the cause, nor oc∣casion of a Fever, and likewise, that Cold is meerly the effect of the Disease: but I think this sufficient. Thirst. This great Thirst in Fevers doth not proceed from Heat and driness, as in a true and natural Thirst; for this will not be allayed by drinking, as that will; but this Thirst is deceitful, and is produced by some excrementitious matter, which
adheres to that sensitive faculty, and de∣ludes the Organ,Nec sitis est ex∣tincta prius quam vita bi∣bndo. as if a great dryness had suddenly come unto it, as I have ob∣served in a very malignant Fever, which the Army in Flanders was infected with, being always cold, and very thirsty; as likewise in the cold Fit of an Ague, &c. and so this is evident, that heat in Fevers is not the cause of that inordinate Thirst; besides I have extinguished this Thirst by those things which have been virtually hot;Contraria con∣trariis curan∣tur. which, if heat had been the cause, would rather have exaspe∣rated. Thus you have the matter, manner, and Concomitants of this Disease. The Schools have observed some Heads, from whence they have derived many Spe∣cies of Fevers, (which I shall not insist on, because they depend upon one and the same way and means of Cure) without mention of an Hectick, or intermitting Fever, which differ only in the place they reside, which I shall speak to in their pro∣per places. It is my chief design to do good unto my
Countrymen, who (I know) would ra∣ther have something to ease them, and be rid of their Diseases, than to hear curious and learned Discourses, or quaint Di∣stinctions; and in pleasing them, I care not whom I displease. As I have put the knowledge of the cause into your Heads, so I shall put a re∣medy into your Hands. Cure. You may clearly see what first is to be done, and wherein the Cure doth consist, which is, in removing the cause or mat∣ter offending; the neglect whereof hath suffered such an infinite Slaughter, which gives me reason to think, that either the cause is not known, or a fit Remedy not yet found; for unless there be a propor∣tion between the Remedy and the Disease, It will do but little good. Diseases which come suddenly, if they are rightly understood, they are soon gone,Extrema non permanent. though they may be extreme sharp whilst they continue. I know it is the practice here to look more unto the Effect than the Cause, in
correcting the Symptoms than the matter whereof they are produ∣ced;Si ta tollantur quae conveniunt aeger melius se habet & facile sert: Sublata causa tolletur effectus. which is a very per∣nicious course, and con∣trary unto reason, and all principles in Healing. And that you may the bet∣ter understand your error, I shall recite your practice. When first any one is taken with this, or the like Distemper, either Child, or those of full Growth, first you run and fetch Mint Water, and a little Syrup to stay the Vomiting. Secondly, then Cinnamon Water and Syrup of Quinces, or Myrtle Berries to stay the scouring. Then, it may be, you give a Carmi∣tive, or Clyster to expel Wind, and cor∣rect the Griping. That done, you give some cooling Ju∣lep to allay its Heat, and to quench in Thirst. And when it is cold, you give a little Mithridate, or Theriack of Andronica, o London Treacle, and lay a Plaister of it to his Stomach. And then lay a Spell against the Fever to the Wrists, &c.
And so you keep doing, till you can do no more; just as a man who hath lost himself in a Wood, he keeps going, but whither he knows not. You see all those things do but respect the effect, here is nothing hath any regard at all unto the Cause. And should things answer the intention for which they were given the party, ei∣ther Child or Man would presently die. To hinder the evacuating of this mor∣bifick matter, is directly a∣gainst the intention of na∣ture;Quo natura ver∣get ad locum conferentem eo ducere oportet. Hippoc. for the evacuation of this matter is to be looked at as the Crisis of Nature, and whosoever shall reco∣ver, all this matter is to be brought out, and whoever goes about to stop it in the beginning, works against nature. What a vain thing therefore is it to think to take away the Gripings, before the matter be gone that causes it; and to corroborate the stomach, or to refresh its Spirits, so long as the Enemy beareth sway. To give the Child Mithridate, or lay a plaister of it to the stomach, which is worse, becomes another Disease; or any thing else that is nauseous, whilst Nature &
the Disease are struggling: and to give cooling things to correct the hear, is to weaken nature and strengthen the Di∣sease. Obj. But you will tell me many have re∣covered by the use of those means. Answ. And many more had been, had they never been used (with submission to providence) but (quoad homines) af∣ter the manner of men, I admire that any should recover that ever was affected with this Disease, for they are ever giving, and all to hurt it; seeing the best Friends be∣come the worst Enemies, which makes good that old Saying, When God cuts off man's thread of life, His dearest Friends do bring the knife. But many things are wrought by acci∣dent, as we have known many have been recovered from a Fever by drinking cold water. Obj. From whence some have asserted, that this Heat is of the Essence of the Di∣sease. Answ. But this Cure is not wrought by the Water, as it is cold and moist, for Sack or strong Beer would have performed
it, and a great deal better; but it is from the great quantity of it, which doth so replete the stomach, that some of the peccant mat∣ter which doth adhere unto the Fibres thereof, the Water hath loosened, and so its brought away with it. I suppose whosoever hath been cured by Water, it hath been when the Disease hath been on him some considerable time, and not in the beginning. I have pre∣scribed Water several times in the end of a Fever, to this intent, and I ever found it very successful; but I suppose the par∣ties that have taken it upon their own sen∣sual inclination, it was hap-hazard with them, for to take Water in the beginning of a Fever, either kills them, or strikes them into an Ague, or some other long Sickness. To drink it in a contagious, pestilen∣tial Fever, or any Fever that tends much to putrefaction, hastens death. I do not speak this as not approving of the use of Water; but I declare the con∣trary, for I have found as strange events by drinking Water, as ever I saw by any Physick. I have known a man cured very soon of an Atrophia, or Consumption, only by the drinking of pure Rock Wa∣tar:
and in many other cases have I used it: but great consideration is to be had in the giving of it. But to return, by applying a nauseous or foetid Medicine to the Stomach, whilst the morbifick matter resides there; nature thinking she is assaulted by another Di∣stemper, unites all her strength and force, and desperately attempts both her Enemies with this resolution, to extirpate them, or sink her self, whereby she may, by exaspe∣rating of her new Enemy, cast forth the old, and then this amongst the ignorant is cryed up for a laudable Medicine, when as such things are done by chance, for where one hath recovered by this means, twenty have died. Thus you see what a blind course hath been taken for the curing this, or any o∣ther Disease. The meer pity that I bear to poor Infants, hath extorted this from me, to whom I have often been sent for, to see them die, when their spirits have been so far spent, that I have not dared to give them any thing to take off the Di∣sease, to the great grief of my spirit, for without the Disease be taken away, to small purpose do we use Cordial Means to refresh their Spirits.
DIRECTIONS. I shall now direct you to a better way, viz. 1. When you are assured this Disease is on them (which is known first by a scou∣ring away of a slimy matter, then a dis∣colouring of the Excremenrs, as yellow, green, &c. and a griping in the Belly, be∣ing very hot and cold by Intervals: press not any manner of Meat upon them,Impura corporae quo plus nutri∣eris eo majus laeseris. as you ten∣der their lives; this very thing hath destroyed thou∣sands. For to give Meat whilst the Disease is on them, when the stomach is not fit to receive it, nor hath strength to digest it, without it be speedi∣ly vomited up again, it becomes a Recruit, or supply to the Disease. 2. Neither administer, nor apply any thing external, or internal, that is any way nauseous or ungrateful to the stomach, for nature hates and abhors such things; for though it be laid upon the stomach,
yet the taste of it is in the stomach, as though it were contained there, especially in young and tender Skins; for to have a thing that is nauseous to the stomach, and ungrateful to the smell, constantly to lie on, would be troublesome to one that is in health, much more to him that is sick. Give not the Child any Milk, and if it suck, wean it; for Milk is the first matter and foundation this Disease is raised on, and it bears still an affinity with it, and is presently converted into its poisonous na∣ture, and likewise let it forbear Water and Beer, either cold or warm: keep the sick party (either Child or otherwise) in a breathing sweat, which is done by drinking warm Posset-drink, the Milk be∣ing turn'd with White Wine, or Sack, or Beer sharpened with Vinegar; let the par∣ty drink of it as warm as he can take it: this is far better than any Cordial or Julip whatsoever in a putrid Disease, between whiles the Child may drink a good draught of Sack, raw, and without Sugar is best; and if it tends to coldness, either in Face, Nose, Hands or Feet, you may safely give it a liberal draught of Brandy, with a lit∣tle white Sugar, though the Child be not two months old, and likewise make a Toast
of old stale Bread, or a piece of Rose-Cake, and soak it in warm Brandy, where∣in a little white Sugar hath been dissolved, and put it to the Child's Stomach, and let it lie on for twenty four hours, and if the coldness is not removed, you may reiterate it. I have a specifick Water for that end, which doth much revive and cherrish na∣ture. What though it exasperateth and ma∣keth more hot? That is well recompen∣sed; for it mightily strengthens and re∣fresheth nature. Observe, that a hot and feverish tem∣per, is the most laudable and best temper the Child can be in, whilst the Disease remains. When the morbifick matter is gone, you may give a little salt of Pearls; Corral, Am∣ber, or Wormwood, which are very good in a Cordial Electuary, to kill that putre∣factive Ferment in the place where the Di∣sease lay, that may lie behind lurking; which is the cause of most Relapses, and long and tedious Sicknesses and Con∣sumptions. 'Tis not enough to remove the effect, or matter produced, nor the cause produ∣cing, but the principal producer must be
rectified before health be perfectly resto∣red. Thus I have directed you in the best course you can take; and be sure you will do nothing that will hurt, but rather to strengthen and refresh nature. Obj. But you will ask me, what shall we do to remove the cause? Answ. That is the principal Verb in∣deed, I know a more proper and safe Me∣dicine to effect it, than I can direct you unto, in all the Dispensitory. 'Tis true, there are a great many good Medicines, though good for little, without it be the Laudanum of Paracelsus, and some few Chymical Preparations: the rest are hard∣ly worth a man's knowledge. That Physician that hath not found out better and more specifical means than what are there, is like to make but a sad pra∣ctice. But I shall speak it to your comfort, God hath given me the knowledge of such a Medicine as will effect it; and not only this, but it doth also eradicate and extir∣pate the cause of most Diseases incident unto our frail Bodies, as you will hereaf∣ter perceive. It is a Powder without either smell or
taste, and the highest dose or quantity is but five or six Grains to the most robustive or strong Body, and so downward to half a Grain, which a Child of two days old may safely take, its operations are various, according to the nature and place where the peccant matter resides. How you shall take it, and what is to be done and observed in the taking of it, I shall give directions in the latter end of this Book. And as it is an effectual, so it is a safe Medicine; for I have given it unto three or fourscore several Children in and about the Town of Boston, and indeed I know not of any one that died, that ever took it, except one: the spirits of which were quite spent before I gave it, that it was not able to retain it in its stomach, but im∣mediately brought it up again. There is an eminent person in this Country, whose knowledge is great in the most curious and best Arcanums, or secret Medicines that are used, he could tell you, it is as safe as good, who was an eye-wit∣ness unto a wonderful operation it had in a most contagious and malign Disease, which was the Small Pox, which struck in among the Passengers in Captain Lord's Ship, coming from England two years
since, that not one died that took it, two only died, and neither of them took it, as the Chyrurgion, Mr. Whiting can testifie, I gave him some of this Powder, and bade him give to every one that was infected with that Disease, which he did accord∣ingly; though he gave it to some that was blind, to others after they appeared twenty four hours, and very ready to be suffocated, and very soon made them all perfectly well, which was well known un∣to all the Passengers in the Ship, as well as unto themselves that took it, which are dis∣sipated through this Country; and I que∣stion not but this Paper will find out some of them, who can well witness this truth. By this you may judge of its efficacy in any other Disease of a malignant nature. I shall tell you what I have observed from it in some other Maladies. I have cured all sorts of Fevers with this Arcanum universale, in all Ages and Sexes; for continual burning Fevers, whether putrid or not, are frequently ta∣ken off by it with one Dose, in the begin∣ning, or at the most by two, so that the Patient may be well before the time of the expected Crisis. The same Benefit I have often observed when given in the state of
the Disease, that it hath been presently taken off, although then nature is obli∣ged to take a longer time to renew the strength, than she would have needed, if she had been assisted with this Medicine in the beginning. How common a thing it is to make a Month or six weeks work in curing a Fever, although peradventure nature it self hath overcome the Disease in twelve or fourteen days, but the diseasie matter formed, and some symptoms of ef∣fects must entertain the Physician a great while longer. For if the Fever were pu∣trid, then the Stomach and Lungs remain loaden with much pituitous matter, to carry off which, the common practice is to follow the Patient close with Expectora∣ters, such are their Pectoral Electuaries, Decoctions, Syrups, Lohochs, &c. the which are so far from answering that end, as really to add to the matter they are de∣signed to expel, for they not being A∣gents impowered to alter or rectifie any Ferment, as soon as they come into the Stomach, either nauseate it with their Load, and so are cast up, or if they stay, submit to the depraved digestion of the Stomach, and there make an increase of the diseasie matter, whence an extraordi∣nary
spitting continues till nature it self, by degrees retrieves the natural Ferment, and frees her self from the disease matter, and the pretended remedy together. But if this seem too long a doing, (that no piece of Art may be wanting) there is ano∣ther way at hand, and that is to exhibit purging Medicines to carry it downwards, the which is more pernicious than the former, for the Purge drawing a great quantity of sordid matter from the Tho∣rax to the Guts, and nature not having yet recovered her right Regiment may admit some of this matter (by the Meseraick or Milky Veins) again into the Blood, whence may succeed again a Fever de novo, called a Relapse, or (if the lately tired spirit take not the present Assault) then the occasional cause of a Dropsie, Hectick, Consumption or some other Cronick Di∣seases: All which is easily prevented by ta∣king a Dose or two of this Arcanum, which evacuates the present matter by vo∣mit, and rectifies the vitiated Ferment of the Stomach, and other parts, whence the power of making such matter is quite taken away. This I have had very large experience of. But a few days before the writing of this, I was sent for to a lusty
young man, who had laboured under a Sy∣nochus, about a week having, for during that time been treated by an Apothecary, first with cooling Juleps, which were con∣tinued all the while, then strongly sweat by a Sudorifick, and the next day blooded; but the Disease notwithstanding increa∣sing (as being newly changed from a non putrida to a putrid, when I came) made the Apothecary, it seems, weary or doubtful of his work; for he desired the Man's Wife to send for a Physician, or a Second, (who was a Friend of his, 'tis like for the Bills sake) but the Woman ha∣ving formerly had some experience of my Medicines, sent to me about five or six that Afternoon, I presently ordered him four Grains of this Powder, which wrought once only by Vomit, and discharged the stomach of that Diseasie matter, which be∣fore felt to him like a great weight, the pain in his Head presently abated, and that night he rested pretty well (for he had no sleep worth mention since he was ill) the next morning I sent him four Grains more of the Powder, which gave him three Vomits and two Stools: about six in the Afternoon I went to visit him, and found him about his Chamber, saying, he
thought he was as well as ever, his Sto∣mach being returned, and he very hungry. Thus you see a Fever cured in eighteen hours, or less, which in all probability would have been at the least three or four weeks (if recovered at all) before nature by such enfeebled helpers, or rather, hin∣derers (as are the common Medicines) could have freed her self from the Disease. I could instance many the like cases were it needful. This Medicine hath (besides its other gifts) such a general tendency for the curing of all Fevers, that upon the first knowledge of it in practice, I called it my Species Febrifuga, by which name I publish∣ed it in my Catalogue of Medicines, Print∣ed in the year 1676, although I had then seen this little Book of the Authors. I shall here subjoyn a short Discourse of in∣termitting Fevers or Agues, in which Mr. Couch is silent, except in the name, yet I cannot doubt but he must be well acquaint∣ed with the power of this Medicine in cu∣ring them.
Of Agues. GReat Diversity hath been, and yet is among Authors concerning this Disease, some holding one thing, and some another concerning its Seat and Causes: but I without reciting their differences or contending with any man's opinion (either of which is no way profitable) shall brief∣ly endeavour to give you my own senti∣ment. It needs no Definition, being suf∣ficiently known here; neither Division, seeing all the sorts thereof proceed from one cause, and may be cured by the same Medicines. Seat. The Place or Seat of Agues is the Pan∣creas, or Sweet-bread; for all the parts of Man's Body being considered, which only by intervals may transmit the cause of in∣termitting Fevers to the Heart, none is found to which not only the Focus or source of those Fevers, but also the cau∣ses
of all their Symptoms may be ascribed, besides the Pancreas or Sweet-bread. Cause. The Cause is an Obstruction of one or more of the Lateral Ducts or Branches of the Pancreas, by reason of Phlegmatick Matter carried thither in too large a quan∣tity, and there detained, the which being separated from the Blood (together with the Pancreatick Juice) by the Glandules of the Pancreas, and sent to the main Duct or Pipe thereof causeth an Obstructi∣on there, and detaineth the juice of the Pancreas (contrary to nature) which ought continually to flow into the thin Gut, called the Duodenum. This Juice being thus stagnated, quickly grows acrimoni∣ous, or sharp, and acquires a putrefactive Ferment, whence at length it makes way through the obstructing Phlegm, and is ef∣fused into the Duodenum, where meeting with the Bile or Gall, it stirs up a vicious and preternatural Ferment, from whence comes the Ague Fit with all its Symptoms, as in the beginning, horrour, chilness, cold, shaking, &c. then presently reach∣ings, yawnings and vomiting of bitter or
four relish, and afterwards burning heat, the causes of Heat, Cold, Thirst, &c. you have in the foregoing Chapter of Fevers: but if any desire further satisfaction, con∣cerning the reasons of the differences of Agues, and the constant or various access of their Fits with the particular causes of Symptoms, they may read it at large in Regnerus de Graaf, in his Book intituled, de succo Pancreatico, published by me in the year 1676, to which I refer the Reader, not having room here to be any larger. Cure. The Cure consists in opening the Ob∣structions, changing the diseasie Ferment, and expelling such matter as the Disease hath rendred incapable of being redinte∣grated and taken into the communion of life. All which intentions are truly and radically performed by this Powder; for an Ague being removed by the due use of this Medicine, returns not again, nei∣ther leaves any danger of its degeneration into another Disease, both of which too frequently happen after the use of some Medicines which take off the Fit only by a kind of soporiferous quieting the present
fury of the Archaeus. If it be taken before the Ague hath exceeded three Fits, one only Dose is usually sufficient to carry it away; if fix or seven Fits, two Doses or three at the most; yea, I have cured di∣vers at twice or thrice giving it that have had it six or eight weeks; but if it be a year old or more, the continuance of its use but a reasonable time (with the help of the Balsamick Pill) will not fail to cure it. I have also known it to cure A∣gues when it hath had no other sensible o∣peration than Breaking of Wind. A person living in Greenwich who had a Tertian Ague, and sometimes a Quotidi∣an all the last Winter, was cured this Spring by three Doses of the Powder which never had any sensible operation, and two Doses of the Balsamick Pill, so that in eight or ten days he was abroad a∣bout his Affairs, and never had any Fit since, although he was before so low brought, that he could not sit up any lon∣ger than while his Bed was made, not∣withstanding the constant advice of an e∣minent Physician of that Town, which he had used. It is to be taken in a Spoonful of Drink, or Posset drink about an hour before the
Fit comes, for two or three Fits together, according as the Ague is in continuance. If the Patient be weak, or of a tender ha∣bit of Body, let him take a Dose of the Balsamick Pill the same night after the Powder hath been given, when he goes to Bed, with a draught of warm Ale, or a Glass of good generous Wine, which Pill will mightily corroborate and refresh his Spirits, and also tends much to the Cure, if the Ague have been of a long continu∣ance, or be a Quartan, or fourth Ague, then after the Patient hath taken the Pow∣der three times, if the Fit still remain, then let him take a full dose of the Balsa∣mick Pill, two or three hours before the coming of the next Fit, and goe to Bed, and dispose himself to sweat before the Fit comes, the which if he do, its ten to one but the Fit comes no more; but if there should be a failure of sweating timely e∣nough, then let him take the powder be∣fore one Fit, and the Pill before the next, till it be gone; but not one Ague in twen∣ty will need to be thus treated.
A general Direction in Fevers. TO drink liberally of such Liquor as is most convenient, is good: I like not Beer of any Liquor in a Fever, before the peccant matter (wherein the Disease doth subsist) be evacuated, because it hath a nutriment from the Grain it is made withal, which doth add unto the matter of the Disease, whereby Thirst is exaspe∣rated, as is commonly seen. I rather advise to drink Wine and Wa∣ter, two parts Water, and one Wine, sharpened a little with the Spirit of Vitri∣ol, or Sulphur, if it be per campanam, which is drawn from a Bell Still, it is the better, which is a singular Medicine to allay and correct the inordinate Thirst and Heat in Fevers. Medera, Fial, French, or Sherry Wines, you may use, Malaga or a∣ny Sweet Wine is not so good, neither Syrups, or any Sugared or Honeyed Meat, or Drink▪ And when they begin to re∣cover,  plainest Broths and Gruels are the best; till then a little is too much,
and if you did use Salt and Vinegar in∣stead of Spices and Sugar, the sick would like it the better; and it would be better for them; a few Prunes and Currants, if the sick like them, may be used. But some may say, How shall we do that live far up the Country, where we have no Wines, nor can get neither of those Spirits? the best that I can advise you to, is Milk boiled, and turned with some Vi∣negar or Verjuice, the Curd being taken away, whereof he may drink freely, but he is to take it alway hot, and the hotter the better. This course is to be taken after the cause is removed by my powder, or something else (but I know not what) otherwise this, or any other, is like to do but little good. Bleeding, Purging, Clysters, Cordials, Juleps, &c. are but Trifles in curing a Fe∣ver, they do at best but correct the Sym∣ptoms or Effects; I will do more good with one dose of my Powder, and one of my Pills, than they with all those in a Month. If the Fever be continual, and come by a Surfeit, or otherwise, so that the Patient
feel a Load or Weight at his Stomach, or hath a propensity to vomit, the first thing to be done is to give a Vomit, whereby the Stomach and first passages may be freed of the grossest of the Diseasie Matter wherein the Fever sits, or hath taken up its Inn, to which purpose you may give half an ounce of the Infusion of Crocus Metal∣lorum, or six Drams, or a whole Ounce (according to the age and strength of the Patient) in a small Draught of warm Pos∣set-drink; but if you know any better An∣timonial Preparation, then give it. That being done, ℞ Tartar. Vitriolat six Grains, Volatile Salt of Amber and Harts∣horn, each seven or eight Grains, mix them, and give the mixture twice a day in a little thin Broth, or Water Gruel. This is ab∣stersive and Diuretick, and will cleanse the Stomach and Intestines of the remaining Sordes, and expel them by Urine. For the Feverish Thirst give the dulcified Spirit of Nitre, or of Salt, in Posset drink, and all the Liquids they take, from five or six to ten or twelve drops at a time. Keep the Patient in a small breathing Sweat, either with the Posset-drink, before-mentioned by Mr. Couch, or with Treacle-water and Powder, or rather the Tincture of Virgi∣nia
Snake-root, or which is most excellent (if you can get it) the Aqua Prophylacti∣ca of Sylvius de le Boe, of which Take three Ounces, Water of Carduus and Borrage, each one Ounce, Syrrup of Citron Peels an ounce and an half, mix them, and take it often by a spoonful or two at a time. But instead of this, if the Fever be malignant, give Be∣zoardicum minerale to eight or ten Grains every third or fourth hour in a spoonful or two of good Canary. But because the Aqua Prophylactica men∣tioned is rarely to be had at any shop, I will here describe the making thereof for the sakes of those who are willing to make it. ℞ Roots of Angelica, Zedoary, of each an ounce, Butterbur two ounces, the leaves of Rue four ounces, of Balm, Scabious and Marygold Flowers, each two ounces, unripe Walnuts, cut two pounds, fresh Citrons cut one pound. Let them be all beaten together, and pour upon them six quarts of the best di∣stilled Wine-Vinegar, let them stand in di∣gestion all night, and then distil them by a very easie fire (without burning) till they be dry, and keep the distilled liquor for use. It is very profitable in all Fevers, especially in those which are malignant and the Plague. In the declining of the Fever, if sleep be
wanting, this following mixture will much avail, both to cause rest, and refresh the Spirits, ℞ of Treacle water an ounce, the thin Syrup of Corn Poppies, an ounce, or an ounce and a half, Laudanum Londinens. or rather that of Paracelsus two grains, mix them, and let the Patient drink it at the hour of Sleep. But give nothing wherein there is Opium or Poppies in the beginning of a Fever, because they tie up the Archaeus of the Stomach and first passages, thereby hindering him from separating and expel∣ling the occasional cause of the Disease. For Agues, or intermitting Fevers, whe∣ther they be Quotidians, Tertians or Quar∣tans, proceed as followeth: ℞ Of Salt of Amber twenty grains, Tar∣tarum Vitriolatum six grains, Diagridium seven, eight, nine or ten grains, according to the strength of the Patient; mix them into a Powder, and give it in a little Posset-drink, or thin Broth, four or five hours before the time of the Fit. Repeat it two or three times, if need be; but if the Ague be not then gone, give the following mixture about an hour, or an hour and an half before the Fit comes; the Patient being in Bed, and disposing himself to sweat.
℞ of Carduus Water two ounces, Treacle Water two drams, Salt of Wormwood half a dram, Spirit of Salt Armoniac ten grains, Syrup of Corn Poppies half on ounce, mix. This, if the Patient sweat well with it, frequently removes the Ague. This following also hath cured many without any other Medicine. ℞ of the Salt of Wormwood and Carduus each fifteen grains, Tartar Vitriolat. six grains, Sugar of Pearls half a dram; pow∣der and mix them, and give it half an hour, or an hour before the Fits access. The Juice of Featherfew being drank (about half an ounce) in a glass of Wormwood Wine, is profitable against the Quartan or fourth Ague. These Remedies I have used with good success, but never found any thing so cer∣tain and effectual in Fevers, as my Species Febrifuga, and Pillula Balsamica.
A Dropsie. There are three sorts of Dropsies, viz. Anasarca, Ascites and Timpanites the two first are most from Water. The last, Timpany is more from Wind. Anasarca, is when the extreme parts swell; but when the Belly, then it is Asci∣tes. The Cause, I do not believe, (as hath generally been received) that it proceeds from a Distemper of the Liver, and that to be the principal part affected; but I have more reason to think it to proceed from an obstruction or impediment in one of the Kidneys: for commonly they that are troubled with Gravel and Stone in the Kidneys are Hydropical; and seldom any that have been affected with either Ana∣sarca or Ascites, but they have observed a Dolor in their Reins to precede it; and so that Water which should be transferred through the Kidneys, to be evacuated by the Bladder is forced out at the Abdomen. And it hath lately appeared by dissection,
that those who have died of those Distem∣pers, the fault hath been through the Kidney, which is most agreeable to rea∣son. And undoubtedly that operation in an Ascites, in making a hole to let out the Water, doth but only respect the effect not taken away, (and yet not inconsistent to that Maxim, Take away the cause, and the effect ceaseth: which is to be understood of that which is to come, and not of what is past, as Helmont well observes) and so that operation might happily perfect a Cure in taking the effect for the Cause. I have cured a man of an Anasarca, (whose Thigh hath been near as big as his middle) with one Dose of this Powder he was presently made perfectly well; that in the operation of this Medicine, his Legs & Thighs fell, and never swelled after, you would have admired (had you seen) what abundance of Water came from him, both by Urine, and Vomiting; and at night I gave him a Pill (which I usually do after this Powder) to refresh his Spirits, and seetle his Body in a right temper. This was all the Physick he took from me, though he had spent many pounds be∣fore in fruitless endeavours. And I know
not any thing to the contrary, but it may do as well in an Ascites, or Timpanites, if it hath not continued too long. First it is necessary to begin the Cure with gentle purging; for strong Purges, (especially in weak and tender Bodies) do far more harm than good, by resolving and expelling the Blood, and good juices with the peccant matter, thereby deject∣ing the strength, and depauperating the vital spirit. ℞ of the Roots of Orris an ounce and a half, Parsley Roots half an ounce, Leaves of Agrimony a handful, clean Senna an ounce, best Rhubarb half an ounce, Agarick three drams, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves one dram, cut the Roots, with the Rhubarb and Agarick into thin slices, bruise the Spices, and put them all into a little Bag, infuse them twen∣ty four hours in two quarts of the best White or Rhenish Wine, then let the Patient drink e∣very morning five or six ounces, or as much as will give four or five Stools. It is plea∣sant to take; but if you please, you may also add Sugar to it. For such as had rather take Pills, those following are good. ℞ Rosin of Scammony and Jallap, of each
half a dram, Tartar Vitriolat, Mercurius dulcis of each two scruples, Oil of Juniper Berries twenty drops, of the purest Venice Turpentine a sufficient quantity to make the powder into a Mass for Pills: the which make into thirty small Pills, and give three, four or five of them, according to the Patients Age and Strength every morn∣ing. After purging, The Salt of Broom or Amber, of Bean-stalks, or of Pidgeons dung are pro∣fitable, either of them being taken twice a day in warm Broth, or which is better, the Spirit or Volatile Salt of humane U∣rine. In a Tympany the dulcified Spirit of Nitre is excellent, being taken in Broth or Sack three or four times a day, from six to twelve drops at a time. A Gentleman, a Friend of mine, living in Greenwich, cured a man of the Dropsie with the Pill alone. This man had an A∣gue first, which either went off it self, or were moved by some common Remedy; about seven weeks after which, he began to swell, and also was sorely afflicted with Gripings and Flux for a great while, which had brought him so low, that he had not been out of his Bed for three weeks. The first Dose of the Pill that was given him
took away the Gripes, and in a great mea∣sure stayed the Flux; but then he swelled so much in his Breast, that he could not lie down in his Bed, but his Breath would be gone, the second Dose freed him from that, and made him able to rise and dress himself, and by a short continuance of it was cured. Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness. I Had a Maid since I came to this Town, that was turned over from one to ano∣ther, no one cared to have her, by reason she was violently troubled with the Falling Sickness: at length I bought her, to whom I gave only one dose of this Powder, which freed her from her Fits, though she had them before almost continually, day and night, that whosoever had her, kept one to watch her, for she would be ready to destroy her self; I kept her about a quar∣ter of a year, and she never had a Fit that I know of. I perswaded her to take ano∣ther
Dose two or three days after, but she would not; she told me she needed not, for she was confident she was perfectly cu∣red. Since I hear she is married some where in the Country, and whether she had them since, I know not By the operation of this Medicine I judged by what came from her, that the primary cause was not in the Brain, but in the Stomach, or some place near adjacent thereunto; and that the Brain suffered on∣ly by consent. Purging in this Disease (when it is sim∣ple) seldom or never doth any good, as also Blood-letting, but both are very in∣jurious, as many have found to their great prejudice. But when it proceeds from the Stomach (as may be known by the Patient, perceiving in himself a pain, soreness, and distention about the mouth, or pit of the Stomach and Heart-strings, especially when they are fasting) before the Fit they have a disposition to vomit, with pain and palpitation of the Heart, and the Fit ends with vomiting, in such, I say, a Vomit may be available, either with the infusion of Crocus Mettallorum, or the Salt of Vitriol; but they are warily
to be administred, and not without the di∣rection of a Physician. All sour and sharp things are hurtful in this Disease, as Oran∣ges, Lemons, Vinegar, &c. In the time of the Fit you may use the following Lini∣ment to anoint and chafe the Temples, Nostrils, Wrists and Coronal Suture, or Seam of the Skull upon the top of the Head. ℞ Ʋnguentum Nervinum two ounces, melt it gently in a Gally pot, then put to it Oyl of Amber and Rosemary of each two drams, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, one dram, stir them well together, and use it warm. Take of Oil of Tartar per deliquium an ounce, Salt of Harts-horn and Amber each a scruple, mix them, and let the Patient take from ten to twenty drops in Broth, or Black-cherry Wine four times a day. The dung of a Peacock, or Liver of a Raven being gently dried, and powdered, and given twice a day to two Scruples, or a dram at a time are very good, but it were better, if their Volatile Salts were extracted. But the Flowers of Sal Armoniack excel all the rest, being given three times a day, from ten to fifteen or sixteen grains at a time in Broth or Sherry Wine.
Tortura Ventris, or a great Gri∣ping. THere was a poor Fisherman that lay down by the New Meeting House in this Town, that had undergone most ter∣rible Gripings and Torture in his Guts, with a great Flux and Vomiting for sever∣al days, till at length his Spirit was almost spent, his Belly was so inflated, that he could hardly breath. About ten or ele∣ven of the Clock at night I was sent for; I knew there was not any Medicine I had would do him good, or preserve his life, but this Powder; I being not very well, and much disposed to Sleep, told them, I would come and see him again as soon as it was day, and then I would give him something. When I returned home, I con∣sidered he could not live till that time, and if not quite dead, yet could not be in a capacity to take any thing, I presently went to him again, and gave him five grains of this Powder: within half an hour after he took it, he broke wind up∣ward
and downward, to the admiration of all those that were there. A little after he had a stool, in which came away abun∣dance of obdurate and hard excrements that a long time adhered unto his Guts, (and was the cause of his sickness) and presently he went to sleep (which he had not before for several nights) and slept very soundly till the morning. The next day when I came up to see him, I found him up, and at Breakfast, and was prepa∣ring for his going to Sea: he told me he was as well as ever he was in his life. A Surfeit is a praeludium to at Fever, which doth not always proceed from the quantity of Meats or Drinks, but it may be from a vicious quality of Meats, as crude Fruits, Pulse, &c. or from an an∣tipathy or loathing of Meats, that the sto∣mach abhorrs; and they are such things as commonly the eating of them hath made them sick before; and sometimes it comes by lying with their Stomachs bare when they sleep, especially in the Summer: I have known many that have beeen surfeit∣ed, and could not tell how they got it. I ne∣ver knew this Powder fail to make them well in six or eight hours. In the Month of May this present year
1679, a Gentlewoman was taken with a Vomiting and Looseness, which exercised her two days, and then of its own accord in a great measure ceased; but she using no means to rectifie the ill Ferment of the Sto∣mach & Bowels, and otherwise neglecting her self, within two or three days was sei∣sed with an intollerable Tortura Ventriculi, or tearing pain in her Stomach, accompa∣nied with Hypochondriack Vapours, and an almost total dejection of Spirits. A∣bout four in the Afternoon she sent for me, and being come, I truly found her in a very deplorable condition, having cryed out so much by reason of the insufferable pain she felt, that she had very little Breath or Voice left to crye out any longer, be∣sides almost her whole Body was cold, and bedewed with a clammy sweat, her Pulse very little, and sometimes wholly cessant, so that at first sight I did not think it pos∣sible that she should escape death; but I with all expedition got some of the Balsamick Pill dissolved in a good Cordial Vehicle, to which (for the Vapours sake) I added a little of my Elixir Hystericum, and so gave her the mixture by two spoonfuls at a time, about twice in a quarter of an hour, continuing half an hour, in which time she
was twice or thrice seemingly dead for a∣bout a minute at a time, at the end of the last she vomited up the Medicine with much slimy matter, upon which her Pulse began to return, but her pain being still intolerable, she dispaired of help, but I being encouraged by some second consi∣derations, and confident of the certainty of my Medicine in such dolorous Affects turned up an Hour-Glass, and promised her (God assisting) that she should have ease before the Sand was run, the which (to the praise of the Almighty) I effectually performed within the time, for I plied her quick with the Medicine, & in half an hour she began to grow warm in the extreme parts, and (as her self expressed it) felt the pain go down out of her Stomach into her Belly, and to lessen, and that she could fetch her Breath from the bottom of her Belly, in an hour she was in a fine transpi∣ring heat all over her Body, and the pain quite gone, notwithstanding I was still forced now and then to repeat the Medi∣cine; for otherwise she would feel some twitchings and girdings in her Stomach, threatning a return. I stayed with her till near twelve at night, at which time she was disposed to sleep, the which she did
but two hours, and then was called up to lay a woman (she being a Midwife by practice) the which she went over the wa∣ter to do, and came home again to Bed a∣bout eight in the morning, and hath re∣mained very well ever since. For the Griping of the Guts I do not think this Balsamick Pill hath its equal in nature. How many grown People as well as Children expire yearly in this City of London, by this tormenting Disease, for want of a good Remedy. I do seriously profess, I do not think that any person need perish by that Enemy, had they but this Medicine in time; for it commonly takes it away at one Dose, but with a se∣cond I never failed in my life; for it will certainly give ease in the most violent Gri∣pings in two hours time, given in a large Dose; and if the pain return, it may be repeated after eight hours; but where there is strong Vomitings also, it is best to give it dissolved in warm Ale, or Sack, and so give it by a spoonful or two at a time, and very often, that so the stomach may not cast it up before it comes to operate, for it will stay the Vomiting and Loosness as well as ease the Pain, the which ought to be done with all expedition (unless the
Disease proceed from a Surfeit, then first give a Dose of the Powder) let ignorant people think what they will, who often out of a foolish timerosity suffer them so long, till the strength is so exhausted, that it cannot be again restored; and so they as miserably as foolishly shake hands with their lives. FLUXES. THere are three sorts of Fluxes, viz. Lienteria, Diarrhoea and Dysenteria: and Authors have very confusedly treated of their Causes, and their Places; and because they would be sure to hit right, they have named almost every place. But the cause of the first, Lienteria, is from a defect of the Spleen, which doth not send a sufficiency of that acid juice into the Stomach, which maketh the digestive Fa∣culty, whereupon it is, that the meat comes away with little alteration. The second, Diarrhaea, is from a de∣fect
of the Mesaraick Veins, that do not attract the Chyle, whereby it is evacuated as Excrements. The last, Dysenteria, is from Excre∣ments that adhere to the Intestines, and by their Acrimony corrode, &c. You see that they proceed from several Causes, and yet to be cured by one Reme∣dy. Every one may judge it to be an Ar∣canum Catholicum, or an universal Reme∣dy, which I know this Powder I tell you of hath perfectly effected, as I have well experienced. And in this last I common∣ly give my Balsamical Pills the next night, to consolidate the Excoriations which the morbifick matter hath caused. In all Fluxes of the Belly, whether bloody, or not, you may do as follow∣eth. First give half a dram, or two scru∣ples, or a dram of the Powder of Toast∣ed Rhubarb, mixed with a little Conserve of Red Roses, and made into a Bolus. Then ℞ of the Conserve of Red Roses & Mint of each an ounce, Orange Pill candied six drams, Red Coral in fine Powder a dram, Diascordium two drams, Syrup of Myrtles sufficient to make a soft Electuary, let the Patient take it
often about a dram at once. Or this: ℞ of Mint Water, and Cinnamon Water, each an Ounce, Plantane Water two ounces, Syrup of Comfrey an ounce and an half, Laudanum two grains, mix them, and let the sick take it by a spoonful every half hour. In the Flux with the Griping of Guts, as also in others, this following is very good. ℞ of the best Cinnamon Water three ounce, of Diascordium three drams, let them be well mixed, and give it by two spoonfuls at a time pretty often. Either this or the for∣mer will both stay the Vomiting, and bri∣dle the Flux. The following Clyster is also good to alleviate the sharpness of the matter, and ease the excoriated Guts. ℞ of new Milk half a pint or better, in which quench a piece of red hot steel once or twice, to which add half an ounce of Venice Turpentine dissolved in the yolk of an Egg, Honey of Roses an ounce, com∣mon Balsam of Sulphur ten or twelve drops mix and make a Clyster. The Pill alone will cure any Flux or Loosness whatsoever presently, yea the Bloody Flux in two, three, or four days, according to its magnitude, but in that case it is good to continue the use of it a day or two after the Flux is stayed, lest the
Acrimonious Ferment (not being quite de∣stroyed) should reassume its force, and cause the Disease to return. Therefore in such Countries where this Malady is in a man∣ner Epidemical (as Ireland, and perhaps some other places) did they but know the worth of this Pill, they would undoubt∣edly prize it at a high rate, and rescue ma∣ny a miserable person from the devouring jaws of death. Calculus Renum; or, Stone or Gra∣vel in the Reins or Kidneys. THe Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Kidneys, as it is the sharpest of Di∣seases, so it hath been the longest in cu∣ring, though the present Fit or Pain is soon remedied. I never knew any Man or Wo∣man that was past forty five, or forty six years of age that was ever perfectly cured, but once or twice a year after, they have been troubled with it more or less; though I knew a Gentlewoman that was free from
any Fit nigh two years, and then assaulted her again as violently as at first. Cause. Those Paroxysms or Fits that come by Intervals, which are so dolorous, do not proceed from the Gravel or Stone genera∣ted, but from the Kidney generating, which may be affected either primarily, from a debility or vitiousness of its own Ferment, or casually, from an excess in quantity, or being too sharp or salt in qua∣lity: and in regard it is so sensible a part, must needs stir up an inflammation, which maketh those cruel Tortures. And should all the Gravel and Stone come away, the pain would not be the less, until the Kidney it self be reduced to its right temper. For we see how vain and useless all those things have proved, that have been given to absterge, and force away the Gravel and Stone, nay, they have much more exasperated the pain, and made it more. And besides that, the Gravel and Stone are not the cause of those Tortures, I find by this Powder, which hath perfectly freed them from all their pain in two or three hours, and no Gravel or Stone hath
come from them, neither that day, nor the next. Again, how many have I seen in perfect health, that have voided a great quantity of Gravel at a time, without the least pain, it would be in one as well as in ano∣ther. By any Weakness, Consumption, In∣flammation, or any Distemper of the Kid∣ney, Gravel may be caused, so that Gra∣vel is the product, not the producer or primitive cause of this pain. In this Disease the Belly is to be kept loose; which may be well performed by this following. ℞ of the Pulp of Cassia, newly drawn four ounces, Tartar Vitriolated, two drams, powder it, and mix; to the mix∣ture, add ten or twelve drops of oil of Juniper. Take of it once in three or four days at night going to Bed, at each time six drams, or an ounce, which will give two or three Stools the next day. Then give the following Powder. Take of Tartar Vitriolated a dram and a half, Crabs-eyes, Salt of Bean-stalks, of Broom, of Restharra, and Pidgeons dung each two scru∣ples, mix and make a Powder. The Dose is a scruple or more twice a day in Parsley or
Saxifrage Water. When the pain is ve∣ry great, and the Urine stopped, the fol∣lowing potion may be given to the com∣fort of the sick. Take of fine Venice Tur∣pentine washed a scruple, dissolve it in the yolk of a new laid Egg, by beating them well toge∣ther, then put them to a quarter of a pint, or half a pint of new Milk, and let the patient drink it off at once. Wild Carrot Seed being boiled in Ale, and the Ale drank two or three times a day, is good both to hinder the increase of the Stone (by resisting the putrefactive stonyfying odour or Ferment,) and also to diminish it being grown, but its use must be continued a Month together at the least. The German Academ. Curios. in their first Volumn published in the Year 1670 observat. 107. highly commend the Decoction of Paul's Bettony for expelling the Stone, being drank in a large quanti∣ty, and continued for some time; an example of which is there set down at large, of a certain Woman who was freed from a Stone in the left Kidney, by the use of the said Decoction, after it had been her miserable Companion for sixteen years. The Pill being taken in a full Dose, and dissolved in a Glass of well warmed White
or Rhenish Wine (or where that can∣not be had, Ale) and so drank, gives pre∣sent ease in the most grievous pains, occa∣sioned by Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys, when all other Remedies fail; and I re∣member once a Gentlewoman that I gave it to, either at the first or second Dose voided three Stones of an untoward Fi∣gure, with much pain, and remained free from that tormenting dolor (with which she was wont to be often exercised) for the space of three years. But for the Stone in the Bladder, I do not know that either the Powder or Pill will do any thing, as to the Cure, only give some present ease. Flatus Hypochond. or Windy Me∣lancholy. ANd likewise there is the Windy Me∣lancholy, that many, both Men and Women in this Country are troubled with, (especially those that live near the Sea) I will not say, that if the party hath been
troubled with it above a year, it is not to be cured; but I never knew it cured: Though this Powder of mine is the best thing that ever I used for it, it gives them speedy ease, and much corrects the sharp∣ness of the Malady. And one that hath not been above a year troubled with it, it cures them at once taking. And be∣cause this Distemper bears an affinity with some other flatuous and windy Distempers, I shall treat of their causes together; as Coliack and Illiack Passion with a windy Pleurisie and Tympany. These are called windy Distempers (though very improperly) neither Air or Wind are the cause of any of them. Cause. Negatively, not Air or Wind that is breathed into us, nor from any windiness that is in Meat or Drink, that is the cause of those Distempers; but positively from some malign or putrefactive or dungy quality that is contained in them, or from a vitious quality or debility of the digestive Ferment, or from Excrements detained beyond their due order. There is in every Vegetive an aiery spi∣rit
[or Gas] which doth defend and pre∣serve it from putrefaction, and endea∣vours its subsistence in its primitive es∣sence and figure, which suffering a Fermen∣tation is evaporated and exhaled. EXAMPLE. As in New Wine, after it comes into the Cellars, it passeth another Fermenta∣tion. Likewise a Raisin of the Sun, when the aiery spirit which was in the Grape is se∣parated from its concrete Body, the Grape contracts it self, and taketh a new Fer∣ment of Raisin. Also we see in an Apple, when it is roasted at the Fire, this aiery Gas is exha∣led, which was co-fermented with the Ap∣ple. In like manner all things that begin to putrefie, this aiery Spirit parts from them, and then they take another Ferment. As in poysons, when their venemous sharp quality seiseth on the Muscles, this aiery Blas flies from them, whence the Body tu∣mifies and swells so: as we see in Bodies that die through putrefaction, a little be∣fore they die, how they are oppressed
with this Wind, which doth puff up their Bodies after they are dead. The windy Blast is made chiefly in those three places, the Stomach, Ilion and Colon. From the Stomach proceeds this windy Melancholy (as they call it) and most of those Flatulent Distempers, for whenso∣ever any thing is not well digested in the Stomach, this Blast is presently made, as we see in this Distemper; whatsoever they eat or drink, how they belch for it, and are worse commonly after they have eaten, than they were before; which doth clear∣ly demonstrate, that the principal defect is in the Stomach, and therefore not from the meat they eat, but from the vicious∣ness or defective Ferment; for let another eat and drink of the same, it doth not di∣sturb them at all. And to talk of windy Meats, is but a meer Chymera: there are no Meats or Drinks windy to good and healthful stomachs; too great repletion doth likewise stir up, and cause this win∣dyness in the stomach. By the favour of belchings you may understand the temper of the Stomach. Sour Belchings betokeneth a weak sto∣mach. Unsavory sheweth a weaker.
Burntish, bitter and sharp ones, pro∣ceed from a vicious stomach. There are some Specifical, which give their own savour, as Garlick, Onions, Radishes, &c. I could say much more to vindicate the Spleen from having a hand in those flatu∣lent Distempers,If you would be better satis∣fied, read Doctor High∣more, de affecti∣one Hypochond. fol. 105. as also that air or wind that we received from without, is not the cause whereof they are made. But lest I should make my Book outswell an Enchyridion. I do pass it in silence: and desiring to be in∣genious and faithful to all, and not willing to write the least thing that I were not convinced of the truth of, nor give you the least occasion to say that I extol this incomparable Medicine beyond its merit; wherefore I must confess what's truth; I never knew them really cured in my life, if they were habitual, and of a long continuance;Quo diuturnus eo difficilis. nor in∣deed is there any Disease, if once it be familiar to nature, that is of easie curation. I could wish, for the sakes of those that are troubled with these Maladies, that I had such a sure
Remedy to cure them after long continu∣ance, as this powder is to prevent them when they are in the beginning, and the surest to bring the greatest help at last. I would not willingly be mistaken by a∣ny one, nor have him to abuse his judg∣ment, as to think he may be as soon well of an old and chronical Distemper, as of one that hath newly taken possession of the body. To proceed, This Disease hath great affinity with the Scurvy, and therefore the same Medicines are proper for both. ℞ of Crabs-eyes prepared two drams, Tar∣tar Vitriolated a Scruple, Flowers of Sal Ar∣moniack a dram, Confection of Alkermes without Musk three drams, Conserve of Gar∣den Scurvy Grass three ounces, mix them into an Electuary, of which let the patient take e∣very morning and evening a dram and a half, or two drams upon an empty stomach, that is, let him fast an hour after it in the morning, and take it three hours after supper. Strong Purges are injurious in this Di∣sease; but after the use of the aforesaid Electuary, you may purge with the follow∣ing Powder: ℞ Cream of Tartar fifteen Grains, Salt of Wormwood and Scurvy Grass
each ten Grains, Rosin of Scammony eight, nine, or ten grains, powder and mix them, and give it in the morning in a little warm Posset drink. The Elixir Proprietatis of Paracelsus is highly profitable in this Disease, being ta∣ken three times a day in a Glass of Sherry Wine fifteen, sixteen or twenty drops at a time. So is also the Volatile Salt of Amber, being taken to fifteen grains twice a day in warm Broth. But amongst all the Remedies I know, I assure you I ne∣ver found any of that efficacy in this Di∣sease as my Balsamick Pill, for that de∣stroys the sharp putrefactive Ferment discusseth all windyness, refresheth the spirits, and takes away melancholy.
Illiaca Passio: or, the Wind in the Small Gut. IT hath been an old received opinion, that this Disease comes from the twist∣ing of that long and small Gut: but I have reason to believe the contrary. This great Torture is not from the wind contained there, but from an excre∣mentitious matter that doth adhere unto the Illion; it is as it were glued unto it by its slimy matter, which it is lined withal, and in time is coagulated into a very obdu∣rate and hard substance. I remember when I was in Dunkirk, there was a Soldier which was miserably troubled with this Disease for some days: after general Evacuation, Vomiting, Cly∣ster, then carminative and fumous Clysters, and abundance of other means, he found not the least ease: there was given him three or four ounces of Quick-silver, and that came soon through him, yet no ease: at last I gave him four of the biggest Musket Bullets I could get; about six or
eight hours after I came to him, and he was discharged of pain, and was fallen asleep, which he had not before for several nights; after he awaked he had a Stool, wherein was two of the Bullets, and about eight or nine great round pieces of excrement, greater than the Bullets, and they did seem to be as hard. Besides, it could not be wind, for it is always repleted with wind, to hinder such accidents, by making the more clearer and more slippery way for the Chyle, and when there is a redundancy of it, it is ea∣sily forced forth behind, without any Gri∣ping or Torture. So you see it is not from Wind, or knotting of the Gut, but from some excre∣ment that doth adhere unto the same. COLLICK. THe Collick is commonly from Excre∣ments contained beyond their course, which vitiates the Ferment of the place,
whence cometh those windy Blasts, which are not wind, but far more subtle and rare than the most rarified air, being of an inco∣agulate nature; whereupon those retained excrements adhere so firmly to the Gut, that it contracts it, which is the cause of that violent dolour. I had a man that was shot (at the Siege of Iper in Flanders) in the lower Belly;Hypogastrium. which penetrated the Colon: all his Excrements came out at his wound for about six days, so that the Intestinum Rectum, or Arse-gut became useless: this wound lay twenty four hours exposed to the wind before he was dres∣sed. I made a Suture to the external Ori∣fice, and cured him by vulnerary Cly∣sters, &c. Besides, how many wounds have I seen that have penetrated the Breast and Belly, and yet never troubled with those windy Pains or Tortures; and yet we see there is hardly a Distemper amongst us, but we accuse wind, troubled with wind, &c. but the small benefit those discussors of wind have brought, is able to convince a∣ny, that wind is not the cause. But indeed this aiery Blast, which is made by a bad digestion of things, that
seems to be wind, (which is perceived to move between the Muscles of the sides, and causeth those Ructations and Belch∣ings) hath never been thought on by the Schools, and but of very late years treat∣ed of. To confirm Mr. Couch's opinion con∣cerning the Illiaca Passio, I shall here add another experiment, which is this; A∣bout a year ago a certain man was sorely tormented with the excruciating pains of this Disease, commonly called the twisting of the Guts, his Physician treated him with (I suppose) all the usual Remedies, and some other Devices, one of which was I remember to blow wind into the In∣testinum Rectum, or Arse-gut with a pair of Bellows, but nothing taking effect to give the miserable man any ease, the last Remedy was instituted, which was three pound weight of Quicksilver, which the Patient poured down his Throat on Friday about ten or eleven in the Fore∣noon, and presently (as advised) rode a little way for the better agitating of his Body, but yet to no purpose; for on the Sunday Morning following I was at his House by accident, with another person,
who was a Physician, and then none of the Quicksilver had made any passage; he had the very aspect of death, and complained of an intollerable cold and weight in his Belly, went not to bed in three nights, and if he fell into the least sleep, nothing but dotage and distraction appeared, His Physician was at a ne plus ultra, thinking him a dead man, as all that saw him. Up∣on enquiry we understood that he was not forbid the taking of any thing, nor yet di∣rected to any thing besides Canary, where∣fore we advised that he should abstain from the use of all acids & others that might have any power to coagulate any of the Quick∣silver in his Body, and to drink sweet Oil plentifully, the which he presently put in execution, and the next day being Mun∣day, the Quicksilver began to come away like Small Shot, and the use of the Oil be∣ing still continued, by Tuesday night he had parted with it all, or most; for what they had collected wanted but four ounces of the three pounds, after which some∣body well advised him to swallow Golden Bullets, which he did divers times, and so to a wonder recovered, and is well to this day. Now had this Torture been oc∣casioned only by wind, such a quantity of
Quicksilver could not possibly have been thereby detained in the Body one quarter of an hour: or again, that it should be the twisting of the Gut, as is commonly believed, is impossible; for it cannot be, that the Gut should be so closely twisted up by any accident that may happen either within or without the Body, that three pound weight of this active ponderous Mineral should not in three days time find a passage; besides (which I had almost forgot to tell you) his Excrements came away with the Quicksilver in small hard Bits, like dried Sheeps Dung, which plainly proves that the occasional cause of this Disease is the Excrements grown to a preternatural hardness. I will here set down (for the sake of the poor) a cheap and easie remedy against this cruel Enemy. ℞ of the Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Car∣raway and Coriander, each half an ounce, let them be all bruised, put them into a quart of Ale, or somewhat more, boil them gently in a Vessel close covered for about three quarters of an hour, then take it from the fire, and strain it, and let the Patient drink half a pint at a time warm. And by God's blessing he shall soon have ease. This is also good in the Wind Chollick.
But the Balsamick Pill is the most immedi∣ate Remedy for the Wind Chollick that I ever yet knew; but it is not to be given in the Illiaca Passio; therefore I will here, for the sake of the ignorant, shew how they may distinguish those Diseases from one another. The pain called the Twist∣ing of the Guts lies about the Navel, and higher, and is felt only before, not extended to the Right and Left Sides: that of the Chollick is about the Navel and lower, going cross the Belly to both Sides, even to the Back, the pain gene∣rally pressing to the bottom of the Belly, with a stoppage of the Urine, which ne∣ver is in the former; there are some Sym∣ptoms which are common to both, as Burning, Chilness, Reaching, Vomiting, &c. but what I have said before is suffici∣ent for any to know them asunder. A Gentlewoman living in Greenwich was lately seised with a pain in all her Bones. and a violent Loosness, for which she took a Dose of the Balsamick Pill, and in two hours time was at perfect ease, and the Loosness stopped. The next morn∣ing she took a Dose of the Powder, and at night a Dose of the Pill, but sleeping very soundly, with the Cloaths off of her,
got cold, which turned to an Ague; after she had had two Fits, she took a Dose of the Powder an hour before the access of the third, and so was cured of her Ague, the next day she fell into a Fit of the Cho∣lick and Stone, for which she took a Dose of the Pill, which gave her ease, and by another Dose the night following was quite freed. Thus you see divers Disea∣ses (and those not trivial ones neither) to be cured by the same Medicine. This was performed by a Gentleman in that Town that buys those Medicines of me. This Disease having its Inn in the thick Guts (particularly the Colon, from whence it hath its denomination) may be eased by Clysters, for which purpose the following is good. ℞ of the Seeds of Coriander, Annise, Fennel, Carraway, each a quarter of an ounce, let them be all well bruised in a Mortar, then boil them in a pint of Posset-drink gently for a quarter of an hour in a Vessel close covered, then strain it, and add thereto two ounces of Oil of Cammomile (and if you will, a little Canary, and let it be administred convenient∣ly hot. If you put to it six or seven drops of the Oil of Harts-horn it will be then stronger and better.
The Fume or Smoak of Tobacco is a present remedy for ease, being blown up into the Guts by a Pipe put into the Fun∣dament. The forementioned Drink with Seeds is also good in this Disease. And forasmuch as the Chollick is many times wont to be accompanied with a grievous Symptomatical Vomiting, it is necessary that it should speedily be stopped, not only in regard of its own molestation, but also because it hinders the retention of any Me∣dicine in the Stomach, to which end use the following mixture. ℞ of Simple Mint Water three ounces, A∣qua Mirabilis an ounce, Tincture of Cinna∣mon two drams, Laudanum Opiatum three grains, Syrup of Myrtles and Mint of each half an ounce, mix, and let it be taken often by a spoonful at a time. After the violence of pain is over, purge the Body gently with this follow∣ing. ℞ of fine Manna an ounce and a half, Cream of Tartar half a dram in powder, mix them, and lot them be dissolved in a draught of warm Ale, or rather Posset-drink, and give it in the morning fasting.
Timpanites: or, the Windy Drop∣sie. THis Timpany ariseth from a sterco∣rous or dungy Ferment in the Saccu∣lus, or blind Gut, from Meats that are not perfectly freed from their stomachical sharpness; and there being obstructed, fer∣ments & putrefies; from whence this foetid aiery blast proceeds, (indeed the worst of all sorts) which is breathed forth to the Pe∣ritoneum, and so inflates the whole Abdo∣men. That it is produced of such a stinking Air, proceeding from some putrefied mat∣ter, I am very certain; but whether it takes its Rise from the blind Gut (as a worthy Author affirms) or from the Me∣senterium, as I rather think, is controvert∣ed: and that this dungy matter might be sucked up by the Mesariack Veins with the Chyle: but what I am not sure of, I shall not speak unto. I never had one under my consideration of this Distemper, since I had the know∣ledge
of this powder; and therefore I cannot speak any thing by experience in this Disease: but undoubtedly since it doth unobstruct the Kidneys, and absterge what is vitious in them, it must needs be good for this. And I perswade my self, whosoever shall try it in the beginning of this Disease, I question not but (with God's blessing) they will find a happy suc∣cess. This sort of Dropsie is easily distin∣guished from others; for in this the Belly only swells, and is hard, not yielding to the pressure of the Fingers, but being struck upon, sounds, after the manner of a Drum. The Cure consists in changing the putrefactive Ferment of the Chyle, whether it be in the Gut, or the Veins of the Mesentery it matters not; the which being done, the inflated Abdomen soon falls of its own accord, for that is but the ef∣fect of the Disease, the which necessarily ceaseth, when its propagator and nourish∣er is taken away. Purging is always per∣nicious in this Disease (I mean with direct Laxatives) and therefore not to be used: This following is very profitable. ℞ of the Seeds of sweet Fennel, Annise,
Carraway and Coriander each an ounce, Juni∣per Berries an ounce and a half, let them be all bruised well, and put into a Glass with half a dram of Salt of Tartar in powder, upon which pour a quart of the best Sherry Wine, stop it close, and let it stand two or three days, then begin to drink of it three times a day, viz. in the morning, half an hour after dinner, and at night, at each time a small Glass, it will be much better if you add to it a dram of the Volatile Salt of Amber in powder, which will dissolve. When that is drank out you may put to the Ingredients a pint of Wine more, with half a dram of Salt of Amber, and it will be good. The Oily Volatile Salt of Sylvius is excellent in this Disease, as also in the Scurvy, Flatus Hypochondriacus and others. But the Pow∣der and Balsamick Pill are more certain and quick in the Cure than any other that I know of. In the next place I shall speak of Gouts.
Arthritick, or Gouty Disease. THey take their names from the places they frequent, viz. Hands, Feet, Knee, or Hip, or Recur∣rent,Arthriticus, Chyragra, Po∣dagra, Gona∣gra, Siatica. and then it is called by the vulgar, the Running Gout: the Gout differeth from other Diseases, for its Idaea or Character consisteth in the vital spirit, and is transferred through the Seed, (which makes it Hereditary) where it maketh a fermental sharpness, which when it is exorbitant, is sent forth into the extreme Parts, and there meeting that Callous orSynovia. seedy Glue, which is conjoyned between the Ligaments and the Bones it doth affect it with its fer∣mental sharpness, and is the cause of that great dolor or pain, and inflammation. It is not from humours, excrements, or blood, but a morbifick Idaea seminally im∣planted in the vital spirit, and that is the reason it is so hard to cure; for there is
not any Arcanum extant will reach it. Yet I believe there hath been aHorizontal Gold of Para∣celsus. Remedy found for it, and hope there will be again, when it will be more divulged. To take off a Toe or Foot doth not cure the Gout; for this pain that is exa∣sperated, is but the fruit or product of it, for it is virtually contained in the Seed im∣planted by the vital spirit. I dare not promise this Arcanum, or secret of mine to effect this Cure: yet in extremity of pain I may boldly tell you, there is not any thing will give you ease sooner; and for any thing I know, it may cure it, for it will strongly repel from the place. The Sciatica and Knee-Gout I never yet failed to cure, with a water I make to em∣brocate, or wash the part withal, though I have had some that one Leg was a great deal shorter than the other, so that they went with Crutches, having an Atrophia, or Consumption in that Leg and Thigh. There is another Disease, much like, which is the Rhumatismus, or Running Gout, but this possesseth the musculous part as well as the Joynts, and exulcera∣teth
or breaketh out, wherefore some have thought it to be that Disease they callScrophula. the King's Evil: I have seen several that have laboured with it in this Country; and without they have a Cure for it in the beginning, it brings them in∣to a Consumption, yet I have cured one that had it twelve or fourteen years. Place. The Place that this Disease doth com∣monly possess, are the Legs, Thighs and Hip-bones; sometimes the lower Region of the Belly, and then it is very danger∣ous; for it is of a very sharp and malign nature, and fouls a Bone presently, if not prevented. Cause. From some excrementitious matter that the Mesaraick Veins have attracted, of a faetid savour, not fit to be transferred with the Blood, therefore the Liver dis∣chargeth it into the emulgent Veins, to be carried to the Reins, and so to be evacua∣ted through the Bladder; but the Archeus,
or vital spirit of the Reins, raised up with indignation against such a fordid matter, passing through them, forceth it to the Legs and Thighs, (as in an Anasarca) and seating it self, by its vitious quality cor∣rupteth the place. Cure. If this Powder be given before it hath too much defiled the place, either by foul∣ing the Bone, or becoming exulcerate, it bringeth it away by the Root, if not at once taking, in twice or thrice be sure; but if it hath had too firm a footing, then it requires the assistance of some other things. This Disease being so intimately joyn∣ed to the very Archeus it self, hath its Inn in the most private Recesses, or innermost Chambers of Life, into which admittance is denyed to all common Remedies, and allowed to none but the most powerful Arcanums, which none but the Adeptists have known. Therefore since I know not what internal Remedy to direct you (that may be had in all places) that hath power to obliterate the Character of this
Enemy out of the spirit of life, I shall be content to set down an outward applica∣tion, the which (respecting the effect on∣ly) doth frequently give ease to the pain∣ed part. ℞ Common Oil of Roses two ounces, Oil of Guaicum and Bricks of each one ounce, mix them, and put them into a clean Pipkin, and set them over the fire, into which cut in thin slices four ounces of Castile Soap, stir it well, till it all dissolve in the Oils, then have in readi∣ness half an ounce of Opium dissolved in spirit of Sal Armoniack, which add to the other, taking it presently from the fire, and keep it stirring till it be cold. Which use as an Ointment; but if you would have it for a Plaister, you may add so much Virgins Wax when it is hot, as will give it a sufficient consistency. The bathing or fomenting the pained part with hot Urine wherein Castile Soap is dissolved doth often give ease; that U∣rine is best that is kept till it putrefieth and stinketh. But the Arcanum and Pill doth certainly resolve and expel the occasional matter, al∣though I do not know them to be able to cure this Disease radically, but some I
have cured therewith, having it in the be∣ginning. In the Month of December 1676, a Gentleman desired my assistance, who was sorely afflicted with the Gout, great pain and tumor in both Knees, insomuch that he could not stir from his Bed to the fire side without Crutches for some weeks be∣fore, during which time he had been un∣der the dispensation of a Physician, but in no part thereof ever found any comfort, except in his promises: but he being dis∣missed, I first gave him a dose of the Ar∣canum, or Powder, and at night after a dose of the alsamick Pill, after which he could go cross the Room without his Crutches: I continued the use of the Pill five or six ti, and repeated the Arcanum once, and he was freed both from the pain and tumour, notwithstanding the extre∣mity of the Weather, being a severe Frost and Snow. But about ten days after he ha∣ving urgent business abroad, the Weather then breaking, being wet, yet cold, got a Relapse, the Disease then returning with great pain and tumour in one foot, by the repetition of the Arcanum once, and the Pill three or four times was per∣fectly restored, and hath so remained to
this day, without any other Remedy, ex∣cept two Doses of the Arcanum, which he took the Spring following to prevent a return. Pluritis: or, Plurisie. THis Disease is accompanied with a Fe∣ver, it derives its name from the place where it is seated, which is the inner skin of the Ribs, which we call Pleura. The matter hath been generally receiv∣ed to be blood; but it is v doubtful un∣to me. There are two reasons from whence some have concluded it is blood. First, By derivation, in opening a Vein on the same side, which hath immediately brought ease; I have done it several times. Secondly, that intention not being timely performed, then an Empyema, or Imposthume ariseth, through the blood there suppurated.
But on the contrary: 1. If it be from the pecculancy of the Blood that hath made an Eruption in the Veins, and extend the Pleura, whether this Blood doth re-enter the Veins, and is e∣vacuated by Phlebotomy? which is con∣trary to that principle, What once nature hath cast forth, never more is received into favour. 2. If not out of the Veins, how comes an Empyema, or Imposthume, which is never caused in the Veins? 3. How comes this Sanies, or bloody matter, which is often seen in a Plurisie, though not yet come to an Empyema? 4. If it be blood, how comes it to be cured by a Diaphoretick, or Medicine causing Sweat, which hath been often done? To treat accurately upon this Disease, would make a bigger Tract than I intend this. In a word: I have cured this Disease both ways. There is an aiery Blas contained in the Blood, which doth stir up and actuate it, and makes it more fluid, and so likewise there is incorporated with the Blood a Se∣rum, or watery matter, to contemper its Ebullition and Inflammation.
But when there is a redundancy, or too much of it, or else when it may be too sharp or salt, then this aiery spirit conveys it to the Pleura, to be evacuated by transpiration thorow it, whereby those Veins are so repleted with this Water, that it extorts and dilates the Pleura, which causeth the pain in the place; and unless it be repelled by bleeding, or dissipa∣ted by a sweat; it maketh an eruption of the Veins, and the Blood issuing forth with it, soon suppurates, which makes an Im∣posthume, or Empyema; and although an eruption by those means may be prevent∣ed, yet there may be some of that aqueous matter transpired through the Pleura, which may be tinctured with a sanguine complexion, and cause that colour which is seen in expectoration; so that I con∣ceive, the essence of this Malady is not blood, with submission to sounder Judg∣ments. Now you may ask me, which of those two ways I think the surest: for Hippocrates saith, a Plurisie not perfectly cured before the fourth day, the party becometh consumptive. Answ. I judge the morbisick matter to be evacuated by transpiration through the
Cutis, or Skin, to be the directest Course. REASONS. 1. For so there is nothing exhausted but the matter offending. 2. Those that are cured by Phleboto∣my, or Blood-letting, are more liable to that Distemper again. 3. The Blood is not so depurated from this offensive matter, as by a powerful Sweat. 4. The party affected may be in that condition, that letting Blood may prove prejudicial; as women with child, young women obstructed, &c. I am not averse to Blood-letting; but I had rather make use of my Balsamical Pill, which effects it singularly, and not hurt∣ful in any condition. Now I am speaking of letting out blood, I shall give my judgment in that great que∣stion, (which hath been, and is to this day controverted amongst our great Doctors) whether it be proper in Fevers. Hollerius, Forrestus, Sennertus, Galen, Avicen, with the rest of the Schoolmen, press it of a necessity to be done in the be∣ginning.
Paracelsus, Helmont, with the rest of the Quicksilver Wits, condemn it, as not convenient at any time. Betwixt Scylla and Charybdis there is a safe Channel, but he must be an experien∣ced Mariner that can sail through. As Practice is the best part of Physick, so observation is the surest. Errors being sometimes admitted, do instruct judicious erring persons, as good Remedies do confirm good Operators. From my observation I shall speak some∣thing to those two extremes. If I could think the School definition of a Fever true, that it is heat besides nature, being kindled in the heart first, and throughout the whole Body, I should think nothing could more clearly indicate Phlebotomy; but I hold the contrary, and no necessity for it in the beginning, but rather prejudicial. I have been an observer in this Intenti∣on about twenty two years, and have had many hundreds under my consideration at once, and almost some of all Diseases; and those in Fevers, some have been let Blood, and others not; and for the most part, those that were not let blood, were well before those that were.
In any contagious pestilential malig∣nant Fever, to let blood is very destructive,Detracto san∣guine licet im∣puro, impurior multo, succedit, Fernel. as expe∣rience well teacheth. In a continual Fever, as Synochus, or burning, &c. it prolongs their sickness, and commonly strikes them into an inter∣mitting Ague, or some other Disease. In a Fever intermitting, or determina∣ted into Paroxysms, or Fits, it strongly confirms them. In a word, to let blood in any Fever in the beginning, I have found to do much hurt several times, good hardly at any time: so that I am inforced to shew my dislike of letting blood in the beginning of this Disease. Neither do I consent with great Helmont, the Calciner of Physick, and lau∣dable Paracelsus, that Blood-letting doth exhaust the spirit of life, because the life is seated in the blood; nor that it may be convenient at any time; but I have reason to believe the contrary. 'Tis true, Letting-blood doth never cure a Disease properly, but it doth mightily refresh and cherish a weak nature that hath almost spent her self, through freeing her from her mortal Enemy,
As we see often after a tedious sickness, nature her self stirs it up as a Crisis,Quo natura verget ad locum conferentem to ducere oportet. and then to take a little blood from her, doth much revive and strengthen her. I have cured a man that had a Quartan Ague above a year and four months, only by once letting blood, who never had a Fit after. The drawing blood was but the occa∣sion, nature was the efficient cause; for she was much more elevated and strength∣ened by it, whereby she expunged the mor∣bifick Reliques with a greater facility. I have cured a man that had laboured with an Atrophia or Consumption for a long time (wholly become a meer Skelle∣ton) only by letting blood three times, about six ounces at a time, in the space of ten days, without the use of any other means, he became perfectly well to the admiration of all his Neighbours. I have several times since experienced it in an Hectick Fever; and although this, nor any thing else that I know of will cure it, yet they have been more refreshed by it, than by all the things took; and whosoever practiseth it, will find it so.
I could instance in several more, but let this suffice to evidence the truth (though a Paradox) that Phlebotomy is very dis∣gustful to nature in the beginning of a Disease, but very grateful in the latter end. The Pleurisie is cured by Diaphoreticks and Diureticks, being mixed with such things as have power to concentrate acidi∣ty, as this following mixture. ℞ of the Syrup of Marsh-mallows an ounce, Syrup of Corn-Poppies an ounce and an half, Crabs-eyes prepared and Mineral Bezoar of each a dram, mix them, and make a Lin∣ctus, of which let the Patient lick very often till he come to sweat. Or if he had rather have it in a liquid form, add to this Mixture Triacle and Carduus-Water of each two ounces, shake them well in a Glass, and take it by spoon∣fuls till sweat proceed. For an outward application this following is excellent. ℞ of the compound ointment of Marsh∣mallows an ounce, oil of sweet Almonds and Roses of each a quarter of an ounce, oil of white Lillies, Poppies, and Henbane strained each a dram and a half, Chymical Oil of Cammomile, Cummin-Seeds and Bricks of each a scruple, Camphire half a dram, mix them, and make a
Liniment. With which anoint the pained side as hot as it may be suffered. It would grieve any pitiful heart to see how many persons lives in this Disease, as well as some others, expire with their Blood, some being blooded five or six times over, and yet receiving no ease while they live, as I have divers times known. About three or four years since I was sent for to a Gentlewoman, lying under this Disease, she had been let blood three times, but yet had no ease, and was plyed with Lohochs and Linctus's, and such like broken Reeds; and while I was in her Chamber the Apothecary came in with a Commission to draw more blood, if he found her not eased. She was Patient to one of the oldest Doctors in London, upon which, and the consideration of her weakness, I wholly declined to meddle with her, not without much reluctancy and regret of mind since, for my timero∣sity: because I then thought I might have saved life by the Balsamick Pill; and on the other hand, was confident, that she would be certainly lost by that usage she had, which accordingly came to pass the next day, at the fifth or sixth bloody Bout, dying under the Lancet. But I
never failed to cure any Pleurisie with the Pill, by repeating it, if need be, in ten or twelve hours; I have sometimes wholly removed the pain in two hours time, al∣though they have been twice let blood be∣fore without ease, although I do not deny but blood-letting may sometimes cure it without injury in such as are lusty and strong, or those that have a Plethora of Blood. But for a common easie Remedy, there is none exceeds the infusion of Horse∣dung in Ale, for it is rich in Volatile Salt, whereby it hath power to slay any acidity in the blood, as also to transpire any other peccant matter. Ictoritia: or Yellow Jaundice. THe Schools have told us, That this Di∣sease proceedeth from an obstruction of the Gaul-Bladder, whereby Choler is diffused through the whole Body. Helmont judgeth it to be a poysonous Ferment besides nature, which so badly af∣fecteth
the Pylorus, or lower Mouth of the Stomach, that the digestive and distributive faculty is alienated, and the Seat of this poison to be either in the Duodenum or I∣leon. And he proves it to be poisonous from the instance of one that was bit by a Serpent, who presently turned yellow. But my judgment doth not sute with either; Helmont is very near it, only I think it not to be of so poysonous a na∣ture as he takes it to be. This Distemper is often the sequel of some antecedent sickness, and therefore is not any primary Disease, but rather the effect or relique of some foregoing one. If you look back into that Disease of Children, there I tell you how the peccant matter comes to be tinctured with Choler; some of this matter which was morbifical in some precedent Disease, did adhere un∣to the Duodenum or Pylorus, which tin∣ctures the Chyle, and so the body becomes yellow, and a bitterness perceived in the mouth, I say, it is from the morbifick matter of some precedent Disease, that this Balsome of the Gaul hath coloured and seasoned with its bitterness, to pre∣vent its putrefaction, and adhering to the Pylorus or Duodenum, stains and imbitters
the Chyle, which is transferred through the whole Body, whereby the superficial parts are discoloured. As to the biting of the Serpent, this yellowness is not essential from the poyson of the Serpent, but from this Balsom that is sent thither to antidote it, and so the Body becomes yellow: as I have instanced in a little Wormwood and Saffron. CƲRE. I have often cured it with a little Tur∣merick roasted in an Apple with a little Saffron. Likewise the middle Rind of a Barbary Tree, steeped in a little White-Wine, and a little Saffron, Flowers of Marygold, Rhubarb. &c. The yellowness of those means shew their ordinati∣on to be for the scour∣ing of this Relique;Vide Helmont: for Signatures bewray the internal Crasis, or temperature of a thing; but the Crasis it self doth not discover the thing. Things of this nature have happily cu∣red several; but if those should chance to fail, my Powder doth it presently.
Calculus Vesicae: or the Stone in the Bladder. THe Stone in the Bladder (that Mon∣ster in nature) which well may be reckoned with those Diseases, that are the shame of Physicians. The cause and manner of its generation hath not rightly been understood by the Ancients: and our Modern Physicians having made no latter search into it, there is yet no Remedy found out for the Cure, but the poor mi∣serable creature is left to the tyranny of this Monster, or delivered up unto the tortorous way of cutting, which is such a Remedy as was never instituted by God or nature. All men are liable to this Disease, though some more than others; but espe∣cially Children. You may observe, that in most Mens water there is this stonyfying matter, though it may not be discerned when it is hot and new; but after it hath stood some while exposed to the cold, it is separated
from the Urine, and remains in the bot∣tom of the Pot, or cleaves unto its sides. CAƲSE. Men of ripe years are not so inclinable unto it as Children, because they have a better digestion, and have not so much of that crude matter out of which it is made. Old men are not incident unto it, though their Digestion be weak, because they want quantity of the matter; but when the Ferment of the Bladder is weak in them, they are liable to the Strangury, which I shall speak a word unto present∣ly. But Children are most inclinable unto it, because they have weak Digestions, which breedeth abundance of Crudities, the Mother of this Disease. It is more from the weakness of the Ferment of the Bladder where it is pro∣duced, than from the matter producing; neither is this matter coagulated and har∣dened as Clay is by the heat of the Sun; but condensed as Ice is, by the frigidity of the Air, And what inordinate heat is per∣ceived,
it is only accidental; as by that example before of a Thorn in the hand. I could produce several instances to il∣lustrate this truth; but I shall omit them at present. The intention curative will shew it, ac∣cording to that Maxim; the truest Indica∣tion is from the benefit or hurt of things formerly used: and that hot and warm things do mitigate and correct the pain, and cold things do exasperate it. PROGNOST. If it hath been of a long growth, and confirmed, I am sorry to tell you, I know not what will dissolve it. Such a Remedy hath been, if we will credit Paracelsus, which I believe to be true; and I hope God will discover it to some of us, for the comfort of those miserable creatures which are affected with it, and keep them from that torturing course of cutting, which very often proves a Remedy worse than the Disease. But when it is in doing, and of no long continuance, it may easily be prevented and reduced.
CƲRE. Now the Cure consists principally in those three things, viz. Evacuation, Al∣teration and Corroboration. 1. In evacuating the matter contain∣ed. 2. In altering the Ferment of the Blad∣der, if it be vicious, or 3. In corroborating of it, if it be weak, which is commonly the cause. And you can hardly evacuate the mat∣ter, before you corroborate the parts,; which is done by this course. Victûs Ratio. Let most of his Liquor that he drinks be Sack; let most of his Meat be roasted well, whereof let him eat but little at a time, though he eat the oftener; let his Bread be Bisket, or the Crust of Bread well baked; let him eat Salt with his Meat; Salt Beef boiled is good for him, if he loves it, and doth well digest with him. Let him avoid Milk, Cheese, let little Butter serve him, and fruits: an Apple
he may eat if he desires it, Raisins of the Sun he may freely eat. You must foment or bath the Region of his Bladder often with Decoctions of some comfortable herb boiled in Sack, and some good Ointment to embrocate it afterward, and so bound up warm. After ten or twelve days that you have kept the Child in this order, you may give him a Dose of my Powder, which will bring forth the matter contained. I shall direct any one further that shall desire it. But above all things, let him avoid all old womens Medicines to void or break the Stone; for I verily believe that hath made many a Stone where there would be none; for if the Bladder be any way de∣fective, whereby he doth not make water freely, they conclude presently the Stone; and then take such a thing, says one, and such a thing, says another; and so keep giving till it come to a Stone indeed; for all those things they give to force the Stone away, or break it, are inimical to the Bladder, and the more debilitates the Fer∣ment, which is the efficient cause in ge∣nerating the Stone. I dare affirm it possible to generate a
Stone in any Body, though never so free from it, only by those things they com∣monly give to cure it. I have been somewhat larger in this than I intended. I shall only name two or three Diseases more, and conclude; for I intend it only for a small thing to carry in a man's hand for a Memorandum.Enchyridion. So potent an Enemy is this Disease of the Stone to mankind, that it is very sel∣dom vanquished or cured, except some∣times by the affrightful way of cutting, under which many also die, and some o∣thers which recover, lose the use and of∣fice of the Bladder for ever; some there are again who generate the Stone afresh, after cutting, as Helmont notes, a young man who was twice cut, but the Stone growing again, the third time he died under the Knife. For indeed the cutting takes not away the power of making, although it may free a man from the matter made. Many Remedies have been invented to dissolve the Stone; but experience hath found them but feeble helpers. First, those which have promised help by being
injected into the Bladder by a Syringe, as juice of Citrons, Spirit of Salt and others, because they have been observed to dis∣solve a Stone in a Glass, taken from a hu∣mane Body; but alas their promises are vain, for a small quantity being cast into the Bladder immediately stirs up an intollerable Strangury, as being wholly foreign to the ferment of the part: A∣gain, the powers of all common Reme∣dies taken at the mouth are altered, trans∣muted, and perish before they get to the Bladder, for they must first pass three di∣gestions, so that little more than their ex∣crements can arrive at the Bladder; for acid or sharp things, from whence so much hath been hoped, as soon as they are past the Stomach, lose their acidity, and are con∣verted into a saline nature, whereby the sharpness is either wholly transmuted, or at least so sealed up, that it is devoid of an acid act before it gets to the Bladder. 'Tis true there are some things (as Turpentine, Asparagus, Raddishes, &c.) which have their odours so fast tied to the middle life of their Concretes, that they are not wholly overcome by the Ferment of the Stomach, but retain them even to the ex∣pelling of the Urine, but those are too
eeble resolvers; and besides persevere not long in that estate, but quickly sub∣mit to any dungy Ferment of putrefacti∣on. Therefore a true Resolver of the Stone ought to have the following powers and properties, viz. 1. It must have a sufficient power to dissolve the Stone, being put with it into a Glass in a heat not exceeding the heat of our Bodies; and that not after the manner of Corrosives, which make a forcible dis∣solution with an ebullition and noise, but by the action are much weakened in their own force: but a true solvent acteth with∣out noise or ebullition, dissolving the Stone insensibly, as warm water dissolveth Ice, neither is its own power infringed, or depauperated by the action. 2. The Solvent of the Stone ought to be so homogenious and singular, that it submit not to any digestions or fermental powers through which it passeth in its way to the Bladder, that coming thither in its own integrity and might, it may work up∣on the Stone as oft as it passeth by it. 3. It ought to be so amicable and agree∣able to the Bladder, that being cast into it with a Syringe, it may not be painful there∣to after the manner of sharp injections.
Such a Remedy I have a near prospect of, but no more of that in this place: but I have a Medicine that will give ease in the most racking pains of the Stone, within the space of an hour. Atrophia or Marasmuss: or, a Consumption without a Cough. A Consumption without a Cough pro∣ceeds from the loss of the Ferment of some principal part, whereby it decayeth and withereth, and some other part doth too much abound and increase: I shall speak a word of this in the Rickets of Children.
Febris Hectica: or, a Consumption with a Cough. A Consumption with a Cough of ehe Lungs, is from the decaying and putrefying of them, either in part, or in the whole, nature sending a more than or∣dinary proportion of nourishment to that part, which by that putrefactive Ferment is converted into Excrement, and is expe∣ctorated, or coughed up. This Disease hath been seldom cured, if it hath been long on the party, where∣by his Body is much emaciated and consu∣med, Paracelsus had a Remedy for it: but I think it was buried with him:Riverius cent. 4. of observ. by the fumy Troch Auri∣pigm. others have cured it likewise, after a great loss of their Substance. Whilst it is in fieri, or in the beginning, I am very confident this Arcanum, or Powder of mine will cure it.
This Disease is usually the consequent of a Surfeit or Fever, or else it is Heredi∣tary, being transmitted by the Parents to their posterity, which admits of no cure, that I know of by Medicine: the former may be cured, if good Medicines be ad∣ministred in time, that is before the Sto∣mach and Lungs be too much vitiated, and the Lungs exulcerated. But it is in vain at∣tempted by the usual Methods of Sugared Milk, nourishing Broths, Jellies, Lo∣hochs, Electuaries, pectoral Syrups, and Apozems, &c. for they all add to the heap of Excrements, Milk and Broth of Flesh being subject to putrefie speedily by the very heat of the Stomach, not meeting with the digestive Ferment thereof (which is almost lost) submit to a vitious Fer∣mentation, and so form a vile and degene∣rate Chyle, which is in no wise fit for the nourishment of the Body, whence all the parts languish and waste; the which also enrageth the Archeus, from whence that burning in all the solid parts proceeds, the which is evidently proved by being in∣creased, always an hour or two after eat∣ing. Then as for Electuaries, Lohochs, Powders, &c. Some of them are design∣ed to relieve the Lungs, by sliding down
the Wind-Pipe insensibly, and so going immediately to the part affected, but o∣thers are appointed to go about, till by the Laws of Circulation they may at length come with their assistance to the Lungs, but both to no purpose: as for the first nature derideth the offer, in as much as she plainly sheweth an abhorrency but of the least crum or drop that through a∣ny inadvertency passeth the Larynx, and gets into the Wind-pipe, and will not be at rest till by coughing it be driven back a∣gain: therefore who sees not that if those licking Medicines should go that way their appointers would have them, that instead of curing or easing a Cough, how migh∣tily they would increase it. As for the latter, they are forced to sub∣mit to the fate of the Food, only they prove more troublesome to the Body, be∣cause more crude. But the cure of this Disease ought to be instituted after ano∣ther manner, viz. by cleansing away of lth, and altering the putrefactive Fer∣ent of the Lungs, the first makes room for n equal distribution of the nourishable ices: and the second restrains the exor∣itant Governour of the Lungs from con∣erting their proper nutriment into pu∣rulent
excrements. But when I speak of cleansing away of Filth, I do not mean ei∣ther by direct purges, or by those things called Expectoraters: for the first are in∣deed poysons, and resolve the good juice themselves, and expel them with the Ex∣crements, and the latter promote cor∣ruption faster than they cause spitting But true cleansers resolve all filth in the Sto∣mach, Guts and Veins, and in their passage carry them to the common Emunctories of nature, as those of the first passage to be expelled by stool, and they of the Veins by Urine. To which purpose you may take Tartarum Vitriolatum every morning for three or four days together, from ten to twenty grains in a little warm Broth, increasing the dose every morning, or in∣stead thereof for those who affect no sharp things, you may give half a dra or two scruples of the Cream of Tarta dissolved in hot Broth: after which gi Salt of Harts-horn and Amber, of each eight, nine, or ten grains twice a day  Broth, or Sherry Wine, continue it fo some time, these will cleanse away Filt and Excrements, as Soap cleanseth Clot and likewise resist putrefaction; but  the farther pacifying the Archeus of t
Lungs, those who have Mineral Sulphurs well prepared, or Opium divested of its Narcotick or Stupefactive Power (which sleepifying force is not its virtue, but its vice) such I say may be able to cure this Disease safely and pleasantly. But seeing those Remedies are known but to few, therefore after (the forementioned Salt) I advise the Balsam of Sulphur of Antimony, or good Balsom of common Sulphur, to be taken twice or thrice a day to six or seven drops, or more at a time mixed with a lit∣tle white Sugar, and taken upon the point of a Knife. But the Arcanum and Balsamick Pill do not miss the cure, if nature be not too far spent. The Rickets. THe Rickets is a Disease amongst Chil∣dren, that hath been but of late years: but ingenious Coke tells us, it hath been known among the Ancients, who have excellently treated of them: so like∣wise
have the Learned Doctors Glysson and Bates, and Mr. Culpepper. They differ but little, and conclude, that it is mostly from an obstruction either in the Liver or Spleen. I rather think it to be from a debilitati∣on, or viciousness of their Ferment, and so there is no assimilation, whereby the part becomes atrophied, or decayed, and some other part increased: for the Con∣sumption of one part is the growing, or greatning of another part: as I have often observed. An Atrophia, or Consumption, and this, are Cousin-Germans, there is little dif∣ference between them. Children do a∣bound more with a crude phlegmatick matter, which makes the Head bigger, and the Joynts knotty, &c. PROGNOST. If they have continued long, they are not to be cured, but if taken in the begin∣ning, my Arcanum, or Powder doth cure it presently, and two or three of my Bal∣samical Pills to be taken after, to rectifie the Ferment; for the Arcanum opens the Obstructions, and sweeps off all the pec∣cant matter.
If the Childs Head begin to grow big, let it blood in both ears. I have known it very effectual, and sometimes it hath made a perfect Cure, without the help of any other thing. Take of the Bark of Ash and Tamarisk each three drams, to which add a scruple of Salt of Tartar, put them into a Glass Bottle, with a quart of good Beer, let it stand twenty four hours, and afterwards let the Child drink it for common drink. When it is out, you may put to the Bark another quart of Beer, and it will be good. If you will make it pleasanter, you may add to it two or three ounces of Sy∣rup of Harts-tongue. Continue the use for some considerable time. Ens Veneris is al∣so excellent, being given twice a day to three or four grains, or more, in warm Broth.
Apoplexy, Paralisis, Catalepsie, E∣pilepsie, Vertigo, &c. THere are several Diseases that have been thought to have their Rise im∣mediately from the Brain, as Apoplexy, Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, Catalepsie, or the sleepy Disease, Palsie, Giddiness of the Head, &c. but it is not my judgment that the Brain is primarily affected in any of them. Apoplexy. An Apoplexy proceeds from a vapour of some poisonous matter that hath for some time lain either in the Pylorus, or a∣bout the Diaphragma, or Midriff, or Hy∣pochondria, fermenting and corrupting.
Vertigo. It is not of so poisonous and malignant a nature as the Apoplexy is; it is somewhat narcotical, or stupefactive, as Tobacco is to them thac cannot well take it. It is the Forerunner of an Apoplexy. PALSIE. AS Giddiness is the Forerunner to an Apoplexy; so a Palsie is the Subse∣quent, or Follower. CAƲSE. It is caused by the horrour or great fear (in the vital and animal spirit of the Brain) by those terrible assaults that are given them by that dreadful Enemy the A∣poplexy. As we may see sometimes many persons do tremble and shake for fear. I know some Palsies have been occasion∣ed
by hurts and colds in some great Joynts, as Shoulder and Hips, and in progress of time that whole side hath become paraly∣tick. How vain hath been the receiv∣ed opinion of the Schools, about Palsies, that they should proceed from Obstructions in the Head, or Conjugation, &c. A Lethargy doth proceed from a more mild poison than the Apoplexy; as from Opium. Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, I have spoken of before. They all affect the Brain by consent of the parts where the peccant matter lies. CƲRE. All these (besides the Palsie) are cured by my Arcanum universale, if ever they be cured at all; which is to be hastened, for if not remedied in the beginning, hardly find any cure. The Palsie is an accident, or product, or the effect, and this may remain, though the cause be removed, it is rather Intem∣peries than Morbus; an affrighted Distem∣per in the Spirits, than a Disease; and the Cure may be performed by my Balsamical Pills, which do refocillate, comfort, and
cherish the spirit, as also by Salt of Pearls, or Corral, or my Aurum vitae, either of them taken alone, with a little sharp Wine drank after doth excellently. From a weakness and decaying, of the spirits, this may be occasio∣ned,My spirit shall be diminished, and my days shall be shorten∣ed. as well as by terrour in them: therefore this is one of the Diseases of old age. And to go about to cure it in old persons, if it hath conti∣nued any time, is to swim against the stream, and write in the Sand. In the Apoplexy, the Ointment for the Head and Neck described in the Cure of the Falling Sickness is good; as also the following mixture, the mouth being first opened by art. ℞ Aqua Langii, Water of Sage and La∣vender of each an ounce, Tincture of Castor half a dram, Spirit of Sal Armoniack a scru∣ple, Oil of Amber nine or ten drops, Syrup of Staechas an ounce, mix them, and give a spoonful very often. The Palsie, Vertigo, Catalepsie, &c. are all of the essence of an Apoplexy, and dif∣fer only in degree, therefore they are to
be cured with the like Medicines. In the Palsie, Lethargy, and Swimming, or Gid∣diness of the Head, those following Pills are effectual. ℞ of Pill. Aloephangina a scruple, Rosin of Jallap six grains, Salt of Amber as much, Oil of Marjoram two drops, mix them, and make four Pills to be taken in the morning ear∣ly, and repeated once in three or four duys. In the Palsie sweat betwixt purgings with spirit of Sal Armoniack given in Sack. You may also use the Ointment a∣bove mentioned to the Back-bone and pa∣ralytical parts. In October 1667, a certain Man-servant to one of the Arts-Masters of Bridewel, London, was suddenly stricken with a Di∣sease in the Evening, as he was at Supper, he fell from his seat sensless and speechless, his eyes were staring open, as in a Cata∣lepsie or Congelation, but totally depri∣ved both of sence and motion, as in an A∣poplexy. When I first saw him he had remained in this condition about a week, during which time means had been used to help him, but proved altogether inef∣fectual, so that he was given over for dead. Notwithstanding which, I observ∣ed that he yet retained a good degree of
heat, as also an indifferent Pulse, the which with some other considerations made me to believe he might still recover, the which I told his Master and Mistress, when they demanded what I thought of his condition, who then desired I would take him into my care, which I did. The first thing I gave him was a Dose of the Powder, which wrought very well up∣wards and downwards, towards the end of which he began to speak some odd words, and came to be somewhat sensible; the next day I repeated the Powder which wrought again as before, upon which he came to perfect sensation, and also to in∣crease in speech, and one side returned a∣gain to the exercise of all Functions, but the other remained paralytical and insensi∣ble from Head to Foot, not being able so much as to stir one Finger on that hand; but by the use of the Balsamick Pill, and repeating the Powder once or twice more (by the blessing of the Almighty) I re∣stored him, and in a months time was a∣gain at work, using those useless Fingers, without which he could have done no∣thing, being a Glover by Trade. In the time that I had this person in cure, the Wife of another of the Arts-masters
in Bridewel, having lain in Child∣bed about a Fortnight, was also one Even∣ing suddenly deprived of her speech, and taken somewhat Paralytical on one side, she sent to me about eleven or twelve of the clock that night; as soon as I came, I gave her four grains of the Powder, which wrought both upward and down∣wards, but most upward, the which being once or twice repeated, and the Balsamick Pill for some time taken at nights, she was also happily recovered. I could give di∣vers other notable instances of Cures of this nature performed by these Medicines, (having had many fallen under my care) but these I think may suffice. However, I will in this place add ano∣ther strange Cure (which comes fresh in my mind) done with the Pill alone, by a Physician, who buys Medicines of me, and lives near Highworth in Wiltshire. At a certain time he being abroad about six miles from his dwelling, was much solici∣ted by a Friend to go a little out of the way to look upon a poor man that had lain bedrid for three months, being grievously pained all over his Body, and not able to turn himself, but as he was helped; he had used Purgations, Phlebotomy, Fo∣mentations,
Unctions, &c. but all to no purpose. The Physician having some of the Balsamick Pill about him, dissolv∣ed a full Dose in a Glass of Ale, and gave him, and so left him, within two or three days the poor man came that six miles on foot to give him thanks, and told him, that within two hours after he had taken the Pill, he was perfectly free from pain, and so remained, with the due use of all the parts, only weak; the Physician gave him another Dose home with him, which he took, and became very well, and had been so many months when the Physician told me of it. Spasmus: or, Convulsion. A Convulsion is caused by some ma∣lignant matter contained in the Guts, as is oftentimes seen after the ta∣king of some Hellebore or Stibium, or a∣ny Medicine that hath a poysonous quali∣ty.
The Sting or biting of any venomous or poisonous creature produceth Convul∣sion. CAƲSE. That vital Blas or Spirit in the Muscle being assaulted by some poysonous quality, contracteth it, the better to defend it from that poyson. SPASMƲS. The Cramp is from a sharp aiery Blas, that doth meet with a Nerve or Sinew. The Worms in Children bringeth Con∣vulsions in them many times. That it is caused through fulness or emptiness, and the primary place affected to be the Brain, I do not consent unto, though it hath been received for a truth. CƲRE. If it be caused by some poysonous mat∣ter that hath been received, or through the biting or stinging of some Snake, &c. my Aurum vitae is admirable: but if it cometh by excrementitious matter con∣tained
in the Body, as the matter of Worms, &c. the Arcanum or Powder e∣radicates it, or takes it away by the root. They are generated from corrupted Chyle, and they differ according to the place where they are made. If in the Stomach little small Worms. In the Ilion long and slender like earth∣worms. In the Colon, little short thick worms, much like the Bots in Horses. This Pow∣der doth not only take away Diseases when they are on, but likewise prevent them, if it be given in health; for this violent Di∣sease in Children, I verily think there is not a better remedy under the Heaven, if it be timely given; for it carries off all that may be the occasion of the Disease or Worms, one Grain is sufficient, and that's but six pence. The last are the worst, and sometimes the longest in curing. If these continue long, they encompass themselves into a Cistis or Bladder, which they run out and into, as a Coney into her Burrough, whereby they defend them∣selves from the injury of any thing that is sent into the place to kill them. For the two former the Powder cures
them perfectly, not only in killing, or bringing away the worms there made, but in taking away the cause. The last, if they have made this shel∣ter, it is very hard to kill and destroy them. I have known a young Gentlewoman that was troubled with them from seven years till she was nineteen, and never could get remedy: they constantly came from her day and night, without any ex∣crement, to her great grief and sorrow, though the pain was not intolerable. Now because I do desire to be found in∣genious to my Countrymen, I shall freely tell in what my two or three Arcanums, or secret Medicines will not avail them, and direct them unto that which will do it. Many Physicians were befooled in this Disease of this Gentlewoman, she took the advice of all within that Country where she lived: many were the Clysters that she took of salt, sharp, and bitter things, with the like ointment, and plai∣sters to her Belly, &c. but all to little pur∣pose; as well as abundance of Mercurial Preparations which she took. She was cured by this following. The same Worm dried (which is the
best thing to destroy them that is) and powdered and given in a Clyster with Milk and a little Honey. But first let the Belly be well anointed and chafed with this Ointment. Take some of the same Powder of the Worms, the Gaul of an Ox, a little Vi∣negar and Bay Salt, three or four Cloves of Garlick, the juice of Worwood,You may have it at the Apo∣thecaries. and the Powder of Coloquintida; if you have not the art to bring them in∣to an Ointment with Ho∣ney, beat the Garlick, and mix them, and so rub the Region of the great Gut, and dip a Cloth in it, and lay to the Na∣vel, do it warm. In the Month of December, 1677, be∣ing extreme cold Weather, great Frost and Snow, a young Woman being with Child, and living near me, laboured un∣der a very strange Convulsion, joined with a Palsie; for besides the Fits which were strange and long, she had continually night and day, in Bed, and out of Bed, inces∣sant Convulsive Motions throughout her whole Body, for she had not the command of any part, neither could she ever sit or
lie still, without drawing and writhing her Legs, Arms, and whole Body after a strange exorbitant manner; sometimes she could speak a little, and sometimes nothing for many hours: but that which was most strange was this, that when she had some liberty of speech, and would endeavour to relate her own apprehensions of her evil, her Tongue would be all on a sudden retracted, or drawn back into her Throat, that she could never proceed, so that most people that saw her thought her to be bewitched, or under an evil Tongue, as they commonly phrase it, but (by the mercy of Almighty God) I perfectly cu∣red her with this Powder and Pill, in a∣bout ten days time; she went out her time with Child, which Child and her self have been ever since in good health. She had been almost as bad the year before, and was cured then by a Physician of Hartford, who buys Medicines of me. Before every Fit she could manifestly perceive her great disturber to arise from about the Sto∣mach and Midriff, and ascend to her Head, which is a plain demonstration that the primary Seat of this Disease is not in th Head as is commonly believed, the whic also is not a little confirmed by thos
Children who are suddenly cut off by Con∣vulsions, whose Bellies I have seen imme∣diately after death to turn yellow, green, or black, and cold before the extreme parts, which plainly indicates the seat of this putrefactive deadly Ferment, to be the Stomach, or thin Guts. Amongst these Diseases, I shall insert a Disaster, (though out of its place) and give my judgment thereupon, viz. Eruptio Venarum: or, the Break∣ing of a Vein. THe Breaking of Veins in any place, are not without some danger. The place where the eruption is, ought princi∣pally to be known; for unless that be rightly understood in vain doth any one think to do any good, as to a Cure. The Schools have left it very obscure to their Scholars, because it was never un∣derstood. by them; for indeed it doth
come meerly under the consideration of an experienced Chyrurgion: to lay a plaister to the Heel for a hurt in the Head, is like to do but little good. Wherefore I shall give you some signs, that you may know the place, and some directions for its Cure. If it be below the Diaphragma, or Midriff, this Blood is evacuated mostly by Urine. If in the Mesaraick Veins (which are annexed to the Guts) by Stool. If from the upper Region of the Tho∣rax, or Breast, it must come through a Thrust of some sharp Instrument that hath penetrated the Pleura, or inner skin of the Ribs; for without that there cannot be any Blood come into the Breast; for the Lungs or Heart, which are the two principal parts contained, cannot be inju∣red by any Blows, Strains, Bruises, &c. without this Pleura be pierced or broken: and besides, there are no Veins in them, they are nourished by Arteries; the Lungs by the Arterialis, which doth bestow many small Twigs into its Body, whereby the are nourished. There hath been many great mistakes a¦bout this part in this Disaster; for a Ve having been broken in the Intercos
Muscles, or Muscles of the Sides or Breast, Blood many times is evacuated at the Mouth; and likewise in the Head or Throat, Blood falling down upon the E∣pyglottis, or Lap that covers the Wind-Pipe, causeth a tickling, which doth stir up a Cough, with which this Blood is e∣vacuated out of the Mouth, and thereby the Throat and Tonsils, and Glandules, or spungy places which do receive the hu∣midity of the Brain, are inflamed. Also the Spittle may become more crass or fro∣thy; and being discoloured by the Blood falling there, many have presently con∣cluded it to have come from the Lungs. Without it were a Vein in the Head, the party himself may very well tell where the eruption is; for he can as perfectly perceive it to flow, as if he saw it. But in the Head he cannot, for he only finds a distilling and tickling in his Throat, with some pain in his Head. If this di∣stilling be from the Dura, or Pia Mater, it is very dangerous, if from some branch about the Throat, not so dangerous, with∣out it be the Jugular, which pours out so violently, without any intermission, that in few hours life will expire. If it be in those Panicles, Dura, or Pia Mater, which cover the Brain, the pain of his Head.
And especially that side where the hurt was, will increase, and likewise his Fe∣ver. The Cure doth solely consist in open∣ing the Skull, and that place where he feels his pain most, to stop and cleanse away the congealed Blood. If it be in the Throat, in applying strong Defensitives round the Throat, and next repellers to the Head and Shoul∣ders, opening a Vein in the Foot, and strong Ligatures or Boundages to his Thighs, a little above his Knees, with vulnary and specifical means. If it should be in the containing parts of the breast, as in the Muscles, &c. letting blood, with discussive means to the place, giving him some proper thing to stir up a gentle sweat, cures him. But if there should be a Laceration, or renting of the Pleura, with an Eruption of a Vein in the sides, (which is a thing hardly ever heard of) whereby the Blood doth fall into the concavity of the Breast, the Cure is thus: Make incision upon, or as near the place as you can, where the Eruption is, then to tie the mouth of the Vessel is the pra∣ctise of some, but I would rather restrain
the Blood by some fit means, whereof my Powder for Wounds is admirable, used as in the Directions; and so it is for Hae∣morrhagia, or bleeding at the Nose, a Tent of Tow or Lint, and armed with the Powder, stays it presently; or any where else, if it doth but touch the mouth of the Vessel, immediately stops the blood. Remove it not presently, but let it unite and heal the Vessel first, which it will not be long in effecting. But if there should be any Blood fallen down upon the Diaphragma, or Midriff, which should not be presently evacuated, but there lies coagulating, (which is per∣ceived by some weight in the place, and likewise a Fever to assault him, with con∣stant increase;) In that case, if the Ori∣fice where you cut to stop the Vein, may be so high, whereby you cannot make it depending enough for the evacuating this blood, there must be another Orifice made more lower for that purpose. But this operation doth belong to an experienced Chyrurgion. Those internal Wounds are very dan∣gerous, and a great deal of circumspecti∣on is to be had about them; and are not to be cured but by a skilful Chyrurgion,
that is well acquainted with those opera∣tions, which are the highest practise in the Art. Wherefore have a care you are not de∣ceived with any old Wifes Stories of Tom Thumb, and Jack of Newberry, &c. to tell you of a Vein broken in the Lungs, or Heart, or Liver, &c. ('tis just as they tell you about Diseases) 'tis a great ab∣surdity to speak it; and should an Artist speak it, he would be laughed at by those that understood the nature of such things: for, the two Roots of Veins in the Liver, either of them hurt, death presently ensues. If it should be asked, what Veins should be broken in the Lungs and Heart, whether the Vena Arteriosa, or the Arteria Venosa? There is not any Vein in the Lungs: only some small Twigs of the Aterialis, or Artery, which are dispersed through them, by which they are nourished: and for what use are the Ribs, but to defend them from such injuries? and it is impossi∣ble they should be hurt by such accidents. And in case what they say were granted to be true, there is no other way under Hea∣ven to save his life, but immediately to per∣form that operation of a Paracentysis,
which is, to make an orifice in the same side, whereof there is no more danger in per∣forming, (by him that hath done it, and knows what belongs to it) then in opening a Vein in the Arm, though probably there may be some professors of Art, that what they never saw, neither understand, they speak against, and tell of danger in let∣ting in Air, and letting out spirits, and a great many more nonsensical Stories. Pray be advised, that you take but lit∣tle notice of it: for although they may be old practitioners, yet look on them but as young Artists. Fluxes of Blood, without sudden help will soon flux out life; and to expect a Cure from those that know not a Reme∣dy, nor the place where to apply it, seems very strange to me. And besides, without it be well cured in the beginning, it will break out again upon certain times, which at last will kill him; whereof I have known many such examples. Wherefore get the best advice you can from Chyrurgions. With∣out it be from the Head, (as I have before told you) the party can very well tell you himself where the hurt is; for he will not only perceive the Blood to flow, but he
will find some pain there: if it be from the Head, he will perceive a great dulness and heaviness, and pain in his Head, with a tickling, as it flows down into his Throat, sometimes ready to choak him, which stir∣reth up a Cough, whereby this Blood is cast forth from the Amygdales, or Glan∣dules, which are of each side the Wind-pipe, and those spungy places about the Throat; and so some have thought them to be from the Lungs, when alas 'tis from the Head. I did presage this in a Gentleman of this Town. Mr. Bishop, only by his Bro∣thers Relation (which he can well tell) of his pain, which was in the fore part of his Head: I advised him, by all means, immediately to be let blood, and to be re∣peated, if occasion served; for I told him,Which that night happen∣ed unto him, and he died in the morning. if he did bleed at the mouth, before he was let blood, he would presently die, for he would be beyond all means, in re∣gard he was ancient, &c. the place diffi∣cult to apply the Trepan, or Trefine, without which, I look on it as impossible (quoad artes) for any to recover, unless the blood be discharged, which falleth
between the Skull and the Panicles, which cannot be done by any other way. For what happens in the lower Belly, it is to be cured as wounds, by vulnary Drinks and Clysters. I have been a little longer on this than I intended; but those internal wounds are of high concernment, and I fear not right∣ly understood by all pretenders to Art. Coryza, Catarrbus, Tussis, Asthma. COughs and Catarrhs, Rheums in the Head, Eyes, Nose, &c. proceed from the Evening cold, sharp wind beating upon the † spungy Bone of the Head.Ethmoides os cribriformae. Asthma, or shortness of Breath, cometh through a vicious matter contained in the Wind-pipe, or Lungs. I have not time to inlarge upon them. The three first are commonly cured in one night, by one of my Balsamical Pills. The last by the Arcanum. I have strong
reason from experience to believe, there is not another such Medicine found for it in any place that ever I was in: this is a Disease that old age is liable unto; and for old persons that have had it long, 'tis folly for them to think to receive a per∣fect Cure from it, or from any thing else, but I know not any thing will ease them more than this. There is another Disease that follows old age, which I shall likewise hint at, and so end, viz. Stranguria: or, the Strangury. THe Strangury is from the defect and weakness of nature in the second Di∣gestion. CƲRE. Let him forbear all sharp meats and drinks, and observe the same course I have directed for the Stone, in which he will find great comfort.
For any Venereal Distemper, or French Disease, there is not a better Medicine that ever was prepared for it, than this Arcanum; for it cures any, of what na∣ture soever (that is curable) without Sa∣livation or Fluxing. There are some Distempers belonging to the Female Sex, that are not here ne∣cessary to express, for which this Arcanum is singular. Hystericus: or, Fits of the Mo∣ther. IN Hysterical Fits, or Fits of the Mo∣ther, there hath been a great mistake, as to the true cause, a well as of the rest. With one dose of my Arcanum universale, and one of my Balsamical Pills: I have cu∣red some in twenty four hours. The Seeds of White Nettles bruised, and drank in White Wine are a very good remedy against these Fits. So is also
the Tincture of Castor, Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack, and Elixir Proprietatis, being given in Rhenish Wine. But I have a Me∣dicine which I call Elixir Hystericum, with Which I never yet failed to cure those Fits. I have also that Remedy mentioned by Mr. Couch for the speedy delivering Wo∣men with Child. And likewise in barrenness, in all the Authors that ever I read, I never met but with one that ever came near the Bush; and it is very unlike that any of those should start the Hare. I am confident there are many that are married who are childless, that should they be divorced, the Husband would be∣get Children by another Woman, and his Wife conceive by another man. Now if one should demand the reason why could they not procreate when they were together. I doubt it would puzzle an old Physician to resolve it. It may be he might tell them of Anti∣pathies in their Natures: as the Stomach doth abhor some kind of Meats, &c. but I suppose those Meats had first injured the Stomach. It may be if the Mother love
not Cheese, she may cry pah unto it, to her little Daughter, and thereby the Child may loath it as much as the Mother. But I never knew a Pica in the Mother to beget a Crapula in the Daughter, though she may labour cum furore matricis. But no more of this. This Discourse deserves more to be whispered in a private Room, than to be treated of here. And no marvel that there are so many incurable Diseases, in regard their true causes were never hitherto found out. Thus you may perceive what a Lethargy and blind ignorance hath benighted Medi∣cine, & obscured the Inquiry into the right Remedies for Diseases, by a sad Theory, and miserable method of the Heathens, (which is still in force amongst Christians) as if Medicine was made only for them, and the true knowledge God should dis∣cover unto them, and Christians were to receive it from them. And well may healing fail us, who make no further in∣quiry after it, than the tradition of such Teachers. I have some other Arcanums, or Secrets, for some Distempers of the Female Sex, e∣specially for Women in Travel, which
commonly delivers them in a very short time; (I have known several within half an hour) after the taking of it; and without the tenth part of that pain which they would have without it. There are some weak or aged persons that digest very badly, whereby they are troubled with crudities, lack of appetite, pains in the Head, &c. my Arcanum uni∣versale may be a little too quick for them; wherefore I make up a Pill, which I call my Stomach Pill. There is a Dispensato∣ry called by that name, which most Apo∣thecaries sell; but alas, one Pill of mine is worth twenty of them for goodness, and whosoever shall try them shall say so. I give but one at a time, and that is at night going to Bed, though you have sup∣ped freely before; in the morning it gives two or three Stools, without the least gri∣ping or pain at all, it doth not only digest those Crudities, and take away the pain of the Head, but it doth likewise strengthen both the Head and the Stomach. I am confident whosoever shall once try them will never take any other Pills. As I have recommended two principal Medicines for the curing of your Diseases,
which proceed from within, so I shall com∣mend another unto you, for the healing the Wounds and Hurts from without. I have seen Cuts, or Hurts, or Bruises, that have been very inconsiderable in the beginning, which afterwards for want of some proper Remedies became matter of great moment and danger. Therefore to prevent the like, I will accommodate you with such a Remedy as the world doth not yield a better. It is of far more worth than all the Balsoms Oyls, Oyntments and Plaisters that ever was yet made for that intent. There hath been a great talk about the weapon-Salve, and Sympathetical Pow∣der; they are not worthy to be her Chamber-maids. Any wound, if it can, but reach the bot∣om of it, it cures at the first dressing, and within half an hour after you have ppli'd it, it takes away the pain and welling, and draws out any Thorn or plinter got into it, let it lie on, till it be eady to come off of it self. I verily believe it will cure an ampu∣tion, (that is, a Leg or Arm cut off)  one dressing, you need not fear, though e Bone appear, there shall not be any
exfoliation nor discolouration, which I have well experienced several times. I want words to praise it to its merit; only this I shall tell you, that whosoever shall use it, will bless God for it, and ad∣mire it with me. As for an Ulcer it is not proper, because a Wound and an Ulcer are of different Natures, and this is specifical to a wound, or Laceration, or Rending, or tearing the flesh and skin. But whosoever shall desire it for an Ul∣cer, I shall but change an Ingredient or two and make it as effectual in any cura∣ble Ulcer, as in a Wound, but then you must not expect to have so speedy a cure a in a wound. I have recommended three or four Ar∣canums, or secret Medicines unto you;  protest unto you, I would rather lose th knowledge of all things in the dispensato¦ry than the worst of those. And as they are the best Medicines, they are the cheapest. My Arcanum universale or Powder, t dose or quantity taken at a time, is fro half a grain to six, which is the highes I will sell it for six pence a grain. My balsamical Pill, twelve pence: whi
is as well worth it, as any six Pills in the dispensatory are worth six pence. My Aurum vitae two pence a grain. As for my specifical Powder for Wounds, Bruises and Hurts, you shall have enough for your money: you shall have an ounce for five shillings, which may be enough to cure a dozen ordinary hurts or wounds; How it is to be used I shall direct you. I have omitted to speak of several dis∣eases this Arcanum or Powder is a Reme∣dy for, I am very confident, there is not any disease that any Country doth infect men withal, but it is a singular Remedy for. Last year I had a Patient that went to Virginia, And he took a Dose of the Pow∣der here, and carried a Dose of it with him; but he proved very healthy himself, and gave it to one that was Sick of that Country Disease, and it presently cured him. If any Master of a Vessel, that carries not a Chirurgeon with him, please to take ome of this Powder in case of Sickness, nd some of my Balsom for Cuts or Wounds; I engage, if once he carries it ith him he will not go without it at any me, if he can get it. And what he doth not ake use of, I will take again, and return
him his mony as he paid me for it. Be∣cause there are many ready to speak evil of what they know not, and some whose judgment may be defiled through preju∣dice, may say, that this is more to be∣nefit my self than you, and that you may not be deceived. I declare, that whosoever shall use any of these things according to direction, and if he do not find me faith∣full in my relation, and himself bettered by it, the loss shall not be his, but mine, I will return him his mony again. Accept it with such an affection as it is proffered, or the good it brings may me∣rit, and the God of health make it suc∣cesful, for from him comes healing. Unto whom give all the Glory.
Courteous READER LEt those great Intervals that I had whilst I was writing this small Tract plead my excuse; for not digesting it into a more Methodical way of treating of Diseases. You have every thing as then I thought on it. I must confess it is hic & ubique. Occasions did then follow me that I was so far from having time to new write it and set it in order, that I hard∣ly took a superficial view of it. If thou think the Meat good, reject it not be∣cause it was not so neatly Cook'd, nor presented to the Table in its due and pro∣per Season. I minded not Oratio, but Ratio, for I think it Eloquent enough, so it be understood by those I princi∣pally
intend it for: wherefore thou may∣est excuse me, and do not carp at words, but take thy Pen, and correct with me, which is no more than I would do for thee upon the like occasion. Vale.
I thought to have severed the Directions how to take the Powder, from the Book, but I am advised to annex it; which I have done. Directions. YOu may take the Powder in any thing, or without any thing: I commonly give it in the pap of an Apple, or Con∣serve, or a little bit of Bread, to the big∣ness of a Pill, it matters not what it is, be∣ing without either taste or smell, so that the most nauseous Stomach may freely take it. It will not dissolve in any Liquor, therefore you may leave some of it be∣hind, if you give it in any Liquor: I have
given it in a little beer in a spoon, to Children that would not take any thing else, then be sure to give it all. Its ope∣rations are various, according to the na∣ture of the matter offending, and the place where it resides; that way which nature thinks most convenient for her, for the discharging that matter which she is willing to be rid of. Sometimes by Stool, by Urine, by Vo∣mit, and sometimes by Sweat, I have known it work effectually, and yet by neither of those ways, but by breaking wind upward and downwards, as I have shewed in the cure of the Fisherman, for it draws wind out of any part of the body effectually. If the matter be in the Stomach, which commonly it is in Fevers, &c. then it of∣ten works by Vomit and Stool: If the matter be more in the Guts, it works by Stool alone. In Dropsies, and such Diseases as water doth abound, it works by Vomit and Urine. What of such aqueous matter is contained in the parts containing, it drives forth by Sweat plentifully. The time; in Winter, and when the wea∣ther is cold, I give it in the morning, with a benefit of a fire in the room, but in Sum∣mer I give it at night: but let them not
eat any solid meat that day, but if the party be very sick, never stand upon any time, whether day or night give it him; the sooner the better: but it is best when the Stomach is empty from meat. It commonly works about half an hour after, take nothing before it works of it self, and then if you please to drink a little warm posset drink, or beer, you may. And if it should work by Vomit more then you would have it, take a little thin Gruel or Broth, so seasoned with Salt that it tasteth well of it; and that makes it work down∣ward, but I have given it to Children and others that never took any thing in the working of it; for what mat∣ter it hath wrought upon, it will bring away, whether you take any thing or not. If you are disposed to sleep, you may freely do it, without the least prejudice unto you, for nothing can hinder the work∣ing of it, nor the bringing it away. I never knew it fail to work in my life (where it hath been retained in the Sto∣mach) But in case it should not, you need not fear; it will do you no more hurt, then if you had taken so much Nutmeg, or Cinnamon, and if you please you may
take a glass of Sack, or a dram of the Bottle, without any dammage at all. As for my specifical Powder for wounds, or hurts, of that nature, take the white of an Egg and beat it well, then take so much of it as may well wet a pledget, and so much lint scraped from an old rag, or so much tow as will cover the hurt, then mix so much Powder with the white of the Egg, as you think will make it to the consistence of honey, stir them well together, and the lint, or fine flax, or tow in it, and lay it to the place, bind it on very gently, only so hard as will keep it from falling off. And although it doth presently cure it, yet you had not best take it off in fourty eight hours, I never knew it fail. And in case it should not be perfectly well, you may take a little more, but it is not one Hurt or Cut in a thousand that you will use it twice, with∣out it be a deep thrust, or shot in the Thigh, where it may not reach the bot∣tom, but for any ordinary hurt though it be never so broad, or torn, it cures it at the first dressing, and takes away all pain and swelling in half an hour, and im∣mediately stops the bleeding; Remember, the sooner you apply it the better. But if you are at Sea, where the white
of an Egg is not to be had; then take the powder and cast it upon the hurt or wound, and take a fine linnen cloth or ragg, dip it in salt water, and then wring out the water well, and lay the cloth several times double upon the place hurt, and bind it on gently (as before) and it will prove as effectual as the other way. If any shall desire it for an Ulcer, I shall so make it, that it shall cure any cureable Ulcer, in a very short time. This is to be kept in some dry place, or carried about one; for against moist and rainy weather, it will be a little moist, wherefore keep it near the fire, and if it should be moist at any time, dry it at the fire, and it will be as good as at the first. It will not decay, you may keep all the Powder twenty years, and be as good as at first. The Stomachical Pills you may keep seven years. I am fully perswaded, and I have reason to think, that there is not any Disease (either in the West or East-Indies, nor any where in the World, but this Powder will take off. I should not question to cure the Plague, with my Arcanum Ʋniversale, and my Aurum Vitae. If any Practitioner shall desire any of
those Arcanums, I shall accommodate him with them upon reasonable terms, I will engage, that any Chyrurgion that hath once found the worth of them, he would ra∣ther have one Dragme, than a Chest of ten pounds worth of the laudablest Ca∣thartical Medicines he can chuse. My Pillula Balsamica, or Balsamick Pill, is to settle the Body, and to restore it into a good temper, (for a House that hath been fired; though the fire be out, yet there may be a great heat and smoke) which I give the next Night after my Powder. If you take the Powder in the Morning, take the Pill at Night, if there be occasion; that is, if he find his Body much disordered, or out of temper, or feels any pain, then it is good to take one of those Pills, otherwise not. If you please you may drink after it: In the Sum∣mer give after it a Glass of White Wine, Cider, or Ale; in the Winter a draught of warm Posset-Drink, or warm Ale, or a Glass of Sack. My Aurum Vitae, is when the Malignity of the Disease hath tainted the Spirits; and that is known by this, though the Cause be gone, and the Effect removed, yet the Party doth not become well, but con∣tinues
in a lingring condition, then give him a Dose of this in the Morning in his Bed, let him drink it in a glass of Sack, or warm Posset-Drink, and it will drive it out by sweating, and let him continue sweating for three or four hours, never fear it, it will not weaken, but make stronger. My Pill. Stomachica, or Stomack Pill, is to be taken at Night, as any other Pill, without taking any thing after it. Thus I have directed you as plain as I could: And a good success shall be ever prayed for unto that God that alone can give it, by Thy Friend R. C.
POSTSCRIPT. THe Dose of the Balsamick Pill for one of full years is twelve, four∣teen, or fifteen grains, yea some∣times twenty, in robust bodies and ex∣tream pains; a Child new born may take a grain of it dissolved in breast milk, or o∣ther. A Child of my own being born with the gripes, began to take it the next day, it was likely to die all the Moneth, and very weakly for the first quarter; so that if the Pill were omitted but one Night, it were even at deaths door, so that the use thereof was continued with happy success till it was a year and a quar∣ter old, for the Teeth sake: at which time it was weaned from the Breast and Pill both together, without the least inconve∣niency, or alteration when it left it, and blessed be God, of a poor weakly Child, became lusty, strong, and forward, as any
Child of its Age whatsoever, and so re∣mains being now in its third year of Age. The Powder for Old Sores or Ulcers mentioned by Mr. Couch, I also prepare and sell by the name of Species Phagadeni∣ca, at the same price with that for wounds and blood-stopping, and is to be used thus. Take a full pint or better of fair water, set it over the fire in an Earthen Pipkin till it be scalding hot, then put in an ounce of this Powder by degrees, stirring it with a wooden Spatula, then cover the pipkin and let it stand half a quarter of an hour, over the fire without boyling, then take it off, and let it stand till the wa∣ter be clear, the which keep in a Glass or Earthen bottle; when you use it to any Old Ulcer or Fistula, put a little into an Earthen Sawcer, warm it as hot as it may be endured, then wash the Sore by dipping a fine rag in it, and at length double the rag three or four times, and let it be well wet with the warm Liquor, and apply it to the Sore; if the Ulcer be hollow or fi∣stulous, so that you cannot come at it to wash it, then inject the Liquor warm with a Syringe; let it be dressed twice a day, and I dare assure you that there is no cu∣rable Ulcer whatsoever that this will not
cure; if you desire to have the water yet stronger, in stead of fair water infuse the Powder in Lime-water. This water is not only a Cure for Old Sores, but for Ring∣worms, Tetters, Manginess, Itch, Scabs, and such like Curaneous Distempers, they being washed therewith, and linnen clothes wet therein laid upon the place. The way of using the Powder or Balsom for Wounds and Blood-stopping is sufficient∣ly taught by Mr. Couch; that I call by the name of Species Vidneraria. The Dose of the Aurum Vitae for one of full years is ten or twelve grains, and sometimes more, it may be taken in a little Sack, Ale, or Posset drink, or made into a Rolus, with a little Conserve of Roses, or any Cordial Syrup; it may as well be taken at Night going to Bed, as in the Morning, provided the Patient hath eat but a light Supper, and that two or three hours before. This is a powerful Remedy in any Ma∣lignant Fever, Small-Pox, or Measels, Sur∣feit, Scurvy, French-Pox, &c. It mightily purifies the Blood, and refresheth the Spirits. All those Medicines mentioned in this Book may be had at my House (except the
Water mentioned for Embrocation in the Gout, which I know not) at the same prices that Mr. Couch sold them; but Phy∣sicians, Chyrurgions, &c. shall have them at my Catalogue price. I have also some other Medicaments of singular use and efficacy, viz. The Oyly Volatile Salt of Sylvius de le Boe. Whose vertue and use is at large de∣scribed in his new Idea of Physick, the first Part, in English. This was some time since sold in divers places in London, I mean somewhat having the same name stamped upon it, but no∣thing of this Famous Sylvian Medicine were to be found in it. I had it from a Gentleman who was divers years a Stu∣dent under Sylvius, and was also Brother and Executor to De Graaf, from whom Sylvius would hide nothing, in whose Stu∣dy he found it after De Graaf's Death Price 6 s. per ounce. Elixir Hystericum. This is an Excellent Remedy against th Fits of the Mother, the which I never y
knew it fail to help, it is also very profita∣ble in the Epilepsie, Convulsion, Vertigo, &c. It is to be taken three times a day, the quantity of twelve, fourteen, or fif∣teen drops at a time in a Glass of Sack, or Ale where Sack is not to be had, as also in the time, or rather upon the approach of any Fit, it may be taken to thirty or forty drops, for there is no danger of exceeding the Dose. Price 5 s. per ounce. Manna Mercurii. This preparation of Mercury is so well divested of its Malignant Volatile Salt, that it never causeth Vomiting or Saliva∣tion, (as the best of the Common Prepa∣rations, especially if they be sometimes repeated) whereby, it is made so innocent, hat it may be as safely introsumed as Man∣a. It is a great Specifick in the French ox, Leprosie, Scurvy, and Itch, against all enereal Nocturnal Pains; as also Pocky lcers and Pustules: it causeth the Scabs resently to fall off, and disposeth the Ul∣ers to heal. I assure you I have known a ontumacious Pox cured by this Medicine one; and which is more, a Physician ce told me that he had cured one with
three Doses of it only, with the help of a little Bezoardicum Minerale, which he used some time in stead of a Sudorifick Di∣et drink, and which is a hundred times better. The Dose is from six Grains to twenty made up into Pills with Rosin of Scammony or Extractum Rudii. The best way is to begin with a small Dose at first, and increase every time as occasion re∣quires: If it should work two or three days together (as it may do where it meets with a Plethora of sordid Matter) there is no danger, but on the contrary the Cure will the sooner succeed. Price 12 s. per ounce. Aqua Venerea. This Water or Liquor cures the most stubborn Venereal Ulcers or Sores in a few days time, they being washed with it twice a day, and rags three or four times double wetted in the same, and lay'd upon them Price 5 s. per pint. Moreover all Chymical Preparations i use may be had at my House, a Catalog of which with the prizes any may ha gratis: Or any Person that desires to ha
any Curious Process wrought, may be ser∣ved faithfully therein, by CHR. PACK. From my House at the Sign of the Globe and Chymical Furna∣ces, in the Postern near Moor∣gate, 1680. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Ro∣bert Harford at the Angel in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. GEll's Remains, being sundry Pious, and Learn∣ed Notes and Observations on the New Te∣stament, opening and explaining it, wherein Jesus Christ, as yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, is Illustrated, by that Learned and Judicious man, Dr. R. Gell, late Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, Lon∣don, in two Vollums, Folio price 30 s. Christian Religion's Appeal from the Groundless Prejudice of the Scepticks to the Bar of Common Reason; Wherein is proved, 1. That the Apo∣stles did not delude the World: 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture Matters of Faith have the best Evidence. 4. The Divinity of Scri∣ptures is as Demonstrable as the Being of a Deity, by John Smith Rector of St. Maries in Colchester, Folio price 12 s. The Admired Piece of Physiognomy and Chy∣romancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical Propor∣tions, and Signal Moles of the Body, fully explain∣ed, with their Natural Predictive Significations, be∣ing delightful and profitable, with the Subject of Dreams made plain; whereunto is added the Art of Memory, by Rich. Saunders, Illustrated with Cuts and Figures, Folio price bound 12 s. The New World of Words, or a general English Dictionary, containing the Proper Significations, and Etymologies of all Words derived from other Languages, the Fourth Edition, containing besides an Addition of several Thousand Words, A brief View of the most Eminent Persons of the Anci∣ents
in each Art or Science, Collected and Published by E. P. Folio. The Longitude not found, or an Answer to a Treatise written by Henry Bond Senior, shewing a way to find the Longitude by the Magnetical incli∣natous Needle, wherein is proved that the Longi∣tude is not, nor cannot be found by the Magnetical inclinatous Needle, by Peter Blackborrow, Gent. Quarto, price 2 s. A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, very re∣quisite for Statesmen, Quarto. The Jesuits Catechism according to St. Ignatius Loyola, for the instructing and strengthening of all those which are weak in that Faith, wherein the Im∣piety of their Principles, Perniciousness of their Doctrines, and Iniquity of their Practices are de∣clared, Quarto, price 1 s. De succo Pancreatico, or a Physical and Anatomi∣cal Treatise, of the Nature and Office of the Pan∣creatick Juice, shewing its Generation in the Body, what Diseases arise by its Visitation, from whence in particular, by plain and familiar Examples, is ac∣curatly demonstrated the Cause and Cures of Agues, or Intermitting Fevers, hitherto so difficult and un∣certain, with sundry other things worthy of Note, written by that Famous Physician, D. Reg. de Graaf of Delph, and Translated by Chr. Pack Med. Lond. Illustrated with divers Copper Plates, Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d. Judiculus Universalis, or the Universe in Epitome; wherein the Names of almost all the Works of Na∣ture, of all Arts and Sciences, with their most ne∣cessary Terms, are in English, Latine, and French, methodically and distinctly digested, being of sin∣gular use to Persons of all Ages, who are desirous to attain to the Knowledge of the said Tongues,
Composed at first in French and Latin, for the use of the Dolphin of France, by the Learned T. Pomey and now enlarged with the Addition of the English Language, and some other Supplements, by A. Love M. A. Octavo. English Military Discipline, or the way and me∣thod of exercising Horse and Foot, according to the Practice of this Present Time, with a Treatis of all sorts of Arms and Engines of War, of Fire works, Ensigns, and other Military Instrument both Ancient and Modern, Octavo. The Count of Gabalis, or Conferences about se¦cret Sciences; Bendered out of French into Englis with an Advice to the Reader, by A. L. M.  Twelves, price 1 s. A Mathematical Compendium, or useful Practise in Arithmetick, Geometry, Astronomy, Geograph and Navigation, Embattelling and Quartering  Armies, Fortification and Gunnery, Gauging a Dialling, explaining the Logarithms with new  dices, Napars Rods or Bones, making of Mov¦ments, and application of Pendulums, with t Projection of the Sphere for an Universal Dial, & Collected out of the Notes and Papers of Sir Jo More, by Nicholas Stephenson, the Second Editio with many Additions, Twelve. FINIS.
