c822 r37528 16966911 105540
'ΑΓΙΩ-ΜΙΜΕΣΙΣ. THE IMITATION Of the SAINTS. Opened in some Practical Meditations Upon the death of Mrs. ANNE BROWNE, late Wife of Mr. PETER BROWNE of Ham∣mersmith. By Thomas Case, M. A. sometimes Student of Christ-Church, Oxon. Minister of the Gospel. Heb. 13.7. . LONDON, Printed by A. M. 1666.
To his honoured Friend, and Son in-law, Mr. Peter Browne of Ham∣mersmith. Grace, Mercy, and Peace. SIR, NOt to revive your sorrow for the loss of your precious Yoke-Fellow, but to mo∣derate and regulate it, do these Meditati∣ons offer themselves to your view: Phy∣sicians say, that if rheum be sweetned, it cannot hurt the lungs; sure I am, if grief be sweetned and sanctified, it cannot hurt the heart;2 Cor. 7.10 Worldly sorrow indeed may cause death, but godly sorrow tendeth to salvation; that your sorrow may be such, let me com∣mend the reading of these Papers to you, and do you, (by holy prayer) commend them to God. Neither grief nor mirth, (simply in themselves) are sinful and hurtful, but as the Object or degree determines them. Your Wife (I know) while she lived,Ezek. 24.16. was the desire of your eyes; so pleasant an Object, that I cannot but presume her very Picture now she is dead, will be a most acceptable Present; which though not drawn by a curi∣ous Pensil, yet (I dare be bold to say) it
is so like her that whosoever knew her, will know whose Picture it is, at the first-sight; I am sure the Painter hath not flattered Her. It is a life-Picture (as Artists call them) taken from her face, and not by Copy. A life-Picture indeed; describing not the outward Effigies of her face but the inward Pourtraiture of her mind, all fair and beautiful: I commend it to your self, and your Friends; not to hang on your Walls, but to wear in your bosom. If the fight of it should occasion your tears, I shall not repent, because by the sadness of the Countenance the heart is made better, and sorrow will flow in the right Channel, not the absence of her person, so much as the want of her graces. Give me leave, by that interest she gave me in you, to enjoyn you, both the serious, and the frequent review of this piece; and if you joyn prayer with your contempla∣tion, it will make you insensibly to pass into her likeness; for which end you will find this In∣scription engraven round about her Effigies, Whose faith follow. This do, sincerely, vigorously, and perseve∣ringly, and I dare assure you, your loss will be your gain; which is and shall be the pray∣er of Your affectionate Friend and Father in-Law, Tho. Case.
Reverend Sir, 'TWas extreamly obliging that you honou∣red me with the perusal of your Ha∣giomimesis, (the occasion was sad, the im∣provement good) where the nature and ground of the Imitation of Saints, is distinctly opened, and rarely Illustrated by an excel∣lent example; when that digitus ferro-luteus saw the fatal houre approaching, he cryed out,Dan. 2.42 Sueton in v. Ner. ut se aliquis ad mortem capessendam exemplo juvaret, that some one would die by him, that he might learn to die by the example; and this was like him, whose name was vir sanguinum, a man of blood: But that brave person, that great Saint your treatise refers to, hath by the incomparable instance of her gra∣cious behaviour, taught us all, how to die, and now to live too, which is the first and hard∣est lesson. Benè vixisse, magnum est;Jerome. I judge
the same Anointing which took her up to the Galleries of Love, fashioning her insensibly into so curious a President, hath disclosed to you this secret,2 King. 13 21. of giving life by dead bones, preserving Religion from mortality, gathering flowers from the Coffin, Embalming Exam∣ples, and finding out advantages in the seve∣rest Providences. Good Sir let me once more desire you to publish your Meditations on this subject, and the rather, because we have had the fire of the last day, lately represented to us in a dreadful figure, happily you may now at length provoke the present evill world to Ae∣mulation,Surius in vit. and save some. Jerome espoused the example of Hilarion. Who knows in what me∣thods God will please to discover himself to poor sinners? Will any say, (they knew not Hammer-Smith) you dipped your Pen too much in love, when you drew the fair Character of an endeared Child? Regard it not, aequo ani∣mo audienda sunt imperitorum convitia,Sen. ep. 76. & ad honesta vadenti contemnendus est iste contemptus. The Inhabitants of the Earth are so much below the cloud of witnesses,Heb. 12.1. Mop∣cyed. that being Tender eyed, they can∣net see the glory wrap't up in it; Let the pro∣phane say in scorn to Elisha, go up, go up (meaning as Elias did) 'tis enough for him to inherit his Masters spirit,2 King. 2.23. and to ha
the Ascendent in Divine Grace. Some years since the merciful Providence of God gave me a Summers rest in the house of that admirable Person (which I ever after found to be one of the hundred built upon the Land of Promise) much was I there also in her last sickness,Mat. 19.29. and still I observed Wisdom and Holiness, Gravity and Meekness,Isocr. He. Lau. Num. 14.24. tempered in her to an unparallel'd sweetness. . A blest Pandora, a highly favoured Enthumia,In. Solin. Polyhist. c. 4. one that had the Other spirit, the Even spirit, eodem vultus teno∣re, etiam adversis interpellantibus perstitit,Pomp. Mel. 3. de orbis situ. as was said of Socrates. The pure spirit came down upon her, rather tanquam Columba, then instar ignis; hers was that Dove-like, Agnine spirit; pro eloquio nutus erat, with what wonderful regard did she walk? Tota pulcra, all fair, and ever fair, shining with holiness when descended from the Mount; her Manna seemed to breed no Worm; Christ dwelt in her with a constant loveliness, and was fairer in her, then in ten thousands! She did excel to a wonder in the esteem of all that conversed with her. But now she  fallen, she is fallen, and gone down to the Chambers of the Dead. A tutto vi è rime∣dio.
fuor che alla morte. Hasten therfore to us your Hagiomimesis, that the fall of the righteous may be the Salvation of the world,Rom. 11.11. which is the hearts desire, and prayer of, Dear SIR, Your Servant in our Lord, William Woodward. Octob. 10. 1666.
THE IMITATION Of the SAINTS. Heb. 6.12. But followers of them who through faith and patience, inherit the promises. THE Apostle having set before the believing Hebrews, a dread∣ful instance of the sin, and danger of Apostacy, from verse the 4th to verse the 8th (for the awakening of them out of their security, to a timely prevention of both) that he might not oc∣casion prejudice and offence in their bo∣soms, as if he had judged them to be A∣postates, He doth two things:
1. He sweetly insinuates a better opini∣on of them, verse 9.10. But beloved, we are perswaded btter things of you, and the ac∣count of which psion, he gives you verse 10th for God is not unrighteous co for∣get your abour of love, &c. 2. Yet. That they may not think them∣selves altogether unconcerned in this cauti∣on, he admonisheth them to take heed of sluggishness and security (on the one side) which are the usuall snare and precipice to Apostacy, That ye be not slothfull; And then he incites them to a vigorous dili∣gence in their Christian profession (on the other side) the way and means which God hath sanctified for the attaining of perseve∣rance and assurance, Verse 11th. We de∣sire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end. The same, i. e. the same, men∣tioned verse 10th Your work and labour of love: q. d. That which some of you have given abundant testimony of, I desire eve∣ry one of you may give also; lest there should be any that may possibly fall short, and prove Apostate amongst you. Or the same, i. e. which you your selves (speaking to the same individuals) have gi∣ven, that ye grow not remiss and negligent
in your love and zeal; for then if you that have been formerly diligent and active, shall cool, and grow negligent, not only your former diligence will be a testimony against you; but the abatement and decay of your love and zeal, may expose you to the sin and danger of Apostacy. Now both these he doth, by propound∣ing the Pattern of the Saints and Worthies of God, to their pious Consideration and I∣mitation. Some of whom were yet alive, whom he proposeth as Presidents to the rest among them: Yea, he proposeth themselves to themselves; their former zeal, to prevent their future luke-warm∣ness. Others here commended, were such of the Primitive Heroes, who had long be∣fore, finished their course and obtained the Crown:Ego de patribus jam in coe∣lis agere hoc loco Apostolum non dubi∣to, Bez. in loc. As Abraham, mentioned in the verses following my Text; and others, of those famous Lights of the World, im∣plyed in the word them (in the Text) Them who through faith and patience in∣herit the promises. These also the Apo∣stle doth commend as standing exemplars for the believing Hebrews, and (in them) for all other Christians, professing the Name and faith of Jesus Christ, to fol∣low.
Now, to be followers of the Saints, i nothing else but vigorously and constantly to endeavor to Imitate them in their gra∣ces, and gracious conversations: to use all diligence to be such as they were; and to do as they did, in our times and places. That you be followers of them, who through faith and patience, &c. We may look upon the words under a twofold aspect. 1. Positive. 2. Relative. 1. Positive, as expressing, and pressing a Duty necessary, for all Christians to pra∣ctice, and that is a diligent imitation of the Saints. 2. Relative, as implying a Soveraign re∣medy, to prevent the sin and danger of A∣postacy. Take them in their Positive aspect, and so they present us with this Doctrinal Ob∣servation. It is the duty of Christians to be followers of the Saints of God, who have been, or are, excellent in their Generations; Or, The Graces of the Saints, whether alive or dead, they are Patterns set forth for our Imitation Take the words in their Relative as∣pect, and so they afford us this,
Observation, sc. That a diligent imita∣tion of the Saints of God in their graces and vertues, is a special Preservative and Antidote against Apostacy. It is the first of these I intend to insist upon; the other will be of use, in the pro∣secution of this. Doct. It is the duty of Christians to be followers of the Saints of God. The Noun (here,1 Cor. 11.1 Heb. 13.7. Called.. as elsewhere)  followers, is derived from the same verb which is used, ch. 13.7. . which signifies to work according to pat∣tern; a metaphor borrowed from Stage∣playes, where the Actors study ex∣actly, and to the life, to express the ge∣stures and dispositions of the persons whom they represent; or else from Apes, who do naturally love to imitate the actions and ge∣stures of men. Thus the Apostle calls Christians to an exact and unfeigned imi∣tation of the Saints of God, whether de∣parted and in Heaven, or yet surviving in the Land of the living. This holy Imitation is frequently com∣manded in Scripture, 1. Cor. 4.16. & 11. 1. Jam. 5.10. Heb. 13.7.
And for this, others are comended, as 1 Thes. 1.6. & 2.14. &c. For the opening of the Doctrine, I shall shew you, 1. Why? The Saints are to be i∣mitated. 2. Wherein The Saints are to be i∣mitated. 3. How The Saints are to be i∣mitated. 4. We shall improve it for our use and practice. 1. Quest. Why? Now the Grounds and Reasons of the point, are such as these following.1 Ground. Gods end in giving such pat∣zerns. This was a principal end or design which God had in bestowing such choice and graci∣ous qualifications upon the Saints in the world, scil.) that they might serve as patterns for the imitation of others, who either live with them, or come after them. Hence they are called lights, Phil. 2.15, 16. They be like the Pharo's, or fires upon the Sea-coasts, to shew passengers their way in the dark night, that they may not suffer shipwrack. They are looking-glas∣ses, by which the Saints should dress them∣selves. God did not bestow graces and ex∣cellencies upon them, meerly for their own
sakes, for the adorning of their own souls, and to qualifie them for their future Glory; (though that was one gracious esign he had upon them, 2 Cor. 5 5. Col. .12.) but that by their light, they mm shew o∣thers the way, holding forth the word of life; and by their heat they might warm others, and by their zeal provok many, 2 Cor. 9.2. your zeal hath provoked ma∣ny. Therefore saith our Lord,Mat. 5.51. let your light shine, &c. No man lighteth a candle to put it under a bed, or under a busel, but on a candlestick, that it may give light unto all that are in the house. Therefore as the Saints themselves sin against Gods design (in giving them such excellent shining graces) when they do withhold their light and influence, by putting them under the bed of pleasure, or the bushel of profit. So Standers-by, sin against the gra∣cious ends and purposes of Gods love in the graces of his Saints, when they do not fruitfully improve them for their own imi∣tation. They take the grace of God in vain, in his Saints; and slight and neglect the bles∣sed helpes which God hath afforded them in their passage to heaven; they regard not Gods love and care in setting up such
lights in the world: whereas they should admire God in his Saints, as David did in the workmanship of the Creation, and cry out in that admiration,Psal. 8.3, 4. Lord, what is man that thou art so mindfull of him! they should Praise and glorifie God, which gi∣veth such gifts and graces unto men. And by daily comparing themselves with these Patterns, strive to correct their errors, and to come up to further degrees of holi∣ness and perfection. 2. To be sure this was one great Reason,2 Ground. Gods de∣siceing siaung the lives of the Saints to be Re∣corded. why God took such order by the Pen∣men of the Holy Ghost, to have the lives and Graces of the Saints, so exactly Regi∣gistred in the Scriptures, and kept upon publick record; That they might be for Patterns and Presidents to future Generati∣ons. So Octavius Augustus erected the Statues of the Roman Hero's, triumphali effigie. That illorum veluti ad exemplar, & Ipse dum viveret, & in sequentium aetatum principes exigerentur à Civibus. Rom. 15.4.Rom. 15.4. Whatsoever things were written a∣foretime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.
Even the sins and failings of the Saints are recorded in Scripture upon this very ac∣count, 1 Cor. 106, 11. to be  Types and ensamples, not indeed for our imitation, but for our caution: They be our Take-heeds, not our Patterns; to the intent we should not lust after evill things, as they also lusted, v. 6. But now their Gracious and Holy Gon∣versations, they are properly Registred for our imitation; to the intent we should tread in their steps, (1 Cor. 4.17. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, &c. who shall bring you into remembrance of my waies which be in Christ) and might be taught by Pattern, as well as by Pre∣cept. Thus Abraham stands in Scripture as a pattern for our faith and self-denyal. David for a pattern of our sincerity, a man after Gods own heart. Encch of our walking with God, &c. VVhy now, if we mind them not, and care not to imitate them, we sin against the design of the Scripture, and bid God (as it were) keep his Copies to himself, we need them not; or we desire not to fllow them.
3. Reason. Patterns make any worke more easie.3. Reason. To be followers of the Saints is a marvelous help and furtherance in our work. His work is half done that hath a president before him; the precept possibly may be dark and obscure; but precept ex∣emplified into a pattern and example, is plain and facile; he that runs may read. Patterns are the commands of God made legible in the lives of the Saints: Holi∣ness made exemplary, by which we may see how the Saints believed, how the Saints denyed hemselves, how they loved God, and how they contemned the world, &c. If you would know what such graces are, look upon the Saints, and they will serve as so many Coments, and Interpre∣ters to you. Besides, Presidents do put  kind of life into men; the very bruit crea∣tures are animated and quickned by their fellow-creatures, their companions in labours and travel. 4. Reason. To pre∣vent mi∣stake.4. Reason, It is a notable means to prevent mistakes of our own estates, and to undeceive us of false opinions of our selves. We are very prone to think well of our selves, till we bring our selves and our
wayes to the pattern and exemplar of the Saints and servants of God; then we be∣gin to say to our selves, Are we like the Saints in Scripture? or the Saints living? Do I live as they lived? Do I deny my self as they did? Doth my zeal for God eat me up? Is my faith and patience like theirs, that have inherited the Promises? Have I a Pauls spirit? Oh how unlike! what Dwarfs and Pigmies are we in com∣parison of them! Surely, either these were more then Saints, or we are none: by comparing, we come to see a wide and manifest difference between them and us. 5 Ground. God is succes∣sively glorified in the world.5. Reason. By imitating the Saints, God is successively glorified in the world. Abraham glorified God in his Generation, and they that walk in the steps of faithful Abraham, they glorifie him successively in their Generations. Though Abraham be gone, and the Saints be not; Imitation makes them live still; Imita∣tion is the multiplication of the Saints: As the Kings Picture is multiplied by taking Copies, so that when the King is dead his Effigies will be known in future Genera∣tions. This is the Generation of them that seek
thy face, O Jacob. The followers of Jacob, are his Geceration: he begot them by his example and Imitation makes them his Genuine Posterity: They stand up as wrestlers with God, as he was. And thus Blievers, the Children of Abraham his spiritual seed, his lively Pictures and Effi∣gies in the world. Et sic in caet. 6 Ground. Imitation is the way to pre∣vent slothful∣nesse.6. Reason. Imitation is the way to cure us of sluggishness and torpor which is in out natures; that ye be nt slothful, but followers of them, &c. so in the text. The slothfulness here disswaded, is di∣rectly contrary to the forementioned dili∣gence: And mention is therefore made of it to shew us that for the more prosperous flourishing of any Grace, the contrary sin is very carefully to be shunned. The Tro∣phie of Miltiades awal∣ed T stoles. Plarch.If we would be diligent, we must take heed of sloth; and if we would take heed of the sluggishness, to which our corrupt natures are so marvellously propense, we must eye the Saints, imitate them, follow them, and be slothfull if you can. Consider what pains the Saints have ta∣ken in their several Generations. Jacob wrestled with the Angel till break of day; Christ prayed till he sweat again. All
he Saints in the Old and New-Testament, hey did much, and endured much: take the reat Apostle, it would even tire one of s to read the Catalogue of his active and assive travells in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.3. to the end. Oh what have the Saints  one and suffered in their several ages! How may such Presidents both shame nd quicken us! Oh their labour of love, heir work of faith, their patience of hope! How steadfast! How unmoveable! How aboundant in the work of the ord! The keeping of such patterns still in ur eyes will marvellously quicken us, to se all diligence in our Christian race∣ Did they run after the rate that we do? Did they pray after the same rate that ve pray? Did they please themselves? O ny sluggish heart! this pace will never ring thee to heaven. 7. Reason. Imitation will pre∣vent Apo∣stacy.7. Reason. The close following of the aints will prevent Apostacy: Joash did ell all the dayes of Jehoiadh. Christians look about you, ye are in great anger of falling away from your own tedfastness. Your temptations are many nd great, and the danger is dreadfull.
Here in the Text, the sin, the punish∣ment, who can expound them to us? Well, if you will stand fast, eye your Presdents. See what they did and suffered in their hour of temptation, rather then turn back upon the profession of Religion. Remem∣ber what the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apo∣stles, Martyrs of Christ have suffered, and stand fast. Remember how they li∣ved! How they died! As the Apostle ex∣horted concerning Christ, Heb. 11.3 Consider them, what they endured, lest ye faint in your mindes. Their perseveranc well said to heart, will be your Preser∣vative. 8. Reason. By this means the loss of the Saints will be less felt.8. Reason. Our following the Saints by holy imitation, will wake them be less missed in the world, when they are taken away. Elijah was less wanted because Elish vvas endued with his spirit. Moses ab∣sence vvas recruited by Joshuas successi∣on. O do you stand in the gap, and fill up the breach of them that are gone, with your gracious influences; and their absence will be the better born.
My seed shall serve him, said Christ up∣ the Cross, or going to it. Psa. 22.. q. d. Though I am going out of the orld, I shall leave a spiritual Generati∣ behind me, that will carry on my Fa∣ers work in the world. It was Christ his mfort upon the Cross. 9. Reason. By imita∣tion of others we be∣come ex∣emplary.9. Reason. By imitating of the Saints, e out selve; shall have the honour of be∣g exemplary unto others. See how the one is inseperably annext to the other in that famous encmium hich the Apostle gives his Thessalnians, Thes. 16 Ye became follors of us, d of the Lord, verse 6. there he com∣ends their piety; And what follows? Why verse 7. So that ye became ensamples all that believe in Macdonia, &c. ere he celebrateth their Hnour. It is our grace to imitae others, it is r glory to be patterns to others. This is e Crown, the Apostle sets upon the ads of his excellent Thessalorians. And it shall be your Crown also, if ith an holy ambition ye contend to be llowers of them who excell in vertue; r thereby you also will become standing∣ atterns and presidents for others imita∣tion
The Baptist followed the Prophe and excelled them; of common Soldier you will become Captains and Leaders  the Lords Army. By intensive and vig∣rous imitation, you will transform you selves into shining and glorious Lumin∣ries, by whose light others may see the way to Heaven. 10. Reas. Imitation is the way to the King∣dom.10. Reason, This is the way to th Kingdom. This way all the Saints and wo∣thies of God went, and are now entre into glory: the foot-steps of Companion is suggested by Christ as an infallible con∣duct in her way. Cant. 1.8. Go you in the Path, tread in their steps and you shall en∣ter also. This is the encouragement whic the text holds out. Be ye followers of them who throug faith and patience inherit the Promise (q. d.) Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and othe of the Primitive Heroes, have by their hol diligence and inconquerable industry in th wayes of holiness, attained assurance  Heaven while they lived, and possession  Heaven when they died: They have fini∣shed their course, and received their robe and their Crowns; By faith and patience in well-doing, they inherit the promise.
Press hard after them, follow them close, and you shall be partakers of the inheri∣tance with the Saints in light: You shall also in the end of your dayes, receive the end of your hope, even the Salvation of your Souls. Thus our Lord encourageth his Soldiers, Rev. 3. v. 21. To him that overcometh, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, as I o∣vercame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Follow me in my Conflict and Conquest, and you shall share with me in my Reward and Triumph. If we be dead with Christ, we shall aslo live with Christ; if we suffer with him we shall also reign with him; 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. This may suffice for the first Querie Why? the Reasons and Grounds of the point. 2. Quest. Wherein the Saints are to be imitated?I come now to the second Querie, Wherein? or in what things we are to imitate the Saints? To which I Answer, 1 Negatively. 2 Affirmatively.Answ. Negat. wherein Not. 1. Negatively, The Saints are not to be
imitated in every thing. Ex. Gra. 1. Not in their sins.1. The Saints are not to be imitated in their sins and infirmities. The best of Gods servants have had their failings and infirmi∣ties, and they are held out in Scripture to our observation; As Abraham's diffidence, Gen. 12.11, 12, 13. ch. 20.2. Job's impatience, Iob. 3.1, 2. Noah's transgressing by Wine, Gen. 9.21. Lot's incest, Gen. 19.33.35. Da∣vid's Murder and Adultery, 2 Sam. 11.15, 4. Elijahs Passion. Jam. 5.17. Peter's denying his Lord, Mat. 27.70, 72, 74. These and many other failings and falls of the Saints, are Recorded in the Book of God: But they are, 1. For the support and comfort of lap∣sed Christians, that reflecting upon their own surprises by temptation, they may not despond and despair, as if their spot were not the spot of Gods Children. 2. For the caution and admonition of all surviving generations; to the intent that we should not presume to sin as they sinned. 1 Cor. 10.6. But to be sure they stand not in the holy Register, as Patterns and encouragements to sin. They are our Take-heeds, not our Warrants; they tell us, here is a Rock, a∣void
it; here is a Quick-sand, come not near it, lest you suffer shipwrack. We are not to imitate the best in their worst. 2. Not in what they did by miracu∣lous in∣spiration.2. They are not be imitated in what they did by immediate and miraculous as∣sistance of the Holy Ghost. As we are commanded to be followers of God as dear Children, but not in the crea∣ting of the world; not in causing the Sun to rise, and the Rain to fall, &c. that is, we must not attempt such an imitation of our heavenly Father, as being above the Sphere of the creature, the Prerogative on∣ly of the great God. Our Lord commandeth us to learn of him, but not in raising the dead;Mat. 11.29. not in multiplying loaves, not in casting out De∣vils by a word, &c. these being works which Christ did not in his Private, but in his Mediatory Capacity. So also the Prophets, Apostles and other of the Saints of God, though they be out Standards and Patterns, yet they are not to be followed in those actions which they did by vertue of an extraordinary afflatus or inspiration of the Holy Ghost; those a∣ctions being peculiar only to their extra∣ordinary commissions and functions, and not common to them as believers.
. Not in hat they id by pecial di∣pensati∣on.3. Neither are they to be followed in those actions which they did by special di∣spensation, or by way of probation and tryal. Ex. Gra. VVe are not to rob, spoil and take away the substance and estates of wicked men, (meerly quà wicked) be∣cause the Israelites robbed the Aegypti∣ans; unless we had immediate Authority and command for it, from him, who is the absolute and Supream Lord of the Creature,Psa. 75.7 and may dispose of the whole Creation to whomsoever he please, as they had. We may not offer up our Sons and Daughters in sacrifice to God, because God tempted Abraham to offer up his Isaac, for tryal of his obedience and Self-denyal. Nor yet again may any man or woman take a Wife or Husband of Whoredome, as the Prophet did, Hos. 1.2. (whether in vision only, or in reality we enquire not here) uness we had the same special dispen∣sation and allowance from the Supream Law-giver. Thus Negatively, We are not to follow the Saints. 2. Affirmatively, Therefore, we are to imitate the Saints in their graces only, and in their holy Conversations in the world, and in whatever they did in a way of obe∣dience
and conformity to the revealed will of God, the standing rule of the word. A more distinct and particular account whereof, I shall give, before I finish this discourse. 3.3 Qu. How we must imitate the Saints Querie. How must we imitate the Saints of God? Answer. Here again our Negative Rule meets us, (scil.) We are not to follow the Saints Universally; not all over. And the reason is, because, all that is in the Saints, is not Sanctity. All that is in the Godly, is not Godliness. Saints have their infirmities, and in them they are not to be imitated. The best of men, are but men at the best. Affirmatively, Therefore our imitation of the Saints it must be but, With li∣mitation.1. A limited Imitation. And that Li∣mitation, one of the best of men (that were but men) the great Apostle hath given us in his own Person:1 Cor. 11.1 Be ye followers of me, (How?) as I am of Christ. If we find holy Paul, not following Christ, he doth not require us to follow him. It was Jehosophat's honour that he made choice of the first wayes of David to walk in. In∣deed we have these intermediate Copies written for our learning: God therein con∣descending
to our infirmity, lest our tender eies should be too much dazled in continu∣al beholding the transcendent brightnesse of the Supream light, 1 Joh. 1.5. But God, and Christ, and the Spirit are the Supream Original Standard of our Confor∣mity. The Father.Mat. 5.48 Be you perfect as your Fa∣ther, which is in heaven is perfect. Jesus Christ.1 Pet. 1.15 As he which hath called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. The Holy Ghost.Rom. 8.7.14 They that are after the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit. And again, As many as are led by the Spirit are the Sons of God. Next to these, the Saints and Angels in Heaven, are our lights of a second magni∣tude;Petit.. 3d. Thy will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. These are our exact and perfect Exem∣plars, in which there is no defect or imper∣fection. But all our Earthly Patterns (be they never so excellent) have their errours and deficiencies; which may mislead us, if we follow them without due limitation. And therefore all these inferiur Patterns, are to be reduced to the Original Standard and
Exemplar; and wherein they are found either erroneous or defective, we are to correct and perfect them by the Original; we must by faith eye the Pattern in the Mount: we may imitate our terrestrial Co∣pies, but we must not terminate in them. The Saints are good Leaders, but not infal∣lible useful Copies, but such as have need to be corrected by the Original. Our imitation of them therefore, must be bounded by Scripture-limitation. 2. Uni∣form. Nemo agit unum nisi sapiens, caeterimul∣tiformes sunt, Sen. Ep. Phil. 4.8.2. Our Imitation of the Saints must be exact and uniform: though we are not to imitate the Saints in all their actions, yet we are to imitate them in all their Graces, and gracious conversation. Whatsoever things are true, whatsever things are just. Whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise in the Saints and Servants of God, these things we must think of; and in these things we must labour to be like unto them. We must take heed of Partiality, in our following the Saints; of preferring one before another, one Saint before ano∣ther; or one Grace in the Saints before another, unless it be such Saints, and such
Graces, as God himself hath preferred by putting upon them more abundant honour, some special remark of excellency; we must take heed of picking and chusing, taking what vve please, and rejecting what we list, according to our own private fancies and interest: We must follow them in eve∣ry path, and in every step, wherein they have fllowed the Captain of their salvati∣on: Whether in their doing-work, or in their suffering-work St. Paul's charge to Timothy will not in this case be improper for us; I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,1 Tim. 5.21 and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by Pa tia∣lity. To this end, 3. Vigo∣rous.3. Our Imitation of the Saints must be a vigorous and industrious Imitation. Truly to follow the Saints fully and exactly, is not a business of an easie and ordinary dispatch, it will require a vigorous and industrious in∣tention and contention of our spirits, as a work that will take up all the faculties of our souls, and parts of our bodies: Our Judgments to discern (according to the word) what is to be chosen, and what to be eschewed in the Patterns we propound to our selves: Our Undestandings, to discover
the beauty and amiableness of the Graces and Holiness that is in the Saints. Our Memories, to keep alwaies before our eyes these excellent Presidents, lest at any time we let them slip; we shall stand in need of such Looking-glasses continually, to see our faces in; we shall want our Guides at every turning, to tell us the way, when we are turning to the right hand, or to the left. Our Wills and Affection, to love our Guides, to take delight and complcency in beholding these beautifull pieces; if we see no beauty in the Saints, why we should desire them, we shall never be zea∣lous imitators of their Persons. Our Consciences: we stand in need of the impartial Testimony of an awakened conscience, to accuse or excuse us according to our fidelity or neglect in this duty of so great concernment. Moreover it will cost us much prayer, meditaion, often reflection upon our selves, watchfull obser∣vation, self-denial, mortification, &c. Yea, much labour and pains even of the out∣ward man much fasting, striving, wrestling, and watchfulness, to carry on this great important duty, of imitating the Saints. Surely a slothful, lazy professor, will never
make any earnings in so curious and la∣borious a work as this is. That's h ghly observable in the Text; That ye be not slothful, but followers of them who through fith and patience, &c. Sloth, and Imitation of the Saint are incon∣sistent. It is a mattet of great labour and dili∣gence to be a follower of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the rest of the Heroes od Worthies of God, in their faith, and patience, and other Graces: A deli∣cate short spirited professour will never carry on this spiritual and blessed trade to any purpose; therefore sayes the Apo∣stle (hee) We desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence, &c. All the strength and industry you have, will be little enough to lay out in this ar∣duous and excellent design. Assure your selves, it will afford you no time for security, and the indulging of the flesh. It cost the Saints much holy contenti∣on, to write and leave these excellent Co∣pies to the succeeding world; and it will cost you no less industry to write exactly after them. You must not think to make to your selves a religion of your own, or
take up this imitation, and lay it down gain when you please. Therefore, 4. Our I∣mitation must be constant.4. Our Imitation of the Saints must be constant and persevering Imitation; so in he verse before my text. We desire every one of you, use the same ligence to the end. Where ever you cease this Imitation, ou disclaim your Patterns; and expose our selves to the sin and danger of Apo∣tacy. 5. Our Imitation of the Saints must e a believing-Imitation.5. Believ∣ing. As we must i∣mitate their Faith, so we must have faith o imitate them. Faith to realize the pro∣ise, and faith to believe Gods Faithful∣ess and All-sufficiency to make good his romise; so did Abraham, Rom. 4.20. Our Imitation of the Saints will meet with much opposition, many discourage∣ments from our flesh, contradiction from he world, and opposition from the Devil: We must have faith to overcome them all, or else we shall easily give out, and sit down with shame and loss. Sixthly and lastly,6. Patient Our Imitation of the Saints, must be a patient Imitation. As we must Imitate the Saints in their Patience,
so there is great need of Patience to perse∣vere in this Imitation. The Saints have in their several Ge∣nerations met with much trouble, and per∣secution in following Christ, and so shall you in following them. You have need therefore of Patience, that when ye have done the vvill of God you may receive the Promise. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, through which they inherit the Promise▪ Patience to suffr, and faith to conquer their sufferrings: Faith to believe the recompence of Reward, and Patience to wait till it come. Go ye, and do likewise. Thus much for the Doctrine; I come now to the Use.
Come now to the Use of the Point. Use 1. And in the first place it may serve way of Information, to shew us, That All commendation of departed Saints not to be condemned. For surely is not meerly upon their own ac∣ount, that their Persons are celebra∣ed with such remarks of honour, and heir names perpetu ted to posterity by a ratefull Commemoration. If it were, ey are not to be envied their just Enco∣iums: Since God is pleased to set the rown of Glory upon their Graces in Hea∣en, we have no cause to think it too reat an honour to set the Crown of Praise pon their Graces here on Earth:Prov. ul ult. Yea, e have the Divine allowance for it. Let their workes praise them in the Gates. But it is upon an higher account that honourable mention,Two grounds upon which commen∣dation of the Saints is warran∣table. and Commemorati∣on, is to be made of the Graces, and Ex∣cellencies of the Saints. 1. In as much as such Encomiums are rather the Commendaion of the
Grace of God in the Saints, then  the Saints themselves. And by this mean Christ is glorified in his Saints, and adm∣red of all them which believe.2 Thes. 1.10 And ther∣fore not unto the Saints, not to the Saint but to the God of the Saints is all the glo∣ry to be ascribed. 2. Because by this means o∣thers are provoked to holi∣ness.2. Because this Commendation of th Saints is for the propagation of their pie and holiness to them that do survive,  shall be born in after-generaions, that the may inherit the benefit of such excelle Patterns, to provoke them to an holy Im∣tation. And therefore to bury the Saints grac in the same grave of Oblivion with their bo∣dies, is to obscure the Starrs, and to rob th world of the light and influence of suc glorious Luminaries, which God hat set up in the firmament of the Church  Yea, to Eclipse the Sun of Righteousness Himself, by whose aspect they shone s bright to the world. 2. Things have made commen∣dation dange∣rous.There be two wayes indeed, whereb the use of the Commendation of th Saints departed, hath become perniciou to the world. 1. Whilest some greedy Preachers (fo filthy lucre-sake) have turned even me
vices into vertues; boldly making Saints where God hath made none.1. When vice pas∣seth for vertue. Whilest not only every Bristol-stone must pass for a Diamond, and every Glow-worm be mag∣nified to a Star; But even Drunkards, Adulterers, and wearers, and the Covetous, (whom the Lord abhorreth) their bodies must not be ut into the grave, before thir souls have en seated upon Thrones in glory. How many thousands, this kind of Pulpit-flattery hath ruined, may (not un∣charitably) be presumed. Since by this means the worst of men fear not to live in he grossest sins whilest they can purchase he Priests Absolution at so cheap a rate when they come to die, and their souls e sent to Heaven by Letters of commen∣dation from a Mercenary Clergie-man when hey are dead. 2. While commen∣dation, hath stol∣len into adoration2. Another way whereby Commenda∣ion of the dead hath proved so fatal to poor deceived souls, is, Whilest Commending of the Saints hath supestitiously Commenced into sacrilegious worshiping of them, and Praying to hem. The Apotheosis in Rme Ethnic▪ and Canonization of Saints in Rome Catholique,
hath sprung principally from this Fountain;eque ali∣ande est  plera{que} Co∣ceii, fun. orat. Maceo. v. whilest in both, the fond oppinion, and overlavish Commendation, which the present generation gave to their Wor∣thies and Be efactors, have ensnared the Ignorance of succeeeding generations, to judge them not unworthy of Divine honou and adortion; while they thought that their translation into those Coelestial habi∣tations, could not but improve their be∣nignity and Power, for the help of poor mortals here below, even to Infinitude, who were of such Heroick Influence, whilest yet amongst the Sons of men. Hence the Original of worshiping the dead, and praying to them. Save only, that the Pride, and Aaice of the latter Pontificians, hath prevailed with them to Canonize for Saints, such as they knew to be the worst of men; and to create them little Dities, who by the justest Character which could be collected out of their Do∣ctrine and lives, are now amongst Repro∣bate Spirits, suffering the vengeance of E∣ternal fire. Surely, thus to commend the dead, is no∣thing less then to blaspheme God, and to enrich the Devils Territories with Cast∣awayes.
The true end of celebrating the Graces of the Saints is, 1. That God may have the Glory,1 Pet. 2.9. whilest the Saints shew forth the praises, or vertues of him who hath called them out of darkness into his marvelous light. 2. That the world may have the benefit and advantage of their worthy Patterns and Exemplars; ut sup. Thanks be to God for such excellent helps in our way to heaven. 2. Use.Use Repr. It may serve to Reprove divers sorts of people. 1 Such as account the Saints the worst of men.1. Such as account the Saints of God the most dangerous kind of men in the world; not fit for humane society. Surely there is not such a reviled, persecuted, defamed gene∣ration again under heaven; The very filth and off-scouring of all things,1 Cor. 4.12 13. the dregs, the sordes, the scraping of the shoes; the superfluous froth and scum, that is good for nothing but to be cast into the fire: Yea the more holy, the worse. The Saints are look't upon as the Troublers of Israel; the Pests of the places where they live, the Deformities of humane society.Mal. 3.17. Rev. 3.1. & 1, 16. Surely, these men are not of Gods mind, God accounts them as his Jewels,Phil. 2.15. Mat. 5.14 the Starrs in his right hand, the Sons of God, the lights
the world, to give light to a dark world: Patterns and Exemplars, worthy to be held forth to the observation and imitation, of the Sons of men; (as here) In a word men think the Saints not wor∣thy of the world,Act. 22.22 Heb. 11.38 2 Cor. 44. when in the mean time, Gods thinks the world not worthy of them. Oh how hath the God of the world blinded the eyes of them that believe not! 2 Such as imitate the worst.2. It may serve to reprove such as do not care whom they follow, or what Pat∣terns in the world they do imitate; none so vile, so debaucht, so prophane, so great a derider and persecutor of holiness, but is good enough to make a Copy for them to write after; men do as they see the major part of men do, they follow the multi∣tude, as thinking it not good to be singular, and stricter then their neighbours; though that be a rule upon which God hath set a special brand of infamy. Fellow not a multitude to do evil.Exod. 23.2. Especially the great and learned men of the world; men are prone to look upon them as infallible Guides, and do greedily follow their conduct. Have any of the Rulers believed on him?Joh. 7.48. Great men have followers of their vices, as well as of their Persons.
Alas, we should take our Patterns from Heaven; Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven; and the greatest of men do not care out of what filthy ditch,Spiritus sunt in∣sinceri vagi a coelesti vigori & virtute de∣stituti &c. ad Sola∣men cala∣mitatis suae nil de∣desinum perditi prodere, Min. Fel. 3. Them that imi∣tate the best, but in the worst. or from what dunghill, they take up their exam∣ples; even from Hell it self people are not afraid to fetch their Patterns; as proud as the Devil, as malicious as the Devil, as blasphemous as the damned Reprobates themselves, as hating of God and good∣ness as the Angels that kept not their first estate, as greedy and industrious to drag o∣thers with them into perdition! This is a lamentation and shall be for a lamentati∣on. 3. It may reprove such, as (it may be) will imitate the Saints, but not in their Sanctity, but in their sins: Lot in his In∣cest, Noah in his Drunkennesse, and Da∣vid in his Adultery, and Peter in his de∣nying his Master, &c. And when they have done, can quote such instances for their Authority! Oh the wonderful per∣versness that is in our Apostate natures, that men should imitate the Saints only in their deformities! Imitate Saints only, in that wherein they are not Saints! Is there any such thing in nature!
Are there any amongst men that desire to be like others in their natural defects and deformities, be they persons never so great? Do you observe any that take de∣light to imitate men under distraction, or mad men? Did it ever ease any that lay sick of the Gout, Stone, Strangurie, Dropsie, Fever, &c. to tell them that many Noble, Rich, learned Persons have been tormented with the like pains? Surely,Object. you will say, no wonder if not, since these are the blemishes, infelicities and destruction of the humane nature. And are not mens lusts and corruptions so too?Answer. Even of the Saints themselves, save only by interposition of divine grace,Hos. 14.4. Psal. 23.3. healing and restoring them! Yea, and of so much worse nature and effect, then ei∣ther intellectual or bodily distempers, by how much the soul is better then the body, and Hell worse then Death;Rom. 1.18 God himself testifying it from Heaven: And the Saints themselves, after they have recovered their lapses, having confest it before all the world, with greatest self-abhorrency and abasement.Ps. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant, and like a beast before thee, cries David when he came out of the Sanctuary; he is so incenst against his sin that he cannot
find a term vile enough to reproach himself withall! And yet is sin the only imitable thing men can discover in the Saints?Prov. 1.22 How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and Scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge. Lord, who hath believed thy report? or to whom is the Arm of the Lord reveal∣ed? 4. Reproof. 4. That will fol∣low the best but in the best.But there is yet another sort of people, that justly merit the lash of reproof; and they are such who though they dare not be so bad as to imitate the Saints in their sins, yet love not to be so good, as to imitate the Saints in their strictness, and holy se∣verity in Religion. They think it enough to follow them in their morality, and ci∣vil deportment, to be just and true in their dealings, to be charitable to the poor, and to keep their Church (as they call it;) But their holiness, their zeal, mortifica∣tion and close walking with God; to be al∣wayes abounding in the work of the Lord: Here they leave them, as deeming these, nothing else but the unnecessary strains of a fruitless precisenesse, and that which may expose them to the scandal and disgust of the world.
Oh the blindness and folly of the wisdom of the flesh! That wherein the Saints are most like God, therein, only the unrege∣nerate world careth lest to be like unto them! That which God accounteth his Glory, (for that is his Name, Glorious in holiness, and (therefore) fearful in praises) the reprobate world account their abasement. Oh ye Sons of men, how long will ye turn Gods glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity and seek after leasing? Surely, carnal men are Gods Antipodes, they stand upon their heads, and shake their heeles against Heaven! They glory in their shame, and are ashamed of their glory; they vilifie what they should ad∣mire, and admire what they should vilifie; they imitate whom, and what they should abhor, and abhor what they should imitate! Ah how have the Sons of men lost not their conscience only, but their judgement! How have they divested themselves not of Reli∣gion only, but of Reason; and put off the Man, as well as the Saint! This is a lamen∣tation, and shall be for a lamentation! I come now to a more particular Applicati∣on of this Doctrine, to our selves of this fa∣mily, together with other Relations and
Friends, more especially concerned in our sorrows. Suffer I beseech you, a word of Exhorta∣tion.Vse Exhor. My dearly Beloved, God hath made a fore breach upon us; He hath smitten us, and made us sick in smiting us. The Crown is fallen from our Head; The Ornament of our Family is taken away: A Wife, a Mo∣th r, a Friend, a Guide, the delight of our eyes is gone, the blessing of all her Relati∣ons at home and Acquaintance abroad! Wo unto us, for we have sinned! And now dear Friends, what shall we do! Shall we give up our selves to sorrow? shall we lie down and roar as men and woe∣men that have no hope? This were to wrong our selves. Or shall we make it our work to forget Her, to cast her out of our thoughts? and to bury her memory with her Ashes? This were to wrong Her, who has de∣served better at our hands. Shall we then spend our thoughts and en∣quires where and how we may recruit our selves with new Relations? and to make up our Lots with other Comforts? or let out our hearts more greedily to them we have yet remaining?
This were infinitely to wrong God, and to pervert the designes and purposes of his grace in this severe dispensation. Or shall we, lastly, satisfie our selves with a few cold fruitless Commendations of the things which were excellent and praise-worthy in Her? This were but to mock our selves, and Her, and God also. Behold, therefore I will yet shevv you a more excellent way, and it is that in my Text, Be ye followers of her; study to i∣mitate so excellent a Pattern, as she hath left us, for me thinks I hear her crying to us out of her grave, or rather from Hea∣ven, (where her triumphant soul is placed amongst the spirits of just men made per∣fect) as sometimes Her Lord, and ours, bespake his Disciples. Joh. 13.15. I have given you an example that you should do as I have done. Now therefore, that I may not beat the aire, nor spend time unprofitably (only) in Generals; I shall propose Her to your view, in a twofold Capacity: But with this preface, That here it must not be ex∣pected from me, that I should either pro∣claim her extraction, which was generous, or describe the loveliness of her person,
though I maysay with modesty, Her soul did benè habitare, 'twas lodged in a beau∣tiful habitation; her body which was an elegant piece of natures artifice, did give (as well as receive) a grace to what ever she did or spake. 1. In her Relational Capacity. 2. In her Personal Capacity.Her Rela∣tional Ca∣pacity. In both which, you will find her wor∣thy of your most exact and vigorous imita∣tion. Take her 1. In her Relational Capacity,1. As a Child. and there look upon her, first as a Child, and a most du ifull and obedient Child she was, not only where the Relation was natural, but even where it was but Legal and Adoptitious. She never diso∣beyed or neglected the Commands of her Parents in the least, vvhile she was under the charge of their education. She was of a most teachable and tracta∣ble spirit; there was nothing of a perverse or peevish disposition in her; her Will vvas bound up in the Will of her Parents, and Governours, she had no will of her own. She was a most exact observer of the fifth Commandment, in honoring her Fa∣ther and Mother, in Word, Gesture and Actions, there was never heard an unbe∣coming
coming vvord fall from her lips towards them, nor undecent carriage observed, nor any thing that might be interpreted as the least defect of that honour which was due unto them by the Law of God and Na∣ture. But her whole deportment, was fraught with as much sweet, reverential, pleasing sub∣jection to thm, as their hearts could de∣sire. You that are Children, or under the just obligation of Children, see you be follow∣ers of Her in this Child-like vertue: Keep this excellent Pattern of filial obedience al∣wayes before your eyes as a singular exem∣plification of the fifth Commandment, expounded by the Apostle,Eph. 6.1.2 3. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Or if this Instance of obedience seems too inferiour, take that Instance of an high∣er authority. That of the Son of God Incarnate, of whom it is said, He went down with his Parents,Luk. 2.51. and came to Naza∣reth, and was subject to them. 2. As a Wife.2. Take her in the Conjugal Relation, and there you may behold Her a most Chast, Loyal, Loving, Tender, and (according to her audibly avowed engagement at her Marriage in the publick Assembly) An
obedient Wife, as two loving Husbands, have successively experienced and testifi∣ed. She studied to please and not to be pleased;Prov. 5.19 sweet as the loving Hinde, and as the pleasant Ree. She never dissnted from them, but as the word did vvarrant her dissent; and then, (if possibly such a then there vvas,) proposing, rather then opposing; perswading by Scripture-rule, rather then contradicting by self-vvill. Above all, she vvas tenderly affected to, and covetuously desirous of the Spiritual good of her Conjugal Relations. A true help she vvas, a Soul-Help unto them,Gen. 2.18. answering fully to the Law of her Creation; themselves have successively acknowledged, they have had cause to bless God for her, with the excellent Woman in the Proverbs, ch. 31.12. She did them good, and not evill all her daies. You that are Wives, be ye followers of such a Pattern; she was subject to her own Husband, as the Church is subject to Christ. As she did imitate the Church so do ye imitate her. Wives be you obedient in all things; to your own Husbands in all things save where∣in
in your obedience to them, may possibly be disobedience to God; and therein, not opposing your wills, so much to theirs as Gods. That's not Rebellion against Rulers and Superiours, vvherein not the will so much of the Inferiour, gives sin a Negative vote as the Conscience, and Conscience rightly informed by the word of God. Yoke-fellows, Love ye one another souls. Love one another to heaven, Let not the flesh go away with all your time, and strength and affections; nor the elder serve the younger. Live together as heirs of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindred.1 Pet. 3.7. 3. Look upon her as a Mistris in her Family.3. A Go∣verness. She was an excellent Governess, her government was o a Scripture consti∣tution. It was made up of sweetness and gravity; sweetness without levity or remis∣ness; gravity without bitterness and seve∣rity. There was no severity in her discipline, save what was in the Pattern she proposed to them, her own Conversation: Indeed she was severely good; her government was made up of Intreaties, rather then Com∣mands or Reprof. She knew not how to be angry, unless it were against sin; and e∣ven
that she exprest rather in grief, then in passion. Her great Care was, that her family might know God, and Jesus Christ,Joh. 17.3. whom to know his life eternal. She was of a Joshuah-like resolution.Jos. 24.13 As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. She thought it not enough to go to hea∣ven alone, but laboured to carry as many as she could with her, especially them of her own Family. To that end she was very exact and con∣stant in Family-duties,Her ex∣actness in family∣duties. (sc.) Reading the Scripture, Prayer, Catechising, as deeply sensible how gainfull God had made that Domestick duty to her own soul in the Fa∣mily of her education: I say, being consci∣ous what good she had got by being dili∣gently instructed in the principles of Re∣ligion, she was conscientious in the dis∣charge of that duty towards those whom God had committed to her trust, not on∣ly in a way of exercising their memories in a bare verbal repetition of words, but (ac∣cording to her faculty, which verily was not ordinary in her sex) in a way of help∣ing them to understand the sence and meaning; and by impressing upon consci∣ence
what was imprinted in their meme∣ries. In the absence of her dear Husband, she constantly performed the duty of pray∣er in her own person, save only when she could call in the assistance of her own pious Pastour, or other faithful Ministers whom the present Providence had cast into her neighbourhood, all which her Christian ob∣liging converse had so marvellously en∣deared, that she had as many Chaplains, as if she had bin one of the greatest Ladies in the Land. A true Gospel-Sabbatarian she was; and thought it no Judaism to keep the Chri∣stian Sabbath as an holy Rest, rather en∣vying her body, that it should have six dayes to her souls one, then sacrilegiously filching out of that precious one, any parcells of time for the uses and purpo∣ses of the flesh; truth is, she counted e∣very moment of Sabbath-time, too good for any time but Sabbath-work, unless it were vvhere divine indulgence had made allow∣ance for vvorks of Mercy and Necessity! In reference to both vvhich (notvvith∣standing) she vvell knevv how to spiritua∣lize even them also into Sabbath-exercises.
Further then these two, she durst not ex∣act any of her servants labour: As knovv∣ing, 1. That the Sabbath vvas the servants priviledge, as vvell as her ovvn. Thou and thy servant, &c. 2. That her Servants souls were as pre∣cious to God, as her own, and cost Jesus Christ as much blood to redeem. Therefore she vvas careful that every one in her Family, should not only attend the publick Ordinances; but that they should improve the whole overplus of Sabbath time, in the holy exercises of Religion. And as God had given her an excellent faculty in taking Sermons, so she made it her vvork constantly to repeat both the former and latter Sermon to her Family, vvhich she did vvith such a judicious accu∣rateness, that the hearer could hardly miss in the repetition, vvhat he had heard from the Pulpit, at least not any head or material en∣largment of the Sermon. The other void spaces of the day she com∣mended to her Family as Gods and their own time, for divine uses, calling upon them, to redeem it accordingly.
You that are Governours of Families, imitate this blessed Saint herein also. The Sabbath is exceedingly fallen amongst us, not in our Publike Assemblies & streets only, but even vvithin our private vvalls: The spirit of Ignatius dyed with him.. Let every one that loves the Lord, sanctify the Lords-day, Ignat. ep ad Magn. Hovv art thou fallen, Thou Morning-Starr? Thou Queen of days; thou golden spot of the week! Thou Map of Heaven! Thou birth-day of immortality! Hovv art thou fallen! You that love the Lord Jesus, and his Resurrection, I charge you by all that right and interest you claim in either, help to lift up the head of this glorious day of Je∣hovah; for the love of God do not put a∣vvay the Pillovv from under the head of this dying day, as you vvould not be found guilty of the blood of Christ and of his Resurrection; Christians, stirr up your selves for the recovery of the life and ho∣nour of this Holy-day. 4. As a Friend and Neighbour:4. As a Friend. She vvas of a most sweet and obliging converse. As many loved her as knew her; as ambi∣tious she vvas to do good offices to the poor∣est, as others are to those that can requite them.
But that vvhich vvas eminent in her converse, vvas her profitable improve∣ment of it; she was not one of those pro∣fessors, that with the holy, could shew her self holy; and with the prophane, could shew her self prophane; that could talk religiously in one company, and vainely and frothily with others: She was not one of them that could shape them∣selves into any form and garb of the pre∣sent Company; but she was gracious and uniform in every Company, which pro∣vidence cast her upon, spending the time in Christian and profitable Communica∣tion; alwayes either doing good or receiv∣ing good, (as opportunity served.) But if the Company were such as admitted nei∣ther; her silence should argue her dissent, and her withdrawment (as far as might consist with civility) should at once ease hem and her self of a burden. Christians, Oh that every one would herein become her followers: Oh what a deal of pretious time is wasted in idle alk, and foolish jestings, which are not convenient! how many precious hours are pent in vain and unprofitable comple∣hents? Yea in carnal mirth, foolish talk∣g and jesting; which might be improv∣ed
to spiritual, soul-edifying conferences; as if Christians had forgotten there were such a word in the Bible, Let your speech be alwayes with grce, seasoned with salt, Col. 4.6. or that other, Redeem the time, for the dayes are evil, Eph. 5.1, 15, 16. The Lord make you wise to salva∣tion. I might easily enlarge in these her Re∣lative excellencies, but I must hasten. In the second place take a view of her in her Personal Capacity. And there we shall find these six Graces, which were eminently in her, to the observation of all that know her, sc. Holiness, Meekness, Love, Sympa∣thy with the afflicted people of God, Faith, Patience. 1. Her Holiness. she was a Christian of a most unstained Holiness, she wore the garment of her Christian profession without any visible spot. The commo▪ Holiness of the world would not serve he∣turn. Modesty, Civility, Moral-righ∣teousness, an Inoffensive Conversation, these go far amongh the commonsort of pro∣fessors, and I wish many that would pa for Saints did not fall short of these Though it is a very sad thing, to fall she
of them that fall short of Heaven; unsess your Righteousness exceed this Rihieous∣ness, you cannot enter, &c.Mat. 5.20 Blessed be God, the Righteousness of this precious servant of Christ was of another make, a purity she contended after of a peculiar strain; zealous of good works; an Holi∣ness that containeth all those excellencies which God sets any store by;Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9. an Holiness conversant about the whole will of God, proving what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.Rom. 12.2 She made Religion her business, Her one onely necessary thing: She pursued an Holiness that comes up to its Pattern, the Pattern in the Mount: As he that called you is Holy,1 Pet. 1.14 15. Mat. 5.6. so be you Holy in all man∣ner of conversation, and again, Be ye per∣fect as your Heavenly Father is perfect. She was in all things as becometh women professing the Gospel, adorned with good works.1 Tim. 2.10 And to this end with the Holy Apo∣stle, She forgot the things that were behind, and pressed toward the Mark, for the prize of the High-calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let the same mind be in you (my be∣loved) that was in this handmaid of Jesus Christ; and do ye follow her, as she follow∣ed the blessed Apostle.
A Second grace wherein she did ex∣cell, (and indeed excell) was the grace of Meekness;Num. 12.3. she was of a Moses-like spirit, meek to a None-such. She was rarely angry, never in her own Cause, and when in Gods, she exprest it in grief, rather then in passion; sin could provoke her zeal, but not transport her into any undecent excess. In her own concerns she had that absolute domi∣nion over her own spirit, that as she knew not how to give offence, so she could not easily take any; or if any at any time were worth taking, it was sooner forgot then acknowledged; she was of so serene a temper, that an angry word was hardly ever heard from her lips; or an angry look ever seen in her face.1 Pet. 3.4. Oh how aimable did the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit render her in the eyes of God and Man! She was a rich Cabinet of heavenly Jew∣els, but she knew it not; She was of as mean esteem in her own eye, as she was honourable in the eyes of all behol∣ders.Taliter pig∣mentatae Deum ha∣bebitis A∣matorem. Tert. de cul. faem. You that are of her Sex and Relation, Oh that you would strive to imitate her in this grace also; beautified with this Com∣plexion;
God, and Angels, and men can∣not chuse but be in love with you 3. The Grace of Love was transcen∣dently in her. 1. Her Love to God, she loved him exceedingly whom she couldnot love ex∣cessively. 2. Her Love to Jesus Christ, who had lov∣ed her so passionately that he died for love of her,Rev. 1.6. and washed her from her sins in his own blood. But because he loves Christ too little,Minus to amat Do∣mine qui aliquid a∣mat quod nonpropter te amat. Aug. Psa. 45.2. Cant. 3. Cant. 5.10 that loveth him for any thing but for himself; This precious Christian lov∣ed Him not only for what he did, but for what he was; His Person as well as his Portion: She loved him for his Loveliness, as well as for his Love, she looked upon Christ with the Spouses eyes, fairer then the Children of men, &c. The chiefest of ten Thousand, The only precious one of her Soul. Her love to Christ had marvelously consumed her love to the World: She was in a great degree (with the Holy Apo∣stle) Crucified to the world, and the world to her. God had given a competent portion of the world to her, but she (blessed be God) made it not her portion. She gave
but very little of her Love to the vvorld; but possest the vvorld as if she possest it not: In this only she vvas (holily) proud, that she thought her love too good for the world. Her love to Christ had vvonderfully vva∣sted and vveakned Self-love. Self vvas a very small concern to her. None had less interest in her self, then her self. 3. Her Love to the Publick Assemblies, and Publick Ordinances; Her word was that of Holy David, Lord I have loved the habitation of thy House,Psa. 26.8. and the place where thine honour dwelleth. 4. Love to the Saints: All her delight was in them that excel in vertue. A vile person was contemned in her eyes,Psal. 16.2.3, 15.4. but she ho∣noured them that fear the Lord. She chose not her Company by their greatness, but by their goodness; a poor Saint was a more welcome guest to her, then a proud sinner; she loved Saints for their Sanctity; the more holy, the more her heart was knit unto them. 5. Her love to the faithful Ministers of the Gospel was very eminent, the very feet of them that bring good tidings, that publish pac, that bring good tidings of good, that publish salvation, were very beau∣tiful
in her eyes; their Persons and Con∣verse was honourable to her above many. A fourth eminent, was Sympathy with the afflicted Churches and servants of Jesus Christ. In all their afflictions she was afflicted; her bowels were troubled for them: Yea, she was in pain, like a woman in travel; who was weak, and she was not weak? who was afflicted, and she burnt not? she was read in that Chapter of Remembrance (as one calls it) Heb. 13.3. She remembred them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them who suffer adversity, as her self also in the made body. Surely this fellow-feeling with the affli∣cted people of God, was not more her duty then her Character; she was a Christian up of bowels. It is verily thought, the Churches sick∣ness, was her death. Queen Mary said (upon her death-bed) that if they open∣ed her, when she was dead, they would find Calais written upon her heart. If this precious Creature had been opened when she was dead, you might have found Sion written upon her heart. So true a Mourner she was in Sion, and for
Sion, that she even mourned her self to death. Oh imitate her in this grace, all ye that love the Lord Jesus. Behold she whom your Lord loveth is sick, sick not of Love only but of persecution. There is not that part of the true Church of Christ under heaven, upon which the hour of temptation is not in an eminent manner. The sinners in Sion abound every where; pray ye that the number of the mourners in Sion may abound more and more. And ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, behold you have your Commission, keep not silence and give him no rest till he esta∣blish,Isa. 62.6, 7. and till he m ke Jerusalem a praise in the Earth: How willing is God to be overcome, that bids his people wrestle? How desirous is God to grant, that com∣mands his supplicants to take no denyal at his hands, nor suffer him as it were to live a quiet day in Heaven, till he gives Rest to his Church upon Earth! Improve your Commission, O ye Saints of God, cry a loud, spare not, beg of Jesus Christ, that King of Saints, hat he would bow the heavens, and come down, or ever his Sp use die, that he would take her up in his Arms, wipe off dust from her face,
tears from her eyes, and blood from her wounds. Oh forget not Jerusalem, lest your Right-hand forget her cunning, plead hard for her, lest your tongue cleave to the roof of your mouth:Ps. 137.5, 6. Oh prefer Jerusalem a∣bove your chief joy. 5. She was a woman of great Faith, the life she lived in the flesh was a life of Faith: In her natural life, in all the pub∣lick calamities of the times, and private afflictions upon her own person, as she was a woman of much sorrow; God ha∣ving exercised her with sharp trials and afflictions in the married estate; Frequent Abortions, loss of Children, and (that which must needs follow) a fee∣ble distempered body, &c. I say in all these she lived by faith, and was more then Conqueress through him that loved her: All her afflictions were but the tri∣als and triumph of her Faith. Faith it was that which kept her Ves∣sel so steddy in the midst of all the Waves and Billows which fell upon her in her passage, that in them all she was obser∣ved by all the standers by, to be of an even tranquil spirit, not transported with joy in her better times, nor dejected with
sorrow in her worse, but (that which was said to be Queen Elizabeths Motto, was really her temper and felicity, Semper Eadem, she was still the same. In her spiritual life, she lived much by Faith; when she could not see, she did believe, and when in darkness, and had no light,Isa. 50.10. she could trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon her God. But in this did the excellency of her Faith consist, she durst not believe with∣out a promise, nor the promise without the qualification, in some good degree. Faith without a promise she believed was not Faith, but Fancy; not believing, but pre∣suming: This she believed, and there∣fore never durst believe further then she had a word for it: Hence she made the promises her dayly study. Hear this all you that take up your sal∣vation upon trust, and swim down the stream of security, not working out your salvation with fear and trembling; but think it enough to hope well, and to believe you do believe, &c. and what will ye do in the latter end? When your Faith will prove but fancy, and your hope but as the Spiders Webb, wrought out of your own bowels, and blown away with the least
of temptation? Take heed, deceive not your selves with shadows instead of sub∣stances: what good will it do you to go down to the Grave with a lie in your Right-hand; one Grain of Faith well tryed, is more worth then a pound of Faith taken up upon trust. The sixth and last Grace which I shall hint to you, (though herein I do both her and you wrong) is her Patience. Truly, her life and her death was nothing else but a Lecture of humility. I told you before, that her life (from almost the first of her married estate) was a life of suffering: Not truly, by reason of the least unsuitableness in the Conjugal relation, nor meerly in regard of Abortion, and loss of Children, both which she bare with a gracious chearful∣ness in submission to her Heavenly Father; but also in respect of an infirm Constitu∣tion which she carried about her; inso∣much that when the time of her dissolu∣tion came, it appeared to her learned Physitians, that her dying sickness was no∣thing else but a Complication of her disea∣ses now come to the birth, which had for near Twenty years before bin breed∣ing and ripening in her tender body; which
though they did (not seldom) make a visible impression upon nature; yet she did carry with so ingenuous a dissimulation, that her nearest Relations could hardly discover any habitual distemper prevailing upon her, but judg'd it only some acci∣dental errour in nature, easily capable of correction by prudent observati∣on. But at length, those sparks which for many years lay smoaking and kindling within, brake out into a flame, and for near twenty weeks together by degrees, prevailed upon the Walls of her feeble Tabernacle, the anguish whereof, though (at times) it was beyond expression full of bitterness and torment; yet she su∣stained it with such an invincible sweet∣ness of patience, as did flatter her friends into a delusive hope, that her sickness was not mortal, untill the dissolution of nature convinced them of their too easie dulity. She had a peculiar patience of her own,Luk. 21.19. and that patience gave her the possession of her soul; so that in her sharpest con∣flicts with pain and sickness, though (as an holy Minister said of himself) she might (possibly) groan, yet she did not
grumble; an impatient complaint was never heard from her lips; but if asked, how is it? Her answer was the Holy Martyrs word, mixt up of Patience and Faith; It is well, and it will be better. It is well, there was her patience, and it will be better there was her Faith: Through both which (as in the Text) She inherits the Pro∣mise. Her Wis∣dome and JudgmentI might easily enlarge the Catalogue of her Vertues; she was of great wisdom and judgement, not as a Woman only, in mana∣ging all her affairs with Discretion, but (much more) as a Christian woman. She was not a light Sceptical professour, nor one that took up her Religion upon trust or imitation: She knew what she believed, and having weighed her principles in the ba∣lance of the Sanctuary;Joh. 4. and tried them by the touch-stone of the holy Scriptures (which from her youth she had known) she became rooted and grounded in the Faith,2 Tim. 3.15 and stood unmoveable and unshaken a∣gainst all the blasts and storms of seducti∣on; Able not only to give an answer to every one that might (rationally) ask her a reason of the hope that was in her with meek∣ness and fear,1 Pet. 3.15. but as a good proficient in Christs School, to make an Apology for
the truths she had learned from the Go∣spel of Jesus Christ. Her Tem∣perance and So∣briety.In Temperance and Sobriety, she ex∣ceeded many, not only of the ordinary rate of vvomen, but even of such as (not without cause) have the repute of Religion. In Appa∣rel.In her Habit, she affected nothing of the pride and curiosity of the present ge∣neration. Accounting it more honour to beautifie her Attire, then to owe any beauty to it. Nor was she in love with any fashion, but that which the exam∣ples of the most pious and modest of her rank commended to her. She was of great temperance in her diet,Tempe∣rance- she did as much disgust whatever might sa∣vor of delicacy and indulgence to the flesh, as the delicate do what is mean and ordi∣nary, eating and drinking at such a rate, as one whom not Nature only had dieted, but Grace. Provident she was without avarice; fru∣gal,Provi∣dence. not that she might get the more goods, but that she might do the more good; ac∣counting that het best riches, not which she laid up for her self, but that which she laid out for God. Her Charity was very extensive,Charity. not knowing any other li∣mits,
but want of opportunity; nor any other partiality but the Houshold of Faith.Gal. 6.10. Her Mercy refused not the lowest of∣fice,Mercy. to the lowest object; her enquiry being not what the person was, but what vvas the need? She thought it no robbery to impoverish her self, that she might make others rich. Heroick spirit.She had a tender, and yet an Heroick Spirit; she feared nothing but sin, and could bear any thing but Gods dishonour and the reproach of Religion. A Coward she was, when Christ (possibly) might suffer by her; but couragious, when she was called to suffer any thing for Christ. Her whole deportment was made up of Sweetness and Gravity,Gravity. which put such a Grace upon her, that she Commenced a Matron in Religion, before her time; as if nature had over reckoned it self one age of her life at least, and took the degree of old age, before she was forty. Her sin∣cerity.Lastly, Her sincerity commended her to God and Man. She vvas fully as much as she appeared to be; to God without hipocrisie; to Man without fraud; a true Nathaniel, in whose spirit there was no guile.
These Vertues, as they were eminent in her, so they deserve a larger share in her just Character; but it is time to give you some account of her Death;Her Death. of which though much might be spoken worthy ob∣servation, yet take the Epitome of it in a few words. Three things she did upon her Death-Bed. The first thing she did, was to give a clear and full account of the work of Grace wrought in her soul, both in the Methods and Progress of it. The foundation whereof she acknow∣ledged was laid in the Catechistical prin∣ciples of her Parental education; the ru∣diments of Religion, were by their care and her diligence, so distinctly imprin∣ted in her understanding, that they be∣came a good foundation, upon which the superstructure of more practical and spiri∣tual truths of the Gospel, were more prosperously and fruitfully raised. After that by Precept and Pattern she had learned the necessity of secret duties, instruction and experience soon taught her the insignificancy of them, without regard to the manner, as vvell as to the matter. From thenceforth she began seriously to study a Duty-frame of spirit, and to
eye the Pattern in the Mount. John 4.24. After this, notwithstanding in the pro∣gress of the Ministry under which she li∣ved during the time of her single state) she found her self at a loss, the Holy Ghost convincing her of a present abso∣lute and indispensable need of Jesus Christ in point of Righteousness. She well perceived her own Righteousness too short a garment to cover her nakedness from the all-piercing eye of Divine Ju∣stice. From thenceforth (with the Apo∣stle) she accounted all things (even the best of her own Righteousness) but loss and dung that she might win Christ, and be found in him not having her own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Accord∣ing to the Original Method asserted by our Lord, Joh. 16.9, 10, 11.But the Conviction stayed not long there, but soon was improved by the same spirit into a Conviction, and disco∣very of the beauty and excellencies that is in Jesus Christ. A Christ she must have as a fountain of Holiness, as well as of Happiness; for a Soveraign as well as for a Saviour, for his Person, as well as for
his Portion: A Christ for Himself, as well as for Her self; she was sick of Love. But yet further, Interest would not serve her turn without evidence; Scripture evidence. This she now made her busi∣ness, she was very diligent to bring her Hopes and Evidences to the Scripture, and to compare them and the word together, by the light whereof as she discovered any fault or defect in them or cause to be jealous of them; She repaired to the ju∣dicious faithful Ministers of the Gospel, for the help of their judgement; especi∣ally that near and tender Relation, whom she trusted (above any) with her spiritu∣al concerns, whom she acknowledged God had made of singular use and advantage to her in the doubts and difficulties of this nature. But above all, she constantly made her address to Him, whose Name and Of∣fice is, The searcher of Hearts, and tryer of the Reins, with holy Davids Petition; Search me O God, and know my Heart; try me,Psa. 139.23, 24. and know my Thoughts: And see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. From evidence at length, she put in for assurance; in the serious and vigorous
pursuit whereof, death met her, as well in the midst of her work, as of her dayes; unexpectedly indeed, but (blessed be God) not unpreparedly, and though her sickness was not fraught with extraordinary joyes and ravishments: Yet she was sustained with a sweet peace and serenity of Spirit, which God did not permit Satan to inter∣rupt all her sickness long; and this was not the fruit of a blind unsensible security, (as in most that cry up a Lamb-like death) for she was able to give answer to any one that asked her reason of the hope that was in her, with meekness and judgement.1 Pet. 3.15. It was the account she her self gave, why neither in her sickness nor health, she had experienc't any great raptures or extraordinary joyes of the Spirit of A∣doption, as some do; for (said she) neither was I brought in with any extraordinary terrors or tremblings of the spirit of bon∣dage: Nevertheless it pleased the Lord not to leave Himself, nor his poor Hand∣maid without witness; not only in giving her a sweet serenity of spirit, insomuch that she suffered no Ecclipse of that Sun of Righteousness; (in all the time of her confinement to her Chamber) who Him∣self (upon the Cross) suffered an Ecclipse
of the light of his Fathers Countenance, at what time He cried out (to the astonish∣ment of Heaven and Earth) My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? But much more, in vouchsafing her some immediate irradiations of his face and fa∣vour, on the evening before she died; at what time, a gracious intimate friend, sit∣ting at a little distance from her Bed-side, forbearing to speak to her, knowing her to be very much spent, and supposing her to be in a slumber; at length she opened her eyes, (as if it had bin out of a sleep) and seeing her friend whom she loved sit∣ting by, she bespake her thus: Oh my dear friend! are you there? I have had a full answer of all my prayers; God hath not denyed me any of the requests of my soul, but hath fully satisfied my desires. Hathe he so, (said her friend?) Then I hope he hath heard you, in that you fear∣ed; (meaning the fear of death,To your God and my God, to your Father & my Fa∣ther: These Words she often used which formerly had held her in some bondage, Heb. 2.14.) She replyed, He hath, He hath; I know whom I have believed, and I am now going to him, and I shall see him (shortly) with these very eyes. You that have prayed to God for me, I desire you would joyn with me in giving him praise
for this gratious answer of peace, vouch∣safed me, poor me! She added moreover, she did not desire prayer for the Continuance of life; but that she might he resigned up to God in prayer,Eph. 1.6. and might be accepted in the be∣loved. And resigned up she was in a so∣lemn manner; first, by several godly Mi∣nisters then present; and last of all by that hand which by the power of the Holy Ghost had Midwived her into Christ in her Regeneration; during all which time, her spirit accompanied that solemn transaction, with strong and vigorous affe∣ctions, to the extream expence of her na∣tural spirits; and when all was finished, being asked, whether she had gone along with the Petition which had bin lifted up to God for her? She answered, Yes, I bless God I have, they were very sweet and precious: The Lord return your kindness and love into your bosom a thou∣sand fold. Whereupon leaving her to try what rest she could take, being very much wa∣sted in her spirits; we had not bin long in our Beds ere we were call'd out in hast to take our last leave of her; but her pre∣cious soul, impatient of longer distance
from her Beloved, did upon [her] Lords day in the morning as early as the light might serve to denominate it day, take its flight to the mountains of spices, there to celebrate an eternal Sabbath in the bo∣som and embraces of her Heavenly-Bridegroom. A Second thing she did upon her Dy∣ing-Bed, was before the Lord Jesus Christ, his Elect Angels, and those Christians which were about her, to make a full and clear Profession of her Faith. Wherein, though she took the Creed (commonly called Apostolical) for her Text: Yet she did not content her self to do it in that steril verbal way, of a literal repeti∣on, (as the mode of most ignorant peo∣ple is) but upon evey Article and Clause, as she went, enlarged her self in so spi∣ritual and savory a Paraphrase of her own, as did marvelloufly affect the hearers, in so much that they afterward accused themselves of robbery against their own souls, that they had not taken the paines to make that legible to their eyes, which she had made audible to their eares. Her third and last dying work was, to give Counsels and Instructions to her sur∣viving Relations that were about her;
which were so full, serious and suitable, that she seemed (as indeed she vvas) to be acted above her self, her spiritual and Heavenly self, acting the weak Organ of her body, as long as there was any passive capacity left in it. In a word, she hath left as many Mour∣ners behind her, as knew her, whether good or bad. The worst in the place where she lived, have given her this Testimony, That if she be not gone to Heaven, never any went thither; which puts us to find out a new exposition of our Lords Text, Woe unto you,Luk. 6.20. when all men shall speak well of you, &c. As for you Beloved, remem∣ber the Text, and make it your work to be her followers, to imitate her in her Graces and gracious Conversation, vvhose Faith follow, Heb. 13.7. It is time to conclude. But though I have given you divers Motives in the Grounds and Reasons of the Doctrine; yet for your special pro∣vocation and encouragement, who are of her Family and dear Relations, give me leave to add some special Incentives and Considerations, to quicken you to a vigo∣rous imitation of so excellent a Pattern. It were a fruitless sorrow to go to the Sepulchre (with Mary) to weep there:Joh. 11.13 It
is a more profitable work, to enquire how vve may recruit our loss; how we may expound Sampsons Riddle to get meat out of the Eater, and out of the strong, sweetness; hovv to make a gain of our great afflicti∣on; and that is the thing I would gladly press upon you in a fevv Motives and Considerations. First, Without a serious imitation of her pious example, that which was our mercy and priviledge in the enjoying of her, will turn to our sin and the aggravation of our loss.Heb. 11.7. . It is said of Noah, He cocondemned the World, &c. How? his Preach∣ing and his Pattern, being not followed, should rise up in judgement against that Re∣probae generation,Mat. 12, 21, 22. and condemn them; so likewise our Lord tells the impenitent Jews that the Men of Niniveh, and the Queen of the South should rise up in judgement with that generation, and condemn them. (i.e.) The example of those poor Infidels not prevailing with them, to move them to repentance, and timely and serious di∣ligence in the great concerments of salva∣tion (having Christ himself, a greater then Jonas or Solomon to be their Preacher) should in the day of judgement rise up as a witness, and an aggravation of their obsti∣nate impenitency.
Dear Sirs, We have had the light of this most excellent pattern, shining with∣in our Walls for diverse years last past, (some of us more, some fewer) give me leave to tell you, even weeping,  it leave no bettering influence upon us.  will give in a judicial testimony against  in the great day. She hath bin a witness from God to us, if (by a practical improvement of what we have seen divine and excellent in her) we receive not her testimony, she will be a witness for God against us, when our Lord shall come to call us to an account. And O how terrible will that be! What a dread∣ful addition to our misery; when to the loss of such a blessing shall be added the Curse of our non-improvement of it! Friends, it had been better never to have been Mother to such a Child, never to have been Husband to such a Wife, never to have been adopted to such a Mother, or Servant to such a Mistris, never to have enjoyed fellowship with such a friend; then, (when all is done) to have her come in as a witness against us, in the great day of Judgement. Oh to have bin possest of such a mercy so many years, (as it were for no other
end then to render our sin the greater, and our condemnation the more grievious! that the very remembrance of her should add to our torment, this will be intolle∣rable! Oh that the serious considerati∣on of our danger, might awaken us to a fruitful contention of being like her! A Second Motive,2. Motive. It will prevent a double sin. 1 Envy. This will prevent a double sin. The first is that whereby we are very apt to envy the praises of them which are better then our selves. The Scripture observes such a baseness in our degenerate natures,Jam. 4.5. the spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy. It is usual in Scripture to call the bent and strong in∣clination of the soul (either to good or evil) (Spirit,) so it calls a worldly frame of heart the spirit of the world.1 Cor. 2.12 Hos. 4.12. Isa. 19.14. An who∣rish disposition the spirit of whoredome, frowardness of heart a perverse spirit, &c. So here, a malignant disposition towards others, a spirit lusting to envy; carrying men strongly to fret, and envy at the gra∣ces or praises of our brethren. We have it as soon as we come into the world, and it is an hard matter to kill it wholly, be∣fore we die our selves; it is almost an e∣pidemical disease: We cannot bear the praises of them that out-shine us.
And there is pride, and self-love at the bottom of it, whereby we are ready to think, that those Eulogies and Commenda∣tions which are ascribed to others, are due rather to our selves; the Laurel of praises would better become our Temples. Hence Saint James, having mentioned envy, speaks in the verse immediately follow∣ing, of pride, as the root of that bitter fruit; God resists the proud, &c. Hence the hum∣ble mans question is, Who am I? The proud mans question is, Who am I not? Am not I as good as such a one? Where∣in am I inferiour to such and such? Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses?Num. 12.2. hath he not spoken also by us? Thus Aaron and Mirian envyed Moses. Jam. 4.5. Ad sola∣men cala∣mitatis suae non desinit per∣ditus per∣dere, Men. Fel. Oct.It is a sin as the Text that dwelleth in the Saints, but it reigns in the wicked; the Devils proper sin: He is an envious spirit, envying God his glory, and the Saints their felicity and honour; the Devil first envyed us the favour of God, and ever since we have envyed one another. Well, it is our disease: Yea, but an ho∣ly imitation of our betters, will help us to mortifie and cure it by an humble and conscientious reflection upon our selves: Thus, I am ready to envy them which ex∣cel
in grace, but am I as careful to imi∣tate them; their graces and excellencies will carry them to heaven, but my envy may sink me to Hell, from whence it came; while I should imitate the Saints in their graces, behold I imitate the Devil, in envy∣ing those graces! Ah what will become of such a wretch as I am! A second sin,2 Sin. Flattery. which Imitation of those that excel us, will (happily) prevent, is that whereby we are prone to rest in a sleight commendation of their persons. If we give them a few good words; If we can but say, Oh such a Minister was an excellent Preacher, he had a rare gift in prayer, a man of admirable parts, and of singular piety, &c. Such a man was a man of great worth and incomparable abilities! Such a woman was a woman of a meek spirit, one that had much communion with God, an holy woman, of large bow∣els and compassions to the afflicted Church and people of God, &c. I say, if we can but give them a good Character, though we never contend after an holy imitation of their virtues, we think we have done enough, and there's an end. But my Beloved know we thus much. First that Commendation without Imi∣tation,
is but an unprofitable Complement,Jam. 2.16 just such another thing as (in the matter of Charity) is as Saint James his, Be ye warmed, be ye filled, and give them nei∣ther fire nor food, &c. or like an handful of flowers strewed upon the Graves of the dead, which makes the Corps smell never the sweeter. Secondly, Yea Commendation without Imtation, is but our Condemnation; we condemn our selves of gross hypocrisie, while we commend them; for if we be∣lieve that precious, which we commend, why do we not imitate them? If we do not, why do we commend them? Thou Hypo∣crite why doth thy tongue belie thy heart? or thy life contradict thy tongue? Out of thine own mouth thou shalt be condemned. For the curing therefore of this vanity, apply we our selves to a sincere and indu∣strious following of their gracious ex∣amples. If we did really believe that conformity to them were our duty, and that such choice Patterns (whether of the departed, or of the surviving Saints) were a talent for which we must be responsable to our Lord, (as well as for the Word and Sacraments, and other helps to salvation) that our non-improvement of our Patterns
as well as of our Precepts, will render us unprofitable servants; it would frighten us out of our torpor and sluggishness, and make us tremble to satisfie our selves with a frigid and fruitless commendation of their shining excellencies. A Third Motive, By a faithful imita∣tion of her vertues,3. Motive. Imitation makes the absent person, present. we may still enjoy our lost Relation. Imitation (like Faith) brings the object and the faculty together. The Limner draws not his Picture with∣out the Person or the Effigies before him: Imitation makes absent persons to dwell together; by our imitation of our deceas∣ed Relation, we may preserve our converse with her, and she being dead, will yet speak with us; & that in a more excellent manner, then while she was yet in the bo∣dy: We may have Communion with her pure, spiritual, unmixt self; her self abstra∣cted from what ever was carnal or terene in her; a communion of an higher & more An∣gelical nature & advantage, then that which the best of Saints are capable of in this lower region; what Prelation the Apostle as∣cribeth to the Communion, which the A∣postles and other Saints had with Christ after his Ascention, above that which they attained, while he was with them on earth;
namely, that whereas the converse they had with him in the dayes of his flesh, was but after the flesh, in a Civil, Natural, Humane way; such as poor, weak, ignorant, indi∣gent servants have with a rich, powerful, wise bountiful Lord; (they converst not with him in his Divine or Mediatory ca∣pacity as he came into the world to save sinners; nor improved the converse they had to heavenly uses:) But when he vvas exalted to the Right-Hand of the Majesty on High, they enjoyed Communion with him in a spiritual and saving manner, be∣fitting the Majesty of that State, to which he was exalted:1 Joh. 1.3. Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; with the Father by the Son, with the Son in the Father; misterious and bea∣tifical I say, in such a prelation (in an Evangeli∣cal proportion) stands that converse and fellowship which we may enjoy with our deceased friend, now uncloathed and stript of what ever was Earthly, or savoured of corruption, by minding and imitating what vvas of an heavenly and divine ex∣traction in her. Yea such a Communion we may have with her in our degree, (setting aside what is earthly and carnal in our
selves) as her self now enjoyeth, with the Spirits of just men made perfect, with Grace,Heb. 12.23. and nothing else but Grace. And for this end (usualy) God doth re∣move from us the Relations in which we took the greatest delight and complacency, namely for the correcting of our sensuality; and for the awakening of us, to a more spiritual and heavenly improvement, ei∣ther which we have with Saints on Earth, or which we may with Saints de∣parted, in their separate and heavenly slate. Upon this very account our Lord tells his Disciples,Joh. 16.7. It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not away the comforter will not come; but if I go I will send him unto you. The removal of Christ his Corporal presence, made vvay for his presence in the spirit; many times the sensual and Earthy part of our desirable Relations, stands be∣tween that spiritual traffick we might have with them, and that heavenly fruit, vve might reap from them; in which case, God sees it expedient to take them from us. My Beloved, Is there such gain to be made by the loss of our gracious friends? Is our spiritual life bound up in their pre∣mature death? Let us study to experience
It was our folly, that we did put God to exercise us with so sharp a Discipline; and that may keep us from murmuring; have we not procured this unto our selves?Jer. 2.17. But now not to profit by this Discipline, will be our sin, and the aggravation of our sorrows. I have observed that there is in every affliction and mercy that is before us, a blessing and a snare; a blessing in every affli∣ction, and a snare in every mercy; yea both n both: Now then it is worth our serious houghts, what a tremendous judgement it is, by our blindness and folly, to run into the snare, and to lose the blessing; pray we for eyes to see the snare, and for grace to a∣void, and to discover the blessing to improve t. Lord God (said Abraham) what wilt hou give me seeing I go Childless? God had denyed him one Blessing,Gen. 22.16.17. and he beggs of God to make him amends for it, with some∣thing as good or better. Do we likewise; say we to him, Lord God, thou hast taken a∣way my Wife, my Child, my Mother, my gracious friend; what will thou give me, for her? Our friends are a Loan,1 Sam. 2.20. & 1.28. Vis ista non ingra∣ta est Deo sed vehe∣menter a∣cepta. Calv. upon Ja∣cobs wrestling. whom when we chearfully resign up to God, God accounts himself our Debter, and he gives us leave to plead the Debt, and not to let him go untill he hath paid it; with such holy incivility God is well pleased; let us then come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace, and say, Lord thou hast deprived me of my sweet natural and evangelical society with my dear Rela∣tion; Lord compensate it in a spiritual con∣verse with, and an heavenly imitation of her graces, that I may be like her in faith, in patience, in holiness, and in every other fruit of the spirit, wherewith she was beautified: Let a double portion of her spirit rest upon me, and the debt is paid. A fourth Motive,4 Motive, It is an Antidote against Sorrow. A serious imitation of her Graces, will prove a Soveraign Antidote against excessive sorrow for her loss. It is a fruitless trouble to go to the Sepul∣chre to weep there with Mary and can only serve (if alone) to adde to our affliction; and surely while we do aggravate our loss, we do also aggravate our sin, and do as it were summon God to our Tribunal, and there ac∣cuse him of Injustice. While we weep with Rachel, and refuse to be comforted, we do sullenly throw away the mercies we leave, and say as it were, Nay if God will not let me enjoy this mercy, let him take all: Thus we despise the mercies we enjoy. I will go down into the Grave to my Son mourning,Gen. 37.35. said old Jacob, when he thought, he had lost his Joseph: Sorrow makes him to say he knows not what; go down into the grave! and what if he did? Could he have imbraced hi
Joseph there? Is there any converse in the Grave? Or do the dead comfort one another? Excess of sorrow obnubilates reason, and maketh us lose our selves after we have lost ur darlings. Oh how much better is it, o take up their graces by an holy imitation; Elisha got more by taking up Elijahs gar∣ent, then he would have done if he had ood still, crying, My Father, My Father, &c. the Mantle of the Saints graces, will elp up to divide the waters of affliction, that e may go through them, and not be drown∣d with overmuch sorrow; partly, by divert∣g the stream into another Channel, a right hannel; a due comparing our selves with ch Patterns, will discover to us wherein we e defective; and so lead us to mourn after godly manner, rather for the want of their races, then for the loss of their society; to eep out such complaints, Ah how unlike  I to my dear Wife, Child, Sister, Friend! ow do I fall short of her meekness and hu∣ility; of her seriousnesse in Religion; of er close walking with God; of her chaity, ith, patience, &c. Oh wretch that I am! ow shall I come to be like unto her? Why ow, this is a sorrow, that will bear its own arges, and better our hearts! Such teares ll serve to wash off our spots and blemishes! essed are they, who (thus) mourn.
And partly, our continual eying of the excellencies, will present us with fresh evide¦ces of their glory in heavenly places. Th will serve (from time to time) as a perfume Handkercheif to wipe off tears from our eye Well, why should I weep? She is happy,  loss is her gain; while I am mourning  Earth, she is triumphing in Heaven; while am weeping amongst sinners, she is singi Hallelujahs in the Celestial Quire of Sai and Angels; while I lament her absence,  (having now experienced the Change) wo not want one hour of the Communion with innumerable company of Angels, the general ¦sembly of the first born which are written  heaven;Heb. 12.22 23, 24. and with God the Judge of all,  with the spirits of just men made perfect,  with Jesus the Mediator of the new Covena I say she would not want one houres Com∣nion in Heaven which she now possesseth,  a thousand of the best daies that ever she sp with us in the Land of the living. And lastly, This continual beholding  example, will dry up the stream of our sorro while, thereby we shall (in Gods way) se to our selves a future fellowship with her glory. God hath linked Grace, and Gl together by an unseparable connexion: that if we carefully mark every step of Saints holy feet, of which they have left
any print, and endeavour to tread exactly in them, It will infallibly bring us to their glory; what God hath joyned together all the Powers of darkness, shall never be able to put asunder. Here is work, Christians, in finite∣ly to bear its own charges, and compensate your labour with unspeakable reward. A fifth Motive;5. Motive. The grea∣test ho∣nour we can do her. Ea demum est vera religio imitari quem colis Lactant. An exact imitation of her eminent graces, is the greatest honour we can lawfully put upon her. As it is our trust wor∣shipping of God to labour to be like him; so to imitate our gracious friends, is the highest ve∣neration they are capable of; should we bring Oxen and Garlands, to do sacrifice unto her, as Jupiters Priests would have done to Barnabas and Paul, Act. 14.13. Or should we pray unto her and worship her as the Pa∣pists do to their Saints and Images, we pay her an honour not due, which would be a fruit∣less piece of Idolatry, as to her, Sacrilegious as to God, and pernicious as to our own souls. Whereas conscientiously to insist in her steps and to set her up as a pattern for our religious imitation,6. Motive. The grea∣test ex∣pression of our thankful∣ness to God. will be a laudable Testimony be∣fore men, that she was highly honourable in our eyes; and a sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased: And this hints, A Sixth Motive; Carefully to follow her pious example, is the best thankfulness we can render to God for her.
Two things are to be done if we would be thankful; The first is to see God in those graces and qualifications wherewith she was beautified. To commend her for her holi∣ness, meekness, love to God and his Saints, fellow-feeling with Gods suffering people, her faith, patience, her wisdom, temperance, prudence, mercy, &c. and no more, were to magnifie Her, but to neglect God; as if she had made her self to differ, or had shined by vertue of a self-born light. She was thus and thus, I, but who made her so? Here's our thankfulness to acknowledge God the foun∣tain whence all these streams of perfection did emanare and issue forth; So it was with those, they returned glorifying of God, who had given such gifts unto men: This is right to see God, and to admire God in the gifts and graces of his servants, to look upon all the excellencies of the Saints as so many Re∣flections of the divine nature in them. To overlook God in the graces of the Saints, is pride and ingratitude; but to deny God, were Atheism. And as often as we call to mind the graces of our dear friend or friends, let us contemplate and admire the in∣finite fulness that is in Jesus Christ of whose fulness they received, and grace for grace, and yet in comparison of whom, her bright∣ness was but darkness, and her perfections,
(pardon the word) but small sparks of that un of Righteousness, but little drops of that mmense Ocean of divine fulness that dwells in Him. The second expression and testimony of our hankfulness after our owning of God, and a∣cribing all the glory to God, I say the second hing is, To write after her Copy, to imi∣ate those virtues for which we would be hankful; while we labour to be like her, we do eally bless God in expressing the true end and design of divine Grace, in leaving such a piece of heaven so long in our Custody; improvement of mercies is our best thankfulness for mercies; while we do indeed make use of such living Directories for our better glorifying of God, we do offer him praise; and ordering our con∣versations aright, we shall (in the end) see the salvation of God. A Seventh Motive,7. Motive. Hereby we shall entail Religion upon our Family. A severe and constant imitation of her worthy example, will be a blessed expedient of entailing Religion upon our family; while each surviving Relation, (Oh that it might be out honour) shall real∣ly endeavour in our persons to derive down a prctical memorial of her Piety, we shall keep Religion alive in the Family, and teach our posterity how to glorifie God. Although Saints do not propagate Saints by natural Generation; yet may even the barren
womb. and dry lynes, thus propagate Saints, b spir Imitation of the holy lives of them tha have gone before us. Thus the Fathers to the Chil∣dren may make know Gods truth.Isa. 3.19. The Grandmo∣ther Lois to the Mother Eunice, and the Mother Eunice to her Son Timothy,2 Tim. 1.5. propagate the Faith. Certainly holiness may be transferred by Pattern, as well as by Precept, from one generation to ∣nother, and it is not education will do it with example; the eye is the more creditable Inf then the ear. Teach we our Children and E so that they may see us: If our practice c∣dict our epts, we bid them (as it were)  ¦lieve s; and take the next course to make th Atheists. Let us labour by both, to leave an  Seed in our Families, of whom we may comfor∣tably say when we come to die, (as our Lord  upon the Cross) My seed shall serve him, it shall b counted to the Lord for a Generation.Ps. 22.30. Eighthly and Lastly, By this means (throu divine Grace) We shall provide for Death- Comfort. As in reference to our dear Relation who is gone before us, Her Graces and graciou life, testifieth comfortably concerning Her, th she is blessed in her death,Heb. 1.23 she dyed in the Faith. So our sincere and vigorous imitation of those graces, will bear a Comfortable Death-Bed Te∣stimony of our future blessedness also. Confor∣mity to her in Grace, will (by Scripture warrant) conclude a future Conformity to her in Glory; w being followers of her in Faith and Patience, (as she was a follower of Abraham, and other Believer in their several generations) we shall together with them and her,Vid. Motive. 4.3. Branch. inherit the promis. But this hath bin already hinted, and therefor we shall insist on it no further. Soli Deo Gloris. FINIS.
