D2431 15603662 104074
To the right Honble. Lords, and Honble. Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the High Court in PARLIAMENT Assembled. The humble Petition of THOMAS DVCKET Gent: Practitioner in Physick. Sheweth: THat he by Gods blessing and his study, great charge, Expence of time, exercise of his natu∣rall guifts, and diligent searching into the Se∣crets of nature, is now perfect in knowledge, able to augment great profit to this King∣dome, by new wayes of Improving Lands and other Expe∣riments, as also to discover many new profitable additions to the Art of husbandry and such like terrene designes▪ all which he is experimentally Mr. of. The effects of which being disco∣vered, my increase in this Kingdome many thousand pounds profit per annum, if the Professor be not debarred by Morta∣tality, hindred, quashed, discouraged by incredulity, or other∣wise frustrated in his indeavours by uncoth events, want of power or meanes to make substantiall manifestation of his skill, which are malevolences that doe often oppose the pro∣gresse of all singular perfections and inventions though they be very hopefull, your Petitioner being capable of such con∣tingent hazards, and knowing the consequents thereof of high nowing it doth onely lye in your Honors powers to uphold
that labour for the Weale-publike; The assurance of which doth stirre the Petitioner in a faith∣full humble way to crave the favourable grant of both the right Honble. Houses of Parliament, to entertaine and take notice of his well intended service for the good of this King∣dome, yet not uncapable of your other great Affaires in con∣tinuall agitation for the good of the Kingdom; amongst wch. notwithstanding your Petitioner most humbly prayes, in be∣half of the whole Kingdom, wch his present intentions so much concerne, you would be pleased to involve and consider of his Designes tendered in the insuing Propositions. And refer your Peitioner and his resolutions, to the scāning & result of a Cō∣mittee for that purpose by your Honours appointed, before there be any procrastination in this Businesses of such hopeful successe and happinesse to this Nation, that may accrew year∣ly thereunto (by Gods blessing) beginning the next insuing yeare, if your Petitioner shall be inabled thereunto in com∣municating his Arts to the Kingdome, part of whose undoub∣ted skill, for the present is manifested by Certificate under the hands of the Hon: Committee of Parliament for the County of Monmouth, sent unto Henry Herbert Esquire, one of the Members of the Honble. House of Commons, to the end, that the contents thereof might be published in both the honourable Houses of Parliament. Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prayeth your Honours that according to the Acts of Parliament in such causes, con∣cerning the Promotion and countenancing of Persons indued with such profitable Arts and mysteries, and inabling them to Practice their knowledge therein: To give unto your Peti∣tioner such meanes, properties, and incouragements, as apper∣taine to the Confirmation of the Practice of the Art, being a Benefit of that consequence, to all people, that they will perceiving the profit thereof, hasten the Effecting, your Peti∣tioners Directions. And the whole Kingdome with your Petitioner herein is concerned to pray, &c.
The Certificate of the Committee of the County of Monmouth. To our much honoured friend Henry Herbert Esqu. one of the Members of the Honble. house of Commons, or to whom he shall appoint to proceed, &c. Noble Sir, WHereas Collonel Hughes Governour of Chepstow, your selfe and wee of the Committees of the Coun∣ty of Monmouth, have in certifying letters for∣merly declared our hope and expectation of the re∣ality of many inventions and profitable additi∣ons and discoveries of this hearer Thomas Duc∣ket Gent. practitioner in Phisicke, for the advantage of the Common-wealth, by the improvement of Land, and other speciall benefits, in which be seemed to us to be so for a Mr. of knowledge, that we held it fit to assist and further his endeavours therein, that they might the better be presented to the high Court of Par∣liament, by which meanes he might receive credit and estimation, preferment and rewards, suiting to the worth and validity of such beneficiall accomplishes, as he by his experience and industry, hath made fit to accommodate this Kingdome therewith; and whereas the said Gentleman ever since your absence, still conti∣nuing in these parts upon his occasions, did take notice that ma∣ny persons were somewhat incredulous of his former intentions which so wrought upon his judgement, that he was loath to let his reputation remaine in such doubtfull suspence. To prevent the which, he justly and ingeniously did rather conceive it fit to disclose and perfect some beneficiall and effectuall designes which accordingly he did so truly and perfectly performe, that we should not do him right, if we should not give him his due deserts, by declaring that he hath made manifest some experiments to our viewes, and also to our apprehensions; which without doubt or further question, will perfectly hold good, in procuring great benefit to this Nation; and therefore we do even more certain∣ly and fully then heretofore approve of his sufficiency, and do con∣fidently beleive that other of his inventions and secrets undis∣covered,
which he saith is of farre greater consequence and respect he hath already shewed us such good patternes of his know∣ledge, wee do the more credibly beleeve that his other designes will appeare as rightly perfect, and as materially certain for the future, as these apparances that are made known unto us: which may justly challenge a requitall of this Nation for his directions therein. And therefore our motion and request unto you is, that you will recommend him and his designes to the friendship and consideration of the powerfull Members of both the Honble hou∣ses of Parliament, that thereby they may the better take notice of his deserts, entertaine his good service for the Common-wealth with love, and speedy setling a certaine course, that he may have fitting preferment and recompence correspondent to the worth of every particuler discovery, when they or any of them are made apparant to the Honble. Houses, by demonstration or by any of the models thereof, or by rationall iudgement and understanding, that any of his Works or Arts seeme infallibly beneficiall, and that then there may be no delayes in advancing and dignifying the said Gent. with such sutable assistance and valuable requitals, as he shall justly merit by publishing and directing others, in these laudable parts and qualities, the which by his studious endea∣vours and observations, he hath attained unto. And therefore according to the former excellent estimations, of this and other civil Nations, of and concerning the Inventions of industrious persons, we make no question but the present state of this Kingdom will ever be ready to requite, cherish and incourage all that la∣bour for the weal-publicke, to which good actions we are assured of your willingnesse and readinesse in your particuler ayd and opportunity, to assist in the effects of these our loving motions, and to persevere in the same untill a fitting course be establish∣ed, and for your endeavours herein you shall oblige. Chepstow this first of May. 1646. Your servants, Tho. Hughes, Edm. Morgan, Jo: Walter, Will. Iones, Rice Williams, Will. Blething, Chr. Catchmay.
To the right Honourable, the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT Assembled. The humble motions and Propositions of Thomas Ducket Gent: Practitioner in Physick, in the Petition be∣fore-mentioned. Wherein is declared the heads of such Designes and Secrets as the Propositor is Mr. of, and is ready to mani∣fest and perfectly make appeare, how to effect the Con∣tents of these insuing Propositions. viz. Expert experiments, how to Improve all sorts of English fruit. 1 IMprimis, He professes to shew singular skill by giving perfect Directions for the Improvement of all sorts of English fruit, viz. In chusing out the fittest land and place for speedy growth and bearing, and shewing wayes by unusuall directions, for defending young Trees or setlings from the spoile of Cattle, by bruising or rubbing, notwith∣standing the residence of many Cattle in the ground, and that by a cheape and easie way, the value being considered; And also to improve the growth of all young Trees in the places where they are planted, far exceeding all former Art in that particuler; insomuch that they shall thrive and prosper so exceedingly, where his skill is used, that they shall in farre lesse time then heretofore, both beare and be growne out of hazard of Cattle, and likewise divers other beneficiall Ob∣servations and additions to the benefit of Fruit; so much that Fruit and all the profits thereof shall in some few yeares af∣ter the generall use of the new Husbandry, become double or treble as plentifull in this Nation, if such successe be by this honourable House held considerable; and the Author made use of to spread and dispierce his directions therein through∣out this Kingdome.
Improvement of all sorts of Wood. 2. He also professes to direct a course how to Plant yong trees of all sorts of Timber wood, or any other bene∣ficiall trees in such manner, that though much Cattle usu∣ally continue in herbage of the said Land, they shall not ne∣verthelesse rubbe or bruise or make spoile of such yong trees, and that by an easie and cheap way, with many other aditi∣ons for improving of the pasture or herbage, that is much lost in and under all sort of Woods or woody Lands, shew∣ing reasons withall for advantaging and increasing of all sorts of Woods, in such convenient places, that little or no pasture shall be wasted, diminished or taken up, by sowing or plan∣ting the same, if the Authors rules be rightly followed A profitable Art of save Wood and Coles, and avoid smoake of Chimneyes. 3. Whereas Wood and Coles of all kind, and other materials for fire growes very scarce and very chargeable, the Author therefore will direct some necessary neate course to be used in the fore-part of every Chimney, that by a small matter of Smiths and Masons worke, Which designe he hath brought to such an exact perfection, that he will direct them a way, that shall save a third or one quarter of the expence of fewell aforesaid, both in this City and the rest of the Kingdome, and of such validity are such designes, that not∣withstanding the expence of lesse fewell, yet shall that lesser quantity make much warmer all roomes then formerly they were with large expence. And by the use of this Art the of∣fence of smoaking Chimneyes shall be for ever avoided, and all sorts of provision of dyet shall be prepared and dressed with more neatnesse and speed then did before. The charge to effect which, is of such small consequence, that the Mony saved in fewell in halfe a yeere, shall make satisfaction for the whole charge belonging to the finishing of the designe in e∣very Kitchen Chimney, or any other Chimney where fire is dayly used.
An Art for the destruction of Mosse more effectually then hath been. 4. Whereas Mosse doth corode and devour the greatest part of the grasse of many thousand Acres of land, the Author Professes to give infallible direction, how to destroy the same without plowing the ground, in case the same lie flat and e∣ven, and not rugged, by Mole hils, Pits, or old Ridges, if so then after the said Land is laid even and smooth by Plough or other instruments, whether Hils or Dales, or sides of hils or in what place soever the ground is overcome with Mosse, all people by the same may know how to destroy and defend the same from Mosse for ever, and also to double or treble the quantity and goodnesse of the grasse, the first yeere where this Art is used, will defray the charge. A speedy way to Cure Land surcharged with Ferne, Heth, Sedges, Rushes, Thistles, Docks, Netles &c. 5. Whereas Ferne, Heath, Sedge, Rushes, Thistles, Net∣tles, Docks or other impedimentall trash, which not onely hinders the growth of grasse killing the rootes thereof, but also shadowes and takes away the benefit of the light of the Sunne from purifying, sweetning and maturizing the same, and so causeth the pasture of that land to be of a sower, cold and earthy constitution, and by all likelihood an similitude is as distastfull for Cattle, as unripe fruit to men, all which trash he will direct a certain course (if the Land so offen∣ded lye flat and even) how to destroy for ever without any Ploughing at all. But if it be very rugged, uneven, or in great ridges, then after the same is once layd even, then ne∣ver more shall any sort of trash be the losse of grasse or breede other impediment in Commons, or severals where the Art hath once been used, except so mountainous, Rocky, or lakey, that it cannot be wrought upon with Plough or other levelling Instruments; in the like manner may Broome, Gorst, Fursne, Brieres, Thornes, or any trashy under Woods, or Shrubs, which overrunne Lands,
destroying much of the herbage in Commons or inclosures, be destroyed either all, or part thereof (if not reser∣ved for fewell whereby for more profit) the same may be converted into Pasture or Medow Greater benefit may be made of Mud Marish ground, Boggs and Lakes then formerly hath beene used. 6. He professes to direct a course whereby greater bene∣fit may be made then yet hath bin, of all Mud-marish grounds, and standing Bogges or mires, by imploying the same upon Corne land or Pasture, with many other additions of that nature, viz. Whereas Black Barren Turffe land yeilds little or no profit (save only for the cutting Turfe for fewell, and the vastnesse of that land so great, that abundance thereof may be spared for other uses. He undertakes to prescribe a way that a greater benefit may be raised thereof, then ever formerly hath bin; and in many places where deepe marish grounds are, to direct a course to draw them dry, that it may be converted to some good use. Turning the watry Lakes thereof into such a profitable way that much Fish may bee there stored and bred. All which may be effected at a very cheape and easie rate, respecting the great profits will accrew thereby. A certaine way of improvement of Cold-marish ground. 7. He professes to direct a course how to improve all baren or moist morish, or marish ground, which beares but a short picked hory course sower grasse, unkindly for feeding or breeding of Cattle, by converting the same into a better, deeper and larger growing layer of grasse, and of a sweeter and better nature, consisting of hony-suckles, dasies, and yel∣low flowred grasse; The profit whereof will be so great, that the very first yeere will quit the cost in those places where the materials may conveniently be had for the performance of the designe, whereby many thousands of Acres of course ground in commons or inclosures may be cured.
Obstructionall Arts to Augment much more Medow ground then hath beene. 8. He will give certain intelligence in a most expert man∣ner, to improve and augment many thousand Acres of Me∣dow ground, which shall yeild a great, sweet, and beautifull crop of Mowing grasse, the improvement whereof that shall be discovered, will so effectually accomplish the ex∣periment, in every place that few mens thoughts or ingenuity hath formerly found it out, or at least not made so full and perfect a use of the meanes or method to effect the designe as shall be described, directed and presented, to the rationall apprehension of all men by the Author. Preventions against rotten Diseases in Sheepe. 9. The Author being desirous to serve his Countrey with the best of his abilities, hath therefore practised rules and medicines to prevent the rotten diseases in Sheepe, which in some Counties he hath so rightly experienced, where he hath resided, that he doubts not (with Gods blessing) to be very expertly able to make that rich accommodation hold currant in all parts of the Kingdome. viz. That by a cheap and easie way, method and observation of little cost or trou∣ble, he will resist the impediment of water in the body, and wormes in the liver of Sheepe, whereby the putrifycations in them, which procures dearth and destruction shall be avoided, when his secrets in this particuler shall be discovered, the impediments before said in those profitable Cattle shall be for ever prevented. Directions and Observations to advance the race of English Horses. 10. Whereas the decay of gallant Horses within these 40 yeeres past in this Kingdome, and the cause thereof not suffi∣ciently known unto many, but fully & specially apprehended by the Author: He intends by his own observations to give infallible rules for the advancing, maintaining and improving
reasons of the decay and declining of the English Race. But give certaine directions how Colts in breeding shall be advanced and improved to a more perfect growth in strength, perfection in shape and courage, He will also set forth rules and meanes by which men of abilitie may in breeding and feeding their young horses in the stable, and by managing them according to his directions, advance their carriage, and proportion them with high crest and comelier areyne then ordinary. Directions to find out fit soyle for Cold Land where Lime is not to be had. 11. Further, he will give directions how to prepare in many Countries where the errable land is either of a cold constitution, or that such tillage land doth lie wet, cold and gaulie, whereby it may be conceived that lime is the fittest soyle or Compost, if it were not too far to be fetched and so scarce to be had, that it will not quit cost in many of those Countries, instead thereof there is other materials, as congru∣ent as Lime to be had in many places as shall be directed, which at cheap and easie rates may be had, when knowne, which will richly availe land-holders for soyling and quick∣ning of their Corne land, and improving the same so effectu∣ally, that the people shall spare much misking, dung and soyle made by cattle from their Corn-land to be imployed for im∣provement of Pasture for which it is most fit and proper, and by this new Art shall cold Corn-land and cold Pasture be much inriched when discovered. Observations concerning Cattle. 12. He further will disclose and publish some more profitabler rules and observations for improvement of all sorts of rother Cattle, as Kine, Oxen, Sheepe, Goats, Swine and the like; then hath hitherto been observed. Now meanes to draw water over much Land. 13. He will prescribe courses by the helpe and power of
this Parliament, whereby more profit may be raysed by wa∣terworks in many Countries then hath been accustomed, and with more ease and facility. As also he will direct the ma∣king of many Engines, Tooles, and instruments of husbandry that are of new invention, and also direct new beneficiall ad∣ditions to advantage and make more usefull many utensils of those kinds. Rules for Smoothing and Levelling of Land. 14. And whereas some land is much disadvantaged by wanhillocks and Anthillocks, and rugged tompes of ground that lyeth dry, and thereby unkindly for grasse that much is lost thereby. The Author will direct the making of Engines whereby much more ground may be levelled and made even with the charge of twenty shillings, then could with the Spade and Shovel be perfected for five pound. And more a∣vaileable, as will be confessed, when the Authors reasons be given and understood. Rules to lay wet Land dry, and dry Land wet. 15. And whereas amongst other of the Authors studies and observations, he hath beene effectually carefull to find out all the cheapest and speediest Rules and Methods, to lay wet land as dry as may be, and to keepe dry land as wet as is possible, touching which designe, he hath many expert per∣fections and directions, that shall in his works be tendred a∣mongst those designes as are formerly treated of, all which designes will much increase the Revenues of this King∣dome; and therefore requires expeditious setling, whilst the property and constitution of such contents be in Esse.
To the right Honorable, the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled. The Manner and forme of the Authors intentions to proceed in the discovery of his Designes. May it please your Honours, WHereas such profitable designes, inventions and additions to former Arts of husbandry as is be∣fore treated of, should be made known by Ma∣nuscript, Printed book, or by Model, Platform or demonstration, by divulging or manifestation, before confirmation of such considerable conditionall gra∣tuities, as your Honours shall in your wisdomes conceive the benefit of his Art will merit of the Kingdome, as thankful∣nesse to the Author, and incouragement of others in the like causes: The benefit and credit of such discoveries may be de∣rived to others as things of their knowledge, or else underva∣lued and slighted by some natures, or ambitious spirits; as things formerly known in some parts of this Nation or For∣raigne Countries in respect there may be some resemblance or coherence with some of this Authors inventions, or else some detraction from the perfection thereof, by some ima∣ginarie opposition; but all the objections of that nature, the Professor by this following & undenyable Sillogisme denies, his inventions consisting of so rich & great profit, as are con∣tracted and abstracted into such cheap and easie wayes of per∣fection; hee therefore saith, if the intelligence thereof had been formerly known, so fully as the Author intends to ex∣presse himself, or that formerly used in some parts, then would the benefit thereof occasion dayly use; and the designs & additions would have been acted in generall, and in all pla∣ces as common as other Artifices of husbandry, whose benefits
are discovered. Many times such objectiōs against such things of rich and hopefull concernment, although the object or doth mistake and recount knowledge of part of some designes, that in some particular kind are used, though not perfectly practi∣sed in generall throughout the Kingdome, may interrupt ma∣ny times the proceedings in good designes, as hereafter will be manifested when the Author hath declared the capacity of his skill. The Author humbly craves that your Honours will take notice of his good intentious service, and allow him in his proceedings your honours protection, that he may not receive any such prejudices or otherwise by explaining or divulging the methodicall & practick part of the said Arts; & that upon tryall made of the sufficiency of any part of them, by rational judgment, discovery or intelligence they hold currant, as some of the primest effects will really do. And that other of his de∣signes, that consist of a Cult mistery, do appeare by patterns or platformes thereof to be apparantly valuable. That then before the Author be requested to unobscure, any other of his designes, that he may be inabled by legall satisfaction by Or∣dinance of Parliament, as to your Honours wisdomes shall seeme answerable to the merit of his first discoveries. That the Author when his first designes are manifested ac∣cording to the season of the yeere, and the faculties and qua∣lities thereof drawn into a Manuscript, may have the same un∣printed, in which booke shall be involved the Print of many artificiall Cuts of the right figure, shape, proportion and Em∣blem of every perfect Modell, Engine, or Instument that is by the Author invented, discovered or observed to be fit to ac∣complish and make perfect the Models, or the designes to performe the works, according to the fancie or device of the director, with instructions to make use of every of them, that then by vertue of an Ordinance of Parliament every Parish with in this Kingdome may receive a booke thereof, published by Authority and with approbation of your Ho∣nours
to be made use of for the good of the Weale-publike in generall, and their owne particuler profit, which Com∣mand will hasten profitable effects, and expedite a requitall of the Author. After which establishment your Ora tour will proceed to discover other valuable secrets in the forme and manner aforesaid. And when the Master-peeces of his in∣ventions are distributed in severall bookes, and himself con∣sidered. Then he intendeth to compose all his works into a naturall History of one intire volume with all convenient observations, materiall and profitable experiments of all the former particuler tracts, and present the same to your Ho∣nours. Garnished and furnished with many other beneficiall and delightfull directions of much consequence. And for a more speedy, secure and certaine accomplish∣ment and perfecting these new Arts, inventions and additions unto husbandry, the Author further craves your Honours to give power to the Author to take a generall Survey of the Kingdome, thereby the better to discover the improvements and profit that may be made and raised in all Countries, ei∣ther upon Land Common, or severall baren or fertile, or of what kind soever, where either himself or such deputies as may be authorized by the said Surveyer, and by him made skilfull and capable of, and in his designes both in finding out the defects in all sorts of land, which the owners through want of knowledge in curing thereof, neglect to their dam∣mage, not only to advise what is fittest husbandry for all sorts of land according to the Authors inventions. But al∣so the said Surveyor or his deputies, may oversee and cause to be made, certain Models and patterns of the Authors de∣signe, with the Engines or instruments that are any whit use∣full in perfecting the same. And when directions are thus gi∣ven, and the benefits made apparant in the most eminent and fit places of this Kingdome in every Shire, which will occa∣sion attractivenesse and willingnesse in people of all places, speedily to make practise of the Authors directions. By
which meanes, in few yeeres more profit will be raysed, then will be in many yeeres without it. Lastly, the Author humbly craves, that to the end his in∣tended designes may be expedited, your Honours would be pleased to appoint unto him a convenient house with necessa∣ries, and some small out-lets walled in, being in the Suburbs of London or Westminster, in the disposall of your Honours, for his better preparation of his Designes, Models and Pat∣terns, Demonstrations and expressions for your honours sa∣tisfaction; whereby you may personally see manifested and substantially be assured in many particuler realities of the consequences and validities, of some of his proposed designes, touching the great benefit and service of this Kingdome. And whereas some may peradventure object. That this fertile Kingdome is already by former industry and inventi∣on of ancient  brought so neere to the very highest improvement of Land, and other conveniences, that little more can be done, shall (by your honours favour find them∣selves convinced in their oppinion) when (by your honours assistance and permittance) the Author hath unclouded the splendor of new and true perfections, fit to deserve your ho∣nours approbation, and the Kingdomes applause and prayers, for him that stands at a helme of knowledge, fraughted with skill, conducing to pleasure and plenty, ready for presenta∣tion to the Kingdome, after Your Honours shall have had tryall of the abilities of your most humble servant whilst he is, yet THOMAS DVCKET.
